UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA 
AT   LOS  ANGELES 


L 


1/rf- 


?n^ 


c/^n 


<f 


l^t 


REPORT 


ON    THE 


3IILITARY    EXPENDITURJ: 


OF    THE 


HONOURABLE    EAST    INDIA    COMPANY. 


ADDRESSED   TO 


MAJOR-GENERAL  THE  HONOURABLE  SIR  JOHN  MALCOLM, 

G.C.  B.K.  L.S.,   Governor. 


By  LIEUT.-COLONEL  EDWARD  FREDERICK. 


I    >    1      1  *  * 

>  »   «    *    >  '     * 


>>>         ^a,         >       • 


»'o      •-•     • 


LONDON: 

PRINTED  BY  RICHARD  TAYLOR, 

RED    LION    COIRT,    FLEET    STREET. 


1831. 
INotfor  Salc.~\ 


C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S. 


t 

to 


Paht    I. 


3> 


0>l 

Q. 


Page. 

Acknowledgement    of"    Sir   John    Malcolm's 

Letter 1 

Introductory  Observations  : 

Commissariat 1 

Provision  Department 7 

Troops  on  board  Ship 13 

Arrack 1,'i 

Hired  Cattle  and  Followers. ...  IG 

Barrack  Department 18 

Boat  Department 21 

Transport  of  Stores 22 

Camp  Equipage 23 


Pagf. 

Carriage  of  the  Sick 24 

Cavalry  Branch 2(i 

Graia  and  Forage ~(> 

Grass-cutters 26 

Saddle  Contract 27 

Saddles,  &c 28 

Line  Articles 28 

Stables 29 

Officers'  Charges 30 

Remount 31 

Stud    ai 

Horses 3.'> 


Part  II. 


Engineer  Corps 38 

Sappers  and  Nliners 42 

Military  Board 47 

Ordnance  Department    51 

Practice  Ammunition 58 

Gun-carriage  Agency 59 

Gunpowder  Agency 60 

Pay  and  Allowances 61 


Regimental  Contracts C  4 

Mode  of  kep])ing  Accounts    65 

Office  Establishment 70 

Medical  De])artment 72 

Supplies 73 

Irregulars,  Horse  and  Infantry 77 

Military  Bazars 77 

Concluding  Remarks 79 


Appendix. 

Sir  John  Malcolm's  Letter  calling  for  the  Report 81 

Sir  John  Malcolm's  Minute  in  Council  on  the  Report 81 

Tables  of  Provision  Department,  1  to  9 82 — 85 

Statement  of  Amount  of  Ordnance  Stores  expended  annually,  with  the  Numerical  Strength  of  the 
Bombay  Army  for  1 4  Years 86 

Statement  of  the  Number  of  Horses  purchased  at  Bombay  for  the  Madras  Cavalry,  from  1823  to  1827     86 

Report  of  the  Annual  Committee  on  the  Progress  of  the  Breed  of  Horses  on  the  Bombay  Establishment     86 

Register  of  Savings  and  Increases  in  the  Military  Expenditure  of  the  Bombay  Presidency 87 

Comparative  Statement  of  the  Cost  of  feeding  9,738  Horses  for  one  Year  in  Bengal,  Bombay,  and 
in  England 95 

A  Statement  of  the  Number  of  Horses  purchased  for  the  Cavalry  on  the  Bombay  Establishment, 
from  1823  to  1827 95 

Statement  showing  the  Receipts  and  Issues  in  the  Gun-carriage  Department  for  1827-28  (Bombay)     96 

Statement  showing  the  Receipts  and  Issues  in  the  Gunpowder  Manufactory  for  1827-28  (Bombay)  102 

Statement  of  the  various  Descriptions  of  Articles  made  up  in  the  Gun-carriage  Department  in 
Bombay,  showing  their  Cost 106 

Account  Current  of  the  Gun-carriage  Department  in  Bombay  for  1825-26,  showing  the  mode  of 
balancing  Accounts  in  that  Department 108 

Statement  of  Gunpowder  expended  for  Annual  Practice,  &c.,  in  the  Bombay  Establishment,  from 
1827  to  1828 109 

Statement  showing  the  Quantity  of  Ciunpowder  manufactured,  and  the  Expenses  incurred  thereon, 
on  the  Bombay  Establishment  from  1  823  to  1828 

Statement  showing  the  Expense  in  Bengal  for  making  Gun-carriages,  &c 

Statement  showing  the  Cost  of  Iron,  Brass,  &c.,  in  the  Constructing  of  Gun-carriagcs  in  Bengal..  . 

Statement  of  the  Quantity  of  Crude  Materials  required  to  make  a  Cwt.  of  Wrought  Metal 

Statement  sliowiiig  the  Cost  of  making  Elevating-screws  in  Bengal 

Statement  showing  the  Cost  of  Powder-barrels  in  Bengal 

Statement  showing  the  Cost  of  a  Barrel  of  Powder  manufactured  in  Bengal 

Statement  showing  the  Expense  of  the  Agencies  of  Gunpowder  and  Gun-carriage  in  Bengal 

Statement  of  the  Reductions  and  Increases  in  the  Commissariat  Department  in  Bombay  from  De- 
cember 1827  to  September  1 830 

Statement  showing  the  Cost  and  Charges  for  Horses  purchased  by  the  Commissariat  in  the  Gulf 
at  Bombay,  an(i  Subordinates,  until  delivered  over  to  the  Mounted  Corps  of  the  Army,  for  the 
Years  1825-26  and  1827-28    


109 
120 
121 
122 
123 
123 
123 
123 

124 


138 


358327 


It  is  I'eared  that  many  verbal  errors  and  inaccuracies  will  be  found  in  this  Report.  The 
friend,  to  whom  the  MS.  was  forwarded  from  India  to  be  printed,  is  entirely  unacquainted  \vitli 
those  details  to  which  the  Report  relates  :  nor  did  he  think  himself  justified  in  seeking  assistance 
elsewhere,  as  the  document  is  intended  only  for  private  distribution  among  a  select  few. 


REPORT. 


To   MAJOR-GENERAL  THE  HONOURABLE  SIR  JOHN   MALCOLM, 

G.C.  B.K.  L.S.,  Governor. 

Honourable  Sir, 

L  HAVE  the  honour  to  acknowledge  your  comniamls  under  date  ,  and 

in  obedience  to  them  have  employed  myself  in  the  contcniplation  and  arrangement  of  the  several 
subjects  which  you  have  deemed  it  requisite  1  siiould  report  upon,  from  such  sources  of  infor- 
mation as  I  may  be  in  possession  of. 

In  attempting  to  discuss  such  serious  and  extensive  questions,  I  trust  I  shall  be  satisfactorily 
meeting  your  wishes,  by  slating  niy  own  conception  of  the  objects  which  you  propose  should 
engage  my  attention.  The  following  points,  I  presume,  may  be  admitted  as  forming  the  leading 
princij)les  of  the  inquiry: — 

L  The  examination  of  the  reforms  which  you  have  introduced  at  this  Presidency  in  every 
branch  of  the  military  system  involving  expenditure. 

II.  How  those  reforms  appear  to  be  progressively  working,  and  their  probable  result. 

III.  Their  comparative  bearing  to  the  same  departments  at  the  other  Presidencies.     And, 

IV.  The  financial  result  as  to  the  oeconomy  and  efficiency  in  expenditure. 

If  the  preceding  ideas  present  a  correct  view  of  the  objects  contemplated  by  your  instruc- 
tions, I  shall  enter  upon  the  discussion  at  once,  with  the  hope  that  the  mode  in  which  I  carry  it 
on  will  evince  if  1  have  lost  sight  of  that  salutary  rule.  I  hope  my  anxiety  to  be  understood, 
will  not  fail  me  as  a  sufficient  palliation  for  any  trespass  of  the  kind. — As  a  commencement  to 
the  work,  I  shall  proceed  to  take  up  one  of  the  largest  branches  of  the  public  service  for 
examination — 

The  Commissariat. 

This  department,  when  instituted  at  this  Presidency  in  1811-12,  was  framed  on  the  model  of 
the  one  at  Madras:  but  it  was  soon  felt  that  modifications  more  consonant  to  the  nature  of  our 
own  service  and  country  should  be  introduced.  To  avoid  prolixity  in  a  long  account  of  its 
subsequent  growth,  I  shall  only  observe,  that  since  that  period  the  number  of  its  officers  has 
increased  from  six  to  nine,  and  the  number  of  conductors  in  a  like  proportion. 

Its  establishments  also  (I  mean  those  exclusively  attached  to  its  offices,)  and  its  general 
expenditure  kept  pace  with  this  increase:  but  it  must  be  remembered  that  the  numerical  strength 
of  the  army  had  nearly  doubled  itself  during  the  same  period,  and  the  territory  over  which  the 
troops  were  dispersed,  and  the  department  had  consequently  to  extend  its  operations,  had  spread 
from  the  confined  limits  of  a  province  or  two  to  the  range  of  a  kingdom  *. 

That  the  expense  of  such  operations  should  be  excessive,  cannot  excite  surprise  ;  but  why 
they  should  not  gradually  have  fallen  into  their  relative  position  on  the  recurrence  of  peace, 
now  seems  to  give  rise  to  a  general  and  serious  complaint. 

This  may  in  part  be  ascribed  to  the  nature  of  the  department,  and  of  Indian  warfare;  for  it 
is  well  known  that  the  expenditure  cannot  be  calculated  upon  fixed,  but  presumed  data,  so  as 
to  produce  a  probable  conclusion.  The  amount  of  establishments  numerically,  and  in  cash 
particularly,  during  the  period  of  war  cannot  be  controlled  by  fixed  numbers,  bearing  a 
regulated  proportion  or  analogy  to  the  number  of  troops  employed  :  for  instance,  the  expense 
of  an  establishment  for  two  companies  of  Europeans  in  the  field,  would  not,  as  one  might 
expect,  be  the  fourth  part  of  the  one  reijuisite  for  a  whole  regiment  of  eight  companies;  but 
it  would  on  the  contrary  be  at  least  one  third  of  it,  and  the  expense  of  hospital  equijiment,  as 
far  as  the  Commissariat  is  concerned,  would  not  be  wide  of  this  estimate.  This  does  not  include 
the  number  of  cattle,  tents,  followers,  and  provisions.  I  merely  mention  this  for  a  right  under- 
standing of  the  nature  of  the  department,  being,  as  will  be  seen,  one  chiefly  of  contingencies, 
indeed  of  accidents,  that  govern  the  demands  as  well  as  the  resources,  which  latter,  duly  managed, 
lead  to  an  effective  state  of  a  useful  Commissariat. 

Where  the  department  in  peace  time  is  merely  an  office  of  receipt  and  issues,  it  loses  much 
of  its  labour  and  responsibility  ;  and  there  can  be  no  reason  why  it  should  not  fall  into  a  similar 
routine  as  the  other  offices,  and  proceed  upon  fixed  methods,  requiring  lew  or  none  ot  those 
exertions  of  a  mind  fertile  in  expedients,  to  meet  unexpected  exigencies  in  the  progress  of  public 
business. 

•  The  Presidency  of  Bombay  alone  exceeds,  I  believe,  14,000  square  miles. 

B2 


In  the  above  state  of  things,  the  militarj-  expenditure  had  swelled  to  an  unexpected  height, 
and  only  at  the  termination  of  the  struggle  for  power  was  it  felt  as  a  burden  upon  the  revenue; 
for  it  is  not  less  remarkable,  that  though  the  settlement  of  our  conquests  was  completed  in  1 823,  yet 
the  increase  of  expenditure  now  complained  of  is  to  be  looked  for  from  that  year,  and  has  grown 
up  during  a  period  of  comparative,  if  not  complete  tranquillity.  I  do  not  introduce  this  or  any 
other  observation  with  any  intention  of  making  allusions  to  political  events  that  may  be  deemed 
foreign  to  the  tenour  of  this  paper ;  I  merely  touch  on  them  as  connected  with  the  spirit  of  it,  or 
in  fact  accounting  for  the  extension  of  our  establishments,  and  their  consequent  drain  on  our 
resources. 

That  "the  success  of  armies  frequently  depends  on  the  state  of  equipment"  is,  I  believe,  no 
novel  doctrine ;  and  I  need  only  allude  to  the  rapid  and  successful  movements  of  our  troops  in  this 
country,  for  some  years  past,  as  fairU'  to  have  been  promoted  bj-  the  care  and  attentions  in  our 
preparations  of  the  several  departments,  which  rendered  the  soldier  always  ready  and  effective. 
I  shall  waive  any  allusion  to  my  own  experience,  but  appeal  for  confirmation  to  the  excellent 
state  of  the  equipments  that  enabled  our  troops  to  move  with  such  celerity,  and  communicate 
on  a  sphere  of  action  of  near  thirty  degrees  of  latitude. 

I  take  the  Commissariat  department,  as  the  one  best  calculated  to  exemplify  the  variety  that 
existed,  when  one  regulated  mode  was  neither  coui'ted  nor  acted  upon,  though  it  had  been  so 
frequently  recommended  by  the  Honourable  Court.  This  neglect  of  uniformity,  and  the  absence 
of  mutual  intercourse  of  the  officers  of  this  line  at  the  several  Presidencies,  produced  what  I 
deem  mischiefs  inseparable  from  such  diversity,  and  particularly  in  the  delegation  of  the  powers 
exercised  by  the  officers  at  the  heads  of  the  several  branches  of  it  in  India. 

The  unparalleled  career  in  which  we  acquired  such  an  extraordinary  extent  of  dominion, 
required  each  Government,  though  nominally  dependent  on  Bengal,  to  act  for  itself,  issuing  such 
rules  as  local  occurrences  demanded,  and  which,  from  their  attention  being  fixed  on  the  rapid 
course  of  political  events,  afforded  tliem  no  leisure  to  attend  to  what  was  in  useful  operation  at 
other  places,  which  would  have  progressively  led,  bj'  comparison,  to  a  beneficial  uniformity  of 
system. 

It  is  true  that  most  of  the  materials  for  a  Commissariat  previously  existed,  and  could  have  been, 
with  some  additions,  arranged  and  digested  into  one  general  code.  Had  this  been  done,  instead 
of  allowing  each  Government  to  frame  rules  for  itself,  we  should  not  now  have  to  lament  that 
irregularity'  the  prevention  of  which  would  have  produced  so  much  good.  For,  however 
merited  the  praises  may  have  been  that  were  bestowed  on  the  officers  at  the  heads  of  the  several 
portions  of  the  Commissariat  in  the  field,  the  want  of  one  uniform  system  was  grievously  felt 
during  the  whole  of  the  late  Mahratta  war,  when  the  several  divisions  of  the  three  armies  were 
meeting  and  acting  together.  Indeed,  it  rather  reflects  additional  credit  on  those  officers,  that 
their  zeal  and  talents  overcame  those  obstacles. 

The  necessity  of  this  uniformity  seems  obvious  to  all  public  men  of  the  present  day;  and 
whatever  may  be  the  mode  for  its  attainment,  the  reform  is  essential  to  the  state  of  our  finances, 
and  its  accomplishment  seems  accelerated  by  the  verj'  nature  of  our  present  position  in  India. 
Indeed  its  adoption  ought  to  be  desired,  were  it  only  to  avoid  the  imputation  of  inconsistency,  of  a 
great  state  permitting  various  and  incongruous  modes  in  the  conduct  of  their  financial  system, 
from  the  operation  of  which  a  simultaneous  and  accurate  result  is  looked  for,  as  if  the  expecta- 
tion were  grounded  on  reasonable  principles  either  theoretical  or  practical. 

As  an  illustration,  I  shall  endeavour  to  show  how  one  line  of  public  business  issuing  from  one 
main  source  should  in  its  course  of  action  diverge  to  points  wide  of  each  other,  dictated  neither 
by  necessity  nor  a  superior  degree  of  utility,  but  seems  to  have  originated  rather  from  the  separate 
views  taken  to  constitute  this  establishment,  and  the  system  of  supplv  locally  in  operation  at 
the  different  Presidencies,  than  any  recognized  general  principles. 

No  part  of  the  topic  of  assimilation  can  be  argued,  as  we  would  consider  that  of  discipline,  on 
the  ground  of  local  inapplicability  of  the  same  rules  pervading  the  whole  of  India.  These  are 
widely  separated  :  ])rivate  sentiments  and  local  prejudices  have  no  existence  in  an  affair  ot  this 
kind;  the  adojition  therefore  of  a  general  uniformity  of  powers,  system,  and  practice,  can  affect 
the  feeling  of  none;  and  the  advantages  accruing  to  the  State  on  the  score  of  oeconomy  and 
efficiency  are  incalculable  in  India,  and  the  facility  of  inspection  that  it  holds  out  to  the  home 
authorities  is  too  obvious,  I  ti'iist,  to  be  questioned. 

In  Bengal,  the  duty  of  the  Commissary-general  and  his  deputy  is  that  of  a  general  supervision, 
ordering  supplies  (not  of  great  amount)  on  his  own  authority,  but  requiring  the  sanction  of 
Government  lor  any  large  outlay — being  totally  unincumbered  with  any  kinds  of  accounts, 
except  in  cases  of  reference  for  explanations  on  the  charges  of  his  subordinate  officers. 

This  species  of  responsibility  I  conceive  to  be  not  only  partial  but  almost  nominal ;  for  he 
neither  receives,  passes,  nor  audits  charges  and  documents.  On  the  contrary  they  are  examined 
by  one  of  tile  Secretaries  of  the  Military  Board,  denominated  "Commissariat  Accountant,"  who 
refers,  wlien  he  thinks  necessary,  to  the  Commissary-general  for  explanations,  on  which  Govern- 
ment finally  decide,  .nnd  occasionally  the  Accountant  defers  to  the  Military  Auditor-general 
for  advice  on  the  score  of  regulations. 


At  Madras,  the  Commissary-general  not  only  carries  on  the  duties  above  stated,  but  used  to 

embody  in  one  general  document  llie  wliole  accounts  of  the  several  branches  ol'  his  denarlnicnt 

a  most  unnecessary  labour  and  nianul'acturiiig  of  papers  and  business.      He  was  also  held 
responsible  for  the  authorizing  of  large  sums,  and  uhiinately  audited  them  *. 

Tiie  Commissary-general  at  Bombay,  in  conse(|uence  of  the  late  revision  of  the  system,  has  "ot 
rid  of  the  intermediate  authority  of  the  Military  Board,  being  dependent  on  Government  alone 
for  sanction  to  his  measures,  exercising  a  general  superintendence  both  over  the  several  branches 
of  his  department  and  the  propriety  and  accuracy  of  their  accounts,  which  are  audiied  bv  the 
constituted  officer  of  Government,  the  Military  Auditoi-general.  This  clothes  liim  with  a 
simple  and  ellective  control  over  the  duties  ot  his  department,  while  it  establishes  a  direct 
responsibility  on  himself,  productive  both  of  elliciency  anil  safety  to  the  interest  of  the  State. 

1  shall  oidy  aild,  that  the  jjowers  of  the  Connnissary-general  at  Madras  are  more  extensive 
than  those  of  the  other  Presidencies ;  for  besides  the  removal  and  stationing  of  his  officers  at 
his  own  discretion,  he  has  no  intermediate  controller. 

The  situation  of  Commissary-general  is  one  of  deep  responsibility,  and  his  office  should  be 
the  source  of  every  information  relative  to  the  department  and  all  the  army  su])]ilies;  it  should 
also  conduct  the  examination  and  audit  of  the  returns  of  provisions  and  stores,  and  be  the 
channel  of  transmission  for  the  accounts,  with  his  remarks  and  ex])lanations  of  the  charrres  in 
the  money  bills  to  the  Auditor-general.     This  plain  system,  so  simple  in  operation  and  effec- 
tive in  result,  must  carry  conviction  to  any  mind  conversant  with  business,  as  jireferable  to  any 
complicated  and,  I  may  add,  irresponsible  mode.     The  plea  of  facilitating  the  settlement  of 
accounts  can  hardly  be  a  counterbalancing  advantage  (for  the  arrears  prove  it  to  be  a  nominal 
one,)  to  the  inversion  of  placing  duties  in  unexperienced  and  irresponsible  hands  and  depart- 
ments ;  nor  does  the  increase  of  expenditure  sanction  the  duties  of  the  Commissary-general  being 
divided  with  his  deputy,   as  in  Bengal,  or  devolved  upon  secretaries  and  others,  that  strictly 
appertain  to  himself  alone ;  for  who  has,  or  can  feel,  so  great  a  concern  for  the  due  performance 
of  the  duty  of  his  department,  or  the  credit  of  it,  as  the  officer  of  high  rank  at  the  head  ?  And  what 
better  security  can  the  State  require  for  a  proper  attention  to  its  interests,  than  that  the  principal 
of  so  important  a  department  should  be  the  centre,  not  only  of  movement,  but  the  efficient  con- 
troller of  so  large  a  contingent  expenditure,  subject  only  to  the  Government  itself  for  his 
proceedings,  and  to  its  authorized  officer  of  audit  for  the  accuracy  of  the  departmental  accounts  ? 
In  a  department  of  this  kind,  npon  what  grounds  can  the  objection  rest,  that  the  system  of  one 
Presidency  is  inapplicable  to  that  of  another?    My  own  experience  leads  me  to  a  contrary  con- 
clusion; andif  the  three  departments  were  assimilated  on  the  principle  that  should  actuate  the  con- 
duct of  their  business,  I  am  convinced  that  the  utmost  benefit  would  accrue,  producing  an  intimate 
knowledge  by  constant  intercourse  with  the  resources  of  our  own  territories  and  tliose  of  our 
allies,  while  it  would  relieve  the  home  authorities  from  the  existing  necessity  of  sending  out 
such  enormous  quantities  of  stores  from  England ;  the  local  Governments  would  provide  for  their 
own  wants  from  the  productions  of  India  at  a  cheaper  rate,  thus  cherishing  and  increasing  the 
resources  within  themselves,  to  the  natural  augmentation  of  the  revenue.     A  general  arrange- 
ment would  also  materially  affect  the  amount  of  the  expense  of  the  department,  effecting  a  re- 
duction in  favour  of  Government,  while  the  individuals  employed  will  suffer  no  pecuniary  injury. 
This  cannot  be  explained  in  a  few  words,  though  I  am  fully  possessed  of  the  accuracyof  the  plan. 
The  Commissary-generals'  tours  should  not  be  amiual,  but  a  general  one,  made  when  they 
first  come  into  office,  and  not  more  than  every  third  year  afterwards ;  for  the  estimated  expense 
of  these  annual  journeys  amounts  to  a  large  sum,  which  calls  for  a  corresponding  benefit.  I  am 
at  a  loss  to  conceive  what  can  be  done  or  altered  annually  by  the  Commissary-generals'  visits, 
after  the  out-stations  have  been  once  inspected  and  arranged.     If  their  assistants  are  capable 
persons,  who  possess  the  knowledge  of  their  current  duties  and  the  regulations  of  the  depart- 
ment, it  cannot  require  such  freijuent  inspection  in  peacetimes,  when  it  is  only  re(]uired  steadily 
to  pursue  a  routine  in  which  no  exigencies  can  occur,  which  latter  only  belong  to  the  move- 
ments of  a  war  establishment:  besides,  the  security  bond  every  officer  is  subject  to,  protects  the 
State  against  defalcations  in  the  regular  accounts,   that  are,  or  ought  to  be,  monthly  examined 
and  audited.  There  is  another  objection  to  the  advantages  oftlie  annual  tour  of  the  Commissary- 
general,  particularly  in  Bengal,  and  is  in  a  great  degree  a])plicable  to  the  other  two  Presidencies, 
where  the  extent  of  the  journey  is  so  great  and  the  rate  of  travelling  so  slow  ; — for  what  is  to 
become  of  his  own  duties,  and  the  references  on  the  accounts  of  his  subordinates  during  his 
absence  of  six  or  eight  months  every  year,  that  are  monthly  sent  in  for  examination.     These 
applications  must  occupy  not  only  weeks,  but  months ;  and  the  evil  of  delay  both  to  the  public 
service  and  the  private  individual  is  of  the  most  serious  nature  :  besides,  the  Government  all  this 
time  are  deprived  of  the  opinion  and  advice  at  head-quarters  of  one  of  its  most  important  and 
responsible  officers. 

The  subject  of  the  salaries  of  the  heads  of  the  department,  I  presume,  admits  of  no  dis- 
cussion in  this  Report,  though  the  same  rule  does  not  obtain  as  to  the  subordinate  officers,  and 

•  By  the  Honourable  Court's  orders. 


6 

should  rest  on  the  principle  of  remuneration  for  the  degree  of  responsibility  attaching  to  the 
extent  of  disbursement. — The  following  scliedule  will  pi obably  exhibit  this  idea  in  a  clearer 
point  of  view  than  any  other  kind  of  explanation. 

SCHEDULE. 

Whenever  the  expenditure  of  a  division  averages  one  lac  of  rupees  per  mensem,  it  might 
have  for  its  duties — 

One  First  Assistant  at 1000  Rs.  salary. 

One  Third  Assistant  at 500 

One  Sub-Assistant  at 300 

When  the  outlay  is  from  half  a  lac  to  one  lac — 

One  First  Assistant  at 1000 

One  Third  Assistant  of  second  class  at     400 

When  the  outlay  is  40,000  to  50,000— 

One  Second  Assistant  at TOO 

One  Sub-Assistant  at 300 

When  the  outlay  is  20,000  to  40,000 — 

One  Third  Assistant  at 500 

When  the  outlay  is  10,000  to  20,000 — 

One  Third  Assistant  of  second  class  at     400 

When  the  outlay  is  3000  to  10,000 — 

One  Sub- Assistant  at 300.     And 

When  the  outlay  is  from  1000  to  3000,  a  Commissioned  Officer  as  temporary  agent.  And 
finally — 

When  the  outlay  is  500  to  1000,  a  Warrant  Officer  is  sufficient  to  superintend;  and  native 
agents  might  conduct  the  duties  for  an  outlay  of  from  100  to  500. 

The  foregoing  arrangement  was  principall}'  suggested  by  the  unaccountable  disparity  that 
was  displayed  in  the  return  in  Bengal  from  the  Commissariat  account, — that  one  officer  receiving 
rupees  1045  salarj',  had  an  outlay  of  cash  of  6210;  another,  of  rupeer  1000  salary,  ex- 
pended rupees  20,000 ;  and  a  third,  a  salary  of  rupees  700,  had  an  outlay  of  rupees  69,000 
per  month.  It  would  not  be  hazarding  too  much  to  saj',  that  there  is  a  similar  disparity 
existing  at  Madras.  I  could  also  produce  more  than  one  instance  of  an  officer  conducting  a 
monthly  expenditure  on  the  Bombay  establishment,  of  near  two  lacs  per  mensevi,  receiving  the 
salary  of  rupees  600. 

No  objection  can  be  urged  against  the  adoption  of  an  equalization,  as  it  will  naturally  follow, 
that  as  the  higher  grades  have  the  largest  salaries,  so  they  ought  to  be  invested  with  the 
heaviest  charge. 

The  Deputy  Commissary-general  in  Bengal  is  also  a  controlling  officer  without  executive 
tluty  ;  thus  admitting  in  fact  that  there  are  two  Commissaries-general.  This  would  be  imprac- 
ticable at  the  other  Presidencies,  as  their  Deputies  or  First  Assistants  are  executive  officers, 
and  consequently  fixed  to  one  station. 

The  mode  also  of  keeping  accounts  is  not  the  same,  and  the  differences  are  many  and 
minute.  Each  Presidency  of  course  prefers  its  own,  and  any  one  possessed  of  a  good  know- 
ledge of  business  could  no  doubt  elicit  an  account  from  the  examination  of  them.  But  I  trust 
the  object  in  view  is  rather  to  understand  systems,  in  order  to  establish  a  preference  in  favour 
of  that  which  possesses  the  greatest  ceconomy  with  the  easiest  practice,  than  to  examine  trifling 
forms,  that  onl}'  constitute  a  part  of  the  duties  of  the  subordinate  executive  officers,  or  the 
shape  or  numbers  of  the  documents  used  in  this  or  any  of  the  military  departments  under 
consideration,  particularly  those  of  the  Commissariat,  which  from  long  use  have  at  different 
times  been  adopted  from  their  utility  for  the  accurate  settlement  of  the  accounts. 

As  a  leading  feature  of  this  part  of  the  subject,  I  shall  observe,  that  the  preparation  of  the 
general  statement  of  accounts  one  might  imagine  was  the  same  all  over  India.  So  it  is  in  its 
general  form  no  doubt,  but  not  in  its  arrangements — for  when  any  comparisons  are  gone  into, 
much  searching  and  picking  ensues,  before  anything  approaching  to  accurate  and  similar 
conclusions  can  be  arrived  at.  The  constant  and  repeated  references  from  England  on  the  score  of 
personal  allowances  would  alone  be  a  sufficient  proof  of  this  fact ;  and  taking  the  argument  as 
capable  of  illustration  on  the  spot,  we  need  only  have  recourse  to  the  mode  of  writing  off"  or  esti- 
mating the  wastage  on  liquor,  which  is  estimated  in  the  general  books  in  cash.  It  is  an  article 
that  demands  the  greatest  care  in  its  preservation,  and  is  of  great  consumption  and  heavy  cost. 

Situated  as  the  department  at  Bombay  is  at  present,  it  will,  I  trust,  be  enabled  to  act  with 
greater  celerity,  as  the  new  arrangements  have  relieved  it  of  a  large  quantity  of  extraneous 
ousiness  which  had  been  from  time  to  time  thrown  into  it,  producing  the  evil  arising  from 
an  accumulated  mass  of  detail  belonging  to  other  branches  of  the  service.  It  may,  however, 
be  subject  to  one  ill  effect,  that  of  dividing  the  public  expenditure  into  a  great  number  of 
channels,  which  were  formerly  all  collected  into  one  view,  and  consequently  afforded  a  greater 
facility  to  the  examination  of  the  Auditor,  who  thus  with  ease  could  compare  the  charges  in  the 


several  bills.     This  pruning,  however,  has  reduced  the  department  to  its  original  foundation, 

a  source  of  commissariat  supply  of  every  description  to  the  army;  not,  as  it  gradually  and 
latterly  became,  a  department  supplying  all  others  with  the  most  trifling  articles  retjuirecl  in  the 
civil,  military,  medical,  marine  and  general  departments,  and  in  some  cases  without  due 
check  as  to  the  (piantity  ami  propriety  of  the  demands.  In  fact  it  was  an  universal  nia'razine, 
or  the  great  bazaar  of  the  Govt^rnmunt.  This  accumulation  of  work,  as  might  have  been 
foreseen,  clogged  its  i)ro])er  working,  besides  ailding  to  the  impossibility  of  a  strict  control 
being  held  over  such  divided  and  minute  expenditure,  and  produced  the  consequent  mischiefs 
of  delay,  and  in  some  instances  of  confusion. 

The  effects  of  its  operations  for  some  time  must  be  looked  forward  to,  and  a  successful 
result  anticipated,  as  the  labour  and  talents  applied  to  its  execution  by  tlie  subordinate  officers 
on  a  simpler  plan  for  action,  affords  every  reasonable  prospect  of  sucli  a  conclusion.  On  this 
footing  1  take  it,  and  will  advert  in  the  proper  jilace  to  those  savings  tliat  are  gradually 
effecting  from  the  alterations;  one  of  the  leading  features  of  which  is  the  plan  of  making 
supplies  by  contract.  The  advantages  the  Government  derives  from  this  mode  are  the  position 
of  check  or  controller  for  the  Government,  instead  of  that  of  supplier,  that  it  places  the 
Commissariat  officer  in;  the  dispensing  witii  numerous  and  expensive  establislmients;  the 
prevention  of  delay,  and  the  ascertained  price  at  which  the  Ciovernment  are  sure  the  supply 
will  be  made,  and  the  total  amount  of  the  ultimate  expenditure.  The  reduction  of  price  also 
appears  a  matter  of  course ;  and  if  success  attends  similar  attempts  elsewhere,  a  cheerin" 
prospect  from  analogy  presents  itself  to  us,  as  to  equal  results  attending  our  own  plans ;  as  1 
can  state,  from  the  most  authentic  source,  that  the  introduction  of  the  contract  system  at 
Madras,  for  the  supplies  to  the  engineers,  occasioned  a  fall  of  24  per  cent,  in  the  price  of 
materials.  Method,  no  doubt,  and  great  discrimination  of  the  capability  of  the  means  of  the 
contractors,  are  indispensable  qualities  in  the  conduct  of  such  a  plan ;  and  the  comparative 
ease,  as  a  novel  or  new  experiment,  with  which  it  appears  to  be  working,  affords  a  pleasing 
presage  of  its  ultimate  success. 

In  I3engal  and  Madras,  the  Commissariat  was  more  confined  to  military  purposes,  making 
but  few  supplies  out  of  its  own  line,  until  those  for  the  hospitals  were  thrown  into  it.  The 
equipments,  however,  for  the  Governor-general  and  civil  officers  of  Government  travelling  on 
duty  in  Bengal,  are  made  by  it. 

Hardly  any  of  the  materials  required  in  the  manufactories  of  gunpowder  and  gun  carriages, 
and  for  the  erection  of  buildings  in  the  military  line,  for  the  engineers,  are  furnished  by  the 
Bengal  Commissariat,  though  at  Madras  this  rule  does  not  obtain;  and  those  for  tiie  engineers, 
as  stated,  are  mostly  by  contract  through  the  Commissariat. 

The  main  principles  for  the  Commissariat  may  rather  be  said  to  have  arisen  from  experience 
and  successful  working  of  the  minutiae  and  temporary  expedients,  than  to  have  been  indebted 
for  their  primary  cause  to  any  plan  or  theory;  which  latter  has  done  but  little  for  this  branch 
of  the  military  service  :  but  in  order  to  understand,  and  particularly  to  reduce,  those  principles 
to  practical  use,  some  of  the  details  must  be  at  least  examined,  and  the  labour  of  condensing 
them  from  innumerable  trifling  sources,  probable  estimations,  and  complicated  calculations, 
cannot  be  estimated  but  by  those  whose  experience  and  knowledge  of  this  line  have  rendered 
them  familiar  with  such  an  occupation.  The  results  which  have  grown  out  of  the  examination 
of  the  subjects  following,  are,  I  trust,  such  only  as  the  facts  themselves  have  warranted  as 
natural  and  unavoidable,  devoid  of  any  previously  conceived  bias  to  any  particular  feeling  or 
system.  Indeed  if  there  is  anything  in  the  preparation  of  this  Report  that  I  would  wish  to 
claim  as  a  merit,  it  would  be  the  sincere  conviction  that  I  have  not  advocated  any  cause  or 
plan,  but  that  which  I  deemed  entitled  to  a  preference  from  its  proved  utility,  or  just  reasoning, 
and  that  I  review  systems  and  measures,  and  not  men. 

Having  premised  these  observations,  for  a  general  comprehension  of  the  subject,  I  shall 
now  offer  separately  those  explanatory  remarks  upon  some  of  the  leading  heads  of  this,  and 
the  other  departments,  that  suggest  themselves  ;  and  if  I  apjiear  to  enter  more  into  detail  than 
I  had  previously  intimated,  it  must  be  excused  me,  as  a  natural  consequence  of  a  closer  con- 
templation of  so  large  and  complicated  a  question. 

Provision  Department. 

The  system  in  its  general  principle  may  be  called  the  same  under  all  the  Presidencies,  as 
regarding  the  provisioning  of  European  and  Native  troops  from  the  Commissariat,  in  all 
situations  where  the  regulations  of  the  several  Presidencies  entitle  them  to  receive  rations:  but 
this  latter  circumstance  varies  in  its  application;  for  in  Bengal,  Europeans,  married  or  unmarried, 
receive  rations  from  Government  all  tiie  year  round;  at  Madras,  in  the  fielil,  and  in  field  stations; 
but  in  Bombay,  they  are  provisioned  only  while  on  actual  service  or  marching. 

There  are  two  modes  of  provisioning  Europeans  ;  nor  am  I  aware  that  the  one, — of  the  men 
dieting  themselves  in  fixed  stations,  has  any  serious  objection  to  it,  as  the  men's  messes  are  very 
strictly  superintended,  and  the  power  of  varying  the  materials  of  their  food  pleases  them : 


8 

besides,  tlie  soldier  in  Bengal,  if  not  also  at  Madras,  would  have  the  advantage  derived  from 
the  lowness  of  price  in  comparison  with  what  the  same  kind  of  articles  would  cost  on  the 
western  side  of  India. 

Here  I  must  beg  to  go  somewhat  into  detail,  otherwise  the  conclusions  I  draw  may  have 
the  appearance  of  not  being  sufficiently  borne  out  by  facts.  The  soldier  in  Bengal  always  gets 
a  smaller  ration  than  at  Madras  or  Bombay,  though  it  varies  at  different  seasons  of  the  year. 
The  ration  for  half  batta  stations  is  peculiar  to  Bengal. — The  following  is  the  comparative 
state  of  rations  issued  to  Europeans  at  the  three  Presidencies,  marching  or  on  actual  service. 


Madras  Field  Service  or  Full  Batta 
Station. 

lb.    oz. 

Biscuit 0     12 

Or  Rice 1     5 

Fresh  Meat 1     8 

Salt 0     2| 

Wood 5  billets. 

Spirits 2  drams. 


Bombay  Field  Service  or  Full  Batta 
Station. 

lb.    oz. 

Biscuit 1     8 

Or  Rice 1     8 

Fresh  Meat 1     8 

Salt 0     2 

Wood 4     0 

Spirits 2  draras. 


Madras  Hal/ Batta. 
The  men  provision  themselves. 


Bombay  Half  Batta. 
The  men  provision  themselves. 


Bengal  Field  Service  or  Full  Batta 
Station. 

Biscuit lib. 

Or  Rice 21b. 

Fresh  meat,   including  bone  : 

for  5  months  in  the  year  . .  1  Jib. 

for  7  months l|lb. 

Salt   2oz. 

Wood 31b. 

Spirits 2drams. 

Bengal  Half  Batta. 

Bread lib. 

Meat lib. 

Salt 2oz. 

Wood 31b. 

Spirits Idr. 

The  plan  of  the  family-man  supplying  his  own  wants,  independent  of  any  general  contract 
entered  into  for  the  whole  regiment,  has  public  oeconomy  on  its  side,  as  the  ration  costs 
Government,  at  a  full  batta  station  in  Bengal,  rupees  7  12  7?;  and  at  half  batta  station,  rupees 
6  S  2.  In  Bombay,  at  a  full  batta  station  it  costs  8  12;  about  the  same  at  Madras ;  and 
throughout  India  no  greater  deduction  can  be  made  from  the  soldier's  pay  than  3{d.  per  diem. 
There  is  another  difference  that  amounts  in  its  effects  to  a  discrepancy  :  As  regards  India,  the 
non-commissioned  officers  in  Bengal  pay  higher  rates  for  their  rations  than  the  privates, 
though  receiving  no  greater  quantity  or  variety  of  food  :  it  is  true  this  is  in  accordance  with 
His  Majesty's  warrant,  but  its  application  is  both  partial  and  local.  But  men  in  garrison 
stations  at  Bombay,  being  unable  to  procure  provisions  at  the  usual  rates  during  a  peiiod  of 
zcarcity,  are  supplied  at  their  own  request  with  the  ration  stated  in  the  mai-gin*,  for  which  they 
pay  reas  70  or  2  annas  9f  pies ;  and  when  individuals  or  small  details  are  marching,  they  are 
allowed  6  rupees  8  annas  per  man,  per  mensem,  for  their  provisions,  under  the  head  of  Dry 
Batta.  To  save  the  expense  of  the  Commissariat  establishments,  a  similar  plan  obtains  in  Bengal 
in  giving  at  half  batta  stations  rupees  .5,  and  at  full  batta  rupees  JO,  per  man,  as  a  compensation 
for  provisions.  At  Madras  the  European  troops  have  the  same  indulgence  as  the  Native,  by 
receiving  compensation  on  the  rise  of  the  price  of  rice  in  the  market,  without  paying  anything 
for  it  in  return. 

Having  condensed  these  details  as  to  tliis  head,  which  at  all  the  Presidencies  would  be  the 
same  if  acting  on  the  same  principle,  I  shall  take  that  part  of  the  system  in  which  they  differ, 
and  proceed  to  the  portion  of  the  subject  "  The  relative  situation  of  the  soldier  to  the  State," 
never  losing  sight  of  his  comfort  and  health  as  the  prominent  features  of  the  discussion. — In 
reference  to  the  individual,  it  will,  I  should  imagine,  be  easily  admitted,  that  in  any  situation 
he  receives  the  best  of  food,  if  not  better,  from  the  public  stores,  than  he  can  procure  by  an 
accidental  contract.  So  far  his  health  is  preserved;  but  his  convenience,  on  the  otiier  hand,  may 
be  consulted  by  his  appropriating  a  small  sum  to  the  purchase  of  pork,  fish,  vegetables,  &c. 
which  he  thinks  indispensable  to  vary  his  food,  even  when  receiving  rations  from  the  public 
stores.  It  follows,  that  in  either  case,  as  he  buys  these  articles,  he  may  sometimes  lay  out  more 
money  when  providing  himself;  but  in  the  latter  case  an  arrangement  is  always  made  by  the 
commanding  officer,  to  enable  him  to  proportion  the  amount  of  his  mess  charges,  which 
generally  exceed  what  the  Government  stoppage  amounts  to,  the  sum  he  can  spare  from  his 
monthly  pay. 

Notwithstanding  the  deduction  that  would  seem  to  follow  from  this  reasoning,  in  favour  of 
the  soldier  providing  himself,  I  must  still  be  permitted  to  offer  an  opinion,  that  there  is  hardly 
any  station  in  either  of  the  Presidencies,  where  the  soldiers  would  not  prefer  receiving  rations 
from  the  Commissariat,  if  they  were  somewhat  varied,  to  the  supply  from  a  regimental  contract, 
owing  both  to  the  price  he  pays  being  less  than  he  could  procure  the  same  quantity  of  meat, 
bread,  &c.  for,  in  the  market  throughout  the  mondi;   and  the  advantage  he  has  of  his  Commis- 


•  One  pound  of  meat,  two  pounds  of  wood,  half  a  pound  of  rice,  one  poand  of  bread. 


9 

sariiit  provisions  being  reported  on  by  a  committee,   if  he  tliinks  them  in  the  slightest  degree 

objcctiunable. 

My  own  experience  in  tlie  coniniund  of  a  European  regiment,  as  well  as  serving  much  with 
European  troops,  induces  me  to  prefer,  as  one  general  .system,  the  provisioning  oi'  the  troops 
from  the  Connnissariat,  as  it  combines  the  two  leading  points  of  health  and  justice  to  the 
soldier,  and  the  consequent  efliciency  of  his  exertions  lo  the  State.  1  cannot  admit  it  as  a 
serious  inference,  that  discipline  woukl  he  afl'ccted  by  the  ailoplion  of  either  measure,  as  it  has 
nothing  to  do  with  the  arrangement  lor  supply.  It  may  be  urged,  that  the  ration  could  be 
procured  in  some  parts  of  India  for  the  same  sum  that  (lovermnent  allow  for  it;  but  this  would 
be  too  partial  an  ailmission  lo  aflect  an  extended  argument  of  this  nature. 

I  shall  now  turn  to  the  other  side  of  the  topic,  anil  look  upon  it  in  an  extended  liglit,  both 
as  it  affects  the  soldier  and  the  princij)Ies  on  wiiicl)  it  operates  towards  him.  'Ihe  keeping  of 
Europeans  in  garrison  in  Bengal  is  more  rxpciisiiu:  than  cither  at  Madras  or  Bombai/,  because 
they  receive  rations  all  the  year  round  ;  but  in  tiie  fiekl,  the  Mailras  army  is  the  most  expensive, 
from  a  rule,  peculiar  to  itself,  of  giving  (u\\  batla  *  to  the  sokliers  in  addition  to  their  pay,  and 
afterwards  making  a  deduction f  equivalent  almost  to  the  batta  ;  and  it  is  to  be  observed  that 
the  Madras  soldier's  payj  and  deduction  for  provisions  vary  from  those  of  the  other  Presi- 
dencies. At  Madras,  by  a  misconception,  I  presume,  of  the  orders  of  the  home  authorities, 
the  pay  in  English  money  of  a  shilling  ;;tv  diem  is  first  converted  into  [jagodas,  ami  then  into 
rupees,  giving  by  these  means  a  larger  sum,  rupees  13 — 2,  while  the  recoverv  ibr  the 
ration  is  not  only  higher  than  elsewhere,  being  't  rupees  7  annas  for  a  private  of  foot,  but 
does  not  rise  in  proportion  with  the  several  non-commissioned  ranks,  and  draws  a  distinction 
between  tlie  cavalry  and  infantry,  as  is  done  in  Bengal.  Nor  is  the  appearance  of  consistency 
preserved;  for  while  4r.  9a.  9p.  are  allowed  as  full  batta  (that  is  to  say,  provision  money),  a 
deduction  only  of  l-r.  7a.  is  made  for  the  rations. 

At  Bombay  the  mode  is  simple.  In  garrison  or  stationar}',  the  soldier  receives  12rs.  per 
month,  and  provides  his  own  provisions.  In  the  field,  or  marching,  he  is  provisioned  bv  the 
Commissariat,  and  pays  3r.  8a.  (or  Z\d.  per  diem)  for  his  ration;  hut  has  one  great  advantage 
in  a  public  point  of  view,  for  he  is  at  all  times  provided  with  cooking  utensils,  has  them  tinned, 
and  carrieil  for  him, — by  which  he  is  always  efficient  as  a  soldier,  having  nothing  to  think  of 
but  himself  and  his  accoutrements.  While  at  Bengal  and  Madras  he  is  put  to  this  ex[)ense  ; 
and  consequently  it  is  but  a  natural  feeling  that  he  should  be  anxious  about  his  property,  and 
sometimes  have  his  attention  distracted  as  to  the  probability  of  its  loss,  when  he  ought  to  be 
thinking  of  his  dutj'  ; — not  to  adveit  to  the  injury  to  the  service,  of  the  soldier  not  having  his 
meal  in  due  time.  This  cannot  occur  to  the  Europeans  on  the  Bombay  side,  as  everything 
is  done  by  the  public  departments,  and  the  commanding  ofScer  immediately  complains,  on  the 
occurrence  of  any  deficiency. 

This  idea  was  probably  present  to  the  minds  of  the  Madras  Government,  as  chatties  or 
earthen  pots  are  given  to  the  men ;  but  this  is  a  poor  substitute  for  the  other  mode.  A  question 
might  be  asked  as  to  its  being  more  expensive.  The  introduction  of  it  generally  certainly  woidd  ; 
though  it  is  essential  to  state — the  scale  lately  introduced  at  Madras  iloes  not  provide  for  the  com- 
fort of  the  soldier  in  any  degree,  as  would  be  expected,  in  proportion  to  the  great  dissimilarity  of 
its  system  to  those  of  the  other  Presidencies :  and  as  to  comparative  expense,  I  have  no  hesita- 
tion in  affirming  it  to  be  greater  than  the  one  that  prevails  at  Bombay  or  even  at  Bengal. 

The  mode  also  of  recovery  from  the  soldier  varies,  as  has  been  shown,  all  over  Inilia;  and 
why  it  should  do  so  in  any  case  I  am  at  a  loss  to  conjecture,  for  it  answers  no  jnu-pose  of 
regularity  or  ceconomy  ;  and  these  anomalies  (for  they  really  are  such)  give  rise  to  those 
frequent  and  reiterated  orders,  complaints,  and  mollifications  by  the  Honourable  Court,  the 
perusal  of  which  by  an  inexperienced  person  would  lead  him  to  the  conclusion  that  something 
like  confusion  existed  in  so  essential  a  branch  of  their  service. 

In  all  general  arrangements  and  plans,  it  is  but  too  obvious  that  distinctions  of  any  kind 
are  productive  of  no  good  in  a  great  public  service  like  that  of  India;  by  any  attempt  to  make 
the  receipts  in  one  place  counterbalance,  or  compensate  for  payments  made  in  another:  this 
variable  mode  should  give  way  to  tiie  establishment  of  one  uniform  and  general  system.  This  idea 
seems  to  iiave  suggested  itself  more  than  once  to  the  Court  of  Directors,  and  may  have  originated 
their  orders  at  different  times,  directing  the  practice  in  force  at  one  Presidency,  which  seemed  to 
them  the  best,  to  be  adopted  at  another;  and  my  miiuite  on  this  subject  of  the  20th  July  1829, 
six  months  previous  to  tlie  leceipt  of  their  orders  issued  at  Bombay,  is  in  complete  accordance 
with  this  opinion,  proving  the  practicability  of  the  measure  in  all  its  parts. 

The  Madras  deduction  of  rupees  !■ — 7  may  a|)pear  larger  than  the  Bengal  and  Bombay  one 
of  rupees  3—8;  for  die  Madras  soldier's  pay  is  calculated  at  13  rupees  2  annas,  instead  of 
rupees  12,  to  which  first  sum  the  deduction  bears  a  relative  proportion;  and  the  general 
expense  is,  as  I  have  already  shown,  greater  in  an  extraordinary  degree  than  that  of  the  other 
Presidencies    in  the  field,    not   from    the  Commissariat  charges,  which  cannot   be   correctly 

•  Four  rupees  nine  annas,  f  ^oar  rupees  seven  aunas.  %  Pay,  thirteen  rupees  two  annas. 

c 


10 

estimated  in  campaigning  (as  they  vary  every  montli),  but  arising  from  the  plan  of  giving  the 
batta  of  rupees  4 — 9. 

I  feel  the  greatest  difficultj'  in  attempting  to  frame  a  comparison  of  the  three  establishments, 
and  will,  to  preserve  perspicuity,  notice  Bengal,  which  will  be  the  best  example  on  the  whole, 
on  the  score  of  charging  the  soldier  for  his  ration  all  the  year  round.  He  receives  8  rupees 
8  annas  pay,  and  is  fully  provisioned ; — thus  in  the  first  instance  complying  with  the  King's 
warrant  as  to  the  3hd.  per  diem  (equal  to  3  rupees  8  annas)  being  deducted  from  him; — but  the 
Government  purchase  back,  from  him  the  dram  of  liquor  at  the  rate  of  3  rupees  2  annas  per 
month  ;  and  thus,  by  a  double  arrangement  of  taking  with  one  hand  and  giving  back  with  the 
other,  the  soldier  in  reality  gets  12  rupees  as  pay,  and  his  provisions.  Whereas  at  Bombay, 
under  similar  circumstances,  he  pays  3  rupees  8  annas  for  his  ration  ;  and  at  garrison  stations 
he  pays  rupees  1 — 4  for  his  liquor  out  of  his  pay,  besides  subsisting  himself;  and  the  one  at 
Madras  pays  4 — 7,  and  in  garrison  Ir.  la.  5p.  for  liquor,  and  subsists  himself  also. 

It  may  be  equally  applicable  in  this  place  to  show  the  general  expense  of  provisioning  the 
soldier  at  the  three  Presidencies  (in  the  field),  including  his  pay,  provisions,  and  compensation 
money  : — 

Rupees.  Annas. 

At  Bengal 18     O"]  including  esta- 

Madras  (including  batta,  but  no  compensation) 23     5  Vblishment,  car- 
Bombay,  (neither  batta  nor  compensation) 18     sj  riage,  &c. 

Garrison  Cost  of  a  Soldier : — 

Rupees.  Annas. 

Bengal 14   13 

Madras 13     2 

Bombay 12     0 

This  statement,  it  is  to  be  recollected,  is  not  founded  on  the  same  comprehensive  basis  as  that 
of  the  Auditor-general's,  as  the  pay  and  Commissariat  expense  only  are  taken  into  account ;  the 
other  items,  of  clothing,  &c.,  I  do  not  conceive  as  belonging  to  this  question,  and  would  only  be 
used  on  the  argument  at  large,  when  speaking  of  the  soldier  as  he  stands  the  State  in,  for 
every  expense. 

It  is  also  to  be  assumed  from  similar  data,  that  the  actual  loss  sustained  by  Government  for 
provisioning  troops  on  the  three  Presidencies,  arises  from  the  difference  of  the  actual  cost  of 
the  ration  to  Government,  and  the  price  at  which  it  is  charged  severally.  At  Bengal,  a 
soldier  in  garrison  costs  1  rupee  11  annas  more  than  at  Madras,  and  2  rupees  13  annas  more 
than  at  Bombay;  and  therefore,  taking  the  number  in  Bengal  to  be  11,000,  the  amount  would 
be  about  Rs.  2,23,000  above  Madras,  and  3,72,000  above  Bombaj',  supposing  each  Presi- 
dency had  the  same  number  of  troops — for  the  comparison  cannot  be  made  in  any  other  way  : 
and  by  the  same  parity  of  calculation,  the  Bombay  plan  is  Rs.  1,47,000  cheaper  than  the 
Madras  per  annum  ;  and  if  the  plan  of  the  Madras  batta  be  considered,  it  follows  that  they 
could  not  send  5000  men  into  the  field  without  exceeding  the  expense  attending  this  number 
at  the  other  Presidencies  by  4  \a.cs  per  cinnimi.  It  must  therefore  be  evident  that  the  arrange- 
ment on  the  western  side  of  India,  on  tlie  score  of  effectiveness  of  the  soldier,  and  ceconomy, 
cannot  be  equalled  by  the  modes  at  Bengal  and  Madras.  On  the  question  of  the  advantages 
and  disadvantages  between  the  system  of  Bengal  and  Bombay,  it  is  only  left  for  me  to  observe, 
that  the  comparison  becomes  still  more  favourable  to  Bombay,  when  the  question  of  foreign 
expeditions  occurs.  Two  thirds  of  those  generally  consist  of  natives;  and  as  no  deduction  is 
ever  made  from  them  for  rations  in  Bengal  and  Aladras,  the  expense  is  consequently  a  dead 
loss;  whereas  at  Bombay  there  is  a  set-off"  of  33t  reas  per  man  per  diem,  or  the  batta  of 
Rs.  2 — 8  per  month.  There  is  another  difference,  however, — that  there  are  no  hospital  stoppages 
at  Bombay  and  Madras,  as  at  Bengal.  All  these  dissimilar  points  should  be  cancelled,  and 
a  general  uniformity  established,  upon  a  basis  that  can  be  easily  made  to  meet  the  prejudices 
and  provide  for  the  comfort  of  the  individual,  both  European  and  Native. 

In  campaigning,  the  Bengal  plan  can  boast  of  a  considerable  advantage  over  the  Madras  one, 
but  nothing  to  speak  of  over  Bombay,  except  the  cheapness  of  provisions  and  servants,  which 
is  adventitious  from  local  circumstances,  and  not  ascribable  to  perfection  of  system.  If  therefore 
the  three  Presidencies  possessed  the  same  means  as  to  cheapness,  to  which  side  the  preference 
would  incline  would  be  immediately  seen,  as  there  is  a  clear  large  saving  by  the  Bombay  plan 
of  allowing  the  troops  to  provision  themselves.  From  these  and  otiier  sources  of  information, 
it  will  be  obvious  that  the  humane  care  at  all  times  evinced  by  the  British  Government  for  the 
lives  of  its  soldiers  (and  in  no  country  is  it  more  conspicuous  than  in  India*)  has  a  direct  ten- 
dency to  charge  the  State  with  every  extraexpense,  which  the  moiety  of  the  soldier's  pay  of  3|f/., 
ordered  by  His  ^lajesty's  warrant,  is  quite  inadequate   to  cover.    It  has  probably  Irom  this 

•  In  Ceylon  he  is  charged  Cxi.  for  lib.  of  meat,  1  seer  of  rice,  and  2  drams  of  aiTack.  In  India  he  receives 
nearly  twice  as  much  in  value,  and  never  can  be  charged  more  than  3\d.  for  it. 


11 

feeling  become  an  established  usage  in  Bengal  to  provision  Europeans  in  all  situations,  charging 
them  (agreeably  to  the  regulations)  less  for  their  rations  tiiau  the  provisions  actually  cost 
the  Government.  This  conviction  gives  rise  to  the  necessity  of  ascertaining  the  lowest  rate  at 
which  the  ration  can  be  supplied  to  the  soldier  when  not  on  actual  service;  for  when  in  the 
field,  it  of  necessity  varies  every  month :  no  average  can  be  formed,  as  no  expense  is  spared  in 
keeping  hint  efficient  as  far  as  the  Commissariat  is  concerned.  All  calculations  therefore  must 
conse(]uently  be  confined  to  fixed  stations,  or  movements  from  station  to  station,  under  what- 
ever denomination  of  full  or  half  batta. 

In  any  change,  I  should  rather  incline  to  the  introduction  of  a  modified  plan,  differing  from 
all  the  modes  at  present  in  use,  and  at  the  same  time  distinguishing  between  the  ration  for  field 
service  (where  a  man  requires  more  sustenance  to  recruit  his  physical  strength),  and  the  one 
for  fixed  cantonments,  whether  full  or  half  batta.  It  appears  that  the  Europeans  at  Madras 
never  receive  biscuit  but  when  the  rice  is  bad,  the  advantage  of  which  might  be  questioned; 
and  I  certainly  would  not  advise  its  adoption  at  the  other  Presidencies,  especially  as  the  cjuantity 
is  only  fib.  bread.  A  healthy  man  marching  can  scarcely  manage  with  less  than  one  jiound 
of  bread ;  this  opinion  might  be  supported  from  the  practice  of  medical  men,  who  allow  their 
patients  in  hospital  fib. :  however,  if  soldiers  are  to  have  the  same  rations  while  stationary  as 
marching,  the  proposed  plan  in  the  annexed  Table,  which  exhibits  but  little  variety  from  the  old 
one,  might  be  adopted  ;  but  as  it  is  eoually  difficult  to  cause  variety  without  entailing  a  greater 
degree  of  expense,  I  have  been  guided,  in  connecting  economy  with  efficiency,  in  adhering  to 
general  and  not  partial  principles  of  calculation. 

Table  A. 
Proposed  Ration  to  Europeans  Marching  and  Stationary. 


Field  Service  or  actual  Marching. 
Ration  Weekly. 

1  \  Pound  of  Meat    7  days 

1  Pound  of  Biscuit  or  Bread    7   do. 

A  Pound  of  Rice    4   do. 

I  Pound  of  Flour      3   do. 

4.  Pounds  of  Wood    7   do. 

1  Ounce  of  Salt     7   do. 

2  Drams  of  Spirits    7   do. 


Stationary  Cantonments  on  Full  or  Half  Batta. 
Ration  Weekly. 

1  Pound  of  Meat     7  days 

f  Pound  of  Bread    7   do. 

i  Pound  of  Rice  3   do. 

i  Pound  of  Flour     4   do. 

2  Pounds  of  Wood   7   do. 

i  Ounce  of  Salt    7   do. 

i  Dram  of  Spirits 7   do. 


Salt  meat  never  to  be  issued  but  on  occasions  of  emergency,  and  then  only  one  pound  per 
man. 

In  order  to  introduce  flour  (an  article  the  men  are  fond  of)  as  enabling  them  to  make  pud- 
dings, dumplings  and  apps,  and  reducing  the  quantity  of  rice,  which  they  generally  dislike, 
seldom  using  it  in  anything  but  curry,  and  whicli  they  conceive  a  bad  substitute  tor  bread  or 
biscuit,  either  of  which  they  deem  indispensable  as  a  daily  ingredient  of  their  meals. 

As  an  argument  of  this  kind  must  to  a  certain  degree  be  hypothetical,  and  can  only  be  partly 
supported  by  facts,  I  shall  venture  to  explain  my  view  of  the  subject  by  entering  on  the  largest 
plan  as  the  safest  one  for  elucidation,  and  take  Bengal  as  the  best  adapted  tor  the  purpose,  be- 
cause tiio  troops  in  Bengal  are  provisioned  all  the  year  round.  And  it  has  been  calculated  from 
the  average  current  prices,  that  the  difference  between  the  present  ration  (witiiout  licjuor)  and 
the  new  one  would  be  a  saving  to  Government  of  5  annas  9  pice  per  man  per  mensem  while 
stationary,  but  when  actually  marching,  or  on  field  service,  the  loss  would  be  9  annas  Ij  pice. 
Pursuing  this  calculation,  I  shall  take  it  as  a  fair  concession,  "  that  hardly  one  fourth  of  the 
Europeans  will  be  ordered  for  service  or  move  from  one  cantonment  to  another  evcnj  i/ear," 
thus  taking  all  disadvantages;  but  admitting  that  proportion  to  be  marching  the  whole  year 

round,  the  Government  would  lose  in  that  year  rupees    20,391      0 

But  by  the  remaining  three  fourths  of  tlie  stationary  number  would  gain  rupees  ....  36,871    14 

Thus  givingrupees  16,832   13 

as  a  clear  profit  per  annum,  allowing  one  fourth  of  the  Europeans  to  be  in  constant  movement. 
This  saving  will  of  course  increase  in  the  same  rate  that  the  number  of  field  or  moving  regi- 
ments and  detachments  decreases ;  but  a  profit  is  never  contemplated  when  discussing  the  subject 
of  the  expense  a  State  incurs  in  e(|uipping  or  providing  for  its  troops.  All  I  believe  that  can 
be  aimed  at  is  a  plan  founded  on  the  most  occonomical  principles  that  will  ensure  efficiency. 

To  show  the  relative  situations  of  the  soldier  under  the  three  Presidencies  on  the  score  of  pe- 
cuniary advantages,  with  the  treatment  he  experiences  under  each  respectively,  I  shall  select 
the  soldier  of  the  third  class,  or  under  seven  years'  service,  as  best  adapted  for  the  calculation  to 
be  founded  on;  and  then  the  following  statement  will  prove  that  the  soldier  in  Bengal  receives 
in  hard  cash  more  money  actually  than  the  soldier  at  Bombay,  and  but  a  little  less  than  at 
Madras. 

C2 


12 

Table  of  Expenditure  for  a  European  on  the  three  Presidencies  for  a  Mo7ith  of  SO  days  at 

Full  and  Half  Batta  Stations. 


Full 

Batta  Stations. 

Bengal. 

Madras. 

Bombay. 

Pay     8 

Compensation  for  Liquor 3 

9  10 
2    0 

Pay 8  11 

Batta 4     9 

0 
9 

Pay 8     8     0 

Nothing. 

Total  Cash     11 

11  10 
9     U 

Total  Cash  ....    13     4 
8  12 

9 
0 

Total  Cash ....  8  8  0 
S  12    0 

Cost  of  Provisions  furnished  to 
each  man                  . .                   4 

Total  cost  to  Government  for  a 

Cattle  establishment,  &c.  Rs.  16 

6     5i 

22     9 

0 

17     4-     0 

Half 

Batta  Stations. 

Bengal. 

Madras. 

Bombay. 

Pay    ; 

Compensation  for  Liquor .... 

Total  Cash 

8 

1 

9  10 
9     0 

Pay 13     2 

Deduct  Liquor        1     6 

0 
0 

Pay 12 

Deduct  Liquor        1 

0     0 
4     0 

10 
•i 

2  10 
10    2 

Total  Cash 11   12 

Subsists  himself.     -     - 

0 

Total  Cash  ....  10 
Subsists  himself.    - 

12    0 

Cost  of  Provisions  to  Govern- 
ment for  one  man  

Total  cost  to  Government. .  . . 

14 

3     0 

13     2 

0 

12 

0    0 

It  is  onlv  requisite  here  to  observe,  that  in  Bengal  the  soldier  at  a  full  batta  station  receives 
(including  his  pay  and  compensation  for  his  liquor)  llr.  11a.  lOp.,  and  at  half  batta  stations 
lOr.  2a.  lOp.  At  Bombay  on  field  service  he  receives  8 — 8  exclusive  of  the  deduction  of 
Rs.  3 — 8  for  his  ration.  Stationary  (having  paid  for  his  liquor  but  getting  no  ration)  he  receives 
lOr.  12a.  At  Madras  in  the  field  he  receives  13 — 5  (after  paying  for  his  ration),  and  at  gar- 
rison stations  11 — 12,  after  paying  for  his  liquor  and  finding  his  own  provisions:  which  at  a  mode- 
rate computation  will  cost  rupees  5 — 4;  thus  clearing  at  the  end  of  the  month  not  more  than 
rupees  5 — 8  Bombay,  and  6^8  Madra.s,  to  coverall  his  other  expenses  of  dress,  tobacco,  pipe- 
clay, cook,  &c.  It  is  therefore  assuming  nothing  more  than  facts  warrant,  that  the  soldier  in 
Bengal  has  a  third  more  money  at  his  own  disposal  for  drinking  (if  he  be  so  inclined)  than  at 
the  other  Presidencies. 

The  question  of  provisioning  native  troops  is  a  short  one,  when  they  are  entitled  to  rations, 
which  is  on  foreign  service  alone:  and  though  it  is  an  expensive,  difficult,  and  extensive  task, 
as  well  as  supply,  the  provisions  are  given  at  Bengal  and  Madras  gratis ;  but  at  Bombay  a  de- 
duction of  33^  reas  per  diem  or  rupees  2 — 2>  per  mensem  (the  full  batta)  is  made  to  counterbalance 
the  expenditure;  while  the  granting  compensation  when  grain  is  high  in  the  market,  is  a  prac- 
tice throughout  India,  with  one  peculiarity  attending  the  mode  at  Madras,  that  the  European 
troops  participate  in  it,  which  must  increase  the  general  expense,  as  they  pay  nothing  in  return*  : 
although  troops  who  in  limes  of  scarcity  receive  provisions  from  public  stores  have  a  deduc- 
tion made  for  the  same  from  their  pay. 

The  humanity  and  consideration  displayed  in  the  late  orders  of  the  Court  on  the  head  of  ra- 
tions for  invalids  and  recruits  from  Europe,  have  their  full  effect ;  as  all  regulations  springing 
from  the  like  motives  must  invariably  tend  to  the  good  of  the  service,  and  ought  to  be  made 
applicable  to  the  sick  on  foreign  service. 

Service  on  Board  Ship. 

The  subject  of  European  and  native  troops  on  board  ship,  though  a  most  serious  one,  must 
still  be  explained  by  Tablesf,  which  I  have  appended,  accompanied  by  explanatory  notes ;  nor  do 
I  conceive  that  I  am  treating  the  question  lightly,  by  recommending  so  concise  a  mode  for  its 
comprehension.  The  necessity  of  so  doing  arises  in  a  considerable  measure  from  the  great  length 
I  have  been  obliged  to  enter  into  of  the  description  already  of  the  preceding  heads.  I  shall 
therefore  only  add,  that  by  the  comparative  view  displayed  in  the  Tables,  it  appears  that  the 

•  This  is  probably  a  species  of  set-off  for  the  Europeans'  never  getting  biscuit. — E.  F. 
t  1,  2,  3,  4,  6,  C,  7,  8  and  9.    See  Appendix  for  these  Tables. 


13 

greatest  difference  is  on  tlie  Madras  side,  ami  tiiat  the  Bengal  and  Bombay  scales  assimilate 
more  to  each  other.  These  two  latter  are  also  less  expensive  and  better  adapted  to  the  several 
castes  of  men  that  compose  those  two  armies;  tlie  items  of  dillei-ence  are  pointed  out,  and  as 
they  exceed  or  fall  short,  to  justity  either  their  adoption,  or  rejection,  as  iIil-  utilily  of  the  case 
must  decide  on  the  preservation  ot'the  health  and  ct)nil'ort  of  the  troops  as  the  primary  object. 

No  Government  ever  paid  more  attention  to  the  religious  sentiments  of  its  subjects  than  the 
Honourable  Court,  who  have  uniforndy  given  the  strongest  jiroofs  of  their  regard  at  all  times 
lor  their  feelings,  and  particidarly  those  connected  with  the  prejudices  of  its  Hindoo  soldiers.  I 
therefore  feel  myself  in  this  situation  encouraged  to  express  myself  with  more  confidence  in 
thus  j)roniptly  stating  the  apparent  oversight  of  a  practice  so  intimately  interwoven  with  tlie 
very  first  j)iinciples  of  our  rule,  being  fully  aware  from  long  experience  of  the  great  influence 
alforded  by  our  conciliation  of  those  peculiar  feelings,  and  the  evil  of  daniping  the  ant-ction^  of 
this  high-spirited  race  of  men,  that  must  ensue  by  a  departure  from  a  long-established  system, 
whose  leading  feature  is  benevolence,  founded  on  the  soundest  policy.  The  circumstance  I  al- 
lude to  is  as  follows: — 

The  Honourable  Court  in  the  Bombay  general  order  December  10,  1829,  directs  the  whole 
of  the  ^Madras  system  of  victualling  troops  at  sea  to  be  enforced  at  Bombay,  which  may  have 
arisen  from  a  slight  oversight;  anil  I  shoultl  ill  fulfill  my  own  duty  were  1  not  to  jioinl  out  the 
discrepancy  for  higher  consideration.  It  would  be  su])erfluous  here  to  enter  into  a  detail  of  the 
articles  proposed  for  the  subsistence  of  Hindoo  troops  on  ship  board,  but  can  be  seen  in  the 
Tables  No.  1,  2,  3,  4-,  5,  6,  7,  8,  and  9.  I  shall  only  state  it  as  a  known  and  admitted  fact,  that 
Hindoos  of  a  certain  caste  cannot  cook  on  board  ship  without  the  loss  of  caste:  of  this  class  of 
Hindoos  there  are  upwards  of  twenty-two  thousand  in  the  Bombay  army  (more  than  two  thirds), 
and  the  subsistence  directed  by  the  Court's  last  orders  consists  of  articles  that  must  be  cooked 
before  they  can  be  eaten  ;  and  are  ailapted  to  Musselmans  and  those  lower  castes  of  Hindoos 
that  can  cook  on  board  ship.  I  cainiot  pretend  to  be  intimately  acquainted  with  the  high-caste 
Hindoos  in  the  Madras  army,  who  can  cook  on  board  ship  without  tlerogation  to  their  religious 
tenets ;  but  of  this  I  am  convinced,  that  no  Rajpoot  from  Hindoostan  or  the  Northern  Provinces 
could  partake  of  provisions  prepared  on  board  ship  without  its  being  followed  by  degradation 
of  caste. 

I  beg  to  repeat,  that  had  I  not  been  most  anxious  on  so  momentous  a  question,  both  as  an 
officer  of  the  native  army  and  a  responsible  public  officer  of  Government,  1  should  have  deemed 
the  preceding  observations  more  than  unnecessary  when  the  orders  of  my  superiors  hail  been 
issued ;  but  on  these  grounds  of  public  regard  towards  my  profession,  and  respect  to  my  Go- 
vernment, I  conceive  I  should  have  had  but  a  very  limited  sense  of  my  duty,  had  I  omitted  to 
point  out  that  which  appears  adverse  to  the  religious  prejudices  of  so  large  a  portion  of  our 
Hindoo  army,  and  can  hardly  be  said,  on  a  fair  view  of  its  anticipated  practical  apj)lication,  to  be 
entirely  divested  of  the  appearance  of  anomaly. 

Arrack. 

This  is  an  article  of  such  universal  use  and  high  price  that  it  requires  a  separate  considera- 
tion, which  is  still  more  requisite  from  the  care  Goverimient  have  always  evinced,  not  only  as  to 
the  wholesomeness  of  its  original  state,  but  also  in  directing  it  to  be  mellowed  by  keeping  before 
it  is  issued  to  the  troops.  This,  ailded  to  the  circumstances  of  the.rate  at  which  the  soldier  re- 
ceives it,  subjects  the  Government  to  a  very  heavy  expense,  though  it  is  attempted  to  be  shown  in 
Bengal  that  a  profit  is  derived  from  it. 

At  Bengal  the  Government  purchase  spirit  at  1  rupee  per  gallon,  proof,  free  of  duty;  and 
retail  it  at  2  rupees  a  gallon  to  the  men,  10  per  cent,  under  proof.  At  Bombay  it  is  bought  at 
1  .  o  .  4  per  gallon,  including  town  duty,  and  retailed  at  1.2.  66f  per  gallon,  2t  per  cent, 
under  London  proof;  while  at  Madras,  the  liquor  is  purchased  1  believe  at  Colombo,  but  I  am 
not  aware  at  what  rate  or  proof;  however  it  is  retailed  to  the  soldier  at  1  rupee  12  annas  per 
gallon  for  the  regulated  allowance,  and  at  2.5.1-  per  gallon  on  the  canteen  account :  so 
the  advantages  of  the  Madras  Presidency  in  this  respect  cannot  be  stated,  but  may  on  exami- 
nation be  found  to  fall  short  of  the  expenses  that  arc  incurred  by  Government  on  that  account. 

It  has  been  argued  in  favour  of  the  Bengal  system,  that  the  gratuitous  donation  of  the  ration 
to  the  troops  is  compensated  for  to  Government  by  the  price  at  v\hich  the  lii|Uor  is  sold,  as 
well  as  of  the  gain  that  arises  between  the  high  degree  of  jiroof  at  which  the  rum  is  received, 
and  the  10  per  cent,  lowering  at  which  it  is  issued,  yielding  in  all  about  112  per  cent,  (irofit. 
This  is  doubtless  an  argument  /)?7Wrt  /flc/c  very  good  but;  it  is  in  fact  a  conclusion  shown 
from  apjiearances,  and  not  a  deduction  from  reality,  as  a  matter  of  figures.  I  shall  therefore 
submit  the  grounds  of  my  opinion  for  believing  that  the  Government  does  not  gain  by  this 
species  of  traffic. 

If  by  giving  compensation,  still  it  is  maintained  to  be  the  cheapest  plan  to  save  innumerable 
charges  of  transport,  &c.  as  well  as  to  defray  the  price  of  the  gratis  ration,  the  argument  be- 


14 

comes  weaker  by  extension ;  as  it  only  proves  that  the  profit  by  the  sale  of  the  liquor  is  still  less 
adequate  to  meet  so  many  demands  and  cover  the  usual  losses :  and  therefoi'e  can  be  admitted 
to  bear  no  part  in  reducing  the  expense  of  the  donation,  the  price  of  which  would  alone  de- 
mand it. 

It  is  evident  that  the  Government,  in  paying  compensation  in  Bengal  to  the  men,  lose  about 
107  per  cent,  as  long  as  the  men  draw  only  their  regulated  allowance  of  one  or  two  drams,  ac- 
cording to  the  station  of  full  or  half  batta  they  are  at ;  but  if  they  were  allowed  to  draw  above 
their  regulated  quantity,  the  Government  would  gain  by  the  excess  in  the  retail  price  about  22§ 
per  cent.  In  explanation  of  which  it  is  only  necessary  to  state  that  the  rum  is  purchased  at 
London  proof  for  15t  Sicca  annas  or  St.  1.0.2  per  gallon,  and  issued  to  the  canteens  at 
10  per  cent,  under  proof,  and  at  2  St.  rupees  the  gallon,  for  11,400  men,  the  number  provi- 
sioned in  Bengal. 

The  compensation  paid  is  as  follosvs  : — 

For  5,619  men  at  Full  Batta  stations 17,559     6 

For  5,781  ditto  Half  Batta  ditto 9,032  13 

11,400  Monthly  amount     26,592     3 

Suppose  the  same  number  of  men  draw  2  drams  from   the  canteen  daily,   the 

amount  is 34,378     2 


The  monthly  saving  is       7,785  15 

or  annually     93,431     4 
which  will  be  hardly  sufficient  to  cover  all    the  charges  of  every  description  for  transport, 
wastage,  &c. 
The  result  of  the  foregoing  calculation  would  be,  that  if  2  drams  were  issued  to 

the  canteen  for  each  man  at  the  retail  price,  the  amount  monthly  would  be  .  Rs.  34,378  2 
This  is  making  a  fair  allowance  for  sick,  prudent,  and  saving  characters.     But  the 

Government  compensation  to  the  same  number  of  men  amounts  to 26,592     3 

Leaving  monthly  a  balance  of 7,785  15 

or  an  annual  one  of 93,431     ♦ 

in  favour  of  Government  retailing  the  liquor  and  paying  the  compensation  also. 

But  there  is  probably  an  objection  to  the  plan  in  question  not  to  be  overlooked, —  that  the  men 
lose  the  monthly  compensation  money  of  rupees  3  .  2  at  a  full,  and  Rs.  1  .  9  at  a  half  batta  station. 
But  as  the  Bengal  Government  introduced  this  payment  about  two  years  since  as  an  advantage  to 
the  men  and  oeconomy  to  themselves,  while  it  operated  as  a  great  increase  to  the  soldier's  receipts, 
beyond  that  received  in  other  parts  of  India,  which  might  not  have  exactly  been  contemplated, 
it  might  seem  worthy  of  consideration  how  far  it  would  be  equitable,  or,  more  correctly  speaking, 
indulgent,  to  withdraw  the  grant,  now  forming  so  considerable  a  part  of  the  soldier's  income. 

The  advantage  of  this  mode  depends  on  the  rate  at  which  the  rum  is  bought,  and  afterwards 
sold,  assuming  that  the  wastage,  dryage,  &c.  are  covered  by  this  advance  of  price :  but  it  is  also 
to  be  recollected,  that  the  liquor  must  be  kept  in  store  for  three  years  before  it  is  issued.  The 
wastage  therefore  for  that  period  alone  must  be  calculated  from  2  to  4  per  cent,  per  annum  for 
vats  of  3000  gallons,  from  9  to  12  for  leagures,  and  from  15  to  20  for  hogsheads;  so  that  the 
advantage  that  is  gained  by  the  lowering  of  the  liquor  10  per  cent,  on  issue,  and  the  ad- 
vanced price  at  which  it  is  sold,  is  barely  equivalent  to  the  loss  occasioned  by  evaporation, 
soakage,  and  leakage  of  the  first  year ;  and  the  loss  sustained  during  the  remaining  two  years 
that  the  liquor  must  remain  in  store  to  become  mellow,  has  nothing  left  to  counterbalance  it. 
This  estimate  does  not  embrace  the  larger  expenditure  of  wastage  on  field  service,  where  it  is 
immense,  but  confines  itself  to  the  circumstance  of  the  most  careful  management,  nor  does  it 
include  any  expenses  of  warehousing  and  other  contingencies. 

At  Bombay  the  liquor  (arrack)  is  purchased  at  24  per  cent,  under  London  proof,  and  issued 
at  the  same,  after  being  kept  eighteen  months  in  store  ;  as  it  is  considered  to  have  become  suffi- 
ciently mellow  in  that  period  :  one  year  and  a  half's  wastage  is  by  this  means  saved,  besides 
other  expenses  of  labour,  watering,  &c. :  and  the  price  which  the  troops  pay  for  it  is  an  advance  of 
41§  per  cent,  exclusive  of  town  duty,  which  covers  most,  but  not  all,  the  charges.  The  following 
statement  of  the  advantages  and  disadvantages  in  the  purchase  and  issue  of  spirits  at  Bombay 
exhibits  the  details,  which  if  applied  by  w.iy  of  analogy  for  calculation  would  furnish  no  insecure 
(lata  to  proceed  on,  in  judging  of  the  systems  pursued  at  the  other  Presidencies  in  forming  a  fair 
and  general  result. 

The  arrack  is  purchased  at  24  per  cent,  under  London  proof,  at  1  rupee  4  annas  per  gallon, 
exclusive  of  town  duty,  and  retailed  to  the  canteens,  as  well  as  issued  to  the  troops,  at  Ir.  10a.  8p. 
I^er  gallon. 


15 

Tlie  amount  annually  expended  is  120,000  gallons,  which  gives  Government 

a  gain  of lis.  50,006 

The  wastage  and  dryage  in   stores,  conveyance,  evaporation,  &c.  under  the 

whole  Presidency  is  about  18,000  gallons,  or Rs. 22,500 

Indemnification  of  one  dram  per  gallon  to  the  troops  on  120,000  gallons,  is 

gallons  3000,  or Rs.  3,750 

Hamallage  on  consignments  to  out-stations,  &c.  annually 12,000 

Cost  of  vessels  to  retain  and  transport,  repairs,  &c.  per  annum 11,950 

Expense  of  establishment  of  contluctors  and  coopers,  &c.  per  annum    .     .     .       7,092 
Wareiiousing  at  5  per  cent,  on  200,000  gallons,  though  most  of  the  ware- 
houses are  public  buildings 10,000 

67,292 

Probable  loss  to  Government  per  ainium,  exclusive  of  town  duty, 
while  the  troops  are  stationary,  but  must  be  considerably  increased 
by  any  field  forces  moving,  by  its  transport  carriage,  and  the  great 

wastage  unavoidable  from  marching,  and  exposure  to  the  heat  of  the  

sun  all  day  long, ■     .      .     .      .  17,292 

I  therefore  reply,  that  it  is  a  result  that  has  been  clearly  arrived  at,  that  the  Government  do 
not,  nor  can,  derive  any  profit  from  the  present  mode  of  supplying  liquor  to  its  soldiers, — a  de- 
duction I  think  that  seems  to  arise  from  the  examination  of  a  practical  system,  but  divested  I 
trust  in  the  discussion  of  the  least  shade  of  bias  or  wish  to  substitute  one  hypothesis  for  an- 
other, leaving  the  facts  as  they  exist  for  higher  authority  to  draw  an  unerring  conclusion  from. 
As  to  the  alleged  evil  of  the  men  appropriating  the  saving  they  may  make  from  their  provi- 
sions to  die  purchase  of  bad  liquor,  the  prevention  to  this  is  good  messes,  and  the  canteen  sup- 
plied with  wholesome  spirits  retailed  at  a  moderate  rate.  All  this  must  rest  entirely  with  the 
commanding  officer  and  the  internal  oeconomy  of  the  regiment.  The  soldier  always  takes  good 
spirits  in  preference  to  bad,  when  it  comes  within  his  means ;  the  canteen  is  preferred  to  the 
precarious  way  of  getting  unwholesome  spirits  by  stealth,  though  he  might  get  more  by  the 
latter  mode  for  his  money,  which  however  subjects  him  to  the  penalties  for  irregular  conduct. 
The  only  objection  he  has  to  it  is,  that  he  is  more  immediately  under  the  eye  of  the  non-com- 
missioned officers  as  to  the  quantity  he  drinks. 

It  is  remarkable,  but  well  known,  that  amongst  men  in  camp  or  even  in  open  cantonments, 
where  the  facilities  of  obtaining  liquor  are  greater,  less  drinking  is  observed  than  when  confined 
to  barracks.  This  may  be  accounted  for  in  a  moral  sense  as  arising  from  their  minds  being 
more  occupied  and  amused,  as  well  as  their  receiving  daily  what  they  generally  deem  a  sufficient 
quantity,  two  drams. 

This  argument  is  more  than  hypothetical ;  for  besides  what  has  been  said  above,  it  is  also 
founded  on  the  feelings  and  inclinations  of  the  men,  who  would  thus  have  the  choice  of  receiv- 
ing the  full  allowance  or  only  a  part  of  it,  as  best  pleased  themselves.  I  might  further  add,  that 
the  Europeans  on  the  Bombay  side  who  have  had  the  option  of  drawing  two  drams  during  the 
rainy  season  invariably  took  it. 

By  the  Bengal  mode  and  rate  of  100  per  cent,  of  retailing  spirits  to  the  canteens,  being  adopted 
at  Bombay,  and  no  per  centage  taken  on  the  regulated  allowance  issued  to  the  men,  the  Govern- 
ment would  not  be  subjected  to  a  greater  degree  of  loss  or  deficiency  than  at  present;  but  the 
new  mode  would  furnish  an  indulgence  to  the  men  who  at  half  batta  stations  would  have  to  pay 
monthly  only  15  annas  per  man  for  their  liquor,  instead  of  rupee  1 — 4;  as  they  do  by  the  old 
plan  : — this  is  only  putting  him  on  a  par  with  the  soldier  in  Bengal. 

The  Bengal  plan  of  allowing  compensation  for  liquor  to  the  men  at  10  pies  per  dram 
in  garrison  and  the  field,  will  not  be  practicable  at  Madras  and  Bombay  in  garrison  stations, 
as  the  troops  are  not  entitled  to  any  li(iuor  without  paying  for  the  same;  while  in  the 
field  this  species  of  indulgence  will  increase  expense,  as  shown  for  the  Bengal  soldier  in  every 
situation,  and  that  to  an  enormous  extent;  for  taking  the  European  troops  at  Madras  and 
Bombay  to  be  16,000,  upon  the  garrison  allowance  of  Ir.  9a.  per  man  per  month,  it  will  be 
about  three  lacks  of  rupees /icr  annum. 

There  was  a  charge  made  in  Bengal  for  rupees  4-716  wastage  for  liquor,  which  agreeably  to 
]Hiblic  information  forms  a  j)er  centage  nominally  of  9000  gallons,  or  \\  per  cent,  oidy  :  but 
the  real  issue  cannot  be  estimated  under  200,000  gallons  (two  lacs),  the  actual  wastage  upon 
which  would  exceed  20,000  gallons  per  annum,  it'  calculated  by  actual  occurrence.  But  the 
fact  1  believe  is,  that  the  10  per  cent,  gain  by  hydrometer  variation  between  the  receipt  of 
the  liquor  from  the  contractor,  and  the  lowered  proof  at  which  it  is  issued  to  the  troops,  is 
thrown  in  to  relieve  the  bond  J!dc  sum  of  the  wastage;  for  it  is  not  carried  to  the  credit  of  the 
Government  in  any  of  the  accounts.  This  therefore  would  account  for  the  wastage  being 
apparently  so  low ;  and  when  added  to  it  would  bring  it  to  its  real  maximum,  and  show  that  it 
is  absolutely  l  +  i  or  15  per  cent,  instead  of  t^  as  stated  above. 

All  this  requires  to  be  rectified ;  because  it'is  not  only  a  fictitious  mode  of  kecjjing  accounts, 
leading  to  no  good  end,    but  may  tend  to  demoralize  the  lower    servants    of   Government 


16 

witnessing  such  an  admitted  fallacy,  whilst  it  places  those  of  the  upper  class  in  a  questionable 
situation.  All  wastages  should  be  ascertained  by  survey  committees  on  the  spot,  the  reasons 
assigned,  and  the  quantity  written  off  in  kind,  and  not  in  money ;  so  ought  the  proof  of  the 
liquor  received  to  be  ascertained  by  committees,  and  entered  on  the  credit  side  of  the  public 
accounts. 

To  charge  wastages  in  cash  is  no  doubt  apparently  the  simplest,  but  decidedly  not  the  most 
accurate  mode  of  exhibiting  expenditure,  as  shown  above;  and  I  trust  that  the  introduction  of 
this  homely  detail  will  not  be  judged  as  a  superfluous  explanation,  but  rather  be  admitted  as  a 
useful  illustration  of  facts  and  systems. 

Under  these  varying  modes,  it  is  difficult  to  pronounce  which  is  the  best;  but  a  uniform  plan 
ought  to  be  adopted  by  the  liquor  being  issued  at  one  rate  and  one  proof,  and  the  charge  for  it 
to  the  men  the  same  all  over  India.     There  should  be  no  excise  duty  levied  on  it,  for  it  stands 
to  reason  that  it  is  a  fictitious  style  of  keeping  accounts,  to  pay  duty  on  an  article  for  our  own 
consumption,  for  the  Government  itself  pays  the  duly  that  it  levies,  which  has  made  an  increase 
at  Bombay  nearly  of  rupees  1250  per  annum,  for  measuring  the  liquor  that  the  collector  may 
lew  the   duty.    This  would  be  one  step  to  clear  off  the  mist  that  hangs  over  the  question,  of 
what  a  European  soldier  really  costs  the  State,  as  the  mode  of  estimation  is  now  so  variously 
conducted  that  hardly  any  one  seems  to  know  the  method  of  ascertaining  it  accurately. — These 
considerations  induce   me  to  think  that  50  per  cent,  on  all  the  establishments,  exclusive  of 
dutv,  would  cover  the  loss  under  the  operation  of  a  uniform  system  ;  but  I  very  much  doubt  if 
twice  that  sum  does  it  at  present. 

Hired  Cattle  and  Folloicers. 

It  must  be  obvious  from  a  glance  even  of  this  widely  spreading  department,  how  impossible 
it  is  to  enumerate  the  particulars  of  the  resources  of  each  Presidency,  and  the  mode  each  has 
pursued  of  adapting  the  different  kinds  of  means  to  their  several  wants.  The  effects  claimed 
by  the  Government  from  this  line  are  both  extensive  and  important,  in  as  far  as  they  relate  to 
the  movement  of  an  army  and  its  effective  operation,  not  only  enabling  it  to  perform  the  most 
rapid  marches  to  insure  success,  but  by  its  weakness  paralyzing  all  military  enterprise. 
Situated  as  the  Indian  army  is,  scattered  over  such  an  immense  space,  it  would  still  not  be 
difficult,  with  the  information  in  our  possession,  to  propose  after  so  much  experience  a  con- 
nected mode  of  conducting  this  branch  of  the  service,  which  formerly  was  thought  of  itself  of 
such  moment,  when  our  armies  were  small,  as  to  be  made  a  separate  department,  with  an 
officer  at  its  head,  with  a  salary  double  that  of  an  individual  who  now  conducts  the  whole  of 
the  Commissariat  for  a  field  force.  The  wished-for  examination  labours  under  more  than  one 
difficulty.  The  cattle  required  are  for  various  purposes, — the  carriage  of  stores  and  provisions 
in  general,  and  those  for  the  draught  of  the  heavy  and  light  artillery  and  ordnance  store  and 
pontoons  ;  for  these  uses  camels  and  bullocks  can  be  reckoned  upon  as  procurable  all  over 
India,  and  do  not  require  much  difficulty  in  arranging  into  one  class.  It  is  of  course  clearly- 
understood  that  this  does  not  include  in  any  way  the  horse  artillery;  and  in  alluding  therefore 
to  bullocks  alone,  the  question  is  a  simple  one,  and  must  rest  where  it  is  ;  and  though  mules 
have  been  tried  for  light  field  guns,  I  am  persuaded  that  whatever  quickness  they  may 
exert  in  the  usual  parade  evolutions,  they  will  fail  in  a  campaign  ;  and  it"  ever  they  take  the 
field,  it  will  be  seen  that  additional  bullocks  will  be  required  to  be  attached  to  them  to  assist 
up  hills,  and  the  steep  banks  of  rivers  and  nullahs,  that  form  such  common  obstructions  to  a 
line  of  march  in  this  country.  I  need  not  dwell  on  the  expense  of  mules,  further  than  to 
state,  that  they  average  two  thirds  as  nuich  as  a  cavalry  horse,  and  lately  their  ciiarges  have 
been  much  reduced  in  point  of  expense;  but  still  the  objection  exists  towards  them,  of  the  cir- 
cumstance of  the  impossibility  of  recruiting  them,  on  the  occurrence  of  casualties,  as  they  are 
not  natives  of  India,  and  nuist  be  brought  from  Persia  and  Scind. 

The  management  of  the  cattle  department  depends,  after  one  general  principle  has  been 
laid  down  for  the  conduct  of  its  interior  duties,  upon  the  first  preparation  for  the  campaign, 
and  the  ap))lying  subsecpiently  the  local  resources  of  the  comitry  in  which  the  troops  are 
situated  or  moving;  and  certainly  north  of  the  Kristna  to  Delhi  there  is  no  want  of  everv 
species  of  cattle,  adapted  to  all  and  every  carriage  for  the  movement  of  an  army;  that  is  to 
say,  elephants,  camels,  and  bullocks,  according  to  the  northern  and  southern  position  of  the 
troops. 

I  am  inclined  in  this  place,  as  not  inapplicable  to  a  subject  of  this  nature,  to  notice  a 
remarkable  animal,  the  Deccan  Tattoo,  which  though  small,  still  from  its  spirit,  hardihood, 
endurance  of  fatigue  and  privation  of  food,  docility  in  management,  though  somewhat  vicious  in 
temper,  1  have  never  witnessed  his  like  in  any  country;  for  he  bears  no  affinity  either  to  the 
pony  ol'the  Eastern  or  to  that  of  the  Shetland  Islands,  for  he  is  not  so  deep-bodied,  and  is 
more  active,  with  a  thinner  skin  and  finer  mane  and  tail.  Of  course  I  am  understood  to 
confine  myself  strictly  to  the  utility  of  the  animal,  and  as  such  I  deem  him  for  the  carriage  of 
every  species  of  stores  and  camp  etjuipage  that  can  be  packed  in  a  package,  or  box,   weighing 


17 

lOOlbs.,  two  of  which  lie  will  easily  earn-  at  a  sharper  rate  than  either  a  camel  or  bullock,  and 
with  e(]ua!  safety;  he  trots  well  in  small  li<i;lit  vehicles,  and  has  freijiiently  shown  a  considerable 
(le<;ree  of  fleetness  and  bottom  for  liis  size  in  a  race:  he  is  generally  a  favourite  with  llie 
younger  officers  of  the  army,  and  is  invariably  preferred  by  the  Sepoys  and  their  families  for 
the  transport  of  their  baggage :  his  head  has  frequently  a  very  blood  appearance,  his  muzzle 
and  nostril  handsome,  and  his  eye  full  and  lively. 

lie  seems  to  have  been  peculiar  (at  least  the  animal  I  mean)  to  the  Mahratta  armies.  He 
was  admirably  adapted  to  the  rajiid  and  long  marches  of  their  predatory  warfare,  for  he 
carrieil  much,  and  moved  at  a  quick  j)ace;  was  easily  maintained,  as  he  re(juired  little  grain, 
and  a  small  cjuantity  of  poor  forage.  \\'hatever  his  size  and  want  of  beauty  may  be,  lie  is 
not  destitute  of  the  qualities  to  perform  long  journeys  and  endure  inclemency  of  weather, 
■which  might  allow  him  to  aspire  to  be  distantly  descended  from  the  line  of  the  Arab ;  but  at 
any  rate,  if  he  be  the  indigenous  native  of  the  soil,  as  he  is  now  generally  reported  to  be,  he 
certainly  may  rank  as  the  blood-horse  of  India.  How  the  fact  may  be  I  know  not,  for  I  have 
been  unable  to  trace  his  pedigree,  or  to  ascertain  anything  more  about  him  than  his  distinctness 
from  the  larger  class  of  horse,  who  either  Arab  or  Indian  have  a  rooted  antipathy  to  the  whole 
race. 

Within  the  last  few  years  much  pains  have  been  taken  to  improve  this  species  by  distributing 
the  smaller  kind  of  Arabs  as  stallions,  and  encouraging  the  natives  to  bring  their  tattoo  mares 
to  be  covered :  the  experiment  is  in  progress,  and  succeeding,  as  the  reports  state  that  the 
inhabitants  prefer  bringing  their  mares  to  these  Arab  horses. 

The  mode  of  stating  the  expenditure  of  the  cattle  department  and  of  its  followers  is  open 
at  Bengal  and  Madras  to  the  common  complaint  of  want  of  clearness ;  for  it  is  mixed  up  with 
other  heads  that  have  nothing  to  do  with  it,  and  consequently  no  accurate  conclusion  can,  as 
to  its  real  expense,  be  arrived  at.  If  a  separation  of  items  was  made,  or,  more  strictlj'  speaking, 
a  simplification  of  accounts  acted  upon,  tliis  evil  with  others  would  disappear,  and  the 
requisite  ceconomy  spring  up  in  the  place  of  any  wastefulness  of  outlay,  which  in  its  present 
shape  it  is  not  easy  to  control,  and  appropriate  its  parts  to  any  particular  branch.  A  new 
arrangement  would  facilitate  the  establishment  of  a  general  and  uniform  plan  that  would 
regulate  the  mode  of  procuring  the  cattle,  their  proper  application,  and  the  amount  of  the 
expense  and  their  attendants,  particularly  those  of  the  draught  and  pack  bullocks,  which 
would  not  pass  as  they  do  now  under  different  denominations,  pay  and  treatment;  which  at 
present  must  in  a  great  degree  be  attributed  as  much  to  the  varying  ideas  of  the  persons  who 
employ  them,  as  to  the  local  usages  of  the  diHerent  provinces  in  which  they  are  i'ound.  This 
circumstance  is  remarkable  from  the  view  taken  of  the  subject  in  Bengal  and  Madras,  where, 
with  the  intention  no  doubt  of  introducing  an  improvement  in  the  breeds  of  the  countrv,  large 
and  expensive  breeding  studs  and  farms  were  established, — exclusive  of  the  annual  outlay  of 
12  lacs  at  Bengal  and  8  lacs  at  Madras  for  the  hired  cattle,  kept  up  as  a  permanent  establish- 
ment. This  disproportion  of  the  expense  in  tranquil  times,  as  well  as  the  practical  utility  of  the 
undertaking,  have  I  believe  been  very  clearly  manitested  by  the  results  produced  at  those 
Presidencies;  for  it  can  hardly  be  worth  while  for  Government  to  breed  cattle  and  camels, 
when  the  latter  are  numerous  and  cheap,  and  the  former  can  be  had  at  rii|)ees  50  per  jiair  in  the 
upper  provinces  of  Bengal,  and  at  a  very  little  higher  rate  in  the  Madras  territories.  The  same 
object,  however,  has  been  accomplished  on  the  western  side  of  India,  as  was  exj)ected  from  the 
breeding  studs ;  the  Government  there  always  gave  the  full  market  prices  for  the  best  cattle, 
and  the  best  hiring  prices  for  the  hired  cattle.  As  a  proof  of  this,  it  is  only  necessary  to 
recollect  that  the  Guzerat  cattle  are  always  procurable,  suited  for  artillery,  with  a  smaller 
class  from  ]\Ialura,  whose  pack  cattle  are  hardly  anywhere  to  be  surpassed,  and  the  Guzerat 
are  held  in  the  highest  estimation  everywhere,  and  nowhere  more  so  than  in  the  nonhern 
parts  of  India,  where  their  own  cattle,  the  nagone,  are  excellent. 

The  only  objection  to  the  Guzerat  cattle  is,  that  they  require  more  care  and  food  than  the 
same  kind  of  animals  from  the  other  parts  of  India:  and  the  stuil  bred  cattle  also,  I  am  tolil,  are 
always  more  delicate  than  others. 

Little  difliculty  seems  to  ])resent  itself  in  attempting  to  account  for  the  fact  of  a  greater 
number  of  cattle  and  tbllowers  being  allowed  and  kept  up  in  Bengal  than  elsewhere,  at  a  com- 
paratively less  ex))ense;  it  is  doubtless  owing  to  more  than  one  reason, — the  local  usages  of  the 
country  do  not  altogether  govern  it,  and  it  may  partly  be  ascribed  to  the  ani])le  means  that 
Presidency  possesses,  added  to  its  being  also  the  seat  of  supreme  authority,  which  furnishes  it 
with  a  surplus  income  that  })laces  that  Ciovernment  beyond  the  anxiety  experienced  by  the 
other  rulers,  who  are  obliged  closely  to  consult  the  extent  of  their  means  on  every  trifling 
occasion  ;  while  no  feeling  of  that  sort,  of  measuring  the  cost  with  the  object  re(]uireil,  need 
exist  in  Bengal,  where  the  sense  of  public  oecononiy  is  practised  on  a  broad  scale.  I  do  not 
wish  this  observation  to  convey  more  than  its  proper  meaning,  or  anything  like  invidious- 
iiess;  but  the  examination  of  facts  when  looking  into  the  size  and  number  of  their  establish- 
ments produces  this  conviction.  The  dilTercnce  can  also  be  imputed  in  a  great  measure  to 
another  source, — the  cheapness  of  food  for  both  men  and  animals;  labour  is  Ibrty-ihrce  per 

D 


18 

cent,  the  principal  articles  of  subsistence  for  natives  thirty-two  per  cent,  and  grain  for  cattle 
forty-three  per  cent,  cheaper  in  Bengal  than  on  the  western  side  of  India.  In  any  attempt  at 
comparison  therefore  in  this  line  where  men  and  animals  are  both  regarded  and  estimated,  the 
numerical  strength  of  men  and  cattle  must  first  be  insisted  on  as  the  basis  on  which  tlie  calcu- 
lation for  the  wants  of  each  Presidency  are  to  be  computed,  and  then  the  most  reasonable  rates 
obtaining  in  each  country  afterwards  fixed  and  paid.  This  argument  of  course  assumes  tliat 
no  cattle  are  to  be  bred  at  the  charge  of  the  State,  which  would  in  this  first  step  get  rid  of  all 
expensive  establishments  ;  and  if  hiring  tlie  requisite  numbers  of  cattle  of  all  kinds  for  a  full 
equipment  be  deemed  too  heavy  a  charge,  the  draft  cattle  for  a  certain  proportion  of  the 
artillery  could  be  purchased,  and  after  a  certain  number  of  years'  working  could  be  resold. 
Even  this  plan  would  be  preferable,  and  fully  as  efficient ;  certainly  a  less  wasteful  one  than 
breeding,  where,  exclusive  of  the  charges  for  supervisors  and  attendants  of  all  descrip- 
tions and  feeding,  the  expense  of  the  necessary  buildings  and  offices  is  a  point  worthy  of 
consideration ;  where  so  deep  a  question  as  that  of  public  oeconomy  presents  itself  for 
inquiry. — I  shall  here  conclude  by  repeating,  that  it  would  decidedly  be  more  oeconomical 
to  hire  cattle  when  required  for  miHtary  purposes,  and  to  keep  up  a  proportion  permanently, 
as  a  precautionary  measure  at  a  few  of  the  frontier  stations,  for  sudden  emergencies  ;  add  to 
which,  now  that  we  have  the  prospect  of  a  confirmed  state  of  tranquillity,  and  have  time  to  look 
into  the  past  as  well  as  the  present,  we  finti,  amongst  other  ways  of  supplying  ourselves,  that, 
generally  speaking,  the  contract  system  gives  employment  to  persons  of  moderate  wealth  in  the 
country;  while  Government  frees  itself  of  the  expense  of  casualties  and  establishments,  which 
according  to  circumstances  can  seldom  be  brought  to  a  very  accurate  conclusion.  And  by  a 
judicious  arrangement  of  retaining,  on  a  moderate  scale,  carriage  for  some  light  stationary  forces, 
and  providing  for  the  occurrence  of  unexpected  calls,  a  considerable  reduction  can  be  brought 
about  in  this  large  department.  It  must  be  admitted  that  I  have,  in  discussing  the  operation  of 
this  important  question,  confined  myself  to  general  observations  and  rules,  with  the  examination 
of  leading  facts,  without  entering  much  into  details ;  because  the  establishment  of  a  general  or 
uniform  system  would  introduce  of  itself  the  minor  arrangements,  producing  their  subordinate 
attendants, — regularitj',  control,  and  oeconomy. 

I  have  done,  it  will  be  observed,  little  more  than  make  a  casual  remark  on  the  followers  that 
necessarily  belong  both  to  the  cattle  and  the  other  parts  of  the  army,  which  are  always  con- 
sidered a  component  part  of  this  department,  and  deemed  so  inseparable  from  the  cattle  them- 
selves, that  an  enlistment  or  bargain  entered  into  for  the  one  includes  the  other ;  the  reduction 
in  the  hire  of  the  animal  therefore  occasions  a  similar  effect  on  the  expense  of  the  wages  of  his 
driver.  We  must  consequently  argue  this  question  by  inference,  taking  the  second  for  granted 
when  the  first  is  settled. 

But  on  the  head  of  followers  of  another  description,  which  is  a  very  serious  concern,  I  must 
observe,  that  they  should  be  separately  considered  when  discussing  the  departments  to  which 
they  appertain ;  so  that  Tent  Lascars,  Dooley  Bearers,  and  Biggaries  are  yet  to  be  described. 
For  instance,  the  dooley  bearers  will  be  noticed  in  the  Carriage  of  the  Sick  ;  and  the  obser- 
vations made  on  them  are  in  a  great  measure,  I  conceive,  equally  applicable  to  the  followers 
in  some  points  of  view  of  the  Cattle  department.  I  shall  therefore,  for  brevity  sake,  not  repeat 
them  here,  but  propose  a  reference  to  them  in  their  proper  place  for  further  explanation. 

Barrack  Department. 

This  department  is  so  blended  and  mixed  up  in  Bengal  with  the  Engineers  and  their  establish- 
ments, that  it  is  difficult  to  ascertain  the  actual  duties  of  the  persons  attached  to  it,  although 
the  scale  of  establishment  is  by  no  means  small.  The  several  heads  of  the  department  are  some- 
times termed  barrack  masters,  at  others,  executive  officers,  including  engineer,  &c.,  and  officers 
from  the  line,  the  whole  jiassing  under  a  comprehensive  but  indefinite  denomination  of  depart- 
ment of  public  works.  This  want  of  distinctness  must  be  objectionable,  anil  is  only  noticed  for  u 
comparison;  lor  if  it  was  arranged  and  placed  on  the  same  footing  as  at  Madras  and  Bombay,  a 
saving  of  expense  would  not  only  accrue, — wiiile  it  would  be  in  accordance  with  the  orders  of  the 
supreme  Government,  which  forbid  a  building  officer  to  judge  of  his  own  works;  but  by  this 
nuxed  mode  there  is  no  distinction  between  the  duties  of  an  engineer  as  the  scientific  designer 
and  builder,  and  the  barrack  master  as  a  mere  detail  officer.  This  can  only  be  rectified  by  the 
i]uarter-master-general's  department,  in  Bengal,  being  placed  on  a  proper  footing  as  to  its 
exercising  a  controlling  power  over  the  various  branches  of  the  service  that  belong  to  it ; 
including  the  barrack  line  anil  the  authority  of  the  military  board,  confined  within  those 
limits  that  should  bound  its  influence,  divested  of  the  business  of  keeping,  passing,  and  auditing 
accounts. 

The  Bombay  plan  for  conducting  the  barrack  duties  is  on  the  whole  preferable,  as  being  the 
simplest,  even  more  so  than  at  Madras,  and  tlie  least  expensive  to  the  State,  particularly  when 
the  comfort  of  the  soklier  in  India  is  taken  into  consideration,  as  doubtless  forming  the  j)rimary 
object  at  all  times  in  any  contrast  on  so  important  a  question.     The  mode  of  supply  of  barrack 


19 

stores,  as  well  as  the  fiiniiture  itself,  varies  under  all  the  establishments  according  to  the  manner 
in  whicli  the  sokiicr  in  each  is  treated.  In  Bengal  he  is  allowed  barrack  lurnilure  while 
receiving  field  rations,  an  indulgence  quite  unknown  to  the  troojis  at  Madras  and  Bombay,  and 
arguing  a  kind  of  anomaly;  for  in  the  field,  straw  and  not  tables  and  benches  is  ail  "that  is 
expected.  At  Madras  the  soldier  has  the  highest  pay,  and  receives  barrack  furniture  uhcti  in 
garrison,  with  chatties,  mats,  and  a  long  list  of  et  ceteras,  which  latter  are  denied  in  Bengal. 
Every  description  of  European  troops  marching  on  the  Bengal  establishment  are  allowed 
I'iO  rupees  ])er  month  per  regiment  for  straw  as  bedding.  But  at  Madras  and  Bombay  nothing 
is  allowed  even  upon  any  campaign  ;  and  the  comparison  therefore  can  be  ilone  only  by  a  long 
detail  of  trifling  articles,  which  I  should  imagine  can  only  be  required  to  guide  us  when  engaged 
in  regulating  a  general  and  uniform  system.  Tiie  furniture  also  differs  very  much  at  the  several 
Presidencies  :  in  Bengal,  the  cot  is  a  rattan  couch  ;  at  Madras,  it  consists  of  three  planks  on  two 
low  tressels,  which  planks  are  taken  off  and  placed  on  two  high  tressels  to  form  a  dinner  table; 
at  Bombay  the  cot  is  the  same  as  at  Madras,  but  used  for  no  second  purpose.  The  bench  is 
the  same  in  Bengal  as  at  Bombay,  but  at  Madras  it  is  formed  of  a  single  plank  taken  from  a 
sleeping  cot,  and  the  table  in  Bengal  is  the  same;  but  at  Madras  there  is  no  distinct  table,  as  I 
stated  above :  consequently  the  expense  of  this  article  of  supply  must  be  greater  at  one  place  than 
another,  for  at  Madras  the  soldier  actually  gets  nothing  but  a  cot,  wliicii  he  must  take  to  pieces 
to  form  into  a  dinner  table  and  bench,  both  of  which  articles  he  is  without  during  his  leisure 
hours.  In  Bengal  and  Bombay  the  barrack  is  certainly  too  much  crowded  by  a  col,  a  table, 
and  two  benches  :  bj'  the  adoption  of  a  mode  now  presented  to  Government  tor  a  high  cot,  which 
answers  the  purpose  of  both  cot  and  table,  and  two  small  benches,  more  room  will  be  allowed 
in  the  barrack,  with  greater  ventilation,  and  the  men  would  have  the  four  small  benches  for  each 
mess  during  their  leisure  hours  to  sit  or  work  upon. 

This  department,  as  comprehending  the  subject  of  buildings  for  European  and  native  troops 
and  departments  under  the  three  establishments,  is  not  the  same  as  to  number,  allotment,  dimen- 
sions and  denomination,  though  there  are  no  reasonable  grounds  for  this  difference,  since  the 
climate  is  not  so  very  dissimilar  in  the  midland  and  northern  provinces.  The  duties,  habits, 
and  convenience  of  all  the  troops  are  quite  the  same  throughout  India.  I  have  witnessed  and 
experienced  it. 

It  appears  that  the  European  infantry  in  Bengal  have  baths,  magazines,  tennis-courts,  com- 
pound walls  for  hospitals;  the  horse  artillery  and  dragoons  have,  in  addition  to  the  above, 
farriers'  workshops,  riding-school,  laboratory,  and  powder  magazines,  which  do  not  exist  at 
Madras  and  Bombay.  The  native  troops  in  Bengal  have  hospital  compound  walls  and  separate 
hospitals  for  females  ;  I  suspect  this  mild  name  to  have  some  affinity  to  the  board  meaning  of 
Lock  hospitals.  The  Commissariat  have  flour  sheds,  furniture  godowns,  cooper's  house,  elephant, 
camel  and  bullock  sheds,  and  bullock  Serjeant's  quarters ;  all  departmental  buildings  should 
be  the  same,  having  reference  only,  as  far  as  regards  the  Ordnance  and  Commissariat  depart- 
ment, to  the  quantity  of  stores  to  be  covered.  Tlie  greatest  number  and  variety  in  shape  of 
building  are  in  Bengal ;  and  the  experiments  as  to  varietj',  particularly  on  the  score  of  bar- 
racks and  bungalows  for  European  privates,  to  say  nothing  of  sheds  for  camels,  elephants,  and 
bullocks,  says  much  for  comfort,  but  little  in  any  other  point  of  view. 

Under  the  present  diversity  of  system,  the  expense  must  unavoidably  increase,  when  so  much 
attention  is  paid  to  propositions  from  every  individual,  whether  regimental  commandant  or 
medical  officer.  The  spirit  of  innovation  and  the  judgement  to  decide  on  what  is  l)est  for  the 
men,  seem  hardly  to  have  met  in  the  experiments  that  were  tried ;  for  the  very  persons 
who  advocated  them,  admitted  that  they  hail  never  looked  so  far  forward  as  to  calculate  the 
severe  effects  of  men  living  {as  soldiers)  in  detached  bungalows,  which  must  inevitably  expose 
them  to  the  effects  of  the  sun  when  passing  from  one  bungalow  to  another.  This  is  easily  seen 
when  we  compare  the  buildings  themselves  in  their  separated  state ;  but  the  space  for  each 
European  soldier  being  163§  square  feet  in  Bengal,  and  88  only  at  Bombay,  exclusive  of 
veranda ;  and 

A  native  regiment  in  Bengal  has  a  Store  Room  of    •iS    by   IS 

Bombay 40    —  22 

A  Hospital  in  Bengal 1 44-^  —  20 

Bombay 96'  —  22 

From  this  statement  it  will  be  obvious  that  if  the  chief  engineers  of  the  three  Presidencies  had 
been  directed  to  communicate  with  each  other,  something  like  regularity,  if  not  uniformity, 
would  have  been  at  least  establislieti  on  so  essential  a  subject,  which  like  many  others  has 
been  determined  according  to  the  taste  of  the  person  possessing  the  local  influence  to  do  it, 
though  probably  it  would  have  been  more  conducive  to  the  comfort  of  the  soklier  and  productive 
of  oeconomy  to  the  State,  to  have  gone  by  a  fixed  and  due  proportion  of  room  as  on  an  incipient 
principle,  and  then  to  have  subsequently  arranged  the  detail  ItUo  jiroper shapes;  this  would  have 
at  least  prevented  those  expensive  experiments  in  Bengal,  which  have  swelled  their  expense,  as 
well  as  on  the  Bombay  side.  I  shall  not  here  advert  to  the  enormous  sums  that  have  been  sunk 
in  this  line  bv  the  abandoning  of  barracks,  from  the  change  of  stations  in  the  removal  of  troops 

D2 


•20 

from  one  position  to  another,  but  leave  that  to  find  its  due  equivalent  either  from  political 
necessitv  or  necessarj'  change  of  a  military  frontier. 

The  "description  of  buildings  lor  the  Orilnance  and  Commissariat  may  at  any  rate  be  fixed, 
leaving  their  dimensions  to  be  settled  according  to  the  extent  of  stores  to  be  kept  in  them  : 
thus  a  uniformity  in  one  line  of  the  style,  description  and  dimension  at  least,  would  attach  to  the 
buildings  of  the  three  armies,  and  put  an  end  in  some  degree  to  that  waste  of  public  money 
which  the  existing  desire  of  change,  that  almost  from  its  frequency  amounts  to  caprice,  unavoid- 
ably gives  rise  to,  from  the  repeated  innovations  that  are  recommended  by  commanding  officers 
according  to  the  taste  of  each,  as  might  be  exemplified  in  a  late  instance  in  Bengal,  of  the  old 
and  simple  plan  of  ten  ranges  of  barracks  being  divided  into  forty  bungalows,  increasing  the 
expense  170,000  rupees  above  the  old  stantlard  for  cost  of  barracks  for  one  regiment  alone. 

After  an  examination  of  the  numerous  documents  discussing  the  different  kinds  of  buildings 
appropriated  to  European  troops,  and  the  several  arguments  produced  by  the  officers  in  that 
line,  pointing  out  the  advantages  and  defects  of  each  style  of  edifice,  the  deduction  which  follows 
in  my  opinion  is,  that  the  old  style  of  building  ten  ranges  for  a  regiment  of  ten  companies  was 
the  most  oeconomical,  and  found  adequate  to  all  requisite  purposes  under  all  the  establishments ; 
but  that  of  late  a  new  mode  was  adopted  in  Bengal,  to  give  not  only  more  room  to  each  individual, 
but  to  divide  each  single  range  into  four  distinct  bungalows  w-ith  verandas,  thus  consulting  the 
convenience  of  the  soldier  by  a  freer  circulation  of  air  for  the  preservation  of  his  health.  But  this 
latter  plan  is  not  only  more  than  twice  as  expensive,  but  exposes  the  men,  and  particularly  the 
non-commissioned  officers,  in  jiassing  from  one  bungalow  to  another,  to  the  effects  of  the  sun : 
this  mischievous  effiict  the  medical  men  have  complained  of. 

It  were  needless  to  say  that  the  two  edifices  alluded  to,  each  capable  of  accommodating  a 
single  regiment,  contain  the  same  quantity  of  building  materials.  If  the  question  of  occonomy  on 
this  head  were  argued,  a  view  of  the  plan  of  course  refutes  such  an  idea  ;  but  it  does  not  appear 
that  the  forty-bungalow  plan  is  intended  in  i-eality  to  accommodate  a  greater  number  of  men, 
though  the  calculation  of  square  feet  to  each  man  is  greater  by  seventy-two  feet ;  and  notwith- 
standing the  boasted  improvement,  the  last  report  on  it  from  Meerul  still  complains  of  the  want 
of  accommodation,  notwithstanding  distinct  rooms  have  been  superadded  for  dining  in. 

It  would  prove  as  endless  as  unprofitable  to  state  the  details  of  the  length  and  size  of  barracks, 
in  addition  to  what  has  already  been  done: — the  proportion  of  room  allotted  to  each  man  ;  the 
arguments  used  for  the  different  modes  of  buildings ;  the  advantage  of  additional  height  to  the 
walls  ;  the  size  and  placing  the  men's  cots,  and  if  the  verandas  ought  to  be  occupied  ;  the  proper 
mode  of  separating  the  family  from  the  unmarried  men ;  the  inconvenience  attending  the 
doubling  up  of  the  men  when  the  barracks  are  midcrgoing  the  annual  repairs.  These  and 
many  otiier  topics  present  themselves  in  considering  the  subject ;  but  I  conceive  the  object  to  be 
kept  in  view  to  combine  the  ceconomical  mode  of  military  building  with  due  attention  to  the 
comfort  and  health  of  the  soldier,  is  not  so  difficult  as  is  imagined. 

The  contemplated  arrangement  does  not  appear  complicated,  and  in  reality  does  not  turn 
out  so  when  in  practice  in  the  hands  of  methodical  men.  It  need  only  be  recollected  that  barracks 
in  this  country  are  always  prepared  for  the  full  strength  of  a  regiment,  which  seldom  or  ever 
retains  its  complements  for  any  length  of  time;  so  that  with  its  diminished  strength,  the  number  in 
hospital,  with  the  daily  guards,  it  would  not  be  easy  to  find  any  barrack  full,  much  less  crowded. 
Every  man  acquainted  with  European  troops  knows  what  a  large  portion  of  the  comfort  of  the 
soldier  depends  upon  internal  regimental  arrangement;  and  giving  more  room,  except  for 
specific  purposes  or  necessities,  admits  of  a  doubt  that  it  increases  the  comfort  ol  the  men.  The 
family  men  only  are  the  persons  to  whom  it  would  prove  of  convenience  for  their  children. 

Barracks  or  pendals  for  native  troops  whenever  erected  should  be  on  the  simplest  construc- 
tion ;  but  the  system  of  hutting  is  the  best,  as  it  consults  the  feelings  and  prejudices  of  the  men 
on  the  score  of  caste,  and  is  generally  followed  under  all  the  Presidencies:  but  as  to  the  barrack 
or  pendal  plan  there  can  exist  no  doubt  as  to  its  greater  expense. 

It  will  be  observed  that  though  I  have  not  strictly  confined  myself  to  the  barracks,  still  1 
have  placed  that  class  of  building  in  the  most  prominent  view  for  discussion  ;  the  other  buildings 
appropriated  to  the  ilepartments  nuist  therefore  be  separately  noticed. 

As  to  the  question  of  buildings  being  |)ucka  or  temjioiary, — there  can  be  no  hesitation  in  pro- 
nouncing, if  political  circumstances  will  atlmit  of  fixing  the  permanent  position  of  troops  at 
once,  that  pucka  buildings  are  preferable,  not  only  for  the  appearance  which  a  British  army 
should  at  all  times  uphold  in  the  eyes  of  the  natives,  but  from  its  stability  is  less  liable  to 
r.xpense  in  the  long  run.  Thatch  for  roofing  is  the  coolest;  but  the  danger  of  fire  is  a  great 
objection,  which  makes  tiles  and  flat  roofs  |)relerable.  Whenever  the  situation  of  troops  appears 
to  be  liable  to  change,  it  would  then  be  more  advisable  to  sanction  only  temporary  buildings,  as 
the  loss  sustained  by  frequent  abandoning  of  cantonments  is  incalculable  :  this  style  ot  building  is 
adapted  to  die  uncertainty  of  the  case,  and  when  ilie  salubrity  or  political  importance  of  the  sta- 
tions had  not  been  decidcil  upon  for  a  permanency,  would  occasion  less  expense  to  the  jjublic,  and 
at  the  same  time  be  of  equal  comfort  to  the  troops.  But  these  matters,  as  I  observed  before, 
should  be  left  to  the  judgement  of  the  chief  engineers  of  the  diree  Presidencies,  who  should  be 


21 

informed  tliat  the  buildings  mentioned  in  the  following  list  are  only  to  be  allowed  to  the  troops 
and  departments  as  embracing  everything  necessary  in  the  shape  of  accommodation  of  the  men 
and  establishment,  and  every  other  accommodation  would  be  deemed  superfluous,  and  should 
be  inadmissible. 

Fni-  Dragoons. 

Barracks.  Staff  Serjeant's  Quarters  with  Female    Ward    with    Out 

Canteen.                           Out  Offices.  Ollices. 

School  Koom.  Store  Rooms.  Solitary  Cells. 

Cook  Rooms.  Armourer's  Forge.  Hospital  with  Out  Offices. 

Privies.  Guard  Rooms. 

Female  Privies.  Sick  Horse  Stables. 

For  Horse  Artillery. 

The  same  as  Dragoons,  with  addition  of  Gun  Shed. 

For  Foot  Artillery. 

The  same  as  Horse  Artillery,  except  Stabling  for  Sick  Horses. 

European  Infantry. 

The  same  as  Foot  Artillery,  except  Gun  Sheds. 

Native  Cavalry. 

Hospital  with  Out  Offices.  Guard  Rooms. 

Store  Rooms.  Staff  Serjeant's  Quarters. 

Arm  Rooms.  Stabling  for  Sick  Horses. 

Native  Infantry  and  Lascars. 

The  same  as  Native  Cavalry,  except  Stabling  for  Sick  Horses. 


Oi'dnnnce  Department. 

Magazines.  Dooley  Sheds.  Guard  Rooms. 

Artificer's  Workshop.  Store  Rooms.  Compound  Walls. 


tif 
Gun  Sheds 

Commissariat 


Granaries. 

Store  Rooms  for  Arrack,  Provisions,  Camp  Equipage,  and  Barrack  Furniture. 

Guard  Rooms. 

Engineer  Department. 

Store  Rooms. 

Barrack  Department. 

Store  Rooms.  Serjeant's  Quarters. 

Miscellaneous. 

Churches,  Sinking  Wells,  Locks  Flospitals,  &c.,  when  found  necessary. 

The  shape,  dimensions,  and  ijuantity  of  space  for  each  dcscrijition  of  troops  and  individuals, 
should  be  determined  on  by  Govermnent,  and  subsequently  never  departed  from. 

Boat  Department  and  Water  Carriage. 

When  Government  send  officers  and  troops  and  stores  by  water,  it  is  with  the  view  of  its 
being  the  cheapest  and  most  expeditious  mode  of  transport.  But  reviewing  its  operation  gene- 
rally, it  is  necessary  to  begin  with  Bengal,  where  it  is  practised  on  the  most  liberal  scale,  under 
the  name  of  "  Boat  allowance,"  as  alluding  to  the  officers,  which  I  shall  advert  to  again.  At  pre- 
sent 1  shall  confine  myself  to  the  subject  as  far  as  it  relates  to  stores  and  troops  generally. 

When  the  officers  go  on  foreign  service  in  transports,  liiey  then  receive  universally  a ;)«r 
diem  allowance  as  table  money,  which  is  paid  to  the  commander  of  the  vessel. 


22 

In  Bombay  the  officers  going  by  water  from  one  station  to  another  on  duty  within  the  limits 
of  the  Presidency,  have  a  specific  allowance  for  passage  money,  calculated  on  the  Commissariat 
rates ;  but  passages  at  Madras  are  not  required  in  this  manner,  from  the  circumstance  of  their 
never  using  water  carriage. 

But  in  cases  of  being  obliged  to  send  stores  from  Madras  to  the  southern  Mahratta  country, 
thej'  are  sent  to  Vingorla  as  the  shortest  route,  on  the  Malabar  coast,  by  vessels  going  round 
Ceylon  ;  for  the  expense  over-land  of  transport  from  Madras  across  to  the  opposite  shore  of  the 
Peninsula  would  be  enormous,  though  the  stores  themselves  could  be  more  easily  and  cheaply 
supplied  in  every  point  of  view  from  Bombay,  as  was  invariablj'  done  to  a  very  great  extent  dur- 
ing the  late  Mahratta  wars  to  all  troops  from  any  Presidency,  Bombay  being  the  centre  of 
almost  all  the  movements  of  the  three  armies.  I  myself  recollect  Lord  Lake  receiving  for  his 
army  at  Bhurtpore  14  lacs  of  rupees  from  this  Government;  and  the  recoi'ds  here  teem  with 
proofs  of  the  supplies  made  to  the  Madras  troops  even  as  far  back  as  1 803.  The  Southern 
Mahratta  countrj-,  the  Nagpore  Toree,  and  even  the  State  of  Hyderabad,  receive  stores  and 
clothing  annually  from  Bombay.  The  private  supplies  for  Mhow,  Neemuch,  Nusserabad, 
frequently  go  from  hence ;  and  so  could  the  public  ones :  and  the  Bengal  officers  when  ordered 
to  join  their  regiments  in  Malwa,  come  down  to  Calcutta,  take  shipping  there  for  Bombay,  and 
then  proceed  via  Baroda  and  Chotadodeypoor  to  Mhow,  as  the  shortest  and  most  convenient 
route. 

And  yet  the  Bombay  Government  have  been  frequently  told,  but  never  b}'  the  Honourable 
Court,  that  JNIhow  cannot  belong  to  them  on  account  of  its  position  as  well  as  greater  expense. 
That  the  first  is  futile  is  abundandy  proved  by  facts ;  and  the  latter  could  be  explained,  if 
the  Bengal  Government  would  oblige  tlie  officers  of  their  departments  who  make  the  calcula- 
tions, to  insert  the  proportions  of  outlay  belonging  to  their  several  studs  and  cattle  establish- 
ments, instead  of  stating  the  mere  expenses  that  take  place  at  the  station  itself.  The  monthly 
feeding  of  the  Ordnance  cattle  is  nothing,  when  compared  to  the  expense  of  breeding  the  cattle 
tiiemselves,  and  casualties,  which  have  never  been  brought  forward  in  the  estimates  of  the  monthly 
or  even  annual  expenditure.  This,  like  many  others,  appears  so  plain  a  case,  that  it  is  surprising 
the  same  mode  of  proceeding  where  the  means  are  similar  does  not  obtain  :  and  in  concluding 
our  observations  upon  it,  it  must  be  evident  that  in  the  adoption  of  one  rule  for  officers  moving 
from  one  station  to  another,  requiring  water  conveyance,  the  mode  at  Bombay  should  be  re- 
sorted to,  of  granting  full  batta  and  passage  money  agreeably  to  the  Commissariat  rates,  as  the 
least  objectionable  and  most  occonomical ;  while  it  leaves  Bengal  on  a  modified  and  reduced  scale 
with  all  its  jiresent  local  advantages  of  a  rich  country  abounding  in  means  for  this  species  of 
transport.  The  transporting  of  stores  by  water  will  be  pretty  nearly  the  same  when  any  uni- 
form mode  is  established  for  that  purpose. 

Transport  of  Stores. 

The  mode  of  conducting  this  department  arises  apparently  from  the  local  position  of  the  three 
Presidencies.  At  Bombay  it  is  conducted  by  the  Commissariat  by  contract,  botli  the  water 
and  land  carriage,  if  public  cattle  are  not  available  to  render  any  assistance.  In  Bengal  the 
Commissariat  engage  carriage  or  freight,  on  the  Ganges,  on  the  moment  of  demand,  to  the 
nearest  depot,  whence  public  cattle  can  be  employed  with  advantage ;  but  at  Madras  the  sea 
conveyance  for  stores  is  but  little  in  demand,  and  the  Commissariat  I  believe  avail  themselves 
of  the  services  of  tiie  public  cattle,  when  present,  for  the  transport  of  their  stores  over-land. 
Under  these  different  modes  of  course  it  is  difficult  to  draw  any  inferences,  which  of  the  plans 
pursued  is  the  most  expedient  or  occonomical :  but  if  the  Bengal  and  Madras  armies  having 
great  and  expensive  establishments  of  cattle  always  in  employ,  with  the  stud  and  iiirm  for  their 
rearing,  be  taken  into  consideration,  there  can  be  no  hesitation  in  pronouncing  the  Bombay 
plan  the  best,  as  must  be  evident  from  its  simplicity,  the  employment  it  gives  to  the  Ryots,  and 
from  the  reason  also,  that  great  establishments  must  be  expensive,  as  it  is  clear  that  in  certain  sea- 
sons of  the  year  the  cattle  cannot  be  employed,  and  therefore  during  that  time  are  a  dead  charge 
on  the  State.  A  comjiarison  alsothat  unavoidably  involves  the  local  usages  and  the  way  ot  applying 
the  productions  of  tlie  several  countries,  without  reference  to  any  definite  mode  of  framing  the 
means  in  our  power  into  some  regular  plan,  makes  me  of  opinion  that  a  contrast  of  this  line  of 
the  service  would  be  almost  nugatory.  It  would  be  as  preposterous  on  the  score  of  expense 
for  cither  Madras  or  Bombay  troops  to  have  the  same  kind  of  cattle  for  the  carriage  of  their 
privates'  tents  as  in  Bengal,  which  would  be  elephants;  as  it  would  be  in  Bengal  to  use  the 
Madras  carriage  for  the  same  purpose,  tiiat  of  bullocks. 

The  Bombay  plan  is  in  this  a  medium  one,  ot  using  both  camels  and  bullocks ;  the  former  of 
these  animals,  tiiough  not  bred  in  the  British  territories,  are  indigenous  in  the  adjacent  ones  of 
their  neighbours,  and  of  easy  acejuisilion.  Bengal  is  no  doubt  the  country  for  the  employment 
of  the  elephant ;  not  only  because  he  can  pass  along  easier  from  the  openness  of  the  plains,  but 
from  the  circumstance  of  the  forage  (foliage  of  trees)  being  so  abundant,  which  is  necessary  and 
natural  to  liis  thriving.     Tliis  with  the  cheapness  of  '^rain,  and  low  rate  of  wages  to  his  attend.- 


<5 


23 

ants  make  him  preferred  even  to  the  camel ;  tliongli  it  is  equally  true  that  the  inferior  kind  of 
camels  in  tiie  northern  and  western  provinces  of  Hengal,  known  as  the  llewaree  breed,  to  carry 
small  loads,  were  used  in  great  numbers  in  the  camps  during  the  northern  campaigns  against 
the  Malirattas  and  the  first  Bluntpore  war.  Besides,  tiie  elephant  lives  longer,  is  less  liable  to 
accidents,  and  is  not  so  delicate  in  his  constitution  as  the  camel,  and  is  upon  the  whole,  takin<' 
every  expense  of  casualties  into  account,  the  most  efficient  antl  least  expensive  carriage  ;  thou'di 
he  does  not  carry  a  burthen  from  his  immense  size  in  proportion  to  that  of  the  camel,  as  the 
latter  does  to  a  bullock.  The  proportion  is  nearly  for  the  elephant  two  to  one,  and  for  the 
camel  three  to  one.  These  useful  animals  are  so  expensive  in  their  keep  on  the  Bombay  side, 
that  they  cannot  be  retaineti  but  for  great  emergencies,  as  they  cost  100  rupees  each  per  month 
keeping,  and  in  the  upper  Provinces  of  Bengal  only  forty-six  ;  nor  indeed  are  they  so  well  adapted 
to  our  hilly  and  irregular  country,  where  tlie  climate  is  dry,  and  the  forage  is  "both  scarce  and 
but  little  suited  to  their  taste.  As  one  ))roof  of  this  reasoning,  let  us  only  revert  to  the  prac- 
tice of  the  native  Princes  when  in  the  zenith  of  jjower,  and  tlie  nobles  of  their  Court,  never 
using  elephants  but  for  state  occasions  of  parade  and  the  transport  of  their  larger  tents.  And 
the  very  utmost  their  great  j)owers  have  been  known  to  be  applied  to  for  military  purposes  bv 
the  Mahratta  Princes,  and  those  south  of  the  Godavery,  in  the  vicinity  of  whose  countries  they 
abound  in  the  province  of  Malabar,  is  to  impel  guns  up  hills,  where  the  declivity  and  rug- 
gedness  of  the  roads  would  not  admit  of  cattle  being  yoked  lo  drag  them  up.  I  lad  it  been 
expedient  to  use  these  animals  for  canying  stores  of  any  kind,  there  is  no  doubt  they  would 
have  been  long  since  employed  in  the  Madras  army,  for  whose  equipments  the  question  of  ex- 
pense seems  seldom  to  have  been  an  obstacle. 

Camp  Equipage. 

The  Madras  and  Bombay  Governments,  upon  a  general  principle  of  compactness  and  eeco- 
nomy,  liave  placed  the  deposit  of  the  camp  equipage  of  their  armies  for  every  description  of  troops 
in  the  Ordnance  Store  Department,  when  stationary,  and  in  the  charge  of  Regimental  Quarter 
Masters  only  when  on  field  service,  but  specially  subject  to  the  supervision  of  the  Quarter- 
Master  General's  Department:  while  in  Bengal  the  native  troops  retain  charge  of  their  own 
canvass,  for  which  the  allowance  of  27  rupees  per  month  to  each  regiment  of  cavalry,  and  32  to 
each  of  native  infantry,  is  granted;  not  to  mention  the  expense  of  the  numerous  store-rooms 
for  the  native  corps  for  that  purpose,  which  could  easily  be  dispensed  with.  The  plan  pursued 
at  Madras  and  Bombay  prevents  the  attendant  expense  of  the  unavoidable  wear  and  tear  of 
the  tents  while  in  such  a  distributed  state. 

The  construction  or  size  of  the  tents  of  the  camp  equipage  is  not  the  same  at  all  the  Presi- 
dencies. The  native  troops  in  Bengal  have  Pauls  similar  to  what  the  Binjaries  and  the  artisans  of 
an  army  use  on  the  march ;  which  possess  one  advantage,  the  convenience  of  being  easily  taken 
to  pieces,  packed  and  carried,  but  is  a  very  uncomfortable  way  for  the  men  themselves.  At  ^ladras 
they  have  one-  and  two-poled  tents  with  Bamboo  Coolies,  their  poles  not  being  jointed :  and  at 
Bombay  a  bell  tent,  which  in  every  way,  military  and  financial,  is  the  best  adapted  to  an  army 
in  the  field,  and  would  prove  the  best  throughout  all  the  establishments,  with  immense  saving 
of  expense.  The  compactness  admits  of  it  going  on  one  bullock  with  jointed  poles,  pegs,  &c. 
thus  saving  the  charge  for  bamboo  coolies*,  and  becoming  on  an  emergency  a  very  useful  cover. 
Where  a  want  of  followers,  the  difficulty  of  moving  of  the  usual  kinds  of  cattle,  such  as  camels 
and  elephants  in  bad  roads,  close  countries  and  passes,  form  serious  obstacles  to  the  travelling 
of  those  large  animals,  as  was  I  believe  particularly  felt  during  the  Nepaul  war,  all  these  impe- 
diments, so  detrimental  lo  the  rajjid  or  easy  movement  of  troops,  would  be  overcome  by  a  pro- 
per attention  to  this  branch  of  equipment,  which  in  point  of  importance  is  certainly  next  to 
the  one  of  provisioning  troops  jiroperly;  and  the  other  Presidencies  by  its  adoption  would  suffigr 
no  inconvenience.  The  cover  for  European  troops  is  very  similar  under  all  the  Presidencies, 
the  Bengal  pattern  being  adopted  for  Bombay,  with  some  variation  as  to  the  numbers  allotted, 
and  the  species  of  cattle  used  for  transport,  except  that  elephants  are  used  in  Bengal,  camels 
at  Bombay,  and  bullocks  at  Madras. 

The  dimensions  of  the  camp  equipage  of  the  three  armies  would  be  better  understood  bv 
taking  the  internal  area  of  the  tents  ;  for  instance, 

For  a  Captain,  it  is 23  by  15  at  Bengal. 

I9|  by  13^  at  Madras. 

19  by  12  at  Bombay. 

Subaltern   14  by  It  at  Bengal. 

12  by  12  at  Madras. 

12  by  12  at  Bombay. 

Field   Officer    25  by  18  at  Madras. 

25  by  15  at  Bombay. 

*  Rupees  3  annas  8  per  each  tent. 


24 

The  Bengal  one  I  do  not  know ;  but  enough  has  been  said  I  hope,  on  a  general  view  of  the 
subject,  to  prove  that  improvement  is  practicable ;  and  I  am  led  to  think  that  much  benefit 
would  accrue  by  the  introduction  of  the  light  compact  tent  used  on  the  Bombay  side  for  native 
troops,  which  embraces  the  wished-for  requisites  so  much  sought  after,  combining  the  effects  of 
oeconomy  and  efficiency,  and  the  soldier-like  appearance  of  an  army  when  placed  under  canvass. 

Tent  Lascars. 

There  should  be  a  very  small  regular  corps  of  Tent  Lascars  kept  up  under  all  the  Presidencies, 
and  distributed  for  the  preservation  of  the  camp  equipage  in  store,  in  proportion  to  the  several 
station  depots.  These  numbers  could  always  be  easily  regulated,  and  increased  when  required. 
At  Bombay  these  people  are  made  to  repair  the  tents  and  furnish  pegs  and  mallets.  I  think 
tiie  classing  of  them  preferable  to  the  present  mode,  and  a  great  improvement.  In  all  field  forces 
while  marching,  the  soldiers  should  assist  (indeed  almost  always  do)  in  the  pitching  of  their  own 
tents,  and  therefore  the  proportion  of  Tent  Lascars  for  a  European  regiment  in  Bengal,  from  se- 
venty to  ninety,  is  swelling  the  number  of  followers,  which  has  at  all  times  been  deemed  one  of 
the  greatest  evils  in  an  Indian  camp.  The  Government  of  Bombay,  by  limiting  the  number 
and  giving  them  full  employment,  and  using  the  bell  tents,  which  from  ih&.Y  jointed  poles  render 
unnecessary  the  employment  and  expense  of  bamboo  coolies  *,  occasioned  a  considerable  dimi- 
nution both  of  the  size  and  expense  of  tiiis  species  of  equipment. 

If  the  Tent  Lascars  are  to  receive  clothing,  I  think  a  biennial  supply  would  suffice  ;  but  as  to 
pensions,  I  cannot  admit  that  they  are  a  bit  more  entitled  to  them  than  the  dooley  bearers,  I 
therefore  incline  to  fix  the  period  of  20  and  30  years,  entitling  them  to  two  different  scales,  if 
tliev  are  admitted  to  enjoy  this  indulgence.  The  work  of  tiie  bearers  may  require  less  training, 
but  it  is  more  severe,  and  certainly  more  exposed  on  the  score  of  personal  danger ;  for  I  have 
known  them  dig  trenches  as  well  as  carry  ladders  on  an  escalading  party  with  the  pioneers.  I 
imagine  the  natives  themselves  conceive  that  we  calculate  the  price  of  their  services  much  more 
on  the  grounds  of  personal  danger  and  risk  than  on  any  work  or  advantage  we  derive  from  the 
exertion  either  of  their  talents  or  information  ;  and  the  estimation  in  which  they  themselves  hold 
Ibllowers  is  certainly  estimated,  and  in  their  own  eyes  acquires  an  increased  value,  as  the  affinity 
approaches  the  treatment,  pay  and  retiring  pension,  of  a  sepoy  or  fighting  man.  I  can  exemplify 
tliis  opinion  by  remarks  that  have  been  made  to  me  at  various  times  when  contrasting  the  wages 
of  followers,  and  even  of  our  own  servants,  with  the  pay  of  the  sepoy,  which  is  so  much  less ; 
and  it  has  been  frequently  hinted,  Make  us  "  like  the  sepahe."  I  therefore  feel  induced  to  con- 
clude that  from  every  motive  of  policy,  as  well  as  justice,  in  apportioning  the  pay  of  followers, 
we  should  keep  them  at  a  distance,  on  the  score  of  pay,  clothing  and  pension,  from  our  sepoys. 
Experience  teaches  us,  that  the  man  who  is  employed  only  temporarily  without  receiving  the 
advantages  of  clothing  and  pension,  must  of  course  receive  more  pay  than  he  who  has  a  fixed 
income ;  but  if  lie  has  also  all  the  benefits  of  a  regular  enlistment,  his  pay  should  be  propor- 
tionally low,  because  he  has  not  only  clothing  and  a  retirement  when  worn  out,  but  a  perma- 
nent subsistence  in  the  mean  time,  while  his  strength  lasts,  equal  to  that  of  a  fighting  man,  with- 
out the  risk  of  life  and  limb;  nor  is  he  subject  to  a  fluctuation  of  %vages  as  a  common  labourer, 
or  even  an  artizan,  compared  with  whose  situation  he  becomes  an  enviable  person. 

Carriage  of  the  Sick. 

The  manner  of  conducting  this  branch  here  and  at  Bengal  is  the  same  that  the  dooley 
bearers  are  retained  by  hire,  while  at  Madras  a  permanent  corps  is  kept  up  at  a  heavy  ex))ense. 
There  can  be  no  cjuestion  that  an  enlisted  corps  upon  the  Madras  system  of  clothing,  pension, 
and  every  other  indulgence  on  the  fooling  of  native  troops,  ought  to  furnish  a  most  clHcient 
body  of  dooley  bearers,  tiiough  in  Bengal  they  retain  large  estuhlishments  with  forces  at  appa- 
rently a  much  less  charge:  I  say  apparently,  because  tiie  followers  will  do  no  extra  work  ; 
since  both  these  Presidencies  can  collect  followers  of  every  description  with  the  greatest  ease, 
at  comparatively  lower  rates  than  under  the  Bombay  Presidency,  where  wages  are  high  from 
the  necessaries  of  life  being  dear. 

In  Bengal,  from  immemorial  usage  I  think  more  than  from  prejudice  of  caste,  the  followers 
of  any  particular  branch  of  the  service  will  not  turn  their  hands  to  any  other  work  than  that 
they  are  exclusively  hired  for;  and  thus  with  the  intention  of  doing  justice  to  all  parties,  it  will 
appear  that  the  Bombay  and  Madras  armies  have  an  advautage  in  their  followers  over  those  of 
Bengal,  from  being  more  genei-ally  useful,  though  tiieir  pay  is  higher. 

The  number  of  dooley  bearers  allotted  lor  the  carriage  of  sick  Europeans  ami  natives  bears  no 
proportion  to  each  other  in  Bengal,  and  under  the  other  establishments  they  arc  calculated  upon 
a  larger  scale.  Madras  and  Bombay  give  about  the  same  number  of  doolies  to  native  troops; 
but  in  Bengal  tliey  allow  only  one  to  a  troop  or  compauy  ;  but  for  Europeans  the  calculation  is 

•  Rupees  3  .  8. 


the  same  tlnoiiglioiit  Iiiilia.  The  care  of  this  article  of  sick  conveyance  is  at  Bombay  anil 
Madras-  always  retained  in  the  Ordnance  de|)nrtment.  In  Bengal  it  appears  tiiat  it  is  placed 
under  the  care  of  the  regiments  themselves,  with  an  allowance  ot'  one  rupee  each,  for  repairs, 
per  month  ;  incurring  a  permanent  annual  expense  of  about  2l-,000  rupees,  exclusive  of  the 
attendant  expense  of  regimental  store-rooms  and  their  repairs. 

The  shape  and  weight  of  the  dooley  are  both  objectionable,  which  mu^t  be  evident  when 
we  consider  that  six  bearers  only  are  allowed  to  carry  the  sick  man,  his  knapsack,  musket 
and  accoutrements ;  this  simple  fact  alone,  forces  the  conclusion  upon  one's  mind,  how  very 
inadequate  this  power  is  to  the  moving  of  such  a  weight,  not  on  good  roads,  but  over  rough 
country,  for  ten  or  fifteen  miles  in  a  day.  What  nnist  we  expect  as  the  consequences  of 
keeping  sick  men  from  four  o'clock  in  the  morning  frequently  till  two  in  the  afternoon,  exposed 
to  a  tropical  heat,  and  without  food  or  refreshment ;  and  yet  it  is  doubtless  the  best  convey- 
ance we  have  been  able  to  use  out  of  the  many  that  have  been  proposed  for  that  purpose.  We 
have  no  claim  to  it  as  an  invention  of  our  own,  for  it  is  nothing  more  than  a  prolongation  and 
enlargement  of  the  same-shaped  vehicle  in  immemorial  use  amongst  the  natives  themselves  all 
over  India. 

Soldier     .     .         9|  stone  or  168  lbs.  The  usual  burden  of  a  cooley     40lbs. 

Kit      ...         1  Dooley     ..113         Six  bearers 24-0 

Musket    .     .  1  Ammunition  5  

Accoutrements     0|  Overplus 46lbs. 

—  286  

12  stone:  


Our  medical  men,  from  feelings  of  humanity,  gradually  altered  the  original  doolev,  which 
was  about  feet  three  and  a  half  long,  with  a  pent-house  roof  depending  from  the  bamboo  on 
which  it  was  slung ;  the  length  was  also  increased  to  six  feet,  and  the  roof  made  square,  and 
covered  with  Europe  canvass  painted.  This  answered  the  double  purpose,  it  is  true,  of  a 
marching  conveyance,  and  of  a  bed  at  night.  The  alteration,  however,  rendered  it  both 
heavy  and  cumbersome,  occasioning  it  to  travel  very  slowly,  as  the  bearers  are  obliged  to  stop 
frequently  to  rest  and  recover  themselves. 

There  is  another  and  a  lighter  kind  of  litter,  much  used  by  the  Portuguese  in  India,  the 
introduction  of  which  into  our  hospital  department  would  prove  in  my  opinion  a  great  benefit. 
It  is  called  by  them  muncheelo :  it  is,  in  its  simplest  form,  a  common  hammock  suspended 
from  a  bamboo  with  a  cloth  or  canvass  cover  fixed  on  the  bamboo,  in  the  same  manner  that  a 
boat's  awning  is.  Those  of  the  better  kind  are  more  ornamented,  and  have  a  cross  stick  at  each 
side  to  spread  the  canvass;  upon  the  whole,  it  is  one  of  the  lightest  and  cheapest  conveyances 
for  sick,  and  particularly  wounded  men.  Its  being  so  very  portable  and  light  renders  it  an 
object  of  the  most  serious  consideration,  where  the  sick  of  an  army  are  to  be  transported ;  it 
has  also  another  advantage,  that  it  is  not  difficult  of  construction,  and,  the  materials  being  found 
everywhere,  is  easily  repaired. 

I  have  more  than  once  proposed  a  different  machine  for  a  dooley,  but  have  been  unsuccess- 
ful in  making  one  that  combined  my  idea  of  lightness  and  convenience.  It  should,  however, 
be  taken  into  consideration,  that  though  the  sick  man  ought  to  have  his  kit  with  him,  still  there 
is  no  reason  that  his  musket,  weighing  fourteen  pounds,  and  his  accoutrements  half  as  much 
more,  should  accompany  him  ;  for  I  presume  that  personal  defence  in  a  sick  state  is  (juite  out 
of  the  question,  and  the  invalid  himself  is  utterly  incapable  of  keeping  them  in  a  proper  state 
for  use,  or  even  of  preventing  them  being  lost  in  crossing  rivers,  or  being  stolen  at  nighu 

The  dooley  ought  to  be  made  of  lighter  and  less  expensive  materials,  to  answer,  as  it  does 
now,  both  for  moving  and  sleeping  in  ;  and  the  musket  and  accoutrements  of  the  sick  man 
should  be  placed  in,  and  carried  with,  the  regimental  stores. 

Relative  to  the  bearers  I  have  already  given  my  o))inion,  and  therefore  can  only  urge  here, 
that  there  ought  to  be  a  small  permanent  body  of  them,  to  be  recruited  as  occasion  might 
demand,  with  the  provision  of  a  pension  at  the  end  of  a  certain  number  of  years,  and  grants 
of  land  in  the  vicinity  of  their  native  villages.  This  plan  would  insure  us  an  active  and  able- 
bodied  class  of  men  from  a  caste  of  people  who  deem  it  an  hereditary  profession  and  livelihood, 
and  provide  our  hospitals  with  an  efficient  conveyance  for  the  sick. 

There  is  a  work  on  the  subject  of  conveying  the  sick  of  an  army,  by  an  eminent  French 
physician,  who  was  attached  to  the  armies  under  Bona])arte  u]iwards  of  twenty  years.  In  it 
there  appears  a  curious  similarity  of  plan,  when  it  is  evident  no  conununication  could  have 
existed,  that  gives  rise  in  some  measure  to  the  idea  how  armies  similarly  situated  on  the  score 
of  severe  and  continued  marching  should  have  found  it  expedient  to  adopt  almost  similar  modes 
of  conveyance  for  their  sick  and  wouniled,  as  seems  from  the  description  to  be  the  case  with  the 
French  in  Russia  and  the  English  in  India.  I  have  been  much  temjUed  to  introduce  some  of 
the  ideas  and  observations  ot  one  who  has  at  least  experience  on  his  si.le,  but  have  retrained, 
from  the  circumstance  of  his   work  being  so  well  known.     His  remarks  and  practice,  which 


26 

though  published  in  Europe  as  a  kind  of  discovery  of  great  benefit,  appear  hardly  a  novel 
svstem  to  those  in  this  country,  familiar  with  the  extensive  as  well  as  expensive  style  in  which 
troops  are  moved  in  India. 

I  cannot  close  this  head  without  stating  that  the  perusal  of  a  very  able  Report,  framed  by 
the  Medical  Committee  ordered  by  the  Bombay  Government  to  report  on  the  state  of  their 
own  service,  has  not  furnished  me  with  an}'  observations  relative  to  the  carriage  of  the  sick.  I 
am  unable,  therefore,  to  introduce  here  any  remarks  beyond  those  that  occur  to  myself:  the 
questions  that  the  Committee  do  discuss  I  shall  notice  when  speaking  of  the  Medical  Depart- 
ment, and  the  mode  of  making  supplies  to  it. 

Cavalry  Branch. 

This  very  important  arm  of  the  service  embraces  many  subjects  so  intimately  connected 
with  it,  that  I  feel  somewhat  at  a  loss  which  of  the  heads  I  should  first  introduce  that  would 
lead  to  a  clear  and  general  opening  of  its  subsequent  details. 

Grain,  &-C. — This  appears,  however,  one  of  the  primary  points.  I  shall  notice  the  quantities 
allowed  at  the  several  Presidencies,  with  the  differences,  and  the  reasons  assigned  for  the 
variation  of  the  feeds,  at  the  different  seasons  of  the  year,  to  meet  the  effects  of  heat  and  cold. 

The  quantity  of  grain  allowed  the  cavalry  in  Bengal  was  less  than  at  Bombay  by  one  pound 
for  six  months,  and  three  pounds  for  the  other  half  of  the  year.  This  may  be  owing  to  the 
horses  having  less  work ;  but  the  reason  alleged  in  Bengal  is,  that  a  larger  quantity  in  the  hot 
months  would  prove  injurious,  as  raising  the  horse  into  too  high  a  state  of  condition:  the  same 
scale  is  in  practice  at  Madras,  and  for  the  same  reasons  no  objection  seems  ever  to  have  been 
raised  on  the  introduction  of  a  similar  I'educed  ration  on  the  Bombay  side  by  the  officers  either 
of  the  European  or  native  cavalry,  on  the  grounds  of  insufficiency,  the  horses  ot  the  other 
two  armies  being  found  to  thrive  upon  the  smaller  allowance. 

It  is  equally  proper  probably,  to  carry  the  comparison  a  little  further,  for  a  comprehensive 
view,  to  mention  the  usage  in  England :  than  which  country,  I  presume,  there  is  none  in  the 
world  where  horses  of  every  kind  are  better  prepared,  or  more  completely  brought  up  to  their 
work.  There  we  shall  find  that  a  peck  of  oats  weighing  ten  pounds  is  considered  a  vevyj'ull  per 
diem  ration,  though  three  fourths  of  it  are  generally  considered  sufficient;  and  oats  certainly 
do  not  contain  the  same  quantity  of  nutritive  matter  that  either  barley  or  grain  does.  In 
Arabia  and  Persia,  both  countries  celebrated  for  their  horses,  seven  pounds  and  a  quarter 
weight  of  barley  form  the  allowance,  with  chopped  straw  forage;  except  for  growing  colts, 
who  have  in  some  places  on  the  banks  of  the  Euphrates  green  clover,  and  green  pasturage  in 
the  season.  This  latter  circumstance,  however,  never  can  be  adduced  as  in  any  way  affecting 
the  mode  of  feeding  the  horse  in  use  or  exercise,  whose  animal  powers  must  be  brought  up 
by  exercise,  and  then  maintained  in  work  on  the  opposite  plan  of  hard  food.  The  difference 
as  to  the  feed  of  grain  between  the  three  Presidencies  is  at  present  very  immaterial,  except 
in  the  case  of  the  dragoons  and  horse  artillery  in  Bombay  and  ^Madras,  where  they  receive 
twelve  pounds  weight  of  grain  while  marching,  or  in  the  fielil.  I  must  confess  this  (]uantity 
seems  hardly  necessary,  not  only  as  it  exceeds  the  old  rate,  but  as  in  itself  it  is  superabundant : 
there  is  hardly  any  horse  will  for  a  continuance  eat  so  much. 

The  above-mentioned  ration  is  detailed  in  the  margin*,  as  it  has  lately  been  fixed  for  the 
Bombay  cavalrj^,  assimilating  it  to  those  of  Bengal  and  Madras,  which,  stationary,  was  deemed 
quite  sufficient  to  keep  the  horse  in  good  condition,  while  it  occasioned  a  reduction  at  Bombay 
of  about  4-5,000  rupees  per  annum;  but  the  greater  quantity  f  in  the  field  it  is  alleged  is 
necessary,  because  the  horses  are  larger.  I  have,  however,  never  been  able  to  ascertain  for 
mj'  own  satisfaction,  that  good  cavalrv  horses  of  l-t :  1  hands  require  less  food  than  those  ot 
14  :  2,  to  keep  them  in  an  equally  good  state  of  condition,  though  the  horses  for  these  branches 
in  Bombay  are  larger  by  two  inches  than  they  are  either  at  Bengal  or  Madras,  for  similar 
arms  of  the  service. 

It  may  however,  with  equal  truth,  be  urged  on  the  other  side,  that  the  horses  of  the  house- 
hold troops  in  England  and  those  of  the  cuirassiers  in  France  were  always  as  a  matter  ot 
course  allowed  a  greater  ration  of  grain  and  forage.  But  we  know  from  experience,  from  the 
trained  racer  to  the  hack,  that  to  increase  the  feetl  of  grain  is  to  decrease  the  iiiiantity  of  forage  : 
all  stable-keepers  who  have  iiorses  for  hard  and  continued  work  are  well  acquainted  with  this 
fact  in  practice,  and  depend  entirely  upon  the  grain  and  grooming.  Cavalry  officers  while 
marching,  and  subject  to  bad  weather,  rest  mainly,  my  experience  leads  me  to  think,  upon 
these  points,  with  the  aid  of  a  few  mussalas  or  cordials,  as  their  horses  consume  but  little 
forage  on  these  occasions. — (Vide  A|)pendix  for  the  statement  showing  the  comparative  expense 
of  feeding  9,738  horses  in  Bengal,   Bombay,  and  England  for  ,'i65  days.) 

Grass  Cutlers. — I  shall  now  take  up  the  grass-cutter  plan,  as  one  of  many  for  foraging  the 
cavalry.     There  is  a  variety  of  forage  in  India,   besides  that  procured  from  the  stalks  of  two 

*  KHU  "7^:    u"t  lOibJ  ""^alT'  +  ^«"Sal  lOlbs;,.,-  dian.    Bombay  and  Madras  12lbs;,.r  dien,. 


27 

kiiuli  of  <rrain,  ami  some  kinds  of  grass:  of  tliis  latter  vegetable  there  is  a  considerable  variety 
all   over  Intlia,   unil   where  the  iiurses  are  fed  on   the  roots  of  it,  nnder  the  general  name  of 
jaiiUcc,  as  is  the  case  with  nine  tenths  of  the  cavalry  in  India,  a  very  remarkable  species  of  it 
is  always  preferred  when  it  is  procurable;   it  has  ditlerent  names  in  diflerent  provinces.     I  do 
not  know  its  name  in  the  districts  composing  the  Madras  territories,  but  in  other  parts  it  is 
called  (loot,   and  in  Cluzerat  and  to  the  northward  jinjxaa.     Its  way  of  spreading  is  unlike  anj* 
other;   it  stretches  out  a  branch,  which,  according  to  circumstances  as  it  finds  nourishment, 
strikes  a  root  at  a  distance  of  three  inches,  and  sometimes  of  ten  anil  eleven,   from  its  parent 
root;  thus  spreatling  all  over  the  surface  of  the  ground,  and  might,  without  carrying  the  resem- 
blance too  far,   be  compared  to  the  mode  the  banjan  tree  multiplies  itself.      It  delights  in  light 
good  soil,  but  is  seldom  found  in  rocky  or  even  in  gravelly  spots.     The  other  mode  of  supply- 
ing forage  is  by  stacking  hay  in  the  season,  which  is  in  great  plenty  in  CJuzerat,  and  the  whole 
range  of  the  w-estern  Ghats.     It  is  now  iiowever  but  occasionally  used,  as  the  movements  of 
the  cavalry  render  a  regular  supply  of  it  more  than  precarious,  and  it  is  only  expected  at  fixed 
stations  where   it  has  always  proved  of  the  greatest  convenience,  as  stacks  of  it  have  always 
been  available  both  in   the  Deccan  and  the   cantomnents  in   Guzerat.     The  Madras  system, 
which  on  a  general  principle  is  applicable  both  to  marching  and  being  stationary,  has  superseded 
the  use  of  hay;  and  the  plan  of  grass-cutters,  attached  as  a  regimental  establishment,  lias  been 
adopted  in  preference.     It  is  a  mode  that  has  its  advantages,   no  doubt,   when  it  is  taken  into 
consideration  that  our  troops  are  at  all  times  liable  to  move,  and  have  such  an  extent  of  country 
to  range  over ;  for  b}'  this  means  they  may  be  said  to  carry  their  supply  of  forage  with  them, 
their  followers,  and  their  families,  cutting  up  the  grass  and  collecting  it  as  they  proceed  along 
the  line  of  march.     They  are  besides  of  use  in  other  ways,  as  they  procure  fuel,  and  sell  it  in 
the  Bazar;  but  in  this  enumeration  of  their  useful  capacity,  I  have  I  am  afraid  exhausted  the 
commendation  due  to  them,  as  they  are  in  other  points  of  view  an  encumbrance,   and  in  some 
cases  a  nuisance,  from  their   habits,   and  an  absence  of  moral  restraint  as  to  the  means  thev 
employ  to  possess  themselves  of  what  they  require.    Their  numbers  too  cannot  be  passed  over 
as  a  matter  of  indifference:  when  the  extent  and  defence  of  a  camp  are  thought  of,  it  must  also 
strike  any  one  accustomed  to  witness  the  conduct  of  followers  of  this,   and  other  descriptions, 
during  the  march  of  an  army,  that  they  form  bands  of  plunderers,  who  call  for  the  utmost  rigour 
to  keep  them  from  committing  excesses  ;   and  they  prove  in  many  situations  a  burthen  to  the 
resources  of  a  camp,  which  ought  to  be  as  much  as  possible  restricted  to  the  maintenance  of 
the  fighting  men  and  their  indispensable  attendants. 

Upon  the  whole,  whatever  the  defects  or  advantages  of  the  system  may  be,  I  rather  incline  to 
the  grass-cutter  one,  as  being  better  adapted  to  a  field  equipment,  and  as  the  regulations 
formed  for  it  are  good,  accompanied  by  a  regimental  fund*.  Experience  however  in  this  case, 
as  in  most  others,  must  be  alone  trusted  to  as  the  best  prover  of  any  experiment,  for  such  it  is 
at  Bombay,  while  we  are  acquainted  with  its  effects  at  Madras :  and  if  the  Bombay  regiments 
could  by  any  precautionary  measure  avoid  the  evils  objected  to  the  grass-cutter  plan,  of  the 
rapid  increase  of  numbers  in  population,  which  is  so  sensibly  felt,  it  would  be  divested  of  its 
faults;  but  how  this  is  to  be  guarded  against  is  a  question  evidently  of  difficult  solution,  as  no 
remedy  has  as  yet  been  proposed  to  arrest  its  progress. 

Saddle  Contract. 

Amongst  other  subjects  that  have  arisen  in  the  course  of  this  review,  few  have  more  seriously- 
attracted  my  attention  than  the  state  of  one  of  the  largest  contracts  in  the  service  as  connected 
with  the  e(iuipnient  of  our  cavalry ;  I  allude  to  the  mode  of  supplying  horse  appointments 
for  that  arm  of  the  service:  whatever  the  previous  ex])ense  may  have  been,  it  will  l)e  useless  to 
advert  to  it ;  the  existing  state  of  the  service  is  all  that  can  be  noticed ;  I  shall  therefore  confine 
myself  to  that  part  of  it,  and  allude  only  as  may  be  necessary  to  its  past  operation.  It  appears 
that  in  Bengal  and  Bombay  the  contracts  for  the  saddles,  harness,  bridles,  and  horse  appoint- 
ments of  the  horse  artillery  and  light  cavalry  (all  mounted  corps)  are  supplied  by  Government 
once  in  eight  years,  and  held  by  officers  commanding  troops  at  one  rupee  per  month  for  each 
set  to  kee|)  them  in  reiiair.  The  allowance  on  this  head  at  Madras  is  rupee  1  and  12  annas, 
which  includes  the  provision  of  troopers'  boots  and  cavasst)ns,  being  in  the  first  instance  pro- 
vided by  Government  and  afterwards  kept  up  by  thepfficers,  except  if  lost  in  action,  by  fire,  or  un- 
avoidable accident;  they  are  then  replaced  by  Government.  In  such  a  supply  as  this  there  can 
be  no  difficulty  in  having  one  system  for  the  three  armies.  The  experience  of  many  years  in 
the  Madras  side  furnished  by  the  adjutant-general  of  that  army,  strongly  recommended  it  to  be 
continued  ;  and  the  connnandant  is  from  rank  and  rcsi)onsibility  the  best  contractor,  it  any  be  ne- 
cessary ;  he  has  better  means  than  troop  officers,  particularly  in  native  cavalry,  to  assist  in  ful- 
filling his  contract  under  all  circumstances  that  can  occur.    And  however  much  I  may  dislike 

•  The  foraae  fund  at  Madras,  Colonel  Conway  informed  me,  became  so  rich,  that  its  amount  purchased  Europe 
cloth  cloaks  for  every  trooper  in  the  cavalry. 

E2 


28 

even  the  appearance  of  indirect  pecuniary  advantages,  still  as  it  must  exist  somewhere  in  ordi- 
nary times,  I  should  prefer  it  benefiting  him,  to  any  subdivision  of  it,  as  connected  with  so 
important  a  part  of  the  duty  of  a  regiment's  efficiency. 

The  expediency  of  placing  trust  and  of  giving  advantage  (where  there  was  any)  to  officersat 
the  head  of  corps,  instead  of  subdividing  it,  is  a  principle  which  lias  in  my  mind  much  import- 
ance, and  has  been  maintained  by  some  of  the  most  eminent  men  in  India.  Both  Sir  Thomas 
Munro  and  Sir  Archibald  Campbell  expressed  themselves  in  its  favour,  and  there  can  be  no 
doubt  of  their  experience  and  judgement. 

To  the  preceding  argmnents,  however,  the  Honourable  the  Court  objected,  and  took  highei- 
ground  for  their  reasoning,  by  ordering  die  regimental  commandants  to  be  placed  to  supervise 
the  acts  of  the  troop  officers  as  their  proper  sphere  of  action. 

Whatever  the  result  may  be  of  these  two  modes,  the  officers  in  both  situations  have  certainly 
done  justice  to  their  own  service  ;  and  it  would  not,  on  an  impartial  review,  on  the  score  of  oeco- 
nomy  be  easy  to  decide  which  is  the  most  favourable  to  the  public  interest. 

Saddles,  ^r. — With  respect  to  the  materials  forming  the  items  of  this  supply,  they  are  as  va- 
rious, and  more  so,  as  the  systems  themselves — some  Europe,  some  country.  I  shall  say  no- 
thing of  the  experiment  tried  of  supplying  the  Bombay  cavalry  with  saddles  from  Cawnpore,  on 
account  of  the  lowness  of  their  price,  which  might  be  adduced  as  a  fair  argument  of  cheapness 
not  alwaj's  being  oeconomy.  I  shall  therefore  address  myself  to  the  main  and  broad  principle 
of  the  cavalry  in  India.  Situated  as  we  are,  the  European  manufacture  is  for  our  use  preferable, 
from  its  strength  and  durability;  the  reason  is  evident,  viz.  that  the  main  article,  the  leather,  is 
properly  prepared.  In  this  country  everybody  knows  that  all  persons  below  those  possessing 
estates  live  from  hand  to  mouth.  There  are  no  capitalists  to  undertake  a  manufactory  of  any 
extent,  and  the  material  we  are  speaking  of  requires  a  long  preparation  to  make  it  compete  with 
that  of  Europe  in  durability.  It  follows,  that  it  the  Indian  be  brought  to  anything  like  the  same 
equality,  it  must  sell  at  a  higher  price  than  it  does  at  present,  to  remunerate  the  labourer  for 
his  time  and  means  employed  to  bring  it  to  that  state  of  perfection.  I  believe  that  nine-tenths 
of  the  hides  tanned  in  England  are  imported  from  foreign  countries;  but  undergoing  that  supe- 
rior mode  of  dressing  which  art,  assisted  by  capital,  enables  the  manufacturer  to  attain,  he 
brings  into  the  market  an  article  unequalled  in  quality  by  that  prepared  in  any  other  country. 
With  these  facts  before  us,  therefore,  it  is  evident  that  whatever  allowance  we  make  for  our- 
selves on  the  score  of  partiality  for  our  own  country,  we  must  nevertheless  prefer  the  material 
for  its  own  superiority,  whether  a  saddle  or  anything  else  made  in  England,  to  the  same  kind 
of  article  manufactured  in  India,  because  the  former  not  only  works  well  in  common  use,  but 
is  to  be  depended  upon  as  serviceable  in  the  time  of  need,  in  the  same  light  that  a  musket,  or 
the  powder  that  fills  it,  should  be  sound  when  required  for  the  use  of  the  foot-soldier  or  artillery- 
man. However  much  motives  of  oeconomy  ought  at  all  times  to  be  present  to  our  minds,  still 
in  military  equipments  the  best  materials  are  always  the  cheapest,  and  should  always  be  used; 
— it  is  the  most  enlightened  oeconomy.  For  very  subordinate  purposes  it  would  be  equally 
ridiculous  to  use  what  are  called  expensive  articles. 

The  Indian  saddle-trees  are  also  inferior,  but  even  those  of  Europe  might  be  much  improved 
by  containing  less  wood  and  iron,  and  thus  be  lighter  and  less  cumbersome  to  the  horse.  No 
comparison,  I  imagine,  can  be  drawn  even  on  this  head  between  English  saddlery,  which  will 
last  out  two  sets  of  that  made  in  India  in  war,  and  more  in  peace ;  it  is  in  fact  as  well  as  argu- 
ment a  cheaper  rather  than  a  dearer  article  of  supply. 

Li/ie  Articles. 

The  contracts  for  head  and  heel  ropes  and  petty  stores  require  but  a  passing  remcirk.  In 
Bengal  it  is  2  rupees,  at  Madras  2  rupees  12  annas,  and  at  Bombay  3  rupees,  per  month,  per 
horse,  besides  additional  allowance  in  Bengal  for  cavassons,  grain,  boots,  &c. ;  2  rupees  12  annas 
might  be  deemed  a  fair  allowance  for  everything  in  a  troop.  But  as  a  practice  I  believe  is  in 
some  places  prevalent  of  a  sub-contract  to  the  veterinary  surgeon  for  country  medicines  and 
mussalas,  and  the  sup])ly  of  horse-shoes  and  nails  is  now  with  the  troop  officer,  while  the  shoeing 
itself  is  directed  by  the  veterinary  surgeon, — if  a  small  deduction  was  made  from  the  contract 
allowance  of  2  rupees  12  annas  per  horse,  to  enable  the  veterinary  surgeon  to  supply  and  per- 
form this  ))art  of  the  business,  except  such  medical  sup])lies  as  are  of  a  European  sort,  re(|iiired 
from  the  stores,  it  would  be  better  to  relieve  the  trooj)  officers  of  these  duties  that  would  be 
better  performed  by  the  scientific  attendant  of  the  regiment,  while  the  officer  himself  became 
the  superintendent  instead  of  the  suj)])lier. 

Tiie  contract  lor  line  articles  is  given  to  officers  commanding  troops,  and  upon  the  same 
principle  aflbrds  them  a  similar  and  proportionate  benefit.  The  honourable  zeal  that  all  officers 
intrusted  with  these  contracts  have  heretofore  manifested,  and  the  efficiency  of  our  regiments  in 
every  respect,  would  seem  to  establish  that  the  check  and  control  which  are  vigilantly  liekl  on 
commanding  officers  of  corps  by  the  superior  officers  commanding  brigatles,  divisions,  and 
stations,  affords  ample  security  to  the  service. 


29 

Slablcs, — I  shall  now  touch  on  another  part  of  this  important  branch  of  tlie  army,  nivolving 
tile  effective  state  of  the  horse  for  military  duty  as  to  his  health  and  condition  when  ref|uire<l  to 
carry  his  rider  to  the  fiekl.  All  results  on  this  head  proiluced  by  exercise,  feedinfr,  and 
covering,  the  treatment  practised  in  fixed  stations,  must  effect  tiie  jneparation  of  the  main  object, 
that  of  an  efficient  soldier  with  a  healtliy  and  seasoned  horse.  If  he  is  unable  by  stable-keeping 
to  move  to  the  field  without  apprehension  of  contracting  any  distemper  unavoidable  from  the 
necessary  exposure  ot  iiis  altered  state,  he  is  then  not  a  cavalry  horse. 

As  to  the  mode  of  preparation  in  this  country,  there  are  very  many  opinions  offered,  and 
various  conclusions  have  been  ileduced  on  this  topic  from  the  same  premises,  inffuenced  as  might 
be  expected  by  the  experience  and  indeed  even  private  practice  of  individuals  ;  their  feelings  have 
also  had  something  to  do  with  their  suggestions.  The  usages  of  different  countries  have  been 
produced  and  pleaded  as  applicable  to  situations  otherwise  quite  incompatible :  but  as  the  argu- 
ments used  are  by  persons  who,  from  their  rank  and  education  in  society,  are  admitted  as  possess- 
ing scientific  as  well  as  practical  information,  I  shall  produce  and  arrange  them,  I  trust,  with  the 
same  impartiality,  as  to  persons  or  places,  as  I  have  at  all  times  endeavoured  to  do  on  every 
occasion  where  conflicting  sentiments  make  their  ajipearance  on  the  examination  of  the  views 
of  well-informed  individuals  on  any  subject  they  are  interested  about.  The  question  is  certainly 
more  practical  than  scientific,  though  1  should  blush  to  deny  the  effects  that  a  good  education 
may  have  to  ameliorate  common  usage;  but  the  point  at  issue  is  not  so  much  that  of  schools, 
as  the  learning  of  schools,  matured  by  practice  for  the  improvement  of  daily  occurrences  ;  it  has 
been  subjected  to  a  diversity  of  grounds,  and  the  importance  of  it  is  great  from  its  effects  on 
efficiency.  This  might  authorize  me  to  determine  it  without  further  argument,  and  take  up 
ceconomy,  the  particular  object  of  this  Report;  but  at  present  I  must  be  permitted  to  dwell  on 
the  superior  subject  of  efficiency,  whether  stabling  for  cavalry  be  indispensable  or  not,  and  if  it 
militates  against  or  preserves  the  condition  of  the  horse  for  the  more  trying  duties  of  the  field. 
I  must  jiremise,  as  a  preliminary  caution,  that  as  much  is  claimed,  and  with  the  same  feeling 
conceded,  on  the  head  of  kindness  and  humanity,  still  it  is  an  argument  mostly  intended  to 
interest  our  feelings  ;  the  stronger  dictates  of  a  public  service,  and  the  imjiossibility  of  compliance 
with  such  motives  from  the  ruinous  expense  that  it  entails,  makes  it  obvious  that  in  military 
matters  hardships  must  be  received  as  matters  of  course,  and  that  privation  on  the  part  both  of 
man  and  horse  is  inseparable  from  such  a  line  of  life.  All  that  remains  to  be  done  is  to  try  and 
ward  oft'  hard  |iressing  events,  and  provide  against  their  worst  effects  by  inuring  our  soldiers 
and  their  horses  by  a  mode  of  treatment  that  will  defend  them  against  hardships,  or  at  any  rate 
enable  them  to  bear  up  against  them  with  strength  and  resolution,  which  in  the  animal  can  only 
be  done  by  a  previous  preparation. 

I  have  considered  this  caution  called  for,  before  we  enter  on  the  main  question  of  stabling 
our  cavalry  horses  in  a  climate  like  India,  as  a  leading  remark.  The  interests  of  the  State  would 
be  obviously  consulted  on  the  score  of  ceconomy  by  dispensing  with  stabling,  which  in  Bengal 
is  proved  to  entail  a  considerable  expense  for  building  and  repairs,  besides  involving  an  annual 
loss  by  fire,  falling  down,  and  the  abandonment  of  them  in  cases  of  contagious  diseases;  while 
the  contrary  system  is  free  from  expense,  establishing  greater  efficiency,  the  horses  being  accus- 
tomed always  to  the  open  air  are  at  a  moment's  warning  fit  to  take  the  field,  hardened  by 
exposure  and  equal  to  all  emergencies.  By  this  plan  those  of  weak  constitutions  would  be 
weeded,  and  not  prove  as  they  now  do  the  marching  of  a  regiment  from  stables  an  incumbrance, 
falling  sick  from  the  change,  which  must  be  detrimental  to  the  efficiency  of  the  regiment  by  dis- 
mounting the  rider. 

The  opinions  of  the  advocates  for  stables,  who  have,  with  a  very  few  exceptions,  all  stated  that 
"roomino-,  fijedings,  and  everything  necessary  for  the  condition  of  a  horse,  can  be  better  done 
in  stables  than  out  of  them,  are  admitted  as  far  as  their  experience  goes  :  but  we  are  not  to  take 
as  incontrovertible  the  opinions  of  those  who  acknowledge  themselves  acquainted  with  stables 
only,  and  at  the  same  time  admit  that  it  renders  the  horse  delicate  ;  still  it  is  generally  concedetl 
by  "them  that  the  loss  by  casualties  is  nearly  the  same  with  as  without  stabling.  What  conclu- 
sion is  to  be  drawn  from  this  ? 

The  following  return  of  casualties  under  the  three  Presidencies  for  eight  years  establishes 
facts  not  easily  argued  against.  It  is  therefore  fair  to  admit,  that  if  horses  with  the  extra  and 
expensive  system  of  being  stabled  are  not  more  efficient  for  military  purposes,  with  fewer 
casualties  than  those  who  liave  always  been  exposed  to  the  weather,  the  arguments  for  stabling 
are  upon  a  weak  ground ;  for  the  object  of  stabling  must  be  to  lessen  expense  in  casualties  and 
to  prepare  the  horse  for  the  field,  otherwise  the  system  is  a  waste  of  public  money. 

Table  of  Casualties,  viz. : — 

Cast.  Dcatlis.  Total. 

Bengal     •     .     .     Sg         •     •     •     3f         ...     12^ 
Madras   .     .     .     9j%     ...     ij^j,     .     •     .     13^.^5 
Bombay  .     .     .     6i         .     .     .     4|         .     .     .     10| 

It  appears  that  the  generality  of  the  veterinary  surgeons  allow  that  contagious  diseases  are  more 


o 


30 

easily  cured  in  the  open  air,  and  liie  spreading  of  their  destructive  effects  more  easily  checked, 
than  in  buildings:  and  both  common  knowledge  and  individual  experience  confirm  the  fact,  that 
the  very  walls  retain  infection  when  once  disease  makes  its  appearance  ;  while  it  is  equally  evident 
and  admitted,  from  the  same  source  of  information,  that  confinement  in  buildings  all  the  year 
round  proves  injurious  to  the  health  of  the  horse,  engendering  inflammatory  complaints,  as  their 
lungs  become  affected*  by  inhaling  the  impure  air  evaporated  from  their  urine,  by  which  also 
farcy  and  other  contagious  diseases  are  brought  on.  Hence  arises  the  practice  in  Bengal  as 
avowed,  that  picketing  the  horses  at  night  outside  the  stables  in  the  open  air  in  the  hot 
season  is  frequently  done.  As  1  wish  to  produce  every  piece  of  information  touching  the  sub- 
ject in  hand,  I  shall  offer  every  detail  that  relates  to  it  as  connected  with  every  establishment. 
I  shall  therefore  add  what  may  appear  to  show  on  a  similar  though  smaller  scale,  which  I 
imagine  upon  examination  will  not  prove  a  less  satisfactory  proof  or  argument  of  the  general 
question. 

The  cavalry  at  Bombay  have  consisted  of  a  regiment  of  dragoons  since  1811,  horse  artillery 
since  1812,  and  of  light  cavalry  since  1816.  The  general  average  of  casualties  in  eight  years, 
without  stables,  was  10|  per  cent;  the  average  of  the  dragoons  for  two  years,  without  stables 
(1826-27  and  1827-28),  was  15  per  cent,  and  for  the  six  preceding  years,  with  stables,  19  per 
cent.  But  the  excess  in  the  latter  instance  was  thought  to  be  ascribable  to  an  extraordinary  mor- 
tality, whether  epidemic  or  contagious,  that  had  occurred  in  1820-21,  where  the  deaths  were 
16|  per  cent,  in  other  years  never  exceeding  6*  per  cent.  These  casualties  by  death  in  the 
17th  dragoons  at  Bombay  were  deemed  excessive  in  1820-21,  attributable  to  a  mortality;  but 
it  seems  equally  necessary  to  draw  one's  attention  to  the  per  centage  in  1826-27  in  the  under- 
mentioned regiments  in  Bengal  by  casting. 

The  16th  lancers     .     .     .     30  per  cent     .     .     Meerul. 

The  2nd  light  cavalry  .     .     33 Mattra. 

The  5th  light  cavalry  .     .     36 Neemuch. 

This  statement  is  merely  introduced  to  exhibit  the  entire  state  of  the  question.  At  the  other 
Presidencies  no  per  centage  for  casting  approaches  this  number,  except  in  the  solitary  instance 
of  the  Madras  cavalry  returning  from  Ava,  and  even  that  does  not  exceed  19  per  cent. 

The  condition  and  treatment  of  cavalry  horses,  and  of  horses  bred  and  trained  for  the  turf  f  or 
the  chase,  are  so  different  that  persons  separately  engaged  in  either  way  are  no  correct  judges 
of  the  other;  and  their  opinions  ought  to  have  no  weight  in  the  present  discussion;  nor  should 
persons  whose  experience  has  not  been  gained  by  long  service  in  the  field  have  any  effect.  The 
"hard-working  order"  implies  a  capacity  to  bear  the  exposure  and  fatigues  of  protracted  cam- 
paigns ;  and  to  be  kept  in  condition  by  care  and  good  grooming  means  more  than  the  jockey's 
good  condition,  which  requires  a  stable  to  continue  it, — it  is  however  attainable;  while  on  the 
other  hand  there  are  the  opinions  only  of  the  Bengal  officers  and  veterinary  surgeons,  who 
admit  that  they  have  little  or  no  experience  of  the  field,  which  are  founded  onpartial  experience 
or  iiitemipted  experimejifa,  that  it  is  unattainable.  The  difference  between  the  two  systems  was 
bv  the  same  account  strongly  contrasted  by  the  sufferings  of  the  6th  Bengal  light  cavalry,  when 
without  stables  at  Nagpoore,  and  of  the  Madras  cavalry,  which  was  subject  to  no  unusual  losses, 
though  uncovered ;  while  the  officer  commanding  the  regiment  of  Bengal  cavalry  reported  that 
his  losses  amounted  to  thirty  and  forty  horses  per  month. 

The  officer  in  charge  of  the  hanaper  stud  gave  it  as  his  decided  opinion  that  stables  were  to 
be  preferred,  and  urged  that  as  the  colts  from  that  stud  were  well  brought  up  in  stables,  they 
should  be  continued  to  be  covered  after  leaving  that  establishment.  The  simple  deduction 
therefore  from  this  reasoning  is,  if  such  it  can  be  called,  that  it  assumes  results  from  premises 
quite  inapplicable  to  the  object  desired,  that  stud  horses  tor  the  cavalry  must  never  be  uncovered; 
and  consequently,  in  a  military  jioint  of  view,  became  inapplicable  to  military  service,  for  which 
they  are  expressly  bred  at  an  immense  expense. 

These  reasons,  and  the  admission  on  the  part  of  those  who  advanced  them,  that  they  hardly 
any  of  them  had  ever  seen  service,  produces  the  conviction  of  the  inexpediency  of  keeping 
horses  in  stables,  and  satisfies  one  that  no  sufficient  trial  of  the  opposite  system  has  yet  been 
made  in  Bengal. 

Chargers  to  Officers. 

Chargers  to  officers  are  furnished  to  the  officers  at  the  Presidencies  on  the  same  principle 
and  in  the  same  manner;  the  only  diflerence  apparent  is  that  of  price.  In  Bengal  they  are 
allowed  to  be  taken  at  the  lowest  rates,  from  tinee  hundrcil  and  fifty  to  three  hundred  and 
sixty-three  rupees  :  allow  these  are  not  the  ]irices  at  which  it  is  possible  that  the  animals  can  be 
reared  at  the  stud,  nor  the  market  price  of  the  Commissariat  for  the  troopers'  horses,  which 
is  five  iiundred  rupees.  I  shall  pass  no  comment  on  this  mode  ;  it  is  clearly  an  indulgence.  At 
the  other  Presidencies  the  Governments  take  the  precaution  of  guarding  against  a  loss  of  this 

•  Veti  Surg.  Body  Guard.  +  Mil.  Ilin.  Com.  Rep. 


31 

kind,  which  they  cover  by  fixing  the  prices  agreeiihiy  to  tiie  anioimts  jiaid  to  the  contractors 
ibr  tlie  Iiorses,  wiiethcr  for  tiie  dragoons  or  native  cavalry.  At  Bombay  it  is>  rupees  550,  and 
iit  Madras  I  believe  it  is  even  rupees  600. 

Remount. 

The  system  now  adopted  at  Bombay  to  supply  the  remount  for  the  whole  of  the  horse 
artillery  and  cavalry  on  the  spot  by  the  conunaiiding  officers  themselves,  will  certainly  be  the 
mosto'conotnical  way  to  Oovernment,  holding  out  the  prosjiect  of  |)roviiig  the  readiest  mode  of 
obtaining  the  remount,  anil  is,  from  the  favourableness  of  our  |)osition  in  relation  to  the  foreign 
supply,  as  well  as  the  facilities  of  breeding  in  our  provinces.  Bombay  has  been,  and  must  con- 
tinue to  be.  the  entrepot  from  many  countries  for  the  sale  of  horses;  it  must  also  be  the  place  of 
reception  and  examination,  from  its  central  position,  for  the  remount  of  nearly  one  half  in 
numbers  of  the  whole  of  the  cavalry  belonging  to  the  eastern  side  of  India  :  but  of  this  I  siiall 
speak  in  its  jiroper  place  in  the  course  of"  this  Report. 

It  is  evident  that  if  unexceptionable  horses  can  be  purchased  on  the  spot  by  this  plan,  even 
at  the  rates  fixed,  a  better  plan,  from  its  sini|)licity,  could  not  have  been  devised  for  recruit- 
ing the  remount,  and  might  I  think  be  adopted  in  Bengal,  which  prevails  there  in  a  partial 
degree  by  regimental  connnittees,  and  would  eflijct  a  great  saving  owing  to  the  facilities  afforded 
that  army  of  providing  horses  in  their  own  territories,  as  well  as  from  the  countries  in  their 
vicinit}',  both  from  the  northward  and  westward  ;  while  it  would  be  impracticable  with  the 
Madras  Presidency,  which  have  no  resources  within  their  own  provinces,  and  must,  as  they 
hitherto  have  done,  be  dependent  on  the  Bombay  side,  or  take  advantage  of  batches  of  horses 
that  annually  proceed  to  the  southward,  for  the  supply  for  their  cavahy.  This  must  make  their 
expenses  on  this  head  very  heavy,  notwithstanding  their  horses,  as  well  as  those  of  the  Bengal 
army,  are  of  a  lower  standard  than  those  taken  at  Bombay. 

The  necessity  of  this  greater  lieight  is  not  quite  so  evident;  as  in  the  late  wars  the  Bombay 
cavalry  standard  was  until  very  lately  the  same  as  that  of  the  other  Presidencies,  and  the  horses 
purchased  at  from  50  to  150  rupees  less  each  than  we  are  now  paying,  which  at  an  average 
rose  to  10  percent,  amounting  to  25,000  rupees  per  annum,  occasioned  by  insisting  upon  a 
talier  horse. 

The  standard  for  the  horses  in  Bengal  and  Madras  is  from  fourteen  hands  one  inch  for 
dragoons  and  horse  artillery,  and  fourteen  hands  for  native  cavalry ;  the  prices  for  them  are 
from  450  to  500  rupees  in  Bengal,  and  from  500  to  600  at  Madras;  but  on  the  Bombay 
side  the  standard  for  native  cavalry  alone  is  fourteen  hands  one  inch,  and  for  dragoons  and 
horse  artillery  fourteen  hands  three  inches  ;  which  is  so  material  a  difference,  and  renders  the 
horse  purchased  in  Bengal  far  cheaper  ;  the  standard  for  the  native  cavalry  at  Bombay  being 
the  same  as  for  the  dragoons  and  horse  artillery  in  Bengal,  thus  accounting  for  the  great 
difference  of  price,  the  size  of  course  creating  the  rise  in  value.  Relative  to  the  remount  for 
the  cavalry  of  Bombay  Presidency,  the  Honourable  the  Governor  minuted  the  following 
opinions : — 

"  The  superintendent  of  the  stud  has  been  empowered  to  purchase  a  certain  number  of  young 
horses  at  fairs  for  the  encouragement  of  breeders,  and  these  might  be  sent  by  him  to  regiments 
that  required  or  were  likely  to  require  them.  They  should  not  be  subject  to  any  committee, 
but  taken  into  use,  and  a  very  short  experiment  would  ])rove  whether  this  casual  and  limitetl 
source  of  supply  required  any  modification  or  should  be  wholly  abandoned. 

"  I  am  aware  of  the  objections  that  may  be  urged  to  the  measure  recommended :  they  are 
however  in  my  opinion  so  greatly  overbalanced  by  its  advantages,  that  I  cannot  doubt  the 
policy  of  its  immediate  adoption  ;  but  its  merits  must  be  tried  with  exclusive  reference  to  the 
Presidency  of  Bombay,  which,  as  the  great  mart  for  Gulph  and  northern  horses,  and  having 
subject  to  its  rule  those  provinces  of  the  Deccan  which  have  long  been  the  most  famous  for  a 
superior  breed  of  horses,  and  the  country  of  Kattyawar,  is  altogether  differently  situated  from 
either  Madras  or  Bengal ;  and  the  question  must  not  therefore  be  judged  by  any  comparison 
with  the  systems  pursued  under  these  Governments. 

"The  first  advantage  will  be  the  saving  of  expense, — this  will  arise  in  many  ways  ;  say  (which 
is  improbable)  that  horses  continue  at  their  present  price,  Government  will  save  agency.  Com- 
missariat establishment,  keep  of  horses,  even  after  committees  have  passed  them  at  Com- 
missariat stables,  till  opportunities  offer  of  sending  them  to  corps,  charges  for  their  equipment, 
feed  on  the  march,  hazard  from  accident,  and  the  greater  hazaril  of  rejection  by  regimental 
committees,  and  sale  by  auction  for  little  or  nothing,  when  lame  or  in  bad  condition,  perhaps 
from  want  of  caie  on  the  journey. 

"  There  are  no  advantages  derived  from  our  tratle  with  the  Gulph  of  Persia  that  balance  the 
evils  that  attend  our  making  the  whole  or  greater  part  of  our  purchases  from  Persia,  Turkey, 
and  Arabia.  The  vast  sums  paid  to  these  countries  for  our  remount  are  no  benefit  to  Inilia, 
and  many  events  may  occur  to  stop  the  supply  from  tliese  countries.  The  export  of  horses 
may  be  ])rohibited,  our  amicable  intercourse  may  be  interru|)tcd,  and  we  may  discover  too  late 
the  deep  error  we  have  committed  in  neglecting  our  own  resources  in  the  essential  blanch  of 


32 

military  efficiency.  There  is  another  reason  for  this  change,  which  in  my  mind  has  a  weight 
that  supersedes  all  objections  that  can  be  urged.  The  perusal  of  records,  the  recent  reports  of  the 
two  different  collectors,  and  my  personal  observation  and  communication  with  the  natives  of 
provinces  which  I  have  recently  visited,  quite  satisfy  me  that  we  must  by  every  means  in  our 
jiower  endeavour  to  prevent  that  complete  poverty  which,  from  the  want  of  demand  of  every 
article,  except  grain  for  animal  subsistence,  is  becoming  general  among  the  inhabitants  of  many 
of  our  finest  provinces. 

"  >Jo  emergency  of  service  is  likely  to  occur ;  but  if  it  did,  the  advantages  of  this  Presidency 
are  so  great  in  this  particular  branch  of  military  equipment,  that  it  is  not  possible  any  wants 
could  arise  that  could  not  be  supplied  in  a  month.  Of  this  fact  I  can  speak  from  my  own 
experience  with  perfect  confidence." 

It  can  hardly,  from  what  has  preceded,   be  required  in  this  place  that  a  minute  comparison 
should  be  drawn  between  the  different  kinds  of  horses  used  at  the  three  Presidencies,  which 
might  be  supposed  in  a  great  measure  to  be  governed  by  local  circumstances,  the  breeds  being, 
as  might  be  expected,  various,  over  such  an  immense  extentof  dominion,  besides  the  importations 
from  other  countries  ;  but  from  an  insight  into  the  subject  we  are  soon  convinced  that  this  is  not 
as  we  expected.     And  however  curious  the  fact  may  be,  that  the  Bombay  Presidency  with  more 
limited  pecuniary  means  has  either  by  its  care  and  vigilance,  aided  by  some  fortunate  circum- 
stances of  position  and  the  habits  of  the  natives  of  the  soil  being  engaged  from  necessity  and 
natural  inclination  in  rearing  horses,   chosen  the  better  mode  of  recruiting   the  cattle  of  its 
mounted  corps,  by  adhering  as  much  as  circumstances  would  allow  to  one  breed,  decidedly  the 
finest  for  cavalry  purposes, — I  mean  the  Kattiawar  horse.    And  as  political  events  and  changes 
affected  the  condition  of  that  country,  and  diminished  its  produce  in  number,  from  the  necessity 
there  was  of  restraining  the  inhabitants  and   breeders  in  their  former  lawless  and  predatory 
habits,  who  depended  upon  the  blood  and  fleetness  of  tiieir  horses  for  success  in  their  expeditions, 
— the  Government  early  perceived  the  effects  of  this  altered  state  of  things ;  and  however  benefi- 
cial in  other  respects  it  might  be,  still  it  was  evident  it  was  likely  to  lead  to  a  total  extinction 
of  this  once  numerous  and  valuable  class  of  animals.     They  adopted  a  remedy  to  meet  the 
apprehended  failure,  and  consequently  in   1811   made  arrangements   to  procure  horses  from 
the  northern  jiarts  of  Persia,  to   be  purchased  by  Captain   Lindsay,  whose  opportunities  of 
obtaining  them  of  the  best  kind  could  be  equalled  by  no  ability  or  exertion  on  the  part  of  any 
contractor  or  common  supplier ;  as  that  officer,  from  the  high  estimation  lie  was  held  in  by  Prince 
Abbes  Mirza,  the  heir  to  the  Persian  throne,  had  permission  not  only  to  purchase  in  any  part 
of  the  country,  but  was  even  permitted  to  take  horses  out  of  the  Prince's  own  stud  and  stables ; 
— not  to  add  that  his  situation  at  the  Court  and  his  intimacy  with  the  nobles,  whose  breedingstuds 
lie  had  access  to,   and  whose  agents  employed  in  the  surrounding  countries  of  Khorasson,  and 
the  banks  of  the  Oxees,  and  the  Tartarian  hordes,  he  knew,  afforded  him  those  means  of  pro- 
curing the  best  produce  of  those  countries  at  reasonable  prices.     His  horses  to  this  day  are 
spoken  of  in  India  as  the  best  ever  furnished, — the  horse  artillery  and  dragoons.  As  a  proof  that 
I  am  not  attributing  too  much  to  the  influence  of  personal  character,  I  can  easily  allude  to  the 
subsequent  periods  when  this  agency  devolved  on  others  without  these  personal  connections, 
in  which  the  experiment  was  continued  to  keep  up  the  supply  of  these  fine  animals  under  several 
gentlemen,  fully  qualified  from  their  judgement  and  information  to  execute  such  a  service.    Two 
of  them  had  travelled  previously  over  the  greater  part  of  Persia,  and  all  were  excellent  judges 
of  horses  ;  but  the  rejection  of  those  they  sent  down  in  point  of  numbers  was  so  great,  as  to  place 
the  operation  of  the  experiment  in  its  true  light,  and  to  induce  the  Government  to  withdraw 
the  .agency  on  the  score  of  expense,  and  depend  entirely  upon  their  former  internal  resources 
and  the  casual  market,  which  by  this  time  became  more  abuntlantly  supplied  from  the  Persian 
Gulph  than  ever,  owing  principally  to  the  increased  demand  for  hordes  for  the  newly  raised  regi- 
ments and  horse  artillery,  and  also  from  the  residence  of  the  Madras  agent,  a  Commissariat 
officer,  purch.asing  for  the  cavalry  of  that  Presidency.     His  purchases  were  both  extensive  and 
high-priced,  though  his  standard  did  not  exceed  that  established  for  the  Bombay  establishment. 

Stud. 

The  studs  and  farms  of  the  three  Presidencies  appear  naturally  to  suggest  themselves  as 
component  parts  of  this  head  of  examination,  not  only  from  their  utility,  but  tendency  to  pro- 
duce su|)eri()r  horses  for  our  cavalry;  with  the  effect  tliey  must  produce  in  being  in  possession 
of  finer  dams  and  sires,  to  improve  the  lower  breeds  of  the  counliy.  Expense  at  the  com- 
mencement of  the  establishment,  from  a  laudable  feeling  for  improvement,  was  disregarded, 
to  create  a  race  that  would  answer  every  purpose,  both  ])ublic  and  private,  that  would  ulti- 
nialely  supersede  the  necessity  of  such  establishments,  and  repay  by  a  general  benefit,  by 
ultimately  ihrowing  the  business  into  its  natural  channel  of  private  individuals  and  country 
breeders,  who  having  once  reaped  the  advantage  of  such  encoiu-agemeiit,  and  jirofiling  by 
the  prices  of  a  good  market  for  the  sale  of  their  produce,  would  gradually  provide  themselves 
with  the  means  of  continuing  the  race,  and  of  procuring  good  food  and  ))roper  attendance  lor 
,the  foals. 


33 

The  Rcngal  stiul  has  been  establislied  near  tliirty  years,  and  has  proved  itself  inadecjuate  to 
an  out-turn  of  a  remount,  equal  to  half  the  number  recjuircd  by  the  cavalry  on  the  15en"al  side 
alone.  In  point  of  excellence,  it  is  sin<i;uhir  to  observe  that  most  of  the  horses  for  the  horse- 
artillery  and  dragoons  are  still  purchased  from  the  native  dealers  ; — this  fact  speaks  volumes  as 
to  the  success  of  this  establishnicnt  boarinff  any  jiroportion  to  its  expense. 

In  allusion  to  studs  in  general,  it  appears  no  tloiibt  to  be  an  object  of  nuicli  importance  to 
have  such  a  capital  military  resource  within  our  own  territories,  both  as  of  great  political  ma"- 
nitude,  as  well  as  one  of  a  financial  nature;  but  I  very  much  (juestion  if  the  end  in  either  case 
lias  been  attained  in  Bengal,  though  at  such  an  enormous  expense;  at  Madras  it  lias  com- 
pletely failed. 

The  efiiciency  is  doubtful,  and  the  occonomy  also;  the  small  number  of  horses  furnished  the 
liorse-artillery  anil  dragoons  prove  this,  as  is  evident  by  the  continuance  of  the  experiment, 
which,  if  it  was  ever  to  have  succeeded,  ought  to  have  done  so  long  since. 

To  allow  the  question  its  full  scope,  there  is  one  important  object  probably  gained,  that  of 
introducing  and  diflusing  in  the  upper  provinces  of  India  a  good  breed  of  horses  ;  at  the  same 
time  it  is  quite  evident  we  have  discouraged  that  commercial  enterprise  of  the  native  merchants, 
by  keeping  up  these  expensive  establishments,  which  they  could  not  compete  with,  while  the 
price  of  the  horse  was  consequently  raised  on  ourselves  and  breeders,  whom  it  would  be  more 
beneficial  to  the  State  to  have  encouraged,  by  furnishing  stallions  in  the  first  instance,  and 
afterwards  ]iurchasing  their  produce. 

My  inijuiries  lead  me  to  believe,  that  eagerness  to  enter  into  this  trade  is  sufficiently  appa- 
rent from  the  merchants  who  annually  travel  down  with  horses  from  Khorassan,  Candahar, 
Lahore  and  Cubul  to  the  northern  fairs,  and  afterwards  extend  their  journey  to  the  lower 
provinces  as  far  south  as  Poma.  This  surely  is  no  proof  of  a  want  of  enterprise  on  the  part 
of  the  breeders  and  dealers.  I  trust,  however,  that  it  is  obvious  that  our  wishes  as  to  breeding 
could  be  effijcted  at  a  less  expense  than  the  books  of  the  Government  exhibit.  This  would  not 
be  the  only  advantage  to  Government,  which  would  be  relieved  of  a  monstrous  expense,  as  our 
own  subjects  would  benefit  in  every  point  of  view  by  the  increase  of  a  better  kind  of  this  useful 
animal. 

The  Bengal  stud,  from  its  first  institution  as  a  great  public  resource,  and  taking  the  losses 
as  they  are  called,  which  are  in  fact  the  absolute  sum  annually  sunk  after  every  credit  is  taken 
for  every  kind  of  supply  made  for  the  remount  of  the  cavalry  in  Bengal,  shows  that  the 
remount  of  the  cavalry  cost  the  Government  about  1000  rupees  each  ;  while  it  appears  that  the 
Commissariat  purchase,  in  the  country  markets  for  the  horse-artillery  and  dragoons,  at  450  and 
500  rupees  per  horse.  It  is  still  more  remarkable,  on  the  score  of  efficiency,  that  the  horse- 
artillery,  which  is  the  most  difficult  arm  of  the  service  to  provide  for,  as  they  require  the  double 
quality  of  activity  conjoined  with  strength  in  their  horses,  that  is  to  say  blood  and  bone, 
received  in  eight  years  a  smaller  number  from  the  stud,  which  is  expected  from  its  means  to 
produce  the  best  cattle,  than  the  other  mounted  corps ;  its  casualties  during  that  period  were 
replaced  by  the  Connnissariat  department  from  the  country  merchants.  The  out-turns  and 
other  expenses  of  the  stud  lead  us  to  conclude  that  when  that  establishment  may  become  capa- 
ble of  furnishing  the  necessary  number  of  horses  for  the  remount  of  the  cavalry  of  Bengal 
alone  (about  1035  *  horses  per  annum),  that  each  horse  will  cost  from  1500  to  2000  rupees. 

I  can  safely  assert  that  in  the  upper  provinces  of  Hindoostan,  from  three  to  four  thousand 
horses  for  cavalry  purposes  are  annually  procurable  at  the  Bengal  rates  f;  nor  do  I  in  the 
slightest  degree  allude  to  the  necessity  of  taking  a  more  inferior  class  of  animal  for  the  Bengal 
cavalry  than  what  is  in  use  at  this  moment.  The  statement  given  in  by  the  Adjutant-general 
in  Bengal  of  the  number  of  horses  furnished  for  everj'  branch  of  the  service  from  the  various 
sources  of  supply,  exhibits  a  singular  fact,  that  in  eight  years  there  were  only  2G  stud-bred 
horses  fit  for  the  horse-artillery,  while  the  Commissariat  purchased  1754-  for  that  corps  from 
the  dealers;  and  during  the  same  period  the  stud  jiroiluced  229()  horses  that  were  only  fit  for 
the  native  cavalry.  It  appears  by  the  same  return  that  the  stud  furnished  from  1S20  to  1828 
as  follows : 

For  horse-artillery  and  dragoons  WO 

Horses  purchased  from  dealers  for  ditto  for  eight  years 1,869 

Furnished  for  native  cavalry 2,296 

Purchased  from  dealers,  ditto 3,375 

These  facts,  I  should  conceive,  bring  us  to  the  conclusion,  that  the  horses  brought  into  the 
market  by  the  dealers  are  taken  even  in  preference  for  the  horse-artillery  and  dragoons  to 
those  bred  at  the  stud;  for  it  is  shown  that  for  seven  years  the  horse-artillery  received  no  horses 
from  the  stud  at  all,  but  got  their  remount  entirely  during  a  time  of  jieace  from  the  Commissa- 
riat, that  is  to  say  the  country  dealers,  at  the  rate  of  from  77  to  534  horses  ^xv  annum. 

I  shall  only  add,  that  from  the  estimation  of  expense  made  by  the  late  Bengal  Auditor-gene- 

•  Col.  Pagan's  return.  f  Rupees  450  .  500. 

F 


34 

ral*,  it  could  not  have  on  an  average  from  its  institution  have  sunk  less  than  five  lacs  fer 
annum ;  and  that  when  brought  to  the  most  favourable  point,  when  its  out-turns  were  greatest,  it 
left  in  1827 — 28  a  dead  loss  of  upwards  of  two  lacs  and  a  half,  after  being  established  upwards 
of  26  years.  This  calculation  is  made  after  great  reductions  had  been  previously  effected  in 
evei'v  branch  of  this  establishment,  exclusive  of  the  expense  of  the  buildings  and  average  annual 
repairs,  equal  alone,  without  any  interest,  to  the  purchase  of  about  100  horses  (at  Bengal  rates) 
■per  annum.  Admitting  therefore,  as  a  fair  argument,  that  these  sums  only  have  been  annually 
sunk  from  the  first  establishment  of  this  institution,  we  arrive  at  the  conclusion,  that,  after  the 
outlay  of  near  one  million  and  a  quarter  sterling,  the  original  anticipation,  of  its  proving  the 
source  from  which  the  Bengal  cavalry  were  to  be  mounted,  and  of  superseding  all  the  lower 
caste  of  horses,  by  promoting  and  disseminating  a  better  breed,  has  not  been  fulfilled. 

And  whatever  generallj*  the  advantages  of  an  institution  of  this  kind  may  be,  and  however 
it  has  been  a  favourite  object  with  all  the  Governments  in  this  country,  it  has,  notwithstanding 
the  lavish  means  and  trouble  employed  upon  it,  produced  disappointment,  not  only  in  Bengal, 
with  a  like  failure  of  a  similar  establishment  at  Ganjam,  on  the  Madras  side,  upon  a  scale,  I 
have  reason  to  conclude,  upon  the  remains  of  the  extensive  ruins  of  numerous  buildings  I 
witnessed  at  that  station  now  abandoned,  and  the  quantity  of  land  occupied  for  that  jiurpose, 
are  proofs  that  go  far  to  establish  one  of  two,  if  not  both  facts,  that  the  thing  was  either  ill 
managed,  or  that  these  countries,  particularly  to  the  south,  are  not  congenial  to  the  breeding 
of  animals  of  that  description.  It  would  be  superfluous  to  add  any  thing  on  the  head  of  the 
past  expense  of  the  stud,  and  every  thing  relative  to  it  at  Madras,  as  it  has  long  since  been 
abandoned ;  our  object  at  present,  in  a  financial  point  of  view,  ought  to  regard  only  existing 
establishments,  whose  charges  will  bear  reduction,  while  the  duties  are  efficiently  performed. 
We  can  only  therefore  profit  by  the  fruits  of  the  past  to  teach  us  to  guard  against  repeating 
experiments  that  have  been  tried  and  failed  under  the  most  able  hands,  aided  by  the  amplest 
means,  and  the  best  intentions. 

As  a  conclusion,  I  shall  add  a  shoi't  account  of  the  mode  employed  on  the  Bombay  Presi- 
dency, to  accomplish  a  similar  object.  It  will  be  seen  in  the  outset,  that  though  the  object  be 
the  same,  neither  the  means  employed  nor  the  management  for  attaining  it  are  at  all  similar. 
No  expensive  buildings  are  first  erected,  no  large  and  numerous  establishments  engaged,  no  su- 
perintendants  with  high  salaries  ;  but  every  thing  of  the  kind,  where  any  of  them  are  necessary, 
is  calculated  and  executed  on  the  smallest  scale,  adapted  to  a  steady  gradual  growth  of  the 
means  available  for  such  an  undertaking. 

There  is  one  superintendant  with  a  salary  of  600  rupees  ])er  menacm  ,-  and  though  there  are  a 
number  of  other  public  officers  engaged  in  the  forwarding  of  the  main  operation  of  the  business, 
still  none  of  them  receive  pay  or  allowances,  but  conduct  the  duties  connected  with  this  line  as 
a  part  of  their  own,  being  generally  collectors  of  districts. 

The  number  of  mares  of  from  50  to  60  of  different  breeds,  are  English,  Arab,  Kattiawar,  Maha- 
ratta,  Bhiematery,  Mhaun-Gunga,  Persian,  but  no  Kandahar,  or  a  Cabul.  Why  these  two 
kinds  are  excluded  is  explained  in  its  proper  place,  where  the  discussion  of  the  several  kinds  of 
horses  best  adapted  to  the  cavalry  are  enumerated  :  here  it  is  only  necessary  to  observe  upon 
what  lelates  to  the  system  now  in  practice,  for  the  improvement  of  the  breeds  in  the  provinces 
equally  belonging  to  our  allies  as  to  ourselves. 

The  stallions  are  sixty-four  in  number,  and  are  at  present  of  the  above-mentioned  races,  dis- 
tributed, under  the  care  of  the  collectors,  in  such  central  positions  as  make  it  most  convenient  for 
the  pro])riet(n-s  to  bring  their  mares  at  the  proper  season.  The  mares,  the  property  of  Govern- 
ment, are  alone  under  the  charge  of  the  superintendant,  whose  principal  duty  consists  whilst 
travelling  over  the  whole  country,  and  visiting  every  native  chief  and  proprietor,  to  spread  a 
wish  amongst  the  people  carefully  to  attend  to  the  improvement  of  the  breed,  by  choosing  the 
best  stallions  for  their  mares,  and  examining  in  his  circuits  that  the  people  have  due  attention 
paid  to  all  their  applications  ;  and  further,  to  excite  and  keep  up  an  cnmlation  for  the  purposes 
of  diffusing  over  the  country  abetter  and  more  numerous  race. 

With  this  view,  annual  fairs  for  shows  of  the  jM-oduce  have  been  established  in  convenient 
spots,  the  proj)rietors  of  the  best  foals  receiving  rewards  in  medals,  gold  and  silver  bangles, 
sums  of  money.  They  are  then  at  liberty  to  dispose  of  their  foals  to  the  best  advantage,  or 
letting  Government  have  them  ata  stated  price.  In  1827  plates  were  given  by  the  Government 
at  the  several  race-grounds  on  this  establishment,  for  which  country-bred  horses  only  were  per- 
mitted to  start. 

Annual  committees  of  officers  civil  and  military  report  the  state,  appearance,  and  perform- 
ance of  tiie  cattle  exhibited  at  these  fairs,  distribute  the  prizes,  and  mention  what  progress  has 
been  made  since  the  last  season  ;  entering  minutely  into  details.  The  last  Report  allbrded  every 
reasonable  ))rospect  of  success  in  this  moderate  but  valuable  branch  of  jinblic  resource;  and  as 
the  native  chiefs  themselves  have  embarked  in  a  pursuit  so  congenial  to  their  own  feelings  and 
habits,  exhibiting  with  exultation  the  several  parts  of  their  studs,  we  may,  without  any  ieeling 

*  Col.  Tmback. 


of  apprehension,  look  forward  to  the  ultimate  result  of  an  annual  increase  of  tliis  cstal)lishnicnt  • 
for  itappears  hy  the  last  Report  by  the  su])erintenilant  of  the  sluil,  that  more  than  nine  hundred 
Deccany  mares,  the  property  of  native  breeders,  had  been  covered  this  season  by  En<'lish  and 
Arabian  stallions  in  diderent  parts  of  the  country;  and  these  breeders  as  well  as  the  chiefs  are 
anxious  to  puichase  at  the  annual  sales  the  produce,  which  answers  the  double  object  of  saving 
the  expense  of  establishment,  and  diffusinj^  over  the  country  colts  and  lillies  from  the  best  stock. 
It  will  besides  in  some  jirovinces  revive  the  former  breeds,  will  gradually  render  us  independ- 
ent of  those  foreign  sup])lies  for  the  remounting  of  our  cavalry;  that  we  are  at  present  wholly 
indebted  to  the  repetition  of  such  a  natural  and  probabK;  calamity,  as  the  famine  that  occurred 
a  3'ear  or  two  since  in  that  part  of  Arabia,  the  low  country  near  Bushire,  that  furnishes  so  large 
a  number  of  horses,  or  the  continuance  of  internal  commotion  in  Persia,  or  in  the  province  of 
Cheab  and  the  country  subject  to  Bagilad,  would  not  only  reduce  us  to  great  straits,  but  almost 
dry  up  the  sources  i'rom  whence  we,  and  all  the  Madras  establishment  in  particular,  derive  such 
extensive  remounts. 

Horses. 

I  do  not  conceive  I  am  exceeding  the  bounds  of  this  Report  when  I  request  to  offer  a  few 
remarks  on  the  several  kinds  of  horses  found  in  the  cavalry  of  the  three  Presidencies.  As  far  as 
my  knowledge  of  the  subject  enables  me  to  enumerate  them,  there  are  two  kinds  of  the  Arab,  the 
Persian,  the  Tookonian,  Herat,  Cubul,  Kandhar,  Kattewar,  those  j-eared  on  the  banks  of  the 
Bheema,  and  Mungunga.  These  are  the  principal  stocks,  but  their  branches  are  numerous, 
and  would  add  little  inlbrmation  in  a  detailed  description.  Those  bred  at  the  studs  in  Bengal 
form  also  a  great  variety,  being  descended  from  a  number  of  different  stocks,  includimr  the  En- 
glish and  the  half-bred  Spanish  horse  from  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope  ;  but  they  have  been  so 
crossed  with  each  other,  that  they  now  nearly  form,  not  a  separate  species,  but  a  separate  class 
or  family. 

The  Arab  is  so  well  known  as  a  genuine  stock,  that  I  almost  feel  it  a  trite  subject  to  do  more 
than  name  him,  for  fear  it  should  be  superfluous ;  but  it  may  be  requisite  to  add,  that 
when  there  are  any  of  his  progeny  found,  or  distantly  descended  from  him,  there  is  always  some- 
thing peculiar  about  them,  as  is  remarkable  in  one  out  of  many  instances,  the  Spanish  horse, 
when  first  known  in  England  under  the  name  of  the  Gennett. 

The  Arab  however  is  himself  quite  an  individual;  and  however  great  his  excellence  and  sym- 
metry, he  is  certainly  not  so  well  suited  for  cavalry  purposes  as  might  be  imagined ;  his  tempe- 
rament and  want  of  size  make  him  less  adapted  to  the  ranks  than  larger  and  coarser  horses. 

The  largest  animal  of  this  kind  is  the  Abyssinian  or  Dongola  horse ;  they  have  been  known 
frequendy  to  be  upwards  of  fifteen  hands  high,  and  pass  in  Bombay  under  the  name  of  the 
Mocha  horse.  The  next  is  the  Egyptian;  they  are  a  larger  and  generally  a  longer  animal 
than  what  we  usually  see  in  India,  brought  from  Arabia.  I  have  seen  hundreds  of  them  ;  these 
two  latter  kinds,  and  particularly  the  Egyptian,  are  those  which  are  exhibitetl  in  Constantinople 
as  Arabians.  The  Koordish  horse  never  could  be  mistaken  for  tliem,  though  the  Syrian,  being 
one  branch  of  the  main  stock  himself,  may  easily  be  so. 

The  light  elegant  Barb,  which  was  the  sire  of  the  Andalusian  race,  is  completely  the  represen- 
tative of  our  most  pure  blood,  the  Nujdee,  with  a  less  flat  knee. 

This  latter  beautiful  creature  has  been  much  bred  from  during  the  last  thirty  years,  and  many 
experiments  have  been  made  of  using  him  both  in  the  cavalry  and  even  horse  artillery,  and  of 
adding  size  to  his  blood.  Success  has  no  doubt  attended  these  efibrts  to  improve  him,  to  a  cer- 
tain degree;  height  has  been  given  to  his  original  stature  (l^  hantls),  but  there  is  a  deficiency 
of  proportional  breadth,  so  that  we  now  get  a  horse  two  inches  taller,  it  is  true,  with  a  longer 
stride  and  a  better  racer;  but  we  must  look  for  the  progeny  of  this  remove  from  the  original,  to 
be  crossed  with  a  mare  of  less  blood,  if  we  intend  him  for  the  every-day  work  of  the  cavalry. 
This  could  be  effected  if  we  had  any  influence  in  the  countries  where  they  are  to  be  found:  for 
instance,  the  size  and  bone  of  the  Koord  and  the  Choab  mares  would  eflect  much.  The  Imam 
of  Muscat  has  done  more  for  the  encouragement  of  this  important  object  than  is  generally  known. 
He  has  a  great  number  of  the  largest  and  most  beautiful  mares,  from  which  he  breeds,  while  he 
is  ever  ready  to  pay  a  thousand  and  twelve  hundred  Spanish  dollars,  that  is  rupees  2,200  and 
2,640,  for  a  colt  under  three  years  old,  such  as  his  agents  ap])rove  of  There  are  two  things 
however  to  be  observed  in  regard  to  the  horses  he  has  bred,  that  may  be  consitlered  defects ; 
they  are  generally  very  hollow-backed,  and  of  a  soft  constitution.  They  are,  however,  almost 
always  very  large ;  and  the  two  animals,  a  horse  and  a  mare,  sent  to  England  to  His  Majesty 
by  Sir  John  Malcolm,  were  the  finest  specimens  of  their  species ;  and  the  mare  in  particular  was 
quite  beautiful,  possessing  what  I  had  never  seen  before  in  any  Arab  in  any  country,  great 
breadth. 

These  fine  horses  derived  from  the  best  sources,  as  I  observed  before  in  another  place,  are 
now  distributed  all  over  the  Bombay  territories  for  stud  purposes. 

The  real  Toorkoman  is  well  calculated  for  the  horse  artillery  and  dragoons,  for  he  has  the 
counterpoising  bulk  from  his  size  for  harness,  and  a  sufficiency  of  blood  to  give  him  activity  and 

F2 


36 

bottom  for  the  endurance  of  fatigue ;  he  has  also  a  particularly  good  light  forehand,  wliich 
besides  its  excellence  is  a  great  beaut\'  in  a  charger.  He  is  so  highly  esteemed  in  his  own 
country,  and  so  high  priced,  that  we  should  never  have  had  any  number  of  them  here,  had  it 
not  been,  as  I  related  before,  for  Captain  Lindsay's  peculiar  situation  with  the  Persian  Prince  and 
Nobles. 

The  Herat  horse  is  a  fine  animal,  and  closely  allied  to  the  Toorkoman,  as  might  be  expected 
from  the  vicinity  of  his  birth-place  in  Khorassan  to  the  Tartar  hordes:  owing  to  the  mode  in 
which  he  enters  India  he  almost  always  passes  under  the  name  of  either  the  Kondahar  or 
Cabul,  as  the  same  merchants  who  bring  down  the  two  last-named  kinds,  and  travel  the  same 
road,  purchase  the  Herat  horse  also;  and  as  strict  inquiries  have  never  been  made  as  to  the  existing 
distinction,  tlie  dealers  are  content  to  let  them  pass  under  these  denomination?,  as  they  generally 
get  a  better  price  for  them.  There  are  a  very  few  of  these  horses  in  the  Bengal  cavalry,  and 
those  that  at  all  come  south  are  generally  purchased  for  the  Madras  troops,  mixed  with  the  real 
Kondahar  and  Cabul,  owing  it  would  seem  to  the  accidental  circumstance  of  the  dealers  being 
the  same,  as  well  as  the  route  they  travel  into  India  being  on  its  western  side  across  the  branches 
of  the  Indus.  The  trade  for  them  is  carried  on  by  the  natives  of  Scind,  who  either  go  themselves 
to  Herat  for  these  horses  or  send  agents,  and  making  a  general  collection  or  assembly  at  Hy- 
derabad in  Scind,  and  a  few  towns  adjacent,  then  proceed  to  India  in  bodies  or  troops. 

But  as  the  Herat  horse  is  in  company  with  others  of  less  blood  and  appearance  than  himself, 
he  shows  to  greater  advantage,  and  therefore  when  tried  or  put  to  work  his  figure  and  activity 
make  him  called  an  excellent  or  best  kind  of  Kondahar.  His  qualities  have  been  described  by 
analogy  when  speaking  of  the  Toorkoman,  and  therefore  require  no  repetition  now,  particularly 
to  those  who  are  judges,  to  whom  he  is  easily  distinguishable  from  the  animals  he  is  always  as- 
sociated with,  for  he  has  a  lighter  head,  neck,  tail,  and  hind  quarters,  with  a  shorter  back. 
There  is  also  another  mark  which  is  more  generally  understood  and  acted  on  by  less  discerning 
persons.  When  of  the  better  class,  he  is  always  to  be  recognised  bj^  a  brand  on  the  haunch, 
bearing  the  mark  of  the  stable  in  which  he  was  brought  up ;  as  the  Princes  and  Nobles  of  Kho- 
rassan, who  generally  have  extensive  breeding  studs,  almost  always  put  their  mark  on  their 
colts.  The  Kondahar  and  Cabul  horses  are  a  coarser  and  more  vulgar  species  of  the  Herat  and 
Tartar  horse,  their  tails,  hind  quarters,  neck  and  head  are  large  and  heavy,  their  backs  long, 
with  a  thick  skin  ;  so  that  when  they  are  put  through  the  manege,  or  lounge,  they  often  give 
waj'  in  the  back  sinews  in  the  exercise  to  supple  them  for  the  cavalrv- :  they  are  also  very  sub- 
ject to  chest  foundering  when  put  into  harness.  They  are  seen  to  best  advantage  when  engaged 
in  a  procession  on  state  occasions,  highly  caparisoned;  their  height,  length,  and  stately  gait 
suit  well  with  such  exhibitions. 

There  are  some  other  kinds  of  foreign  horses  that  I  could  introduce  an  account  of;  but  as 
they  are  not  employed  in  our  cavalry  I  omit  any  mention  of  them,  as  unconnected  with  the  main 
subject  under  discussion. 

The  Kattewar,  as  a  native  of  our  own  dominions,  next  claims  our  notice  as  the  chief  of  Indian 
horses,  and  certainly  is  a  distinct  race,  possessing  every  quality  requisite  for  a  cavalry  horse; 
and  is  another  remarkable  instance  of  the  effects,  however  distantly  existing,  of  an  Arabian 
descent.  He  is  light,  active,  compact,  breaks  well,  and  is  capable  of  enduring  fatigue  to  a  great 
de<rree.  Good  aroominir,  with  a  sufliciencv  of  the  common  grain  of  the  countrv,  will  alwavs 
keep  him  in  condition  for  work;  his  spirit  is  untameable;  generally  speaking  he  is  too  vicious  for 
the  common  saddle;  he  can  walk  on  his  hind  legs  for  some  yards  together,  with  a  full  accoutred 
dragoon  on  his  back,  but  is  not  accustomed  nor  taught  to  make  those  bounds  (the  of 

the  old  school)  that  the  Mahrattas  are  so  fond  of;  but  in  the  ranks  he  is  comparatively  quiet 
and  very  amenable  to  discipline;  his  height,  strength,  and  vivacity  make  him  preferred  for  all 
cavalry  purposes. 

The  caste  and  qualities  of  the  Kattewar  make  him  stand  alone  amongst  the  innnerous  breeds 
of  India  ;  he  has  been,  and  is  still,  sought  after  at  a  high  price  in  every  part  of  India.  I  natu- 
rally expressed  my  regret  previously,  that  this  valuable  class  should  have  declined  so  much  in 
immbers,  as  to  make  us  apprehensive  that  it  would  in  a  few  years  more  become  extinct. 

Probably,  while  speaking  of  his  c]ualities,  it  might  not  be  intrusive  to  give  a  slight  sketch  of 
the  master  who  rears  him. — The  political  causes  that  acted  so  powerfully  to  produce  the  change 
that  reduced  these  lawless  and  active  freebooters  to  order,  I  have  alieady  explained.  The  in- 
habitants of  that  peninsula  are  mostly  Hindoos,  and  are  all  cultivators  and  shepherds;  and  pre- 
viouslv  to  the  English  getting  the  paramount  rule,  they  used  immediately  after  the  ceasing  ot 
the  rains  to  put  tiieir  horses  through  a  regular  course  of  training,  and  then  at  appointed  places 
to  assemble  in  troops  and  set  out  with  a  Bajarce  cake  and  some  pills  of  opium,  generally  to- 
wards the  banks  of  the  Mhye  river  and  the  adjacent  countries.  Their  own  usual  remark,  de- 
scriptive of  the  length  and  continuance  of  these  rides,  was,  that  the  first  stream  they  wateretl 
their  mares  in  was  the  jNIhye  *. 

Having  plundered  a  village,  they  instantly  set  off  home  to  secure  their  booty.     Their  own 

•  From  40  to  60  miles. 


37 

couTitrv  was  at  the  same  time  equally  suhjcct  to  the  ravages  of  the  Klioosars,  wiio  crossed  l\\v 
llunn  I'rom  C'utcli  ami  Scind  for  tlie  cattle  in  Kattcwar ;  so  tiiat  tliis  constant  state  of  alarm  and 
warfare,  aggressive  and  regressive,  within  and  without  their  own  country,  led  to  the  adoption  of 
singular  customs  connected  with  the  jjrotection  of  their  persons  and  property.  Their  villages 
were  always  surrounded  with  a  ditch  and  a  thick  higii  milk-bush  hedge,  which  is  impenetrable 
to  anything  but  camion  and  musketry;  there  is  only  one  entrance,  and  that  is  secured  by  :i 
gate  covered  with  dry  thorny  bushes.  In  the  village  there  is  a  tower  of  rude  materials,  at  the 
top  of  which,  from  simrise  to  sunset,  a  person  is  constantly  on  the  look  out:  the  moment  he 
descries  the  approach  of  horsemen  he  makes  a  particular  cry,  the  meaning  of  which  is  even 
understood  by  the  cattle  grazing,  who  instantly  on  hearing  it  set  off  at  a  full  gallop  towards  tlie 
gate  of  their  own  village.  The  circumstance  also  of  abstaining  for  great  intervals  from  food, 
rendered  necessary  in  the  time  occupied  by  their  long  and  fatiguing  predatory  journeys,  made 
the  use  of  opium  indispensable,  which  hail  taken  such  strong  hold  that  it  still  continues  to  be 
a  universal  custom  in  that  province,  even  after  the  original  cause  has  ceased,  to  demand  its  tran- 
quillizing eflects  against  the  pains  of  hunger. 

Their  horses  thus  carefully  bred  and  educted  for  a  particular  purpose,  always  proved  their 
superiority  wherever  they  went;  but  no  prospect  of  gain  could  prevail  with  these  people  to  bring 
their  colts  for  sale  to  an\'  particular  person  or  spot;  they  would  attend  no  fair  or  market,  but 
must  have  them  purchased  at  their  own  doors.  Every  inducement  has  been  held  out  to  them 
to  attend  at  places  at  stated  periods,  whei'e  prizes  would  be  given  for  the  best  colts;  but  custom 
and  prejudice  overcome  the  prospect  of  gain,  though  they  can  now  no  longer  procure  anything 
by  plunder. 

The  foals  are  not  let  loose  on  grass  lands,  but  brought  up  in  their  villages  and  houses ;  and 
this  race  of  horse  is  so  highly  prized  in  the  north  of  India,  that  Colonel  Skinner,  a  person  of 
the  greatest  experience  and  information  on  the  subject  of  horses,  who  is  also  a  very  extensive 
breeder,  has  gone  to  a  considerable  expense^to  obtain  and  establish  a  breed  of  them.  He  has 
succeeded  to  a  certain  degree,  from  the  specimens  he  showed  me;  but  they  all  had  a  defect, 
which  I  remarked  and  he  admitted,  urging  at  the  same  time  what  I  had  previously  observed, 
that  it  was  also  common  with  the  stud-bred  horses  of  every  kind, — a  small  ill-shaped  hoof. 

There  are  many  other  curious  particulars  relative  to  this  country,  its  history,  productions,  and 
antiquities,  that  are  deeply  interesting  to  the  intelligent  traveller  of  every  turn  of  mind,  from 
the  deep  searching  geologist  to  the  superficial  admirer  of  natui'al  scenery  ;  but  as  I  conceive 
these  particulars  foreign  to  the  general  tenour  of  this  Report,  I  refrain  from  doing  more  than 
just  alluding  to  them  and  other  topics  of  etjual  interest.  Tliis  is  also  the  country  in  which 
the  unnatural  practice  of  infanticide  was  so  prevalent  amongst  the  higher  classes,  springing 
from  a  feeling  of  delicacy  and  pride. 

The  horses  produced  on  the  rivers  Blima  and  Maungunga  are  improved  breeds  on  the  native 
mares  of  the  Deccan,  by  the  cross  with  the  Arab.  The  studs  at  many  places  on  the  streams 
were  much  encouraged  during  the  late  Peuhwah's  reign,  and  their  )irocIuce  used  during  that 
period  to  be  sent  to  the  north  of  India,  where  they,  the  mares  in  particular,  sold  well,  under  the 
general  name  of  Deccanee ;  but  the  devastation  of  war  put  a  stop  to  the  increase  of  their 
numbers,  from  the  general  confusion  that  took  place.  But  since  the  lapse  of  the  last  few  years, 
every  exertion  has  been  made  by  our  own  Government,  and  encouragement  held  out  for  a 
revisal  and  re-establishment  of  a  breed  of  horses,  that  with  the  care  and  attention  that  are  given 
to  the  subject,  promise  to  furnish  us  with  numbers  of  an  animal  well  suited  for  our  cavalrv. 
The  common  Mahratta  horse  is  seldom,  except  when  of  the  better  kind,  e(|ual  to  the  work  of 
the  ranks,  from  deficiency  both  of  height  and  strength,  though  he  is  not  wanting  in  the  other 
qualities  of  hardihood  and  activity. 

It  is  not  the  least  remarkable  )iart  of  this  subject,  that  a  coincidence  of  treatment  on  the  score 
of  rearing  the  foals  of  the  blood-horse  exist  in  most  of  the  countries  that  produce  them.  They 
are  generally  brought  up  by  hand,  and  seldom  allowed  to  be  in  pasturage,  and  in  that  case  they 
are  always  handled  at  an  early  age.  Pasturage  can  only  be  beneficial  in  cool  climates  like 
those  of  Europe,  some  parts  of  Tartary,  and  Persia;  but  has  proved  hurtful  in  more  southern 
countries,  though  many  degrees  to  the  north  of  the  tropics,  from  the  effects  of  heat  and  the 
injury  induced  by  the  coat  of  the  animal  getting  full  of  dust.  This  latter  objection  was  urged 
to  me  when  in  Bengal  in  1822,  on  seeing  some  of  the  Government  studs  in  that  ([uarter. 

It  is  somewhat  singular  also,  that  a  short  removal  of  distance  sometimes  makes  the 
greatest  diffiirence  in  the  constitution  of  the  horse;  and  the  diflerent  kinds  in  India  suggest 
this  observation,  which  must  have  been  evident  to  others  as  well  as  myself;  and  I  merely  state 
the  facts  as  suggested  by  practical  knowledge,  leaving  the  dee])er  question  of  natural  history  to 
the  examination  and  decision  of  those  who  have  made  it  their  study. 

It  is  admitted  in  Bengal  by  the  breeders  and  some  veterinary  surgeons,  that  the  native  horse 
within  the  British  provinces,  and  even  those  produced  at  the  Government  studs,  are  less  ca- 
pable of  undergoing  fatigue  and  privation  than  the  thorough  bretl  English  and  Arabian.  My 
reason  for  stating  this  position  is,  that  I  imagine  it  will  be  obvious  to  those  of  long  ex- 
perience and  extensive  knowledge  of  different  countries,  that  it  has  been  generally  found  that 
low  flat  rich  soils  are  ill  adapted  to  breed  a  strong  hardy  race,  though  those  that  they  do  pro- 


S5&327 


38 

duce  are  of  the  largest  size  and  most  bulky  shape,  witli  heaviness  of  movement :  but  they  are 
comparatively  of  a  soft  constitution ;  and  though  possessed  of  great  powers  for  any  short 
exertion  of  strength,  they  are  unequal  to  a  protracted  effort,  and  sink  under  any  unusual  work 
and  privation,  for  instance,  the  horses  from  the  Netherlands,  Lancashire  and  Lincolnshire, 
the  rich  provinces  of  Bengal  and  Guzerat  in  the  western  side  of  Lidia  ;  and  yet  in  the  imme- 
diate vicinity  of  these  countries  some  of  the  finest  animals  are  bred,  capable  of  any  work  and 
anv  endurance.  I  might  even  carry  the  argument  still  further,  into  Persia  and  Arabia  itself, 
wliere  the  colt  of  a  rich  district  is  never  so  highly  prized  as  the  one  born  in  the  desert,  or  bred 
on  the  grass  of  the  elevated  pasture.  Nor  am  1  aware  of  any  striking  deviation  from  this  rule, 
except  the  Neapolitan  horse,  used  in  a  low  country,  which  has  every  mark  of  figure,  size,  cou- 
rage and  activity  to  prove  his  direct  descent  from  the  Barb  :  but  this  animal  is  not  brought  up 
in  marshes,  but' in  the  plains  of  a  hilly  country.  The  same  remark  holds  good  when  descend- 
ino-  in  the  scale  of  animal  life  on  the  score  of  great  distinctions  ;  as  relating  to  other  animals, 
the  sheep  of  Europe  and  the  bullocks  of  Guzerat,  the  latter  differing  from  those  of  Malwa 
and  adjacent  countries,  are  a  confirmation  of  this  opinion. 


ART 


11. 


Engineer  Corps  and  Department. 

If  the  construction  and  repairs  of  buildings  under  the  three  establishments  were  conducted 
on  contract,  as  in  most  cases  they  might  be,  the  saving  would  be  very  considerable  :  as  a  very 
small  establishment  would  then  be  required  by  the  engineer  officers  at  each  station  of  the  army, 
who  superintend  the  erection  of  public  works.  If-is  a  known  fact,  that  this  mode  on  its  intro- 
duction at  Madras  lowered  the  price  of  building  materials  twenty-four  per  cent.  It  is  also 
under  trial  at  Bombay  with  apparent  great  advantage,  and  an  immediate  reduction  appears 
practicable  in  Bengal.  If  a  classification  of  the  stations  for  engineers,  and  the  executive  or 
superintending  officer  in  a  division  was  to  adopt  the  contract  plan,  I  do  not  perceive  any  serious 
objection  to  its  working  well:  making  it  embrace  at  the  same  time  moderate  distances  for  action 
for  every  officer,  and  ejvtending  the  range  of  the  districts  sufficiently  without  being  too  wide. 
This  I  think  is  to  be  preferred  to  the  existing  mode,  which  comprehends  very  unequal  dis- 
tances, which  must  create  much  inconvenience ;  as  some  places  are  far  from  others,  while  other 
districts  present  but  little  to  do.  These  observations  allude  more  particularly  to  Bengal,  but 
they  are  by  no  means  inapplicable  to  Madras  also,  and  would  occasion  a  considerable  saving  on 
both  those  establishments,  without  any  injury  to  the  public  service ;  indeed,  on  the  contrary,  the 
compactness  of  space  for  supervision  would  amply  compensate  on  the  score  of  dispatch  of 
business. 

As  a  further  elucidation  of  the  subject,  I  shall  quote  the  sentiments  of  the  higher  authorities, 
embodied  in  a  minute  of  the  Honourable  the  Governor's,  and  then  afterwards  proceed  to  state 
my  own  opinion. 

'"  It  is  my  duty  to  bring  before  the  Board  those  revisions  and  reductions  in  the  Engineer 
department,  which  will  modify  that  body  conformably  with  the  orders  of  the  Honourable  the 
Court  of  Directors  and  the  Supreme  Government,  and  unite  as  far  as  we  can  attention  to 
these  with  the  objects  of  ceconomy  and  efficiency. 

"  The  late  changes  in  the  duties  of  the  engineer  corps  place  it  in  my  power  to  carry  into 
execution  the  repeated  orders  of  the  Court  of  Directors,  for  transferring  the  pioneers  to  that 
department. 

"  The  benefits  of  this  measure,  in  a  military  point  of  view,  are  no  longer  disputed;  but 
various  causes  have  hitherto  prevented  obedience  to  the  repeated  orders  of  the  Court  of  Direc- 
tors upon  this  subject,  of  which  the  pioneer  corps  of  the  several  Presidencies  have  been  very 
efficient ;  and  it  cannot  be  otherwise  while  the  present  system  continues.  By  the  transfers  [ 
propose,  the  Government  will  not  lose  the  labour  of  these  men  ;  many  of  them  will  become 
qualifietl  as  overseers,  that  without  lessening  their  use  in  peace  will  render  their  services  in- 
valuable on  the  occurrence  of  war.  The  objections  of  the  deficiency  of  the  engineer  officers 
still  existing,  and  my  knowledge  that  the  Court  of  Directors  would,  at  the  present  moment, 
agree  to  no  augmentation  of  their  numbers,  prevented  my  proposing  at  the  period  I  wrote 
this  minute,  that  a  transfer  of  the  pioneers  should  be  made  to  the  engineer  department.  The 
recent  revision  of  the  duties  of  the  engineer  corps,  however,  has  wholly  removed  this  objec- 
tion, and  it  was  one  of  the  results  to  which  I  looked  when  I  brought  forward  that  measure. 

"  Subsequent  to  writing  the  minute  I  have  alluded  to.  Government  has  been  called  upon  to 
reply  to  the  approved  recommendations  of  the  Einance  Committee,  for  the  revision  and  reduc- 
tion in  the  engineer  department ;  on  some  parts  of  which  I  have  given  my  sentiments,  and  on 
others  have  reserved  them,  in  order  that  I  may  go  fully  into  the  present  part  of  the  subject.  I 
have  also  been  requested  by  the  Governor-general  to  give  him  my  own  opinions  on  the  com- 
position and  state  of  the  different  branches  of  the  army,  which  I  mean  to  do.  And  as  my  senti- 


39 

mcnts  on  tlie  part  of  lliat  subject  wliicli  relates  to  tlic  engineer  corps  continue  unchanged,  I 
bhall  assuredly  recommend  tiie  adoption  of  the  transfer  of  tlie  i>ioncers  to  tlie  engineer  depart- 
ment: and  I  can  furtlier  state  my  conviclir)M,  ihat  furtiiei-  orders  will  be  repeated  from  ICngland 
to  carry  it  into  execution.  And  tims  deeming  it  adviseabic,  and  considering  it  unavoidable,  I 
shall  proceed  to  state  the  mode  I  consider  best  calculated  to  effect  this  object  with  attention  to 
oeconomy,  efficiency,  and  local  circumstances. 

"  The  pioneers  may,  I  think,  be  transferred  on  the  1st  of  November,  and  incorporated  in 
the  corps  of  engineer  soldiers,  which  will  then,  besides  the  present  small  company  of  Euro- 
peans and  youths  sons  of  Eurojieans  and  Anglo-Indians,  consist  of  two  comjianies  of  native 
sappers  and  miners,  and  six  of  pioneers.  Tliis  corjjs  will  have  a  fixed  head-cpiarters,  the 
officers  commanding  at  which  can  detach  ]iarties  as  retjuired  where  there  is  an  engineer  officer. 

"  The  engineer  corps,  consisting  altogether  of  about  five  hundred  men,  would  I  conceive  be 
of  the  greatest  service,  not  only  from  the  instruction  that  men  and  officers  would  obtain  at 
the  depot  where  the  head-(]uarters  was  fixed,  but  from  the  csiablishments  they  would  soon 
furnish  the  engineers  employed  on  executive  duties,  and  they  could  carry  on  public  works  in 
their  vicinity,  aided,  when  wanted,  by  day  labourers;  and  on  this  point  of  the  subject  it  mav 
be  affirmed,  that  under  the  ))lan  proposed,  the  common  men  of  the  corps  would  soon  be  able 
to  give  better  instruction  to  those  who  worked  with  them,  than  non-commissioned  or  even  com- 
missioned natives  can  at  present.  This  is  no  reflection  on  the  zealous  and  efficient  officers 
attached  to  the  pioneers.  If  they  have  the  same  science  even  as  engineer  officers,  they  have 
neither  the  same  means  or  opportunity  of  exercising  their  skill,  nor  have  their  men  when 
labouring  or  relieved  from  it  a  school  of  instruction,  and  examples,  which  continually  though 
imperceptibly  advance  them  in  that  knowledge  which  must  render  them  so  useful  as  engineer 
soldiers,  both  in  peace  and  war. 

"  With  reference  to  the  first,  Qilconomy,  it  is  to  be  observed  that  the  saving  in  the  engineer 
department  consequent  to  the  adojition  of  the  measure  recommended  in  my  minute  of  the  1st  of 
Ma}',  1830,  is  estimated  by  the  Auditor-general  in  his  register  for  June,  1830,  at  (48,000) 
forty-eight  thousand  rupees,  part  of  which  will  be  prospective  ;  but  the  whole  will,  I  trust,  be 
effected  at  an  early  period  :  some  additional  expense  will  no  doubt  fall  upon  other  departments 
consequent  to  this  arrangement,  but  assuredly  none  that  can  subtract  one  fifth  from  the  saving. 

"  With  respect  to  the  performance  of  the  duties  of  the  civil  engineer  by  the  chief  engineer, 
as  recommended  in  the  twent3'-fifth  paragraph  of  the  Finance  Conmiittee's  letter,  it  would  be 
contrary  to  the  important  principle  of  preserving  him  in  his  duties  as  a  controlling  officer  ;  but 
it  would  be  consistent  with  this,  that  he  should  perform  the  duties  of  inspecting  engineer.  And 
considering  that  when  the  Town  Hall  is  completed,  no  more  public  works  of  magnitude  will 
be  required  at  Bombay,  I  think  that  one  officer  of  rank,  with  the  aid  of  an  efficient  assistant, 
might  perform  all  the  executive  duties,  civil  and  military,  at  the  Presidency. 

"  The  chief  engineer.  Colonel  Goodfellow,  with  whom  I  have  most  fully  communicated, 
not  only  npon  this,  but  every  other  point  relating  to  his  corps,  in  a  memorandum  1  have  just 
received,  states  as  iollows  : 

"  '  If  it  should  be  found  necessary  to  do  away  the  appointment  of  the  civil  engineer,  it 
should  be  incorporated  with  the  office  of  superintending  engineer,  from  which  it  has  twice 
emanated,  in  consequence  of  the  duties  of  the  two  being  tbund  more  than  one  officer  can  well 
attend  to.  The  last  separation  took  place  in  1820  or  1821,  was  approved  of  by  the  Honour- 
able Court,  and  the  salary  fixed  by  them.  It  is  true  that  both  appointments  are  now  under 
the  charge  of  one  officer,  but  the  great  want  of  engineer  officers  has  rendered  this  necessary 
as  a  temporary  measure.  I  am  clearly  of  opinion  that  to  do  the  duty  of  each  office  properly, 
two  officers  are  required,  or  at  any  rate  one  officer  and  an  European  assistant  in  each.' 

"  When  the  two  offices  were  blended,  about  twenty-five  years  ago,  the  establishment  was 
not  dispensed  with  ;  and  that  now  proposed  to  be  added  to  the  chief  engineer,  for  conducting 
the  duties  of  the  civil  office,  is  quite  inadequate  in  amount,  and  if  enforced  will  only  be  an 
imaginary  saving,  whatever  office  it  may  be  added  to ;  ibr  such  people  as  will  be  required 
beyond  it  must  and  will  be  put  upon  the  works. 

"  The  chief  engineer,  by  the  Honourable  Court's  order,  more  than  thirty-five  years  ago, 
was  made  an  officer  of  control  solely,  and  restricted  from  having  anything  to  do  with  the 
expenditure  on  public  works.  If  the  Honourable  Court  thought  such  a  measure  proper  in 
those  days,  how  much  more  so  is  it  now,  when  the  expenditure  is  unavoidably  so  much 
increased.  As  an  officer  of  control,  I  have  full  occupation  for  my  time,  and  it  would  be 
<]uite  impossible  for  me  to  perform  the  current  duties  of  my  office  as  such,  and  to  make  esti- 
mates and  look  after  the  work-people  employed  in  the  construction  and  repair  of  public  build- 
ings at  the  same  time;  setting  aside  the  inconsistency  of  blending  the  two  ajipointments  of 
controlling  the  executive  officer,  and  the  derogatory  employment  it  would  be  tor  an  officer  of 
my  standing  and  rank,  which,  as  well  as  that  of  the  commandant  of  artillery,  is  1  believe 
generally  understood  to  be  little  inferior  to  that  of  the  brigailier. 

"  The  natural  consequence  of  such  an  arrangement  would  be,  that  the  issue  woidd  gra- 
dually, if  not  all  at  opice,  fall  into  the  hands  of  inferior  agents  or  natives. 

"  Notwithstanding  the  chief  engineer's  opinion  to  the  contrary,   1  see  no  difficulties  that 


40 

cannot  be  overcome,  to  the  executive  branch  of  the  engineer  establishment  being'reduced  to 
what  it  was  in  1821 ;  and  one  officer  of  rank  and  experience,  aided  by  an  efficient  assistant, 
performing,  under  the  orders  and  control  of  the  chief  engineer,  the  combined  militarj^  and 
civil  duties.  This  arrangement  will  enable  Government  to  dispense  with  the  inspecting 
engineer  at  the  Presidency,  as  well  as  the  station  of  civil  engineer.  And  as  the  duties  of 
this  officer  in  the  soutliern  division  are  as  yet  limited,  I  think  the  appointment  may  be  abo- 
hslied;  and  when  the  Madras  troops  leave  Belgaum,  an  executive  officer  may  be  named  to  that 
station,  either  reporting  direct  to,  and  being  controlled  by,  the  chief  engineer  or  the  inspecting 
engineer  at  Tannah,  as  may  hereafter  be  deemed  most  advisable. 
"The  arrangement  will  create,  besides  the  saving  calculated  by  the  Finance  Com- 
mittee, of  rupees lOjS^S 

"  The  allowances  and  an  establishment  of  an  inspecting  engineer  16,020 

"  Tiie  extra  pay  and  allowances  to  the  nine  infantry  officers  and  staff  now  attached  to 

the  pioneers 24,240 

"  Making  a  total  saving  by  what  is  now  proposed,  of  rupees 50,808 

"  The  increase  would  be  the  difference  of  the  personal  allowance  of  his  rank  to  a  com- 
mandant of  engineer  soldiers  and  superintendant  of  depot  above  that  now  drawn 
bv  the  lieutenant  in  command,  which  supposing  the  situation  to  be  filled  by  a 
captain,  as  is  most  probable,  is  rupees  1,890 

"  Add  the  difference  of  200  rupees  per  mensetn  to  the  same  officer  for  commanding  a 

corps,  instead  of  its  present  two  companies,  rupees 2,4-00 

"  To  ihe  staff  and  personal  allowance  of  his  rank  to  the  officer  performing  the  duties 

of  quarter-master  and  pay-master  4,584 

"  To  the  pay  of  an  additional  executive  engineer  for  the  duties  of  Ahmednuggur  and 

Candish,  being  the  personal  allowance  of  a  captain 5,040 

"  Making  a  total,  the  first  and  last  items  of  which  are  liable  to  fluctuation,  of  rupees  13,914 

"  All  voung  engineers  should  be  employed  under  the  commandant,  either  at  the  depot  or 
upon  the  public  works  in  its  vicinity,  at  least  for  a  twelvemonth  before  they  were  detached ; 
other  officers  for  whom  there  was  no  specific  duty,  might  be  usefully  attached  to  this  corps, 
especially  when  employed  in  forming  roads  and  bridges.  There  might  also  be  great  advantage 
in  permitting,  when  the  Commander-in-Chief  chooses,  infantry  officers  to  attend  for  a  short 
period  at  this  depot  to  receive  instruction  in  military  service. 

"  Calculating  the  effects  of  the  reductions  of  the  executive  engineers  at  out-station,  the 
abolition  of  the  station  of  inspecting  engineer  and  of  civil  engineer  at  the  Presidency,  and  the 
transfer  of  the  pioneers  to  that  department,  the  whole  amount  of  actual  and  immediate  saving 
by  these  arrangements  must  be  estimated  at  more  than  sixty  thousand  rupees  per  annum.  The 
progressive  saving  that  must  result  from  the  measure  will,  I  can  pronounce  on  the  most  minute 
knowledge  of  the  system  it  supersedes,  be  very  early  more  than  double  the  amount ;  and  as  far 
as  mv  experience  enables  me  to  judge,  no  serious  inconvenience  will  be  incurred,  and  the  true 
interest  and  efficiency  of  the  corps,  as  well  as  the  public  service,  are  on  many  points  essentially 
promoted. 

"  I  must,  for  a  variety  of  reasons,  of  which  I  shall  state  the  principal,  prefer  Seroor  to  every 
station  for  the  engineer  corps  of  soldiers  and  depot. 

"  IsL  This  station  is  acknowledged  to  be  one  of  the  healthiest,  if  not  the  healthiest,  under 
tiiis  Presidency. 

"  2nd.  It  is  now  a  matter  of  regret  that  it  has  ceased  to  be  a  military  station  ;  and  although 
I  mean  to  propose  that  on  account  of  the  cheapness  of  grain  and  plenty  of  forage  it  may  be 
made  the  head-quarters  of  the  Poona  auxiliary  horse,  that  will  not,  when  Sir  Lionel  Smith 
and  his  staff  leave  it,  save  the  excellent  Bazar,  full  of  old  camp  followers,  from  ruin. 

"  The  country  around  has  suffered  much  from  our  troops  leaving  Seroor,  and  will  suffer 
more  when  it  is  almost  wholly  deserted. 

"  3rd.  Seroor,  since  we  made  Ahmednuggur  a  considerable  cantonment,  has  become  more 
necessary  than  ever  as  a  station  to  be  maintained.  It  is  exactly  half  way  between  the  former 
and  Poona,  and  is  from  position  of  consequence  as  a  place  of  refreshment  and  supply. 

"  4th.  I  deem  it  of  primary  importance  that  the  engineer  corps  should  be  separated  from 
other  troops  as  much  as  possible;  the  oilicer  at  its  head  should  have  the  whole  conduct  of  its 
details,  as  well  as  the  general  command.  The  young  officers  are  better  at  a  distance  from  the 
dissipation  and  temptations  of  a  large  cantonment ;  and  it  is  of  great  consequence  that  the 
Europeans  of  the  company  of  artificers  and  youth  that  are  training  lor  the  higher  duties  of  the 
corps,  should  be  removed  from  the  society  of  other  soldiers,  and  be  in  a  place  where  they  can 
have  libertv,  and  their  bodies  and  mind  kept  healthy,  by  being  free  not  only  from  vicious  asso- 
ciation, but  from  those  necessary  but  fretting  restraints  that  are  indispensable,  when  in  large 
anionment  or  the  vicinity  of  large  towns. 


41 

"  5tli.  I  consider  that  no  outlay  having  been  incurred  at  cither  place,  it  will  be  no  more  ex- 
pense to  buikl  at  one  than  the  other  ;  but  troni  the  many  buildinirs  for  sale  at  Senior,  and  that 
at  a  very  moderate  rate,  tiiat  may  be  ada|)te(l  tor  barracks  and  workshops  for  the  few  Europeans 
of  the  corps,  or  hospitals  for  the  natives  that  may  re()uire  it,  there  would  probably  be  a  savinij 
in  this  point.  It  would  also  be  a  great  convenience  to  officers  attached  to  this  corps  to  have 
liouses  they  could  rent ;  but  all  this,  if  the  plan  and  station  are  ajjproved,  can  be  belter  ascer- 
tained by  the  survey  and  report  of  the  inspecting  engineer  of  the  division. 

"  The  sixth  reason  for  choosing  Seroor  as  the  best  station  for  the  corps  is,  that  I  trust  my 
colleagues  will  concur  with  me  in  thinking,  that  now  the  road  by  Nasseik  is  finished,  and  the 
Bhore  Ghaut  will  be  completed  in  two  months,  that  the  next  public  work  of  tliis  Presidency 
should  be  the  military  road  to  Ahmeilnuggur  from  Poona  ;  which  in  one  line  joining  the  great 
road  to  Nasseik,  and  in  another  that  to  Arungabad,  would  be  advancing  our  comnuniication  by 
Candiesh  with  Central  India,  and  by  Nagpoor  to  the  Bengal  territories,  and  must  be  ibr  these 
reasons  one  of  the  most  useful  public  works  that  can  be  contemplated.  This  road  could  at 
once  be  assigned  to  the  officer  commanding  the  engineer  corps  at  Seroor ;  and  working  from 
that  station  as  a  centre,  with  such  extra  aid  as  Government  might  deem  expedient  from  time 
to  time  to  assign  him,  he  could  gradually  complete  it;  and  from  the  numerous  small  bridges 
to  be  made,  and  the  rocks  to  be  blasted,  he  could  combine  many  parts  of  his  labour  with 
the  instruction  of  his  men. 

''The  Commander-in-Chief,  if  he  desired  any  men  of  the  line  to  be  instructed  in  the  use  of 
pontooning,  might  send  detachments  from  the  stations  of  Poonah  or  Ahmednuggur  to  Seroor, 
and  the  river  at  that  station  would  offer  in  this  respect  many  advantages,  both  to  the  corps 
itself  and  to  others  who  come  for  instruction  in  a  branch  of  military  science  singularly  essential 
to  facilitate  movement  in  India,  and  which, — I  speak  on  the  highest  authority  (Colonel  Pasley), 
— never  can  be  learnt  except  by  practice  on  streams  similar  in  their  current  to  those  which  our 
armies  when  in  military  operation  have  to  pass. 

"  I  have  viewed  this  question  as  a  whole,  and  if  adopted  as  such,  I  should  be  confident  of  its  full 
success,  but  I  should  lose  this  confidence  were  it  partially  adopted.  I  may  .ilso  add  that  if  this 
depot  and  corps  is  placed  on  the  footing  I  propose,  it  would  be  early  enabled  to  contribute 
essential  aid  to  our  civil  department,  in  which  there  must  be  frequent  demand  for  persons  who, 
combining  practical  knowledge  and  science,  can  from  doing  so  direct  or  superintend  the  works 
which  under  recent  arrangements  are  so  frequently  required  to  be  undertaken  in  that  branch 
of  the  public  service." 

I  shall  now  add  the  following  practical  remarks.  The  mode  in  Bengal  is,  that  the  engineer 
officers  or  barrack-masters  make  their  own  supplies,  agreeably  to  the  estimates  they  furnish  the 
Military  Board,  who  sanctions  it.  At  Madras  the  engineers  with  large  establishments  make  their 
own  supplies  by  contract  through  the  Commissariat ;  and  at  Bombay  they  make  the  supplies  by 
contracts  under  the  authority  of  the  inspecting  engineer.  At  Madras  there  are  no  inspecting 
engineers,  only  superintendants,  committees  performing  the  duty  of  inspection,  which  is  effected 
in  Bengal  and  Bombay  by  divisional  inspectors.  I  should  think  the  Madras  plan  the  least 
expensive,  every  thing  considered  ;  for  they  are  at  no  expense  for  inspecting  engineers,  which 
at  the  other  two  Presidencies  has  increased  the  charge  to  a  great  extent. 

The  constitution  of  this  department  under  all  the  Presidencies  is  the  same, — the  officers  who 
are  for  constructing  buildings  doing  the  duty  of  civil  and  military  engineers.  But  I  cannot 
avoid  noticing  one  singularity  existing  in  Bengal,  that  officers  of  the  line  are  employed  for  such 
situations,  notwithstanding  there  are  engineer  officers  disposable  for  that  duty ;  which  latter 
are  attached  to  the  corps  of  sappers  and  miners,  instead  of  being  engaged  in  the  more  scientific 
and  appropriate  duties  of  their  own  profession  :  consequently  a  remarkable  incongruity  arises, 
of  practical  men  superintending  those  scientifically  educated,  as  some  of  the  superintendants 
are  infantry  officers,  and  the  executives  engineers :  this  is  in  direct  opposition  to  the  Court's 
orders  of  the  26th  July,  1826.  At  Madras  and  Bombay  the  occurrence  of  a  deficiency  of 
engineer  officers  is  partially  provided  for ;  and  the  same  mode  should  be  adopted  in  Bengal, 
of  making  officers  of  the  line  eligible  for  executing  any  temporary  public  works,  with  a  fixed 
rate  of  salary.  There  is  no  reason  why  one  uniform  system  should  not  prevail,  for  at  present 
the  three  Presidencies  appear  to  beguiiled  by  no  fixed  rule,  to  say  nothing  of  the  ill  appearance 
of  an  unequal  distribution;  as  the  number  in  the  public  returns  in  one  division  alone  in  Bengal 
is  equal  to  the  whole  establishment  at  Bombay;  while  at  Madras  every  superintending  engi- 
neer has  one  or  two  assistants  on  the  staff  pay  of  2G2|  rupees  each,  merely  for  military  duties, 
in  addition  to  a  separate  officer  for  civil  duties. 

The  allow-ances  granted  to  the  engineer  officers  for  executing  public  works  vary  under  the 
three  Presidencies,  although  the  Honourable  Court,  by  their  orders  of  11th  October  1816,  to 
Madras,  fixed  an  allowance*  which  marks  the  distinction  of  ranks,  though  doing  the  same  duty: 
this  is  strictly  followed  at  Bombay,  partially  only  at  Madras,  and  totally  unregarded  at  Bengal. 
It  is  thus  evident  that  upon  the  whole  the  13engal  system  of  allowances  is  the  largest ;  while  the 

*  Field-officers  700;  Captains  430  ;  Lieutenants  362i. 

G 


42 

dividing  of  the  duties  of  the  chief  engineer  into  superintending  has  increased  the  expense  upon 
an  estimate,  I  believe,  to  150,000  rupees  j9«-  annum,  and  at  Bombay  of  rupees  4'6,000,  which 
probably  gave  rise  to  those  repeated  orders  of  the  Court  of  Directors  to  the  Supreme  Govern- 
ment, to  place  the  engineer  officers  upon  the  Madras  footing ;  although  1  am  not  sensible  that, 
except  in  the  instance  of  inspecting  engineers,  their  plan  is  either  more  efficient  or  more  oecono- 
mical,  as  they  divide  the  duties  into  military  and  civil,  which  with  few  exceptions  have  two 
distinct  officers  for  each  station,  while  both  duties  are  performed  by  one  at  Bombay  and  Bengal. 
I  must  confess  I  prefer  the  plan  of  superintending  or  inspecting  engineers  to  committees,  par- 
ticularly if  the  mode  of  proceeding  of  the  latter  is  not  very  strictly  attended  to  by  the  local 
commandinor  officer. 

Sappers  ami  Miners. 

Before  I  enter  upon  the  main  question,  by  stating  my  own  views  of  it,  I  shall  introduce  as  a 
species  of  groundwork,  the  orders  of  the  Honourable  the  Court  of  Directors,  the  sentiments  of 
the  Honourable  the  Governor  (Sir  John  Malcolm),  those  of  His  Excellency  Sir  Charles  Col- 
ville,  and  of  the  chief  engineers,  Colonels  Brooks  and  Goodfellow,  mentioned  in  the  Honourable 
the  Governor's  minute  of  the  16th  August,  1830.     It  proceeds  as  follows  : — 

"  The  Court  of  Directors,  in  a  letter  dated  the  27th  December  1822,  state,  that  having  taken 
into  consideration  the  system  of  officering  the  pioneer  corps,  they  are  of  opinion  that  it  would 
be  for  the  good  of  the  service  if  they  were  to  be  transferred  to  the  engineer  corps,  and  placed 
under  the  command  and  direction  of  officers  by  whom  they  might  be  instructed  in  the  art  of 
sapping  and  mining,  and  other  branches  connected  with  the  engineer  department ;  and  at  the 
same  time  those  officers  might  be  employed  in  superintending  the  works  carried  on  in  their 
respective  districts. 

"  The  Court  likewise  give  it  as  their  opinion  that  no  specific  number  of  engineer  officers 
need  be  attached  to  the  pioneers,  with  the  exception  of  commandant  and  adjutant. 

"  Lieutenant-general  Colville,  after  expressing  his  concurrence  as  to  the  necessity  of  having 
a  coqjs  similar  to  the  royal  staff  corps  (in  England),  or  to  the  sappers  and  miners,  the  Bombay 
pioneers  the  Lieutenant-general  thought  could  not  be  properly  instructed  as  sappers,  &c., 
without  a  considerable  increase  of  establishment,  or  by  their  being  employed  as  overseers  of 
workmen.  He  suggested  the  expediency  of  assembling  a  certain  number  from  each  company,  to 
be  placed  under  officers,  competent  from  their  knowledge  of  the  Hindoostanee  and  Mahrattee 
languages,  as  well  as  talent,  to  instruct  them  in  the  duties  of  sappers,  &c. 

"  The  chief  engineer  (Colonel  Brooks)  gave  it  as  his  opinion,  that  to  carry  this  into  effect 
it  would  be  necessary  that  the  non-commissioned  officers  should,  in  the  first  place,  possess  a 
knowledge  in  various  branches  of  which  they  are  at  present  ignorant ;  and  referring  to  their 
actual  employment,  he  suggested  the  establishment  of  a  corps  of  sappers,  &c.,  distinct  from  the 
pioneers,  commanded  by  engineer  officers :  to  these,  when  trained,  should  be  attached  in  rota- 
tion a  company  of  pioneers  to  instruct  the  remaining  portion  of  the  corps.  That  in  time  of 
peace  a  body  of  well-trained  sappers  and  miners  would  be  very  useful,  if  attached  to  the 
executive  engineers  of  fixed  stations. 

"  The  chief  engineer  recommended  strongly  an  increase  of  the  officers  of  the  corps  to  carrj' 
this  plan  into  execution.  In  answer  to  his  proposition  the  Governor  observed,  that  the  chief 
engineer's  view  of  the  case  having  embraced  two  propositions  not  contemplated  by  the  Court, 
viz.,  an  increase  of  the  establishment  of  the  engineer  officers,  and  the  formation  of  a  corps  of 
sappers  and  miners,  he  could  not  sanction  such  augmentation,  but  will  submit  them  to  the 
Honourable  Court.  In  the  mean  time  the  Governor  suggested  the  expediency  of  commencing 
instructions  in  sapping  and  mining,  to  a  certain  degree,  and  will  consider  of  any  arrangements 
which  may  tend  to  carry  the  same  into  effect. 

"The  Court's  letter,  dated  the  8th  February  1826,  and  their  military  letter  of  the  22nd  De- 
cember 1822,  state  it  to  have  been  their  intention  that  the  pioneers  of  this  establishment  wei'e  to 
be  put  under  the  command  and  direction  of  officers  of  engineers.  The  chief  engineer  (Colonel 
Goodfellow)  gave  his  ojiinion,  that  as  the  Court  of  Directors  have  not  thought  it  necessary  to 
raise  a  corps  of  European  sa))pers,  the  pioneers  are  the  only  substitute  for  them  ;  the  Court's 
arrangement  respecting  them  should  be  carried  into  effect ;  that  a  captain  and  subaltern  of 
engineers  should  be  nominated  commandant  and  adjutant:  he  thought  two  companies  ol 
pioneers  chosen  in  rotation,  always  at  head-quarters,  who  would  not  only  assist  the  officer  in 
training  the  recruits,  but  might  be  of  material  service  if  employed  in  draining  or  embanking 
land  subject  to  inundations.  They  might  also  be  occasionally  instructed  with  advantage  in  the 
art  of  sinking  shafts,  pontooning,  and  rigging  of  suspension  bridges." 

From  a  perusal  of  the  Honourable  Court's  letter,  he  imagined  they  did  not  at  the  time  of 
those  orders  fully  com)nehcnd  the  nature  of  the  application  made  to  them  by  Colonel  Brooks, 
which  he  understands  not  to  have  been  for  a  corps  of  sappers,  &c.,  raised  in  England,  but  for  a 
few  Europeans  selected  from  regiments  in  this  country,  who  might  have  been  with  little  expense 
instructed  by  engineer  officers  in  the  duties  retjuired  of  them. 

"  In  every  branch  of  the  Indian  army  it  has  been  found  necessary  to  introduce  a  proportion 
of  Europeans,  and  in  no  branch  of  the  service  is  their  skill  and  intrepidity  more  likely  to  prove 


43 

serviceable  than  in  tlie  sapjiers ;  and  in  addition  to  the  transfer  of  the  pioneers,  he  recommended 
that  ten  European  lads  he  attached  to  each  company,  who,  when  competent  from  their  knowledge 
of  the  duties  required  in  this  branch,  would  he  elifrible  for  jjroniotion  ;  and  it  would,  he  thought, 
be  necessary  that  the  pioneers  should  be  enableil  to  act  ollensively  or  defensively  as  tiie  occa- 
sion might  retjuire,  which  purpose  would  be  answered  by  iheir  being  arined  with  fusils  and 
drilled  as  infantry. 

"The  foregoing  arrangement  being  considered  as  the  most  eligible,  the  Adjutant-general 
received  instructions  to  continue  the  pioneers,  at  that  time  emjiloyed  in  road-making,  without 
any  reduction,  and  such  a  body  of  men  to  be  raised  by  recruiting  for  the  sappers,  as  there 
were  engineers  suthcient  to  instruct.  The  Honourable  the  Governor  in  Council  likewise 
sanctioneil  the  addition  of  European  lads  in  the  sapjicrs,  in  the  proportion  often  to  each  com- 
pany. The  chief  engineer  being  reejuired  to  state  the  number  of  men  the  European  officers 
of  the  engineer  corps  would  be  able  to  instruct,  and  the  description  of  persons  best  fitted  for 
sappers  and  miners,  states  in  reply,  that  the  commandant  and  adjutant,  if  appointed  to  the 
corps  agreeably  to  order,  will  be  capable  of  affording  instructions  to  five  hundred  natives,  with 
the  proportion  of  artificers." 

The  Honourable  the  Governor  then  proceeds  to  explain  his  own  views  and  deductions  on 
this  serious  subject,  and  continues: — "  When  I  left  England  I  was  under  the  impression  that 
the  orders  for  transferring  the  pioneers,  so  repeatedly  sent,  had  been  obeyed.  This  measure 
having  been  originally  suggested  by  me  in  1817,  and  this  transfer  as  apart  of  apian  for  forming  a 
corps  of  engineer  soldiers,  were  the  result  of  much  experience,  and  are  fully  embodied  in  the 
concluding  chapter  of  Captain  Lake's  excellent  work  on  the  Sieges  of  the  Madras  army.  On 
my  arrival  at  Bombay,  I  was  informed  that  the  want  of  engineer  officers  was  the  reason  why 
the  pioneers  were  not  placed  in  that  department,  and  that  a  corps  of  sappers  and  miners  had 
been  formed  of  Europeans  and  Sepoys  drafted  from  regiments  of  the  line,  all  of  whom  were 
high-caste  Rajpoots,  who  it  was  expected  would  answer  every  purpose.  They  were  cantoned  at 
Versuvah,  were  well  instructed,  and  it  was  meant  to  send  companies  of  pioneers,  as  they  could 
be  spared,  to  receive  casually,  as  opportunity  offered,  that  knowledge  which  is  so  essential  to 
engineer  soldiers.  This  plan,  I  considered,  would  answer  only  so  far  as  to  prepare  a  small 
body  of  men  to  be  useful  at  a  siege,  which,  judging  from  the  actual  condition  of  India,  was  not 
likely  to  occur  once  in  five  or  ten  years :  they  .were  from  their  composition  not  calculated  to  be 
useful  in  any  other  way,  and  their  expense,  for  which  there  was  no  return  either  in  duty  or  in 
work,  was  greater  than  the  state  of  our  finances  could  warrant  the  continuance  of.  With 
respect  to  the  project  which  had  been  made  of  one  or  more  companies  of  pioneers  occasionally 
joining  the  sappers  and  miners,  and  learning  their  art,  I  know  from  experience  that  it  would  be 
found  at  once  expensive  and  mefficient  to  the  object ;  and  1  was  quite  confirmed  in  this  opinion 
by  the  difficulties  that  occurred  *,  and  the  little  good  done  when  a  party  were  brought  to  work 
with  the  sappers  and  miners  in  1829. 

"  The  pioneers  are  a  most  valuable  body  of  men ;  but  I  wish  now,  as  I  always  have  done,  to 
see  them,  if  expected  to  aid  the  engineers  in  the  field,  altogether  transferred  to  that  department. 
The  natives  of  India  must  look  exclusively  to  one  branch  of  the  service;  and  while  pioneers  are 
under  infantry  officers,  they  will  never  enter  with  that  spirit  into  the  duties  of  sappers  and 
miners,  which  are  to  qualify  them  not  only  to  aid  that  body,  but  to  be  selected  into  them-f 
wlien  vacancies  occur.  There  is  no  reason  why  their  labours  should  not  be  directed  as  profitably 
to  the  public  under  engineer  officers  as  under  infantry,  and  I  am  decidedly  of  opinion  that  it 
will  be  more  so ;  for  independent  of  the  labour  of  roads  and  bridges,  the  pioneers  attached  to 
the  engineers  will  increase  the  power  of  the  commandant  of  that  corps  to  form  the  establishments 
of  executive  officers,  and  not  only  (as  pointed  out  in  my  minute  of  the  1st  of  May  1830)  to 
prevent  the  great  abuses  that  were  inseparable  from  the  former  system,  but  to  promote  at  once 
oeconomy  and  efficiency. 

"  But  particularly  those  at  Madras  become  well  instructed  in  the  militai'y  parts  of  their  duty, 
by  constant  practice  in  the  field  and  at  sieges :  but,  employed  continually  as  pioneers  during 
peace,  when  that  is  of  any  continuance  they  must  lose  all  efficiency,  except  as  attached  and  well 
practised  military  labourers;  so  that  as  far  as  the  making  of  public  road  is  concerned,  their 
employment  to  any  extent  is  most  unprofitable.  The  subsecpient  inquiries  I  have  made,  lead 
me  to  assert  that  reckoning  the  batta  he  always  draws  when  employed  on  roads,  his  clothing, 
and  the  pension  to  which  he  becomes  entitled,  and  the  other  items  that  may  be  brought  into  the 
estimate,  the  pioneer's  labours  on  the  road  at  a  cost  of  ten  rupees  each  man  to  Government, 
while  the  pay  of  a  labourer  is  only  four  rupees  J  p«-  mensem,  1  should  not  consider  the  pay  of  a 
pioneer  too  great,  if  the  corps  was  acquiring  and  maintaining  during  peace  that  instruction  and 
knowledge  which  would  render  them  in  war  complete  aids  to  a  branch  in  which  aid  is  so  much 
required  as  the  engineer  department :  but  at  present  they  neither  are,  nor  can  become  that  aid ; 
their  lessons  must  commence  when  required  to  act ;  and  they,  ami  probably  their  officers,  nmst 
learn  under  the  fire  of  an  enemy  how  to  form  a  battery  or  shape  a  trench ;  anil  be  taught  when 

•  Vide  Proceedings  of  Government.  f  Tlie  sappers  and  miners  have  a  liiijiier  pay  than  the  pioneers. 

J  I  am  afraid  this  estimate  is  too  low. — E.  F. 

G2 


44 

on  its  banks  how  their  labour  may  assist  an  army  in  crossing  a  river.  And  ihey  will  from  being 
wholly  under  engineei'  officers  and  incorporated  in  the  higher  branches  of  that  corps,  earlv  attain 
an  efficiency  as  engineer  soldiers. 

"  From  the  manner  in  which  I  propose  this  corps  to  be  constructed  and  employed,  I  anticipate 
that  it  will,  on  the  reduced  scale,  be  almost  as  efficient,  as  far  as  its  numbers  went,  from  the  various 
duties  for  which  it  would  be  required,  in  the  event  of  war;  while  in  peace  they  would,  or  I  am 
greatly  mistaken,  more  than  pay  themselves.  Numbers  will  be  eventually  distributed  among  the 
officers  of  the  engineers'  department,  while  those  not  on  detachment  would  be  improving  at 
head-quarters ;  but  those  should  be  employed,  when  practicable,  on  public  works  :  for  the  fact  is, 
there  is  not  that  balance  of  advantage  in  keeping  up  a  corps  of  this  description  that  can  re- 
concile Government  to  maintain  them  in  peace,  %vithout  it  has  a  return  in  labour  obviously  pro- 
ductive of  public  benefit  and  a  saving  of  disbursement ;  and  I  cannot  understand  why  almost  as 
much  may  not  be  learned  under  able  superintendants  by  the  labours  of  artificers  and  in  useful 
works,  the  construction  of  bridges,  the  formation  of  aqueducts,  and  the  mining  of  rocks,  to  clear 
passes,  as  in  making  models  or  learning  their  duty  on  a  practice  ground. 

"  I  must  consider  the  present  arrangement  as  the  commencement  of  a  system  which  would 
gradually  (when  there  are  officers  sufficient  for  the  charge)  lead  to  the  transfer  of  the  pioneers 
to  the  corps  of  engineer  soldiers,  and  artificers  would  become  a  superior  branch  of  that  corps. 
This  measure  has  been  directed  by  the  Honourable  the  Court  of  Directors  in  their  military 
letter,  under  date  the  22nd  December  1822:  and  to  all  the  arguments  against  this  plan  I  am 
perfectly  satisfied  that  though  a  few  pioneers  might  be  necessary  for  camp  or  cantonment  duties, 
the  corps  intended  to  be  useful  in  the  field  in  erecting  batteries,  digging  trenches,  Sec,  and 
employed  during  peace  on  roads,  bridges,  and  public  works,  should  be  in  the  engineer  depart- 
ment. 

"  I  think  we  can  place  it,  consistent  with  those  considerations  of  efficiency  and  means  of  prompt 
action,  in  every  military  branch,  which  in  an  empire  like  India  it  would  be  the  opposite  of  true 
oeconomy  to  neglect. 

"  The  numbers  of  Europeans  and  youth,  sons  of  Europeans  and  Anglo-Indians  now  belong- 
ing to  sappers  and  miners, — and  their  education  will  qualify  them  to  aid  and  occasionally  to 
superintend  public  works  of  every  description,  as  well  as  the  particular  duties  of  the  coi-ps  to 
which  the}'  are  attached, — will  act  under  him,  i.  e.  an  engineer  officer,  and  where  there  is  not 
one,  they  will  be  placed  under  an  officer  of  the  Quarter-Master-general's  department,  or  local 
staff  officer.  I  trust  that  on  the  organization  of  the  corps  some  further  reduction  may  be 
made  on  its  expense  without  any  sacrifice  of  its  efficiency;  but  such  detail  of  the  plan  that  is 
adopted  will  be  next  carried  into  execution. 

"  I  consider  it  quite  essential  that  the  station  of  commandant  be  always  a  selection  by  Govern- 
ment, but  that  it  should  be  on  a  footing  that  made  it  a  point  of  ambition  of  the  engineer  officers. 
The  course  of  instructions  which  he  would  have  to  give  to  officers,  as  well  as  other  duties  which 
would  fall  to  his  charge,  should  combine  that  experience,  knowledge,  and  personal  character, 
so  necessary  in  my  opinion  to  give  full  success  to  this  plan. 

The  Court  of  Directors  have  sanctioned  a  commandant  and  adjutant  to  this  corps.  I  must 
for  many  reasons  recommend  a  Quarter-master,  whose  duties  in  charge  of  stores  and  as  pay- 
master, from  head-quarters  of  this  corps  being  an  engineer  depot,  and  from  its  composition  ren- 
dering it  liable  to  such  frequent  detachments,  could  not  be  performed  by  the  adjutant. 

"  Much  would  depend  upon  the  stations  for  the  engineer  corps  and  depot.  The  sappers  and 
miners  are  now  at  Ahmednuggur.  Buildings  are  commenced  for  them,  and  4-000  rupees  has 
been  expended  ;  but  contemplating  the  arrangement  I  now  propose,  1  stopped  Captain  Jervis 
the  inspecting  engineer  from  proceeding  further,  and  learn  from  him,  that  if  the  building  is  not 
required  for  the  sappers  and  miners,  it  can  without  expense  be  converted  to  a  lock  hospital,  the 
estimate  for  which  has  been  sanctioned.     This  is  therefore  no  loss  on  this  score. 

"  I  must  further  state,  upon  this  point,  that  recent  inquiries  have  satisfied  me,  that  all  men 
regularly  employed  in  jiubiic  works,  like  sappers,  miners,  and  pioneers,  from  June  till  Octo- 
ber, a  period  of  four  months,  can  in  common  seasons  work  three  or  four  days  more  in  the  week 
than  on  the  Ghauts  or  below  them.  The  year  before  last  upwards  of  100  inches  of  rain  fell  in 
Bombay  and  the  Concan.  There  was  at  least  that  cjuantity  on  the  Ghauts,  while  there  was  only 
20  inches  at  Poonah,  and  less  at  Seroor  and  Ahmednuggur.  To  the  roads  in  the  Concan,  there- 
fore, a  few  pioneers  as  overseers  should  only  be  attached,  as  the  price  of  labourers  in  that  coun- 
try renders  their  employment  much  more  occonomical. 

"  The  engineer  soldiers  could  do  tiie  little  military  duty  necessary  at  Seroor,  and  their  engi- 
neer corps  would  in  all  respects  be  complete  within  itself,  ami  be  a  nucleus  upon  which  any 
number  might  be  formed  with  facility ;  engineer  officers  would  preserve  that  part  ot  their  edu- 
cation they  receive  at  the  depot  of  instruction  at  Chatham,  and  would  never  lose,  as  they  now 
do,  the  habit  of  commanding  soldiers,  as  well  as  of  directing  artificers,  sappers,  and  labourers. 
This  would  be  a  most  efficient  improvement  in  a  very  essential  branch  of  our  army. 

"  The  present  proposition  as  to  the  mode  of  carrying  into  execution  the  orders  of  the  Court 
of  Directors  is  nothing  new,  as  far  as  the  corps  and  depot  of  engineers  is  concerned.     It  is 


45 

merely  following  up  to  its  conrpletion  the  plan  recommended  in  my  minute  of  the  9th  December 
1829,  which  was  approved  and  adopted  by  Government." 

Having  submitted  this  comprehensive  description  of  this  corps,  it  might  appear  that  I  can 
have  little  to  say  that  couid  add  any  information.  I  shall,  however,  with  permission,  subjoin  a 
few  remarks,  wliicli,  thouij;h  less  of  a  scientific  than  a  jjractical  nature,  I  conceive  belonging  to 
this  Report;  the  object  of  which  is  doubtless  to  produce  those  details  and  particulars  that  tend 
to  elucidation,  and  to  show  that  efhcienc}'  which  is  combined  with  ceconomy.  I  shall  proceed, 
on  the  basis  of  the  two  latter  objects,  to  observe,  that  upon  a  serious  consideration  this  corps 
of  men,  which  is  the  only  one  in  the  Indian  army  that  in  any  way  approaches  to  what  may  be 
deemed  a  staff'  corps,  and  as  a  separate  one  I  am  very  much  inclined  to  look  upon  it,  on  its 
original  footing,  more  in  the  light  of  one  for  exhibition  than  real  utility; — for  what  sieges,  with 
a  reference  to  present  and  prospective  events,  can  we  have  to  undertake,  now  that  all  the  forts  are 
either  destroyed  or  in  our  |iossession?  And  I  think  I  am  not  hazarding  too  much  in  saying,  if 
this  opinion  requires  confirmation,  it  is  not  unknown  that  we  besieged  and  took  forts  without  such 
a  corps ;  and  the  only  instance  in  which  they  were  used  was  the  last  Bhurtpore  war :  as  to  the 
superabundant  means  employed  on  that  occasion  I  shall  make  no  remark,  and  there  our  bat- 
tering artillery  did  everything.  On  the  advantages  of  giving  persons  of  this  class  of  our  army 
this  species  of  scientific  education,  I  have  strong  doubts,  which  I  do  not  deem  necessary  to  state, 
as  political  affairs  do  not  form  any  part  of  this  Report :  besides,  what  is  there  that  a  good  disci- 
plined pioneer,  under  proper  commissioned  and  non-commissioned  officers,  could  not  effect,  with 
an  engineer  to  direct,  that  is  required  from  these  highly  paid  people  who  are  but  seldom,  even 
during  war,  employed,  and  can  only  put  their  hands  to  one  kind  of  work  during  the  probable 
period  of  half  a  century  ?  I  am  aware  I  am  urging  points  that  will  be  strongly  contested  ;  and  I 
have  nothing  but  my  own  experience  of  past  service  to  plead,  which  makes  me  give  a  most  de- 
cided preference  to  a  pontoon  corps,  where  a  single  corps  only  is  maintained.  There  is  no  coun- 
try upon  comparison  that  presents  like  India  so  many  obstacles  to  the  advance  of  an  army  for 
four  months  in  the  year ;  from  the  passage  of  large  and  small  rivers,  and  nullahs,  and  the 
greater  streams  all  the  year  round.  Let  us  only  reflect  on  the  common  fact,  that  the  three 
ai'mies  have  detachments,  and  even  whole  battalions,  moving  in  different  directions  at  all  seasons  ; 
not  to  notice  the  biennial  reliefs,  which  latter  are  certainly  connected  with  our  system  for  the 
maintenance  of  proper  discipline;  and  though  a  trite  aphorism,  still  it  is  not  the  less  valuable, 
— that  troops  should  never  occupy  any  station  so  long  as  to  make  them  feel  a  disinclination 
to  leave  it.  Here  then  we  have  an  obvious  and  direct  use,  if  not  a  necessity  for  pontooners;  and 
we  know  further,  that  Government  are  at  a  considerable  expense  to  maintain  the  common  and 
indispensable  ferries  for  the  usual  thoroughfare  of  the  great  rivers  all  over  the  country.  Had 
there  been  any  corps  of  this  kind,  I  should  not  have  had  it,  most  likely,  in  my  power,  at  this  late 
period,  to  instance  two  occurrences  as  proofs  of  so  essential  a  part  of  military  equipment  being 
so  defective.  In  1827  the  Belgaum  force,  ordered  to  attack  the  Kolapore  Rajah,  could  not 
approach  his  capital  in  the  month  of  September,  from  the  want  of  pontoons  and  boats,  there 
being  two  small  rivers  in  their  route  impassable ;  and  the  troops  under  Colonel  Wilson,  that 
were  to  cooperate  from  Poona,  could  not  cross  the  Kistna  to  join  Colonel  Welsh,  for  the  same 
reason.  At  last  the  round  basket  boats  of  the  country,  covered  with  leather,  were  put  in  requi- 
sition, and  in  crossing  the  light  six-pounders  their  bottoms  were  soon  beat  out. 

I  have  been  able  in  more  than  one  instance  to  cross  rapid  streams  in  a  single  canoe,  making 
a  horse  swim  on  each  side  in  much  less  time,  and  with  less  difficulty,  than  other  persons  who 
were  endeavouring  to  cross  in  the  basket  boats,  which  after  a  little,  acquire  a  rapid  rotatorj' 
motion  that  renders  them  unmanageable,  and  makes  one  reach  the  other  side  at  random  far 
down  the  opposite  bank. 

The  other  instance  is  rather  of  a  different  kind :  Boats  are  absolutely  necessary  even  in  the 
month  of  May,  the  dry  season,  to  cross  the  Godavery  at  Rajmundry :  for  this  purpose  there  are 
a  number  of  large  and  small  heavily  and  expensively  built  boats  of  the  clumsiest  shape  it  is 
possible  to  conceive ;  the  current  in  that  river  is  at  all  times  strong,  and  for  five  months  in  the 
year  particularly  so.  Why  therefore  boats  of  a  construction  that  combine  lightness  and  strength, 
and  of  easy  management,  should  not  have  been  adopted,  when  so  much  expense  is  incurred  for 
those  in  present  use,  I  am  totally  at  a  loss  to  conjecture ;  besides,  unwieldy  boats  are  dangerous 
from  the  deficiency  of  jiower  to  control  them,  as  the  number  of  men  employed  in  them  is  never 
equal  to  the  work  of  impelling  them  across  to  the  proper  landing-place. 

I  do  not  recollect  any  attempt  ever  having  been  made  to  establish  a  corps  of  pontooners,  ex- 
cept a  proposition  by  Lord  Hastings,  which  was  never  carried  into  effect. 

On  the  continent  of  Europe  there  are  various  ways  of  passing  the  great  rivers, — ferry-boats, 
bridges  of  boats,  &c.  But  the  most  ingenious  contrivance  1  recollect  for  this  purpose  was  sx  pont 
volant  over  the  Waal,  in  the  road  from  Amsterdam  to  Nimeguen.  It  consisted  of  two  very 
large  boats,  over  which  was  fixed  a  firm  platform,  large  enough  to  contain  five  or  six  carriages 
with  their  horses,  having  its  prow  stemming  the  current  of  the  river;  and  from  the  top  of  a  stout 
short  mast,  of  about  twenty  feet  high,  a  strong  rope  was  extended  along  a  line  of  five  or  six  small 
boats,  the  size  of  an  English  jolly-boat,  the  furthest  one  being  secured  by  an  anchor,  and  exactly 


46 

in  the  middle  of  the  river:  when  the  ferry-boat  was  pushed  off  from  one  bank,  and  the  two  hehns 
placed  in  a  proper  position,  the  current  acted  upon  it,  and  swung  it  across  the  river  to  the  opposite 
side  without  sail  or  oar;  while  all  the  little  boats  according  to  their  proximity  swung  also,  descri- 
bing the  segment  of  a  circle  corresponding  to  the  distance  each  had  to  go  to  keep  itself  in  the 
straight  line  drawn  from  the  anchor  to  the  landing-place. 

It  might  not  be  altogether  irrelevant  to  this  part  of  the  subject,  which  is  certainly  of  much  ge- 
neral interest,  to  notice  some  of  the  means  in  practice  amongst  the  natives  of  India,  who  must 
be  allowed  to  possess  ingenuity  in  the  application  of  the  various  means  in  their  power  for  many 
useful  pui'poses. 

Besides  the  usual  common  ferry-boats,  canoes,  and  even  the  Chaharpoys,  or  common  wooden 
sleeping  cot,  placed  on  earthen  pots  and  large  gourds  with  their  mouths  downwards,  is  a  species 
of  round  basket  about  seven  feet  in  diameter  and  three  deep,  made  of  different  kinds  of  materials, 
according  to  the  local  productions  of  the  country,  covered  with  skin.  My  object  in  mentioning 
this  curious  kind  of  conveyance,  is  not  only  to  notice  its  utility,  but  the  extraordinary  coincidence 
of  precisely  the  same  kind  of  machine  being  in  use  from  time  immemorial  on  the  Euphrates,  and 
mentioned  as  the  only  boat  or  water  conveyance  on  that  river  by  Herodotus,  except  the  very 
large  rafts  on  which  the  merchants  from  Armenia  and  the  North  floated  down  annually,  which 
were  principally  supported  by  inflated  skins  ;  and  the  only  difference  that  seems  to  exist  between 
the  Indian  and  the  Arabian  round  boat,  is  that  the  latter  is  made  of  rushes  and  reeds  plastered 
over  with  bitumen,  and  the  former  is  made  of  bamboos,  grass,  &c.  covered  with  hides. 

I  wish  also  to  notice  that  ingenious  contrivance  called  the  Shakspear  bridge  : — it  may  not, 
strictly  speaking,  be  an  invention,  as  the  original  principle  of  it  is  to  be  found  in  Soutli  America, 
but  the  application  of  it  in  India  demands  for  the  author  the  highest  commendation  for  his  in- 
genuity in  improving  and  applying  it.  The  wood,  ropes,  reeds,  rushes,  and  rattans  are  abun- 
dant in  Bengal  and  the  adjacent  countries,  for  the  construction  of  this  most  lengthy  of  primitive 
bridges.  The  present  splendid  chain-bridges  are,  I  have  no  doubt,  originally  deduced  from 
the  idea  of  the  South  American  bridge ;  and  the  one  now  in  use  on  Mr.  Shakspear's  plan  is 
constructed  of  the  rudest  and  simplest  materials.  The  platforms  are  entirely  of  split  bamboos, 
laid  over  ropes  formed  of  coir  (the  fibres  of  the  cocoa-nut  husk,)  and  rattans,  the  latter  some- 
times of  80  and  100  feet  lonjj. 

Mr.  Shakspear  in  his  improvements  has  not  omitted  to  introduce  the  scientific  mode  of  sup- 
porting the  platform  by  a  number  of  ropes  ranged  on  each  side,  in  imitation  of  the  perpendi- 
cular iron  rods  used  in  the  chain-bridges.  The  great  beauty  of  his  bridge  consists  in  its  sim- 
plicity, cheapness,  and  the  complete  suitableness  of  it  to  the  countries  for  which  he  has  offered 
it.  Every  part  of  India  furnishes  some  kind  of  materials  that  can  be  applied  for  its  construction, 
or  substituted  for  those  he  mentions.  I  believe  it  can  be  used  for  a  span  of  100  and  150  feet  and 
upwards.  The  forest-trees  of  India  supply  the  upright  points  on  each  bank  of  a  river,  the 
cocoa-nut  produces  the  ropes  the  rattans,  the  binders  for  general  connection  and  support,  and 
the  bamboo  answers  admirably  for  the  platform. 

I  may  appear  to  have  digressed  on  this  subject,  and  shall  return  to  the  original  point  by  ex- 
pressing my  surprise  that  a  pontoon  corps  should  have  remained  so  long  undetermined  on  after 
so  many  discussions  of  it.  One  would  imagine  that  the  unfortunate  affair  of  the  Chumbul  under 
Colonel  Monson  (27  years  since)  would  have  pointed  out  the  necessity,  and  have  given  time 
tor  the  introduction  of  some  plan  that  would  have  rendered  the  movement  of  our  troops  a  matter 
of  less  difficulty  than  it  is  even  at  this  late  period,  when  so  many  experiments  have  been  tried, 
and  succeeded  by  no  regular  plan. 

I  do  not  conceive  I  am  in  the  slightest  degree  deviating  from  a  correct  idea  of  the  question 
by  objecting  to  the  sappers  and  miners  as  a  separate  corps,  as  I  am  perfectly  convinced  that 
the  class  of  men  so  employed,  if  taken  from  the  pioneers,  would  soon  be  instructed  in  everything 
necessary  for  them  to  know,  and  which  they  would  soon  perform  with  equal  dexterity  as  the 
present  corps  of  sappers,  who  ai-e  working  and  constantly  trying  expensive  experiments,  the 
art  of  which  is  well  known  to  every  engineer  officer,  and  could  easily  be  comnmnicated.  Their 
expense  is  a  dead  loss  to  the  Government  in  time  of  peace,  of  which  the  Honourable  Court 
seemed  sensible  in  their  letter  of  the  25th  November,  1823,  to  the  supreme  Government.  The 
proposed  arrangement  just  introduced  at  Bombay  will  meet  the  Court's  wishes,  by  making  them 
form  a  component  part  of  the  useful  corps  of  pioneers,  to  consist  of  eight  or  ten  companies  of 
one  hundred  and  twenty  rank  and  file  each,  who  would  thus  become  more  perfect  in  their  own 
duties  of  road-making,  constructing  small  bridges,  with  the  additional  knowledge  of  making 
mines,  fascines,  and  gabions,  &c.  &,c.  Twenty  in  each  company  might  be  trained  as  sappers 
and  miners  by  the  European  officers  for  the  more  difficult  and  scientific  parts  of  their  duty  as 
above  mentioned  ;  and  under  these  circumstances  the  commanding  officer  and  one  half  of  the 
subalterns  should  be  engineers,  and  the  adjutant,  and  the  other  half  of  the  subalterns,  should 
be  infantry  ojjiccrs,  to  introduce  and  conduct  lor  a  time  the  usual  regimental  duties,  with  which 
engineers  cannot  be  supposed  to  be  so  intimately  acquainted.  One  com))any  to  be  attached  to 
each  division  of  the  army  inider  the  Quarter  Master-general's  department,  and  the  others  to 
form  the  head-quarters  of  the  corps,  ami  be  disposable  tor  the  usual  routine  of  the  service.  The 


47 

proposition,  if  adopted,  will  prove  a  saving ;  since,  though  it  will  increase  the  men  to  one  hundred 
and  sixty,  or  rupees  1,140  jicr  annum,  in  the  pioneers,  it  will  diminish  all  charges  ot  the  sappers, 
amounting  to  rupees  7,000;  as  the  officers  will  be  the  same  both  with  respect  to  numbers  and 
allowances,  and  the  utility  and  efficiency  of  a  corps  formed  upon  such  principles  must  be  too 
obvious  to  require  being  dwelt  upon. 

If  the  same  rule  were  ajjplied  to  Bengal  and  Madras,  considerable  reductions  would  be 
effected,  without  any  detriment  to  the  jiublic  service ;  on  the  contrary,  it  would  lead  to  that 
uniformity  of  system  and  action,  producing  benefits  on  the  widest  scale,  that  are  well  known  to 
those  accustomed  to  contemplate  questions  like  this  so  intimately  connected  with  the  effective 
state  of  a  well  equipped  army. 

I  am  much  afraid  that  my  anxiety  upon  so  important  a  point  as  this  has  led  me  to  express 
opinions  not  only  strong  in  themselves,  but  contrary  probably  to  the  received  notions  of  others 
of  greater  experience  and  judgement  than  myself:  however,  I  hope  my  readiness  to  explain 
will,  in  some  measure,  be  interpreted  as  having  but  one  motive  in  stating  objections ;  as  all  I 
aim  at  is  to  show  that  the  combination  of  science  and  practical  labour  by  the  two  corps  being  in 
one,  and  working  under  one  head  and  on  one  system,  scientifically  directed,  would  produce  by 
their  joint  efforts  those  results  that  might  reasonably  be  expected  from  such  an  union. 

By  this  I  think  it  will  be  seen  that  I  do  not  deny  the  utility  of  sappers  and  miners,  but  only 
object  to  them  in  a  separate  state.  The  corps  having  all  engineers  ultimately  is  as  it  should 
be:  all  that  I  contend  for  is,  that  in  its  infancy  engineers  themselves  require  being  taught  regi- 
mental dutv.  And  who  is  to  do  it?  The  artillery  officers  cannot  be  adduced  as  a  parallel  case, 
as  they  are  taught  discipline  and  regimental  duty  from  the  day  they  join  their  regiment.  The 
engineers  are  a  staff  scientific  body  to  act  and  superintend  separately  and  individually.  No  man 
can  have  a  higher  opinion  of  engineers  than  I  have,  but  my  object  is  to  keep  them  in  their  own 
sphere  as  directors  and  not  executives.  Were  every  one  of  them  carried  through  Colonel  Pas- 
ley's  system  of  regimental  as  well  as  engineer  duties,  the  question  would  be  at  rest.  But 
the  system  was  not  that,  nor  had  they  any  men  or  companies  to  attend  to  in  their  interior 
ceconomy  as  regimental  officers.  The  late  orders  dii'ecting  all  young  engineer  officers  to  be 
attached  to  the  sappers  and  miners  in  the  first  instance  is  the  most  effective  mode  of  rendering 
them  regimental  officers:  and  whatever  may  be  an  individual's  talents  and  education,  discipline 
will  never  injure  them,  but  on  the  contrary  assist  their  development  and  chasten  their  action. 

Military  Board. 

Bengal     .     .     .     Rupees  57,016  Salaries  88,140     Establishment. 

Madras 29,160     .     .     .  36,183  

Bombay 15,603     .     .     .  14,040  


The  item  for  establishment  for  Bengal  I  shall  first  discuss,  as  the  largest  sum*,  though  it 
may  be  replied  that  it  provides  for  and  conducts  a  very  great  part  of  the  military  expenditure 
of  the  army ;  which,  however,  is  hardly  a  good  argument  for  such  an  enormous  charge,  three 
times  as  much  as  at  Madras,  and  eight  times  as  much  as  at  Bombayf ;  while  it  is  well  known 
that  the  business  is  tardily  done. 

Much  of  this  expense  arises  from  the  high  pay  given  to  examiners,  accountants  and  drafts- 
nren,  the  first  of  whom,  properly  speaking,  belong  to  the  auditor-general's  office,  and  the 
latter  to  the  Chief  Engineer's  office ;  in  the  former  of  which  the  auditing  of  all  the  army 
expenditure,  including  depots,  &c.  should  take  place,  and  in  the  latter  the  plans  of  edifices. 
Sec.  should  be  di'awn. 

For  the  duty  of  the  engineer  money-bills  and  plans,  there  appear  to  be  nineteen  writers 
and  two  draftsmen,  besides  twenty-four  writers  for  the  Ordnance  department,  and  thirty-two 
for  general  and  current  duties.  The  effects  of  this  accumulation  cannot  escape  remark,  and 
must  be  perfecdy  evident  to  any  one  in  the  slightest  degree  conversant  with  business. 

It  would  probably  be  found,  that  a  very  considerable  reduction  in  work  and  expense  would 
take  place  if  the  business  of  the  department  was  properly  distributed  ;  for  even  the  Secretary 
himself  has  been  known  repeatedly  to  complain  of  the  load  of  business  on  his  hands,  which 
made  him  propose  bodi  an  increase  of  salary  and  being  constituted  a  member  of  the  Board. 
But  in  a  Report  of  this  kind  it  can  only  be  pointed  out,  wanting  room  for  many  details;  for 
it  must  be  obvious  to  any  one  acquainted  widi  the  existing  system,  that  an  overcharged  machine 
of  this  description  cannot  work  with  that  facility  that  it  would  do  if  its  several  branches  were 
carefully  disposed  of  into  dieir  natural  hands.  An  examination  of  this  immense  department, 
which  in  process  of  time,  and  the  accumulating  spirit  of  its  officers,  became  a  general  board 
of  works  and  expenditure,  produces  the  conviction  that  a  complete  reform  of  it  must  at  some 
time  follow,  from  the  posiUon  in  which  it  is  now  placed,  and  to  which  it  was  gradually  brought 
by  those  who  influenced  its  powers. 

*  About  one  crore  and  9  or  11  lacs.  t  Ttiis  estimate  includes  the  extra  contingent  charge, 


48 

The  Military  Board  at  Calcutta  was,  no  doubt,  first  intended  as  a  Board  of  primary  exami' 
nation  and  check  and  control,-  it  has  been  transformed  into  a  department  of  expenditure:  for 
the  Commissariat,  amongst  other  sums  that  it  carries  to  its  own  credit,  debits  the  Militajy 
Board  349,511  rupees,  the  Barrack  with  354,747,  and  the  department  of  Public  Works  with 
43,331.  Though  all  these  departments  are  under  its  control,  notwithstanding  the  large  sum 
against  the  barrack  department,  the  engineer  progress  Reports  exhibit  charges  by  the  several 
barrack-masters  for  barrack  furniture.  This  fact  alone  would  be  sufficient  to  show  the 
impracticabilitj'  almost  of  ascertaining  the  real  aggregate  amount  of  the  expenditure  of  any 
single  branch  ;  and  it  appears  at  the  same  time  that  the  constituted  officer  of  Government,  the 
Auditor-general,  never  has  these  accounts  submitted  to  him  but  as  a  member  of  the  jNIilitary 
Board.  It  is  true  that  the  Secretary  has  part  of  the  duties  of  the  Auditor-general,  Commissary- 
general,  Quarter  Master-general,  and  Chief  Engineer  to  perform  :  while  at  the  other  Presi- 
dencies they  leave  the  head  of  every  department  to  be  amenable  for  everything  relating  to 
themselves,  except  orders;  which  is  decidedly  the  most  advisable  plan  to  lessen  expense,  faci- 
litate business,  and  give  greater  security. 

The  number  of  secretaries,  and  their  various  occupations  under  the  name  of  accountants 
and  joint  secretary,  would  have  their  business  lessened,  and  might  become  not  so  necessary, 
when  the  military  Auditor-general  has  the  examination  of  the  accounts  of  the  Commissariat, 
engineers,  &c.  relating  to  money  matters,  and  the  Commissary-general  his  own  returns. 
This  I  imagine  would  be  the  most  advantageous  for  Government,  rendering  officers  responsi- 
ble under  proper  assurance ;  besides,  as  it  exists  at  present  it  is  a  species  of  anomaly,  for  an 
officer  of  the  rank  of  Colonel,  at  the  head  of  such  an  immense  department  as  the  Commissa- 
riat, or  of  any  of  the  other  great  departments,  to  be  in  fact  subject  to  the  check  and  control 
of  any  of  the  secretaries  to  the  ISIilitar}-  Board,  who  may  be  a  Captain  in  the  army,  who 
takes  no  oath,  while  the  Auditor-general  does,  when  auditing  contingencies  hardly  more 
extensive.  The  same  remark  applies  in  this  place  as  to  the  agencies*,  on  the  score  of  the  com- 
plicated mode  of  keeping  accounts.     The  consequence  is  the  unavoidable  evil  of  arrears. 

The  agents  pay  themselves  and  the  whole  amount  of  their  agencies,  being  subject  to  the 
examination  of  one  of  the  secretaries  of  the  Militarv  Board,  though  the  Board  are  ostensibly 
the  controllers.  But  how  is  it  possible  that  the  Board  can  do  justice  to  the  Government,  when 
two  of  its  members,  the  Adjutant  and  Quarter  Master-generals,  are  almost  always  absent  on 
tours,  and  the  other  members  have  abundance  to  engage  them  in  their  own  line :  for  instance, 
the  commandant  of  artillerj'  lives  at  Dum  Dum  ;  the  chief  engineer  has  much  to  attend  to ; 
and  the  Auditor-general  must  be  fully  occupied  with  his  own  business,  if  he  attends  to  it 
properly.  Consequently  the  authority  falls  into  the  hands  of  a  Secretary-,  who  conducts  the 
whole  in  the  name  of  the  Board,  and  is  an  iiresponsible  person,  the  Board  being  a  body,  and 
he  merely  their  organ  for  communication. 

The  audit  officer  is  consequently  completely  relieved  from  the  most  arduous  and  difficult  part 
of  his  business,  that  of  auditing  the  contingent  accounts  of  the  departments  of  the  greatest  expen- 
diture, viz.  the  Commissariat,  Ordnance,  Manufactory  of  Gun-carriage  and  Gunpowder,  the 
whole  of  the  Building  department,  called  the  Department  of  Public  Works,  and  Stud,  both 
horsesand  cattle,  and  Barrack  department;  in  short,  every  department  in  Bengal  appears  under 
the  control  of  the  Military  Board,  who  both  order  the  expenditure  and  audit  the  accounts.  The 
result  therefore  of  this  accumulation  of  business  into  the  hands  of  almost  one  person  must  be 
clear ; — the  public  accounts  fall  into  confusion,  or  must  be  made  up  by  estimation  ;  though 
nominally  brought  up  annually  at  an  additional  charge  for  secretaries,  assistants,  and  clerks  in 
the  office,  of  58,000  rupees  ]]er  annum\.  If  a  further  proof  be  required  of  tlie  state  of  the 
accounts,  1  think  it  would  be  found  on  a  reference  to  the  supply  of  timber  for  the  gun-carriage 
agency,  though  the  accounts  of  that  department  are  annually  sent  home  as  properly  arranged. 
These  objections,  serious  as  they  may  appear,  are  not  the  only  ones  to  this  system  from  the 
want  of  simplification,  which  would  prevent  the  subdividing  the  expenditure  into  so  many 
heads  and  offices,  that  makes  it  next  to  impossible  to  collect  and  ascertain  the  real  sums 
expended  ;  for  it  mixes  up  the  receipt  and  value  of  European  stores  with  the  outlay  of  cash 
in  India;  it  therefore  places  in  reality  what  check  and  control  exists  over  these  enormous 
sums,  in  the  hands  of  a  very  few  if  not  a  single  individual,  who  are  required  neither  to  take 
an  oath  nor  give  security. — I  may  be  putting  the  case  in  a  very  strong  light,  but  the  fact 
suggests  itself  from  a  view  of  the  difference  of  situation  of  the  controllers  of  these  departments, 
in  reality  to  the  extent  of  hundreds  of  lacs,  being  irresponsible;  while  the  liome  authorities 
deemed  it  proper  both  that  the  Auditor-general  and  Commissary-general  should   be  under 

•  Gun  carriage  and  gunpowder. 

t  Engineer,  &c 15833  12 

Ditto  establishment 627-  9 

Commissariat,  &c 24360  0 

Secretary  and  Accountant 12000  0 

58466    5 


40 

assurances,  and  that  security  is  demanded  from  a  Paymaster,  whose  outlay  may  be  only  from 
three  to  five  thousand  rupees  per  mensem.  It  certainly  appeared  to  nic,  as  a  member  of  the 
Finance  Committee,  after  a  careful  examination  of  the  mode  of  conducting  accounts  and  busi- 
ness, that  it  was  confused,  laborious  ami  complicated. 

No  proposition  can  be  made  to  substitute  any  system  to  rectify  these  inconveniences,  except 
by  a  (reneral  reform  that  would  relieve  the  INIilitary  Hoard  from  its  overwIiuliiiiMfr  (jiiantitv  of, 
business,  which  arose  probably  from  a  sup])osed  convenience  of  assembling  the  conirol  ot  the 
different  branches  of  the  service  into  its  own  hands,  that  belonj^ed  to  other  departments  ;  but 
a  new  system  would,  by  distribution,  regulate  the  duties  by  placing  them  untler  their  proper 
heads:  it  would  also  make  the  chiefs  of  the  several  departments  responsible  for  their  own  lines, 
and  entirely  divest  the  Military  Board  of  the  mixed  and  incompatible  character  aiul  authority 
of  both  ordering  the  outlay  of  money,  and  the  auditing  of  the  expenditure  ultimately. 

There  is  one  thing  that  I  have  not  touched  upon,  which  would,  I  should  imagine,  inmie- 
diately  attract  the  attention  oi"  the  higher  authorities,  if  the  discussion  of  the  power  of  this 
Board  ever  came  muler  their  notice.  The  opinions  of  the  Military  Hoard,  as  a  congregated 
number  of  individuals,  are  allowed  the  weight  of  those  of  a  body,  and  are,  \vhen  sent  to 
England,  admitted  as  such,  whether  in  cases  of  financial  ccconomy  or  as  distantly  affecting 
even  discipline  itself,  and  are  sometimes  opposed  to  those  of  the  Government  themselves ; 
though  in  iact,  when  inquired  into,  they  would  prove  to  be  the  sentiments  of  single  individuals. 
This  could  of  course  be  illustrated  by  attending  to  the  practice  and  decisions  on  the  recorils  of 
all  the  Military  Boards  at  various  times ;  but  this  defect  in  its  constitution  the  Military  Hoard 
at  Calcutta  has  only  in  common  with  those  established  at  Madras  and  Bombay. 

In  conclusion  to  these  details  upon  a  subject  of  such  moment,  it  will  probably  be  expected 
that  some  observations  should  follow  on  a  step  so  intimately  connected  with  the  spirit  of  it,  as 
the  experimental  measure  of  the  abolition  of  this  Hoard  at  Bombay. 

As  the  question  had  been  most  deeply  considered  by  the  Honourable  the  Governor  of  that 
Presidency,  and  fully  detailed  in  his  several  minutes,  proposing  the  ceasing  of  the  existence  of 
that  Board,  at  the  same  time  that  he  afforded  a  clear  exposition  of  its  history  and  powers,  I  am 
led  to  imagine  that  a  laboured  description  will  prove  less  acce))table  than  a  condensed  state- 
ment of  the  arguments  and  reasons  that  influenced  the  dissolution  of  a  Board  of  so  old  a  date 
througliout  India. 

TheHonourableCourtthemselves  appear  longsince  to  have  been  inclined  to  the  opinion,  which 
seems  to  have  been  present  to  the  mind  of  the  Governor,  and  mainly  to  have  been  the  primary 
cause  of  inducing  him  to  effect  what  may  certainly  rather  be  considered  a  reformation  of  a 
system  than  the  abolition  of  any  particular  functions  exercised  by  the  Board  themselves,  or 
their  effective  powers,  by  consigning  the  performance  of  their  duties  to  individuals,  accompa- 
nied by  a  certain  degree  of  responsibility,  which  in  a  collective  state  was  never  direct  and 
effectual  on  any  one;  the  inconvenience  of  which  was  occasionally  felt  by  Government,  when  a 
diversity  of  opinions  was  maintained. 

I  conceive,  therefore,  that  the  quoting  of  the  above  alluded-to  sentiments  expressed  by  the 
home  authorities  and  the  Honourable  the  Governor  of  Bombay  will  sufficiently  elucidate  the 
arguments  on  which  so  material  a  reform  on  the  leading  points  of  a  great  branch  of  the  public 
service,  as  to  responsibihty,  check  and  control,  of  all  its  principal  departments,  has  been 
effected . 

"  Whether  Boards  are  the  fittest  instruments  either  of  improvement  or  control,  and 
whether  both  objects  might  not  be  more  effectually  attained  by  iiulividual  agency, — it  is  a 
common  but  true  observation,  that  responsibility  is  lessened  by  being  divided  ;  and  there  is,  we 
believe,  no  doubt  that  more  business  can  be  done  by  the  same  numbers  of  persons  acting  sepa- 
rately than  in  conjunction. 

"  If  the  business  is  not  divided,  it  can  hardly  fail  of  being  impeded  in  its  course  by  incom- 
patible tempers,  conflicting  opinions,  and  the  frequent  occurrence  of  useless  discussions. 

*'  Nor  do  we  overlook  the  consideration,  that  where  great  interests  are  not  at  stake,  and 
important  trusts  are  reposed,  it  is  not  always  expedient  that  they  shoidd  be  committed  to  the 
intelligence  and  probity  of  a  single  individual,  even  under  the  check  of  subordinate  function- 
aries :  but  we  nevertheless  think  it  deserving  of  mature  consideration,  upon  which  side  the 
balance  of  advantage  upon  the  whole  preponderates  *. 

"  No  reasoning  can  more  strictly  apply  than  that  which  the  Court  of  Directors  have  used 
on  this  occasion  to  the  Military  Board  of  this  Presidency,  which  has  had  large,  and  I  may 
add,  in  many  cases,  undefined  duties  allotted  to  it. 

"  It  is  the  defect  of  offices,  and  one  that  grows  with  the  multiplication  of  their  labom-s,  that 
attention  to  forms  and  to  the  exact  fulfilment  of  their  necessary  and  relative  duties  supersedes 
in  a  great  degree  the  higher  objects  of  their  establishment. 

"  But  in  examining  the  subject  closely,  it  will  be  found  that  as  the  army  of  diis  Presidency 
increased,  the  duties  of  the  dillerent  heads  of  departments  have   increased  to  a  degree  that 

•  Honourable  Court. 
H 


50 

limited  them  more  and  more  to  particular  lines,  and  made  it  almost  impossible  for  them  to 
give  their  attention  to  the  general  question  that  came  before  the  Board. 

"  My  conviction  is,  that  tiie  object  will  be  frustrated  and  not  forwarded  by  tlie  multiplication 
of  checks,  forms  and  vouchers,  and  by  everything  that  creates  delays  injurious  to  the  service, 
while  it  lessens  direct  responsibility  and  piompt audit. 

"  This  is  not  stated  in  derogation  of  the  INIilitary  Board.  It  has  been  in  my  opinion  a 
better  course  than  if  useless  discussions  and  controversies  had  impeded  its  proceedings. 

■'  The  same  observations  apply  in  a  great  degree  to  the  Chief  Engineer  and  Commandant  of 
Artillery,  who  having  the  sanction  of  the  Board  given  to  all  their  measures,  become  almost 
irresponsible  heads  of  offices,  instead  of  being  directly  amenable  to  Government  for  the  con- 
duct of  their  respective  departments*." 

These,  and  many  other  reasons  of  equal  cogency,  are  stated  bj-  the  Honourable  the  Gover- 
nor, for  the  adoption  of  a  measure  so  replete  with  efficiency  for  the  separate  and  effisctual  work- 
ing of  so  great  a  machine,  the  connection  of  the  several  parts  of  which  with  each  other  was  main- 
tained by  no  apparent  necessity,  as  each  of  the  individuals  was  the  head  of  some  principal  corps 
or  great  department,  who  in  his  own  line  had  abundance  to  occupy  both  his  mind  and  his  time, 
without  forming  one  of  a  body,  which  when  assembled  could  outvote  him  on  any  given  subject 
that  he  perhaps  was  solely  qualified  to  judge  of,  and  might  also  afterwards  be  made  responsi- 
ble for  the  execution  of  a  measure  he  had  decidedlj-  disapproved  of.  At  any  rate,  supposing 
the  case  to  be  reversed,  and  that  a  mutual  confidence  and  reliance  in  each  other's  talents  and 
information  subsisted  amongst  the  members,  inconconvenience  still  arises,  particularly  to  the 
higher  authorities;  the  Board  then  acquiesce  in  or  devolve  their  collective  duty  of  decision  on 
one  person,  whose  single  opinion  is  to  be  presented  to  their  superiors  with  the  force  of  that  of 
an  assembled  bodv.  The  argument  goes  further  ;  for  the  Board  being  composed  of  the  heads 
of  departments  and  corps,  has  a  consequence  from  its  constitution  that  is  on  many  grounds 
objectionable.  Its  opinions  on  every  subject,  and  sometimes  on  military  points  of  importance, 
are  occasionally  opposed  to  those  of  Government,  and  even  to  those  of  its  President,  the  Com- 
mander-in-chief. Such  collision,  if  the  expression  be  admitted,  must,  in  the  forcible  language 
of  the  Honourable  the  Governor,  have  the  effect  of  placing  Government  in  the  situation  which 
exposes  it  to  the  dilemma  of  an  apparent  difference  of  opinion,  on  a  military  question,  with  a 
Board  composed  of  all  the  principal  military  staff  of  the  army,  with  the  Commander-in-Chief  as 
its  President,  "  who  again  in  his  turn,"  as  the  Honourable  the  Governor  observes,  it  would  "  be 
unseemlj-  to  have  in  frequent  controversy  with  his  own  staff;  and  it  is  adverse  to  the  principle 
on  which  the  Board  is  constituted,  to  have  any  of  its  members  act  in  a  spirit  of  deference  to 
the  President,"  and  exhibit  the  anomalous  consequences  of  the  head  of  the  army  being  held  in 
opposition  of  sentiment  to  his  own  immediate  general  staff  and  confidential  advisers. 

It  may  be  now  requisite  to  afford  a  short  sketch  of  the  distinct  manner  in  which  the  per- 
formance of  the  duties  of  the  Military  Board  is  provided  for,  by  ascribing  to  each  officer  the  re- 
lative duties  of  his  own  department  or  corps,  pointing  out  the  channel  of  communication  widi  the 
ultimate  authority  and  the  controlling  superintendence  the  officers  themselves  have  over  the  trans- 
actions of  their  own  lines  of  service,  for  the  due  and  correct  attainment  of  which  they  ai"e  held 
directly  res])onsible  to  the  Government.  The  Honourable  the  Governor  then  proceeds  to  state: — • 

"  The  Quarter-master-general  and  Adjutant-general  are  officers  of  his  (the  Commander- 
iri-Chiers)  staffs,  and  liable  from  his  visit  to  the  different  stations  of  the  army  to  be  frequently 
absent  from  the  Presidency. 

"  Not  only  the  heads,  but  the  different  branches  of  the  service  will  have  their  character  asso- 
ciated with  the  success  of  a  system  which  reposes  a  confidence  which  cannot  be  abused  by  an 
individual,  without  in  some  degree  implicating  the  branch  of  the  army  to  which  he  belongs. 

Bv  the  late  orders  of  Government,  the  Commissary-general  is  unfettered  as  far  as  regards 
his  detail  duties,  and  vested  with  authority  for  conducting  his  own  dejiartnient,  the  supplemen- 
tary regulations  for  that  officer's  guidance,  as  regards  the  making  of  all  su|iplies. 

"  The  Commandant  of  Artillery  might  be  vested  with  authority  to  control  all  matters  con- 
nected with  the  ordnance  department,  exercising  his  power  over  the  grand  arsenal,  gun-car- 
riages, and  guni)owder  departments,  holding  himself  responsible  to  Government  for  regulating 
everything  connected  therewith. 

"  The  Chief  Engineer  in  like  manner,  and  upon  the  same  principle,  might  be  vested  with 
authority  for  controlling  all  matters  connected  with  estimates  for  buildings,  repairs,  &c. 

"  The  Auditor-general  to  be  responsible  to  Government  for  conducting  matters  connected 
with  the  contingent  expenditure ;  and  he  may  forward  his  contingent  lists  to  that  autliority 
direct,  instead  of  laying  them,  as  he  has  hitherto  done,  before  the  Military  Board. 

"  Tlie  Quarter-majter-general  also  may  be  invested  with  authority  for  regulating  (under  the 
orders  of  His  Excellency  the  Commander-in-chief)  everything  connected  with  his  and  the  bar- 
rack departments,  for  the  purpose  of  being  submitted  to  Government. 

"  Such  responsibility  being  established,  all  the  correspondence  and  vouchers  now  received  at 

•  Honourable  the  Governor. 


51 

the  Military  Board  would  be  tlirovvn  into  direct  channels,  and  notliinrr  would  remain  but  the 
audit  and  account  departnieiit  of  stores,  which  could  be  bettor  perlbnned  by  a  dej)uty  secretary 
anil  auditor  of  ordnance  returns  and  stores,  subordinate  to  the  Secretary  to  Government  in  the 
military  department." 

Exclusive  of  these  considerations,  the  objects  for  which  the  Military  Board  was  originally 
constituted  have  in  a  jjreat  tiegree  ceased,  or  its  powers  of  action  become  so  overloaded  by  the 
increase  of  business,  from  circumstances  and  events  that  could  nut  be  held  even  in  remote 
contemplation  of  jiossible  occurrence,  that  it  must  gradually  have  sunk  into  a  mere  Board 
of  examination  of  detail,  or  have  enlarged  into  the  unwieldy  size  and  unmanageable  state 
of  tile  one  in  Bengal. 

To  conclude  this  head  without  noticing  the  Military  P.oard  at  Madras  may  be  looked  upon  as 
a  kind  of  omission,  particularly  as  the  Govcrnnieiu  of  that  Presidency  entrusts  a  verv  lar^e 
portion  of  authority  to  that  body,  as  far  as  regards  sujjcrintending  and  regulating  the  depart- 
ments of  the  army.  But  as  the  system  upon  which  it  proceeds  is  strictly  similar  to  that  of 
Bombay,  no  distinct  descri]ition,  it  is  obvious,  can  be  re()uired,  beyond  that  of  describing  it  as 
such,  except  the  necessity  that  arises  of  alluding  to  the  evils  connected  with  its  mode  of  pro- 
cedure being  the  same  as  those  pointed  out  as  existing  in  the  one  at  Bombay,  and  ori<rinating 
from  the  same  causes  :  for  instance,  there  is  no  want  on  their  records  of  examples  of  diversity  of 
opinion  with  their  superiors;  and  the  home  authorities  have  more  than  once  complained  of 
the  deciiled  influence  of  a  single  individual  being  so  powerful  that  it  called  for  their  marked 
observation.  I  imagine  therefore  that  nothing  more  need  be  said  on  this  topic  on  the  score  of 
efficiency,  though  it  may  be  added  that  it  must  be  clearly  seen  that  oeconomy  is  the  result  of 
the  introduction  of  such  a  reform. 

Ordnance  Dcparlmeiit. 

The  principle  of  the  systems  must  of  course  be  the  same  under  all  the  Presidencies  for  the 
conduct  of  this  very  important  dejiartment,  particularly  as  to  receiving  their  Europe  sui)plies 
from  the  Honourable  Court,  and  the  country  ones  from  the  Commissariat;  and  the  only  differ- 
ence seems  to  arise  as  to  the  strength  and  classes  of  the  commissioned  and  warrant  officers.  At 
Bombay  it  may  seem  to  be  carried  on  in  every  point  of  view  on  the  most  (Economical  footing; 
and  I  have  every  reason  to  conclude  as  efliciently  as  at  the  sister  Presidencies,  if  we  are  to 
judge  from  the  past  experience  of  the  ease  with  which  it  moved  its  artillery  durinn-  the  wars 
of  the  last  twenty-five  years,  and  the  total  absence  of  complaint,  both  as  to  the  efficiency  of  the 
corps  and  its  ordnance.  I  am  perfectly  convinced  from  what  I  have  seen  of  the  gun-carriages 
of  the  three  Presidencies,  that  those  prepared  at  Bombay  might  court  a  comparison,  thoun'h  I 
suspect  the  Madras  horse  artillery  appointments,  on  the  score  of  harness,  &c.,  are  superior,  and 
more  expensive. 

The  judicious  arrangements  original!}'  established  in  the  Bombay  ordnance  line,  and  the 
recent  revisions,  which  will  subsequently  be  noticed,  where  multiplied  duties  are  performed 
with  fewer  hands  or  smaller  establishments, — on  a  comparative  view  must  be  as  evident,  as  that  it 
isthelowness  of  wages,  in  many  instances,  that  makes  the  establishments,  in  Bengal  in  particu- 
lar, look  so  small  in  amount  of  cash,  although  in  point  of  fact  the  number  is  greater.  But  as  their 
naval  departments  are  trifling  in  comparison  with  those  of  Bombay,  the  current  duties  must 
consequently  be  less  arduous,  with  an  office  establishment  in  Bengal  nearly  three  times  that 
of  the  other  Presidencies,  which  proves  the  fact  as  above  stated. 

The  arsenal  at  Bombay,  besides  its  usual  routine  of  duties,  has  the  ships  of  His  Majesty's 
navy  and  the  Indian  navy  to  provide  lor. 

The  other  Presidencies  have  commissaries  abundantly  disti'ibuted  for  the  purpose  of  their 
Presidency  work  and  its  vicinity ;  so  that  their  greatest  duty  at  head-quarters,  perhaps,  is  the 
dispatching  of  the  stores  to  the  subordinates,  and  receiving  sujiplies  from  England. 

The  Madras  arsenal  may  be  free  from  the  heavy  dispatch  of  gun-carriages,  which  appear  to 
be  sent  direct  to  the  different  stations  from  Seringapatam,  or  the  making  up  of  light  cartridges. 
The  arsenal  of  Fort  William  has  nothing  to  do  with  making  light  cartridges,  or  taking  care  of  the 
camp  equipage  of  the  native  corps,  which  latter  forms  a  distinct  duty  on  the  Bombay  establish- 
ment. It  may  therefore  a|)pear,  notwithstanding  the  different  size  of  the  armies,  that  the  head- 
quarters of  the  smallest  Presidency  has  as  much  if  not  more  duties  to  perform  with  less  aid. 

The  constitution  of  this  department  did  vary  from  those  of  the  other  Presidencies,  in  as  far 
as  related  to  classing  of  conductors,  who  were  eligible  to  become  deputy  assistant  and  deputy 
assistant  commissary,  which  was  not  allowed  at  Bombay,  where  artillery  officers  were  in  charge 
of  small  depots.  This  latter  plan  is  certainly  a  saving  to  Government  in  every  point  of  view: 
the  late  orders  of  the  Bombay  Govermnent  reorganized  these  points,  with  regard  to  efficienc}', 
as  well  as  to  reward  the  service  of  deserving  conductors. 

The  magazines  at  Madras  of  any  importance,  seldom  have  less  than  three,  and  sometimes 
five,  while  in  Bengal  there  are  three,  and  in  some  places  ten  :  for  instance,  the  depot  of  Allahabad 
has  eleven  conductors,  Cawnpore  six,  Dinnapore  three,  Agra  tour,  Dhelhie  eight;  while 
at  Madras  there  are  three   for  the   Hyderabad   force,   three  at   Jeulna,  five  at   Nagpore, 

H2 


52 

four  at  Dooat,  three  at  Bellarj^,  and  five  at  Banglore;  but  at  Bombay  there  are  two  at  Poena, 
and  at  every  other  force  or  depot  one  only.  This  forms  a  very  material  difference  in  point  of 
labour.  It  is  also  necessary  to  observe,  that  when  a  conductor  proceeds  in  charge  of  stores  in 
Bengal,  he  is  allowed  twenty  rupees  per  month  for  stationery,  and  (thirty)  for  a  horse;  but  he 
receives  nothing  at  Madras  under  this  latter  head,  but  has  it  consolidated  with  his  batta;  and^at 
Bombay  nothing.  At  the  two  latter  Presidencies  the  conductors  draw  a  tent  from  the  public 
stores  when  detached  on  service  onlj',  which  is  the  most  expensive  plan,  and  may  be  urged  as 
o-ivino-  a  favourable  appearance  for  Bombay  :  the  allowances  at  the  two  other  Presidencies  were 
and  are  still  higher  to  every  class  of  warrant  officers;  but  singular  to  remark,  they  are  not  the 
same  in  any  two  of  the  Presidencies,  although  the  duties  are  precisely  the  same.  These  plain 
observations  suggested  themselves  as  requisite  for  contrast,  previously  to  entering  upon  the 
description  of  the  late  revisions  at  Bombay,  which  I  shall  now  introduce  as  explanatory  of  a 
system  well  adapted  to  promote  regularity,  and  establishing  that  efficiency  at  all  the  Presi- 
dencies which  must  be  the  grand  and  principal  object  of  all  regulation. 

The  Honourable  the  Governor  then  exhibits  the  following  view  of  the  subject : — "  It  is  one  of 
ureat,  and  often  unnoticed,  and  I  may  almost  add,  unchecked  expenditure.  Under  common  cir- 
cumstances it  is  difficult  to  preserve  complete  checks  over  this  branch  without  apparent  hazard  to 
military  efficiency  ;  and  the  recent  military  occupation  of  extended  territories,  the  formation  and 
abandonment  of  cantonments,  the  charges  of  depots  and  recurring  emergencies,  have  combined 
at  this  Presidency  to  create  difficulties  and  increase  expense  in  this  important  department :  it 
was  specially  under  the  Military  Board  ;  and  assuredly  there  was  neither  want  of  zeal  or  talent 
in  those  of  whom  that  Board  was  constituted  ;  but  there  was  a  want  of  leisure  in  the  majority  to 
devote  that  minute  attention  to  this  branch  of  the  service  which  it  so  peculiarly  demands,  and 
to  make  from  time  to  time  those  modifications  which  were  required ;  while  those  upon  whom 
that  charge  more  particularly  devolved,  had  not  the  same  motives  of  action  which  must  influence 
them  when  they  have  individual  responsibility,  and  when  they  have  to  expect  all  that  praise  or 
censure  of  Government  which  awaits  their  active  or  negligent  performance  of  their  duty. 

"  I  have  no  desire  to  make  further  comment  on  what  is  past :  if  there  were  errors,  they 
belonged  to  the  system,  not  to  individuals.  But  a  period  is  now  arrived  when  we  have  more 
leisure  for  revision,  and  when  we  are  comparatively  called  upon  b}'  the  state  of  our  finances  to 
make  every  possible  reduction. 

"  I  have,  in  my  different  tours  through  the  territories  of  Bombay,  visited  and  inspected  almost 
everj-  arsenal  and  depot.  I  have  not  only  had  recent  reference  to  the  records  of  the  Military 
Board,  but  have  examined  the  numerous  details  connected  with  every  part  of  the  subject.  The 
reduction  and  revisions  I  propose  are  not  new.  In  a  letter  from  Mr.  Newnham  (then  chief 
Secretary)  to  the  Commander-in-Chief,  under  date  3rd  April  1824',  I  find  almost  everything 
I  have  recommended  was  in  the  contemplation  of  Government.  Why  the  measures  suggested 
were  not  carried  into  effect  at  that  period,  need  not  now  be  inquired  into.  I  can  well  suppose, 
from  what  I  have  experienced,  all  the  difficulties  with  which  they  were  surrounded. 

"  In  fact,  the  more  the  subject  is  considered,  the  more  desirable  appears  the  entire  re-organi- 
zation of  the  ordnance  store  department,  as  well  in  the  distribution  of  the  arsenals  and  depots  ot 
stores,  as  in  the  different  establishments  connected  with  them. 

"  The  following  is  the  present  distribution  of  arsenals  and  depots. 

Principal  Arsenals.  Subordinate  Depots. 

Bombay.     .     .   ^nf""^^'.   J- Supplies  sent  as  required  by  the  troops. 

Bhooj      .     .     .       None. 

Surat ....       Kaira  and  Hursole. 

T,       ,  f  Deesa, 

Baroda    .     .     •    ■(  u  ■     ^ 
(^  najcotc. 

f  Ahmednuggur, 
T,  J  Malligauni  and  Asseerghur, 

Poona     •     •     •  <  Sholapore, 

LSattara. 
Q  ,  /  Vingorla, 

bevernuroog     .    ^  \-i2iadroog,  and  other  minor  depots  in  the  Southern  Concan. 

"  Since  the  above  distribution  was  fixed,  circumstances  have  so  totally  changed  in  the  position 
of  the  troops  and  departments  requiring  supplies  of  stores  from  the  arsenals,  that  preserving 
this  distribution  of  tliem  would  in  many  cases  be  attended  with  a  real  increase  of  expenditure, 
both  in  the  carriage  of  stores  and  in  their  establishments.  I  would  suggest  the  following  dis- 
tributions. 

Principal  Arsenals.  Subordinate  Depots  of  Stores  proportionate  to  the  demands  of  each  Station. 

f  The  Station  in  the  Northern  and  Southern  Concan  supplied  by  Indent 
„       ,  I       from  the  Presidency  arsenal. 

liombay  .     .     .   -j  Reserve   ammunition  to  be   kept  at  Severndroog  for  the  troops  in  the 

I       Southern  Concan. 


Northern 
Dii 


53 

Principal  Arsenals.  Subordinate  Depots  of  Stores  proportionate  to  the  demands  of  each  Station 

pBaroda,  ") 

,,       ^  l  ,^"  *     '  > Depots  for  reserve  ammunition. 

■■'^'.'■'•"l  Ahmedabad.    <^    ,^'-".'^^"'      [ 
<tstun.  J  j  Kajcoie,  J 

o  )  A  small  supply  of  reserve  store  and  ammunition,  an  en- 

J      trepot  for  Asseerghur  and  Maliigauni  iioni  lionibay. 

^  ^  nr  ,,.''  I  A  small  supply  of  reserve  and  ammunition  for  the 

Poona    I   Au       1  J  Mailigaum,  >  ,       ,.'■,  •',  ^   .       ^    ■ 

'.   .  .       >  Ahmcdnuffsur.<  eu  i  (        supply  ot  the  troops  at  the  station. 

Division.  J  oo      ^  Sholapore,  J  ' '  •'  ' 

(_Sattara,  Reserve  ammunition. 

Southern  \  r>  i  /  Darwar,   \  As  an  entrepot  to  Belgaum  and  a  small  supply  for  the 

Division.  /       °  '     '    \  Vingorla,  J      troops  at  the  station. 

"  Besides  the  above,  I  would  propose  that  the  depot  at  Booj  be  kept  uji,  though  on  a  very 
reduced  scale.  In  Guzerat,  Broach  has  been  abolished.  The  establishments  may  be  divided 
as  follows  : — 

Commissioned  officer.  Corps  of  Store  Lascars. 

Warrant  officer.  Permanent  artificers. 

"  The  commissioned  officers  are  at  present  as  follows: — 

{One  Senior  Commissary  of  Stores. 
One  Senior  Deputy  Commissary  of  Stores. 
One  Junior  Deputy  Commissar}'  of  Stores. 
Surat  Division.     One  Commissary  of  Stores. 

■n  -r\-  ■  ■        f  One  Commissary  of  Stores. 

Poona  Division.    \  r\       t>,        .     r^  ■  c  a. 

(^  One  Deputy  Commissary  ot  Stoi'es. 

Southern  Concan.     A  Subaltern  of  Artillery  on  Deputy  Commissary  allowances. 

"  If  to  this  establishment  be  added  that  required  for  Belgaum,  there  will  be  no  less  than  five 
commissaries  of  stores,  and  four  deputy  commissaries  of  stores  ;  whereas  by  the  distribution  of 
arsenals  which  I  have  proposed,  there  will  be,  including  Belgaum  only,  four  commissaries  of 
stores,  and  four  deputy  commissaries  of  stores,  with  a  corresponding  reduction  in  all  the  other 
branches  of  the  ordnance  establishment,  as  follows  : — 

{One  Commissary  of  Stores. 
One  Senior  Deputy  Commissary  of  Stores. 
One  Junior  Deputy  Commissary  of  Stores. 

T.T    .^         T\-  •  ■       f  One  Commissary  of  Stores. 

Northern  Division.  \  r\      w       .    r-         ■  re. „ 

(^  One  Deputy  Commissary  ot  btores. 

_  T->  •  ■  ■       r  One  Commissary  of  Stores. 

Poona   Division. ■{  r^      t\       ^    r^         ■  re* 

(^  One  Deputy  Commissary  ot  Stores. 

Southern  Division.  One  Commissary  of  Stores. 

"  The  subject  of  the  low  rates  of  staff  allowances  at  present  received  by  the  officers  of  the 
ordnance  department  has  been  brought  under  consideration  by  the  Commandant  of  Artillery, 
who  has  suggested  that  they  should  be  made  in  some  degree  proportional  to  the  responsibility 
incurred ;  and  that  these  officers  should  be  placed  more  upon  an  e(]uality  with  those  of  Bengal 
and  Madras,  and  with  officers  of  the  General  Commissariat  of  this  Presidency,  the  pay  at 
present  being  as  follows  : — 

Commissary  of  Stores,  Bombay Rupees  833     1   33 

Senior  Deputy  Commissary  of  Stores,   Bombay  and  Qutstation  Com- 
missaries         too    0    0 

Deputy  Commissary  of  Stores 200     0     0 

"  The  classification  proposed  by  the  Commandant  of  Artillery  is  as  follows  :  — 

Senior  Commissary  of  Stores Rupees  1000 

First  Class  Commissary 650 

Second  Class  Commissary 'l-'O 

Deputy  Commissary '-^50 

«  Without  at  present  going  further  into  the  plan  proposed  by  the  Commandant  of  Artillery,  I 
may  observe  that  in  so  limited  a  department  as  this,  it  does  not  appear  desirable  to  divide 
the  officers  into  so  many  classes.  It  may  however  be  observed,  that  until  very  lately  the  pay 
of  the  senior  commissary  was  nearly  what  is  proposed  by  the  Commuiulant  ot  Artillery,  but  was 
reduced  to  the  present  amount  by  the  abolition  of  the  oil-reckonings  previously  lirawn  by 
the  senior  commissary  of  stores,  as  commandant  of  the  corps  of  Store  Lascars.  The  new  arrange- 
ment involves  a  greater  degree  of  responsibility  ami  trouble  than  at  present,  a  responsibility  which 
under  the  improved  system  of  control  lately  established,  will  be  felt  to  be  real  and  immediate. 


54 

Upon  these  grounds,  therefore,  no  less  than  that  of  placing  full  ordnance  commissaries  under 
this  Presidency  more  upon  an  equality  with  those  holding  inferior  charges  in  the  same  depart- 
ment at  Bengal  and  Madras,  and  also  with  the  assistants  in  the  General  Commissariat,  I  con- 
ceive the  representation  of  the  Commandant  of  Artillery  to  merit  attention,  although  the  classi- 
fication and  rates  of  paj*  which  he  proposes  may  not  be  approved  of  to  their  full  extent. 

"  The  ofiicers  in  the  ordnance  stores  department  are  collectively  entrusted  with  public  stores 
and  dead  stock,  amounting  to  about  rupees  102,59,469*,  and  they  conduct  the  issue  and  expendi- 
ture of  them  to  the  average  amount  of  about  rupees  65,?,  192  f  annually,  besides  disbursement  in 
their  own  departments  for  artificers,  and  in  other  departments  for  country  articles  to  a  conside- 
rable extent.  When  all  these  circumstances  are  considered,  I  do  not  think  the  present  rates 
of  pay  at  all  adequate ;  they  are  much  below  those  of  the  other  Presidencies  holding  similar 
charges,  with  less  responsibility. 

"  In  all  departments  having  an  extensive  dead  stock  in  charge,  frequent  changes  and  removal 
should  as  much  as  possible  be  guarded  against, — a  consideration  which  strengthens  the  argument 
in  favour  of  a  small  increase  to  the  present  pay  of  ordnance  commissaries,  whose  situation 
should  be  made  so  permanent  as  to  remove  the  probability  of  an  officer's  relinquishing  his  ap- 
pointment at  an}'  time  for  a  temporary  command,  to  which  by  seniority  they  so  frequently  be- 
come entitled,  by  which  the  service  would  be  deprived  of  the  valuable  aid  of  officers,  in  a  de- 
partment which,  above  all  others,  requires  the  professional  qualification  of  a  vigilant  and  expe- 
rienced superintendant. 

"  I  would  therefore  propose  as  follows : — 

Senior  Commissary  of  Stores Rupees  J, 000 

Senior  Deputy  at  Bombay,  and  outstation  Commissary  of  Stores      500 
Deputy  Commissaries  of  Stores 250 

Which  classification  gives  to  each  a  similar  proportion  of  allowances  to  that  of  the  present 
system,  the  subordinates  being  paid  respectively  one  half  and  one  fourth  of  the  pay  of  the 
senior.  And  as  the  duty  and  the  interest  of  a  responsible  officer  should  never  be  placed  at  vari- 
ance, I  further  suggest,  that  full  batta  at  all  times  should  be  given  to  the  full  commissaries  in 
Guzerat  and  the  Deccan,  who  are  constantly  liable  to  sudden  unexpected  calls  to  attend  the 
divisional  commanding  officer,  the  Commandant  of  Artillery,  and  the  inspecting  field  officer  of 
artillery  in  the  province,  in  their  inspection  of  the  widely  scattered  depots  of  those  divisions, 
besides  making  tours  ot  private  inspection  at  other  times  themselves. 

"  It  has  been  fully  ascertained  that  the  half  batta  granted  to  these  officers  whilst  thus  de- 
tached is  not  sufficient  to  pay  for  their  divided  establishment,  so  that  their  travelling  expenses 
at  present  fall  on  their  personal  allowances ;  and  it  can  be  no  matter  of  surprise  if  in  this  case 
the  chief  object  of  such  periodical  visits  of  an  ordnance  commissary  should  be  defeated  by  the 
anxiety  he  cannot  but  feel  to  return  to  his  station. 

"  To  such  visits  of  inspection,  as  much  as  to  anything  else  that  can  be  devised,  must  we  look 
for  a  high  degree  of  efficiency  in  all  the  subordinate  departments,  combined  with  the  exercise 
of  the  most  rigid  ceconomy ;  the  absence  of  which,  if  observable  heretofore,  must  be  traced  more 
to  the  defect  of  the  system  than  in  the  character  of  the  individual.  For  the  inspecting  field 
officer  of  artillery  in  the  ])rovince  will  personally  inspect  the  whole  of  the  depots  annually,  and 
exercise  a  general  control  over  their  expenditure. 

"  The  increase  of  expense-  attending  the  measure  I  have  proposed  will  be  more  than  covered 
bv  the  reorganization  of  the  other  branches  of  the  ordnance  establishments,  as  will  presently  be 
shown  ;  but  the  measure  rests  on  its  own  merits.  And  though  there  may  not  perhaps  be  any  one 
item  of  saving  attending  it  at  first  sight  visible,  I  do  not  hesitate  to  assert  my  belief,  that  inde- 
pLMidently  of  the  equity  of  the  arrangement,  in  the  operation  of  the  system  it  will  be  found  not 
only  efficient  but  most  occonomical  to  Government. 

"  The  visits  of  the  full  commissaries  to  his  subordinate  stations  should  be  strictly  obligatory, 
and  when  practicable  once  a  (]uarter;  and  confidential  reports  of  the  actual  state  of  these  ilepots 
siiould  be  made  to  the  Commandant  of  Artillery,  which  will  secure  Government  against  those 
losses  to  which  it  has  hitherto,  and  may  hereafter  continue  subject,  from  the  youth  and  inexpe- 
rience of  officers  in  charge,  unless  this  measure  is  adojHed  and  strictly  enforced. 

"  The  next  subject  for  consideration  is  tlie  establishment  of  warrant  officers  for  the  ordnance 
department.     These  at  present  consist  of 

19  Conductors,  on  rupees  90  each  : — 21^  Sub-Conductors,  rupees  40  each. 
"There  can  be  no  question  about  the  necessity  of  securing  men  of  respectability  of  character 
and  qualification  for  the  situation  of  warrant  officers  in  the  ordnance  department;  for  the  best 
system  and  the  most  judicious  arrangement  of  a  conmiissary  would  be  thrown  away  unless  fol- 

•  Balance  in  hand  1828-29.  t  Expended  in  1826-27  rupees  .'■)7.3,8.37,2,l.-{ 

l«27-28  rupees  745,8fi7,l,()0 
1828-2!)  rupees  G,")l,872,.3,31 
As  per  Records  in  Military  Board's  Office. 


55 

lowcil  up  by  those  wlio  form  the  connecting  link  between  the  superior  and  liis  establishmeiil, 
and  notiiiuf;  siioulti  be  omitted  that  wouki  tend  to  excite  them  to  ])erseverance  in  a  uiiitbrni 
course  of  tliligence  and  integrity.  They  are  Iretjuently  left  in  temporary  charge  of  depots, 
where  they  are  re()uired  to  keep  the  accounts  and  to  act  to  a  great  extent  as  a  commissioned 
ordnance  commissary  ;  whilst  their  present  rank  and  pay  afford  no  security  for  those  qualifica- 
tions which  the  public  service  expect  from  them. 

"  The  Commaiidnnt  of  Artillery  proposes  to  create  a  superior  class  of  warrant  officers,  under 
the  designation  of 'Deputy  Assistant  Commissary  of  Ordnance,'  to  divide  the  conductor  into 
two  distinct  classes,  and  to  raise  the  pay  of  the  whole  as  follows: 

Deputy  Assistant  Commissary     .     .     .    Rupees  275  (above  Lieut.) 

1st  Class  Conductor 200  (above  Ensigns.) 

2nd  Class  Conductor 120  E.  F. 

Sub-Conductor 85 

"  Besides  the  serious  objection  to  raising  this  class  of  men  upon  an  equality,  with  and  even 
above,  the  commissioned  officers  of  the  army,  whose  mode  of  living  and  situation  in  life  are  so 
different,  and  the  inexpediency  of  entailing  such  an  increase  of  expense  in  the  present  state  of 
our  financial  embarrassments,  I  should  consider  the  class  of  men  who  rise  to  these  situations 
amply  rewarded  by  a  more  moderate  scale  of  allowances.  I  would  therefore  propose  a  classifi- 
cation of  the  warrant  officers  of  the  following  kind,  the  aggregate  of  whose  pay  will  be  somewhat 
less  than  that  at  present  drawn  by  the  whole  body. 

Garrison.  Field. 

.3  Deputy  Assistant  Commissaries  of  Ordnance   .     .     Rupees  1 50  225 

6  Senior  Conductors  (as  at  present) 901  Field  Balta 

9  Junior  Conductors  (not  affecting  present  incumbents)    .     .  70>        as  at 

24  Sub-Conductors  (as  at  present) 403       present. 

"  For  the  greater  efficiency  of  these  classes,  I  would  propose  that  the  qualification  of  the 
highest  rank  be  fixed  in  such  a  manner  as  would  exclude  all  but  those  of  the  first  qualifications 
of  real  merit  and  of  intelligence,  from  amongst  the  class  of  conductors;  and  that  in  future  all 
warrant  officers  on  their  first  nomination  to  the  department  be  required  to  attend  the  artillery 
depot  of  instructions,  to  complete  their  qualification  for  office. 

"  The  director  of  the  depot  might  also  be  required  to  prepare  a  course  of  such  practical  in- 
structions for  the  sanction  of  Government,  to  be  forwarded  by  the  Commandant  of  Artillery 
to  His  Excellency  the  Commander-in-Chief 

"  I  come  next  to  the  corps  of  Store  Lascars,  which  consists  of  nine  companies,  attached  to  the 
arsenal,  and  one  complete  company  belonging  to  the  establishment  of  the  gun-carriage  manufac- 
tory, as  follows: — 


Attached  to 

Arsenals. 

Gun  Carriage 
Manufactory. 

Total 
Strength. 

Rank. 

Present  Garrison 
Monthly  Pay. 

9 

27 

27 

603 

5 

1 
3 
3 

70 

1 

10 

30 

30 

673 

6 

Syrangs    .  . 
1st  Tindals  . 
2nd  Tindals 
Lascars.  .  . 
Bheesties .  . 

24-     2    0 

10    2     0 

8     3     0 

7     0    0 

7     2  85 

"  The  object  of  burthening  the  state  with  fixed  establishments  of  any  kind  is  eventuallv  to 
secure  the  more  efficient  and  faithful  performance  of  the  duties  required  from  them ;  and  so 
long,  and  so  long  only,  as  these  ends  are  secured,  does  it  consist  witii  sound  policy  to  retain  them. 

"  But  in  a  case  like  the  present,  this  must  depend  on  the  nature  of  the  works  and  the  degree 
of  instruction  and  experience  required  in  those  who  liave  to  perform.  Cases  may  also  occur, 
where  from  local  causes  it  is  more  ceconomical  to  employ  Store  Lascars  than  labourers.  It  is  only 
necessary,  in  order  to  show  this,  to  advert  to  the  case  of  the  gun-carriage  manufactorj-  at  Bombay 
in  the  year  1816—17,  whose  expenses  were  actually  diminished  more  than  ten  thousand  rupees 
annually,  by  the  augmentation  of  the  detail  of  Store  Lascars  attached  to  it,  to  a  complete  com- 
pany ;  and  the  consequent  discharge  of  the  Nowgunnies  or  bamboo  Coolies. 

"  Reductions  therefore  in  this  branch  should  be  approached  with  considerable  caution,  or 
they  may  be  found  eventually  to  involve  increase  of  expense  to  Government :  and  I  confess 
that  were  the  present  widely  scattered  state  of  the  arsenals  under  this  Presidency  to  remain 
unaltered,  I  should  have  great  hesitation  in  proposing  any  material  change  in  the  establishment 
of  Store  Lascars.  I  feel  assured  that  the  reduction  of  one  third  of  the  present  strength  of  the 
corps  of  Store  Lascars,  and  three  fourths  of  the  permanent  establishment  of  artificers,  maj-  be 
effected  without  impairing  the  efficiency  of  this  branch  of  the  service. 

"  It  may  be  objected  that  the  peculiar  nature  of  the  work  carried  on  in  arsenals,  requires  pre- 
vious instruction  and  experience,  which  it  would  be  unsafe  to  entrust  to  the  ignorant  day- 


56 


labourer  taken  from  the  town  or  bazar  for  the  occasion  ; — that  packing  and  transporting  ord- 
nance stores,  and  other  military  equipments,  render  an  establishment  of  Store  Lascars  and  arti- 
ficers not  merely  necessary,  but  even  the  most  oeconomical. 

"  I  mean  to  leave  the  principal  depots,  where  the  work  above  described  is  chiefly  carried  on, 
with  such  an  establishment  as  would  in  this  respect  preserve  them  efficient ;  whilst  all  inferior  and 
subordinate  stations  are  reduced  to  a  scale  more  proportionate  to  the  limited  nature  of  the 
work,  which  under  the  new  system  will  devolve  upon  them. 

"  The  proposal  for  the  revised  distribution  of  arsenals  being  adopted,  I  would  reduce  the  nine 
companies  of  Store  Lascars  attached  to  arsenals  to  six ;  and  considering  the  diminished  demands 
on  the  gun-carriage  manufactory,  those  belonging  to  its  establishment  to  the  number  shown  in 
the  annexed  table  of  fixed  artificers,  allowing  the  supernumeraries  to  be  absorbed  by  vacancies. 

"  The  issue  of  clothing  to  the  whole  corps  to  be  biennial,  instead  of  annual  as  at  present. 
No  batta  to  be  allowed  except  when  actually  marching,  or  in  the  field.  And  observing  a  just 
distinction  in  this  as  in  all  other  points  between  those  who  are  actually  fighting  men  and  such 
as  come  more  under  the  character  of  followers  or  artificers,  I  would  reduce  their  pension  as 
follows : 

Those  of  20  years'  service,  and  not  reaching  25  years,  half-pay. 

25  ditto  ditto        30  years,  two-thirds  paj-. 

30  years  and  upwards  three-fourths  pay  ;  leaving  cases  of  wounds  or  other 
extraordinary  claims  in  the  service,  to  form  subjects  of  the  special  consideration  of  Government. 
And  further,  I  would  effect  a  classification  throughout  the  corps  of  Store  Lascars  as  follows:  — 


Rank. 


Syrangs    .  . 
1st  Tindals. 

2nd  Tindals 

Lascars.  .  . 
Bheesties .  . 


Class. 


{i 

{ 

{ 


Period  of  Service. 


Proposed     |      Present 
[Monthly  Pay-!  Monthly  Pay. 


After  10  years'  service  as  Syrangs    • 
After  6  ditto  ditto  .  .  . 

Under  6         ditto  ditto  .  .  • 

After  lOyears'  service  as  1st  Tindal  . 
After  6  ditto  ditto  .  .  . 

Under  6         ditto  ditto  .  .  . 

After  10  years'  service  as  2nd  Tindal 
After  6  ditto  ditto  .  .  . 

Under  6         ditto  ditto  .  .  . 

.'\fter  10  years'  service 

Under  10  ditto 


26 

0 

0 

24 

0 

0 

22 

0 

0 

11 

0 

0 

10 

0 

0 

9 

2 

0 

9 

0 

0 

8 

2 

0 

8 

0 

0 

i 

0 

0 

6 

0 

0 

7 

1 

24 

21  2     0 

10  2    0 

8  3     0 

7  0     0 

7  2  48 


"  The  aggregate  saving  effected  by  this  classification  alone  amounts  annually  to  rupees  3,309. 

With  the  present  strength,  and  on  the  absorption  of  the  supernumeraries   and  the  decrease  of 

the  charge  of  clothintj,  it  will  amount  as  follows: — 

To  pay,  jn^r  annum Rupees  20,783     2  20 

Clothing  of  supernumeraries 1,718     2  20 

Biennial  clothing  and  annually  to  reduced  establishment     1,718     2  20 


About  rupees,  p«- annum 24,220     2  60 


Not  including  the  saving  on  the  reduction  in  the  Lascars  of  the  gun-carriage  department,  about 
2000  rupees  annually. 

"  But  the  principal  object  gained  in  this  classification  is,  that  of  holding  out  inducements  to 
all  ranks  to  remain  in  the  service  from  the  prospect  of  increase  of  pay  in  each  rank,  which  will 
tend  to  check  the  disposition  felt  by  many,  on  attaining  a  certain  rank,  to  retire  on  their  pension 
upon  the  frivolous  or  ill-grounded  complaint  of  infii'mity  or  superannuation. 

"  The  extra  pay  to  each  class  should  be  considered  '  working  jiay.'  To  be  withheld  on  a 
certificate  against  a  man's  name  in  the  muster  roll,  bearing  the  signature  of  the  commissioned 
officer  in  cliarge  of  the  department,  showing  his  misconduct,  indolence,  or  incapacity. 

"  I  am  borne  out  in  this  belief  from  the  experience  obtained  in  the  corps  of  royal  sapjiers 
and  miners,  and  of  the  royal  artificers  in  England,  where  this  system  in  a  modified  degree 
obtains,  and  has  been  found  to  realize  the  objects  proposed  from  its  adoption. 

"  The  only  remaining  branch  of  the  subject  requiring  consideration  is  that  of  the  permanent 
establishment  of  artificers  for  arsenals  and  depots  of  stores. 

"  The  existing  proportion  was  fixed  by  Government  in  general  orders  on  the  28th  of  Febru- 
ary 1828,  merely  under  the  supposition  that  each  depot  was  to  depend  chiefly,  if  not  solely, 
for  its  resources  upon  its  own  means.  I  have  made  myself  acquainted  with  the  resources  of 
every  military  station,  and  I  am  quite  satisfied  that  besides  other  advantages,  this  measure  will 
give  an  encouragement  to  mechanics  of  every  description,  that  will  tend  generally  to  the  im- 
provement of  the  useful  arts  throughout  our  provinces.    I  conceive,  however,  the  present  tran- 


57 

quil  state  of  the  country,  and  the  reduction  of  otlier  e-.tal)lisliments,  liave  left  the  principal  sta- 
tions abundantly  supplied  with  all  the  ordinary  kind  of  artificers,  sucii  as  carpenters,  smiths, 
tailors,  &c.  And  that  an  establishment  of  such  workmen  need  no  longer  be  kept  up,  except- 
ing in  the  field  or  in  such  peculiar  situations  as  can  be  made  special  exceptions  to  tlie  general 
rule,  I  would  therefore  reduce  all  the  establishments  in  the  ordnance  de|)artment  down  to  the 
very  lowest  scale,  merely  retaining  mestries  as  responsible  men  attached  to  each  arsenal,  leavinnr 
others  to  be  taken  up  as  occasion  may  require  upon  sanctioned  estimates  :  and  should  this  re- 
duction be  found  on  trial  to  be  attended  at  any  jiarticular  station  with  inconvenience  to  the 
service,  the  present  system  can  at  any  time  be  partially  restored  on  a  special  representation  to 
Government,  tiie  necessity  for  which  however  I  do  not  anticipate. 

«'  I  am  borne  out  in  my  conviction  of  the  practicability  of  this  system,  from  the  fact,  that 
throughout  the  whole  of  the  executive  engineer  departments,  there  are  no  perniatienl  artificers 
kept  up,  with  the  exccjition  of  mestries  or  head  men  of  each  kind,  by  whom  work-)ieojile  are  en- 
tertained whenever  repairs  or  other  work  may  retjuire  their  assistance,  and  no  difficulty  has  yet 
been  experienced  in  those  departments  from  the  ojicration  of  this  system. 

"  Profiting  therefore  by  this  experiment,  the  adoption  of  a  similar  system  in  the  ordnance 
department  may  be  attempted  with  the  solitary  exception  of  the  gun-carriage  manufactory, 
whei'e  considerable  previous  instruction  is  necessary  to  mnke  expert  workmen.  The  ]iarticular 
allotmentof  artificers  for  each  arsenal  may  be  entrusted  to  the  discretion  of  the  Connnandant  of 
Artillery. 

"  Until  the  year  1827  there  does  not  appear  to  have  been  any  regularly  fixed  proportion  of 
reserve  ordnance  for  the  out-stations  of  this  Presidency,  which  were  up  to  that  period  supplied 
as  circumstances  seemed  to  require  it,  at  the  discretion  of  officers  selected  for  jiarticular  com- 
mands ;  and  on  the  termination  of  the  service  for  which  these  stores  were  required,  they  were 
lodged  generally  in  the  most  convenient  arsenal.  In  the  year  1827,  however,  a  proportion  of 
reserve  ordnance  was  framed  by  the  late  Commander-in-Chief,  and  received  the  sanction  of 
Government. 

"  From  a  review  of  existing  political  relations,  however,  I  have  no  hesitation  in  stating  my 
feelings,  in  which  I  have  the  concurrence  of  His  Excellency  the  Commander-in-Chief,  that  this 
proportion  may  be  considerably  reduced  with  advantage  to  the  service  and  with  regard  to  the 
change  of  arsenals  and  depots.  It  is  my  ojiinion  that  no  inunediate  expense  need  be  incurred  in 
the  removal  of  surplus  ordnance  from  any  station  where  it  may  no  longer  be  required,  merely 
on  the  ground  of  fulfilling  the  objects  of  the  new  distribution.  Gun-carriages,  for  instance,  had 
better  for  the  present  remain  where  they  have  cover  than  be  brought  where  there  is  none,  and 
expenses  incurred  in  erecting  sheds,  for  which  there  is  no  urgent  necessity ;  but  I  should  ob- 
serve to  refer  the  subject  of  gradually  carrying  into  execution  the  charges  in  the  proportion  of 
reserve  ordnance  to  His  Excellency  the  Commander-in-Chief. 

"  The  only  use  of  this  fixed  proportion  of  stores  being  to  regulate  out-station  commissaries 
of  ordnance  in  their  demands  for  annual  supplies  of  stores  from  the  grantl  arsenal  at  the  Pre- 
sidency, and  from  the  local  Commissariat,  the  Commandant  of  Artillery  may  be  instructed  to 
prepare  a  revised  proportion  of  stores  for  the  sanction  of  Government,  framed  upon  the  new 
distribution  of  arsenals  now  proposed*." 

This  full  development  of  the  reorganization  of  this  department  requires  no  comments,  and 
therefore  leads  me  to  another  part  of  the  question,  in  which  no  scientific  knowledge  is  requisite, 
though  much  attention  is  necessary  to  provide  and  superintend  those  employed  in  the  line  ; — as 

Ordnance  Drivers 

which  are  certainly  in  peace  time  a  most  unnecessary  expense,  and  to  retain  a  large  establishment 
on  the  pay  and  immunities  of  fighting  men,  as  an  annual  permanent  outla}-,  is  carrying  the  notion 
of  efficiencv  to  an  extravagant  lennth  : — their  clothiufr  alone  costs  a  large  sum.  Few  things  are 
better  understood  than  the  common  art  of  driving  a  pair  of  bullocks  in  India;  or  where  there 
is  greater  abundance  of  that  class  of  persons,  whom  the  usual  pay  of  the  Government  always 
commands ;  and  the  necessity'  of  retaining  an  organized  body  of  this  description  cannot  be 
defended  at  so  heavy  an  expense,  on  the  plea  of  their  being  disciplined  ;  for  they  neither  can 
nor  do  drive  a  bit  better  than  the  counnon  cart  drivers,  from  whom  indeed  they  are  recruited. 
Besides,  their  pay,  exclusive  of  other  contingencies,  is  only  half  a  rupee  less  than  that  of  a 
regular  soldier  at  Madras:  anil  under  this  impression  it  might  be  abolishe  dwith  great  ju'opriety 
and  saving  to  the  State. 

I  think  the  retaining  of  mules  for  foot  artillery  has  been  proved  inefficient,  as  the  experiment 
was  tried  at  Bombay  by  Sir  Charles  Colville,  who  expected  these  animals  from  Persia  to  be 
equal  to  those  of  Spain,  which  they  are  in  their  natural  (jualities  of  hardihood  and  pace,  but  not 
in  point  of  size,  to  afford  a  counter-balancing  weight  to  the  guns  they  ilraw  ;  for  it  is  well  known 
that  light  cattle  are  unequal  to  heavy  weights.  'I'here  is  another  objection  to  them  ;  not  being 
natives  of  India,  they  cannot  be  replaced  on  field  service,  and  in  times  of  peace  they  are  two 

*  The  Tables  of  Practice  Ammunition,  &e.  will  be  found  in  the  Appeiiilis. 

I 


58 

tliirds  as  expensive  as  a  liorse,  without  his  strength  and  activity,  and  buta  httle  better  than  good 
draft  bullocks  of  the  country.  Hardly  any  circumstances  can  warrant  keeping  up  these  foreign 
cattle,  especially  as  in  all  the  past  warfare  in  India,  bullocks  have  answered  every  common 
purpose  for  foot  artillery,  and  will  continue  to  do  so,  no  doubt,  in  future.  If  any  aid  is  required, 
cart-horses,  and  the  common  coarse  ones  of  the  country  that  are  not  sufficiently  active  for 
cavalry,  would  supply  every  defect  of  the  bullock. 

It  appears  by  an  official  statement  at  Bombay,  that  allowing  the  proportionate  numbers  of 
horses,  mules,  and  bullocks  for  a  light  six-pounder,  the  expense  was  as  follows : — 

Pay  and  clothing  to  artillery-men,  grain  and  forage,  syees,  harness,  head  and  heel 

rope,  remount  of  six  horses  in  draft,  and  one  spare  monthly 235  0     0 

Expense  as  above  for  nine  mules 222  1   66 

Expenseof  twelve  bullocks  hired , 96  0     0 

It  is  therefore  evident  that  mules  are  126  rupees  per  month  dearer  than  bullocks,  besides 
their  original  cost  of  250  rupees  each;  and  that  horses  are  12  rupees  2  annas  dearer  than 
mules,  and  139  dearer  than  bullocks.  That  the  plan  has  fallen  into  disuse  is  not  to  be  wondered 
at;  for  there  are  few  things  on  the  head  of  military  equipments  which  should  be  more  carefully 
studied  than  the  idea  of  procuring  and  adapting  the  productions  and  animals  of  a  country  to  every 
possible  military  purpose.  Our  peculiar  situation  in  India  points  out  the  necessity  of  this  measure 
more  than  may  be  requisite  in  regard  to  other  states  ;  for  where  is  there  so  great  a  variety  of 
people,  surface  of  country,  and  various  kinds  of  animals  adapted,  sometimes  only  to  particular 
situations,  and  indeed  districts?  for  instance,  in  a  warfare  in  Malabar,  horses  are  little  required, 
and  camels  quite  useless: — but  how  diffi^rent  is  the  case  when  we  approach  the  arid  deserts  of  the 
north-western  frontier  of  Mewar,  and  the  bank  of  the  Indias  ! 

The  heavy  guns  and  light  field-pieces  at  Madras  and  Bombay  are  in  charge  of  the  officers  of 
artillery  at  the  several  stations,  and  the  ordnance  stores  under  the  charge  of  the  commissary  of 
stores,  who  of  course  has  the  station  magazine  also  under  him  ;  while  at  Bengal,  separate  and 
expensive  establishments,  under  the  denomination  of  the  light  field  batteries,  are  retained,  which, 
except  to  relieve  the  artillery  officers  of  their  proper  duties,  it  is  difficult  to  understand  the  su- 
perior use  of,  and  could  with  great  propriety  be  dispensed  with  as  a  superfluous  expense. 

It  appears  that  an  organized  corps  of  artificers  is  retained  at  Madras  at  a  permanent  expense, 
the  necessity  for  which  is  difficult  to  be  explained ;  while  the  other  Presidencies  provide  artificers 
e()ually  skilful  at  the  ordinary  rates  paid  by  Government,  without  any  institutions  of  such  a 
nature. 

Practice  Ammunition. 

A  singular  difference  is  observable  relative  to  a  subject  that  one  would  suppose  it  almost  im- 
possible that  any  could  exist  in ;  for  it  appears  by  the  late  orders,  that  all  the  Presidencies,  not- 
withstanding the  trouble  that  has  been  taken  upon  this  score,  are  not  alike;  and  that  the  pro- 
jiortion  of  ammunition  for  annual  practice,  though  reduced  for  the  several  descriptions  of  troops, 
jtill  requires  to  be  regulated,  though  one  rule  should  prevail  for  consistency  sake.  That  this  is 
practicable  must  follow,  and  will  eventually  lead,  from  the  introduction  of  a  regular  plan,  to  de- 
crease of  expenditure,  there  can  be  no  doubt,  as  the  annexed  statement  will  prove ;  for  the  num- 
ber of  cartridges  allowed,  as  well  as  the  quantity  of  powder  for  their  making,  are  not  the  same 
everywhere.  The  strength  of  the  powder  may  have  something  to  do  with  this  dissimilarity,  and 
a  smaller  or  larger  quantity  being  necessary  for  a  cartridge ;  but  this  circumstance  is  a  further 
reason  how  necessary  alteration  is. 

The  regiments  in  Bengal  and  Madras  themselves  make  up  their  own  light  cartridges,  by  re- 
ceiving all  tlie  requisite  materials  for  that  purpose  from  the  public  stores,  the  expense  of  wliich, 
added  to  the  Quarter-master's  establishments  returned  to  make  them  up,  must  swell  the  expense 
wliere  there  are  ordnance  depots,  whose  permanent  establishment  ought  easily  to  do  that  work, 
as  they  prepare  the  ball  cartridges  :  for  instance,  one  set  of  formers,  knives,  and  measures,  will 
answer  the  ordnance  department  to  make  up  light  cartridges  lor  10,000  men;  whereas  every 
regiment,  company,  or  troop,  making  up  their  own  cartridges,  must  have  a  separate  set,  without 
adverting  to  the  waste  of  paper,  powder,  wax,  cloth,  &c.  In  all  this  subordinate  state  there  can 
be  no  occonomy,  but  tiiis  duly  is  exacted  by  the  Bombay  Government  of  the  store  department; 
and  the  custom  in  Bengal  of  granting  45  rupees  per  annum  to  each  corps  for  targets  can  hardly 
be  any  saving,  but  on  the  contrary  may  prove  more  expensive. 


59 


Description  of  Troops, 


Horse  Artillery  .  . 

Dragoons 

Native  Cavalry  .  . 
Light  Infantry  .  . 
Foot  Artillery  .  . 
European  Infantry 
Native  Infantry . 

Sappers 

Pioneers 

Extra  or  localCorps 
1  Horse  Artillery  . 
Foot  Artillery.  . 


Bengal. 


Ball.  Light  Flints. 


20 
20 
20 
50 
10 
,30 
30 
10 
10 
24. 


60 
60 
60 
100 
17 
80 
80 
17 
17 
60 


5 
5 
5 
9 
2 
6 
6 
2 
2 
5 


MaJia-;, 


Ball. 


20 
20 

20 
60 
36 
36 
36 
0 
0 
36 


Light 


110 
110 

no 

140 
110 

no 
no 

0 
0 

no 


Flints. 


13 
13 
13 
20 
14 
14 
14 
0 
0 
14 


Discretionary  with 
theCom. of  Artillery 


Bombay. 


Ball. 


Light 

Flints 

80 

7 

80 

7 

80 

7 

0 

0 

80 

7 

80 

7 

80 

7 

0 

0 

0 

0 

80 

7 

30 
30 
30 
.0 
30 
30 
30 

0 

0 
30 

Discretionary  with 
thcConi.  of  Artillery 


(iuantily  i)f  rciwihr  for 
Light  Cartridges. 


Drains. 


Bengal. 


6 

4 

:i 

0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 


Drains. 
Madras. 


4 
0 
2 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 


Drams. 


Bombay, 


8 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 


Remarks. 


Mu.sket 

Fusil. 

Pistol. 


Gii»-  Carriage  Department. 

The  system  in  Bengal  is,  that  the  Commissariat  have  a  distinct  agent  for  this  branch,  to 
superintend  a  de]X)t  and  provide  a  supply  of  seasoned  timber  for  it ;  at  the  same  time  tliat  the 
agent  retains  estabhshments  and  incurs  ail  other  ciiarges,  under  the  direction  of  the  Military 
Board,  who  control  and  audit  the  expenditure. 

At  Madras  the  same  rule  obtains  as  is  in  practice  at  Bombay,  except  that  at  the  latter  place 
they  receive  the  supply  of  timber  from  the  Indian  navy,  who  have  a  naval  yard.  This  would 
be  difficult  to  be  practised  at  the  other  Presidencies,  as  they  have  timber  depots,  but  no  Go- 
vernment naval  ones.  There  can  be  very  little  doubt,  amongst  other  changes  lately  introduced 
under  the  Presidency  at  Bombay,  that  the  one  of  transferring  the  construction  of  barrack  I'urni- 
ture  to  the  Commissariat  (which  has  it  made  up  by  contract)  has  reduced  the  permanent  esta- 
blishments to  the  lowest  scale ;  relieving  the  gun-carriage  department  of  extraneous  work,  and 
making  the'Indian  navy  the  proper  department,  as  a  repository  for  the  timber  and  plank,  instead 
of  the  Commissariat.  This  is  not  only  the  most  efficient  mode  when  compared  with  any  other 
pursued  at  the  other  establishments,  but  unquestionably  the  most  occonomicaj. 

The  subject  of  expense  or  outlay  of  the  gun-carriage  department  cannot  be  discussed, — 
nor  is  it,  I  presume,  expected, — as  the  wants  and  exigencies  of  the  .State  must  necessarily  deter- 
mine that  question ;  though  we  must  not  overlook  either  the  taste  or  ingenuity  of  the  artillery 
officers,  who  have  for  the  last  twenty-four  years  conducted  that  important  department,  in  the 
alterations  and  the  adaption  of  the  means  of  the  country  to  the  construction  of  gun-carriages. 
A  particular  instance  of  this  kind  occurred  in  the  construction  of  the  cars,  &c.  for  the  rocket 
troop,  and  the  numerous  and  expensive  experiments  that  have  been  practised  in  Bengal. 
There  is  no  line  connected  with  the  effective  state  of  the  armj-,  except  the  gunpowder,  that 
ought  to  have  more  intense  interest  directed  to  it  for  its  encouragement  and  improvement  than 
this  one;  and  few  artillery  yards  have  had  more  attention  paid  to  them  by  their  superintendants 
on  this  important  object  than  that  at  Bombay  ;  as  I  can  conhdeiitly  refer  to  the  improvements, 
as  I  above  stated,  relating  to  the  cars  and  carriages  for  the  rocket  establishment,  when  that 
invention  was  first  introduced  here.  The  only  thing  left  therefore  to  remark  as  a  proposition 
is,  that  each  Presidency  should  aj^ply  that  close  and  unremitting  attention  to  keeping  the  charges 
for  permanent  establishments  as  low  as  practicable,  that  the  j)rice  of  the  materials  should  be- 
come moderate,  and  particularly  that  no  more  than  the  number  of  gun-carriages  absolutely 
required  to  replace  worn-out  ones,  should  be  constructed.  This  proposal  I  conceive,  looking 
forward  to  a  long  period  of  tranquillity,  is  not  jiressiiig  the  subject  too  much;  for  whatever 
view  of  the  question  is  taken,  it  is  still  evident  that  all  our  equi|)ments  are  on  an  ellective  war 
establishment.  Retrenchment,  therefore,  is  strictly  speaking  (economy,  as  it  places  more  abun- 
dant means  in  oin-  possession  for  any  extraordinary  exertion  of  power,  and  any  additions  could 
be, on  an  emergency  easily  and  promptly  met;  as  we  possess  not  only  the  requisite  science 
and  command  the  labour  of  the  workmen,  but  have  plenty  of  seasoned  materials. 

It  therefore  only  remains  to  adopt  the  necessary  measures  by  the  vigilance  of  the  Com- 
mandant of  Artillery,  who  coidd  on  a  general  estimate  of  the  work  easily  eill-ct  what  is  wished, 
by  confining  the  mmiber  of  permanent  artificers  and  people  to  the  lowest  scale,  which,  when 
once  effected,  should  be  looked  upon  as  the  germ  for  the  ibrmation  or  extension  of  the  ilepart- 
ment  to  any  size  that  the  inciilental  or  emergent  demands  oi"  the  service  called  for ;  anil  that 
when  the  press  of  business  had  ceased,  the  number  of  workmen  thus  temporarily  employed 
should  be  reduced  to  its  former  quota,  to  proceed  with  the  current  business  of  the  department. 

I  2 


60 

Gunpowder. 

Bengal  and  Bombay  conduct  the  business  of  this  department  upon  the  same  footing,  as  the 
agents  at  the  head  of  them  make  their  own  supplies,  with  a  permanent  establishment :  but  at 
Madras  I  believe  the  supplies  are  made  by  the  Commissariat,  besides  a  large  permanent 
establishment  retained  by  tiie  agent.  I  should  suppose  the  agent  being  left  unfettered  as  to 
both  the  choice  and  mode  of  obtaining  his  supplies,  may  produce  dispatch  in  the  transaction 
of  business  (as  the  concentration  of  power  and  means  to  accomplish  an  object,  in  any  degree 
of  perfection,  and  particularly  in  the  case  of  one  of  such  vital  importance  to  the  success  of  an 
army  as  this  is),  be  not  only  a  serious  consideration,  but  must  materiall}'  promote  its  success, 
which  sinks  expense  into  only  a  secondary  rjuestion.  For  more  than  practical  means  are 
necessary  ;  indeed  much  science  and  knowledge  are  indispensable.  The  evil  of  inattention  or 
deficiency  of  information  in  this  line  is  easily  appreciated,  and  in  that  estimation  of  the  subject 
it  will  produce  the  conviction  that  the  service  benefits  by  a  liberal  view  of  it  as  the  most 
oeconomical  one. 

The  concluding  remarks,  on  the  head  of  regulating  the  expenses  relative  to  the  gun-carriage 
department,  apply  equally  here  to  the  fullest  extent,  so  that  repetition  is  unnecessary. 

It  is  still  more  difficult,  however,  to  establish  a  strict  supervision  over  this  department,  as  I 
can,  after  much  labour,  discover  no  mode  of  checking  or  preventing  the  conversion  of  materials 
to  purposes  they  were  not  intended  for,  except  to  judge  and  decide  by  the  quantity  and  quality 
of  the  powder  produced.  It  is  a  department  in  which  we  must  always  be  very  dependent  on  the 
vigilance,  talent,  and  active  integrity  of  the  public  officer  at  its  head.  Nothing  more  can  be 
added,  except  that  I  was  much  interested  by  the  able  observations  on  the  mode  of  manufacturing 
powder,  contained  in  Lieutenant  Colonel  Galloway's  Report  of  the  Bengal  Powder  Establish- 
ment. I  should  subjoin  them,  but  the  paper  is  of  too  great  a  length  and  too  controversial  a 
nature.  I  shall  therefore  content  myself  with  a  short  extract,  relating  solely  to  the  financial 
part,  as  connected  with  the  spirit  of  this  Report. 

"  But  in  discussing  the  question  of  expediency  or  of  ceconomy  in  having  manufactured  at 
any  "-iven  place,  besides  the  mere  expense  of' labour,  there  are  otlier  points  which  are  usually 
thought  not  unworthy  of  notice,  such  as  the  quality  for  instance  of  the  vianujactured  article,  the 
price  of  the  rati'  matei-iah,  the  care  or  dijficulty  of  briiiging  it  to  market,  or,  which  is  the  same 
thing,  to  where  it  is  to  be  used,  the  risk,  expense,  c/ia;;ce  of  damage.  And  if  the  article  be  very 
important,  such  as  Jbod  for  vian,  forage  for  cattle,  or  ammunition  for  an  army,  the  production 
of  it  on  the  spot  where  it  is  wanted  has  generally  been  thought  by  no  means  a  matter  of  indif- 
ference :  six  annas  and  six  pice  per  barrel  of  gunpowder  would  scarcely  be  found  a  prudent 
balance  against  these  contingencies. 

"  The  expense  of  manufacturing  gunpowder  at  Madras,  labourers,  &c.  is  permanent 
throughout  the  year,  and  consists  of  14  Europeans,  301  men,  6i  women,  and  T^  bullocks; 
expense  per  diem  165  rupees,  is  per  annum  60,225  rupees,  which  on  10,400  barrels  ma- 
nufactured in  the  year,  amounts  to  within  a  fraction  of  six  rupees  per  barrel ;  that  is,  6 
rupees  for  60lbs.  of  powder,  equal  to  10  rupees  per  barrel  with  us,  our  barrels  being  100 
pounds. 

"  Now  a  daily  expense  of  165  rupees  for  200  days,  amounts  to  33,000  rupees,  which  on 
1 0,400  barrels  approximates  to  the  sum  they  state,  3  rupees ;  it  is  3  rupees  5  amias  yer  barrel. 
The  committee  of  the  Madras  Military  Board  state  the  cost  at  rupees  3  9  6  as  before  noticed  of 
the  Madras  ]iowder,  making  44  barrels  per  day ;  and  thus  have  taken  only  the  expense  of  the 
200  days  the  'j.-<orkmen  ivere  actually  employed,  leaving  the  expense  of  the  establishment  for  165 
days,  or  7/(y/;7(/ half  the  year,  out  of  sight  entirely.  This,  however,  forms  an  item  of  27,225 
rupees;  and  although  the  peo])le,  when  the  manufacture  ceases,  are  employed  under  the  superin- 
tending engineer,  and  their  pay  debited  to  that  department. 

"  Charcoal  being  provided  ready  made  by  contract  at  Madras,  consequently  the  head  labour 
is  not  debited  with  it.  At  Ishaporea  large  establishment  is  kept  for  preparing  charcoal,  which 
of  course  falls  under  the  head  of  labour  alone  assured.  The  mills  at  Ishapore  in  1821  worked 
only  200  days  :  and  only  200  days  in  the  year  can  work  be  done,  that  is  in  fair  weather,  in 
Bengal  :  for  that,  the  mills  at  Madras  may  be  worked  240  days.  But  in  1821,  so  far  as  the 
■weather  was  concerned,  the  mills  of  Ishapore  might  have  been  worked  260  days  instead  of 
200  or  240  days,  and  in  that  case  the  produce,  instead  of  5,908  barrels,  would  have  been  7,000, 
equal  to  13,000  Madras  barrels. 

"  At  Ishapore,  in  the  annual  accounts  of  the  agency,  every  item  of  expense  charged  upon  the 
pnivder,  including,  besides  the  ingredients  of  saltpetre  and  sulphur  furnished  by  Government, 
the  agent's  salary,  the  cattle  and  Commissariat  establishment,  both  keep  and  purchase,  the 
expense  of  repairing  and  receiving  machinery,  and  of  keeping  the  buildings  in  repair,  a  further 
cliar^e  was  last  season  introduced,  and  put  on  the  powder  of  6  per  cent,  in  name  of  interest 
on  the  capital  laid  out  on  the  buildings,  lands,  machinery,  and  10  per  cent,  on  the  value  of 
the  cattle. 


61 

"  Taking  therefore  this  mode  of  calculation,  the  price  of  the  powder  manufac- 
tured at  Madras  and  at  Ishaporc  last  year  will  be  as  follows  : — Madras  pow- 
der, the  rate  2  fanains  per  lb.,  the  amount  ol'  the  ca])ital  laid  out  on  the  works 
there,  I  will  take  it  ns  given  by  the  Madras  connniltce,  including  G  per  cent, 
interest  on  capital,  the  price  ])er  lOOlb.  of  i)owder  is  rupees  22     9     0 

"  At  Ishapore,  per  Captain  Galloway's  annual  accounts,  including  interest  on 

capital  at  (5  per  cent.,  the  price  was 17   15     7 

"  Less  at  Ishapore  per  barrel  rupees  ■!•     9     5 

"  So  that  it  leaves  out  that  the  iml  cost  of  the  powder  made  at  Madras  nearly 
five  ru])ees  per  barrel  more  than  that  which  is  made  at  Ishapore. 

"  I  have  seen  that  the  quantity  of  powder  made  at  Madras,    10,400  barrels, 

amounts  to  62t,00()lbs.,  which  at  2  fanams  per  lb.  make  rupees  104,000     0     0 

"  And  that  the  annual  expense  of  establishment  alone  by  Capt.  Balmain's  state- 
ment is 60,225     0     0 

"  Leaving  for  the  ingretlients  of  the  powder   rupees    43,775     0     0 

"  Viz.  for  saltpetre,  sulphur  and  charcoal,  stores  of  timber,  iron,  copper,  brass, 
firewood,  tear  and  wear,  repairs  of  machinery  and  building,  only  7  rupees  per 
barrel,  for  G,240  x  7  make rupees    43,680     0     0 

"  Now  with  us  at  Ishapore,  the  saltpetre  alone  in  its  crude  state  contained 
in  a  barrel  of  powder  cost  last  year  per  export  warehouse  invoice  upwards  of 
7  rupees.  The  firewood  used  in  preparing  the  ingredients  amounted  to 
rupees  5,986.  What  the  saltpetre  cost  at  Madras  I  know  not,  but  I  believe 
it  is  fully  as  dear ;  and  fuel  is  more  expensive  at  Madras  than  at  Ishapore : 
the  sulphur  I  presume  is  nearly  the  same  price  at  both  Presidencies.  But  the 
third  ingredient,  the  charcoal,  I  find  by  Captain  Balmain's  statement,  not- 
withstanding its  inferior  quality,  cost  within  a  fraction  of  double  the  price  of 
ours.  Our  composition  charcoal  was  only  2r.  8a.  7p.  per  lOOlbs.,  including  price 
of  the  wood,  fuel  to  burn  it  in  Coleman's  cylinder,  in  peeling  the  bark  off  and 
in  preparing  it  in  every  way,  2r.  8a.  per  lOOlbs.  is  per  candy  of  500lbs.  rupees  12  10  11 

"  At  Madras,  per  candy,  the  cost  is  stated  by  Captain  Balmain  to  be 22  12     0 

"  DifTerence  in  price  of  charcoal  less  at  Ishapore 10     1      1 

"  So  also  even  in  numbers  our  establishment  at  Ishapore  is  less  than  at  Madras. 

Europ.    Nat.     Cattle. 

"  Captain  Balmain  states  the  establishment  to  be,  exclusive  of  charcoal  esta- 
blishment       14     365        74 

"  At  Ishapore,  whilst  working  and  including  charcoal  establishment,  we  have     2      324     120 

"  When  working  at  Ishapore  less  12  less  41  more  46 

♦' At  Ishapore  when  not  manufacturing 2       101  120 

"  Not  working  at  Ishapore less  12  less  264  more  46 

"  It  appears,  therefore,  that  when  working,  we  have  in  cattle  46  more,  but  in  men  41  natives 
and  12  Europeans  less,  than  are  employed  at  Madras;  and  when  not  working  we  have  men, 
natives  264,  and  Europeans  12  less  than  at  Madras.  And  I  doubt  much  whether  those  12 
Europeans  in  excess  to  our  number,  besides  their  pay,  which  is  only  here  reckoned,  do  not  cost 
the  Honourable  Company  within  a  trifling  sum  of  the  whole  expense  of  all  our  native  establish- 
ment put  together." 

Pay  and  Allowances. 

By  tliis  article  I  do  not  intend  to  intimate  anything  more  than  an  intention  of  discussing 
some  of  the  several  items  generally  that  form  it.  But  to  take  the  subject  upon  a  broad  principle 
of  equality,  I  should  conclude,  as  a  fair  measure,  that  one  scale  of  pay  and  allowances  for  the 
three  armies  should  regulate  without  reserve  that  serious  point  of  military  finance;  for  other- 
wise all  distinctions  of  a  peculiar  nature,  among  bodies  of  men  who  are  in  daily  communication 
with  each  other,  create  discontent,  and  are  looked  upon  as  marks  not  only  of  indulgence  on  the 
part  of  the  Government,  whose  servants  they  all  equally  are,  but  of  partiality  that  scarcely 
any  individual  merit  can  claim.  It  cannot  be,  however,  the  object,  as  I  stated  above,  to  discuss 
the  component  part  of  pay  allowance,  but  only  to  notice  the  differences  that  exist  among  the 
regimental  allowance,  connected  more  intimately  with  those  that  pass  under  the  denomination 
of  contingencies,  or  extras,  and  to  propose  the  adoption  of  a  simpler  method  for  the  allowances 
of  the  army  produced  by  consolidation,  but  in  no  way  affecting  their  amount,  the  t)bject  being 
the  simplification  of  accounts  to  both  parties.  Before,  however,  entering  upon  this  miscella- 
neous question,  I  shall  state  the  plans  of  others  that  are  in  practice,  and  consider  it  may  prove 
curious  to  examine  how  the  mode  of  consolidation  in  Bengal  proves  by  its  operation  either  a 
gain  or  loss  to  the  individual  or  the  public  ; — for  that  purpose  I  subjoin  the  argument  in  a  tabular 
form,  which  exhibits  the  annual  amounts  of  the  pay  and  allowances  of  the  several  ranks  of 
commissioned  officers. 


62 

This  plan  is  unlike  those  in  practice  at  Madras  and  Bombay,  whose  calculations  are  by  tb 
per  diem  mode :  the  inference  is  by  the  table,  that  the  public  sustain  a  loss  by  the  Bengal  plan  on 
the  occurrence  of  all  casualties,  which  must  take  place  annually,  during  the  intervening  period 
of  four  years,  or  of  one  leap-year  to  another,  owing  to  the  pay  and  allowances  of  the  interca- 
lary dav  (29th  of  February)  being  distributed  in  the  calculation  for  the  three  preceding  years  ; 
consequently  an  officer  in"  Bengal  actually  receives  more  pay  and  allowances  pc7-  annum  for 
three  successive  years  than  one  at  the  other  two  Presidencies,  where  however  it  is  made  up  to 
them  in  the  bissextile,  who  by  the  per  diem  system  draw  an  additional  day's  pay  and  batta  in 
the  fourth  year  (29th  of  Februarj).  To  instance  which,  let  us  take  any  one  rank,  that  of 
Colonel,  who  bv  the  consolidated  plan  receives  8r.  12a.  per  annum  more  than  the  others,  which 
in  four  years  amounts  to  3j  rupees,  being  just  the  sum  of  an  extra  dai/s  pay  and  batta  dr&vin  in 
the  fourth  year  at  Madras  and  Bombay,  equalling  the  aggregate  of  those  four  years  ;  so  that  by 
the  Bengal  consolidation  plan  every  officer  in  that  army  that  dies  or  resigns  before  the  expira- 
tion of  the  fourdi  year,  really  receives  the  small  overplus  or  difference  stated,  which  could  only 
be  recovered  if  he  remained  in  India  to  the  end  of  the  leap-year.  And  singular  further  to 
observe,  that  upon  whatever  principle  the  calculation  may  have  been  framed,  a  kind  of  off-set 
is  either  accidentally  or  intentionally  made  in  favour  of  the  Government,  who  on  the  score  of 
another  species  of  casualty  (the  absence  of  officers  in  Europe  upon  private  affairs,  or  sick  leave, 
which  must  be  viewed  in  "this  light,  being  in  effect  a  temporary  casualty)  gain  by  their  absence 
while  in  England,  even  though  they  may  receive  their  net  pay  there,  still  the  gain  arises  from 
their  batta. 

By  Consolidation  By  the  j)eT  diem  Loss  until 

fXaa  per  annum.  plan ;ier  annum.  Leap-year. 

Colonel 15,543   12  15,535     0     8  12 

Lieut.-Colonel 9,934-     8  9,930     0     4  8 

Major 7,690  14  7,687     8     3  6 

Captain 4,488   12  4,487     0     1  12 

Lieutenant 2,709     0  2,708     0     1  0 

Ensign 2,185     0  2,175     8     9  15 

The  disproportionate  difference  to  the  ensigir  is  very  striking  :  how  it  is  brought  about  I 
cannot  conceive ;  there  is  however  no  mistake  in  the  way  which  I  have  derived  it  by 
calculation. 

All  subsistence  should  be  a  fixed  per  diem  allowance,  as  this  item  must,  from  its  peculiar 
influence  and  effect  on  an  officer's  ultimate  pension,  be  deemed  the  ground  not  only  of  his 
pay  in  India,  but  operate  in  the  end  as  the  reward  of  his  long  period  of  service  when  worn 
out  and  fit  only  for  retirement. 

The  other  parts  of  an  officer's  income  called  allowances  should  be  a  consolidated  monthly 
sum ;  for  the  clearer  understanding  of  which  I  have  subjoined  a  table  of  the  present  and  the 
proposed  consolidation  plan.  The  one  in  Bengal  is  only  partly  so,  and  does  not  comprehend 
mv  view  of  the  question,  and  is  not  I  hope  open  to  the  same  objection :  but  on  the  contrary 
will  appear  fair,  as  it  consults  the  interests  of  individuals  as  well  as  those  of  the  State :  the 
bearings  of  both  I  trust  will  be  obvious. 

The  batta,  house-rent,  tentage  (except  horse  allowance)  should  form  one  amount,  corre- 
sponding with  the  rank  it  belongs  to,  not  only  because  it  is  a  convenience  to  the  officer,  but 
would  tend  much  to  the  simplification  of  the  public  accounts,  which  would  be  freed  of  a  load 
of  small  items  that  arose  from  temporary  causes,  now  past,  for  the  insertion  of  which  much 
time,  labour,  and  expense  are  incurred  :  but  all  broken  periods  should  be  calculated  on  the 
average  of  tlie  current  month.  In  fixing  the  sum,  regard  should  be  had  to  maintaining  a  dif- 
ference, as  they  exist  at  present,  between  the  field  and  garrison  allowance,  which  appears  to 
have  been  the  object  of  the  principle  laid  down  by  the  Court  of  Directors.  The  rule  for  field 
allowances  could  be  applied  or  extended  to  troops  on  actual  service,  marching  about,  and 
defending  certain  frontier  posts,  on  stations  difficult  of  access,  or  occu|)ying  certain  positions 
of  political  importance.  This  would  be  establishing  a  distinction  in  favour  of  those  most  liable 
to  expense,  on  account  of  marching  equipments. 

This  further  examination  of  this  question  shows  there  is  no  part  of  it  has  given  rise  to  more 
inconvenience  than  the  increases  and  decreases,  however  well  intended  to  meet  temporary  inabili- 
ties, that  have  been  at  different  periods  ordered  ;  and  the  tent  allowance  has  I  think  been  subject 
to  more  fluctuation  tlian  any  other  item.  It  would  be  here  both  teilious  and  useless  to  repeat 
its  changes;  the  principle  embracing  it  I  presume  is  the  only  part  comiected  with  the  tliscus- 
!>ion,  and  this  I  should  imagine  rests  on  the  basis  as  stated  by  the  Court  of  Directors,  "  in  lieu 
of  all  camp  equipage  and  quarters,"  though  they  made  a  further  addition  in  1823  of  house- 
rent  to  those  on  garrison  allowances  :  since  that  period,  however,  the  half  tentage  was  directed 
in  1829  to  become  general  tor  European  troops  on  garrison  allowances.  [  have  shown  that  the 
effects  of  this  order  bear  most  unequally. —  It  might  probably  belong  to  this  heaii  to  annex  a 
short  statement  to  show  how  the  pay  and  allowances  of  an  officer  of  any  rank  (for  any  one  rank 
will  suffice  to  explain  the  argument)  have  been  augmented  or  decreased. 


63 

Total  Garrison  Total  Field  _.._ 

pay  and  allonaiiccs.    pay  and  allowances.  uinerencc. 

Licut.-Colonel 828     0     0     .     1028     0     0     .     200     0     0 

Major 6U      0     0      .        ISG     0     0     .      145     0     0 

Captain 37.'5     0     0     .       415     0     0.       40     0     0 

Lieutenant 226     0     0     .       256     0     0.       30     0     0 

Ensign        181     2  40     .       281     2  40     .       20     0     0 

The  original  pay  and  allowances  of  a  lieutenant  were  as  follows  :— 

Pay,  60^     Halfbatta,  62.     Gratuity,  24.     House-rent,   25. — Total,    171 
Subsequently  tent  allowance  of  50  rupees  was  substituted  for  house-rent.     The 

total  was 196     0     0 

Lastly,  house-rent  was  added  of  rupees 30     0     0 


The  present  amount  of 226     0     0 

So  that  the  increase  of  the  batta  for  the  field  of  60  rupees 60     0     0 


IMakes  it  rupees 286     0     0 

But  the  house-rent  is  struck  off 30     0     0 


256     0     0 


So  that  a  lieutenant  taking  the  field,  literally  only  receives  an  increase  of  rupees  30,  because 
his  garrison  pay  and  allowances  have  been  increased  from  171  to  226. 

This  account  however  can  only  apply  to  the  officers  of  Madras  and  Bombay,  as  those  in 
Bengal  have  always  been  on  field  allowances,  with  whom  therefore  no  fluctuation  could  take 
place  ;  for  I  do  not  look  upon  the  abrogation  of  the  double  full  batta  as  a  reduction  of  the  es- 
tablished allowances  of  the  officers,  as  it  was  created  for  a  particular  service,  and  paid  as  a  kind 
of  gratuity  by  the  naval  Vizier  of  Oude,  in  whose  territories  it  alone  existed. 

Exclusive  of  pay,  batta,  gratuity,  the  several  ranks  from  the  year  1799  to  1804  drew  when 
on  field  service  every  second  year  the  following  sums,  under  the  head  of  tent  purchase,  with  a 
monthly  sum  for  carriage  : 

Field  officers 1,600 

Captains 800 

Subalterns 400 

I  n  December  1804  this  was  abolished,  and  a  higher  rate  of  tent  carriage  instituted,  dividing 
the  above  sums  into  twenty-four  parts,  to  be  drawn  monthly,  as  follows.  This  order  was  also 
repeated  in  July,  1823. 

Garrison.  Field. 

Colonel 150  .,  216  3 

Lieutenant-Colonel 150  .     .  216  3 

Major 150  ..  216  3 

Captain,"or  Surgeon 80  ..  133  2 

Subaltern,  or  Assistant  Surgeon    ....  52  .     .  66  3 

In  September  1824  it  was  again  altered,  and  stood  thus: — 

House.  Garrison.  Field. 

Colonel 0  .     .  200  .     .  200 

Lietenant-Colonel     ......   100  ..  150  ..  150 

Major 80  .     .  120  .     .  120 

Captain,  or  Surgeon 50  .     .  75  .     .  75 

Lieutenant,  or  Assistant  Surgeon     .     30  .     .  50  .     .  50 

Ensign 25  .     .  50  .     .  50 

The  application  of  the  half  tentage  at  the  three  Presidencies  stands  forth  as  a  remarkable 
instance  of  that  deviation  from  uniformity,  so  frequently  pointed  out,  not  only  as  a  serious  defect, 
but  an  unaccountable  one  in  the  application  of  a  general  system  of  finance.  Its  operation  is 
))artia],  for  its  extension  is  the  widest  at  the  smallest  Presidency,  that  is  to  say,  it  comprises  in 
its  range  the  greatest  number  of  troops  (at  Bombay).  The  existence  of  this  distinction  between 
European  and  native  troops  serving  together  in  the  same  army  and  same  cantonment,  appears 
at  first  sight  as  invidious,  and  for  the  interest  of  the  State  better  obliterated  than  allowed  to 
remain  as  a  seeming  defect  in  the  code ;  but  the  higher  authorities  iiave  always  considered  it 
expedient,  for  strong  reasons,  to  maintain  these  two  branches  of  the  service  on  a  footing  ap- 
parently distinct,  from  motives  that  in  their  view  of  the  nature  of  the  service  required  such  a 
system. 

The  half  tentage,  however,  independent  of  this  reasoning,  appears  almost  questionable  on  the 
score  of  justice;  for  officers  are  not  furnished  with  quarters  anywhere,  except  at  Fort  William. 
Fort  St.  George,  and  Bombay.     In  cantonments  they  have  bungalows,  either  rented  or  pur- 


64 

chased,  and  must  be  provided  with  camp  equipage,  whether  stationary  or  moving,  not  only  for 
emercrencies  but  ordinary  occasions  of  reliefs.  I  should  imagine  that  it  is  but  a  proper  sense  of 
dutv  on  every  occasion  where  rules  operate  partially,  or  in  any  way  bear  hard  on  indi- 
viduals in  the  service  at  large,  to  bring  the  subject  to  the  knowledge  of  Government,  especially 
when  the  operation  of  anv  such  rule  or  order  is  expected  to  produce  a  good  effect,  by  oblitera- 
ting distinctions  between  coips  of  the  same  army.  1  am  therefore  induced  to  think  that  placing 
the  partial  effect  of  this  order  in  a  clear  light,  both  as  to  feeling  and  limited  saving  on  the  score 
of  oeconomv,  that  it  mav  tend  to  a  beneficial  result  of  admitting  full  tentage  at  all  stations;  for 
the  abstraction  of  that  allowance  certainly  gives  room  for  the  conclusion,  that  officers  are 
relieved  from  the  idea  of  their  having  the  camp  equipage  in  constant  readiness,  as  the  full 
tentage  was  originally  granted  in  lieu  of  all  camp  equipage  and  quarters. 

I  must  add  as  a  conclusion,  I  have  avoided  entering  into  any  statement  of  the  expense  of  the 
pav  department  as  connected  with  this  subject,  which  when  arranged  must  and  ought  always 
to  bear  a  reference  to  the  number  of  stations  for  which  paymasters  are  necessary:  and  were 
we  to  go  into  an  examination  of  that  question,  we  should  soon  be  convinced  that  the  principle 
now  in  practice,  whether  just  or  otherwise,  seems  not  to  have  been  the  governing  one,  of  pro- 
portion, either  on  the  score  of  the  number  of  individuals  employed,  the  number  of  regiments  to 
be  paid,  the  salaries  to  paymasters  and  clerks,  or  the  quantity  or  responsibility  apportioned 
with  an  equal  hand. 

Mess. 

The  mess  allowance  only  requires  one  remark:  that  in  Bengal  it  is  rupees  120  always,  and  at 
Bombay  90;  but  it  is  at  Madras  126  in  the  field,  and  63  in  garrison.  This  notice  of  it,  I 
presume,  is  quite  sufficient. 

Boat  Allmcajjce. 

This  allowance  I  shall  advert  to  again  in  another  place,  and  must  at  present  confine  myself 
to  that  part  of  it  that  relates  to  the  officers  alone. 

In  Bengal,  officers  proceeding  to  their  regiments,  or  staff  officers  proceeding  on  duty,  draw 
a  monthly  allowance  according  to  their  rank,  which  at  the  recommendation  of  the  civil  Finance 
Committee,  by  the  late  Bengal  orders,  has  been  reduced  ;  for  instance,  the  lieutenant-colonel 
from  630  to  rupees  per  month.     I  do  not  here  allude  to  the  circumstances  of  transports  or 

expedition,  which  are  conducted  pretty  nearly  in  the  same  manner  at  the  three  Presidencies. 
The  first  part  of  this  subject  (the  officers'  boat  allowance)  is  the  most  prominent  in  its  ope- 
ration in  Bengal,  and  appears  also  the  most  tardy  and  expensive  plan.  As  an  instance  applica- 
ble to  this  general  rule  : — for  the  journey  from  Calcutta  to  Agra,  a  lieutenant-colonel  was  paid 
rupees  3,780  in  addition  to  his  pay  and 'field  allowances  for  six  months;  and  was  during  that 
period  of  half  a  year  not  available  for  duty.  But  the  distance  through  a  cultivated  countrj-, 
and  a  fine  military  road  by  land  to  that  station,  is  958  miles,  which  by  the  regulations  at  12 
miles  per  diem,  with  the  halts  for  every  three  days'  march,  allows  him  to  accomplish  his  journey 
in  three  months  and  a  half,  while  it  brings  him  to  his  duty  and  station  two  months  and  a  half 
sooner  than  by  boat.  If  however  it  is  argued  in  mitigation,  that  the  boat  allowance  is  to  enable 
an  officer  in  Bengal  to  buy  his  marching  outfit,  and  to  defray  a  number  of  incidental  charges 
at  the  commencement  of  so  long  a  journey,  it  would  still  be  more  ceconomical  for  Government  to 
give  an  extra  marching  allowance  to  meet  this  object.  But  there  is  no  indulgence  of  this  kind 
known  at  the  other  Presidencies  :  a  passage  is  found  for  an  officer  in  a  boat :  or  the  Commissariat 
charge  for  a  passage,  and  the  batta  of  the  rank,  are  made  to  meet  and  suffice  for  the  expenses 
incurred  in  all  movements. 

Having  made  these  observations,  it  can  only  be  left  to  the  judgement  of  the  higher  authorities 
to  consider  these  local  inequalities  and  advantages  as  forcing  themselves  upon  our  view;  but  to 
persons,  the  sphere  of  whose  minds  is  not  confined  within  the  limits  of  a  single  Presidency,  but 
w  ho  look  abroad,  and  contemplate  in  a  wide  range  the  affairs  connected  with  the  existence  and 
general  welfare  of  the  whole  of  India,  these  objections  will  appear  of  a  minor  class,  and  will  not 
be  allowed  to  interfere  with  the  introduction  of  a  conformity  to  a  general  and  well  digested 
system,  which  ultimately  will  tend  as  much  to  the  contentment  of  individuals  as  it  would 
promote  the  interests  of  the  State. 

Regimental  Contracts. 

On  the  subject  of  the  regimental  contract  allowances,  I  had  proposed  to  myself  at  one  time 
not  onl  v  to  enumerate  almost  all  of  them,  but  so  to  class  them  as  to  exhibit  all  iheir  differences ; 
but  those  differences  are  so  minute  and  various  that  hardly  any  advantage  would  be  derivable 
from  the  detail,  and  could  only  prove  of  use  when  a  general  assimilation  and  uniformity  was 
to  be  established.  To  show,  however,  that  I  do  not  proceed  entirely  on  general  maxims 
without  sufficient  regard  to  deUils,  for  illustration  I  shall  note  some  of  the  most  striking  topics, 
omitting  those  of  minor  interest. 


G5 

The  allowances  for  a  company,  the  stationery,  and  repairs  of  arms,  &c.,  are  all  so  blended 
together,  that  they  must  be  exaniineil  in  that  collected  state;  their  amounts  vary,  and  furnish 
us  with  the  following  result: — As  a  specimen,  suppose  that  the  Madras  and  Bombay  armies 
were  each  of  e(|ual  strength  with  that  of  Bengal  (I  lis  Majesty's  troo|)s  not  being  included  in 
the  calculation),  tlicie  would  be  an  excess  drawn  in  Bengal  of  rupees  171,Ht()  over  Madras, 
and  rupees  llGjOGl'  over  Bombay,  agreeably  to  the  regulated  allowance  for  a  company.  But  if 
the  numerical  strength  ecjualled  the  Madras  number,  Bengal  would  then  ilraw  an  excess  of 
rupees  122,880  over  Madras,  and  rupees  104,4"1'8  over  Bombay:  and  if  the  number  was  taken 
at  the  strength  of  the  Bombay  army,  Bengal  would  still  draw  an  excess  beyonil  that  army,  of 
rupees  57,261',  and  of  rupees  66,810  over  Madras.  Or,  in  other  words,  the  Bengal  army  con- 
sisting of  about  716  troops  and  companies,  draws  rupees  ISgjg+l  more  than  the  Madras  and 
Bombay  armies  together,  consisting  of  about  778  troops  and  companies.  I  note  this  merely  as 
an  observation  connected  with  the  general  financial  question  at  large,  to  exhibit  differences,  but 
with  no  view  to  cause  a  diminution  in  Bengal :  my  object  only  is  to  ])lace  the  whole  existing 
system,  with  all  its  defects  and  anomalies,  in  their  true  and  fair  light,  that  those  who  have  the 
authority  to  determine  should  not  be  deficient  on  the  score  of  the  requisite  information,  for  the 
decision  of  so  momentous  a  question  as  the  personal  income  of  the  several  individuals  compo- 
sing an  army  of  two  hundred  thousand  men. 

In  His  Majesty's  regiments  of  dragoons  and  infantry  there  is  also  a  different  system  obtain- 
inff  at  each  Presidency,  with  retrard  to  the  Kind's  contingent  and  non-effective  allowance. 

This  ought  to  be  entirely  discontinued,  as  inapplicable  to  this  country ;  and  the  same  allow- 
ance should  be  granted  to  officers  commanding  troops  and  companies  in  His  Majesty's  service, 
for  stationery  and  command,  as  is  granted  to  those  of  the  Company. 

In  Bengal  alone  there  is  a  contract  allowance  for  the  repairs  of  gun-carriages,  and  wheels, 
and  petty  stores  to  the  artillery. 

At  Madras  there  are  artificers  for  these  purposes,  both  in  the  ordnance  stoi'es  and  in  the 
regiments. 

In  Bombaj'  there  are  artificers,  and  an  allowance  per  troop  for  the  horse  artillery,  for  grease, 
tar,  iron,  &c. 

I  am  much  averse,  on  general  ]5rinciples,  to  all  regimental  contracts  for  the  supply  or 
repair  of  arms  and  stores  in  particular,  for  reasons  hardly  necessary  to  mention ;  and  whatever 
objection  may  be  made  to  this  opinion,  facts  furnished  by  experience  prove  the  justice  of  this 
reasoning.  Few  can  have  a  higher  opinion  of  the  military  character  than  I  have;  and  the  more 
I  indulge  in  an  estimate  of  their  qualities  as  gentlemen,  the  more  I  am  satisfied  they  make  bad 
contractors  :  but  if  their  incomes  are  to  be  added  to  by  the  means  of  contracts  *,  I  should  feel 
happy  to  see  a  fair  and  legitimate  one  opened  to  the  commanding  officers  of  regiments,  that 
woukl  afford  remuneration  to  them,  be  an  object  for  the  younger  officers  to  look  up  to,  and  prove 
a  good  and  effectual  source  of  supply  to  the  Government. 

Instructed  artificers  in  regimental  establishments  attached  to  corps  is  probably  the  best, 
though  most  expensive  mode ;  but  a  modified  j)lan  is  equally  attainable  of  one  superior  master 
of  each  class  on  good  pay,  and  others  to  be  hired  when  requisite  at  Bazar  rates,  which  vvoulil 
have  also  the  effect  of  encouraging  artificers  to  remain  in  our  Bazars,  and  the  periodical  delivery 
of  all  petty  articles  of  supply  from  the  magazines  on  indent. 

The  establishments  or  allowances  for  writers  and  stationery,  office  allowance,  moonchee 
allowance,  candles,  sirkar,  writers,  office,  tentage,  carriage  for  regimental  books  in  the  field, 
family  certificates,  repairs  of  tents  in  the  field  and  in  garrison,  are  all  instances  of  dissimi- 
larity, and  so  unequally  applied  to  the  departments  that  a  new  uniform  scale  seems  the 
only  remedy. 

The  differences  relative  to  the  saddle  contract,  their  repairs,  &c.,  beingof  higher  im]iortance, 
I  have  reserved  for  the  discussion  of  the  cavalry  branch,  as  appertaining  peculiarly  to  that 
arm  of  the  service,  and  therefore  could  not  with  propriety  be  introduced  in  this  miscellaneous 
enumeration. 

Nor  has  it  appeared  necessary  to  me  to  quote  the  opinions  either  of  the  Honourable  Court 
or  of  the  Governors  and  Commanders-in-chief  in  India,  by  way  of  sujiport  to  my  own  mode  of 
thinking,  which  will,  if  I  introduce  them  at  any  time,  appear  I  trust  in  a  moreapprojjriate  place 
to  maintain  arguments  and  sentiments,  touching  matters  of  deeper  interest  both  to  the  State  and 
private  individuals,  than  when  discussing  minor  points  of  this  nature.  I  shall  therefore  offer  no 
excuse  for  so  short  and  concise  a  notice  of  a  subject  that  every  military  man  knows  could  be 
easily  dilated  into  great  detail. 

Mode  of  Keeping  Accounts. 

It  appears  that  the  mode  of  keeping  accounts  under  the  thi-ee  establishments  varies,  and  that 
nothing  but  a  close  inspection  of  the  several  heads  of  expenditure  could  induce  me  to  pronounce 

•  Mil.  Fin.  Com.;  and  SirT.  .Monro,  &c. 

K 


66 

tliat  the  existing  systems  require  modification,  from  tiie  difficulty  in  some  cases  that  attended 
any  attempt  to  ascertain  the  real  charges  appertaining  to  any  particular  department. 

The  plan  of  charging  part  of  the  military  expenditure  to  the  civil  department  by  thirds  and 
fourths  is  peculiar  to  Bengal,  and  seems  an  objectionable  way  of  keeping  accounts,  as  it  renders 
tlie  tracing  of  the  real  outlay  of  money  verj'  intricate.  This  is  proved  from  the  manner  in 
which  the  department  of  public  work  is  conducted  in  Bengal,  and  the  mode  at  Madras  in  which 
the  salaries  of  some  of  the  heads  and  subordinates  of  the  great  department  are  proportioned : 
at  this  last  place  the  pay  and  allowance  of  the  Adjutant-generals,  &c.  are  ciiarged  to  the 
regiment  he  may  belong  to,  and  his  salary  to  the  staff' line.  In  Bengal,  he  draws  a  consolidated 
staff'  salary,  and  his  subsistence  only  with  his  regiment.  The  complication  occasioned  in  the 
military  and  civil  books,  under  the  heads  of  credits  and  debits,  by  these  and  other  charges,  which 
ought  to  be  debited  in  a  verj'  simple  way  to  each  line,  by  preferring  separate  bills,  and  for 
supplies  made  for  work  done  to  each  branch,  civil  or  military,  as  the  case  might  be.  The  latter 
part  of  the  preceding  remark  alludes  principally  to  the  almost  unintelligible  and  certainly 
inconvenient  mode  of  mixing  the  charges  for  the  transport  of  troops,  stores,  ferries,  passage- 
money  from  port  to  port,  shipping  and  freight  by  the  marine,  all  together.  All  this  will  be 
duly  noticed  subsequently  in  its  proper  place,  with  such  explanations  as,  I  trust,  will  prove 
that  the  working  of  systems  elsewhere  possess  a  greater  degree  of  utility,  which  is  the  conse- 
quence of  the  clearness  and  regularity  of  the  practical  rules,  being  more  applicable  to  those  lines 
of  business. 

In  discussing  the  subject  of  keeping  accounts,  the  Pay  department  naturally  presents  itself 
for  consideration,  as  forming  a  main  part  of  the  subject ;  the  remarks,  however,  relative  to  it  will 
not  be  numerous,  but  closely  confined  to  the  mode  of  procedure,  and  cannot  comprehend  any 
observations  on  the  scoreof  the  expense  of  establishments,  as  this  latter  question  is  noticed  in  its 
proper  place.  To  allude  generally  to  this  part  of  the  subject,  I  must  state  that  the  Supreme 
Government  have,  I  believe,  become  sensible,  on  comparison,  that  the  number  of  Paymasters  at 
Madras  exceeded,  and  also  that  the  aggregate  annual  amount  of  establishments  equals,  Bengal, 
and  is  three  times  that  of  Bombay,  notwithstanding  the  territories  of  that  establishment  are  more 
compact  than  those  of  either  of  the  other  Presidencies. 

At  Madras  there  is  a  separate  Paymaster  for  king's  troops;  in  Bengal  and  Bombay  this  duty 
is  done  by  the  same  person,  and  at  the  latter  Presidency  he  is  Paymaster  of  all  departments  and 
extraordinaries,  besides  the  Presidency  division  of  the  army.  It  appears  that  the  Paymaster  of 
Fort  M'illiam  has  a  greater  range  of  payment  to  make  than  at  the  other  Presidencies ;  but 
then  his  duties  upon  the  whole  do  not  exceed  those  at  Bombay,  because  the  abstracts  are  sent 
to  the  Audit  Office  in  the  first  instance  for  examination,  and  payment  is  made  only  when  audited; 
so  that  there  is  neither  responsibility  nor  trouble  attached,  and  consequently  his  office  duties 
consist  of  transcribing  the  disbursements  authorized  by  the  Auditor-general.  This  practice,  I 
apprehend,  may  tend  to  make  the  local  Paymaster  less  careful ;  while  he  at  Bombay  examines 
all  regular  abstracts  or  charges  of  a  fixed  nature,  and  endorses  and  transmits  all  the  Commissa- 
riat and  Engineer  bills  which  pass  through  his  hands  to  the  military  Auditor-generals:  he  is 
also  responsible  for  all  errors  in  calculation  and  deviation  from  the  regulations  in  the  pay  of  the 
troops,  who  in'  these  means,  having  responsible  persons  in  the  Pay  Office,  receive  their  pay  every 
month  at  an  earlier  period  at  Bombay.  But  in  Bengal,  in  consequence  of  having  the  accounts 
first  audited  and  afterwards  paid,  they  are  always  one  month  and  a  half  in  arrears: — hence 
arises  the  fact,  that  the  Bengal  and  Madras  Paymasters  receive  more  pay  and  appear  to  do  less 
duty  than  the  Bombay  ones  ;  the  first  have  less  responsibility,  and  the  other  a  smaller  amount 
of  payment. 

The  Bombay  system  seems  to  me  the  most  comprehensive  and  occonomical,  as  also  e()ually 
efficient;  and  there  can  be  no  objection  to  the  introduction  both  of  its  principle  and  mode  all 
over  India.  It  is  after  all  a  mere  arrangement  of  the  routine  of  office  duly,  and  its  adoption 
would  produce  the  best  effects,  particularly  on  tlie  score  of  uniformity. 

If  the  officers  of  the  subordinates  in  Bengal  were  on  the  principle  of  the  Presidency  one,  as 
to  a  sufficiently  wide  range  of  business,  with  the  adojition  of  the  regimental  Paymaster  in  the 
person  of  the  Quartermaster,  with  the  single  abstract  ior  the  whole  regiment;  instead  of  eight  as 
at  present,  the  business  would  be  conducted  with  greater  facility  and  efficiency,  and  considera- 
ble saving  to  Government;  indeed  with  this  simple  mode,  and  a  little  local  arrangement,  it 
would  not  be  difficult  to  ])lace  this  important  department  u])on  the  best  foundation.  The 
remark  relative  to  the  arrangement  for  having  central  ]iositions  for  the  ordnance  depots  is 
equally  applicable  to  this  office  when  the  stations  of  this  department  are  arranged. 

As  a  matter  connected  with  the  general  question  of  kee]iing  accounts,  it  is  I  conceive  not 
irrelevant  to  introduce  any  opinions  or  modes  of  calculation  intended  to  exhibit  financial  results. 
I  shall  therefore  ap|)end  the  following  remarks,  as  throwing  more  light  upon  a  topic  of  this  nature 
by  comparison  than  could  be  done  by  a  long  dissertation,  and  is  only  projiosed  as  an  example 
ot  different  ways  of  estimating  the  public  expenditure.  The  minute  itself  is  by  a  Madras  officer 
of  rank,  intended  to  describe  both  the  system  prevalent  at  that  Presidency,  and  the  improve- 


ments  that  had  been  elTected  witliin  the  last  seventeen  years  ;  placing  the  ocronomical  part  of  it 
in  a  very  prominent  point  ot  view.  My  remarks  will  attend  as  they  may  be  culiud  tor.  "  It 
appears  that  until  the  formation  of  the  Conimissariat  in  1810,  the  whole  of  the  barrack  depart- 
ment, including  the  charge  of  military  buildings,  and  the  supply  of  barrack  iu-ticles  for  the  use 
of  the  troops,  was  in  the  hands  ot  ollicers  iioiding  the  ajipointmcnts  of  barrack-masters,  one  of 
wiu)m  was  altacheil  to  each  division.  These  appointmonls  were  then  abolished,  with  the  exception 
of  two,  one  at  the  Presidency  and  another  at  Bangalore,  who  also  contiimed  to  have  charge  of 
the  military  buildings,  though  this  charge  at  all  other  stations  was  vested  in  the  department  of  the 
Quartermaster-general  ;  while  the  miiun-  supplies  of  oil,  barrack  articles,  cots,  &c.,  devolved  on 
the  Commissariat.  The  former  barrack-masters'  salaries  being  small,  thev  were  remunerated  in 
some  situations  by  liberal  fixed  rates  for  supplies,  and  they  also  lield  a  contract  for  the  maintenance 
of  barrack  cots,  which  ceased  at  the  same  ])eriod.  The  Commissary-general,  under  date  the 
fith  February  ISI 1,  received  from  Government  a  discretionary  ])ower;  while  new  re<Tulationswere 
being  prepared  to  make  such  deviations  from  the  existing  regulations,  in  regard  to  the  I'ates  and 
number  of  barrack  servants,  'as  in  his  judgement  might  be  most  conducive  to  the  public 
interests.' 

"  The  general  result  of  these  arrangements  was  a  great  and  immediate  saving  to  Government. 
Thecostof  the  article  of  oil  alone,  which  in  November  1810  was  rupees  9,105  2  5,  was  reduced 
during  the  next  month  to  rupees  2,696  6  1,  giving  at  once  a  saving  of  rujiees  6,408  12  4,  being 
at  the  rate  of  rupees  76,905  4  per  annum.  The  rates  of  every  other  article  of  barrack  supply 
were  also  materially  reduced  in  price  during  the  first  month,  and  afterwards  were  still  further 
decreased  as  the  new  system  became  regularly  established. 

"  The  expense  of  the  barrack  supplies  to  His  Majesty's  troops  on  this  establishment  for  many 
months  prior  to  the  formation  of  the  Commissariat  was  equal  to  pice  6  22  cents  aman  per  diein. 
The  expense  from  1st  December  1810  to  .'50th  April  1811  by  the  Commissariat  amounted  only 
to  pice  2  93  a  man  per  diem." 

I  shall  now  remark  on  the  preceding,  that  I  am  at  a  loss  to  imagine,  and  leave  the  accuracy 
of  the  idea  to  those  conversant  with  matters  of  this  kind,  how  a.  per  diem  calculation  per  man 
can  be  formed  for  one  year,  on  data  that  can  only  be  depended  on  when  furnishetl  by  an 
aggregate  or  a  series  of  years  ;  for  it  is  only  necessary  to  meet  this  hypothesis  and  its  sweeping 
and  condensed  conclusion  by  one  observation, — that  barrack  furniture  is  calculated  to  last  for 
years.  How  then  is  \.\\^  first  year  to  be  made  the  average  of  anything  beyond  itself?  The  memo- 
randum then  continues : 

"The  total  number  of  barrack  cots  belonging  to  the  public  on  the  1st  December  1810 
were  20,542,  and  the  charge  for  keeping  them  in  repair  and  good  condition  under  the  former 
system  would  have  amounted  in  twelve  months  to  rupees  57,517  annas  9  and  pice  Ty^jf ;  while 
tlie  actual  expense  incurred  during  the  same  period  in  the  Commissariat  was  only  rupees  3,761 
annas  15  pice  lyxyn?  ^^'^^^  ^^^^  effected  during  the  year,  in  the  item  of  barrack  cots  alone,  a 
saving  of  rupees  5,'J,755  annas  10  and  pice  5-^^q." 

Here  then  we  have  the  solution  of  the  preceding  accounts ;  for  the  very  commencement  ot 
this  paragraph  speaks  volumes  as  to  the  grounds  of  the  above  alhided-to  calculation.  Tor  ad- 
mitting that  the  whole  of  the  European  troops  on  the  Madras  establishment  were  on  the  full 
waj-  complement,  in  point  of  numbers  they  could  not  have  exceeded  10,000;  it  will  therefore 
be  seen  by  the  first  part  of  this  paragraph,  that  there  were  at  least  t\s}0  cots  per  man  in  store, 
without  adverting  to  the  European  regiments  at  field  stations  and  in  the  field,  where  barrack 
furniture  is  7iot  allowed.  How  then  can  a  per  diem  allowance  of  expenditure  per  man  (when 
more  than  double  the  quantity  is  on  hand)  be  entered  into  on  sound  data  for  a  comparative 
statement  on  ceconomical  principles?  for  it  is  not  only  a  contradiction  in  terms,  but  in  ideas,  and 
even  of  the  regulations.  Supposing,  for  argument's  sake,  that  the  Government  at  all  times  kept 
up  one  cot  for  each  man;  but  on  the  Madras  returns  there  are  no  less  than  20,542  in  December 
1810,  that  is  to  say,  two  cots  per  man  with  542  surplies,  and  for  their  viaintenaiicc  it  cost 
upwards  of  rupees  57,517,  which  sum  in  the  current  year  was  reduced  to  rupees  3,761,  and  for 
which  credit  is  assumed  as  a  saving,  which  is  quite  correct  for  that  year. 

The  fact,  I  presume,  however,  is,  tliat  this  inaintenance  means  original  price  on  a  series  of 
years,  as  well  as  annual  repairs;  for  it  is  almost  absurd  to  think  that  every  cot  should  cost  up- 
wards of  rupees  2  12  repairing  one  year,  and  never  afterwards  cost  barely  three  annas,  or  about 
a  fifteenth  part :  and  the  Ibundation  of  this  great  saving  may,  1  think,  also  be  fairly  referred  to 
the  abolition  of  the  regulation  contract  allowance  for  the  maintenance  of  each  col,  touched  on  in 
the  first  paragraph,  which  was  discontinued,  and  subsetjuently  the  rei|uisite  repairs  by  the  Com- 
missariat were  only  allowed.  This  liberal  allowance  previously  mentioned  to  be  intended  to 
compensate  for  smallness  of  salary,  made  it  the  interest  upon  the  above  avowed  privilege  of  the 
person  in  charge  of  the  furniture  to  increase  and  accumulate  the  number  as  nnich  as  possible, 
leaving  the  Military  Board  to  judge  of  the  question  from  the  monthly  returns. 

The  question  of  oil  is  a  very  different  one;  that  article  is  daily  received  and  daily  consumed. 
The  expenilitme  therefore  can  be  jiroportioned  to  each  man  accortling  to  the  quantity  of  oil 
issued,  and  the  number  of  men  for  whom  it  is  received. — The  memorandum  then  proceeds: 

K2 


68 

"  It  seems  unnecessary  to  enter  into  further  particulars.  Suffice  it  to  sa}-,  that  the  saving  in 
this  branch  during  the  hrst  year  was  rupees  2,26,4-02  15  3.  Tlie  system  as  then  established  by 
the  Commissariat  is  still  in  force,  but  various  savhigs  have  been  gradually  effected  since  the  first 
year;  and  in  contrasting  tiie  present  system  with  that  maintained  previous  to  the  month  of  De- 
cember 1810,  those  savings  up  to  the  30th  April  1827  have  amountedto  rupees  4,166  6  76. 

"The  actual  amount  of  saving  since  the  30th  of  April  1827  lias  not  been  exactly  ascertained : 
it  has  probably  fallen  rather  short  of  the  two  preceding  j'ears,  on  account  of  tiie  number  of 
new  cots  of  a  new  muster,  which  have  been  made  up  in  obedience  to  tiie  orders  of  Govern- 
ment. Tiiese  cots  are  scarcely  more  expensive  than  the  one  formerly  in  use;  while  they  afford 
much  additional  comfort  to  the  troops,  by  answering  as  messing  furniture.  The  average  saving 
for  the  last  two  years  may  perhaps  therefore  be  assumed  at  two  lacs  and  a  half  per  annum,  which 
will  increase  the  entire  amount  of  saving  in  the  barrack  department  up  to  the  30th  of  April 
1829,  to  46  i  lacs  of  rupees." 

The  summary  of  the  argument  is  made  by  a  statement,  that  from  December  1810  to  April 
1827  (nearly  seventeen  years),  the  monstrous  sum  of  forty-six  lacs  and  a  half  has  been  actually 
saved,  and  is,  I  believe,  thus  proved  to  be  so.  The  saving  effected  the  first  year  (1810-11)  by  the 
establishment  of  new  and  beneficial  regulations  is  taken  and  carried  on,  by  which  the  actual 
expenditure  of  one  year  is  in  the  first  place  substituted  for  the  lavish  outlay  of  the  old  contract 
allowance,  which  it  is  said  was  intended  not  only  to  cover  all  public  expenses,  but  also  to  pay 
and  remunerate  the  officer  in  charge.  This  mixing  of  personal  salary  with  the  allowances  for 
establishments  I  have  complained  of  so  frequently,  that  to  comment  on  it  here  would  appear 
superfluous;  but  the  calculation  does  not  terminate  with  the  saving  of  the  first  year,  but  influ- 
ence gives  it  a  prospective  and  certainly  an  ideal  existence,  b}'  multiplying  it  by  the  sum  of  the 
succeeding  sixteen  years,  as  if  in  each  of  those  years  tlie  same  sum  had  been  actually  oecono- 
mized  to  the  public  purse  as  was  saved  in  the  first  year. 

I  therefore  trust  that  this  explanation  will  sufficiently  exhibit  both  the  style  of  the  argument 
and  elucidate  the  data  on  which  are  founded  such  immense  results.  It  ma}'  also  occur,  probabh', 
to  many  others  to  ask  a  question  not  inapplicable  on  viewing  sucii  deductions.  What  the  actual 
sum  total  of  the  cost  of  the  whole  of  the  barrack  furniture  and  supplies  for  one  year  is  at  JNIadras, 
if  it  amount  to  two  lacs  and  a  half;  for  the  expense  of  the  oil  does  not  exceed  rupees  3,300  per 
ajimim,  and  the  repairs  of  the  furniture  rupees  3,800,  giving  an  actual  outlay  of  rupees  36,800, 
upon  which  no  saving  can  be  effected :  and  therefore  what  proportion  of  the  barrack  furniture 
must  be  worn  out  and  expended,  to  admit  of  a  substitution  of  an  annual  quantity,  on  which  a 
per  centage  of  two  lacs  and  a  half  can  be  saved  by  deduction  of  price  or  number  every  succeed- 
ing year  for  seventeen  years  ;  because  if  that  sum  be  annually  saved,  it  must  be  oeconomized  from 
one  very  far  exceeding  itself.     And  again,  What  must  have  been  the  original  outlay. 

In  analysing  the  calculations  or  statements  of  any  person,  it  would  be  unfair,  both  on  the 
score  of  feeling  and  regular  mode  of  conducting  business,  not  to  make  every  allowance,  not 
only  for  the  obvious  meaning  tiieir  arguments  can  bear,  but  also  to  extend  that  admission  to 
what  may  be  supposed  to  be  their  intention  on  the  grounds  of  this  sentiment,  which  cannot  for 
me  be  too  tenaciously  held  in  mind,  injustice  to  the  variety  of  the  task  I  have  to  perform,  and 
the  unavoidable  different  views  of  others  that  must  be  expected  to  be  encountered  in  the  course 
of  examination,  not  only  of  the  details  of  offices,  but  of  the  opinions  of  numerous  individuals  of 
rank  and  talent.  I  must  still  come,  I  am  inclined  to  think,  with  strict  propriety  to  the  conclusion 
relative  to  the  tenour  of  the  foregoinfj  statement,  that  thouijh  foundeil  on  original  fact,  still  that 
the  results  deduced  from  tiiem  are  extended  to  meet  conclusions,  that  a  sense  of  more  moderate 
zeal  and  mode  of  judging  would  circumscribe  within  narrower  limits.  I  ought  probably  to  say 
much  more  in  this  expiatory  strain,  for  I  am  led  to  imagine  I  am  combating  the  opinions  and 
arguments  of  one  of  the  best  informed  officers  on  the  Madras  establishment ;  but  I  feel  assured, 
that  nothing  has  escaped  me  that  could  give  rise  to  the  imputation,  that  I  have  done  more 
than  fairly  examine  a  statement,  the  tendency  of  whicii  points  to  the  good  of  the  public  service, 
•with  the  best  feelings  towards  tiie  individuals  who  drew  it  up. 

Another  and  very  serious  division  of  this  general  subject  next  attracts  our  attention. 

The  dispersion  of  charges  at  all  times  into  a  variety  of  channels,  wiien  belonging  to  the  same 
department  or  line,  instead  of  being  brought  together  under  one  head,  defeats  one  of  the  first 
principles  of  ceconomy  and  regularity;  for  it  is  quite  impossible  to  ascertain  if  charges  are 
correct  or  can  be  diminisiied  when  divided  between  the  civil  collectors,  for  instance,  and 
Commissariat,  except  from  an  intimate  knowledge  of  both  those  departments.  From  a  regular 
mode  of  conducting  business,  a  conviction  arises  that  if  the  dispersed  items  were  brought 
together  and  charged  for  in  one  department,  under  proper  regulation  anil  control,  they 
would  be  much  less;  as  a  due  check  would  then  be  had  if  the  outlay,  for  example,  were  on  the 
score  of  freight  for  stores  and  passages  for  officers  and  troops.  In  these  latter  cases  the  marine 
department  should  be  furnisiied  by  the  Quartermaster-general's  department,  with  an  indent  for 
the  (]uantity  and  species  of  tonnage  reijuired,  and  the  description  .■mil  number  of  persons  to  be 
accommodated  ;  njion  which  the  marine  deiiartmcnts  should  examine  and  determine  both  the 
kind  of  vessels  most  eligible,  and   the  price  of  the  freight  by  contract  or  bargain.     These 


69 

charges  should  be  defrnycd  by  a  bill  from  tlie  marine  at  the  military  Pay  OfTicc;  but  as  to  tlic  usual 
passages  tor  ollicors  aiul  troo[is  by  boats,  liic  (JuarlermaslL'r-gi;iicral  sliouid  liiriiisli  tiie  Com- 
missariat with  au  indent,  wlio  should  supply  them  by  means  of  a  contractor  in  that  line,  and 
defray  the  expense,  which  would  be  both  more  occonomical  and  regular  than  the  ])resent  Ikngal 
plan  of  currents  on  tide  calculation  u|i  and  down  the  river. 

Under  the  head  of  Medical  Disbursements  in  Bengal,  there  are  charges  for  medicines  to  camp 
followers  and  magazine  establishments;  while  ila|)pe;us  diat  the  garrison  surgeons  draw  similar 
allowances  in  several  instances  tor  the  same  at  some  of  the  principal  forts  on  that  establishment. 

The  Commissariat  accounts  show  charges  for  supplies  to  the  hospitals  of  all  troops,  both 
King's  and  Company's ;  while  the  dispensary  charges  also  for  medicines  to  them,  and  the 
medical  disbursements  also  exhibit  charges.  Tiiis  is  at  least  productive  of  inconvenience 
if  not  confusion;  as  on  occasions  of  reference  the  Commissariat,  dispensary,  and  medical 
disbursements  must  be  travelled  through  to  ascertain  any  particular  expense;  and  after  all, 
the  truth  is  not  found  without  examining  some  surgeon's  personal  abstract  for  his  established 
allowances. 

The  examination  of  the  head  called  Ordnance  Losses,  which  includes  the  expenditure  of  stores 
of  all  descriptions,  with  the  artillery  corps,  exhibits  in  Bengal  a  large  sum,  written  off  the  books, 
which  will  prove  some  ex]ilanation  of  the  mode  of  kee])ing  accounts.  The  loss  quoted  might 
be  with  no  great  breach  of  propriety  called  ten  lacs,  as  seven  for  the  whole  is  estimaleil ;  as  there 
is  no  distinction  drawn  between  the  actual  outlay  of  cash  and  the  estimated  value  of  the  stores 
received  from  Eurojie  :  and  when  there  is  any  debit,  which  must  of  course  be  annually  the  case, 
it  is  written  off  to  the  debit  of  the  military  department ;  consequently  the  real  charges  are  not 
known,  even  to  the  accountants  themselves,  as  the  labour  and  expense  may  be  considered  incal- 
culable, from  their  minuteness  and  dispersion  amongst  so  great  a  variety  of  heads.  We  could 
instance  one  branch  (the  Military  Board  in  Bengal)  which  debits  and  credits  itself  for  sup- 
plies many  times  in  their  own  account.  This  of  course  makes  it  difficult  to  ascertain  whence  the 
articles  originally  came,  and  where  they  are  finally  expended. 

Further  instances  might  be  adduced  of  this  mode  of  keeping  accounts,  but  detailed  references 
can  answer  no  good  end  till  a  general  arrangement  is  determined  upon.  Nor  do  I  intend  to  make 
observations  of  this  nature  as  attaching  solely  to  one  Presidency,  but  conceive  that  all  the 
systems  might  be  improved  ;  for  Madras  is  not  exempt  from  the  imputation  of  blending  anil 
mixing  the  items  of  their  accounts  together,  as  they  include  the  hire  of  carriage,  bullocks,  the 
pay  of  Bamboo  Coolies,  Tent  Lascars,  and  hutting  money,  in  one  aggregate  sum  ;  so  that  per- 
spicuity is  set  at  defiance. 

The  practice  also  in  Madras  of  charging  for  clerks  under  different  heads  in  one  and  the  same 
office,  when  they  have  a  specified  sum  office  establishment  for  the  Commissariat,  is  observable 
in  the  pi'ovision,  cavalry,  and  cattle  departments,  &c.,  anil  is  no  doubt  objectionable.  Stationery 
is  also  drawn  from  the  public  stores,  and  other  allowances  are  ])ermitteil  under  dilferent  heads 
to  departments  which,  when  specific  sums  are  required,  render  the  tracing  of  the  several  items 
com])osing  the  amount  expended  for  office  establishments  and  stationery  almost  unattainable. 

These  are  not  the  only  objections  to  this  system  in  Bengal,  which,  besides  the  subdivision  of 
the  expenditure,  places  the  check  and  control,  if  any  exist,  over  these  enormous  sums,  in  the 
hands  of  irresponsible  persons.  If  it  is  said  I  give  a  dark  shade  to  the  subject,  reference  could 
be  had  to  the  accounts  of  the  Burmese  war,  and  other  sums  not  subject  to  the  examination  of 
the  Auditor-general's  office,  but  are  accounted  for  by  the  secretaries  to  the  Military  Boaril 
agreeably  to  the  rules  of  that  Board,  and  reported  accordingly. 

Under  these  circumstances,  I  should  imagine  an  unitbrmity  of  system  on  general  principles 
absolutely  necessary,  leaving  the  details  of  jcourse  to  the  discretion  of  the  heads  of  departments ; 
and  then  I  conceive  the  subject  would  resolve  itself  into  the  following  propositions: — 

All  officers  of  supply  intrusted  with  the  disbursements  of  money  should  render  their  actual 
accounts  monthly,  supported  with  vouchers  as  specified  by  regulation;  and  the  charges  incurred 
should  not  be  passeil  to  the  credit  of  any  officer  until  inspected  by  the  regular  ofiice  of  audit. 
That  neither  the  Government  nor  Military  Board  be  auditor  to  pass  the  accounts  of  any  branch 
of  the  service  which  they  order,  except  in  such  cases  as  appeals  to  Government  for  sanction  for 
outlay  of  cash,  in  emergencies  not  provided  for  by  the  regulations. 

2nd.  All  charges  relating  to  any  particular  department  to  appear  in  its  own  accounts,  and 
not  to  be  dissipated  under  numerous  heads.  By  this  rule  the  real  expenses  will  a))pcar  in  their 
proper  places.  All  wastages,  loss  of  stores,  provisions,  liquor  and  deail  stock,  slioidd  be  written 
off  in  kind,  to  show  the  number  and  distinct  quantities,  to  enable  an  exact  calculation  to  be  the 
result,  as  the  averages  arising  from  these  heads,  and  might  subsequently  be  stated  in  the  general 
books  in  money.  This  will  exhibit  the  point  in  two  lights,  and  enable  the  home  authorities  to 
come  to  correct  conclusions. 

3rd.  All  calcidations  on  money  or  stores  should  be  actually  for  the  sums  and  quantities  pur- 
chased, received,  lost,  &c.,  and  nothing  should  be  taken  in  the  settlement  of  accounts  on  suppo- 
sition, nor  should  accounts  be  made  up  by  estimation,  nor  passed  to  the  ci'edit  of  any  officer  ihv 
the  money  or  stores  under  his  charge,  without  being  authenticated  as  above  proposed  ;  while  all 


70 

accounts  of  money  and  stores  should  never  be  permitted  to  fall  into  arrears  under  any  pretence 
whatever. 

The  evil  of  this  laxity  is  felt  so  seriously  by  all  Government,  that  its  being  mentioned  even, 
is  I  conceive  a  sufficient  comment  of  itselt. 

Office  EstabUshme72t. 

The  first  view  of  this  heading  will  probably  suggest  the  idea  that  in  point  of  charge  the  sums 
ought  to  be  in  proportion  to  the  size  of  the  Presidency  and  extent  of  business  of  each  office 
and  department.  This  argument,  reasonable  as  it  may  appear,  is  not  on  a  comparative  view- 
always  borne  out  in  the  conclusion ;  for  instance,  the  two  Quartermaster-generals'  offices  at 
Madras  and  Bombay  should  bear  the  proportion  of  three  to  two,  and  of  three  to  one  to  that  of 
Bengal,  though  they  both  conduct  so  many  more  branches  of  the  public  service  than  the  one 
in  Bengal ;  the  deduction  therefore  from  the  above  reasoning  proves  the  reverse  fact,  for  thev 
have  equally  as  much,  if  not  more  business,  and  Bengal  has  an  annual  contingent  charge  be- 
sides for  clerks,  of  rupees  1020. 

But  the  duties  of  the  departments  in  Bengal,  generally  speaking,  are  either  so  jumbled  in  one 
Board  or  assigned  to  other  offices,  which  at  IVIadras  and  Bombay  are  assigned  to  their  appro- 
priate lines,  that  facts  only  can  be  stated,  without  any  prospect  of  being  able  to  exhibit  by  com- 
parison any  coincidence;  and  pointing  out  differences  would  be  easy  in  either  case,  if  the  same 
denomination  of  office  executed  the  same  kind  or  quantity  of  duty.  I  shall  however  attempt 
what  may  be  in  my  power,  making  such  references  as  occur  to  me  to  be  necessary  for  a  clear 
comprehension  of  a  topic,  that  cannot  but  be  a  serious  question,  from  its  involving  the  outlay 
of  such  immense  contingent  sums  ; — probably  a  few  details  would  prove  a  better  illustration  of 
the  meaning  than  general  description. 

The  ratio  of  wages  to  clerks  at  Madras  are,  generally  speaking,  lower  than  at  Bengal  and 
Bombay  ;  but  at  the  same  time,  in  many  instances,  they  have  a  greater  number  of  hands  in  their 
offices  for  the  same  duties,  when  compared  with  the  other  Presidencies.  In  Bengal  the  same 
scale  of  pay  for  clerks  obtains  in  the  military  as  in  the  civil  branch*;  but  the  rate  does  not 
exist  at  Madras  and  Bombay,  nor  are  the  people  themselves  classed  under  similar  denomina- 
tions, as  registers,  indexers,  examiners,  indorsers,  common  writers,  fair  copiers,  and  assistants 
to  heads  of  branches ;  while  at  Bombay  the  scale  in  the  military  department  seems  to  be  regu- 
lated upon  no  fixed  principles,  the  necessity  of  the  care  or  local  circumstances  determining  the 
persons  to  be  employed  :  so  that  except  the  audit f  and  pay  department!  at  head-quarters,  as 
well  as  the  cash-keeper  of  the  Commissariatl,  there  is  not  a  head  clerk  or  person  in  these  offices 
who  receives  above  ISO  a  month,  being  less  than  what  assistants  to  heads  of  branches  receive 
under  the  Bengal  system  §,  and  the  head  clerks  under  that  of  Madras  ||.  However,  taking  the 
expenditure  on  the  whole,  which  is  not  always  the  correctest  way,  the  Madras  expenditure  will 
appear  as  the  smallest;  though  a  further  inquiry  makes  this  fair  appearance  questionable,  from 
the  practice  of  charging  for  clerks  under  different  heads  in  one  and  the  same  office.  For  in- 
stance, there  is  of  course  an  office  establishment  for  the  several  divisions  of  the  Commissariat 
department,  and  their  charges  are  also  entered  for  clerks  in  the  provision,  cavalry,  and  cattle 
departments,  &c.  separately,  which  if  made  into  an  aggregate  would  be  large  :  this  is  not  the 
case  in  Bombay,  and  I  believe  only  partially  followed  in  Bengal. 

Having  made  these  remarks  regarding  the  mode  of  conducting  the  duty  at  each  Presidency, 
it  is  but  consistent  to  assign  to  each  its  relative  advantages,  and  to  observe  what  is  derived  from 
local  usages  at  Bengal  and  Madras  on  the  score  of  low  rate  of  wages,  at  least  such  as  are  down 
in  the  public  accounts,  which  I  ascribe  to  them  as  an  advantage  that  would  be  desirable  every- 
where ;  for  the  average  for  twelve  stations  in  Bengal  is  381  rupees  each  ;  at  Madras,  ten  stations 
at  350  each  ;  and  at  Bombay,  nine  at  394  each  :  this  arises  of  course  from  the  higher  rate  of 
pay,  and  not  from  the  numerical  strength  of  the  individuals  employed.  I  would  wish  however 
to  state  in  this  place,  with  the  view  to  make  every  allowance  for  the  statement,  that  this  com- 
parison should  not  be  admitted  as  strictly  conclusive,  as  comprehending  all  the  expenses  of 
establishments  in  all  lines  of  the  service;  for  in  Bengal  and  Madras  the  executive  engineer 
draws  not  only  a  separate  salary  for  civil  works,  but  an  additional  sum  for  establishments:  in 
Bombay  he  draws  neither  the  one  nor  the  other  for  this  latter  work,  but  conducts  both  duties 
without  anything  additional,  with  the  single  exception  of  the  one  at  the  Presidency.  The  great 
and  real  disproportion  however  appears  to  me  to  be  in  the  amount  of  the  salaries  ;  for  instance, 

25  officers  in  Bengal  get  5,728  rupees ;  monthly  average 224    each, 

10     ditto    in  Madras  get  6,020 602    ditto. 

9     ditto    in  Bombay  get  2,958 262  i  ditto. 

This  difference  is  striking  enough  I  conceive  to  call  for  the  details  into  which  I  have  entered. 
•  FromSOO  to  15;)crnicwcm.     f  400  to  300  annas.         J  300  rupees.  $  200  rupees.  ||  170  rupees. 


71 

The  nature,  extent,  and  science  connected  with  tlicse  officers'  duties  are  of  course  independent 
of  tlie  argument,  and  belonf^  to  tiie  class  and  iirufcssion,  and  not  to  the  individuals,  and  there- 
fore cannot  be  urged  more  in  favour  of  one  place  and  person  than  another. 

The  subject  also  of  stationery  and  printing  forms  for  offices  is  u  curious  item  in  Bengal  and 
Madras,  and  amounts  to  considerable  sums,  notwithstanding  that  it  is  a  generally  received 
opinion  that  the  officers  have  an  allowance  adecjuate  to  that  purpose,  and  sometimes  an  allow- 
ance for  candles,  lights.  Sec.  as  at  Madras.  M'hatevcr  is  allowed  should  be  fixed,  otherwise  this 
contino'ency  will  have  no  limit.  If  forms  are  j)iinted  for  the  convenience  of  offices,  it  is  with 
the  intent  of  accelerating  business,  and  diminishing  the  number  of  clerks,  &c. 

The  following  will  show  both  the  efiect  and  extent  of  contingencies,  and  their  liability  to  be- 
come permanent  when  once  incurred,  attaching  to  most  of  the  offices  at  Calcutta: — 

Military  Auditor 6,528 

Military  Accountant G,300 

Adjutant-general 5,076 

Quartermaster-general 1,020 

A  very  casual  examination  of  the  annual  statements  of  the  military  Auditor-general  will  show 
how  the  amounts  of  the  salaries  and  establishments  vary  at  all  the  Presidencies  in  every  grade. 
I  believe  no  other  reason  can  be  assigned  for  this  than  w  hat  is  urged  in  many  other  cases, — local 
circumstances  :  for  the  personal  rank,  duties,  and  responsibility  are  not  so  widely  separated  as 
to  warrant  so  great  a  difference.  This  examination  might  lead  to  the  consideration  of  a  fair 
principle  for  a  new  and  more  beneficial  arrangement,  which  besides  its  fairness  as  to  propor- 
tional remuneration  would  be  conducive  of  osconomy  as  well  as  regularity,  which  can  only  be 
brought  into  practice  on  the  grounds  of  a  plan  more  generally  applicable,  which  by  its  arrange- 
ments would  separate  and  assign  the  several  duties  to  the  department  to  which  they  properly 
belong.  It  is  true  this  necessarily  involves  much  of  detail ;  but  it  demands  no  great  degree  of  either 
talent  or  knowledge  to  effect,  and  its  execution  can  be  only  determined  upon  when  a  final  adjust- 
ment of  a  general  plan  of  the  kind,  which  now  appears  inevitable,  is  resolved  upon,  and  die  dis- 
tribution of  the  responsibility  and  executive  part  of  some  of  the  branches  belonging  to  the  Quarter- 
master-General's department  arranged  (vvhicli  appertain  to  that  department  at  Madras  and 
Bombay),  but  are  conducted  by  the  Commissariat  and  the  Military  Board  and  other  departments 
in  Bengal. 

I  trust  that  these  matters  of  fact  will  suffice  and  render  any  further  detail  unnecessary ;  as  it 
neither  can  be  wished,  nor  intended,  I  should  more  than  point  out  what  seems  to  need  modifi- 
cation for  the  introduction  of  improvement.  Systems  and  not  individuals  can  alone  be  noticed 
in  such  a  Report  as  this,  in  which  the  contrasts  are  to  elicit  good,  and  the  establishments  ex- 
hibited in  their  real  shape  to  attain  a  proper  knowledge  of  this  important  topic. 

I  entreat  it  to  be  held  in  recollection,  while  perusing  these  discussions,  that  they  involve  only 
the  current  and  indeed  mechanical  part  of  the  duties  of  all  officers.  This  will  be  only  a  common 
act  of  justice  to  myself,  who  am  engaged  in  so  serious  and  deeply  responsible  a  duty ;  and  that 
throughout  the  reasonings  introduced,  and  arguments  used  here,  or  in  any  other  part  of  this 
Report,  the  comparative  statements  are  intended  to  be  quite  free  of  any  allusion  to  personal 
talent  or  responsibility ;  and  that  the  object  of  this  contrast  is,  as  it  ought  to  be,  solely  to 
show  the  relative  bearing  of  the  departments  of  each  Presidency  to  each  other,  and  fairly  to 
place  their  work  and  means  of  accomplishing  it  in  one  view,  as  to  the  power  they  possess  of  pro- 
ducing the  requisite  dispatch  of  business.  I  hope  therefore  it  is  obvious  how  much  this  object 
may  be  facilitated,  and  the  labour  of  detail  to  the  officers  themselves  diminished  in  the  case  ot 
those  who  possess  the  amplest  means. 

The  Auditor-general's  offices  being  the  largest  on  the  three  Presidencies  will  afford  probably 
the  best  illustration  of  my  meaning. 

Madras.  Bombay. 

Per  Month. 

1  Accountant 400 

1  Clerk 175 

1  Ditto 100 

1  Indexer    225  '      Highest  native  writer  140 

1  Examiner 200 

1  Assistant   ISO 

Highest  native  writer 

Bengal,  65  Ordinary  Clerks. — Madras,  96. — Bombay,  18. 

The  duty  of  the  Bengal  office  comprehends  some  contingencies;  and  die  pay  and  allowances 
of  the  army  of  that  Presidency,  which  latter  being  fixed  monthly  sums,  and  not^x-r  diem  allow- 
ances, as  they  are  at  the  other  Presidencies,  require  comparatively  little  calculation  for  the  em- 
ployment of  so  many  able  persons,  at  such  high  salaries,  as  auditors  and  examiners,  besides  a 
deputy  and  two  assistants.  For  it  must  here  be  observed,  as  a  well-known  fact,  that  the  accounts 


Bengal. 

Per  Month. 

1  Registrar 500 

6  Auditors    1 800 

1  Assistant 200 


Per  Month. 

1  Accountant    400 

1  Ditto   300 

1  Clerk   280 

1  Ditto  180 

Highest  native  writer    SO 


72 

of  the  other  two  Presidencies  are  always  sent  round  fiiiriy  made  out,  and  maj'  therefore  only 
require  the  mechanical  act  of  transcribing  for  the  home  authorities.  I  should  imagine  no  ques- 
tion would  be  entertained  as  to  the  preference  being  given  to  the  Bengal  mode  of  making  the 
per  diem  allowances  monthly  ones  :  but  of  this  I  shall  subsequently  speak,  and  at  present  beg  to 
repeat  that  I  am  perfectly  aware  that  much  serious  business  is  referred  to  the  Auditor-general 
for  his  opinion  ;  but  this,  as  I  stated  before,  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  current  duties  performed 
in  his  office.  The  correspondence  with  the  higher  autliorities  calls  into  play  the  talent  and  per- 
sonal information  of  the  head  of  the  office ;  but  the  other  parts,  such  as  examinations,  &c.  of 
accounts,  must  be  conducted  by  the  clerks  and  examiners.  This  topic  explains  to  us,  that  as 
the  Military  Board  conducts  so  large  a  share  of  the  expenditure  of  the  army,  this  office  must 
he  greatly  relieved  from  many  arduous  branches  of  its  business  which  devolve  upon  the  audit 
office  at  the  other  Presidencies ;  for  instance,  that  of  auditing  the  accounts  of  the  tlepartments  of 
the  largest  expenditure,  viz.  the  Commissariat,  Ordnance,  Manufactories  of  Gun-carriages  and 
Gunpowder,  the  whole  of  the  Building  Department,  called  the  Department  of  Public  Works, 
and  Barrack  Department.  In  short,  I  might  say  that  every  department  in  the  army  is  under  the 
control  of  the  Military  Board,  who  frequent!}-  both  order  the  expenditure  and  audit  the  accounts. 

At  INladras  and  Bengal  most,  if  not  all  the  military  offices  are  supplied  with  stationery  from 
the  public  stores,  with  a  peculiarity  at  Madras  of  the  heads  of  departments  receiving  also  certain 
allowance  for  lights,  candles,  &c. ;  while  at  Bombay  a  fixed  sum*  to  meet  all  charges  is  granted 
to  the  military  offices,  which  is  not  allowed  to  be  exceeded  except  in  the  pay  department.  By 
this  detailed  review  I  think  it  may  be  seen  which  plan  is  preferable,  as  it  relieves  Government 
from  accidents  and  occasional  losses ;  as  paper  is  particularly  liable  to  damage  when  retained 
any  time  in  store,  while  there  appears  but  little  check  on  the  quantities  drawn  that  would  satisfy 
Government  that  there  is  no  waste. 

In  noticing  the  office  establishment  at  Madras,  the  quantity  of  its  business  must  be  compared 
with  that  at  Bombay,  to  which  it  bears  the  nearest  affinity,  and  has  indeed  the  same  heads  for 
examination,  with  the  exception,  as  has  been  previously  noticed,  of  the  Commissariat  accounts. 

The  number  of  troops,  European  and  Native,  is  about  double  that  at  Bombay,  and  equal  to 
about  two  thirds  of  that  in  Bengal.  This,  though  a  fair  general  argument,  cannot  altogether  be 
admitted  as  the  most  accurate  mode  of  reasoning,  for  increased  numbers  of  the  same  class  do 
not  necessarily  create  a  proportionate  increase  of  business  to  an  office  of  this  kind;  as  allow- 
ances, established  by  regulation,  do  not  require  the  same  care  or  acuteness  in  the  examination, 
as  contingencies,  which  demand  discrimination  and  judgement  to  decide  on  their  validity.  This 
latter  species  of  business  however,  strictly  s[)eaking,  belongs  to  the  head  of  the  department,  and 
stands  forth  as  a  proof  of  the  propriety,  indeed  necessity,  of  the  broad  line  of  separation  I  drew 
between  the  mere  duties  of  the  establishments  and  the  severer  one  of  responsibility  required  of 
the  officer  at  the  head  of  an  office;  nor  should  I  have  introduced  it  here,  had  it  not  suggested  itself 
from  a  view  of  the  unequal  number  of  clerks  in  the  three  offices,  that  appears  to  bear  hardly  any 
proportion  to  the  apparent  executive  business  of  each. 

I  do  not  perceive  anything  more  that  I  could  add  on  this  head  as  to  its  details,  except  that  I 
have  not  mentioned  Bomb.iy  byitself,  and  only  by  inference.  I  have  imagined  this  to  be  the  clearest 
mode  of  exhibiting  the  general  comparative  state  of  the  three  offices  as  a  fair  groundwork  for 
the  argument,  to  affiard  that  comprehensive  view  of  it  that  analogy  alone  is  likely  to  produce. 
The  one  at  Bombay  is  deemed  the  smallest,  though  in  fact  the  review  of  its  duties  as  to 
variety  will  not  bear  us  out  in  such  a  conclusion ;  though  the  annual  expense  of  its  office  is  less 
than  the  fourth  part  of  that  at  Bengal,  and  much  less  than  half  that  at  Madras. 

Aledical  Sei'vicc. 

The  rule  lately  introduced  by  the  Honourable  Court  throughout  all  the  armies,  of  giving  su- 
perior batta  to  the  surgeons  in  charge  of  a  regimental  hospital  instead  of  a  fixed  allowance  as 
heretofore,  will  be  a  saving  to  Government  in  every  point  of  view  while  stationary;  but  in  the 
field  every  regiment  that  has  a  full  surgeon  it  will  prove  otherwise,  for  he  receives  by  the  new  mode 
."JOO  rupees,  exclusive  of  the  Commissariat  charges  for  a  native  regiment,  which  the  old  plan  ac- 
complished for  220  rupees,  including  every  charge.  The  case,  however,  of  the  assistant  surgeon  in 
both  situations  is  materially  deficient  and  greatly  reduced;  and  though  it  may  be  a  set-ofl"or  coun- 
terbalance to  the  higher  grade,  and  provide  him  with  greater  allowances  in  the  field,  yet  no  pecu- 
niary advantage  can  be  meant  on  this  head  to  be  in  proportion  to  any  idea  on  the  scoreof  pro- 
fessional skill ;  and  though  it  would  be  in  accordance  with  all  received  maxims  of  established 
order,  that  the  superior  .rank  should  claim  superior  advantages  on  the  head  of  salary,  still, 
where  a  subordinate  is  unavoidably  doing  tiie  duty  of  a  higher  grade,  possessing  the  same  pro- 
fessional knowledge,  he  might  be  allowed  the  same  emoluments  temporarily.  In  garrison  the 
surgeon  gets  165  rupees,  and  an  assistant  performing  the  same  duties  receives  GO  ;  in  the  field, 
300  the  Ibrraer,  and  90  the  latter.    The  constitution  of  the  medical  branch  of  the  service  under 

•  20  rupees  per  vientem. 


the  tliree  Presidencies  is  of  course  similar,  aitlioufrh  tlie  emoluments  vary  very  considerably.  As 
the  same  stair  duties,  for  instance,  a  sui)eriiiteiidin^  surgeon  at  Houibay,  gets  1300  rupees,  at 
Madras  1,375,  and  at  Bengal  2060.  'I'liis  inc(juaiity  is  too  remarkable  not  to  attract  notice, 
particularly  as  the  tiict  appears  that  the  Bombay  ollicer  traverses  a  greater  extent  of  country 
tlian  those  of  either  of  the  other  establishments,  with  as  much  duty  in  his  superintendence  ;  while 
the  divided  state  of  the  troops  and  their  distance  from  each  other  must  constitute  the  greater 
labour  wherever  it  occurs.  The  Honourable  Court  have,  I  conceive,  recognized  tliis  principle 
in  some  degree,  as  well  as  the  djft'ercnce,  by  their  late  orders ;  though  the  fact  might  not  have 
been  so  fully  brought  before  them,  that  exhibits  the  Bengal  officer's  receiving  760  rupees,  and  a 
Madras  one  275,  more  than  thatof  Bombaj-,  for  a  duty  which  as  to  personal  exertion  is  the  same, 
and  as  to  professional  skill  or  education  can  give  no  preference,  as  might  be  urged  in  other 
lines;  and,  arguing  from  the  scale  of  allowance  the  Honourable  Court  fixed  for  the  Medi- 
cal Board  of  the  three  Presidencies,  I  should  affirm  they  had  no  intention  to  make  such  a  dis- 
parity with  regard  to  the  other  classes. 

Medical  Supplies. 

The  system  at  Bengal  and  Bombay  is  precisely  the  same ;  that  is,  the  supplies  are  made  by 
the  Commissariat  to  the  European  and  Native  hospitals,  and  I  believe  the  same  regulation  is 
established  in  the  Madras  army ;  while  the  three  Presidencies  have  their  peculiarities,  arising  in 
a  great  measure  from  the  local  situations  of  their  territories.  The  Bombay  army  has  the 
smallest  scale  for  the  several  diets  of  patients,  and  only  makes  hospital  stoppages  from  the 
European,  at  a  fixed  and  indiscriminate  rate  for  all  ranks ;  while  in  Bengal  these  stoppages  are 
calculated  according  to  ranks  respectively :  and  the  same  rule  also  obtains  with  them  for  stop- 
pages to  the  native  troops  in  hospital.  This  contrast  will  prove  that  the  Bengal  system  is  more 
oeconomical  than  either  of  the  others,  where  there  are  no  deductions  made  to  the  natives  in 
hospitals.  However,  it  is  to  be  remembered,  that  seven  rupees  (the  pay  of  a  sepoy)  will  go 
further  in  the  Bengal  establishment  than  eight  rupees  will  at  most  places  at  the  other  Presi- 
dencies, except  in  some  of  the  Madras  territories,  from  the  positive  fact  that  the  aliments  of  life 
and  clothing  for  natives  are  from  thirty  to  forty  per  cent,  cheaper  in  almost  all  the  stations 
occupied  by  the  Bengal  army. 

I  shall  now  subjoin  the  Report  of  a  Medical  Committee  assembled  at  Bombay ;  and  however 
ably  the  subject  of  this  nature  may  be  treated  by  professional  persons,  I  must  beg  to  dissent 
from  some  of  their  propositions,  as  far  as  regards  comparative  rank  and  pay,  as  forming  part 
of  die  military  establishment  of  the  Presidency. 

Report  of  the  ]\Iedical  Coimniltee. 

"  On  the  actual  condition  of  all  offices  in  the  Medical  branch  of  the  sen'ice. — For  the  sake  of 
clearness,  the  offices  may  be  subdivided  into  those  of  the  European,  and  those  of  the  Native 
branch  of  the  Army ;  the  Indian  Navy  ;  the  Medical  Store  department ;  fixed  Plospitals  and  Dis- 
pensaries ;  and  the  Civil  branch  of  the  service.  The  department  of  Vaccination  and  the  office  of 
the  Medical  Board  have,  as  stated  in  rule  5,  &c.  of  the  Rules  for  subordinate  Medical  Servants, 
been  considered  distinct:  these  and  the  Native  Medical  School  will  be  considered  in  a  future 
Report.     Each  of  the  above-mentioned  offices  may  properly  embrace  three  heads  of  inquiry. 

"  1st.  The  subordinate  medical  servants. 

"  2nil.  The  hospital  and  medical  servants. 

"  3rd.  Tlie  supplies.  But  of  these,  the  first  only,  as  being  the  most  important,  shall  be 
noticed  in  this  letter. 

"  European  armi/  subordinate  medical  servants. — These  men  have  generally  been  favourably 
reported  of;  their  numbers  and  individual  pay  seem  likewise  ample;  yet  in  the  opinion  of  the 
Committee  several  material  defects  exist  in  the  present  system.    Of  these,  the  principal  are — 

"  The  improper  terms  o/'cngagement  under  which  these  servants  enter  the  Compantf  s  army. — The 
system  of  indentures  is  radically  bad  ;  it  binds  an  individual  for  five  years,  to  what  he  may  not 
after  the  first  month  like;  it  presents  no  stimulus  to  exertion  ;  it  cramps  the  power  of  Govern- 
ment in  ridding  the  service  of  these  men  if  found  unworthy;  and  in  being  a  form  of  civil  com- 
pact used  amongst  military  servants,  presents  an  anomaly  beneficial  to  none,  and  most  injurious 
to  the  Government  and  its  officers  who  may  chance  to  be  placed  over  these  men.  The  proba- 
tionary service  which  it  is  proposed  to  substitute  for  this  is  free  from  all  these  objections;  and 
the  discretionary  power  with  which  executive  medical  officers  are  vested,  will,  in  giving  great 
facilities  for  the  immediate  discharge  of  all  indolent  and  worthless  characters,  have  the  effect  of 
excluding  from  the  service  those  who  are  not  fitted  for  it ;  and  the  Medical  Board,  in  having 
access  to  a  knowledge  of  the  extent  of  all  punishments,  will,  on  the  other  hand,  have  a  power 
of  controling  any  undue  exercise  of  authority  on  the  part  of  medical  officers. 

'•  The  mode  in  which  these  servants  are  educated. —  Placed  in  the  best  of  all  schools  for  rearing  up 
men  to  be  afterwards  employed  in  ministering  to  disease,  namely,  in  large  hospitals,  and  constantly 
engaged  at  the  bedsides  of  their  inmates,  the  subordinate  medical  servants  have  in  attainments 
fallen  short  of  what  might  have  been  expected  from  them,  tor  two  causes — 1st,  The  want  of 
instructors,  and  of  a  properly  digested  system  of  instruction.     2nd,  The  want  of  objects  of 

la 


74 

ambition  being  held  out  to  these  servants,  and  the  want  of  legitimate  modes  of  selection  of  the 
individuals  entided  to  rewards  or  places.  On  the  first  of  these  the  Committee  would  observe, 
that  although  the  attainments  of  these  men  perfectly  fit  them  for  acting  under  medical  officers, 
and  carrying  their  orders  into  execution,  yet  to  it,  it  seems  that  had  one  medical  officer  in 
each  regiment  been  made  responsible  for  communicating  instruction  of  certain  kinds  to  these 
men,  they  might  have  been  fitted  to  be  very  efficient  substitutes  for  commissioned  medical 
officers  in  the  provision  of  medical  aid  to  small  charges,  or  in  giving  aid  of  a  higher  descrip- 
tion than  what  thev  can  now  affijrd  to  these  officers,  when  from  sickness  or  other  causes  there 
existed  a  necessity  for  the  obtainment  of  such  aid.  Their  attainments  now  are  of  a  description 
which  perfectly  fit  them  for  all  hospital  duties  as  subordinates;  but  the  system  of  education 
which  the  Committee  has  sketched  out,  will,  if  properly  executed,  fit  them  for  duties  of  a 
much  higher  order,  will  on  many  occasions,  and  in  many  situations,  much  facilitate  the 
arrangements  of  Government,  and  this  at  a  cost  which,  compared  with  the  advantages  obtained, 
is  trifling  and  not  worthy  of  notice.  On  the  second  clause  the  Committee  ■woidd  beg  to  state, 
that  this  has  been  supposed  rather  than  actually  ascertained. 

"  The  Committee  has  learnt  that  many  of  their  servants  after  promotion  to  the  higher  grades 
have  relaxed  in  their  endeavours  to  merit  the  approbation  of  their  superiors,  have  fallen  into 
error  and  guilt,  and  ultimateU-  have  been  expelled  the  service.  To  very  rapid  promotion, 
caused  by  the  great  demand  for  this  class  of  men,  this  may  in  part  have  been  owing;  and  some 
may  have  attained  to  places  for  which  they  had  not  been  qualified,  and  from  which,  on  this 
being  made  evident,  they  have  been  expelled.  Yet  the  Committee  feels  assured  that  a  great 
want  under  which  this  department  laboured,  was  the  non-existence  of  some  places  of  comfort, 
light  duty  and  emolument,  to  which,  as  a  reward  for  long  and  faithful  services,  they  might  have 
looked.  Another  defect  is  the  want  of  competition  among  these  men  to  attain  to  these  places. 
That  however,  in  the  then  state  of  the  service,  was  caused  by  the  great  deficiency  of  this  class  of 
men,  and  to  supply  which  man\'  individuals  were  doubtless  promoted  who  would  not  have 
been  so,  had  there  been  a  large  body  to  select  from.  A  system  of  instruction  is  laid  down,  for 
the  superintendence  of  which  remuneration  is  given  to  individuals,  thus  rendered  responsible 
for  a  correct  performance  of  their  duties  ;  the  ascertainment  of  this  performance  as  to  its  being 
correct  or  not,  is  not  left  to  the  simple  report  of  an  officer  of  coutroul,  the  sujierintending  sur- 
geon, but  may  be  made  out  by  the  number  of  subordinate  medical  servants  who  pass  examina- 
tions on  certain  branches  of  education,  before  committees  composed  of  medical  officers,  who,  in  the 
performance  of  their  duties,  have  certain  rules  to  guide  them,  and  are  free  from  all  bias  and 
above  all  controul  in  these  matters.  Hereafter  (should  this  system  be  adopted)  it  will  be  easy 
to  learn  from  what  officer  the  best  and  the  most  speedily  instructed  subordinate  medical  ser- 
vants have  proceeded  ;  it  will  be  seen  what  officer  has  his  duty  most  at  heart,  by  the  length  of 
lime  which  it  is  reported  the  pupils  and  others  have  been  in  the  service,  and  consequently 
under  his  instructions;  and  from  this  circumstance  alone,  without  anj- reference  to  medical 
authorities.  Government  may  come  to  just  conclusions  as  to  what  officers  have  deserved  their 
remuneration ;  while  from  those  who  do  not  seem  to  have  deserved  it,  the  care  of  the  subordi- 
nate medical  servants  may  be  taken,  either  by  their  being  placed  under  the  charge  of  another 
officer  of  that  regiment,  or  by  being  in  a  body  removed  therefrom  and  placed  under  the  medi- 
cal officer  of  another  regiment  who  may  have  done  his  ciuty  in  a  satisfactory  manner,  and  who 
in  such  case  should,  if  superintending  the  instruction  of  the  pupils  of  both  corps,  have,  in 
addition  to  the  pay  for  his  own  charge,  half  the  sum  (50  rupees)  on  account  of  the  pupils  of 
the  other  regiment. 

"  With  regard  to  the  pupils,  their  admission  into  the  service  in  the  first  instance,  depends 
on  examinations  passed  before  committees  of  medical  officers,  free  from  all  bias  in  their  favour; 
their  continuation  in  the  service  depends  on  their  own  good  behaviour,  and  on  a  sedulous 
attention  to  their  duties,  and  to  the  instructions  given  them;  and  their  promotion  (if  they  are 
tiiought  worthy  of  being  retained  in  the  service)  depends  entirely  on  their  own  application  and 
exertions,  together  with  their  good  behaviour  as  rejiorted  on  by  their  superiors. 

"  The  places  of  trust  and  emolument  are  open  to  all  who  prove  themselves  qualified,  and 
nothing  but  bad  behaviour  can  prevent  a  qualified  person  from  rising  to  them. 

"  In  thus  presenting  abundant  stimulus  for  exertion  to  those  men  of  abilities  who  will  rise  in 
every  line,  it  presents,  in  its  graduated  scale  of  pay  (on  a  previous  report  of  a  correct  performance 
of  duties),  for  remuneration  to  those  men,  who,  though  not  possessed  of  brilliant  parts,  may  per- 
form their  duties  in  a  sufficiently  proper  manner,  and  beiiave  respectably.  Thus  therefore,  al- 
though these  men  may  not  attain  to  the  highest  situations  in  the  service,  there  is  a  stimulus  held 
out  to  them  to  perform  their  duties  correctly,  and  to  merit  the  approbation  of  their  superiors. 

"  Native  armi/  subonlinate  medical  servants. — Several  important  defects  exist  in  this  depart- 
ment. And  of  the  servants  in  it,  oidy  onc-iialf  have  been  reported  in  evei-j-  respect  fitted  for 
their  duties;  of  the  remaining  half,  four-fifths  are  unfitted  by  reason  of  their  ignorance  of 
English  reading  and  writing;  and  the  remaining  fifth,  though  possessed  of  sucli  knowledge  in 
a  certain  degree,  is,  either  from  its  being  very  lin)ited,  or  from  other  causes,  only  qualified  to 
a  certain  extent.  Many  of  these  servants  must,  from  the  above  circumstances,  be  but  very 
indifferent  compounders;    and  several  are  reported  as  being  imperfect  dressers.     The  inquiries 


/J 

of  the  Committee  liave  settled  tlie  cause  of  this  great  disparity  of  attaiDiiients  between  the  ser- 
vants in  tliis,  and  in  the  European  army.  Almost  all  of  those  men  who  are  favourably  reported 
of,  have  either  been  brought  up  in  the  hospitals  of  the  European  army  as  apjirentices,  or  their 
education  has,  like  that  of  apprentices,  been  acquired  in  these  hospitals:  this  fact  will  likewise 
explain  the  cause  of  the  number  of  imperfect  dressers  in  this  department;  the  men  so  rcjiorted  have 
generally  been  brought  up  in  native  hospitals;  and  these  institutions,  with  very  few  exceptions, 
are  not  at  all  fitted  to  form  schools  of  instruction.  More  of  the  practical  parts  of  the  duty  of 
suborilinate  medical  servants  may  be  seen  in  a  month  in  an  European,  than  in  a  year  in  most 
Native  hospitals;  service  in  the  former,  too,  divests  of  prejudice,  gives  habits  of  self-possession  and 
confidence,  and  in  every  respect  quickens  and  excites  the  faculties  of  all  engaged  about  them. 

"  All  that  has  been  said  refers  to  the  individual  attainments  of  the  men  of  this  class;  but 
even  as  a  whole  this  department  is  deficient. 

"  Detachments,  when  sent  out,  are  fre(]uently  supplied  with  insufficient,  and  at  times  with  no 
subordinate  medical  servants  whatever;  for  it  has  not  unfrequently  happened,  that  there  were  none 
to  send  out,  and  in  consequence  hospital  menials,  who  had  acquired  a  slight  smattering  of  some 
parts  of  the  duties  of  subordinate  medical  servants,  have  been  detached  to  perform  their  duties. 

"  The  pay  of  the  men  of  this  department  is  quite  inadequate,  as  remuneration,  to  those  who 
are  in  every  respect  fitted  for  their  duties ;  and  much  of  the  deficiency  in  number  of  such  men 
may  be  attributed  to  this  cause. 

"  The  defects  of  this  branch  of  the  service  may  be  remedied  in  the  following  manner.  The 
want  of  sufficient  knowledge  of  English  reading  and  writing  may  be  obviated  by  a  greater 
strictness  in  the  admission  of  candidates  into  this  class.  Over  the  duty  the  quarterly  committees 
are  placed  ;  and  by  a  proper  performance  of  their  functions,  no  servants  can  hereafter  be  imper- 
fect in  these  necessary  branches  of  information.  By  constituting  European  hospitals  the 
schools  for  the  whole  service,  the  subordinate  medical  servants  of  the  native  army  will  here- 
after be  qualified  to  a  greater  extent  than  they  could  ))ossibly  have  been,  had  they  been  reared 
in  their  own  hospitals.  All  that  was  stated  in  the  remarks  on  the  advantages  of  the  proposed 
system  to  the  subordinate  medical  servants  doing  duty  with  European  troops,  is  applicable  to 
the  men  serving  in  this  and  all  the  other  departments  of  the  public  service. 

"  Indian  navy  subordinate  medical  scrvanls. — As  the  men  of  this  department  have  only  been 
posted  to  it  very  lately,  and  as  many  of  the  vessels  are  at  considerable  distances  from  the  Presi- 
dency, the  Committee  has  not  been  able  to  institute  very  particular  inquiries  regarding  these 
servants,  but  has  taken  for  granted  their  being  efficient  both  as  a  department  and  individually. 
It  must,  however,  remark,  that  it  is  very  doubtful  whether  any  of  the  subordinate  medical 
servants  should  ever  be  employed  in  the  Indian  navy,  excepting  as  substitutes  for  medical 
officers.  It  entertains  fears,  that  servants  trained  up  at  some  cost,  widi  much  care,  will  by 
being  posted  to  this  branch  of  the  service,  from  having  little  or  nothing  to  engage  their  atten- 
tion, (the  average  number  of  sick  even  in  the  largest  vessels  of  war  being  only  eight,  including 
both  natives  and  Europeans,)  become  idle,  ignorant  and  vicious;  in  which,  from  the  circumstance 
of  junior  medical  officers  being  employed  in  the  navy,  they  are  not  so  likely  to  be  checked  as  in 
other  branches  of  the  service.  The  Committee  would  therefore  recommend  a  return  to  the 
former  system,  viz.  that  of  granting  an  allowance  of  fifteen  rupees  monthly  to  medical  officers  for 
procuring  a  compounder;  for  which  sum  a  person  calculated  for  a  performance  of  all  the  duties 
required  of  him  can  easily  be  had,  and  in  whose  discharge,  should  he  behave  badly,  medical 
officers  will  have  no  trouble,  and  suffer  but  little  inconvenience.  The  men  at  present  in  the  navy 
cannot  be  got  rid  of,  excepting  by  sentence  of  a  court-martial ;  and  every  such  sentence  must, 
should  its  cause  originate  as  above  stated,  give  much  uneasiness  to  the  medical  officer. 

"  Slore  departmeiif  subordinate  incdical  servants. —  These  men  have  generally  been  favourably 
reported  of;  but  one  great  defect  exists,  in  their  being  retained  too  exclusively  for  these  duties  : 
to  remedy  this,  the  Committee  would  recommend  a  frequent  removal  of  the  inferior  grades  of 
servants  in  this  branch,  to  and  from  hospitals,  so  as  to  prevent  their  becoming,  by  long  and 
habitual  employment  in  one  branch,  somewhat  unfitted  for  the  others  in  the  service. 

"  Fixed  Hospitals  and  Dispensaries,  and  the  Civil  branch  of  the  service. — To  the  servants  in  these 
departments,  nearly  the  same  remarks  apply  which  have  been  stated  in  reporting  the  servants 
attached  to  the  native  army.  In  adverting  to  the  rules  for  the  subordinate  medical  servants  which 
accompany  this,  the  Committee  would  beg  to  remark,  that  in  new-modelling  the  system  for  the 
rearing  up  of  these  men,  it  has  been  actuated  by  several  considerations. 

"  1st.  The  comparative  efficiency  of  the  men  reared  in  European  hospitals  on  the  system 
which  now  prevails. 

"  2nd.  The  opinions  of  the  oldest  medical  officers  in  the  army  being  in  favour  of  some  such 
system. 

"  3rd.  This  being  actually  the  system  of  education  at  work  in  the  most  celebrated  schools 
for  the  rearing  up  of  medical  men,  and  combining  in  itself  many  requisites  for  a  proper 
fitting  of  individuals  for  medical  duty.  For  its  success,  the  Committee  is  of  ojiinion,  that  it  is 
indispensably  necessary  that  it  should  be  adapted  in  foto  to  it :  it  seems  impossible  that  any 
part  of  it  can  be  adojited  with  advantage ;  eitlier  the  whole  must,  as  a  whole,  be  introduced, 
or  the  present  system  had  better  not  be  altered. 

L2 


76 


"  Its  advantages  over  that  system  seem  to  be  the  following  :— 

"  1st.  Greatly  increased  acquirements  of  the  subordinate  medical  servants,  with  little 
increase  of  cost. 

"  2nd.  Great  simplicity  in  the  conduct  of  all  medical  duty  connected  with  this  class  of  men. 

"  3rd.  Great  increase  in  the  number  of  qualified  subordinate  medical  servants  to  be  drawn 
from  in  case  of  any  emergency.  At  present  above  2,800  rupees  are  disbursed  monthly  on 
account  of  servants,  whose  duties  are  strictly  those  of  this  class  of  men*,  but  whom  the  Com- 
missariat is  supposed  to  supply  (yet  how  inefficiently  so,  medical  men  can  best  testify),  and  over 
whom  Government  has  no  controul.  This  sum  will,  on  the  proposed  system,  be  entirely  dis- 
bursed on  account  of  subordinate  medical  servants,  of  whom  rolls  are  kept,  concerning  whose 
attainments  and  fitness  there  will  always  be  the  fullest  information,  and  over  whom  Government 
and  its  officers  will  have  the  most  unlimited  controul. 

"  -tth.  Better  behaviour  of  these  servants  will  be  secured.  From  the  mode  of  engaging 
them  originally :  from  the  power  given  to  medical  men  to  discharge  all  who  misbehave;  from 
committees  discharging  all  who  are  indolent,  or  not  apt  at  their  studies  and  duties;  and  from 
the  numerous  checks  imposed  on  improper  behaviour  by  the  rules  for  the  conduct  of  these  men, 
this  must  result. 

"  5th.  From  the  pay  of  the  lower  grades  being  small,  and  all  increase  thereto  dependent  on 
tlieir  attainments  and  behaviour,  and  from  the  greater  number  of  places  of  emolument  by  this 
system  laid  open  to  deserving  men,  extravagance  in  the  outset  of  their  service  is  guarded  against, 
and  })owerful  inducements  for  correct  behaviour  held  out  to  them. 

"  From  finding  it  not  adapted  to  the  subordinate  medical  servants,  clause  3rd  has  been  con- 
siderably modified,  and  instead  of  two,  six  classes  have  been  constituted.  On  the  principles  laid 
down  in  clause  4th  as  a  foundation,  has  the  whole  superstructure  of  this  class  of  public  servants 
been  raised. 

"  No  servant  can  be  promoted  from  the  lowest  grade,  even  without  meriting  such  promo- 
tion ;  seniority  alone  will  do  nothing  for  one  of  these  men ;  a  certain  ordeal  must  be  passed 
through,  without  which  no  individual  can  even  continue  in  the  service  beyond  two  years  ;  and 
if  found  worthy  of  being  continued  in  it,  he  cannot  rise  one  step  farther  without  meriting  such 
rise  by  possessing  certain  qualifications,  without  which  no  conduct  however  good,  no  service 
however  long,  and  no  recommendations  however  powerful,  either  in  themselves  or  in  the  source 
whence  thev  emanate,  ought  to  procure  him  increase  of  rank."  With  regard  to  the  "  Class  of 
Merit,"  the  institution  of  such  clause  inculcates,  on  this  system,  that  every  superior  grade  forms 
"  a  class  of'  merit  "  to  the  rank  beluxsj  it. 

Pay  Table. 

Hates  of  Pay  of  the  Subordinate  Medical  Servants,  per  Mouth,  in  Field  and  Garrison, 


Head  Apothecary 

Apothecary 1st  Class,  after  24  years 

2nd  Class,  after  16  ditto 
3rd  Class,  after  8  ditto 
4th  Class,  under  8  ditto 

Assistant  Apothecary  1st  Class,  after  24  ditto 
2nd  Class,  after  16  ditto 
3rd  Class,  after  8  ditto 
4th  Class,  under  8  ditto 

Dressers 1st  Class,  after  24  ditto 

2nd  Class,  after  16  ditto 
3rd  Class,  after  8  ditto 
4th  Class,  under  8  ditto 

Assistant  Dresser  f 

Compounder 

I'upil    

With  either  rations,  or  5  rupees  compensa- 
tion, accordinp  to  their  cast. 


c 

rarnson 

lie 

Itl. 

Pay. 

House 
Rent. 

Total. 

Pay. 

Full 
Batta. 

Tentage. 

Total. 

no 

25 

135 

110 

40 

35 

185 

90 

20 

110 

90 

30 

30 

150 

80 

20 

100 

80 

30 

30 

140 

70 

20 

90 

70 

30 

30 

130 

60 

20 

80 

60 

30 

30 

120 

56 

10 

66 

56 

20 

76 

49 

10 

59 

49 

20 

69 

42 

10 

52 

42 

20 

62 

35 

10 

45 

35 

20 

55 

40 

4 

44 

40 

9 

49 

35 

4 

39 

35 

9 

44 

30 

4 

34. 

30 

9 

39 

25 

4 

29 

25 

9 

34 

20 

4 

24 

20 

7 

27 

10 

10 

10 

5 

18 

6 

6 

6 

3 

9 

Remarks  by  Lieutenant-colonel  Frederick. — The  Head  Apothecary  has  nearly  the  same  allowance  as 
a  Deputy  Assistant  Commissary  ;  the  Apothecaries  have  more  than  Conductors,  and  above  Subedars  of 
the  first  class  ;  the  .\ssistant  Apothecaries  more  than  Sub-conductors  and  Subedars  of  the  third  class, 
and  Serjeant-majors  and  Quarter-master  Serjeants. 

•  All  servants  are  by  the  regulations  selected  by  the  medical  officers  themselves  and  paid  onlif  by  the  Commissariat. 
(Signed)  Edw.  Krkdeiiick. 

f  Only  to  be  granted  wlien  unprovided  with  quarters,  as  in  Medical  Store  Departments,  Ac— Assistant  Dressers, 
if  European,  East  Indian,  or  Portuguese,  have  20  rupees  per  mensem  in  native  corps ;  if  in  European,  la  rupees 
and  ration  of  full  diet. —  Vide  Garrison  Pay. 


Imm 


h'regitlars,  Horse  ami  Infantrxj. 

Tiiere  is,  I  believe,  only  one  opinion  on  the  subject  of  this  class  of  troops.  In  war  tliey 
merely  thin  the  ranks  of  the  enemy  by  remaining  in  our  pay,  and  in  peace  their  occupation  is 
gone,  as  they  cannot  act  as  foragers, — consetiuently  they  are  supernumerary,  indeed  superfluous, 
rile  horse  maybe  occasionally  employed  as  mounted  police,  but  the  infantry  have  never  shown 
that  they  possessed  common  firmness  for  action,  and  consecjuently  bring  the  regular  troops 
into  disrepute  by  their  conduct;  for  the  inhabitants  of  India  seldom  view  them  in  any  other 
light  than  as  police  peons,  to  assist  in  the  collection  of  the  revenue,  or  duties  of  that  descrip- 
tion. 

'Inhere  are  no  situations  in  which  the  native  cavalry  and  infantry  could  not  be  employed,  with 
propriety,  (I  do  not  mean  any  civil  or  police  tluties,)  with  more  effect  than  is  now  performed 
by  the  irregulars.  The  troops  of  the  line  are  now  never  called  upon  to  do  any  other  duties 
than  being  guards  to  prisons;  the  system  of  Berkundazhas  relieved  them  from  all  others.  The 
expense  was  enormous  *,  without  a  corresponding  degree  of  efficiency  :  if  troops  are  absolutely 
required  for  a  temporary  service,  they  should  be  regulars  raised  under  certain  conditions  of 
being  disbanded  when  no  longer  required,  officered  from  the  line  ;  the  officers  also  being  subject 
to  a  similar  obligation  to  return  to  their  former  regiments  at  the  expiration  of  the  stated  period, 
during  which  they  should  be  selected  and  receive  some  addition  of  pay,  as  if  they  had  been  trans- 
ferred into  a  newly  raised  regular  regiment.  As  a  proof  this  is  feasible,  we  have  only  to  look  at 
the  rifle  corps  at  Madras,  acknowledged  by  every  one  who  ever  saw  it  on  service  to  be  fully 
equal  to  the  best  troops  of  the  regulars  f ;  and  yet  this  corps,  from  the  principles  on  which  it  was 
raised,  can  be  reduced  at  a  moment's  warning,  and  the  officers  ordered  to  join  their  respective 
regiments.  The  neglect  of  some  rule  or  precaution  of  this  kind  has  occasioned  the  mischief  of  a 
superabundance  of  troops  in  one  Presidency,  and  a  deficiency  in  another,  and  has  consequently 
placed  the  Government  in  the  embarrassing  situation  of  having,  after  the  war  is  over  and  the 
whole  of  India  in  a  state  of  the  utmost  tranquillity,  a  supernumerary  number  of  regular  regiments 
tliat  they  know  no  mode  of  reducing,  without  serious  injury  to  the  fair  promotion  and  prospects 
of  their  officers,  who  have  thus  at  once,  for  a  particular  emergency  of  the  moment,  been  promoted 
into  newly  raised  regiments,  with  the  tacit  sanction  of  being  for  ever  kept  up  on  the  same  footing 
as  the  old  regiments.  Both  Bengal  and  Madras  are  exactly  in  this  predicament :  as  for  the 
greater  number  of  their  regiments,  they  have  been  raised  at  different  periods  to  meet  the  particular 
emergencies  of  the  times  which  have  now  ceased  to  exist,  without  any  reference  to  the  general 
state  of  the  service.  The  evil  does  not  rest  here,  as  a  pressure  on  our  Indian  finances;  for  with 
the  increase  of  troops  of  all  kinds  an  immense  increase  has  been  made  simultaneously  to  the 
staff  and  departments  of  every  kind,  as  well  as  to  the  expense  of  the  offices.  This  subject  might 
be  gone  into  at  great  length  with  obvious  utility ;  but  I  trust  I  have  said  enough  to  point  out  not 
only  the  necessity  of  alteration,  but  the  germ  of  the  existing  evil,  with  the  progressive  mode 
with  which  it  has  operated,  and  now  appears  almost  incurable.  At  any  rate  the  whole  of  the 
irregulars  ought  to  be  disbanded  :  this  will  to  a  certain  degree  open  out  some  employment  for 
the  troops  of  the  line,  who  should  if  possible,  and  particularly  our  Indian  arm^-,  from  its  singu- 
lar constitution — be  kept  as  much  engaged  or  employed  as  possible:  its  tone  will  always  be  the 
more  healthy  for  active  occupation ;  for  few  maxims  apply  more  forcibly  to  classes  of  men  than  the 
one  pointing  out  the  evil  of  idleness  does  to  large  military  bodies  ;  for  though  our  sepoys  are  the 
most  easilv  manatied  and  tractable  soldiers  in  the  world,  thev  are  still  strictlv  mercenaries soverned 
by  foreigners,  with  whom  they  possess  no  comuiunity  of  domestic  or  political  ties  such  as  exist 
in  the  armies  of  all  other  nations.  It  is  true  we  rec[uire  a  very  large  body  of  them,  which  could 
be  kept  faithful  to  us  by  common  favour  to  their  prejudices,  and  security  to  their  families.  By 
these  simple  means  their  affections  would  be  commanded,  the  native  powers  would  gradually 
subside  into  peaceable  principalities,  our  own  civil  police  would  gain  strength,  and  the  iilea  of 
so  large  a  regular  force  being  necessary,  merely  to  preserve  the  tranquillity  of  our  own  provinces, 
would  gradually  die  away,  and  the  army  with  its  reduced  numbers  would  be  compact  and  effi- 
cient to  repel  foreign  invasions. 

Military  Bazars. 

The  Bazars  were  taken  from  the  Commissariat  on  the  Bombay  establishment,  which  was 
formerly  like  the  Bengal  and  Madras  svstem,  from  the  idea  that  the  Commissariat  being  a 
supplying  department,  ought  to  have  no  influence  in  the  market  whose  prices  current  were  to 
check  their  own  charges.  There  is  no  arguing  against  a  plan  that  separates  check  from  supply, 
but  it  appears  to  work  well  at  the  other  Presidencies  ;  and  if  there  be  an  evil  in  it,  I  doubt  that  it 
produces  a  commensurate  efficiency,  while  the  extra  expense  is  evident ;  and  is  certainly  not  so 
good  a  mode  in  the  field,  where  the  spare  Commissariat  cattle  are  employed  to  bring  in  supplies 
that  keep  down  the  price  of  the  necessaries  of  life  to  the  soldier  ; — at  all  events  the  bazar  collec- 
tions generally  equal  the  charges,  which  in  one  sense  would  be  a  revenue  to  Government,  and 

•  Upwards  of  96  lacs.  f  It  has  lately  been  made  a  regular  corps  bj-  transfer  to  the  line. 


78 

increase  the  surplus  amount  of  the  collection,  which  the  bazar  superintendant's  salarj-  would 
diminish.  And  as  I  fully  concur  in  the  experienced  opinions  of  Sir  John  Malcolm  for  the 
conduct  of  the  bazars  of  an  army,'I  prefer  the  reasons  and  arguments  used  by  him,  as  possess- 
ing clearness  and  force,  in  recommending  the  establishment  of  one  uniform  system  throughout 
the  Indian  army.     They  are  as  follows  :  — 

"  The  best  and  indeed  the  only  mode  of  supplying  a  bazar,  which  is  so  important  a  duty  in 
an  army  in  this  country,  is  by  every  means  to  encourage  the  villagers  to  bring  their  grain  and 
other  articles  to  market,  and  to  levy  no  customs  on  the  grain  and  necessaries  of  life,  to  give 
an  efficient  protection  both  to  the  Brinjara  carriers,  and  to  make  the  bazar  perfectly  free*. 
General  Wellesley,  whose  camp  was  better  supplied  probably  than  any  I  have  ever  seen,  gave 
the  greatest  attention  to  this  point.  He  resisted  all  applications  (and  such  were  made  daily)  to 
limit  the  prices  of  the  different  articles  brought  to  his  camp,  and  he  indeed  proclaimed  that  all 
were  free  to  ask  what  prices  they  chose  for  either  grain,  sheep,  or  cattle  :  the  consequence  was, 
that  the  competition  which  the  rigid  observance  of  this  just  principle  created,  filled  the  bazar, 
and  the  price  of  grain  and  other  articles,  though  high,  was  almost  always  lower  in  his  camp  than 
in  the  towns  in  its  immediate  vicinity.  Besides  those  sources  of  supply  which  I  have  specified, 
there  is  another  of  a  very  indefinite  but  considerable  extent :  this  is  obtained  through  the  exertions 
of  the  apparently  superfluous  and  unemployed  followers  of  the  camp.  These  accompany  every 
party  sent  out  to  forage;  and  when  on  those  parties  on  the  line  of  march,  they  purchase  or  find 
grain  f,  and  if  they  cannot  get  that,  gather  fire-wood  which  they  sell  in  camp,  and  by  these 
and  such  like  means,  not  only  obtain  their  own  livelihood,  but  contribute  in  no  small  degree  to 
the  general  stock  of  supply;  and  a  camp  is  often  much  indebted  to  the  activitj-  of  those  numerous 
followers,  which  at  first  view  seem  an  incumbrance  likely  to  impede  instead  of  prompting  its 
power  of  movements  :  but  the  fact  is,  an  Indian  army  cannot  march  any  distance  without  every 
resource  within  itself,  as  it  may  frequently  have  to  pass  larc;e  tracts  of  coiuitry  which,  if  not  a 
desert,  are  yet  totally  unequal  to  its  supply ;  and  it  is  from  tiiis  cause  that  these  armies  have 
such  an  immense  train  of  followers,  which,  as  Colonel  Derwin  observes  (in  his  Narrative  of  Lord 
Cornwallis's  campaign),  make  them  look  not  so  mucli  like  an  army,  as  a  nation  emigrating 
guarded  by  its  troops. 

"  A  well  regulated  and  well  supplied  bazar  is  the  most  essential  point ;  for  it  is  on  it  that 
success  or  failure  in  military  enterprises  in  India  as  often  depends  as  on  the  valour  and  dis- 
cipline of  the  troops.  I  speak  from  much  experience  and  much  attention  to  the  subject,  when 
I  state  that  the  maintenance  of  this  main-spring  of  our  operations,  is  the  most  difficult  pait  of  a 
commander's  duty.  It  embraces  much  beyond  the  mere  feeding  of  the  soldiers  or  the  followers 
of  an  army,  but  that,  even  in  times  of  difficult}',  depends  chiefly  on  the  mode  of  obtaining  sup- 
plies. Gates  are  opened  or  shut  upon  our  Brinjaries  and  Bazarmen,  as  there  is  confidence 
or  alarm  in  the  country.  And  the  inhabitants  of  this  province  (Malwa)  have  been  so  accustomed 
to  the  abuse  of  military  power,  that  they  cannot  believe  that  it  is  ever  accompanied  by  the 
virtues  of  moderation  or  justice:  years  must  pass  before  they  will  understand  the  true  character 
of  British  rule. 

"  The  Commissariat  officer  has  always  had  the  sole  conduct  of  the  bazar  and  police  duties 
with  tile  Madras  troops. 

"  The  sale  of  liquor  and  intoxicating  drugs  form  the  only  sources  from  whicii  any  revenue  is 
derived  from  the  bazar ;  all  other  articles  are  exempt  from  duty  ;  and  it  is  the  chief  object  to 
increase  the  number  of  shopkeepers,  particularly  to  induce  substantial  men  of  the  country  to 
settle  in  the  bazar,  as  on  them,  as  the  natural  mediums,  the  chief  supply  of  the  force  greatly 
depends. 

"  The  usage  of  the  Bombay  army  with  regard  to  the  management  of  their  bazars,  is  different 
from  that  of  Madras  ;  an  officer  is  appointed  to  conduct  the  duties  wdio  has  no  connection  what- 
ever with  the  Commissariat.  The  market  is  free;  but,  as  in  the  Madras  military  bazars, 
spirits  and  noxious  drugs  are  taxed,  and  sold  under  severe  restrictions. 

"I  iiave  for  many  years  devoted  much  of  my  time  to  military  bazars,  and  experience 
has  led  me  to  believe  that  no  system  has  succeeded  better  than  that  of  Madras,  where  they  are 
placed  under  the  Commissariat.  The  combining  different  branches  of  supply  under  one 
authority,  enables  the  Commissariat  officer  (in  communication  with  the  oflScer  commanding  the 

•  "  On  the  manner  in  which  these  regulations  are  carried  into  execution,  everything  depends;  and  the  Com- 
missary of  bazars  should  be  one  of  the  best,  most  active,  and  honoiuahle  men  in  the  service ;  and  in  large  armies  his 
allowance  should  be  adequate  to  his  responsibility-  The  same  person  that  has  charge  of  the  bazars  may  have  the 
contrnul  of  Brinjaries,  and  on  his  ability  and  integrity  the  supplies  will  greatly  depend." 

+  This  requires  explanation.  During  war,  the  country  through  which  an  army  has  to  pass,  is  often  deserted  ;  the 
inhabitants  bury  their  grain  in  pits,  which  men  skilled  in  the  search  soon  discover.  As  an  instance  of  the  great 
supplies  to  be  obtained  in  this  manner,  I  may  only  mention  that  I  was  able  during  the  whole  of  the  siege  of  Seringa- 
patam  to  support  six  thousand  of  the  Nizam's  infantry  (who  acted  in  line  with  the  arm_\),  from  the  grain  discovered 
in  this  manner.  I  gave  the  Icstarics,  or  idle  followers  of  the  N'ixam's  camp,  protection  to  prosecute  their  search  after 
the  buried  grain,  and  we  shared  equally  w  hat  was  found ;  and  from  the  success  that  attended,  the  corps  was  not  only 
supplied  without  expense,  but  the  burden  of  its  support  taken  off  the  general  store,  on  which  it  must  otherwise  have 
fallen. 


70 

field  force,  under  wliose  order  lie  is  placed,)  to  regulate  tliequantity  of  grain  carriage,  agreeably 
to  iiis  practical  knowledge  of  the  eiliciency  of  tlie  bazar  witli  the  army  :  but  it  is  necessary 
to  observe,  that  I  chieHy  refer  the  success  of  this  system  to  the  duties  ol  the  Mailras  Commis- 
sariat, as  they  relate  to  the  carriage  and  issue  of  j)ublic  grain  being  comparatively  limited." 

But  as  new  duties  have  sprung  up  in  the  bazar,  on  tiiis  side  of  India,  the  bazar  officer  lias 
become  a  magistrate  acting  under  the  regulations.  In  the  Poonah  cantonment,  which  has 
been  extremely  enlarged  in  its  population  of  every  description,  botii  European  and  Native,  he 
is,  even  with  an  assistant,  employed  for  nearly  six  hours  every  day  as  a  magistrate,  and  the 
police  is,  I  believe,  well  regulated.  This  plan  is  tiecidedly  jireferable  to  the  introduction  of 
the  civil  authority  into  the  cantonment.  Events  have  satisfactorily  provetl  it  could  only  succeed 
by  the  military  magistrate  being  immediately  under,  and  receiving  in  fact  a  considerable  support 
from,  the  general  officer  of  the  division,  who  probably  would  not  take  that  interest  in  the 
concern,  and  give  that  efficient  aid,  if  the  officer  was  not  subject  to  his  direct  authority.  This 
argument  however  cannot  apply  to  all  subordinate  stations. 

With  this  view  I  consulted  with  a  distinguished  gentleman  of  the  civil  service;  and  after  a 
very  serious  examination  of  the  bazar  regulations,  we  were  convinced  both  from  the  excellent 
tendency  of  their  several  provisions,  as  well  as  facts  derived  from  experience,  that  the  present 
system  has  worked  well,  never  having  in  any  instance  produced  the  slightest  collision  with  the 
civil  power ;  that  some  alterations  and  a  few  additions  relative  to  capital  crimes,  in  part  to 
relieve  the  Court  of  Requests  of  some  part  of  its  business,  the  code  in  its  proposed  revised 
state  would  have  a  still  more  beneficial  effect.  I  therefore  proposed  modifications  as  amendments 
to  the  existing  regulations  merely,  that  is,  as  an  alteration  of  so  much  of  Clause  I.  Sec.  IX. 
Regulation  XXII.  of  1827,  as  Sec.  I.  provides  for  the  trial  of  heinous  crimes,  and  for  the 
awarding  in  such  cases  of  the  punishments  of  death,  transportation,  or  imprisonment  beyond 
three  (3)  years,  by  a  native  General  Court  Martial  within  the  Company's  territories,  should  be 
rescinded  ;  and  it  be  provided,  that  when  a  crime  of  such  a  description  as  would  in  the  judgement 
of  the  commanding  officer  of  the  station  or  cantonment,  if  proved,  subject  the  offender  to  one 
of  the  above-named  punishments,  is  committed  within  the  Company's  territories,  and  not  more 
tlian  one  mile  from  the  principal  military  station  in  the  Collectorate  or  other  military  station, 
where  native  General  Courts  Martial  have  by  regulations  criminal  jurisdiction,  the  command- 
ding  officer  shall  make  over  the  case  to  the  Zillah  Court,  which  may  be,  in  modification  of  the 
rules  hitherto  in  force,  vested  with  exclusive  jurisdiction  over  the  same,  and  will  dispose  of  it 
in  the  same  way  as  other  similar  cases. 

The  labour  that  so  voluminous  a  Rejiort  has  cost,  it  may  well  be  believed  has  not  been  small, 
especially  when  the  variety  of  sources  from  which  the  information  was  to  be  collected,  and  the 
short  period  for  its  preparation,  are  taken  into  consideration  ;  and  provided  the  exposition  of 
my  reasons  be  clear,  I  think  that  no  further  apology  will  be  necessary  for  any  apparent  in- 
attention to  j)hraseology. 

Of  its  merits  generally,  it  would  ill  become  me  to  speak  ;  but  there  is  one  to  which  I  think  it 

may  most  justly  laj'  claim, — it  discusses  measures,  and  not  men.    And  while  it  contemplates  with 

an  unbiassed  eve  all  such  modifications  and  retrenchments  as  the  nature  of  the  times  and  rigid 
*  ......  .  .  . 

dictates  of  oeconomy  demand,  it  maintains  undiminished  the  efficiency  of  the  army  in  all  its 

principal  feelings,  with  its  pay  and  allowances,  and  carefully  avoids  all  injury  either  to  tlie  service 

or  to  individuals. 

This  pruning,  that  relieves  the  State  while  it  preserves  the  main  subject  healthy  and  improv- 
ing, can  hardly,  I  conceive,  be  attained  by  these  modifications  even,  that  involve  the  abolition  of 
some  staff' appointments  and  departmental  retrenchments,  numerous  and  deep  as  these  last  may 
be.  In  this  ])roposition  I  am  of  course  understood  to  include  all  the  Presidencies,  for  the  need- 
ful reform  would  not  otherwise  be  impartial ;  while  I  conceive  this  a  part  only  of  an  extensive 
plan  that  prepai^es  for  the  introduction  of  a  more  compendious  system. 

My  anxiety  on  this  head  has  led  me  to  allude  to  some  past  occurrences.  I  sincerely  hope 
that  the  plainness  with  which  I  express  mj'  opinions  on  their  s])irit  will  meet  with  indulgence. 

Our  present  state  of  tranquillity,  and  the  prospect  of  its  continuance,  afford  that  leisure  that 
the  exciting  occupations  of  war  led  us  to  disregard.  OEconomy  seems  imperatively  demandeil 
for  the  due  exercise  of  financial  regularity,  or,  in  plainer  terms,  a  smaller  expenditure  conducted 
on  a  simpler  and  clearer  arrangement  of  our  accounts.  Had  this  vital  (juestion  been  seriously 
entered  on  from  those  plain  and  simple  maxims  that  appear  now  so  obviously  essential  to  our 
future  existence,  after  the  cessation  of  hostilities  in  1S18,  the  results  wijuld  have  been  incal- 
culable, and  the  resources  of  our  Indian  Empire  would  have  been  comparatively  in  a  flourishing 
condition.  Every  branch  of  the  .service  would  long  since  have  recovered  from  the  effects  of  the 
necessary  retrenchments ;  and  even  the  war  establishments  might  have  been  retained,  while  a  few 
reforms  in  the  old  system  would  have  checked  those  increases  that  have  since  gradually  grown 
•  up.  This  would  have  left  the  army  on  its  former  war  complement,  with  its  proper  staff.  But 
the  glow  of  success,  and  such  success  as  ours  was,  would  selilom  allow  the  prudent  part  of  our 
judgement  its  due  exercise,  and  may  be  easily  pardoned  for  such  an  oversight. 

I  am  sensible  of  giving  expression  to  sentiments  of  a  nature  that  directly  point  to  political 


80 

events  and  individuals  of  great  eminence,  who  acted  the  prominent  parts  of  legislators  after  the 
war,  and  of  whom  I  may  be  deemed  an  incompetent  judge  ;  but  a  consideration  of  the  extra- 
ordinary mixed  character  of  affairs  in  this  country  will  justif}',  I  hope,  allusions  to  persons  that 
in  such  arduous  times  held  both  the  sword  and  the  pen,  and  who  appear  to  have  shone  so  emi- 
nently in  the  one  capacity,  and  have  left  us  only  excellent  theories  of  government  in  the  other, 
that  were  seldom  realized  into  financial  results.  Indian  warfare  maybe  said  to  be  divided  into 
two  parts — conquest,  and  the  reorganization  of  the  country  conquered.  It  will  be  thought  by 
the  experienced  that  the  first  is  the  easiest.  As  the  time  and  minds  of  the  principal  actors  are  so 
fullv  occupied,  after  the  conquest,  with  local  settlements, — which  upon  every  feeling  of  humanity 
and'justice  it  would  be  inexpedient  if  not  rash  to  disturb,  from  their  deep  importance  to  the 
princes  and  inhabitants  of  the  subdued  countries, — they  could  have  but  little  leisure ;  and  it 
would  have  been  in  such  a  situation  taxing  human  talents  and  energy  beyond  the  powers  of  the 
most  capacious  mind,  to  have  expected  a  system  of  retrenchment  and  oeconomy  in  detail.  What- 
ever their  intentions  may  have  been,  they  were  encompassed  with  difficulties  in  any  and  every 
attempt  at  settlement,  after  such  a  total  disorganization  of  all  rule  and  order;  they  were  met 
at  every  turn  by  innumerable  demands  for  rewards  for  service,  discordant  claims,  favours  to  de- 
serving persons,  and  a  general  adjustment  of  rights,  property,  rank,  and  pretensions,  whether 
well  or  ill  founded.  However  iliminished  our  finances  may  have  become  from  past  events,  no 
state  of  depression  equal  to  the  present  could  have  been  anticipated  by  the  most  keen  and  pro- 
vident foresight.  Some  diminution  might  have  been  expected  from  the  disappearance  all  at 
once  of  those  princely  establishments,  maintained  at  the  several  Indian  Courts,  that  gave  subsist- 
ence to  thousands,  on  the  ceasing  of  such  expenditure;  but  no  one  would  have  the  temerity  to 
predict  that  it  would  have  reached  its  present  depression,  particularly  as  some  of  the  causes  that 
determined  it,  commenced  their  effects  subsequent  to  that  period  of  indiscriminate  confusion. 

Other  reasons  could  be  alleged  for  the  delaying  of  the  introduction  of  a  retrenching  system, 
but  it  would  be  exceeding  the  proper  object  of  this  Report  to  attempt  it.  I  shall  therefore  merely 
advert  to  our  situation  in  its  widest  sense,  that  it  seems  at  present  to  require  little  more  than  a  system 
which  collects  all  the  materials,  and  arranges  them,  subject  to  certain  rules,  making  the  whole 
act  together.  INIethod  then  is  requisite  to  set  the  prepared  machine  to  work  and  keep  it  so,  on 
the  principles  it  has  been  framed  on.  To  accomplish  this,  we  neither  want  zeal,  information, 
public  spirit,  nor  talents,  but  possess  them  in  every  line  in  every  part  of  India.  Selections  could 
be  made  of  men  of  all  professions  to  act  separately  and  individually,  to  compass  the  great  object 
of  arrangement  and  oeconomy.  But  if  those  who  are  selected  are  made  to  act  in  a  body,  the 
usual  objections  may  naturally  be  apprehended,  that  the  views  of  some  may  cross  or  oppose 
those  of  others ;  and  however  correct  each  may  be  in  its  principle,  still  they  w  ill  unhappily  have 
the  effect  of  altering,  impeding,  and  in  some  cases  even  of  rendering  tiie  best  measures  nugatory. 

As  the  main  principles  for  governance  no  doubt  emanate  from  home,  while  the  details 
comprehended  in  those  general  maxims,  though  perfectly  understood  in  England,  must  be 
necessarily  undertaken  for  execution  by  those  executively  employed  on  the  spot,  and  entrusted 
with  the  local  Governments, — a  steady  and  careful  management  of  so  important  a  branch  of 
financial  administration  as  is  involved  in  the  maintenance  of  one  of  the  largest  armies  in  the 
world,  particularly  when  reductions  become  unavoidable,  is  best  effected  by  a  calm  and  critical 
disquisition  of  its  operative  system,  by  those  who  are  amicably  disposed  towards  it,  and  must 
prove  the  most  probable  and  just  procedure,  to  ensure  a  fair  and  beneficial  result. 

The  deep  attention  I  have  given  the  subject  convinces  me,  that  a  long  list  of  emendations 
still  remains  to  be  consulted,  before  the  important  and  contemplated  relief  can  be  attained, 
in  the  adoption  of  a  better  system.  I  shall  not  enumerate  the  unnoticed  parts  of  military 
expenditure,  but  onlv  advert  to  one, — the  large  amount  of  ordnance  and  other  stores  annually 
indented  for  from  Euro|)e,  as  if  the  State  were  still  engaged  in  actual  warfare ;  or  the  idea 
of  keeping  up  in  its  highest  state  of  preparation  every  species  of  equipment  in  the  heart  of 
the  country,  as  if  the  greater  portion  of  it  were  not  comprised  in  our  own  territories,  and  were 
not  under  civil  rule  or  a  capable  Government. 

I  hope  that  the  task  I  had  undertaken  will  not  appear  a  presumptuous  one,  in  seeming  to 
possess  a  complete  knowledge  of  such  large  and  diversified  subjects;  in  reality  I  had  no  preten- 
sions of  the  kind,  but  have  acted,  I  trust,  on  the  fairest  grounds,  by  candidly  and  unreservedly 
offering  what  knowledge  I  had  acquired  during  a  long  and  umemitting  series  of  service.  But  as 
a  satisfaction  to  you.  Honourable  Sir,  I  can  add,  in  accordance  with  your  own  acquaintance,  the 
circumstance,  that  few  iiave  been  more  fortunate  than  myself  in  their  opportunities,  and  if  my 
judgement  prove  wrong,  I  have  the  proud  conviction  that  the  ideas  that  guided  it  originated 
from  the  study  of  the  sentiments  of  some  of  the  ablest  and  soundest  men  that  have  distinguished 
themselves  in  the  field  of  Indian  policy  and  finance. 

I  have  now  the  honour  to  subscribe  myself,  with  the  greatest  respect. 
Honourable  Sir,  your  obedient  Servant, 
Bombay,  (Signed)         E.  Fredeiuck,  Lieutenant- Colonel, 

October  1st,  1830.  Memb.  of  the  late  Mil.  Fin.  Com. 


APPENDIX. 


To  LIEUTENANT-COLONEL  FREDERICK,  &c.,  &c.,  &c. 

Sir, 

JL  HAVE  given  tlie  most  attentive  perusal  to  the  numerous  papers  you  have  shown  to  me  ;  and  from 
these,  and  your  personal  communication  wlien  at  Malcolm  Peyt,  I  deem  it  my  duty  to  state  the  hij^h 
satisfaction  I  have  derived  from  tiie  full  proof  you  have  aftbrded  me,  that  your  time  during  your  resi- 
dence at  Calcutta  was  actively,  zealously,  and  usefully  employed  ;  and  that,  connected  with  your  actual 
and  anticipated  duties  as  Commissioner  (which  I  observe  from  your  letter  to  Government  were  performed 
in  a  manner  satisfactory  to  the  Governor-general),  you  have  accumulated  a  body  of  facts  upon  every 
subject  of  military  finance  of  the  three  Presidencies,  which  must  prove  of  great  utility  to  this  Govern- 
ment, by  enabling  it  to  promote  an  object  which  the  Honourable  the  Court  of  Directors  have  long  had  in 
view,  of  assimilating  the  establishments  and  departments  of  the  different  Presidencies,  where  local  cir- 
cumstances do  not  render  that  impracticable. 

Subsequent  to  your  departure  for  Bengal  I  have  been  incessantly  occupied  in  efforts  to  reduce  the  ex- 
penses of  this  Presidency.  No  branch  of  expenditure  has  attracted  more  of  my  notice  than  the  Military, 
and  my  personal  visit  to  the  different  stations  has  aided  Government  in  its  establishments  to  revise  and 
reduce  every  department,  with  the  strictest  attention  to  oeconomy  and  little  injury  as  possible  to  efficiency. 
It  will  become  my  duty  to  make  an  early  report  to  the  Supreme  Government  and  to  the  Honourable  the 
Court  of  Directors  upon  this  subject,  in  order  that  these  high  authorities  may  have  the  whole  that  has 
been  done  imder  one  view,  by  which  they  will  be  better  able  to  form  a  judgement  of  its  merits,  than  from 
detached  details  of  my  proceedings  ;  for  these  (however  different  the  objects)  are  all  regulated  by  the 
same  leading  principles,  which  are — to  diminish  offices  by  combining  duties,  and  through  the  reduction  and 
limitation  of  establishments  by  the  diminution  of  charge  of  unnecessary  forms  and  documents,  by  insti- 
tuting direct  responsibility,  and  making  checks  more  upon  demand  than  supply  ;  thus  vesting  that  power 
with  those  who  must,  from  their  experience  and  personal  knowledge,  be  able  to  exercise  it,  and  whose 
reputation  is  associated  with  the  strict  performance  of  this  most  important  of  all  duties  in  the  oeconomy 
of  a  Government. 

You  will  observe,  from  a  Circular  from  the  Acting  Secretary  under  date  the  21st  December  1829,  and 
other  papers  connected  with  the  subject,  that  a  complete  reform  of  the  constitution  of  the  different  offices 
under  this  Presidency  is  in  progress.  To  this  I  look  beyond  all  other  measures  for  the  diffusing  of  edu- 
cation, the  promotion  of  usefid  knowledge,  the  multiplication  of  efficient  persons  for  the  subordinate  duties 
of  different  departments,  and  eventually  the  promotion  of  oeconomy  as  well  as  of  integrity  in  the  subor- 
dinate branches  of  the  public  service. 

I  have  made  these  observations  that  you  may  be  aware  of  the  objects  I  have  had,  and  continue  to  have, 
in  view,  while  you  are  fulfilling  the  task  1  wish  to  assign  you,  of  examining  and  making  a  short  abstract 
under  distinct  heads  of  all  the  oeconomical  reforms  in  the  military  department  made  by  this  Government, 
under  orders  from  England  or  Bengal,  or  at  my  suggestion,  from  the  1st  of  November  1827,  up  to  the 
date  of  your  Report.  I  must  also  desire  that  you  will,  from  the  information  you  possess,  contrast  the 
constitution  and  the  whole  of  the  oeconomy  and  efficiency  of  our  military  estabhshments  and  departments 
with  those  of  Bengal  and  Madras,  giving  such  opinions  as  your  experience  and  knowledge  dictate  upon 
each.  This  Report  I  must  desire  as  early  as  you  can  prepare  it,  and  in  as  concise  a  form  as  it  can  be 
rendered :  and  to  enable  you  to  frame  it,  the  chief  Secretary  will  be  directed  to  give  you  access  to  all 
records,  and  to  call  for  any  account  or  statement  you  require  from  the  different  public  departments. 

I  have  the  honour  to  be,  &c. 

(Signed.)  John  Malcolm. 


This  full  and  able  Report  from  Lieutenant-Colonel  Frederick  on  the  Military  Establishment  of  the  diffi;- 
rent  Presidencies,  their  actual  constitution,  the  reforms  that  have  been  made  ;  the  contrasted  view  of 
those  of  the  different  Presidencies  and  general  financial  residts, — entitles  that  officer  to  the  best  thanks  of 
Government.  It  contains  a  great  body  of  information,  which  his  duty  as  a  Commissioner  at  Bengal 
could  alone  have  given  him  an  opportunity  of  collecting  ;  and  the  deductions  and  comparisons  made  from 
the  facts  accumulated  have  great  value,  as  coming  from  an  officer  of  such  experience  and  judgement. 

I  am  generally  agreed  with  Lieutenant-Colonel  Frederick  in  the  sentiments  he  has  expressed.  I  shall 
therefore  make  only  a  few  remarks  upon  his  letter. 

I  concur  with  Lieutenant-Colonel  Frederick  in  thinking  it  quite  practicable,  and  I  am  sure  it  would  be 
advantageous,  to  extend  the  same  principles  and  rules  to  the  Commissariat  over  all  India. 

I  do  not  concur  with  Lieutenant-Colonel  Frederick  in  all  his  opinions  regarding  grass-cutters  for  the 
cavalry, — I  deem  them  essential  to  that  branch  in  the  field  ;  and  in  India,  active  followers  who  supply 
forage  and  provisions  (though  difficult  perhaps  to  keep  in  order)  add  to  the  efficiencv  of  an  army. 

M 


82 

One  of  the  principal  duties  of  the  sappers  and  miners  in  India,  as  in  England,  is  pontooning;  and  there 
are  many  reasons  which  render  me  of  opinion  this  part  of  the  corps  should  have  superior  pay.  The 
eno-ineer  soldiers  in  England,  with  no  officers  but  their  own,  are  practised  in  all  infantry  duties,  and  it  is 
deemed  a  oreat  improvement  in  the  efficiency  of  that  branch.  The  engineers  for  the  Company's  army, 
who  are  instructed  at  Chatham,  learn  this  part  of  their  duty,  and  only  forget  it  when  they  have  no  practice 
in  India.  It  is  of  consequence  to  be  maintained  ;  and  for  this  and  other  reasons  I  should  be  sorry  to  see 
infantry  officers  introduced  into  this  corps  on  any  ground  but  an  actual  deficiency  of  numbers  in  those  of 
the  engineer  branch. 

The  grounds  upon  which  tentage  was  given  to  officers  of  native  troops  and  not  to  those  of  European 
corps,  though  food,  is  certainly  in  some  respects  invidious.  It  must  be  recollected,  however,  that  officers 
of  native  corps  are  frequently  liable  to  move  out  at  short  warning,  European  corps  seldom  and  almost 
always  with  warnino' :  an  allowance  of  this  nature,  not  often  wanted  for  the  specific  purpose  for  which 
it  was  given,  becomes  part  pay,  and  so  far  is  most  objectionable.  If  this  question  comes  imder  con- 
sideration in  Eno-land,  and  consideration  is  given  to  it, — I  think  a  sura  equal  to  half  that  before  granted 
at  Bombay  on  a  corps  being  ordered  for  service,  would  be  of  more  real  service  to  the  officers,  and 
more  ceconomical  to  Government,  than  any  other  mode.  This  amount,  if  given  to  officers  not  in  the 
field  every  two  years,  would  only  be  equal  to  one  third  of  the  amount  struck  oft",  and  might  not  be  paid 
until  the  certificate  of  the  commanding  officer  was  produced  of  the  party  to  whom  it  was  given  having 
his  camp  equipage.  This  would  effectually  provide  against  the  distress  and  difficulty  which  must  occur 
whenever  a  European  corps  is  ordered  to  move  under  the  present  system  ;  for  the  junior  officers  say, 
:md  with  justice,  they  have  not  money  to  enable  them  to  purchase  a  tent. 

I  am  f  lad  Lieutenant-Colonel  Frederick  has  given  the  first  Report  of  the  Jledical  Committee,  in  whose 
plan  of  education  and  employment  of  subordinate  medical  servants  I  fully  concur. 

I  have  in  several  recent  occasions  given  my  sentiments  on  Irregular  Horse.  They  are  at  variance  with 
those  of  Lieutenant-Colonel  Frederick  and  of  many  others  for  whose  judgement  I  have  a  high  respect. 
But  more  experience  than  probably  any  man  in  India,  of  the  utility  of  this  branch,  leads  me  to  consider 
them  a  most  ceconomical  and  essential  branch  of  our  military  strength ; — and  political  as  much  as  military 
considerations  satisfy  me,  they  cannot  be  enlisted  and  discharged  as  circimistances  suit,  without  the  loss 
both  of  their  efficiency  and  attachment: — but  I  have  elsewhere  given  my  reasons  at  great  length  on  this 
subject.  When  troops  are  wanted,  the  best  mode  is,  as  Lieutenant-Colonel  Frederick  suggests,  to  raise 
extra  corps  which  with  a  commandant  and  two  staff"  are  fit  for  all  ordinary  service.  If  required  in  the 
field  officers  can  be  named.  Such  corps  are  ceconomical,  and  can  be  raised  or  disbanded  without  that  dis- 
tress to  individuals  and  embarrassment  to  Government  which  attend  reductions  of  regidar  regiments. 

I  have  stated  all  that  appears  necessary  on  this  Report;  but  caimot  close  without  again  repeating  my 
sense  of  the  obligation  which  Government  owe  to  Lieutenant-Colonel  Frederick  for  this  valuable  com- 
munication,  a  copy  of  which,  with  the  letter  calling  on  him  for  it,  should  be  sent  to  the  Supreme  Govern- 
ment and  to  the  Honourable  the  Court  of  Directors,  with  a  strong  commendation  to  the  latter  to  distin- 
CTuish  by  their  particular  notice  an  officer  who  has  with  such  zeal,  ability,  and  independence  of  character, 
come  forward  at  this  moment  of  difficidty,  with  information  and  propositions  well  calculated  to  promote 
the  objects  of  ccconomy,  without  any  serious  injury  to  those  of  efficiency,  throughout  every  branch  of 

the  army  in  India. 

(Signed.)  J.  Malcolm. 

Bombay,  23rd  November,  1830. 


Table  No.  I Comparative  Statement  of  the  Rations  issued  to  Europeans  on  Ship-board 

proceeding  on  Foreign  Service. 


Names  of  Provisions. 


Biscuit    . 
Rice   . . . 
Flour  . . . 
Raisins 
Pease  . . 
Sugar    . , 
Tea    . . 
Pepper  . 
Mustard 


Bengal  ; 
Weekly. 


lbs.    oz. 


0  12 
0  2 
0     1 

0     2 


IMadras : 
Weekly. 


lbs.  oz. 

4  104 

0  0 

3  S 

0  8 

1  S 
1  0 
0  U 
0  0 
0  H 


Bombay ; 
Weekly. 


lbs.  oz. 
7     0 


0 
4 
8 

3tV' 


Xamcs  of  Provisions. 


Beef 

Pork 

Firewood    

Onions    

Spirits. .  . .    Dram 

Vinegar Pint 

Water  ....  Gallons 
Limejuice.  .Drams 


Bengal  :    I   Madras  :    I  Bombay  : 
Weekly.    ;    Weekly.    |    Weekly. 


lbs.   oz.        lbs.   oz. 
2      5-3"   1      ~      O-j- 


2     0 

2     0 

28     0 

14  billets 

0     0 

0     7 

14 

14 

T 

+ 

1 

5+ 

7+ 

0 

oz. 
o 
0 
0 
0 


14 


The  preference  is  to  the  Bengal  ration,  which  is  also  that  of  Bombay  with  little  variation. — Pepper  is 
necessary  with  the  pease,  and  not  onions,  which  do  not  keep  nor  mix  upwitii  anything  else :  and  limejuice 
is  absolutely  requisite  as  an  antiscorbutic  ;  while  one  gallon  of  water  is  by  no  means,  particularly  in  a 
hot  climate,  too  much  for  a  European  wjicn  fed  on  salt  provisions,  four  pints  out  of  the  gallon  being  re- 
quired for  cooking :  but  instead  of  one  pound  of  flour  per  week  it  should  be  3h  pounds  per  week  per  man, 
and  the  3i  pounds  of  rice  be  discontinued,  as  the  rice  is  of  little  use  to  Europeans,  and  to  reduce  the 
pound  of  biscuit  to  three-fourths.  This  will  improve  the  ration,  while  the  expense  is  decreased. 


83 


Table  No.  II. — Comparative  Statement  of  Personal  Appointments  to  Europeans  on  Shiiv 

board  [jroceciling  on  Foreign  Service. 


Names  of  Stores. 

Bengal. 

Madras. 

ISombay. 

Itcmarks. 

Hammocks  with  beds  complete 
for  each  man     

0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 
0 

0 
1 

1 

0 

(A) 
(A) 

1 

1 

(A) 
(A) 

0 

1 

0 
(B) 

(A).  The  Bombay  troops  are  in  every  situ- 
ation provided  with  camp  kettles,  covers 
and  dishes,  in  the  proportion  of  about 
1 3  of  each  kind  for  every  hundred  men ; 
consequently  these   articles  are   never 
necessary  on  foreign  service. 
(B).  These  articles  are  shipped  in  each 
transport,   agreeably  to  the  number  of 
troops  she  carries,  and  not  more  than 
one  set  for  a  transjx>rt,  which  was  found 
sufficient  on  these  occasions. 

Tin  bowls,  for  S  men   

Tin  mugs  for  each  man    

Canteens           tlitto 

Tin  kettles  for  5  men 

Tin  pans           ditto 

Wooden  spoons  ditto    

Haversacks  for  each  man     .... 

Meat  forks  for  50  men     

Spirit  measures,  sets  for  50  men 

The  Bombay  system  of  providing  tlie  soldier  in  every  situation  with  camp  kettle,  covers  and  dishes, 
may  be  considered  expensive  at  first  sight ;  but  in  the  end,  from  its  utility  in  a  military  point  of  view,  is 
certainly  the  best,  as  it  leaves  the  soldier  quite  unincumbered,  and  consequently  always  ready  for  his  duty. 
It  will  not,  I  believe,  be  any  increase  at  Madras,  as  earthen  pots,  chatties,  &c.  are  issued  there  in 
garrison  ;  and  at  Bengal  it  woidd  be  about  8000  per  annum.  If  the  whole  of  the  European  troops  were 
embarked  for  one  year  on  the  Bombay  Presidency,  no  additional  expense  would  be  incurred,  as  the  men 
get  kettles,  &c.  at  all  times. 


Tabl£  No.  III. — Comparative  Statement  of  the  Rations,  issued  to  Europeans  on  Shore, 


marching  on  actual  Service. 


Names  of  Provisions. 

Bengal : 
per  diem. 

Madras  : 
per  diem. 

Bombay  : 
per  diem. 

Biscuit,  or     

Rice 

lbs.  oz. 

1  0 

2  0 
I      8 
0      2 

3  0 

lbs.    oz. 

0  12 

1  5 
1      8 

0     2i 
5  billets 

2 

lbs.   oz. 
1      8 
1      8 
1      8 

0      2 

4      0 
o 

Fresh  Meat 

Salt 

Wood   

Spirit Drams 

The  ration  in  the  table  marked  [_A^  is  no  more  than  sufficient  for  a  man  on  a  march,  when  his  appetite 
increased  by  strong  exercise  becomes  keener,  and  requires  more  sustenance  to  recruit  his  physical  strength. 
It  is  to  be  remembered  that  the  soldiers  have  to  maintain  their  cooks  and  many  of  their  women  who  ac- 
company them  ;  and  in  all  calculations  of  this  nature,  something  more  than  tlie  mere  quantum  of  food  to  be 
consumed  by  a  single  individual  must  be  provided  for.  But  if  on  the  contrary  no  kind  of  allowance  is  made 
on  this  head,  the  pay  of  these  followers  must  be  increased, — the  eft'ects  of  which  will  prove  by  no  means 
inconsiderable  to  the  soldier,  particularly  where  labour  is  so  dear  as  it  is  on  the  western  side  of  India. 
It  appears  that  the  Europeans  at  Madras  never  receive  biscuit  but  when  the  rice  is  bad,  the  advantage  of 
which  might  be  questioned  ;  and  I  certainly  would  not  advise  its  adoption  at  the  other  Presidencies,  esjK'- 
cially  as  the  quantity  is  only  fib.  of  bread  :  a  healthy  man  marching  can  scarcely  manage  under  one 
pound  of  bread.  This  opinion  might  be  supported  from  the  practice  of  medical  men,  who  allow  their  patients 
in  hospital  |lb.  However,  if  soldiers  are  to  have  the  same  rations  while  stationary  as  marching,  and  it  is 
intended  that  the  increase  of  expense  on  one  establishment  should  be  counterbalanced  by  a  correspond- 
ing reduction  on  the  other,  I  should  in  that  case  give  the  pcference  to  the  Bengal  scale  ; — but  I  still  think 
the  proposed  modification  jnefi  rahie  as  shown  in  the  table  marked  [/•/.] 


Table  [^-J. —  Statement  of  the  proposed  Rations  to  Europeans  Marching  and  Stationary. 


Field  Service  or  /Actual  Marching. 
Ration  Weekly. 

^Ibs.  ofmeat    7  days. 

lib.  of  biscuit  or  bread    7  ditto. 

•jlb.  of  rice        4  ditto. 

^ib.  of  flour      3  ditto. 

•tlbs.  of  wood          7  ditto. 

loz.  of  salt       7  ditto. 

2  dr.ims  of  spirit      7  ditto. 


Stationary  Cantonments  of  Full  or  Half  Batta. 
Ration  Weekly. 

lib.  of  meat      7 

fib.  of  bread    7 

^ib.  of  rice        3 

lb.  of  flour      4 

of  wood   7 

oz.  of  salt 7 


2 

21b 


1  dram  of  spirit   7 

Salt  meat  never  to  be  issued  but  on  occasions  of  emergency,  and  then  only  one  pound. 

M2 


days, 
ditto, 
ditto, 
ditto, 
ditto, 
ditto, 
ditto. 


84 


Table  No.  IV. — Comparative  Statement  of  Rations  issued  to  Natives  on  Shore,  when 

Foreign  Service. 


on 


Names  of  ProTisions, 

Bengal  : 
per  diem. 

Madras  : 
per  diem. 

Bombay  : 
per  diem. 

The   Bengal  scale  is  here  the 
best,   as  turmeric   is   merely  for 
colouring   the    rice  :    nor    should 
tobacco    be   given    except    when 
tlie  men  cannot  provide  themselves 
with  it  in  the  bazar. 

Rice 

lbs.  oz. 
2      0 
0     4 
0      2 
0      0 
0     0 
0     04 

lbs.  oz. 
2      0 
0     4 
0      2 
0     2 
0     04- 
0     04 

lbs.  oz. 
1      8 
0     8 
0     2 
0     0 
0     0 
0     2 

Dholl 

Ghee 

Tobacco 

Turmeric    

S.ilt 

Table  No.  V. — Comparative  Statement  of  Rations  issued  to  Hindoos  who  do  not  cook  on 
board  ship  when  proceeding  on  Foreign  Service. 


Names  of  Provisions. 


Flour  

Ch'.irah 

Gram 

Ghee 

Oil 

Tamarind 

Sugar 

Salt  Fish  ....  No. 

Salt 

Chillies 

Pepper 

Coriander  seed  . . 
Cinnamon  seed  . . 

Garlick 

Onions 

Turmeric 

Tobacco 

Beetlenut. . .  .No. 
Paun-leaves . .  No. 

Chunam 

Kaut 

Firewood 

Water ....  Gallons 


Bengal  : 
per  diem. 


lbs.  oz. 

0  6 

0  12 

0  10 

0  2 

0  H 

0  4 

0  4 

0 

0  1 

0  0^ 

0  0 

0  0 

0  0 

0  0 

0  0 

0  0 

0     2 
o 

10 

0     04 

0  0-j 

1  0 

1 


Madras  : 
per  diem. 


lbs.  oz. 
0  8 
0      0 

0  0 
0      U 
0     0 


0  2- 

0  O-rt- 

0  OA 

0  0- 

0  OA 

0  0-fy 

0  0^ 

0  OW 

0    H 

0 

0     0 

0     0 

H  billet 

1 


Bombay  : 
per  diem. 


lbs.  oz. 

0  0 

1  4 
0  12 
0  2 
0  0 
0  2 
0     4 

0 
0     1 
0     04- 
0     Oi 
0     0 
0     0 
0     0^ 
0     2 
0     0 
0     2 

2 

0 
0     0 
0     0 
0     0 

1 


One  chest  of  tea  and  five  quarts  of  limejuice 
are  allowed  at  Bengal  for  200  men  when  the  voyage 
exceeds  two  months. 


I  should  prefer  the  Bombay  scale  being  esta- 
blished, as  it  was  formed  from  experience  on  expe- 
ditions of  considerable  extent,  and  found  to  answer 
for  the  last  twenty-eight  years.  To  Egypt,  the 
Persian  Gulf,  and  coast  of  Arabia,  Hindoos  cannot 
cook  on  board  ship,  consequently  they  do  not 
require  either  flour  or  wood,  and  as  paun-leaves 
spoil  very  soon,  they  with  the  kaut  and  chunam 
are  quite  superfluous: — as  a  proof,  nearly  all  the 
kaut  shipped  for  the  expedition  with  General 
Keir  was  returned  to  Bombay,  and  the  chunam 
was  used  to  whitewash  the  transports. 


Table  No.  VI. — Comparative  Statement  of  Rations  issued  to  Natives  who  cook  on  board 

ship,  proceeding  on  Foreign  .Service. 


Names  of  Provisions. 


Bengal : 
per  diem. 


Rice 

Dholl 

Gram 

Ghee 

Oil 

Tamarind 

Sugar 

Salt  Fish  . . .  .No. 

Salt 

Chillies 

Pepper   

Coriander  seed  . . 


lbs,  oz. 


8 
4 
2 
2 

It 

4 

4 

0 

1 

0+ 

0-i 

0 


Madras  : 
per  diem. 


Bombay  : 
per  diem. 


lbs.  oz. 
1    12 
0     4+ 
0     0 
0     H 
0      0 


U 

0 


1 

0  2-^^ 

0  OA 

0  OA 

0  OA 


lbs.  oz. 


1  6 

0  6 

0  2 

0  2 

0  0 

0  2 

0  4 

0  8 

0  1 

0  Oi 

0  0-k 

0  0 


Names  of  Provisions. 


Cumnur  seed .... 

Garlick 

Onions 

Turmeric    

Tobacco 

Beetlenut. .  .  .No 
Paun-leaves     No- 

Chunam 

Kaut 

Firewood 

Water  .  . .  Gallons 


Bengal ; 
per  diem. 


Madras  ; 
per  diem. 


lbs.  oz. 
0     0 


0-k 
0-V 


10 
0     Oi 
0     Oi 
2     0 

1 


lbs.  oz. 
0      OA 


OA 
OA 
OA 

u 


0 

0     0 

0     0 

U  billet. 

1 


Bombay  : 
per  diem. 


lbs.   02. 
0      0 


0+ 
0+ 

ov 


0 
0     0 
0      0 
2      0 

1 


The  Madras  scale  for  this  class  of  men  is  the  best.  It  includes  everything  necessary  for  currie  and 
kedjeery  of  people  cooking,  omitting  those  articles  which  are  only  useless  delicacies ;  such  as  parched  gram, 
sugar,  and  oil ;  while  j)aun  will  not  keep,  which  with  the  kaut  and  chunam  are  a  needless  expense. 


85 


Table  No.  VII. — Comparative  Statement  of  the  Personal  Appointments  allowed  to  the  Native 

Troops  proceeding  on  Foreign  Service. 


Names  of  Storts. 

Uerigal. 

Madras. 

Uombay. 

Names  of  Stores. 

Bengal, 

Madras. 

Bombay. 

Cuniljlifs  per  man   .... 
Canteens     ditto       .... 
Beetlenut-cuttcrs  for  50 

0 
0 

0 

1 
1 

1 

0 

1 

0 

Ueastie     bags    for     25 
men  ••••••••....•. 

0 

1 

1 
0 

(1 
0 

Towalis  for  1 0  men  .  . . 

Preference  Iiere  should  be  given  to  the  Bombay  mode  ;  as  canteens  are  not  only  necessary,  but  ex- 
tremely useful  to  enable  the  men  to  keep  the  water  in  on  board  ship,  as  well  as  on  marches,  ])articularly 
over  arid  lands  where  a  scarcity  of  water  prevails,  which  has  frequently  happened  to  the  Bombay  troops. 
Towahs  for  bakinjr  bread  are  useless  to  Hindoos  in  the  Bengal  and  Bombay  Presidencies,  as  they  do  not 
cook  ;  while  tlie  issue  of  beastie  bags  at  Madras  seems  almost  superfluous,  if  the  regimental  beastiea  are 
present  with  a  canteen. 

The  beetlenut-cutters  have  hitherto  been  deemed  unnecessary,  as  the  men  crack  the  beetlenut  on  the 
deck,  or  frequently  have  cutters  themselves. 


Table  No.  VIII. — Comparative  Statement  of  the   Proportion  of  Dead   Stock   shipped    for 
Europeans  and  Native  Troops  proceeding  on  Foreign  Service  in  Transports. 


Names  of  Articles. 


Lanthorn  for  100  men 

Candles  for  100  men 

Pail  buckets  for  10  men  .... 
Horse  buckets  for  20  men  . . , 
Cabooses,  with  sheet  leads  for  50 

men    

Copper   boilers    with    covers,    and 

spoons  for  25  men 

Scuttle  butts  for  100  men 

Copper  scales  with  weights  for  100 

men 

Deck  scrapers  for  5  men 

Brooms  for  5  men 

Grinding  stones  for  50  men 

Swabs  for  25  men 


Bengal. 

Madras.  ] 

3ombay. 

0 

0 

1 

1 

0 

1 

0 

1 

0 

1 

0 
0 

1 
1 

>(A) 

0 

2  sets 

0 

1 

0 

1 

0 
0 

1 
1       - 

(A). — All  these  articles  are  shipped  at  the 
discretion  of  the  Commissary-general,  and 
in  the  proportion  which  the  agent  for 
transports  may  judge  expedient  on  these 
occasions,  so  that  the  ships  may  not  be 
lumbered  with  anything  superfluous. 


I  must  differ,  both  as  to  the  proportion  in  which  it  is  supplied  at  Madras,  as  well  as  to  the  mode  of  dis- 
tributing the  articles  to  the  men  and  to  be  taken  care  of  by  them  :  it  can  hardly  be  a  question  which  is  the 
best  plan  ;  for  the  quantity  in  the  first  place  is  too  large,  and  will  be  found  very  much  to  encumber  the 
ships,  and  it  is  out  of  reason  to  expect  tiiat  the  troops  can  take  care  of  them  when  they  land.  The  people 
of  the  transports  are  the  proper  persons  to  have  charge  of  these  articles,  otherwise  while  the  troops  are 
on  shore  they  would  be  neglected  and  lost  for  want  of  proper  superintendence  :  I  therefore  prefer  the 
Bombay  plan,  as  most  efficient  and  economical.  The  quantity  of  dead  stock  being  calculated  by  the 
Commissary-general  according  to  the  length  of  the  voyage,  and  in  the  proportion  whiih  the  agent  for 
transports  may  think  sufficient,  who  might  be  deemed  the  most  proper  officer  to  judge  what  may  be  most 
useful  in  his  own  line,  to  prevent  the  transport  being  lumbered  with  anytliing  superfluous  : — for  instance, 
a  transport  carrying  three  hundred  men,  would  by  the  Madras  calculation  require  six  cabooses  with  sheet 
leads  complete  ;  a  number  sufficient  at  Bombay  for  three  ships,  as  all  ships  have  cabooses  of  their  own. 
To  accommodate  such  numbers  must  greatly  inconvenience  the  shipping  on  these  services,  where  too  much 
room  cannot  be  appropriated  for  the  personal  accommodation  of  the  men  and  the  working  of  the  ship. 


Table  No.  IX. — Comparative  Statement  of  Rations,  &c.,  issued   to  Horses  proceeding  on 

Foreign  Service  on  Ship-board. 


Names  of  Articles. 


Hay  or  Straw. . . . 

Grain 

Water  .  .  .Gallons 
Horse-buckets.  .  . 


Bengal  : 
per  diem. 


^ladras  : 
per  diem. 


lbs. 

10 

G 


lbs.    oz. 

44     0 

7     0 

5 

1 


Bombay  : 
per  diem. 


lbs.  oz. 
24  0 
11      4 

S 
(A) 


(A). — This  like  all  other  dead  stock  for  the 
voyage  is  shipped  by  the  Commissariat,  at  the  dis- 
cretion of  the  Commissary-geneml  in  communi- 
cation with  agents  for  transports. 


Few  cavalry  have  ever  been  shipped  from  Bombay  for  foreign  service  on  transports  for  any  lengtli  of 


86 

time,  except  a  troop  of  horse  artillery  to  the  coast  of  Arabia  in  1821,  and  then  the  horses  were  sent  in  open 
boats  called  buggalahs.  I  have  however  been  upwards  of  thirty  days  on  board  a  ship  containing  seventy- 
four  horses,  in  very  hot  weather,  in  the  Persian  Gulf,  where  the  distress  occasioned  by  heat  and  a  small 
quantity  of  water  was  very  great;  and  from  what  Colonel  CunliHe  mentioned  of  the  heat  between  decks 
generally,  an  ample  supply  of  water  appears  desirable.  By  His  Majesty's  orders  also  in  the  tmbarkation 
of  horses,  it  is  directed  that  they  should  not  be  over-fed  during  the  voyage. 

Tlie  Bengal  ration,  as  embracing  both  these  points,  might  therefore  be  preferred ;  for  a  pony  would 
drink  nearly  five  gallons  of  water  on  shore,  and  a  horse  must  require  more  to  relieve  his  thirst  occasioned 
by  frequent  perspiration. 


Statement  exhibiting  the  Strength  of  the  Honourable  Company's  Army  on  the  Bombay  Esta- 
blishment from  the  year  1816  to  1829.  Showing  also  the  Expense  incurred  on  account  of 
Stores  duriniT  the  same  Period. 


Strength  of  the  Company's  Anny. 

Yearly  Expense 

Infantry  including  In- 

Cavalry. 

Artillery. 

valids  and  Pioneers. 

Total. 

on    account  of 

Total  amount 

of 

Year. 

Stores. 

5  years. 

Native 

European. 

Lascars. 

European. 

Native 

Cavalry. 

Infantry. 

lSlG-17 

229 

857 

1,446 

1,036 

22,556 

26,124 

3,64,709  3  20 

1S17-18 

783 

884 

1,394 

1,119 

24,613 

28,793 

8,24,721   0  89 

1818-19 

946 

865 

1,417 

1,042 

27,751 

32,021 

11,54,151    1   31 

1819-20 

924 

954 

1,040 

886 

27,287 

31,091 

7,38,816  0  63 

1820-21 

1,375 

907 

870 

775 

28,153 

32,080 

5,65,969  2   17 

36,48,368  0 

20 

1821-22 

1,548 

1,033  ' 

871 

836 

27,492 

31,780 

3,52,337  0  46 

1822-23 

1,513 

910 

1,000 

774 

27,056 

31,253 

3,17,756  1   74 

1823-24 

1,519 

952 

926 

1,010 

27,814 

32,221 

5,25,940  3  25 

1824-25 

1,913 

845 

959 

1,135 

29,887 

34,739 

2,59,416  3  85 

1825-26 

2,085 

823 

974 

1,239 

35,138 

40,259 

5,23,550  2  21 

19,79,001   3 

51 

1826-27 

2,181 

917 

978 

1,301 

34,074 

39,451 

5,23,550  2  21 

1827-28 

2,145 

1,084 

1,114 

1,091 

36,109 

41,543 

5,73,837   2   13 

1828-29 

2,230 

1,089 

1,115 

1,259 

33,775 

39,468 

7,45,867   1   60 

1829-30 

2,157 

992 

1,158 

1,339 

32,358 

38,004 

6,51,872  3  31 

24,95,128   1 

25 

Statement  of  the  Number  and  Prices  of  Horses  purchased  during  the  last  Four  Seasons  in  the 
Market  at  Bombay,  for  Remount  of  the  Madras  Cavalry. 

1823-24 80  Horses  purchased  for  Rupees      39,635 

1824-25 106     ditto         ditto  ditto        65,586 

1S25-2C 432     ditto         ditto  ditto     2,17,696 

1826-27 434     ditto  ditto  ditto     2,53,060 

Total  number  of  Horses  1052  Total  Rupees. . . .   5,75,977 

General  average  price  547^  rupees  nearly. 


Statement  relative  to  the  Stud  Establishment  on  the  Bombay  Presidency :    established  for  the 

Improvement  of  the  Breed  of  Horses. 

Stallions. 

Six  or  eight  stallions  are  stationed  in  each  collectorate,  and  all  mares  brought  are  covered  by  tiiem  gratis. 

The  produce  is  considered  exclusively  the  property  of  the  owner  of  the  mare,  and  he  is  at  liberty  to 
dispose  of  it  as  he  diinks  proper. 

Casualties  amongst  the  stallions  are  supplied  from  superior  horses  sent  to  Government  as  presents  from 
the  Imaum  of  Muscat  and  other  princes  in  the  Gulf 

Four  En''lish  stallions  were  sent  out  by  the  Honourable  Court  of  Directors  in  May  1829. 

A  market  has  been  opened  at  the  head-quarters  of  each  regiment  of  cavalry,  where  a  committee  passes 
and  for  any  horses  of  which  they  approve,  without  the  aid  of  any  intermediate  agency  ; 

so  that  the  breeder  receives  the  full  value  of  his  horse  on  the  spot,  and  returns  to  his  village  without 
delay  or  expense. 

The  keep  of  64  mares  and  47  foals  averages,  during  the  last  year,  about  637  rupees  per  month. 


87 

On  the  SHbjpct  of  the  prizes  jjrantcd  to  the  winners  of  cart  races  carrying  a  certain  weiglit,  we  tonsi- 
iler  tlie  plan  well  calculated  to  please  the  crowds  which  attend,  and  thereby  aflbrd  a  general  inducement 
to  Patels  and  Ryuls,  tic.  to  visit  the  fairs  witli  their  families,  which  no  doubt  has  a  great  efiect  in  creating 
in  tlieir  minds  an  interest  and  excitement  which  wnidd  in  most  cases  lead  to  their  individual!}'  entering 
into  the  object  in  view,  viz.  cattle-breeding;  and  on  these  grounds  we  should  be  sorry  to  recommend  the 
i)remiums  being  abolished.  I!ut  it  by  no  means  follow  s  that  the  largest  are  the  l)est  bullocks,  even  on 
these  occasions ;  the  winners  are  generally  cattle  vvhicli,  from  being  in  good  training  as  speedy  travelling 
bullocks,  are  enabled  to  live  longer  at  a  (piick  pace,  than  animals  capable  of  drawing  much  more,  and 
theretbre  better  for  agricultural  purposes  than  the  smaller  active  description  of  cattle  used  in  travelling. 

On  the  whole,  wc  consider  the  result  of  the  show  satisfactory,  particularly  as  regards  the  Iiorses. 

It  will  be  gratifying  to  Government  to  learn,  that  the  number  of  horses  at  the  late  show  was  consider- 
ably greater  than  last  year :  l)ut,  what  was  of  far  more  importance,  the  increase  of  a  better  description 
was  particularly  conspicuous.  The  concourse  of  people  assembled  was  larger  than  in  1828,  and  the 
same  interest  displayed  by  them  in  the  proceedings,  as  we  had  the  gratification  of  noticing  in  our  last 
Report.  Indeed  this  part  of  the  object  in  contemplation  is  now  so  far  advanced  as  to  ensure  the  accom- 
plishment of  the  wish  of  Government,  that  in  the  course  of  a  few  years  the  appointed  day  will  become  a 
sort  of  fair  in  each  district,  affording  the  most  substantial  encouragement  and  convenience  to  all  parties, 
if  future  measures  are  squared  upon  those  which  have  been  hitherto  followed. 

Present  State  of  the  Stud  Establishment  at  Alligaum,  1st  July,  1830. 

Number  of  Mares  in  charge 64 

'     of  Foals 25 

of  Fillies 22 

Total     in 

^  Expenses  of  the  Establishment  for  Improving  the  Breed  of  Horses. 

40  Stallions  averaging  IC  rupees  each  per  month 640 

64  Mares  and  47  Foals,  averaging  per  month 637 

Superintendent's  salary  and  travelling  charges 840 

Office  establishment ,.,  142 

Rupees  2259 


The  keep  of  the  stallions  (with  the  exception  of  five  stallions  at  Malligaum)  is  paid  by  the  collectors 
in  whose  districts  they  are  stationed. 


Register  of  Additions  and  Alterations  in  the  Establishments  of  the  Bombay  Presidency,  from 
1st  November  1827  to  1st  November  1830. 

Annual   Charge. 
r- " < 


Things  Ordered.— 1827.  jj^^g_ 

A  quarter-master-serjeant  allowed  for  the  depot  for  King's  troops  at  Colabah.  IQ$ 

The  battalion  of  Golundaze  remodelled  (Court's  orders) j  7  454 


Increase  of  salary  to  the  Musselman  Moonchee  of  the  native  medical  school 

An  establishment  allowed  for  the  care  of  sick  officers  quarter 

Increase  of  salary  to  brigade-major  (Court's  orders) 

Reduction  of  Allowances  of  certain  Staff  Officers  :    viz. 

Agent  for  gun-carriages 

Paymaster,  Poona  division 

1  St  member  of  the  medical  board 

,'nd  ditto  

Jrd  ditto  

Superintending  surgeon,  Concan  and  South  Guzerat 

Ditto  North-west  division,  Guzerat 

Ditto  Poona  division 

Ditto  Malwa  field  force 

Medical  storekeeper 

Inspector  of  hospitals.  King's  troops 

Two  assistant  adjutants-general 3,696 

Two  assist;tnt  quarter-masters-general S,6dG 


7,392 
990 


480 
600^ 
924  J 


Less. 


2,800 
2,400 
9,570 
9,570 
9,570 
4,487 
4,487 
4,487 
4,487 
6,000  • 
12,380 


6,402^ 


Deduct  additional   batta  (without  house-rent)  allowed  to  two  of  the  1 
above,  not  previously  in  receipt  of  it J 

'  This  is  the  amount  of  prospective  increases  in  salaries  :  but  as  brigade-major  of  districts,  if  lieutenants, 

will  not  draw  ;is  formerly  the  allowances  of  captain,  there  will  probably  be  a  saving  instead  of  an  increase. 

-  Honourable  Court's  order,  2nd  May  1827.  '  Prospective  as  vacancies  occur. 


88 


Regimental  Tent  Allowance  struck  oflf  from  certain  Staff  Officers,  viz. 

Auditor-general 

Deputy         

1  St  Assistant 

2nd     ditto  

Agent  for  clothing 

for  gun-carriages 

for  gunpowder 

Barrack-master  at  Bombay 

Commandant,  depot  King's  troops 

Commissary  of  stores,  grand  arsenal 

1st  deputy 

2nd  ditto    

Director  of  artillery,  depot  of  instruction 

Fort-adjutant,  Bombay 

Surat 

Ahmednuggur 

Medical  store-keeper 

Deputy,  Poona 

Secretary  to  the  military  board 

Assistant 


Secretary  to  the  medical  board 

Surgeons'  general  hospital 

Assistant 

Bombay  garrison 

Assistant 

Tannah  garrison 

Surat  ditto,  and  dry  medical  store-keeper 

Assistant 

.  Broach  garrison  assistant 

Lunatic  asylum 

Town-major 

Full  batta  allowed  to  the  commissary-general  and  the  military  secretary  to  the 

commander-in-chief  (Court's  order) 

An  allowance  to  the  non-commissioned  officer  teaching  the  sword  exercise  at 

the  Presidency 

Increase  of  allowance  to  Roman  Catholic  priests  to  attend  soldiers  at  the  Pre- 
sidency   

A  contract  for  three  years  executed  for  repairing  the  road  from  Panvell  to  Poona  : 
Average  yearly  amount,  rupees  16  3  20. 

A  convalescent  hospital  established  at  Mahablishwar 

Additional  establishment  for  the  barrack  department  at  Poona 

Increase  of  house-rent  to  the  town-major,  fort-adjutant  and  garrison-surgeon, 

Bombay 

An  officer  appointed  to  superintend  the  repairs  of  buildings  at  Assurghur 

A  treasure-chest  at  Malligainn  re-established 

Establishment  allowed  to  the  inspector  of  the  sword  exercise  at  Poona 

Two  officers   appointed   to  assist  the  executive  engineer,   Baroda  and  N.  D. 

Guzerat,  in  carrying  on  the  repairs  at  Baroda  and  Hursole 

An  officer  appointed  to  conduct  a  trigonometrical  survey  in  the  Deccan 

Increase  of  allowances  to  the  medical  storekeeper  (Court's  order) 

Additional  establishment  for  the  church  at  Mhow 

Reduction  of  Commissariat  Establishments  in  Malwa :  viz. 

234  Dooley-bearers  and  1 37  Brinjary  bullocks 

Increase  of  pay  to  Peons  gunpowder  manufactory 

A  cooper  allowed  for  the  ordnance  department,  Baroda  S.  F 

Allowance  granted  to  officer  in  charge  of  the  station  at  Mahablishwar  for  con- 
valescent soldiers 

Purchase  of  4  draft  bullocks  bred  in  Candesh  (authorized) 

Increase  of  pay-olKce  rent  allowance,  Poona 

A  horse  and  a  pair  of  bullocks  sanctioned  for  Kirkee 


Annual 

!^harge. 

More. 

Less. 

1,800-) 

900 

600 

600 

900 

900 

900 

900 

600 

1,440 

900 

900 

900 

900 

600 

•  •  ■  • 

COO 

900 

•  •  •  • 

600 

•  •  .  * 

1,800 

•  ■  •  • 

900 

«... 

900 

•  •  •  • 

900 

■  •  •  • 

600 

•  .  *  . 

900 

>  .  .  • 

600 

•  •  •  • 

900 

• . .  • 

900 

> .  . . 

600 

• . .  . 

600 

.... 

600 

.... 

1,440  J 

4,900 
4S0- 
480 


15,000 

84' 

3600 
1460 
1320 
480* 

2920 
14,266 
1527 
444  ' 


102 
360' 

1988 
600 
600 
360 


21,000 


'  Struck  oflTby  the  Honourable  Court's  order.  May  2nd  1827.  Regimental  tent  allowance  increases 
with  increase  of  rank.  This  calculation  is  made  with  reference  to  the  rank  of  the  officers  holding  sta- 
tionary staff  appointments  at  the  time  tlie  orders  striking  off  the  allowance  were  issued. 

-  Since  discontinued.     The  saving  is  shown  in  the  statement  of  reductions. 

■■  The  whole  establishment  is  not  kept  up  throughout  the  year  ; — temporary,  or  during  the  fair  season 
only. 

*  Since  discontinued.  '  Since  discontinued.  '  Since  struck  off. 


89 


Annual  Charge. 


Field  allowances  at  Mliow  struck  off,  heinj;;  a  savinp;  in  tlic  allowances  to  Euro- 
peans of  ruprt'S  til, 000,  and  to  natives  of  1,70,000 

Establishment  allowed  the  committee  compiling  the  supplementary  sections  to 

the  rejjulations,  discontinued 

Full  batta  allowed  to  those  officers  at  Poona  learning  the  sword  exercise  who 

are  absent  from  their  corps    

Lascars  for  the  Ihanghar  boats  at  Malligaum  allowed    

Persons  to  administer  oaths  in  the  cantonment  adawlut  allowed  to  the  superin- 
tendent of  bazars  at  Poona      

An  interpreter  allowed  to  Guzcrat  i)rovincial  battalion    

Addition  to  bazar  and  police  department,  Assurglnir        

Thirty-six  eojjies  of  the  Quarterly  Army  List  ordered' 

A  commandant  allowed  for  Assurghur   on  the  pay  of  a  2nd  class  brigadier 

(Honourable  Court's  order) 

Allowance  for  four  field  Rowtie  tents  for  the  Poona  bazar  struck  off   

Stationary  allowance  on  accounts  of  unfits  at  the  Presidency     

Addition  to  ordnance  establishment,  Surat  and  Kaira   

Sundry  details  detached  from  the  13.  S.  F.  to  take  possession  of  certain  districts 

belonging  to  the  Guccowar  placed  under  sequestration      

A  dooley  for  European  veteran  company  at  Tannah 

Additional  office  rent  allowance  to  quartermaster-general     

The  regimental  allowances  of  the  Bombay  army  in  the  service  of  native  princes 

struck  off,  viz.  two  captains  of  cavalry  and  four  of  infantry 

An  executive  engineer  appointed  at  Deesa     

An  additional  washerman  for  sappers  and  miners 

Superintending  surgeons  granted  travelling  batta  as  surgeons  on  tours  of  in- 
spection     

A  trumpet-major  added  to  the  establishment  of  the  brigade  of  horse  artillery. . 

Additional  establishment  for  the  church  at  Bhooj 

Additional  establishment  for  the  church  at  Poona    

The  Lock  hospital  at  Dapoolie  abolished 

House  hired  for  a  granary  at  Hursole    

Additional  establishment  in  commissariat  department,  Poona     

Extra  allowance  to  cantonment  surgeon,  Matoonga      

Full  batta  allowed  native  infantry  details  at  Poona  learning  the  sword  exercise . 

Additional  office  establishment  for  military  board      

Four  pay  Havildars  in  Southern  Concan  to  assist  in  paying  pensioners    

A  dooley  for  ICth  regiment  native  infantry  at  Baroda     

Allowance  to  artillery  officer  in  charge  of  the  ordnance  department,  Southern 

Concan,  for  Vingorla 

Two  Government  plates  to  be  annually  run  for  by  horses  bred  in  Western  India 
Allowance  to  officer  selected  for  command  of  troops  occupying  Guicowars  se- 
questered district 

Allowance  to  officer  appointed  to  command  the  troops  occupying  sequestered 

district  north  of  Baroda 

Salary  to  an  officer  specially  appointed  to  assist  in  purchasing  horses  for  Euro- 
pean corps    

An  establishment  for  soldiers'  library  at  Poona 

Additional  office  establishment  to  quartermaster-general 

The  appointment  of  a  line  serjeant  at  Deesa  sanctioned     

Assistant  to  drill  instructions  in  the  sword  exercise    

Establishment  of  Puckaulies  with  His  Majesty's  4th  light  dragoons  reduced, 

1 8  bullocks  with  drivers  being  discharged 

A  barrack-serjeant  appointed  to  Nilgherry  Hills 

A  line  serjeant  appointed  at  Bhooj      

New  organization  of  Hill  Fort,  native  commands 

Two  staff-officers  appointed  to  proceed  on  special  duty  to  Calcutta,  and  two 
officers  to  act  in  their  room,  all  drawing  full  staff  allowance  (order  by  the 
Supreme  Government)    


More. 


1,440"- 
575 

312 

720 ' 
2,010 
432 

0,240 

340  < 
240* 

48,000  « 
336 
000' 


3,150 
120' 

1,000» 
435 
408 
000 

300 

900  '0 
1,400" 
3,780  I- 
3,240  " 

240 

420 

1,200 '< 
2,400  " 

3,000  '« 

3,000  " 

is 
84 
780  " 
252 
300  -"o 


240 


9,468 


Less. 
2,10,000' 
2,535 


1,440 


9,304 


1,500 


2,392 


'  The  strength  of  the  force  was — 1  troop  horse  artillery,  1  company  foot  ditto,  1  regiment  native 
cavalry,  4  ditto  native  infantry,  pioneers  and  department. 

-  Since  discontinued.       ■"'  A  civil  charge.       *  This  amount  is  liable  to  fluctuation.       '  Since  discharc-ed. 
'  Temporary  ;  this  sum  is  the  estimated  amount  of  field  allowances  and  extra  establishment. 
'  Since  struck  off  '  Struck  off.  "  Probable  amount.  '"  Since  reduced. 

"  Since  discontinued.  '''  Ibid.  "  Since  struck  off.  "  Since  discontinued.  "  Ibid. 

■'  Temporary.        "  Ibid.       ''  Rupees  500  per  month,  temporary,  confined  to  a  period  of  six  months. 
''  Since  reduced.  '"  Since  discontinued. 

^'  Temporary,  since  discontinued;  expense,  rupees 29,534  ;3er  annum. 

N 


90 


Annual  Charge. 


The  light  battalions  at  Poona  broke  up     

Instruction  of  infantry  details  in  the  sword  exercise  discontinued      

The  establishment  of  each  regiment  of  native  cavalry  from  70  to  50  troopers, 

each  troop    - 

The  establishment  of  the  regiments  and  battalions  of  Native  Infantry,  viz. : 
Fourth  regiment  of  the  line  B.  S.  F.  106  privates  each  company. 

Twenty-second  ditto  .  i gg       ^.^^^  ^.^^^ 

First  Marine  Battalion  \ 

Second  extra  Battalion  80       ditto  ditto. 

Reduced  to  70  privates  per  company      

1S29 — A  special  committee  at  Poona  appointed  to,  of  whom  are  staff-officers 

whose  appointments  are  temporarily  held  by  others 

Addition  to  the  office  establishment  of  the  deputy  inspector  of  His  Majesty's 

hospital     

His  Majesty's  40th  regiment  admitted  on  the  establishment  (orders  from  home) 

Received  establishment  of  cattle  for  Poona  division 

The  cavalry  equitation  drill  discontinued   

A  captain  appointed  acting   inspecting  engineer  during  the  employment  of  a 

major  on  other  duty     

Additional  establishment  for  regimental  native  schools 

New  scale  of  allowance  fixed  for  brigadiers  (Court's  orders) 

Occupation  of  Sholapore  by  Bombay  troops  (by  order  of  the  Supreme  Govern- 
ment)    

Evacuation  of  !Mhow  by  the  Bombay  troops    

The  rented  commissariat  store-room  at  Sural  given  up      

A  contract  entered  into  for  forage  for  camels  at  Poona     

Additional  salary  to  the  commanding  officer,  pay-master,  and  deputy  commissary 
of  stores  appointed  to  Sholapore,  to  place  them  on  the  same  footing  as  they 

stood  at  >Ihow     

The  station  of  Poona  made  a  bridge  command  of  the  1st  class,  to  complete  the 

number  allotted  for  this  Presidency    

A  medical  officer  appointed  to  the  charge  of  the  convalescent  station  on  the 

Nilgherry  Hills    

Allowance  to  the  officer  in  charge  of  the  public  buUdings,  &c..  Sec.  at  the  con- 
valescent station  on  the  Mahableshwar  Hills 

Allowance  for  the  horse  and  for  stationery  to  the  chaplain  at  Kirkee   

A  quartermaster-serjeant  and  two  laboratory  men  in  (Suzerat 

Beggaries  attached  to  the  pioneers  at  Poona    

Additional  stationary  allowance  to  the  officer  commanding  the  depot  of  His  Ma- 
jesty's troops 

Two  additional  Packaulies  for  pioneers  at  Lulling  Pass    

Four  Packaulies  for  artillery  at  Matoonga      

New  scale  of  allowance  fixed  for  medical  officers  regimentally  employed,  and 
those  formerly  drawn  for  the  supply  of  medicines,  &:c.  discontinued  by  order 

of  the  Honouarble  Court  to  the  Supreme  Government,  28th  May  1828 

Writers  allowed  to  the  medical  board  for  copying  their  proceedings  annually  for 

transmission  to  the  Honourable  Court  of  Directors 

An  establishment  of  the  Peons  allowed  to  the  European  corps   at  Bombay  and 

Belgaum,  for  the  purpose  of  taking  up  diseased  women    

Allowance  granted  to  two  Serjeants  appointed  to  the  care  of  sick  officers'  quar- 
ters at  the  Presidency 

Two  hospital  serjcants  allowed  for  the  convalescent  hospital  at  Mahableshwar  . 


More. 


3,240 
4,200 

1,200 

480 

11 

1-2 

360 


400 

1,368 

336'* 
240 


Less. 
6,744' 
8,046^ 

2,55,000' 


545,000* 


1,044" 
300,000 
30,000 

7,404 

. . . .  ' 

3,264 
22,560 

41,725 
.... 

300,000' 
720 
12,000' 

60,000 


'  Being  command  allowance  4,800  ;  .adjutant  staff  allowance,  rupees  1,944. 
-  Officers  instructing,  rupees  3,480;  drill  native  cavalry  officers  780;  batta  to  details  3,786. 
'  Sixhundred  troopers'  pay,  clothing,  &c.  rupees  93,000  ;  GOO  horse  maintenance,  saddles,  &c.  1,62,000. 
This  reduction  was  prospective  as  casualties  occurred. 

*  Pay,  clothing.  Sec.  for  5,320  privates.     This  reduction  was  prospective  as  casualties  occurred. 
'  Temporary,  since  discontinued  ;    expense,  rupees  19,830  per  annum. 

*  Since  discontinued. 

'  Temporary  (this  is  the  difference  between  the  garrison  allowances  of  captain  and  field  allowances  jof 
major),  since  discontinued  ;    expense,  rupees  4,248. 

*  Staff  and  staffs  establishments,  100,000  public  cattle  followers,  and  extraordinaries  200,000. 
'  This  saving  is  calculated  for  184  camels  at  rupees  5-2  74  each. 

'"  Temporary,  allowed  only  to  the  officers  lately  appointed  ;  annual  charge,  rupees  9,720. 

"  Temporary,  during  the  artillery  practice  in  the  province ;  annual  charge,  rupees  408. 

"  Allowed  for  three  months,  rupees  GOO  per  month. 

"  Allowed  till  the  setting  in  of  the  monsoon,  rupees  110  per  month.  '*  Since  struck  off. 


91 


Annual  Charge. 


7,893' 
1,584 


680,000 

17,'l-60 


I\lorc,  Less. 

Lieutenant-colonel  Sullivan,  while  in  command  of  Boml)ay  garrison,  permitted 

as  a  special  case  to  draw  tlie  allowance  of  a  brigadier  of  the  1st  class ' 

Bazar  establishment  allowed  lor  Mahablcshwar 456 

Allowance  granted  to  senior  surgeon  at  Poona  attending  the  staff  and  details. .  1,200 

The  situation  of  troops  quarter-master  of  horse  artillery  abolished 

Reduction  in  the  pay  of  27  horse-keepers  attached  to  the  breeding  mares 

A  Subadar-major  allowed  to  each  of  the  two  extra  battalions    GOO  ' 

A  farrier-major  allowed  to  the  head-(iuarters  of  the  horse  artillery  brigade.  .  . .  252 
Stationery  allowance  to  the  barrack-master  serjeant,   Nilglierry  Hills  ;  allow- 
ance to  the  chaplain  at  Deesa  for  going  to  Ihirsole  to  perform  divine  worship  3,000 

Sub-assistant  surveyors  and  builders  allowed  house  rent 1,000 

A  line  Serjeant  allowed  to  the  brigade  in  Candesh 252 

Additional  establishment  for  Asseerghur  Fort    126 

A  dooley  attached  to  the  garrison  guards  at  Bombay   576 

A  second  major  added  to  the  establishment  of  the  engineers  (Honourable  Court's 

order) 7,087 

Reduction  in  the  .army,  as  ordered  by  the  Honourable  Court  of  Directors  of 
2nd  troops  or  2  companies,  with  3  subaltern  officers  in  regiment  of  native 
cavalry  and  native  infantry,  and  of  the  same  number  of  subaltern  officers  in 

the  European  corps    , 

Office  rent  discontinued  for  certain  offices  removed  into  old  secretary  office 

Hospital  establishments  for  detached  companies  of  pioneers     2,000 

Increase  of  pay  to  certain  native  hospital  servants     864 

Allowance  to  a  Roman  Catholic  Priest  at  Deesa     SCO 

A  line  serjeant  for  the  station  of  Sholapore    252 

An  establishment  of  Cassids  for  ditto     252 

Increase  of  pay  to  8  sub-assistant  surveyors  and  builders 1,440 

A  superintending  surgeon  at  the  Presidency  appointed  till  further  orders     ....  10,513  * 

A  pundit  allowed  for  each  battalion  of  artillery      360 

Additional  office  establishment  and  stationery  allowance  in  the  commissariat 

department,  in  consequence  of  the  increased  duties  of  hospital  supplies   ....  5,000' 

Permanent  establishment  for  the  convalescent  hospital  at  Mahableshwar 144 

Allowance  for  children  of  soldiers  in  the  central  school  extended  to  those  of  con- 
ductors, and  the  allowance  continued  to  all  children  in  that  school  till  the  age 

of  15    672 

Office  establishment  fixed  for  the  deputy  pay-master  at  Sholapore 3,852 

Office  establishment  fixed  for  the  executive  engineer  at  Deesa. 3,876 

Increase  to  the  office  establishment  of  ditto  in  the  N.  D.  Guzerat,  in  conse- 
quence of  the  new  station  of  Hursole , 1,728  ' 

An  ordnance  assistant  to  the  commandant  of  artillery  appointed  and  allowances 

fixed 3,443 

A  brigade-major  of  artillery  for  the  Poona  division  appointed 5,163 

Allowance  for  office  establishment  to  the  acting  executive  engineer  at  Sholapore  600' 
Annual  allowance  to  the  Cutwal  of  the  Poona  bazar  for  celebrating  the  Malia- 

raem     300 

Establishment  for  the  officer  stationed  on  the  Mahableshwar  Hills   1,116 

Increase  of  salary  to  Mr.  Sundt  of  the  deputy  surveyor-general's  office 600 

Additional  salary  and  office  establishment  to  the  judge  advocate-general,  ap- 
pointed judge  advocate-general  of  the  army  and  marine • 

Palanqeen  allowances  granted  to  the  chaplain  at  Belgaum     504 

Office  of  inspector  of  Hill  Forts  in  the  Deccan  abolished 

A  2nd  class  bazar  establishment  allowed  at  Ahmednuggur   1,262 

Establishment  fixed  for  the  church  at  Deesa      636 

Additional  establishment  allowed  to  the  church  at  Dapoohe      582 

A  barrack  serjeant  allowed  at  Deesa    168 

Office  establishments  of  the  inspecting  engineers  revised 

Salary  fixed  for  the  secretary  to  the  general  prize  connnittee    2,100 

A  pundit  and  school-room  allowed  for  the  Nalvah  Battro    240 

The  brigadier- generals  commanding  the  Presidency  and  Surat  division  of  the 

army,  each  allowed  an  aide-de-camp 5,235 

Salary  of  assistant;  adjutant-general  and  assistant  and  deputy  assistant  quarter- 
master increased  to  correspond  with  the  Madras  rates 5,736 

'  Temporary  ;    rupees  3,240  per  annum. 

-  This  is  the  prospective  saving  by  the  reduction,  as  casualties  occur,  of  the  situation  of  four  troop 
quarter-masters.  '  Corps  since  disbanded. 

*  Supposed  to  be  temporary  until  a  vacancy  occurs  to  bring  superintending  surgeon  fresh  arrived  from 
Europe  on  the  regular  medical  staff.  '  Since  reduced.  ''  Since  discontinued. 

"  Since  discontinued.  *  A  marine  charge,  rupees  4,968  ver  annum. 

N2 


6,284 


5,688 


m 


Annual  Charge. 


r 

More. 

Hospital  orderly  allowed  to  each  regimental  hospital     2,040 

The  garrison  surgeons  of  Bombay,  Tamiah,  and  Surat,  allowed  superior  batta 

agreeably  to  the  regulations     4,927 

Increase  of  salary  to  the  members  of  the  medical  board  (by  order  of  the  Ho- 
nourable Court)    10,998 

Ditto  ditto  to  superintendent  surgeon  ditto 2,400 

Ditto  ditto  to  inspected  of  His  Majesty's  hospital  ditto 4,212 

Reduction  in  the  establishment  of  the  brigade  of  horse  artillery  of  88  gunners, 

and  1 5th  January  1830,  240  horses    

The  establishment  of  25  horses  and  101  mules,  employed  with  the  foot  artillery 

at  Poena  and  Baroda,  broke  up  and  cattle  sold    

Ten  elephants,  late  attached  to  the  Bombay  troops  in  Malwa,  transferred  to  the 

Bengal  establishment 

The  two  regiments   of  European  infantry  of  8  companies  each,  reduced  to  5 

companies  each,  (Honourable  Court's  order  13th  ISlay,  1829) 

The  salary  allowed  on  the  10th  October  1S2S  to  the  officers  temporarily  ap- 
pointed to  assist  in  the  purchase  of  horses,  prolonged     ' 

A  body  of  cooleys  to  be  employed  under  the  collector  in  constructing  the  roads 

between  Dharwar  and  Belgaum ' 

Six  dooley-bearers  allowed  for  the  regiment  N.  I.  at  Asseerghur     504 

The  surveys  on  the  Deccan  and  Southern  Concan,  under  Captains  Graflons  and 

Jervis,  discontinued  from  31st  May  1830 

The  battalion  of  native  invalid  reorganized 

Reduction  on  the  proportion  of  blank  ammunition  for  annual  practice.     The 

amount  of  saving  as  reported  by  the  commander-in-chief  is  estimated  at 

Reduction  in  the  establishment  of  the  foot  artillery  Lascar,  and  of  tiie  depot  of 
instructions  on  the  expense  of  artillery  practice  ;  also  by  the  discharge  of  the 
draft  cattle  at  the  Presidency,  and  by  their  measures  attending  the  removal  of 
the  1st  battalion  from  Bombay  to  Ahmednuggur,  computed  as  per  accom- 
paniments to  Mr.  Secretary  Williamson's  letter  a 

Two  dooleys  allowed  for  1st  light  cavalry  at  Sholapore 600 

Brigade-majors  of  divisions  designated  deputy  assistant  adjutant-general     ....  624 

Establishment  for  the  Presidency  garrison  hospital  fixed 450 

A  dooley  allowed  to  the  sappers  and  miners  during  the  fair  season ' 

Eight  carts  attached  to  the  pioneers  employed  on  the  Dharwar  road '' 

A  tuttoo  allowed  to  the  aqueduct  serjeanl  at  Poona 180 

Field  establishment  of  puckalies  allowed  to  the  native  corps  at  Poona ' 

The  pay  of  the  boat  Lascar  attached  to  the  Flying  bridge  reduced 

Allowance  to  the  deputy  assistant   quartermaster-general  at  Sholapore   for   the 

charge  of  tents 360 

Increase  to  the  establishment  of  boys  with  native  corps,  and  an  increase  of  pay 
to  a  portion  of  them,  as  well  as  to  a  specific  number  of  the  privates  in  each 

corps 30,000 

A  sexton  allowed  for  church  at  Ahmednuggur 120 

Two  additional  draftsmen  in  the  office  of  the  quartermaster-general 

An  establishment  of  Halalkhores  for  the  native  regiments  at  Poona 612 

Additional  bhesties  and  watermen  for  the  wing  of  the  regiment  at  Dcesa ' 

Nine  students  from  the  engineer  institution  transferred  to  the  establishments  of 

executive  engineers 3,240 

The  two  extra  battalions  disbanded 

The  office  of  brigade-major  of  artillerj'  made  distinct  from  that  of  ordnance  as- 
sistant to  the  commandant,  and  a  separate  officer  appointed  thereto 3,507 

Officers  of  European  corps  placed  on  halt  tent  allowance .... 

The  two  European  regiments  of  five  companies,  each  formed  into  one  regiment 

of  eight  companies 

A  tindal  at  the  Taka  ferry  discharged 

Functions  of  the  military  board  suspended,  the  secretaryship  and  assistant  se- 


Less. 


98,000 

40,000 

8,000 

128,000 


38,000 
8,352 

27,000 


41,044. 


744 


200,000' 


70,000  " 

1,12,000'" 
180 


'  The  estimated  amount  of  the  further  outlay  non-sanctioned  is  rupees  5,000  per  10  months,  from 
Fbruary  to  December.  -  Temporary  ;  computed  annual  expense,  rupees  72,000. 

^  Tem])orary,  since  discontinued  ;    annual  expense  320  rupees. 

'  Temporary;  annual  exprnse  1,921  rupees.  »  Temporary;  315  rupees  per  month. 

'  Allowed  for  six  months,  total  720  rupees.  'Temporary;    monthly  expense  191  rupees. 

'  This  annual  saving  will  not  be  entirely  eflfected  until  after  the  men  transferred  and  borne  as  super- 
nun  e  aries  on  the  of  other  corps  shall  have  become  effective. 

'  Lieutenant-colonel,  major,  captain,  lieutenant  and  ensign  8 — 6 — 39 — 93^-45  more. 

'"  Effective  reduced, non-effective  reduced,  non-commissioned  reduced,  serjeant,  corporal,  doo.  prov.  com. 
offic.  adjutant,  quartermaster,  sta°'non  follow,  and  sup.  cost  IS — 30 — 14 — 300 — 1 — 1 — 1 — 14 — 2. 


93 


Annual  Charge. 


crc'taryship  iliscontinued,  and  the  office  of  accountant  and  auditor  of  military 
store  accounts  created 

Establishment  of  a  treasure  tumbril  at  Maliableslnvar  during  the  fair  season  . . 

A  hospital  Serjeant  to  European  general  hospital  at  the  Presidency 

Establishment  fixed  for  the  executive  engineer  at  Sholapore 

A  sweeper  allowed  for  the  cantonments  gaol  at  I'oona 

Reductions  in  the  otlice  establishments  of  the  conmiissariat  at  Poona,  Surat, 
Haroda  and  Bhooj 

Reductions  in  the  rates  of  pay  of  dooley-bearers,  camel-drivers,  and  other  com- 
missariat followers 

The  workmen  employed  on  the  roads  at  Hursole  discharged 

The  establishment  of  artificers  with  the  fooc  artillery  revised 

Extra  followers  for  European  details  attached  to  the  Queen's  Royals 

Scale  of  office  rent  for  assistant  commissary-general  revised 

Allowance  granted  to  the  district  chaplain  of  Belgaurn  for  visiting  Dharwar  and 
Kulludghee 

Expense  of  the  Flying  bridge  over  the  Moola  river  at  Poona  discontinued. .  . . 

Batta  to  Sukhghurs  of  horse  artillery  reduced 

Pay  of  tent  and  store  Lascars  reduced,  and  batta  to  the  latter  at  field  stations 
struck  off 

The  daily  grain  ration  of  the  mules  in  Cutch  reduced  from  7^  to  5  pounds. .  . . 

Two  hurkaras  of  the  Cutch  force  discharged 

Ninety  Bringaree  bullocks   ditto         ditto 

Additional  washermen  aiul  puckaulie  for  foot  artillery  at  the  Presidency 

Horse  allowance  granted  to  the  ordnance  assistant  to  the  commandant  of  artillery 

Transfer  to  Baroda  of  the  Roman  Catholic  priest,  formerly  maintained  by  the 
Bombay  Government  at  Mhow 

A  Lock  hospital  established  at  Ahmednuggur 

Extra  office  establishment  allowed  to  the  auditor  and  accountant  of  military 
store  accounts 

A  barrack  serjeant  allowed  for  the  station  at  Ahmednuggur 

Increase  of  office  establishment  for  the  assistant  adjutant-general  southern  divi- 
sion of  the  army 

The  allowance  for  contingencies  for  bazars  of  the  2nd  class  reduced  from  SO  to 
2S  rupees 

Rates  of  clothing  stoppages  equalized  with  those  of  Bengal 

The  commissariat  establishment  at  the  timber  depot  and  remount  stables  dis- 
charged   

Reduction  of  the  commissariat  office  establishment  at  the  Presidency,  Surat, 
Rajcote,  Deesa,  and  Cutch 

Surgeons  and  assistant-surgeons  of  foot  artillery  allowed,  by  order  of  the  Hon. 
Court  of  Directors,  the  pay  of  captains  and  one  lieutenant  of  artillery 

The  commissariat  duties  at  Vingorla  placed  under  a  comvnissariat  officer 

A  pay  tindale  allowed  to  each  company  of  tent  Lascars 

The  pay  of  the  boatmen  of  the  Flying  bridge  on  the  Kim  river  reduced 

The  two  Serjeants  appointed  to  take  care  of  the  sick  officers'  quarters  at  the 
Presidency  returned  to  their  corps,  and  staff  allowances  struck  off 

Reduction  in  the  conmiissariat  establishment  in  Kutch,  viz.   IC   camels  and  25 


dool 


ey-uearers 

The  regimental  bazar  establishments   of  the   artillery  and  engineer  corps   at 

Ahmednuggur  discontinued 

Reduction  in  the  commissariat  establishment  at  Rajcote,  viz.    250  draft,   pack, 

and  brinjary  bullocks,  and  (iO  dooley-bearers 

The  situation  of  overseer  in  the  camp  equipage  department  abolished 

Reductions  ordered  at  Broach,  in  consequence  of  its  no  longer  being  maintained 

as  a  garrison 

The  troops  at  KuUudgee  (a  wing  of  native  cavalry  andreginient  native  infantry) 

continued  on  field  allowance  till  further  orders 

An  establishment  allowed  for  the  church  at  Ahmednuggur 

A  farrier  allowed  for  the  horses  of  the  commander-in-chief 


More. 

HOG 
120 
2,310  I 
CO 


300 
4,800 


425 
3C0 


COO  3 
1,500 


888 
'2.t2' 


Less. 
8,86S 


5,67C 

10,  lot 

2280 

381 


y3C 

84 

15,000 

765 

480 

2,700 


304 

COO 

1,200 

27,000 

1,116 

10,180 

!)90 

720 

3  CO 

•• 

110 

,S36 

4,500 

1,152 

13,678 

,  , 

480 

13,000 


'  Since  discontinued.  -Temporary;    expense  C9  rupees  per  month. 

3  The  p.-iy  of  the  persons  having  been  included  in  the  saving  efiected  by  the  transfer  of  Mhow  to  the 
Bengal  Presidency,   it  becomes  necessary  to  exhibit  it  here  as  an  increase  of  expense. 

'  Temporary,  being  limited  to  a  period  of  six  months,  at  415  rupees  per  month. 

'  By  order  of  the  Honourable  Court,  4th  June  1828. 

^  Temporary  ;  expense  about  40,000  rupees  per  annum. 

'  No  additional  expense  will  be  incurred  at  present,  the  situation  being  filled  by  one  of  the  supernu- 
merary farriers,  with  the  native  cavalry, 


94 


Annual  Charge. 


Allowance  to  the  oflRcers  appointed  to  superintend  buildings  of  the  travellers' 
bungalows  on  the  Betgaura  roads 

Allowance  fixed  for  the  adjutant  and  quarter-masters  of  artillery  in  Guzerat, 
which  appointment  was  sanctioned  on  the  5th  of  March 

Allowance  granted  to  the  surgeons  in  medical  charge  of  the  staff  and  engineer 
institution  at  Ahmednuggur 

Charge  of  the  staff  at  Deesa 

A  civU  surgeon  at  Sholapore  to  have  medical  charge  of  the  staff  and  military 
details,  and  to  draw  his  military  allowance  and  palanqeen  allowance 

Ditto  at  the  Residencies  at  Sattara  and  Bhooj  ditto 

Ditto,  and  to  draw  their  military  allowances 

The  Lock  hospital  at  Sattara  abolished 

The  situation  of  brigade-major  in  Cutch  abolished,  and  that  of  line-adjutant 
substituted 

Various  public  offices  ordered  to  remove  into  the  new  Town  Hall  when  ready 
for  their  reception,  causing  a  saving  in  the  office  rent  of. 

Regimental  allowances  struck  off  from  His  Majesty's  officers  on  the  staff  not 
borne  on  the  establishment  of  regiment  in  India   

Reduction  in  the  number  and  pay  of  the  artificers  of  the  ordnance  department 
in  Cutch 

Ditto  in  the  establishment  of  the  bazar  department 

Ditto  in  the  establishment  of  ordnance  mules  in  ditto 

The  situation  of  the  commanding  officer  of  the  escort  in  Kutch  abolished 

The  grain  ration  for  the  horse  artillery  and  cavalry  horses  reduced 

An  establishment  allowed  for  the  church  at  Belgaum    

A  portion  of  the  establishment  employed  in  the  late  survey  in  the  Deccan  re- 
tained for  the  purpose  of  being  employed  on  a  survey  in  Candesh 

Batta  struck  off  at  the  frontier  stations  of  Deesa  and  Biiooj  from  all  classes  of 
persons  except  European  officers 

The  Government  allowance  for  Turf  Plates  to  be  run  for  by  country  horses  in 
Guzerat  and  the  Deccan  struck  off   

Reduction  in  the  equipment  of  the  ordnance  mules  at  Bhooj,  and  of  the  allow- 
ance for  keeping  up  the  same,  viz.  18  saddles  and  IS  sets  of  harness  in  Cutch 

Further  reduction  in  the  number  and  pay  of  the  ordnance  artificers  ditto 

Ditto         ditto  in  the  pay  of  commissariat  followers  ditto 

Ditto         ditto  in  the  bazar  establishment  ditto 

Ditto  the  field  tentage  of  the  general  officers  commanding  the  Poona  divi- 
sion of  the  army 

The  situation  of  the  executive  engineer  at  eight  stations  abohshed 

Extra  Neet  hospital  servants  at  Surat  and  Broach 

A  peon  allowed  to  take  care  of  the  burial-ground  at  Matoonga 

The  appointment  of  native  adjutant  to  a  detached  wing  of  native  cavalry 
abolished .  .■ 

The  battalion  of  native  invalids  broke  up  and  men  pensioned 

A  writer  and  stationery  allowed  for  the  barrack  department  at  Baroda  on  the 
transfer  of  the  duties  from  the  commissariat  to  the  ordnance  department .... 

Two  pairs  of  bullocks  allowed  at  Deesa  for  drawing  water  for  the  European 
regiment 

Two  puckalies  allowed  to  the  foot  artillery  in  Kutch 

Allowance  granted  to  a  Roman  Catholic  priest  at  Belgaum. . . ., 

A  treasure  chest  allowed  at  Sholapore 

An  immediate  reduction  of  15  per  cent.,  and  a  further  prospective  reduction  of 
5  per  cent.,  directed  to  be  made  in  the  amount  of  office  establishment,  causes 
a  saving  which  is  estimated  at 

Medical  officers  granted  an  allowance  of  IS^  rupees  per  100  men  per  month  for 
corps  and  details  extra  to  their  field  medical  charge 

A  naique  and  9  Ramoosees  allowed  for  the  station  of  Ahmednuggur 


More. 


2,794 

1,200 
360 


732 
5,800 


72 


480 

408 
216 
540 


Less. 


6,000 
636 


1,500 

1,068 

13,200 

10,437  » 

5,926 
1,764 
3,162'* 
1,095 
45,000 


180,000 

2,400 

1,356 

1,224 

552 

1,764 

7,200  ' 
55,536 


210 

ro.ooo » 


60,000" 


'   Temporary ;  4  rupees  per  diem. 

-  The  increase  in  the  military  department  will  be  for  a  surgeon  3,347  rupees  ;  for  an  assistant-surgeon 
2,098  ;  but  there  is  a  reduction  in  the  civil  allowance  of  1,800  rupees  per  annum. 

J  Increase  in  the  military  department  1,738  rupees.  ■"  Decrease  in  civil  ditto  2,098  rupees. 

*  Honourable  Court's  order,   9th  Sept.  1829,  published  by  Supreme  Government  26th  March  1830. 

'  Reduced  from  68  to  50.  '  Honourable  Court's  order,  19th  August  1829. 

"  Temporary  ;  110  rupees  per  montli. 

'  This  sum  includes  the  difference  between  the  pay  and  pensions,  the  latter  being  estimated  to  average 
about  one-fourth  less  than  the  former.  '"  Temporary;  sanctioned  110  rupees  per  month. 

II  It  is  not  possible  at  present  to  estimate  the  amount  of  this  increase  correctly ;  the  calculation  is  made 
for  4,000  men,  as  being  a  probable  number  for  whom  the  allowance  may  be  drawn. 


95 


Tho  late  cxocntivc  engineers,  whose  situations  were  abolished  by  Government 
orders  Kith  June  List,  appointed  assistants  to  the  inspecting  engineers  of 
divisions 

The  difTerence  between  the  pay  of  assistant  and  executive  engineers  allowed  to 
six  of  tho  above  officers    

The  sit\iation  of  chief  guide  abolished 

The  command  of  Tannah  garrison  notified  to  have  been  abolislied 

The  pioneer  corps  reduced  from  eight  to  six  companies 

The  officer  inspecting  engineer  at  the  Presidency,  abolished 

Reduction  of  allowance  to  the  two  ottlcers  attached  to  tlie  I'oona  auxiliary  liorse 

Ditto  in  the  establishment  of  artificers  with  the  horse  artillery 

Ordnance  dei)artmentl  Arsenal  store  Lascars  reduced  in  number  and  pay 

re-organized.         /  Reduction  in  the  number  of  artificers 

Corps  of  tent  Lascars  ditto  reduced  in  the  number  and  pay 

Increase  of  establishment  to  Poona  paymaster 

The  situation  of  brigade  to  the  King's  troops  at  Poona  abolished 

In  pursuance  of  Instruction  from  the  Supreme  Government, 

The  whole  of  the  troops  in  GuzeratT  r>       i         i       j  /.  /.  , 

placed  under  the  command  of  the     ^'''f^  ""^'"'^^  fr"™  ^  ^'''  '°  ^««™"'l 

'^  ,     ai  1-       .1     \.      class  command 

general  othcer  as  commandmg  the  >^  .      i  •      i    i-  ,     i 

^  ,■       ,•   ■  .  ,       »  •      .  S-   I     1  One  paymastership  abolished 

native  division,  and  certain  start  al-     „       ■  •       i  u  •      i         •      ■  •      ,    i-  ,     . 
1                     11-  I  Provisional  brigade  maiorship  abolished 

lowances  reduced,  viz J  =>  ■>         '^ 

One  raoochee  and  one  blacksmith  in  each  troop  of  native  cavalry  struck  oft" . . . 


More, 


Annual  Charge. 
•* — f^  — ^ 

Less. 


14,400 


Total  Rupees 7,67,500 


744 

4,920 

20,000 

14,833 

7,200 

3,072 

30,000 

24,000 

14,000 

3,423 


3,240 
G,000 
0,543 

4,536 


37,07,498 


By  Order  of  the  Honourable  Court, 
15th  Dec.  1829. 


Statement  showing  the  Cost  of  Grain  to  9,738  Horses  at  Bengal  and  Bombay,  compared  with 

the  same  number  in  Europe. 

Total  cost  of  grain  for  9,738  horses  at  lOlbs.  for  six  months,   and  8lbs.  for  the  other 

six,  per  diem  per  horse,  is  for  one  year  in  Bengal  rupees  4,54,644,  or  at  two  shillings  £.       .v.    d. 

the  rupee 45,464     2     0 

Total  cost  of  grain  for  9,738  horses  at  lOlbs.  for  eight  months,  and  Slbs.  for  the  other 
four,  per  diem  per  horse,  is  for  one  year  in  Bombay  rupees  4,91,995,  or  at  two  shil- 
lings the  rupee 49,199     2     6 

Total  cost  of  oats  for  9,738  horses  for  one  year,  allowing  a  peck  of  lOlbs.  ver  diem  per 

horse,  at  21  shillings  per  quarter,  is   1,16,667     0     0 

Europe.  Bengal.  Bombay. 

£.    s.    d.  £.    s.     d.         £.    s.    d. 

Or  ^er  hoTse  per  annum 11    19   11^         4  13     4|  5     1     Oi 

This  shows  that  the  keep  of  a  horse  in  Europe  in  grain  alone   is  more  than  twice  as  dear  as  at  either 
Bengal  or  Bombay. 

It  is  however  to  be  observed,  that  the  amount  of  estab- 
lishment in  Bengal  was     52,782  rupees.     Or  about  £5,278     1     0 

And  in  Bombay 3,876  rupees.     Or  about         387     3     0 


Statement  of  the  Number  and  Prices  of  Horses  purchased  during  four  years  on  the  Bombay 

establishment  for  the  Cavalry. 

1823-4 394  horses  purchased    1,64,361 

1824-5 737           ditto    3,09,696 

1825-6 959           ditto    3,89,621 

1826-7 133           ditto    61,861 


Total  number  of  Horses..  2,223  Total  rupees..    9,25,539 

General  average  price,  417  rupees  each  Horse. 


Temporary ;  290  rupees  per  month. 


^  Temporary  ;   140  rupees  per  month. 


96 


Statement  of  Gun-carriage  Department  for  the  Year  1827-28. 

Issues. 


Kames  of  Articles. 


Quantity. 


Rate. 


Amount. 


Toul. 


1S27. 

May.  Adzes,  coopers',  iron 

Hinges,  chest,  brass,  iron 

June.  Iron  pigs,  grey  (pigs  739  and  54 
pices) cwt. 


July. 


Aug. 


Tin  sheets 

Iron  sheets  -Jr  inch  42    

thin  ditto  40     . . . 

Iron,  flat,6  .  1  inch  bars  32 


-   5 


-  4 

-  4 
-34- 

-  3 
-2-5- 


18 
10 
19 
40 
149 
89 


Iron,  bolt      1 


Iron,  square  84 
2 

U 

U 


Iron  hoops  2  . 

1+. 

H. 

1    . 

Iron  rod 


ditto 

ditto 

ditto 

ditto 

ditto 

ditto 

ditto 

ditto  135 

ditto     45 

ditto 

ditto 

ditto 

ditto 

ditto 

ditto 


cwt. 

cwt. 
ditto 
ditto 
ditto 
ditto 
ditto 
ditto 
ditto 
ditto 
ditto 
ditto 
ditto 
ditto 
ditto 
ditto 
ditto 


50 
50 

398  18 


50 
19  3 

10  0 


do.  bundles  9  do. 


ditto 
ditto 
ditto 
ditto 
ditto 


10  do. 
9  do. 
10  do. 
20  do. 
20  do. 


Axletrees,  iron,  with  brass  boxes 

6  pounder     

,  with    one  brass 


boxes  6  ditto 


40 

41 

20 

10 

19 

54 

99 

50 

60 

9 

10 

9 

22 

10 

30 

20 

9 

9 

9 

10 

20 

20 


. without  ditto,6do. 

Trucks,  cast  iron,  for  6  pounder 
garrison  carriages,  N.  P 

Sept.  Files,  flat,Europe,l 6  inches  doz. 

. 12  ditto   ditto 

. 14  ditto   ditto 

•      10  ditto    ditto 

. 8   ditto   ditto 

. smooth,  1 8  do.  do. 

14  do.  do. 

FileSjhalf  round,Europe,  1  Cdo.do. 

14  do.  do. 

12  do.  do. 

. 8  do.  do. 

smooth,  1 8  do.  do. 

. 1 2  do.  do. 


Iron  work,  Europe,  for  limbers 
and  boxes  for  light  howitzer 
5-r  inch,  weighing 7,323.  .sets 

for  travelling  1 8- 

pounders, weighing  28  3.  .sets 

Spades,  country,  complete  .... 

Trucks,  cast  iron pair 

.Sockets  for  rockets,  32  pounders 

,     24     ditto.. 

,     18     ditto,. 


Oct.     Brushes,  hand    

Cutters  portfires  G  and  3  pounder 
Drivers,  coopers'  brass 


1 

2 

1 
3 
1 

2 

1 

2 
0 
1 
0 
2 
2 
1 
2 

0 
3 
3 
3 

2 
2 
0 

70 

1 

9 


IG 
16 
10 

8 

5 

8 

8 

16 
10 
16 

5 

8 

8 


15 

12 
17 

5 

3 
16 
25 
10 
12 
27 
10 

3 
15 
27 

4 
21 

8 

0 
14 
25 

3 
14 
11 

1 


r.    a.  p. 

1   3  26  each 

1  1  55  pair 

3  3  51  cwt. 

2  1  25  cargo 
13  0  86  cwt. 


y^O  0  83  cwt. 


103  2  07  each 

103  2  07 
103  2  07 


23  1  29 


27 

0 

22 

2 

22 

2 

22 

2 

22 

2 

1 

0 

1 

0 

27 

2 

22 

2 

22 

2 

22 

2 

1 

0 

04  doz. 

80 

80 

80 

80 

39  each 

59 

04  doz. 

80 

80 

80 

S9  each 


1  0  39 


38  0  53  cwt. 


15 

27  0  53  cwt. 

6 

3  1   0  each 

1 

23  1  29  each 

54 

1  1  61 

54 

1  1  61 

52 

1  1  61 

24 

9  2  45  doz. 

50 

1  0  40  each 

100 

1  1  0 

T.  a.  p. 
90  3  0 
69   1   50 


1,543  3  47 


5   3   12 
396   1   32 


5,523   3   04 


7,246  0  90 

103  2  07 
931   2  63 

513  0  38 


36 
30 
18 


72 
06 
66 


15   0  53 


9 

8 

8 

36 

18 

SO 

9 

8 


83 
12 
12 
72 
66 
06 
83 
12 


160  0  50 
1,543  3  47 

402  0  44 


14,318   1   02 


8 

3 

12 

303 

1 

43 

780 

0 

23 

19 

2 

0 

23 

1 

29 

75 

2 

94 

75 

2 

94 

72 

3 

72 

19 

0 

90 

55 

0 

0 

125 

0 

0 

1,591   2   10 


97 

Statement  of  Gun-carriage  Department  for  the  Year  1827-28. 

Receipts. 


Names  of  Articles, 

Quantity. 

llalc. 

Amount. 

Tuul. 

1827. 

May.  Barrels,  powder,  empty,  50  lbs. 

r.      a.  p. 

r.      a. 

V- 

with  four  copper  hoops  each  . 

117 

10  0  54  each 

1,185   3 

18 

Boxes,  aiiuminition,  musket. .  . . 

75 

3  2  £0  do. 

271   3 

50 

Chests,  laboratory,  empty 

2 

55  3  52  do. 

111   3 

4 

Choakcs,  fascine 

10 
C 

9  2  40  do. 
22  0  64  do. 

96  0 
132  3 

0 

84 

Coins,  mortar,  wooden,  10  inch. 

4 

24 

20  0  80  do. 

80  3 

20 

Doolies,  hospital 

25  2  72  do. 

616   1 

28 

Fids,  wooden,  for  traces 

100 

0  2   66  do. 

66  2 

0 

Forks,  sap     

IC 
3 

8   1   33  do. 
277   ]    50  do. 

133   1 
832  0 

28 
50 

Gins,  tied 

Helves  for  hoes     

927 

8G8 

0  3     0  do. 
0   3     0  do. 

695   1 
651   0 

0 
0 

for  pickaxes      

Horses'  magazine,  wooden   .... 

100 

IG  3  40  do. 

1,685  0 

0 

Mallets,  fascine     

10 
5 

0  3  90  do. 
22   3  33  do. 

9   3 
114  0 

0 

Moulds,  bullet,  brass,  king'spistol 

Platform,  gun,  traversing 

1 

331    1   39  do. 

331    1 

39 

Platforms,  mortar 

2 
6 

298   1   90  do. 
5   1    77  do. 

596  3 
32  2 

80 
62 

Traps,  rat,  wooden 

7,643   2   28 

June.  Aprons,  wooden,  32  pounder  . . 

14 

2  3  45  do. 

40  0 

30 

,     24    ditto 

17 

2  3  45  do. 

48  2 

65 

1    Q         A'^**n 

47 
10 

2   3  45  do. 

134  2 

15 

1  O        Att*r^ 

2  2  31   do. 

25  3 

10 

Barrels,  powder,  empty,  50  lbs. 

with  4  copper  hoops  each .... 

90 

10  0  54  do. 

912  060 

Beds,    cheek,    howitzer,    heavy. 

with  wooden  coins,  complete. 

5-J-  inch  coins 

5 

233  2    14  do. 

1,167  2 

70 

Boxes,  ammunition,  musket.  .  . . 

252 

3  2  50  do. 

913  2 

0 

Carriages,  ammunition, body,  with 

limbers  and  iron-naved  wheels, 

complete,  12  pounder 

4 

1,720  0     0  do. 

0,880  0 

0 

•,  ditto,  ditto,  9  pomider 

4 

1,640  0     0  do. 

6,560  0 

0 

,  ditto,  ditto,  ]  2  ditto 

1 

1,583  2  40  do. 

1,583  2 

40 

,  block,  howitzer,  light. 

with  limbers    and    iron-naved 

wheels,  complete,  5-i^  inch .... 

2 

1,495   2  86  do. 

2,991    1 

72 

with  limbers   and   iron-naved 

wheels,  complete, 5-i-in.,fov  trial 

1 

1,773  2  66  do. 

1,773  2 

66 

Carts,  platform,  with  iron-naved 

wheels,  complete 

12 

587  3   67  do. 

7,055  0 

4 

Chest,  laboratory,  new  pattern. . 

4 

00   3  52  do. 

223   1 

8 

Choakes,  wooden,  magazine. .  . . 

450 

0   1   67  do. 

187   3 

50 

Doolies,  hospital 

20 

25   2   72  do. 

513   2 

40 

Fids,  wooden     

300 

0  2  66  do. 

199   2 

0 

Furnace  or  grate,  iron,  for  heat- 

ing shot     

1 
1 

364   1   33  do. 
330   1   67  do. 

364   1 
330   1 

33 
67 

Gin,  field 

Helves  for  pickaxes      

105 

0  3     0  do. 

78  3 

0 

Horses,  wooden,  magazine    .... 

75 

16  3  40  do. 

1,263  3 

0 

Jack,  iron,  for  making  spun  yarn 

1 

61   0  66  do. 

61   0 

66 

Mould,  portfire,  brass 

1 

87  2  43  do. 

87  2 

43 

Platform,  mortar     

1 
I 

298   1    90  do. 
331    1    39  do. 

298   1 
331    1 

90 
39 

. .  trnvcrsuii^ 

Port,  wooden,  with  a  large  staple 

and  ring,  iron,  for  castle  flag- 

staff   

1 

46   1   33  do. 

46   1 

3S 

Skids,  cast  iron,  for  supporting 

do. 

(runs 

2 
15 

52  2  33  do. 
9   1   33  do. 

105  0 
139  3 

GG 
95 

j^iiiia   .....  

Trestles,  fascine    

Wedges,  mason,  iron,  with  steel 

point,  each  1 2  inches  long    . . 

23 

1    2   33  do. 

36   1 

59 

34,554  0  21 

o 


98 


Statement  of  Gun-carriage  Department  for  the  Year  1827-28. — Continued. 

Issues. 


Names  of  Articles. 


Quantity, 


1827. 

Oct.    Handspikes,  trail 

Harps  and  staples,  brass 

Nails,  brad    cwt. 

. ,  clout     ditto 

,  clasp    ditto 

,  rose-headed      ditto 

Planes,  toping,  coopers'     

Rivets,  iron cwt. 

Rules,  two  feet      

Sa%vs,  cross  cut    

,  setters    

•  whip      

Screws,  iron,  of  sorts gross 

.Shovels      

Sieves,  brass-wire,  of  sorts  .... 

,  iron,  ditto   

Tack,  iron     cwt. 

Heads,  powder  barrel,  50  lbs.  old 

Hoops,   copper,   powder    barrel, 
90  lbs doz. 

,    50  lbs.  do. 

Staves,  powder  barrel,  90  lbs.  old 

,    50  do.  do. 

Nov.  Iron,  bolt,  -j-  inch   cwt. 

,  H  ditto ditto 

,  1     ditto ditto 

,     4  ditto ditto 

,  flat,  bar,  4  inch  ....  ditto 

,  3i  ditto  ....  ditto 

,    3  ditto .  ditto 

,  H  ditto ditto 

. ,    1  ditto  ....  ditto 

Arbors  for  holding  knives     

Bed,  cast  iron,   for  machine  for 

cutting  elevating  screws    .... 

Fly-wheel,  cast  iron,  5  ft.  5  inch 

Frame,  iron,  with  brass  bearings, 

and  ^  wheels  and  spindles  for 

machine  for  cutting  elevating 

screws   

Handles,  wooden,  for  fly-wheel, 

cast  iron    

Knives,  for  male  and  femalescrews 
Regulating  screw,  left-handed .  . 

right  ditto   ... 

Fly-wheel,  for  machines,  blowing 
Iron  work,  mortar  bed,  13  inch, 

weighing  29  2  20 sets 

,    10  inch, 

do.      31  2  21 sets 

,      8  inch, 

do.      313     7 sets 

• ,    5^  inch, 

do.      17  0  22 sets 

,  howitzer,  1 0  in.  weigh- 
ing  14  2  23 sets 

,  8  in.  weigh- 
ing  10  1  10 sets 

-,5-4  in. weigh- 
ing 12  2    9 sets 

,  4t  in.  weigh- 
ins     3  3  22 sets 


50 

100 

10  0 

8  0 

20  0 

12  0 

24 

2  0 

24 

24 

20 

50 

200 

12 

4 

4 

2  0 

81 

15 
378 

61 
908 


9  3  23 

55  0     4 

31   0  27 

19  0  20 

9  0  17 

6  2  25 

1 

1 

3 


00 

26 
0 


12 

7 

16 


1 

24 
1 
o 

2 

6 

6 

10 

12 

4 

4 

6 


Rate. 


1   2 
0   1 


0 
7 

18 

22 
0 

25 
1 

11 
4 
6 
o 


6  0 

7  0 
6  2 
1  1 
0  1 


P- 

75  each 
12  do. 
87  lbs. 
62  mdl. 
89  cwt. 

87  do. 

88  each 
28  cwt. 
31  each 
79  do. 

0  do. 

^G  do. 
0  gross 
0  each 
0  do. 
7  do. 

25  lbs. 

50  each 


1   1  32  do. 

1    1  32  do. 

0  1  0  do. 

0   1  0  do. 


^'S  9  0  S3  cwt. 


Amount. 


84  1   50 

28  0     0 

523  2 

228  3 

1 

2 

1 

9 


379 

272 

11 

50 


40 
84 
80 
44 
12 
56 


43  3  44 
274  2   96 

95  0 
312  0 
500  0 

72  0 

28  0 

26  0  28 
294  0     0 

30   1   50 


19  3  80 

502  2  96 

15   1  0 

227  0  0 


1,969  0     3 


2,489  3  bo 


617  2  96 


8,247  3  85 


3,536  3  10 


Total. 


4,«19  0  50 


16,861    1   49 


99 


Statement  of  Gun-carriage  Department  for  the  Year  1827-28. — Continued. 

Heceitts. 


Names  of  Articles. 


1827. 
.lulv. 


Aprons,  wooden,  32  pounder    . . 

,   24     ditto    .... 

— ,   18     ditto    .... 

Barrels,  powder,  empty,  50  lbs., 

with  i  co]iper  hoops  each     . . 

Barrows,  wheel     

Beaters,  hand,  wooden 

Benches,  paring 

Boxes,  ammunition,  musket. . . . 
Chest,  laboratory,  new  pattern. . 
Choakes,  wooden,  magazine. .  . . 
Coins,  wooden,  spare  10  inch  .. 

— ,      8  ditto  . . 

Cutters,  portfire    

Doolies,  hospital 

Tellies,  teak,  rough 

Gin,  field 

Grate,  iron,  for  heating  shot. . . . 

Handspikes,  purch.ising 

Helves  for  pickaxes 

Horses,  wooden,  magazine   .... 

Ladders,  scaling,  joint 

Moulds,  bullet,  musket,  brass  . . 

Platforms,  mortar    

,  traversing    

Skids,  cast  iron,  for  supporting 

guns 

Spokes,  teak,  rough 

Tables,  laboratory 

Trestle,  fascine 

Triangles,  weighing 


Aug.  Aprons,  wooden,  32  pounder  . . 

,  24     ditto.... 

Barrels,  powder,  empty,  50  lbs. 

with  4  copper  hoops  each     . . 

Barrows,  wheel    

Beds  for  gun,  12  pounder 

Block  iron,  double,  with  brass 

sheaves  

Boxes,  ammunition,  musket. . . . 

Bucket,  fire,  wooden   

Coins,  wooden, for  gun,  12  pounder 

,  spare,  10  inch   ... 

,      8  ditto  .. . 

Cutters,  portfire,  spare    

Doolies,  hospital    

Handspikes,  purchasing,  Eynce 

wood    

Helves  for  pickaxes 

Horses,  magazine,  wooden   .... 

Ladders,  scaling,  joint 

Pickets,  pack     

Skids,  iron,  for  supporting  guns. 
Triangles,  weighing 

Sept.   Barrels,  powder,  empty,  50  lbs., 

with  copper  hoops  each     .... 

Boxes,  ammunition,  musket. . . . 

Barrows,  wheel 

Handspikes,  purchasing    

Ladder,  scaling,  joints 

Sticks,  rocket,  with  iron  sockets, 

32  pounder 

,  24  ditto  . . 


Quantity. 


37 
!)!) 
39 

280 

7 

5 

G 
1G6 

1 
1,550 

8 

4 

12 
27 
100 

2 

1 

94 
225 
380 
29 

5 


10 

100 

2 

25 
5 

16 
35 

91 
6 
6 

3 
3G0 
12 

6 

9 

3 

12 
22 

100 
78 
90 
33 
30 

4 

4 


100 

170 

2 

15 
10 

54 
54 


llate. 


r,   a,  p. 
2  3  45  eacli 
2  3  45  do. 
2  3  45  do. 


10  0 
37  0 

1  2 
36  2 
32  0 
55   3 

0 

2 

2 
12 


4 

330 

364 

14 

0 

13  2 
39  0 
22  2 

298   1 

331   1 


54  do. 
27  do. 

0  do. 

0  do. 
.'">0  do. 
52  do. 
67  do. 
63  do. 
63  do. 
76  do. 
72  do. 
11  do. 
67  do. 
83  do. 
54  do. 

0  do. 
70  do. 

0  do. 
33  do. 
90  do. 
39  do. 


52  2  33  do. 

3  2  25  do. 

35   1  6  do. 

9  1  33   do. 

46  2  97  do. 

2  3  45  do. 

2  3  45  do. 

10  0  54  do. 

37  0  27  do. 

6  2  0  do. 

23  0  33  do. 

3  2  50  do. 

4  0  74  do. 
2  0  63  do. 
2  0  63  do. 
2  0  63  do. 

12  2  76  do. 

25  2  72  do. 

14  1  54  do. 

0  3  0  do. 

16  3  40  do. 

39  0  0  do. 

16  0  35  do. 

52  2  S3   do. 

46  2  97  do. 


10  0  54  do. 

3  2  50  do. 

37  0  27  do. 

14  1  54  do. 

39  0  0  do. 

1  1  61  do. 

1  1  61  do. 


Amount. 


105  3  65 

283  1  55 
111  2  53 


2,837 

259 

7 

219 

601 

55 

C47 

17 

8 

152 

693 

427 

660 

364 

1,352 
168 

5,196 

1,131 
112 
596 
662 


19 

6 

152 

564 


1,438 

58 

1,516 

1,287 

482 

210 

186 


20 

89 

0 

0 

0 

52 


0  50 

1  04 

2  52 
1  12 
1  44 


1  33 
0  76 
3  0 

2  0 
0  0 

3  65 
3  80 
2  78 


525  3  30 
356  1  0 
70  2  12 
233  1  25 
233  2  85 


45  3  20 

100  0  75 

922  1  14 

222  1  62 

39  0  0 

G9  0  99 

1,305  0  0 

50  0  88 

12  3  78 

1 

1 

1 

3 


67 
89 
12 
84 


0 
0 

0 

0 

50 

32 

88 


1,013  2 

616  1 

74  0 

215  3 

390  0 


75  2  9t 
75  2  94 


Tolal. 


18,094  2  16 


8,690  2  58 


O  2 


100 


Statement  of  Gun-carriage  Department  for  the  Year  \S2~ -2%.— Continued. 

Issues. 


Xames  of  Articles. 


1828. 
Jan. 


Heads,  powder, barrel,  50  lbs. . . . 
Hoops,  copper,  powder  barrel  do, 

Staves,  powder  barrel 

Bellows,  forge,  small, Europe,  pairs 
Drum  shells,  unserviceable  . . . 
Hoes,  mamoties,  Europe 


Feb.   Augers,  Europe,  H  inch 

Coals,  Europe chaldrons 

Iron,  bolt cwt. 

Tin,  sheets 

Tires,  wheel,  for  sling  cart  .... 

Iron,  rod   cat. 

Bar,  brass,  with  teeth    

Bars,  traversing,  carronade  .... 
Bolts,  tiighting,  13  pounder. .  . . 

,  housing  mortar  bed,l  3  inch 

,  5i  do. 


,  32  pounder . . 

trunnion,    32  ditto. .  . . 


-,  12  ditto 


Boxes,  brass,  convertible 

Box,  nave,  cast  iron,  6  pounder  . 

,     3  ditto  . . 

Carriages,  ship, ,  24  ditto  . . 

^ ,  1 8  ditto  . . 

,  12  ditto  .. 

,     9  ditto  . . 

,     6  ditto  . . 

,  carronade,  block,  1 8  ditto 

,  cheek,  pounder 

, ■  12  ditto 

■  24  ditto 

■  IS  ditto 
12  ditto 
12  ditto 
24  ditto 


•  with  slide, 


—    block, 
•  -    cheek. 


Iron  work  for  battering  limber, 
12  pounder,  15  sets  ....  cwt. 

box,  ammunition,  100 

sets,  5-j-  inch cwt. 

for  box,  ammunition, 

200  sets,  6  pounder  ....  cwt. 

for   box,   ammunition, 

12  pounder,  75  sets  ....  cwt. 

of  sorts do. 

for  box,  ammunition, 

75  sets,  9  pounder    ....  cwt. 
Naves,  brass,  with  brass  box    . . 

Pentails,  limber,  iron 

Plates,  trail,  bed,  carronade. .  . . 
Trunnion,  shoulder,  brass     .... 

.March. Boxes,  brass,  unserviceable  .... 

Carriage  and  limber  forge  travel- 
ling, English,  muster    

Heads,  powder  barrel,  old,  90 
lbs 

,    50  ditto 

Hoops,  copper,  old,  90  lbs 

,   50  lbs 

Staves,  powder  barrel,  old,  90  lbs. 

,  50  lbs. 


Total. 


•■3  32  do. 

3   32  do. 

54  do. 

54  do. 

66  do. 

66  do. 


4,326 

0 

0 

352 

0 

0 

24 

3 

60 

S95 

0 

S2 

545 

0 

64 

2,387 

2 

92 

418 

3 

80 

21,077 

0 

70 

70,953  1  24 


29,526  3  98 


101 


Statement  of  Gun-carriage  Department  for  the  Year  1827-28. — Continued. 

Ueceipts. 


Names  of  Articles. 


)8'27. 

Sf])t.  Sticks,  rocket,  with  iron  sockets, 
1 8  poundt'r    

,  portfire    

Triangle,   weighing 

Yokes,  single,  spare 

for  traces,  N.P 

Oct.  Barrels,  powiler,  empty,  50  lbs., 
with  1-  cop])er  hoops  each. .  .  . 

Barrows,   wheel 

Boxes,  annniinition,  musket. .  . . 
Doolies,  hospital 

Nov.   Boxes,  ammunition,  musket.  .  .  . 
Carriages,  cheek,  howitzer,  with 
limber,  iron-naved  wheel,  com- 
plete, General  Miller's  pattern, 

10  inch 

,  garrison,  for  short  gun, 

complete,  with  2  coins  each,  C 

pounder  

Staves,  rocket,  signal,  2  pounder 

,  1     ditto 

,  -J-     ditto 

• ,  \     ditto 

Chest,  laboratory 

Doolies,  hospital 

Dec.   Barrows,  wheel 

Boxes,  ammunition,  musket .... 

Doolies,  hospital 

Mallets,  Gluirry-wood 

Platform,  mortar,  complete  .... 
1828. 

Jan.  Barrels,  powder,  empty,  100  lbs., 
with  4  copper  hoops  each .... 

,  50  lbs.,  do. 

Barrows,  wheel 

Doolies,  hospital 

Boxes,  ammunition,  musket. .  . . 

Slide  for  boat,  3  pounder 

Feb.  Barrels,  powder,  empty,  50  lbs., 
with  4  copper  hoops  each .... 

Beds,  cheek,  mortar,  8  inch,  with 
elevating  screws,  complete.  . . 

Carriages,  block,  T.l'.,  with  lim- 
bers and  iron-naved  wheels, 
complete,  12  pounder 

,     ammunition,     body, 

with  limbers  and  iron-naved 
wheels,   complete,  12  pounder 

— ,  G      ditto 

,  5^   ditto 

Carts,  sling,  field,  with  limbersand 
iron-naved  wheels, complete. . 

,  platform,  with  navedrtheels, 

light,  new  i)attern,  complete  . . 

Doolies,  hospital    

Platform,  barbatle,  complete  .  . . 

Yokes,  trace,  new  pattern 

Carts,  platform,  with  iron-naved 
wheels,  light,  old  pattern,  com- 
plete   


Quantity. 


52 
46 
1 
100 
100 


41 

4 

125 

40 

125 


11 

300 
300 
300 
300 
1 
12 

4 
125 
22 

1 

1 


3 
441 

3 

19 
180 

1 


ISO 
10 

s 


10 
4 


c 

13 
1 

100 


30 


Rate. 


Amount. 


r.    a. 
1     1 


1 

46 


61  each 
0     0  do. 

2  97  do. 
0   25  do. 

3  79  do. 


10 

0  54  do. 

415 

2 

14 

37 

0  27  do. 

148 

1 

8 

3 

2  50  do. 

45S 

0 

50 

25 

2  72  do. 

1,027 

0 

80 

3  2  50  do. 


2,486   1   38  do. 


280 
1 
1 
1 
1 


1   61 
1   61 


96  do. 
do. 
do. 


1    61   do. 

1  61   do. 
3  52  do. 

2  72  do. 


37   0  27  do. 

3  2  50  do. 

25  2  72  do. 

1   0  55  do. 

268  0  87  do. 


14  0  88  do. 
10  0  54  do. 
37  0  27  do. 
25  2  72  do. 
3  2  49  do. 
51   0  98  do. 


10  0  54  do. 
594  2   jj  do. 

1,680  0     0  do. 


1,720  0  0  do. 

1,700  0  0  do. 

1,720  0  0  do. 

1,647  0  98  do. 

786  3  67  do. 

25  2  72  do. 

331  1  39  do. 

8  0  0  do. 


486  3  67  do. 


72  3 

46  0 

46  2 

508  3 

1,894  3 


P- 

72 
0 

97 
0 
0 


453  0  50 


2,486  1  38 


3,090 
420 
420 
420 
420 


308  0  64 


148  1  8 

453  0  50 

564  3  84 

1  0  55 

268  0  87 


42  2  61 
4,469  2  14 


111 

487 


0  81 
3  68 


C52  0  20 
51  0  98 


1,824  1  18 
5,946  1  50 

13,440  0  0 


3,440  0  0 

17,000  0  0 

6,880  0  0 

4,941  2  94 

4  721  2  2 

'sza  3  36 

331  1  39 

800  0  0 


14,607  2  10 


Total. 


5,030  1  21 


2,044  0  52 


8,077  1  GO 


1,435  2  84 


5.814  2  45 


t,266  3  49 


102 

Statement  of  Gun-cai-riage  Department  for  the  Year  1827-28. — Continued, 

Issues. 


Names  of  Articles.                              Quantity.                   Rate. 

Amount 

Total. 

1828. 

April.  Saws,  hand,  Europe 

Staves,  spunge,  ash 

Trucks,  cast  iron,  small    

Tin,  sheets 

80 

50 

0 

100 

r.    a.     p. 
2  3  45  cwt. 
0   3  92  do. 
0  0     0  do. 
4  2     0 

T.     a,     p. 

229  0     0 

49  0     0 

0  0     0 

22  2     0 

300  2     0 

Rupees 1,48,878  0  62 


Statement  of  Gunpowder  Department  for  the  Year  1827-28. 

Issues. 


Names  of  Articles. 


Quantity. 


Rate. 


Amount. 


Total. 


1827. 

May.  Barrels,  powder,  empty,  50  lbs. 

with  4  copper  hoops  each .... 

Powder,  cannon,  dried&  sifted,  lbs 

Sulphur,  refined,  weighing  1000 

cwt casks 

June.     Barrels,  powder,  empty,  50  lbs., 
with  4  copper  hoops  each  .  .  . 

Sept.   Tent  routies,  No.  3,  complete . . 

Oct.     Clock,  register 

Barrels,  powder,  empty,  50  lbs., 

with  4  copper  hoops  each .... 

Powder,  cannon,  dried  &sifted,  lbs 

Bottoms,  sieve 

Hoops  for  sieves sets 

Sieves,  brass-wire,  30  holes. , . . 

,  30  ditto 

,  24  ditto  .... 

Sieves,  brass-wire,  18  ditto. . . . 
,   14  ditto 


1,000 
9,917 

200 


900 


1 

1,300 
14,923 
4 
50 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 


r.  a.  p. 

10  0  54  each 
2  0  0  lb. 

8  1  22  cwt. 


10  0  54  each 

C7  2  0  do. 

48  3  36 

10  0  54  each 

I  1  32  lb. 


r.    a,    p. 

10,135  0   0 

198  1  36 


8,305 

0 

0 

9,121 

2 

0 

202 

2 

0 

48  3  36 

13,175  2  0 

198  1  90 

6  2  4 

52  3  55 


75  0  56 


18,638  1  36 

9,121  2  0 
202  2  0 


103 


Statement  of  Gun-carriage  Department  for  the  Year  1827-28. — Continued. 


Ueckipts. 


Names  of  Articles. 


1828 
Marcl 


April 


1.  Barrels,  powder,  empty,  ."iO  lbs., 
with  4  copper  hoo])s  each  .  . . 

Blocks,  iron,  double,  with  brass 
sheaves  

Boxes,  amnninition,  musket. .  . . 

Doolies,  hospital    

Fillies,  rough,  1st  size 

,    '2nd  ditto    

,    .'ird  ditto     

Gins,  field    

Ladder,  scaling,  joint 

Platforms,  gun,  traversing,  com- 
plete   

. ,  mortar,  complete    . . 

Scales,tangent,forT.P.  1 8  pounder 

,    6  ditto. 

Spokes,  rough,  1st  size    

,  2nd  ditto      

,  3rd  ditto      .... 

Limbers,  field-piece,  G  pounder. 

Ball,  iron,Eprouvelle,(G  64-pound- 

er) 

Boxes,  ammunition,  musket  .... 
Carriages,  carronade,  18  pounder, 

complete    

,  forge,  with  limber  and 

a  spare  wheel,  complete    .... 

Ladders,  scaling,  joints 

Platforms,  mortar,  complete  . . . 

,  traversing,  ditto  .... 

Shafts,  spare    pair 


Quantity. 

Rate. 

Amount. 

Total. 

r.  a.    p. 

r.   a,  ;). 

130 

10  0  54  each 

1,317  2  20 

4 

23  0  33  do. 

92  1  32 

60 

3  2  49  do. 

217  1  40 

9 

25  2  72  do. 

231  0  48 

2 

4  1  11  do. 

8  2  22 

48 

4  1  11  do. 

205  1  28 

100 

4  111  do. 

427  3  0 

0 

277  1  50  do. 

554  3  0 

20 

32  1  76  do. 

648  3  20 

3 

331  1  39  do. 

994  0  17 

7 

26S  0  87  do. 

1,877  2  9 

10 

14  3  70  do. 

149  I  0 

10 

14  3  70  do. 

149  1   0 

0 

3  2  25  do. 

17  3  25 

36 

3  2  25  do. 

128  1   0 

110 

3  2  25  do. 

391  3  50 

7 

767  1  81  do. 

5,372  0  67 

12,783  2  78 

1 

24  2  8  do. 

24  2  8 

295 

3  2  49  do. 

1,068  2  55 

8 

161  2  30  do. 

1,292  2  40 

1 

352  0  0  do. 

352  0  0 

10 

32  1  76  do. 

324  1  60 

1 

268  0  87  do. 

268  0  87 

1 

331  1  39  do. 

331  1  39 

10 

22  1  74  do. 

224  1  40 

3,886  0  29 

Rupees 

182,121  1  41 

Statement  of  the  Gunpowder  Department  for  the  Year  1827-28. 

Receipts. 


Names  of  Articles. 


1827. 

July.  Barrels,  powder,  empty,  50  lbs., 
with  4  copper  hoops  each. .  . . 

Saltpetre,  refined,    lbs. 

Sulphur     ditto  do. 

Nov.  Barrels,  powder,  empty,  100  lbs., 
with  4  copper  hoojjs  each.  .  . . 

. ,    50  lbs., 

with  4  copper  hoops  each .... 

Powder,  cannon, lbs. 

,  fine,        do. 

,  cannon,  damaged,  . .  do. 

,  dried  and  sifted, 

lbs 

Charcoal,  ground,    do. 

Saltpetre,  refined,     do. 

Dec.    Barrels,  powder,  empty,  50  lbs., 

with  4  copper  hoops  each .... 

Powder,  cannon,  dried  and  sifted, 

lbs 


Quantity. 


33 
1,000 

650 


19 

1,693 
56,600 
11,800 

2,100 

13,940 
345 
600 


867 
27,709 


Rate. 


r.    a,  p. 
10  0  54  each 
9   1   72  cwt. 
7  3  40  md. 


14  0   88  each 

10  0  54  do. 
0  1  96  lb. 
0  1  96  do. 
0  0  65  do. 

2  0  0  do. 
0  0  18  do. 
9   1   72  cwt. 


10  0  54  each 
2  0      0  lb. 


Amount. 


r. 

a. 

p- 

334 

1 

82 

84 

0 

78 

182 

0 

92 

270 

0 

72 

17,156 

0 

22 

27,734 

0 

0 

5,782 

0 

0 

341 

1 

0 

278 

3 

20 

15 

2 

10 

50 

0 

7 

8,787 

0 

IS 

554 

0 

72 

Total. 


600  3  52 


51,630   3   31 


104 


Statement  of  Gunpowder  Department  for  the  Year  1827-28. — Continued. 

Issues. 


Names  of  Articles, 


1327. 

Oct.     Balls,  brass,  4  inches  diameter. . 

Nov.  Barrels,  powder,  empty,  50  lbs. 
with  4  copper  hoops  each. .  . . 

Powder,  cannon,  dried  and  sifted, 
rep lbs. 

Cylinders,  iron,  for  burning  char- 
coal     

Levers,  iron,  for  press 

Dec.   Barrels,  powder,  empty,   50  lbs., 

with  4  copper  hoops  each.  .  . . 
Powder,  camion,  dried  and  sifted, 

lbs 

1828. 
Jan.   Barrels,  powder,   empty,    whole, 

with  4  copper  hoops  each  .... 
,    50   lbs., 

with  4  copper  hoops  eacli .... 
Powder,  cannon,  dried  andsi  fted, 

lbs 

fine,  dried  and  sifted,  lbs. 

Barrels,  powder,  copper,  English, 

100  lbs 

■ ,  50  lbs. 

Compasses,  caliber,  large  size  . . 

,  small  do.  .  . . 

Glasses,  time,  half  minute 

Scale,  Gimter,  brass,  2  feet . . , . 

Feb.  Barrels,  powder,  empty,  90  lbs., 
with  4  copper  hoops  each. .  . . 

,   50  lbs., 

with  4  copper  hoops  each .... 

Powder,  cannon,  dried  and  sifted, 
lbs 

Balls,  brass,  small,  weighing  44-v 

March.  Barrels,  powder,  empty,  90  lbs., 
with  4  copper  hoops  each .... 

,    50  lbs., 

with  4  copper  hoops  each .... 

Powder,  cannon,  dried  and  sifted, 
lbs 

Ball,  brass,  weighing  ."2  lbs.    . . 

,  iron,  Eproiivelle,  CS  lbs.  . . 

April.  Barrels,  powder,  empty,  90  lbs., 

with  4  copper  hoops  each.  .  . . 
,  50  lbs. 

with  4  copper  hoops  each .... 
Powder,  cannon,  dried  and  sifted, 

11)S 

Ball,  brass,  4  inch 

,  iron,  Eprouvelle,  with  keys, 

08  lbs '. . 

Cylinders,  iron,  large 


Quantity. 

Rate. 

Amount. 

Total. 

200 

r.   a.    p. 

84  1  66  each 

r.       a.   p. 

16,883  0     0 

30,440   1 

41 

300 

10  0  54  do. 

3,040   1     0 

14,743 

11      2   lb. 

196  0   32 

1 
4 

102  0  67  each 
81   2   71   do. 

102  0  67 
326  2   84 

3,665  0 

ss 

587 

10  0  54  do. 

5,949  0   98 

29,350 

2  0     0    lb. 

587  0     0 

6  536   0 

OS 

43 

14  0   88  each 

611    1   84 

1,299 

10  0  54  do. 

13,165   1   46 

29,700 
50 

2  0     0    lb. 
2  0     0  do. 

594  0     0 
1   0     0 

1 
2 
1 
1 
6 
1 

37  2  62   lb. 
26  3   78   do. 
30  2  22 
20  0     0 
1    1      0 
22  0     0 

37  2  62 
53  3  56 
30  2  22 
20  0     0 
7  2     0 
22  0     0 

14  543   1 

70 

64 

14  0   88  each 

910  0  32 

G84 

10  0  54  do. 

6,932   1   36 

29,890 
400 

2   0     0    lb. 
84   1    66  each 

597  3  20 
33,766  0     0 

42,206  0 

88 

164 

14  0  88  each 

2,332   0   32 

C79 

10  0  54  do. 

6,881   2   66 

27,159 

301 

1 

2  0     0   lb. 
84   1    66  each 
24  2     S  do. 

543  0  72 

25,408   3  66 

24  2     8 

35,190   1 

44 

262 

14  0  88  each 

3,725  2   50 

1,130 

10  0  54  do. 

11,452  2  20 

50,080 
200 

2  0     0    lb. 
84   1   66  each 

1,001    2  40 
16,883   0     0 

2 
4 

24  2     8  do. 
102  0  67  do. 

Ri 

49   0   16 
408  2  68 

33,520  2 

0 

ipees 

194,064.  2 

60 

105 


Statement  of  Gunpowder  Department  for  tlie  Year  1827-28. — Continued. 

Receipts. 


Names  of  Articles. 


1827. 
Dec.  Powder,  cannon,  new  powder,  lbs. 

,  fine,  new  powder.  . .  lbs. 

Saltpetre,  refined,    do. 

1828. 

Jan.    Barrels,  powder,  empty,   50  lbs., 
with  4  coppur  hoops  each.  .  . . 

Powder,  cannon,  dried  and  sifted, 
lbs 

,  cannon,  new  powder,  lbs. 

,  fine,  now  powder.  .  .do. 

Febr.     Barrels,  powder,  empty,  50  lbs., 

with  ■!■  copper  hoops  each. .  . . 

Powder,  cannon,  dried  and  sifted, 

lbs 

-,  new  powder,  lbs, 


. ,  fine,  new  powder  .  .do. 

March.  Barrels,  powder,  empty,  90  lbs., 
with  4  copper  hoops  each .... 

■ ,   50  lbs., 

with  4  copper  hoops  eacli .... 

Powder,  cannon,  dried  and  sifted, 
lbs 

• ,  new  powder,  lbs. 

,  fine,  new  powder.  .  .do. 


April.  Barrels,  powder,  empty,  90  lbs., 
with  4  copper  hoops  each .... 

■ ,  50  lbs.,  with  4 

copper  hoops  each 

Powder,  cannon,  dried  and  sifted, 
lbs 

,  new  powder,  lbs. 

fine,  new  powder  .  . .  do. 


(iuantity. 


12,500 

2,500 

600 


1,070 

28,482 

18,750 

C,250 


1,167 

28,350 

21,250 

8,750 


60 

649 

14,350 

16,500 

7,000 

406 

913 

54,690 
14,750 
12,750 


Rate. 


r.  rt.   p. 

0  1   96    lb. 

0  I    96  do. 

9  1   72  cwt. 


10  0  54  each 

2  0     OprlOO 
0   1    96    lb. 
0   1    96  do. 


10  0  54  each 

2   0     OprlOO 

0   1  96  lb. 

0   1  96  do. 


14  0   88  each 

10  0  54  do. 

2  0     OprlOO 
0   1   96    lb. 
0   1   96  do. 

14  0   88  each 

10  0  54  do. 

2  0     OprlOO 
0  1   96    lb. 
0   1   96  do. 


Amoiiiil. 


r.       a.  p. 

0,125    0  0 

1,225   0  0 

50  2  7 


10,844  1    80 

569  2  56 

9,187  2     0 

3,062  2     0 


11,827  2   IS 

567  0     0 

10,412  2     0 

4,287  2     0 


853  0   SO 

6,577  2  46 

287  0     0 

8,085  0     0 

3,430  0     0 


5,773  1   28 

9,253  1      2 

1,093  3  20 

7,227  2     0 

6,247  2     0 


Total. 


10,741   2   97 


23,664  0  36 


27,094  2    18 


19,232  3  26 


29,595    1    50 


Rupees 168,560   1   10 


106 

Statement  of  Articles  of  various  Descriptions  made  up  in  the  Gun-carriage  Manufactor}-,  and 
Supplies  to  the  different  Departments,  from  1st  of  May  1827  to  the  30th  of  April  1828; 
exhibiting  also  their  costs. 

Bombay  Gun-carriage  Office,  9th  April,  1829. 


Xames  of  Articles. 


For  and  to  the  Commissary  of  Stores. 
314  aprons,  wooden,  of  sorts 

4  balls,  cast  iron,  Eprouvelle 

1,345  barrels,  powder,  50  lbs.,  with 

4  copper  hoops  each 

28  barrows,  wheel 

5  beaters,  hand,  wooden 

14  beds,  cheek,  mortar,  with  eleva- 
ting screws  complete,  8  in 

5  beds,  cheek, howitzer,  heavy,  com- 
plete, 5-}^  in 

C  benches,  paring at 

7  blocks,  iron,  double  and  treble, 
with  brass  sheaves 

1988  boxes,  ammunition,  musket.  . 

8  carriages,  ammunition  body,  with 
limber  and  iron-naved  wheels, 
complete,  1 2  pr at 

4 ,  9  pr at 

1 1  ,  C  pr at 

4 

8 


Rate. 


,  o-J-  m at 

— ,   block  field  piece,  with 
limbers    and   iron-naved  wlieels 

complete,  12  pr.,  inch    at 

2 ,  block, howitzer,  light,  with 

limbers  and  iron-naved  wheels 
complete  54-  inch at 

I  ,  cheek,  howitzer,  iron,  with 

limber  and  iron-naved  wheels 
complete,  o-,-  inch at 

II  ',  garrison,  with  iron 
trucks  complete,  6  pr at 

1  howitzer,  withlimbersand 

iron-naved  wheels,  Sec,  complete, 
10  inch.  General  Miller's  pattern 

6 travelling,   for  battering- 

gun,  with  limbers  and  iron-naved 
wheels,  IS  pr.,  complete 

60  carts,  platform,  with  iron-naved 
wheels,  complete 

9 ,  sling,  field,  withlimbersand 

iron-naved,  wheels  complete .... 

8  chests,  laboratory 

2,000  chokes,  wooden,  for  magazine 

10  choakers,  fascine 

12  cutters,  port  fire 

155  doolies,  hospital 

1 6  forks,  sap 

6  gins,  field 

209  handspikes,  purchasing 

52 ,  train 

2503  helves  for  tools,  of  sorts. .  . . 
645  horses,  wooden,  magazine. .  . . 
1  jack  rope,  or  machine  for  making 

spun  yarn,  large 

59  ladders,  scaling,  joints 

7  limbers,  spare  field  piece,  com- 
plete, G  pr.,  made  up  from  alter- 
ing old  ammunition  tumbrels.  .  . 

10  moulds,  bullet,  brass,  for  king's 

pistol 

1  mould,  port  fire,  brass 


5   3  80  each 

18    1  10  do. 

11   2  75  do. 

37  0  27  do. 

2  0  do. 

465    1  91   do. 

233  2  14  do. 

SI    1  44  do. 

3G  0  0  do. 

3  2  49  do. 


1,720  0     0  do. 

1,640  3   13  do. 

1,583  2  40  do. 

1,640  3   13  do. 


1,680  0     0   do. 

do. 

do. 
1,680   0     0  do. 


1,988  0  40  do. 
280  3  96+ do, 


2,209  3   11   do. 

486  3  67  do. 

1,647   1     0  do. 

44  0   97  do. 

98  do. 

2   1     0  do. 

6  2  80  do. 
25  2  72  do. 

7  1      0  do. 
230   1   67  do. 

4  0  0  do. 

5  0  0  do. 
10  0  do. 
10  0  do. 

32   1    76  each 

279   1     0  do. 

5   0  82  do. 
S3   1   25  do. 


.Amount. 


1,873  0     4 

73  0  40 

15,719  2   75 

1,037  3  56 

2  2     0 

6,516  2   74 

1,167  2  70 

ISS  0  64 

252  0     0 

7,201  2   12 


13,760  0     0 

6,563  0  52 

1,7419  2  40 

6,563  0  52 


13,440  0     0 

3,360  0     0 

1,988  0  40 
3,090  3  60 

2,486   1   38 

13,258  2  66 

29,215   0  20 

14,825  1      0 

353  3  76 

490  0     0 

22  2     0 

80  1   60 

3.980  1   60 

116  0     0 

1,382  2     2 

836  0     0 

260  0     0 

2,50a  0     0 

161  1     0 

198   1      0 
1,913  3  84 

1,954  3     0 

52  0  20 
35   1   25 


Total. 


Grand  Total. 


■5  C3 

=  -= 

s  ^ 

I  t 

C  3 


X 


M 


Tl 

t*H 

h 

c 

0 

m 

5 

£ 

n 

rt 

CJ 

%m 

'D 

4-» 

c 

Zi 

^ 

a 

E 

0 

0 

0 

1-1 

^ 

0 

C3 

X 

_ 

a 

a 

cj 

■*^ 

,  ii 

ij 

■_ 

C 

•F" 

0 

" 

V3 

0 

■ji 

^ 

ct 

•T. 

w 

-^ 

;_ 

-a 

^ 

=2 

0 

> 

TL 

T3 

13 

"n 

0 

C3 

[ft 

x 

SI) 

i^ 

i> 

rn 

.  \ 

2 

■A 

C 

X 

0 

E 
0 

, 

^A 

-^ 

« 

'J^ 

& 

0 

> 

/^ 

fc. 

r-i 

^ 

c 

fl» 

h 

'  For  the  use  of  the  grand  arsenal. 


107 


Statement  of  Articles,  &c.  —CoJit inucd. 


Names  ol'  Articles. 


30  pickc  ^   park 

1  platfonti,  barbel,  traversing,  with 

cast  iron  trucks 

1 3 ,  mortar 

8 ,  traversing,  field 

1  post,  wooden,  large,  with  iron 
rings,  iVe.,  for  the  Castle  flag-statV 

20  scales,  tangent,  brass,  complete 
16  skids,  iron,  for  supporting  heavy 

guns 

46  sticks,  port  fire 

1 6 ,  rocket,  of  sorts 

2  tables,  laboratory 

6  traps,  rat 

40  trestles,  wooden 

223  yokes,  single  or  pole 

200  ditto,    trace   

6  beds,  wooden,  spare,  for  carronade 
carriage 12  pr. 

12  buckets,  fire,  wooden 

8  carriages,  carronade,  complete, 
18  pr 

40  coins,  wooden,  of  sorts 

1  slide,  gun,  complete 3  pr. 


1  beam,  scale,  iron,  6  feet  - 


3  do.  ■ 


1  bell,  brass,  with  wooden  stock, 
wheel,  and  iron  clapper,  rings, 
axles,  &c.,  &c.,  complete  ^    .... 

1 ,  with  iron  axles,  clap- 
per and  rings,  and  wooden  stock, 
wheels,  &c.,  complete  '■ 

For  and  to  the  Commandant  of  Ar- 
tillery. 

1 1  frames,  shot,  wooden 

6  rollers,  wooden,  for  rolling  heavy 
guns 

For  and  to  the  Secretary  of  the  Na- 
tive School-Book  School  Society. 

2  presses, iron,  lithograph.,  complete '' 
For  and  to  the  Agent  for  Gunpowder. 
1101  balls,  brass,  4  inch 

3  ■ ',  cast  iron,  Eprouvelle, 

with  iron  keys 

1  cylinder,  ship,  iron,  large,  com- 
plete   

4  levers,  iron,  for  press,  large  .... 
For  and  to  the  Director  of  the  Ar- 
tillery Depot. 

2  balls,  cast  iron,  Eprouvelle,  68 
lbs.  each,  with  iron  keys at 

1  bell,  brass,  complete,  (re-cast)  . . 
4  knees,  cast  iron,  large 

G  crowbars,  iron,  large,  of  sorts  . . 
1  frame, wooden,  large,  for  water-well 

1 ,   with  iron    bolts 

and  brass  clamps.  Sec,  complete, 
to  support  transit  instrument .  . . 


Uute. 


12  0 


0  each 


270  0 
350  0 


0  do. 
0  do. 


4  0     0  do. 


60  2 

1  3 

4  0 

2,9  0 

3  2 

4  2 

5  0 
7  0 


50  do. 
0  do. 
0  do. 
0  do. 
0  do. 
0  do. 
0  do. 
0  do. 


3   2  S!)4-do. 
3  2   10  do. 

154   1   37  do. 
3  71   do. 


5  2     0  do. 

3   1     0  do. 

115  1  G7  do. 

72  do. 

24  2     8  do. 


81  2  7Hdo. 

31  2  57    do. 

35  0  46-i-do. 

4  0  96    do. 


Amount. 


360  0      0 

388  1  25 
3,510  0  0 
2,800  0      0 

46    1    33 
80  0     0 


970  0 

SO  2 

64  0 

58  0 

21   0 

180  0 

1,115  0 

1,400  0 


22  1   37 

42  1  20 

1,234  2   98 

37  0  40 

51  0   58 


114   1      0 
64  0   97 


335   1   55 


246   0  51 


60  2     0 
19  2     0 


230  3  34 

198  0  72 

73   2  24 

108  0     5 
326  2   86 


63  1  14 
131  0  b3 
140   1   86 


25    1    77 
100   1   86 


97    1   46 


Total. 


185,415  3  48 


1,387  2   93 


760  0     3 

80  0     0 
230  3  34 


706  1   87 


331   3  53 


223   1      9 


Grand  Total. 


186,803  2  41 


760  0     3 

80  0     0 
230  3  34 


706  1   87 


334  3  53 


223   1      9 


}■ 


J 


'  For  the  use  of  the  grand  arsenal. 
3  For  the  use  of  the  warehouse-keeper. 
»  For  the  use  of  the  churcli  at  Coolaba. 
'  For  the  use  of  the  ditlerent  fortifications. 
'"  For  the  use  of  the  depot. 


-  For  the  use  of  the  Honourable  Company's  vessels. 

*  For  the  use  of  the  powder-works. 

'^  For  the  use  of  the  church  at  Rutnacherry 

"  For  priming.         ■'  For  the  use  of  the  powder-works. 

' '  For  the  use  of  erecting  observatory  at  Coolaba. 


108 
Statement  of  Articles,  &c. — Continued. 


Names  of  Articles. 


For  and  to  the  Honourable  Company's 
Astronomer. 

I  liammer,  iron,  large 

1  liandle,  iron,  for  crrinding-stone  .  . 

1  hatchet,  iron,  large 

1  model,  wooden,  of  the  observa- 
tory (now  building  at  Coolaba), 
scale  i  inch  to  a  foot 

20  rings,  iron,  larLre 

1  siiovt'l,  iron,  large,  with  wooden 
lon>;  handle 

1  table,  teak-wood,  large,  with  a  lid 
and  several  divisions,  9  inches 
square  each,  to  receive  chrono- 
meters   

1  trough,  wooden,  300  feet  long, 
6  inches  wide,  and  6  inches  deep 

1  wheel,  wooden,  complete,  for 
drawing  water  from  well 

For  and  to  the  Marine  Storekeeper. 

1  dog-bolt,  large,  iron at 

2  dredges,  iron 

1  lid,  cast-iron,  for  a  tank,  iron  .  . . 
1  plate,  with  rollers,   cast  iron,  ac- 
cording to  pattern  furnished .... 

1  roller,  cast  iron,  with  wrought  iron 

bolt    

For  and  to  the  Honourable  the  Go- 
vernor. 
1  soush,  cast  iron 


Rate. 


r.    a.   p. 


5  2  41  each 
3  2  S2    do. 


Amount. 


20  2  52    do. 


2  telegraphs,  complete  ' at     294  2     4-}-  do. 

(Errors  Excepted.) 


r.  a.    ji. 

3  0  62 

2  0  74 

3  1   77 


24S   1   95 
112  0   20 

3  2  82 


132  2  32 
390  0  52 
292  0  56 


Total. 


Grand  Total, 


10  2  33 

41   3     4 

6  0  66 

10  3   78 

31   3  51 


10   3  56 


589  0     9 


1,148  2  60 


1,148   2   60 


101    1   32 


10  3  56 
589  0     9 


101    1    32 


10  3   56 
589  0     9 


Rupees 190,765  2  75 


'  For  the  use  of  erecting  observatory  at  Coolaba. 
'  For  the  use  of  the  signal. 


(Signed.)  A.  Masson, 

Agent  for  Gun-carriages. 

-  For  the  use  of  the  marine  department. 


Dr. 


Account  Current. 
Gim -carriage  Manufactory. 


1825. 
Mayl. 


1826. 
Ap.30 


To  Balance,  viz. 

Articles  prepared  for  supplies 

Unfurnished  in  hands 

To  Expenditure  of  Stores  for  the  Year  1825-26.  r.    a.    p. 

129  axletrees,  iron,  of  sorts,  weighing  224  1  19..nid.   10  2  88i 

54-i-  candies  babool  firewood Cy     3   1    97 

144  baskets,  rattan each     0  2  21f 

2  pounds  black  lead  dust per  lb.     0   1      0 

50  blocks,  circular per  100   55  2  22 

50  3   26tV  brass  confortible per  lb.     0  2     7i 

41  pairs  bolts,  brass,  for  bookcase per  pair     1    1   54 

36  lbs.  borax per  lb.     0   1    98 

SO  1  12i  brass,  cake do.       0   186 

1 5-iV  lbs.  brass,  sheet 

2-^  lbs.       do.     plate 

357  bricks,  China each     0   151 

14,159  bricks,  Europe do.       0  0  42^ 

22  brooms,  common do.       0  0   16  J 


r.    a.   p. 

r.    a.    p. 

29,032  1  61 

173,635  2  38 

202  GG7  3  99 

9,622  1  52 

190  1  36 

79  2  85 

0  2  0 

27  3  11 

2,961  1  84 

56  3  14 

17  3  77 

1,581  1  37 

7  2  68 

1  0  50 

134  3  29 

1,495  3  88 

0  S  66 

100 
Quantity  of  Gunpowder  issued  during  the  Years  182G,  1827,  and  1828. 

Common  Powder.  Fine  Powder. 

Uis,        oz.  dr.  lbs,         ox,  dr. 

Quarter  ending  SOtli  April  1826      7,002     0  0  14,508     0  0 

31st  .luly     124,172     2  0  42,183     0  0 

31st  October     4,337    10  0  9,645     0  0 

31st  J:inuary  1827 90,143   18  0  30,682     0  0 

30tii  April 32,615     0  0  31,528     0  0 

31st  July     18,341      0  0  4,944     9  0 

31st  October 25,267     0  0  8,910     9  0 

31st  January  1828    99,320     0  0  5,772     0  0 

31st  April    170,588     0  0  51,267   13  0 

31st  Julv     00,372     8  0  01,073     0  0 

31st  October 08,990     8  0  1,573     0  0 

31st  January  1829      66,980     7  0  24,371     4  8 


774,141    15     0         286,464     3     8 


lbs,         OS.    dr.  r.  a.    p.  r.  a.     p. 

774,141   15  0  common  powder  at  0   1   96  per  lb.— 379,329     2   19 
286,464  3     8  line  ditto       at  0  1  90     ditto.— 140,367     1  86 


(Signed.)  P.  Fearon, 

Secretary  to  the  Military  Board. 


Statement  of  the  Quantity  of  Gunpowder  manufactued  in  the  Bombay  Powder- Works  during 
the  Years  1823-24,  1824-25,  1825-26,  1826-27,  1827-28.  Showing  the  Total  Annual 
Amount  of  the  Bills  of  Establishment,  &c..  Sec,  delivered  to  the  Paymaster-general,  vi/. : — 


Official  years. 

Total  Amount  of  Bills 

delivered  to  the  Audit 

Office  and  Military 

Paymaster-general . 

New  Gunpowder. 

Common. 

Fine. 

100 11). 
Barrels. 

100  lb. 
Barrels. 

Total. 

Barrels 

lOOlbs.  each. 

Pounds. 

1823-24   

1824-25   

1825-20  

1820-27  

1827-28  

r.           a,     p. 
42,241      3  77 
37,576     1      4 
40,745     0   80 
30,0, 4     1    17 
30,106     2   37 

2,960 
3,092 
3,111 

S12i 
l,009i 

555 
430 
392 
6921 
41  Si- 

3,515 
3,522 
3,503 
1,505 
1,422 

351,500 
352,200 
350,300 
150,500 
142,200 

Account  Current. 
Per  Contra. 


Cr. 


1820. 
Ap.  30.  By  made  up  during  the  Year  1825-26.  r. 

Axletrecs,  iron,  Europe,  completed 

136  barrels,   powder,  lOOlbs.,  with  4  copper  hoops, 

each each        1 5 

6081  . ,  50lbs do.        12 

1  basin,  evaporating 

2  beds,    howitzer,  heavy,  54-  inch each     287 

1 ,  light,  54-  do 

2  beds,  mortar,       ,    1 3  do each     0 1 0 

1 ,    cheek,         ,   1 0  do 

1  ,   ,  ,     8  do , 

2  beds  and  coin,  9  pounder each  4 

227  benches  or  forms do.  5 

26 ,  with  arm,  hospital do.        30 

4 ,  carpenter's do.        50 

6 ,  paring do.       3 1 

2    • ,  mealing do.       77 

2  bells,  brass 

100  heaters,  hand each  0 

3  binnacles,  brass,  patent 


a. 

7'- 

2 

1 

1 

75 

2 

40 

0 

0 

0 

89 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

44 

2 

24 

O 

0 

r. 

a. 

p- 

2,446 

o 

32 

2,108 

1 

SO 

5,032 

1 

75 

45 

2 

15 

575 

0 

80 

272 

1 

52 

1,220 

0 

0 

020 

2 

37 

576 

0 

27 

8 

1 

78 

1,135 

0 

0 

780 

0 

0 

202 

0 

24 

188 

0 

04 

155 

0 

48 

703 

0 

0 

50 

0 

0 

106 

0 

99 

110 


Dr. 


Account  Current — Continued. 
Gun-carriage  Manufactory. 


r- 
74- 
0 

0 


1S26. 
Ap.  30.  To  Expenditure  of  Stores  for  the  Year  1825-26.  r.  a. 

22  brushes,  painting each     0  3 

290,425  cakes,  cowdung   mil.     2  3 

4b.  22y.  canvas 

1  1  15  chalk per  lb.     0  0 

64,383  baskets,  charcoal per  100  23  0 

2  3  27-5-  charcoal  dust 

10  11-J-  bushels,  coal,  Europe 

6  3   3  coin,  loose 

20  coats  camlin    each     1   2   DO 

58  12  J  convertible 

295  3  7  copper,  sheet per  cwt. 

1118  cloth,  green,  fine   per  yd. 

37  27 ,  coarse do. 

14  pounds  cotton md. 

35  crucibles,  black  lead each 

100  crucibles,  earthen do. 

5  sets  crucibles,  Europe per  set 

350  crucibles,  Bussora,  small each 

8cwt.  3qrs.  Gibs.  Daunner md. 

7  yards  damask,  red per  yd. 

2  1  10  earth,  red per  lb. 

94-  pounds  emery  do. 

8  corges  glass  panes each 

1  17-Tglue per  lb. 

2  pairs  handles,  chest,  brass 

30 ,  iron per  pair 

173  pairs  handles,  drawers  orrecobs,  brass  . .      do. 

23  hasps  and  staples each 

•i-  hide,  calf 

147  pairs  hinges,  butt  brass per  pair 

52  i- ,  iron do. 

214- 1  chest,  iron do. 

6       — ,  brass do. 

10,043  hoops,  copper 7  ins. 

1600,2  4G4-  iron,   bar per  cwt. 


64 
9 
3 
6 
6 
0 
0 
0 
2 
3 


1 
0 
1 
1 
3 
1 
1 
0 
0  0 
0  0 
0   2 

0  1 

1  0 
0  3 


9 

13-4 
35 
-0 
21 

0 
37 
334- 
97 

0 
191- 
92 
50 

1 

0 
634- 


r.     a.    p. 

16  3  60 

798  2  67 

106   3   70 

2  2  62 

14,808  0  36 

21   3   72 

644  3  33 

57  0  23 


34 

1,860 

19,160 

109 

125 

3 

220 


0  0  82 


8  0 
1   2 


,  pig md. 

,  hoop 

,  old per  c«  t. 

,  rod per  lb. 

,  sheet per  cwt. 

,  work,  Europe,  for  field  carriages . . 

,  for  carronade  carriages .... 


563 
15  3 
29  1  9 
47  2-i. 
47  2 

308  2  17 
53  6 
58  154- 

1  piece  kharva,  red 

2  11  lead,  pig  

52  skeins,  line,  log per  skein 

2  84-  linen  Dangaree per  yd. 

41  locks,  bookcase,  brass each 

3  locks,  chest,brass do. 

3  . ,  iron do. 


10 
1 


0 
454 
55 
29 
46 
23 
17 


7   0     0 
0  0   39^ 
13  0  59 


work,  old per  cwt.  27  0  86 


0  34 

1  284 
0  614 


158  locks,  drawer,  brass  and  iron 

2  locks,  pad,  brass   each     4 

1  3  224-g-  nails,  brad,  iron per  lb.     0 

44-  lbs.  nails,  burnished  brass do.      1 

3  2  214-  nails,  copper do.     0 

32  1  54-f  nails,  iron 

6  2  164-  oil,  cocoa  nut per  lb 

6  3  1 6i  oil,  Jingerly do, 

5  3  1 9  linseed  oil do, 

3  lbs.  oil,  preservative 

I  1  64-  paint,  black do.     0   1 

9  1  IHpaint,  white do.     0  1 

112  27  pipe  clay do.     0  0 

45  planks,  black  wood each  61   3 

140  planks,  Calicut,  7  and  6  inch,  measuring  17,979  I4- 

463  ,  5  inch  square,     15,816  6 


2H 
0 

0 
174- 


0 
3 

0   14 
3  504, 


0  0  38} 

0  0  534 

0   1    564- 


12* 

8 
40 


116 
87 


40 

63 

5 

53 

96 

0 

35 

25  0     0 

4  0  85 

3  25 

3     8 

21   0     0 

12  3  52 

2  0  94 

100  0     0 

37  1   22 

10  3  23 

30  0     0 

157  0   85 

4  3   86 

1  1   77 
624  3     0 

71  2  38 

29  3   32 

48   1    74 

16,223  0  12 

16,492  0  95 

2,351    1  52 

189  0  42 

205   1   25 

529   1   58 

653   1   48 

12,815   1   17 

2,436  0  38 

1,586  2   45 

2  2  0 
17 
73 
52 
14 
65 

0 
54 

0 
34 
59 


41   3 

39   1 

182 

129 

6 

3 

735 


8  0 


173 

4 


362   1   31 
1,394  2  78 
0  49 
3   15 


102 

259  0  40 


3   1 

44  2 

295   1 

31   3 

2,783   1 

11,325   1 


33 
73 
62 
67 
0 
1 


6,873  3  70 


Ill 


Account  Current. — Conlinited. 
Per  Contra. 


Cr. 


182G. 
Ap.  30.  By  macif  up  during  the  Year  1825-26. 

2  blocks,  cliopping    each 

IS ,  wooden,  for  brass  sheeves    do. 

18 ,  cast  iron do. 

5 ,    double    and  triple,    with    brass 

sheeves each 

870  boxes,  ammunition,  musket    do. 


r.  a.  ;>. 

30  0  0 

25  0  0 

8  0  0 


1469  - 
6- 
1 
5 
5 
5 

1  • 
\ 
o  , 


36  0 
4  0 
4    1 

•10  0 

3  2 
3  2 
3  2 


-,  sliot  and  shell do. 

— ,  sentry do. 

— ■,  ammunition  for  carronade,  12-pounder. . 

— ,  matelc each 

— ,  kitt do. 

— ,  mealed  powder do. 

-brass 

— ,  packing,  deal  wood ... 

— ,  iron,  with  wooden  boards  for  pressing 

paper •  •  • 

168  bolts,  eye  and  ring •  •  • 

2  bookcases,  teakwood each        57    I 

20  buckets,  gun do.  4   2 

9  carriages,ammumtion, bodywithlimbers,  12lbs.do.   1720  0 

10. ,     6    do.  do.   1640  3 

2  — • ,   5-i-inchdo.   1700  0 

2  ,      block,     field-piece,    with     limbers, 

18-pounder. . . .each 

12 do. 

6 do. 


-,  liowitzer,  cheek,  with  limbers,  8  inch. 

,  heavy,  54-  inch each 

,  light,  5-5-  inch    do. 

-,  carronade,  with  slide,  32-pounder  .  . . 

,  without  slide,  12-pounder. . 

,18     do.     .. 

— ,  garrison ,  32 

,  24 

: .,  18 

,     9 

-,  ship, — ,  12 


6  

10 

1  

1  

3 

28  

1  

6 

2  

2 

1  

12 

2 

1 

1 

33  carts,  platform   each 

2  sling,  field,  with  limbers do. 

50  chains,  drag,  rope,  of  sorts do. 

35 ,  black  wood do. 

16 ,  teak  wood   .  .• do. 

1  chest,  laboratory,  8  inch 

1 ,    54-  do 

20 

1 

1 

59 


-,  travelling,  with  limbers,  1 8 
,  12 


do. 
do. 
do. 
do. 
do. 
do. 
do. 


1680 


59 


580 


2781 


-,  transport,  mortar  . 


— ,  clothing,  hospit.il each 

— ,  weather 

— ,  powder 

— ,  arm,  package,  heady each 

8  coins,  wooden,  s])are,  8  inch    do. 

1 4  cots,   wooden,  with  bolster do. 

1  cot,  wooden,  hollow,  new  pattern 

1  ,  field 

2  collars,  wrought  iron 

1 9  couches,  teak  wood each 

2  cupboards,     ditto do. 

2  cushions,  damask do. 

1  desk,  writing,  with  bookcase,  black  wood 

7 ,   teak-wood ....  eacli 

2 ,  without  ditto         ditto      do. 

1 ,  minister,  ditto     

1  Despence,  teak 

317  doolies,  hospital each 

5  ilag-stafls,  with  top-mast do. 


0 

0 

10 

0 

0 

0 

50 


66 
0 
0 

13 
0 


2391  2  0 
1680  0  0 
1510  0  0 


786  3  67 

1647  1  0 

10  0  0 

6  0  0 

3  0  0 


44  0  40 


7  0  0 

1  2  0 

12  3  96 


12  0  0 
181  1  7 

13  3  0 

165  0  0 

90  1  90 


SO  0  0 
630  1  98 


r.  a,  p, 

60  0  0 

325  0  0 

144  0  0 


180  0 

3,480  0 

6,279  3 

240  0 

40  0 

17  2 

17  2 

18  0  50 
0  3  21 

18  1  13 


4,783 

10,080 

15,100 

2,340 

1,760 

5,040 

6,623 

9S 

459 

1,195 

590 

1,160 

540 

2,137 

5,563 

2,629 

1,321 

25,968 

3,294 

500 

210 

48 

56 

52 

882 

296 

7 

413 

12 

181 

13 

22 

90 

228 

362 

27 

458 

1,155 

180 

49 

70 

9,510 

3,152 


55  2 

652  2 

114  3 

90  0 

10,320  0 

16,407  3  30 

3,400  0  0 


1  91 

2  88 


1  10 
0  0 


112 


Dr. 


Account  CuTTent.—Coiiiinued. 
Gun-carriage  Manufactory. 


18:26. 
Ap.30.  To  Expenditure  of  Stores  for  the  Year  1S25-26. 

3,200  planks,  Calicut,  of  sorts,  measuring  1,30,100  4 

75  planks,  deal  wood each 

34  1 9  planks,  heady  wood per  corge 

4  corges  rafters do. 

15,659  rattans per  mill. 

14,358  rivets,  copper each 

214-  rivets,  iron per  lb. 

18  2  4  rope,  coir md. 

15  2  50  rope,  Europe    per  cnt. 

224-  rope,  cotton 

1 5  lbs.  rosin per  lb. 

230  cart-loads  sand,  casting   per  cwt. 

28  screws,  elevating each 

942g.  9d.  lOe.  iron,  of  sorts per  gross 

1 04-  lbs.  seed,  lack   per  lb. 

5  sheeves  lignum  vitas  wood each 

35^  tollas,  silver 

41  staves,  sponge each 

2  stones,  grinding do. 

2  1  steel  spring per  lb. 

23  94-  steel    md. 

20  summerhead,  China   

12 ,  Cudjeons 

1  1  444-  tacks,  tin per  lb. 

1  skein  tape,  red 

2  21  tar,  Europe 

60  2  timber,  Babool per  piece 

80  9 •,  Bassian,  measuring  1,097  H guz. 

6  8  black  wood per  piece 

168  154-  black  wood,  Bendy do. 

4  1  black  wood,  Calicut,  1  sort,  measuring,  753  1 4- 

-,  2  sorts,  measuring  676  24-  guz. 
-,  crooked,  measuring  242  S-J-guz. 


7  "^ 
'  -nr 


18  13 , 

4  11     , 

16  4  black  wood,  Eynee per  piece 

19  7 , Toolpady, measuring  302  2  1-}-.  .guz 

4  2  16-rV  tin per  lb. 

12  trucks,  cast  iron,  for  garrison  carriages 

I  1  1 7  T  turpentine,  spirits 

10  cwt.  3  124  tutenag 

I I  lbs.  twine per  lb. 

119  wax,  bees' do. 

6  pieces  wax  cloth per  piece 

3  24^  wire,  brass per  lb. 

6  wire,  iron do. 


r.     a.  p. 
5    2       0 

8  0     0 
18  0     0 

15   2  76 

0  0 

0  0  90 

2   1  49 

37  0  20 

0  0  374- 
2  0     0 

59  0  414- 

1  3     6 
0  0  99 

2  2     0 

0  1     84- 

20   3  88 

0   1  32 

5  3  75 


1    1    84 


4  1  40 
9  2  0 

43  0  9-5 

91  3  48 

14  0  26 
7  0  25 

5  2  49 
9  2  0 
0   1   68^ 


1  0   64-S 

0  2  614 
3  0     0 

1  1      84 
0  0  92 


To  Pay  and  Allowances. 

Established  allowances 27,333  2  80 

Contingencies 123,942  0  96 


To  made  up  during  the  Year  1825-26. 
Articles  completed 


56,648 

412 

378 

72 

243 

263 

12 

175 

580 

11 

1 

460 

1,654 

1,664 

2 

12 

37 

11 

41 

83 

548 

12 

3 

211 

4 

2 

5,228 

10,422 

5,507 

15,505 

16,259 

6,702 

1,714 

1,821 

2,874 

219 

279 

85 

343 

12 

30 

18 

138 

1 


a.  p. 
0  8 
2  0 

2  90 
0  0 
2  70 


11 
94 
61 
55 

0 
62 

0 
59 

8 
35 

0 

2  15 
0  58 

3  76 

0  64 

1  65 

2  0 
0  0 
0  97 

2  19 

3  61 
2  80 
0  37 

0  37 

1  43 

2  44 
29 
38 
36 
85 
98 
48 
95 
98 

7 

82 

0 


1 

o 
o 

1 
1 

3 
3 
1 

3 
2 
0 

0  81 

1  52 


264,613  1  30 


151,275  3  76 


415,889  1   6 
274,595  1  97 


113 


Account  Current. — Continued. 


Per  Contra. 


Cr. 


1826. 
Ap.  30.   By  iiiadi'  up  during  the  Year  1825-26. 

1  flag-staff,  portable 

20  frames,  target each 

2 ,  triangular do. 

2  galleys,  double,  iron 

3  gins,  field each 

1  gurry,  grass  

729  handspikes,  purchasing each 

12         ditto  ditto         

13S5  helves  for  tools  of  sorts each 

26  horses,  wooden do. 

2010 ,  magazine do. 

771  .  6  iron  work,  cast 

114  kegs,  grease each 

SO  ladders,  scaling,  joints do. 

20  linstocks,  wooden,  with  lock  complete do. 

12  mallets,  black  wood    do. 

2  ,  large do. 

1  maulelet,  iron 

220  models,  in  brass,  for  iron  work 

7  moulds,  brass,  musket-ball each 

1  ,  bullet,  brass   

14 ,  portable,  ditto each 

4 ,  rocket,  ditto     do. 

1  music-stand 

6  4  pickets,  park each 

50  pairs,  spare,  for  limber   do. 

1  platform,  garrison 

3 ,  mortar each 

3 ,  traversing do. 


1  plate,  cast  iron 
36  ditto      ditto  . 


-,  with  5  rollers 


27  poles,  limber,  spare each 

5  presses,  hospital,  large,  with  drivers do. 

3 ,  paper,  teak-\vood do. 

1 ,  on  stand 

3 ,  wooden,  for  pressing  paper 

20  racks,  clothing each 

50  rollers,  cast  iron,  small 

3  ditto 

1  ditto,  with  2  springs 

30  scales,  tangent each 

1  scraper,  cast  iron 

1  ,   wrought  iron 

40  scuttles,  brass,  complete 

1 4  shafts,  spare each 

10  sockets,  iron 

50  spokes,  teak 

50  spikes,  marline each 

6  standard  sizes do. 

C37  staves,  rocket do. 

51  sticks,  ditto do. 

S ,  Gugging  black  wood do. 

2  stools,  teak  wood do. 

1  ,  kneeling 

50  sockets,  rockets,   for  stick 

10  tables,  camp,  teak each 

1 ,  desk,  drawing,  teak    

1  ,  folding     

4 ,  laboratory     each 

181 ,  mess do. 

3 ,   writing,   with  a  slope  and  fine  cloth  and 

locks,  black  wood each 

1 ' ,  teak do. 

Q 


r.  a. 

/'• 

r.      a,     p. 

•  ■  •  * 

01  0  94 

20  0 

0 

400  0  0 

18  0 

45 

36  0  90 
1,948  3  95 

304  3 

25 

914  1  75 
33  2     7 

4  0 

0 

2,916  0  0 
11  0  83 

1  0 

0 

1,385  0  0 

10  0 

0 

260  0  0 

2 

0 

1,005  0  0 
2,276  2  15 

5  2 

9 

629  2  26 

48  1 

44 

1,450  3  20 

8  1 

80 

169  1  20 

4  1 

0 

51  0  0 

11  0 

85 

22  1  70 

373  0  34 

76  0  0 

22  0 

0 

154  0  0 

.  •  •  • 

5  0  82 

35  1 

25 

494  1  50 

20  0 

0 

80  0  0 

•  •  •  • 

216  0  0 

12  0 

0 

768  0  0 

2  0 

0 

100  0  0 
520  0  0 

270  0 

0 

810  0  0 

350  0 

0 

1,050  0  0 

3  2  94 

453  1  95 

18  2  13 

19  3 

70i 

538  0  0 

201  2 

19 

1,007  2  95 

143  3 

79 

404  3  37 
132  0  25 

•  •  •  ■ 

643  2  35 

45  0 

0 

900  0  0 
12  3  32 
45  2  74 
40  2  36 

6  0 

0 

ISO  0  0 

•  •  •  • 

12  1  89 

•  •  >  • 

15  1  32 

•  ■  •  • 

845  2  40 

19  1 

o 

269  2  28 
379  0  85 
195  3  50 

3  0 

0 

150  0  0 

15  0 

0 

90  0  0 

1  0 

0 

037  0  0 

10  0 

0 

510  0  0 

21  0 

0 

63  0  0 

8  3 

88 

17  3  76 

4  3  25 

428  3  6/ 

30  0 

0 

590  0  0 

•  •  •  • 

169  0  77 

• .  ■  • 

45  0  0 

29  0 

0 

116  0  0 

15  0 

0 

2,715  0  0 

300  0 

0 

900  0  0 
233  3  25 

Dr. 


114 

Account  Current. — Continued. 
Per  Contra. 


Brought  forward 

r.         a.     p. 
893,152   3     2 


ISJC. 
Ap.30.  By  made  up  during  the  Year  1825-26. 

18  traps,  rat each 

6  triangles,  flogging     do. 

2 ,  weighing do. 


r.  a.  P' 
10  0  0 
15  1  94 
42  0  54 
2  0  0 
50  0  60 


10  0     0 


100  tressels,  spare,  for  cott    do, 

2  trunks,  wooden,  for  bullocks  . .  each 
1  tumbril,  treasure 

5  tubs,  match   

390  yokes,  double each 

Sundry  trifling  Articles,  viz. 
1  anvil,  with  steel  face  and  cutter .... 

1  roller,  iron     

4  crucibles,   iron 

2  gravers,  steel,  with  wooden  handles . 

4  ladles,  iron 

1  mortar,  cast  iron 

12  gads  or  wedges,  iron 

2  screws,  female    

Made  up  and  Repaired  for  the  Lithographic  Department. 
Made  up. 

6  springs,  steel .... 

5  handles,  iron   .... 

5  scraper  cases,  cast  iron,  with  screws  .... 

6  dozen  pins,  steel .... 

2  screws,  iron,  spare .  •  .  • 

2  bars,  iron .  •  ■  • 

1  ditto,  cross . .  •  • 

26  poimds  iron,  wrought .... 

Repaired. 

1  scraper  case .... 

1  trome  iron   .... 

5  springs,  steel   .... 

1  cross  bar,  iron .... 

2  handles,  iron .... 

10  presses,  hthographic .... 


15  2 
11   1 

287  2 


By  Supplies  during  the  Year  1825-26 
To  the  Commissary  of  Stores. 
136  barrels,  powder,  100  pounds,  with 

4  copper  hoops  each    each 

6081  ditto  ditto       50  pounds,  do. 

2  beds,  howitzer,  heavy,  o-J-  inch  .  . .  do. 

1  ,    hght,   54-  do 

2  beds,  mortar, ,    13do....each     610  0     0 

1  cheek,     ,    10  do , 

1 ,      8  do , 

2 and  coin,  wooden,  spare,  9  pounder 

4  benches,  carpenter's each       50 

6  . ,  paring 33 

-,  mealing each       77 


1  bell,  brass 

1 00  beaters,  wooden each 

1 3  blocks,  wooden,  with  brass  sheeves  do. 
5  — ■ — ,  iron,  double  and  treble,  with 

brass  sheeves each 

915  boxes,  ammunition,  musket   .... 

14C9 ,  shot  and  shell,  of  sorts. . . 

1         ,  ammunition  for  carronade 

5        ,  match each 

5        ,  kitt do. 

5  ,  mealed,  powder do. 


36  0 
4   1 


20  buckets,  gun do. 

6  carriages,   ammunition   body,   with 

limbers,  12  pounder each  1720  0 


6 

60 
24 

0 
0 

0 

90 

0 

0 

50 

0 


Cr. 


180 

92 

84 

200 

100 

1,337 

32 


3,900  0 


P- 

0 

64 

8 

0 

20 

60 

49 

0 


121   1   50 


295   0  34 


274,595   1   97 


2,108 

75,632 

575 

272 

1,220 

020 

576 

8 

202 

203 

155 

187 


1  se 

1   75 

0  80 

1  52 
0     0 

2  37 

0  27 

1  78 

0  24 

1  60 

0  48 

1  64 


50  0 

0 

325  0 

0 

180  0 

0 

3,606  1 

12 

6,279  3 

90 

40  0 

73 

17  2 

0 

17  2 

0 

18  0 

50 

90  0 

0 

10,320  0 

0 

ii: 


Tin. 


Brought  forward 

r.        a.    p. 

893,152  3     2 


Account  Current. — Continued. 
I'or  Contra. 


Cb. 


a.  p. 


18i.'6. 

Ap.30.   By  Supplies  during  the  Year  1825-26 
To  the  Commissary  of  Stores. 
10  carriages,    ammunition  body,   with 

limbers,  6  pounder. ..  .each   1040  3   13 

2 ditto,  howitzer,    Scinch.. do.   1700  0     0 

2  _- -,  block    field   piece,    with 

limbers,  1 8  pounder   . . .  each 

Q ,  12  pounder. do. 

10 . 1  (i  ditto    .  .do. 

1  . ,  howitzer,  heavy,  5.J-  in. 

—,  light,  51  do. each  1G80  0     0 


2391 
1C80 
1510 


28   carriages,    carronade,   with  slides, 

32  pounder 

1 .without  do.  1 2  pounder 

6 — ,  with  iron  trucks,  18  do. 


1  carriage  cheek,  howitzer,  with  limber, 

8  pounder     

2  carriages,  garrison,  32  pounder .  each 


J  24  ditto 

— . ,  18  ditto 

,  9    ditto  . 

-.ship,  12  ditto. 

-.     travelling,     with 


.each 


597  2 
580  0 


90 


16,407   3 
3,400  0 

4,783  0 

10,080  0 

15,100  0 

1,7(;0  0 

5,040  0 


6,C23 

98 

459 


limber, 

18  po"under each  2781 

,  1 2  ditto 


-,  transportmg  mortar 


each 
.do. 


33  carts,  platform 

2  ,  sling,  field,  with  limbers 

40  pairs  drag-ropes,  of  sorts do. 

6  chairs,  black  wood     do. 

1  chest,  laboratory,  8  inch 

1 ,     5i  ditto 

1  chest,  weather 

1  . ,  powder 

59 ,  arm,  package each 

8  coins,  wooden,  spare 

1  cupboard,  teak    

317  doolies,  hospital each 

5  flag-staffs,  with  top-mast do. 

1  . ,  portable     

3  gins,  field    each 

1  gurry,  brass 

676  handspikes,  purchasing    each 

1384  helves  for  tools,  of  sorts  .  .  .  .do. 
2010  horses,  wooden,  magazine    .  .do. 

114  kegs,  grease do. 

80  ladders,  scaling,  joints do. 

20  linstocks,  with  iron  cocks do. 

2  mallets,  wooden   do. 

1  mantelet,  iron 

7  moulds,  brass,  musket-ball  ....  each 

1 ,  bullet,  brass 

13 ,  portfire,  ditto each 

4    • ■,  rocket,  ditto do. 

1  music-stand 

64  pickets,  park each 

50  pins,  spare,  for  limber      do. 

1  platform,  garrison    

3  . ,  mortar    each 

3  ,  traversing do. 

27  poles,  spare do. 

30  scales,  tangent do. 

1  screw,  elevating 

14  shafts,  spare     each 

50  spokes,  teak    

50  spikes,  mortar each 

Q2 


786 

1647 

10 

6 


11 


67 
0 
0 
0 


.2,340  0 
1,195  1 

590  0 
1,160  0 

540  0 
1,380  0 


!'■ 

30 

0 

0 
0 
0 
0 
0 

21 
71 

82 

33 

80 

0 

0 

0 

85 


7  0  0 


30 
630 


0 
98 


304  3 


4 
1 

5 
48 

8 
11 


22  0  0 


35  1 

20  0 


12 


270  0 

350  0 

19  3 

6  0 


25 
0 

0 
0 

0 

0 

71 

0 


19  1 


3  0  0 


5,563 

2,629 

1,300 

25,968 

3,294  2 

400  0 

36  0 

56  2 

52 

296 

7 

413 

12 

181 

9,510 

3,152 

61 

914 

33  2 

2,704  0 

1,384  0 

1,005  0 

629  2 

1,450  3 

169  1 

22  1 

573   0 

154  0 

5  0 

459 

SO 

216 

768 

100 

520 

810 

1,050  0 

538  0 

180  0 

59  0 

269  2 

195  3 

150  0 


22 

8 

79 

11 

0 

0 

0 

43 

60 

91 


0 
0 
7 
0 
90 


0  94 

1  75 

2  7 
0 
0 
0 

26 
20 
20 
70 
34 
0 


0 

68 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

17 

0 

41 

29 

50 

0 


116 


Dr. 

Brought  forward 

r.  a.      J). 

893.152  3     2 


182C. 
Ap.30. 


Account  Current. — Continued. 
Per  Contra. 


Cr. 


By  Supplies  during  the  Year  1825-26. 
To  the  Commissary  of  Stores. 

600  staves,  rocket    each 

51  sticks,  ditto do. 

5 1  socket,  ditto 

4  tables,  laboratory     each 

1  triangle,  weighing 

1  tumbril,  common  treasure 

5  tubs,  match 

3S0  yokes,  double    each 

7  carriages,  muster,  Europe 

Repaired. 

Carts  and  carriages     

Carriages,  ship,  of  sorts 

Barrels,  powder,  of  sorts    


To  the  Commissary-general. 

1  basin,  evaporating 

227  benches  or  forms each 

26  ■ ,  with  arm,  hospital .  do. 

2  blocks,  chopping    do. 

6  boxes,  sentry do. 

2  bookcases,  teak  wood     do. 

29  chairs,  black  wood do. 

1 6 ,  teak  wood do. 

20  chests,  clothing,  hospital do. 

14  cotts,  wooden,  with  bolster  . .  .  .do. 

1  ,  field do. 

19  couches,  teak  wood do. 

1  cupboard,  ditto    

2  cushions,  damask    

1  desk,  writing,  with  book  case,  black 

wood 

7  — ■ ,  teak  wood  .  .each 

2  . ,  without  book-case,  teak 

each 


wood 


mniister 


1  Despence,  teak  wood 

20  frames,  target each 

2 ,  triangular    do. 

26  horses,  wooden,  large do. 

12  mallets,  black  wood do. 

5  presses,  hospital    do. 

3 ,  paper    do. 

1 ,  on  stand     

20  racks,  clothing do. 

10  sockets,  iron 

6  standard  size    each 

3  sticks,  Gugging  black  vpood do. 

2  stools,  teak 

1  ,  minister     

10  tables,  camp,  teak do. 

1  table  or  desk,  drawer,  teak 

1 ,  folding 

165 ,  mess   each 

3 ,   writing,  with  slope, 

black  wood each 

-,  teak  wood 


1 


1 8  trai)s,  rat     each 

()  triangles,  flogging do. 

100  tressels,  spare,  for  cott do. 

2  trunks,  wooden,  bullock 


r. 
1 

10 


a.  i>. 
0  0 
0      0 


29   0      0 


10   0     0 


5  0 
SO  0 
SO  0 
40  0 
57   1 

6  0 
3  0 


600  0 
510  0 
428  3 
116  0 


r- 

0 

0 

67 

0 


42  0  54 


1,337 
32 


3,300  0 
3,297   1 


250,505   2   11 

19,189  2   11 

3,077   2  44 
3,030  2   65 


44  0  40 
12  3  96 


12  0     0 


165   0     0 


90   1   90 


20  0     0 

18  0  45 

10  0 

41  0 
201  2 
134  3 


45   0     0 

15  0     0 
21   0     0 


30  0  0 

15  0  0 

300  0  0 

10   0  0 

15   1  94 

2  0  0 


45  2 

15 

,135  0 

0 

780  0 

0 

60  0 

0 

240  0 

0 

114  3 

32 

174  0 

0 

48  0 

0 

882  0 

0 

181  3 

44 

22  2 

25 

228  0 

0 

181  1 

7 

27  2 

0 

458  2  44 
1,155   0     0 


ISO 

49 

70 

400 

36 

260 

51 

1,007 

404 

132 

900 

370 

90 

63 

17 

4 

300 

169 

45 

2,475 


0  90 
0  0 
0     0 

2  95 

3  37 
0  25 
0  0 
0  85 
0     0 


900  0 
233  3 
180  0 
92  3 
200  0 
100   1 


275,803   1   31 


0 

76 

25 

0 

77 

0 

0 

0 
25 

0 
64 

0 
20 


117 


Dr. 


Account  Cun-eiit. — Continued. 
Per  Contra. 


Cr. 


Brought  forward 

r.  a .     p. 

893,152  3     -i 


Vp.SO.  By  Supplies  during  the  Year  1825-26. 

For  the  Church  at  Tannah.  r. 

1  bell,  brass,  complete 

For  Assay-master. 
1  plate,  cast  iron 

Repaired. 

Boxes,  sentry 394 

Fire  engine     11 


a.  p. 


To  the  Marine  Storekeeper. 

3  binnacles,  lamp    

1C8  holts,  eye  and  ring 

4  carriages,  ship,  12  pounder 

2  galleys,  double,  iron     

2  plates,  iron 

46c\vt.  Iqr.  6lbs.  iron  work,  cast  . . 
3G  plates,  cast  and  wrought  iron  . .  < 

1  triangle,  weighing   , 

50  rollers,  cast  iron,  small 

3  ditto     , 

40  scuttles,  brass,  complete 

Repaired. 

4  boilers 

3  beams,  scale,  iron    


10   3  49 
18   1   89 


9  0     0 


To  the  Superintending  Engineer. 
5cwt.  Sqrs.  lOlbs.  iron  work,  cast. . . . 

18  blocks,  cast  iron each 

2  collars,  wrought  iron . .  . . 

To  the  Secretary  of  the  Military  Board. 

0  3  20  brass  work  containing  models, 

iron  work    . . . . 

1  box  for  packing  the  above . . . . 

To  the  Superintending  of  Government  Lithographic 
Department. 

2  boxes,  iron,  with  wooden  board,  for 

pressing  paper    . .  . . 

3  presses  for  pressing  paper .  .  . . 

6  springs,  steel    .  .  . . 

5  handles,  iron    . .  .  . 

5  scrapers,  cast  iron,  with  screws  ....  . .  . . 

20  pounds  iron  work,  wrought . .  . . 

6  dozen  pins,  steel .... 

2  screws,  iron,  spare . .  . . 

2  bars .... 

1  cross  bar,  iron .... 

Repaired. 


1  scraper-case     

1  frame,  iron 

5  springs,  steel 

1  cross  bar,  iron 

2  handles,  iron^ 

10  presses,  lithographic. 


To  the  Secretary  of  the  Native  School  Book  Society. 

1  roller,  with  2  springs . .  . . 

1  scraper-case,  cast  iron . . . . 

1  ,  wooden . . . . 

1   spring,  steel,  with  2  springs   and  2 

scrapers,  repaired . . . . 


r.     a.     p. 
515  2  80 

3  2  94 


I4,99C   3     6 


405   2   75 


116  0  99 

652  2  45 

757  2     1 

1,948  3  95 

18  2   13 

1,309  2   91 

453  1  95 
42  0  54 
12  3  32 
45  2  74 

845  2  40 


6,253   1    39 


29   1   38 


271    1   60 
162  0     0 

90  2   97 


76  0     0 
18   1   13 


55   2   12 
643  2  35 


295  0  34 


40  2  36 
12  1  89 
15   1   32 

5   1    16 

73  2  73 


15,402   1    31 


6,282  2  77 


524  0  57 


94   1    13 


994  0  81 


118 


Dr. 


Account  Current. — Continued. 
Per  Contra. 


Cr. 


Brought  forward 

r.  a.    p, 

893,152  3     2 


1S26. 
Ap.  30.  By  Supplies  during  the  Year  1825-26. 

Repaired.  r,    a.    p. 

2  lithographic  presses 41   0   79 

Iron  work  for  ditto    9  1  40 


To  the  New  Mint. 
12  handspikes,  purchasing     .... 

To  Messrs.  Forbes  and  Co. 

7  3  4  iron  work,  cast .... 

1  grating,  iron    .... 

To  Messrs.  Leckie  and  Co. 

8  126  iron  work,  cast .... 

To  the  Agent  of  Immaum  of  Muskat. 
8   116  iron  work,  cast .... 

To  the  Commissary-general  for  the  Statistical  Reporter. 

1  anvil,  with  steel  face  and  cutter ") 

1  bottle,  iron I 

4  crucibles,  iron 

2  gravers,  steel,  with  wooden  handles v 

4  ladles,  iron ( 

1  mortar,  cast  iron 

12  gads  or  wedges,  iron,  with  steel  point | 

2  screws,  female J 

To  the  Government  of  Fort  JVilliam. 

75  cheeks,  wrought  hole "I 

— ,  half f 


r.     a.    p. 


50  2   19 


11   0  83 


69 


By  Repairs. 

Repairing  department,— tools,  &c.  . . 

Erecting  air  furnace 

Repairing  model-rooms  and  pressers . 

By  unserviceable  condemned. 

4  blocks,  train 

60  baskets,  fire 

40 ,  forajje 


933   10  plank,  teak 

91   3  2  timber,  teak 

40  cheeks,  block,  carriage 

4  bottoms,  wooden    

4  w  heels,  brass-naved,  1 8  pounder 

1  wheel,  platform,  cart 

1 3  naves,  brass 

1535  fellies,  teak 

240  fellies.  Bendy 

536  spokes  


By  Charges. 
Pay  and  allowances  to  conductors 
Pay  to  lascars  and  overseers    . .  . . 

Office  establishment 

Department  expenses 

Models 


983,152 


By  altering  and  filing. 
Charges  on  Europe  axletrees  and  iron  work 

By  Balance. 

Articles  prepared 

Ditto,  unfinished,  in  hand 


199  1   59 
59  2  17 


146   3  50 


349  0  55 


121    1   50 


r.      a.     p. 

124   0   92 
11   0   83 

258  3  76 
146  3  50 
349  0  55 


— 

121  1  50 
7,190  0  11 

3,186  1 

50 

2,269  0 

9 

673  1 

23 

6,128  2  82 

348  0 

0 

150  0 

0 

120  0 

0 

168  2 

0 

1,490  3 

10 

1,000  0 

0 

2  0 

0 

1,181  0 

28 

83  3 

31 

780  0 

0 

6,519  0 

51 

240  0 

0 

1,993  3 

79 

14,027  0  99 

2,680  0 

0 

7,835  2 

80 

4,428  0 

0 

3,680  0 

40 

2,826  3 

58 

21,450  2  78 

12,966  0  49 

636,471  0  C2 

25,037  3 

66 

231,643  2 

74 

256,081  2  40 

Rupees. . 

.893,152  3  2 

o 
O 

V 


(X 
I 

00 


C3 


c  1? 


s.'S 


119 


,  t^ 

1^ 

(^f 

o 

91 

o 

~o 

O 

00 

<»< 

CO 

■* 

d  ^^ 

« 

OJ 

o 

o 

0< 

•o 

<N 

CO 

-4* 

^ 

„ 

o 

o 

OJ 

-* 

1^ 

w 

-* 

■* 

CO 

■* 

(^ 

to 

00 

■^ 

CO 

»^ 

o 

■* 

CO 

'O 

O! 

<n 

CO 

0( 

. 

— 1  —   t^irS   —    -<l^00OJ!OO 

"O 

o 

CO 

a 

O  O  O  O  00  Ci 

Ci 

CO 

•* 

«COI^^.-IQO>OOOClt^O 

"O 

•-■5 

(X 

CO           ■*    '-O   C5 

■* 

CO 

c     ■ 

— lOOlN^OOOOOOTCT 

o 

-' 

-H 

o 

o  oj  o  o  «  o 

o 

CO 

Oi 

mw<^^^o^■*-^-*QOo 

!-l 

o 

CO 

Cl 

O   "O   OO  O  CO  1^ 

CO 

1^ 

CO 

o  Gi  00  o^  c^  c;  ct  ^H  c^  4i^  >:j< 

-f 

00 

1^ 

o 

00  CO  0)  cc  o<  ej 

CO 

K. 

Q0_  '-'5_  0»^          r-<_  C5  lO           i-c   (N   t-i 
t^  — 

CO 

»5 

«o 

of 

0_  00  ■*  CO  oc  o 

oT  t>r  -*  oo"  or  -i*" 

of 

t— * 

CO 
0( 

Q  01 

^  2 

~  o 

•~  c3 


C      ?      M   "-^ 

tJD  >r    _    - 


[r  c-5' 


-  c-  h^    tjO 


o  • 


o 


c3   ii 


Cq     o 


o  >5  ;3  9 

■uSSO 


o  6  6  o 

^  «  3  g 
•5  3  -^^  W 


'^-^. 


w  -  y  s 

CJ  OT  W 

C)  M  M  C 

i-«  al  MJ  (11 

"  <"  SJ  hn 


o 


3 
-3 


o   o 

CJ      'X 

O   o; 


fe    w:    M 

-     ^-  Hi 


OJ 

00 


bo 


5« 


"  W 


occ 


*-—>-' 


-3  — 
O     >- 


S  2  o  ^32-3 

s  rt  S  i;  wS  o . 


bo 


so 


O 


C5 


O 


3 

c 

s 

4-> 

C3 
&< 

01 

Q 

c 


CO 

Ol 
I 

>-o 
o< 

00 


0) 


o  «0 

00  CJ 

00  "5 

no  1^ 


_•  — •    00 

o 

CO 

•^•O    CO 

00 

t^ 

i-o* 

i-H 

00 

OJ    to 

■?o 

■o 

CO   CO 

t^ 

s:  o  CO 

CO 

o* 

C5    CO 

•^ 

rH 

o<  t^ 

CO 

■o 

^^ 

O' 

— 

CO 
OJ 


CO 
X 


o 

CO 

oo 

C5 

O! 

o 

CO 

01 

o:) 

-s< 

r: 

CI 

CO 

t^ 

so 

OJ 

OJ 

OJ 

1 

uw  ^ 


CO  S 


-3 

01 

o 


^       ii     ■« 


cn  -•-• 


<5 


<Q 


-s 


c 

<D 
Oi 
X, 

W 
o 
H 
■  o 

CO   CO 
O!       . 

00    c^ 


^        c^    -3  -Jl 


—   a 
.2   to 


S   c 

CA      O 


-::         w 


OJ 
00 


to 


120 


lU 


o 
O 


o 


s= 

rt 

s 

^ 

o 

t- 

n 

"^ 

to 

c 

< 

c: 

CI 

•N 

tl) 

CJ 

a 

^ 

c 

o 

o 

1 

^ 

3 

en 

o 

!•> 

e 

o 

o 

'SI 

rt 

>— 1 

U 

-*-> 

o 

tc 

ts 

p 

C3 

K- 

►" 

!U 

c> 

3 

CJ 

s- 

S.2 


V) 


C3 
V 


01 

c 


60 


X 

U 


C 
0) 


3> 


2 
o 


111 


ft 


BO(NOOOi>-iO<»-'5  00i— ii-hOS  —  ^-.CO■-•OOl-•^T^>r-ll— 
I— I  I— I  I— «  ^H^^i— (t— ti-Hl— I 

s;QOO*l^^^^<^^■->«C50T?>o'^»oo■—^--5<^<oooDOT^.co 


a.oocoooc;cooocsa)o&«oooc»oooo 

o 

^OOCOOCCOOOOC^ClOl^OOt^OOOC 

i;ooooccccooot^ot>.oo  —  —  ooco 


u:  .2    -    ^ 

'^  i-  n  .i: 

«   ci     .~ 

-    2-=    3 

"S  ^  "5  to 
tc  c  = 

X  u  o  ■;, 


-I: 

i^^OCJ>--5OOOOOOi-i«5<«O<N501>.m!Hi-<-*C0 

•?^Of-iOOOOOOOOJC<5-*-^coo-«>000^000-* 
=  r-i  ,_  «  ri 


^  £  01  c 

e5    -    =J 


"3  =  -5  CO 

><    u    O    ' 


2^^ 

B    to- 
Coo 

as-;,; 


E,  1— I    O  0>  C 

f— <  »— I 


00  — 

'■oOOOr-iOO'*   —  O00t^O<>««3G<«0<NO!0«0O^>-'5O 


^  30 


.     ^  O)  •*    00   OJ  C5   «S  ■"   CJ   0»  O   ■*   „ 

(r— Ooo«o(  —  1-1  -Trt  at  "^ 

-  -       -       -   >.-5 


"5  2 


.£  o  o  o  o  o 

o  ~  :S  ;S  :S  ;S 
c  -   -  -^  -  - 

o    _ 

t!   c 

o 


B  o   o   o 


bC 


c  -5 


r-  ^   a 


^^'^'/^    J^^'^'^'^"-^    ^""C^ccc 


o 


o   ■'  o 

-2  rt  .2 


—    o 


O         O  tH 

s^  ° 

CA      C  ^ 

>=  H  c 

o  *^  5 

&-  C  3 

S  .i  ^ 


'H 

c  s 

u 

c 

t^E 

<    0 

o 

tc-a 

•^ 

a   c 

■r    rt 

o 

M  ,,;■ 

V   " 

i  2 

=  J2 

,    c 

Q> 

H  o 

O 

^ 

13  S 

W 

y 

rt 

(/I 

*j    o 

w 

Tfii 

c 

O    *J 

CD 

^■tc 

-Tl 

r,',     3 

3 

'T^ 

^  s. 


?= 

o 

cu 

n 

v<i 

U 

*^ 

Oi 

Q 

o 

a 

•^ 

o 

-d 

>^ 

c 

CJ 

^ 

3 

f-^ 

X 

O 

CJ 

fl 

tri 

i/i 

CO 

£ 

s 

o 

•T3 

rt 

^ 

w 

;> 

Oi 

^ 

EP 

« 

'tfj 

w: 

C 

c 

rt 

h 

rt 

^ 

u 

H 

n 

o 

CD 

tfl 

^ 

"S 

P 

'e 

<u 

c 
o 

;2: 

-:= 

n 

u 

C8 

"S 

•rs 
oj 
oo 

I— • 

-a 
s 

CO 
> 

■* 

00 

— « 

s 


a 


3 
J2 


I 

to 
0< 
00 


^ 


121 

Statement; — Exhibiting  the  cost  of  Iron,  Brass,  and  Copper,  used  in  the  construction  of  Gun- 
carriages  at  Cossipoor,  in  1827-28,  distinguishing  tlie  several  charges  which  compose  the 


Total. 


IltON 


ia.r.  a.  p, 

9  7  5 


-  s . 


a  to 


*"  °  ^  .5 


Efi«j 


r.  a.   p. 
4    5    0 


H  o 


a.    ;>. 
12   5 


aj    O    ^ 

So      u 

re    (U    u 


1    12 


r.     a.  p, 
7    5    5 


<s  s 


r.    a.    p, 
0   12  7 


M  o   to 


>    O    3 


r.  a.  />. 
1   5   6 


s 

.5"  3 

c  ■=  3 

.j<  -3    O 


r.    o.  ;). 
10    6    4 


sa.T.   a.  p. 

35   6   II 


Deduct  per  centage  of  scrap  iron  received  from  the  workings 0     7     0 


Recapitulation. 


Nctt  Sa.  Rupees 34  15   II 


The  iron  in  its  crude  state,  average  rate  per  cwt i) 

Additional  iron  required  to  make  up  1  cvvt.  of  linished  iron,   inclu- 
ding wastage  in  forging  and  finishing 4  !>   0  >       „ 

Deduct  cuttings  and  scrap  received  back 0  7   0) 


5n.r.    a.      p. 


J 


14       0 


Cost  of  1  cwt.  of  finished  iron  exclusive  of  cliargos  and  workmanship iLi  o  o 

Add. — Charcoal 1  12  8 

Sea  coal 7  5  5 

Petty  stores 0  12  7 


Tools  worn  out 


23 
1 


Total 24     9  7 

Workmanship 10     6  4 

Total  per  cwt.  of  finished  metal Sa.  Rupees  34  15  11 

Brass. 


^     . 
3   s 

£| 

2  "* 

Value  of  additional 
25i  lbs.  brass  metal 
required  per  cvvt.  to 
make  up  for  loss  in 
casting,  filing,  finish- 
in*;,  &c. 

Average  rate  per  cwt. 

measure  of  charcoal 

used  per  cwt.  of 

wrought  brass. 

Average  rate  per  cwt. 
of  firewood  used  per 
cwt.  of  wrought  brass. 

Average  charge  for 

petty  stores  per  cwt. 

of  wrought  brass. 

Cost  of  workmanship 
in  casting  and  finish- 
ing I  cwt.  of  wrouglit 
brass. 

J 

r.     a.   p. 
44  8  0 

r.  a.   p. 
10    1    0 

r.     a.     p. 
1     It    11 

r.    o,    p. 
0    14   3 

r.     n.    ;;. 

0    12    5 

r.  a.    p. 
3   3   G 

sa.r.    a.   p. 
61       5    11 

/tdd. — Proportion  of  tlie  high-priced  serviceable  brass  works  of  ])receding  years 
issued  in  this,  the  rate  being  incorporated  into  and  averaged  with  the  price  of 
tlie  brass  work  of  the  present  year 1 


Nett  Sa.  Rupees G2   13   II 


The  average  per  cwt.  of  the  brass  metal  in  its  crude  state 

Additional  brass  metal  rccpiirid  to  make  up  1  cwt.  of  finished  brass,  includinij 
wastage  in  fortrini;  and  linishini; 


■1  1.      8      0 


Cost  of  1  cvvt.  of  finished  brass,  exclusive  of  charges  and  workmanship.  .  .  , 

Charcoal 

Firewood 

Petty  ^tores 


10  I  0 

54  9  0 

1  14  9 

0  14  3 

0  12  5 


Workmanship 


58     2 
3     3 


Sa.  Rupees 

Add. — Proportion    for  the  high-priced    serviceable  brass   works   of  preceding 
years,  incorporated  into  and  averaged  wiiii  the  rate  of  this 


Gl      5    11 


1      8     0 


Total  per  cvvt.  of  finished  metal Sa.  Rupees  G2  13   II 

R  


122 


Statement  exhibiting  the  cost  of  Iron,  &c. — Continued. 
Copper. 


Rale  of  crude  metal 
per  cwt. 

Quantity  of  charcoal  to 
each  cwt.  of  copper. 

Rate  of  workmanship 
per  cwt. 

Different  on  original 

and  conversion  rate  of 

cutting. 

Total. 

sa.  r.   a.  p. 
SS    13  0 

r.   a.   p. 
5  4  0 

r.   a.  p. 
1    8    2 

T.      a.     p. 
11    12    0 

T.        a.     p. 

107     5   2 

Keca-pitulation. 

Vahie  of  crude  metal  per  cwt 88  13  0 

Charcoal ^     '^  " 


Workmanship 


94     1   0 
18   2 


95     9  2 
Difference  between  the  actual  and  conversion  rate  of  cuttings 11   12  0 


Total. 


,107 


Statement; — Exhibiting  the  quantity  of  Crude  Metal  required  in  addition  to  make  up  each 
cwt.  of  Wrought  Metal,  together  with  the  quantity  of  Charcoal,  Sea  Coal,  and  Firewood 
expended  in  forging,  finishing,  &c.  each  cwt.  of  metal  at  Cossipore  Gun-carriage  Agency  in 

1827-28. 


Metal. 

Quantity  of  additional 

metal  required  per  cwt. 

to  make  up  for  loss  in 

forging,  &c. 

Quantity  of  charcoal 

expended  on   each  cwt. 

of  wrought  metal. 

Quantity  of  sea  coal 

expended  on  each  cwt. 

of  wrought  iron. 

Quantity  of  firewood 

expended  on  each  cwt. 

of  wrought  metal. 

lb. 

51  ' 

254- 

None  ^ 

<-.      q.     lb. 

1  3     0 

2  0     4 
5     2     0 

c.     q.      lb. 

5     0   10 
None. 
None. 

c.     q.      lb. 

None. 

2     1   15 

None. 

Copper 

'  The  circumstance  of  most  of  the  heavy  iron,  as  axletrees,  &c.,  used  in  the  construction  of  the 
carriao-es  in  1827-28,  being  of  Europe  manufacture,  altered  in  the  Agency,  has  thrown  an  undue  propor- 
tion of  loss  on  the  small  works,  which  would  have  been  much  less  had  the  axletrees,  Sec,  been  forged  in 
the  Agencj'. 

-  In  copper  there  is  little  or  no  wastage,  the  cuttings  being  received  back  as  serviceable  metal. 


Statement; — Exhibiting  the  cost  of  Elevating-screws,  together  with  the  Rate  of  the  Wrought 
Iron  and  Brass,  and  tlie  charge  of  Workmanship  per  cwt.  at  the  Cossipore  Agency,  in  the 
Year  1827-28. 


Elevating-screws  for 


Field-carriage  iron  gun  24 
Ditto,  ditto.  .  IS 

Ditto,  brass,  R.P.  ...   12 

Ditto,    ditto C 

Ditto,  howitzer  . .    8  in. 

Ditto,  ditto 5^  do. 

Mortar  bed 10  do. 

Ditto,  8  do. 

Ditto,  5|  do. 


Tola 
kind 

cost  of  each 
of  elevating- 
screw. 

Cost  per 

cwt.  for 

Cost  of  workmanship  on  each 
cwt.  of 

Iron,  including 

Brass,  including 

Iron  for  elevating- 

Brass  for  eleva- 

a 

11  charges  except 
workmanship. 

all  charges  except 
workmanship. 

screws  in  a  finibh. 
ed  sUte. 

tmg-screws  in  a 
finished  state. 

19 

5     7   2G 

19 

5     7  2G 

2G 

11    10     0 

2G 

11    10     0 

19 

5      7     0 

J>24  9  7  8W 

58  2  5-,V 

37  12  10-rV 

4    13    7Vt 

26 

11   10     0 

19 

5     7     0 

19 

5     7     0 

8 

0     3     0 

123 

Statement ; — Exhibiting  under  the  heiicis  of  Timber  Materials,  Metal,  Petty  Stores,  and  Work- 
[maiiship,  tlic  cost  of  constructing  Powder-barrels  at  Cossipore,  in  1827-28. 


For  1  l)arvel  of  100  ll)s.  capa- 
city witli  4  copper  Loops. 

Timber  materials. 

Mttal. 

JVlty 
stores. 

Workman, 
ship. 

Toul. 

Staves. 

Heads. 

Copper 
hoops. 

Rivet  and 

nails. 

Prop"  for 
each  barrel. 

Prop"  for 
caeh  barrel. 

Cost  of 
each  barrel. 

r.    a.   p. 

1    14  8 

r.    a.    p. 

0   15   4 

r.    a.    p. 

4   15   3 

r.  a.  p. 
0    1    0 

r.    a.   p. 

0    4    11 

r.    a.  p. 

0   8   0 

r.     n.    p. 
8    11;.' 

Major 
Official  Secretary  and  Accountant,  Military  Board. 


Statement ;— Exhibiting  the  Quantity  and  Rate  per  Barrel  of  the  Gunpowder  manufactured  at 

Ishapore  in  1824-25,  1825-26,  1826-27. 


Years . 

Number  of  barrels,    100  lbs. 
in  each. 

Rate  per  barrel. 

1824-25. 
1825-26. 
1826-27. 
1827-L!S. 

81.72 
7941 
7989 

517 

17      6      31^ 
17    12       1-rV 
17      3    10 
16     5     6A 

Statement ; — Exhibiting  the  Sums  of  Money  which  have  been  disbursed  by  the  Agent  for  Gun- 
carriages,  Gunpowder  and  Rockets,  and  Superintendent  of  the  Foundry,  in  1826-27,  1827-28, 
and  1828-29. 


Years. 

Cossipore  abolished. 

Fully  Ghnr. 

Ishapore  sus- 
pended. 

Suspended,  Allaha- 
bad Gunpowder 
Agency. 

Abolished,  Allaha- 
bad War-rocket 
manufactory. 

Foundry. 

1826-27. 
1827-28. 
1828-29. 

720,21      0      5 
71,625      6      6 
68,968   13     0 

63,037     6     0   13 
45,672      1     4 
40,011     5     7 

59,273     9  0 
37,683  15  4 
20,037     5   2 

45,593   12  4  5 
38,269     6  7  4 
13,568     5   1 

17,453     4     6 

■9,028     9  11 

None. 

■2  25,087  0  4 
28,165  14  4 
28,067   10   10 

Total  Sa.  Rs. 
Average.  .  .  . 

212,615     3   11 
70,871   11   11   67 

148,770   12   11    13  116,994   13   6 
49,590     4     3   71    38,998     4   6 

97,431      8  0   9 
32,477     2  8  3 

26.481   14  5  0 
13,240   15  2  5 

81,320  9  6 
27,106   13   10 

'  For  9  months  only,  the  W.R.  M.  havintr  been  suspended  on  the  1st  May  1S2S. 

'  The  cash  accounts  of  the  Foundry  not  extending  further  than  June  1826,  the  total  of  the  year  of 
1826-27  is  to  be  understood  as  for  11  months  only. 


R: 


124 

Statement  of  the  Establishments  of  the  Commissariat  Department  as  they  stood  on  the  1st  December 
1S27,  and  1st  October  1830  ;  showing  the  Increases  and  Reductions  within  these  periods,  and  the  pro- 
spective Saving  ordered  as  vacancies  occur. 

Commissary-generaF s  Office. 


As  it  stood  on  the  1st  December  IS^T. 


As  it  stood  on  the  1st  October  ISSO. 


Xame5  of  Persons. 


Monthly   Pay. 


Names  of  Persons. 


ilncrease  between  Red"^    between 
J  1st  Dec.  1S27  and    1st  Dec.  1S27 
Monthlv   Pav.'    1^'  Oct.  ISSO.    andlstOct.1830. 


No. 

I .  John  Walker    

Z.  Jas.  Deabrew 

3.  Hurrychund  Ragoonathjee 
i.  Constancio  X.  Francisco . . 

5.  Soonder  Naronjee    

6.  Appa  Succojee     

7.  Janardun  Baboojee 

8.  Govindrow  Succojee    .... 

9.  John  Thompson 

10.  Alfred  Tumber 

II.  Ballajee  Sadasewjee  .... 

12.  Sadoba  Ballajee   

13.  Ballajee  Govindjee 

14.  Puttoba  Nillajee 

15.  Bappoo  Ballajee     

16.  Ramchunder  Juggonnath- 
jee 

17.  Soonder  Bappoojee    .. 

18.  Narrayen  Soonderjee   . 

1  Havildar    

.5  Peons,  at  6  rupees  each 

Office  rent 

Stationerv 


Carriage  of  the  Sick. — Pioneer 
Battalion. 

24  Dooley  bearers,  at  8  rs.  each 


Tannah. 
6  Dooley  bearers  at  8  rs.  each 

Dapoolie. — Vingorla. 
1  '2  Dooley  bearers,  9  rs.  each 

Rajapoor. 

1  First  muccadum    

5  Second  ditto,  at  12  rs.  each 
126  Dooley  bearers,at  9  rupees 


Betgaum. — Attached  to  the  1st 
Bombay  European  Regiment. 

2  First  muccadums,  at  20  rs 
9  Second  muccadums,  at  1 2  rs 
1 22  Dooley  bearers,  at  9  rs. 

Attached  to  the  light  ming  of 
the  iZnd  Regiment  N.  I. 

1  Second  muccadum    

24  Dooley  bearers   

Cattle  Department. 

26  Bamboo  coolies 

26  Pack  bullocks 


120  0 
120  0 
50  0 
35  0 
30  0 
30  0 
30  0 
30  0 
SO  0 
30  0 
20  0 
20  0 
20  0 
15  0 
15  0 

15  0 
15  0 
15  0 
12  0 
30  0 
200  0 
90  0 


40  0 

108  0 

1,998  0 


p.   No. 

0  1 .  William'Barnes    

0  2.  Jas.  Deabrew 

0  3.  Gunput  Cassinathjee    . . 
0  4.  Constancio  X.  Francisco 

0  J.  Soonder  Naronjee 

0  6.  Appa  Succojee     

0  7.  Govinda  Balcrustjee  . .  . 
0  S.  Govindrow  Succojee    . . 

0  [9.  John  Thompson 

0  1 1 0.  Thomas  Wright 

0^11.  Ballajee  Sadasewjee    . . 
0  12.  Pandoorung  Dirraanatlijee 
0  13.  Ballajee  Govindjee     .. 

0  14.  Puttoba  Nillajee 

0  |15.  Bappoo  Ballajee 

,16.  Ramchunder  Juggonnath- 

0  '       jee 

0  jl 7.  Soonder  Brppojjee     .. 
0  |1  S.  Xarrayen  Soonderjee . . 

0  1  Havildar    

0  5  Peons,  at  6  rupees  each 

0  Office  rent    

0  Stationery 


168  0     0 


48   0     0 


108  0     0 


Presidency  Division. 

Carriage  of  the  Sick. — Pioneer 
Battalion. 

30  Dooley  bearers    

6  Dooley  bearers  attached  to 
the  European  taken  ill  whilst 
on  garrison  duty 


20 

0 

0 

60 

0 

0 

1,134 

0 

0 

J 

Belgaum. — Attached  to  a  n-ing 
of  His  Majesty's  iOth  Reg 

1  Head  muccadum 

5  Second  muccadums 


0  120  Dooley  bearers  , 


12 

0 

0 

216 

0 

0 

182 

0 

0 

104 

0 

0 

Cattle  Department. 

19  Bamboo  Coolies,  6  rs.  each 
0  |38  Pack  bullocks,  at  4  ditto. . 


r.  a. 

P- 

120  0 

0 

120  0 

0 

50  0 

0 

35  0 

0 

35   0 

0 

30  0 

0 

20  0 

0 

30  0 

0 

30  0 

0 

30  0 

0 

20  0 

0 

20  0 

0 

20  0 

0 

15  0 

0 

20  0 

0 

15  0 

0 

15  0 

0 

15  0 

0 

12  0 

0 

30  0 

0 

200  0 

0 

90  0 

0 

14  0 
40  0 

r20  0 


180  0     0 


42  0     0 


0  1 

oJ 


114  0 
152  0 


200  0     0' 


54  0     0 


48  0     0 


1,322  0     0 


1,372  0     0 


228  0     0 


'  Prospective  saving  ordered  as  vacancies  occur, — rupees  128. 


125 


Statement  of  the  Establishments,  &c. 
I'lc.iidoir;/  Divi.siim.  — Continiictl. 


As  it  stood  on  the  1st  December  IS'27. 


Names  of  Persons. 


Attached  to  the  Public  Cattle 

at  iMalouiiga. 
No. 

1  Subedar   

1  Muceaihim 

24  Drivers    

Amount  of  feeding  28  public 
cattle 


Dapoolie. 
1 0  Pack  bullocks . . 


Rajajioor. 

10  Puccaice  bullocks 
1  Second  nniccadum 
214.  Pack  bullocks    .. 


Monthly  Pay. 


n 


r.  n.  p. 
20  0  0 
12  0     0 

98  0     0    >•■ 


As  it  stooj  on  tlic  1st  October  18:iO. 


Names  of  Persons, 


Monthly  Pay. 


117   3   SO 


50  0     0 


1.50  0 


Belgaum. — Attached  to  the  1st 
Bombay  European  Regiment. 

2  Second  niuccadums.at  15  rs. 
8  Draught  bullocks,  at  S  do.  . 
24  Puckaulies,  ditto,  at  15  do. 
401  Pack  ditto,  at  5  ditto  . . 
7  Bamboo  coolies  at  9  ditto. . 
1  Second  muccadum,at  12  do. 
22  Medicine  coolies,   at  9  do. 


3,032  0     0 


Attached  to  the  22nd  Regi- 
ment Na  live  Infantry. 

GO  Pack  bullocks     

5  Puckaulie  ditto 

1  Second  mestre    

1 8  Camel  drivers 

Expenses  incurred  for  35 
camels  for  feeding,  &c 

Medical  Department  Commis- 
sariat Branch. — Amount  oj 
Abstract  for  Presidency. 

European  general  hospital 
Ditto  2nd  Bombay  European 

regiment 

Ditto  2nd  battalion  artillery 
Ditto  His  Majesty's  6th  regi- 
ment     

Ditto  His  Majesty's  depot  . . 

Ditto  Tannah    garrison    los 

pital  

Ditto  lunatic  asylum - 


15 
1,177 


30  0 

Ci  0 

3G0  0 

2,305  0 

G3  0 

12  0 

198  0 


300 

0 

0 

75 

0 

0 

15 

0 

0 

1G2 

0 

0 

Belgaum. — Attached  to  a  wing 
of  His  Majesty's  iOth  Regt. 

]  Second  muccadum 

14  Drivers    

Expenses     incurred     for    28 
camels  feeding,  &c 


12  0     0 
84  0     0 

242   3  25 


300   3   86 


338   0     0 


J 

Medical  Department  Commis 
sariat  Branch. — A  mount  of 
Abstract  for  Presidency. 

European  general  hospital  . 


472  0 
199  2 

526   0 
191    2 


99  0 
1G7  0 


Proceed  to  Deesa     

Proceed  to  Ahniednuggur 


Proceed  to  Poona     

Amount    of    abstract   of  His 

Majesty's  depot    

Ditto  do.  native  gen.  hospital 
Ditto  do.  ophthalmic  inly.  . , 
Tannah  garrison  hospital    . . . 

Lunatic  asylum     

His  Majesty's  20th  regiment 
Native  garrison  hospital  .... 

.Marine  battalion , 

1  St  grenadier  regiment    .... 

19tl\  regiment , 

Native  invalid  at  Mahim  .  . , 

Pioneer  battalion 

Tannah  native  hospital  ... 
Bhendy  17tii  regiment  .... 
Dapoolie  4th  regiment   .... 


338  3  25 


288 


lniria-.t!    between 

1st  Dec.  I8i'7  and 

1st  Oct.  I8:!0. 


Ued°   between 

1st  Dec.  18'2- 

andl6tOct.l830. 


156 


87  0 
167  0 


105  0 
87  0 


567  0 
49  2 
52  0 

52  0 

53  0 
12  0 
31  0 
26  0 

52  0 

53  0 


297  3  80 


1,392  0  0 


2,693  0  75 


852  3  86 


50  0  0 

472  0  0 
199  2  80 

526  0  0 

35  0  0 


12  0  0 


126 


Statement  of  the  Establishments,  &c. 
Presidency  Division. — Continued. 


As  it  stood  on  the  1st  December  1S27. 


Xames  of  Persons. 


Monthly  Fay. 


As  it  stood  on  the  1st  October  1830. 


Office  Establishment.  /Account 
ant   and    Cashier    Depart- 
ment. 

No. 

1  Purvoe,  Sakarani  Bapoojee . 

2 ,  Bhanoo  Sadasewjee. 

3 ,  Janardon  Soonderjee. 

4 ,  Juggonath  Casinathjee 

5  ,  Rowjee  Balcnistnajee 

1  Shroff,  LuxanionBallajee  , 

2  Dandajee  Pandoba 

Military  Supply  Branch. 

1  Purvoe,  Damother  Vacatesh 

~  ,  Moroba  Sewjce  . . 

.'5 ,  Sakaram  Pandoorung 

1  Inspector,    Moroba  Rago 

natty , 

2 ,Naronrow  Luxamonjee 

4  Peons,  at  6  rupees  each  . . . 


Provision  Department. 

1  Purvoe,  Ragonath  Ramjee. 

2 ,  Cassinath  Kessowjee. 

3 ,  Luxamon  Ragojee  . . 

1  Inspector  

1  Measuring  man 

2  Weighing  men,  at  1 4  rupees 

2 ,     12  do. 

1  Cooper 


Medical  Department. 

1  Purvoe,  Sadanund  Govind- 
jee 

2 ,  Balcrustna  Succojee. 

3 ,  Luxamon  Wittoba. . . 

4 ,  RamchunderBallajee. 

1  Inspector  Suttoo 

1  Shroff,  Sadasew  Gopall .... 
1  Peon 


Transport  of  Stores. 

1  Purvoe,    Balcrustna  Sada 

sewjee , 

2 ,Juggonnath  Vencatesli 

1  Inspector,  Jairaui  Bajee.  . . 
2 ,  Sakaram  Ballajce. . 

2  Peons,  at  6  rupees 

Timber  Depot. 

1  Gurdar,  Dinsaw  Sorabjee  . . 

2  — — — ,  Ragonath  Gunggee 


;>• 


200  0 

0 

60  0 

0 

50  0 

0 

40  0 

0 

20  0 

0 

23   0 

0 

12  0 

0 

70 

0 

40 

0 

20 

0 

20 

0 

18 

0 

2S 

0 

24 

0 

18 

0 

100  0 
50  0 
40  0 
25  0 
20  0 
12  0 
6  0 


Names  of  Persons. 


100 

0 

0 

40 

0 

0 

OJ 

0 

0 

25 

0 

0 

15 

0 

0 

24 

0 

0 

Dapoolie  veteran  battalion 
Garrison    hospital   at   Rulnu- 

gury 

Vingorla  1 4th  regiment  .... 

Office  Establishment.  Account 
ant    and    Cashier   Depart- 
ment. 

Purvoe,       Shapoorjee      Fur- 

doomjee 

,  Bhawoo  Sadas  ewjee  . . 

Dadoba   Wisswanathjee 

Shroff,  Luxamon  Ballajee  . . . 
,  Dadajee  Pandoba  .... 

Military  Supply  Branch. 

Examiner,    Sadasew  Wisswa- 
nattv 


Jlonthly  Pay. 


I 


Janardun  Baboojee 

Inspector,  Ammernath   Jaga- 
nath 


3  Peons,  at  6  rupees  each 

Military  Supply. 

1  Purvoe,  Moroba  Naronjee  . 
1  • — ,  Moroba  Sev.jee. . . 

Provision  Department. 

Purvoe,  Ragonath  Ramjee. .. 
,  Cassinath  Kessowjee  . . 
,  Pursholum  Hurjee   . . . 


Inspector,    Wisswanath 

2  Measuring  men,  at  1 2  rupees 


1  Cooper,Rustomjee  Cawasjee 
1  Peon 


Medical  Department. 

Purvoe,    Sadanund    Govind- 
jee 


-,  Luxamon  \\  ittoba. . . 
-,  Hamchimder  Ballajee 
-,  Bapoo  Naronjee  .... 


Transport  of  Stores. 


60  0 

0 

25  0 

0 

20  0 

0 

15  0 

0 

12  0 

0 

40  0 

0 

30  0 

0 

Balcrustna  Succoja. 


2  Peons,  at  6  rupees . . 
Timber  Depot. 


Increase  between  I  Red^  between 
1st  of  Dec.  IS1~  ;  1st  of  Dec.  18-27 
and  lstOcUlS30.  andlstOcUlSSO. 


300  0   0  1 

55  0  0  j 

j 

45  0  0 

30  0  0 
15  0  0 


100  0  0 

35  0  0 

30  0  0 

18  0  0 


70  0  0 
40  0  0 


80  0  0 

55  0  0 

25  0  0 

15  0  0 

24  0  0 


15  0  0 
GOO 


80  0  0 


45 

0 

0 

30 

0 

0 

12 

0 

0 

55  0  0 


12  0  0 


r.  a.  />. 

53  0  0 

12  0  0 

52  0  0 


100  0  0 


5  0  0 

5  0  0 
3  0  0 


5  0  0 


70  0  0 
40  0  0 


10  0  0 

15  0  0 

5  0  0 

6  0  0 


6  0  0 


5  0  0 
5  0  0 


5  0  0 
50  0  0 

20  0  0 


40  0  0 


15  0  0 
6  0  0 


5  0 

28  0 

24  0 

3  0 


20 

0 

50 

0 

8 

0 

12 

0 

6  0 


5 

0 

0 

25 

0 

0 

20 

0 

0 

15 

0 

0 

40 

0 

0 

30 

0 

0 

127 

Statement  of  the  Establishments,  &c. 
Presidency  Division. — Continued. 


As  it  stood  on  tlie  1st  Dccumbcr  1827. 


Names  of  Persons. 


Monthly  Pay. 


As  it  stood  on  tliu  1st  October  1830. 


Names  of  Persons. 


Montlily  Pay. 


Increase  i)ctwecn 

1st  Dec.  IK'.'Tand 

1st  Oct.  1830. 


lied"  between 
1st  Dec.  18'J7& 
1st  Oct.  1830. 


No. 

1    Purvoc,    Damothcr    Run- 

sordji-e 

3  Peons,  at  G  rupees  caeh  . . , 
Oil  for  a  cliokies 


Office  Peons,  <^c. 

1  Naique 

7  Sepoys,  at  G  rupees  . 

1  Sweeper 

1  Water  Bramiii 

Stationery 

Office  rent 


Civil  DepartmenU — Supply 
Department. 

1  Purvoe,   Gunput  Cassinath- 

jee. 

1  Shroft',  Aba  Rowjee 

1  Carpenter 


Civil  Supply  Bills,  ^'c. 

1  Moroba  Ballajce    

1  Gunputrow  Moiojce  .  . . 
1  Govinda  Balcrustjee.  .  . . 
1  Anajee  Balcrustjee 


Marine  Supply  Bills. 

1  Babajee  Mullar 

1  Inspector,  BhowsaSlirether. 
1  Peon 


Tannah. 


1  Clerk . . . 
Stationery 


Dapoolic. 

1  Writer 

i  Peons,  at  G  rupees  each 

Stationery 

1  Cooper 

1  Beggaree 

1  Writer  at  Vingorla 

1  Peon  ditto 

1  Karkoon  at  Ragapoor. . . 
S  Peons  at  S  rupees 


Belgaum, 

1  Head  Purvoe 

1  Second  ditto 

Stationery  and  Light 

1  Karkoon , 

1  Weighing  man  . .  .  , 

1  Peon 

1  Lascar 

1  Cooper 

1  Peon 

1  Karkoon  at  Camp 
1  Cooper  ditto 


r.  a.  p. 

18  0  0 

IS  0  0 

1  0  0 


7  2 
•12  0 

5  0 

6  0 
59  0 

200  0 


30  0 
15  0 


45  0 
'2i  0 
20  0 
20  0 

6  0 
30  0 

6  0 
30  0 
24  0 


50   0 

15   0 

25   0 

S3  0 

17   2 

9  0 

9  0 

37  2 

C  0 

33  0 

37  2 


70  0  0 
25  0  0 
14  0     0 


40  0  0 

30  0  0 

25  0  0 

20  0  0 


50  0     0 

20  0     0 

6  0     0 


Cooperage. 
1  Cooper,  Bhimjee  Bamonjee. 

Office  Peons,  ^-c 

1  Naique 

4  Peons,  at  6  rupees 
Sweeper 


1  Water  Bramin 
Stationery 


Civil  Department.- — Supply 
Department. 


Clerk,  John  Walker . 


Civil  Supply  Bills,  8j'c. 

1  Moroba  Ballajee 

1  Andrew  Seram 


1  Inspector,  Sadasew  Gopal 
Stationery 


Marine  Supply  Bills. 


Tannah. 


1  Writer.. 
Stationery. 
1  Peon  . .  . 


Dapoolic. 

1  Writer 

t  Peons,  at  5  rupees 

Stationery 

1  Carpenter 

1  Beggaree 


1  Peon  at  Vingorla. 
Belsaum. 


Changed 
troops 


by    the  Madras 


15   0     0 


7  2 
24  0 

5  0 

8  0 
120  0 


15   0 

28  0 


45  0 
20  0 
20  0 
12  0 
G  0 


60  0     0 


45  0     0 
25   0     0 


30  0     0 

15  0     0 

5  0     0 


5   0     0 


15  0     0 


2  0 
61    0 


5   0     0 


28  0     0 


5   0     0 


^.       a.  p. 

IS  0  0 

18  0  0 

1   0  0 


18  0     0 


SOO  0     0 


10  0 
25  0 
14  0 


5  0 

25  0 

5  0 


30  0 

6  0 

30  0 

19  0 


50   0     0 

20   0     0 

6   0      0 


4   0      0 


8   0      0 


395   0     0' 


Prospective  saving  ordered,  as  vacancies  occur, — rupees  30. 


128 


Statement  of  the  Establishments,  &c. 
Presidency  Division.- — Continued. 


Barrack  Department. 

2  Halalkhores 

2  Massals 

1  Overseer 


-Sural. 


Kaira. 

2  Beggaries'  pay  for  Oct.  182' 
.'i  Puggies  ditto  for  Sept. . . . , 


Baroda. 


1  Cooley 


Carriage  of  the  Sick. — Surat. 
12  Dooley  bearers 

Kaira. 
10  Dooley  bearers 


Rdjcote. 

1  First  muccadum.  .. 
3  Second  muccadums. 
90  Dooley  bearers  . . . 


Decsa. 

1  First  muccadum  . . 

5  Second  ditto 

114  Dooley  bearers. 

Baroda. 
15  Dooley  bearers  . . 


Maliva  Field  Force. 

3  First  muccadums  for  Nov. .  . 
14  Second  ditto  for  do.  .  . . 
354  Dooley  bearers  for  do.  . 

Cutch  Sub''  Force. 

1  Head  muccadum  for  Nov. . 
5  Second     ditto         ditto  .  . . 

119  Dooley  bearers 

1  Entertained  from  21st  Nov, 

Cattle  Department. — Kaira. 

1  Muccadum  of  camel  drivers 
1 1  Camel  drivers 

2  .Sandnte  Swar 

Feeding  for  24  camels.  .  . . 
21  Packbidlocks 


12 

0 

S 

0 

.0 

0 

10 

0 

30 

0 

Rajcute. 
Feeding  for  1 4  camels  . 


Guzcrat  Division. 
Barrack  Deparimcnt. — Sural. 


2  Massals . 


7  0     0 


84  0     0 


(0  0      0 


Kaira. 


2  Puggies. 


Baroda. 


1  Beggary 

1  Sneeper 

Carriage  of  the  Sick.- 
1 0  Dooley  bearers . . 


-Surat. 


15   0 

0 

30  0 

0 

630  0 

0 

15  0 

0 

45  0 

0 

798  0 

0 

Kaira. 

i  Second  maccadums. 
49  Dooley  bearers  .  .  . 

Rajcote. 


105   0     0 


45  0 
129  0 

2595  0 

0 
0 
0 

20  0 

GO  0 

1071   0 

3  0 

0 
0 
0 
0 

o   0 
4  0 


16   0 
294  0 


1  Second  muccadum 

30  Dooley  bearers   

Dccsa. 

1  First  muccadum 

4  Second  ditto 

126  Dooley  bearers 

Baroda. 

102  Dooley  bearers,  out  of 
which  15  in  G.  H.  and  the 
rest  on  detachment   .... 


Malwa  Field  Force. 


}• 


Cutch  Subv  Force. 


9  0     0 

77  0     0 

30  0     0 

176  3  23 

52  2     0 


128  0  20 


3  Second  muccadums . 
75  Dooley  bearers. . . 


Cattle  Department. — Kaira. 

1  Muccadum  of  caniil  drivers 
6  Camel  drivers 


8   0 
180  0 


12  0 

28  0 

756  0 


For  feeding  12  camels  . 

30  Pack  bullocks 

130  Bringary  ditio  . .  .  . 

Rajcote. 
Feeding  for   10  camels 


8  0  0 


8  0  0 


60  0  0 


612  0  0 


24  0 
450  0 


8  0 
36  0 


46  0  57 
82  2  0 

325  0  0 


25   1  42 


4  0  0 


16  0  0 
224  0  0 


507  0  0 


30  0 
325  0 


As  it  stood  on  the  1st  December  IS27.                      As  it  stood  on  the  1st  December  1830. 

Increase  between 
1st  Dec.  1827  and 

Red"  between 

1st  Dpc.  1R?>7  * 

Names  of  Persons. 

Monthly  Pay.                Names  of  Persons. 

Monthly  Pay. 

Isl  Oct.  1830.       Isl  Oct.  1830. 

No. 

1  Weighing  man  at  Camp.    . . 

'>  Peons     ditto     

r.       a.     ]}. 

17  2     U 

18  0     0 
27   0     0 
56  0     0 
20  0     0 

r.     a.     p. 

r.     a.    ;). 

r,     a.     p. 

4  Bamboo  coolies,  ditto 

Godown  rent     

12  0  0 
5  0  0 


10  0  0 
22  0  0 


1  0  0 


24  0  0 


15  0 

22  0 

450  0 


3  0 
17  0 
42  0 


2,772  0  0 


20  0  0 

30  0  0 

624  0  0 


1  0  0 

41  0  0 

30  0  0 

130  2  66 


102  2  78 


129 


Statement  of  the  Establishments,  &c. 

(I'uzerat  Diiision. — Contiiuu  <l. 


As  it  stood  on  the  1st  December  1827. 


Names  of  Persons. 


No. 

1  Second  muccadiim  ofcamcls 

7  Camel  drivers 

1  Piiccaulif  hidlock 

1  Buij;gle  bhestie 

1-  Second  muccadum  of  Brin- 

gary 

200  Hringary  bullocks 

110  Pack  bullocks 

1  Muccadum  of  draft  bullocks 
24  Pair  of  draft  bullocks. . 


Deesa. 

Feeding  for  24  camels  , 

1  Muccadum 

12  Camel  drivers 


1  Muccadum  Bringary  bullock 
200  Bullocks  ditto    


Draft  Bullocks  Establishment 

1  Muccadum 

48  Bullocks,  or  24  pairs 

19  Puccaulie  bullocks 

5 1  Pack  bullocks 

21  Bamboo  coolies 

2  Puccaulie  bullocks    


Baroda. 

Sural  monds  of  mutt 
UOO  Bundles  of  hay. 


50  Pack  bullocks,  outof  wliicli 
41  bullocks  with  detach- 
ment at  Deesa 


Monthly  Pay. 


2  Muccadums  of    draft    bul- 
locks   

100  Draught  bullocks 

2  Puckaulies  bullock  driver.  . 

Malrva  Field  Force. — Cattle 
Depart iiunl. — Bamboo  Coo- 
lies EUablishmcnl. 

1  Second  muccadum 

36  Bamboo  coolies 

1  First  muccadiun,  Bringary. 

4  Second         ditto  

1137  Bringary  bullocks,  wit!) 
driver 


r.     n.  p, 

10  0  0 
49  0  0 
1.5   0  0 

11  1  0 

10  0  0 

650  0  0 

160  0  0 

10  0  0 

480  0  0 


78 

9 

84 

9 
650 


9 
438 
285 
285 
147 
30 


3  17 
0  0 
0     0 


0     0 
0      0 


0  0 

0  0 

0  0 

0  0 


18 

900 
14 


2,842 


Camp  Equipage  Bullock  Esta- 
blisliment. 

2  Second  muccadums  .... 
162  Regimental  ])ack  bullocks 

3  Second    nuiccadums     draft 

bullocks 

70  Pairs    draft  bullocks  with 

drivers 

1  Second    muccadum  Pucau- 

lie  bullocks 

52  Puccaulie  bullocks,  out  of 

which  46  at  1 0   rujieeS; 

and  the  rest  at  1 3  each . . 


232  0     0 


As  it  stood  on  tlic  Ist  October  1830. 


Names  of  Persons. 


9 

0 

0 

52 

0 

0 

15 

0 

0 

36 

0 

0 

Muccadum 

Camel  drivers  . .  .  . 
I  Puccaulie  bullock. 


20  Bringary  bullocks. 
10  Pack  bullocks    ..  . 


28  Draft  bullocks 


Deesa. 

Feeding  for  26  camels  .... 

1  Muccadum 

12  Camel  drivers 

2  Sandnee  Sivar 

1  Muccadum  Bringary  bullock 
240  Bullocks,  Bringary 

Draft  Bullocks  Establishment 


jO  Bullocks. 


Montlily  Pay. 


r.  a.  !>■ 

8  0  0 
30  0  0 

9  0  0 


42   0  66 
33  2     0 


238  0     0 


121  2 

7  0 

72  0 

20  0 

7  0 

COO  0 


Baroda. 


59  Pack  bidlocks 

^8  Bamboo  coolies  at  6  rupees 

3  Puccaulie  bullocks 

2  Muccadums    of  draft    bu 

locks 

0  Pair  of  ditto    


18  0  0 
648  0  0 

27  0  0 

1,2C0  0  0 

9  0  0 

538  0     0 


Malna  Field  Force. — Cattle 
Department. 


205  0   0 


201  2 

208  0 

27  0 

14  0 
850  0 


increase  between  '   lied"  between 

1st  Dec.  1H27  and   1st  Dec.  l.-i27  & 

1st  Oct.  1830.        1st  Oct.  1830. 


r.      n.     p. 


42  3  17 


;o  0    0 


208  0     0 
27   0     0 


r.      ti.  p. 

2    0  0 

19  0  0 

6   0  0 

11    1  0 

10  0  0 

607  3  34 

126  2  0 

10  0  0 

242  0  0 


2  0 
12  0 


2    0     0 
50  0     0 


9  0 

227  0 
285  0 
285  0 
147  0 
30  0 


1   2  54 
4  2     0 


30  2      0 


4  0  0 
50  0  0 
14  0     0 


130 


Statement  of  the  Establishments,  &c. 
Gu:::ciat  Dhlsion.- — Continued. 


As  it  stood  on  the  1st  December  ISii: 


-L 


As  it  stood  on  the  1st  October  ISSO. 


Names  of  Persons. 


Monthly  Pay.[ 


Names  of  Persons. 


No. 

1  Second  muccadura  of  public 

camels 

1 2  Camel  drivers 

Feeding  for  2i  camels. .  . . 


9  0 

96  0 

101    1 


0 

0 

60 


Monthly  Pay. 


Elephant  Establishment. 

1  Jemedar 

1 0  Malioots 

10  Mates 

1  Peon 

1  Hand  bhestie 

For  feeding  of  10  elephants 

1 0  Leather  buckets,  with  hemp 
rope,  for  watering  ele- 
phant   

10  Pound  Jingely  oil  for  the 
above  buckets 

1  Cotton  rope,  weighing  9]bs. 
Repairing  bimden  and  bady. 

1  Hide,  large 

26  Pounds  mussala  for  sick 
elephant 

14 twine,  country,  for 

repairing  tools 


12  0 

80  0 

70  0 

5  0 


335 


48  Earthen  chitties  for  break- 
ing daily  br 

Cutch  Field  Force. 

1  Second  muccadiun 

28  Bamboo  coolies 

1  Second  muccadum 

190  Bringary  bullocks 

Regimental  Bullocks. 

1  Maistry 

40  Pack  bullocks , 

9  Camel  drivers 


12 
0 


1 


22 
0 
0 
0 


4  0 

26  0     0 

1   0  66 

3  0     0 


12  0 
252  0 

12  0 
665  0 


Hurhara  Camel  Driver. 

2  Camel  drivers 

Feeding  public  and  Hurkara 


el 


10  0 
60  0 
81   0 


20  0 
19  0 


Cutch  Field  Force. 


100  Bringary  bullocks. .  . 
Regimental  Bullocks. 


;40  Pack  bullocks 

7  Puccaulie  bullocks 


Cavalry  Department. — Kaira.\ 

1  Weighing  man 30  0 

1  Measuring  man '      10  0 

1  Beggaree 


Rajcote. 

1  Metta 

2  Weighing  men. .  . 
4  Beggarees 


Deesa. 

8  Muccadums 

120  Grass-cutters 

1  Metta 

3  Weighing  men 

2  Peons 

J  Beggarees 

Allowance    of   stationery  for 

the  detachment  at  Deesa. 


5  0 


20  0  0 
24  0  0 
28  0     0 


Cavalry  Department.- 

1  Metta 

1  Measuring  man ... 

I  Sepoy  

S  Muccadums 


72  0 

840  0 

25  0 

36  0 


Rajcote. 

1  Metta    

1  Weighing  man  .  . 
1  Peoii 


Deesa. 


14  0     0 


40  0     0 


2  Mett  IS 

2  Weighing  men 


1  Sepoy 


16  0 

12  0 

5  0 

24  0 


16  0 

12  0 

5  0 


Increase  between 

1st  Dec  1827  and 

1st.  Oct.  1830.   , 


Red°  between 
1st  Dec.  182"  & 
1st  Oct.  1830. 


160  0 
81  0 


28  0  0 

20  0  0 

5  0  0 


r,  a,     p. 

6,419  0  75 


81  0  0 


2  0  0 
24  0  0 


3  0  0 


12  0  0 

252  0  0 

12  0  0 

390  0  0 


10  0  0 


SI  0 
81  0 


20  0  0 
19  0  2 

14  0  0 


4  0  0 
12  0  0 
23  0  0 


72  0 
840  0 

16  0 

9  0 

35  0 


40  0  0 


i:ji 


Statement  of  the  Establishments,  &c. 
Cu~erat  Division.  — Coruinuod. 


As  it  stood  on  tlie  1st  December  18;27. 


Names  of  Persons. 


Maliva  F.  Force. 
No. 
12  Second  muecadums 

3  Mlicta 

465  Grass-cutters 

1  Metta  . .    

3  Weijjhing  men 

7  Beggaries 


Medical  Department. — Kaira. 

Amount  of  medical  servants 

establishment 


Broach.    , 
Amount  of  m(<lical  servants' 

establishment 

Ditto 


Cutcli  Field  Force. 

Amount  of  medical  servants' 
establishment  of  foot  artil 
lery 

Ditto  of  2nd  Bombay  Euro- 
pean regiment 


Ordnance  Department. 
Rajcote. 

2  Carpenters 

2  Smiths 

1  Hammerman 

1  Bellows  boy 

Broach. 

2  Overseers 

Baroda,  Hub.  F. 
1  Mestry  carpenter  .... 

1  Ditto     smith 

1  Hammcrniaii 

1  Bellows  boy 

Provision  Department. 
Surat. 
Rent  of  store  rooms .... 
1  Cooper 


Monthly  Pay. 


r.  a,     p. 

108  0 

CO  0 

3,48 7  0 

30  0 

30  0 

49  0 


158   0     0 


G8  0     0 
129  0   66 


SB  0     0 
79  3  99 


45   0  0 

45   0  0 

13  0  0 

9   0  0 


10  0     0 


15  0  0 

12  0  0 

9  0  0 

5  0  0 


CO  0     0 
15  0     0 


As  it  stood  on  tlic  1st  October  1830. 


Names  of  Persons. 


J 

Medical  Department. — Kaira. 

Amount  of  n)edic:d  servants 

establishment 


Broiiclt. 

Amount  of  niLdical  servants' 

establishment 


Cutch.  Field  Force. 


Bhooj  establishment  of  medi- 
cal servants  


Surat. 
Medical    servants'    establish 
ment   


Rajcote. 
Amount  of  medical  servants 
establishment 


Deesa. 

Amount  of  medical  servants' 
establishment    


Baroda. 

fVmount   of  medical  servants' 
establishment 


Ordnance  Department. — 
Rajcote. 


} 


Surat. 


1  Overseer . 


Provision  Department.- 
Surat. 


1  Cooper 


S2 


Monthly  Pay. 


r.     a.     p. 


199  0     0 


23  0      0 


116  2     0 


329   0     0 


SI   2     0 


231   0     0 


173  0     0 


5  0     0 


15   0     0 


Increase   lietwccn 

1st  Dec.  1827  and 

1st  Oct.  1830, 


I'- 


41   0     0 


329  0     0 


81   2     0 


31   0     0 


173   0     0 


5   0     0 


Ued"  between 
1st  Dec.  1827  & 
Ist  Oct.  1830. 


r.   «.  p. 


3,770  2  0 


45  0  0 
129  0  C6 


51  1  99 


112  0  0 


10  0  0 


41  0  0 


60  0  0 


132 


Statement  of  the  Establishments,  &c. 
Guzerat  Division. — Continued. 


As  it  stood  on  the  1st  December  1  S'JT. 


Names  of  Persons, 


No. 

1  Cooley 


Kaira. 

1  Cooper 

1  Beggaree 

1  Metta  employed  at  Canibay 

Rajcote. 

1  Shroff 

1  Native  agent 

1  Cooper 

1  Carpenter 


Monthly  Pay. 


Broach. 

Paid   Lieutenant    Hume    his 

allowance    for     conducting 

Commissariat  duties  .  . . 


Baroda. 

1  Cooper 

2  Beggarees    

Paid  Godown  rent. 


Mhon. 
1  Cooper 

1  Weighing  man  .... 

2  Second  muccadums 

14-  Beggarees 

1 7  Wood-cutters  .... 


Assurghur. 
1  Native  writer  . . .  . 
1  Peon  


1  Beggaree 


Cidch. 
1  Cooper's  pay  for  Nov.  . 

1  Metta  for  ditto 

1  Weighing  man  for  ditto . 
."?  Peons  for  ditto 


Office  Establishment  at  Surat. 

1  Head  clerk 

I  Secpnd  ditto 

1  Third     ditto 

1  Fourth  ditto 


1  Naique 

a  Peons 

Stationery,  bookbinding,  &c. 
Office  rent 


70 

0 

12 

0 

9 

0 

98 

0 

19 

0 

20 

0 

o 

0 

7 

0 

.As  it  stood  on  tlie  1st  October  1S30. 


Increase  between   Red"    between 
.1st  Dec.  1827  and,  1st  Dec.  1827  & 


Names  of  Persons. 


Monthly  Pay.!    1st  Oct.  1830.       1st  Oct.  1830. 


a.     p.   No. 

0     oil  Coolev. 


30  0  0 
10  0  0 
20  0     0 


15  0  0 

15   0  0 

35  0  0 

22  2  0 


CO  0     0 


SO  0  0 
14  0  0 
50  0     0 


35  0  0 

15   0  0 

15   0  0 

27  0  0 


Kaira. 

1  Cooper 

1  Beggaree 

1  Native  agent  at  Carabay 
1  Ditto  at  Ahmedabad  .  . . 

Bajcote. 


1  Native  agent  at  Gogo 


Broach. 


Baroda. 


1  Beggaree   

Paid  office  and  Godown  rent 


1  Cooper 


Bhooj. 


1  Weighing  man 
1  Peon 


Deesa. 

1  Cooper 

1  Weighing  man   

1  Measuring  man 

2  Peons  

Paid  for  water  for  stores  du- 

rint;  the  month 


r.     a.    p. 
5  0     0 


20  0  0 

6  0  0 

20  0  0 

15  0  0 


130  0  0 

100  0  0 

90  0  0 

•10  0  0 


9  0  0 

25  0  0 

45  0  0 

100  0  0 


Office  Establishment  at  Surat. 

I  Head  clerk 

1  Second  ditto 

1  Third    ditto 

1  Fourth  ditto 

1  Fifth      ditto 

1  Sixth     ditto 

1  Seventh  ditto 

1  Shrof 

1  Naique 

C  Peons  

Stationery,  bookbinding,  &c. 
Office  rent....... 


6  0 
50  0 


15  0     0 


20  0     0 


20  0 
10  0 
10  0 
10  0 


150  0 

100  0 

80  0 

50  0 

40  0 

20  0 

15   0 

15  0 

8  0 

30  0 

120  0 

100  0 


20  0     0 


12  0     0 
5   0     0 


7  0     0 


5   0     0 


20  0 
10  0 
10  0 
10  0 


7   0     0 


20  0     0 


5  0     0 
75  0     0 


a.     p. 


10   0      0 
4   0     0 


15   0      0 

35  0     0 
22  2     0 


60 

0 

0 

SO 

0 

0 

8 

0 

0 

340  0     0 


15  0  0 

15  0  0 

3  0  0 

22  0  0 


10  0 

0 

10  0 

0 

40  0 

0 

20  0 

0 

15  0 

0 

15  0 

0 

1  0 

0 

133 


Statement  of  the  Establishments,  &c. 
Guzcrat  /)/iv,v;o«.— Continued. 


As  it  stood  on  the  1st  December  18'27. 


Names  of  Persons. 


Broach. 
No. 
Stationery,  &c.  .  . . 

Ka'ira. 


1  Clerk 

1  Ditto 

1  Native  writer   anil   keeping- 
accounts  

1  Sliroft' 

3  Peons 

Office  rent  

Stationery 


Monthly  P-iy 


Baroda. 


1  Head  clerk 

2  Clerks  at  SO  rupees  each 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 


Ditto 

Ditto      

Mlieta    

Shiort" 

INIheta  at  Tankaira 

1  Carpenter    

7  Peons 

Office  rent    

Stationery     


Rajcntc. 


1  Clerk  . 
4  Peons  . 
Stationery 


Deesa. 


1  Clerk 


Cuich. 

1  Head  clerk,  Salamon     

1  Second  ditto,  Hurrichund  . 

1  Third  ditto,  Narrayen  Balla- 

jee     

Office  Estahlishnent. —  Cutcli 

1  Shroff    

1  Peon      

Stationery     


Malwa  Field  Force. 


1  Head     clerk,    Ramchundar 
Cassenath      

1  Clerk,  Dadoba  Hurrichund 
jee     

1  Ditto,  Rhawoo  ditto 

I  Ditto,  Dinnath  Sham     .... 

1  Shroff    

4  Peons     , 

Stationery     


r.   rt.   ;>. 
10  0   0 


80  0 

50  0 

100  0 

1.-)  0 

1.5  0 


50  0 
20  0 


150  0 
160  0 
CO  0 
25  0 
20  0 
15  0 
U  0 
12  0 
49  0 
100  0 
45  0 


75  0 
28  0 
25  0 


As  it  stood  on  the  1st  October  1830, 


Inrrcilse  between 
1st  of  Dec.  18^7 


Names  of  Persons. 


Kaira 
1  English  writer 


i  Peor 


Baroda. 
1  English  writer   . 


1  Native  agent  at  Tankaira . 

2  Peons     


Monthly  Pay.  »>"'  HtOcu  1830. 


1  Native  aarent. 


45   0     0 


1  Clerk     

2  Peons     

Stationery     

Deesa. 

1  English  writer   . 

2  Peons     

Stationery      

Office  rent    


l.'JO  0     0 
75   0     0 

50  0     0 


15   0     0 

9   0     0 

31   3   15 


150  0     0 

SO  0  0 
50  0  0 
40  0 
15   0 

20   0 
G4  0 


Rajcote. 


Bhooj. 

1  English  writer  . 
1  Ditto       ditto    . 


Office  Establishment. — Bhooj 


1  Peon  . .  . 
.Stationery 
Office  . . . . 


u 


80  0     0 


10   !)      0 


75   0     0 


75  0 
10  0 
10  0 


50  0 
10  0 
25  0 
60  0 


SO  0 
20  0 


5  0 
20  0 
60  0 


14  0     0 

10   0      0 

60  0     0 


Ue<l"  belMeen 
Isi  Dec.  \Hn  ft. 

1st  Oct.  isao. 


CO    0      0 


5  0 
10  0 
25  0 
60   0 


60  0     0 


10  0 


50  0      0 


100  (I 

15   0 

5   0 

50  0 

20  0 


75  0 

160  0 

60  0 

25  0 

20  0 

15  0 


12   (I  0 

3)  0  0 

100  0  0 

45  0  0 


IS   0 
15   0 


50   0 
5:>   0 


50  0     0 


15   0 

4  0 
11    3 


0 

t) 

15 


419  0     0' 


Prospective  saving  ordered,  as  vacancies  occur, — rupees  148  3  SO. 


134 


Statement  of  the  Establishments,  &c. 
Poona  Division. 


As  it  stood  on  the  1st  December  1827. 


As  it  stood  on  tlie  1st  October  1830. 


Names  of  Persons. 


I  Monthly  Pay. 


Increase  between 
1st  Dec.  18'27  and 


Names  of  Persons. 


Red"^   between 
1st  Dec.  1827  & 
1st  Oct.  1830. 


No. 


Carriage  of  the  Sick. — Poona. 

1  Head  muccadum 

2  Second   ditto,   at  9  rs.  each 
38  Dooley  bearers,  at  7  do. . . 

MalUsaum. 


1  Head  muccadum 

30  Dooley  bearers,  at  7  rs.  each 

Sattara. 
1  Second  muccadum    .... 


Poona  Division. 
BarrackDepartment. — Poona, 
1  Mussall 

Carriage  of  the  Sick. — Poona 

1  Head  muccadum 

2  Second  ditto 

20  Dooley  bearers,  at  6  rs.each 

Malligaum. 

15  0     0  1  Head  muccadum 

210  0     0  IS  Dooley  bearers      


15   0 

0 

18  0 

0 

266  0 

0 

9  0     0 


Satta 
1  Second  muccadum 


30  Dooley  bearers,  atZrs.eachi    210   0     0  9  Doolevbeareis,  at  6  rs.  each 


Sholapore. 


Cattle  Department. — Poona. 
598    Draft     bullocks,     at     7 
rupees  each 


Sholapore. 
1  Second  muccadinu 
33  Dooley  bearers    . 


Cattle  Department.- — Poona 
600    Draft    bullocks,     at    7 
rupees  each 


4,186  0     0 
16  Ditto  ditto,  at  lOdittol     160  0     0 

52.1  Pack  bullocks,  at  5  dittos, 625   0     0,250  Pack  bullocks,  2^  rs. each 

Ditto,  extra  pay 
60  0     0  .T  Head muccadums, IS  rs.each 
112  0     0  jl 3  Second  ditto,  at  11  ditto. 

S5   0     0  2  Mawoots,  at  7  ditto 

30  0     0  ,2  Mates,  at  6  ditto 

7  0     0   1  Peon 

2  Elephants,  expense  of  feed 
948   1    96 


4,200  0      0 


2  Head  maistries,  at  30  rs.  each 
16  Petty  ditto,  at  7  ditto. . . . 

5  Mawoots,  at  7  ditto 

5  Mates,  at  6  ditto 

1  Peon  

5  Elephants,  expense  of  feed- 
insr    


1  Head  muccadum  of  camels' 

4  Second  ditto  of  ditto,  at  12 
rupees  each 

99  Camel  drivers,  at  7  rupees 
each 693  0     0 

198  Camels,  ave- 
rage expense  of 
feeding      2,685  2   19 


20  0 
48  0 


4  Drivers  of  Harcara  camels, 
at  7  rupees  each    

1  Second   muccadum  of  bul- 
locks       

26  Bullock  drivers,  at  7  rupees 
each 182  0     0 

54  Ditto,  expense 

for  feedinir 564  3  90 


Sholapore. 


3,378  2  49 


28  0 
12  0 


746  3   90 


ing     .... 
1  Ramvosie 


1  2  S( 
j       ca 


2   Second    muccadums    of 
camels 


625   0 

421   3 

54  0 

143  0 

14  0 

12  0 

5   0 


168  2   17 
6  0     0 

24  0     0 


130  Camels,  hired  at  13  rupees 
per  month     


7  Bamboo  coolies,  at  6  rs.  each 


Sholapore. 
4  Draft  bullocks,  at  5  rs.  each 
75  Pack  ditto,  at  4  ditto  . .  . . 
1  Muccadum  of  camels    .... 
1  Ditto  of  bullocks 


1,690  0     0 
42  0     0 


}- 


31   0     0 


6  0     0 


42  0      0 


20  0 

300  0 

9   0 

9  0 


20  0 

300  0 

9  0 

9  0 


r.      a.     p. 


2   0     0 

IS  0     0 

146   0     0 


15  0     0 
102  0     0' 


9  0     0 
156   0     0- 


146  0     0 

1,578  0  95 
6  0     0 

21   0     0 

IS  0     0 

2  0     0 

779  3  79 


44  0     0 


1,688  2  49 

28  0     0 
12  0     0 

746  3  90 


Prospective  saving  ordered,  as  vacancies  occur, — rupees  24. 


Do.  rupees  6. 


Do.  rupees  18. 


■•  When  these  cattle  are  employed,  the  owner  recieves  2i  rupees  extra  per  month. 


135 


Statement  of  the  Establishments,  &c. 
Poonn  Dicisiiin. — ContiiuuHl. 


As  it  stood  on  tlic  1st  December  18'J7 


Names  of  Persons. 


Afallirrnum. 
No. 
40  Draft  bullocks,  at  7  rupees 

each 

40  Pack  ditto,  at  .)  ditto 

I  Second  niuccadiiin     


Cavalry  Department. — Poona. 

1  Native  writer     

1  Measuring  man 

1  Weighing  man 

1  Peon 

2  Grass  muccad.  at  10  rs.each 

4  Raniosies,  at  7  ditto 

1  Muccadum  of  coolies    .... 
10  Coolies,  at  7  each    

CavalryDcpartmcnt. — Kirkee 

1  Mheta    

1  Assistant  ditto 

1  Weighing  man 

1  Measuring  ditto    

Sholapore. 


Lock  Hoxpilal. — Poona. 


Mnntlily  Pay. 


Medical  Department,  E.  I. — 
Poona. 

Hospital  servants  of  His  Ma- 
jesty's 4tli  light  dragoons' 

Ditto,  of  His  Majesty's  20th 
regiment 

Ditto  of  3rd  foot,  H.B 

Ditto  of  1st  batt.  anil 

Ditto  of  4tli  troop,  H.B 

1  Native  writer     

1  Peon      

Kirkee. 
1   Native  writer     


280  0  0 

200  0  0 

]2  0  0 


25  0 

7  0 

7  0 

7  0 

20  0 

28  0 

10  0 

70  0 


20  0  0 

10  0  0 

7  0  0 

7  0  0 


30G  0  0 


47S  2 

81  2 

188  2 

106  2 

20  0 

7  0 


As  it  stood  on  the  1st  October  1830. 


Names  of  Persons. 


MalUi 


Ahmednuggur. 
\  Second  muccad.  of  bullock 
25  Bullock  drivers,  at  5  rupees 

each     125   0     0 

52   Ditto,   expense 

for  feeding 403  3   90 


Caiiilr  I/Department. —  Poona. 

!  Native  writer     

1  Measuring  man     

1  Weighing  niMn 

1  Peon  

1  Grass  muccad.  at  S  rs.  eacl 
8  Ramo.sies,  at  6  rs.  ditto. . . . 
1  Muccadum  of  coolies  . . . . 
.'  Coolies,  at  6  rs.  each    . .  . . 

Cavalry  Department. — Kirkee, 

1  Mheta    

1  Assistant  ditto 

1  W  eighing  man 

I  Measuring  man 


Sholapore. 

I  Mheta    

1  Measuring  man     . 

1  Peon  

2  Coolies 


Lock  Hospital. — I'oona. 
Servants  attached     


Ahmednuggur. 
Servants  attached     . .  , 


Sholapore. 
Servants  attached 


Medical  Department,  E.  I. — 

Poona. 
Hospital  servants  of  His  Ma- 
jesty's 4th  light  dragoons 
Ditto  ditto  of  2nd  or  Queen's 

58  I  Royals 

0  Ditto  of  Cth  regiment  .... 
0  Ditto  of  1st  troop,  H.B.  .  . 
0  Ditto  of  3rd  troop,  H.B.  . . 

0  1 1  Native  writer     

0  1  Peon  


Kirkee. 
20  0     oil  Native  writer     . 


Monthly  Pay. 


a.    ;., 


110      0 


528  3   90 


519  0 

5id  0 

84  2 


Increase  between 
lit  of  Dec.  18'_'7 
and  1st  Oct.  1830. 


(    0 

5   0 

32  0 

48   0 

8  0 

12  0 


17   0     0 
7   0     0 


IG  0 

12   0 

5   0 

12  0 


57   2     0 


59   0     0 


32   0     0 


413  0     0 


85   1   20 


0     0 


11    0     0 


528  3   90 


12  0 
20  0 


IC   0  0 

12   0  0 

5  0  0- 

12  0  0 


57  2     C 


59   0     0 


32   0     0 


>1,749    1   50 


lied**    between 

Ist  Uoc.  Ifi27  & 

1st  Oct.  18.S0. 


280    0      (» 

200  0     0 

12  0     0 


25  0     0 
7   (I     0 

2   0      0 


2  0     0'' 
58   0      0 


3  0     0* 

10   0      0 

7   0     0 


Si; 


Prospective  saving  ordered,  as  vacancies  occur, — rupees  32. 
Do.  rupees  17.  '  Do.  rupees  5. 


Do.  rupees  48. 


'  Do.  rupees  S. 


136 

Statement  of  the  Establishments,  &c. 
Poona  Division. — Continued. 


As  it  stood  on  the  1st  December  1S27 


Names  of  Persons. 


Ahviednussur. 


Sholapore. 


Medical  Department,  N. 
Poona. 


As  it  stood  on  the  1st  October  1830. 


I.— 


Medical  Department,  N.  I. — 
Sattara. 


Ahmednuggur. 


Malligaum. 


1,20G  0  58 


Asseerghur. 


Sholapore. 


Office  Estahlishment. — Poona 
1  Head  clerk,  Naronjee  . .  . . 


1  Clerk,  Moroba 

1  Ditto,  Hindser 

1  Ditto,  Wittoba 

1  Ditto,  Gozba. . 


130  0     0 


65  0  0 

65  0  0 

60  0  0 

60  0  0 


Increase  betweeni  Red°   between 
1st  Dec.  1827  and  1st  Dec.  1827  & 


Names  of  Persons. 


Jlonthly  Pay. 


Ahmednussur. 

Hospital  servants  of  the  1st, 
and  details  ol'the  2nd  bat- 
talion artillery 

Hospital  servants  of  the  En- 
glish corps    

1  Native  writer    

2  Peons,  at  5  rs.  each 


Sholapore. 
Hospital    servants,  4th  troop 
H.  B 


Medical  Department,  N.  I.- 

Poona. 
Hospital  servants  attached  to 

the  1 1th  regiment  N  .1. 
Hospital  servants  attached  to 

the  13th  regt.  N.  I.    . 
Ditto  8  companies  of  pioneers 
1  Peon 


Medical  Department,  X.  I. — 

Sattara. 
Hospital  servants  of  the  2nd 


gren.   regt.   native  infantrv 

50 

0 

0 

1  Peon    

5 

0 

0 

Ahmednuggur. 

Hospital  servants  attached  to 

Golundauze  battalion  .... 

50 

0 

0 

Ditto  8th  regiment  N.  I 

50 

0 

0 

Ditto  gun  lascars  attached  to 

1st  battalion  artillery    .... 

17 

0 

0 

Ditto  1  company  of  pioneers  . 

11 

0 

0 

Malligaum. 
Hospital  servants  6  regt.  N.I. 

Ditto  10th  ditto   

Ditto    of    a    detachment    6tl 
regiment  N.  I 


Asseerghur. 
Hospital  servants  attached  to 

18th  regiment,  N.  I.  .  . . 
1  Peon 


Sholapore, 

Hospital  servants  attached  to 

1st  regiment  light  cavalry  . 

Ditto,  5th  regiment  N.I.  .. 

Ditto,  ditto,  9th        


Office  Establishment. — Poona, 
1  Head  clerk,  Damother  Ven- 

klceba 

1  Second  clerk,   Ramchundar 

Cassinalh 

1  Clerk,  Wittoba 

1  Ditto,  Gozba 

1  Ditto,  Wisswanath 

1  Ditto,  Shreecrustna  .... 


a.     p. 


SS9  3  90 

44  0  0 
25  0  0 
10  0     0 


67   0     0 


2,141   3  50 


51   0 

0 

50  0 

0 

11   0 

0 

5   0 

0 

120  0 

60  0 

GO  0 

60  0 

55  0 


51    0     0 
50  0     0 

11  0     0 


50   0     0 
5   0     0 


48  2  0 
53  0  0 
53  0     0 


150  0     0 


1st  Oct.  1830. 


>.   621   2     0 


1st  Oct.  1830. 


r.     n.    p. 


20  0     0 
120  0     0 


5   0     0 
5   0      0 

5  0     0 


137 

Statement  of  the  EstablLshments,  &c. 

I'uona  Division.  —  Contimud. 


As  il  stood  on  the  1st  December  1 827. 


Names  of  Persons. 


No. 

1  Ditto,  Pyran 

1  Ditto,  Shreecrusliia   . .  . .  , 

1  Ditto,  Balcrustna 

1  Ditto,  Ragonath 

1  Ditto,  Crouly 

1  Naique  of  peons 

4  Peons,  at  7  rs.  eacli 

Kandiesk. 

1  Clerk,  Moroba 

2  Peons,  at  7  rs.  each  .... 


Ahiiicdnitggur. 

1  Native  writer 

1  Peon 


Satara. 
1  Native  writer  .  . 
1  Peon  


Asseerghur. 
Sholapore. 


Provision  Department. — 
Poona. 

1  Head  cooper 

1  Second  do 

3  Peons  at  7  rs.  each 


Kirkee. 


1  Cooper 


Mallii 


1  Cooper 

2  Peons,  at  7  rs.  each 


AhinednugguT. 


Sholapore. 


Cicil  and  Insane  Hospital. 


Engineer  Department. 

1  Native  writer 

1  Peon 


Monthly  Pay. 


As  it  stood  on  the  1st  October  1830. 


Names  of  Persons. 


r.  a.  p. 

55  0  0 

50  0  0 

30  0  0 

30  0  0 

25  0  0 

10  0  0 

28  0  0 


No. 

I  Ditto,  T.  Frcta    

1  Ditto,  J.  Knight 

1  Ditto,  T.  M.  Cuddiini  . . 

1  Ditto,  F.  Sale 

1  Siiroff',  Bapoo 

1  Naique  of  Peons 

■i  Peons,  5  each 


35  0 
14  0 


20  0     0 
7  0     0 


20  0     0 
7   0     0 


Kandicsh. 

1  Clerk,  Moroba  .... 

2  Peons,  at  5  rs.  each 


I  Clerk 
1  Peon . 


Ahmednussur. 


Satara. 


1  Peon 


Asseerghur. 
1  Native  writer  . .  . . 
1  Peon  


Increase  bctwceni  Red"    between 
Islof  Dec.  l8'-'7    1st  of  Dec  1827 


Montlily  Pay. 


and  1st  Oct.  1830. 


Sholapore. 
1  Clerk,  Moroba  .... 

1  Shroff 

3  Peons,  at  5  rs.  each 


30  0  0 
25  0  0 
21  0     0 


25  0     0 


20  0     0 
14  0     0 


Provision  Department.- 
Poona. 
1  Head  cooper 

1  Second  do 

2  Peons,  at  5  each 


35  0     0 
7  0     0 


Kirkee. 


I  Cooper 


Malligaum. 

1  Cooper 

2  Coolies,  at  G  rs.  each . 


Ahmednuggur. 
1  Cooper 

1  Weighing-man  .... 

2  Coolies 


1  Cooper 
1  Peon  .  . 


Sholapore. 


Civil  and  Insane  Hospital. 
1  Peon    


Engineer  Department. 

1  Native  writer 

1  Peon  


r.  a.  p. 

50  0  0 

45  0  0 

40  0  0 

35  0  0 

15  0  0 

8  0  0 

20  0  0 


45  0  0 
10  0  0 


50  0  0 
5  0  0 


5  0  0 


20  0  0 
5  0  0 


55  0  0 
20  0  0 
15  0  0 


30  0  0 
10  0  0 


andlstOct.1830. 


25   0      0 


12   0      0 


20  0     0 

8  0     0 

12  0     0 


20  0 
5   0 


0     0 


/'• 


10  0     0 

5   0     0 

15   0     0 


10  0     0 


50  0     0 


20  0     0 
5  0     0 


55  0  0 
20  0  0 
15   0     0 


20   0     0 

8   0     0 

12  0     0  = 


20  0     0 
5   0     0 


5   0     0 


Grand  Total 8,760  0  57 


r.  a.  p. 
5  0  0 
5   0      0 


25  0  0 
2  0  0 
8  0     0 


4  0     0 


:o  0     0 
2  0     0 


20  0     0 
2  0     0 


25  0 
11   0 


20  0     0 
2  0     0 


35   0     0 
7   0     0 


39,378   1   36' 


'  Prospective  saving  ordered  as  vacancies  occur, — rupee  I. 


'  Grand  Total  of  Prospective  savings  ; — rupees  467  3  80. 


-  Ditto, — rupees  2. 


Bombay,  Commissary-general's  Office, 
29th  November,  1830. 


E.  Frederick, 
Lieutenant-Colonel  Commissary-  general. 


138 

Statement ; — showing  the  Cost  and  Charges  for  Horses  purchased  by  the  Commissariat  in  the 
Gulf  at  Bombay,  and  the  Subordinates,  until  delivered  over  to  the  INIounted  Corps  of  the 
Armv,  for  the  Year  1825-26  and  1827-28. 


£  =  ^  3 
'Hi,  0:2 

M     •§  —  Jl 
^  rt  k.  H^ 


1825-26. 
Average    of  the   horses  pur- 
chased by  the  Agent  in  the 
Gulf  for  European  cavalry 
Ditto,    ditto,   for  Native  ca- 
valry   

Average  of  horses  purchased 
by  the  Commissary-gene- 
ral at  Bombay  for  Euro- 
pean cavalry 

Ditto,  for  Native  cavalry  .  . . 

1827-28. 

Average  purchase  for  Euro- 
pean cavalry  at  Bombay . . 

Ditto,  ditto,  for  Native  ca- 
valry   


427 
371 


475 
395 


550 

488 


10 
10 


10 
10 


20 
20 


Average  travelling  expense 
until  delivered  over  at 


14 

14 


14 
14 


12 
12 


46 
46 


46 
46 


53 

53 


07 

67 


Average  cost  of  a  horse  when 
delivered  over  at 


rs. 


451 
395 


499 
429 


582 
510 


483 
427 


531 
451 


490 
434 


538 
458 


504 
448 


552 
472 


Exclusive  of  the  Agent's  pay  of  COO  rupees  per  mensem. 


Abstract  showing  the  Price  of  Horses  purchased  by  the  Commissariat  on  the  spot,  in  1825-26 
and  1827-28,  at  ^_     . 

Kaira.       PooDa.      Rajcote.      Bhooj. 

Average  for  European  cavalry 397  400 

Ditto       for  Native  cavalry  350         377         313         378. 

Abstract  showing  the  Prices  paid  by  the  Commissariat  in  1830-31  on  purchases  by  Command- 
ing Officers  ou  the  spot. 

°  Poona.        Guzerat.        liombay. 

European  cavalry 554         None.         None. 


THE   UNIVERSITY  LIBRARY 
TMs  book  is  DUE  on  the  last  date  stamped  below 


OCT  \  «  lS*f 


€r«m«MTT  0¥  t'Ai  arvHuu 


465 
125 
1831 


East  India 
company- 


(Enraish) 
Report. 


■if^r 


PM 


[i^^'W 


s^vf 


^-  7-  \ '. 


fZ. 


IfAf' 


m 


"^^ 


f^' 


I 


>»T 


[^A 


% 


m 


0yf^ 


7i 


'A 


\p,^^i 


i^n^ 


*'.■'■ 


5?* 


t* 


y 


tL\ 


