TOT 
00110527 


WVU MUAN TUT TMU TAY a 
00110527 


Digitized with financial assistance from 
Shri Brinad Bhartiya Samaj 
on 31 October, 2019 


GENERAL AFPENDIX: 


TO WE PrN earn 
anna V0 
sree: oP 


i au 
ry 


PROM THE 


SELECT COMMITTEE OF THE HOUSE OF COMMONS 


corm: = MEESOP 
oe” 
AFFAIRS 


OF 


THE EAST-INDIA COMPANY, 


16th. AUGUST 1832, 


LIST OF GENERAL APPENDIX. 


1.—-Mr. Grant’s Observations on ft State of Society among the Asiatic Subjects of Great Britain, 
particularly with respect to ovals; and on the Mans of i Empeoy ing it. "Written chiefly in 


the year 1792 - 7 +e - “pp 3 
“Il. 
2.—The Marquis of Hastings’ Summary of ihe Operatiody in dace from the goth April 1814 to 
gist Japuary 1823 - - - - p. 12g 
III. 


CALCUTTA CIVIL FINANCE COMMITTEE. 


Their Appointment, with certain of their Reports; and Minutesy&c. of Government thercon : 


3.—-Minute of Lord William Bentinck, Governor-general of Bengal, dated 7th October 1828: 
Appointment of Committees to revise the Civil and Military Establishments and Charges of 
India . - - = « - - : s - + p. 136° 


4.--Circular Letter from the Government of Bengal to the Governments of Madras and seta 
dated 10th October 1828, upon the same subjects - - - - = pols 


5-~Resolution of the Governor-general in Council at Bengal, dated the 25th November ae 
appointing Civil and RAUATy Finance ponamibiecs of Inquiry; and giving Instructions for 


their Guidance - - - - eo p. 158 
6.—Letter from the Calcutta Civil Finance Committee to the Governor-general in Council at 
Bengal, dated 1st October 1829, relating to the Observatory at Madras - - pe 163 


7.—Resolution of the Sayerpoy- graces) in Council at Bengal, date 22d December 1829, upon 


the same subject - a - - - - - - - - op. 164 


8.—Letter from Calcutta Civil Finance Committee to the Governor-general in Council at Bengal, 
dated zoth November 1829: Principles upon which the Committee ppeapere to proceed 
in their Inquiries into the Charges and Establishments of India - - p. 104 


y-—Letter from the Calcutta Civil Finance Committee to ditto, dated 2d December 1829, on the 
Coptingent Charges of Bengal - - - - - ~ o- - - - p. 108 


e @ 
10.— Resolution 


ee ‘LIST OF GENERAL APPENDIX. 
reer ements iS 


10.—Resoluttan of the Governor-general in Council at Bengal, dated 8th December 182g, 
requiring @ proper Gontrel to be exercised over those Charges - - - - p. 169 


11.—Letter from Calcutta Civil Finance Committee to the Governor-general in Council at Bengal, 
dated 3d February 1830, with a Minute *of Mr. Bax on the Revenue and Judicial Systems 
of Bombay - -— - - - - - - < a Es 7 - p. 169 


(Enclosure.) Minute of John Bax, Esq., dated 16th June 1829, above-mentioned p- 170 


12,—Minute of. David Hill, Esq., oped om arch ioe feletivg to de Judicial and Revenue 
Administration of India - - + -  - p. 178 


13.—Letter from the Calcutta Civil Finance Committee to the G Jovgrnor-general # Council at 
Bengal, dated 25th Octover 1830, we eStinut of Holt Mackenzie, Esq. upon the same 


subject - - — - - - - + = p. 186 
(Enclosure.) Piaute of p Hele Mackénde, Log, fen 1st October 1830, above-men- 

tione®? = - - - p. 187 
14.—Minute of David Hill, Esq., dated 19th October 1830, upon the same subject - - p. 226 


For Letter from the Secretary to the Governor-general to the officiating Deputy Secretary to 
the Government of Bengal, dated the 26th January 1831, upon the same subject, see 
JupiciaL Appendix, No. IV. e 


For Minute of Lord William Bentinck, dated January a 1831, upon the same subject, see 
Jupicrat Appendix, No. IV. 


For Minute of William Blunt, Esq, dated 24th March ae see fuvicia Appendix, No. IV. 


For Minute of Sir C. T.. Metcalfe, dated 11th April 1831, upon the sarge subject, see 
JupicraL Appendix, No, IV. 


15.—Letter from the Calcutta Civil Finance Committee to the Govarnor-general in Council at 
Bengal, dated 24tk February 1830: Establishment of Civil Servams in India - =p. 228 


16.—Letter from the Galcutta Civil Finance Committee to the Vice President in Council at Bengal, 
dated 16th December 1830, upon the same subject - + a - p. 22g 


17.—Letter from the Calcutta Civil Finance Committee to the Governor-general in Council at 
Bengal, dated 26th Apel 1830, ¢ on certain of the Establishments in the General Department 
at Bombay - - - - - - - - - - p. 234 


18.—Letter from the Calcutta Civil Finance Committee to the Governor-general in Council 
at Bengal, dated 2oth September 1830, on the Judicial and Revenue Establishments at 
Bombay - ~ - - - - - - = - - - - = pe 241 


19.—Letter from the Calcutta Civil Finance Committee to the Governor-general in Council at 
Rengal, dateds4 1st “_ see Abolition of the Revenue Assessment and Survey in the 
Deccan - 7 = = - : = é 5 5 - p. 258 


20.--Letter from the Calcutta Civil Finance Committee to the Governor-general in Council at 
Bengal, dated 5th ay ba on certain of the Civil Establishments of the Madras 
Presidency - - - = - - - - - a - Pp. 259 


21.—Letter from the Government of Madras (Judicial Department), dated 2d November 1830, with 
Minute, &c. of the Governor on the Modifications propored by ae ie Finance Committee 


in the Judicial Establishrnents of Madras - - - - pe 264 
(Enclosure.) Minute of the Right honourable Stynlien R. Tauhiegtons, Governor of 
Madras, dated.14th September 1830 - - - - p. 264 
(Enclosure.) Esocestings of the ous of Sudder Adawlut at Madras, dated Toth Oc- 
tober 1830 - - - - - - S - = P. 0 
(Enclosure) Letter-from the Saccaiy to ‘the Madras Government to the J eae of the 
Sudder and Foyjdarry Adawlut at Madras, dated 2d November 1830 =~ p- 284 


Letter 


LIST OF GENERAL APPENDIX. ny 
re repre aarti nate le SAT ea A Ry EE EES, 
22.-Letter from the Calcutta Civil Finance Committee to the Governor-general im*Council, at 


Bengal, dated 12th ee @ 1830, on certain of the Civil Establishments of the Bengal 
Presidency - = - 2 “ é . ~ ow +p. 284 


23.—Letter from the Calcutta Civil Finance Committee to ditto, dated 14th June 1830, on the 
Indian Navy - - - - - - e ° - - - = - p. 292 


24.—General Minute of gir John Malcolm, Koverior of Bombay; 8 goth Nevevmer 1830, relat- 
ing to the same subject ¢ - 9 - -- - - 7 * P+ 805 


25.—Letter from the Calcutta Civil Finance Committee to the Governor-general in Council at 
Bengal, dated toh Jane AER: Charge annually: ancuried foe ANEACY Stores from Eng; 
land e - - - p. 309 
26.—Letter from the Calcutta | Finance Gpmnfittee to the Governor-general in Council at 


Bengal, dated goth July 183 obi cup of a more efficient Control over the Military 
Expenditure of Bengal = - - - - - - 7 - *. - p. 310 


27,.—Letter from the Calcutta Civil Finance Committee to the Governor-general in Council at 
Bengal, dated 28th June 1908 Expense of oe Supreme Courts of Judicature at the 
three Presidencies - - e. - - - - p. 311 


28.—Letter from the Calcutta Civil Finance Committee to tHeeVice President in Council at Bengal, 
dated 25th November 1830: Provision of suitable Allowances for Head Native Servants, 
e. P- 313 
29.—Letter from the Calcutt& Civil Finance Committee to the Vice President in Council at Bengal, 
dated xgth December 1830: Institution of Individual Agency for that of Collective Boards, 


p- 316 
30.—Minute of Willian? Blunt, Esq., dated 6th January 1831, upon the same subject " pe 325 
31.—Minute of Sir C. T. Metcalfe, dated ath January 1831, ditto + -% « -f = p. 327 
32.—Minute of Lord Wm. Bentinck, dated 24th Janlary 1831, ditto - e- = = p. 327 


IV. 
CIVIL SERVANTS. 
33.—Letter from the Bengal Government (Judicial Department), dated 3d July 1823, relating to 
the Increase’ of the Number of the Civil Servants on the Bengal Establishment =p “328 
34.—~-Minute of John Adam, Esq., Governor-general of India, dated 12th June 1823 - p. 329 
35--—Minute of J. H. Harington, Esq., Member of Council in Bengal, dated 18th June 1823, p. 337 
36.— Memorandum by Mr. Chief Secretary Bayley, dated 1st January1821  - - - p. 339 


37-—Letter to the Bengal Government (Judicial Department), dated 23d July 1824 - P- 342 
See also Punic, Appendix (H.) 


a LIST OF GENERAL Apvenprx, 


Vv 


SETTLEMENT OF EUROPEANS IN INDIA. 


38.—Letter from the Chairman and Deputy Chairman of the East Indta Company to the Right 
honourable Geo. Canning, dated 27th February 1818, Sespetting the Grant of Licences to 
proceed to India me ee ee ope 346 


e 
89.—Letter from the Right honourable Geo. Canning, dated 22d August 1818, in reBly ~ p. 363 


40,—-Letter from Peter Auber, Esq. to T. Hyde Villiers, oie 4th February 1832, with State- 

a - - - - - p- 365 

* Return 8f the Number of Licences which have been granted by the Court of Directors and 

by the Board of Commissioners for the Affairs of India, to Individuals to reside in India, 
and also the Number refused, from 1814 to 1830. 


ment of Licences granted to Persons te piceed to In 


(Commons’ Report, 1830-31, Appx.) 


* An Account of all Sums recgjved at the East India House on granting Licences, from 1814 
tol83t - - = = = + =  (Commons’ Report, October 1831, Appx.) 


* Statement of the Number and Amount in Value of Se@urity Bonds, exacted by the Company 
‘from Persons peceive to India, specifying the cases (if an}) in which Prosecutions have 
been instituted, and the Penalties of Breaches ofsuch Bonds - - - = (ibid.) 


* A Return of the Numbér of Europeays in British India not in the Service of His Majesty or 
of the East-India Company; distinguishing those residing within the Presidencies of 
“Bengal, Madras and Bombay, and each of the British Settl@ments within the Straits of 
Malacca, respectively, on 1st May 1814 and ist May 1830 ~ - - - (ibid. 


41.—-Letter from the*Court of Directors to Governmgnt df Bengal, dated 8th July 1829 (Revenue 
Department): Permission granted to Europeang to hold Lands on Lease in India - p. 370 


42.—-Letter from the Seeretary to the Government of Bengal tq P. Auber, Esq., dated ist September 


1829, with Enclosures relating to the same subject - - p» 371 
43.—Memorial from the Principal Merchants at Calcutta to the Government of Bengal, dated 
28th January 1829 - - - - - - « « . Fs = p. 372 

_ 44.—Resolution of the Government of Bengal, dated 17th February 1829, upon the same subject, 
P- 373 
45—-Minute of Sir C. T. Metcalfe, dated 19th February 1829, ditto - - - ‘= pe 373 


46.—~Minute of the Governor-general, dated goth May 18209, ditto - - - - p. 374 
47.—~Letter from Government of Bengal (Revenue Department), dated ist January 1830, ditto, 


. p- 382 
48.—Minute of the Governor-general, dated 8th December 1829, ditto - - - - p. 388 
49.—Minute of Sir C. 'T. Metcalfe, dated 13th December 1829, ditto - = - - p. 391 


50.—Minute of W. B. Bayley, Esq., dated 31st December 1829, ditto - «= - - p. 392 
§1.—Letter 


he Papers marked thus * will be found as referred to, having been printed at the time men- 
tioned ; and are therefore fot reprinted in this collection, 


7 LIST OF GENERAL APPENDIX. ~vVil 
St ee ee 
5\.—~Letter from the Court of Directors to the Govermmait of Benga erence Dopartedent); 
dated 6th April 1831 ce - - . - _ 2. = f. 392 

e 


* Letter from the Government of Bengal, dated 29th June 1826. —(Lords’ Report, 1830, 
Appx. and Commons’ Report, China Trade, 1830, Appx.) 


* Minute of C. Trower, Esq,, Member of the Board of Revenue, Lower Provinces of Bengal, dated 
‘g5th Marchi823 @- - «+ = - om - - - +  (ibid.) 


* Resolutions of the Goverumchts of Bengal, respecting the Grant of Lacenices to Europeans for 
the purpose of ronnens the Coffee Plant into Bengal - - - - (ibid. ), 


* Letter to the Government of Bengal dated 10tlke September 1828, upon the same subject, (ibid.) 
* Ditto - + - ditto - - ee July 18g9,dftto - =. - + =  « (ibid.) 


5%.—-Letter from the Court of Direcédrs to the Governor-general in Council at ‘Bengal (Finan- 
cial Department), dated ed April 1828, respecting the Conduct of British-born Subjects 


resident within British India, in their Intercourse with the Native Inhabitants - p. 393 
53.—Letter from the Court of Directors to ditto, (Judicial pi nab dated 6th August 1828, 
upon the same subject - - - - % . - - = Pp» 393 
54.—Bengal Judicial Consultations, dated 24th March 1829, ding - - = 8) Se pe 398 
55.—Letter from the Governor-genoeval in Council at Bengal to ue Cours of Directors (Judicial 
Department), dated 8th» September 1829, ditto - - + = p. 398 
56.—Letter from the Governor-general in Council at Bengal to the ecune of Directors ; udictal 
Departmeftt), dated ist June 1830, ditto - .- - = - P- 399 


57.—Letter from the Govergor-general in Council at Bengal to the Court of Directors (Judicial 
Department), dated §th November stance - - - - ott yt p 401 


58.—Letter from the Registrar to the Nizamut Adawlut to he secu to, the Government of 


Bengal, dated 3d April 1830, ditto” -6 - - - = p. 401 
59.—Minute of A. Hoss, Esq. ., Judge of the Sudier Densnny mdewlnt, fated ist April 1830, 
ditto - - Sgr Ot - - p. 402 


6o.—Statement prepared by the Secretary to the Bengal Government of European Indigo Planters 
in the Western and Lower Provinces, the Number of Factories, and the extent of Cultivation, 


the Number of Civil and Criminal Cases decided, &c. &c. + - - - - p. 403 
61.—Minute of Wm. bexnimaas Eaqs ra sadge of the sadder Dewanny Adawlut in 1829, 
ditto - - 2 = p. 420 


62.—Ditto - + + - ditto - - - «ditto - ditto - ~ . a - Pp. 420 
63.--Minute of A. Ross, Esq., dated 21st September 1829, ditto ‘- - - * «= p. 421 
64.—Minute of C. T. Sealy, | casd ay udge of ihe padder wavenny Rdawiuk; dated 28th May 1829, 


diito - > = "pe 423 
65.—Minute of R. H. Rattray, Esq., ditto, dated goth May 1829, ditto - - - = p. 424 
66.—-Minute of M. H. Turnbull, Esq., ditto, dated ad July 1829, ditto - - = « p. 426 
67.—Regulation proposed by A. Ross, Esq. » ditto eos Se pe 428 
68.—Notes of H. T. Prinsep, Esq., Secretary to ane Benga: Gorermens (General Department, ) 

dated 26th October 1829, ditto- = - ao 438 

69.—Notes - 


= 


_, The Papers marked thus * will be found as referred to, having been printed at the time mene « 
tioned ; and’are therefore not reprinted in this collection. 


. 


he LIST OF GENERAL APPENDIX. 


ee SS NE SE P= Se Se ES SEEPS SE 


69.—Notes*of H. Shakspear, Esq., Secretary to the Bengal Government, (Judicial Department,) 


lated 1st January €830, upon the same subject-  - - = Pe 445 
70.—Ditto - aqth April 1830, ditto == -e - - - - - - = = p. 449 
7f.--Resolution of the Government of Bengal, 1830, ditto - - - - - - Pp. 451 

® 
72.—-Regulation V. of 1830 - = = 2 = - - * - - - Pp. 453 
73,—Abstract Supplementary Statement of the European Indio Planters in the several Districts of 

the Lower and Western Provinces, the Number of Factories, &c. - - - Pp» 455 

% e 
74.—Letter from the Court of Directors to the Governor-general if& Council at Bengal (Judicial 
Department), dated 10th April 1832 - - - - - - - p. 456 


e ° 
75.—Statement, showing the Number of Indigo Factories in te several Districts under the Bengal 
Presideney ; also.the Number of European Indigo Pla&ters, Proprietors of Estates, and the 
Number of European Assistants resident in the several Districts under the Bengal Go- 
vernment - - - -. - - « - - - - - - p. 465 


76.—Remarks by Rammohun Roy, dated 14th July 1832 - 2 - - = = = p 466 


77.—~Paper relative to the Conduct, of Europeans in India, drawn up by a Person temporarily 
employed for that purpose by the Board of Control - . - - = oo p, 469 


48.—An Account of the Quantity of Indigo imported into Great Britain and Ireland, in each Year 
from 1780 to the latest Period to which the same can be mad@up, specifying the Countries 
from which imported, and the Quantities received from each - - - - p. 518 


GENERAL APPENDIX. 


I. 


OBSERVATION S on the STATE of SOCIETY among the ASIA'TIC SUBJECTS of 
Great Britain. narticularly with respect to Morals; anel on the means of improving it. 


Written chiefly in the Year 1792. 
To the Honourable the Court of Direcfors for the Affairs of the East India Company. 


Honovuraste Sirs, 


According to the ifitimation which I lately took the liberty of gifing, I have now the - 


honour to submit to your censideration a tract*which Bears upon a subject pressed by 
repeated proposals on your attgrtion, namely, the communication of Christianity to the 
natives of our possessions in the Fast. 


- That this is a question .of importance, will hardly be denied; and from the numerous 
letters which have been addressed to the Court, if favour of such communication, as well as 
from the share of general regard now bestowed 6n subjects of that nature, it appears to be 
a question on which an explicit determipation, on the part of the Company, is become 
necessary. 


It is therefore, in different views, worthy of a full and candid discussion ; and such I have 
been solicitous to give it, actuated solely by motives of duty, arising from the several rela- 
tions in which I find myself placed. For, in becoming an advocate, as I profess myself to 
be, for making known to our Asiatic subjects the pure and benign principles of our divine 
religion, I not only pay that obedience which is due to its authoritative injunctions, but, in 
my sincere opinion, highly consult the true interests of the Company, and the general 
welfare of the many millions living under its government. Nor can I doubt, that this will 
be the verdict of serious deliberation, however a hasty view of the subject, under some of 
its aspects, may have unnecessarily excited alarm. 


In earlier periods, the Company manifested a laudable zeal for extending, as far as its 
means then went, the knowledge of the Gospel to the Pagan tribes, among whom its fac- 
tories were placed. It has since prospered, and become reat, in a way to which the 
commercial history of the world affords no parallel; and for this it is mdebted to the 
fostering and protecting care of Divine Providence, It owes, therefore, the warmest grati- 
éude for the past, and it equally needs thé support of the same beneficent Power in time to 
conge ; for the ‘* changes and chances” to which human affairs are always liable, and espe- 
ciafly the gmphatic lessons of vicissitude which the present day has supplied, may assure 
us, at ofr elevation nor safety can be maintained by any of the nations or rulers of the 
eand!? Jefit through Him who governs the whole. The duty therefore of the Company, as 
part cf a Christian community, its peculiar auperenced obligations, .its enlarged — 

an 


APPENDIX, 


ommeene 
Mr. Grant’s State* 
of Society in Asia, 


ah aie 


2 APPENDIX ro REPORT#xdm SELECT COMMITTEE. 


7 ~ 


ae 


Mr. Grant’s State 
of Sdviety in Asia, 


and its continual dependence upon the divine favour, all ‘call upon it to honour God, by 
diffusing the knowledge of that revelation which he has vouchsafed to mankind. 


In urging this*momentous work, however, I wish to be clearly understood, as connecting 
with the formation and execution of any scheme for the performance of it, every prudent 
care, every just precaution, which tay be suitable to the nature of the undertaking, and to 
the wise, humble, mild spirit of that religion which is to be recommended. At present I 


_presume to offer no specific proposal, contending only for the general principle ; but if that 


is recognized, I shall be most ready to submit the ideas [ endertain of the manner in which 
it might be safely brought into operation. e* 2 


If the considerations already adduced, did not sufficiently guard me against the censure of 
launching beyond the ordinary lines of business, I mightgustly plead, that the office which 
you, Gentlemen, exercise, and whiclf I have the-honour to hold in common with you, sum- 
mons, not unfrequently, your attentiog to subjects of the highest nature,—-to the principles 
of government, and the interests of nations; subjects upon which, having mentioned them, 
I may be permitted to observe, that even a deliberative voice, though to that you are not 


restrained, attaches a trust of great importance to the station of a Director. 


But with respect to the execution of the treatise which is now offered to your perusal, ‘I 
am sensible that I need the utmost indulgence. Incapable at best to do justice to the 
several topics which it embraces, “I might yet in India, the centre of materials and infor- 
mation relating to them, have produced something less unworthy of notice; but though I 
held there the leading opinions now advanced, no idea of giving any publicity to them, by 
writing, ever occurred to me, until after my return to thjs country, when persuaded of the 
expediency of some attempt of that kind, and incited by a particular occasion, I several 
years ago hastily drey up the substance of the present essay. It hag however since lien by 


"me unused, and my other avocatians have,allowed me only to revise “it, not to form a new 


work, as would certainly have been desirable. To meet a°variety of opinions, and to 
fortify the argyment which is maintained in it, many things are introduced which must be 
already known to you, and indeed things which in my own first views, I should have deemed 
superfluous » for according to my apprehension, the main question is so clear as to need 
little auxiliary illustration. Under all the8e disadvantages, however, I am content to come 
forward, at the cal] of a greater interest, forming no pretension to literary merit, nor having 
on that score, any higher hope, than that youemay be pleased to receive this tract on the 
footing of one of those many Papers of Business, with which the records of your govern- 
ments have been furnished, by the observation and experience of men whose time and 
thoughts have been chiefly. employed in the concerns of active life. 


I have the honour to be, with the greatest respect, 


Gentlemen, 
‘ Your most obedient humble servant, 
East-India House, August 16, 1797. ; CHARLES GRANT. 
CONTENTS. 

- CHAP. I.—Introduction ; including a brief Review of | CHAP. 1V.—lInquiry into the Measures which might be 
British Territorial Administration in the East. p. 3. adopted by Great Britain, for the improvement of the 
CHAP. I.—View of the State of Society among the , condition of her Asiatic Subjects ; and Answers to 
Hindoo Subjects of Great Britain, particularly with Objections. p. 82, e 
respect to Morals. p. 26. APPENDIX.—Extracts from the Transactions of the 

; CHAP. IiI.—(auses which have produced the present Society for promoting Christian Knawledge. forthe 


Situation and Character of the Hindoos. p. 43. year 1795, p. 124. 


GENERAI4APPENDIX. 3 


CHAP. I. 


Introduction ; including a brief Review of British -Territorial Administrati&n ‘in 
The East. 


Wuatever diversity of opinjon may have prevailed respecting the past conduct of the 
English in the East, all parties will,coneur in one sentiment, that we ought to study the 
happiness of the vast body of subjects which we have acquired there. Upon this proposi- 
tion, taken as a truth of the highest certainty and importance, the following Observations, 
now submitted with great deferenc®, are founded. e 


He who ventures to propose a plait which has an air of govelty, at a time when the wildest 
fanaticism in politics and philosophy is pursuing, with*impious and inhuman success, the 
indiscriminate subversion of received principles and existing establishments, labouxs under 
peculiar disadvantages. Truth, however, and reason, always the same, are not to be 
abandoned because they may sometimes be perverted and abused. Of late they have been 
perverted and abused in a way new in the history of the world. The writer of these obser- 
vations holds the spirit that has thus broken forth, in the utmost abhorrence, and would 
stand at the remotest distance from its influence. His aim is to§promote the peace and hap- 
piness of men, By pacific and rational means, and where he is compelled to speak of past or 
present errors and defects, he mentions them with no disposition to censure, but solely with 
the view of doing good. He trusts, that if the opinions which he delivers, and the measures 
which he recommends in the subsequent pages, be patiently “and impartially considered, 
they will neither be found inconsistent with right principles, nor pointéng to any other than 
the most beneficial consequeyces. . ° 


Although in theory it never cgn*have been denied, that the welfare of our Asiatic subjects. 
ought to be the object of our soNcitude, yet jin practice, this acknowledged «truth has been 
but slowly followed up, and some of the inferences which are deducible from it, remain, as 
it should seem, still to be discovered. Of late wadoubtedly much has been don®, and excel- 
lently done, to improve the condition of our swbjects in the East; yet upon an attentive 
examination it may perhaps be found, that much still remains to be performed. 


It is now five-and-thirty years since the English East-India’ Company, and through that 
Company the British Nation, acquired an extensive political power in Hindostan. Some 
time before this period, they had been compelled by the ambition of the French, to take a 
part in contests which had arisen among the Mahomedan Princes on the Coromandel Coast; 
for the representatives of that nation, the first among the people of Europe who conceived 
the design of procuring a dominion out of, the broken empire of the Moguls, pursued their 
object by entering systematically into the politics of the Decan, and becoming hence the 
ally of one of the parties contending for the possession of the Carnatic, the English who 
foreseeing the success which would probably attend the unchecked prosecution of this ambi- 
tious enterprize, and in the consequent aggrandizement of their rivals, the ruin of their own 
commercial establishments, espoused the defensible pretensions of the other side. In this 
struggle they were finally victorious ; they gave a Nabob to the Carnatic, who continued to 
depend upon them ; and were thus advanced to a certain degree of military and political 
‘importance in the eyes of the natives of that part of India. But that prince was left by 
treaty in full possession of the internal government of his territories, and exercised: all the 
powers of sovereignty over the people of them. The only possession which the English 

*retained for themselves, was a narrow tract of land along the Coast of Coromandel, chiefly 
in the vicinity of their principal settlement of Madras. 

{Benga} was destined to be the seat of British empire in the East, The first military 


operatyens however of the nation in that province, instead of being prompted by views of 
B 2 conquest, 


APPENDIX,” 


— 


British Territorial 
Administration. 


A.D. 175%. 


saa cia 4 APPENDIX ro REPORT prom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


i 
—. “conquest, wese employed solely tor the defence of their prfncipal factory, suddenly, when 
Mr. Grant’s State they thought only of the peaceable pursuits of commerce, wantonly attacked by the Nabob 
of Society in Asia of the country, the recent successor of an usufper, with a numerous army. The English of - 
¢ Calcutta,baving* neither men nor means adequate to ghis unexpected service, fell an easy 
prey, atid the survivors of the hagbaroas scenes then exhibited, were driven from their 
plundered settlement, and, destitute of every thing, forced to seek a wretched refuge on the 
water. At this crisis, the warfare and the political transactions into which the English had 
been led in the Carnatic, appeared of new importance. By the result of them, the Govern- 
ment of. Madras was itself in a condition to assertby arms fhe right of the Company and 
the Nation, to the settlements of which they had been dispossessed in Bengal, and to seek a 
compensation for the immense property of which they had been despoiled. 


That right. was unquestionable ; ig was derived from fhe lawful sovereign of Hindostan, 
when the empire was in the zenith of its power, and had long been quietly enjoyed. The 
struggle made for the recovery antl sesurity of it, Rich was on our part self-defence, ended 
in the ryin of the aggressor ; for after once breaking with us, he never thought himself safe 
until we should be extirpated. Fresh plots for our destruction soon terminated a pacifica- 
tion, in which he had never been sincere ; we were reduced to the alternative of suffering 
extirpation from our just and ancient possessions, or maintaining by force our footing in the 
country against the oppressive ruler of it; and a handful of foreigners driven to this extre- 
mity, accepted the offers ofgonfederacy, which his sanguinary tyranny impelled some of the 
principal persons living under his government to make, for his deposition, and the substitu- 
tion of another Mussulman in his room. Perhaps the rigid casuists might not choose to 
defend the expedient of facilitating the progress of our argns, by leaguing with the subjects 
of the Nabob, imminent as our danger and theirs was, This point must be left to be tricd 
upon its own merits ;, but whatever decision may be passed concerning it, two things are in 
fairness entitled to attention in the general consideration of this subject :—First, that it is 
aa the Company and the Nation, had they remained, without confederates, never would 

ave submitted to be wantonly stript of valuable rights; tgerefore the maintenance of them, 
with further accessions of force derived from their own resources, might have produced the 
discomfitureof their enemy, and by an easy consequence, his loss of power :—Secondly, that 
the confederation into which the English Jntered was no part of their original plan, but an 
incidental circumstance in the sequel of hostilities, 


From this circumstance, however, viewed in*the most unfavourable light, prejudice has 
taken. occasion to characterize the whole of their transactions of that period; and the French, 
who as has been said, first of the European nations, conceived the scheme of Indian war and 
conquest, and whose game of wanton ambition ended in the loss of all their possessions in 
the East, have not failed to describe the revolution in Bengal as originating in our lawless 
lust of wealth and dominion. Many of the inflammatory misrepresentations whieh envious 
disappointed rivalship has prompted them to make, our own countrymen have precipitately 
adopted, not examining whether, in their readiness to testify an abhorrence of injustice to- 
wards the natives of India, they were not inadvertently contributing to do injustice to the 
‘character of their own nation. But as in any serious inquiry into the duties which we owe 
‘to our subjects in that country, men of correct. principles will naturally be led to carry back 
their view to the first ‘steps by which we acquired power there, it is hoped that some brief 
elucidation of so important a question, both here and as it may come again imto notice in 
the course of this essay, will be deemed no irrelevant digression. 


' By the deposition of Surajah Dowlah, the provinces which he had ruled fell first under 
the control of the English, and subsequently under their immediate management. They 
aequired also among the conquests made from the French soon after this revolution, a tract 
of country on the Coromandel Coast, called from its relative situation, the Northern Cirears ; 
and at a later period the celebrated district of Benares was annexed by cession to their 
“possessions on the Ganges. These countries, thus acquired, and now held in full ropetty 
‘by the British Nation, joining with them Bombay and Salsett, are teckoned by free able 


geographer, \, 


GENERAL. APPENDIX. 5 (APPENDIX, 
. . . Le 
geographer, Major Remnel, to e&ntain 182,000 square miles, that is, 50,000 square miles = "'——- 
more than are, according to him, contained in Great Britain and Ireland ; and the popula- British Territorial 
tion of these extensive regions may be estimated at about fourteen millions.* Besides thiese Administration. 
absolute acquisitions, the fertile territogy of Oude, with its appendages, is fo be reckoned. 
among the states dependent on the British power, wear governed internally bg their 
own princes; and all the territories which come under this description, are by the same 
author, computed to contain nearly 100,000 square miles. Supposing their population to 
be in proportion less than that of Bengal, it may be allowable to state it at six millions. 
The-conquests lately made in te M sore, Country and on the Malabar Coast, are.to be 
added to the account of the territoriat property of the British Nation. They have not been 
directly comprehended in the foregoing enumeration, because jt is intended to speak chiefly 
upon the authority of time and experience; but. the observations which these suggest, 
respecting the people with whom we are already acquaiifted, will doubtless equally apply to 
those of the same race and principles, wkoeare recently become our subjects. The number 
of these last may perhaps be estimated at two millions, Thus the whole aggregate of 
Asiatics who depend immediately and solely upon us for every comfort and happiftess of 
ood government, amounts to sixteen millions ; and those who indirectly and ‘partially 
Senautl upon us, by living under princes subject to our control, and therefore considerably 
under our influence, if we chose to exert it, even in matters of interior regulation, amount, 
as has-been stated, to six millions, Such a charge as this, chawe of no less than two-and- 
twenty millions} of people, must be allowed to be one of, the Inost weighty and seriqus 
nature, as it constitutes also one of the largest divisions of the power which is distributed 
among the rulers of the earth, - 


What then has been the effect of our administration upon the countries which have thus 
fallen under our dominjon? This is no unfair inquiry, nor is it propgsed invidiously, but 
as having a relation to the main design of the enguing pages; neither shall it be pursued 
upon conjectural positions or‘by problematical reasonings, but rested on the broad basis of 

eneral facts, many of which stand conspicuous in the records of our Indian transactions. 
hat the same topics have already been handded by persons of distinguished Situations, and 
especially that abilities have been op upon them far transcending the humple preten- 
sions of the present writer, would invincibly deterrfine him to abstain from treating of them, 
if his design did not impose this task upon hinf, and impose it with a view which other 
. writers have not exactly proposed to themgelves. Happily this undertaking calls not for the 
powers or the details of regular history ; nor on the other hand would it be answered by the 
exhibition of mere results, which would carry more the air of assertions than. of faets. 
Facts, therefore, so far circumstantiated as to be seen in their truth and their connection, it 
will be his endeavour to trace with’ simplicity and with moderation. 


The account ef our territorial management in the East, or of the internal exercise of our 
power in those countries which are now held directly by us, may be conveniently arranged 
into four distinct periods, of which it will be sufficient here to sketch the prominent features; 
and as Bengal with its appendant provinces forms both the main portion of our possessions, 
and the scene of our greatest exertions, experience, and progress, that division shall be the 
subject of our present brief review, with only such concluding notice of the other parts, as 
may serve to indicate the state to which they have hitherto advanced. 


In the first period, comprehending eight years, from 1757 to 1765, the provinces, (except. A.D. 1757 to 1765. 
ing a few districts ceded to the Company in the course of that time, with the sanction of 
the 


*.The latest estimates would make Bengal, + Or according to the preceding note, eighteen 
Behar, and qur part of Orissa, to contain at least, | millions. : _ ‘ ; 
twelve millions. If they do, the whole population | { Or according to the same note, twenty-four 
of these different possessious may amount te six- | millions. ' 

Aeen millions. . ; 


Aeeennx 6 APPENDIX ro REPORT grow SELECT COMMITTEE. 


el 


. 


‘ the Mogul Emperor) were continued under the government of Nabobs, to whom the admi- 
Mr. Grant's State istration of civil and criminal justice, the collection of the revenues, and the general powers 
of Society in Asia. of internal superintendence and regulation, were left, The English reserved to themselves. 
the direction 8f foreign palicy, a controlling militgry power, a considerable tribute, and 
advantages in trade more extensivg than the grants of the Emperors, or the past usage of 
the country, had conceded to them. . 


The circumstances of the first revolution seemed to dictate such a division of power ; of 
which, the share vested in the Nabob is usually called, in the writings of that time, the 
Country or the Native Government, as when the mass of both divisions, or the complex 
power, Native and European, was spoken of, it was termed (sometimes in a way of censure} 
the Double Government. To this arrangement the orders of the Company seem to have at 
first restricted their servants, who iffhey had felt themsélves more at liberty, would perhaps 
have deemed it unsafe or inexpedient to enter at onge upon the direct charge of a govern- 
ment, to the details of which théy, were entire sttahgers. 


But.plausible as the system, viewed in some lights, appeared, it proved in practice unsa~ 
tisfactory to all parties, and especially detrimental to the people. ‘The Eastern governments 
are in general careless as to the interests of their subjects, and this is particularly true. of 
Mahomedan rulers. The Nabobs created by the English in Bengal, foreign adventurers 
suddenly raised to power, dependent, suspicious, and rapacious, could have little concern for 
the lasting prosperity of @country, with the government of which, their connection was so 
cagual and precarious. Whilst they saw with secret indignation the ehief attributes of 
sovereignty in the possession of a handful of commercial men, every way alien to the Asiatic 
world, and so large a share of the riches of the country, devoted through: them to a distant 
land ; whilst they believed’ alsu that the favour of these people was uncertain, they could 
scarcely have any ther aim, than to use the time present in maing the most of their 
situations, 


' e 
And indeed such seems to have. been the temper of the other princes' more remotely 
placed, who were styled the allies, but who in reality wert the dependents of the East-India 
Company. Feeling that the same power which supported could also dispossess them, and 
habituate@by the whole history and the ganfers of Hindostan to the ideas of perfidy and 
of change, they could have no settled confidence in the solidity-of their tenures, but be on 
the contrary indisposed to that study to which Eastern rulers at the best need a stimulus, 
the permanent good of their subjects. Asiatics, &customed either to absolute command or - 
implicit obedience, do not seem well qualified to make a beneficial use of delegated or mixed 
power. The policy of our dependent allies has in general been directed only to secure them- 
selves in their situations; it has been their aim to please the immediate arbiters of their fate, 
and they have found, either sagaciously or by incidental discovery, that even running largely 
in debt is one means of interesting many in the stability of their government. But this 
policy is pursued at the expense of their subjects, and the people, both of Arcot and of 
Oude, are with too much foundation represented to be in a wretched condition. A state of 
dependence seems also to unfit or indispose the princes who stand to us in this relation, for 
any vigorous co-operation in the external defence of their own territories. Perhaps that- 
species of protection to which they have been used, has enervated them, made them unwilling 
to contribute the funds requisite in such cases, and persuaded them that the English will not 
suffer those countries of which. they are in effect the paramount lords, to be possessed by any 
other power. , Another evil, more formidable possibly than our experience has yet dis- 
covered, flows from this system ; it enlarges the sphere of advantage to the servants, espe- 
cially the military servants of the Company, it enlarges the military establishment, military 
emoluments, and perhaps encourages, in its consequences, the spirit of military independences 
The experience we have..acquired, may prebably establish an opinion of the impolicy-of 
forming any new connections of this nature; but with respect to those which already 
subsist, as it is--our power which maintains the authority of ur dependent allies over their 
subjects, it seems incumbent on us-te exert every possible endeavour, consistent with the 


juste 


GENERAL-APPENDIX. , 


just sense and faith of treaties, Rat the governments which we thus uphold may render the ) 


people easy and happy. 


“ Where the controlling power of the English and the derived power of ,the dependent 
Nabob met in one place, as in Bengal,*they could not long exist together without-colligion. 
The unwilling submission of the weaker party, and the deminating temper of the stfonger, 
soon became too plain; mutual distrust and aversion succeeded ; the excesses of individuals 
inflamed the animosity on each side, and the country became the unfortunate scene of war. 
The cruelties, the rapacity, and Jhe expulsion of Cossim Ali, whom an unhappy policy had 
elevated to power, are sufficiently knowne Whether we ascribe his conduct to unprincipled 
ambition, or the licentious encroachments of Europeans and their dependents upon his proper 
authority, or with more probability. to both of these causes, and the maddening effect of 
events hurrying him to lengths he? had not deliberately purposed, it still exhibited this 
striking spectacle, the"English obliged to fight with the creature of their own power, for the 
continuance of that power, nay even for thtir existencein, Bengal ; and the country, instead 
of being better protected under co-existing authorities, suffering grievously by both, and in 
their shock convulsed and torn. What had thus happened, however blameable the cause, 
might happen again ; and this experience purchased at so dear a rate, naturally led the way 
to the acquisition of the Dewannee of Bengal, Behar, and Orissa. 


This may be considered as a point at which a second period of territorial management 
commences, ‘The Dewannee is the office of the Dewan, the titl®of the provincial collector 
of revenues undef the Mogul Emperors, whose policy it. was to place the financial admirfis- 
tration of the several divisions of the empire, in hands distinct from those entrusted with 
military command and judicial authority. 


The adventurers who upon the decline of the empire, assumed the powers of government 
in the provinces, assumtd also the exclusive administration and appropriation of the revenues, 
as most essential to their views. The rights of th® reignifig emperor, however, though dis- 
regarded, had never been denied, *He was induced, in consideration of an annual tribute 
to himself, and a handsome stipeftd to the reigning Nabob, who was also a party in this 
treaty, to grant in perpetuity to the East-India Company for their own benefit, the 
Dewannee, that is, in other words, the reventes @f those three provinces. He Bad not at: 
that time, nor was likely ever to have, the leas*power to assert his rights; his bestowing 
that grant therefore, on the condition of an ample compensation, was making the most advan- 

" tageous use he possibly could make of his‘pretensions. No other power in Hindostan would 
have given him such favourable terms; and his consciousness of this led him voluntarily to 


propose a cession of the Dewamnee, It is thence to be concluded, that.in this transaction he - 


was guided chiefly by the exigencies of his own situation; for his remote distance from the 
seat of the Company’s government must have rendered their influence over him proportionably 
weak. But at the same time it ought to be acknowledged, that the subsequent proceeding 
with him, by which the payment of the stipulated tribute was discontinued, appears to be 
of a more dubious character. ‘This remark also is interjected for the sake. of those who 
question the principles on which our acquisitions have been made. 


The Company having before held a controlling military power, were thus put in possession 
of the finances of the country, which as an immense estate they were henceforth to manage, 
and to manage for themselves. ‘The collection of the revenues there is known to have been 
till of late a business of extreme intricacy and detail ; the causes of which have been explained 
in a variety of masterly preaueors particularly the excellent writings of Mr. Shore* on 
this subject ; into which, however, it will not be.necessary to go farther here than the state- 
ment of certain usages which form the first, lines of the Indian system of finance, In Hin- 
@ostan, far the greater part of the revenue of the sovereign arises from land ; and it has long 

. ; ' been 


* Now Sir John Shore, Governor-General, in | important services he had before rendered to the 
which high station he has largely added to the | Company. 
aA 


Appenpix, 
\. L. s 


British Territorial 
Administration. 


A.D. 165. 


APPENDIX, 
e 


el. 


Mt. Grant's State 
of Society in Asia. 


8 APPENDIX ro REPORT row SELECT COMMITTEE. 


“been, the unjversal practice to rorm we assessment of goternment upon the actual produce 


of the soil, and to do this annually. Not unfrequently the share of government has been 
paid inkind, In like manner the landholder regulates the rent of his inferior tenant annually, 
and according %o the value of the articles which hegraises, whether rice, cotton, sugar, or 
anyother of the many productiogs which the soil furnishes. It will easily be perceived, 
that this system, as it naturally leads to concealment on the one side, requires a constant 
course of vigilance and laborious local investigation on the other, in every rank of persons 
employed in the revenue, from the first officer to the lowest farmer of a village. Again, the 
sovereign is arbiter of the share which he himself shall enj®y of the produce ; and though 
anciently his proportion seems to have been moderate in modern times it has usually been 
very large.. Despotism being the principle of government, force is the real, though some- 
times latent instrument which procures acquiescence in his allotments. Without a com- 
pulsory power, ever ready to act, Tittle revenue would be obtained. _ Arbitrary demand, 

eremptorily enforced on the one hapd, sharpens all*the arts of evasion, concealment, and 
raud, on the other. . 


Since the fall of the Mogul empire especially, and under the Asiatics, Hindoos, or Maho- 
medans, who have usurped power, the business of collecting the revenues has been a most 
debasing struggle between the superior and inferior in every gradation. New taxes upon 
a thousand pretences, often false and preposterous, have been imposed even in direct 
breach of agreements befyre made. The revenue officers of every rank have exacted for 
themselves, besides collecting the demands of government; and from this fruitful source of 
injustice, severity, chicane, and meanness, have flowed innumerable evils to the community. 
Want of principle in the landholders and occupants of the soil has led the government to 
give them as little credit for their rents as possible ; so that payment may in some places be 
required at the end of every month, or more often, by eight instalments in the year. From 
the inferior occupants of the soil, care is taken to secure arrears before the crops are removed 
from the ground, for otherwise, from the poverty and artifices of that description of persons, 
those arrears will generally be in effect lost ; because if thes are recovered at a future period, 
it is in reality’by an application of the Produce of a new year, which having its own exi- 
gencies, wil thence probably also owe a balance at the close. And as hence the necessity 
of summary proceeding with the renters Ras been pleaded, their complaints have not been 
allowed to suspend the payment of the defnand on them; but this unremitting exaction has 
afforded the agent the opportunity of keeping hig own malversations covered. 

These elucidations may convey a faint idea of the vast detail and attendant difficulty of 
the Indian’ system of finance, notwithstanding the apparent simplicity of its fundamental 
principle ;* but they also ‘suggest that the power which enforces the payment of the reve- 


. . Ci Bo . 
nues, agit is operative at all times and comes home to all 


consideration of the people.t 


.* The most methodical and full exposition 
extant of the Mogul system, of finance is to be 
found in the Analysis of the Revenues of Bengal by 
Mr. James Grant, a work which, though it ought 
to have been set on foot by government at the 
moment of acquiring the Dewannee, was never 
attempted tilt he, from private curiosity, entered 
upon it many- years afterwards, when the obtain- 
ment of accurate information on such a subject 
was become peculiarly difficult. In this elaborate 
treatise, he has developed with minute detail, both 
the principles of the Mogul system of finance and 
the sources and amount of the revenues collected 
from every division; great and small, of the soubah 
of Bengal, as well in remote periods as in the 
year preceding the assumption of the Dewannee. 


persons, must be the first in the 


The 


It contains a more complete account of the lands 
of Bengal than that rendered to our government 
by the native ministers in 17665, but is little known, 
being in manuscript among the records of the 
Company, and too much loaded with technical 
and involved language, the fundamental principle 
also of the Mogul system of finance having since 
been superseded in our practice; but it.is the 
product of extraordinary disquisitory powers em- 
plpyed upon a curious and interesting subject. 

+ Strictly speaking, it must be supreme. Tho 


‘power of the Emperor went along with his Dewan. 


The English possessed the Dewannee only be- 
cause they had power (which was not used before) 
to assert the grant, 

ey 


, 


GENERAL* APPENDIX. — 9 Arexnix, 


. a 


The Company therefore were now not only to reap the produce of the country, but were ; 
virtually invested with the interior government of it, none-of the prerogatives of dominipy British Territorial 
remaining to the Nabob*, excepting the judicial power, which was attended with no political Administration. 
importance. It was not however theepolicy of their servants, nér did they at first think 
themselves able to exercise all this power; but in entering upon their new privilege€ they 
made use of ministers who had served the Nabob in the affairs of the revenue. The people . 
were taught henceforth to regard the Company as their masters ;' but they were treated with 
through the medium of the same persons with whom, as agents of the Nabob, they had 
before transacted. No Englishman was egnployed in the districts, or in the-details of the’ 
collections, that is to say of the Dewaunee landst. The Mahomedan and Hindoo ministers 
of the revenue managed the whole, appointing all the subordinate officers, laying their 
general schemes of assessment befoe the principal servants of the Company, reporting to 
them the state of the collections from time to time, and disposing of the money received into 
the exchequer, according to their orders. *’Phe only pessop¢who in the districts represented 
the Company in the exercise of the new powers they had acquired, were the same persons 
who on behalf of the native government exercised the like powers in them before; hever- 
theless, the effects of this change, besides the transfer of the financial rights and profits of 
the country to new hands, were many and important. 

The wants and desires of the Company at home seemed to grow with this immense 
acquisition, Their servants abroad were suspicious, and *not wgthout reason, that all the 
sources of revenug might not be fairly disclosed to them; and they were alarmed lest, the 
amount of it should decline under their management. The progressive accessions of the 
Company also enlarged the views of every’ European in the provinces, and of the native 
dependents of Europeans. Power fas not, as in the former system of government, inherent 
in one person only, but in many persons, all of whom therefore it invested with a portion of 
its consequence. The fative ministers, of the’ revenue wished to gratify the eager views of 
the Company, and to conciliete the general favour of the English. They had likewise 
their own interests and their numer$us dependents to serve, and to serve whilst opportunity - 
lasted ; but whatever extraordinary funds they gnight with these aims seek to fiossess, as all 
parties concurred in the urgency uf keeping up, the standard of the public income, the only 
means left them, exclusive of the salaries they enjoyed, were private imposts, mon¥polies, or 
appropriations of one kind or another ; and if, as*has been affirmed with great appearance 
of truth, certain portions of the government lands were omitted in the accounts presented to 
’ their new masters, the burthen upon the rest must from this cause, as from others, have 
fallen the heavier. ; : 

Difficulties began to be experienced in realizing the assessment. A set of coercive 
officers or rather farmers of the revenue were employed in the districts to ensure and quicken 
the payment. These men, chiefly adventurers from Tartary or Persia, executed their busi= 
ness rigorously Unfeeling aad rapacious, uncertain of holding their employments beyond 
the year, they lost no time in amassing money for themselves ; and the Zemindars, or prin- 
cipal landholders, made every extraordinary demand upon them, the ground of still more 
excessive demands upon the inferior tenants, - 

Compulsory measures came also to be used in providing the investment of the Company. 
As the new wealth poured into their treasury could be realised in Europe only by the 
medium of commerce, the orders for that investment were at once augmented two or three 
fold. The produce of every country and the demand for that produce having a certain 
relation to each other, it was impossible that the funds now destined: for the purchase ,of 

commodities 


* Who was the descendant of Jaffier Ali Khan, + Some districts, as observed above,. were by 
the first Nabob raised by the English, with whom | cession before in the hands of the Company ; 
a treaty had been made, in virtue of which, the | who also had; possessed commercial factories in 
succession was continued in his family. the provinces above a century. 


C 


APPENDIX, , 


1¢ APPENDIX to REPORT -rou SELECT COMMITTEE. 


commodities* on account of the Company, could be invested at once without extruding 


Mr. Grant's State private-‘merchants. European individuals also, confident now both of protecting and con- 


of Society in Asia. 


A.D. 1769. 


, trolling their native agents, employed them in trade all over the country ; and the foreign” 

European companies and their dependents, availingethemselves of the substitution of the 
milder Yenius of English rule, forgthe prompt despotism of the Mahomedans, everywhere 
increased their pretensions and activity. The manufacturers were not unfrequently obliged 
to accept the English Company’s employ, and even those private agents required a prefer- 
ence to other traders. Some of the-native dealers retired. Both natives and foreigners, 
especially those attached to the other European qompgnies complained ; though the latter 
not always reasonably nor temperately ; and in a word, violence and disorder became too 
prevaleut. . 


Wherever the native agents of the English traders *went, they assumed power; they 
interfered in the affairs of the cquntry, and even in the proceedings of the courts of justice, 
which the Company still left solely ufider the cohtrol of the Nabob. These courts, which 
ought to have been the sure refuge of the oppressed, were before systematically venal, and 
in a time of divided power and general relaxation, were become so scandalously corrupt, as 
to constitute one of the most intolerable evils under which the country groaned. 


_ All these causes operating with the energy of a new revolution, produced a great and un- 
happy pressure upon the country. It was in fact without a proper head, The English 
administration left the intehal government to the native-ministers, and these, little under the 
influence of public spirit, (a rare quality among the Asiatics,) intent chiefly on the affairs of 
the revenue, were unwilling to offend by honestly ¢esisting the licentiousness of individuals. 


With respect however to the Company and to Europtans in general, these various evils 
proceeded more from the elation of new success, from extravagant notions of the resources 
of the country, and Unreflecting eggerness, than from intentional rdpacity. They did not 
feel that the cognizance of the internal affairs of the country was a duty resting upon them, 
and they may have implicitly given credit to the minister¥, more intelligent than themselves, 
for a regard tf that important concern, *For these causes} and the remoteness of the seat of 
English government, placed near one of tha extremities of the country, they remained 
ignorant of the true state of the interiornor were they fully aware that the natives whom 
they employed would exercise against their, own countrymen any power, even falsely 
assumed, in the most unfeeling and iniquitous manner. They had not, in fine, at all pre- 
considered the probable effects of so great a chafige as the assignment of the Dewannee to 
the Company.* ° 

In less than four years these effects showed themselvés very plainly. The country ex- 
hibited unequivocal signs of impoverishment and decay. The trade to the other parts of 
India was reduced, and the revenues, with increased exertions, could not be kept up to 
their first standard. In truth, upon a comparison of the state of the country in the year 
1757, after the battle of Plassey, ard in 1769, when the power of the English, in one form 
or another, had predominated twelve years, the result is extremely against the revolution. 
The English are not directly chargeable with the misconduct of the Nabobs and their 
ministers to whom they entrusted authority,'especially: with the ruinous enormities of Cos- 
sim Ali, but in the transfer of the country to a set of European merchants, consequences 
were involved unfavourable to its prosperity. ‘The specie which those merchants and others 
had for a long series of year's annually imported; ceased to flow in. The English Company 
bought their large investment, encreased to three times the amount at which it stood when | 


bullion was brought to pay for it, with the revenue of the provinces; other companies made 
' ‘ 7 : thain 


* Mr. Vertlst, who was Governor of Bengal | His successor, Mr. Carter, was also‘a very honest 
during this period, was certainly a man’ of fair | and amiable man. ; : 
intention and correct in his. personal conduct, 


' = ‘GENERA? APPENDIX. , 77 hee | 


their purchases with money received from English individuals, who ‘also derivad it from the = ——_—>. 

country ; and this was to-be the system thenceforward, at least for the greater part. of the British Territorial 
“exports. Neither did the evil stop here. Both the Company and private persons exported . Administration. 
‘large sums of specie collected there. The quantity. thus extracted from tRe country, even * 

within the period spoken of; was astonishing, -A-wantof circulating medium begam ‘to be 

felt. These drains, added to the. immense treasures which the extortion of Cossim Ali 

enabled him to carry off, exceedingly reduced the stock of the country, and the diserders 

which had arisen in the districts threatened to impair its annual produce, The first person 

who had the integrity and resolutipn tg call the attention of government to the unhappy 

state of the country, was Mr. Becher, resident.at the Durbar. ; 


Certainly a great deal was due from us to the people in compensation of the evils which 
the establishment of our power had introduced among them’; and in return for the vast 
advantages which we reaped from the change, it was but fit that what the country had 
suffered, or was subjected unavoidably to® lose by being dependent upon us, should be re- 
paid by all the benefits which good government, in consistency at least with that depen- 
dence, could bestow. And there was in the national genius of Britain, formed by superior 
lights and juster principles, and possessed of higher energies, what might still render that 

_ country happier than it had ever been before. 


To discover and suppress the abuse of trust and powey in the collection of the revenues, A.D. ty69. 
in the purchase of the investment, and in the conduct of the cturts of justice*, were the 
objects of anothér institution, which forms the commencement ofa third period of territorial. 
management, English-servants of the Cempany were sent as supervisors into thé districts, 
and the coercive officers whom the ministers had employed, were withdrawn. ‘The super- 
visors were furnished with a commission of investigation and active superintendence over 
the various departmeiss of provincial administration, the state, the paace, and order of the 

_ country ; but without the digect charge of any @epartment. To many persons in Europe 
these progressive assumptions of pewer may have appeared as so many exorbitant encroach- 
ments: but whatever may have been thought at figst even by judicious men, if we deter- 
mined to retain the country and to govern it*either to the benefit of the people, or ta our 
own, they were necessary. From the first achuisifion of a controlling power tothe posses- 

‘sion of the entire.executive government of those provinces, it has been found that there was 
no point at which to rest. Experience evinced that in every intermediate stage, the’ interest. 
of the country was neglected, and the alsuses of power more felt than ifs protection. Out 
national standard of sentiments and morals, undoubtedly gives a comparative elevation to 
the character of those who are reared under it. The European servants of the Company 
therefore, who were also held by greater responsibilities, were worthy of more confidence ~ 
than transient adventurers, ignorant and barbarous, from the Upper Asia. ‘This institution 
was the first step towards an English provincial administration, and the remote beginning of 
a new system, more open to, the influences of the British genius and principles. 


The supervisors rendered considerable service, Their presence in the districts imposed 
a restraiut upon the native officers, and their inquiries and interferences, whilst they evinced 
the wretched state of the interior, checked many evils. But they had acted only avery 
short time when the country began to suffer from another calamity, which in the end over-+ 
whelmed it in misery, incomparably more dreadful than all it had before endured. This was 
the famine that began in the year 1769, and continued through the greatest part of 1770; A.D, 3769. 
of which, as few circumstantial relations have been ‘given, perhaps the following account 1770. 
may not be unacceptable. -- ot 
The principle food of the great body of the people who inhabit our provinces, is rice. Of 
this 


* Private European traders and the Native orders in the districts, were by this gime brought + 
‘agents of Europeans, who had in the beginning of | under considerable restraint. ' 
the, Company's power been guilty of such dis- | — 
C2 


APPENDIX, 


tle 


Mr. Grant’s State 
of Society in Asia. 
! 


12 APPENDIX to RFPART weay SELECT COMMITTEE. 


this, from tlte fertility of the soil, the joint effect of an ardent sun and of ‘saturating periodical 
raiys, they have annually two crops, besides a variety of other grain and pulse. The first 
crop of rice is gathered in about the end of August, the second (which is the greatest) early 
in December ; and the other inferior articles from the month of February till the end of 
April ® so that the ground brings ferth almost all the year round. In general the produce is 
so abundant as to render Bengal the granary of India, and it is but at considerably distant 
intervals that a season fails. The natives indolent, improvident, fatalists,'and exposed till 
of late to be taxed in proportion to the produce they eh or even to have any apparent 
superfiuity invaded, by their brethren in power, hed nqver adopted the practice of keeping a 
stock of grain in case of dearth. When a season of drought therefore occurs, the sun, 
usually the great agent in fertility, parches the ground. Scarcity ensues ; a scarcity aggra- 
yated by the eagerness which peopl¢ then show to purch’se rice, and by the artifices of the 
grain dealers, who are skilful in taking advantage of .the public apprehension. If drought 
extended through two successive® geasons, it woutd almost inevitably follow that the quan- 


 .tity of.grain in the country would not be equal to the consumption of a people whose lives 


depend on the supply of this article; for extremity of want will not induce the Hindoos in 
general to resort to animal food, especially the flesh of the cow, because of the horror with 
which they regard an act that they are taught to believe would incur the dreadful punish- 
ment of loss of caste in this life, and tarments or degrading transmigrations in the next. ‘The 
periodical rains begin early in Jtne, and continue with mtermissions till late in October, 
commonly falling more plentifully in the last two mouths. . 


The crops of December 1768 and August 1769 were both scanty; and throughout the 
month of October 1769, the usual period of heavy rains, which are abrolutely necessary for 


‘the latter crop of rice, hardly a drop fell. The almost total failure of a third crop, afier the 


deficiency of the twe preceding ones, filled all men with consternation and dismay. Sone 
hope was still placed in the crops of inferior grain, usually reaped between February and 
April, which every endeavour was exerted to increases; but the refreshing showers that 
annually fall jn what are called the dry months, between J&nuary and May, also failed, and 
in the fatal year 1770 there was scarcely any*rain till late in May. ‘The heat was insuffer- 
able, and gvery kind of grain or pulse then grtwing was, in a great degree, dried upon the 
ground, othing appeared but universal despondence and unavoidable destruction ; for the 
same calamity extended to the Upper India, and there was no neighbouring country that 
had been used to furnish Bengal with rice by Seay or that could afford an adequate supply, - 


The Company’s administration and the native ministers early took the alarm, and entered 
upon such precautionary measures as were within their power, In September 1769 the 
English and all their dependents were absolutely prohibited from trading in rice; not 
because they or any other set of people were at all suspected of having been monopolizing 
that article, but lest on the temptation of very high prices, European influence should in any 
form operate to collect such undue quantities as might aggravate the scarcity. General and. 
strict injunctions were also published against hoarding grain, buyitg or selling it clandes- 
tincly, or carrying on any dealings in it but at the public markets ; and a stock of rice, 
amounting to 60,000 maunds, was laid in for the use of the army, a measure to which the 
preservation of our military power, and indeed of the country, may be.ascribed ; for it is 
not to be doubted that want would have made the soldiery throw off all command, and seek 
subsistence with their arms in their hands, which must have produced total anarchy. The 
prime mover in all these measures also was Mr. Becher,* resident at the Durbar. 
, Ose ; The 
4 17 = ‘ e ’ es 
* A man noted for his honesty and humanity, [ to England he found himself traduced as the 
whose anxiety and exertions for alleviating the | author of the famine. This calumny is said to 
tmiseries of that whole period ended in an illness | have had its rise at the French *settlement of 
that almost cost him his life. Yet on his return | Chandernagore, in the vicinity of which an agent 


of 


GENERAI+ APPENDIX. 3 


The famine was felt in all the northern districts of Bengal as early as the mopth of 
November 1769, and before the end of. April following, had spread desolation through the 
three provinces. Rice rose gradually to four, and at length to ten times its usual price, b&t 
even at that rate was not to be had Lingering multitudes were seen seeing subsistence 
from the leaves and bark of trees. In the country the highways and fields were strewed, in 
towns the streets and passages were choaked, with the dying and the dead. Multitudes 
flocked to Moorshedabad, the capital. It became more necessary to draw supplies to that 
city, and no endeavour was spared to bring all the grain in the country to market. Sub- 
scriptions were set on foot. The Compayy, the Nabob, the Ministers, European and native 
individuals, contributed for feeding the poor. In Moorshedabad alone 7,000 were daily fed 
for several months, and the game practice was followed in other places; but the good etiects 
were hardly discernible amidst the general devastation. In and about the capital, the mor- 
tality increased so fast, that it became necessary to keep a set of persons constantly employed 
in removing the dead from the streets anderoads, andghgsé unfortunate victims were placed 
in hundreds on rafts and floated down the river. At length the persons employed in this sad 
office died also, probably from the noxious efiluyia they imbibed ; and for a time dogs, jackals, 
and vultures were the only scavengers. It was impossible to stir abroad without breathing 
ani offensive air, without hearing frantic cries, and seeing numbers of different ages and sexes 
in every stage of suffering and death. The calamity was not less in other: quarters; in 
many places whole families, in others the people of entire villages had expired. Even in 
that country there were persons who fed on forbidden and abhorred animals ; nay, the chjld 
on its dead parent, the mother on her child, At length a gloomy calm succeeded. Death 
had ended the miseries of a great portion 8f the people, and wheu a new crop came forward 
in August, it had in some parts nd owners, The number which dell in this period of horror 
has been variously estimated, and may perhaps be moderately taken at three millions.” 


It must be very evident from a simple review of this desolating event, that it was the 
‘visitation of Heaven, not the work, of man. Those Eastern countries have unhappily been 
too well acquainted with this speges of calamity in all ages. Upon turning to the last 
century only, the records of the Company mentioif a destructive famine in “Surat and the 
neighbouriug countries about the year 1630. Dow gives an account of a prodigious one 
almost general in the Mogul empire, anno 1661: * Instances might easily be multiplied by 
a more particular research ; in our time we have Seen several on the Coast of Coromandel, 
the last of which a few years ago destroyel nvultitudes. Since the awful era of, 1770, there 
have been two seasons of great scarcity in Bengal, the years 1783 and 1788.. The dearth in 
those years was only partial ; but the common people were driven to great distress, and 
some perished. Lord Cornwallis, seeing how much the country was exposed to calamities of 
this sort, instituted public granaries in Bengal, in which a stock of grain should always be 
preserved against emergencies. Indeed, if we could suppose ‘that any man, or set of men, 
especially European servants of the Company, who had easy means of acquiring wealth, could 


have been so iron-hearted as to form the design of enriching themseives by withholding - 


sustenance from their fellow-creatures ; if we could suppose they could have borne the 
sight, even for the first week or day, of the miseries under which a whole people were sink- 
‘ing ; if we could suppose further, that after denying every. thing human for the sake of gain, 
they could so far forego their own vbject as, instead of accepting a fourfold, nay tenfold 

a price 


of his had in the year 176g, before things came to | of which the materials were furnished by him 
extremity, some articles of the provisions of ife | when the event was recent, that this relation (of 
Jormer year selling off, and among them a parcel | the faets stated in which the writer hereof was 
of rice, in value about 20,000 rupees. Perhaps | also an eye-witness) is chiefly taken: 


the purchase of a stock of rice for the Company's | _Another gentleman, still living, was also accysed - 
troops may also have contributed to suggest the | of being the author of the famine, though he was- 


idea of a monopoly. It is from a MS. account, in England when it commenced. 


APPERLLS 


Is 


British Territorial 
Administration. 


‘ 


Avrenvix, 14, APPENDIX to REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 
*7. . : 
aa price, to allow those who would purchase to die in immensé multitudes for want ; if we could 
Mr. Grant's State entertain all these extravagant suppositions, and the equally extravagant one of a general 
of Society im Asia. monopoly of the produce of a great country, still a little cool reflection upon the means of 
® accqmplishing & scheme so flugitious, would show thgt the execution of it would be abso- 
lutely ¢mpracticable. 
It was perfectly established that the dearth was general over the three provinces, and in all 
ruinously severe. A monopoly, therefore, if that had been the cause, must have been 
general also. It is easy to conceive how one quarter coujd be deprived of its produce to 
supply another ; but when in all quarters there was aglike destitution, if we suppose this to 
have proceeded from monopoly, we must also’ suppose not a simple operation of emptying 
ene district to fill another, still less to surcharge any other, .ecause that would be to go 
trom a better market to a worse ong, but a local monofpoly in every township, keeping up, 
nut sending away, the grain found within its circle. «Let us now enquire imto the lowest 
quantity of grain that can be Supposed to hafe been hoarded. In the course of twelve 
months, three millions of people are estimated to have died; that is, nearly one-third of the 
whole population ; but as a third of the usual allowance of food might have preserved life, 
we should hence be led to conclude that the grain retailed in that year was two-thirds at 
least below the quantity usually vended. As further, the failure would fall chiefly on those 
who in times of common plenty earned only a subsistence, and these may be computed at 
eight in ten of the community, tife deficiency in the supply of the markets that year may 
well be rated at two-thirds of the usual consumption of eight millions ot people, that is 
somewhat more than onc-lialf of the whole quantity brought to market in ordinary times: 
and if this was occasioned by monopoly, so much must have been kept up. But let us 
assume what would be the*most plausible theory, that a real scarcity, to a certain extent, 
was rendered severe]y fatal by the supervention uf monopoly ; of what magnitude must we 
conceive the monopoly to be, in order ta become thus operative? Here we must go on an 
ample supposition ; for if monopolists had thought of cqntenfing themselves with collecting, 
for instance, only a month’s demand at a time, their main, purpose would have been defeated, 
becausce,in the mean while the rest would hawe found a distribution in the usual way. They 
must therefore have bought up largely at or before the reaping of a crop, and bought up 
more than’ they withheld, because part of*their purchases we must suppose, would be resold. 
Tf, then, we admit a real scarcity, which ‘would have occasioned a mortality of a million of 
people (which prejudice has never granted), and ascribe the mortality of the other two mil- , 
lions hy pedehed to monopoly, concluding, as we are obliged, that this monopoly con- 
sisted only of two great operations, that, is, on the December crop of 1768, and the August. 
crop cf 1769, then the quantity of grain hoarded up.will turn out to have been one-third of 
the market supply’ of ordinary years ; and assigning in such years, to ten millions of persons, 
the young and the adult taken together, half a seer (or a pound) of rice per diem, which is 
a moderate allowance, that third will amount to six hundred and four millions of seers, or 
fifteen millions of maunds, which at a rupee each, a probable purchase-price in a time of 
real scarcity, which we-here suppose, will amount: to fifteen millions, or a crore and a half 
‘of rupees, one half, perhaps, of the whole circulating medium of the provinces at that time, 
and such a capital in the hands of those suspected of being concerned, as no extravagance 
of credulity can hold to be supposable. ; , 


But we have not yet seen all the difficulties, The three provinces contain 150,000 square 
miles ; and if we reckon fifteen square miles for the sphere of one monopoly agent (which 
surely, after allowing for water, is an average full as much as he could compass), and reckon 
‘further two assistants only to each agent, we shall have thus ten thousand monopoly 
stations, and thirty thousand persons employed*at them, Such a set of operations, or the 
hundredth part of them, and operations continued through a whole year, would have fur- 
nisbed uncantroulable evidence to all men. The natives are, indeed, patient in suffering, 
when they think suffering inevitable ; they suffered in that calamity with wonderful passive- 
ness ; but if they had traced their miseries to any source like this, the country would have 


-GENERAL APPENDIX.’ 15 Apprennix,” 
Se woh 
soon rung with their complaints.’ “They are’known to be clamorous, even on trivial occa-" Mot 
sions, where any redress is possible. They have. been known, in a time of scarcity merely, British Territori:. 
apprehended or artificial, to have carried urgent representations against the grain dealers; Administration. 
they did so at the period spoken of, as leng as they thought that those dealers secreted, any 
grain, which according to their usual practice they may gave done, thereby unneces€afily 
adding to the evil, But very probably, if the people had’ seen that the calamities of that 
period proceeded from human hands, they would not have borne them ; they. would have 
helped themselves to grain, perhaps have risen upon their European masters. No, they” 
they well-knew and acknowledged whgnce «heir distresses came; they foresaw them in the 
drought of successive seasons, a drought not confined to their provinces ; and felt in them the 
dispensation of a superior Power. This was one of those severe inflictions of the Almighty, by 
which offending creatures, who forgét their Maker, are yeminded of his being, and of his 
government of the universe. Those poor people sought, by superstitious observances, to 
propitiate their deities; but they were “ gods that sould not save,” and their votaries 
remained without any moral change. 


© 

The members of administration appointed from England by Parliament in 1773, a few 
years after the famine, with a special view to the discovery of abuses, men zealous in the 
execution of their trust, and free in expressing the most unfavourable opinions, never inti- 
mated the suspicion of monopoly, but always spoke of the famine as a natural evil of most 
destructive consequences, still visible in the country. Lord Cornwallis, if he had not judged” 
in the same way, would not have contented himself with proposing only the simple preveit- 
tive of an establishment for storing part of the surplus produce of plentiful years. Yet 
wonderful to consider, without any proof, without investigation, without one well authenti-. 
cated adequate fact, the belief of a monopoly by some servants of the India’‘Company has 
been, and perhaps may séill be, very general in the western world. The Prench of Chander- 
nagore, like the rest of that nation, too ready to biacken tue British conduct in India, are 
accused, and with apparent reason, ef being the authors of thistale. From Chandernagore 
it first passed to Calcutta,and frorhathese places it was then transmitted to Paris, to London, 
and to all Europe. It has been registered as’ truth in the page of history, has been the 
public subject of religious lamentation, has been embalmed in verse, and still remains such 
a foul stain upon the British character, as the annals of any people can hardly parallel. 
Such is the power-of credulity. In this case it not only ‘‘ gave to airy nothing a local habi- 
tation and a name,’ but it ascribed to a phahtom, effects, which ‘had that phantom been 
a reality, it was incapable of producing. Nothing short of an absolute want of a sufficient 
stock of food in the country, could have occasioned so.dreadful a devastation of the human 
race. The whole idea of a monopoly of any kind or degree (unless such a natural aggrava- 
tion of real scarcity as the eagerness of the people to lay in some store, and the retention 
of native grain dealers may have created), the present writer, himself an eye-witness of that 
dire calamity, and with particular means of information, most assuredly believes to be with- 
out foundation, and to have originated in calumny or inerror. This testimony, due to truth 
and to the British character, he is able deliberately and conscientiously to deliver ; and: 
though his main design may not have called for so full an exposition of a collateral. subject, 
yet since the current of time swiftly removes the opportunities of giving and receiving infor- 
mation, he hopes he shall be pardoned in availing himself of the present occasion, to per- 
form what he thinks an act of justice and of duty. 


The subject of territorial administration shall now be continued. In 1772 the principle =A D. 1772. 
of sending English supervisors into the districts, considered here as introducing a third” | 
period, was enlarged by a very important measure which, completed the change begun in 
the adoption of that principle. The Company stood forth as Dewan: hitherto the office - 
continued to be executed by native ministers who resided at Moorshedabad, the old seat of 
government aid of the public Exchequer. These ministers, with the officers whom they 
employed in the districts, were now laid aside, and the Company by the agency of their 
Own, servants, took upon themselves tle entire care and collection of the revenues.’ The 
: ‘ .. Governor 


A IPENDIX, 


Mfr. Grant’s State’ 
ot Sacicty in Asia. 


16 APPENDIX ro REPORT rrmw SELECT COMMITTEE. 


Governor and Council with their former controlling powér, joined that of cognizance and 


executive management, which had been till then vested in those ministers. They removed 
the ostensible seat of Government and of the Exchequer to Calcutta, the principal English 
settlement ; tlfey divided the three provinces into coblectorships, and stationed an European 
servGim of the Company in each @f those divisions as collector. 


This change threw also the judicial administration of the country in civil affairs, into the 
hands of the English. Under the government which the Mahomedans had for many cen- 
turies maintained in Bengal, they established also their owy system of laws, and it was the 
standard of decision in all cases civil and crimyial, ,exclusive cf those between Hindoos, 
which were determined by the code of that people. ‘Phe Nazim, orruler, in person executed 
the office of supreme criminal judge. By deputy he also administered in the principal civil 
court appointed for the cognizance, of all matters of pr8perty, excepting claims of land and 


* inheritance, which fell within a third department called the Dewannee Adaulet, or Court of 


the Dewan, to whom, as the Efnpener’s officer for the collection of the revenues, all causes 
relatipg to the details of that extensive province, and particularly to property in land, were 
referred. From the time of the Company’s accession to the office of Dewan, the authority 
of the Dewannee Court naturally enough encreased, till at length it became in effect the 
sole tribunal for civil suits. In this state, as appertaining to the department of the reventies, 
it fell into the charge of the Company's servants when they assumed the executive manage- 
ment of that branch; and they*immediately proceeded to make various regulations and 
iusprovements in the administration of civil justice. They appointed a Provincial Dewannee 
Court in every collectorship, over which the English collector was to preside; they even 
modified, in some: respects, the administration of criminal justice, which was peculiarly the 
province of the Nabob ; appointing inferior criminal coffrts in the districts, and subjecting 
them, as well as the priucipal criminal court, to English superintendence. ‘T’hus every inter- 
posing medium between the Engljsh and jheir’Indian subjects was removed ; they came then 
to transact immediately with each other. The direct authority. of the English pervaded the 
interior of the provinces, and the Native or Country Gowcrnment, saving only the prero- 
galive of the Nabob as chief criminal magistrate, was in form and in fact done away. 


Many obstacles to good government were dissipated by this change. The English admi- 
nistration entered upon their new functions with a tone of intelligence and vigour. Besides 
intreducing more method and order into the conduct of the public business, they set them- 
selves to correct some of the most prominent ef those abuses by which the country had . 
been so long oppressed. In collecting the revenue, for instance, from the ryots or hus- 
bandmen, there was no fixed standard. Agreements did indeed pass between the land- 
holders and their tenants at the beginning of the year (for their leases extended only to one 
year), but.as before hinted, those agreements were commonly broken by the stronger party 
upon a thousand pretences, of which the superior made himself the judge, and this prac- 
tice opened a door of exaction to every subordinate officer of the revenue. Hence the people 


never knowing what portion of the produce of their labour would be left to them, were not 


only impoverished but discouraged from exertion. 


Exactions still more scandalous were practised in the judicial courts. The Phousdary, 
or criminal court, raised a revenue by the imposition of fines upon crimes and misdemeanors 
tried before it, having thus a direct interest in the multiplication of accusations, and in 
finding the accused guilty. The government of 1772 styles its exactions, ‘* detestable and 
unauthorized, but yet imitated by every farmer and aumil in the province.” 


The Dewannee, or civil court, in like manner, wherever it could, had recourse to heavy 
arbitrary fines. Things however sanctioned by the native government even down to the 
period. now spoken of, may give a more striking idea of the state of the country. In law 
concerns, the civil courts were allowed to take a commission, sometimes amounting to one- 
fourth, upon the sums recovered’ on their awards ; in the revenue, the inhabitafits of a town 
‘or district, however reduced in number, were obliged to make up the assessment at which 
that division had been rated: by government, that is. fo pay the rents of those who poabs 
: 4 dea 


‘ 


. GENERAL APPENDIX. 7 


dead or fled, as well as theif own. This principle, which must surprise persons tmacquainted 
with that country, was acted upon even after the famine ; and the greatest wonder is, how 
the people could subsist under such accumulated barbarous impositions. 


The English government of 1772 aphears to have set out in the sincere d....~ -. allgspfiting 
the sufferings of that people. But the first great fin®ncial measure which they adopted 
produced most unhappy effects. In opposition to. the annual leases, which were certainly 
very unexceptionable, the idea of farming the lands for long terms of years had been fre- 
quently suggested, and came at, length to be regarded as a remedy for many existing evils. 
Sufficient attention however was nog pail to the wide distinction which exists between the 
landholder having an interest in the soil, and the revenue farmer, whose principal object it 
must ever be not to consider the permanent welfare of a district or an estate, but the best 
return he can draw from it within the term of his engayement. The desire of keeping up 
the collections as near as possible to their former standard, still haunted the councils of the 
Directors at home and of the servants abfoad. Undér the idea that there were hidden re-. 
sources in the country (which might be so far justified, that early subductions and alien- 
ations had been made from the Exchequer lands, but the resumption of them was become 
extremely difficult, whilst the genera] circumstances of the country had decayed), and in 


the view of uniting increase of revenue with ease to the people, it was determined to lease ~ 


the lands of Bengal on farm for five years, and that their utmost value might be ascer- 
tained, these farms were put up to public auction. Calcutta banians, money dealers, and 
adventurers, were among the highest bidders, The country was hence given into their hands, 
under a positive condition indeed for the gquitable treatment of the occupants of the soil, 
but the ancient usage of collecting the instalment of the month, within the month, was still 
followed by the farmers; and if there was any interference with*even the most violent exer- 
cise of their authority, they had to plead the impossibility of realiging the revenue and 
making good their engagements. The English coltectors, eafraid perhaps of having a failure 
in the revenue ascribed to thém, were selon willing to interpose except in flagrant cases ; 
and the poor people preferring ¢ften the first loss to subsequent litigations, gr wearied out. 
by the protractions of the other party, had dittle redress. At the end of five years, an 
immense balance of the stipulated revenue was due by the farmers, and the country-having 
been in effect delivered again into the hands of ngtives, still continued to suffer. 


It has been said in favour of the English government, that under it, and even within the _ 


- period of which we now treat, Bengal has enjoyed a tranquillity from hostile assaults and 
commotions, rarely experienced under its former masters, But though little disposed to 
panegyrize Mahomedan governments, we must observe, that this comparison can hardly be 
meant to extend to the times anterior to the dismemberment of the Mogul Empire. The 
usurpation of Aliverdi Khan, who waded to power through perfidy and blood,* provoked 
the court of Delhi to encourage an invasion of the country by the Mahrattas, and for 
several years they harassed the districts west of the Ganges, the far larger divisions on the 
eastern side of that river remaining all the time perfectly safe. But from the establishment 
of Aurungzebe on the imperial throne, until the invasion of Nadir Shaw, a period of eighty 
years, Bengal enjoyed profound peace without, and experienced only few, and these tran- 
sient, disturbances within. . ‘ ae 


If, however, a comparison of this kind is to be instituted, it must be carried much further, 
Under the government of the last two regular viceroys, Jaffier Khan and Shujah Khan, who 
ruled in succession near forty years,t the state of the country was eminently flourishing, 

A " and 


2* A.D. 1741. lah, who was deprived of the musnud and his life 
+ Shujah Khan died in 1739, and was succeeded | in consequence of the battle of Plassey, anno 
by his son, Sirferaz Khan, who was deposed and | 1757; so. that from the death of Shujab Khan 
slain by Aliverdi Khan-in 1741. Aliverdi Khan | to the ascendancy of the English power, was only 
possessed the government fifteen years, and was | eighteen years. . . °°. |: - scene dcne 
succeeded in 1756 by his grandson, Surajah Dow- . ¥ 
: D 


APPENDIX,\ 
ey { 
e ry 


British Territorial: 
Administration. 


| APPENDS 18 APPENDIX to REPORT From SELECT COMMITTEE. 


and is yet'a subject of celebrity. Jaffier Khan indeed appears to have been culpably as 
Mr. Grant's State well as unnecessarily severe in inflicting personal punishments upon the zemindars, and this 
of Society in Asia. part of his conduct has brought reproach upon his memory ; but he strenuously protected. 
the common people, and most ably administered they affairs of the soubah. His successor 
is reprtsented to have been a mag singularly beneficent and humane, Under both, the 
taxes were little felt, and in the time of the latter, though the annual tribute remitted to 
Delhi was usually a crore of rupees, local collectors were seldom requisite, the zemindars 
paying their rents immediately into the royal treasury. Even after the usurpation of Ali- 
verdi Khan, that class of persons was so opulent, as at on@time to give him a donation of 
a crore of rupees, and at another time fifty lacs, thwards defraying his extraordinary 
expenses in repelling the Mahrattas. The general power and authority of the empire were 
a protection to this dependency of if ; its military forcesespecially during the long admi- 
nistration of Jaffier Khan, was inconsiderable, its civil administration simple aud econo- 
mical, and it had no separate politigal relation; to maintain with neighbouring or foreign | 
countries, Easy, in short, in its fmances, moderate in its expenditure, and free from the 
state, fhe charges, and cares of independent dominion, its inhabitants enjoyed, in the occu- 
pations of agriculture and commerce, public peace and abundance. Under the violent 
assumption of Aliverdi Khan, its connections of a political nature were still very limited, 
for it had nothing to fear from its neighbours, except on the western side, and he seems 
never to have cast an ambitious view beyond the provinces which he wrested from the family 
of his ancient master. But Bengal, as held by us, possesses the rank of a sovereign state ; 
it is the head member of an empire whose parts are remotely separate from each other, 
and intermix with the territories of several powefful princes ; it contributes to the support 
and defence of the other diwisions of British Asia ; and suj%posing its system of foreign policy 
to be entirely pacific, it is liable to be affected at so many points, that the government of 
it requires far greatér resources than were ne¢essary when it was mtrely a dependent pro- 
vince. The tribute then which it*pays to us, being at least equal to what the Mogul Em- 
perors derived from it, and neither its population nor ptogluce, as we have already found 
reason to condlude, greater than in theiretime, it will follow that the inhabitants must now 
be more highly assessed than they were under their former rulers, not excepting even the 
usurpers. “And if this state should pursue plans of offensive policy towards its neighbours, 
it might multiply beyond calculation its extgencies and dangers, and thus aggravate still more 
the disparity between its actual and preceding situation. It is indeed possible, as has been 
already observed, to render the country happier ifnder our government than it ever was be- 
fore ; but after it had experienced so many convulsions, we need hardly look even for an 
equality, itt the earlier unsettled stages of our management. 


The time of which we now speak may be called a period of experiment. It is evident that 
with respect to the revenues, on the due regulation of which the case of the people so much 
depended, the great desideratum was to fix'a just standard for their amount, and to provide 
for the certain unoppressive realization of that amount. This was soon perceived ; but there: 
were various opmions concerning the best mode of attaining that, in the propriety of which 
all agreed, and whilst discussions were continued, current exigencies frequently decided. It 
can be no presumption to assert, that our first and main duty then was to establish a just 
and comprehensive system of domestic policy, to cherish our subjects, promote internal im- 
provement, and according to the maxim recommended, and thence dignified, by Lord Clive, 
** to cultivate our garden.” , ; 


The remote distance of the supreme directive seat of our authority was an obstacle to the 
settlement of wise plans of internal government, Persons at home could seldom act but 
upon transmitted information. -Distrust produced hesitation, The constitution of the Com- 
pany left the executive body without sufficient control, and divisions weakened its energy? 
Official changes, both here and abroad, interrupted the progress of measures,,and though 
the objects which ought to be pursued were understood, there was still uncertainty as to the 


‘sacrifices which might be hazarded in new attempts. 


Séch 


APPENDIX 


GENERAE APPENDIX. 19 
Such considerations as these may, probably, among others, have produced the legislative 
interference of 1773, by which a new constitution was-given to the government of Bengal, 
‘and a majority of the members which were to compose it sent from England. the rest being | 
selected from the former administration. . 


Whatever may be the views which the conviction of the writer has led him to enfértain of 
the affairs of this period, he will surely be pardoned in wishing to avoid, as far as can 
possibly consist with any fairness to his subject, the introduction of controversial topics, 
always unpleasant, upon an gccasion like the present. Where he is led to notice events 
which come within that descriptiong hiss aim will be to consider‘them, not with relation to 
the motives which may have produced them,:or their intrinsic character, but to their 
influence. upon the conditien of the people of our Eastern dominions, and as articles of a 
national account, between those {possessions and thisecountry. Instead, then, of entering 
into the merits of the contests which soon arose in the new government of Bengal, we may 
be allowed to remark, that however wel? intended tle anStitution of that government might 
be, it was at first unhappily compounded. Only upon the supposition of a coincigence of 

- opinions respecting past as well as present measures, which from the circumstances of that 
institution seems not to have been expected, could dissentions have been thought avoidable ; 
and if they should arise, as may more particularly have been apprehended, concerning 
former acts, a disapprobation of which must implicate the credit both of the preceding admi- 
nistration and of those connected with it, a divided govérnment and state were naturally to 
be looked for, -That these consequences, proceeding. from criminatory retrospections,*and 
the utmost discordance of opinion upon various important questions, did soon follow, is well 
known, And they produced unhappy effects upon the administration of affairs upon the 
European service of the Company, and upon the people. The felief of the country was still 
suspended ; and the failure of the first great measure adopted at horge for this end, may 
have prevented a progress to others of executi¥e and official regulation, probably at that time 
seen to be requisite, and sufbseqyently included in the parliamentary provisions of 1784. 
Into the subjects of these we forkear to enter, although after all the candoyr and discrimi- 
nation which would be solicitously exercised én tréating of them, doubtless they would be 

_ found to discover a distinct source of pressure upon the country. 


* Hitherto, from the period of the revolution in,1757, we have not seen the English, on the 
side of Bengal, engaging in any offensive alliances or wars with the neighbouring country 
, powers. ‘The system recommended by Isord’ Clive and inculcated by the Company, was, to 
, avoid schemes of conquest and political intrigues with the native princes, improving our 
domestic state, and making ourselves respected for our moderation and good faith, Upon 
‘ these principles, his Lordship and his Select Committee * had the magnanimity to restore 
to Shujah. Dowlah the dominion of Oude, after victory had chastised an unprovoked 
aggression of that prince, and made us the arbiters of his fate.t A deviation from this 
system began in 1774, having professedly for one object the pecuniary advantage of the — 
Company ; and a much wider departure from it was made in 1778, by carrying offensive 
war, With a view to the acauisition of territory, into the west of India. The long duration, 
~ the 


° 
é 


poe See 
British Territorial 
-Administration. 
A.D. 1773+ 


A.D. 1774. 
+ A.D. 1778." 


* Consisting of Messrs. Sumner, Carnac, 
Verelst, and Sykes. 

+ In 1764.. A time may perhaps come when 
it will seem less extravagant than it might now 
be thought, to insinuate, that it had possibly been 
gvell for us, notwithstanding the private wealth 
and even public subsidies derived from our con- 
nection with, Oude, if we had to the present da 
adhered to the general ‘spirit of Lord Clive’s 
policy. 
departure from the pacific system, and the am- 


The late war with Tippoo was a forced_ 


bition and perfidy of Indian powers may possibly 
expose us to new necessities of the same kind, 
until they are taught a better conduct, by ‘our 
continued superiority and moderation. But this 
probable necessity of extending our conquests is 
one of the disadvantages attaching to our domi- 
nion in Hindostan, for the wider it spreads the 
more vulnerable we become. It wag the unwieldi- 


ness of the Mogul Empiresthat accelerated its. 
fall; the loss of distant provinces being the rise- 


of new enemies, and loss of reputation also. 


D2 


APPENDIX, 


ce 


Mr. Grant’s State 
of Society in Asia. 


e Commencing in 


oe. 


A.D: 1784. 


1785. 


29 ARPENDIX TO REPORT rrou SELECT COMMITTEE. 


the external effects; and the issue of this war, are sufficiently known. At home it plunged 
the government into a sea of military and political cares, that left little time or opportunity 
fof fie study and application of those protecting, cherishing measures, which the state of the 
country requirefl ; it incurred an enormous expense, g heavy load of debt; and, when the 
pablewencaress were greatly exhaysted, to all these evils succeeded the attacks of Hyder 
Ali in the Carnatic, and a defensive war against him and the French, the support of which 
chiefly fell upon Bengal. ‘ 


Such were the necessities to which our affairs were then yeduced, that although we had 
before acquired a very forbidding experience of tbe farming system, a temporary recourse 
was again had to it in several districts, some of which were swept by the renters witha 
rigour that became afterwards a subject of public inquisition. «Thus, notwithstanding the 
useful regulations begun in 1772, ¢hrough errors or defects in carrying the designs then 
adopted into execution, through the etfects of integtine divisions, fluctuating counsels, 
foreign wars, and real or conceiv&d, exigencies ofagovernment, added. to its commen cares, 
a series of twelve years passed without the application of any effectual relief to the state 
of the country, without acting steadily and systematically upon the acknowledged necessity 
of fixing on just principles the extent of our demand upon the territorial possessions, and 
giving the people, once for all, rest and exemption from every species of arbitrary taxation, 

About this time the Legislature again interposed. The parliamentary regulations of 1784 
went upon principles well adapted to the correction of the evils which prevailed in our 
Indian governments and possessions, and to the invigoration of the authortty of the home 
administration over them. If they established a, new power in giving the state a control 
respecting the affairs of India, they established new respoysibility. But after all, it is to be 
acknowledged, that whatevér laws may be enacted for the government of those distant de- 
pendencies, inhabited by a people so dissimilar to the European wations, the efficacy cf 
those laws must ever essentially depend en tle character of the persons to whom the execu- 
tion of them is entrusted.* ; Ses. 


The fourth and last period of which it.was intended to *speak was now approaching, and 
brought with it a great and happy change for the natives of Bengal. Under the auspices of 
the parliamentary system just alluded to,adniinistered at home with enlarged and upright 
views, and seconded abroad by the excellent conduct of Lord Cornwallis, the objects till. 
then ineffectually proposed, have been fully attained. A new constitution ‘has been esta- 
blished for the land tenures of Bengal, whereby hereditary property in them is secured, the 
tax payable by the proprietors to government is equitably and unalterably settled, industry 
and improvement are hence encouraged, and provision is made for the extension ‘of the same 
encouragement, the same enjoyment of rights, to every inferior occupant of the soil. This is 
in effect the foundation of a constitution for the country, because the government is bouid . 
by it as well as the subject. Very essential reforms have also been made by his Lordshi 
in the administration of justice. The office of supreme criminal judge remained still vested 
in the Nabob, represented by some Mussulman delegate, by whom the inferior courts 
were filled with mean retainers of his own, who paid for their places. Nothing can be con- 
ceived more defective, oppressive, and scandalous, than the administration of these persons. 
The country groaned under it, the government was reproached by it, yet reluctant to touch 
the remaining prerogative of the Nabob, it endured this evil long ;but seeing no other mea- 
sures of reform could prosper whilst such a source of flagrant abuse was tolerated, the good 
of the people at length absolutely demanded an interference, and the Nabob appointed the ° 
Company his delegates in the office of supreme criminal judge. The Governor ae and 

; embers 


‘ Picevb 


* If the sole object of this review were not:| time. in the different departments of the Bengal 


ta treat of ‘measures immediately affecting the { government, under Sir John Macpherson, weuld ' 


natives, an economical retrenchment made at this | deserve.to be introduced here with applause. 


GENERAL APPENDIX: 


Members of Countil.then took. upon themselves the execution of this offices The chief 
criminal court was removed to Calcutta, the collectors in the districts were invested with 
the. powers of magistracy, for the apprehension and confinement of delinquents, Courts ‘of 
circuit for the trial of criminals, weregestablished in the principal divisions Sf the country, 
and filled with English judges selected from the most gxperienced of the servante/cf the 
Company. Ina word, this great department, which was before made up of the vilest per- 
versions of ‘legal power, was composed anew, and filled with men of principle and ability, 
placed under the strongest responsibilities, and acting upon a system which was to carry the 
inspection and the dispensatioff of the Jaws regularly into every section of the country. 
Even Europeans in the districts. weré subjected to the authority of the provineial laws, and 
in civil affairs the Dewannee Court properly so called, that is, the court of the collector for 
the trial of revenue causes, was abobished: that officer wgs no longer allowed to judge where 
,he was a party, but all revenue cases, as well as other civil suits, were to be referred to the 
civil judge of the district, who was td havg no concerg with the collections, but to be em- 
ployed solely in the administration of justice; whereby delay in decisions, the consequence 
of divided attention, anda grievance almost equal to adenial of justice, would be pre®ented. 
To his court also the commercial agents of the Company, who had been, in consideration of 
the nature of their business, exempted in some degree from the ordinary routine of conrt 
processes, were henceforth regularly to refer all matters of litigation occurring within their 
departments, The law, in a word, is now made the arbiter in all matters of property, even 
between the government and its subjects.* With regard to the rules by which justice was 
to be administered, the Hindoo and Mahomedan codes were in general to be the standard 
for the respective subjects of them, but terfpered, in some instances where they are barbarous 
and cruel, by the mildness of British sentiments, and improved jn others which have rela- 
tion to objects of political economy. ‘ These'codes,” says Lord Cornwallisin his minute 
introductory of this gre&t reform, “ are still in foree, as far as regards r@ligious tenets, mar- 
riage, caste, inheritance, and some other points.” ° id 

Thus by the measures of his Lord&hip’s administration, important rights of property, never 
before enjoyed, and ameliorated legal constitution, seally adequate to the protection of those 

rights, have been conferred upon our Asiatic subjects in Bengal. 
Nor are these the only grand events by which ¢he government of Lord Cornwallis has 
been marked as a providential blessing, and has become an epoch to that country. He has 
; ; given 


ve oe 


* It is to be remembered, that nothing said | 


here or elsewhere in this treatise respecting the 
administration of justice, has relation to the Su- 
preme Court of Judicature, established by his 
Majesty at Fort William. That tribunal seems 
to have been instituted with two views ; the first, 
to answer more effectually the purposes for which 
the municipal court, called the Mayor's Court, had 
been established at Calcuttain the merely com- 


mercial times of the Company, namely, to ad- 


minister justice to British subjects, and to all 
persons living under the British flag ; the second, 
to answer another purpose, which the acquisition 
of territory was thought to have rendered neces- 
sary, the affording of an asylum to the natives 9f 
the acquired provinces who might be aggrieved 
by the English. The jurisdiction of the Supreme 
Court, therefore, now extends over all British- 
born subjects residing within the provinces, for 
all acts done by them against eachother or against 


natives; it extends over some of the immediate 
native dependents of the English, and over such 
other natives as may by voluntary agreement in 
any case submit themselves to it; and it extends 
also over all persons, of whatever nation, living 
within the limits of the English flag, as they were 
defined prior to our acquisition of territorial pos- 
sessions. But the Judicial Courts,.which the 
Mogul Emperors had established in those posses- 
sions, were continued after the transfer to the 
Company, and the regulation and control of those 
Courts are now vested in the British government 
of Bengal, independent of the Supreme Court of 
Judicature; over them that court has no power + 
to them only the natives of the provinces, not ia 
the service of the English, that is to say, the great 
body of the people, are amenable, and it is of 
them only, and of the reforms made én them, that 
we all along here treat. , 


ya 
AppEnpix 
ee? 
races 
British Territorial 
Administration. - 


APPRK DIX, 


e _ 


Mr. Grant’s State 
of Society in Asia. 
e 


22. APPENDIX to REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


given a newetone, a new principle of purity and vigour to the British administration there ; 
opder aud economy, integrity and zeal, pervade all its departments ; for, exhibiting in his 


‘own conduct an example of equity on the part of government, he has been solicitous that 


all inferior autforities should follow it ; and nowhera, it may be safely affirmed, throughout 
his Mtsesty’s dominions, has publi business been transacted, so far as the civil servants of 
the Company are concerned, with more public principle than in Bengal, under the influence 
of the spirit and the conduct of thatillustrious nobleman. Distinguished ameng many other 
valuable qualities by good sense and magnanimity, which enable him with ease to meet the 
most trying exigencies, yet capable of descending,to the smallest concerns ; acquainted. him- 
-self with all affairs and with the officers employed im them; by his intelligence and the 
uprightness of his own character, he has overawed corruptiq, and by kind, conciliating 
manners, flowing from a generous gnd modest mind, ha® produced, in the midst of a system 
of reform, attachment both to himself and to that system. 


e 
It would be easy and gratifying® if it came within the scope of this essay, to dilate upon 
othereparts of his Lordship’s character, his justice and good faith towards the Indian 
powers, his achievements in war, and his moderation in victory ; but it may suffice to say, 
that whether we look to his internal administration or to his foreign policy, to his talents 
for civil government or for military affairs, to his conduct towards the Natives or 
Europeans, towards enemies or friends, we must rejoice that such an example of character, 


-and of British character, has been displayed to the inhabitants of the East. Let it not 


then be imagined that any remarks which are made in the following pagés are intended to 
derogate, or can justly be conceived to derogate, from the merit of his administration. 
Even had there been any grounds which could give colow to such an attempt, one who can 
neither speak of his government nor of himself without sentiments of respect and attach- 
ment, would have been among the last. to engage in it, ° 


e e 

It will now be fit to advert to the other Indian possgssion’ held by the Company in full 
roperty ; and after what has been said, a very brief notiee of their state will be sufficient. 
nares, which is completely incorporated with our dominions on the Ganges, has received 
the full benefits of the improvements mada in Bengal. The Northern Circars have con- 
tinued, until very lately, in a situation sfmilar to that of Bengal under the second period of 
our management, and have suffered extrémely from the mal-administration of the natives. 
The Bengal system, as nearly as it can be adapted to them, is, we understand, intended to . 
be established in them and in the Company’s jaghire lands, which have been more under 
European inspection. The same system, we may presume, will also, as speedily as possible, 

be extended to our newly acquired lands in the Carnatic and on the. Malabar Coast. 


If after this review, in which it will not be asserted that any excess of colouring has been 
employed, we proceed to form an estimate of the general effect of our early conquests, upon 
the state of the countries and the happiness of the subjects acquired by them, however we 
may be inclined to avoid censuring individuals, we can hardly fail, on the whole, to admit 
some humiliating conclusions. The history of our rule in Bengal is in great part a history 


‘of our own errors, or of the abuses public and private of power derived from us ; and the 


brightest portion of our administration there, is that which has been employed in applying 
remedies to the political diseases which either have arisen, or become more inveterate, in 
the country, in our time. Our accession to the government of if has been productive of 
prodigious changes ; and if we take the result of them for thirty years together, from the 
elevation of Mhir Jaffier, we shall be compelled to allow, that, at the end of that long period, 
the country and the people were not in so good a condition as that in which we found them, 
Doubtless the ravages of the famine greatly reduced the cultivation for a time, as well as the 


_ number of inhabitants, which will account for a decrease of the national revenue, but not 


for decay ia the circumstances of surviving individuals,” either of the poorer sért: or middle 
classes ; because the natural effect of great depopulation was rather to enhance the value 
of 


GENERAL, APPENDIX. 23 


of labour and lessen the cost:of subsistence, as also to Jeave the field of traffic in fewer 


hands, . 


* Persons who remember the state. of the country in.the beginning of 1769 and: in 1787 


(the thirtieth year of the revolution), ¢hink that it exhibited more appearancé of opulence 
at the former period than at the latter ; and it is clearly agknowledged in the Bengal fcords, 
not only that the country declined considerably in the twelve years anterior to 1769, but 
that various causes of its decline continued to operate after the ealamity of the famine, 
though perhaps with less activity.* It will likewise be granted, that the wars in which we 
were engaged subsequent to tfat eyent, were unfavourable to internal prosperity, and 
whatever may be urged in vindication of our governments, as to the grounds on which they 
were undertaken, yet with rgspect to wars of offence, not even a remote necessity or interest 
of the people of Bengal can be pleaded for making thatgpeople parties in them. 


But exclusive of all local mismanagement, the nature of that subjection in which Bengal 
is placed to this country, will alone acdpunt for a fonderful change in its internal state. 
All the offices of trust, civil and military, and the first lines of commerce, are in the hands 
of foreigners, who after a temporary residence remove with their acquisitions in constant 
succession. The government is foreign. Of native rulers, even the rapacious exactions 
went again into circulation, and the tribute formerly paid to Delhi, passing chiefly by 
the medium of private commerce, when a general communication throughout the empire 
gave Bengal great advantages, was little felt. But the tribute paid to us extracts every 
year a large portion of the produce of that country without the least return. It may fot 
perhaps be too much to say, that in the thirty years following the acquisition of the Bengal 
provinces, this nation, by public and private channels, derived from them alone, exclusive 
of its other Eastern dependencies and of the profits of gootls remitted, fifty millions 
sterling. 


These observations, and the review which ptecedes thent, are intended fore to impress 
“ 3 R A * 3 5 

upon the mind the sense of those epeculiar obligations under which we lie to the people of 
our Asiatic territories, on accourft.of the benefits we draw from them, the disadvantages they 
have suffered, and must still in certain ways*suffer from their connection with us, and the 
relation in which they stand to us as our subfects, True, we have corrected abuses in the 
internal government of these possessions, we hava encouraged our Hindoo subjects, we have 


at length given to them the secure enjoyment of property, both inherited and acquired.. 


- All these events were most desirable ané important, and to accomplish them was a work 
singularly arduous. But does nothing further remain to be done? In decreeing that our 
subjects shall be delivered from oppression and injustice, in setting an equitable limit to our 
own demands, and in establishing rights of property never well ascertained nor respected 
before, have we done all that the circumstances of the Hindoos require, all that is incumbent 
upon us as rulers? That by many this inquiry has not been seriously made, nor our 
obligations deeply considered, may be ascribed to several causes. ‘There is a description of 
persons to whom the whole subject of India is confused and obscure.. They know not what 
to believe or conclude; and a few there have been, who with very good meaning have 
thought of eluding all difficulties by giving back our territories to the natives, not reflecting 
that we should thus abandon them to new distractions, to adventurers of less pretensions 
than ourselves, and most probably to a rival European power. No, we cannot now 
renounce them without guilt, though we may also contract great guilt in the government of 
them. Z 

It 


, , 
© * See the Jetters of Governor Verelst and Mr. | Minutes, page 100; and Bolt’s Considerations, 
Beecher, in 1769, in the Appendix to Verelst’s | Vol. III. page 199. See also Lord Cornwallis’s 
View. of Bestgal; in Mr. Francis’s Original | Letter to the Court of Directors of August 2d, 1789." 


APPENDIX; 
. Is 
e ry 


British Territoriaf 
Administration. 


APPENDIX, 


el. 


—aven 


Mr. Grant’s State 
of Society in Asia, 


24 APPENDIX to REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


It was Logg betore our acquisitions in India, even those provinces which we professedly 
held in perpetuity, came to be regarded here as permanently our own. A secret idea of 
tlfeir insecurity prevailed, and our conduct towards them was perhaps influenced by this 
apprehension. *We were eager to acquire, but slow {p cherish. A better acquaintance with 
their ngtural and political advantgges, and the experience of. thirty -years passed under 
trying vicissitudes, have now established an opinion, not only of the practicability of main- 
taining them, but with many, a confidence approaching to presumption that they cannot be 
lost. Were we indeed to become secure in this notion, it would be one of our greatest 
dangers. We are no doubt internally strong, especially in Bengal, and whilst we retain our 
superiority at sea, we have a peculiar and essential advantage over all enemies, Kuropean or 
Indian. But we ought still to remember that Hindostan is the region of revolutions. A few 
more successful turns in Benares oy the part of so inferior a chief as Cheyte Sing,* would 
have put all Bengal in commotion. We ought also to remember how much the authority of 
a handful of strangers depends on opjnion. To gedute the sources of prejudice against us, 
and to multiply impressions favourable to us, by assimilating our subjects to our modes of 
thinkifte, and by making them happy, and teaching them to understand and value the 
principles of the people who confer happiness upon them, may be some of the surest means 
of preserving the footing we have acquired. Under the influence of their original notions, 
it is impossible they can regard any foreign yoke with a greater degree of predilection than 
may arise from their deemitig it preferable to some other foreign one. 


dt is indeed no uncommon idea among us, that our only duty towards our Hindoo subjects 
is to protect them from oppression, and that doing this, the more we ‘‘leave them to them~ 
selves” the better. But to evince that this vague hypothesis, like some others which 
have a currency on Indianssubjects, must have been hastfly adopted from its show, without 
serious examination, it may be sufficient to observe, that the code, of the Hindoos, which 
they regard as divine, and which gstablishes pot only principles but a multitude of positive 
minute laws, all held to be immutable, has received no gddittén for many ages; and as iny 
all societies and affairs of men, the course of time must produce many changes, many new 
circumstaices “nd combinations, which Will require a succession of legal provisions, a code 
formed in an early stage of society in many gespects rude, can never be adequate to the 
exizencies of all future generations. ‘these codes,”’ (the Hindoo and Mahomedan) says 
Lord Cornwallis in the minute before qudted, ‘‘are in many respects inapplicable to the 
** internal government of the country.” Theelnstitutes of Menu seem to leave a latitude 
to the sovereign (who was to be of the kheteree or military caste), with the advice of his 
Brahmins, to make new regulations according to occurrent necessities. But the Hindoos 


‘ with whom we have chiefly to do, have had no sovereign of their own faith for many cen- 


turies ; nor is it to be supposed that their original code has hitherto proved sufficient, even 
in causes between parties ; for the institutions, or personal decisions of their Mahomedan 
conquerors, must have superseded an appeal to it in many cases. And there is reason to 


‘believe that the Hindoo rajahs, whom, those conquerors found in possession of the provinces 


which had before formed a Hindoo empire, as lately they formed the empire of the Moguls, 
dispensed justice in cases not provided for by the code, according to their own discretion, 
by a summary verbal process and decision; a practicet not usual with rulers in Hindostan, 
which tended, however, to derogate from the dignity of the courts of justice, and may 
account in part for our meeting with no ancient judicial récords or preeedents, From these 
considerations, then, it may be concluded, that when the state of society among the Hindoos 
calls for any new provision, it must be proper and even necessary for us to interfere. 5 

: But 


) 


.* ALD.1781,. : , : general character are little competent, excepting 
‘“+ The Brahmins, in countries under foreign | in cases respecting caste. 
rulers, are often made referees; but from their | - 


. 


‘GENERA APPENDIX. . 25 


But not to pursue these incidental discussions, since we treat our Indian pessessions: as 
permanent and consolidated parts of the British empire, and the impolicy of governing 
them on any other principle, even if the tenure were uncertain, is well understood, doubtless 
we stand charged with the duties resulging from a permanent relation: and furely a relation 
of so serious a nature cannot fail to be productive of ngmerous duties. _ It must ingolve in 
it various points highly important to the happiness of our subjects, and therefore various 
corresponding obligations. : Rates 

If we have appropriated thosg territories in perpetuity to ourselves, if we have assumed 
the sovereign dominion of them, if ye apply a large portion of their annual produce to the 
use of Great Britain, if we are avowedly resolved tg maintain our possession by arms against 
all pretensions, foreign or lecal ; if by these measures, as well as by specific declarations, 
we show that we regard the inhalfitants as exclusivelysand absolutely our subjects, all the 
duties of rulers must be incumbent upon us. We are not only concerned to free the people 
placed under our dominion from evils ca@nnected with taxation, such as feudal oppressions 
and official abuses, which may be termed extraneous grievances, but to look into eviJs and 
disorders which arise among themselves, which prevail in their society, and destroy their 
peace ; to enact and enforce wholesome laws for their internal regulation, and in a word, 
with the affection of a wise and good superior, sedulously to watch over their civil and 
social happiness, No laboured argument drawn from the nature of government, is neces- 
sary to prove this position; the consideration which has been just adverted to, seems 
naturally to establish it; nor could it ever suit the principles of this nation to hold the 
Hindoos under its power as slaves, whose labours are exacted without a due return of 
benefits. Besides, such a system would s$on defeat its own end, by reducing the value of 
the subjugated country. It is a truth perfectly obvious, that our own interest recommends 
the happmess of that pgople. The primary object of Great Britain, let it be acknowledged, 
was rather to discover what could be obtainad from her, Asiatic subjects, than how they 
could be benefited. In process of time it was found expedient to examine how they ‘might be 
benefited, in order that we might continue to hold the advantages which we at first: derived 
from them; and now, when we have wisely apd fof ever fixed a limit to our“demand upon 
them, duty calls upon us to accomplish the remainder of our progressive work, and to exert 
that solicitude for the gradual improvement of theif condition, in all points whereih it is still 
capable of amendment, which is due to them as’ useful subjects and as fellow-creatures, 
_ whose happiness is committed to our care., « 


To elucidate some of those points which thus demand our attention, and to suggest such 
means of melioration as we may with safety use, is the design of the ensuing pages ; in 
which the method of proceeding shall be, first, to give a view of the present state of our 
Hindoo subjects with respect to society:and morals, illustrated by authentic documents ; 
secondly, to inquire into the causes which have produced that state ; and thirdly, to propose 
remedies for the evils of it, with answers to such objections as are likely to be made to the 
plan which shall thus be offered to consideration. 


APPENDIX. 
e* ls 
British Territorial 
Administration. _ 


Arrexpix, 26 APPENDIX “to REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


Mr. Grant’s State 
of Society in Asia. 


‘CHAP. Il. ° 


View of the State of Society among the Hindoo Subjects of Great Britain, particularly 
with respect to Morals. | 


In prosecuting the proposed inquiry, the State of Society and Manners among the people 
of Hindostan, and more particularly among those'who inhabit our territories, becomes in the 
first place a special object of attdition. It is an object which perhaps has never yet 
reccived that distinct and particyjar consideration, to which,from its importance ina political 
and moral view, it is entitled, 7° ® 


It Bas’ suited the views of some philosophers to represent that people as amiable and 
respectable; and a few late travellers have chosen rather to place some softer traits of their 
characters in an engaging light, than to give a just delineation of the whole. The gene- 
rality, however, of those who have written concerning llindostan, appear to have concurred 
in affirming what foreign residents there have as generally thought, nay, what the na- 
tives themselves freely acknowledge of each other, that they are a people exceedingly 
depraved, e 


In proportion as we have become better acqfainted with them, we have found this 
description applicable, inea sense beyond the conceptidn even of former travellers. The 
writer of this paper, after spending many years in India, and a considerable portion of them 
in the interior of our provinces, iphabited alpost entirely by natives, towards whom, whilst 
acknowledging his views of their caneral character, he always lived in habits of good-will, 
is obliged to add his testimony to all preceding evidences and to avow that they exhibit 
human nature*in a very degraded, humiliating state, and are at once objects of disesteem 
and of coramiseration. Discriminations in so,vast a body as the whole Hindoo people, there 
must be, though the general features are Very similar. . 


Among that people, the natives of Bengal rank low; and these, as best known and forming 
the largest division of our Asiatic subjects, are hqld more particularly in view in this essay. . 
The Mahomedans who are mixed with them, may, in regard to manners and morals, often 
be comprehended under the same observations; but ‘something distinct shall afterwards be 
subjoined concerning them. 

Of the Bengaleze, then, it is true most generally that they are destitute, to a wonderful 
degree, of those qualities which are requisite to the security and comfort of society. They 
want truth, honesty, and good faith, in an extreme, of which European society furnishes no 
example. In Europe, those principles are the standard of character and credit; men who 
have them not are still solicitous to maintain the reputation of them, and those who are 
known to he devoid of them sink into contempt. It is not so in Bengal. The qualities 
themselves are so generally gone, that men do not'found their pretension in society upon 
them; they take no pains to acquire or to keep up the credit of possessing them. Those 
virtues are not the tests by which connections and associations are regulated ; nor does the 
absence of them, however plain and notorious, greatly lower any one in public estimation, 
nor strip him of his acquaintance. Want of veracity, especially, is so habitual, that if a man 
has truth to defend, he will hardly fail to recur to falsehood for its support. In matters, of 
interest, the use of lying seems so natural, that it gives ho provocation, it is treated as ay 
excusable indulgence, a mode of proceeding from which general toleration has taken away 
offence, and the practice of cheating, pilfering, tricking, and imposing, in the ordinary’ 

transactions of life, are so common, that the Hindoos seem to regard them as they do 
natural evils, against which they will defend themselves as well as they can, but at which it 
would 


- GENERAL? APPENDIX, 


would be idle to be angry. Very flagrant breaches of truth and honesty pass ‘without an 
deep or lasting stain. The scandalous conduct of Tippoo, in recently denying to Loyd 
Cornwallis, in the face of the world, the existence of that capitulation* ,whica he had 
shamefully broken, was merely an example of the manners of the country, where such things 
occur in common life every day. 


In the worst parts of Europe there are no doubt great numbers of men who are sincere, 
upright, and conscientious. In Bengal, a man of real veracity and integrity is a great phe- 
nomenon; one conscientious inéhe whole of his conduct, it is to be feared, is an unknown 
character. Every where in this quarter of the globé, there is still much generous trust and 
confidence, and men are surprised when they find themselves deceived. In Bengal, distrust 
is awake in all transactions ; -bargains and agreements are made with mutual apprehensions 
of breach of faith ; conditions and securities are multiplidd, and failure in them excites little 
or no surprise. 


A serious proposal made to a native, that he should’ b& guided in all his intercourses and 
dealings by the principles of truth and justice, would be regarded as weak and impr&ctica- 
ble. “* Do you know,” he would reply, “ the character of all those with whom I have to 
** act? How can I subsist if I take advantage of nobody, while every person takes advan- 
‘*§ tage of me?” Frauds, deceptions, evasions, and procrastinations, in every line of life, 


in all professions, perpetually occur, and forgeries also are often resorted to with little 


scruple. A 


If confidence is from necessity or credulity at any time reposed, it is considered by the 
other party as the season of harvest. Few will omit to seize such an opportunity of profit, 
The chief agent or steward of a lardholder or of a merchant will commonly endeavour to 
transfer to himself what he can gradually purloin of the property and the influence of his 
principal ; this agent is in the mean time preyed upgn in a gimilar way, though on a smaller 
scale, by his dependents, especially if prosperity has rendered him less vigilant. But sup- 
pose him, by a slow, silent, and systematic pursuit, to have accumulated a large fortune, and 
to leave it on his death to his son: the son, rjch and indolent, is, in turn, Imperccptibly 
fleeced by his domestic. F : 


Menial servants who have been long in place, and have even evinced a real attachment to 
their masters, are nevertheless in the habitual practice of pilfering from them. If a nephew 
_is entrusted by an uncle, or a son by his father, with the management of his concerns, there 
is no certainty that he will not set up a separate interest of his own. Wardships and execu- 
torships, trusts of the most necessary and sacred kind, which all men leaving property and 
infant children must repose in surviving friends, are in too many instances grossly abused. 
The confidence to which the Bengaleze are most true, is in the case of illicit practices, on 
which occasions they act upon a point of honour. 


Even the Europeans, though in general possessed of power and of comparative strength of 
character, which makes them to be particularly feared, yet as often as they are careless or 
credulous in their transactions with the Bengaleze, find that they have fallen into the hands 


of harpies.t 
Through 


27 


* Of Coimbeture. 

+ if the reader should here advert to the many 
large fortunes which are brought from Indm, and 
thence infer that the Europeans make the:own 
part good there, notwithstanding all the dishénest 
attifices of the Hindoos whom they are obliged to 


employ, he may be answered, that according to * 


the judgment of the person who writes this, the 
great mass of the fortunes now acquired, is riot 
by qny mode of extortion ‘or exaction taken out 


of the pockets of individuals. A considerable por- 
tion of it is derived from the offices, salaries, con- 
tracts, and emoluments, enjoyed under govern- 
ment.. Another portion from commerce, parti- 
cularly foreign commerce, in which Europeans 
have superior enterprize, character, and edvan- 
tage. And if any part is obtained by forbidden 
means, still the acquisition may if general be 
traced ultimately to what is strictly pubtic pro~ 
perty, not the pronertv of private individuals. 
These 


APPENDIX, 

~ J, 

View of the Morals 
of the Hindoos. 
e 


ArRenvix, 
a 
Sercaat Ff 
Mr. Grant's State 
of Society in Asia. 
= e 


28 APPENDIX ro REPORT rrow SELECT COMMITTEE. 


Through the influence of similar principles, power entrusted to a native of Hindostan 
seldom fails of being exercised tyrannically, or perverted to the purposes of injustice. Offi- 
cial or ministerjal employments of all sorts, and in all gradations, are generally used as means 
of peculation. 


It has already appeared that the*distribution of justice, whenever it has been committed 
to natives, whether Hindoos or Mahomedans, has commonly become a traffic in venality ;* 
the best cause being obliged to pay for success, and the worst having the opportunity of 
purchasing it. Money has procured acquittance even for murder. .Such is the power of 
money, that no crime is more frequent, hardly aity less thought of, than perjury. It is no 
extraordinary thiug to see two sets of witnesses swearing directly contrary to each other, 
and to find, upon a minute investigation, that few, probably, of the evidences on either side 
have a competent knowledge of. thd matter in question, Now, as these corruptions begin 
not in the practice of the courts pf law, but have theie origin in the character of the people, 
it is just to state them in illustrati¢n Of that charfcter ; for although the legal reforms intro- 
ducedeby Lord Cornwallis will purify, it may be hoped, the fountains of justice, yet the 
best, administration of law will not eradicate the internal principles of depravity. 


Selfishuess, in # word, unrestrained by principle, operates universally ; and morey, the 
grand instrument of selfish gratifications, may be called the supreme idvl of the Hindoos. 
Deprived for the most part. of political power, and destitute of boldness of spirit, but formed 
fog business, artful, frugal, aud persevering, they are absorbed in schemes for the gratification. 
of avarice. : 


The tendency of that abandoned selfishness is* to set ‘< every man’s hand against every 
man,” either in projects er in acts of open force. Front violence, however, fear interposes 
to restrain them. ‘Lhe people‘of the lower provinces, in particular, with an exception of the 
military caste, are a8 dastardly ag they are unprincipled. They séek their ends by mean 
artifices, low cunning, intrigue, falsehood, servility, and hypocritical obsequiousness. To 
superiors they appear full of reverence, of humble and Willing submission, and readiness to 
do every thing that may be reqitired of them, and as long as they discern something eithér: 
to expect or to fear, they are wonderfully patient of slights, neglects, and injuries. But 
under all this apparent passiveness and ftheanness of temper, they are iinmovably persisting 
in their secret views. With inferiors, th€y indemnify themselves by an indulgence of the 
feelings which were controlled before ; and towards dependents, especially towards those 
whom an official situation subjects to their authority, they carry themselves with the mean ° 
pride of low minds, In the inferior, and by far the most numerous class of the cummuuity, 
where each man is nearly on a level with his neighbour, the native character appears with 
less disguise. The passions have a freer range, and new consequeuces are seen to result 
from the absence of the primary virtues of society. Discord, hatred, abuse, slanders, 
injuries, complaints, and litigations, all the effects uf selfishness unrestrained by principle, 
prevail to a surprising degree. ‘They overspread the land, they cume perpetually before 
all men in authority. The deliberate malice, the falsehood, the calumnies, and the avowed 
enmity with which the people pursue each other, and sometimes from father to son, offer a 
very mortifying view of the human character. No stranger can sit down among them with-. 
out being struck with this temper of malevolent contention and animosity, as a prominent 
feature in the character. of the: society. It is seen in every village; the inhabitants live 
among each other in a sort of repulsive state, nay it enters into almost every family. Sel- 
dom is there a household without its internal divisions and lasting enmities, most commonly, 
too, on the score of interest. The women partake of this spirit of diséord. Held im slavish 

subjection by the men, they rise.in furious passioys against each other, which vent themselves 
* ate oe 7 A . f . . 4 é : : 

These slight*remarks are thrown out as worthy | More might be added upon the subject, but it 
the consideration of those: persons who, without | would not suit the design of the present work. 
examination or inquiry, are apt. to suspect that, * There may be‘exceptions: Ibrahim Ali Kpan: 
every fortune gained in India is got by extortion. | of Benares is reckoned a man of probity. 


mo . : ‘ 


GENERAL “APPENDIX. 029 


in such loud, virulent, and indecent railings, as are hardly to be heard in any ‘other part. 
of the world. “9° 


Though the Bengaleze in general havg not sufficient resolution to vent thefr resentments 
against each other in open combat, yet robberies, thefts, burglaries, river piracies, agd all 
sorts of depredations where darkness, secrecy, or surprise can give advantage, are exceed- 
ingly common, and have been so in every past period of which any account is extant. There 
are castes of robbers and thieves, who consider themselves acting in their proper profession, 
and having united their families, train their children to it. Nowhere in the world are 
ruffians more adroit or more hardendd. ‘Troops of these banditti, it is well known, are 
generally employed or harboured by the zemindars of the districts, who are sharers in their 
booty. They frequently make attagks in bodies, and those occasions murder is very 
common, But besides these regular corps, multitudes of individuals employ themselves in 
despoiling their neighbours.: Nor is it Snly in large and populous places and their vicinity, 
that such violences are practised ; no part‘ of the county, no village is safe from them. 
Complaints of depredations in every quarter, on the highways, on the water as well a& the 
land, are perpetual. Though these are the crimes more immediately within the reach of 
justice, and though numbers of criminals have been, and are executed, the evils still subsist. 
Doubtless the corrupt administration of criminal justice in Bengal, for many years under 
the authority of the Nabob, has greatly aggravated disorders of this nature ; but they have 
their origin from remoter springs. Robbers among the Hindoos, and frequently thieves also, 
are educated from ‘their infaney in the belief that their profession is a right one. No ray 
of instruction reaches them to convince them of the contrary, and the feeble stirrings of 
natural couscience are soon overborne by example and practice. Jesides this, they hold, in, 
common with other Hindoos, the principles of fatalism, which, in their case, has most per- 
nicious effects. They believe that they are destined, by an inevitable necessity, to their 
profession, and to all that shall, befal them in it; théy therefore go on without compunction. 
and are prepared to resign life, wheitever the appointed period shall come, with astonishing 
indifference ; considering the law that condemns therg, not as the instrument of justice, but 
as the power of a stronger party. And here again it is evident, that a radical change in 


. . iJ o 8 * . - 
principle must be produced before a spirit of rdpinesthus nourished can be curéd. 


Benevoleuce has been represented as a leading principle in the minds of the Hindoos ; 
but those who make this assertion know little ,of their character. How is it possible that 
‘benevolence should be vigorous where justi¢e, truth, and good faith are so greatly wanting ? 
Certain modes, indeed, of distributing victuals to mendicants, and a scrupulous abstinence 
from some sorts of animal food, are prescribed. by the religion of the Hindoos. But the 
ostentatious distribution is frequently commutative ; an offering from the gain of iniquity 
bestowed on idle and sturdy priests. And though a Hindoo would shrink with horror 
from the idea of directly slaying a cow, which is a sacred animal among them, yet he who 
drives one in his cart, galled and excoriated as she often is by the yoke, beats her unmerci- 
fully from hour to hour, without any care ‘or consideration of the consequence. Though 
therefore the institution of the two practices in question may be urged as an argument for 
the originally benevolent turn of the religion which enjoined them, it will not at all follow 
that individuals, who in future ages perform them in obedience to that religion, must also 
be benevolent; and he who is cruel even to that creature for which he is taught by his 
religion to entertain the highest reverence, gives the strongest proof of au unfeeling dispo- 
sition, It is true that in many cases they are strict in observing forms, These are indeed 
their religion, and the foundation of their hopes; their castes are implicated in them, and 
in their castes their civil state and comfort, But of the sentiments which the furms would 
seem to indicate, they are totally regardless. Though from the physical structure of their 
bodies they are easily susceptible of impressions, yet that they have little real tenderness of 
mind, seems very evident from several circumstances. The first that shall be mentioned is 
the shocking babanty of their punishments. The cutting off legs, hands, noses, and ears, 
puttjng out of eyes, and other penal inflictions of a similar kind, all performed in the 
coarsest manner, abundantly justify our argument. 


A similar 


e* 


APPENDIAQ. 
L 


— 


View of the Morals 


of the Hindoos. 


AwPENDIX, 
Mr. Grant’s State 
of Society in Asja. 


APPENDIX to REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


306 


A similar disposition to cruelty is likewise shewn in their treatment of vanquished enemies. 
“And in general a want of sensibility for others is a very eminent characteristic of this people. 
The apathy with which a Hindoo views all persons and interests unconnected with himself, 
is sugh as excites the indignation of Europeans. it, any rate his regards extend but to a 
very narrow circle. Patriotism if absolutely unknown in Hindostan, : 


These observations lead us to another striking proof of want of benevolence in the Hindoos ; 
namely, their deficiency of natural affection. It is admitted that examples are not very 
uncommon of parents who show much tenderness to their®children, especially during their 
infancy; but instances on the other side are so genefal, as clearly to mark the dispositions 


‘of the people. The following fact is one out of many, by which this assertion might be 


justified. In the scarcity of grain which prevailed about Calcutta in the year 1788, a 
gentleman then high, now still higher in office there, ordered his servants to buy any chil- 
dren that might be brought for eaje,, (for in times of dearth Hindoo parents frequently sell 
their offspring,) and to tell fieir mothers, that when the scarcity should be over, they might 
comé again and receive their children back. Of about twenty thus humanely preserved, 
most of whom were females, only three were ever enquired for by their mothers. The 
scarcity was neither extreme nor long. The unnatural parents cannot be supposed to have 
perished from want, for each received money for her child, and by the liberal contribution 
of the inhabitants of Calcutta, and chietly of the Europeans, rice was distributed daily to 
raultitudes at various stations about the city. And yet notwithstanding this facility of ob- 
taining food, a woman was at that time seen, in broad day, to throw awdy her infant child 
upon the high road. Most of the slaves in @lindostan (where they are used only for 
domestic services) have Jost their freedom by the act of their parents. If the necessity is 
such at times as to lead to this expedient, is it not also an occasion to call forth the warmth 
of parental affecti8n? Filial and paternal affection appear equally deficient among them; 
and in the conjugal relation, thé chara¢teristic indifference af the people is also discernible 
ened those who come most within the sphere of Eurofcan observation, namely, the lower 
orders. 


The domestic state ot the better ranks is morc concealed from general view ; but from the 
knowledge which is acquired, and fron? the peculiar usages by which marriage is governed 
among the Hindoos, we have no reason Yo believe that it is often sweetened by generous 
attachment or rational enjoyment. The parties betrothed by their parents whilst mere 
children, transplanted, with minds uncultivated and inexperienced, from the maternal’ 
zenana * into one of their awn, united whilst reason is’ still in its infancy, can give little 
more account of the situation. in which they find themselves than animals of a lower species. 
Affection and choice have had no influence in this connection, nor does it often happen 
that the former is studied and improved. The parties continue passive under that law 
which first brought them together. According to the despotic manners of the East, the 
husband is lord, and the wife a servant ; seldom does he think of making her a companion 
ora friend.’ Polygamy, which is tolerated among the Hindoos, tends stilt more to destroy 
all rational domestic society. The honour of the family, and the preservation of its caste, 
the most awful of its concerns, depends on the reputation of the wile. She is secluded from 
all eyes but those of her nearest relations, and the most terrifying and disgraceful punish- 


tents are held out against misconduct. From so early an union, and such subsequent care, 


Europeans may suppose that order and decorum reign in the Hindoo zenanas ; but the con- 
clusion is founded on conjecture, rather than upon actual knowledge. The profound 
reserve and caution observed by the men in their conduct, and even in their conversation, 
respecting. their family connections, keep.all foreigners at a distance; and it is to the 
honour of the English, that there is perhaps no instance of their attempting an invasion of 
the domestic recesses of the Hindoos. But those who have an opportunity of living among 
the natives*in the interior of the country, see reasons for apprehending that the’ purity of the 
female character is not always so well preserved in reality, as in appearance. : 
ie _In 


« 


* The private apartments of the women 


GENERAL APPENDIX. 31 Appenrre 


In a residence of several years entirely among the natives, the present writeg heard so °° 
many charges of irregularity, and saw so many disorders among the inferior ranks, that he ‘ View of the Morals 
could uot but believe the existence of a gross laxity of behaviour and principle in this great* of the Hindoos. » 
branch of morals, in some degree at least reaching to the better classes. But the disgrace 
and loss which follow to the family fron! the proof of dishonour in the wife, are such,as to 
induce the parties concerned to hush up all matters of that sort, and to take their revenge 
in some secret way;, they will seldom seek redress openly, unless the affair has already 
been notorious. Accusations by others of such contaminations in families, are very com- 
mon among the lower Hindoos, aad scandals of the same kind pass among the higher orders, 


: : ° . : 
Enmity, it is true, may be supposed fo have its share in these charges ; it may occasionally 
fabricate them, and is undoubtedly active in bringing them forward; but that it should 
always invent them, and should persevere in a successiog of inventions which experience 
was ever ready to discredit, is not to be conceived. The truth is, the Hindoo writers and 
the Hindoo laws express the worst opinion of their womeg,*and seem to place all security 
in vigilance, none in principle. And, indeed, what fund of principle can minds which have 
received no improvement in education, and in which reason as yet has hardly begun to*act, 
carry into a premature and unchosen conjugal relation? a relation, the early commencement 
of which is probably to be ascribed to the apprehension of parents for the conduct of their 
children. Imperious dominion, seclusion and terror, are the *means afterwards used to 
enforce the fidelity of the wife. But opportunities of guilt are not wanting. In the hours 
of business, men are generally at a distance from the retirements of the women; they are 
often, and for considerable periods, far from home ; females, who are the great instruments 
of corrupting their own sex, are permitted ¢ccess to the zenanas; besides, the Hindoo law 
allows women to converse with Soneassees, a set of vagrant devotees, some of them most 
indecent in their appearance. ‘The consequences are such as might be expected. 


It is not however asserted or believed, that the infection gf depravity has overspread the 
whole mass of females, many of whqm, doomed to joyless confinement through life, and a 
violent premature death, are perhaps among the most inoffensive and suffering of, the Hindoo 
race, As to the men, they are under little restraint from moral considerations. ‘The laws 
of caste impose restrictions and fines for offences of the nature in question, so far as that 
distinction is concerned, but leave great scope for*new connections, and for proriiscuous 
intercourse, which is matter of litilescruple or obsérvation. Receptacles for women of in- 
famous character are every where licensed, and the women themselves have a place in 
society. The female dancers, who are of this order, make the principal figure in the enter- 
tainments of ceremony given by the great. Indecency is the basis of their exhibitions ; 
yet children and young persons of both sexes are permitted to be present at these shows, 
which have admittance even into the principal zenanas.* Licentious connections are there- 
fore most common, though subsisting apparently without that intoxication of passion which 
hurries on the mind against conviction, and earried on without much concealment, nay: 
almost with the insensibility of brutes. On such points, the Hindoos seem to-advert to no 
rule except what the law enjoins; there is no sentiment diffused at large through society, 
which attaches shame to criminality. Wide and fatal are the effects of this corruption of 
manners ; a corruption not stopping here, but extending even to the unnatural practices of 
the ancient Heathens, though in these the Mahomedans are still more abandoned. 


- Europeans who, not having resided in Asia, are acquainted ‘only with a few detached 
features of the Indian character, may possibly feel some doubt whether this sketch, which 
professes to trace but the greater and more palpable lines, is to be received as a sober and 
faithful representation. They will reason concerning the Hindoos from what they have seen 
of human nature elsewhere; and it is unquesttonably true, even that part of Europe which | 

is 


#* Lord Cornwallis, soon after his arrival in] of this sort, to which he was invited by the 
Bengal, refused to be present at.an entertainment | Nabob. 
~ e y 


ANDI 32 APPENDIX ro REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


Macc nue is most eqrrupt, offers no such picture as that which has been drawn in the preceding pages. 
Air. Grant's State» They may be staggered too by having heard many discordant opinions on this very subject. 


af Saciety in Asia.e . . . 

For some modern philosophers already hinted at, whose aim has been to subvert, together 
with revealed religion, all ideas of the moral goverrgnent of the Deity, and of man’s respon- 
sibility to him, have exalted the gatives of the East, and of other pagan regions, into models 
of goodness ‘and innocence, Other writers, with far better views, indignant at the alleged 
delinquencies of Europeans in Hindostan, have described the natives of that country as a 
harmless, kind, peaceable, and suffering race. Others, again, speak rather from an admira- 
tion inspired by the supposed past taste of the <Hindoos, ‘mixed with pity for their present 
situation, than from experience cf their actual qualfties and dispositions. And there may 
be others still, who have not had much personal experience of the evils resulting from the 
state of society among the ITindogs, but being pleasedewith their obsequiousness, and easily 
acquiescing in the licentiousness prevalent among them, have been willing to treat of their 
character and proceedings with indulgence. , Thé doubts, however, arising from these 
sources, will, it is hoped, be entirely removed by the corroborating testinionies uow about to 
be Produced. 


It is indeed true, that travellers are apt to form their opinions of countries and of nations 
from what they have themselves happened to see, and it 1s also to be remembered, that of 
thie many Kuropeaus who have visited India, especiallyin later times, the opportunities, the 
meaus, and perhaps the desire, of information, have been very different. We may all be 
seusible that more accurate observation aud mature experieuce often correct the first im- 
pressions we receive, even of European countries or places new to us; and that it is no easy 
work to attain toa just and comprehensive Rnowledge of the character of any people. 
Whilst au European, defiving a superiority from his race, or from the station he is appointed 
to fill, regards only in a distant speculative way the effeminate exterior, adulatory address, 
and submissive demeanor of the Hindogs, he naturally enough conceives them to be a people 
in whom the mild and gentle qualities predominate. Heis apt to consider them with a 
mixture of complacency and contempt ; and even the bad dispositions towards each other, 
which he soon discovers to exist in them,he may view with feelings analogous to those 
which the petty malignity of children, or ef beings of a diminutive species, might excite, 
But le#him enter into dealings with thém, let him trust them, or become in concerns of im- 
portance dependent on them; let him ‘n short, by these or any other means, come more 
upon a level with them, and he will then learn better to appreciate their real character. Let 

» it therefore be recollected, that as members of ‘the same community they always stand, in 
many respects, on such a level with each other, suffering continually from mutual injuries ; 
and that it is in thus viewing them, in considering not so much the mischiefs which they can 
do to us; as the evils which they diffuse through their own society, that we shall assign 
to them their true place in the moral scale. Whether that is done here, shall therefore be 
‘cheerfully left ta the determination of those who have had a long residence among them, 
cand extensive dealings with them. It is believed, that no person of this description will 
think the picture now given adds fictitious features, or aggravates real ones.* 

" It will not however be understood, that what is here advanced generally is to be applied 
es : to 


* It may be proper to remark, that the features ; themselves to our service: they are withdrawn 

here delineated, are taken from the Hindoo cha- | from many of the collisions of civil affairs, and 

_ racter as it generally exists in civil life. Those | they are under the powerful control of military 

« gentlemen who have passed their time chiefly in | discipline, which, with the habits of military 

our Indian armies, may not have seen it with } life, must throw a perceptible. distinction into 

exactly the same aspects: The military caste of | their character, at least while they remain em- 

, the Hindoos havé_a portion of those qualities | bodied in our employ; but when they retire and 

which usutlly accompany the profession of arms: | separate, they assimilate more to the rest of their 
better pay, better treatment, and our high repu- { countrymen, fs . 

tation in war, make it their interest to attaclr 


t 


GENERAL APPENDIX. 33 ‘Avon ; 
to the utmost extent to every individual and every transaction ; it is the universakity of great —. — 
depravity that is here insisted on,—a general moral hue, between which and the European View of the Morals 
wtoral complexion there is a difference analogous to the difference of the natural colour of of the Hindoos. 
the two races. ; 


There is a standard to which, for the elucidation of this §ubject, we.may largely apfeal,— 
the records 6f the East-India Company, which contain an immense collection of facts 
respecting the Hindoos, and relating to various subjects, political, judicial, financial, and 
commercial. Those records lesg frequently profess to treat of character and common life,: 
than of matters of business; but it cogtinvally happens, that they incidentally develope the 
ptinciples and conduct of the Hindoos, and that in a more convineing way ‘than if the pri- 
mary object had been to describe them: Nor do they contain the mere representations of 
Europeans, who might be suspected of a tincture of parfiality in this case, but the natives 
are themselves brought upon the stage, and heard concerning each other. ‘These records 
will be found abundantly to substantiate all that is hefe ecvanced. 


“To introduce a great variety of quotations from so copious a source (as numerous a they, 
must be, to do justice to the subject,) is not within the compass of the brief exposition here 
intended ; but after having previously stated the opinion of an intelligent traveller, who 
observed the manners of the Hindoos in the last century, we shall select a few extracts, 
containing the sentiments of persons of distinguished information and respectability, writing 
at different periods, without any concert with each other, and under no temptation to depre- 
ciate the people of whom they speak. 


Bernizk, about 1670." 


“« Ces sortes de rois barbares n’ont aucune véritable générosité, et ne sont guéres retenus. 
* par la fot q<wils ont promise, ne regardant qu’a leurs intéréte présensy sans songer mémes 
* aux malheurs qui leur peuvent arriver de leur pepfidie, et de leur brutalité. 


5 « 7 . A . . e . 
** Pour se tirer de leurs mains, iP faut étre ou le vlus fort. ou n’avoir rien oui puisse 
** exciter leur avarice.” 


** Je ne sai s'il y a au monde, une nation plus avare et plus sordide que celle-la,” 


. e ae ‘ 
«* Les Brahmens entretiennent ces peuples dans, ces erreurs et superstitions, ef*passent 
méme jusques & des fourberies et a des vilainies si infames, que je ne les aurois jamais pi. 
croire, ,si je ne m’en étois pleinement informé,** ; 


Mr. Scrarton, 1759. 


‘* The Gentoos are found still more cruel and rapacious than their foreign masters, and, 
what is more extraordinary, the Brahmens still excéed the rest in every abuse of power, 
* and seem to think if they bribe God, by bestowing part of their plunder on cows and 
Jaquirs, their iniquities will be pardoned.” ‘ : 

* Loyalty and patriotism, those virtuous incentives to great and noble actions, are here’ 
unknown ; and when they cease to fear they cease to obey.” 

** Such of the Brahmens as engage in the world, are generally the worst of all the Gen- 
** toos ; for persuaded that the waters of the ore will purify them from their sins, 


“ and being exempted from the utmost rigour of the courts of justice under the Gentoo 
* goyernment, they run into the greatest excesses.” t : 


GovERNOR Howe, about 1760. 


** A race of people, who from their infancy are utter ‘strangers to the idea of common 
 fuith and honesty.” : a ' 


a 


e 
_fan, by Luke Scrafton, Esq., pages 26, 27. Sed 
in the same Work, page 19 & seq. a striking cha- 
racter of the Mahomedans of rapk in India. * 


* Voyages de Francois Bernier, Tome I. page 
150, 162, et Tome IL. page 105. 
+ Reflections on the Government of Hindos- 


Aryxorx, 54 APPENDIX ro FIRST REPORT riow SELECTCOMMITTEE, 


«« This is’ the situation of the bulk of the people of Indostan, as well as of the modern 
‘‘sBrahmins; amongst the latter, if we except one in a thousand, we give them over 
** measure. 


Mr. Grant's State 
of Society in Asia, 


* The Gentoos in general are as degenerate, crafty, superstitious, litigious, and wicked 
“« @ people, as any race of peopl&in the known world, if not eminently more sp, especially 
** the common run of Brahmins ; and we can truly aver, that during almost five years that 
«¢ we presided in the Judicial Cutchery Court of Calcutta, never any murder or other atro- 
“* ctous crime came before us, but it was proved in the end a Brahmin was at the bottom 
* of it.”* 
, Lorp Cuive, 1765. 

‘The inhabitants of this countryg we know by long experience, have no attachment to any 
*« obligation.”’t 

Governgr VerEtst, about 1768. 
"ee It is customary with these people to spin out treaties to an immoderate length; ava- 

© ricious in the highest degree, they endeavour by every artifice to increase their exorbitant 
** demands ; and, faithless themselves, they are suspicious of the faith of others. 


‘© His (Haffez Rahmet Caun’s) character has little to distinguish it, except that low 
** cunning, intrigue, and deceit, so general in this country.” 


é* The Nabob Sujah-al-Dowlah is our next ally, and ¢f gratitude can be any tie on an 
‘© Hindostan heart, we have every reason to look upon him as connected with us by the 
‘€ most indissoluble bonds.” 


«¢ His (Jewhar Sing’s) eharacter, like the majority of the great in Hindostan, is that of 
a man absorbed in pleasure and luxury, weak, vain-glorious, aspiring, without experience 
‘© or abilities.” 


«The body of the people are in a manner formed to bgar tlte yoke. They possess nothing 
** of the inquisitiveness of the European nations, and the most slender arts (i.e. in things 
** unknown to them) are sufficient to obscure their understanding, and fit them for implicit 
** submission.” 


ee 


_ * It Buld be as easy to change the genus and manners of the people, as to prevent 
** the Banians and followers of men in station from abusing their master’s name, Chas- 
 tisements may deter the oppression for a nfoment, but in such cases, the servility of the - 
“ people must be removed before oppression can be eradicated.” 


«< An Englishman will ever be unfit to follow the subtle native through all his arts. The 
« treachery of Hindostan professions will prepare him better for the frank declarations of 
** his English allies.” 

“« Phe venality which forms part of the genius of the people, and which is known to be 
“© openly exercised, or iacitly allowed by government, without drawing any shame or dis- 
** credit on the guilty, or being thought any peculiar hardship on the injured... .. .” 

« Every person of any substance or character in this country, has been successively 
** tried in the department of the collections. Fear, reward, severity, and indulgence, 
“ have all failed, and ended in a short political forbearance, or additional acts of dis- 

*«* honesty and rapine.” 
© The evasions and artifices which are familiar to the natives of this country, have often 
** been 


* Holwell’s Historical Events, Vol. I. page we may add, that he was a well-informed sep- 


228, and Vol. Il. page 151. vant of the Company: and that many papers in 

_--f Cited jn Boelt’s Considerations, Vol. Ill. | the Appendix to his «« View of Bengal,” are va- 

Appendix A, page 33. luable. 
-£ Besides w , 


has been already said of him, | 


GENERAL APPENDIX. 35 Arpexorx, 


“* been successful in screening them from that open and manifest detection which can justify —_— 

** punishment.” . *” View of the Morals 
’ * Certain it is that almost every decision of theirs (the Mahomedan jueges, who conti- «of the Hindoos. 
nued to decide in criminal matters 6 the time of- Lord Cornwallis) is a corrupt pargain 

with the highest bidder. The numerous offences which are compromised by fines, have 

*« left a great latitude for very unjust determivations. Trifling offenders, and even many 

** condemned on fictitious accusations, are frequently loaded with heavy demands; and 

** capital criminals are as often absolved by the venal judges.” : 


© The peculiar punishment of fomfeiting castes, to which the Hindoos are liable, zs often . 
** inflicted from private pique and personal resentment among themselves .”* 


c 


” 


€ 


a 


The Governor (Mr, Hastines) and Councft of Beneaz, about 1772, 


** The decoits of Bengal are not, like the robbers ig England, individuals driven to such 
«« desperate courses by sudden wants. They are robber$ by profession, and even by birth; 
“* they are formed into regular communities, and their families subsist by ‘the® spoils 
which they bring home to them ; they are all therefore alike criminal; wretches who have 
** placed themselves in a state of declared war with government, and are therefore wholly 

excluded from every benefit of its laws. We have many instances of their meeting death + 
with the greatest insensibility.” ; ; 

“* The litigiousness and perseverance of the natives of this country in their suits and 
complaints, is often productive not only of inconvenience and vexation to their adver- 
** sartes, but also of endless expense and actual oppression,” 


«© To curb and restrain trivial and groundless complaints, dud to deter chicane and 
“* intrigue, which passions amongst these people often work to the undping of their neigh- 


ee bours .. cee e e 
i Mr. Snorz,t about 1783 or 1784. 


** The natives are timid and servile, As individuals, they are insolent to their inferiors ; 
*« to their superiors, generally speaking, submissive, though they are to them also guilty of 
** insolence when they can be so with impuntty. Individuals fave Little sense of honour, 
“© and the nation is wholly void of public virtue. They make not the least struple of 
‘* lying where falsehood is attended with advantage ; yet both Hindoos and Mahomedans 

- continually speak of their credit and reputation, by which they mean little more than the 

** appearance they make to the world. 

“© Cunning and artifice is wisdom to them. To deceive and over-reach, is to acquire 
“© the character of a wise man. The greatest disgrace they can suffer is to lose their 
‘© caste, or as we say, to be excommunicated. This punishment is inflicted for the breach 
** of the injunctions of their religion, or what is the same, of the ordinances of their 
“* priests.” : 

« To lie, steal, plunder, ravish, or murder, are not deemed sufficient crimes to merit 
“ expulsion from society.” — 

‘© With a Hindoo, all is centred in himself ; his own interest is his guide ; ambition 
** ig a secondary quality with him, and the love of money is the source of his passion.” 

«¢ The advantage they derive over Europeans, is by practising those arts of meanness 


** which an European detests, A MAN MUST BE LONG ACQUAINTED WITH THEM,§ before 
- ce he 


a“ 
nx 


n 
a 


a 
an 


~ 
a 


** Verelst’s View of the English Government of } { Now Governor General of Bengal. 
Bengal: Original Papers in the Appendix, pages § To this declaration from a witness eminently 
58, 102, 103, 105, 108, &c. 2 competent, attention is particularly réquested. | 
+ Reports of the Secret Committee of the 
House of Commons, 1772, Appendix, No. 2. ‘ 
EF ‘7 


Appunoix, 36 «APPENDIX ro FIRST REPQRT rnom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


o 


° i ; 
« he can believe them capable of that barefaced falsehood, servile adulation, and delibe- 
Mr. Grant's State <? yate deceptions which they daily practise. It is in vain that we search for men of en- 
of Society in Asia. ce Jichtened urflerstanding, deep reasoning and reflection, among the natives. The education 
«* of the Hindoos is confined to their being taught their own language. The Mahomedans 
«are little better instructed: the acquisition of a few moral or political maxims, which in 
“" practice they neglect, is all they-know of the art of government: if exceptions can be 
«« found, they are very rare. An Englishman cannot descend to fhose little practices of 
“© oppression, or extortion, so familiar to the natives, Ris mind revolts at the idea of 
« them. And admitting even that some are by habit, connection, or necessity, become 
‘« depraved, there is, after all, in every breast, a sense of honour and virtue that recoils 
« from the low, vicious acts of gt native of Bengal.e It is the business of all, from the 
« Ryot'to the Dewan, to conceal and deceive ; the simplest matters of fact are designedly 
* covered with a veil, through which no human undérstanding can penetrate.” * 


;. Sir Joun Macruerson, Governor General, about 1785-6. 


“T am afraid that the picture which he (Mr. Shore) draws, and the low ebb at which he 
* states the popular virtues of the Bengaleze, are not fictitious representations.” + 


: Cotonet Sir Rosert Barker, 


** It is well known that neither promises nor oaths have been able to bind this treacherous 
sect of people to their engagements. Sujah Dowlah was, like all other Indostanners, not 
** observing much faith when it was his interest to do otherwise.”’t : 


The transcriber of the preceding pages, writing at a distance from public offices, and 
possessed of few unpublished documents, is not able to adduce any comprehensive opinion 
delivered by Lord Cornwallis respecting the natives ; but in the many papers on almost all 
subjects connected with his govefument,*which his Lordship has entered on the records of 
the Company during his administration, his sentiments must be abundantly seen, and to 
those papers the reader is referred, without fear of their contradicting the views here given, 
A government of reform, like his Lordship’s; implies a ‘sense of many existing evils, and the 
conduct,in one striking instance of a gerson so considerate and humane, is entitled to 
particular notice. Though civil and attentive to the natives, he has reposed no confidence 
an any of them, nor has he had a single individual, either Hindoo or Mahomedan, about 
his person, above the rank of a menial servant, contrary to the general usage of men- 
occupying such stations as he filled. 


Upon one very important subject, the criminal justice of the country, to the administration 
of which Lord Cornwallis-has given a new constitution, some of his observations, written as 
introductory to that essential improvement, are here exhibited. 


3d Drcrmner, 1790. 


«© The .regulation of justice in criminal cases, although constituting one of the most 

* essential requisites of good government, yet never appears (as far as.can be traced) to 
‘“‘ have received the attention it so well merits, under any system, either of the Mogul 
«* or Hindoo administration, in India......The next alteration I would propose is that 

‘ already alluded to, in regard to the option left to the next of kin to remit the sentence 
** of the law and pardon the criminal. The evil consequences, and the’ ssa 
aa . : mada ; ; “« hereby 


+ Parliamentary ~Proceedings _ against Mr. 
Hastings, Appendix to Vol. I. page 65. 
- { Ibid. Appendix to Vol. I. page 229, and 
Vol. II. page 8. 


* The whole of this cutious paper is inserted 
in the Parliamentary Proceedings against Mr. 
Hastings, Appendix ‘to Vol. IL. page 67.—The 
Remarks in the preceding sheets were penned before 
this document was examined by the writer of them. 


GENERAL APPENDIX. 37. 


«* hereby escape punishment, are so manifest and frequent; that to take away the discretion 
“© of the relations, seems absolutely requisite to secure an equal administration of justice, 
** and will constitute a strong additional check on.the commission of murder and other 
** crimes, which are now no doubt ofteh perpetrated, under the idea of an easy escape 
“* through the notorious defect of the existing law, whith at first perhaps. was conffned to 
** appeals, or private prosecutions, by the next of kin, and had no.application to public 
‘* prosecutions in the name of the sovereign, and which is besides peculiarly inapplicable to 
** this country (however it mag have suited the society it was originally intended. for) ; 


** because where Brahmins commit murd€r an any person of the Hindoo religion, they . 


«« know that they do so with almost perfect impunity, since in most cases it cannot be 
** expected that any Gentoo will ever desire, or be consenting to the death of a Brahmin, 
«© of which a case exactly in point is now depending before the Board, from Benares, where 
“* a Brahmin having wantonly killed his wife, has, although confessing and convicted of 
“« the crime, been pardoned by her relations. \ But it Is ®nnecessary to have recourse to the 
** testimonies of the magistrates, to prove the abuses practised in these courts. Thamul- 
** titudes of criminals with which the jails in every district are now crowded, the numerous 
‘© murders, robberies, and burglaries, daily committed, and the general insecurity of 
‘«.person and property, which prevails in the interior parts of the country, are melancholy 
*« proofs of their having long and too generally existed. ‘The inefficacy of the clause in the 
“¢ engagements of the landholders, making them responsible for all robberies, has been long 
‘© experienced, and so far from protecting the country, they or their police officers (who fn 
‘* general purchase their appointments, or pay an annual consideration for them) are but 
“* too often concerned in the enormities it is their duty to prevent,” > 


When this great change in the administration of criminal justice was in contemplation, 
various queries were proposed to the English magistrates stationed throuthout the country, 
respecting the existing state ofthe police. ‘Their fnswers, which are inserted at length in 
the records of the Bengal goverumeht, present a scene of shocking disorder. As it would 
be too tedious to insert the whole of them upon a subject so little questionable, one only, 
which goes into character as well as facts, shall be quoted. It is from Mr. Rocke, the 
magistrate of Jessore. 


Decemser, 1789. 


« The punishments however, though they exceed in variety and severity those inflicted 
«¢ by a British court of justice, do not appear at all adequate to the suppression of crimes } 
** and of this the Fougedary records, to the present hour, will bear a melancholy testimony, 
** as well with regard to the number, as the nature of the offences, always to be found in 
** the calendar. The partiality of the natives of this country to a profession they have 
“© once embraced, and their extreme reluctance to quit it, are notorious. The same prin- 
** ciple and inherent prejudice which attach the mechanic to his particular line of profession, 
‘* operate equally upon the robber, house-breaker, or murderer, who, desperate as his occu~ 
pation is, cherishes it as much, holds it as dear, and follows it as systematically, as the 
** peaceful merchant his easy and lucrative one. Besides this, the constitutional apathy of 
** the natives of this country, and the patience with which they endure pain, and even 
** resign life, render them, for the most part, regardless of corporal sufferance ; and prin- 
‘* cipally to this cause may be ascribed the reason, why crimes of all description still 
“* continue to be perpetrated, although such frequent sacrifices are made to the offended 
** laws,” 


“© Of the effects produced by the differerrt modes of punishment in this country, we have 
‘frequent experience. It may be needless to particularize the milder ones inflicted for 
** trifling offences, as. their effects may be judged of from what we see produced by those of 
*¢ oreater magnitude, and more severe nature. Perpetual imprisonment is, I think, impro~ 
“ perly regarded as a punishment of a higher order. To British minds, the idea it conveys 
** i¢ indeed, dreadful ; but there’ is nothing in it so terrible to'a native of Bengal, to wie 

‘ ° ** natura 


APPENDHX, 


a4 cf : 


View of the Morals 
gf the Hindoos. 


Averxpix, _ 38 » APPENDIX ro FIRST REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


is ra 
——s «* natural indolence and inactivity a life of this nature is perfectly congenial, and whilst the 
Mr. Grant's State « necessaries and comforts of life are within their reach, the restraint they are under is.a 
of Society in Agia. «« circumstance of no great hardship to them, being seldom or never so close as to debat 
«, them from intercourse with the rest of the world. The effects of this punishment are, I 
‘© apprehend, never such as must evidently have been expected from it, as being in rank 
** immediately next to a capital one, Loss ofa hand, or a foot, is undoubtedly a punishment 
*¢ of a very severe nature, as being not only a painful and dangerous operation, but at once 
«© depriving the body of a most useful limb, and stamping @ mark of indelible infamy upon 
«. it, and yet this is so little regarded, that man? aneoffender, on apprehension, is found 
** to have already forfeited a limb, and sometimes even two, to the laws. Death, the 
** last, and in the general opinion of mankind, the greatest of all punishments, fails here 
“ greatly of its intended effect. Vortified by their strong religious prejudices and notions 
“ of predestination, and not ig Oat elated bith the idea of suffering as martyrs 
** to the cause, and amidst the Prayers and applauses of their confederates, criminals 
“ inthis country meet death with indifference and composure.” , 


Authentic relations of the transactions of Hindoo nations, and Hindoo-individuals with 
each other, would constitute a very satisfactory kind of evidence in the illustration of their 
character. But of true history they possess few records, The genius of the government, 
and the genius of the people, were alike unfavourable to that species of composition, Such 
accounts, however, as have reached us of their ancient wars, exhibit pictures of eminent 
cruelty and injustice. 


« Of recent times, the public occurrences, in which. Europeans have been parties or wit- 
nesses, are generally diffused through voluminous official writings, which if accessible 
could not be pergpicuously contracted within one division of this limited work; and of 
private observations and experiegce, whjch might have furnished many curious and intructive 
collections, seldom has it been the practice to register acctrate details. But happily one 
testimony presents itself, which unites with unquestionable authority, views of Hindoo 
character, in a country never under a*Mahemedan power. This country is Nepaul, and 
the relation is given by Father Joseph, ae Roman missionary of known respectability in 
Bengal, from whom it was communicated by Mr.(now Sir John) Shore, to the Asiatic 
Society.* Father Joseph was in Nepaul in the year 1769. Three chiefs of that region , 
then contended for sovereignty, and some of sthejy proceedings are described in the follow- , 

ing extracts. . ; 


«« The inhabitants of Certipore, receiving no support from the King of Lelit-Pattan, to 
«© whom they were subject; applied for assistance to Gainprejas, who immediately marched 
‘* with his whole army to their relief, gave battle to the army of the King of Gore’ha, 
** and obtained a complete victory. A brother of the King of Gore’ha was killed on the 
** field of battle, and the King himself, by the assistance of good bearers, narrowly es- 
** caped with his life by fleeing into the mountains. After the action, the inhabitants of 
* Certipore demanded Gainprejas for their King, and the nobles of the town went to confer 
“« with him on the business ; but being all assembled in the same apartment with the King, 
“* they were all surprised and seized by his people. After the seizure of those persons, 
“* Gamprejas, perhaps to revenge himself of these nobles for having refused: their con- 
** currence to his nomination as King (upon a former accasion) privately caused some of 
© them to be put to death ; another, by name Danuvanta, was led through the city in a 
** woman's dress, along with several others, cloathed in aridiculous and whimsical man- 
* ner, at the expense of the nobles of Lelit-Pattan. 'They werethen kept in close con- 
‘« finement for a long time ; at last, after making certain promises, and interesting all the 
“6 -principal men of the country in their behalf, Gainprejas. set them at liberty......” 
«« The King of Gore’ha, despairing of his ability to get possession of the plain of er 
* ‘ rn - * : 3 ' F : 1! : . cs 2 Vv 


* Asiatic Researches, Vol. II. page 307. + 


GENERALIe APPENDIX. 29 = APPENDIX, 


-. I. 
' « by strength, hoped to effect his purpose by causing a famine ; and with this design, | = —-"~ 
«« stationed troops at all the passes of the mountains, to prevent any intercourse with View of the Moral 
«© ‘Nepaul ; and his orders were most rigorously obeyed, for every person who was found °f the Hindoos. 
«* intheroad, with only alittle salt or gotton about him, was hung upon atree ; and he 

«* caused all the inhabitants of a neighbouring village toghe put to death in a mostecruel 

“© manner ;' even the women and chitdren did not escape for having supplied alittle cotton 

“© to the inhabitants of Nepaul: and when I arrived in that country at the beginning of 

“¢ 1769, it was a most horrid spectacle to behold so many people hanging on trees in the road. 

«* However the King of Gore’ha? being algo disappointed in his expectations of gaining his 

** end by this project, fomented disSensions among the nobles of the three kingdoms of 

** Nepaul, and attached to his party many of the principal ones, by holding forth to them 

« liberal and enticing promises, for which purpose he hadeabout two thousand Brahmins in 

S His Service. seeccecnccovecessveee . 


e ' 

« The inhabitants of Certipore having already sustainedgi& or seven months siege, a noble 
** of Lelit-Pattan, called Danuvanta, fled to the Gorc’ha party, and treacherously intro- 
** duced their army into the town. The inhabitants might still have defended themselves, 
** having many other fortresses in the parts of the town to retreat to; but the people of 

Gore’ ha having published a general amnesty, the inhabitants, greatly exhausted by the 
** fatigues of along siege, surrendered themselves prisoners upon the faith of that promise. 
«* Tn the mean time the men of Gorc’ha seized all the gates and fortresses within the town ; 
“ but two days afterwards, Prit hwinarayan, who was at Navacuta (a long day’s journey 
** distant), issued an order to Suruparatna, his brother, to put to death some of the prin- 
** cipal inhabitants of the town, and to cut off the noses and lips of every one, even the, 
“© infants, who were not found in the arms of there mothers, ordvring at the same time all 
“© the noses and lips which had been cut off to be preservd, that he might ascertain how 
“* many souls there were, and to change the namg of thg town into Naskatapur, which 
** signifies the town of cut-noses. The order was carried into execution with every mark 
** of horror and cruelty, none escaping but those who could play on wind-instruments ; 
« although Father Michael Angelo, who withaqut kifowing that such an inhuman scene was 
“* then exhibited, had gone to the house of Suruparatna, interceded much in favour of the 
** poor inhabitants. Many of them put an end fo their lives in despair ; others came in 
** great bodies to us in search of medicines, and if was most shocking to see so many fiving 
_* people with their teeth and noses resemkling the skulls of the deceased.” 


‘** During the siege of Cat’hmandu, the Brahmins of Gore’ha came almost every night 
‘ into the city, to engage the chiefs of the people on the part of their King; and the more 
* effectually to impose upon poor Gainprejas, many of the princial Brahmins went to his 
‘* house, and told him to persevere with confidence, that the chiefs of the Gore’ha army were 
** attached to his cause, and that even they themselves would deliver up their King, 
‘* Prit’hwinarayan, to his hands. Having by these artifices procured an opportunity of de- 
** taching from his party all his principal subjects, tempting them with liberal promises 
“¢ according to their custom, one night the men of Gore’ha entered the city, without oppo- 
** sition, and the wretched Gainprejas, perceiving he was betrayed, had scarce time to 
‘€ escape, with about three hundred of his best and most faithful Hindostany troops, towards 
** Lelit-Pattan, which place however he reached.the same night.” 


«* The King of Gorc’ha having made himself master of Cat’hmandu, in the year 1768, 
persisted in the attempt of possessing’ himself also of the city of Lelit-Pattan, promising 
-** all the nobles that he would suffer them to remain in the possession of their property, 
. © that he would even augment it ; and because the nobles of Lelit-Pattan placed a* reliance 
‘on the faith of his promises, he sent bis domestic priest to make this protestation: that 

: : . “if 


. 


* So in the original; but it seems to be an error of the press, the sense requiring that it 
should be “ zo reliance.” ‘ 


APPENDIX, 


e [,.. 


Mr. Grant's State 
of Society in Asia. 


ao APPENDIX ro FIRST REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


‘< if he fadled to acquit himself of his promise, he should draw curses upon himself and his - 
<* family, even to the fifth, past, and succeeding generation, So that the unhappy 
«* Gainprejas, and the King of Lelit-Pattan, seeing that the nobility were disposed’ to 
«« render therfiselves subject to the King of Gore’hg, withdrew themselves with their people 
* todhe King of B’hatgan. Wen the city of Lelit-Pattan became subject to the King of 
** Gore’ha, he continued for some time to treat the nobility with great attention, and pro- 
«© posed to appoint a viceroy of the city from among them. Two or three months after- 
«* wards, having appointed the day for making his formal entrance into the city of Lelit- 
« Pattan, he made use of innumerable strataggms to gef into his possession the persons 
‘« of the nobility, and in the end succeeded. He had prevailed upon them to permit their 
** sons to remain at court, as companions of his son; he had dispatched a noble of each 
** house to Navacut, or New Fert, pretending that the apprehensions he entertained of 
** them had prevented his making a public entrance jnto the city; and the remaining nobles 
« were seized at the river withqitdhe town, where they went to meet him, agreeable to a 
© prior engagement. Atterwards he entered the city, made a visit to the temple of Baghero, 
«¢ aoining to our habitation, and passing in triumph through the city amidst immense num- 
«* bers of soldiers, who composed his train, entered the royal palace which had been prepared 
‘© for his reception ; in the mean time, parties of his soldiers broke open the houses of the 
‘« nobility, seized all their effects, and threw the inhabitants of the city into the utmost con- 
«© sternation. After having caused all the nobles whowere in their power to be put to death, 
< or rather their bodies to be mangled in a horrid manner, he departed with ‘a design of 
«« besieging B’hatgan, and we obtained permission, through the interest of his son, to re- 
‘* tire with all the Christians into the possessions of the English.” 


A multitude of other quotations which might be made in illustration of the Hindoo cha- 
racter, both from modern publications and from authors of more ancient date, as Sir Thomas 
Rowe, Hamilton, Baldecus, Niguhoff, Tavernier, and others, are for the sake of brevity 
omitted ; but as it may be interesting to see the sentiments’ of so distinguished a character 
as Timour, or Tamerlane, upon the subject in question, these extracts shall be closed with 
a quotation from his Institutes, supposed tochave been compiled A.D, 1400. 


«* The inhabitants of Hindostan arg eqifally debiligated in their corporeal, and inert in 
** their mental faculties ; inexorable and,penurious to such an extreme, that only personal 
“© violence can enforce justice. Regardless of honour, and indecent in their dress, they 
** sacrifice their lives for trifles, and are indéfatiable in unworthy pursuits ; whilst improvi- 
*© dent and imprudent, their ideas are confined and views circumscribed. When reduced to 
‘* poverty, they patiently have recourse to the most menial employments, forgetting their 
‘* previous circumstances, and seldom quitting the world without injuring their benefactors ; 
«« but whilst the acquisition of. riches tempers every atrocity, indolence pervades their most 
* momentous transactions. The native of Hindostan has no pretensions to humanity but 
“© the figure ; whilst imposture, fraud, and deception, are by him considered as meritorious 

* accomplishments,’”’* : 

Of the Mahomedans, who mix in considerable numbers with the former inhabitants of all 
the countries subdued by their arms in Hindostan, it is necessary also to say a few words. 
Originally of the Tartar race, proud, fierce, and lawless ; attached also to their superstition, 
which cherished their native propensities, they were rendered by success yet more proud, 
sanguinary, sensual, and bigotted. Their ‘government, though meliorated under the housé 

of 


* 


may be replied, that-they are not opinions ad- 
vanced, in a state of hostility or controversy, but 
mature observations, made in a time of settled 
government, after many years’ experience of the 
behaviour of Hindoos to each other. 


* Mackay’s Asiatic Miscellany, Vol. I. page 
‘279. This picture may be compared with that 
which Sir John Shore, drawing likewise from the 
life, more than three hundred years afterwards, 
has delineated.. Hf it be said, that these are the 
representations of conquerors and foreigners : it 


GENERAL*APPENDIX. 41, Appengix, 
| of Timour, was undoubtedly a violent despotism, and the delegated administrati6n of it too fo Serre 
often a severe oppression. Breaking through all the restraints of morals which obstructed View of the Morals 
tlieir way to power, they afterwards abandoned themselves to the most vicioys iudulgences, of the Hindoos. - 
and the most atrocious cruelties. - Perfidy in them, was more signal than in the Hindoos, 
Successive treacheries, assassinations, and -usurpations,¢ mark their history more Perhaps 
than that of any other people. The profession of arms was studied by them, and they eal: 
tivated the Persian learning. They introduced Arabic laws, formed for rude’ and ignorant 
tribes, and in the administratign of them, as may be judged from the specimen above 
exhibited, were most corrupt. , 


Every wordly profession, indeed every course of secular business, was in their avowed 
opinion (an opinion which they still bold) irreconcileable with strict virtue. Commerce, and 
the details of the finances, they left chiefly to the Hindoos, whom they despised and 
insulted. Where their government still prevails, the charagter resulting from their original 
temper and superstition, aggravated by theenjoyment °of*power, remains in force. In our 
provinces, where their authority is subverted, and where many of them fall into the dower 
lines of life, that character becomes less obvious ; but with more knowledge, and more pre- 
tengons to integrity, they are as unprincipled as the Hindoos, Their perfidy, however, and 
licentiousness, are the perfidy and licentiousness of a bolder people.* 


From the government and intermixture of the Mahomedans, the Hindoos have certainly 
derived no. improvement of character. The invaders may fairly be supposed to have cop- 
tributed their share to the general evils, and even to have increased them, But they did not 
produce those evils, nor could they have perpetuated them in opposition to the genius and 
spirit of the Hindoos, who are in number probably as eight to ong. ‘They may therefore be 
‘considered rather as constituting an accession, than as giving a character to the mass. The 
vices, however, of the Mahomedans and Hindoos are so homogeneous, that in stating their 
effects, it is not inaccurate to speak of both classes*under the description of the one collec- 
tive body into which they are now formed. 


Upon the whole, then, we cannot avoid recognizing in the people of Hindostan, a race of 
men lamentably degenerate aud base, retaining but a feeble sense of moral obligation, yet 
obstinate in their disregard of what they know t& be right, governed by malevolent and 
licentious passions, strongly exemplifying the effects produced on'society by great and 
general corruption of manners, and sunk in m¥sery by their vices,t in a country peculiarly 
‘ealculated by its natural advantages to promote the happiness of its inhabitants. The 
delineation from which this conclusion is formed, has been a task so painful, that nothing 

. except the consciousness of meaning to do good could have induced the author to proceed 
in it. He trusts he has an affecting sense of the general imperfection of human nature, and 
would abhor the idea of needlessly or contemptuously exposing the defects of any man or 

. set of men, If he has given an unfavourable description, his wish is not to excite detesta- 
tion, but to engage compassion, and to make it apparent, that what speculation may have 
ascribed to physical and unchangeable causes, springs from moral sources, capable of 
correction. , 


* See the character of the Mahomedans, before |. solution among these people, if they are indeed 
alluded to, in Scrafton’s Reflections, p. 19, et seq. | so greatly and so generally depraved. To that 

+ Some persons may be disposed to inquire, how | question, an answer will be given in the course 
the frame of society has been preserved from dis- | of the following chapter. 


APPENDIX, 


1. .? 


Mr. Grant’s State 


42. APPENDIX to REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


of Society in Asia. 
e 


Causes of the Situ- ; 
ation and Character CHAP. III. 


~ of the Hitfdoos, 


Causes which have produced the present Situation and Character of the Hindoos. 


In investigating the peculiar characters of diffgrent natidns, it is both usual and reason- 
able to ascribe them principally to the influence of clithate, of government and laws, and of 
religion; it will be proper, therefore, to lay before the reader the situation of Hindostan 
with respect to each of those particulars, that he may be enabled to judge whether the © 
wretched state of society and manners among the Hindoos, who, as has been already ob- 
served, have a general identity of gharacter, may not fairly be traced to that source. 


" Thé climate of India, particularly of the south-east provinces, must be allowed to be less 
favourable to the human constitution than the more temperate regions of Europe. The 
bodily frame is less strong and hardy, the faculties have less energy, their exercise is Jess 
expanded and delightful, ardour is checked, the oppressed spirits yield more easily to indo- 
lence and indulgence, and the fertility of the soil easily supplying the few natural wants of 
the natives, aids this propensity. Nevertheless, in developing the causes of the Hindoo 
character, too much seems sometimes to have been imputed to the climate ; effects greater, 
and of more necessary result, than fair examination will confirm. 


The inhabitants of foretgn descent, who continue the use of animal food, especially the 
Armenians, a sober people, are more robust than the Hindoos; and to speak of the Hindoos 
themselves, their military tribe has discqyered, under foreign discipline, a considerable share 
of active vigour. The Banians, and all thetrading part of the community, are capable of 
long sedentary application. Porters, boatmen, runners, and others of the labouring class, can 
endure severe fatigue. Multitudes of devotees manifest a resolution and perseverance in 
a sufferings altogether astonishing. And with regard to the faculties of the mind, the 

rahmins, who have cultivated learning, ‘have certainly evinced themselves an acute, subtle, 
and penetrating order of men, These citcumstances show, that the people in general are 
equal at least to decent application in different lines, susceptible even of a strong impulse, 
though not perhaps of great continued energy. And it is reasonable to believe, that were’ 
those evils corrected which do not arise from the climate, they would in time hold a much 
higher place among the human species, than they are now capable of maintaining. 


The despotic mode of government which generally is prevalent in the East, and appears 
,at all times to have subsisted among the Hindoos, has undoubtedly had a very considerable 


- influence. in the formation of their character. When a man finds himself dependent on the 


will-and: caprice of another, he thinks and acts as a degraded being ; his regard for all that 
is valuable im life is reduced to the degree of personal interest which he has in it, his care 
for whatever extends to the rest of his race, and to future time, is sunk in the precariousness 
of the present hour. Fear necessarily becomes his grand principle of action ; thence springs 
distrust ; and as arbitrary power does not excite in those over whom it tyrannizes, the expec- 
tation of finding truth and justice its associates, it is not productive of integrity and veracity. 
The arts of deception, suppleness, and servility, are resorted to, and thus a system of false~ 
hood and narrow selfishness is generated. Violence in the ruler quickens the process. The 
first idea raised is that of self-defence against him ; then follow plans of concealed and 
avowed hostility against his deputies and agents, from whom injury is apprehended. “The 

despotic principle actuates all the subordinate offices and posts of authority, and its effects 
become general ; every manis a slave to those above him, and a despot to those below him; 

the more he is oppressed, the more he oppresses ; and thus is diffused a temper of universal 

enmity, acting secretly or openly according to opportunities. No wonder, therefore, ii 

2 when 


GENERAL-APPENDIX. 43 


‘ : 
when the principle is highly strained, treasons and revolutions are continual ; by which the 


insolent and abject frequently change places, so that he who yesterday scarcely deigned to 
look on the suppliant before him, is to-day spurned from the feet of that suppliant, now in 


his turn exalted to the seat of authority. Such, in particular, is the descriftion that may. 


be given of a large period of the Mahomedan governmegt in Hindostan. The descendants 
of Timour, holding for a time the greater part of that continent under one head, prevented 
much of the war and bloodshed that had before, and have since wasted it ; but internal dis- 
orders, under the best of their governors, were necessarily very great ; and the character of 
the Hindoos, suffering from the*°opvressiop of numerous invaders, must in several respects 
have been debased. 


APPENDIX, 


se et 


Causes of the Situ 
ationand Character 
ef the Hindoos. 


But they did not receive the despgtic form of government from the Tartars, nor were they — 


degraded only when they became subject to Mahomedan conquerors. Had they not been 
an abject people before, foreigners from a vast distance, cagrying few magazines with them, 
could not have possessed themselves of so great a country, rendered by its natural defences, 
its climate, and its periodical rains, very strong against invasions by land. They hawe had 
among themselves a complete despotism from the remotest antiquity ; a despotism, the most 
remarkable for its power and duration that the world has ever seen. It has pervaded their 
government, their religion, and their laws. It has formed, by its various ramifications, the 
essentials of the character which they have always had, as far as the light of history goes, 
and which they still possess ; that character, which has made them a prey to every invader, 
indifferent to all their rulers, and easy in the change of them; as a people, void of public 
spirit, honour, attachment ; and in society, base, dishonest, and faithless. That despotism, 
with a variety of subordinate principles to which it has given birth, still exists in’ great 
vigour, even where the Seer government is in foreign hands, and therefore although by 
acting the part of upright rulers towards our Hindoo subjects, and endeavouring to provide 
for a fair administration of justice among them, weshall repress many disorders that before 
prevailed, yet this reform wilf not reach those evils in their character and conduct, already 
described, which are the bane of their happiness, personal and social, Nor will it ensure 
to us their attachment, which, in point of poticy, it would be desirable to engage by an 
amelioration of their character, instead of leating {heir old facility in changing, to co-operate 
with their imbecility, in favour of any new invader. _ ; 


The ancient Hindoo government is thought scarcely to. exist now in its original form,.* 
' The Hindoo states taised from the ruin$ of the Mogul Empire, cannot well be taken as 
pure representations of it; at least we have but little certainty of possessing an entire model, 
and can therefore only refer to its fundamental principles, of which there is indisputable evi-. 
dence. But their religion and their laws, both parts of one complex system, still remain; 
the former in all its authority; the latter also, in its essence and in many of its branches, 
operative: ‘and these,’ by the principles on which they are founded, and by the rules and 
precepts which they deliver, have given birth to that spirit, and those practices of oppression, 
injustice, corruption, in a word, those immoralities, which incomparably more than saree 

other 


* The government of Nepaul, of which less was 
known when this passage was written, is probably 
no inexact representation of the original Hindoo 
constitution. Of that country, which, as has 
been already observed, was never subdued by 
the Musselmans, our information was scanty 
kefore the late deputation thither of Captain Kirk- 
patrick from Bengal. That gentleman has given 
a curious and interesting account of his journey, 
Which affords much light into the history of Ne- 
paul. It would thence appear, that the form of 


selves, 


the government, the state officers, civil and mili- 
tary, employed under it, and the sources of its 
revenue, are nearly the same in kind as are found 
to have been established in Hindostan under the 
rule of the Moguls; a strong presumption in 
favour of what we have ventured elsewhere to 
suppose, that these conquerors did not innovate 


greatly in the forms of administration in the . 


Hindoo pets of which they pogsessed them- 


G2 


APPENDIX, 


ae are 


Mr. Grant's State 
of Society in Asia. 
» 


other cause,render the people base and miserable. 


44 APPENDIX to REPORT: rrem SELECT COMMITTEE. 

To this position the most particular 
attention is requested. A full exhibition of all the proofs which might be brought in sup- 
port of it, would require a much longer space than is necessarily prescribed to this treatise. 
Some leading facts.and arguments however, sufficignt, it is hoped, solidly to establish it, 
shall ngw be stated. They will bg derived partly from the code of Hindoo laws and partly 
from the tenets of the Hindoo religion. The code of laws was compiled and published in 
1773, under the government of Mr, Hastings, and at his desire, by a body of ‘“ experienced 
** lawyers, selected for the purpose from every part of Bengal,” who, we are further told, 
* carefully picked out the ordinances, sentence py sentence, from various: originals in the 
Shanserit language, neither adding to, nor diminfshing from, any part of the ancient 
«« text.”* And the translator adds, what is of importance to be observed, ‘ that from this 
code may be formed a precise idea of the customs*and manners of these people; that 
*« their institutes are interwoven with the religion of the country, and therefore revered as of 
*« the highest authority.” The authenticity of this work, and the value of the general 
evidence which it furnishes, must fioties be unqtestionable. 


” 


e 

With regard to the religion of the Hindoos, although a regular translation of the Vedes, 
those writings which they repute as sacred, has not yet given us all their mythology, doc- 
trines, rites, and ceremonies, in authoritative detail; yet the intercourse of three centuries 
between the Europeans and that people, the relations of various travellers in different parts 
of India, and their agreement as to the general matter and character, as well as many par- 
titulars of the Gentoo faith, the elucidating accounts of the Mahomedans, and the daily 
experience of multitudes of Europeans, leave us at no loss concerning the grand features, 
the main credenda and agenda of that superstition, its genius, and its consequences. Of 


_late the public has had other accesions of information, stamped with great authority. We 


refer, in the first plece, to the Institutes of the Emperor Akber, compiled by his learned and 
intelligent minister Abul Fazil, about A. D. 1550, in the zenith of the Mogul power ;f one 
volume of which work is employed solely upon the religion and sciences of the Hindoos, and 
professedly formed from the communications of the most learned Brahmins. We may rest 
assured, that such a man, employed in’a work intended for a public record of the highest 
order, would obtain from that source mych atithentic information, and that the view given 
him of the Hindoo doctrines would be ag least sufficiently favourable. Favourable, indeed, 


‘both in respect of those doctrines and the character of the people, that view will appear to 


have been, by comparing it with other authorities; and there are obvious reasons why the 
noble writer would naturally be disposed to acquiesce in it.. It was the design of Akber, 
who was of a tolerant spirit, to conciliate all his subjects towards himself and towards each 
other ; and in a work composed immediately under his inspection with this intention, and 
for public use, it could never be admissible to delineate at length the faults of the great 
body of those subjects. 


The second recent acquisition, is the Bhagvad-Geeta, translated by Mr. Wilkins from 
a Shanscrit work, certainly of considerable antiquity. This is a very curious record. It is 
deemed to be so purified from the grosser parts of the Hindoo superstition, that it is care- 
fully concealed by the Brahmins from the rest of the people; yet it has evidently been 
corrupted, in order to conciliate some tolerably just principles with a degenerate practice. 
Besides these publications, Sir William Jones,{ a. man wonderful for his stores of know- 


ledge, 


| discoveries, among the recondite repositories of 
Hindoo learning, into which he carried such a 
lamp of general knowledge, as_ threw surprising 


* Preface to the Hindoo Code. _ 
+ Translated from the Persian into English, by 
Francis Gladwin, Esq: + 


+ Europe, and Asia, and the world, have since 
sustained aneirreparable loss in the death of this 
most valuable man, who was cut off in the vigour 
of his days, and in the midst of new enquiries and 


light on every subject he investigated. . What he 
has done, however, will immortalize his memory. 
He has opened the way into the mythological and 
scientific arcana of a people, who have for many 


’ GENERAL* APPENDIX. 


ledge, and for the ardour with which he still presses forward to increase them, whe penetrates 
into the abstruse recesses of oriental learning with singular felicity and success, has com- 
municated much valuable information from his late researches. Arrived at length at the 
fountains of Shanscrit learning, he indeed appears to consider past discoveries as inaccurate 
or imperfect ;* referring propably to the speculative andemetaphysical doctrines comrtained 
in the Vedes, concerning which the Brahmins themselves have divers opinions and systems, 
But of the obvious and popular tenets of the Hindoo religion, its worship and ceremonies, 
enough is certainly known to engble us to judge of their nature and their effects. 


In the following pages, the writer will fest the argument he maintains, on information 
already before the public, rather than on any new matter which his own observation, during 
his residence in India, might enablediim to furnish. For though the shoots. from the great 
trunk of Hindoo superstition are so numerous, and all partake of the same nature, yet the 
additional facts which a single individtal, whose atteytionewas not wholly devoted to the 
subject, could have an opportunity of ascéytaining, mus? appear trifling, in comparison of 
the whole mass of knowledge collected by the industry of numbers, during a long course of 
time, and rendered more worthy of notice by ascending nearer the source of things. And 
where important deductions are to be made, as in the present case, he is far from wishing 
the premises from which they are drawn to rest upon his authority. , 


It'is proposed, then, to proceed to the consideration of the Hindoo laws, But since it has 
appeared that both the Mahomedan and English conquerors of India have by legislative 
provisions of their own, in part superseded those which they found there, persons who reason 
from the changes which have relatively taken place in the social state and in the laws of 
every European nation, and from the mutual influence of laws 4nd of mamers upon each 
other, may naturally conceive, that rules which have been abrogated cgn no longer affect 
‘the character of the people; therefore that before any application is made of evidence 
deduced from the Hindoo law8, it ought to be shown what portion of those laws is still 
operative, and from that portion only to estimate the effect produced. It is the wish of the 
writer to allow to this objection all the weightsto which it is entitled, and as far as he can, 
to afford the satisfaction which it requires, 


To give an exact enumeration of the Hindoo laws, and to distinguish those which may 
now be regarded as obsolete, would, if the tagk could be performed, require a detail incon- 


‘ sistent with the design of this essay. But*no such digest has yet been made. The general - 


lines of discrimination, however, are tolerably clear. ‘The Mahomedans, as we have seen, 
introduced their own forms of judicature. In criminal matters, their code, severe and bar- 
barous, like that of the Hindoos, was made the general rule of judgment. In civil concerns 
between Hindoos, these people had the benefit of their own laws, The English continued, 


as we have also seen, the legal establishment of their predecessors, improving them, and 


softening in some instances, the cruelty of puuishment.. At present, therefore, the criminal 
law. 


45 


ages been as remarkable for their adherence to 
their peculiar institutions, as for arrogating to 
themselves an unfathomable antiquity, and the 
possession of a pure and primeval, though care- 
fully concealed system of theology and science; 


claims which have been as officiously as ignorantly ° 


accorded to them by some anti-christian philoso- 
pher of Europe. Hehas shown that one of thei» 
e@liest traces of true history describes an univer- 
sal deluge, in which only a patriarch, and seven 
other men (to whom this account gives. wives) 
‘were saved in an ark ; and that the whole-of their 


chronology is reconcileable with the Mosaic his- | 


tory.—See Asiatic Researches, Vol. II. Art. 
“« Chronology of the Hindoos.”——It is impossi- 
ble on this occasion to avoid expressing a very 
high degree of respect and esteem for the learned 
and instructive labours of various other members 


of that distinguished society. Though the charac- 


ter of the Hindoos be ina moral view not low, yet 


‘the developement of their history, their literature, 


their mythology, and science, has been a great 
desideratum in human knowledge, and must prove 
of eminent importance to mankind. 1797. 

* Asiatic: Researches, Vol. II. 


Appenp ix, 

°, J e 
Causes of the Situ-' 
ation and Character 
6f the Hindoos. 


Agrenony 46 APPENDIX ro REPOPT rrbu SELECT COMMITTEE. 


law adminigtered in Benal, is that of the Mahomedans, rendered in certain cases more mild 
Mv Grant’s State and equitable. The civil code stands likewise upon the basis of their system, but has a 
of Society in Asia, larger infusion, of English ordinances, and it refers’causes between Hindoos to be decided by 
the laws of that people. 


: °° e : : 
_ Those laws prescribe certain rules to the sovere:gn, which cannot of course be acted upon 
in our government, though the general influence of a governing power will still be felt: and 
on subjects of political economy, such as cultivation of the soil, revenue, and commerce, 
respecting which the Hindoo code is very defective. we Mave been obliged to enact new 
regulations. : 


On the whole, besides the Hindoo institutions purely religious, all those which relate to 
castes, to marriage, to inheritance, and to divers other*civil concerns, remiain still in force ; 
excepting only that certain offences against caste, for, which the code decrees. capital or san- 
guinary punishments dreadfully*sgvere, are not gognizable in our criminal courts; nor does 
our government countenance the infliction of those barbarities ; and transgressions of the 
innumerable rules of caste being tried among themselves, are commonly punished by fines 
or excommunications. Still, however, the branches now particularized of their system, are 
those which have the greatest influence in the formation of their character and manners; and 
it should be remembered, that the ways in which caste may be contaminated or lost, have 
been, ip course of time, arbitrarily and exceedingly multiplied. 


* But in estimating the effect produced upon the Hindoos of our territories, even by that 
ae of their institutions which is in a proper sense legal, some other considerations must 
e taken into the account, 


The Hindoo Jaw,stands upon the same authority as the Hindoo religion; both are parts of 
one system, which they believa to haye been divinely revealed. That law is regarded by 
them therefore with a superstitious veneration, which institufions avowedly of human origin 
do not produce; so that even under a foreign yoke, which in various particulars superseded 
its injunctions, it still maintained its credit. «Hence may be deduced, in part, the predilec- 
tion of that people, especially of the leading erders, for their ancient state and peculiar cus- 
toms, which in all the long period of Mahomedan rule, prevented them from being assimi- 
lated to the institutions of their conquerors, 


‘Laws, which by tacit consent have fallen into feneral disuse, can no longer be quoted as- 
characteristic of the actual state of manners. .They serve rather to prove some change in 
the sentiments or dispositions of a people; but the abrogation or suspension, by the power 
of a foreign master, of certain parts of a code still-approved, does not necessarily infer any 
such alteration. The Hindoos have generally, in their intercourse with each other, acted in 
the spirit of their own institutions. The landholders, for instance, many of them possessing 
extensive districts, have been io their obsequious dependents as petty sovereigns ; causes 
originating in their vicinity have been very commonly referred to their decision, or even in 
parts more distant, to their deputies. Disputes are also frequently referred to the Brahmins. 
Maiters of caste are solely cognizable by ‘them, or by arbitrators of the tribe in which the 
contest breaks out, and form a source of endless litigation. - If even increasing security and 
ease conciliate them more to our government, which is probable, they will still perhaps 
ascribe the change, not to the superiority of our system over their own, but to the superior 
personal conduct of the English, who preside over them. Their Mahomedan rulers, espe- 
cially since the accession of .the line of ‘Timour, have partly from political, and partly from 
venal motives, paid. considerable regard to their prejudices ; and the English, both in the 
execution of the laws, and in the general exercise of their authority, have uniformly agd 
spontaneously displayed a spirit of extreme toleration and indulgence to all their peculiar 
Notions and usages, i 


Tt is to be ‘remembered also, that our subjects form only a small part of the vast race of © 
DS “oo } a : people 


GENERAL APPENDIX. 47 


people who profess the Hindoo faith, and that with whole nations of these they live in 
‘immediate contact. 7 


Nor, lastly, must it be overlooked, that the account which has been given of the Hindoos 
is a description of their character as it exists after a long suspension by their forme~ ~*lers 
(a suspension continued by us) of some of the worst partseof their legal system. 


If all these things then be considered, together with the influence of the congenial insti- 
tutions, which are still authoritatively in force, perhaps we shall not see reason to suppose, 
that the innovations which we ha%e made ip the administration of law among the Hindoos, 
have produced, or are likely to produte, any material change in their character ; but we may 
rather expect that this character will still. 
their institutions, civil and sacred. eTo illustrate that spirit, is one object particularly pro- 


posed by the survey upon which we are-now to enter of the Hindoo code. 


Despotism is not only the principle of thegovernmerft of Hindostan, but an original, fun- 
damental, and irreversible principle in the very frame of society. The law, not contgnting 
itself with enjoining passive obedience to the magistrate or sovereign, and with having a 
due regard to thé inequalities in condition, and subordinations in rank, which arise from the 
constitution of the world, and are plainly agreeable to the will of the great Creator, rests 
entirely on the following fundamental position :—that certain classes or races of the society 
are in their elementary principles, in the matter from which they were formed, absolutely of 
a higher nature, of a superior order in the scale of being, to certain other classes. It is, in 
the opinion of the Hindoos, an awful and momentous truth, a truth maintained in full 
vigour to this day, a truth placed in the front of their code, that the Brahmins were formed 

‘ from the mouth of Brimha, the Kheterees from his arm, the Vyse* (or Bice) from his thigh, 
and the Sooders from his foot. Hence it is a necessary consequence, tha this primeval and 
essential distinction is no more mutable or defeasible, than it is possible for one of the brute 
creation to advance itself to the rank of man.* And such is the division of the Hindoos 
into four great tribes or castes—the priests, the soldiers, the husbandmen or traders, and 
the servile class, whose sole assigned duty is toeserve’ the other three.t 


Now the evils that flow from such an arrangerfent, are infinite. Other modes of des- 
potism lead in their very excess and abuse to a remedy, but here the chain of servitude is 
indissoluble and: eternal. Though the highest orders be guilty of the most flagitious 
‘wickedness, pervert the use of power, becbme weak, arrogant and oppressive, the frame of 
society can suffer no changé; that order must still continue in the enjoyment and exercise 
of all its vast privileges and prerogatives. 


The lowest rank, on the contrary, is doomed to perpetual abasement and unlimited sub- 
jection. . It has no relief, agaiust the most oppressive and insulting tyranny, no hope of ever 
” escaping 


* «The Brahmins, indisputably persuaded that 
“ the superiority of their tribe is interwoven with 
“the very essence of their nature, esteem that 
“to be a full and satisfactory plea for every ad- 
“ vantage settled on them above the rest of the 
“ people.” —Preface to the Code, page 52. 

+ It is worthy of remark, that according to a 
tradition in Nepaul, reported by Captain Kirk- 
‘patrick in the ingenious work before-mentioned, 


*Passo-Pusp-Deo, a Rajah of that country, is said: 


to have first divided the general mass of his peo- 
‘ple into the four grand and well-known tribes of 
the present day. The chronological series of 
Nepaul princes, which Captain Kirkpatrick has 
beeil able ta exhibit, and which, as he well ob- 


if at all in that region. 


serves, assigns to many of the reigns an extrava- 
gant duration (making on the whole an average 
of more than forty years), would give to Pusso- 
Pusp-Deo an antiquity of about three thousand 
years. Be that as it may, it is evident, that a 
tradition subsisting in Nepaul makes the first in- 
stitution of castes an human ,appointment. A 
small secluded valley like Nepaul, environed on 
all sides with hills, is. very likely to have been an: 
early, if not an original seat of such an institu- 
tions and there are at least strong reasons for 
believing, that the Brahminical religion had not 
its. first rise in the southern parts of Hindostan, 


ApPENpix, 
ook 
Causes of the Situ. 
ation and Character 
of the Hindoos, 


ear the lively impress of the general spirit of | 


APPENDIX, | 


Mr, Grant's State 
of Society in Asia. 


”“ 


48 APPENDIX tro REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


escaping fgom its sufferings. Though peiuuucd indeed to employ its industry, the greatest 


success can never in, the shghtest degree rescue it from inherent dishonour ; and if the genius 
of a Newton should arise in that class, it could have no room to expand, nor if it had, could 
all its excelleifce deliver its possessor from the ~"*~-‘‘on of administering to the most igno- 
rant apd vicious of the Brahmins., 


_ One of the heaviest grievances attending this state of degradation, is, that it discourages 
all hberal exertions, and consigns those who are destined to it, to ignorance, mean opinions 
of themselves, and consequent meanness of manners, sentiment and conduct. Lest however, 
through the medium of learning, they should have a,chance of emerging from this low and 
confined state, the Brahmins (by an ordinance of the Vedes, which through their imposture 
have the credit of proceeding from a divine origin, and of containing all valuable science) 
have forbidden them,.on pain of death, to read the‘sacred books. 


_ Now as this fourth tribe woukl naéurally comprehend, at the very first, more than a fourth 
part of the people, and as the offspring of every subsequent, irregular commixture of the 
four riginal tribes, and all the descendants of that mixed race, fall by the jaw still lower 
than the fourth class, we may conclude that a large portion of the people is thus held down 
to earth. The evils inherent in this sort of distinction, (widely different, it will easily be 
seen, from mere gradation in society, because here essential superiority is entailed upon 
some classes, and essential inferiority upon others, for all generations,) extend in their 
degree to each of the intermediate classes, and the lowest feels the accumulated weight of 
general superiority. Those nearer the summit, become a cement to this system, which by 
allotting to them certain prerogatives, disposes them the more easily to acquiesce in it, and 
to support it, ° 


Nothing is more plain, than that this whole fabric is the work of a crafty and imperious 
priesthood, who feigned a divine revelation and appointment, to invest their own order, in 
perpetuity, with the most absolute empire over the civil state of the Hindoos, as well as over 
their minds. It is true, that they assigned the reins of political government to another 
order, the Kheterees ; but they still maintaMed in full exercise the indefeasible superiority 
of their own rank, they prescribed the rulés of administration, they were the privileged 
advisers of the Magistrate, (as the sovergign, or ruler, is termed in the code,) they rendered 
‘themselves necessary to the man invested with that dignity, in his personal as well as 
: official capacity ; and in the preliminary discourse to the code, we are told of a king, whom. 
on his obstinate disregard of some ordinances of the Vedes, and of the counsel given by the 
Brahmins, they put to death. ‘ That ‘ this resignation of. the secular and ’éxecutive power 
** into the hands of another caste, is a striking instance of the moderation of the Brahminicak 
‘* order,” cannot then be conceded to the translator of the code, for they secured to them- 
selves all the power of the empire, but transferred the danger and trouble attendant on it to 


their inferiors ; they retained. all the advantages of secular pre-eminence, and divested. 


themselves of all responsibility.* 


, 


* As some persons* appear disposed to think 
the institution of castes, and their separation by 
impassable barriers, the effect of profound political 
wisdom, it may be well for them to consider, 


- whether it be possible to reconcile with the idea 


_of true wisdom, that which derives both its origin 
« and support from fraud and imposture; whether 
fraud and imposture can finally produce the fruits 

of truth and justice ; and how far the supposed 
object of sugh policy, namely, the good of society, 


To 


is in fact fairly and solidly obtained by it. The 
subjection of one part to another is indeed se- 
cured ; but is it good for the part so subjected, 
{infinitely the larger part of the whole,} and its 


- numerous posterity, through all the successions 


of time, to be placed in bondage to the other ? 
Jt seems difficult to maintain such an assertion 
by arguments ‘which will not also recommeyd, 
both in a personal_and social view, the ancient 
system of slavery... That such @ mechanical con- 


* See Dr. Robertson’s Ancient India. 


GENERAL -APPENDIX.. 40 


To show how the singular species of despotism here described, pervades thedegal system 
of the. Hindoos, and to exhibit specimens of different laws, various passages from the code 


- shall now be produced. Since it has, we trust, appeared, that the still remaining influence of 


that system is not to be ascribed solely to those parts of it which are sanctioned by British 
authority, we shall be justified in extending our views and our selection, beyowd them. 
And it will be recollected, on the other hand, that those parts include the laws which relate 
to the grand concerns of inheritance, marriage, and caste, besides others of inferior import ; 
the severity only of some of the Hindoo punishments being discountenanced by our admi- 
nistration of criminal Jaw: fo one orgother of those branches, the greater ‘part of the 
ordinances now to be quoted, will be*found to appertain ; and for the introduction of others 
which do not belong to them, ~articular reasons, in addition to the general one already 


urged, will appear. 


The specimens of laws to be edduced-here, shall be 


heads : 


arranged under the following 


First, Of those which determine some of the prerogatives, or duties, of the Chief 


Magistrate ot Ruler. 


struction of society is not favourable to the ex- | 


ternal interests of a body politic, may be easily 
discerned ; for what public principle can exist in 
a state, where the greatest part of the people are 
totally and for ever excluded, under the highest 
penalties, from taking any concern in public affairs. 
Some who have considered this subject philo- 
sophically, seem to rest the defence of such an 
arbitrary arrangement, upon a sentiment supposed 
to pervade the different classes, of the inviolabi- 
lity of each other’s rights.* Had a sentiment of 
that nature influenced them, the rights remained 
very unequal; but the truth is, that the same° 
consequences follow which must ever be expected 
from unlimited power,—pride and tyranny on 
one side, abject servility and suffering on ghe° 
other. And were it certain, as the translator of 
the code has intimated, “that long usage has 


z persuaded the people of the equ ty of their 


«« distinctions,”+ this would be an additional 
proof of their minds and judgments being de- 


‘based. Nothing is better known, than that the 


+ 


Brahminical tribe are pre-eminent in those atro- 
cities which disturb the peace of society ; and 
this is but one branch of the mischiefs generated 
by such a system, 

The subdivisions of the four original castes, 
arising from difference of professions, and a variety 
of separating distinctions, are now so many ; the 
ways of contamination (and therefore of purifi- 
cation) so multiplied; stains or expulsions, on 
the one side, so terrible, and to those, on the 
other, who thereby succeed to property, so ad- 


* wantageous, that the subject of caste is a prodi- 


* See Dr. Robertson’s Ancient India, page 264. + 


«© Second, 


gious source of wrangling, animosity, litigation, 
loss of time, of property and of peace, among 
the people, and of influence and emolument *to 
the Brahmins, who are the arbiters in all these 
matters. oo 2c: . 

When these consequences are considered, to- 
gether with that which must inevitably have been 
expected from the beginning, namely, the irregu- 
lar Commerce of the tribes, the political sagacity 
of the legislators of the Hindoos seems not en- 
titled to great praise, since to every public benefit 
which they could propose from their system, the 
preservation of its simplicity appears to have been 
essential, And although a celebrated namet 
regards the institution of castes as a mark of 
considerably advanced society, there seems more 
probability in referring it to one ‘of the earlier 
stages, in which there would indeed be priests, 
soldiers, and husbandmen, labouring and domes- 
tic servants, but the community would be small; 
and in such a community, an ordinance, appa- 
rently simple, fixing the several members and 
their families in the professions which they 
already exercised, might more easily be adopted 
and enforced. Had an ordinance of that nature 
been promulgated after the society was become 
numerous, and intermarriages (not before prohi- 
bited), between persons of different professions, 
and between their descendants, had taken place ; 
and when occupations had been multiplied, and 
various gradations already established, the diffi- 
culty of carrying it permanently into execution, 
would apparently have been insuperable. 


' + Preface to the Code, page 1f. 


} See Dr. Robertson’s Ancient Tadis 


Hf 


n 
Aprenpix, 
ame e, 


* 


Causes of the Situ- . 
‘ation andCharacter 
* of the Hindoos. 


APPENDIX, 


“—r.: 


Mr. Grant’s State 
of Society in Asia. 


50 


APPENDIX T6 REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


Second, Of those which establish distinctions in favour of the superior castes. 

Third, Of those which, without reference to castes, give a direct sanction to immoralities, 

Fourth, Of those which, without reference’ to castes, go upon principles of oppression 
_ _® and injustice. 

Eyfth, Of those which, without reference to castes, discover a spirit of cruelty. 


First then, Specimens of Laws which establish some of the Prerogatives and Duties of the 
; Chief Magistrate or Ruler. 
Although no Hindoo can now exercise this office in our Eastern territories, these passages, 
few in number, are produced to show the arbitrary pgwer with which the law invests the 
sovereign, and the abject submission which it imposes on his subjects. It may be remarked, 
that our tributary zemindars in the Carnatic, and even the great landholders in Bengal, have 
still retained some resemblance of tRis lordly aythority over their people. 


Some of his PreroGatives. 
Code, page 110.—*‘‘ He is not to be considered as a mere man, but as a Dewtah” (a 


‘ subordinate deity, of whom they actually worship numbers). 


'269,—* If in any place where the Magistrate is playing at tables, or any such game, in 
«* that case if any person, without permission of the Magistrate, interposes with his hand, 
* or by speaking, the Magistrate shall put him to death.” 

270.—* If aman complains causelessly against the Magistrate’s counsellor, the Magistrate 
“* shall put him to death,” - 
«‘ Ifa man performs any business or service for the Magistrate’s accuser, the 
Magistrate shalt put him to geath.” , j 
«© Men who vilify the Magistrate, men of innate°bad principles, or men who 
** without reason, cause any internal uneasiness to others (of all which the Magistrate 
«© himself must be the judge), the Mavistrate shall-banish all such the kingdom.” 
188.—<* If a man speak reproachfully of Sny upright Magistrate, the Magistrate shall 
cut out his tongue; or having confiscated all his effects, shall banish him the kingdom.” 
189.—** If a Magistrate, for his own goad, has passed any resolutions, whoever refuses 
to submit to such resolutions, the Magistrate shall cut out the person’s tongue.” * , 
207.—** If a man beat of ill-use a Magistrate who commits a crime, whatever it be, the 
crime of murdering a hundred Brahmins shall be imputed to him ; he shall have an iron 
spit run through him, and be roasted with fire.” 
Note——This contains an exception in favour of Brahmins, for which see the next head. 


a 
Ss 


a 
nx 


a“ 
na 


a 
x 


5 
” 


. Some of his Dutis. 
Code, page 91.—“* A Magistrate must have near him a learned Brahmin,” 


92,.* The Magistrate is required to maintain not less than ten Brahmins of learning 
A , © an 


* In the Institutes of Menu, a work of great 
antiquity and curiosity, translated by Sir William 
Jones, since this tract was written, is the follow- 
ing description of the formation and dignity of 
the king.: ae < 

“ Since a king was composed of particles 
“ drawn from ‘those chief guardian deities, he 
« consequdhtly surpasses all mortals in glory. 

« Like the sun, he burns eyes and hearts ; nor 


: z 
‘. 2 


Institutes of Menu, page 159. 


«* can any human creature on earth even gaze on 
“ him.” | 

“« He is fire and air; he, both sun and moon; 
“ he, the god of criminal justice ; he, the genius 
“ of wealth ; he, the regent of waters; he, the 
“ lord of the firmament. A king, even though 
“a child, must not be treated lightly, from an 
* idea that he is a mere mortal ; no, he is a pow- 
“ erful divinity, who appears in human shape.” 


GENERAL APPENDIX. 51 


“* and worth, to give them money, and every token of respect and consideration in the 
** judgment seat,” : gy a 
113.— In all cases, he shall spare and excuse the-Brahmins.” 
116.—* He shall .give much-effec& and money ‘to the Brahmins of a conquered 
“ country.” . oe + e ere -.. , 
“« And erect a stately building for them.” 
118.—-** He shall keep magicjans who can cure by spells.” . 
«« He shall keep a great number 8f. buffoons, or parasites, jesters, and dancers.” 
119.—<* If he resume a religious endowment, he shall remain in hell a thousand years.” 


Srconp, Specimens of Laws, which establish Distinctions in favour of the Brahmins and 
the other Superior Casté. e ° 


_ First, concerning Avtuoriry. : 
Code, page 117.—** The other three orders shall be obedient to the Brahmins,*” 


282.—‘* Whatever ordinances Pundits, (who are Brahmins) deliver to the Ryots, (the 
body of the people,) from the Shaster, (the great body of their ordinances, civil and 
religious,) the Ryots (who cannot and dare not read the Shaster,) are bound to obey.” 


«* A Pundit, not delivering the sentiments of the Shaster; to be fined two hundretl 
** and fifty puns of cowries” (about four or five rupees, or ten shillings), 


261.—* If a Sooder reads the Vedes to. either of the other three castes, or listens to 
** them, heated oil, wax, and melted tin, shall be-poured into his ears, and the orifice 
“© stopped up.” Seah Bo ‘ 

“¢ If a Sooder gets by heart the Vedes, he shall be put to death.” 


*« Tf he always performs the jugg, (one of their modes of worship, in which 

** the Brahmin officiates,) he shall suffer death,*or’be fined two hundred ashruffees” 
(about £300). ; 

Second, 


.* The following passages in the Institutes, of |e @ powerful divinity, even as fire is a powerful 
Menu are remarkable : « divinity, whether consecrated or popular.” 
“ Let not a king, though in the greatest dis- | “ Thus,although Brahmins employ themselves 
“ tress for money, provoke Brahmins to anger by | « in all sorts of mean occupations, they must in- 
“ taking their property ; for they, once enraged, | « variably be honoured, for they are something 
“ could, immediately, by sacrifices and impreca- | © transcendantly divine.” ; ed 
“ tions, destroy him and his troops, elephants, {| “ Of a military man who raises his arm vio- 
“© horses, and cars.” “ Jently on all occasions against the priestly 
“ Who, without perishing, could provoke those | «« class, the priest himself shall be the chastiser, 
“holy men, by whom, that is, by whose ances- | « since the soldier originally proceéded from the 
“ tars, under Brahm, the all-devouring fire was | « Brahmin.” | : 
“ created, the sea with waters not drinkable, and “ A priest who well knows the law, needs not 
“ the moon with its wane and increase?” “ complain to the king of any grievous injury ; 
“ What prince could gain wealth by oppressing. | * since even by his own power, he may chastise 
“ those, who if angry could frame other worlds | « those who injure him.” 
“ and regents of worlds, could give being to new “ His own power, which depends on himself 
“ gods and mortals ?” : ‘| © alone, is mightier than the royal power, which 
“ What man, desirous of life, would injute |‘ depends on other men; by his own might 
those, by the aid of whom, that is, by whose |“ therefore, may a Brahmin coerce his foes.” 
“ oblations, worlds, and gods perpetually sub- | . “ He may use, without hesitation, the power- 
“ sist; those who are rich in the learning of the | “ ful charms revealed te At-harvan, and by him 
“ Veda?” . “ to Angurar; for speech is the weapon of a 
“ A Brahmin, whether learned or ignorant, is_| “ Brahmin; with that he may destroy his op- 
. “ pressors.”—JInstitutes, pages 285, 286, 311. 


H 2 


APPENDIX, , 
. e, 


. : 


Causes of the Situ- 
ation and Character 
@f the Hindoos. 


APPENDIX, 
me a 


Mr. Grant’s State 
ef Society in Asia. - 


52 


APPENDIX to*°REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE, 


; Second, Concerning ResPEcr. 
“Code, page 261.—** If a man of inferior caste, proudly affecting equality with a superior, | 
** shall travel py his side on the road, he shall be fined equal to his abilities.” 
“< If a Sooder sits on the carpet of a Brahthin, the Magistrate having thrust a hot 


“< jronSinto his buttock, and branded him, shall banish him the kingdom, or else shall cut 
© off ‘his buttock.” : 


Note.—The shadow of a Chandal, one of those degraded below the fourth caste, passing 
over victuals, milk, or even water, defiles it. Tgn thousarftl other ways of being. polluted 
by the lower ranks, mark their vileness.* : : 

275.—‘* Brahmins waiting upon great men, shall have free entrance.” 

e 
© Being passengers in a boat, shall pay no fare, and have precedence.” 
*¢ And shall pay for geods jn a boat, no freifht.”’ 


? 
Third, Concerning Crimes,—-as Assauuts, &c. 


e : 
Code, page 206, 283.—‘* No crime whatever, nor any number of crimes, shall forfeit the 
* life of a Brahmin: he shall not be put to death on any account whatever.” 


‘* No crime in the world is so great as that of murdering a Brahmin; the Magis- 
“* trates shall never desire his life, nor cut off his limbs.”’ 


0284,—‘* A Brahmin murdering a Brahmin, or committing incest, shall be punished only 
“* with ignominious branding.” 


.206.—If a man deprive another of life, the Magistrate shall deprive that person of life, 
“© except he be a Brahmin§ he shall be fined a hundred gold mchurs” (about £150). 


207.—‘« For beating or ill-using a Magistrate, who commits a crime, (which the first head 
rates as the crime of murdering a huntlred Brahmins,) a Brahmin shall only be fined a 
«* hundred ashruffeee”’ (about £150). 

209.—** If a man sets fire to another persoy’s house, with intent to destroy him ; or causes 
‘** him to take poison ; or is desirous to murdgr him with a sword; or carries away that 
** person’s wife from his house, and keep’ her himself ; or plunders all that person’s effects, 
‘* or his tillage; in that case, if the latter deprives the former of life, he shall not be 
** amenable. But he shall not kill either a cow or a Brahmin,” (consequently a Brahmin 
may do all this for a fine).t ; 

206.—‘* With whatever limb a man strikes a Brahmin, that limb shall be cut off.” 


« If a Sooder strikes either ‘of the other three classes, 7¢ shall be so done to him.’’ 
208.—‘* If a Sooder spit on a Brahmin, his lips, &c. shall be cut off.” 

“ If a Sooder plucks a Brahmin by the hair, &c. both his hands shall be cut off.” 

. 1 ; ews ° ee Te 

« By day they may walk about for the purpose 

of work, dlotinguished by the king’s badges; 


and they shall carry out the corpse’ of every 
one who dies without kindred: such is the fixed 


* «¢ The abode of a Chandal and a Swapaca 
*’ must be out of the town ; they must not have | “ 
*¢ the use of entire vessels; their sole wealth must | “ 
« be dogs and asses. Their clothes must be the | “ 


«© mantles of the deceased ; their dishes for food, { “ 


« broken pots ; their ornaments, rusty iron; con- | 


“ tinually must they roam from place to place.” 


“ Let no man who regards his duty, religious 


« and civil, hold any intercourse with them ; let 


_their transactions be confined to themselves, 
and their marriages only between equals.” 
“ Let food be given to them in potsherds, but 
¢ not by the hands of the giver ; and let them 
é not walk by night in cities or towns.” . 


oe 


a 


rule.” : . 
“« They shall always kill those who are to be 
slain by the sentence of the law, and by the 
royal warrant; and let them take the clothes 
ef the slain, their beds, and their ornaments.” 

Institutes of Menu, page 295. © 
+ The Institutes of Menu, however, appear to 


permit to a man who cannot otherwise escape, 
the slaying of a Brahmin, who assails him with 


an intent to murder, 


Page 234. 


GENERAL ‘APPENDIX. 253 


; If a Sooder gives much and frequent motestation to a Brahmin, he shall be put 
* to death,” AES a 
Crimes. continued—ADULTERY. ° oe 

Code, page 242,—** A Sooder, Bice,*or Kheteree, guilty with a woman of the Brahmin 
© caste, who has a master, (that is a husband or keeper) shall suffer death by mufilation 
* and burning.” mt xhe 


« A Sooder, guilty with a Chandal woman, (one of a degraded tribe,) shall suffer 
‘*¢ death. : 


m ; 
« A Bice or Kheteree, guilty with a woman of inferior caste, to be fined jive 
« hundred or one thousand puns of cowries’” (from eight to sixteen rupees, sixteen to 
thirty-two shillings). . ; . dite Ste 
«© A Brahmin, guilty with a woman of any of the castes, who has a master, to be 
“ fined five hundred or one thousand puns ef cowries Peigh? to sixteen rupees). He is not 
“« in any case of adultery, to be deprived of life.” ; 's 


243.—< A woman, guilty with one of the inferior caste, to be eaten by dogs, or burnt 
“ with faggots,” . : : 


«¢ A woman of equal or inferior caste, guilty, shall not be liable to punishment, 
*« only she shall perform the ceremony of expiation.” 


244,—*If a man commits adultery with an unmarried girl of inferior caste, by her con 
** sent, he shall not he deemed guilty. If it was done by violence, the Magistrate shall take 
‘«¢ a small fine from him.” 


248,—** For crimes beyond this class, and beyond the line of the human species, the 
“* superior castes are taxed in a fine of five hundred mune of cowries (about eight rupees) ; 
«* the Sooder only, doomed to death.” - - 


Crimes continued—Sreatine, 
Code, page 220,—* If a man steals any mgn of superior caste, he shall be burnt with 


*¢ fire, by having a particular species of grass bound round his body. If he steal a woman, 
* he shall have'that grass bound round his body,*be stretched out ona hot plate of iron, 
‘© and burnt in the fire.” ‘ 
. e . 

‘ If a man steals a man or woman of middling caste, the Magistrate shall cut off 
“ both his hands and feet, and cast him out upon a highway where four roads meet.” 

« If any person steals aman of inferior caste, he shall be fined oné thousand puns 
“* of cowries” (about sixteen rupees or thirty-two shillings). 


‘* Tf he steals a woman of inferior caste, all his property shall be confiscated.” 

** Ifa man, in time of war, steals a horse, or an elephant, the Magistrate shall 
“« deprive him of life.” 

‘< If he steals either of these animals in time of peace, the Magistrate shall cut off 


«« from him one hand and one foot.”” (Compare this article with the preceding one con- 
cerning stealing a Sooder). a: 


« If a man steals an elephant or a horse, excellent in all respects, the Magistrate 
«* shall cut off his hand, and foot, and buttock, and deprive him of life.” 


221.‘ If a man steals a small animal, the Magistrate shall cut off half his foot.” 
224,.—‘* If a man steals flowers for dyings &c. the Magistrate shall cause the article to 
“be returned, and take a coin of gold asa fine.” ~— ° 
225.—‘* If a man steals flowers, or fruit, or wood, or grass, belonging to a, Brahmin, 
“ the Magistrate shall cut off his hand.” acs 
226.—‘* Ifa Brahmin who every day performs the jugg, commits a robbery that deserves 
«« déath, the Magistrate shall cut off the hair of his head.” m 
Concerning 


APPENDIX, - 
° . LA 


Causes of the Situ- 


_ ationand Character 


f the Hindoos. 


Arvexoix, 54, APPENDIX ro REPORT rio SELECT COMMITTEE. 


ie Concerning the Scare of Puntsumunt for scandalous or bitter Expressions, which species 
Mr. Grant's State of offence will be further explained under a subsequent article, (Page 58.) 
of Society in Agia. . z a Pane waa 
Code, page 182.—“« A man of equal caste and “equal abilities with the accused, 
“6 shall be fined Scdiseued cece cedsusccr ded bousbenag bes esacbscse she cee esdbeeees cgeseedsenscseusexeisuce 1,000 
(about sixteen rupees, less than £2) oN oe 
«« A man of inferior caste and inferior abilities ..cscccecrsoeseessovsesscesaceors 2,000 
«« A man of superior caste and superior abilitic® ...cscccccccccscosessesecesess 500 

. An equal in caste and abilities, accu&ing another of one of the crimes in 
** anoo patuk, (the third class of this offence) .....cccccesccsssesescenscccsereceseeccseeeee 100 
: «© An inferior in caste and abilities, ditto ..g...ccccssccecsesecescecrercsesscsese 200 
© A superior in caste and abilities, CittO s..scocsececneeceecccces con vsssssecsors 50 


“(about one rupee). . ° 


183.—* A Sooder, accusing ofe of a superiér caste of any of the crimes of the three first: 
«* classes (which will be hereafter described), shall have his ‘tongue cut out, and a hot iron 
« of ten fingers breadth thrust into his mouth.” This article may be compared with the 
one immediately preceding. The Sooder forfeits his tongue, and in effect his life, for com- 
mitting against a superior that offence, which, if a superior commit it against him, costs only 
half-a-crown ; a fine so trifling, whilst the penalty of retorting on the other side is so dreadful, 
gs rather to encourage than prevent this species of wrong in the upper ranks. 


Concerning Civm AFFairs, 


As to interest of mongy, the proportion of rates payable by the different classes, shall 
be introduced for the sake of illustrating the spirit of the code.‘ ; 


Code, page 2.-°*¢ Where a Brahmin pays per month 1 per cent. 
; «¢ A Kheteree shall*pay .......s.cs0e00 Ide 
*¢ A Bice (or Vyse) ccccsecsereveesceeeee 2 
se A Sooder Wee eee qeececcnscovcsssoconetee 
‘* And so in proportion, whatever the rate is.”’* 


Payment of Dests. 


Code, page 21.—** If a very rich man, ofsweak understanding and of a very mean tribe, 
*¢ from a principle of fraud and obstinacy refuses to pay his debts, the Magistrate shall 
“* oblige him to discharge the money claimed, and jine him double the sum.” 


22,— Ifawery rich man, of an excellent education and of a superior caste, froma 
** principle of fraud and obstinacy refuses to pay his debts, and the creditor commences a 
** suit against him, the Magistrate shall cause the money in dispute to be paid, and shall 
«* fine the debtor one-twentieth of the sum recovered.” ; 


4 


As to Taxes on Buyine and Setune. 
Code, page 258.—* On all sales. Inland purchase and sale 10 per cent, 
° : * Foreign ...... 5 percent. on the profit, 
‘* A Brahmin, learned in the Vedes, shall pay no tax on sales,” 


; As to Finpine Tunes. . 

’ Code, page 256.—* A man finding his own, long lost, is to inform the Magistrate, who 

* * is to take from him, : 
 Tfhe be a needy unlearned person, oneesixth ; 


« 


scolf 


7 “*,The English government in Bengal has now | tinction of castes or nations. Wealthy natives, 
ordained twelve per cent. per annum to be the | however, probably still favour borrowers of the 
general legal maximum of interest, without dis- | higher castes. ; 


c 


.3 GENERAL APPENDIX, oo 


nee Ifa MAN Of SCIENCE, crvccecesececceces one-habf.”* ; 
256,—* A learned Brahmin finding any thing, the property of a stranger who is unknown, 
takes, the whole ; an unlearned Brahmin takes five-sixths, and gives one,sixth to the 
‘** Magistrate.” - 
«< A Kheteree is to give to the Magistrate ene-fourth,. afid the Brahmins one-fourtl?” 
«« A Vyse is to give the Magistrate one-fourth, and the Brahmins one-half.” 
« A Sooder finding any thing, divides to the 
** Magistrate, five-twelféhs ; 
«* Brahmins, five-twelfths ; 
* Himself,—two-twelfths.” es 
e : . 

« A Magistrate finding any thing, shall give one-half to the Brahmins, and keep the 
“© other half himself.” ‘ 
As to Girts, and Suocesston‘to the Prorerty of BRAHMINS. 

Code, page 26.—* A woman may give to the Brahmins any part of her husband's effects. 
to procure his future happiness: if she gives the whole, the gift is approved, but she 

is blameable.”’ 
«« A gift proposed to be given to a Brahmin,-if afterwards withheld, shall be enforced by 
the Magistrate with interest.” 
33.—‘* The property of Brahmins, must always descend to Brahmins,” 
46.—** So must the property of Brahmins’ wives.” 
128.—** On failure of heirs to one of the three lower castes, thé Magistrate may appro- 
priate the property to himself.” 
‘* But if a Brahmin has no hej, his property shall* pass t¢ other Brahmins; and if there 
are no Brahmins, the Magistrate shall cause it to be thrown into the water.”’t 
As to Siayery.. 
Code, page 143.—* Slaves are made of the three castes of Kheteree, Vyse, and Sooder. 
«¢ A Brahmin can never be a slave.” s 
«« A man of superior caste, if he is upright and steady in the principles of that caste, can 
“* never be the slave of a man of inferior caSte.” 
144,—< If a Brahmin has purchased a Sooder, or even if he hath not purchased him, 


“ he may cause him to perform service.” 


These instances may sutlice to illustrate the nature of the distinctions which obtain 
among the different castes. They extend indeed to all the concerns of life; and the laws 
regulating them are diffused throughout the code, make up a great part of it, and seem in 
reality to be its main business, 


a 
a 


‘ 


n 
me 


a 
e 


a 
x 


a 
n 


n 
ns 


Turd, Of those Laws which, without reference to Caste, give a direct Sanction to 
Immorality. ° 


Concerning Evipence, Promises, and Fatse Pretences. 


Code, page 115.—-** Wherever a true evidence would deprive a man of his life, in that 
“* case, if a false testimony would be the preservation of his life, it zs allowable to give such 
** testimony 3; 


4 


* So it is in the code, and the proportion in| + “ Should the king be near his end, through 
this instance seems to contradict the main prin- | “ some incurable disease, he must bestow on the 
ciple of the law; but the striking point of com- | “ priest all his riches accumulated feom legal 
parison is, that a Brahmin, finding what belongs | “ fines.” - 
to a stranger, keeps the whole, or five-sixths of Institutes of Menu, page 286. 
it; an& another person finding his own, is obliged 
to give up a part of it. 


APPENDIx, 
ry I, 6 
Causes of the Situ- 
ation andCharacter 
ofthe Hindoos. 


APPENDIX, 
& ° 


Mr. Grant’s State 


of Society in Aoi: 


56. APPENDIX 10 REPORT reom. SELECT COMMITTEE. 
: ! 7 


«© testimony ; and for absolution of the guilt of false witness, he shall perform the Poojahk 
«« Sershuttee (worship to Sershuttee, the Goddess of Letters): but to him who has mur- 
‘© dered a Brahmin, or slain a cow, or who being of the Brahmin tribe has drunken wine, or 
«< has commifted any of these particularly flagrantgoffences, it is not allowed to give false 
*¢ witgess in preservation of life.¢ , 


“If a marriage for any person may be obtained by false witness, such falsehood may be 
‘told; as upon the day of celebrating the marriage, if it isliable to be incomplete for want 
* of giving certain articles, at that time, if three or fourgfalsehoods are asserted, it does 
“ not signify ; or if a man promises to give his daughter many ornaments, and is not able to. 
« give them, sich falsehoods as these, if told to promote a marriage, are allowable.” 


“Tfa man, by theimpulse of lust, tells lies to a woman ; or if his own life would other- 
« wise be lost ; or if it 2s for the benefit of a Brahmin ; in such affairs falsehood is allow- 
“able.” 136.—* If a man sayg to another, I will give you something if you are able to ap- 
‘* prehend a thief or a murderer,®or such kindsof criminals, then even if the other should 
“apprehend and bring such a person, nothing shall be bestowed on that account. If any 
** thing had been given before the business, it may be taken back.” 


19, 20.—*< A Creditor is repeatedly directed, by feigned and by evasive pretences, to get 
‘¢ hold of some of the.debtor’s goods.” 


Introd. to the Code, page 114.—*The Magistrate is directed to send to the party in hos- 
€ tility against him a man of intelligence, and well skilled in artifice, to insinuate himself 
“among the enemy’s men, and make them dissatisfied with each other, that they may 
*¢ quarrel and fight among themselves, and so be ruined.” 


It will be remembered, that the two last articles are not supposed to describe merely the 

preeuce or the counsel of sinister human policy, but to be, like the rest, the dictates of a 

ivinity. ° e 
" Mope of Suarinc among Rosbers. 

Code, page 129.—** The mode of shares among. robbers is this: If any thieves by the 
“*command of the Magistrate, and with hi§ assistance, have committed depredations upon, 
“and: brought any booty from anothew province, the Magistrate shall receive a share of one- 
‘sixth of the whole; if they received no command or assistance from the Magistrate, they 
** shall give the Magistrate, in that case, one-tenth for his share ; and of the remainder their 
** chief shall receive four shares, and whosoever*among them is perfect master of his occu- 
«* pation, shall receive three shares ; also whichever of them is remarkably strong. or stout, 
‘« shall receive two shares, and the rest shall receive one share. If any of the community 
** of the thieves happen to be taken, and should be released from the Cutchery Court upon 
«‘ payment of a sum of money, ail the thieves shall make good that sum by equal shares.” 


This is, in every view, a curious characteristic article. The translator of the code main- 


- tains, that it “by no means respects the domestic disturbers of the tranquillity of their 


‘country, or violators of the first principles of society, but only such bold and hardy adven- 
‘turers as sally forth to levy contributions in a foreign province.’ It were to be wished the 
article itself had spoken as definitely ; but suppose it to be thus understood. In the first 
place then, it sets before us, not an open military expedition, but a thieving, robbing excur- 
sion ; for the actors are ‘‘robbers, thieves, by profession,” they are recognized to be of a 
** community of thieves,” to be amenable for the depredations they have committed to the 
civil court, and if taken, liable to punishment. 


_ 2d.—The Magistrate directs and assists these robbers and thieves to plunder in another 
province. Itis a clandestine operation, and his concern in it must therefore be clandestine. 
Booty is the professed object, and he shares it with them. 


3d.—As this regulation authorizes the procuring of a release from the court which may 
have seized any of these offenders, by the payment cf a sum cf money, it sanctions the 
concurrence of a Magistrate in such a transaction, which has strongly the complexion o 
, , : ae teing 


GENERAL APPENDIX. - 57 Appewnix, 
: epee 


being a private corrupt bargain between the judgment of that court and the eulprft ; but whe- ; 
ther the ransom be a secret bribe, or a more opencommutation for punishment, the principles Causes of the Situa- 
of justice are violated, the Magistrate becomes a party in a complicated gutrage against tign and Character 
society, and is in fact countenanced ly this ordinance in being indulgent, in his turn ‘to % the Hindoos. 
criminals who may come into his power, for a pecuniary c®nsideration. 


4th.—But it may be asked, how this “‘ community of thieves,” some “ perfect masters of 
“their occupation,” are formed and brought to sich a state’ of perfection in their vocation? 
—Can we conceive it to be. sofly by thg exercise of their parts in alien lands? ‘ Born, 
educated, and dwelling in the Magisttate’s district, is it to be supposed .that they never 
practise at home? Yet the Magistrate harbours these banditti, he knows them personally, 
and he sets them at work. j : 


If the translator’s apology be admitted, that this is an gneient law, correspondent to the 
early manners of qther nations, still it is to be remembered, that it stands in a code which 
claims to be divine, that therefore an equal authority is necessary to its repeal, dndhat it 
is offered to us as a law of the Hindoos at this day. 


But what are we to understand by “‘ another province’ ? If it means another state, Hin- 
dostan consisted anciently, as it does now, of many states. This law was made for the whole 
Hindoo people ; therefore it authorizes and encourages them to rob and plunder each other. 
It recognizes a community of thieves and robbers in each state, and makes it lawful for 
them to live by depredations on their neighbours. Such accordingly has been the practice 
of at least smaller divisions, in all time past. The zemindars, throughout Hindostan, keep 
robbers and thieves under their protection ; and whatever else has changed, the business of 
pillage, often attended with murder, still continues universally and systematically. Can it 
be doubted whether this ordinance has not'had a most powerful effect ‘in establishing and 
fortifying a practice so ruinous to the peace and good order of society? Must we not 
believe that robbers, finding their professions evidently recognized and sanctioned by the 
law, have thence with a quiet conscience formed themselves into castes and bands, and that 
it is the persuasion of acting upon the divine,authority of the Shaster, which inspires them 
with contempt of death, and perseverance, from ofie generation to another? Can we sup- 
pose that our prohibition, and our punishment of ‘predatory outrage, will, in minds prone to 
them, destroy that persuasion? But the ordinance ‘under consideration can hardly apply 

- to any other than small divisions of territory ; and if we were certain that “* province ” means 
the territory of another master, yet no fact is more notorious than that the bands of robbers 
whom the zemindars of Bengal are known to entertain, employ themselves within that 
country; for its ‘ domestic tranquillity is disturbed by them” perpetually from one end to 
the other, as the extract before quoted from Lord Cornwallis has evinced, and a variety of 
other vouchers might be produced, if necessary, to prove. . 


We see then a most glaring instance, in this ordinance, of immorality in principle, and of 
the consequent wide diffusion of evil in practice, 


To proceed to further examples. 


SERVANTS committing Crimes by order of their Mastrrs.—Divers cases of 
Licentiousness, es 
Code, page 149.—« If a servant, at the command of his master, commits theft or murder, 
“or any such crimes, in that case, 7 is not the fault of the servant, the master only is 
* guilty.” Fe : 
239.—* Adultery with common prostitutes and dancing girls, shall not be finable.” 


247.—** Several kinds of adultery allowed, with consent of the Magistrate, forthe trifling 
** fine of ten puns of cowries” (less than a shilling). : 
= ec If 


ARRENDIX, 


de 


Mr. Grant’s State 
of Society in Asi, 


58 APPENDIX to REPORT erim SELECT COMMITTEE. 


« If a man by violence commits adultery on his own slave girl, a fine of ten puns of 
** cowries” (about a shilling). 


151.—** Prostitutes and dancing women ?’—Ceees tated, and decrees thereupon, in- 
cluding pimps, &e. ; 
Commission of a BAD Action allowed, to save life. 


Code, page 271.—** If a man in immediate danger of his life, by committing a bad action 
can save his life, in that case the Magistrate shall not fing him.” — 


e 
, Designine to Procure’ Deatu. 


Code, page 268.—‘* Performing a jugg (religious cergmony), to procure the death of an 
“* innocent person, afine of two hundred puns of cowries.” : 


- 268.——« Causing an innocent pgsen to drink a pétion, in order to procure his death, a 
« fine of two hundred puns of cowries.” _ 


Note-—T hey have great faith in both these expedients ; intentional murder is therefore 
here rated at about ten shillings, . 


Concerning GAMING. 


Code, page 254.—‘* Games of chance are allowed before the Magistrate, or aman be- 
‘longing to him ; the winner to give half to the Magistrate.” This last clause explains 
the reason of prohibiting hazard, except before the Mugistrate. 


138.—‘* A man may become a slave by loss on the chances of dice, or other games.”’ 


Scanpa.ous and Birter Expressions. 


This is a copious article in the*code, and becomes such from a correspondent feature in 
the character of the people. Virulent, foul, criminating abuse, overflows among them in a 
manner probably unparalleled any where else in the world. No language but their own 
‘could describe its shameless nature, and tle malicious persevering eagerness with which 

, they lavish it upon each other. : 


The Hindoo law has therefore found it necessary to arrange the various topics of scandalous 
abuse under distinct denominations, expressive of ,the quality, or’rank, of the crimes which _ 
it imputes, 

This classification is curious: it places together offences of very unequal enormity; it dis~ 
tributes into the same division, moral and ceremonial pollutions ; and thus tends to lessen. 
the guilt of some heinous iniquities, and to confound all just ideas of morality. For instance, 
under the second denomination, or class of crimes termed maha-putuk, with the murder of 

.& Brahmin and incestuous adultery, there appears stealing eighty ashruffees, (about £120) 
from a Brahmin, and a Brabmin drinking wine. Under the third, with ‘‘the murder of 
‘a friend,’ and divers kinds of incestuous adultery, is conjoined “‘ eating the victuals of 
the washerman’s or any base caste.” The fourth class, termed opoo-patuk; which the 
glossary of the code explains to be “ small offences,” contains a large .association of 
crimes, of which the following make a part. 


Code, page 108.—* Slaying a cow; adultery with the wife of another; performing 
‘* the jugg to procure the death of any person; giving a philter to obtain an unwarrantable 
‘© power ; spoiling trees ; eating victuals at the hands of an astrologer ; a man’s not paying 
** his debts ; stealing grain and metals, except gold ; depriving a woman or a man of 
«* either of the three inferior castes, of life.’”” e 


Petty assaults (see code, 191) are also frequent among these people, and proceed from the 
temper just described. They employ a large chapter of the code, in which a number of 
frivolous ridiculous eases, hardly fit to engage the attention of children, the offspring of ' 
superstition, pushed to endless punctilios, are stated. The punishment, though lightey,-in 

pe n. <S : , itgelf, 
og 


GENERAL APPENDIX. 59 


itself, proceeds in the same gradation, as that" for scandalous imputations, ef which the 


scale has been already given. But concerning these it may be observed, under this head, 
that there is surely a direct breach of moral propriety in taking * abzlities” into the de- 
cision, especially by the superiority of ability to alleviate indecorous behaviour ; yet this 
direction very frequently occurs ; and how is the superiogity of ability to be ascerjained ? 
In this instance, as in numberless others, every thing is left to the judge. 


_e a ; 
Fovurtu, Of Laws which, without referesce to Caste, go upon Principles of Oppression 
and Injustice. 


* Of Inuertrance. 


Code, page 64. A person born*blind, deaf, or dump, without a hand, a foot, or a 
nose, &c.; whoever is of such generalill-behaviour? that his relations and partners 
refuse to eat or drink with him; whoever is so incurably disordered as that remedies 
«* have no effect upon him; a man afflicted with a consumption, &c.; whoever procures his 
‘* subsistence by an unwarrantable business or profession ; is thereby incapacitated for 
inheritance.” : 


Note.—The relations must probably be often interested in the succession. 


€ 


n 


an, 


€ 


a 


c 


a 


Of Recovertne Dests. 


Code, page 19.—* After other methods prescribed there to,a creditor for recovery of 
debt, fail, he shall carry the debtor home with him and detain him. If this mode also 
fails, he shall by feigned pretences, endeavour to get hold of sdme of the debtor's 
goods. If he succeeds not here, and has no pleflige, he*shall then seize and confine the 
debtor’s wife, children, cattle, buffaloes, horses, and such kind of useful animals, 
also ‘his pots (necessary for dressing his food), clothes, mats, aud: furniture ; and 
“* seating himself at the debtor’s door, therg receive his money. If even these methods 
*« prove unsuccessful, he shall seize and bind the debtor's person, and procure by forcible 
means (corporal punishment) a discharge of the debt.” 


21.—* Ifa man acknowledges himselfeindtbted to another, and yet refuses to pay, the 
creditors shall use the means above specified, to recover his money without hindrance or 
molestation from the Magistrate. If the debtor should lodge a complaint, the judge 
shall fine him, and cause the creditor to be paid.” 


37.—** If during the time of a famine, or for the execution of some religious purpose, or 
** on account of sickness, or to satisfy the importunate demands of a creditor, who has 
proceeded so far as to seize his debtor, and confine him without victuals, the husband 
should appropriate to himself his wife’s property, without her leave, he is justifiable, nor 
‘< is he abliged to return or repay what is so appropriated.” 


a an a aw 
an es a 8 


a 
a 


s 
a 


na 
nA 


a 


a 
n 


* 
a 


. These regulations are limited by the following. 


Code, page 20.—** If a man lends money to a Magistrate, his own master, or a Brahmin, 
he shall not be rude or uncivil in procuring payment.” 


23.—< When a creditor procures his money by application to a Magistrate, he shall 
‘© give him one-twentieth of the sum received for his interposition.” 


® 

270.—* If a Magistrate’s officer hath brought beforé the Magistrate any person for any 
“ crime, and upon the Magistrate’s examining that person, he should deny thg crime laid 
*¢ to his charge, then, even if a small offence be proved against him upon a trifling crime, 


¢ Magistrate shall levy a great fine.” 


a 


@ 12. ; FirtH, 


‘4 


APPENDIX, 
ee on 


ny 


Causes of the Situa- 


tie 


and Character 
the Hindoos. 


APPENDIX, 


#1.» 


Mr. Grant's State 
of Society in x 


60 APPENDIX 10 REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


Firtx, Specimens of Laws which, without reference to Caste, discover a Spirit of Cruelty. 


Code, page 211—* A man killing a goat, horse, or camel, except for sacrifice, to have 
** one hand and one foot cut off.” . 


212.4-* A man always guilty ef selling the flesh of dogs or jackalls, for goat or stag 
“© flesh, to have his hand and his nose cut off, and his teeth broke.” : 


217.—‘* A man selling white copper, &c. to counterfeit silver, the Magistrate shall break 
** the hands, nose, and teeth of such person, and fine him thousand puns of cowries.” 


e 
217.—** A man stealing an elephant or horse, excellent in all respects, the Magistrate 
** shall cut off his hand, foot, and buttock, and deprive him of life.” (Note.—Stealing 
a man of inferior caste is rated ata fine of a thousand puns of cowries, as we have already 
seen.) 


218.—« A man frequently guilty of counterfefting gold, to be cut in pieces with a razor.” 


e 

But the cruelty of the Hindoo people appears in no way more evident than in the whole 
of the treatment to which their women are subjected in society, under the sanction and 
authority of the code. They are truly an unfortunate part of the community, and greatly 
to be pitied. Receiving no education, disposed of in marriage without having their consent 
asked, or knowing any thing of the person to whom they are to be given, they are immured 
fdr life, and made mere servants in the family of their despotic lord. If barren, or bearing 
only daughters, they are neglected ; and not always released from oppression, even when 
death removes the husband; for they are then frequently reduced to the alternative of 
sinking into a state of infamy, or of burning themselves with his dead body. 


The code expressfy sanctions this inhuman and astonishing custom. 


253.—** It is proper for a woman, after her husband’s death, to burn herself in the fire 
‘© with his corpse.” 


«Every woman who thus burns herself, shall remain in paradise with her husband, 
* three crore and fifty lacs (three milliofs and a half) of years.” 


This strong recommendation and injunction from a lawgiver, believed to be divine, is of 
course admitted to have the force of a religious%bligation ; and it is one of those institu- - 
tions of which the Brahmins are very tenacious. We are naturally led to inquire, what 
could have been the primary cause of an institution so horrid. The Hindoo writings, :so 
far as they are known, seem to be silent on this head: but an explanation however offers 
itself, from the principle of the perpetual separation of castes, and the manners of the 
people. It was essential to that principle, that the castes should marry each within itself. 
In a few permitted cases, men of a higher caste might take a wife from an inferior one of 
the original four orders, and all the children were deemed of that to which the father 
belonged ; but in no case was it allowed to a woman of a higher caste to marry with a man 
of a lower. ~ = 


Mixed intercourses were therefore almost universally prohibited under penalties; and 
the offspring which, notwithstanding prohibitions, appeared from that source, was degraded 
below the fourth caste. But polygamy has always been practised. among the Hindoos, 
especially among those of the higher orders ; and the latter wives must infallibly, from the 
custom of the country, be considerably younger than the husband, and generally still young 
when he dies. A multitude of widows must tltus soon arise in the community, and from 
the nature of the case, progressively increase. Second marriages of women appear to* b& 
unknown, and repugnant to the Hindoo law and usages. 


‘ ® : 
When a woman’s husband therefore dies, she is reckoned an useless being, and what is 
worse, a dangerous one. The jealousy of the Eastern people has placed their honour in the 
condggt 


.\ 


GENERAL “APPENDIX.” 51 


conduct of their women,-as being what touches them most. Not the husband himself only, 
but the whole family are stained by the misbehaviour of a wife ; and if she degrades herself 
after his death, they are still affected by her dishonour. If she should bring other children 
by a man of inferior caste, she would iatroduce, more haat than any misconduct in a 
man could, that disorder and confusion into the societyevhich would tend to brealy- down 
the lines of separation between castes, But. seeing the number of widows must always be 
great, and they have no effectual stiperintendent or protector, there must be a proportionable 
danger of such irregularity as wguld at length make the exceptions bear down the rule ; 
and if mothers, as in many instances miglt thus happen, were to rear the ‘children of a 
Sooder with those left by her former noble husband, the higher caste could not be preserved, 
during infancy, from defilements produced by eating and drinking, and touching what 
appertained to the other ; nor coulf the son of a Sooder, brought up in this way, after- 
wards regard his Brahmin brother and gompanion with the veneration deemed indispensably 
requisite to be shown to that order. 


How then, might it be said, shall the evils to be erp bende from this source, notgvith-- 


standing prohibitions and disgrace, be prevented ? t an ordinance, professedly divine, 
recommend to widows a voluntary departure with their husbands to paradise, under an 
assurance of enjoying there a very long succession of felicity ; honour shall stimulate them 
to embrace this choice, and lest the love cf life should still prevail, the fear of infamy shall 
compel them to die. Nor would this expedient appear as shocking to the Hindoos, as it 
does to us. Admitting the separation of castes to be a sacred institution, whatever tendedl 
to subvert it, might be obviated, not only lawfully, but as a matter of duty. 


Women there have no concern in the education of their children,after infancy ; they can- 
not go abroad ; the chief, if not the only way in which they are considered to be useful, 
terminates with the life of the husband ; the code imputes to them the most depraved, 
impure, unsafe nature; they aye ranked in the “‘ Bhagudd” with those who are “ of the 
_womb of sin ;” and it is believed that they are doomed to successive transmigrations, until 
they are regenerated in the body ofa Brahmin. Vile therefore in their nature, and become 
useless and dangerous, to remove them from th8 earth, would be to study the preservation 
of order below, and to accelerate the course they have to pass through to a happier state. 
And thus there is a regular progress from the first stage of a false principle to a practical 
consummation that is tremendous. 


Z : 

Our supposition, that the original desigi? of this institution was to prevent the dishonour 
and confusion of castes, appears to be confirmed by the terms of the ordinance in which it is 
delivered ; for after saying that “ it is proper for a woman to burn herself in the fire with 
her “ husband’s corpse,” it adds, “* if she cannot burn, she is to maintain an inviolable 
chastity.” If she remains always chaste, she goes (still) to paradise, and if she does not 
preserve her chastity, she goes to hell,* 


It is probable that though the ordinance speaks in genera] terms of any woman, the Brah- 
mins might not mean its operation to extend beyond the higher orders, and might especially 
intend to preserve their own in all the distinction of purity necessary to maintain their 
authority. Among the lower castes it is seldom enforced. With the others, what was origi- 
nally in part at least policy, is now superstition, or an honourable family distinction ; and 
in this last view, the practice seems to have extended to other Eastern nations, who probably 
adopted it from the Hindoos. . Expences and domestic inconveniences attend it, which may 
contribute to confine it to those alone, even of the superior castes, who are in better cir- 

cumstances ; 


* A paper in the fourth volume of the Asiatic | this subject, confirming in general the view of 
Transactions, published long after this passage ; it here given.—Asiatic Transactions, Vol. 1V. 
was written, exhibits a variety of decretory sen- | page 209.’ 

“< from the Vedes and Shasters, relative to 


APPENDIX, 
: 4 


-I. 


Cauges of the Situa- 
tof and Character 
ofthe Hindoos. 


A pPENDIX, 


I. 


“Mr. Grant’s § 
of Society in 


APPENDIX to REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


62, 


eumstance?; but among persons of that description, happiness and misery, honour and 


te 
jas 


- 


infamy, the present and the future, are all urged as motives to destruction, with great and 
horrid success, . The number of ‘women thus annually destroyed in Hindostan, probably far 
exceeds the general conception of Europeans.* 


, As connected, with this subjects it may be added in illustration of the cruel genius which 
pervades the Hindoo code, that the Vedes undoubtedly enjoin human sacrifices ; that such 
were. certainly formerly offered to Kallee, the Goddess of Destruction, one of whose terrific 
ornaments is a uecklace of human skulls; and_that there is reason to believe that this 
infernal practice, though now publicly disused, has net yet entirely ceased.t 


One article more shall close the elucidations from the Hindoo code. 


Code, page 274.‘ In cases where it is ordered, a man shall be put to death, instead 
“ thereof he shall pay one hundred gshrufiees (about £150) ; and where it is specified that 
“ one of his hands, or one of his feet, shall b& cut off, instead thereof he shall pay fifty 
<* asfruffees ; and instead of having two of-his fingers cut off, he shall pay twenty-five 
ashruffees ; so also, when banishmeut from the kingdom is his sentence, instead thereof 


he shall be fined twenty-five ashruffees.”’ 


a 


ce 
é 


nN 


“¢ Men of rank, or good principles, or learning, committing such a crime as to, deserve 
capital punishment, if they are not men of property, the Magistrate shall take less than 
one hundred ashrutfees, according to his fortune.” 


ce 
Cd 


« Tf a Brahmin who hath always acted in conformity to the Vedes, commits such a crime 


** as to deserve capital-punishment,t the Magistrate, to prevent him in future from the 


oe 


* No judgment can be formed of the number. 
from the transactions of this kind, occasionally 
seen about English settlements; by far the greater® 
part takes place in the interior of thé cougtry, 
out of the view and intelligence of foreigners. 
Roger, a writer of great credit in the last century? 
relates that the Kheterees compelled their women 
to burn, reckoning it a disgrace if their wives 
were not laid on the funeral pile with them; and 
that during his residence at Paliacatta, a nan of 
distinction of that caste dying, sixty of his wives 
were burnt alive with his corpse. A Hindoo of 
education stated to a friend of the writer, his 
conjecture that the victims thus annually burnt 
in the Bengal provinces, amounted to fifteen 
thousand. The calculation indeed seems ex- 
cessive; yet if we adopt moderate data, the result 
will be enormous. Hiudostan has been estimated 
to contain a hundred millions of inhabitants, 
and at least one-tenth of these to be Mahomedans..- 
Tn the more opulent families of the three inferior 
original tribes, particularly the Kheterees, the 
practice in question is occasionally followed. 
Suppose then the four original tribes to make up 
two-thirds of the Hindoos, that is, sixty millions, 
the Brahmit families, with a small proportion of 
the Kheterees, and a few of those belonging to 
the other two tribes, to constitute a tenth part of 


° * 


commission of such crimes, shall confiue him in perpetual imprisonment.” 
punishthent to a Hindoo, to whgm indolent inactivity is aspecies of enjoyment.) 


(No heavy 


e From 


the four original tribes, or six millions, the heads 
of families in this number to be one-sixth, or one 
million, the deaths of these annually, one in 
thirty, and (a plurality of wives being in many 
of these families) one woman only to be burnt 
far each, the number annually sacrificed in Hin-. 
dostan will then be about thirty-three thousand. 

These data are all hypothetical, and have little 
certainty; but let the proportion be reduced to 
the lowest probable scale, the annual immolation 
of human victims to a dire superstition, will still 
ne an-enormity under which language must 
sink. 

The principle alone, however, is so dreadful, 
that it needs not the aid of numbers to shew its 
atrocity. ; 

+ When Mr. Elliot, deputed by Mr. Hastings, 
in1777, to the Rajah of Berar, had advanced 
into the country, between that prince’s capital and 
our territories, a young man presented himself, 
and solicited leave to travel under the protection 
of his suite; on being asked his reason, he replied, 
he understood the rajah or zemindar of a district, 
before them, offered every year a human sawi- 
fice, and generally seized some stranger passing 
by at that time. : 

t+ The implied consistency of these two sup- 
positions deserves to be remarked. 


GENERAL .APPENDIX. * 63 


From what has been stated in the former part tf this chapter, it will be undegstood that _ 


the ordinances quoted under this last article, as relating to criminal law, are not now a rule 
of judgment in our territorial courts, but they are introduced here for the sake of illustrating’ 
the genius of the Hindoo code. At firgt sight, they seem to diminish the cruelty of that 
code. They only afford, however, a fresh and striking demonstration of its injustige and 
venality. ; 

The best apology for a severe system of laws would be, that they were impartially admi- 
nistered. But here is an office of indulgence set up to the rich, and the pecuniary rates 
fixed at which they may commit crimes worghy of death. On the poor, who cannot perhaps 
raise one ashruffee, the laws must still“have their course ; and thus it becomes evident, that 
their steady object is. not the prevention of offences, and that their remissions do not proceed 
from clemency ; but that there is in the dispensation of punishments, a scandalous partiality 
in favour of rank and wealth, and a pglpable regard to the emolument of the Magistrate. 
Indeed, pecuniary fines are one great object of the code » tye} occur perpetually, the law is 
so loosely delivered that in personal disputes almost every thing is left to the discretion of 
the Magistrate, and one sure issue of them is his private advantage. - 


From this brief inspection of the Hindoo code, a tolerable adequate idea of its genius, in 
points upon which the happiness. of society essentially depends, may be obtained. The 
articles which have been selected, are such as do not take their character from the light 
wherein they are placed, from forced constructions, or extraneous circumstances ; ‘their real 
nature, their intrinsic quality, their conformity or repugnance to the fair unalterable standard 
of good and evil, is evident. It cannot certainly have escaped attention, that the immo- 
rality, the injustice, and the cruelty of the code, are by no means ,confined to the instances 
which have been adduced under these heads, respectively, but appear in glaring colours in 
the numerous regulations which have been quoted, in reference to that wide and important 
subject, the distinctions in favour of the superior tribes. *Actions are indeed often esti-. 
mated, not according to their intrinsic good or evil, but according to the relation they have 
to caste. . : 


e 
Immoralities of every description are tolerated on easy terms to one part of the society, 
and some of the most atrocious kinds are permittetl without reprehension, that is to say, 
have all the encouragement which a Jegal sanction van give them, 


An unfeeling barbarity also runs through tlfe punishments of the code; it defends san- 
guinary inflictions ; and the translator, who is usually its apologist, acknowledges, that its 
*« various modes of capital retribution contradict the general opinion adopted in Europe, 


APPENDIX, 
‘4 
Causes of the Situa-" 
tioyand Character 
of fie Hindoos. 


« that the Gentoo administration was wonderfully mild, and averse to the deprivation of - 


‘¢ life.” If such an opinion has ever been general in the West, it was plainly a gross pre- 
judice, and may show the necessity of paying more attention than has hitherto been given 
to the character of this people, in order to know it. ae 


‘Of the effects produced upon a feeble, ignorant, superstitious people, by such a departure. 
from the genuine principles of equity, truth, honesty. purity, benevolence, peaceableness, 
and good order, in a word, by such a standard of morals as these laws, professing the autho- 
rity of a divine appointment, establish, it cannot be difficult to judge. ‘It is a maxim so 
plain as not to be mentioned without apology, that a corrupt rule must produce a practice 
still more corrupt, since no higher point of perfection being aimed at, and a progressive 
degeneration common to all establishments, the spirit and manners of the people, if season- 
able reforms are not interposed, will in time become generally vicious. —— 

But other causes have essentially co-operated in the formation of the Hindoo character ; 
these are to be found in that part of their complex system which is purely religious, and. of 
which we next proceed to give some account. 

So great an undertaking as a general or systematic exposition of the Hindoo feligion, is 
not here intended. All that is proposed or thought necessary, is only a view of some of 


4 : ‘ its 


APPENDIX, 
al. 


Mr. Grant's State 
of Society in i 


* penance and expiation. 


64 APPENDIK ro REPORT rnpw SELECT COMMITTEE 


" its tenets and institutions, which have a direct influence upon the morals and sentiments of 


the people ; and these shall be presented under the five following heads: 


First, 


Ceremonial and pecuniary atonements.. 


Secondly, Doctrines relating to transmigratione 
Mirdly, The characters of the Hindoo deities. 


Fourthly, Modes of worship. 


Fifthly, Superstitious opinions, immediately affecting the conduct cf the Hindoos in 


+, eommon life. , 


e 


. e . . 

In the first place then, concerning that grand article, the expiation of the guilt of sin; the 
Hindoos are taught to have recourse to various ceremonial works and observances, and con- 
fidently to depend on these for absolution: real contrition and amendment, hatred of evil, and 
a respect to the holiness of the divine nature, do notappear to enter into their consideration 
of this subject. The whole is fedu@ed to certain external performances; and in the Vedes, 
there, are long enumerations of sins, that is to say, of offences against morality, and every 
species of offences which men can commit, with the particular expiation prescribed for each.* 


* Ayeen Akberry, Vol. III. page 252.—Roger, 
pages 262, 267.—Sonnerat, Vol. I. pages 220, 


273, et seq-—Religious Ceremonies, Vol. VI. | 


pages 190, 221.—Boldzus, in Churchill's Collec- 
tion, Vol. IIT. page ’785.—Bernier, Tome II. page 
121.—Herbert’s Travels, page 334.—Bhagvad 
Geeta, page 46, et seq.— But see more particularly 
the Institutes of Mesu, published since this tract 
was drawn up, Chap. IIL. pages 307, 343. © The 
professed business of this chapter is to treat of 
The efficacy of expiatory 
penance is laid down as a general prineiple or 
doctrine. e 
« Some of the learned consider an expiation as 
confined to involuntary sin; but others, from 
the evidence of the Veda, hold it effectual even 
in the case of a voluntary offence.” 

« A sin involuntarily committed, is removed 
by repeating certain texts of the scripture ; but 
a sin committed intentionally, through strange 
infatuation, by harsh penances of different 
sorts.” 

After employing near thirty pages in describing 
various crimes, many of the deepest dye, and the 
performances by which atonement for them, if 
they are publicly known, and thence mischievous 
by their example, may be made, we meet with 
some sentences which speak of open confession, 


113 
¢ 


es 


se 


na 
aon 


n 
nw 


73 


’ repentance, loathing of the sin committed, and 


abstinence from it. If the most favourable con- 
struction be put upon these expressions, what are 
afew such glimmerings of mental religion, amidst 
a heap of ceremonial observances, painful or ridi- 
culous? They are overwhelmed and lost in a mass 
of false principles and senseless practices. They 
are indeed, superseded and contradicted by the 
general tenor of this very chapter, and by the 
doctrine of penances; for no hint is any where 


a 
. 


In 


given that the expiations and sacrifices prescribed 
in the Vedes are emblematical or typical, the 
plain and obvious sense of the precepts which en- 
join them is that they really atone for sin. “ By 
“* these penances,” says the legislator, to quote the 
conclusions of his impositions for one species of 
offence, may a twice-born man (one of the three 
“ superior castes) atone for the guilt of theft.” So 
with respect to secret sins, “‘ the man who desires 
* to expiate his secret sins, great and small, must 
repeat once a day, for a year, the text ava or 
the text yatcinchida. Though he have com- 
_mitted many secret sins, he shall be purified by 
repeating for a month the text somarandra, or 
the three texts aryamna, while he bathes ina 
sacred stream: or if he thrice repeat a canditd 
« of the Vedes, or a large portion of them, with’ 
“ all the mantras and brah’manas, dwelling in a 
“ forest with subdued organs, and purified by 
“ three pdracas,'(a total abstinence for twelve 
« days and nights,) he shall be set free from all 
“ sins, how heinous soever.” If some of the 
Brahmins should have juster views of the evil of 
sin, and of the necessity of moral purity, we may 
be assured that the bulk of the people, from whom 
even the contents of the Vedes are carefully 
concealed, rest in the external forms which are 
prescribed to them. So it has happened in 
various parts of Europe, amidst more general 
knowledge, and a light truly divine. Men have 
turned aside from that light, and resorted to in- 
ventions of their own, to penances, pilgrimages, 
dndulgences, and supererogatory works; which 
being corruptly grafted upon a systemr in itglf 
altogether pure and complete, have thence recon- 
ciled the practice of allowed sin, with the hope 
of pardon and of heaven. . 


7 : aN 


GENERAL’ APPENDIX. , 65 


In general, these expiations consist in pilgrimages, in living and dying in places reputed 
holy, in ablutions, in penances, in the celebration of festivals; in fasts, in largesses to 
Brahmins, in sacrifices and offerings to idots, in anointing the body with theeexcrements of 
a cow, and in other expedients of-a Amilar nature. 


- It would far exceed the limits of this treatise, to enter into a detail of the methods adopted 
among the Hindoos for obtaining the remission of sin, Besides those which the authority 
of the Vedes, or general usage has established, there are many other inventions, imposed by 
teachers individually upon their fespective followers ; a few examples however shall be stated, 
of those which fall under the former" description. ; 


I. Hoty Rivers, dedicated to ope or other of the deities, Brahnia, Vishnow, or Maha- 


APPEN D(X, 
‘ im bs 3 


Capes of the Situ- 
at®nand Character | 
of the Hindoos. 


deo, may be mentioned in the first place. There are twenty-eight of them named in the © 


Ayeen Akberry, beginning with the @anges, and travgrsing the whole continent to the In- 
dus ; so that all the professors of Hinduism are within r@ach of an antidote against the con- 
sequences of guilt. Each of these rivers has some peculiar property ascribed to i¢, and 
many places upon the banks are held sacred, and annually resorted to. 


The virtues of the river Ganges are universally allowed to be pre-eminent ; the water 
of it assuredly purifies from all sin. Ablutions in it are used continually for this end, as 
Europeans daily see ; and the dying, when within a moderate distance of it, are carried to 
its edge, and their feet are placed in the river, that thus they may have a happy passage out 
of life. Its water is conveyed to distant parts for the same purposes ; and if persons con- 
fiding in its virtue are not within reach of it, thinking of it and invokiug it, when they bathe 
in any other water, will still give them all the efficacy of it. This river is believed to have 
flowed down from Heaven ; hence its transcendent excellency. 


Il. Hoty Pracxs,* dedicated to the same deities, art also spread through all parts 
of Hindostan. Some of the most distinguished are the following: The city of Kashee, or 
Benares, with the district around it for ten miles. Jt is held that those who die here are 
transmitted immediately to Heaven. ‘The celébrity of this city, and the continual resort to 
it of pilgrims, are well known. ° 

Ayoda, or Owde, is another sacred region of @onsiderable extent, hallowed by the birth 
of Rama, one of the most popular deities of the Hindoos. ar oR 

Metra, with a territory around, is famous for the birth of Crishna, another of their 
distinguished deities. : 

- Herdewar, where the Ganges falls into Hindostan, ‘a place of great annual resort. 

Eliahbas, formerly Pyag or Prayaga, at the confluence of the rivers, Jumna and 

Ganges. 
__ This place is esteemed superatively holy ; the man who dies there, not only has the par- 
don of all his sins, but it is said, that whatever he wishes for, he will obtain in his next re- 
generation ; and there also suicide, though in general thought by the Hindoos to incur 
future punishment, is deemed meritorious. 

«« The Hindoos,” says Abul Fazel,t ‘ regard all Cashmere as holy land. , Forty-five 
«* places are dedicated to Mahadeo, sixty-four to Bishen, or Vishnow, three to Brahma, 
** and twenty-two to the goddess, Durgah. In seven hundred places, there are carved 
«© figures of snakes which they worship.” : : 

Cashmere is about two hundred and fgrty miles in length, and. thirty-five in breadth. 

The famous pagoda of Jaggernaut, in Orissa, is another place of great sanctity. It is 


alleged that the body of Crishna was carried there by an inundation of: the sea from Dow- - 


arka, near Surat, formerly a station of distinguished fame and resort. At Jaggernaut, 


5 : 
a Brahmin 


* Ayeen Akberry, page 255. ae | - t Ibid. Vol. II. page 156. 


Mr. Grant’s 
' of Society in 


te 
Ash. 


Arrgvpm, 66 | APPENDIX 10 ‘REPORT rrou SELECT COMMITTEE. 


a Brahmin, who would every where else be defiled even by the touch of a Sooder, may 
receive without the least stain, victuals from his hands. .- . Se 


There are m&ny more such places of great resort ju the Deccan, and the northern parts 
of Hindostan. Rules are laid doyn for every pilgrimage to them, and various rewards 
promisell to those who perform them.* ~ 


Not only are pilgrimages held beneficial, both to the soul and to the body, but such is 
the virtue ascribed to the sanctity of the sacred places, thgt by naming them only, men 
receive the remission of their sins ; and on that accoynt great persons, who are somewhat 
solicitous on this score, run over the names of the principal of them every morning, as if 
they repeated a prayer ; so that where a pilgrimage cannot be conveniently undertaken, yet 
the benefit may thus be secured.f 


III. Sacrifices, Orrerines, end Frstivats, are celebrated at particular periods, and 
by the different castes in their respective forris. These are deemed eminent means of 
obtaintng absolution from guilt. 


IV. Aumsetvine is prescribed in various ways, for the remission of particular crimes, or 
the obtainment of particular favours.[ The Dan-Poojah, a religious ceremony, in which 
by many fantastic modes costly presents are bestowed, is conceived to be followed by pro- 
digious rewards in a future state. ; 

oJ 


V. ENDowMENTS To THE Braumins, to Pacopas, &c. are all esteemed highly 
meritorious, and the variety and extent of these cannot be described. A large portion of 
the lands of Hindostan has been transferred, by means of them, into the ‘hands of the 
Brahminical order. , 


VI. Ricorovus Prenances, proture the pardon of some species of offences particularly 
enormous, 


VII. Methods are likewise devised for theebenefit of those who have not been su ficiently 
careful during their own lives to ensure the pardon of their sins, by which their friends who 
survive, are enabled to be highly useful t6 them. ‘The body or the bones of the deceased 
being thrown into the Ganges, temporary fiappiness at least is procured to the soul, and the 
advantage of such a condition in another transmigration as shall at last bring it to Heaven. 
At Gaya, a famous resort of pilgrims in Bahar, there is a particular stone on which ‘the 
god Vishnow set his foot ; and a person by putting on this stone, in the form prescribed, 
a certain paste prepared there, and by repeating at the same time the name of a deceased 
friend,’ can transfer that friend from hell itself to supreme felicity. And this benefit he may 
extend, not to one friend only, but by repeated applications of paste, to as many as he can 
recollect, even of his distant connections. 


VIII. Worxs or SuPereRoGATion, to procure distinguished eminence in the heavenly 
world, are also exceedingly numerous, and many of them altogether astonishing, An 
account of them would fill a volume ; anda few instances, however striking, would give 
but an inadequate idea. The hideous painful distortions, and tormenting inflictions, to 
which the Joguis subject themselves, till life is wasted away, would be perfectly incredible 
if they were not so abundantly attested, and yet seen, by many who visit those countries, 
They afford new proofs of what the human mind ‘ean imvent, and the body endure, in 
the way of torture, under the influence of superstition. There is reason however to believe, 
that this species of zeal rather declines in the pregent day. | 

oe oo Bug 


+ Ayeen Altbery, Vol. IIT. page 254. | “f Ayeen Akberry, page 174. 
.+ Roger. be 7 


GENERAL APPENDIX: .. by 


But though the painful details which it furnishes must bé spared, it would be injustice 
to the present subject not to mention that divers kinds of suicide are held by the Hindoos 
to be meritorious. These, as stated in the institutes of Akber, are fige in number: 
« 1. Starving. 2. Covering himself with eow-dung, and, setting it on fire, consuming him- 
** self therein. 3. Burying himself in snow. 4, At tite extremity of Bengal, wgrere the 
«© Ganges discharges itself into the sea, through a thousandgchannels, he goes into the 
“* water, enumerates his sins, and prays till the alligators come and devour him. 5, Cutting 
« his throat at Allahabad, at te confluence of the Ganges and the Jumna,”” To this last 
species of suicide, performed at apppinted times, such as eclipses of the sun and moon, 
great stores of wealth are promised in the next state.* 


In short, the modes of ‘expiating guilt, and of acquiring merit, are endless among this 
people. To accomplish this end, is the business of all their vast train of ceremonies, 
services, and external performances ; “it is the very thinge that hag upheld the fabric of 
Hindoo superstition, and has perpetuated *the credulity of the multitude, and the impos- 
tures of their priests : even by the Bhagvad, the purest production of Hindoo thebdlogy, 
proceeds upon the same principles for the remission of sin. The ingenious translator, 
upon whose authority it has been stated that this work is carefully concealed from the 
vulgar, also observes, that the great ignorance in which they are kept, contrary to the 
better knowledge of at least the more enlightened of the Brahmins, supports, together with 
the ceremonies of the Vedes, the consequence and the vety existence of the Brahminigal 
order. But although the Bhagvad refines upon the popular system, and contains some 
moral passages, with others, which though mystical have respect to the intention of the mind 
in religious worship ; yet it palpably admits polytheism and idolatry, and inculcates such 
pitiable and pernicious doctrines as the following : 


7 e 

‘«* Those who eat not but what is left of the offerings, shall be purified from all their 
“* transgressions. Some attehd to the worship of Devatas or angels; others sacrifice 
*¢ their ears and other organs in the fire of constraint. There are also the worshippers with 
** offerings, the worshippers with mortificattons. * Some there are who sacrifice their 
*¢ breathing spirit, and force it downwards from ifs natural course, whilst others force the 
‘* spirit that is below, back with the breath. —_ All these different kinds of worshippers, 
** are by their particular modes of worship, purified from their offences.t 


. An intelligent friend of the writer expresses himself thus in a late letter from Calcutta : 

«* One day at a Brahmin’s house I heard a wonderful man, a Poorannee, (a reader of com- 
‘© mentaries on their sacred books,) explaining their Shasters. He frequently made the 
** people burst into tears, and wept aloud. Whenever their passions were touched with 
‘** any pathetic passage, the man obtained several rupees, thrown to him both by Brahmins, 


AppENpix, 


ry 


Cases of the Situ- 
aon and Character 
of the Hindoos, 


*¢ and Sooders,- only the latter attended their donations with a pernaum, or act of worship . 


*¢ to the Poorannee, The Sooders, you know, are taught to worship the Brahmins, and 
*¢ they do it by pernaum, that is, touching the ground with their heads while they pro- 
*¢ nounce the word, then the Poorannee holding out his hand in a convex manner, says, 2sho, 
*< i, e. come, amounting to “thy sins be forgiven thee,” for by ‘‘ come,” they mean to call 
*« all the sins on the neck of the Sooder to the hollow of their hand, where a mystic fire 
** consumes them, The Brahmins are the true idols, while they carry about with them the 
“© powers of absolution, and to break off their yoke will not be easy. One evening I went 
** to Kallee-ghaut (a temple of Kallee), at the time of Arutee, which is performed by the 
** moving of a lamp with several wicks about the face of the goddess. When the operation 
** was over, 2 Brahmin brought up the lamp, and walked through a passage lined with poor 
** Sooders on each side, who anxiously, as he passed, put their hands for a moment over 

the flame before it-went out, in order to procure the remission of their sins for that day.” 


Upon the whole then it appears, that the Hindoos pursue methods of obtaining pardon 


of 


* * Ayeen Akberry, pages 274, 174. a t Bhagvad Geeta, page 55. 
2 . 


APPEN DIX, 


"Mr. Grant’s Qtate 
of Society in Aa. 


68 | APPENDIX ro REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


fe 
of sin withdut regard to the disposition of the mind, or the :conduct of life on their own 
principles. They may go on. committing wilful offences every day, and as regularly wiping 
them off, and,die at last pure and in-peace, and. pass through the water of the Ganges to 
happiness in anew state. For the violations of conseiénce, which though smothered is not 
extincty* for the disregard of truth, of justice, and of mercy, their system has enabled them, 
without making any the sliglatest compensation to men, to give sufficient satisfaction to their 
gods.t .To them they pay a certain quit-rent, or acknowledgment for liberty to do. 
whatever their’ inclination and ability may prompt them tg, as far as their fellow creatures 
are concerned, Can we hesitate to say what must bg the effect of such principles on their 
character? Among such a people, crimes must prevail. True it is, and greatly to be 
lamented, the prevalence of crimes is no new thing, nor peculiar to them. The ancient 
* world exhibited a picture of the same kind ; and to thedishonour of the Christian name, in 
countries nearer home, that pure religion has been changed into a mystery of imposture and 
corruption. But though it musf be ‘said, that, the light which overspreads Europe, has 
preveyted the same degree of effect from the system of delusive fraud still practised there, 
yet have not the consequences been infinitely prejudicial to those countries where it has 
prevailed ; and is not that system likely, in the end, to dissolve the frame of society in 
them ? ' 
‘ 

Seconpity. The Doctrine or TRANSMIGRATION, and others connected with it, univer- 
sally received among the Hindoos, have great influence upon their modes, of thinking and 
afting, and serve to weaken their sense of moral obligation, The Hindoos are taught to 
believe that their present corporeal habitation, and earthly sufferings, whatever they may 
be, result from their actions in a former state ; and that there are inherent original qualities 
in the constitution of man, from which all his good and all his evil actions proceed. From 
these tenets it follows, that the commission of crimes is the result of destiny, and yet that 
they are punished ; and that natural evils, the consequences of personal misconduct, will be 
regarded as the chastisement of offences to which destiny compelled the sinner in a former 
state. Thus ideas are introduced of original injustice, of arbitrary destination to sin, and 
to punishment, in the constitution of things # and offences bear the character of misfortunes. 
rather than of guilt, It is very commog to Rear a criminal answer, when he is asked how 
he could be guilty of such atrocity, ‘ that it was his nusseeb,” his fate. ‘The same persua- 
sion extends to the success of men in life, particularly of warriors and conquerors ; and he 
who has once got the ‘opinion of a happy désting in his favour, will from that very preju- . 

s dice, achieve things which a contrary opinion might have rendered impracticable to him. 


The doctrine of transmigration tends likewise to weaken the idea of future responsibility. 
It unites the soul sometimes to the human form, then again to one of the lower animals, in 
which, even according to the Hindoo notions, there is an incapacity for the exercise of 
rational powers, and a want of a moral sense: it likewise supposes the consciousness of 
former states of existence to be lost. Hence there is no sense of personal identity, no 
suffering from the reflection of past crimes, no real perception of the reasons of suffering ; 
but merely passive temporary endurance. It is true the Brahmins have an art by which 
they profess to discover the former state and character of persons, by their present suffer- 

‘ ings ; 


* «If having performed any expiation, he feel | offended justice of God, this seems to be spoken 


“ not a perfect satisfaction of conscience, let him 
“ repeat the same devout act, until his conscience 
‘be. perfectly satisfied.”—Institutes of Menu, 
On Expiation, page 339. 


+ This is spoken of their practical system. In 


a passage of the work just quoted (page 330), it 
is saig that “the penitent thief must always re- 
«¢ store the goods that he stole.” But besides that 
neither restitution nor penance can satisfy the 


only of those who literally, by the act of stealing, 
subduct the property of others, It ought cer- 
tainly to apply to all dishonest agents and traders, 
Dut is probably not so understood ; if it be, surely 
no precept was ever less observed. The banks &f 
the Ganges afford every day the sight of multi- 
tudes of worshippers of different lines of business, 
who are in the habitual practice of cheating, and 
never think of restitution. ap te : 


‘GENERAL APPENDIX. © . 69 


ings; but the existence of such an imposture does not invalidate these observatfons, since 
with whatever credulity it may be regarded by a Hindoo, it cannot impart to-him the 
conscious knowledge of experienced truth. Its chief object seems to be mogey, and as it 
affords a curious specimen of the subjeotion into which the human mind may be brought, 
some notice of it shall be taken hereafter. / ‘ 


The Hindoos, indeed, entertain such inadequate and obscure apprehensions of a future 
state of punishment, and have so many ways of fortifying themselves against them, that 
their moral conduct is little influeaced by fear derived from that source. 


One of the notions which they have fiequired from the doctrine of transmigration is, that 
some departed spirits may be doomed to whirl for ten days after death; like devils, in the 
air, suffering from.hunger and thisst; and therefore during that space, after funerals, 
victuals are laid out for the birds, that the unhappy deceased, if they are floating in the airy 
regions, may partake of the food. On the other hand, there is a happy state, to which the 
course of transmigrations may convey men, fo the court of Indra, God of the Firmament, 
te aN says Sir William Jones, <‘ the pleasures, as in Mahomed’s paradise, are wRolly 
‘© sensual.” . 


But even he who is arrived at paradise is not secure ; for the omission of certain cere- 
monies, or oblations to the manes of deceased ancestors, by the descendants of those no 
longer in a state of probation themselves, is dreadfully fatal, ‘‘ precipitating the unhappy 
‘© persons into nark, or hell, thence to be borne again into the bodies of unclean beastse 
** until by successive regenerations, all sins are done away.”* These offerings, which come 
under the denomination of sheradha, are made by some daily, by others monthly and 
annually ; and the manner of performance is thus explained in the Ayeen Akberry:¢ ‘¢ He 
“* gives to the Brahmins, money, goods, and food, dressed’ and undregsed, in the name 
** of his father, grandfather, and great-grandfather, and of, his mother, grandmother, and 
‘* great-grandmother.”” ‘The principle upon which they proceed, is that of increasing the 


Appennig, 
‘L ‘ 
Cauges of the Situ- 
2atif’n and Character 
of the Hindaos. 


welfare, solace, and enjoyment of departed progenitors ; the real effects are to provide a: - 


stated succession of sacrificial entertainments fog the Brahmins, to add to the ceremonial 
burthens and superstitious terrors of the people, by threatenings of dreadful consequences, 
as well to those who omit these rites, as to the°spirits of the deceased, who are thus 
neglected. ian 


: ‘ 
. What suitable ideas of spiritual happingss gnd of divine justice can a people, adopting 
such a practice, possess ; and how must it discourage virtuous exertion to think, that all may 
be undone after the death of the performer, by the carelessness of another person ! 


Tuirpty. The Cuaracter of the wore Muttirupe of Hinpoo Derries, male and 
female, is another source of immorality. The legends and histories of their actions are 
innumerable, and in the highest degree extravagant, absurd,, ridiculous, and incredible. 
But the feature by which they are, above all, distinguished, is the abandoned wickedness of 
their divinities, Brahma, Vishnow, Mahadeo (who are held to be respectively the creator, 
the preserver, and the destroyer of the world), and of all the rest, in their several subordi- 
nate capacities. The most enormous and. strange impurities, the most villanous frauds and 
impostures, the most detestable cruelties and injustice, the most filthy and abominable con- 
ceits, every corrupt, excess and indulgence, are presented to us in their histories, varied in a 
thousand forms. These scandalous legends are more or less known among all the millions 


‘ of Hindostan ; they form an immense series of adventures, which fill the imagination of a - 


weak and credulous people ; very many of them are perpetuated by images, temples, and 
ceremonies, and those of such a nature as‘ it were pollution to describe. Representations 
-whjch abandoned licentiousness durst hardly imagine within the most secret recesses of 
impurity, are there held up in the face of the sun to all mankind, in durable ee in 
places 


* Notes to the Bhagvad. | + Vol, IIL. page 231. 
xd 


Aeon: 70, APPENDIX to REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 
nei places dedicated to religion; nay, they are the objects of religious adoration, and miniatures 
ue Grant's Riere are taken from them and worn by multitudes about the neck.* Is it conceivable that the 
of Society in Asia: senses and ynagination of the people, especially of the youth, should not be utterly 
'. depraved by such representations ; or that all.feelmgs and ideas of natural modesty should 
not begconfounded and extinguisked by them? What then must be the effect when religious 

influence is superadded ? oO 


If such indecent exhibitions as are now forbidden by the law in this country, were to be 
presented to public view with the highest honour, in lofty“%ind elegant edifices, appropriated 
by the legislature for that purpose, and all ranks,’ sexes, and ages, were encouraged to 
resort to them ; if religious merit were added as a further encouragement ; and if the practice 
were to be permanent ; what would be the effect upon the general manners? A great 
revolution in all ideas of modesty, chastity, continence, and decorum ; the.exclusion of 
sentiment and virtue. Of all these, nothing would’ be left, but the consideration of what 
custom had prescribed, and positive institutio’ had forbidden, as to exterior demeanor and 
conduct. Such is the state of the people of Hindostan as to these points: there is a dis- 
cernible absence of our feelings and opinions of propriety and decorum in what regards the 
sexes, a grossness in their language, manners, and ideas, which (whatever allowances are to 
be made for the differences of eastern or of ancient habits of life) is best to be accounted 
for by tracing it to this source. There is a certain modesty which seems to be inherent in 
the constitution of the human mind ; traces of it are to be seen in the rudest hordes still 
uncorrupted ; it is positive corruption that destroys it; and the usages of the Hindoos must 
therefore be an effect, as well as a cause of depravity. 


Nor are these which have been enumerated, the only ways in which the Hindoo mythology 
influences the mangers of the people. He who wants to glut his revenge, knows where to 
address himself to a patroness: Kali, (or Kalee), the Goddess of Destruction, has still. 
many votaries ; and the Vedes afford examples of sacrifices‘and tremendous incantations for 
the destruction of enemies. The robber also, when about to issue forth against the person 
and the property of his neighbour, pfopitiates his tutelar Deity for a successful expedition. 
We have seen from the code, that the pyactice of offering worship and sacrifices, in order to 
compass the death of another, is known to the law. In short, what is the nefarious practice 
for which a patron may not be found in the Hindoo pantheon? The morals of these people 

‘are therefore poisoned at the fountains and altar of religion. 


Fourtuty. The Worsuie and Crremonigs practised by the Hindoos, with various 
circumstances appertaining to them, have the effect of vitiating, as well as of stupifying, 
their minds. In an enlightened land it may appear superfluous, formally to state, that such 
are the consequences of idolatry ; but that which is admitted, it may be well also, to recol- 
lect and to view, as exemplified in practice. The divine nature is infinitely degraded by , 
every material representation ; and the man already so gross as to resort to one, becomes 
more gross in using it, If he does not at length drop the idea of a distinct invisible power, 
and think only of the object before him (as there is reason to suspect he will), he at least 
believes that his god inhabits either the stock or the stone which he has set up. European - 
apologists for so monstrous a practice have been willing to deny. this idea of idolatry ; but 
an evidence of far superior authority, the author of the Bhagvad, asserts its reality. He 
introduces Crishna, who is there represented as Vishnow, with supreme authority, saying, 

: - - the 


* Cérémonies Religieuses, Tome VI. passim. | Jones, in the first vol. of the Asiatic Transag- 
Roger, page 157.—Voyage de Gentil, Tome I. | tions, page 254.—Baldzus, in Churchill’s Collec- 
page pert 8 de Sonnerat, Vol.I. page 41 | tion, Vol. III. passim.—Nieuhoff, in ditto, Vol. II. 
& 175.—H&milton’s Travels, Vol. I. page 379.— | page 184.—Fryer’s Travels, page 179, &c. 


Pietra della Volle, page 55, &c.—Sir William 


’ GENERAL APPENDIX. 671 ARPENDIy, 
** the ignorant* believe me, who-am invisible, to exist in the visible form under Which they ° a 
«* see me.’t And the learned translator of the Bhagvad is of opinion, that it was one of Caug& of the Situ- 
the aims of that work “to induce men at least to believe God, that is, the Qipreme God, &tionand Character 
«* present in every image before which they bent.” Between depraved opinions entertained of the Hindoos. 
of the Divine Being, and depraved practice, there is a nece®ary and inseparable connection, ~ 
Those opinions originate from corruption, and he who makes a god for himself, will certainly 
contrive to receive from him an indulgence for his corrupt propensities. Hence all the scan- 
dalous and shocking proceedings,gof which some intimation has been given in the preceding 
pages. If we suppose the origin of the erroneous notions in question to have been the alle-- 
. gorization of physical truths, or of the powers of nature, still if the inventors had not 
ceased to be shocked by lust, fraud, and robbery, would they have stamped those qualities 
on their gods, and chosen’ extravagant representations of them as badges of religion? In 
all the popular worship of the Hindoos,God is never set forth under the idea of Holiness, 
‘* as of purer eyes than to behold iniquity ;”, nor is any’service offered to him worthy of a 
rational mind, The Supreme God has indeed neither temple nor honour among the people; 
the few Brahmins who recognize his being, do not suppose him to concern himself with the 
affairs of the world ; and the better conceptions which they have of his nature (though 
the rays of original truth scattered through their system are overwhelmed in the mass of | 
‘polytheism and idolatry), they hold as speculations, which they conceal from the multitude, 
and in practice oppose. So that the indulgence in immorality, which we have seen to be 
carried to such a length, is not the perversion and degeneracy of their system, but its very* 
essence, 


Unrestrained however as the Hindoos are, with respect to immoral license, they gain little 
satisfaction from their religion with regard to those things which affect them most, namely, 
natural evils, and the interests of the present life. They do not considér one Mind, one. 
Power, as governing the universe; they are distracted by a multiplicity of deities, who are 
not represented as acting in uniform concert, but often as at variance.’ It must generally 
therefore be an uncertainty among them whether the tutelar deity whom they have chosen is 
able to protect them ; whether the prayers of their enemies may not prevail; whether other 
deities, whom they do not assiduously serve, may nét injure them; though they multiply 
inventions to persuade themselves, and others, ofthe pre-eminence of their respective 
peculiar deities ; and the followers of Vishnow and Eswara are, on this account, in mortal 
opposition to each other. ; 


They invoke, indeed, particular deities for particular things, (with ceremonies of the most, 
abominable kinds, in which the women are pre-eminent,) and those of the subordinate 
classes are perhaps not to be enumerated. But after all, they think it best, especially the 
lower castes, to endeavour to conciliate evil spirits likewise, to deprecate their malice, and 
implore their friendship. To one of themt they sacrifice, on the festival dedicated to his 
honour, goats and buffaloes, instead of a man, the sacrifice which it is said was formerly 
offered ; at which time also some of his deluded votaries were wont to throw themselves 
before his processional car, that by being crushed under it they might receive a happy death. 
The epee still common, of swinging by hooks fixed in the muscles of the bad: and 
attached to ropes, which with a lever raise the body to a considerable height, is performed 
in honour of this malevolent spirit. This is the same deity described by Sonerat§ as a god~ 
dess, under the name of Mariatale, who, he says, was a most infamous woman, guilty of all 
sorts of cruelties ; but her body, after the head had been deservedly severed from it, being 
re-animated by an evil spirit, she is now, under this decapitated form, greatly feared and 

i served 


* The “ignorant,” from the whole scope of the | t+ 
work whence this is taken, appear to be allexcept | ff 
a few of the most enlightened Brahmins. § 


-~ 


Bhagvad-Geeta, page 71. = 
Calledby Roger, page 245, Ganga-gramma. 
Vol. I. page 246. 


SLPPENDIX, 


Mr. Grant’S§tate 


of Society in 


sia, 


42, APPENDIX to REPORT. rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


e 
served by the lower Indians on the coast of Coromandel, and by the Parians in particular, 
who put her, he adds, above God. 


Another mode of honouring their deities is common in those provinces where the Maho- — 
. medan invaders never fully settled themselves, ‘Proops of prostitutes are attached to the - 


pagodas ; they are brought up &s the servants of the idol, dance in its processions, and make 


part of the establishment of the place. The accession of stich auxiliaries to a religious 
institution, and the belief of their being even in an enviable state as to another world, are 


ustified by the legendary merit of one of their order, whe is related to have been visited by 
Dewender keeper of the celestial regions, in tlte fogm of a man, and to have shown great 


fidelity to him. Let this notorious fact declare, whether the impurity of their deities and 


temples has any connection with immorality in practicg. 


The Hindoo mythology has not only the tendency of directly vitiating the heart, but gives 
such false notions of nature, @s mest envelop the mind in gross ignorance and error, and 
thus strengthen the dominion of superstition, and its attendant vices. Their legendary 


allegorical histories of the creation of good and evil spirits, and saints, with their wars and. 


actions; of the elements, the seasons, and the planets, all of which are personified by them, 
have come at length literally to be received by the vulgar, who thus seriously believe that 
the sun and moon are animated beings, or Dewtahs, and that when they are eclipsed, two 
evil spirits, or dragons, have seized them. On such occasions therefore vast multitudes have 
ebeen used to resort to the rivers for the purpose of ablution and prayer, to beat the water, 
and make hideous noises, in order to induce the dragons to relinquish their hold. Bernier 
witnessed a scene of this sort at Delhi, in the last century, of which he has given a striking 
description.* The people in our settlements do not seem now to be so loud on these occa- 
sions. ‘The learned among the Brahmins know better: but if they have for more than two 
thousand years persisted in keeping the vulgar under such absurd deception, they are very 
unworthy depositories of science. In® the knowledge of the globe they seem to be them- 
selves grossly defective, maintaining a scheme. of geography imaginary and ridiculous, the 
offspring of the same genius as the mythological legends, The extravagant errors of the 
Hindoos respecting visible nature, tend to gender their minds less apt for the perception of 
moral truth. - . 


‘Besides the consequences of idolatry, which are universal, the very appearance of the 
Hindoo idols in general has a tendency te dgsrade the worshippers: they are hideously 
ugly, with many heads, arms and weapons; with great teeth and eyes, and terrific counte- 
nances, of a black colour; many of them smeared with oil, and smelling strongly of it. 
They are shut up in narrow dark rooms, and the approach to them is through obscurity and 
silence. Thescandalous obscenity of others has been before hinted. Figures of the monkey, 
the bull, and of various other animals, are often placed around, and worshipped as the 
attendants of the superior deity of the place. 


Of the innumerable, strange, and antic ceremonies, gestures and postures, practised by the 
Hindoos in their worship, no full description can be given. They are varied according to 
the rules of different sects, and the fancies of individuals. The account contained in the 
Ayeen Akberry,t of the Poojah, a form in daily and ordinary use, will give some idea of 
them, and hardly fail to excite commiseration for the deplorable blindness of the people. 


“ Poojah is divided into sixteen ceremonies. After the worshipper has performed his 
‘¢ usual ablutions, with the Sindehya and Howm, he sits down, looking towards the east or 
. the north, with his legs drawn up in front ; then taking in his hand a little water and.rice, 
«« sprinkles the idol, thinking that he thereby ae the worship of God. Next is the 
«© Kulsh-Poojah, or the worship of the conch-shel 
‘ : ** plaistering 


* Tome II. page 97. | + Vol. IIL page 226. 


. Last is the Gunta-Poagjah, which is: 


ra 


GENERAL’ APPENDIX. 73 


@ 

«* plastering the bell with sandal-wood. When he has performed these Poojahs,’ he throws 
*¢ down a little rice, and wishes that God may be manifested; thus far includes the first of 
s¢ thesixteenceremonies, 2. He places a table of metal, or any thing else? as a seat for the 
« deity, 3. He throws water into a Yessel, to wash hig footsteps. In Hindostan it is the 
** custom, that when a superior enters the house of an inferior, fe washes his feet 4. He 
*« sprinkles water thrice, to represent the idol rinsing his mouth. It is also the custom for 
** an inferior to bring to a superior water to rinse his mouth before meals. 5. Sandal 
«¢ flowers, beetle, and rice, ar@ offered to the idol. 6. The idol and his seat are carried to 
** another spot. When he takes in his right hand a white conch-shell full of water, which 
*¢ he throws over the idol, and with his left rings the bell. 7. He dries the idol witha 
‘« cloth, replaces it upon its seat, and dresses it, 8. He puts the zenar (a sacred thread) 
*¢ upon the idol. 9. He makes the kushck (lines with a composition of cow-dung, &c.) 
«¢ upon the idol, in twelve places. 10. He throws over theeidol flowers or green leaves, 11. 
*« He fumigates it with perfume. 12. Ht lights a lanfp with ghee (clarified butter). 13. 
*¢ He places before the idol trays of food, according to his ability, which are distributed 
** amongst the by-standers, as the idol’s leavings. The 14th is called numskar, which is 
«* worshipping God with heart and tongue; and stretching himself at full length, with his 
*« face towards the ground (this prostration is called dundowt) ; then he lays himself in 
** such manner that his eight members touch the ground, namely, the two knees, two hands, 
“* forehead, nose, and cheeks ; aid this they call shastang. These kinds of prostrations are 
** also performed to great men. 15. He compasses the idol several times. 16, He stands 
‘© like a slave, with his hands uplifted, and asks permission to depart. There are particular 
** prayers, and many different ways of performing these sixteen ceremonies: and others 
** believe, that only from the ninth to the thirteenth are indispensable duties. Ex- 
es i a Sonny-assy and a Sooder, all other Hindoos perform this*Poojah thrice every 
“ ay.” 2 e 

Firruty. The spirit of superstition extends among the Hindoos to every hour, and every 
business of life. The particulars recently statgd, though striking, give no adequate idea of 
the universality of its operation; and to follow it through all its influences, would be an 
endless task. Some further illustrations may, ho'wever, suffice to confirm:the existence of 
such a spirit, and to prove its powerful and incéssant influence over the minds of this peo- 
ple. Affecting, in a variety of ways, their understanding and their conduct, it must also 
" enter, in no inconsiderable degree, into tite constitution of their moral and national charac: 

ter, 


The Hindoos, it has been already observed, are afraid of evil spirits, such as are denomi- 
nated among us, demons and genii, They believe the world to abound with them ; every 
little district has its haunted places ; and persons who pass them often, make some offering, 
or render homage to appease and conciliate the residing genius. Many are the devices in 
use amongst them to fortify themselves against the assaults of these malignant beings, 
which they apprehend on small occasions as well as on great ; for when a Hindoo yawns, 
he performs a short exorcism, to prevent the demon from seizing that opportunity of enter- 
ing into his body. Possessions are most firmly believed by them, and the appearance of 
them is not at all uncommon. The persons are evidently convulsed and agitated in an 
extraordinary manner ; they declare that a spirit has seized them; and there is seldom 
reason to think them insincere in making such assertions, because the circumstance happens 
to servants and others, who, from caste and the usages of. the country, hardly ever meddle 
with the curious arts. The notion of. apparitions is also very familiar among the people. 
Their legends countenance it, and their infaginations, weak and inordinate, multiply rela- 
tfons:of this kind. It is supposed also, that the spirits of the dead have access to the living, 
in various ways, and may do them good or evil. Witchcraft is universally believed, and 
practised among them. Every village has one or more female professors of tRis art, and 
wizards also abound : these are dreaded, accused, and resorted to, .as was the ease in Europe 
in fhe dark ages. But in Hindostan, this is still an active and flourishing profession. The 
several arts of divination, soothsaying, sea necromancy, and, above all; astrology, we 

we 


‘ 


*APPEN@IX,- 
se hae 


° 


Catsesof the Situa- 
tion and Character 
of the Hindoogs. 


APPENDIX; 


—_ , 
Mr. Grant's State 
of Society in Asia- 


34 APPENDIX ro REPORT rrom SECRET COMMITTEE. 


well known and highly regarded. From the work of: Abul Fazil, it- would appear that they 
are all explained and sanctioned in the Shasters. The Vedes, we know, enjoin the horo- 
scope to be drafwn at the birth of a child, and this is constantly practised. The Magistrate, 
among the Hindoos, was bound always to have skifful astrologers and soothsayers about 
him. Ye code imposes punishment upon any one ignorant of astrology, who shall ‘penne 
to: predict misfortune to the Magistrate. No affair of importance is at this day undertaken 
without consulting a soothsayer. . 


se . 
Incantations also, which form another very large brapch in the occult arts of the Hindoos, 


are amply treated of in the Vedes, and in practice are universal. Their object is unlimited ; 
to procure all good, and avert all evil. 


e 

With incantations, may be classed the endless variety of charms, spells, talismans, amulets, 
and other inventions. of this nagure, of which no intlividual, small or great, of all the 
millions of the Hindoo race, is destitite. ‘The eonfidence reposed in these things is won- 
derful, It isa part of the duty enjoined in the Hindoo code to the sovereign, “that he 
** keep magicians, men who can cure by spells,” upon which far more reliance is placed than 
on medicine. While the writer of this sketch was in Hindostan, he saw in one morning, 
two fine young men, the pupils of a/ snake-charmer, lying dead, in consequence of their 
undoubting confidence, that the spell which he had taught them would render the poison of 
the serpent innoxious. Presuming upon this spell, first one and then the other provoked a 
mfost venomous snake to bite him, and in two hours they were both corpses, leaving des- 
titute families. Unsuccessful instances of this sort do not open the eyes of the people. They 
are referred to irregularity in the application of the spell, and do not impeach the efficacy 
of the art. \ 


As a further illustration of this vast system of imposition, the following transcripts are 
made from the Ayeen Akberry,* the work, it is to be yemembered, of a man of the 
first eminence for talents, rank, and information, who was born and passed his life in 
Hindostan, : 

: Sur, 

“Is the art of predicting events, by dbserving in what mamner the breath issues through 
‘© the nostrils. The breath comes out of the nostrils after three ways. First, when it comes 
‘© mostly out of the left nostril. This they attribute to the influence of the moon, and call 


they: attribute to the influence of the sun, and therefore call soorejnaree and pingela. The 
“¢ third is, when both nostrils breathe equally. The following is the order in which the 
‘© breath ought to pass through the nose :—from perva to the third tith, chandernaree, and 
the same number of days soorejnaree, alternately throughout the month: others make 
it weekly ; thus, Sunday, Tuesday, Thursday, and Saturday, soorejnaree ; and Monday, 
«© Wednesday, and Friday, chandernaree. Others maintain that it is regulated by the 
** sun’s course through the zodiac, Aries beginning with the soorejnaree, Taurus with chan- 


** dernaree, and thus alternately through all the signs. AJl the learned of the Hindoos’ 


‘* believe, that if a man breathes differently from one of these three ways, some misfortune 
** will befal him ; if the irregularity lasts two days, a quarrel will ensue; if it continues ten 
«« days, some misfortune will befal him ; if fifteen days, he will have a severe fit of sickness ; 
«< if for a month, his brother will die. Others speak thus of the irregularity of breathing; 
** if for a day and night, soorejnaree is in excess, the person will die at the expiration of a 
“* year; if it lasts two days and nights, he will live two years; and so a year for every day ; 
‘se if the excess continues for a month, he willdie at the end of the ensuing month. For 
"«* the excess of chandernaree, they say, if it lasts a day and night, that person will have « 
«* fit of sickness at the expiration of a year; and according to the number of days he will 
“* be so neany years sick.” a 

; i: le 


* Vol III. page 175- 


-adda and chandernaree. ‘The second, when it issues most from the right nostril, which ° 


= 


x4 
¢ 


a 


ee 


ee 


“e 


n 


€ 


GENERAL APPENDIX. | 75. 


The manner of predicting events by the knowledge of this art.* 
« If any one comes to enquire whether a woman who is pregnant shall be, delivered of a 


4 
Appendix, | 
I 
Causes of the Situa- 
tion and Character 


boy or girl, the person who is to answer must examine the nostrils of the questioner ; if he of the Hindoos.’ 


breathes more through one nostril than the other, and*stands on that side, it sha]]-foretel 
a son; but if he happen to place himself on the opposite side, it shall indicate that it will 
be a daughter ; if he breathes equally through both nostrils, there will be twins. Some’ 
believe that if the questioney stands on the soorejnaree side, it will be a boy ; and if on 
the chandernaree, a daughter ; ang thet if the breathing be equal, it denotes an herma- 
phrodite.” ‘ : 


«¢ If an inquiry is made concerging a person who is sick ; if the questioner stands on 
the soorejnaree side, the sick person will die: but if on the chandernaree side, he will 
recover.” 


«* If it be inquired whether or not an en®my’s army will come; if the questioner is chan- 
dernaree, and stands on that side, the army will come; but if he is soorejnaree, and stands 
on that side, it will not come.” 


‘© If he inquires concerning peace and war; chandernaree implies the first, and soorejnaree 
the last.” 
Axum,t 


“« Teaches what incantations are advantageous, and what. are hurtful’; what will improve 
the understanding, increase rank and fortune, cure diseases, subdue enemies; cement 
friendships, insure the conquest of countries, and advance the success of government.” 


. 


Suoocun,f 


e : 
* Ts the art of discovering what is now happening, and predicting future events by observ- 
ing the motions of birds. This is an art in which many Hindoos are skilled.” 


«* The learned Hindoos discover hidden things by means of five things; 1. Astrology,— 
2. Sur,—3. Shoogun,—4. Keyweel, which are onfens learnt by throwing dice,—5. Sam- , 
dirg, predicting from observing the form of the,limbs, and their motion, and the lines and 
moles on the body.” ‘ : 
Garwp,§ 
‘* Ts the art of repeating certain incantutions for recovering a person who has been stung 
by a scorpion, or snake, or any other venemous reptile. ‘This is done by repeating his 
genealogy and praising his ancestors, which obliges the animal to present itself. The 
following is a wonderful fact. When they have caught an old snake of a particular 
species, they repeat certain incantations, and then make it bite a Brahmin; when the 
poison takes effect, the Brahmin continues for some time in a state of stupefaction, when, 
upon any question being put to him, he gives answers. which are invariably found to be 
true. The Hindoo philosophers believe that during the revolution of the Cal-jowg, no- 
thing is truer than such answers. And these answers have been collected together into 
several volumes.” 
INDERJAL,|| 


_ ‘© Includes the art of necromancy, talismans, and sleight of hand, in which they are won- 


derful beyond description.’ 
But the excessive solicitude of the Hindoos about the future, is in nothing more conspi- 


cuous than in their regard to omens, signs, lucky and unlucky days. They carry this atten- 
tion to a length almost incredible. It interferes perpetually in all the affairs in which they 
fre concerned, as Europeans who have to act with them have the mortification to find. 
Roger, a Dutch clergyman of great credit, frequently cited in this treatise, has given in his 


j work, 
*-Ayeen Akberry, vol. III. ‘page 176. - | § Ayeen Akberry, vol. III. - 178. 

fm ¢ Ibid. - = TE. = 174. . ft Ibid. . - III. .- 179. 
fbi, - - 9 TE, 098. . . 


L 2 


\ 


ny 
ApgenDix : 

Mr. Grant’s State 

of Society of Asia. 


y6°* APPENDIX ro REPORT vnoa SELECT COMMITTEE. 


work, written in the earlier’ part of the last century, on the Coast of Coromandel, and since 
translated into French, an account of their proceedings in this respect, which so well suits 
the present matiners of Bengal, that while it fully illygtrates the subject, under consideration, 
‘it evinces the sameness of charactes, prevalent among them jn distant periods and places. 

« D’utant* qu’il' a esté dit dans l’onzieme chapitre, que les Brahmins, et autres nations 
“* payennes, prennent garde aux jours, quand ils ont dessein d'aller faire la demande d’un 
‘© marrjage, ou pour Je confirmer, il ne sera pas pour ce sujet, hors de propos, de parler un 
** peu comme on prend garde au signes et aux chgx des jouts.” 

* TJs n’entreprendront point une affaire qu’en un jour, qui, selon leur compte, est ban ; et 
« s'il se presente quelque signe ce bon jour-1a, qui selon leur opinion, est mauvais, ils ne la 
“€ poursuivront pas, craignant que la fin n’en soit pas*bonne. Quand ils ont le dessein 
« d’entreprendre un voyage par terre, ils avanceront, souvent leur ‘voyage, pour prendre 
 Voccasion d’un jour et d'une bonpesheure, quojque ce seroit vers le soir, et qu’ils ne pour- 
 roient pas aller plus d'un quart d’heure loin de ta ville, cela n’estant pas eapable de les en 


-empescher, estant asseurez que quand ils partent en une bonne heure tout leur voyage 


«* sera heureux. Ils différont souvent leur voyage quelques jours, pour avoir un bon jour.et 
« une bonne heure ; et il arrive souvent, (comme j’ay dit,) qu’ils ont perdu, en attendant les 


. * bons jours, la bonne occasion, et le temps propre, pour avancer leur voyage, et pour avoir 


* ‘un heureux succez de leurs affaires. De fagon qu’on peut dire, avec juste raison, de ces 
** payens-la, ce que Seneque disoit des sabats des Juifs ; ‘ que plusieurs choses, qu’on devoit 
** faire 4 linstant, estoient souvent perdues, ou ne se faisoient jamais, 4 eause qu’on diffé-. 
*“roit, et qu’on ne les faisoit pas en temps.’ I] s’en va de cette facon avec ces payens-cy ; 
“* car pendant qu'ils attendent assez les bons jours, et les bonnes heures, ils les perdent 
** souvent, et souffrent beaucoup de dommage ; et ce que je n’ay pas vu seulement une fois, 
** pendant que j’ay’fait 1a ma résjdence, mais d’an en an, que par le retardement, ils ont 
«* Jaissé passer le temps de mouson, et oft esté contraints de revenir, sans. rien faire, apres 
* estre parvenus a la moitié du chemin de Pegu, Jannasseri, et Achim.t C’est une chose 
** estonnante, qu’ils ne deviennent pas, plus prudents pour l’avenir, par le dommage, et la 
** perte qu’ils souffrent continuellement ; qu’ils persistent et continuent tousjours dans leur, 
‘* ancienne erronée, et inutile practique. *Comme cette opinion est profondément enracinée 
en eux, ils n’en peuvent pas estre divertts.”” ' 
‘* Mais} pour entendre le dit panjangam (almanach) il faut sgavoir, comme nous avons dit 
** au chapitre précédent, que les payens avoient tfente heures au jour, et trente heures ala - 
nuict. J] est déclaré dans ce panyangam, touchant chaque. jour de la semaine, et touchant - 
chaque heure qui se rencontre dans le jour, ce qu’on peut faire en icelles avee bons succez, . 
** et ce qu’on doit laisser.” a 
‘«* 1, Que le dimanche commencant au lever du soleil, la premiere heure est bonne pour 
‘* toutes sortes d’affaires de discours, ou de conseil.”’ 
« 2. Sil’on entreprend quelque affaire, quiapporte ordinairement du profit, elle suecédera 
“ bien, et apportera du profit.” 
. 3. Si l'on entreprend quelque affaire pour en recevoir du profit, elle ne succédera pas 
ce jien,”’ ; ‘ ', . 
“ 4, Si l’on espere recevoir quelque chose de bon, .l’enemy jouira de ce bien-la.” 
* 5, Il y aura du profit 4 faire marchandise.” ‘ 
‘© 6, I fait bon célébrer une feste, ou entreprendre quelque chose concernant joye ou 
eF doctrine.” co 
« 7. Traité touchant femmes succédera selon le desir.” 
** 8, La marchandise ne donnera point de profit.” 
- * 9, Comme en la, sixieme heure.” 
* 10, Ce qu’on entreprend ne succédera pas bien.” 
. +, : 


q : 5 
* Roger, Porte Quverte, page 71. vessels may have been Hindoos, but both hdve 
+ The mariners concerned in these voyages { this superstition. 
- were probably Mahomedans, the owners of the + Roger, p. 84. 


my , 
APPENDEX, 


_GENERAL APPENDIX. | a7 


prendre médicine, ou de faire quelque chose pour le eontente- 


Causes of the Situa- 
. tion and Character 
of the Hindoos. 


“ 11. El est mauvais de 
Ment ducorps.” . — - 
* 12, Qui cherche victoire, il luy sucgédera bien.” 

* 13. Il fait bon d’acheter des vaches, des bestes, &c.” 
44. Il fait bon de prendre quelqu’un & son service.” > 
« 15. Il est mauvais d’entre dans une maison neuve, ou de visiter quelqu’un dans sa 
maison.” ie ase . 
16. Il est bon de commence? quelques maisons, village, ou ville.” 

17. Il n’est pas bon d’entreprendré un voyage.” 

18, Il est bon de visiter les grands.” . ; 

19. Tl est bon de faire des images a l’honneur des pagoden.” 

20. H est mauvais d’entreprendre quelque chose.” 

21. Celuy qui pense gaigner quelque chose, sera tsompé.” . . 

32. Celuy qui entreprend une bataille, la perdra.” 

23. Il est bon de rechercher l’amitié.” 

24. Il fait bon se battre.” , 

25. Il fait bon prendre eonseil de quelqu’un quelque- part.” 

26, La marchandise‘n’apportera pas de gain.” . 
‘27. Qui aura la connaissance d’une ferame, aura un enfant.” . 

28: Tout ce qu’on entreprendra, reussira.” 
ag. Celuy qui entreprendra quelque chose de plantage, aura bon succez.” 

* 30. Tout ce qu’on souhaitera auparavant, ne succédera pas bien.” 

« J] ira de mesme la nuict, d’heure & heure, jusqu’au soleil levant.” 

The other days of the week, and the sixty parts into which each is divided, are detailed 
in the same strain; and thus every half hour is marked by spmething spécific te be under- 
taken or to be avoided. * How*much the affairs of life, and all rational considerations about 
them, must be interrupted ; how much the poor people, who are enslaved to this superstition, 
must be harassed by it ; may easily be conceived. They seek relief from every thing, and 
fear every thing except the Supreme Lord. « ‘i 

‘But this is not the only yoke imposed upon thenf. Their ceremonial defilements, pollu- 
tions, and uncleannesses, the ways in which caste nay be stained or lost, the methods of 
purification, the regulations concerning food, sthe manner of dressing and eating it, the 
ceremonies at births, at different ages, at marriages and deaths, all these multiplied beyond 
enumeration, with a prodigious calendar of burthensome festivals and fasts, constitute a 
most grievous bondage. 


A scrupulous Hindoo cannot go forth from his house without being accessible, on all sides, 
_to dangers from omens and defilements. He must proceed every step with fear and 
eircumspection, lest some calamity should come upon him. “ Dust+ shaken from flesh, 
* from a broom, a garment, or from divers animals ; the touch ofa burnt net, a crow, a cock, 
“a hen, @ rat or mouse, an eunuch, a washerman, a hunter, a fisherman, a gamester, a 
« distiller, an executioner, a tanner, a dealer in leather, an oilman, and of any sinner ;” 
* these are some of the manifold ways in which by contact, by accidents, or by the arts of 
others, personal pollutions may be contracted. The ceremonies which respect the article of 
‘food alone, might form a volume, Many kinds of provisions are totally forbidden ; others 
become, in particular circumstances, unlawful; and those which. are allowed, may be defiled 

- by 


t 


- * A few articles in the detail are curious enough 
* to,be noted. 
“© Celuy qui entreprendra quelque chose au 
* desavantage de son prochain, cela lui réussira. 

“ Tl fait bon, entreprendre une mauouise affatre. 
‘¢ Il est bon, d’entreprendre quelque chose, pour 
“ donner de la erainte a quelqu’un ; celuy qui mange 
“ du poison, ilen recevra les mesme avantages que 

. \ 


“ de ’Amortam,” (supposed to be the same as 
Amrita, the nectar of the gods.) 

“ Tl fait bon brusler les malades, ou les couper. 

* Celuy qui cherche chose pour tromper, 11 ne 
“ Je recontrera pas. _ ° 

* Qui veut entreprendre quelque chose, ses 
“ enemies mouront.” 

+’ Ayeen Akberry, page 242. * 


_ AQPENDrX, 


Mr, Grant’s State 


of Society in Asia, 


78e APPENDIX ro REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


by a thousand contingencies. The vessels used in preparing food, if touched by one of the 
lower caste, are defiled. The shadow of a chandal, (a person of the base caste before men- 
tioned,) passiag even over water, defiles it. All things useable, liquids, grain, metals, silks, 
cottons, vegetables, domestic ugensils, the earth itself, are lable to pollution, and the 
remedies to be applied for their purification are prescribed. * «Sunshine, moonshine, the 
“ light of a fire, air, water, earth, ashes, mustard-seed, wild grain, the shade of a tree, the 
“ hind part of a cow’s leg, a plough, milk, milk curds, ghee or clarified butter, the dung and 
“« urine of a cow,” are a very few of the things which afe esteemed to have a purifying 
virtue, and mostly in cases of personal defilement. ° 
Besides the time employed in their daily ablutions and ceremonies, that which is lost 
from attending to the lucky and unlucky hours, and that which must be given, to the 
temoval of contracted defilements, there are many rigorous fasts + prescribed, and a still 
teater number of festivals. { ¢ Of ¢hese last only,*the whole number appointed for the 
ifferent castes appears, from the ‘Ayeen Akberfy, to be about a hundred in the year, and 


- theyeare in general carefully observed. 


It is not however enough, that the Hindoos bear the accumulated evils, natural and 
fictitious, of their present state of existence. .The Brahmins profess a science called Kur- 


‘rembeypak, “ by which,” says Abul Fazil, “ can be discovered whatever was done by men in 


“ their former state of existence ; and it prescribes a particular expiation for each crime.§ It 
ig probable that there has always been more discretion than rigour, in the exercise of the 
authority derived from this source; but the invention itself.is so singular, as to merit some 
further observation. 

The art is subdivided into four kinds; and distinct examples of each are given in the 
Ayeen Akberry, (Vol. III. page 167). || . 

From these exarfiples, the following only shall be selected, as being short, and affording a 
sufficient explanation of the nature, and’ possible extension of this new species of taxation. 


Diseases which are Punishments-for Crimes in a ForMER Stare. 


*¢ Lameness is a punishment for having ki¢ked a Brahmin.—Cure, Let him take one tolah 
of gold, in the form of a horse, and bestow it in charity; and give food to one hundred 
and eighty Brahmins.” 

« A fever isa punishment for killing an inrfocert Kheteree.—Cure, Repeating one hundred. 
times the incantation of Mahadeo, feeding thirteen Brahmins, .and sprinkling with water 
“ the image of Mahadeo one hundred times.” 


a 
a 


an 
a 


a 
a 


“ A cough 


* Ayeen Akberry, page 243. 
Ibid. r 


i = = = 247. 
pak Ibid. - - - 268. 
Ibid. - = = 167. 


\| The Institutes of Menu established the doc- 
trine of sufferings. for sins committed in a former 
state, and describe both the signs by which those 
sins may be discovered, and the expiations which 
must be made for them. Some passages from that 
work will further illustrate the doctrine. 

“ Ifa twice-born man, by the will of God in 
* this world, or from his natural birth, have any 
corporeal mark of an expiable sin committed in 


‘ &¢ this or a former state, he must hold no intercourse 


* with the virtuous while his penance remains un- 
“ performed.” 

* Some evil minded persons, for sins committed 
« in this life, and some for bad actions in a preceding 
« state, suffer a morbid change in their bodies.” 


* A stealer of gold fram a Brahmin, has whit- 
‘¢ lows on his nails; .a drinker of spirits, black 
teeth ; the slayer of a Brahmin, a marasmus; 
the violator of his guru’s bed, a deformity ia 
“ the generative organs; a malignant informer, 
“ fetid ulcers in his nostrils; a false detractor, 
* stinking breath; a stealer of grain, the defect 
*« of some limb ; a mixer of bad wares with good, 
“ some redundant member ; \ 

‘« A stealer of dressed grain, dyspepsia ; a stealer 
“ of holy words, or an unauthorised reader of the 
“ scriptures, dumbness; a stealer of clothes, le- 
*¢ prosy ; @ horse stealer, lameness.” 

‘“‘ Penance, therefore, must invariably be p®r- 
‘« formed for the sake of expiation ; since they who 
« have not expiated their sins, will again spring to 
*¢ birth with disgraceful marks.” 


Institutes of Menu, page 35 3. 


GENERAL APPENDIX. 


} : ; 
« A cough is a punishment for killing a Brahmin.—Cure, Making a lotus of four tolahs of 

* gold, and after repeating certain incantations, performing with it the ceremony of the 

‘ flowm, and giving it to a righteous Brahmin.” -° 

_ © A woman whose husband dies before her, in her former state was of a great, family, 

«« which she left to live with a stranger, and when he died burned herself with him.— 

** Cure, She must pass all her life in austerities, or put an end to her existence by burying 


< herself in snow.” 


« A woman who has only daughters, is® punished for having possessed a great deal of 


~ 
a 


forming certain incantations, give it*in charity, and feed fifty Brahmins.” 


“ pice in her former existence, and not showing proper respect to her husband.—Cure, 
esides ornamenting a white ox with gold, &c., she.is to satisfy with food one hundred 
« Brahmins: or she must make ten mashes of gold, in the form: of a deit 


y, and after per- 


s ° . . . 9 . . . . . . 

The review of the Hindoo religion shall be closed here. Whatever antiquity may be 
justly ascribed to that religion, whatever acknowledgments its mysterious writings maf con- 
tain of one Supreme Being,* and of some of His perfections, whatever mixture of moral 


* It is doubtless very pleasing to discover the 
recognition of this grand principle, the foundation 
of all true religion, even under an.immense mass of 
falsehood and superstition ; but some persons seem 
to have thought, that in ascertaining the existence 
of this principle in the writings of the Hindoos, or 
in the opinions of their learned men, they had sub- 
stantially vindicated and established the religious 
character of that people; making little account 
of their idolatry, which is practised by the Brah- 
mins, they represent to be no more than a symbo- 
lical worship of the divine attributes; and which 
as admitting among the vulgar, theidea of subaltern 
‘intelligences, they represent to arise from the ve- 
neration paid to the elements, which are thought 
‘to contain a portion of God, who according to ‘an 
alleged tenet of the Hindou faith, is held to be the 
soul of the world.* Not to dwell upon the falsity 
of this ‘view of Hindoo idolatry, which has been 
already contradicted by quotations from the 
Bhagvad+Geeta, it may be sufficient to observe to 
‘any who lean to so latitudinarian an opinion, an 
opinion which falls below even the creed of deism, 
that the speculative admission of one or more im- 
portant truths will not, in the least, prove the re- 
’ ligious system, or the religious practice, of any 
person or community to be right. The picture of 
‘the ancient Heathens, given to us by unerring 
’ authority, is a striking and affecting representation 
of the people of whom we now speak. “ They 
“* held the truth in unrighteousness, .... From 
‘“ the visible works of the Creator, they under; 
“ stood his eternal power and godhead ...... 
< But when they knew God they glorified him not 
““ as God, neither were thankful; but became vain 


principles 


*¢ in their imaginations, and their foolish heart was 
* darkened. . ... . Professing themselves to be 
“ wise, they became fools . . . . . And changed 
« the glory of the uncorruptible God into an image 
* made like to corruptible man, and to birds, and 
“ four-footed beasts, and creeping things .... « 
«¢ Wherefore also God gave them up to unclean- 


“¢ nass, throagh the lust of their own hearts, to . 


« dishonour their own bodies between themselves ; 
“ ,.... Who changed the truth of God into a 
«* lie, and worshipped and served the creature more 
“ than the Creator, who is blessed for ever, amen. 
« °, . . . For this cause, God gave them up to vile 
“ Sffections . .. . . Andeven as they did not like 
“¢ to retain God in their knowledge, God gave them 
“ over to a reprobate-mind, to do those things 
“ which are not convenient; ... . Being filled 
‘“ with all unrighteousness.” Romans i. 18. 24. 
26. 28, 29. 

With respect to the real tenets of the Hindoos 
on subjects of theology, they are to be taken from 
their ancient books, rather than from the oral 
declarations of the most learned Brahmins of mo- 
dern times, who have discovered that the opinions 
of Christians, concerning the nature of God, are 
far more rational than those currently entertained 
among them,’ and that the gross idolatry of the 
Hindoos is contemned by the more intelligent na- 
tives of the western world. Berniert seems to 
have found occasion for the same remark in his 
time, for after relating a conference between him 
and some learned pundits, in which the latter en- 
deavoured to refine'away the grossness of their 
image-worship: “ Voila (says he) sans ajéuter, ni 
“ diminuer, la solution qu’ils me donnerent, mais a 

: . * ® vous 


* 


Se eee 
’ * Dow's History of Hindostan, Vol. E. Dissertation on the Religion, &c, of the Hindoos. 


.t Tome II, page 159, 


ry 


. 


79; 


AprEn x, 
I. : 
Causes of theSitua- 
tion and Character 
of the Hindoos. 


Pu 
Arrenpix, | 


Mr; Grant's State 


80 ¢ APPENDIX ro REPORT rrow SELECT COMMITTEE. 


principles may be found interspersed in its ordinances (for without some cement of this kind 
it would be impossible to constitute a religion for creatures, endowed with any share of reason 


of Sosiety in Asia. and conscienc) it plainly appears, that its general system is in theory most depraved; and 


- ened with the crimes so common among those o 


that it is a systeni which, when reguced to practice, fenders abortive the few moral principles 
originally admitted into it; and not only tolerates, but necessarily countenances, and encou-~ 
rages, the most extravagant and abandoned wickedness. The manners of some of the Brah- 
mins who pass their time in going through the ceremonies of their religion, or an indolent 
application to their books, exempt from the ey ale of the world, and therefore unblack- 
mort active pursuits, form no exception to. 
this remark ; nor the rigorous austerities practised by the devotees of another class, who give 
themselves entirely up to a life of wandering mortification. Both these descriptions of men 
deny themselves in some things, but it is in order to be more abundantly gratified in others. 
The pride of their superior rankeand qualifications, atid above all, of their supposed sanctity, 
and the idolatrous reverence which they receive trom the common people, render them insuf- 
teralfly arrogant ; and there is the grossest deviation from rational and meritorious principles 
in the conduct of both :—in that of the Brahmin, who imposes upon the people a worship 
and ceremonies, which he knows to be groundless and pernicious; in that of the Jogee, who 
abandons his wife, children, and connections, to become useless and burthensome to others, 
and to himself, for the rest of his days. 
~ Lhe absolute dominion which this religion gives to the Brahmins, and a few of the second 
tribe, over the rest of the people, must also have forced itself upon the attention. No similar 
invention among men, seems to have been so long and so completely successful. This 
success may be accounted for, partly, from a favourable concurrence of various circumstances ; 
but chiefly, from the character of the religion itself. Erected upon the darkest ignorance, 
and the boldest fal8ehood, it has,been the work of ages to strengthen these foundations, and 
to render the fabric impregnable. The ‘understanding is chained and kept in perpetual im- 
prisonment, like dreaded rivals for power in the East, who deprived of their eyes, and immured 
in dungeons, receive poisoned provisions from the gaoler’s hands. Every avenue which might 
lead to emancipation, is strongly guarded. fear is immeasurably excited, and incessantly 
wrought upon ; not a rational fear of féiling into moral evil, and offending the righteous 
and holy Sovereign of the universe, but ¢ fear of numberless fictitious dangers from every 
art of nature, from things real and imaginary, in every situation, and in every transaction. 
ear is the grand instrument by which these poér people are held down, never daring to’ 
examine into the reality of what they are told is impending over them. False hope is hke- 
wise held out to them; and they are taught to seek deliverance, safety, and happiness, in 
a multitude of unmeaning, fantastic ceremonies, which constitute a grievous drudgery, en- 
grossing their time, and confining their thoughts. In all these rites, and in whatever se 
the 


“« yous dire le vrai, cela me sembloit un peu trép 


“ bien concerté, a la chretienne, aux prix de ce 
*¢ que j’en avoit appris de plusieurs autre pandits.” 
-~It may be allowable to add here, that it is of im- 
portance in communicating, through the medium 
of European tongues, the writings of Eastern na- 
tions, not only to render their sense with rigid 
strictness. and accuracy, but as much as possible, 
with the dress, the air, the manners of the original; 
for it is conceivable, that elegance of language, 
harmony of periods, grace of composition, and the 


iMuminations of European learning, may in a ver-. 


sion, unintentionally impart te doctrines, senti- 
ments, or narrations, an elevation, a symmetry, 
or a polish, which, in their original garb, they do 
not possess. In this. view, an author, to whom 


ry 


the world are under considerable obligations, may 
be quoted with applause. ; 
“In execnting this work,” (says Mr. Wilkins, . 
of the translation of the Heetopades) “ I have 
‘¢ scrupulously adhered to the text; and I have 
‘¢ preferred drawing a picture, of which it may be 
“ said, I can suppose it a strong likeness, although 


«© Fam unacquainted with the original, to a flatter- 


“ ing portrait where characteristic features, be-_ 
“* cause not altogether consonant to European 
“ taste, must have been-sacrificed to the harmoty 
“ of composition. 1 have ever attended to the 
“ form of my model, and have preserved what 
*¢ was originally in verse, distinct, by indenting 
*“* every line but the first of each distich.”-*Mr. 
Wilkins’ Preface to the Heetopades, page 14.° 


GENERAL APPENDIX. * “81, ‘Aprastors, 


the civil and personal, as well as the religious concerns of the Hindoos, the Brahmins have a 
made themselves indispensably necessary. They formed the religion, they are the sole ex- Causes of the Situa- 
clusive depositaries of its ordinances, éhey are the expounders of them, they are, under a pipe arate 
Hindoo sovereign, authorized to assist in the government of public affairs, and in effect to % ‘HE 1nd00S- 
control it; they are the framers and administrators of the law, they have exorbitant personal 

privileges in all the ordinary affairs and’ transactions. of life, they ate the sole ministers, 

either officiating or directing, gn all the vast train of cer€sonies, observances, ablutions, 

defilements, purifications, penances,, ande works of Se of whieh their religion 

consists ; the endless questions arismg about caste, are determined by them. In short, 

a Hindoo, from the hour of his birth, through the different stages of his existence, in infancy, 

in youth, in manhood, in old age, and in death, in all the relations, and in all the casualties 

of life, is subject to an accumulatien of burthensome rites, with which the preservation of 

his caste, his credit, and place in societypare strictMy eonnected : nay, for his conduct in 

former states of being, preceding his birth, these absolute lords of his faith, conscience, and 

conduct, bring him to account, nor do they resign their dominion over him when he 1s dead. 

The return he has for unbounded subjection, is an indulgence in perpetual deviations, even 

from those few principles of morality which his religion acknowledges. It is thus that 

anes slavery, and unparalleled depravity, have become distinguishing characteristics of the 

_Hindoos. 

Before we dismiss this branch of our subject, it may be proper to meet an enquiry which 
may have been rising in the mind of the reader while this account has proceeded. It may 
_ be said, If the representation here given be just, if such be the consequences of the complex 
system of Hindoo government, religion, and laws, how has Hindostan flourished under that 
system, as it is said to have done in ancient times ? How has even the fame of society among 
the Hindoos been preserved from dissolution? « ° 

That country, certainly possessed of various advantages, derived them however from 
nature, not from its government.. It enjoyed a most genial climate, a most fertile soil, a situ- 
ation the most happy for security and for commerct. ‘But its political institutions cramped 
its natural powers; in process of time they produged general corruption ; the interests of the 

country, or the state, came to be no concern with people, who, excluded even from thinking 

of public affairs, and unalterably fixed to one rank and occupation, had little to hope, or to- 
. fear, from a change: whence it was, as the @ncients inform us, that the husbandman might 

be seen calmly tilling his field, while two armies were contending in his sight for dominion. 

Those institutions failed in effectual provision against foreign invasion, in the same degree 

that they produced internal degradation; and the people having at length filled up a high 

measure of immorality, the natural consequence of their principles, their northern neigh- 

bours, after many desolating inroads, and massacres, brought them under 4 foreign yoke. 

But though the Hindoos lost the dominion of their own country, the influence of their 
religion and their priests remained. The ignorance and fear of the people, their terrible 
apprehension, especially of the loss or contamination of caste ; the necessity thence resulting 
of adhering to the profession, and remaining in the country in which they were born; these 
causes, which the great extent of continent over which Hinduism had anciently spread, and the 
prodigious number of the people professing it, upheld its institutions (institutions which even- 
tually sacrificed every thing else to perpetuate themselves) long after the transfer of sovereignty 
to foreigners of another faith. Thus the people were held together in the forms of the social 
state, by a chain, which the rude bigotry and ignorance of their conquerors only served to fasten 
more strongly ; and this, in a word, with the coercive power exercised by the conquerors, 
else why they still continue united beyond the period, when their corruptions might 
nave dissolved the frame of society. * ; 


‘*. The ancient splendor of India, its career in { greatly beyond their just dimensions, and guided 
refinement, and the happiness resulting from its | his masterly hand in the delineation of a picture, | 
- policy, have been viewed by the celebrated author | far more beautiful than the original. In treating 
of the Historical Disguisition, through a medium | of the progress of society, one position seems of 
which hath magnified them to his apprehension | late to be generally assumed, that men at first set 
out 


APPENDIX, 


I. 


Mir. Grant's Sjate 
of Society in Asia. 


APPENDIX ro REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


CHAP. IV.. 


Inquiry as the Measures which might be adopted by Great Britain, for the Improvement of 
the Condition of her Asiatic Subjects; and Answers to Objections. 


WE now proceed to the main object of this work, for the 8ake of which all the preceding 
topics and. discussions have been brought forward,—an ‘inquiry into the means of remedying 
disorders, which have become thus inveterate in the state of society among our Asiatic 


subjects, 
them. 


which destroy their happiness, and obstruct every species of improvement among 


That it is in the highest degree tlegirable, that a, healing principle should be introduced, no 


man surely will deny. 


Supposing it to be in our power to convince them of the criminality 


of the afinual sacrifice of so many human victims on the funeral pile; ofthe profession of rob- 


out from the savage state; a position which may 
sometimes at least be questionable, and which in 
respect to the original inhabitants of Hindostan, 
musé be disputed. From this point, however, Dr. 
Robertson conceives them te advance, through a 
long series of internal improvements, to the 
highest stages of refinement, unaided even by the 
accession of extraneous lights’; whereas it appears 
more probable, that upon the first digpersion of 
mankind from the plains of Shinar, where fhe 
habits of civilized life must have prevailed, the 
most attractive climates would direct the lines of 
migration, and that early colonies proceediig to 
the eastward, through tracts of fertile country, 
would,’ without sinking into barbarism, soon 
spread into the luxuriant regions of India, where 
the rich abundance of the svil would speedily 
Jead them to the arrangements of regular society. 
For countries extremely productive of the boun- 
ties of nature, seem to ripen the ideas of men, 
in some respects, with a quickness analogous to 
the rapidity of their vegetation; and where 
enjoyments are profusely otfered, a certain degree 
of refinement will easily take place, and rights 
of property be understood, though the facility of 
acquisition will not be favourable to the spirit 
of improvement, and there may be vices in the 
political constitution which will absolutely limit 
it8 progress. ; : 

With respect to the Braminical system of reli- 
gion, law, and science, from which the strongest 
arguments for a long progressive course of refine- 
ment are deduced, reason has of late been given 
us to believe, that the elements of them did not 
spring up in Hindostan, but were derived from 
a source nearer to the original seat of the post- 


diluvian race. (See, in the Asiatic Researches, . 


the papers of Sir William Jones, concerning the 


Hindoos.). But ‘whatever the origin, or extent - 


of knowledge amopg the Hindoos might be, it 


was, as we have seen, monopolized and concealed - 


bery, 


by the Brahmins. It spread little light among 
the great body of the people, and it is incorrect . 
to refer to the whole nation, what only the priests 
possessed and guarded as a mystery. So with 
respect to the accumulations of wealth, which the 
nation enjoying abundant produce, and having 
few wants, might at length contain, it would centre 
with the Princes, Brahmins, and some of the 
chief persons of the other tribes. There might 
be numerous armies, splendid retinues and esta- 
blishments, appertaining to the great, with a 
profusion of jewels and effeminate finery, in 


* which these people delight; there would be 


‘many superb richly endowed pagodas, astonishing . 
for their workmanship and cost, there would be 
great bodies of indolent well appointed priests, 
*troaps of buffoons, players, and dancers, the last _ 
belonging to the temples as well as the court ; 
and all these appearances, with the general face 
of a country ever verdant and luxuriant, would 
strike the imagination of a stranger, especially 
if his business were with the metropolis, like 
that of Megasthenes, from whose _ superficial 
account of a country then little kaown, the 
opinions of the ancients seem to have been 
formed. But there is no reason to believe, that 
wealth was diffused freely through all the body . 
politic; the head and arms might be enlarged, 
but the other parts would retain nearly their 
original size. ere is no reason, in short, to be- 
lieve, that the common people ever lived upon any 
thing but rice, or other inferior grain ; ever wore 
any thing but a cincture, or at best a slight half 
covering of ordinary cotton cloth; or ever in- 
habited any better dwellings than low incone 
venient huts, with matted er mud walls, and 
straw roofs. Such is the present style, and such 
-in all probability it ever has been, not because 
the people preferred this, but because they had 
no choice. , . 


4 
. 


GENERAL APPENDIX. 83 


bery, ‘comprehending murder ; of the indulgence of one class of people in the whole catalogue 
of flagitious crimes, without any adequate punishment; of the forfeiture of the lives of others, 
according to their mstitutes, for the merest trifles ; of the arbitra: impositio® of burthensome 
rites, devoid of all moral worth; of the pursuit of revenge, by offerings to vindictive deities ; 
of the establishment of lying, false evidence, gaming, and other immoralities, by lfw; of the 
pardon of capital offences for money ; of trying to purchase the expiation of wilful and habitual 
iniquity, by ceremonial observances; and of the worship of stocks, stones, impure and male- 
volent deities; no man living, Surely, woyld affirm that’ we ought, that we are at liberty, to 
withhold from them this conviction. : 

Are we bound for ever to preserve all the enormities in the Hindoo system? Have we become 
the guardians of every monstrous principle and practice which it contams? Are we pledged 
to support, for all generations, by the authority of our government and the power of our 
arms, the miseries which ignorance and knayery have #0 Jofg entailed upon a large portion of 
. the human race? Is this the part which a free, a humane, and an enlightened nation, a nation 
itself professing principles diametrically opposite to those in question, has engaged to act 
towards its own subjects? It would be too absurd and extravagant to maintain, that any 
engagement of this kind exists; that Great Britain is under any obligation, direct or implied, 
to uphold errors and usages, gross and fundamental, subversive of the first principles of 
reason, morality, and religion. ‘ ; . 

If we had conquered such a kingdom as Mexico, where a number of human victims were 
regularly offered every year upon the altar of the Sun, should we have calmly acquiesced in 
this horrid mode of butchery? Yet for near thirty years we have, with perfect unconcern, seen 
rites, in reality more cruel and atrocious, nected in our Indian territories. If human life 
must be sacrificed to superstition, at least the more useless, worthless, pr unconnected mem~ 
bers of the society might be devoted. But in Hindostan,,mothers of families are taken from 
the midst of their children, who have just-lost tleir father also, and by a most diabolical 
complication of force and fraud, are driven into the flames. 

Shall we be in all time to come, as we hithertp havebeen, passive spectators of this unnatural 
wickedness? It may indeed well appear surprising that in the long period during which we have 
held those territories, we have made no serious atfempt to recal the Hindoos to the dictates of 
truth and morality. This is a mortifying proof h8w litle it has been considered, that the ends 
of government, and the good of society, havesan inseparable connection with right principles. 
. We have been satisfied with the apparent’ submissiveness of these people, and have attended 
chiefly to the maintenance of our authority over the country, and the augmentation of our com 
merce and revenues ; but -have never, with a view to the promotion of their happiness, looked 
thoroughly into their internal state. a 

If then we ought to wish for the correction of those criminal habits and practices which pre- 
.vail among them, it cannot reasonably be questioned, that we ought also to make allowable 
attempts for this end; and it remains therefore only to consider in what manner this design 
may be best pursued. ; 

hall we resort to the power we possess, to destroy their distinctions of castes, and to 
demolish their idols? Assuredly not. Force, instead of convincing them of their error, would 
fortify them in the persuasion of being right; and the use of it, even if it promised happier 
consequences, would still be altogether unjust. a 

To the use of reason and argument, however, in exposing their errors, there can be na 
objection. There is indeed the strongest obligation to make those errors manifest, since they 
generate and tend to perpetuate all the miseries which have been set forth, and which our 
duty, as rulers, instead of permitting us to view with silent indifference, calls upon us by every 
proper method to prevent. : 

The true cure of darkness, is the introduction of light. The Hindoos err, becapse they are 
ignorant; and their errors have’ never fairly been laid before them. “The commineation of 
our light and knowledge to them, would prove the best remedy for their disorders; and this 
rethedy is proposed, from a full conviction that if judiciously and patiently applied, it would 
ha¥e great and happy effects upon them, effects honourable and advantageous for us. - 

. M2 ere 


‘ Apribyorx, 


—— 

Inquiry for improv- 
ing the Condition ot 
our Asiatic Subjects. 


Arrpnpix,” 84 ABPENDIX.ro REPORT rxom SELECT COMMITTEE. 
ah ae 


— There are ‘two ways of .making this communication: the one is, by the medium of the 
Mr. Grant’s State languages of those countries; the other is, by the medium of our own. In general, when 
of Society in Asia. foreign teachers*have proposed to instruct the inhalants of any country, they have used 
the vernacular tongue of that peoplg, for a natural and necessary reason, that they could not 
hope to ntake any other mean of communication intelligible to them. This is not our case 
in respect of our Eastern dependencies. They are our own, we have possessed them long, 
many Englishmen reside among the natives, our language is not unknown there, and it is 
practicable to diffuse it more widely. The choice,therefore $f either mode, lies open to us ; 
and we are at liberty to consider which is entitled to a*preference. Upon this subject, it is 
not intended to pass an exclusive decision here; the points absolutely to be contended for 
are, that we ought to impart our superior lights, and that*this is practicable; that it is prac- 
ticable by two ways, can never be an argument why neither should be attempted. Indeed 
ho great reason appears why eitker should be systematically interdicted, since particular 
cases may recommend, even that which is in general least eligible. 

The &cquisition of a foreign language is, to men of cultivated minds, a matter of no great . 
‘difficulty. English teachers could therefore be sooner qualified to offer struction in the 
native languages, than the Indians would be prepared to receive it in ours. This method 
would hence come into operation more speedily than the other ; and it would also be attended 
with the advantage of a more careful selection of the matter of instruction. But it would be 
far more confined and less effectual; it may be termed a species of deciphering. The deci- 
pherer is required to unfold, in intelligible words, what was before hidden. Upon every new 
occasion, he has a similar labour to perform, and the information obtained from him is limited 
to the single communication then made. All other writings in the same character, still 
remain, to those wha are ignorant of it, unknown; but if they are taught the character itself, 
they can at once read every writing in whigh it is used. Thus superior, in point of ultimate 
advantage, does the employment of the English language appear ; and upon this ground, we 
give a preference to that mode, proposing here, that the communication of our knowledge 
shall be made by the medium of our own language. This proposition will bring at.once to 
trial, both the principle of such communication,sand that mode of conveyance which can alone 
be questioned ; for the admission of the principle must at least include in it the admission of 
the narrowest means suited to the end, which we conceive to be the native languages. The 
principle, however, and the mode, are still distmct questions, and any opinion which may be , 
entertained of the latter, cannot affect the former ; but it is hoped, that what shall be offered 
here concerning them, will be found sufficient to justify both. 

‘We proceed then to observe, that it is perfectly in the power of this country, by degrees, to 
impart to the Hindoos our language; afterwards through that medium, to make them 
acquainted with our easy literary compositions, upon a vartety of subjects ; and, let not the 
idea hastily excite derision, progressively with the simple elements of our arts, our philosophy 
and religion. These acquisitions would silently undermine, and at length subvert, the fabric 
of error; and all the objections that may be apprehended against such a change, are, it is 
confidently believed, capable of a solid answer. 

" The first communication, and the instrument of introducing the rest, must be the English 
language ; this is a key which will open to them a world of new ideas, and policy alone might 
have impelled us, long since, to put it into their hands. - , 

To introduce the language of the conquerors, seems to be an obvious mean of assimilating 
the conquered people to them. The Mahomedans, from the beginning’ of their power, em- 

loyed. the Persian language in the affairs of gowernment, and in the public departments. 

his practice aided them in maintaining their superiority, and enabled them, instead oé 
depending blindly on native agents, to look into the conduct and details of public business, 
as well ag-fé-keep intelligible registers of the income and expenditure of the state. Natives 
readily learnt the language of government, finding that it was necessary in every concern of 
revenue and of justice; they next became teachers of it; and in all the provinces over which ~ 
the Mogul Empire extended, it is still understood, and taught by numbers of Hindoos. 


Tt 


GENERAL APPENDIX. 85 ‘Arrrpix, 
hoe 


It would have been dur interest to have followed their example ; and had we done so on ee 
the assumption of the Dewannee, or some years afterwards, the English language would now Inquiry for improv- 
have been spoken and studied by multitudes of Hindoos throughout our Provinces. ‘The 198 the Condition of 
details of the revenue would, from the Beginning, have begn open to our inspection ; and by ourA static Subjects. 
facility of examination on our part, and difficulty of fabrication on that of the natiyes, mani- 
fold impositions of a gross nature, which have been practised upon us, would have been prev 
cluded. An easy channel of communication also, would always have been open between the 
ralers and the subjects ; and nifnberless grievances would have been represented, redressed, 
or prevented, which the ignorance of the former in the country languages, and the hindrances 
experienced by the latter in making their approaches, have sometimes suffered to pass with 
impunity, to the encouragement of new abuses. We were long held in the dark, both in 
India and in Europe, by the use of a technical revenue language ; and a man of considerable 
judgment, who was a member of the Bengal administrationnear twenty years since, publicly 
animadverted on the absurdity of our submitting to enfploy the unknown jargon of a con- 
quered people. It is certain, that the Hindoos would easily have conformed to the*use of 
English; and they would still be glad to possess the language of their masters, the language 
which always gives weight and consequence to the natives who have any acquaintance with 
it, and which would enabie every native to make his own representations directly to the 
Governor-general himself, who, it may be presumed, will not commonly, henceforth, be, 
chosen from the line of the Company’s servants, and therefore may not speak the dialects of 
the country. Of what importance it might be to the public interest, that a man in that 
station should not be obliged to depend on a medium with which he is unacquainted, may 
readily be conceived. 

It would be extremely easy for government to establish, at a moderate expense, in various 
parts of the provinces, places of gratuitous instruction in rgading and wfiting English: mul- 
titudes, especially of the young, would flock to thém; and the easy books used in teaching, 
might at the same time convey obvious truths on different subjects. The teachers should 
be persons of knowledge, morals and discretiog ; and men of this character could impart to 
their pupils nyuch useful information in disgourse: and to facilitate the attainment of that- 
object, they might at first make some use of thé Bengalese tongue. The Hindoos would, 
in time, become teachers of English themselves$ and the employment of our language in 
public business, for which every political reason remains in full force, would, in the course 

‘of another generation, make it very general throughout the country. There is nothing want- 
ing to the success of this plan, but the hearty patronage of government. If they wish it to 
succeed, it can and must succeed. The introduction of English in the administration of the 
revenue, in judicial proceedings, and in other business of government, wherein Persian is 
now used, and the establishment of free-schools for instruction in this language, would 
insure its diffusion over the country, for the reason already suggested, that the interest of 
the natives would induce them to acquire it. Neither would much confusion arise, even at 
first, upon such a change: for there are now a great number of Portuguese and Bengalese 
clerks in the provinces, who understand both the Hindostanny and English languages. To 

- employ them in drawing up petitions to government, or its officers, would be no additional . 
hardship upon the poorer people, who are now assisted in that way by Persian clerks ; and 
the opportunity afforded to others who have sufficient leisure, of learning the language of 
the government gratuitously, would be an advantage never enjoyed under Mahomedan 

‘rulers. 

With our language, much of our useful literature might, and would, in time, be communi- 
cated. The art of Printing, would enable us to disseminate our writings in a way the Per- 
veans never could havé done, though their compositions had been as numerous as ours. 
Hence the Hindoos would see the great use we make of reason on all subjects, and in all 
affairs ; they also would learn to reason, they would become acquainted with the history of 
their own species, the past and present state of the world; their affections would gradually 
become interested by various engaging works, composed to recommend virtue, and to deter 
from vice ; the general mass of their opinions would be rectified ; and above all, they would’ 

. see 


APREN DIX, 
n ], . 
Mr. Grant’s State 
of Society in Asia. 


86 » APPENDIX To REPORT From SELECT COMMITTEE. 


see a better’system of principles and morals. New views of dutyas rational creatures would 
open upon them; and that mental bondage in which they have long been holden would gra- 
dually dissolve _. ‘ 

To this change, the true knowlgdge of nature would contribute; and some of our eas 
explanatapns of natural philosophy might undoubtedly, by proper means, be made intelli- 
gible to them. ‘Except a few Brahmins, who consider the concealment of their learning as 
part of their religion, * the people are totally misled as to the system and phenomena of 
nature; and their errors in this branch of science, upon whith divers important conclusions 
rest, may be more easily demonstrated to them, than*the absurdity and falsehood of their 
mythological legends. From the demonstration of the true cause of eclipses, the story of 
Ragoo, and Ketoo,the dragons, who when the sun and the moon are obscured are supposed 
to be assaulting them, a story which has hitherto been an article of religious faith, produc- 
tive of religious services among the Hindoos, + would fall to the ground ; the removal of one 
pillar, would weaken the fabric of falsehood; the discovery of one palpable error, would 
open the mind to farther conviction; and the progressive discovery of truths, hitherto 
unknown, would dissipate as many superstitious chimeras, the parents of false fears, and 
false hopes. Every branch of natural philosophy might in time be introduced and diffused 
among the Hindoos. Their understandings would thence be strengthened, as well as their 
minds informed, and error be dispelled in proportion. 

But perhaps no acquisition in natural philosophy would so effectually enlighten the mass 
of the people, as the'introduction of the principles of mechanics, and their application to 
agriculture and the useful arts. Not that the Hindoos are wholly destitute of simple 
mechanical contrivances. Some manufactures, which depend upon patient attention and 
delicacy of hand, are carried to a considerable degree of perfection among them; but for 
a series of ages, perhaps for two thousand years, they do not appear to have made any con- 
siderable addition to the arts of life. In¥ention seems wholly torpid among them} in a few 
things, they have improved by their intercourse with Europeans, of whose immense superiority 
they are at length convinced ; but this effect ig partial, and not discernible in the bulk of the 
people. The scope for improvement, in this respect, is prodigious. 7 

What great accessions of wealth woufd Bengal derive from a people intelligent in the 

principles of agriculture, skilled to make thé most of soils and seasons, to improve the existing 
modes of culture, of pasturage, of rearing cattle, of defence against excesses of drought, 
and of rain; and thus to meliorate the quality of all the produce of the country. All these ° 
arts are still in infancy. The husbandman of Bengal just turns up the soil with a dimi- 
nutive plough, drawn by a couple of miserable cattle; and if drought parches, or the rain 
inundate the crop, he has no resource; he thinks he is destined to this suffering, and is far 
more likely to die from want, than to relieve himself by any new or extraordinary effort. Hor- 
ticulture is also in its first stage: the various fruits and esculent herbs, with which Hindostan 
abounds, are nearly in a state of nature; though they are planted in inclosed gardens, little 
‘skill is employed to reclaim them. In this respect likewise, we might communicate information . 
of material use to the comfort of life, and to the prevention of famine. In silk, indigo, sugar, 
and in many other articles, what vast improvements might be effected by the introduction of ° 
machinery. The skilful application of fire, of water, and of steatn, improvements which would 
thus iminediately concern the interest of the common pecple, would awaken them from their 
torpor, and give activity to their minds. At present it is wonderful to see how entirely they 
resign themselves to precedent: custom is the strongest law to them. Following implicitly, 
seems to be instinctive with them, in small things as well as great. The path which the first 
passenger has marked over the soft soil, is trotiden'so undeviatingly in all its curves, by 
every succeeding traveller, that when it is perfectly beaten, it has still only the width of . 
a single track. 

But undoubtedly the most important communication which the Hindoos could receive 
through the medium of our language, would be the knowledge of our religion, the principles 

a ; : 00 
* Page 51. + Page 72; and. Bernier, Tome Il. page 102. 


GENERAL APPENDIX. | 8a. 


of which are explained in a clear, easy way, in various tracts circulating among us, and are 
completely contained in the inestimable volume of Scripture. Thence they would be instructed 
in the nature and perfections of the one ¢rue God, in the real history of man ; his creation, 
lapsed state, and the means of his recovery, on all which poifits they hold false and extgavagant 
opinions ; they would see a pure, complete, and perfect system of morals and of dutyfenforced 
by the most awful sanctions, and recommended by the most interesting motives ; they would 
learn the accountableness.of maa, the final judgment he is to undergo, and the eternal state 
which is to follow. Wherever this knosledye should be received, idolatry, with all the rabble 
of its impure deities, its monsters of wood and stone, its false principles and corrupt practices, 
its delusive hopes and vain fears, its rjdiculous ceremonies and degrading superstitions, its lying 
legends and fraudulent impositions, would fall. The reasonable .service of the only, and the 
infinitely perfect God, would be estableshed : love to him, peace and good-will towards men, 
would be felt as obligatory sor rene . e ae 

“It is not asserted, that such effects would be immediate or universal; but admitting them 
to be progressive, and partial only, yet how great would the change be, and how ae at 
length for the outward prosperity, and internal peace of society among the Hindoos ! en 
would be restored to the use of their reason ; all the advantages of happy soil, climate, and 
situation, would be observed and improved ; the comforts and conveniences of life would be 
increased ; the cultivation of the mind, and rational intercourse, valued ; the people would rise 
in the scale of human beings ; and as they found their character, their state, and their comfofts, 
improved, they would prize more highly, the security and the happiness of a well ordered 
society. Such a change would correct those sad disorders which have been described, 
and for which no other remedy has been proposed, nor is in the nature of things to 
be found. 

Desirable as it must be that such animating prospects wefe realized, and reasonable as the 
grounds on which they are held out are presumed to be, it is nevertheless probable, that 
various objections, more or less plausible, may be started against all that has been advanced. 
These objections, as far as they are foreseen, shell now be distinctly met ; and it is hoped, that 
upon examination, none of them will be found’to possess that substance and validity, which 
we are entitled to require in arguments opposed éo a scheme resting on principles the most 
incontrovertible, and having for its end the most diffusive good. 

_ Frersr. The plan here proposed, preserting so new an association of ideas, so strange 
a revolution, as the abject Bengalese using the language and the light of Europe, may upon 
the very suggestion of it, be treated as in its nature zdle, visionary, and absurd. 

But this would be the decision of prejudice, rather than the conclusion of mature reflec- 


tion and reason. If the character of the Hindoos proceeded only from a physical origin, - 


there might be some foundation for thinking it unalterable; but nothing is more plain, than 
that it is formed chiefly by moral causes, adequate to the effect produced: if those causes 
therefore can be removed, their effect will cease, and new principles and motives will produce 
new conduct and a different character. It is unwarrantable to infer, that because the 
Hindoos, or to narrow the term, the Bengalese, are at present low in their sentiments, con- 


APPENDIX, 

4 
4 
Inquiry for improv- 
ing the Condition of 
our Asiatic Subject= 


‘duct, and aims, they must always remain so. We cannot presume from the past state of any — 


pepe with respect to improvement in arts, that they would, under different circumstances, 
or ever continue the same. The history of many nations who have advanced from rudeness 
to refinement, contradicts such an hypothesis ; according to which, the Britons ought still to 
be going naked, to be feeding on acorns, and sacrificing human victims in the Druidical groves. 
In fact, what is now offered, is nothing morg than a proposal for the further civilization of 
a people, who had very early made a considerable progress in improvement; but who, by 
déliberate and successful plans of fraud and imposition, were rendered first stationary, then 
retrograde. These considerations alone, forbid us to assume, that if they were released from 
the darkness and stupefaction of ignorance and superstition, the human mind could not among 


them, regain some ordinary degree of elasticity ; or that if light shone upon them, they would. 


still be incapable of seeing or judging for themselves. Let it however be again observed, that 
the argument maintained here supposes only a gradual change. If we bring into immediate 
° , contrast, 


Arien Dix, , 
oe E 
Mr. Grant’s State 
ef Society in Asia. 


$8, APPENDIX ro REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


contrast, the presentstate of the Hindoos, and the full, general, accomplishment of such a change, 
tacitly smking,in our comparison, a long series of years; and of slow progressive transi-° 
tions, we shalf indeed form to ourselves a pictures of egregious contrarieties, but it will 
not be a just representation. Noting is contended for, which cannot be supported from the 
nature of{man, and the experience of past ages. 

Seconp. Nearly allied to the objection now considered, is another which some persons 

acquainted with the Hindoo character and habits, -and pogsibly apologists for them, may 
derive from the attachment of that people to thetreowngnodes and customs. “ If,” may it be 
said, “ the Bengalese are not to be reckoned below the reach of instruction, and incapable of — 
“. new perceptions and views, still their attachment to long established opinions and usages, 
« is so rooted, as to form an insuperable obstacle to such an innovation as is proposed ; arid 
“ therefore the scheme may at least be regarded as ipracticable.” 

Is this argument however, quitephilosophical? Must it be granted, without fair trial, 
that there is any portion of the human race, upon which reason and science can have zo in- 
fluence, which 1s doomed by nature to perpetual ignorance and prejudice? It is true that 
the Hindoos have a strong predilection for their system; but stil] it must be remembered, 
that in the bulk of the people, this is a predilection consequent of a privation of light, and 
riveted by the errors which darkness generates, not an attachment which has resisted the 
light, or has ever been tried by it. Many Europeans have implicitly adopted an overstrained 
notion of the immutability of Hindoo opinions in matters of religion, and of the obstinacy of 
the people in retaining their own practices, even in civil life. But if we look to facts, we 
shall find that a variety of sects have prevailed, and still prevail, among them. ‘The nse, 
especially of the Seeks, a new religious-order, numerous and powerful, who have abjured the 
Brahminical faith, ié sufficient to evince that the Hindoos are capable of considerable fluctu- 
ations of opmion. Hitherto indeed they have more commonly fluctuated only from one 
delusion to another; though it must be allowed, that the systém of the Seeks, if the accounts 
which have been received of it are accurate, is comparatively simple and rational; and we 
cannot without wonder behold a set of Hindoos casting off at once, in the heart of their 
country, the whole load of Brahminical ,mcutmbrances, and as it should seem, renouncing 
polytheism and the worship of images.* ,A sight far more pleasing has also been exhibited 
to us, in the conversion of Hindoos to the divine religion of the Gospel. These were not 
encouraged by an armed protection, or actudtedeby the prospect of conquest, which may. 
have stimulated the followers of the Seeks; but in opposition to the allurements and terrors 
of the world, they yielded to conviction, and rendered homage to the truth. This important ~ 
fact, which is perfectly established, it may suffice barely to state here, since there will be 
occasion, in speaking to a following objection, to which it more pointedly applies, to enlarge 
upon it. When we read of these things on the one hand, and on the other of the extremities 
which Hindoos have sometimes endured through the bigotry of their Mahomedan masters, 
or from the pressure of misfortune, rather than submit to apprehended contamination, what 
is the inference fairly deducible from these dissimilar views but this, that whether the dread 
either of dishonour in this life, or of degradation in the next transmigration ; whether resent- 
ment, or the idea of acquiring distinguished merit, were the principle from which these— 
people suffered, still what terror could not induce them, misguided as they were by false 
notions, to relinquish, they yielded voluntarily to reason and persuasion. 

If we now turn to instances of a more familiar nature, in the affairs of common life, here 
too actual experience will inform us, that it is not insuperably difficult to induce the Indians 
‘to depart from old established: practices, and to adopt new ones. One or two cases of pre- 
eminent magnitude and notoriety will suffice to confirm this position. Raw-silk, as is well 

known, has been for many years a great article of commerce in Bengal. The natives had 
_their own prethods of winding it, and much attachment to those methods, defective as they 
were. The: India Company attempted to introduce the Italian mode of winding this 
article, a mode more complex, but far more perfect; they have completely succeeded,. and 

wit, : : : : ethat 


_ * See Mr. Wilkins’s aécount of the Seeks, in the first volume of the Asiatic Transactions. 


GENERAL APPENDIX. — 89. (APPENDIX, 
‘ i - I, 
that mode is now practised in all parts of the country.. So again with respect to the culturet;\ | —— 
and manufacture of indigo, which the skill and industry of Europeans have, within these last Inquiry for improv- 
twelve years, introduced into Bengal, end have now rendered an immense article of com- "8 re Condi of 
merce between that country and Europe: the natives, tlfough possessed of the indigo plant, “SHesmsect 
from which their dyers extracted a very inferior substance for domestic nS held the 
culture of it rather in disesteem, and had no idea of those modes, and that scale of, manu- 
facture, ‘of which the Europeang gave them examples; but those.examples they now begin 
to follow on their own account, and here is reason to believe the Hindoos will come in for 
a share of the produce of this article in the London markets. Be it acknowledged then, 
that they are now incurious, and without love of learning; yet make it their interest, and 
they will attend to new discoveries; make it easy for them also to know the English 
language, and they will acquire it; show them profitable improvements in agriculture and 
the arts, and they will imitate them; make it. in short their interest, and why may they not 
become in time students, and even teachers of natural philosophy ? ‘s 
Let not the idea be hastily treated as chimerical, if we add that the. India Company, 
possessing the revenues of a great country, might very beneficially for themselves and that 
country, set the example in introducing such improvements. It would be worthy of them to 
turn their attention to. this fruitful subject, to employ skilful artists of various kinds in | 
ascertaining what improvements are practicable, and in carrying plans for them into execu- 
tion. Were such a design to be taken up, with due zeal, by the Company, and their govern- 
ments abroad, the expense and labour would assuredly be repaid in the end, probably by 
specific returns, but certainly by the augmentation of the agriculture and commerce of the 
country, and the general effects upon society. In like manner, if after the English language 
began to be diffused, seminaries, with suitable apparatus, were institsited, for gratuitous 
instruction in natural philosophy, and premiums agsigned*to those who should excel, young 
. persons, both Hindoos and Mahomedans, would become students and candidates; and if 
those. who were found competent, were at length to be taken as assistant teachers, with suitable 
salaries, such a measure would prove a new and powerful means of establishing this species 
of knowledge. If a kind, patient, and encéuraging conduct, were observed towards the 
Hindoos ; that contempt with which Europeans in general regard them, restrained ; and their 
first inaptitude borne with; it cannot be irrational to expect, that in things which come home 
_ to their business and interest, which respect the truths of nature, and the improvements of 
art, such a conduct should be productive of success. Many of the Hindoos and Mahome- 
dans are brought up to the ready practice of writing and accounts; and persons of this class 
might be more easily carried on further. - 
Turrp. It may be objected, with more plausibility, that the Brahmins, by their determined . 
opposition to innovations, which would so essentially affect their interests, would prevent the 
introduction or success of them. 
It is certainly natural to suppose, that they could not look with indifference upon any 
attempt from which they might apprehend danger, to that system whence they “ have their 
“wealth,” their honour, and their influence. It shall be readily admitted therefore, that 
' upon any serious alarm for the stability of these distinctions, auch opposition as should be 
within the power of that order of men might be expected. But though it will be proper to 
consider the effect of that opposition, and the force of the objection grounded upon it, we 
must previously maintain that it can constitute no reason at all against endeavouring, by 
prudent and pacific means, to make the truth known; for to admit this, would be to make 
the resistance of those who profit by abuses, an argument for continuing to tolerate them, 
and upon the same principle, Christianity had never been propagated. 
To objections of a prudential or political kind, it is one main design of this piece to oppose 
answers founded on considerations of a like nature; and we venture to believe, that if the 
cause here pleaded for, rested on this ground alone, it could have nothing to fear. But the 
employment of political arguments does not oblige us to decline the use of others justly 
applicable to the subject; and upon the present occasion, it would be strange to omit one of 
decisive weight, which flows from the very nature and principles of Christianity. - 
: N e 


\ 


Avpinpix,) go APPENDIX ro REPORT rron SELECT COMMITTEE. 


—— +“ The divine authority of that religion, its unrivalled excellence, and incomparable fitness to 
Mr. Grant's State promote the hgppiness of man, its whole tenor, and many particular injunctions and en- 
of Society in Asia. eouragements which it holds forth, impose upon those who profess subjection to it, the duty 
of contributing to diffuse, by all Proper methods, the knowledge and influence of it in the 
world. man who takes the Gospel as the standard of his reasoning, can for a moment 
dispute this position; to deny it, would be virtually to deny the authority of Christ, and’ 
therefore it will not be expected, that we should enter here igto the proof of a position which 
rests upon the truth of Christianity itself. But afirmjng, as we may with perfect right, the - 
‘validity of this argument, it will apply to communities as well as individuals; the duty is 
incumbent upon this nation, and it 1s augmented two-fold by the addition of that which we 
owe to the misguided Pagans who are become our subjects. 
Having asserted the regard due to this important argument, let us proceed, in the next 
place, to examine how far the preseet Sbjection is warranted, in ascribing so great an efficacy 
to the opposition of the Brahmins; or, in other words, to inquire into the extent and 
probable amount of their counter-action, still supposing their resistance to be strongly excited ; 
for here it will be proper to remark, that in general where they see no indication of persecution, 
they are not likely to feel any alarm. As the more learned and ingenious of them lead a, 
retired life, inattentive to novelties, so the rest, chiefly men busied in worldly concerns, 
possess the confidence which often belongs to deluded ignorance. They know that their 
‘system is held by numerous nations, They believe from their legends, that it-always .has 
been, and always will be so. They possess the same spirit as that Pagan votary of old, who 
felt himself quoting a fact of universal notoriety and authority, sufficient to appease a popular 
tumult, when he affirmed that the image of the great goddess Diana fell down from Jupiter. 
When therefore they see a few simple foreigners offering “ certain strange things” to the 
ears of their people, they may be seady s¢cretly, if not to use the language of the conceited 
Athenians, yet to say with a more ancient scofter, “ what do these feeble Jews?” Still less 
will the people be apprehensive about consequences. And whilst things continue in this 
state, it will be the basiness of Christian teachers to confine themselves chiefly to the 
positive declarations of ‘the Gospel, giving, no éccasion for an imputation which indeed they 
should never wish justly to incur, that of being “ blasphemers,” or resorting to abusive 
language in speaking of the Hindoo gods, or the Hindoo absurdities. They have greater 
themes; “ temperance, righteousness, and judgment to come ;’—the noble topics, brought . 
forward by St. Paul to the superstitious Athenians. “God that-.made the world ».,... 
“ the Lord of Heaven and Earth, who is not worshipped with men’s hands...... who: 
“ giveth to all, life, and breath, and all things ......1n whom we live, move, and have. our 
“ being ...,.. And that forasmuch as we are the offspring of God, we ought not to think 
“ that the godhead is like unto gold, or silver, or stone graven by art and man’s device ...... 
** And the times of this ignorance God winked at; but now commandeth all men, every 
“ where to repent; because he hath appointed a day in which he will judge the world in 
“ righteousness, by that man whom he hath ordained ; whereof he hath given assurance 
* unto all men, in that he hath raised him from the dead.” _ aa 
If by such doctrines as these, or the fruits of them, resentment and opposition should be 
provoked, let us now consider what the utmost activity of opposition so stimulated could 
effect. Usually true religion has been combated, and false religions have been upheld, either 
by fraud or force, or by both. What artifice, imposture, misrepresentation, and vicious 
eae oe have not been able to effect, persecution and the coercion of the secular power 
have been.called in to accomplish. False religion shuns fair examination ; before this test it 
cannot stand. Such is the force of truth, that on the first promulgation of. Christianity, it 
prevailed against all the deceits, impositions, ignorance, prejudice, and prescriptive authorit? 
of the anciept superstition, aided by the utmost cruelties that tyrannic governments could 
inflict. Now in the present case, the Brahmins will not possess the instrument most effectual 
for the support of religious error and imposture, that is, the power of the sword. They may 
be able to strengthen indisposition to new-opinions by their personal influence, by availing 
themselves of traditional respect and existing habits, by venting calumnies, by denouncing 
: . spiritual 


GENERAL APPENDIX. . Ql. ,APPENeIX, | 
spiritual judgments, especially that most formidable of their punishments, loss of caste; and —_— 
it shall be granted, that these expedients may be sufficient to narrow the avenues, and retard Inquiry for improv- 
the progress of truth.. Such obstructiqns are to be contended with only by patient perseve- 9g the Condition of 
rance, maintained on Christian principles. But with theseexpedients, the means of opposition °Y Asiatic Subjects, 
end; and if all such means have not prevented many Hindoos, even of the superypr orders, 
on the Coast of Coromandel, from embracing the doctrine preached by a fw humble 
Europeans, without: national or local consideration, why should it be thought that pious, 
discreet, intelligent teachers, should paveeno success in Banal) where the full establishment 
of our authority must at least secure the national religion from open contempt or disrespect. 
In that country, the gross absurdities of Heathenism have never yet been clearly exposed, and 
their abettors would find themselve$ extremely at a loss to defend by argument, assumptions 
wholly destitute of evidence, internal and external. Indeed how is it posstble to justify to the 
common sense and imperfect natural light of men, the thopstrous actions ascribed to the deities 
of the Hindoos, the immoral tenets established by the Hindoo system, and the immoral practices 
which they are used to sanction? These things could not stand before the pure and heart- 
searching word of God, which recommended by the lives of those who declared it, could not 
fail to make a powerful impression ; especially as the Hindoos, who easily suppose the authen- 
ticity of other systems of religion, (thus with Pagan latitude concluding the certainty of that 
which they hold to be peculiarly assigned to them,) would not be inchned to controvert the 
truth of ours, and therefore would be reduced to the task of proving that their own is ofdiyine - 
authority. And the great difference between this kind of contest, and the religious controver- 
sies which have usually prevailed in Europe, ought to be considered. For here the dispute 
has commonly been, which of two contrary systems or tenets was the right one, and entitled to 
general acceptance. But the Hindoos do not wish for proselytes; they cannot receive 
any: on the other hand, Christian teachers peither,able nor desirous to resort to_ 
any kind of compulsion, would be confined to a quiet exposition of the truths of their 
own system, and of the errors of Heathenism. From such a state of things no violent 
contention could easily arise. If finding excommunieation insufficient to deter Hindoos from 
embracing Christianity, the Brahmins should attempt to follow with persecution those who 
had been converted, the calm interposition of the civil government to prevent such an infrac- 
tion of justice and good order, would be sufficient. And if natives acknowledging from’ 
. conscience the Christian revelation, at the hazard of sacrifices which the confession of it 
might require, were thereby rendered more honest, more faithful, and upright, would this be 
any injury to society? Need we ask whether it would make them better servants and agents, 
make them more useful and valuable in all the relations of life? Would not such persons be 
a real accession to European masters; and must it not be supposed, that men professing 
Christianity, whose interest would be promoted by employing such converts, would not reject 
them, upon a principle which even Paganism could not justify, that is, because they had 
honestly followed their convictions? In this way the great terror of excommunication would 
be obviated; for it is in the loss of employment, the want of subsistence, and protection, that 
its great evil consists. Let it not be said, that such views might tempt natives hypocritically 
to assume the profession of Christianity who would afterwards disgrace it. The truth is not 
to be kept back, nor a credible profession of it discouraged, because it may be thus abused ; 
and those who-should act so dishonestly, would generally soon find themselves despised by 
all parties. : “ 
° Thus it is hoped a satisfactory answer has been offered to the objection now under consider- 
ation, even when admitted in its strongest form; that is, in supposing the great question 
fespecting religion to be brought into early and direct controversy. Of such a collision of 
systems however, for some considerable time to come, the probability may, from the observa- 
tions which haye been advanced, be reasonably doubted ; and if the more gradual process 
here assumed, a process by the concurring extension of the English language, should be fol- 
lowed, additional aids will, in the mean while, arise to the argument we maintain. That 
extension for instance, and the employment of the language in public business, cannot be dis+ 
puted by the Brahmins; for how could they deny the same obedience td our errant 
: N2 which 


APPENDIX, 5 


a 
Mr. Grant’s:State 
of Society in Asia. 


92 APPENDIX ro REPORT rrow SELECT COMMITTEE. 


which they formerly yielded to, the Mahomedan, and in a matter on which it is solely the 


province of government to decide ? Brahmins themselves have spoken English for a century 
past; many of them now speak it; and no bey poi plea can therefore be henceforth advanced’ 
against the use of it. Improvements in manufactures and the arts, the Brahmins could not 
exclude ; or in the adoption of some such improvements introduced by Europeans, they have. 


‘ also joine® The true system of natural philosophy, demonstrable as it is to the sight by 


machines, could be communicated to the Mahomedans, throygh whom it would have a wide 
diffusion, even if the Brahmins could prevent all Rindoos from attending to it, which is not 
to be imagined ; nor could such an expedient occur to them until the progress of light had. 
made an impression. That progress it is probable, would operate silently with persons wha 
would not choose to encounter the painful feelings attend&nt on the dereliction of caste ; and 
in this. way, without any great external change which should excite alarm, a gradual enlarge- 
ment of views and opinions, guidéd by that spirit, of order and obedience which the Gospel 
eminently inculcates, and operating rather to the prevention of any vehement conflict of 
opiniorfs, might take place, to the true happiness, as far as it went, of all parties. 

Fourru. It may possibly occur to some of the readers of this tract, that the Portuguese 


‘of India, many of whom speak English, are nevertheless still a vicious and contemptible race.— 


There are among them, it must be admitted, many who cannot be cleared from this impu- 
tation. These men, descendants of the Portuguese soldiers and freebooters of a rude age, 
and, of the lowest Bengalese women, born in the meanest stations, dispersed under govern- 
ments foreign to them, adopted by no other class of society, commonly without education, 
retaining only the errors of the Roman Catholic persuasion, grow up in ignorance, immora- 


lity, and superstition, like the Heathen around them; and if they know the English lan- - 


guage, it is but imperfectly and colloquially. They cannot be referred to as specimens of 
the effects of Christianity, any mere thap some of the Indians of America, for they under- 
stand and possess hardly an ttang of it beyond the name. But there is another description 
of persons ranking under the general denomination of Portuguese, more respectable ; per- 
sons of some.education, who are clerks, traders, or merchants. These are often men of 


‘decent lives and tolerable information ; they are, in some degree, an improving set of people, 


and have clearly profited from their acquaintance and intercourse with Europeans, particu- 
larly the English. Now the proposed plah of communicating instruction to the Hindoos, 


through the medium of our language, does not suppose that the vilest out-casts of society. . 


are first to be selected for the purpose, or that a new name merely is to be imparted, but 
that men of substance and consideration, men employed in the affairs of government, con- 
nected with the revenues and with the administration of justice, will procure for their 
children, if not for themselves, the knowledge of a tongue which will then be necessary in 
transacting business ; and that the instruction to be conveyed by this, or any other vehicle, 
shall be important and practical. 
Firru. Another objection may arise from the result of the direct attempts which have 
been made to enlighten the Hindoos, by the preaching of the Christian religion: -It has been 
said by some, that the success of suck attempts has been very small, and has been confined to 
the Pariars and others of the lowest castes.. This statement is, in the first place, very 
erroneous ; and in the next, to infer from it the impracticability of extending, by any efforts 
however strenuous, by any means however prudent, and under any circumstances however 
favourable, the influence of Christianity in Hindostan, would be altogether illogical and fal- 
lacious. Little stress shall be laid here upon the attempts of Roman Catholics: for it must 
be confessed, that though they made numerous converts, they too often only changed one 
set of ceremonies and images for another. Yet it must also be admitted, that the Romish 
establishments in Europe have shown a zeal in this matter, much superior to that. of any of 
the Protestant nations; and that Xavier, who traversed a great part of the coasts and 
islands of Infia, about the beginning of the sixteenth century, and appears to have been a 
pious indefatigable man, planted the Gospel in various places, in a way that a have led 
to a large extension of it, if his labours and zeal had been well seconded. The efforts.of 
the Dutch to establish Christianity in ‘their Indian settlements, as being made. under cir- 
a : * cumstances 


GENERAL APPENDIX. a 
cumstances more similar to our own, may deserve greater attention. There was, in the’ 
eatlier periods of that republic, a vey ee spint in the government # home for the 
promotion of this object, and the numlftr of native Chrigtians in their colonies abroad was 
very considerable. Baldeus, the author of the History of Ceylon, a person of gregt credit, 
who was one of the Dutch ministers there in the last century, and wrote fron his own 
knowledge, has stated that in the year 1663, the Christians in the province of Jaffna- 
patnam,* amounted (exclusive of slaves) to sixty-two thousand, many of whom must no 
doubt have been educated in the Romish churches, which the Portuguese had founded 
there; but it is extremely worthy of remark, that this author declares the number of children 
in the schools, maintained by the Dutch government, to have risen at the time of his 
departure from the island, to eighteen thousand. 

The learned John Leusden, Professor of Hebrew gt Ugrecht, about the end of the last 
century, produced several letters from his cdrrespondents? which gave the following further 
accounts of the state of Christianity in the Dutch possessions in Ceylon. “ Mr. Herman 
« Specht, minister of the Gospel at Columbo, writes, that in the province of Jaffnapatnam, 
“ without including Manaar, which appertaiis to it, there are, according to the last compu- 
“< tation and the list sent thence to us, one hundred and forty-one thousand four hundred and 
“ fifty-six Christians, who have five pastors to take care of them.” The same Mr. Specht, 


in another letter from Columbo, dated January 


6th, 1688, says, “ the number of converted 


“ Indians, who have embraced Christianity, 1s in the space of four years greatly increased ; 
“ for the province of Jaffnapatnam, subject only to the Dutch East-India Company, hath 
“ two hundred and seventy-eight: thousand seven hundred and fifty-nine inhabitants ; 


“ among whom there are Indians professing to be Christians, one hundred and eighty-eight 
thousand three hundred and sixty-four.”+ Another very respectabte authority of the 


same period informs us, that “the Dutch East-india Company maintain in the Indies, 
“ thirty or forty ministers for the conversion of ei Infidels, who are under their dominion, 
0: 


“ and are at the annual expense of £10,000. 


r this purpose, and have hereby converted 


“ many hundred thousands of them to the true* Christian faith ; and for the further propa- 
“ gating of it, have lately erected a college in the bsland of Ceylon, in which one place only 


. * The inhabitants of Jaffnapatnam are Mak- 
bars, known to have come originally from the 
continent, and are a distinct people from the Cin- 
galese, who possess the rest of the island, and 
follow the religion of Boude, or Bhoudda, whom 
‘the Brahmins treat as a heretic; whilst some 
learned Europeans are inclined with great ap- 
pearance of reason to believe, that his religion, 
which prevails over many countries of the East, 
is more ancient in India than the Brahminical 
. system. He is mentioned by Jerome, Clemens 
Alexandrinus, and other authors of antiquity, and 
is now held to be the same as the Sommonacodom 
of Siam, the Foe of China, and the Saca of Japan. 
See in the first volume of the Asiatic Transactions 
a curious and learned paper, which has relation 
to this subject, by William Chambers, Esq. . 
A premature and lamented death has since 
d@prived learning and society of this excellent 
man, who to an exquisite skill in several Oriental 
languages, joined a very uncommon knowledge 
of Asiatic history and manners. But these.qualities 
were in him only themes of inferior praise. He 
exhibited, during along residence in India, ir all 
his relations, employments, and intercourses, a 


“ they 


consistent and distinguished example of the 
Christian character ; and from him, inquisitive 
and ingenious natives, both Mahomedans and 
Hindoos, with whom it was his practice often to 
converse, received at once just views and favour- 
able impressions of Christianity. If the occasion 
had permitted, it would only have been doing 
justice to his name to place it in a far more con- 
spicnous station than the present note assigns to 
it ; and for this particular reason, among many 
others, that he was- always a strenuous advocate 
for the diffusion of the Gospel in the East. He 
had himself begun, with great care, a translation 
of the Gospels into Persian. 1797. 

+ Millar’s Propagation of Christianity, Vol. IT, 
page 318, in which is cited Masétricht’s Theologica 
Theo-practica.——If it were asked, whether all 
these converts were sincere in their profession, 
it might be answered, that probably some were 
ignorant and some hypocritical; but so would 
the result be upon any large survey, éven in Eu- 
rope. Yet to have discarded the horrid idolatry 
and mythology of the Hindoos, and to come un- 
der the stated instructions of a*pure and divine 
system, would be important changes. 


APPENDIX, 
Inquiry for improv- 
ing the Condition of 
ourAsiatic Subjects... 


APPENDIX, 


Mr. Grant's State 
of Society in Asia. 


94 °APPENDIX to REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 
e 
-“ they have above eighty thousand converted Indians upon the roll, for whose use they print 
‘¢ bibles, catechisms, and many other books.” * . 
The Dutch Company however, it appears from recent information, never could get a suffi- 
cient nipber of ministers to undertake the work of propagating the Gospel in those coun- 
tries, or dyen to serve the churches which had been founded in'them ; and in later times, the. 
funds allotted for the support of those churches and of the clergy there, have been more and 
more curtailed ; so that from want of labourers,.of mainteaance, and zeal, Christianity has 
greatly declined in most of the Dutch settlement threugh the course of the last fifty years. 
Nearer to our own days, the single Protestant mission which has been seriously prose- 
cuted, that of the Danes at Tranquebar, under the pgtronage of the English Society for 
promoting Christian Knowledge, though extremely limited in its funds, and aided by lit- 
tle, if any, territorial or commergial jnfluence, has produced solid and valuable effects, not, 
among the lowest castes only, but 7 the Brahmins and Pandarims, persons of the 
highest order and greatest knowledge; and some of the converts have themselves become © 
useful teachers to their countrymen. There has been, since the beginning of this century, 
a succession of zealous missionaries at Tranquebar, who by no other means than preaching 
the truth, and exposing the errors of Heathenism, have won multitudes over to the faith of 
Christ, and formed several respectable churches on the Malabar Coast.{ The congregations 
of native Christians under this mission have indeed been diminished by the wars and cala- 
mities, which within the last twenty years have ravaged the Carnatic; but upon the whole, 
the number of converts made by it, in spite of all the opposing terror of exclusion from their 
own tribes, has been very considerable ; and it may be asserted, upon unquestionable autho- 
rity, that many of them have been truly sincere and earnest, living and dying in a manner’ 
worthy of the Christian profession. It is evident then, that the light of Christianity has not 
been held out by this mission without effect. Such is the force of eminent goodness, that 
the name of Swartz in particular, a missionary still living, who has laboured with a spirit 
truly apostolical for more than thirty years in that country, exposed to its hottest sun, and 
furnished only with the scantiest neéessarits of life, is revered all over the peninsula of 
India, by Hindoos, Mussulmans, and Europeans. The Hindoo King of Tanjore, when 
dying, was solicitous to make him the guardian of his heir, and to put the whole manage- 
ment of affairs into his hands, a trust which he declined. ‘ The famous Hyder Ali received 
him as an envoy on the part of the English, and effered to take his word as the guarantee. 
of a proposed engagement, when, as we have been assured, he would trust no one else; and 
Colonel Fullerton, who was commander of an English army in that country, though severe" 
in his strictures upon others, has declared publicly, that Mr. Swartz singly had retrieved 
the European character in India. This mission, supported by men of such a stamp, has 
still real success in educating the young, and converting the adult, not to a new name only, 
but to a better life and conversation. And if the number of missionaries there were greater, 
it cannot reasonably be doubted, that the success would be proportionably increased. 
The history of the Romish missions proves, that it is practicable to induce multitudes of 
the professors of Hinduism, to embrace a new faith. The present low state of Christianity, — 
both 


* A proposal from the eminent Dean Prideaux + “ The Danish mission of Tranquebar was very 


to the Archbishop of Canterbury (Dr. Tennison) 
for the propagation of the Gospel in the English . 
settlements in the East-Indies, contained ina let- 


In this letter the Dean greatly complains of the 
indisposition of the English East-India Company 


to the good work which he recommends. The 


- Company, then under the management of Sir 


Josiah Child, must have much declined from its 
earlier zeal for the honour of religion, _ 
: See the Life of Dean’ Prideauzx. 


b 
| 
ter to his Grace, dated the zoth January 1694-5. | 


“ highly extolled by several people here (Colum- 
“bo in Ceylon), who at the same time assured 
“ me, that had the Catholics, in their endeavours 
“‘to propagate Christianity in India, conducted 
* themselves with equal gentleness, moderatiqn, 
‘¢ and Christian charity, devoid ofavarice, haugh- 
“ tiness, and violence, the major part of the nu- 
* merous inhabitants of Asia would, at this present 
‘time, have been converts to this doctrine.”— 


“| Thuneberg’s Travels, Vol. 1V. Anno 1778, « 


GENERAL APPENDIX. re 


both in those missions, and in the Dutch establishments, is clearly to be ascribed, not to the . 


- determined adherence of the Indians to their own tenets, but to the remissness, indifference, 
and at length almost total neglect of the Europeans, whose too general disregard of the 


Aprenbdix, 
ae 
Inquiry for improv- 
ing the Condition of 


spirit and precepts of their own professed faith, is, it musbe acknowledged, a hindrance of Asiatic Subjects. 


another kind, more lamentable and pernicious than all the rest put together; for fied they 
abel lived conformably to their religion, Hindostan would at this time probably Mave been 
istian. 5 _ : 

The observation therefore of & late wriger, that.“ notwithstanding the labours of mis- 

“ sionaries for two hundred years, and the establishments of different Christian nations who 
“ support and protect them, out of perhaps one hundred millions of Hindoos, there are not 
“ twelve thousand Christians, and those chiefly Chandalas or outcasts,” * leads to a wrong 
conception of facts, and to conclusions,totally unsupported. ugh this number were cor- 
rect, it ought by no means to be taken as the utmost pésgble product of united exertions for 


a long series of time; for nothing is plainer, than that these exertions, never great, never in. 


any degree what they ought to have been, have gradually declined, except in the sdlitary 
instance of the small mission of Tranquebar, for more than a century past, and are in most 
places now entirely abandoned, not for want of success, but for want of the spirit that should 
animate such-undertakings. Even if the success had never been greater than it is said to be 
at this day, and had been confined to the lower classes, who however have immortal souls, 
they who consider the value of Christianity, and the vast importance of the interests con- 
nected with it, as well as the opposition which the priests of other religions have uniformly 
made to it, would still think this success an object of very considerable magnitude. But we 
have seen what had been done in the times of Baldeus and of Specht,+ and we may judge 
how far it is reasonable to take the number of twelve thousand { in the, year 1790, as the 
existing amount of Christians in Hindostan, when we may feirly state no less a number than 
one hundred and eighty thousand to have been existing in the year 1688, a full century 
earlier. Length of time however, can be.no exact, criterion in this case. Persecutions, wars, 
and famines, may reduce the number of Christians. A want of pastors may disperse them, 
and in a generation or‘two leave no vestige of flourishing churches. The diligence and. 
earnestness employed in this work will in general be found the truest test, and wherever these 


have appeared, the effect has been | peewee * As to “the establishments of different. 


“Christian nations, who support and protect them,” where are they? Exclusive, first, of wan- 


dering Romish missionaries, who to do them justice subsist on little, and submit to a painful . 


course of life, and next of the Tranquebar mission already mentioned, which consists not of 
above seven or eight ministers, on very narrow appointments, where are the establishments, 
where are the support and protection? Do the Dutch, possessing many large islands and 
settlements, now maintain even a sufficient number of clergy for their factories? Do the 
British, the lords of immense territories, and of twenty-four millions of Heathen subjects, 
“maintain a single missionary? Pudet hoc opprobrium! This is a very serious subject, which 

would require and well deserves & distinct consideration. § a 
. . ea 


* Sketches concerning the Hindoos, quoted in 
Dr. Robertson’s Ancient India, page 230. 

7 Pageg3e 

f A letter recently received from a very re- 
spectable person on the Coast of Coromandel, 
states that in consequence of the capture of 
Ceylon by the English, twenty thousand native 
Christians in the province of Jaffnapatnam were 
left without pastors, and thence were falling off 
to Paganism. . 1797. 


. § National support is here ‘spoken of. The - 


Society for promoting Christian Knowledgé, be- 
fore noticed, from their moderate funds, the 


subscription of individuals, have for a long series 
of years given an annual allowance to the Danish 
missionaries of Tranquebar, or more properly have 
upheld thevaluable mission established there near- 
ly since its commencement ; and they wish to ex- 


tend their Jabours both on the Coast and in Bengal; - 


but their funds, enlarged as they have lately been, 
are not adequate to the scheme now proposed. 
An evasive plea, with which some persons meet 
proposals of this kind, is hardly entitled to notice. 
‘« Let us, say they, begin dt home;” as if they 
were-hindered in any domestic plans of benevo- 


‘lence by such proposals; as if He who sincerely 


wishes 


APRENDIX, 


e 


Mr. Grant's State - 
of Society in Asia. 


96 « APPENDIX ro REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


The conclusion therefore, which the writer recently quoted, would draw, that the pecu~ 
“ liarly obstinate attachment of the Hindoos to their religion, has prevented, and by parity of 
reason will ever continue to prevent, their conversion to Christianity, is repugnant to the past 
experience of Europeans. . Whergver an attempt Ras been seriously and prudently made, 
a certaig degree of success has followed it; and if such attempts were more extended, the 
juccese Would be correspondent. ; “ 
Doubtless there is always difficulty in turning men from error to truth; and those who: 
have been taught to place a high degree of merit in abstinence from certain meats and 
liquors, will be prejudiced, as has also been objected? against a religion which treats these’ 
things as indifferent. But prudence and discretion will do much. The Danish missionaries 
have never encouraged converts to shock their Heathemneighbours, nor to run themselves: 
into unnecessary expense and danger in this respect ; for in imitation of the conduct of the 
first teachers of Christianity tawards. the Jews, whilst they have explained to them the 
allowableness of using any Kind W& food withoht. exception, they have also inculeated the. 
expediency, in their circumstances, of forbearance. But it is idle to lay any great stress as. 
some have done upon such an impediment, when in order to real conversion, much greater 
obstacles must be overcome. , Undoubtedly the grand hindrance, on the part of the Hindoos, 
to the reception of the Christian faith, is not so much an attachment to their religiony as the 
dreadful forfeitures which follow the dereliction of it,—excommunication from society, family, 
wife, children, inheritance, employment, subsistence, every thing valuable in life, and every 
thfing necessary to its support ; yet these prodigious sacrifices many have made for conscience 
sake ; and if converts could have protection from persecution, and the means of subsisting. 
themselves by honest labour, which among so many European Christians as, are in Ben 
could not be wanting, their numbers would be far more considerable than they are at present. 
In remoter ages, we know from undoubted authority, that the diffusion of Christianity in 
India, was more general than it has beef in modern times ;% but the people were the same, 
their religion and prejudices the same as they are now; nothing was different, but the ardour 
for propagating the Coapel: and when this ardour revives, in places where the ascendancy of 
Europeans has prevailed over the Hindoo government, it may be expected that more homage 
will be paid to true religion, than it has yet received. 


Sixt. If, after all that has been alrtady said of the causes by which the Hindoo cha- 
racter is formed, any person should still be willing to believe, that: nothing more is necessary 
for the social peace, order, and happiness, of our Asiatic subjects, than to enact good laws, and 
duly to administer them, such persons may be pleased to consider a maxim which experience 
has established in the science of legislation, “ that laws are of no avail without manners.’’ 
Where the general spirit of a community runs counter to particular laws, those laws, instead 
of overcoming that disposition, more commonly lose their own efficacy, as may be seen in 
the case of duelling, and many other forbidden practices among ourselves. And it usually 
happens, that regulations which have the maintenance of good morals for their sara 

; ; . object, 


wishes the extension of religion at home must not 
also wish it abroad; as if it were ability, and 
not will, for both, which is wanting; as if we 
ought to postpone the communication of light to 
other countries, whilst any individuals remain 
uninstructed (though through the fault of ap- 
tae iy teachers,) among ourselves; as if the 

uties of-sovereignty did not extend wherever 
we hold possessions; as:if the communication of. 
the Gospel to all our subjects, were not an indis- 
pensable duty, and the obligation to perform one 
duty, could justify the neglect of another both 
incumbent and practicable; as if, in a word, a 
sesident of this country, having a foreign estate 


rs 


peopled with Heathens, should not immediately - 
attend to their religious instruction. 

* A considerable church subsisted on the Coast 
of Malabar from a very early period, and when 
the Portuguese first visited India, the Christians 
on that coast were still very numerous and re- 
gpectable. They were a simple people, and by a 
complication of artifice and force were brought 
into subjection to the Romish see, whence they 
were incorporated with the Portuguese and shared. 
in their fate-—See. Histoire du Christianisme des 
Indes, par la Croze, and the Portuguese writers 
cited by him. 


‘ GENERAL APPENDIX. 097 


¥ ® : i , . = : 
object, fall sooner into neglect, and are infringed with more impunity, than those made to 
* protect the property of individuals. 


Our berate in India is besides, jp this respect, under some peculiar disadvantages. 
A handful of foreigners preside over a very numerous peeple, extremely. corrupt, and for- 


tified in their corruptions by their own institutions. Out of that mass, we must take the. 


subordinate instruments of our administration in all departments, particularly in tle courts 


of law, and in the police of very extensive provinces. The number of our courts, and of. 


British judges or officers in them, from thegheavy expense which they occasion, can hardly 
be made equal to what ig required for the conveniency of the people, of whom also, many 
reside at a distance from the seats of justice, where moreover the formalities of procedure, 
and the accumulation of suits, ne@essarily produce delays repugnant to the nature and 
circumstances of that people, who earngstly desire prompt decisions. 

It may easily be seen, that these causes, especially the nattonal characteristics attaching to 
the multitudes whom we are obliged to employ in all the inferior lines of administration, 
would, notwithstanding the many excellent things done to render the fountains an@ the 
channels of justice pure, hinder the perfect operation of our legal institutions, even if it were 
in the nature of such institutions to furnish internal principles of morals, as well as to punish 
the external violations of right. That it is not, authority and experience concur to assure us. 
It is the judgment of the great Lord Bacon, a man pre-eminent in jurisprudence as well as in 
philosophy, “ that good government, and good laws, though they indeed nourish virtue when 
“ grown, do not much mend that seed.” Corruption has destroyed .many states, where legis- 
lation had attained to considerable perfection ; and how plainly does it come within our own 
observation, than even in countries where the awful sanctions of true religion are added to’ 
the wisest laws, uprightly dispensed, all are found little enough to check the progress of 
depravity? ‘Phe insufficiency of laws alone to this end, cannot then be bétter stated than in 
the words of another writer of stperior order, which* may close the discussion of a topic in 
itself so clear. “ As for human laws, made to encourage and requite virtue, or to check and 
“ chastise vice, it is also manifest that they do extend to cases in comparison very few ; and 
“ that even as to particulars, which they touoh, they are so easily eluded or evaded, that 

_© without intrenching upon them, at least without iicurring their edge, or coming within the 
“ verge of their correction, men may be very b&d in themselves, extremely injurious to 
“ their neighbours, and hugely troublesome to the world; so that such laws hardly can 
“ make tolerable citizens, much less thoroughly good men, even in exterior demeanor and 
“ dealing. However, no laws of men can totich internal acts of virtue or vice; they may 
“ sometimes ‘bind our hands, or bridle our mouths, or shackle our feet, but they cannot stop 
“ our thoughts, they cannot still our passions, they cannot bend, or break our inclinations; 
“ these things are beyond the reach of their cognizance, of their command, of their com-+ 
“ pulsion, of their correction; they cannot therefore render men truly good, or hinder. them 
“ from being bad.” * 


Srventu. There is another species of objection, which does not peculiarly apply to the 


_ plan now in question, but equally to all schemes which go upon a principle of proselyting men - 


of one religion to another. The objection is to the principle itself. It supposes that if any 
religion be necessary, the religion in which a man happens to be born, will do at least as well 
for him as any other; that being sincere in his hereditary religion, he will be safe and happy 
in a future state; and that itis.therefore wrong to disturb him about any newone. Now 
this objection plamly assumes, that all religions, however contrary to. each other, are 
much the same as to their end and efficacy. It must suppose, that they.are all indifferent 


APPENDEx,. 


Inquiry for improv- 


ing the Condition of 
ourAsiatie Subjects. 


_or all acceptable to the Deity; and if the’ latter, thet either they had their origin from - 


him, or that human inventions of various and opposite systems of faith and practice, 
according to the different tastes, fancies, -habits. of men, and their degrees of knowledge, 
-are at least approved of by him. e ‘ This 


_ * Dr. Barrow, Vol. II. page 335- ; 
; 0 


APPENDIX, 


Mr. Grant's State ° 
of Society in Asia. 


g8e. APPENDIX:10. REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 
. _ This is no otherthan the old Heathen opimon, revived and extended by modern infidels. * 
But some men who have fallen into it perhaps carelessly, as an easy way of solving points 
dubious or disquieting to their minds, have surely pot reflected on the gross and impious 
‘absurdities vith which it is preggant. Allowing that it does not mean to discard morals, 
it procegds upon a fatal sophism, too common, that they. may. equally subsist with any or 
with fa belnion. and that only the duties which our fellow-creatures claim, are important, | 
_those owing to God, mere ceremonies; it implies, that an infinitely pure, wise and good 
Being, may be pleased with rites fantastic, cruel and impfre, which in their nature violate 
‘évery idea, even of morals; or what is nearly as ménstrous, that he places on the same 
level, doctrines and services essentially contrary to each other, and many of them utterly 
unsuitable to his own holy character. In either case, the greatest outrage will at once be 
offered to right reason and to the infinite perfections of the divine nature. But one inference 
will thus be reserved, which it ¢s tosbe feared _is too often the main drift of all the crude 
SS notions unhappily indulg@l upon a subject the most momentous,—that no religion 
as @n exclusive claim to be preferred, or that in other words, there is no such thing as 
a divine revelation; for if a revelation were acknowledged, the consequence must of course 
be, that it is entitled to supreme regard. 
But this is directly to attack the truth of Christianity, which claims God for its. author, 
and, including as it does, the Jewish and patriarchal dispensation, to be the only religion 
that he hath revealed. This is not the place to vindicate the justice of the claim, nor 1s it 
necessary. The truth of Christianity has been a thousand times proved, against rely 
species of attack which the abilities or the passions of men have been able to devise. It 
stands upon such various invincible evidence, external and internal, as belongs to no other 
object of human belief; evidence sufficient to satisfy the most secret doubts of every honest 
inquirer, and to asfonish him with its clearness and power. All the assaults of ancient and . 
modern enemies have only served to establish the authentieity of Christianity more firmly. 
It gains by being examined. It courts the light. The age in which it was introduced, and 
made its way in the world against all opposing powers, was an age of light. With the 
revived and increased light of modern times, it has received new lustre and confirmation. 
Those superior geniuses, who have extehded the sphere of human knowledge, have been 
steady believers in Christianity. The di8coveries of science validate none of the truths of 
revelation, The improvement of the mental faculties yields no illumination that can disparage 
the matter, or léssen the importance of those truths. But in proportion as the investigation 
of nature, and of the character and state of man, enlarges his views of the great Creator, 
and his acquaintance with himself, he sees more of the suitableness of the Christian scheme, 
to the perfections of the one, and the condition of the other. It is by a gross perversion of 
language, that the light of this advanced period is spoken of, as affording any ground for dis- 
regarding the doctrines or the precepts of the Gospel. Men have indeed, by too general an 
agreement, departed from them in practice, and thence the transition is easy to a denial of 
their authority, the source of all which is corruption, and the consequence, a return to the 
darkness of error; yet this common, profane relaxation, in opinions and in manners, is all 
that is often meant by such phrases as “ the light of the eighteenth century ;” and experience 
has shown, that wherever the Gospel has been obeyed, it has made communities and indivi- 
duals better and more happy, as in proportion to the degree in which it has been rejected 
or slighted, vice and misery have prevailed. It 1s the only religion which ever has wrought 
any reformation among mankind; all other systems have made men easy in their immo- 
ralities. _ Christianity will allow no compromise with evil, and this is the true cause of the 
= . ad resistance: 


' ™ It is the creed of Voltaire, and ‘many others 
‘styling thegelves philosophers, who from plead- 
ing for toleration, moderation, indifference, i 
matters of religion, proceeded gradually, and by 
‘a thousand insidious arts, first to bring into con- 
“tempt, and theA to overturn the established faith 


in: 


of that country, in which they were left at liberty 
to enjoy even their most extravagant dogmas ; 
and to effect this purpose, razed its civil consti. 
tution, its monarchy, all its existing establish. 
ments, to the foundation, covering them with 
anarchy and blood. : 


GENERAL APPENDIX. * °*99 | APPENDIX, - 
I . 


resistance made to it; mén do not oppose it from tne love of truth, or any honest intelligent. 


ne 


conviction of its want of foundation, but because it holds out too strong a light, and too Inquiry for improv- 
strict a rule. To argue therefore as if it were untrue, (which is indeed done when the ing the Condition of 
_ sufficiency of any other is pleaded,) after every attempt te destroy its authority has ended rAsiatic Subjects. 


in its stronger confirmation, is a high strain of unjustifiable assumption, and most intlecorous | 
in a country where this religion is the established faith, and a part of the law ofthe land. | 


This single consideration however, our national acknowledgment and profession of its truths, 
imposes upon us, as has ‘been alfeady Stated, the obligation of communicating, as far as we are 
able, the blessings of it to the Heathen world, and precludes therefore the use of anyjsuch ob- 
jection as we are now combating, especially in all national or public discussions of this subject. 
| It may not be unnecessary, howéVer, to repeat here, that every kind and degree of com- 
pulsion is utterly excluded from this sgheme, as subversive of the rights of private judgment 
and conscience, and totally contrary to the spirit and*genfus of Christianity. The abuses 
which have been committed in this way, whether under Rid name of that religion, or avowedly 
in opposition to it, have furnished the enemies of revelation with a set of commori-place 
objections, which also require some notice, because they are applied, not merely against 
religious persecution, but against the principle of propagating the knowledge of the Gospel 
in Pagan countries. “ The agitation of religious opinions,” say those opposers, “and parti- 
“ cularly of the doctrines of Christianity, has been the occasion of manifold contentions and 


immense bloodshed.” That is to say, in effect, that because some wicked men have per- . 


secuted their fellow-creatures for preaching or embracing Christianity, and others, professing 
that religion, have been guilty of similar cruclties against those who could not hold every 
dogma which they sought to impose, nothing should be done that might possibly awaken. 
this persecuting spirit; men ought not to be disturbed in their errors, however fatal; and 
the occasional or possible abuse of a thing, however, excellant in itself, is sufficient to decide 
against the dissemination or maintenance of it. The mere statement of these objections is 
enough to expose their weakness: they alledge the conduct of the greatest enemies of religion, 
against religion itself. They ge to supersede raverence to God, love to man, obedience to 
conscience, and all freedom of opinion. e. 

But the very ground of these objections, surely never sincere, has now ceased. Toleration. 
in matters of religion is well understood. Religiofi is not propagated by force ; and all that 
is now proposed is, that a certain moderate number of individuals, armed with nothing but 
truth, reason, and argument, shall in a mild, pacific way, communicate the Christian system 
to those who have never hitherto had an opportunity of hearing it, and who, whether they 
listen to it or not, certainly have need of its benign and salutary influences. 

It is not, let us again disavow the idea, the introduction of a new set of ceremonies, nor 
even of a new creed, that is the ultimate object here. Those who eonceive religion to be 
conversant merely about forms and speculative notions, may well think that the world need 
not be much troubled concerning it. No, the ultimate object is moral improvement. The 
pre-eminent excellence of the morality which the Gospel teaches, and the superior efficacy 
of this divine system, taken in all its parts, in meliorating the condition of human society, 
-cannot be denied by those who are unwilling to admit its higher claims; and on this ground 
only, the dissemination of it must be beneficial to mankind. 

Do we then wish to correct, to raise, to sweeten the social state of our Indian subjects ? 
‘Would we at little cost, impart to them'a boon, far more valuable than all the advantages 


we have derived from them? The Gospel brings this within our power. Of the effects which . 


it would produce in civil society, if men acted according to its principles, we may, in the 
words of a distinguished prelate,* say, that ‘in superiors it would be equity and moderation, 
“ eourtesy and affability, benignity and condescension; in inferiors, sincerity and fidelity, 
“ respect and diligence. In princes, justice, gentleness, and solicitude for the welfare of their 
* subjects; in sibjects loyalty, submission, obedience, quietness, peace, patience, and ee 

“ fulness. 


: ; \ 
* Bishop Horne. Sixteen Sermons, page 101. 
02 


APPENDIX, 


—— 


Mr, Grant’s State 
of Society in Asia. 


“400¢ APPENDIX ro-REPORT From SELECT COMMITTEE. 


“ fulness. In parents, tenderness, carefulness ot their children’s good education, comfortable 


subsistence, and eternal welfare ; in children, duty, honour, gratitude. In all men, upon 
all occasions, a readiness to assist, to relieve, to gomfort one another. Whatsoever, m a 
word, is pure, and lovely, and good.”—Can we help exclaiming, with the celebrated 
author of the spirit of laws,—“ How admirable the religion which, while it seems only to. 
“ have inbview the felicity of the other life, constitutes the happiness of this!”’* 

And is this the religion which we hesitate to communicate,—to communicate to those 
whose welfare it is atike our duty and our interest,to consulf? Is it not enough that more 
than thirty years have already elapsed, more than fwenty millions of our subjects have 
passed into eternity, without our making any attempt to instruct them? 


- Eientn and Last. Another. objection still remain$ to be ‘stated, one of an opposite 
nature to some of those which have been discussed, and in appearance more formidable than 
any of them. Its constituent idéags,*the danger which might result from the adoption of the 
proposed plan. Put in its strongest and amplest terms, it may be thus expressed: “ If the 
* English language, if English opinions, and improvements, are introduced in our Asiatic 
“ possessions, into Bengal for instance; if Christianity, especially, is established in that 
“ quarter; and if, together with these changes, many Englishmen colonize there, will not 
a the people learn to desire English liberty and the English torm of government, a share in the 
“ legislation of their own country, and ‘commissions in the army maintained in that country ? 
“ Will not the army thence become, in time, wholly provincial, ofticered by natives of 
“ India, without attachment to the sovereign state :—will not the people at length come to 
“ think it a hardship to be subject, and to pay tribute, to a foreign country: and finally, 
“ will they not cast off that subjection, and assert their independence ?” 

Before we proceed to offer a reply to this objection, it is fair to remark, that whoever 
seriously entertains it, cannot also entexfain those which may be advanced against the prac- 
ticability of the plan, or the possibility of its succeeding.” And in like manner, he who 
thinks success hopeless, can feel no real alarm for the danger which another might conceive 
success to be capable of producing. Hencesthough every man is unquestionably entitled to 
follow the best decision of his own judgmeht, yet in this case, an opposition, increased in 
numbers by contradictory principles, would therefore be diminished in argumentative strength, 
since objections incompatible with each other could not both be valid. . 

It will be proper likewise, previously to separate and exclude from this complex objection 
some parts of it, which can with no justice be reckoned among the imaginable consequences 
of any estimated improvement in the state of our Indian subjects. Such are the free coloni- 
zation of Europeans in that country, and the gradual transfer of military appointments and 
military power into the hands of provincials. These are things which do not depend on the 
admission of any particular religion into our territories, or its exclusion; nor upon the will 
of the people inhabiting them; but upon the government of this country.’ They are wholly 
unnecessary; they would, in our humble apprehension, be most unwise ; and that light 


4 
ce 
“ 
“cc 


. which wé now possess regarding our Eastern affairs, that sound policy in the management 


of them, of which late years have furnished so many proofs, forbid the admission of suppo-., 
sitions so superfluous and extravagant. 
With respect to colonization, the nature of our connection with that country, renders the 
residence there of a certain number of Europeans, for the various lines of public service, 
necessary. The admission of a further number as merchants, navigators, artists, and pro- - 
fessional men, is useful and important ; but beyond such a fair proportion as may be requisite 
for these different lines of employment, and the prosecution of useful improvements and 
enterprizes, in which the energy and skill of Europeans are essential, their ingress into that 
‘ country ought not to be permitted’; for otherwise a new race might spring up, with larger 


. pretensions, and more untractable than the Hindoes. Those also admitted should be laid 


under particular restrictions ; the more considerable settlements should be confined to the 
, ae | ; sea 
* L’Esprit des Loix, Liv. XXIY. Chap. 3. ° 


GENERAL APPENDIX. e 101 
sea coasts; and the laws against the entrance of unlicensed adventurers be strictly enforced; 
for these adventurers may be of nations hostile to our interests, they will be less known, less’ 
to be depended on by us, more liable to fail of success in their own views, and from neces- 
sity, be more likely to colonize. But i all the decent gnd liberal classes of Europeans, 


APPENDIX, 
- | 


Inquiry for improv- 
ing the Condition of 
our Asiatic Subjects. 


there is even an ardent desire to return at length to their native country; and hafdly an - 


instancé can be found of any person, capable from his circumstances of following this course, 
who has deliberately chosen to make. India his ultimate home. The state of native society 


there, may, no doubt, contribufe to for: 
congenial to the European constitutién,, 


this disposition; but the Indian climate is not 
d the strong endearing attachments of early days, 


with the rational judgment of matnrer years, powerfully impel the natives of this happy 


.island to their original seat.* 


* The following remarks, ‘added as a postscript 
to the first copy of this tract, and intended to ap- 
ply to the subject of the Company’s charter, then 
about to be renewed, it may still not be improper 
to insert here. 


“ Lest the scope of these observations should 


* be misunderstood, the writer begs leave to de- 
“ clare, that he is no advocate for any system 
“of intercourse between this country and our 
“ Eastern territories, which shall give Europeans 
“an unlimited freedom of entrance there; but 
“ would most earnestly deprecate all schemes, of 
“ which such unlimited freedom should be the pro- 
“ fessed basis, or the actual, though unavowed 
“ consequence. There is a quéstion concerned 
* here, of far greater importance than the merely 
“« commercial one of an open or a restricted trade 
-“ to India; it is a question that involves in it the 
“ welfare, both of Great Britain and of our Asiatic 
“ possessions, 

“If the subjects of this country are permitted, 
“ at their pleasure, to visit those possessiorfs as 
‘“ they may our American colonies, though pro- 
“ fessedly but for the purposes of traffic, great 
. “numbers of them will settle; for mercantile 
“ transactions must entail residence, because it 
“ will be impossible for a government to say, that 
* all such transactions shall be closed, and the 
* parties be gone within a certain time, or to take 
“‘ cognizance in this manner of the conduct of 
* every individual; and if such a measure were 
“ at first attempted, it would not continue any 
“time. All the lines of trade and manufactures 
« would soon be overstocked, and then men would 
*“ seek to fasten themselves on the soil. Coloni- 
* zation would therefore very soon commence in 
“ India, especially in Bengal ; those whom uncon- 
*< trolled enterprizes in commerce would carry 
“ thither, would see a rich soil, apprehend great 
** scope for exertions, and regard the natives asa 
* subjected people, feeble, timid, and contempti- 
“ble; all things would tempt them, and many, 
“ both agents and seamen, would remain. But the 
“increase of Europeans there would not be 
“regulated by the gradual progress of colonial 


The 


“ induBtig. “Multitudes of the needy and the idle, 
« allured by ‘the fame of that country, and eager 
“ to seize novel privileges, would flock tltither at 
“once. Britain would, in a short space, be 
“ thinned of inhabitants, and those eastern pro- 
“ vinces filled with a new race of adventurers, 
“ many of them low and licentious. Being there, 
“they must subsist; they would spread them- 
“ selves throughout the country, would run {nto 


« the inland trade, fix themselves wherever they’ 


“ could on the lands, domineer over the natives, 
* harass, extrude, exasperate them, and at length 
“ provoke them to plots and insurrections; they 
“ yould be bold and assuming towards our 
“ own government there ; its present form cal- 
“ culated chiefly for the natives, would not be 
* sufficiently coercive in such a new state of 
“ things, and hardly any government which we 


“ecould maintain in that quarter, would controul° 


* swarms of Europeans, thus let loose, and ani- 
“ mated by the spirit of adventure and acquisi- 
“tion. Nor would the emigrations be confined 
“to our countrymen only. If we. tolerate the 
“ practice of free colonization in India, peo- 
“ ple from all the nations in Europe would resort 
“ thither, mix with other subjects, and aggravate 
“the mischiefs of such an invading system. In 
“a certain degree, we should have that lawless 
“ destructive scene acted. over again, which.the 
“ Spaniards exhibited when they first’ poured 
“into America. It was thus.that the Portuguese 
“ power in the East declined. The intolerable 
“ licence of the roving adventurers of that nation 


-“ rendered them odious to the natives, and arm- 


“ ed the coasts and islands of India against them, 
“ so that weakened before, they fell an easy prey 
“to the Dutch. And thus too, we should ours 
“ selves be exposed, perhaps at no distant period, 
“ to the danger of general convulsion and revolt 
“ in those possessions, which prudently guarded 
“ and cultivated, may under the favour of Pro-~ 
“ vidence, to conciliate which shoa@ld be our first 
“ care, be preserved for ages, to our great advan- 
“ tage, and the happiness of their native ‘inha- 
“ bitants. 


“The . 


ae 


Mr. Grant's State 
of Society in Asia. 


102, APPENDIX 1o REPORT rrom, SELECT COMMITTEE. 

The other‘idea, which makes our Indian Power to depend at length on provincial officers 
and soldiers, proceeds upon the supposition of previous unrestrained colonization, which has 
just been shown to be needless and inadmissible, and upon other imagined changes, into the 
probability of which we need not now examine. Fof upon any hypothesis compatible with 
our reténtion of the country, it is not conceivable how we should ever be exposed to the 
‘danger here alleged. Is it not among the first prerogatives of government to select its military 
servants ?- What inducement could possibly arise to transfer the delicate and important trust 
of military command from the natives of this country to those less connected with it? Do 
we act thus with our American colonies, peopled bY subfects of the British race? As we now 
ultimately depend not only on British officers, but on British troops, so, in the opinion of most 
competent judges, an opinion which appears to be indisputably solid and important, ought we 
to do in all time to come.* : 

Among the articles unreasonably crqwded into the objection now to be examined, are those 
which state the people as becoming, ¢n consequente of some future supposed events and com- 
binatioys, dissatisfied at the payment of a foreign tribute, and with subjection to a forei 
country. Is it to be thought, that such ideas are then only to have existence, or that the 
pore have in any past time been contented under the dominion of strangers? Surely not. 

he only point for consideration here is, their comparative acquiescence in this condition 
under their present circumstances, and under those which it is assumed may hereafter arise. . 
We shall now enter upon the consideration of the objection itself; and the first things which 


-attract our attention here, are the foundation on which the whole of this objection rests, and 


the principle upon which it proceeds. The foundation is pure hypothesis, or conjecture; and 
hypothesis supported by no real experience of any case similar to the one assumed to happen, 
nor by wae just analogy. Some general apprehension, prepossession, or unexamined suspicion, 
suggests the possibility of certain events; and to this suggestion, without any satisfaction 
concerning the premises on which it is advanced, or the conclusion deduced from it, without 
regard to all the other relations of the subject in question, we are required to give our assent. 
The principle of the objection, at least equally remarkable, is plainly no other than this, that 
to prevent the remotest chance of such"conseQyences as the proposed improvements might 
produce, our Asiatic subjects must be for ewer held in the same state of ignorance and error 
in which they now are. “ Give them not,” eays the unstrained sense of this objection, “ the 
“ light of true religion, teach them not a better system of morals, provide no stated means 
* for their public or private instruction, impart not ‘to them our knowledge of nature, be not 
“ liberal to them, even in communicating the principles of our arts; afford them, in a word, 
“ no benefit whatever of light and improvement, lest our interest should in some future period 
“ suffer; keep them blind and wretched for all generations, lest our authority should be 
“ shaken, or our supremacy over them incur the slightest possible risk.” Surely those who 

; . : may 


“. The question now therefore, with respect to. 


“ these possessions, is not, whether all British 
“ subjects shall have a right to trade thither in 
“their own persons, but whether the -natives 
« shall be protected from being overrun and op- 
“ pressed by foreigners. A different cause re- 
“-eommends, that the intercourse with these pro- 
“ vinces be still carried on by one national organ, 
“ like the India Company. At first, such a col- 
* lective body was preferred, as a better defence 


* against the arbitrary and rapacious temper of - 


*<.the native governments. Now that the coun- 
« tries are our own, sucha limited channel is also 
* preferable, to save this nation, and our Asiatic 
« subjects, from ‘the evils which might accrue 


* If, upon premises very opposite to those on 
which the objections we are now answering are 
grounded, a doubt should be started of the pro- 
priety of keeping any people perpetually under 
foreign rule, this would be to agitate a question 
involving the right of conquest, and the rature 
of government ; but it might perhaps be sufficient 
to reply, that we can foresee no period in which 
we may not govern our Asiatic subjects, more 


‘happily for them than they can be governed b 


themselves or any other power; and doing this, 
we should not expose them to needless danger 
from without and trom within, by giving the mili- 
tary power into their hands. - 


from too great a transfusion of the people of | | 
prs 


« Europe among the Hindoos.” 
% % : . » 4 


GENERAL APPENDIX. 103. - APPENDIX, ° 
: e . e : ws i 
‘may have inconsiderately lent themselves to this objection, will not, upon'a clear deliberate pacers 
. view of its principles, seek to justify or to contend for it. A Christian nation cannot possibly Inquiry for improv- 
maintain or countenance sucha principle. To doso would be virtually to trample upon every ing the Condition of 
sentiment which we profess in religion or in morals. Itwould be to make ourselves parties ourAsiatic Subjects. 
‘in all the impositions of the Brahminical system, and in effect to hold with its priests, the 
doctrine of Demetrius,* “by this craft, we have our wealth.” To enlarge uffon so very 
obvious an argument must be unnecessary. i 
’ Besides the series of effects which the ecto professedly supposes, certain other positions 
are tacitly comprehended in it, which next claim our notice. It implies, that the establish- 
ment of Christianity in a country may, on the whole, prove unfavourable, or less favourable’ 
than some other religious institutifa, to good government ; that its efficacy may, on-the whole, 
be inferior in securing the subordination, obedience, and attachment of the people, and the 
‘authority of the sovereign. Since reason, experience} an@general consent, have fully decided 
against this position, it would be superfluous and unbecoming to enter into any refutation of it. 
It is certainly one of the grossest misconceptions of the nature and tendency of the religion of 
the Gospel, which is known to afford precepts, motives, and encouragements to lawful sub- 
mission and good order, infinitely more powerful and efficacious than those of any other 
system. Its real genius’is so contrary to licentiousness and anarchy, that as we have seen in 
’ alate memorable instance, their triumph can be raised only upon its extinction. Ifwe would 
read the judgment of enlightened Europe upon this subject in a single sentence, the celebrated 
author already quoted, who spent a long life in profound and certainly unbigotted investigations 
into the nature of different systems of religion and law, may supply it. “ True Christians,” 
_ says he, “ must be citizens thoroughly enlightened respecting their duties, with the greatest 
“ zeal for fulfilling them; the more they feel the obligations of religiog, the more must they 
“ be sensible of eit they owe totheircountry. The principles of Chcudily well engraven 
“ on the heart, must be infintely stronger than the false honour of monarchies, the human 
“ virtues of republics, and the servile fear of despotic states.” + 
The objection implies also, that rather than expose ourselves to the possibility of suffering 
future evils, which it is assumed Christianity might ultimately introduce, we should forego 
great advantages which are confessedly within our reach. The probability of effecting con- 
siderable improvements is not denied ; it is, on the contrary, supposed; and this supposition 
constitutes the very ground of resistance. ““ Though the field be spacious, and much might 
“ be done, attempt not to benefit either your subjects or ae lest success should, at 
“ some very distant day, be abused. Let us not do moral good, that pace evil may not 
“come.” Such is the language of the objection ; an acquiescence in the propriety of which, 
since the duty of aiming at those salutary meliorations has been sufficiently established, 
would imply this further notion, “that the way of duty is not, on the whole, the way of 
“ prosperity.” It is enough to have pointed out these exceptionable positions. 
But another still remains to be mentioned, which goes to the essence of the ‘present 
subject. . The objection silently assumes, “ that in a system opposite to the one proposed 
“ inthis essay, must consist our future safety and stability in India.” The high importance 
of this proposition, not surely one of such intuitive evidence as to command instant assent, 
entitles it to particular consideration; but that consideration will be more conveniently 
bestowed, after we have viewed the direct matter of the objection, to which we now 
roceed. 
z It alleges then, the probability of the utmost possible success from the adoption of a system 
of improvement, and the greatest possible abuse of that success. We have no design to 
' exaggerate the effects or events which ar€ necessary to. justify these large conjectures; but 
ewe apprehend, that upon any reasonable estimate of them, they will be found to form a long. 
series of stages, not only in the advancing, but also in the descending scale of human society 
for no partial change in the people, either with respect to opinions or to numbers, seems 
_ adequate to the production of them. Let us endeavour therefore, to trace the career which 
is 


* Acts, Chap. 1g.——Page 8g. + L'Esprit des Loix, Liv. XXIV. Chap. 6. 


Appifnpix, 


Mr. Grant’s State 
of Society in Asia. 


164, APPENDIX 10 REPORT rxom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


-is thus imagined, and’ to expand to the view, the various gradations of that ample progression’ 


by which we are to be conducted through greatness to decline. First, the diffusion of a 
foreign language, of foreign opinions and arts, of a spirit and religion the most dissimilar to 
those of the natives, who are a p@ople exceedingly numerous, and from remote antiquity 


’ peculiarly attached to their own customs and notions; next a large increase of agriculture, 


manufactuis, commerce; with new wants, tastes, and luxuries; a great demand for English 
productions and fashions; and a gradual separation from neighbouring nations, in whom these 
changes, probably misrepresented to them, would beget disgust and aversion to the converted 
Hindoos. The objcciion must imply moreover, not only the rise of just notions of civil liberty, - 
but that they have become deeply rooted in a country where despotism seems to have been in 
all ages, and to be still, the natural and only idea of govefhment;* it must imply vigour and 
unanimity to assert this liberty; then (before it can he abuscd) the possession and enjoy- 
ment of it; after this, a provies$ {p ficentiousngss; and lastly, the violent dissolution of 
their connection with their sole procector, in the midst of nations become hostile to them, 
without a rational prospect of improving their situation, if they threw themselves upon the 
valet of other European or native powers, or of maintaining independence if they stood 
alone. 

To what distant age, may we not now ask, does this immense process lead us? If we even 
contract it to any space which an objector could urge as at all commensurate to the assumed 
consequences, should we still, in reasoning upon such conjectural delineations, stand upon 
any solid foundation? Would we act in serious and great concerns, even of private, indi- 
vidual import, upon such precarious remote contingencies? Do they not set us afloat upon 
the ocean of possibilities, where the prospect, extended so far as to become wholly indistinct, 
confounds sea and gky, and, in interspersed clouds of many shapes gives fancy easily to 
discover formidable promontories and rocks ? 

But if we look to known realities, to some of the many afid great obstacles which will 
stand in the way of any such political revolution as is imegined, we shall be at a loss to give 
any sober satisfactory account of the menner in which they are to be removed. We insist 
not on the difficulty of disseminating, only by just and rational means, a new religion, opposed 
by inveterate habits and prejudices. The tiiends of that scheme, indeed, dare not speak of 
success, with the confidence which the language of the objection seems to favour; yet they 
are not without hope ; and they are animated by a,conviction, that even a partial diffusion of 
Christianity, would improve the whole mass of society. But if we inquire, for instance, into 
the probable period of the general abolition of castes, which allowing it ever to happen, must 
be conceived, in the natural order of things, to precede some other supposed changes, what 
pee shall we assign to it? Some point, we may venture to say, not within our ken; and 

eyond which, it seems vain to stretch our political solicitude in so changeable a world as this, 
wherein political prediction is so often baffled ; perhaps indeed, because it is so seldom'con- 
nected with present duty. Supposing, however, the tendency of events to be towards such an 
abolition, we may conclude, that the progress to it will be gradual. With the institution of 
castes, are blended not only religious doctrines and legal privileges, but the whole system of 
Hindoo manners. Deep-rooted prejudices, combined with strong mterests and immemorial 
habits, cannot reasonably be expected to give way tosuddenimpressions. The entire manners. 
and usages of a people do not change at once. The institution, therefore, will not be deprived 
of its power by any violent rupture or convulsion. And even after the doctrine of castes shall 
have lost its religious authority, and its tyrannical influence in society, (still arguing on the 
supposition that these things may happen,) the manners which it contributed to form will, in 
a considerable degree, and for certain time, femain. Among the Malabar converts to 
Christianity, distinctions of. caste have not lost all their force; the habit of separation, the 
repulsive feelings, the. secluding reserves, which spring from that source, though aaa 
; sti 


* The government of the Secks, though it'| less the aristocratic connection of the Mahratta 
have more of an aristocratic or republican form, | chiefs. 
seems no real exception to this observation, still | 


‘GENERAL APPENDIX. °. 105. 


still exist, in some degree perhaps analagous to the ceremonial prejudices’ of the first 
Christian Jews. As long as a:principle of this nature remains in society, preventive as it. 
will be of an intercommunion in margages and professions, no formidable. political asso-. 
Giation is likely to arise. Hence as the decline.of.theeinstitution of castes will be slow: 
and imperceptible; so the moment of its expiration will be unperceived ; subsequent observa-, 


APPENDIX, 
awe 
Inquiry for improv- 
ing the Condition of: 
ourAsiatic Subjects. 


tion only will discover that it is past: therefore neither can this change be a sigrml for new | 


events. 5 . 

The grand danger with whiclf the objegtion alarms us is, that the communication of the 
Gospel and of Eurdpean light, may probably be introductive of a popular form of govern 
ment and the assertion of independence. Upon what grounds is it inferred, that'these effects 
must follow in any case, especially 4n the most unlikely case of the Hindoos? The establish-- 
ment of Christianity in a country, doeg not necessarily bring after it a free political constitu- 
tion. The.early Christians made no attempts to change forms of government; the spirit of 


’ the Gospel does not encourage even any disposition Which might lead to such attempts. 


Christianity has been long the religion of many parts of Europe, and of. various protestant 
states, where the form of government is. not popular. It is its peculiar excellence, and an 
argument of its intended universality, that it may subsist under different forms of government, 
and in all render men happy, and even societies flourishing; whereas the Mahomedan and- 
Hindoo systems are built upon the foundation of political despotism, and adapted, in various 
instances, only to the climates that gave them birth. Christianity seeks moral good, and* 
general happiness. It does not, in the pursuit of these objects, erect a peculiar -political. 
" system ; it views politics through the safe medium of morals, and subjects them to the laws 
of universal rectitude. ei 4 
Nor are we to expect, that Christianity is entirely to supersede the effects of physical causes. 

The debilitating nature of the climate of our Eastern territories, and its unfavourable influence 
upon the human constitution, shave been already mentioned*, and by others represented in 

strong colours: “ Notwithstanding,” says the celebrated historian of the British Transactions 

in Hindostan, “the general effeminacy of charagter which is visible in all the Indians through- 
“ out the empire, the natives of Bengal are stall of weaker frame, and more enervated dispo- 
“ sition, than those of any other province; bodfly strength, courage, and fortitude, are! 
“ unknown ; even the labour of the common peofle is totally void of energy; and they are 

of a stupidity, which neither wishes, nor seems to be capable of extending its operations 

into any variety of mechanical dexterity: All those of the better castes, who are not fixed: 
.to the loom, are bred to the details of traffic and money, in which their patience and per-: 
severance are as great as their detestation of danger, and aversion to bodily fatigue t.” 

From this striking description ought to be excepted the military tribes, to whom it will not, 
poe apply; and the general features, we must take the liberty to say, are overcharged : 


if 
“ce 
ce 
“ 


ut having made due allowances on these accounts, the picture will certainly possess no faint | 


resemblance of the original. 
Indalence, pusillanimity, insensibility, as they proceed not wholly from physical sources, 
would be at least partially corrected by moral improvement ; but the influences of a tropical 
- sun would still be oppressive. The slight structure of the human body, with its ordinary 
concomitants, still forming the taste to a vegetable diet, would ill second ardent designs, even 
if the mind were vigorous enough to conceive them. In the early formation of the relations 
and habits of domestic life, which modify, in no inconsiderable degree, the Hindoo character, 


ww ‘ 


* Chap. III, pp. 42,&ce- tion ; but not appealed to in the former part of 

% Part Il, page sth, of the History of Military | this Tractin the account there given of the state 
Transactions, &c. by Mr.*Orme, an author well | of society among the Hindoos, from an idea 
entitled to the high rank he holds in public esti- |. that he had not any large opportunities of inti- 
mation, by his generally just and comprehensive | mately observing the conduct and manners of 
views of the subjects which he treats, the clear- | the middling and lower classes, who live remote, 
nees, accuracy, vigour and dignity of his narra- | from European intercourse. : 


’ r, ; is there 


APPENDIX, 
i 3 
Mr. Grant’s State 
of Society in Asia. , 


106 APPENDIX ro REPORT rom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


e 

there would be no material innovation. The nature of the country adds to the effects of the’ 
climate. It is unfavourable for long journeys ; and the Hindoos, in general a remotely inland 
people, have a strong aversion to the sea; even the ajr of it is offensive tothem. They are 
thus deprived of all the advantagesevhich the intercourses of navigation, and an acquaintance 
with the world at large, would procure to them. Nor is there the least probability, that they 
will ‘ever become maritime; and as little likely are they to become im other respects, an 
enterprising people. More calculated for passive suffering than for arduous attempts, they 
little love such exertions as freedom demands, and wish rather to be protected, than to have 
the trouble of protecting themselves. 

Where then is the rational ground for apprehending, that such a race will ever become 
turbulent for English liberty? A spirit of English libertf is not to be caught from a written 
description of it, by distant and feeble Asiatics especially. It was not originally conceived 
nor conveyed by a theoretical sckemee It has grown.in the succession of ages from the 
active exertions of the human powérs; and perhaps can be relished only by a people thus 
is adie Example is more likely to inspire a taste for it than report; but the nations of 

urope have seen that liberty and its great effects, without being led to the imitation of it; 
for the French revolution proceeds not upon its principles ; it is an eruption of atheism and 
anarchy. 

The English inhabiting our settlements in India, have no share in the British government ~ 
there. Some are employed as servants of the Public, but no one possesses any legislative 
right. Why then should we give to the natives, even if they aspired to it, as it is unlikel 
that they will thus aspire, what we properly refuse to our own people? The British inhabi- 
tants would be extremely averse to such a participation. Our Government, as it is now con~ 
stituted,. interests Europeans in its support, without the danger which colonization might . 
ultimately incur, ther views of establishment and of final comfort centering in the mother 
country. : ; 

The coidact of the British American colonies has raised, in some minds, confused sur- 
misings and apprehensions of, the possibility gf similar proceedings on the part of our Indian 
provinces. These alarms are easily caught by such persons, as shrink from the idea of what- 
ever might have a remote tendency to ad¥ance our Asiatic subjects in the scale of human 
beings ; conceiving, (with what political trath may perhaps hereafter appear,) that the more 


entirely they continue in their present ignorance, superstition, and degradation, the more 


secure is our dominion over them*. 


* ‘From the mischief which has recently been 
done in this country, by the dissemination of per- 
nicious publications among the lower people, 
some persons seem inclined to think, that it 
would be better for the national security and 
tranquillity, if that class of the community re- 
ceived no education. As this opinion touches 


. very nearly the main argument which is main- 


tained in the present Tract, the writer, though 

,scouscious that neither his ability, nor the limited 
space of a note, can do justice to the subject, 
hopes he shall be pardoned in throwing out a few 
observations upon it. 

_ Springing probably from. much better motives 
than the old exploded maxim, that “ ignorance is 
“ the mother of devotion,” it nevertheless seems 
to'go upon 4 principle of a similar kind ; it seems 
to imply, that “ ignorance is the surest source of 
“ obedience.” But it is presumed, .that neither 
history nor reason will justify such a position, in 


' any sound ‘sense, or indeed in any sense at all, 


But never surely were apprehensions more destitute 


of 


unless a government could be supposed to confine 
all the knowledge of a country to itself. Know- 
ledge has been said, with apparent truth, to be 
a species of power. ‘The knowzng have power over 
the zgnorant ; even the pretence of knowledge, where 
ignorance only is opposed to it, has a similar ad- 
vantage; and knowledge, like other kinds of power, 
the more exclusively it is possessed, the more it ~ 
may be made an instrument of abuse. In: the 
dark ages, when the stock of learning and infor- 
mation was comparatively little, and that little 
was shared only among a few, the abuses of know- 
ledge and of pretended knowledge, and. the ill 
consequences of those abuses, were greater than 
they have been in more enlightened times. Jn 
our own country, what numerous and gross evils 
prevailed in society from these causes? Corrupt 
churchmen and ambitious nobles, (who had the 
credit of superior intelligence as well as the 
honour of superior rank,) ied the common peeple 
within their respective spheres, as they pleased, 

. The 


4 


GENERAL APPENDIX. 


‘107 


.of solid foundation. There is, and there ever must be, an essential dissimilarity between the 
two cases. “The Americans were, in fact, Englishmen, (with some infusion of foreign Euro- 


. 


The common people indeed, had then a spirit of 
implicit obedience, but it subjected them con- 
tinually to the impositions of those who assumed 
the direction of them, and generally to she détri- 
ment of the nation at large. Hence the history 
of this island, prior to the Reformation, exhibits 
a frequent succession of internal @onvulsions. 
That grand event introduced new light; and it 
was diffused among the lower orders, whose ip- 
struction became thenceforth an object of par- 
ticular care. The consequences were, greater 
internal order, peace, and stability; thence sprung 
enlarged industry, adventurous enterprises, and 
all the long succession of prosperity which this 
country has enjoyed. 

We have advanced to a high degree of improve- 
ment in sciences and arts, in all the conveniences 
and enjoyments of civil life. Wast commerce has 
brought vast wealth; and wealth has been fol- 
lowed by its too inseparable attendant, corruption 
of manners. Our old solid principles, which were 
the foundation of our greatness, have been gra- 
dually falling into disregard andmeglect. They 
might have been well enough in our humbler be- 
ginnings, or in a less liberal age ; but increased 
lights, greater elevation, and a fullness ofall means, 
of gratification, have seemed to many to plead 
first for relaxation, and then for the admission of 
other principles allowing a suitable enlargement in 
indulgences without fear. This spirit has spread 
through the whole mass of society. Writings and 
representations have helped the diffusion of it. 
Its effects have been visible on morals, and on the 
happiness of private life. Reverence for religion 
and for government has decayed. Both have been 
insidiously attacked from time to time; and at 
length, as the more mature produce of this spirit, 
some, disdaining the measured advances hitherto 
made in unprincipling men, and encouraged by 
the fatal consummation of a like career in a neigh- 
bouring country, have openly and furiously at- 
tempted the subversion of all legitimate authority, 
human and divine. The incendiary torch and the 
secret mine, have been industriously employed to 
destroy the venerable fabrics of our religion and 
our constitution. Seditious and atheistical writ- 
ings, superlative in the impudence of their falsé- 
hood, have been particularly adapted to the vulgar 
taste; and obviously, because the ignorance of the 
vulgar exposes them to easier imposition, as the 
too general example which they had long seen 
around them, predisposed them to progressive 
boldness in licentiousness. Then it,is, that some | 


peans, which may have contributed to glienate the colonies from this country,) they possessed 


all 


men seeing the foundations of our pqiitical exist- 
ence thus attacked, begin to argue from the abuse 
of a thing against its use, and te think it would 
be better for the community, that the lower 
pore should not be instructed even to read, as 
y such privation they would, it is conceived, be 
inaccessible to infection from the press. 

But in fact, the evils of which we complain, 
origin&te in?ho small degree from the ignorance 
that has faturally followed thie dereliction of right 
principles. The symptoms indicate a*method 
of cure contrary to that which is proposed. The 
habit is diseased ; the disorder, too deep to be 
reached externally, requires that the application 
be directed to its source. . A return to ignorance 


‘may hasten the destruction of a society hecome 


corrupt through refinement, but can hardly eon- 
tribute to restore it to soundness. At our ad- 
vanced stage of improvement, it must be vain to 
imagine, that any retrograde movement we could 
effect in knowledge, woujd avail to secure the 
common mind from agitations and commotions. 
If &ny scheme of that kind even succeeded so far 
as to confine knowledge again among a smaller 
number, it could not reach to such characters as 
are now zealous to loosen and root out all received 
opinions in religion and government;. but they 
would, on the contrary, be able to do more mis- 
chief than they effect now, because the more 
profound were the ignorance of the multitude, 
the more scope would there be, as in the dark: 
ages, for the arts and activity of wicked men to 
work upon their credulity. Of this France has 
furnished a recent instance, too-memorable to be 
ever forgotten. ‘the want of knowledge and 
principle among the lower classes, left them 
a prey to Jacobinical Impostures and delusions, 
by which they were hurried at once into the 
atrocities of anarchy and atheism. 
~ It is not then by exposing our common people, 
unarmed and defenceless, to the daring blasphe- 
mies and sophistries of the preachers of impiety 
and sedition, that we can hope to keep them 
quiet. Our security lies, and lies only, in diffusing 
good instruction and right principles among them. 
In this too, the French revolutionists have afford- 
ed a lesson, which may suggest something useful 
to us. They endeavour that the minds of the 
people may not remain in that unfurnished state, 
of which they made advantage; but tleat the young 
especially, may be imbued with the tenets and 
prejudices favourable to their cause. ; 
It is perhaps a mistake to suppose, that the 
Pa” common 


Aprpnpix, 


Inquiry for improv- 
ing the Condition of 
ourAsiatic Subjects. 


© 


——a— 


Areyxorx, 108» APPENDIX to REPORT ruom, SELECT COMMITTEE. 


— ‘all the energy of the European character, alf the lights of Europe ; they were born in a tem- 
Mr. Grant's State perate climate, nursed in the largest principles of freedom ; nay the seeds of republicanism 
of Society in Asia, were sown in the first formation of the leading colonies. They had already a popular govern- 


- \ 1 
commen people among us,’ who have been most 
prone to turfult and disorder, are such as can read 
and write, or that the tendencies to commotion 
which have appeared, are to be ascribed to any de- 
gree of education possessed by that class. Besides 
that one reader in a circle or in a village would 
be sufficient to disseminate what was level to the 
vulgar understanding and acceptable to vulgar 
prejudices, and that the lower ranks are more 
affected by what they see or hear, thar® by what 
they read; those tendencies have chiefly mani- 
fested themselves in large towns, abounding with 
manufacturers, or idle vagabonds destitute of cha- 
racter or qualities sufficient to procure an honest 
livelihood, and it is therefore fair to présume, the 


least instructed part of the community. The ma-. 


nufacturers, generally put to work when yet chil- 
dren, often receive no education. When grown 
up, they are, not unfrequently congregated in 
large numbers, sometimes without due attention 
to decorum ; they encourage each other in vice ; 
and the gains of their fabour enable them to pass 
the time of relaxation, in which they commohly 
include what ought to be allowed to sacred pur- 
poses, in dissolute indulgence. Among people of 
this character, there is combustible mattér al- 
ready prepared for the designs of those who seek 
to kindle discontent and disturbance. But the 
writer of these observations had occasion, not 
long ago, to see a contrast to this description, in 
& populous country parish. In that district there 
were very few persons of sufficient age, who could 
not read. The people were in general sober, 
decent, regular in their attendance on public 
worship ; and in the course of twenty preceding 
years, one instance of the commission of a capital 
crime among them had not occurred. The doc- 
trines of Paine found little to work upon in such 
a community; the Bible was reverenced there, 
and every man kept'steadily within his own place. 
But we are not left in this case to smaller 
instances of individual observation. An experi- 
ment has been going on upon a large scale for 
a long series of years, in the sight of the whole 
nation, in the two countries of Ireland and Scot- 
“Jand. . The common classes of the former country 
have unhappily been too generally kept in igno- 
rance to the present day; and are not the conse- 
quences most obvious and most serious? How 
Jamentably age the lower people there distin- 
guished by vicious, turbulent, and lawless pre- 
ceedings? In..what' division of the British 


dominions has there appeared so great a pro- | 


ment. 


pensity to embrace democratic, disorganizing 
principles? And it is observable, that these 
principles, and the barbarities of which we hear 
so muchg have prevailed chiefly in remoter, less 
enlightened parts of the kingdom, whilst the 
vicinities of Dublin, Cork and other considerable 
places mofe civilized by knowledge, have been 
more orgerly and quiet. Scotland, on the con- 
trary, has been remarkable for attention to the 
instruction of the lower classes of its inhabitants, 
and they have, in general, been distinguished for 
near two centuries past by a spirit of sobriety and 
order. In the more remote inaccessible parts of 
that country, whither, obstructed by particular 
causes, light penetrated more slowly, regularity 
and good order were also of later establishment ; 
but the natives of those divisions, misguided into 
excess on some occasions now long past, have 
since been as eminent for a quiet and peaceable 
demeanour at home, as for standing numerously 
in the foremost ranks of those who have bled for 
the interests and the ‘honour of this country in 
every quarter of the globe; and at the present 
critical juncture have come conspicuously for- 
ward, in many bands, for the support of our con- 
stitution and our religion, against all enemies, 
foreign and domestic. 

Indeed, if we were even to set aside the con- 
sideration of religion, and the good principles 
it igculcates, and to regard knowledge merely 
as power, or as an instrument of civilization, 
we might safely rest the present question upon 
this ground. The diffusion of knowledge would, 
in the end, render a nation more disposed to 
check the admission of disorganizing principles. 
Doctrines it is admitted, while new, might make, 
as they often do, an irregular impression ; but at 
length these irregularities would be corrected by 
good sense and reflection ; and surely literature, 
even in its lowest stages, must be allowed to be 
more favourable to the production of good sense 
and reflection than ignorance. 

But when we take into the question the influ- 
ence of religion and all its salutary principles, 
certainly no one who considers their force and 
tendency can hesitate how to decide. Christianity 
was given to be “ a light to the world ;”’ ignorance 
is declared in the inspired writings to be one of 
the leading causes of the ruin of the Jewish 
nation, and of the vices of the Heathens. The 
ancient Pharisees were condemned by the Author 
of our religion for taking away the key of know~ 
ledge, that is, the use of the Scriptures from the 

people ; 


GENERAL APPENDIX.’ 


a ; Z : 
_ment. They were inured to arms, to hardships, and toils. The spirit of improvement ani- 
mated them in a thousand different lines. They were expert seamen ; their country abounded 
in excellent harbours; and in their geqgraphical situation, they were (with the exception of 
one or two of our detached, more recently settled colonies) the sole civilized people in a great 
tract of continent, which seemed to offer to them the tempting prospect of becoming there 
the only political power. With all this, they were near enough to our insidious gnemies to 
be constantly instigated to resistance by their arts, and effectually aided by their arms and 
resources. To what one of theSe many pgrticulars, shall we discover a parallel among our 
Hindoo subjects? To none, as they now are; and in various important points, no resem~ 
blance is ever to be expected. - The origin, the physical character and condition, the intel- 
lectual, moral, and political state of%he Hindoos, have already appeared, in the course of this 
essay, to be totally different. On their local circumstances only, it remains to say, in addition 
to what was before intimated, a few words. Jf they were ever “ to exalt the spear of enmity” 
against their ancient masters, they would do so almosf*environed by Hindoos, whose faith 
they had renounced, and to whom their apostacy would have rendered them odious. *Could 
they trust such neighbours as allies, or resist them as enemies? What their interest would 
obviously require them to avoid, surely we have no right to assume that they would be'so 
unwise as to commit. And if they called in the assistance of an European power, would they 
thus obtain independence, or only change one master for another? on all the coast of Hin- 
dostan there are but three or four good ports, and these at great distances from each other ; 
though the shore is in many places accessible to an invading force, and there are some tole- 

rable harbours in the islands of the Ba 
advantage. Now if the Hindoos could be renovated in every other particular, no assignable 
eriod can be imagined for their acquiring and practising the art of navigation; and there~ 
ore those of them now subject to Great Britain must, in their supposed new circum~ 
stances, not only continue to need the supply of many wants from that country, but always 
be exposed to the hostile approaches of the navies of Europe. By a people so circumstanced, 
it does not appear how independence is attainable. They must, in effect, be at the mercy of 
the strongest maritime power. Whilst therefore, we continue to be that power, it is rather 
to be expected that their own interest, and the preference which their imitation of our manners 
will have given us over other European nations, will jointly induce them to remain safe under 
our protection ; as these motives, on their part, will strengthen us in India against European 
invaders, and so contribute to maintain our naval superiority at home ; which superiority, in 
"3 the 


of Bengal, of which an enemy could take great. 


people ; which also has been eminently the sin of 
the Romish Church. It is, on the contrary, 
a stated prayer of the Church of England, that 
the people may so read the word of God as duly 
to profit by it; and as that word .“ thoroughly 
furnishes” those who submit to it “ for all good 
works,” so where else shall we find such pointed 
* authoritative precepts for the due regulation, 
order, and peace of society? ‘ Put the people 
“* tn mind to be subject to principalities and powers, 
“and to obey magistrates, not only for fear of 
“ human punishment, but for conscience sake ; to 
“ submit to every ordinance of man for the Lord's 
“ sake, whether it be to the king as supreme, or te 
“ governors as sent by him, for so is the will of 
“God. Prayers are to be made for Kings and all 
“ én authority, that we may lead a quiet and peace- 
* able life, in all godliness amd honesty. Christians 
“ are commanded to study to be quiet and to mind 
“ ther own business, to fear God and the King, and 


“ not to meddle with those who are given to change.” 


Those therefore, who would, by withholding 
the knowledge of letters from the vulgar, abridge 
the use of the Scriptures, would in fact aid the 
views of such as wish to overthrow our Christian 
faith and our civil establishment. If there be any 
who misuse the doctrines of the Gospel, by teach- 
ing a wild and shallow religion, which may indeed 
too easily connect with political error and disor- 
der, the remedy must assuredly be, in this or in 
any similar case, not to leave the field entirely to 
mistaken guides, but more strenuously to oppose 
error by truth; and if the same zeal, the same 
personal interest, with which the emissaries of se- 
dition have laboured, were universally employed 
on the other side, rationally and solidly to incul- 
cate right principles and wholesome instructions, 
we might comfortably hope, that the attempts of 
domestic and foreign enemies to excite internal 
troubles among us would end in their disappoint- 
ment and disgrace. , 


© 109 «APPENDIX, 
eae 


Inquiry for improve 
ing the Condition of 
ourAsiatic Subjects. 


APREN DIX, 


e > 


Mr. Grant's State 
of Society in Asia. 


110, APPENDIX to REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


* «4 

the present state of our Hindoo subjects, if still more necessary for the preservation of our 
‘Eastern possessions, than it would be on the supposed approximation of that people to the 
British character. 9 a : 

It may now be fair to inquire into the propriety with which that species of doubt or appre- 

hension, which has just been considered, insinuates, as it does, some moral relation between 
the American revolution, and such principles as are proposed to be introduced among our.Indian 
subjects. ° Is it to be supposed, that if the Americans, being in their physical character, their 
local and political circumstances, the same, had professed» Mahomedanism, or any pagan 
religion, they would not have been at least, equalWy prene to a revolution? If we had main- 
tained in America, the same kind of despotic government which has prevailed in the East, 
where the sovereign, when dispatching a viceroy to a digtant province, could seldom know 
that he should not soon have to send an army to reduce him to obedience, will it be asserted 
that our authority would have been better or equally secured? But after all that is said of 
the separation of the American colanies from Great Britain, it is now a fact well known, that 
it did pot spring from the general disposition, or the previous design of the people: in the 
possession of all the advantages, which have been enumerated, they had not become impa~ 
tient for independence ; and among the reasons to be assigned for the attachment which then 
still remained among them for this country, may certainly be reckoned their possession of 
the same language and religion. 
* If it be urged, that a comparison between the American colonists, and the natives of our 
Eastern territories, can be justly instituted only in considering the latter, not as they are at 
present, but as they would be after all the proposed improvements were diffused among 
them, it may be answered, that our previous statement of the effects of these improvements, 
affords matter for this comparison, so far as things contingent and unknown, can be com- 
pared with things established and known; and that it is fair, for a double reason, to state 
the present disparity between the two races of people, first to ghew the immense career which 
the Handoos have yet to run, even in the prosecution of such improvements as are attainable, 
and secondly to demonstrate, that in the character, situation, and circumstances of the Ame- 
ricans, at the era of their revolution, there Were radical important distinctions, which no 
improvement, on the part of the Hindoos, could annihilate ; or in other words, that they could 
never be expected to arrive at the point at avhich the Americans then stood. 

Indeed those who know the country of Hindostan will probably think that political liberty 
is the last thing likely to flourish there. Thougle that country has been, from causes of 
a different nature which will be hereafter noticed, always subject to revolutions and convul- 
sions ; a revolution, the idea and act of the popular mind, upon the principles, or rather from 
an abuse of the principles of civil liberty, would be as great a political phenomenon as the 
world has exhibited, and one of which Asia has given no example. ‘To bring a timid sub- 
missive people, whom the Tartars called, “ worshippers of power,” up to the manliness of 
the European character, to elevate the feeblest of them, the Bengalese, to so high a point of 
energy, that like the American descendants of the British themselves, they should plan the 
daring project of an independent empire, seems to be something beyond what has yet been 
seen, or is reasonably to be expected from the effects of institutions, civil-or religious, upon 
nations. 

Having thus considered the adverse consequences held forth by the objection, it may 
now be proper to notice more particularly, the favourable suppositions which it contains, 
The dangers it fears, are the dangers of prosperity. If then, this prosperity were realized, 

- and the produce, the manufactures, and the riches of the country were greatly increased, as 

according to the objection, English manners, tastes and wants, must also have become com- 
mon, would not exports thither, and the reciprocal commerce arising from the change (nog 
to reckon the bie ae which merchandize, now hardly taxed at.all, would then easily bear) 
be proportignably augmented? For what series of years, and with what multiplying 
powers, may we then conceive this augmentation to be progressive? Large as the asser- 
tion may seem, perhaps the shortest term we could assign to it would produce an accumu- 
lation of commercial profits and advantages, more than tantamount to a very high valfa- 

tion 


GENERAL APPENDIX. “rie 


e ‘ 
tion of the fee-simple of our provinces, if we could suppose a sale of them to be now made. 
And it is fair also to admit, that if the country were finally lost, our commerce might still 
. be necessary to it, and possibly even centinue to increase. Such then would be the con- 
clusion afforded by this formidable objection ; if for the s@ke of argument, we were to allow 
the process described in it, 0 go on without resistance to its éxceptionable parts. But we 
trust, we have already shewn, that it is not entitled to this concession, and tha whilst it 
holds forth evils, only as distant and hypothetical, it is obliged, as the sole ground of its 
apprehension, to admit advantages tq be ¢ertain and proximate. 

It remains now to examine one important position, already mentioned to be tacitly con- 
tained in the objection, “ that in a system, opposite to the one here proposed, must consist 
“our future safety and stability in Badia.” Unwilling as the writer is, to enter on so delicate 
a subject, and indeed inadequate to the due treatment of it, he feels himself called by his 
argument, to make some circumspect obsegvations ujfog it. Certainly in a political view, 
the great question which this country has to determine respecting India is, ** What are the 
“best means of perpetuating our empire there*?” Not, what set of measures or line of policy 
may suit with the aspects of the day, or keep up the motion of the machine of government ; 
but upon what general principles may we best hope to make our connection with that 
country permanent, and, as far as we can, indissoluble? Towards the determination of this 
question, perhaps it will be well to revert to the past history of our Indian provinces (or let 
us say to those of Bengal in particular, the chief seat of our dominion) and to the charaeter 
of the natives of them. The English, it is true, were at first guided in their eastern admi- 
nistration, rather by ‘nascent events, than by abstract principles or recorded experience ; 
but however natural this may be, in the progress to eatiblishinent. a more extended survey 
of the course of past affairs in the acquired country, with their causes and consequences, 
may well befit the new possessors, when firmly se¢tled in their power. It is not perhaps 
enough to exempt them from*this review, that they follow a system of government widely 
different from the system of their predecessors, and are themselves a very different people. 
Among their Asiatic subjects, certain generah properties which belong to human nature, 
and certain peculiar qualities resulting frofh a peculiar composition of society, may be 
expected to have a steady operation, where not controlled by stronger influences. If we 
look back then to the history of Bengal for five centuries, we shall find, that except in the 
period when the Mogul empire was in jts vigour, and the component parts of it thereby 
kept in peace with each other, that country has been the scene of frequent revolutions ; and 
we cannot fail to discover, that as the despotism of eastern government may be reckoned 
the first and remote principle of such changes, so they have immediately proceeded from 
two causes, the lawless spirit of ambitious adventure common among all the military tribes 
of Hindostan, and the nature of the general mass of the people inhabiting that region, 

The Persians and Tartars, who have poured into it from early ages, have generally been 
soldiers of fortune, who brought little with them but their swords. With these they have 
not unfrequently carved their way to dignity and empire. Power has been, and is their 
darling object ; nothing was scrupled by them to obtain it; the history of Mahomedan rule 
- in Hindostan is full of treasons, assassinations, fratricides, even parricide is not unknown to 
it. These northern adventurers by their spirit and pursuits, became in fact an accession, of 
more active and stronger qualities indeed, to the military division of the people of Hindos- 
tan. The Hindoos, though held to be less prone to the shedding of blood, have not how- 
ever, carried their nicety far, when the prize of sovereignty or authority has been in ques- 
tion; but among them, sanguinary ambition has been usually confined to the Brahmins and 
the military caste; to the latter more. *° 
” The 


. * Some will be ready to answer, “ By securing { sition. But what if the religion should be less 


“ to the people their religion and laws;” andinthe | favourable to our dominion than another system, 
just sense of the words, namely, that no violent | and the people were induced voluntarily to make 
change in either; contrary to the sense of the | that other their religion; would not the change 
people, is to be enforced, we agree to the propo- | be for our interest ? ; 


a 


“4 i eran 
APPENDIX, 


. 
oy 
eet 


Inquiry for improv- 
ing the Condition of 
our Asiatic Subjects. 


APRENDIX, 


—— 


Mr. Grant’s State 
of Society in Asia. 


112e° APPENDIX ro REPORT rao SELECT COMMITTEE. 


, The military class of the Hindoos, which in its institution has some of the.features of a 
militia, forms in reality a great standing army of mercenaries, ready to be hired on all occa- 
sions, though usually not obliged to enter into actual service. Thus the sovereign of a 
country eannot always command heir assistance, whilst the existence of such a body may 
often render a domestic competitor, or 4 foreign enemy, formidable to him. From this 
copious sgurce, any man of enterprise, whatever were his views or pretensions, could always 
find partisans, if he had funds to entertain them ; the treasure of the prince has been often 
used by his servants, to hire men to despoil him also of his thfone. No character has been so 
bad, no cause so unjust, as not to find an army to Support it if there were money to pay 
them. The members of the military caste, conceiving themselves destined by their creation 
to fight, often take up arms with the same indifference end indiscrimination as a labourer 
takes up a spade; insomuch that it has not been unusual to see a defeated army join the 
standard of the victor, upon the same principle which carries the labourer from one em- 
ployer, with whom business runs ]®w, to another whose service and means he deems more 


_ sure. ¢The military Mahomedans (for many of the descendants of the Tartars who settled 


in Hindostan fell into the lines of civil life) are equally ready as the military Hindoos to 
engage themselves in commotions, quarrels, and any species of warfare, both having always, 
in times of confusion, an eye to plunder. . 

From this institution of a military class, the wisdom of which is surely impeached by the 
general effects it has produced, the military spirit came at length to reside almost wholly in 
one portion of the people. And hence may, in part at least, have followed the abjectness 
of the inferior tribes, composing the main body of the nation, and their want of public spirit. 
However much they may, on different accounts, have preferred a Hindoo to a Mahomedan 
government, no instance is recollected of their rising to support any native prince, or keep 
out any invader. The whole history of the Mahomedan empires in Hindostan, as well as 
the traces we have of the anterior goverfiment of the Hindoas, and what we see in modern 
days, all concur to prove the slavish disposition of that people, and their want of attach- 
ment to their rulers. 

From these several causes, the despotic ‘genius of Eastern government, the exclusive 
hereditary allotment of the military profession to one class, and the abject character of the 
people, have proceeded the great encouragement of individuals to the violent assumption of 
power, and the frequency of insurrections, convulsions, and revolutions in that country. 
And the same causes, though their operation nfay, by various circumstances, be occa- 
sionally suspended, will as long as they exist, have a tendency to produce the same effects. 
Hindostan has alternately been united under one great head, or partitioned into many states. 
New conquerors have, in different ages, appeared on that continent, who increasing as they 
went on, have at length, by the vast number of their followers, overwhelmed every thing that 
opposed them. We now, indeed, see the empire of the Moguls prostrate, and may be apt 
to think, that arranged as the politics and powers of Hindostan are, the same order of 
things is not likely to return; but it was upon the subversion of the Patan empire that the 
Moguls rose; and may not a new adventurer, and a new horde from Tartary, establish yet 
another dynasty? It was perfectly in the option of Nadir Shah, when he entered Dellii 
ag a conqueror, in 1739, to have done this*. And if one of those scourges of mankind wha 
have so frequently desolated India, should again arise, sending his fame, and the idea of 
his “ happy destiny” before him, might not the multitudes collected in his progress, poured 
out at length into the remote quarter of Bengal, endanger our existence there? hether 

we su ies him to advance in the first flash of conquest, or after he. had given:a central 
consolidation to his power, he would be backeds by the resources of a vast inland region, 
by large armies of horse, and myriads of infantry. If we now figure to ourselves the proe 
ress of his operations, it will not bring them nearer; it will be in order that we may be 
etter’ guarded against them. The Tartars, unaccustomed to cope with our steady military 
ve gallantry 


‘ * 1 
‘# If we had, we might probably have still been mere merchants in India, * 


GENERAL APPENDIX. 113 


gallantry and skill, might be repeatedly repulsed. Still fresh ‘swarms of assailants might 
be brought forward, and season after season, invasion be renewed. We could bring ie 
cavalry into the field ; the numerous sQuadrons of the enemy might waste and exhaust the 
country ; the landholders, from whom the revenues are derived, would, as is usual in Hin-~ 
dostan, upon the appearance of commotion, withhold the payment of their rents; the 
produce of the districts which the enemy might occupy, they. would immediafely appro- 
priate; and the credit of our government, as indeed we even now experience in times of 
exigency, would not procure us any &deqtate supplies. We should thus be straitened and 
embarrassed in our resources ; suspicions of our stability might arise in the minds of our 
subjects, and among them would ke a great number of the military caste, unemployed by 
us, and ready to make their own use of any promising occasion. Many of those subjects, 
, won by the splendour of new powef, and the proud display of an imperial standard, or 
desirous of securing an early interest, perhaps indulgingnew hopes from a revolution, would 
fall away from us: others would wish for a cessation of predatory vexations, at the axpense 
of our expulsion. The Sepoys, whose attachment to us has appeared surprising, though 
the causes of it seem neither inexplicable nor immutable*, supplied tardily, and perhaps 
only partially with the pay, of which the regular advance had before so conciliated them to 
our service ; and instead of being animated by the career of victory, cooped up in a dubious 
defensive warfare, might also be tempted to listen to the large offers of a dazzing leader, in 
whom their ready notions of fatalism might easily present to them a new hing of the world. 
In such an arduous crisis, we trust that every thing to be expected from bravery, fortitude, 
and military science, would be performed on our part; but must not our lasting dependence 
be chiefly on British troops, on our maritime power, and on supplies by sea? With all 


these, it is very easy to see how oppressive, how threatening, a long struggle, maintained , 


under such circumstances, pogsibly by aids derived from ‘the mother country, must be to 
us ; how much also it must shake our interests and our stability in the rest of India. Now 
in any such state of things, in any case of the same nature, less extreme, what would be of 
more importance to us, what could so effectyatly fortify our cause, as to have the people of 
our territories sincerely attached to our government; to have established in their minds 
such an affectionate participation in our lot, sueh an union with our interests, as should 
counteract the defection, defalcations, and treachery, to be otherwise apprehended from the 
ordinary bent and practice of the Asiatic eharacter? We should thus have the service of 
all the resources which our rich provinces contained, we should have the steady adherence 
and co-operation of the people, and in this way, might certainly confound and baffle even 
the powerful preparations of an imperial despot, to whose affairs long and spirited resistance 
might prove highly detrimental, by encouraging distant provinces which he had before over- 
run, to throw off the yoke. And how are our subjects to be formed to a disposition, thus 
favourable to us, to be changed thus in their character, but by new principles, sentiments, and 
tastes, leading to new views, conduct, and manners ; all which would, by one and the same 
effect, identify their cause with ours, and -proportionably separate them from opposite 
interests? It is not, we may venture to affirm, from such a change, but in continuing as 
we are, that we stand most exposed to the dangers of political revolution. The objection 
which conceives remote evils to result from a plan of improvement, does not advert to others 
which may, in the mean time, arise from causes of a different kind. We join with it in the 
desire of securing in permanence, the fair possession this country has obtained (more, it 
may be concluded, by the over-ruling dispensation of Providence, than by any scheme of 
man,) but differ as to the means. To us if appears, that nothing promises so fair for the 
and proposed, as engaging the attachment and regard of the people, and removing those 
causes which have hitherto made them so acquiescent in every change. It was this passive 
temper, joined to the expectations which many might entertain from the deposition of the 
reigning Nabob, that contributed to our easy acquisition of the country; but the same 
temper would render our hold of it less sure in any arduous contest. At present, we are- 

a every" 
* See note to page 33. az P 


Q 


fe | 
APPENDIX, 


Inquiry for improv. 
ing the Condition of 
ourAsiatic Subjects. 


APPENDIX, 


« ? 


Mr. Grant’s State 
of Society in Asia. 


114 APPENDIX ro REPORT rom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


‘every way different from'the people whom we hold in subjection; different in country, in 
language, in manners, in customs, in sentiments, andgn religion; their interest also, for the 
reasons mentioned in the early paw of this memoir, they must conceive to be different from 
ours. "What then can be a healing principle with regard to all these points, but a principle 
of assimilation, a common-bond, which shall give to both parties the reality and the convic~ 
tion of mutual benefit from the connection? Without an uniting principle, a conjoining tie 
of this nature, we can suppose the country to be, jn fact, retfined only by mere power; but 
in the same degree that an identity of sentiments and°principles would be established, we 
should exhibit a sight new in the region of Hindostan, a people actively attached, cordially 
affected to their government, and thus augmenting its strength. In this laudable way, we 
should become more formidable to the other powers of that continent, we should be best 
secured against foreign enemiesy inswrrections, and the dangers of an hereditary military - 
body ; we should have more support from the mass of the people, and in a word, be most 
effectually guarded against a revolution. 


It is remarkable, that the radical principle of the conclusion thus made, a conclusion to 
which an acquaintance with the Indian character, and the experience that progressive time 
has afforded of the effects of knowledge, particularly the dive knowledge of Christianity, 
may now gl lead an ordinary mind, directed, according to the judicious historian of 
The ancient European Intercourse with India, the policy of the Grecian conqueror of that 
country, in securing his Eastern acquisitions. However different, in other respects, the 
circumstances of that celebrated personage may be from ours, in this we agree with him, that . 
we have an Asiatic empire to maintain. And Dr. Robertson, who in acknowledging the 
eccentricities of that extraordinary man, gives him also the credit of profound political 
views, observes, “ he early perceived, thaf to render his authority secure and permanent, it 
““ must be established in the affection of the nations he had subdued, and maintained by their 
“ arms; and that in order to acquire this advantage, all distinctions between the victors 
“ and the vanquished must be abolished, and his European and Asiatic subjects be incor- 
“ porated and become one people, by gbeyitg the same.laws, and by adopting the same 
“ manners, institutions, and discipline.” It 1g the leading idea only of this policy, that is meant 
to be applied here; and that leading idea is plainly the principle of assimilation. It would 
neither suit us, nor our subjects, to act upon it upiversally, as Alexander proposed. We 
ought not to wish, that the distinctions between the two races should be lost, or to aim at 
introducing into Asia laws framed for this country ; but to attach our subjects by affection, by 
interest, by winning them to our religion and our sentiments,—this would be at once to add 
to their happiness, and to arrive at tie same object which the great conqueror had in view, 
that of rendering our authority “‘ permanent and secure.” 


This policy is recommended by some other considerations, which shall be briefly noticed. 
It.is sufficiently understood, that since our first appearance on the theatre of Indian war 
and politics, the native powers have improved in military discipline, and that we now find 
it necessary to bring into the field, armies proportionably larger than those that served to 
achieve our early victories. Having so interesting an evidence of the capability of the 


‘ natives to improve, there appears no good reason to conclude, that their advancement in 


military skill may not be further progressive. It is extremely probable, that the beneficial 
effects of our civil policy will also in time force themselves upon their attention, and from 
the cogent motive of self-interest, produce at least some imitations. All the advances 
they make in the arts of war or of peace, will serve to lessen that superiority in both, by 
which, under the disadvantages attaching to us as foreigners, and with forces comparatively 
small,.we have acquired an ascendency among the powers of Hindostan. The nearer we 
approach to,an equality, the more these disadvantages will be felt. Our business seems to 
be therefore, by new resources in policy, still to preserve the relative rank in which we have 
hitherto stood ; and what can more directly conduce to this end, than to infuse new -prin~ 
ciples of attachment, of activity, and industry, among the people we govern, thus strengthenmg 
their character, and deriving additional support from them. - 


The 


GENERAL APPENDIX. 15 Apprworx, 
1 : x * a : I ” 
s e a 
The European nations have an undisputed possession of the Indian seas, and are now so —- 
much connected with the continent of India, at every material change which takes place in Inqui for Hnprove 
them, may be expected, in some shapeeor other, to extend its influence thither. It cannot ™8 tle Condition of 
be irrational, therefore, to suppose, that the astonishifig events which have lately con- °WAsiaticSubjects. 
vulsed. Europe, and are likely to produce consequences durable and momentous, may have 
their bearings upon our Asiatic interests. ‘That exorbitant ambitious power which seeks our 
destruction, may aim, by different channels and instruments, to excite troubles and disorders: 
in our possessions, or to embroil us with eur Indian neighbours. _ The bon of Good Hope, 
the head of a vast country, in a fine climate, and singular in the felicity of its position for a 
great emporium, whether it remain with us or fall under French influence, will probably, by 
a change already begun in its internal policy, swarm, at no distant period, with a numerous 
race, of European character and deseent, planted at the entrance into the’ Indian seas, and 
within two months sail of the Indian coasts. Anoth&r,grtat colony of the same race, in a 
climate equally favourable to the human constitution, is springing up on the eastern side of 
the Indian Ocean. The appearance of many adventurers of these descriptions on thé shores 
of Hindostan, as one day they may be expected to appear, (a day perhaps nearer than it is 
possible to bring other apprehended improvements,) can hardly fail to have some effect upon 
the political affairs of that country, those of the native princes as well as our own. In all 
these, or any other supposable cases then, the more closely we bind the people under our rule 
to ourselves, the more firmly shall we be prepared, in that quarter, against adverse events and 
combinations. ; ‘ 
It may be urged by some, in opposition to the systematical improvement here proposed,. — 
that the influence of the British government and character, especially where the intermixture 
, of Europeans is large, will of itself gradually produce a change in the sentiments of our 
Eastern subjects. Let this position be, to a certajn degree, admitted ; it is one interesting 
enough to merit some attentioi. The English, in their obscure commercial state, were little 
known or regarded by the people whom they now govern. Their elevation to power, brought 
into public display all the particulars of theis character, with their manners and customs. 
These, in various instances, at first shocked the prejudices of the Hindoos, who thought, with 
a kind of horror, of the new masters to whom they bowed. But by degrees they perceived, 
that usages the most repugnant to their ideas, were free of that turpitude which they had 
associated with them. They found these, foreigners superior to them in general powers and 
knowledge, in personal honour and humanity; and at length saw the British government 
assume a character of equity and patriotism, unknown in their preceding administrations. 
These qualities, it shall be granted, have a tendency to conciliate in some measure, the natives: 
who are near enough to observe them. Among those who live in our settlements, or are much ' 
connected with Europeans, long habits of intercourse have softened down repugnancies, or - 
blunted the sensations which our manners at first inspired ; and there is in such, an apparent, ' 
perhaps a real abatement of jealousy and solicitude respeeting their own notions and punc-. * 
tilios. But in all these varying aspects of the European character, something essential to those 
disposed to fall into an imitation of it has been absent. Men that meet together in this 
country for the purposes of business, seldom enter into communication respecting the founda- 
tions of their faith and practice ; any serious discussion of this nature, occurs still more rarely 
there. The indifference for religion, which Mr. Hume ascribes to the English in general of 
“the present age,—(he calls it profound indifference,}—may there pass for liberal toleration, or 
complaisant forbearance towards inferiors of another faith. -Discovermg im their intercourses 
with us little of the nature of the religion we profess, they will not, of course be apt.to refer 
the good qualities of which the English appear possessed, to that source ; nor will they know, 
that the national standard of morals formed from it, has an influence, even upon the conduct of 
those who pay no particular regard to a religious system. If then any of the Hindoos should, in 
time, feel some tendency to imitate that freedom in manners, sentiments, and” intercourse, 
that latitude as to religious opinions and observances, which they see in their European 
masters, what would be the consequence but evidently this, that they would be loosened from 
their own religious prejudices, not by the gies reception of another system in ware 
. 2 5 ‘ stea: , 


Aprenpix, 
Mr. Grant’s State 
of Society in Asia. 


“116 ¢ APPENDIX ro REPORT rrov: SELECT COMMITTEE. 


stead, but by becoming indifferent to every system. For a transition from one error to 
another is, it must be acknowledged, more readily made, than a transition from error to 
truth. Error is more easily imbibed, more hardly eradicated; truth more slowly received, 
more easily resigned. And m this tvayit is, that if we conceive the anarchal, principles which 
have burst forth in Europe ever to spread to India, they will be most likely to have their 
entrance. eIndeed so wonderfully contagious do they appear to be, so congenial to the worst 
qualities of human nature, that it may be difficult to pomt gut a place where they can find 
nothing to fasten upon. Societies in which muchecorryption and much superstition prevail, 
seem in general more liable to them, than those in which true religion and morals are still 
strongly rooted. The French, it will readily be: allowed, fell into them more readily 
than they would have embraced any scheme of personal reformation, or a more pure and 
strictly practical religious system. The abuses of civil and religious institutions lead to them, 
and furnish the most plausible prétepdts for them. False principles, and the fooleries of a 
false religion, even-when used to support things good in themselves, as government and sub- 
ordinatfon, would ill stand before such arts and abilities as have Jately assailed the truth. 
Truth only is invincible. To teach it therefore, is to take the surest means of excluding the 
infection of licentious disorganizing sophistries. A change from false religion to the true, is 
a movement from an exposed place to a strong fortress; and every advance made in the 
system of moral and religious instruction here recommended, so far from opening the way to 
thoge loose latitudinarian notions which tend to a rejection of all authority, would éstablish 
rights, human and divine, upon their proper basis, and, bind the conscience to the observance 
of them. 
* To these considerations, which on the whole may certainly be deemed not unworthy of 
attention, two other reflections may serve to give additional weight. First,—It is to be feared, 
that the number of lower Europeans will go on to encrease in our territories; they mix most 
with the natives, and by them the worst part of our manners Will be exhibited. Secondly,— 
By the security which we have with great wisdom given to the land tenures of Bengal, 
the value of property there, and the consideration arising from the possession of it, will 
naturally be enhanced, so that in process of tine, the owners of large estates, hitherto little 
productive to them, may become of consequence by their wealth and possessions. We know 
also, that encreasing prosperity tends to strengthen pride and disorderly propensities. Here 
again, therefore, we find motives for the introductiqn of our principles ; for if some at least, 
both of the higher and lower orders, may be led, by European manners, to adopt new ideas of 
relaxation, at the same time that new powers are put into the hands of the former, we ought, 
in good policy and reason, to communicate to them a system which, divested of all burthen- 
some unnecessary ceremonies, and all superstitious folly, is yet calculated to produce @ purer 
and higher influence than their own, upon the general moral conduct, and all the relative 
duties of life. As then we have already been yatiually led, by good sense and expediency, to 
introduce regulations derived from our national ideas and principles, into the government and 
management of our possessions, their advantage and our safety may dispose us also to wish, 
that our religion and moral principles might obtain a fair establishment there; for if we can 
suppose, that through the encreasing relations between Europe and India, the common lights 
and manners of Europeans adventuring thither should ever make a strong impression, unac~- 
companied by the knowledge of those principles, which do not propagate themselves sponta- 
neously, and are not to be implanted without culture and care, that change might not be 
favourable to our interests ; since the present circumstances of Europe seem emphatically to 
point out, that nothing but such principles can be depended upon, for keeping subjects in 
obedience and subordination *. : Z 
In 


* These several objections, and the answers to | 1793, 8 discussion took place in a general Court 
them, excepting the sixth and seventh, were, as | of Proprietors of East India Stock, in which al- 
"to their substance and scope, committedto'writing | most all the same objections were advanced, by 
in the latter end of the year 1792,’though-not | persons with whom the writer never had any cot- 
then in any shape brought into notice,’ ‘In April | munication’on such subjects. This was on acca- 
sion 


GENERAL APPENDIX. 


hay 


In coming, as we now do, to the close of the answer to the last and most material of the 
objections which are foreseen against the provosed scheme, that objection which questions the 


sion of two resolutions which the House of Com- 
mons, very honourably for itself, had voted in the 
view of introducing the purport of them into the 
Act of Parliament then about to be passed, for 
renewing the charter of the East India Compaay. 
The Resolutions were these: 

' © Resotven, That it is the opinion of this 
“ House, that it is the peculiar and? bounden 
“ duty of the legislature, to promote, by, all just 
“ and prudent means, the interests and happiness 
“of the inhabitants of the British dominions ih 
{ndia; and that for these ends, such measures 
ought to be adopted, as may gradually tend to 
their advancement in useful knowledge, and to 
* their religious and moral improvement. 

* ResoLVED, That sufficient means of religious 
“worship and instruction be -provided for: all 
persons of the Protestant communion in the 
4‘ service, er under the protection of the East 
“‘ India Company in Asia, proper ministers being 
“ from time to time sent out from Great Britain 
“for those purposes; and that a chaplain be 
“ maintained on board every ship of 500 tons 
‘ burthen, and upwards, in the Kast-India Com- 
“ pany’s employ; and that moreover, no such 
“ ministers or chaplains shall be sent out, or 
*« appointed, until they first shall have been ap- 
“ proved of, by the Archbishopof Canterbury, or 
* the Bishop of London, for the time being.” 

Several Proprietors of East India Stock made 
a violent attack upon these resolutions, and ghe 
following is an abstract of all the arguments or 
objections urged against them, as they are re- 
ported by Mr. Woodfall. It is with reluctance 


cz) 
ee 


“ 


* It will be remembered, that these are chiefly Idolaters, 
something of whose character and worship we have already 
seen. With whatever indifference idojatry may be viewed, 
and however venial it may be accodnted in these times, 
even by persons born in Christian Laine it is a crime 
against which the displeasure of the/holy and true God, the 
sovereign and, ungtring judge of te qualities of actions, is 
expressed, with pecutiar indignation, contempt, and abhor- 
tence, throughout that revelation{which he hath vouchsafed 
ty us} and it is therein sbewn to'have often brought on, by 
ils nature and effects, the misery and ruin of individuals and 
of nations. 

1 Even the ‘wiset' men of ancient Pagan Europe, between 

_ the superstition of which, ard the idolatry of the Hindoos, 
an identity has been proved, (by Sir William Jones, in the 
Asiatic Transactions, Vol. {.) saw and complained of the 
evils of their popular syst¢.m of religion. Cicero brings in 
an Epicurean philosopher, arraigning that system in severe 
terms: “* The most absurd, things, observes he, are suid by 
the poets, things which are noxious even by the agreeable 
“ style in which they are conveyed; for they have. intro- 
* dced gods mad with anger, inflamed with lust, and have 
. presented ‘to our -view -their wars, battlés, fightings, 
w 


expediency 


that any réference is made here to the opinions 
then given, because they stand connected with 
particular names; and it is far fron® being the 
wish of the writer to introduce any thing that 
may seem to have even a remote tendency to 
personality; but as opinions delivered in a public 
assembly, and afterwards made more public by 
the press, are fairly open to animadversion, so 
justice to the present subject, renders some notice’ 
of those nowin question, indispensable. 
OBsEC@IONS STATED GENERALLY. “ That 
“.sending missionaries into our Eastern gerrito- 
“ ries, is the most wild, extravagant, expensive, 
“ unjustifiable project, that ever was suggested 
“by the most visionary spceculator. That the 
“ principle is obnoxious, impolitic, unnecessary, 
“ full of mischief, dangerous, useless, unlimited.” 
Speeciric ARcumMENTS, First Cluss. »“ The 
“plan would be dangerous and impolitic; it 
‘« would affect the peace and ultimate security of 
“ our possessions. It tends to endanger and 
“injure our affairs there most fatally, it would: 


-* either produce disturBances, or bring the 


“ Christian religion into contempt. Holding one 
“faith or religion, is the most strong common: 
“ cause with mankind, and the moment that took 


.|°* place in India there would be an end of British 


woands; their hatred, differences, strivings; their births, | 


a 


* gupremacy. 

»‘* That the principle of proselyting was impo- 
“ lisic, and was, or ought to be exploded, in so 
“ enlightened a period as the eighteenth cen. 
“ tury.” a , 

“That it would be a most serious and fatal 


' disaster, if natives of character*, even a hun- 


dred 


“ deaths, complaints, lamentations; their lists, exceeding 
“‘ in every kind of intemperance; their adulteries, fetters ; 
“their lying with mankind, and mortals begotten of im- 
“ mortal’ gods.” (De Nat, Deor, Lib.1.§16.) And again, 
in the person of a Stoic, be thus reprobates the same system: 
“ The introduction of- feigned gods, has begotten false 
“ opinions, and turbulent errors and superstitions, no better 
“ than old wives’ fables; for the figures of the gods, their 


_* ages, dress, and ornaments, are set.ferth; their alliances, 


* marriages, affinities ; and all are reduced to the similitude, 

« of human imbecility: They are brought in as men dis- 

“turbed by passion; we hear of their lusts, sickness, 

* angers yea as fables tells us, the gods; have not wanted. 
“ wars and battles...... These things are said and believed ' 
“« most sottishly, and are full of extreme vanity and futility.” 

« (Ibid. Lib. 11. § 28.) : : 

To these base gods, however, temples were erected, and 
divine honours paid. They had their costly trains of priests, 
services, sacrifices, festivals, and games. Seme of their rites 
were atrociously crael, others infamous for debauchery, 
prostitution, and the most unbridled excesses.’ Hence -cor- 
ruption was diffused among the people, the moral system, 
even of the philosophers, was veryedefective, and their 
allowed practices, in some respects abominable. = * 


APPENDIX, 
Inquiry for improv- 
ing the Condition of 
ourAsiatic Subjects. 


APRENDIX, 


° 
~ 


Mr. Grant's ‘State 
of Society in\Asia. 


118 ¢ APPENDIX ro REPORT rnom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


eek : bane : 
expediency of using the English language, it will be proper to call to recollection what was 


stated in the first opening of it,—that the principle of communicating our light and 


“ dred thousand of them, were converted to 
« Christianity. Pas os . 4 

“That the establishment of seminaries and 
“ colleges in America, was one of the most 
* efficient causes of the loss of that.country. 

“ That suffering young clergymen, (who are 
“ usually of pleasurable habits,) to over-run the 
“jnterior of India, would be dangerous, and 
“ prove ultimately destructive to the Company’s 
“ interest.” ee 


Second Class. “ The scheme woul be un- 


“successful. It is extravagant to hope for the 
‘* conversion of the natives. They are invincibly 
“ attached to their own castes; their prejudices, 
manners, and habits, are all against a change, 

“ It is vain to attempt to overcome prejudices 
“ fixed by the practice of ages, far exceeding the 
“time in which Britons had any idea of religion 
“at all. The attempt is, in these views, idle, 
“ absurd, and impracticable. 

* Only the dregs of the people can be con- 
* verted ; they will pretend conversion, and dis- 
*¢ grace Christianity. ° 

«« The higher and more respectable natives, are 
“ people of the purest morality, and strictest 
‘* virtue, (this was said only by one speaker, who 
“ knew little of India.) * 

“The services of religion are devoutly per- 
formed inthe Company’s settlements and shipg, 
“ either by clergymen or laymen, and their eccle- 
*¢ siastical establishments are sufficient.” 

Third Class. “ The scheme would be expensive. 
«¢ The expence would be enormous, intolerable ; 
*€ one, two, or three hundred thousand pounds.” 

Fourth Class. “The scheme would be un- 
“« limited, in respect of the numbers and qualifi- 
“ cations of the missionaries.” 

All these objections will be found already an- 
swered in the text. A few brief remarks upon 
them may however be proper, and will be suf- 
ficient here. é 

1*t, The objections urged in general terms, are 
merely declamatory. They are accompanied by 
no reasonings or elucidations. But the principle 
which they censure as the most wild, extravagant, 


unjustifiable, mischievous, dangerous, useless, im-. 


politic, that ever was suggested by the most 
von speculator, is the principle of the Gospel 
itself. — j 

The Gospel was propagated by missionaries ; 
missionaries ened. it in the different eountries 
of Europe. ‘Almost all those countries have, in 
imitation of the same practice, sent missionaries 
into infide] parts: and how is it possible for men 
to communicate it otherwise? In this kingdom, 


é 


know- 
ledge, 


two societies are established by royal charter, for _ 
propagating the Gospel in Heathen lands; and 
there is a third society of long standing, employed 
in the same object, which enrolls among its mem- 
bess, many of the most eminent persons of the 
nation. So much for the antiquity, authority and 
general acknowledgment of thes principle, which 
is treated &s if nothing like it had ever been heard 
of before. 

24, It is obvious, that the first and second 
classes of specific objections, militate against each 
other.. Since the scheme proposes only a pacific 
exposition of Christian truths, it cannot be both 
dangerous and unsuccessful. The danger is 
avowedly founded mainly, if not wholly, on the 
supposition of success. If success therefore is: 
not to be hoped for, where is the danger? And 
again, if the scheme really threatens so much 
danger, what becomes of the argument against 
success? 

These contradictory objections cannot. both be 
just. ‘he same speaker however, who is reported 
to have “ thanked God” that the conversion of the 
natives would be a matter of impracticability, 
strenuously opposed the scheme on this ground, 
that the moment they and we came to hold one 
faith there would be an end of our supremacy in 
the East: but if he thought it impracticable to 
convert them to our faith, with what reason could 
he urge the danger which would follow from such 
conyersion as a serious and alarming objection ? 
When the cause does not exist, neither can that, 
which can only flow from it as its effect. 

3". The principle of not .communicating to the 
Hindoos the Christian religion, lest this should in. 
the end, destroy our government over them, is how- 
ever here fairly acknowledged and argued upon. 
The establishment of seminaries and colleges in 
our American colonies, is in the same spirit ad- 
verted to in a way of warning ; as if Christianity 
had produced the revolution there, when in fact 
they were men of infidel opinions, who planned. 
both the American and French revolutions. 

The reason assigned in justification of this pre- 
cautionary , principle aiso deserves attention ; 
* because holding ene religion is the moststrong 
* gommon cause with mankind.” If the pro- 
posal had been, that the English should become. 
,converts to Hindooism, this argument might have 
been well placed; but applied to the present- 
scheme, it can only operate in favour of it. ; 

4". It is curious to find it \alleged, among the 
arguments against the propwsed clauses, that 


‘ some of the Hindoos were too! good, and  othérs 


, too bad to be converted. 
= 1a This 


A GENERAL APPENDIX. 


e : 
oe | 19 


ledge, and the channel or mode of ‘communication, were two distinct things; that the admis- 
sion of the former did not depend on the choice which might be made of the latter, and was 
alone absolutely contended for., The cRannel of the English language, however, has been 
preferred, in the present plan, as beg deemed the most ample and effectual ; and though 
new, also safe and highly advantageous. Against this channel, however, the writer thinks 
it possible, that reluctancies may remain when arguments are obviated. Strongly as he is 
himself persuaded, that great artl peculiar advantages would flow from it, he nevertheless 


would do injustice to the cause for¢whi&h he 


leads, if he were to suspend ‘its success 


entirely upon the adoption of this mode. The channel of the country languages, though 


This was advanced by only one gentlemaa, little 
acquainted with India, whose speech happening 


by a common newspaper to reach the Reverend | 


Mr. Swartz, already noticed as Jong a missionary 
of distinguished reputation in the Tanjore and 
Trichinopoly districts, produced from him a vin- 
dication of the conduct and effects of the mission 
in which he is concerned; a vindication framed 
indeed in modest and simple terms, suitable to the 
character of the writer, but highly honourable to 
the cause of missions, and though he intended it’ 
not, to his own. This piece, too good to be 
concealed, has been printed in the Transactions 
of the English Society for promoting Christian 
Knowledge, and a copy of it is given in the 
Appendix. . 

The assertion of the same speaker, that the 
higher natives of India are people of the purest 
morality and strictest virtue, is altogether new; 
and in palpable opposition to testimony and ex- 
perience. Upon the gospel scheme, no man is too 
good or too bad for the benefits it proposes; and 
there is a very large class between the best and 
the worst, of whom the speaker took no notice. 
His other assertion, that the ceremonies of re- 
ligion, or the service of the Common-prayer 
Book, were with great decency and devotion 
regularly performed by laymen on board the 
Company's ships, and on land, in places where 
there happened to be no clergyman, is a topic for 
ridicule, if the subject were not of so serious a 
kind; the reverse of this assertion being so 
notorious. And is there no use for a minister of 


religion, but to perform a ceremony, or to reada | 


form of prayer once a week? 

5%. The objections urged on the ground of 
the unlimited expence of the scheme, the unlimited 
numbers of the clergy that would be sent, theic 
smproper Character, and their roving through the 
- country, all go upon assumptions not only un- 


wWorranted, but contradicted by the tenor of the | 
clauses themselves, and in opposition to the dic- - 


tates of common sense. The Directors of the 
Company were themselves to be entrusted with 
‘the execution of the scheme; they were to judge 
of.the number of missionaries sufficient, they 
were to regulate the expence. Was it conceiv- 


’ 


- revive. | ° 


less 


able, that they would have gone, in either article, 


to a pak: gk odareneaed or dangerous to the 


Company? Was it conceivable that they would 
have suffered missionaries to -ramble, at their 
pleasure, through the country, if the missionaries 
sent should have been men so disposed? but can 
it be imagined, that the friends of the scheme 
and the respectable authorities whose testimonials 
were to render the missionaries receivable by 
the Company, (not to force them into their 
employ,) would have had so little regard to the 
success of their own object, as to select persons 
the ‘least likely to promote it? In fact, the 
danger was of another king; so much was left in 
the discretion of the Directors that if they should 
have had the disposition, they might also have 
possessed the power, very materially to thwart the 
prosecution of the scheme. And as to the real 


*number and expence of missionaries at first; the 


former, if proper persons should have been found, 
would perhaps have been thirty; and the annual 
charge of their establishment, including dwel- 
lings, probably about fourteen thousand pounds. 

6", Upon the whole of this discussion, it ap- 
pears to have been undertaken with a vehement 
determination against the principle of introducing 
Christianity among our Asiatic subjects; but 
without much previous consideration, or a large 
acquaintance with its bearings and relations, still 
less with a dispassionate temper of mind; for 
arguments subversive of each other, assertions 
palpably erroneous, assumptions clearly unwar- 
rantable, were pressed into the opposition; the 
question was argued chiefly upon a partial view 
of supposed political expediency, and the supreme 
importance, authority, and command, of Chris- 
tianity, were left out of sight. 

It ought to be remarked, upon the second of 
the two resolutions passed in the House of Com- 
mons, that the maintenance of a chaplain on board 
every ship of considerable size, employed-in the 
long navigation to and from India, was the early 
spontaneous practice of the Company, and en- 
joined to them in the charters of King William 
and Queen Anne, the clauses of which, respecting 
this point, the said resolution did no more than 


4 _ 


be Tha : 


Inquiryfor improve | 
ing the Condition of 
ourAsiatic Subjects. 


_Arbenpix, 120° APPENDIX ro REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


» 


less spacious, less clear, less calculated to transmit the general light of our opinions, our 
arts, and sciences, less free also for the conveyance of the light of religion itself, is never- 
theless so far capable of rendering this last and moSt important service, in which are essen- 
tially ‘involved all the other proposed meliorations, that if the question were «between 
making no/ attempt, or making it in this way, undoubtedly there could be no hesitation. 
This modt ought, by no means to be declined or neglected, if there were no other. Through 
the medium of the country languages, though more contrasted, more dim, and. distant, still 
something may be done, and that in a concern Which is of the last importance to present 
and to future happiness. But in choosing this method, more instruments ought necessarily 
to be employed; and then the meliorations which aregso much wanted, may in time be 
ied effected ; and the apprehensions which some may entertain from the diffusion of the 
‘English language, will have no place, But still it mfst be maintained, that for every great 
purpose of the proposed scheme, tke introductitn and use of that language would be most 
effectyal ; and the exclusion of it, the loss of unspeakable benefits, and a just subject of 
extreme regret. : 


‘Mr. Grant’ State 
of Society in Asia. 


THUS, we trust, it has been evinced, that although many excellent improvements have 
of late years been made in the government of our Indian territories, the moral character 
and condition of the natives of them is extremely depraved, and that the state of society 
among that people is, in consequence, wretched. These evils have been shewn to lie be- 
yond the reach of our regulations, merely political, however good ; they have been traced 
to their civil and religious institutions; they have been proved to inhere in the general 
spirit and many pogitive enactments of their laws, and more powerfully still. in the false, 
corrupt, impure, extravagant, and ridiculous principles and tenets of their religion. Upon 
any of these points, it is conceived, that persons who either form their opinion, from actual 
observation, or from the current of testimony, will not greatly differ; shades of distinction 
there may be between them, but no substantial, radical contrariety. A remedy has been 
proposed for these evils ;—the introduction of otr light and knowledge among that benighted 
fers especially the pure, salutary, wise principles of our divine religion. That remedy 
chas appeared to be in its nature suitable and adequate ; the practicability also of applying 
it has been sufficiently established ; our obligation to impart it has been argued, we would 
hope convincingly, from the past effects of our administration in those countries, from the 
more imperious consideration of the duties we owe to the people of them as our subjects, 
and from our own evident interest, as involved and consulted in their welfare. Our obli- 
gation has been likewise urged from another argument, the authority and command of that 
true religion which we have ourselves the happiness to enjoy and profess*. As the leading 
subject of this essay has been intentionally treated chiefly upon political grounds, the argu- 
ment now mentioned has not been insisted upon at great length; but all its just rights are 
claimed for it, and it is transcendent and conclusive. 

Nothing it would seem besides these intrinsic properties of the proposed measure, and 
these powerful extraneous motives, can be necessary to recommend the adoption of it. Yet 
since some persons have appeared to think, that the improvements which they allow to be 

. likely from the prosecution of the suggested scheme might, by producing a course of en~ 
creasing prosperity, at length open the way to consequences unfavourable to the stability 
of our Indian: possessions, these conceived consequences have also been largely examined ; 
and if the whole of the reasoning used by the writer has not been erroneous, they have 
been found to resolve themselves at last into mere apprehensions, conjectures, and general 
surmises, which the causes assigned for them seem so little to warrant, that in proportioh 

‘ Hie to 


e 
* To disallow either the fitness of our religion | a difference, if any:mind were influenced by it to 
asa remedy, or our obligation to promote the } resist the projected communication, ought in can- 
knowledge of it, would be to differ from thd, rea- | dour to be avowed. * 
soning of this essay in first principles ; and-sueh - 
‘ tye 


GENERAL APPENDIX. 421 


to thie degree in which those causes may actually exist, effects propitious to the permanence, 
as well as prosperity of our Eastern dominion, effects more propitious than our present sys- 
tem. can generate, may rather be expected from them; as indeed it would not be less a 
phenomenon in the political than in the natural world, tat from a root the most excellent, 
the worst fruit should be produced. The principle also upon which such consequences are 
objected, and the improvement of our Heathen subjects opposed, the principle*ef keeping 
them for ever in darkness and error, lest our interest should suffer by a change, has been 
shown to be utterly inadmissible im a Moral view, as it is likewise contrary to all just 

olicy. . 
se in eascting about things futurg and contingent, the writer would wish to stand remote 
from whatever should have the appearance of dogmatical decision, which indeed is not the 
right of even superior penetration, and to speak with that diffidence of himself, and deference 
for others, which so well become him; he would wisk. to speak for no cause further than 
the truth will bear him out; but the views he entertains of the present subject afford him 
no other conclusions than those he has advanced, and in them he thinks he is well sup- 

orted. That a great remedy is wanted ; that we have an excellent one in our hands; that 
_it is our duty, on general and special grounds, to apply it; all these, are in his apprehen- 
‘sion, positions nearly self-evident: from these alone a strong presumption, he conceives, 
arises, that it must be our interest to make the application; and if cogent specific reasons 
are further adduced to prove, that our interest would, in fact, thus be promoted, opposition 
to this scheme ought, in his opinion, to be justified by arguments very clear and very 
powerful; and such, he must honestly say, he has not been able to discover. 

.This subject has not hitherto received a formal consideration; but the objection which 
would resist. all improvement, lest future inconvenience should arise from it, necessarily 
brings on this decisive question, whether we shallpin all time to come, passively leave our 
subjects in the darkness, errr, and moral turpitude in which they now grovel, or shall com- 
municate to them the light of truth, and the means of melioration, and of happiness personal 
and social? The qucetion may more properly*be,—whether we should keep our subjects in 
their present state? For if improvement night net to be communicated to them, we should 
‘not be merely passive, but be careful to excludg it; as on the other hand if it ought to be 
communicated, or if it is possible that any rays of light may fortuitously break in upon 
them, we should not leave the task to others, or to chance, but be ourselves the dispensers 
of the new principles they receive, aud regulate the administration of them. This question 
then is to determine the grand moral and political principle, by which we shall henceforth, 
and in all future generations, govern and deal with our Asiatic subjects: Whether we shall 
make it our study to impart to them knowledge, light, and happimess; or under the notion 
of holding them more quietly in subjection, shall seek to keep them ignorant, corrupt, and 
mutually injurious, as they are now? The question is not, whether we shall resort to any 
persecution, to any compulsion, to any sinister means :—No: the idea has been frequently 
disclaimed ; it is an odious idea, abhorrent from the spirit of true religion; but whether, 
knowing as we do the falsehood and impiety of idolatrous polytheistic superstitions, know- 
ing the eruelties, the immoralities, the degrading extravagancies and impositions of the 
Hindoo system, we shall silently and calmly leave them in all the fulness of their operation, 
without telling our subjects, who ought to be our children, that they are wrong, that they 
are deluded, and hence plunged mto many miseries? Whether, instead of rationally, 
mildly explaining to them the divine principles of moral and religious truth, which have 
raised us in the scale of being, and are the foundation of all real goodness and happiness, 
we shall wink at the stupidity which we deem profitable to us; and as governors, be itt 
ect the conservators of that system which deceives the‘people? Whether, in a word, we 
shall do all this merely from fear, lest in emerging from ignorance and error, they should be 
less easy to rule, and our dominion over them be exposed to any risk. _ 

The wisdom, as well as the fairness of such a proceeding, must also be determined ; 
whether.on the whole it would be the best policy for our own interest, even if we look only 
to the natural operation of things: and here - least we should be careful and clear ; for if 


APPENDIX,. 


} . 


Inquiry for improv- 
ing the Condition of , 
our Asiatic Subjects. 


we 


wu 


*APPEN D1X; 
I f 
Mr. Grants Sidte 
of Society in Asia.- 


422 APPENDIX ro REPORT veny SELECT COMMITTEE. 

‘ 
we mistake ‘our interest, we lose our all, the very thing to which we sacrifice other con- 
siderations: especially it should be pondered, whether believing the moral government of. 
the world, we can expect the approbation and contisued support of the supreme Ruler of 
it, by willingly acquiescing in so much error, so much moral and political evil, when so 
many just means for the alleviation of them are in our power. : 

These af the inquiries which this subject presents; the inquiries which fidelity to it,. 
and to all the mterests involved in it, would not permit the writer to suppress when he 
originally- considered it; and the same motives, ¢o which he may add, the duty of the 
station wherein he has since had the honour to be placed, forbid him to keep them back 
now: But does he in stating them, mean to point them offensively to any individual or body 
of men? No,—far from it; they were, at first, penned as they are now delivered, in good 
‘will and with a general aim: in this great question he strives rather to abstract his mind. 
from personal recollections; and if % glances involuntarily at the idea of any one who he 
fears may not accord with his sentiments, if he should especially dread to find among. 
such any-whom he particularly respects and loves, it is a painful wound to his feelings. 
He-eannot wish to offend or to dispute,—he has no objects to serve by such means; and is 
sufficiently aware of the situation in which a work of this nature may place him, both in 
Europe and in India, never to have brought it forward but from some serious sense of 
duty. This question is a general one; if it seem to carry in it any retrospective censure, 
that censure applies to the country and to the age. Circumstances have now called for 
a more particular consideration of it, and of the result of that consideration he entertains 
encouraging hopes! He will not allow himself to believe, that when so many noble and 
beneficial ends may be served by our possession of an empire in the East, we shall content 
ourselves with the meanest and the least, and for the sake of this, frustrate all the rest. 
He trusts we shall dare to do justice, liberal justice, and be persuaded, that this principle 
will carry us‘to greater heights of prosperity, than the precautions of a selfish policy. 
Future events are inscrutable to the keenest speculation, but the path of duty is open, the 
time present is ours. By planting out language, our knowledge, our opinions, and our 
religion, in our Asiatic territories, we shalj put a great work beyond the reach of contin-: 
gencies; we shall probably have wedded the inhabitants of those territories to this country; 
but at any rate, we shall have done an act of strict duty to them, and a lasting service ‘to- 
mankind. . ° 

In corisidering the affairs of the world as under the controul of the supreme Disposer, 
and those distant territories, as by strange events, providentially put into our hands, is it. 
not reasonable, is it not necessary, to conclude that they were given to us, not merely that 
we might draw an annual profit from them, but that we might diffuse among their inha- 
bitants, long sunk in darkness, vice, and misery, the light and the benign influences of 
truth, the blessings of well-regulated society, the improvements and the comforts of active 
industry ? And that in prudently and sincerely endeavouring to answer these ends, we 
may not only humbly hope for some measure of the same success which has usually 
attended serious and rational attempts for the propagation of that pure and sublime religion 
which comes from God, but best secure the protection of his providential government, of 
which we new see such awful marks in the events of the world. 

In every progressive step of this work, we shall also serve the original design with which 
we visited India, that design stil so important to this country,+the extension of our com- 
merce. Why is it that so few of our manufactures and commodities are vended there ?: 
Not merely because the taste of the people is not,generally formed to the use of them, but 
because they have not the nieans of purchasing them. The proposed improvements would 
introduce both. As it is, dur woollens, our manufactures im iron, copper, and steel, ouf 
clocks, watches, and toys of different kmds, our glass-ware, and various other articles are 


admired there, and would sell m -great quantities if the people were rich enough to buy. 


them. - Let invention be once awakened among them, let them ‘be roused to improvements 
at home, let them be led by industry to multiply, as they may exceedingly, the exchange-- 
able productions of their country, let them: acquire a relish. for‘the ingenious exertions of | 

. ° the 


GENERAL APPENDIX. a8 


: 3 

the human mind in Europe, for the beauties and refinements, endlessly diversified, of 
European art and science, and we shall hence obtain for ourselves the supply of four and 
twenty millions of distant subjects. Mow greatly will our country be thus aided in rising 
still superior to all her difficulties ; and how stable, as wéll as unrivalled, may we hope our 
commerce will be, when we thus rear it on right principles, and make it the means of their 
extension? It might be too sanguine to form into a wish, an idea most pleasing and 
desirable in itself, that our religion and our knowledge might be diffused over other dark 
portions of the globe, where nature has been more kind than human institutions.—This is 
the noblest species of conquest ; and wherever, we may venture to say, our principles and 
language are introduced, our commerce will follow. 
‘ To rest in the present state of things, or. to determine that the situation of our Asiatic 
subjects, and our connection with them, are such as they ought to be for all time to come, 
seems too daring a conclusion: and if a change, a gre&t.cHange be necessary, no reason can 
be assigned for its commencement at any future period, which will not equally, nay, more 
strongly recommend its commencement now. ‘To say, that things may be left to their own 
course, or that our European settlements may prove a sufficient nursery of moral and” 
religious instruction for the natives, will be, in effect, to declare, that there shall be no 
alteration, at least no effectual and safe one. 

The Mahomedans, living for centuries intermixed in great numbers with the Hindoos, 
produced no radical change in their character; not merely because they rendered them- 
selves disagreeable to their subjects, but because they left those subjects, durmg that whole 
period, 46 uninstructed in essential points as they found them. We are called rather to 
imitate the Roman conquerors, who civilized and improved the: nations whom they sub- 
dued;. and we are called to this, not only by the obvious wisdom which directed their 
policy, but by local circumstances, as well as by sounder principles and higher motives: 
‘than they possessed, + . : 

The examples also of modern European nations pass in review before us. We are the 
fourth of those who have possessed an Indiaw empire. That of the Portuguese, though 
acquired by romantic pavers, was unsysteméatic and rapacious ; the short one of the French 
was the meteor of a vain ambition; the Dutch agted upon the principles of a selfish com-' 
mercial policy ; and these, under which they apparently flourished for a time, have been 
the cause of their decline and fall. None of these nations sought to establish themselves 
in the affections of their acquired subjects, or to assimilate them to their manners; and 
those subjects, far from supporting them, rejoiced in their defeat ; some attempts they made 
to instruct the natives, which had their use; but sordid views overwhelmed their éffects. 
It remains for us to show how we shall be distinguished from these nations in the history of 


mankind ; whether conquest shall have been in our hands the means, not merely of dis-- 
playing a government unequalled in India for administrative justice, kindness, and modera-- 


tion, not merely of encreasing the security of the subject and prosperity of the country, but 
of advancing social happiness, of meliorating the moral state of men, and of extending 
& superior light, further than the Roman eagle ever flew. 

Ifthe novelty, the impracticability, the danger of the proposed scheme, be urged against 
it, these objections cannot all be consistent ; and the last, which is the only one that could 
have weight, presupposes success. In success would lie our safety, not our danger. Our 
danger must, he in pursuing, from ungenerous ends, a course contracted and liberal ; but 
in following an opposite course, in communicating light, knowledge, and improvement, we 
shall obey the dictates of duty, of philanthropy, and of. policy; we shall take the most 
rational means to remove inherent, great disorders, to attach the Hindoo people to ourselves, 
t8 ensure the safety of our possessions, to enhance continually their value to us, to raise 


a fair and durable monument to the glory of this country, and to increase the happiness of 


the human race. 


Aprefpix, 
Inquiry forimprove - 
ing the Condition of 
our Asiatic Subieets. 


e . ” 
APPENDIX} 
I. ; 
erect ; 
Mr. Grant's State 
of Society in, Asia. 


124 APPENDIX ro REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


APPENDIX. 


Extract from the Transactions of the Society for promoting Christian Knowledge, for the 
year 1795. 


- AnoTuER. letter has been received from Mr. Swart2, dated at Tanjore, February 
*« 18th, 1794, which -being of a particularly intereSting nature, the Society judge fit 
* to produce at length. As, moréover the Society, after forty years experience, have had 
“ constant reason to approve of Mr. Swartz’s integrity afid veracity as a correspondent, his 
“ zeal as a promoter of Christian knowledge, and his lgbours as a missionary, they take this 
“ opportunity of acknowledging ‘this faithful services, and recommending his letter to the 
“ consideration of the Public, as cofttaining a just statement of facts relating to the mission, 
“ beliéving that Mr. Swartz is incapable of departing from the truth, in the minutest 
“ particular.” 


Te the Reverend Dr. Gaskin, Secretary to the Society for promoting Christian Knowledge. 


Reverend and Dear Sir, . . * Tanjore, February 13, 1794, 
As His Majesty’s seventy-fourth regiment is partly stationed at Tanjore, and partly at 
Vallam, six English,miles distant from Tanjore, we commonly go once ina week to Vallam, 
to perform divine service to four companies of that regiment, 


When | lately went to that place, the 210th number of a hewspaper, called the Courier, 
Friday evening, May 24th, 1793, was communicated to me. 


In that paper I found a paragraph, delivered by Mr. Montgomerie Campbell (who came 
out to India with Sir Archibald Campbells in the station of a private secretary) wherein my 
name was mentioned in the following manner: 


“ Mr. Montgomerie Campbell gave his decided. vote against the clause, and reprobated 
“¢ the idea of converting the Gentoos. It is true,’missionaries have made proselytes of the 
“ Parriars; but they were the lowest order of people, and had even degraded the religion 
“ they professed to embrace. 


« Mr. Swartz, whose character was held so deservedly high, could not have any reason to 
“ boast of the purity of his followers: they were proverbial for their profligacy. An instance 
“ occurred to his recollection, perfectly in point ;—he had been preaching for many hours, 
“ to this caste of proselytes, on the heinousness of theft, and in the heat of his discourse, 
“ taken off his stock, when that and his gold buckle were stolen by one of his virtuous and 
“ enlightened congregation. In such a description of natives, did the doctrine of the - 
“ missionaries operate. Men of high caste would spurn at the idea of changing the religion 
“ of their ancestors.” \ 


As this paragraph is found in a public paper, I thought it would not displease the 
Honourable Society to make a few observations on it; not to boast (which I detest) but to 
declare the plain truth, and to defend my brethren and myself. 


. About seventeen years ago, when I resided at Tiruchinapally, I visited the congregation 
at Tanjore.. In my road, I arrived very early at a village which is inhabited by Collaries, a 
set of people who are infamous for stealing ; even the name of a Collary (or better, Kallen} 
signifieth a thief, : a: 

These Collaries make nightly excursions, in order to rob. They drive away bullocks and 
sheep, and whatever they can find; for which’ outrage, they annually pay fifteen hundred 


chakr, or seven hundred and fifty pagodas, to the Rajah. — 


GENERAL APPENDIX. » 195 ks ee 


Of this caste of people, many live in the Tanjore country, still more in Tondiman’s country, Inquiry for Fmprovs 
and likewise in the Nabob’s country. ing the Condition of. 
When I arrived at one of those villates, called Pudaloor, I took off my stock, putting it ourAsiatic Subjects. 
upon a sand-bank. Advancing a little to look out for the “nan who carried my linen clothes, 
1 was regardless of the stock, at which time, some thievish boys took it away. Not one 
grown person was present. When the inhabitants heard of the theft, they desited me to 
confine all those boys, and to pynish them as severely as I pleased. 


But I refused to do that, not thinking that the trifle which I had lost was worth so much 
trouble. os 

That such boys, whose fathers are professed thieves, should commit a theft, can be no 
matter of wonder. , 


All the inhabitants of that village were, Heathens ¢ not one Christian family was found 
therein, 


Many of our gentlemen, travelling through that village, have been robbed. 


The trifle ofa buckle I did therefore not lose by a Christian, as Mr. Montgomerie Camp- 
bell will have it, but by Heathen boys. 


Neither did I preach at that time: Mr. Montgomerie Campbell says that I preached two. 
hours: I did not so much as converse with any man. 


This poor story, totally misrepresented, is alleged by Mr. Montgomerie Campbell to 
prove the profligacy of Christians, Whom he called, with a sneer, virtuous and enlightened 
people. ; 

If Mr. Montgomerie Campbell has no better proof, his conclusion is built upon a bad foun- 
dation, and I shall not admire his logic: truth is against him. 


Neither is it true, that the best part of those people who have been instructed, are 
Parriars. Had Mr. Montgomerie Campbell visited, even once, our church, he would have 
observed that more than two thirds were of the‘higher caste; and so is it at Tranquebar and 
Vepery. © re 

Our intention is not to boast; but this I may Safely say, that many of those people who 
have been instructed, have left this world with comfort, and with a well-grounded hope of 
everlasting life. ’ 


That some of those who have been instructed and baptized, have abused the benefit of 
instruction, is certam. But all sincere servants of God, nay even the Apostles, have expe- 
rienced this grief. 


It is asserted, that a missionary is a disgrace to any country. Lord Macartney, and the 
late General Coote, would have entertained a very different opmion. They, and many other 
gentlemen, know and acknowledge, that the missionaries have been beneficial to government, 
and a comfort to the country. | 


This Tam able to prove, in the strongest manner. Many gentlemen who live now in 
England, and in this country, would corroborate my assertion. 


That the Reverend Mr. Gerické has been of eminent service to Cuddalore, every gentle- 
man, who was at Cuddalore at the tume when the war broke out, knows. He was the 
instrument, in the hands of Providence, by which Cuddalore was saved from plunder and 
blood-shed. 


fle saved many gentlemen from becoming prisoners to Hyder, which Lord Macartney 
- kindly acknowledged. 


When Negapatnam, that rich and ‘populous city, fell into the deepest poverty, by the 
unavoidable consequences of war, Mr. Gerické behaved like a father to the distressed people 
of that city. He forgot that he had a family to provide for. Many impoverished families 


were supported by him; so that when I, a few months ago, preached and administered the 
: ; sacrament 


4 


AprEenDrx, 
. Mr. Grant's State 
of Society in Asia. 


126° APPENDIX ro REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


sacrament in that place; I saw many who owed their, and their childrens’ lives, to his disin- 
terested care. Surely this, my friend, could not be called a disgrace to that place. When 
the Honourable Society ordered him to attend the cengregation at Madras, all lamented his 
i fake And at Madras, he is*esteemed by the governor, and many other gentlemen, to 
this day. | 


It is a lost disagreeable task to speak of oneself. However, I hope that the Honourable 
Society will not lock upon some observations which I am tomake, as a vain and sinful boast- 
ing, but rither as a necessary self-defence. Neither ef the missionaries, nor many of the 
Christians, have hurt the welfare of the country. 


.: In the time of war, the fort of Tanjore was in a distressed condition. A powerful enemy 
was near; the people in the Fort, numerous ; and not provision even for the garrison. There 
was grain enough in the countrys butewe had no bullocks to bring it into the Fort. When 
the country people formerly brougl® paddy (ricé in the husk) into the Fort, the rapacious 
dubashes deprived them of their due pay. Hence all confidence was lost; so that the 


' inhabitants drove away their cattle, refusing to assist the Fort. The late Rajah ordered, nay 


* 


intreated the people, by his managers, to come and help us; but all was in vain. 


At last the Rajah said to one of our principal gentlemen: “ We all, you and I, have lost 
our credit; let us try whether the inhabitants will trust Mr. Swartz.” Accordingly he sent 
mea blank paper, empowering me to make a proper agreement with the people. Here was, 
no time for hesitation. The sepoys fell down as dead people, being emaciated with hunger ; 
our streets were hned with dead corpses every mornin; our condition was deplorable, 
1 sent, therefore, letters, every where round about, promising to pay any one, with my own 
hands; and to pay them for any bullock which might be taken by the enemy. In one or 
two days, I got above a thousand: bullocks, and sent one of our catechists, and other Chris- 
tians, into the country. They went at the risk of their lives, made all possible haste, and 
brought into the Fort; in a very short time, eighty thousand kalams (of.rice.) By this means, 
the Fort was saved. When all was oyer, I paid the people (even with some money which 
belonged to others) made them a small present, and sent them home. 


The next year, when Colonel Braithwaite, with his whole detachment, was taken prisoner, 
Major Alcock commanded this Fort, and behaved very kindly to the poor starving people. 
We were then, the second time, in the same miserable condition. The enemy always invaded 


_ the country when the harvest was nigh at hand. I was again desired to: try my former 


expedient, and succeeded. The people knew that they were not to be deprived of their pay, 
they therefore came with their cattle. But now the danger was greater, as the enemy was 


‘very near. The Christians conducted the inhabitants to proper places, surely with no small 


‘danger of losing their lives. Accordingly they wept, and went, and supplied the Fort with 
rain. When the inhabitants were paid, I strictly enquired whether any of the Christians 
ad taken from them a present. They all said, No, no; as we were so regularly paid, we 

offered to your catechist a cloth of small value, but he absolutely refused it. 
, But Mr. Montgomerie Campbell says,, that the Christians are profligate to a proverb. 
- If Mr. Montgomerie Campbell was near me, I would explain to him who are the profligate 
people who drain the country. When a dubash, in the space of ten or fifteen years, scrapes 
together two, three, or four. lacks of pagodas, is not this extortion a high degree of 
profligacy ? - cet 

Nay, government was obliged to send an order, that three of those Gentoo dubashes 
should quit the Tanjore country. The enormous crimes committed by them, filled the 
country with complaints; but I have no mind to enumerate them. ; 

It is asserted, that the inhabitants of the country would suffer by missionaries. 
. If the missionaries are sinceré Christians, it is impossible that the inhabitants should 
suffer any damage by them. If they are not what they profess to he, they ought to be dis« 
missed, . : 

: When 


GENERAL APPENDIX. "1o” 


When Sir Archibald Campbell was governor, and Mr. Montgomerie-Campbell his private 
secretary, the inhabitants of the Tanjore country were so miserably oppressed by the manager 
and, the Madras dubashes, that they quatted the country: of course, all cultivation ceased. 
In the month of June, the-cultivation should commence; But nothing was done, even at the 
beginning of September. Every one dreaded the calamity of a famine. I entreated the 
Rajah to remove that shameful oppression, and to recall the inhabitants: He vent them 
word, that justice should be done to them; but they disbelieved his promises. He then 
desired me to write to them, and to assure them, that he, at my intercession, would show 
kindness to.them. Idid so. All immediately returned; and first of all, the Kallar (or as 
they are commonly called, Collaries) believed my word, so that seven thousand men came 
back on one day. The other inhabitants followed their example. When I exhorted them to 
exert themselves to the utmost, because the time for cultivation was almost lost, they replied 
in the following manner: “As you have showed kindne&s ,to'us, you shall not have’reason to 
repent of it; we intend to work night and day, to show our regard for you.” . 


Sir Archibald Campbell was happy when he heard it; and we had the satisfaction of. 


having a better crop than the preceding year. ee 
As there was hardly any administration of justice, I begged’ and entreated the Rajah to 


establish justice in his country. ‘“ Well,” said he, “let me know wherein my people are 
-oppressed.” Idid so. He immediately consented to my proposal, and told his managey, 


‘ o 
APPENDIX, 
Se 
Inquiry for improv- 
ing the Condition of 
our Asiatic Subjects. 


that he should feel his indignation, if the oppression did not cease immediately. But as he 


soon died, he did not see the execution. . 
When the present Rajah began his reign, I put Sir Archibald Campbell in mind of tha’ 


necessary point. He desired me to make a plan for a court of justice, which I did; but’ 


: was soon neglected by the servants of the Rajah, who commonly sold justice to the best 
idder. : 


When the Honourable Company took .possession of the country, during the war, the 
plan for introducing justice was re-assumed ; by which many people were made happy. But 
when the country was restored to the Rajah, the fogmer irregularities took place. 


During the assumption, government desired me to assist the gentlemen collectors. The 
‘district towards the west of Tanjore had been very much neglected, so that the water-courses 
had not been cleansed for the last fifteea years. I proposed that the collector should 
advance five hundred pagodas to cleanse those water-courses. The gentlemen consented if 
I would inspect the business. The work was begun and finished, being inspected by 
Christians. All that part of the country rejoiced in getting one hundred thousand kalams 
(of rice) more than before. The inhabitants confessed, that instead of one kalam, they now 
reaped four. . 


No inhabitant has suffered by Christians; none has complained of it. On the contrary, 
one of the richest inhabitants said to me ; “ Sir, if you send a person to us, send us one who 
has learned all your ten commandments ;” for he, and many hundred inhabitants, had been 
present when I explained the Christian doctrine to Heathens and Christians. 


The inhabitants dread the conduct of a Madras dubash. These people lend money to the 
Rajah, at an exorbitant interest, and then are permitted to collect their money and_ interest, 
in an appointed district. It is needless to mention the consequences. 


When the Collaries committed great outrages in their plundering expeditions, sepoys 
were sent out to, adjust matters; but it had, no effect. Government desired me to inquire 
into that thievish business. I therefore sent letters to the head Collaries; they appeared ; 
we found out, in some degree, how much the Tanjore, and Tondaman’s, and the Nabob's Col- 
laries had stolen ; and we insisted upon restoration, which was done accordingly.« At last, 


- all gave it in writing, that they would steal no more. This promise they kept very well for . 


eight months, and then they began their old work ; however, not as before. Had that in- 
spection over their conduct been continued, they might have been made useful ec ien 
I insiste 


APPENDIX, 


. 


Mr, Gr&nt’s State 
of Society in Asia. 


128 * APPENDIX ro REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


I insisted ‘upon (their) cultivating their fields, which they really did. But if the demands 
become exorbitant, they have no resource they think, but that of plundering. 


At last some of those thievish Collaries desired t@ be instructed. I said, “ I am obliged 
to instruct you; but Iam afraid that you will become very bad Christians.” Their promises 
were fair. I instructed them; and when they had a tolerable knowledge, I baptized them. 
Having bé&ptized them, I exhorted them to steal no more, but to work industriously. After 
that, I visited them; and having examined their knowledge, I desired to see their work. 
I observed, with pleasure, that their fields were excellently cultivated. “ Now,” said I, 
“ one thing remains to be done. You. must pay your tribute readily, and not wait till it 
is exacted by military force,” which otherwise 1s their cusgom. Soon after that, I found that 
they had paid off their tribute exactly. 


The only complaint against those Christian Collarits was, that they refused to go upon 
plundering expeditions, as they hadedone before? 


, NoW I am well aware, that some will accuse me of having boasted. . I confess the charge 
willingly, but'lay all the blame upon those who have constrained me to commit that folly. 


I might have enlarged my account; but fearing that some characters would have suffered 
by it, I stop here. ; 

One thing, however, I affirm, before God and man, that if Christianity, in its plain and 
urdisguised form, was properly promoted, the country would not suffer, but be benefited 
by it. 

If Christians were employed in some important offices, they should, if they misbehaved, 
be doubly punished; but to reject them entirely, is not right, and discourageth. 


The glorious God, and our blessed Rgdeemer, has commanded his Apostles to preach’ the 
Gospel to all nations. , zo 


The kaowledge of God, and his divine perfections, and of his mercy to mankind, may be 
abused ; but there is no other methods of reclaiming mankind, than by instructing them well. 
To hope that the Heathens will live g good life, without the knowledge of God, is a 
chimera. ‘ 


The praise bestowed on the Heathens of this country, by many of our historians, is refuted 
by a close (I might almost say, superficial) inspe¢tion of their lives. Many historical works 
are more like a romance than history. Many gentlemen here are astonished, how some 
historians have prostituted their talents by writing fables. 


I am now at the brink of eternity; but to this moment I declare, that I do not repent of 
having spent forty-three years in the service of my Divine Master. Who knows but God 
may remove some of the great obstacles to the propagation of the Gospel? Should a refor- 
mation take place amongst the Europeans, it would no doubt be the greatest blessing to the 
country. : 


These observations I beg leave to lay before the Honourable Society, with my humble 
thanks for all their benefits bestowed on this work, and sincere. wishes that their pious and 
Aecihe endeavours to disseminate the knowledge of God and Jesus Christ, niay be bene- 

ial to many thousands. 

I am sincerely, 


_ Reverend and Dear Sir, 
Your*affectionate Brother, and humble Servant, 


C. F, Swartz. 


t 


GENERAL APPENDIX. © 129 


If. 


nn vn 


- Taz MARQUIS or HASTINGS’ SUMMARY of the OPERATIONS in INDIA, . 
with their Results ;, from the 30th April 1814 to the 81st January 1823. 


To the Honourablé the°Court of Directors, &e. &e. Ke. 


Honourable Sirs : 

- NotwitnstanpiIne you havin& received information, in regular course, respecting all 
the transactions which took place dying my administration in India, the particulars would 
unavoidably reach you in so desultory a manner, as that the exigencies or views by which 
I was guided, in many cases, must. be indistinct. The finpression has thence been strong on 
my mind, that it was incumbent on me, in due attention to you, to furnish such a statement 
as would enable you to form a clear judgment of my procedures, connected with the impulses 
which influenced them. I beg leave to submit to you an exposition of that nature; and 


I have the honour to remain, with the greatest respect, : 
Honourable Sirs, your most obedient and obliged servant, 
Gibraltar, 6th May 1823. . (signed) HASTINGS. , 


Operations in India, with their Results, from the 30th April 1814 to the’ 
Ist January 4823. ° 


APPENO@LX, 
II. 


Letter from 
the Marquis of 
Hastings. 
6 May 1823. | 
a 


THE solicitude which any one of just feelings must experience, to pore his having Lord Hastings’ 


adequately fulfilled an important trust, ought, in my case, to be increased, by the peculiar 
nature of the office which I have held. The extent and multiplicity of its functions are little 

‘ comprehended at home; and still less are those circttmstances understood, which called upon me 
for exertions beyond the ordinary demands of myrsituation. If those unusual efforts were not 
necessary, they either risked improvidently the welfare of the Honourable Company, or the 

‘were illicit aggressions on weak unoffendifig Native Powers. It thence behoves me to justify 
the principle and the prosecution of the measures alluded to. The exposition will be short, 
because it aims not at submitting any detail of operations. A statement of the ground on 
which each material determination rested, will enable every one to decide on the equity, as 
well as prudence, of the course adopted ; while the general result may answer, whether the 
main object of the Honourable Company’s financial prosperity was duly kept in sight during 
these complicated transactions. The facts asserted are so supported, as not to admit of 
controversy. Proofs of them are, for the most part, in the hands of the Honourable Court. 

‘Where that is not the case, the official vouchers will be found in the Appendix ; and, it is 
hoped, it will appear that, whatsoever were the advantages attained for the Honourable Com~ 
pany, the interests of our country at large have been similarly promoted, the comforts of the 
Indian population being at the same time signally consulted. 


I entered upon the management of affairs at Calcutta in October 1813. My first view of 


them was by no means pleasing. The treasuries of the three Presidencies were in so un- 
furnished 2 condition, that the insufficiency of funds in them to meet any unusual charges 
(and many such menaced us) excited considerable uneasiness. At that period, the low 
gredit of the bonds which had, at different times been issued as the securities.for monies 
borrowed, made eventual recourse to’ a loan seriously discouraging in contemplation. As 
twelve per cent. discount on.the above securities was the regularly computable rate in the 
market, when no immediate exigency pressed upon us, the grievous terms to which we must 
have subscribed for a new supply of that nature in an hour of alarm, could not be disguised 
to'any foresight. Under this embarrassment, an attempt had been made by the preceding 

S : Government 


Summary.. ° 


APPENDIX, 
Lord’ Hastings’ 
Summary. 


3go* APPENDIX ro REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


‘ e 
Government to provide, in a partial degrée, for the anticipated difficulties, by curtailing the 
annual disbursement, so as to leave a surplus of receipt. What are called the Charges 
Military, the provision for all warlike objects, offensive or defensive, had appeared the only 
head o: eealitars in which a sa¥ing of efficacious magnitude could be made. The paring- 
knife was thence applied with rather an undiscriminating hand to many articles of the 
military astablishment, which had till-that time been deemed indispensable towards a tran- 
.quil tenure of the country. As it-was matter of simple, arithmetical measurement, the 
eg Bakes surplus was produced; but it was ettenged with circumstances which had not 
been taken into the reckoning. Let it not be supposed that I am insinuating a censure on 
an expedient to which Government was pressingly urged by financial difficulties. The limit 
within which a reduction of disbursement in the military branch would not entail mischief, 
‘was perhaps not to be computed without trial. As it was, experience showed that hazard 
‘had been’ incurred in a degree quite ufapprehended. The saving had principally arisen from 
a great diminution of our armed force. The operation of such a measure was not confined to 
.the question of sufficiency for eventual defence. Nothing would mislead the judgment more 
than a parallel supposed between the employment of the Indian army and. that of our mili- 
tary at home. e native’ troops are, in fact, the police of India, the Burkundauzes, or 
armed attendants of the Magistrates, being totally inadequate, if not supported by the 
regulars. Hence, the complication of duties resting upon the soldiery is so great, as that it 
is were for eyen half of a battalion to be found at its head-quarters. Occupation of dependent 
stations, detachments with treasure which is in constant transit, escort of stores periodically 
despatched from Calcutta to the several provinces, charge of convicts working on the roads, 
custody of prisoners transmitted from different parts for trial before the Courts of Circuit, and. 
guards over jails, farm a mass of demand which our fullest military complement can barely 
answer. A great number of those amopg whom such duties had been divided could not be 
dismissed, without causing the service to ‘be oppressive to tHe remainder. But there was a 
.further consequence which rendered the burthen intolerable to the native soldier. This in- 
competence of strength involved nearly an extinction of those leaves which it had been the 
‘custom to grant annually, for a proportion of the men in each regiment to visit their villages. 
‘The privation of hope to see his connections occasionally was insuperably irksome to the 
Bengal Sepoy, usually of high caste: In consequence, very many in each corps solicited 
discharge from the service. Unless when in the field, this indulgence had been uniformly 
_conceded on application, as the individual received no bounty on entrance. Of course, there 
‘was an awkwardness in refusing what had, from practice, assumed a colour of right, when 
-contest was only secretly anticipated by Government, from particulars which it wished not to 
divulge.. So many of those who thus petitioned to quit the service were veterans approaching 
‘the period of claim to’ the invalid pension (the great object of the native soldier), that the 
sacrifice which those men desired to make, exhibited unequivocally the deep discontent of 
the army. I therefore found Government convinced, that’ perseverance in the experiment 
‘was too dangerous ; and the re-adoption of those military provisions which had been stricken 
‘off would have taken place, even had not another consideration pressed its being done with 
‘the utmost speed. The disgust of our native troops was so loudly expressed in all “quarters, 
‘that the causes of it were universally canvassed ; and as such an extraordinary lessening of 
our military means was ascribed to uncontroulable necessity, the same inferences of our 
debility were drawn by all the surrounding States. As'might have been expected, a tone 
and procedure altogether novel ‘had been assumed towards the British Government.’ There 
were made over to me, when the reins were placed in my hands, no less than six hostile dis- 
‘cussions with Native Powers, each capable of entailing resort to arms. It was thence 
obvious, that a beneficial alteration in our pecuniary condition was not to be effected By 
‘parting with the sinews of our strength, but by striving to cultivate and render more pro- 
. ductive those sources of revenue which we possessed. In the above-mentioned number of 
angry controversies, no advertence is made to the Pindarries. Communication could not be 
held with those execrable spoilers; yet the atrocity of their character, though it forbad.the 
degradation: of “negociating with them, could not disparage their inherent force, so as to 
: ; : prevent 


GENERAL APPENDIX. © 131 
prevent my regarding them, even at that juncture, as the most serious’ of the diffi- 
- culties with which I had to deal. Could the moral call for suppressing one of the most 
dreadful scourges that ever afflicted hgmanity, be put aside, still the task of dispersing an 
association, whose existence was irreconcileable to our ultinfate security, as well as to our more 
immediate interests, seemed to me not capable of being long postponed. At the same time, 
I saw the intimacy of connexion between the Pindarries and the Mahrattas so disginctly, as 


to be certain that an attempt to destroy the former must infallibly engage us in war with the. 


whole body of the latter. While the extrane effort was delayed, which our entanglements in 
other quarters made unavoidable, it was desirable to impose some check on the plunderers. 
The year before my arrival they had ravaged part of our territories, they had carried off an 
immense booty with impunity, and they were professedly meditating another invasion, every 
military man well comprehending tha defensive frontier stations, though heavily expensive 
to the State, were absolutely nugatory against a. mounttd eitemy without baggage, following 
at, will through a vast’ expanse of country any line whith the information of the moment 
might recommend. There was a chance that intimations from Gwalior might cau%e the 
Pindarries to suspend their mroad. It was inappreciable to us to stop, if possible, the pro- 
jected devastation, while we were to be occupied elsewhere: on which account, {- proposed. 
a remonstrance to that Court, on the score of the Pindarries being permitted to arrange within. 
the Maharajah’s dominions the preparations for assailing the Honourable Company’s pro-. 
vinces. The present unreserved acknowledgment of our supremacy throughout India, wall 
scarcely leave credible the then existence of a relative position, which could occasion my being, 
met in Council by a representation, that a remonstrance of the above nature might be offensive 
to Scindia, and that nothing ought to be ventured which eould give him umbrage. Such, 
however, was at that period, on either side, the estimate of British power., 

This introduction, though longer than I could haye wished, was necessary to render our. 
circumstances at that crisis aecurately intelligible. There was especially a necessity to: 
explain, why, when a surplus revenue had been actually exhibited, it had no permanence. 
The delusiveness of the principle on which such g surplus had for the moment been obtained, 
has been disclosed, aid 
contests not be avoided. A large sum is always réquired to be kept in hand by. Government 

. for current purposes, because the revenue from laid, the chief article in our income, is not 
receivable at periods corresponding ‘with the regular disbursements, and is moreover hable to: 
defalcation, from the remission allowed in case of bad seasons: therefore a sum deemed. 
simply adequate to this object cannot be relied upon, as a provision for a further contingency. 


Of the six disputes which I have noticed, four were amicably adjusted. One, in the instance _ 


of Rewah, was speedily settled by the storm ofa principal fortress, with the menace of a siege 
to its capital; and the sixth, the contention with Nepaul, remained for decision by arms. 
A struggle with the latter was unpromising. We were strangely ignorant of the country 
Or its resources; and overlooking the augmented abilities latterly furnished by science to a 
, regular army for surmounting local obstacles, it was a received persuasion, that the nature of: 
the mountainous tract which we should have to penetrate, would. be as baffling to any exer- 
tions of ours, as it had been to all the efforts of many successive Mahomedan sovereigns. 
No option, however, remained with us. We were not, through a point of honour, demand-. 
ing atonement for the wanton invasion of our territories, the brutal massacre of our police- 
men, and the studied cruelty’of tying, to a tree, and shooting to death with arrows, the native 
officer whom we had appointed to preside over the district, though the hopelessness of 
obtaining from the Government any disavowal of such a complicated outrage must have made 
us look to war -even on that ground; but we were at issue with a nation so extravagantly 
presumptuous respecting its.own strength, and ‘so ignorant of our superior means, that the 
Goorka Commissioners had, upon a former occasion, remarked to ours the futility of debating 
about a few square miles of territory, since there never could be real peace: betweén the two 
States, until we should yield to the Goorkas our provinces north of the Ganges, making that 
river,the boundary between us, as heaven had evidently designed it to be. The conviction, 
that the evil day of contest could not be put we weighed heavily on the minds 6f functionaries 
Breathe” . : 2 . ; m 


it will be understood, that we were to seek other supplies, should. - 


Appgn fix, 
II. 


Lord Hastings’ 
Summary. « 


er 4 
APPENDIX, 


Lord Hastings” 
Summary. 


132° APPENDIX ro REPORT rxom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


in Calcutta. The possible necessity of withholding an investment was anticipated, and even 
hinted to the Court of Directors. 1 endeavoured to allay this anxiety, by assurances that, as. 
far as my professional judgment went, the difficulties ef mountain warfare were greater on the 
defensive side than on that of a welf-conducted offensive operation ; that I believed myself able 
to calculate tolerably what expenditure would be entailed by the necessary efforts, estimating 
the charge much below what they apprehended ; and that I could look with confidence toa 
supply of treasure from a source which they had never contepplated. Soon after my arrival, 
some British officers came to me from the Nawab Yizier Saadut Ali, sovereign of Oude, 
bringing to me a representation of the painful and degrading thraldom in which, through 
gradual and probably unintended encroachments on his freedom, he was held, inconsistently 
with the spirit of the treaties between the two States. The system from which he prayed to 
be relieved appeared to me no less repugnant to policy than to equity. On my professing a 
disposition to correct so objectionable a course, those officers who had been long in the Nawab 
Vizier’s service assured me, that any persuasion of my having such an inclination would cause 
Saadut Ali to throw himself upon me with unbounded confidence, and to offer from his immense 
hoard the advance of any sum I could want for the enterprise against Nepaul. The gratitude 
with which such a supply would be felt was professed. While I was on my passage up the 
river, Saadut Ali unexpectedly died: I found, however, that what had been provisionally 
agitated with him was perfectly understood by his successor, so that the latter came forward 
with a spontaneous offer of a crore of rupees, which I declined as a peishcush or tribute on his 
accession to the sovereignty of Oude, but accepted as a loan for the Honourable Company. 
Eight lacs were afterwards added to this sum, in order that the interest of the whole, at six per 
cent., might equal the allowances’to different branches of the Nawab Vizier’s family, for which 
the guarantee of theBritish Government had been pledged, and the payment of which, without 
vexatious retardments, was secured, by the appropriation of the interest to the specific purpose. 
The sum thus obtained was thrown into the general treasury, whence I looked to draw such 
betes of it as the demands of-the approaching service might require. My surprise is not to 
e expressed, when I was shortly afteranformed from Calcutta, that it had been deemed expe- 
dient to employ fifty-four lacs of the sum, obtdined by me in discharging an eight per cent. 
loan, that the remainder was indispensable for current purposes, and that it was hoped I 
should be able to procure from the Nawab Vizier a‘further aid for the objects of the war. 
This took place eaity in autumn, and operations ggainst Nepaul could not commence till the 
middle of November, on which account the Council did not apprehend my being subjected to 
any sudden inconvenience through its disposal of the first sum. Luckily I was upon.such 
frank terms with the Nawab Vizier, as that I could explain to him fairly my circumstances. 
He agreed to furnish another crore; so that the Honourable Company: was accommodated 
with above two millions and a half sterling on my simple receipt. Particular details of the war 


"in Nepaul would be superfluous : the terms on which it closed will suffice. That State, instead, 


of flanking, as it had done, for nearly six hundred miles, our open frontier or that of the 
Nawab Vizier, which we were bound by treaty to defend while itself could only be attacked in 
front, was reduced to about a half of its criginal extent, remaining with both its flanks exposed 
to us, through the connexion which we formed with the Siccim Rajah to the east and our pos-. 
session of Kamaon to the west. The richest portion of the, territory conquered by us bordered 
on the dominions of the Nawab Vizier. 1 arranged the transfer of that tract to him, in extine- 
tion of the second crore which I had borrowed. Of that crore, the charges of the war 
absorbed fifty-two lacs: forty-eight lacs (600,000 2.) were consequently left in the treasury, 
a clear-gain to the Honourable Company, in addition to the benefit of precluding’ future annoy-. 
ance from an insolent neighbour. : 
While the war was waging in the mountains, my attention was anxiously fixed on eur 
southern boundaries. I had traced many indications of active communication between States 
which had for many years had no political intercourse. As I could not then know what has 
since been unveiled, that a wide confederacy was forming for the expulsion of the British from 
‘India, I ascribed the symptoms to-vague speculations excited in the Native Powers, by seeing 
us engaged in dn undertaking where they considered our failure certain. The ‘anticipated 


exhaustion 


GENERAL APPENDIX. ° 133 


. exhaustion of our strength in the rash enterprise, would present advantages for the improvement’ 
of which they might think it desirable to be prepared, and their several views were to be reci- 
procally ascertained for the eventual crigs. This spirit, though it did not lead them to imme- 
diate action, would naturally prompt them to steps whichecould not be regarded by us with 
indifference. In one instance, the forecasting disposition of our neighbours showed an intel- 
ligible consistence. An agreement was made between Scindia and the Rajah of Nagpore, that 
the forces of both should act under Scindia for the reductionof Bhopaul. The very terms of the 
agreement betrayed the real objéct ; for Bhopaul, when conquered, was to be made over to the 
Nagpore Rajah: It was obvious that Scindia only wanted an excuse for bringing the 
Nagpore troops into junction with those already under his command, in which case he would 
have found himself at the head of ave powerful army. It was not a moment for hesitation, 
Had Scindia’s forces, which were asserpbled and ready to march, once entered Bhopaul, shame 
would have made him risk any extremity, rather than re¢ede upon our intervention. The 
Nawab of Bhopaul had solicited to be taken under Briti$h protection. I was at that time on 
Scindia’s frontier, my escort being composed of one weak battalion of native infantry, @ troop 
of the body guard, and a squadron: of native cavalry. In three weeks I could not have 
assembled five thousand men, all our disposable strength being employed against Nepaul : but 
the case called for decision, and I directed the Resident at Scindia’s Court to request that his 
Highness would forbear any aggression upon Bhopaul, as that State had become an ally to 
our Government. I desired that this communication should be made in the most conciliatgry 
tone, and that the Resident would not report to me the violent language with which it would 
probably be met by Scindia, so as that there might be no affront to discuss, There was 


seemingly hardihood in this procedure, but there was essentially none; supposing Scindia ~ 
predetermined to go all lengths, any pore from my message was of no moment. If he 


were only trying his ground, and taking steps towards rendering a remoter decision more 
secure, the unexpected check might make him pause, and the gain of time was every thing to 
me, when I was disciplining recruits in all quarters for the augmentation of our force. Scindia, 
as was unoflicially imparted to me, received the jntimation with all the vehemence of language 
which I had expected: but, notwithstanding his declaration that he should follow his own 
course, his troops did not move, and the oer against Bhopaul was silently abandoned, 
The Maharajah must have been influenced by the supposition, that the confidence of my 
procedure, and the apparent carelessness of my progress along the frontier with so slender an 
accompaniment, arose from my possessién of means which he could not calculate. The 
Resident, in a later day, made a merit with Scindia of having suppressed in his report to me 
_the offensive tone which had been-used, and his Highness acknowledged the obligation. The 
circumstances which I have detailed, will give an useful insight into the doubtful terms on 


which we then stood with the neighbouring States. Whether positive engagements nad | 


secretly taken place among them was uncertain. It was, at all events, clear that they looked 
to a possible juncture; when they might pursue a common object necessarily unfavourable 
for us. When Ummer Sing Thappa and Runjore Sing, generals of the Goorkas, surrendered 
‘themselves, they could not be brought to believe that the Mahrattas were not nates A in the 
field against us, though neither of them would assign a reason for the supposition. As they 
had severally professed the persuasion when they could not have had communication, it was 
evident that each of them must have had knowledge of proposals for co-operation made by 
the Mahrattas to his Court. 

Early in 1817 an event occurred, seemingly unconnected with the suspicious indications 
which were fixing our attention in other parts, but really deriving great moment from 
reference to those symptoms. Scindia had, in 1803, given up to us, by treaty, extensive 
pessessions in the Dooab, or tract contained between the Ganges and the Jumna. Those lands 
were inhabited by Jauts, a hardy and warlike tribe. This ceded territory was divided into 
several petty districts, each under-a Talookdar, corresponding to the Zemindar of the Lower 
Provinces. From the exposure of the country to frequent mvasion from predatory cavalry, 


the, distant sovereign who had not management enough in his dominions to shield his detached’ . 


_ provinces from such inroads, was forced to consult his own interest as to pecuniary ss 
1 cee . - : % y 


= . ’ i) 


ArrEnoix, 


—— 


Lord Hastings’ 
Summary. 


APPENDIX, 


+ 


—_, 


Lord Hastings’ 
Sammary. . 


134 APPENDIX 1o REPORT rom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


by allowing tlose Talookdars to have fortified residences, where the revenue was lodged, as 
collected, for ultimate remittance to the treasury at Gwalior. The permission for maintaining . 
a fortress necessarily included a garrison, which from yanity, or views‘of depredation, was in 
every instance carried far beyond what the duties of the place required. It is probable, that 
those Talookdars had been looking forward to a time when they might cast off their alle- 
giance to the Mahratta rule, and render themselves independent chiets. of little principalities. 
Their. assiduity in strengthening their fortresses may be ascribed to the anticipation of such a 
‘favourable hour. They were encouraged in this speculation? by the circumstance that the 
Rajah of Bhurtpore, whose power was rated high fidm his successful resistance to the 
British, had affinity with their principal families. He and his people are Jauts. In practice, 
the situation of the Talookdar under the Mahrattas unite the characters of the middle-man 
and the manager of an absentee’s estate in Ireland, with whatsoever degree of authority over 
the peasantry: he thought proper t® usitrp, knowing that his government would never be at 
the trouble of calling him to account. ® The most populous and productive of the districts were 
under the superintendence of Dyaram, an active ambitious man, whose preponderance in the 
tribe was supported by amassed riches as well as personal energy. Calculating on a future. 
opportunity for establishing sway over the rest, he employed himself sedulously in perfecting 
his fortress at Hattrass, which he had originally found of great strength, and m keeping up 
the discipline of a well-organized force. When his territory was surrendered to the British 
Government, though our judicial administration was declaredly introduced into it, congidera- 
tions deemed politic led us to withhold a strict enforcement of our regulations. For obvious 
reasons, we had never suffered a strong hold to be possessed by an indiyidual in our pro- 
vinces. On this occasion we deviated from our caution, and did not insist on the immediate 
demolitian of the fortresses in the territory transferred to us. .[ have understood it was con- 
ceived, that when thé Talookdars shoul ,find themselves efficiently protected from external 
violence, they would gladly forego the expense of providing for their own security, and would, 
without repugnance, dismantle their forts, which they were told must ultimately be required 
of them. Perhaps there was an error ip supposing that, after having been continued for a 
time in the enjoyment of what flattered their pride, they would feel less the sacrifice of the 
distinction. As it was, they evidently madé common cause in a plan for evading that humi- 
liation: they encouraged each other in the résolution, by promises of reciprocal aid; and from 
the confidence thus inspired, they gradually assumed an undisguised air of pretension to be 
on the footing of mere tributary dependence. Tfiis disposition became more marked and- 
overt at the period to which I have before alluded, when the debilitation of our Government 
had become matter of genera] belief, and manifold trespasses on our authority were impu- 
dently committed by those Talookdars. Our occupation with Nepaul constrained us to shut 
our eyes, as much as might be, on those encroachments, an impunity’ which naturally 
invited ‘still more determined steps. As soon as our hands were free, it became necessary to 
notice those irregularities, therefore it was signified to-the Talookdars, that any repetition of 
them would meet decisive chastisement. The intimation was wholly disregarded. At length the 
Members of Council unanimously represented to me (I hating then returned to Calcutta from 
the Upper Provimces) a daring defiance of our legitithate jurisdiction by Dyaram, who 
had seized and kept in irons within his fortress several of our police officers, for arresting 
a robber within his district; and who had, moreover, caused a party of his troops to confine 
for twenty-foir hours in a village the judge and magistrate. of the zillah containing those; 
Talooks. This was communicated to me with anxiety, because the supposed strength of 
Hattrass made it appear awkward to undertake the corréction of Dyaram. Punishment of | 
.the substantive offence was of itself imperiously* demanded: but the urgent expedience of. 
bringing the whole body of those Jauts definitively into regular submission as subjects was 
as strikingly visible. As I had not, however, betore learned the particulars to which the 
Members of*Council referred, I answered, that if they would-lay before me.such a case, sus- 
tained by due evidence, as should prove Dyaram to haye justly incurred the penalty, Hattrass 
should be reduced ; an operation which I pledged myself to them would not require for its. 
completion eight-and-forty hours after the batteries had opened against the place. Wfien, 
, ° : . , I was’ 


GENERAL APPENDIX. 135 


I was in the Upper,Country, it had: of course been my duty to obtain minute information 
- respecting every fortress with which any claim might bring us into contact, and I had pro- 

cured.the requisite knowledge of Hattr&ss among the res That fort had the reputation of 
being impregnable; which silly persuasion had betrayed Dyaram into his contumacious 
outrages, . According to the mode of attack which the natives had been accustomed to see 


preci by us, Hattrass might, indeed, appear formidable to meddle with. Aitch one’ 


undred and twenty feet-wide and eighty-five deep, surrounded a work, in which triple tier 
of defences exhibited a provision for ¢onte8ting the place inch by inch, after the silencing its 
artillery, and the making a practicable breach; should bring the besieger to the point of 
storming. Luckily, science has layl down procedures, where the means can be commanded, 
for avoiding the necessity of hazarding a disadvantageous assault. One of my earliest 
military cares on arriving in India hadebeen, to satisfy myself why we had made so compara- 
tively unfavourable a display in sieges. The details at gnce unfolded the cause. It is well 
known that nothing can be more insignificant than shells thrown with long intervals, aad we 
never brought forward more than four or five mortars when we undertook the capture of 
a fortified place. Hence the bombardment was futile; so that, at last, the issue was to be 
staked on mounting a breach, and fighting hand to hand with a soldiery skilful, as well as 
obstinately gallant, in defending the prepared intrenchments. This was not the oversight of 
the Bengal artillery officers, for no men can be better instructed: in the theory, or more ca- 
pable in the practice of their profession than they are: it was imputable to a false economy dn 
the part of Government. The outlay in providing for the transportation of mortars, shells, 
and platforms, in due quantity, would aire | have -been considerable, and it was on that 


account forborne. The miserable carriages of the country, hired for the purpose when. 


a military exertion was contemplated, were utterly unequal to the service, and constantly 
failed, under the unusual weight, in the deep roads¢hrough which they had to pass ; there- 
‘fore we never sat down before a place of real strength furnished with the means -which 
a proper calculation would have allotted for its reduction. Sensible of this injurious defici- 
ency, I had, with the utmost dilligence, instituted a ttansport train; and it was in reliance 
on its efficiency, that I assured the Council of the short resistance which Hattrass should 
offer. Expedition, no less than secrecy, was important, to prevent any interventions which 
might trouble us in the undertaking: ‘and notwithstanding the advance of the troops was so 
rapid, that Dyaram had information of their approach only two days before Hattras was 
‘actually invested, forty-two mortars kept pace with the march of the force. From the 
incessant shower of bombs, the garrison was unable to persist in defending the place more 
than fifteen hours. The body of troops employed was of such strength, that no sudden 
assemblage could venture to free it, while the speedy effectuation of the object left no time 
for interference from remoter quarters. Thus uninterrupted, the officer commanding it, ac- 
cording to his orders, summoned successively the other fortresses of the Jauts. Terrified by 
the fate of Hattrass, all of them, to the number of eleven, some very strong, surrendered 
without resistance. The works were every where raised, and the troops attached to them 
were disbanded, except a few armed attendants allowed for security to the household of each 
of the Talookdars, in a country not yet brought into habitual regularity. The Talookdars 
were indemnified for the cannon and arms of which they were dispossessed, being further 
maintained in as much eminence as was consistent with the laws of the British Government. 
Those terms, with an oblivion of his past misdeeds, had been offered to Dyaram on the first 
appearance of the troops before Hattrass, and had been rejected by him, therefore his lands 
‘were declared forfeited. “Thus was effected af a critical juncture, an object pressingly incum- 
bent in itself: I mean, the assimilation of those Jaut communities to the orderly condition of 


ou? other native subjects, but of enhanced importance relatively to their otherwise possible - 


insurrection in the centre of our possessions, when our force was engaged elsewhere, whether 

that insurrection should arise from secret preconcert with powers leagued against us, or be 

stimulated by accidental temptations. The politics of the Rajah of Bhurtpore would be 

seriously influenced by deprivation of an eventual support from his tribe; and every prince 

“in India must have felt a diminution of the confidence with which he would have oppose a 
e when 


APPENDIX, 


Lord Hastings’ © 
Summary. 


we i 
APPENDIX, 


Lord Hastings’ 
’ Summary. 


h 


136. | APPENDIX ro REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


4 


when the falt of Hattrass dissipated his trust in fortifications. It is not altogether irrelevant, 

‘ to add, that an annual saving, by no means insignificant, has arisen from the transport trains 
being employed, during peace, 1, collateral. servicés under the Commissariat department, of 
which I constituted it a branch. 

While the ferment perceivable in the Mahratta States could be ascribed to the tempting 
prospect of a particular opportunity, there was the hope that when all chance of such an opening 
was dissipated, the machinations would subside. Many symptoms’concurring to prove that 
this was not the case, the conclusion was irresfstible, that a more defined and methodized 
understanding, of a tenour hostile to us, had been established, at least among the powers 
upholding the predatory system in Central India. Ther success in seducing other Native 

- States into pledges for acting in concert could not be judged of, as I have mentioned that 
our discoveries had then gong no further than the ascertaining that there were frequent 
missions conducted with great stealth between: powers not in prior habits of communication. 
Thesymptoms might be fallible ; yet common caution required that the no longer postpon-~ 
able enterprise of extirpating the Pindarries, who had again mercilessly laid waste our terri- 
tories, should embrace a provision for encountering’ the widest combination among the Native 
States. Supposing their confederacy to be actually established, and that I failed in the 
project I had formed for rendering the collection of their forces impracticable, I was to look 
to coping with little less than three hundred thousand men in the field. It was a formidable 
struggle to incur ; such, indeed, as it would have been irreconcileable to my duty towards my 
employers to have risked, had the hazard been avoidable. I think, however, no one who 
considers the circumstances will regard it as having been adventured wilfully or inexpediently. 
I refer not to the fortunate issue, which is always a doubtful criterion of policy. I desire my 
position to be fairly examined. If it be evident that the contest, whether it should originate 
in a conspiracy of the native sovereigns, or in the support given by the Mahratta States and 
Ameer Khan to the Pindarries, was not ultimately to be evaded, the question was, only’ 
when, and how it might be entered upon with the best chances for success ; and I believe that 
I decided as was imperiously demanded bythe interests with which I stood entrusted. I cal- 
culated, that by celerity of movement oneour part, the ill-disposed might be incapacitated from 
attempting the opposition which they meditated ; and any appearance of our proceeding upon 
unconfirmed suspicions would be far counterbalanced by their escape from being involved in 
the destruction of the Pindarriés, still more as the measures held in view promised them their 
share in the anticipated improvement of condition throughout Central India. Before, however, 
our troops were put in motion, our information respecting the concerted attack upon the 
British possessions became distinct and incontrovertible. From Cawnpore, whether I had 
proceeded, I notified to the Council at Calcutta my purpose of framing the campaign conso- 
nantly to the above computation. What I contemplated was, the pushing forward unexpect- 
edly several divisions which should occupy positions opposing insuperable: obstacles to a 
junction of the army of any State with that of another, even subjecting to extreme peril any 
sovereign’s attempt to assemble the dispersed corps of his forces within his own dominions, 
should we see cause to forbid it. The success of the plan depended on the secrecy with which 
the preparations could be made, the proper choice of the points to be seized, and the speed with 
which we could reach the designated stations. I speak relatively to the troops which were to 
penetrate from the north; for the advance of those from the south, destined to act against 
the Pindarries, could not be concealed. The formation of my magazines of.grain on the 
frontier.was fortunately disguised by a bad harvest in that quarter, which furnished the 
excuse for transportation of corn thither, as if it were a provision for the inhabitants against 
eventual dearth. In all other respects, the arrangéments were so admirably conducted by 
the few public functionaries confidentially entrusted with them, that not a suspicion of" any 
" ntendedestir was afloat. In the most distant battalion destined for the service there was not 
a surmise of impending movement. above five or six days previous to its being actually in 
march, The suddenness with which we occupied the heart of the inimical countries, added 
to the efficiency of the means employed, caused all the essential parts of the business to be 
finished completely to my wish, in hardly more than three months; so as that I was enabled, 
ce ; : almost 


GENERAL APPENDIX. . 137 


almost immediately after that period, to sen. ..... .o their cantonment the part of the force* 


the most chargeable in the field, the European troops. The vast scale of the operations 
could not but be attended with great @xpense. - It was from their short duration, that when 
the war charges came to be wound up, the amount for the six divisions of the Bengal troops 
brought forth on the occasion did not reach: thirty-five lacs of Sonaut Rupees, or about 
thirty-three and a half of Sicca. When the ‘charge for the troops periodically and unavail- 
_ ingly moved forward from the Madras Presidency to cover the country south of the Ner- 
budda from the Pindarries is considered, and the heavy loss of revenue from the devastations 
committed by those wretches is taken into account, it may be thought a thrifty expenditure, 
which at such a rate, once for all put an end to that annual tax upon our finances. In that 
expenditure is included, not only every kind of disbursement usually connected with troops, 
beyond what would have been reqaired for them pad they remained in quarters, but one 
Posing out of the special circumstances :- while every gxaction for provisions or forage was 
strictly forborne in the neutral or feudatory countries through which we passed, compensation 
‘was made for the damage done by the encampment of the troops, even for a night, where the 
- ground was under crop, as was almost invariably the case. The injury was estimated between 
‘the chief commissariat officer and the principal men of the villages concerned, and the retri- 
bution agreed upon by them was made upon the spot in ready money. This measure, 
besides its essential justice, had the object of manifesting to the natives the equity of the 
‘British Government, and of inducing such petty independent communities as hades not 
already relations with us, to obtain our protection, by voluntarily soliciting to be taken under 
our paramountship. The expectation did not deceive us : all those little territories which had 
‘till then remained unattached ranged themselves under our banners. Among other chiefs, 
‘the Rajah of Tehree, when he presented his nuzzur in token of plighted fealty, desired me 
‘to understand it was the first time that State had acknowledged the supremacy of another, 
“ali the efforts of the Mogul emperors to subdue it having proved abortive. We were not at 
-the time in the Tehree territories, nor were we likely to enter them, therefore the conduct of 
the Rajah could only spring from an impregston which must be flattering for our country. 
The economy of making our exertion so powerful will be still better comprehended from 
a further particular. Trimbuckjee Dainglia, the favourite and the confidential instrument 
‘of the Peishwah, was the immediate agent in the murder of the Guickwar’s minister, 
Gungadhur Shastry. The person in question had been earnestly invited to Poona by the 
- Peishwah, for the ostensible purpose of settling accounts which were afloat between the two 
States, but with the. real object of having an opportunity for gaining the minister to seduce 
his sovereign into the -confederacy against us. The Guickwar, from some doubt of the 
Peishwah, would not suffer his minister to repair to Poona, unless the British Government 
would be answerable for his safety, and we pledged ourselves to that prince accordingly, not 
‘merely in compliance with the solicitation of the Peishwah, but because we were anxious 
that counter-claims between the two States which had given us much trouble, should be 
finally adjusted. That a Brahmin of the highest caste, first minister of an independent 
sovereign, and invested with a public commission by his prince, should stand in any risk, 
appeared incredible, therefore our guarantee was unhesitatingly given. When the Peishwah 
found that the minister was proof against all temptation, and refused absolutely to betray his 
master into a scheme which the minister thought would entail his destruction, his Highness 
determined to make away with such an obstacle to his views, in the hope that the office of 
minister might be filled by a more manageable individual. Gungadhur Shastry was barba- 
rously ‘assassinated on his way back frgm a devotional ceremony by night in the temple, 
whither he had gone upon repeated entreaties from Trimbuckjee Dainglia, after having pre- 
viously excused himself on the score of indisposition. The Peighwah was apprised that his 
participation in the crime was minutely known to us, but that, to save his credit, the guilt should 
be thrown on the special pee, Trimbuckjee Dainglia, who must be delivered up to us, in 
‘ atonement for the outrage offered to our plighted security. Trimbuckjee was put into our hands 
aecordingly: To conciliate the Peishwah, it was promised to his Highness that his favourite 
‘should not be proceeded against capitally, but be merely kept in confinement as a state prisoner. 
: T 3 Trimbuckjee 


AppENprx,. 


Lord Hastings" 
Summary. 


APPENDIX, 


a 


Lord Hastings’. 


Summary. 


138 APPENDIX tro REPORT rrou SELECT COMMITTEE. 


Trimbuckjee having made his escape from a fortress where he was negligently guarded, was 
afterwards speedily, subsequent to the Peishwah’s surrender, taken in the field. Regarding. 
the game as irretrievably lost, he thought concealmeift useless, and indulged that boast of 
a nearly-accomplished design, with Which persons often console themselves under failure. He 
unfolded, that from early in 1814, the Peishwah had been busied in organizing a general con- 
federacy of ¢he Native Powers, for the purpose of driving the British out of India, and he 
averred,: that we were only by three or four months too quick, upon them, or we should have 
found them the assailants, in which case the issue méght pave been very different. Certainly, 
had Scindia, by much’ the most powerful of the Native Sovereigns, been in the field at the 
head of his assembled veteran troops, with the fine and well-manned artillery which he 
possessed, time, as well as encouragement would have been afforded to the other confederated 
powers for resorting to arms, in so many quarters as must have made our movements cautious, © 

consequently protracted, under heavy,expense. The incurrence of such circumstances was, 
at all events, to be risked by us: since, I repeat, it was not a matter of option, whether the 
‘extinction of an evil so intolerable as the ravages of the Pindarries should be undertaken. 
It has been said, however, that a confident expectation was entertained of achieving the main 
“purpose, while every hostile speculation of the Native Sovereigns would be repressed by our 
‘sudden pre-occupation of particular positions ; and this calculation applied in a more special 
‘degree to Scindia. Residmg at Gwalior, he was in the heart of the richest part of his 
:domtinions ; but independently of the objection, that those provinces were separated from our 
‘territory only by the Jumna, there was a military defect in the situation, to which it must be 
‘supposed the Maharajah had never adverted. About twenty miles south of Gwalior, a ridge 
.of very abrupt hills,.covered with the meee wood peculiar to India, extends from the little 
«Sind to the Chumbulh, which rivers forni the flank boundaries of the Gwalior district and its 
- dependencies. There are but two routes by which carriages, and perhaps cavalry, can pass 
' that’ chain ; one along the little Sind, and another not far from the Chumbul. By my 


* seizing with the centre division a position which would bar any movement along the little Sind 


and placing Major-General Donkin’s drvisione at the back of the other pass, Scindia was 
reduced to the dilemma of subscribing the treaty which I offered to him or of crossing the 
. hills through bye-paths, attended by the few followers who might be able to accompany him, 
, saenificing his splendid train of artillery (above one hundred brass guns) with all its appen- 
- dages, and abandoning at once to us his most valuable possessions. The terms imposed upon 
« him were essentially unqualified submission, though so coloured as to avoid making him feel 
‘public humiliation. Their intrinsic rigour will not be thought overstrained or unequitable 
: when it is observed that I had ascertained the Maharajah’s having promised the Pindarries 
‘decisive assistance, and that I had intercepted the secret correspondence through which he 
. was instigating the Nepaulese to attack us. Nothing, in short, but my persuasion that the 
maintenance of the existing Governments .in Central India, and the making them our 
‘instruments and sureties for preserving the future tranquillity of the country, could have 
. dictated the forbearance manifested under the reiterated perfidies of that prince. He closed 
with the proffered conditions, and was saved by the acquiescence. The advantage to us was, 
‘that resistance in any other quarter could be only a transient ebullition. To the more distant 
‘ States, this non-appearance of a formidable. force with which they were to co-operate, was 
‘absolute incapacitation from effort. In my way back to Calcutta in July 1818, I received 
“arescript brought by an envoy from the Birman Monarch, whom we incorrectly call King of 
- Ava, from one of the great divisions of his empire. The purport of this curious paper was 
.@ requisition for our immediate surrender of ail the provinces east of the Baugrutty, even 
-ineluding Moorshedabad, with a menace, that should the demand not be obeyed, he would la: 
waste our territories with fire and sword. His projected hostility was evidently @ measur 
. concerted with the Mahrattas ; and during the rainy season, when the overflowing of the rivers 
renders: the march: of troops jeapencticatley his ‘Majesty conceived, by advancing a title, 
- howsoever'extravagant, to those provinces, he should have an ostensible ground for invading - 
: a State with which otherwise he had no-quarrel. I sent back the envoy with an intimation 
-that the answer should be conveyed through another channel. He hed come from the court 
: through 


GENERAL APPENDIX. » 139 


@ F, 
“through the northern Birman provinces. The answer was. despatched by sea to the. Viceroy 
‘ of Arracan, residing at the port of Rangoon in the Central Division, for transmission to his 
“sovereign. It expressed, that I was teo well acquainted with his Majesty’s wisdom to be the 
‘dupe of the gross forgery attempted to be palmed up8n me; wherefore I sent to him the 
document fabricated in his august name, and trusted that he would subject to condign 
punishment the persons who had so profligately endeavoured to sow dissension }etween two 
powers reciprocally interestel to cultivate amity. By this procedure, I evaded the 
necessity of noticing an insolent, step, foreseeing that his Birman Majesty would be 
thoroughly glad of the excuse to remam quiet, when -he learned his secret allies had been 
subdued. hat information he received at the same time with my letter; and all further 
discussion or explanation being forborne, the former amicable intercourse continued without 
change. The circumstance will shew the extent to which the negotiations of the Mahrattas 
had gone, exhibiting also the advantage of using exertiois so decisive, as should not leave 
time for distant enemies to come forward. 4 ; 

The former treaty with Scindia, which I had declared annulled on the proof of his 
hostile practices, contained an article equally discreditable and embarrassing. We were 
bound by it to have no correspondence with the Rajpoot States, and were thence debarred 
from granting to them that protection, which they offered to repay by co-operating for the 
suppression of the Pindarries. Emancipated from so injurious a shackle, I received all 
these States as feudatory to the British Government. Though each possessed considerable 
force, their reciprocal estrangements (proceeding chiefly from punctilious, and often here- 
ditary quarrels between the reigning princes) prevented. their ever forming any union. They 
-were consequently plundered for a succession of years, not only by the Pindarries, but. by the 
armies of Ameer Khan, of Scindia, and of Holkar. Devastation had begome so familiar to the 
eyes of the rulers of those countries, that they wiewed almost with indifference the ie 
‘gions exercised over the ryots, or cultivators of the soil, by the troops which garrisoned their 
fortresses or were maintained. about the Sovereign’s person. The connexion which they now 
formed with us secured them against outrage from» without, while a main stipulation on our 
part was, that their own troops should be Subjected to such a system of regularity, as would 
ensure the property and domestic quiet of the villager, or entail upon an aggression immediate 
exemplary punishment. The further obligations under which the chieftains placed them- 
selves were, to refer all differences among them to the British Government, to keep a well- 


equipped contingent in readiness for any call from us, and to employ that soldiery, in the . 


mean time, to crush within their respective States any petty predatory gangs which might 
‘become a nucleus for future mischief. These arrangements, rendered efficacious by. very 
simple measures adopted on our recommendation, produced to. the Sovereigns, as well as to 
the subjects throughout those populous regions, a comfort to which every British individual 
who has traversed that part of India will bear witness. A more formal testimony is .on 
record. When Major-General Sir David Ochterlony was to quit Delhi, in order to assume 
‘the superintendence of our relations with the Rajpoot States, he: was directed to make an 
‘extensive tour through those territories, in order that he might inform the Government at 
‘Calcutta what had really been the practical result of our endeavours to meliorate their 
‘condition. A copy of his account is annexed to this document. The nature of the statement 
admits no loose representation; it is an official report, to. the accuracy of which the character 
‘of the-officer is pledged. isnt: 
The campaign closed with our having acquired undisputed sway over every portion of 
India: the States which had not profegsedly subscribed to our sovereignty (Gwalior and 


Bhurtpore) being, in truth, thence the most entirely subjected to our pleasure, since they were | 


unable to hesitate about compliance with any suggestion;. while our interference, on what- 
.ever plea of public necessity, would not be limited by those reservations which we had 
defined in favour of the feudatory sovereigns.. This advantage for the Honourable Compan 
greatly enhanced, ‘by its having been attained at a price in blood and treasure short of all 
probability, when the operations were on so vast a scale, that some of the corps directed to 
a common centre and object, had been aie from stations distant not less oan ut iade 
2 ae undre 


4 


APPENDIX, 


. 


‘Lord Hastingy 
Summary. ' 


Appenpix, 
II. 


‘Lord Hastings’ 


Summary. 


‘line of practical application, departure from which wou 


140 APPENDIX ‘ro REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


e - ° 
hundred miles from each other. The dissipation of a serious conspiracy, and the uniting 
almost every Native power with our interests, were still not the only grounds of satisfaction. 
The important degree in which, as represented by Sif David Ochterlony, the population of 
the Raj states, amounting to®some millions, was benefited by the procedure of the 
British Government, will excite lively gratification. That population, however, formed but 
a part of the immense mass rescued from misery. A lighter term cannot well be used, for 
the condition of those who had been exposed to the ravages pf the Pindarries. When it is 
recollected that the association in question consisted@ of above thirty thousand mounted men, 
all professedly subsisting upon plunder, the extent of theatre necessary to furnish an 
—— prey may be well conceived.. The whole of the Nizam’s subjects, as well as the 
inhabitants of the northern Circars of the Madras Presidency, were constantly exposed to 
devastation. It was not rapine alone, but unexampled barbarity, that marked the course of 
the spoilers. Their violation of the women, with circumstances of peculiar indignity, which 
made multitudes of the victims throw themselves into wells or burn themselves together in 
straw huts, was invariable; and they subjected the male villagers to refined tortures, in 
order to extract disclosure where their little hoards of money were buried. - From this 
scourge the territories to which I have alluded were freed by the annihilation of the Pin- 
darries ; and the value of the relief was manifested by the speedy re-occupation and cultivation 
of extensive districts in the Nizam’s dominions, which had for some years lain deserted by 
the former inhabitants. The extremity of despair, alone capable of making Hindoos aban- 
don their native seats, will be intelligible to all acquainted with India. Had it not been for 


‘the timely interposition, large tracts in the Company’s provinces would have been similarly 


depopulated. 
A security from external violence was not the only boon which the body of the inhabitants 
throughout Central India received fromthe British Government. The anarchy existing in 


‘the States now become feudatory, not only furnished a just pretension for reeommendin 
“arrangements, but made the chiefs unfeignedly resort to us for aid, in fixing the fundamenta. 
‘rules of their governments. Confined to their capitals, as they had nearly been for years, 


through the fear of being cut off by some pyedatory leader or by some of their own refrac- 
tory vassals, they were conscious of inability fo restore order in their disorganized dominions, 
an fear d frankly invited advice, which according to my directions was, in every case, so 
respectfully tendered by the British Agent, as not $o hazard 4 wound to pride. Hence it 
was easy, where no acknowledged usages stood in the way, to establish principles between 
the sovereign and. the subject advantageous to both; giving to those principles a defined 

Id_afford to either party the right of 
claiming the intervention of our paramount power. - While the sovereign had fis legitimate 
authority and his due revenue insured to him, the subject was protected agaist illicit 
exaction or tyrannical outrage. The main danger to this compact lay with the great vassals. 
They, however, were unequivocally apprised that any infraction on their part of the pro- 
mulgated regulations of the State would be immediately chastised by a British force, so that 
they had not to reckon on the weakness of. their sovereign for impunity in any unconsti- 
tutional combination. This could not be construed by them asanempty menace. A striking 


“example had been displayed to them: Two ‘chiefs dependant on Scindia, confiding in the 
‘strength of the fortresses held by them within his dominions, had disclaimed obedience to 


him, and remained contumacious, though summoned by us to submit themselves to their 


“sovereign. As a body of our troops were in the neighbourhood, I caused each of, the for- 


tresses to be besieged ; and as soon as they were surgendered, I put them into the hands of the 
‘Maharajah, without any demand for the expenses of their reduction. I was guided by two 
‘considerations ; first, that chiefs destitute of revenue could not maintain garrisons without®’ 
a licence to their men for plundering, which would renew the system I had been eradicating ; 
‘secondly, that Scindia might, from their unchecked insubordination, pretend equal inability 
to control others of his vassals, thereby escaping the responsibility which I meant to fix 
upon him for the maintenance of tranquillity. The measure evinced so clearly the sincerity 

of our intention to uphold the Maharajah’s Government, that it won him.te decided reliance 

, ae * . upon 


GENERAL APPENDIX. 141 


-upon us, and induced him to meet unhesitaungiy many propositions relative to general con- 


venience, which he would otherwise have regarded with jealousy. In particular, I-obtained 
his acquiescence to the gi es up for a further term. the contingent of five thousand 
horse, paid by him, but subject to our requisition arid direction. This force he had 
been bound by an article of.the treaty to furnish towards the extirpation of the 
Pindarries. One of the Company’s officers was attached to this corps, ander the 
semblance of securing that jts number and efficiency should answer to the terms 
of the engagement; but the. Sirdgr ostensibly Sy puprney Cras body ‘left, with his 
master’s assent, the complete guidance of it in the field to the British officer. Scindia had 
evaded producing this contingent yntil after the destruction of the Pindarries. To compen- 
sate for such a delay, which I affected to consider as accidental, I pressed that the corps 
should be employed in extinguishing certain mischievgus associations in Scindia’s territories. 
The description applied not only to some bands of arya’ robbers, but to a particular class 
denominated Thugs. This nefarious fraternity, amounting by the best information to above 
a thousand individuals, was scattered through different villages, often remote from each 
other ; yet they pursued, with a species of concert, their avocation. This was the making 


-excursions to distant districts, where, under the appearance of journeying along the high 


roads, they endeavoured to associate themselves with travellers, by either obtaining leave 
to accompany them, as if for protection, or when the permission was refused, keeping near 
them on the same pretext. Their business was, to seek an opportunity of murdering -the 
travellers when. asleep or off their guard. In this three or four could combine, without hav- 


ing given suspicion of their connexion. Though personally unacquainted, they had signs and * 


tokens by which each recognised the other as of the brotherhood; and their object. bein 


. understood without the necessity of verbal communication, they shunned,all speech with eac. 


other, till the utterance of a mystical term or twoeannounced the favourable moment and 
claimed common effort. Scindia’s tolerance of an evil so perfectly ascertained, merely 
because the assassinations were seldom committed within his own dominions, may afford a 
tolerable notion of the vitiation of society in Central India before this late convulsion. There 
is reason to believe, that by this time the pest ih qugstion has been rooted out; which, with the 
suppression of some bodies of horsemen under military adventurers (a service completely 
achieved by the contingents) will be no less a benefit to Scindia’s own government than the 
adjacent countries. These changes having been effected, no excuse remained with Scindia 
why he should not be answerable for any aggressions suffered by his neighbours from parties 
assembled within his territories. To counterbalance the bond thus imposed upon him, he 
received signal advantages. It is true, he was hemmed round by States leagued with each 
other.and with us; so that, still possessing considerable military means, he could not under 
take a war without entailing destruction on himself: but he was incomparably more master 
over his own Sirdars, or leaders of divisions, than he had ever before been, since, if dis- 
missed from his service, they could not debauch the troops which they commanded, through 
the confidence of supporting them by the plunder of other countries: and he had ‘gained 
materially in point of revenue, both as to amount and as to certainty of receipt. A number 
of insulated patches in Malwa, forming a very valuable aggregate, had belonged to the 
Peishwah, and by right of conquest devolved to us. Few of those small possessions would 


be annexed to territories which we meant to retain. Such of them as were contiguous to _ 
‘States where it was our interest to give additional a were gratuitously transferred to 


those governments. Where any of them lay between the body of Scindia’s dominions and 
some detached district of his, so as that by the cession we could connect those territories, we 
made over our rights to the Maharajah by exchanges, which were always extraordinarily 
profitable to him. — It was highly gratifying to me, that in this mode I was enabled to bestow 
on the Nawaub of Bhopaul a splendid reward for the liberality with which-he had sold all 
his jewels to maintain troops in aid of our exertions. The fortress and territory of Islamnug- 
gur had been the original possession of his family. In the lifetime of his father, Scindia’s 
predecessor had obtained it, through the treachery of the officer to whom it was entrusted, 


and the strength of the fortress rendered hopeless any endeavour to regain if by siege. This 
: ‘ possession, 


APPENDIX, 


Lord Hastings’ 
Summary. 


ApPENnpix, 


IT. 


‘Lord Hastings’ 
Summary. 


142° APPENDIX ro REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


possession, widely separated from the territories of Gwalior, we acquired from Scindia, by 
giving him in exchange districts greatly superior in value, as well as adjoming to the body 
of his dominions ; and then we conferred it on the ‘Nawaub of Bhopaul, as a free gift, to 
recompense his gallant manifestation of gratitude for the protection his country had received 
in the crisis of the Nepaul war. The Henourable Company will no doubt approve the policy 
of such am exhibited proof, that attachment to -their government was an advantageous 
course. In other instances, the exchange was rarely territory for territory. Many of the 
neighbouring States acknowledged tribute as du@ from them to the Maharajah of Gwalior. 
It had been a Black Mail, by which they purchased’ an exemption, ill observed, from preda- 


" tory incursions. Length of usage, however, had given to these payments a colour of right. . 


I desired to extinguish them,. that Scindia might not have a motive or plea for regular com- 
munication with those governmepts, gnd I proposed to him that he should accept land in 
lieu of them, where I could allot tg him: any tract contiguous to his old possessions. This 
-was agreed upon, with large amount of surplus of yearly income to him on each exchange 
and where the annihilation of the tribute could not be managed on those terms, it was settled 
‘that we'should regularly pay the sums to Scindia as they became due, on his transfer of the 
tributary claims'to us. This is noticed, not merely as explaining the precautions taken by 
us for the future quiet of Central India, but also for the purpose of introducing mention of a 
circumstance so descriptive of Mahratta principles, as to show the impossibility of reckoning 
upen tranquillity im India, with a less complete revolution than what we effected. Scindia’s 
minister appearing not wholly satisfied with the arrangement to which the Maharajah had 
subscribed, it was represented to him that the gain was unquestionable; since, where his 
sovereign had received land, there was a material accession of territory, as well as a great 
increase of income,ebeyond the rate of the tribute, while, in the other cases, Scindia never 
could have levied the tributes for which we had agreed to furnish the -eomposition, his 
marching troops through the States dependant on us being interdicted. “True,” replied the 
minister, “there is a visible immediate profit, but then there is the loss of an advantage which 
“we Mahrattas think inestimable, that of having a finger in every man’s dish,” 

All the vices of administration which.reigned in Scindia’s dominions, existed no less 
rootedly within the Poona State and that of Nagpore. The population, therefore, in each of 
those States, as likewise in Holkar’s territory, was extraordinarily benefited*by the issue of 
the contest. In the districts which were retained efor the Honourable Company, the regular 
paney of our rule superseded the capricious oppression of the antecedent sway ; but even in 
the dominions restored to: native princes, our example and advice established a tone of 
government altogether unknown before. The general view of policy embraced by us had 
been to uphold, as much as possible, the ancient authorities, Shee we could prevent their 
being hereafter dangerous ; and our principle was, to confirm titles as we found them, with- 
out admitting retrospects which could never be satisfactorily determined. One obvious ex- 
ception to this plan presented itself. The Peishwah, Bajee Rao, could never be trusted, 
after his original perfidy in unprovokedly forming a wide conspiracy for the extirpation of the 
British, and after his subsequent attempt to overwhelm and massacre the, British Resident 
stationed at his court under the pledge of his protection. This criminality of Bajee Rao’s | 
was aggravated by the murder, in cold-blood, of British officers who -were travelling in his 
dominions without suspicion of impending rupture. A more imperious consideration, how- 
ever, presented itself. We had experienced in the conduct of Toolsye Bhye (the Regent of 

Hotkar’s State), and in that of Appah Sahib, Rajah of Nagpore, that no acts of personal 
kindness, no obligations of plighted faith, no conviction of almost inevitable ruin, could 
weigh with the Mahratta chiefs against the professed bond of obedience to the heads of 
their tribes. It was evident that, were such an ostensible superiority to be revived, any 
compact with Mahratta princes must be nugatory towards the future tranquillity of India. 
“It was indispensable to divorce those sovereigns from acknowledged community of interest. 
To have put the Sattara family in possession of the Poona dominions would have been to . 
create a new leader of the Mahratta confederacy, in whom would have vested all that influ- 
ence which we had found capable of being’ so dangerously exerted against us. It was 
matter 


- GENERAL APPENDIX. | 143 


matter of the clearest self-defence, not to resuscitate such a power?’ Bajee Rao’s dominions ' 
were, therefore, declared forfeited. The profligacy of his conduct.towards us justly merited 


that punishment. At the time, howevef, of his surrender, -he had bargained that he should _ , 


not be kept in close confinement, and that he should..have a handsome allowance for his 
support. These stipulations have been construed. with-the liberality due to his former emi- 
nence. He resides at a station on the Ganges fixed’ upon by himself, under the sofe restric- 
tion that he shall not move thence without the assent of the British Government; a limitation 
so little embarrassing to him in practice, that he has been repeatedly permitted to visit places 
at which he wished to offer his devotions, though the distance might amount to two hundred 
miles. In these progresses he has.geceived from every military post the salutes and atten- 
tions customary towards a prince;’**On his marches and at his residence he is surrounded by 
his own guards, amounting to about four hundred, horsg and foot, among whom he adminis- 
ters justice in all cases not capital. Beyond his allowange of one hundred thousand pounds, 
yearly, he is in possession: of several camel-loads of treasure, which have never, been 
examined, so that he and his two wives can display any degree of splendour they may wish 
to exhibit. In short, his situation is as dignified as it can be made, consistently with our 
security and with the necessary superintendence of a Commissioner, who observes towards 
‘him every exhibition of respect. His brother, Chimnajee, resides at Benares on a more 
moderate, but still generous stipend. To the Sattara Rajah an independent territory has 
been assigned out of the late Peishwah’s possessions. It yields a large revenue, competent 
to. the maintenance of considerable pomp: an extraordinary change of position for one who 
used to be kept in strict custody, with a knowledge that the guards set over him had Bajee 
Rao’s orders to put him and his family to death, on any probability of his being delivered ; 
a command, the execution of which was prevented by the sudden dispersion of his escort, 
and capture of his person, achieved by our cavalry at the battle of Ashta. Holkar, a hope 
“less fugitive, was recalled, and established as sovereign of a territory really producing more, | 
from the beneficial administration introduced, than had ever before reached the coffers of the 
Government. The districts of which he was jneminal deprived, to form the independent 
territory of Ameer Khan, the feudatory allotment for Guffoor Khan, and a little addition to 
the Rajah of Kotah, had in fact been irrecoverably alienated, and were held by those chief- 
tains with a force which would render any attempt by Holkar’s government to dispossess 
them, idle. The Guickwar had-not beengnvolved in the conspiracy, and he profited, as a 
friend, by oug bestowal to him of some lands and rights in the province of Guzerat, which 
had appertained to Bajee Rao. Appa Sahib, the expelled Rajah of Nagpore, is the only 
individual of the Mahratta sovereigns remaining to be accounted for. When he stood in a 
perilous condition, from his pony to the rule of that country and the jealousy which the 
reigning prince entertained of him, we secured his life by our avowed protection. The sub- 
sequent decline of that reigning prince’s intellect into complete idiotcy, made it necessary for 
the British Government to use that privilege of interposition, to which we had entitled our 
selves by a recent treaty. The Rajah was taken out of the hands of some low wretches, 
whom he had collected to amuse him while he had yet a sense of volition, and who under 
his name were pillaging the treasures of the state; and the Regency was placed in the hands 
of Appa Sahib. The egent, availing himself of the facility which his situation afforded, 
caused the Rajah to be poisoned, lest he should adopt a:'son who might, notwithstanding 
the Rajah’s incapacity of choice, find support from some party in the state. The crime was 
suspected ; but as there was not then any thing like proof of it, the surmise could not stand 
_ in the way of Appa Sahib’s accession to the musnud or throne, so that he was immediately 
Yecognised by us as the lawful head of the Government. Our further intercourse was a suc- 
cé&sion of favours lavished by us, till the Peishwah resorted to arms. At that epoch Appa 
Sahib, with the basest treachery, endeavoured to destroy the Resident, by an atjack which 
he hoped would be unexpected. Being foiled im the attempt, and intimidated by the 
approach of large bodies of our troops, he opened a secret negotiation with the Resident, 
offering to withdraw from his army, which he would order to separate into quarters, and to 
Tepose himself entirely on the Resident, were he assured that his exercise of his sovereign 
power 


e 
AprEenpix, 


Lord Hastings’ 
Summary. 
% a 


¥ e es 
Aprenpix, 
* 
Lord Hastings’ 
Summary. - 


144. APPENDIX to REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


power should be undiminished. The proposal was accepted, on Appa Sahib’s solemnly 
plighted faith, that he would not seek to aid the Peishwah, whom we were pressing closely in 
the field, or hold any communigation with him. The army of the Rajah did not disperse, 
but on the coritrary stood an action under the walls of the capital, thereby affording ground 
for suspicion that Appa Sahib had taken the double chance of resting upon us, should his 
forces be'defeated, or of rejoining them should they be victorious. Notwithstanding the 
doubt unavoidably excited, the route of the Rajah’s troops made it appear our most desira- 
ble course to pouhtin him in his professed good Aisposition, by seeming to give the fullest 
credit to his sincerity. While we were thus encouraging him, we obtained unquestionable 
proof of his being in correspondence with the Peishwah, and of his having’ solicited that 
pene to hasten with his army to Nagpore, where his Highness would be joined by the 
‘Nagpore forces, broken for the moment, but not e&tirpated. Pursuant to this invitation, 
the Peishwah marched in the dire@tion of Nagpore, and was joined by the portion of the 
Rajah’s troops which happened to have retired in the vicinity of that line. As the machina- 
tions of the Rajah now became seriously dangerous, his arrest was indispensable. It took 
place accordingly, when one of his principal ministers, who was seized at the same 
time, openly reproached him for the ingratitude and folly of the conduct, whereb 
his Highness had involved both of them in such disgrace. He asked the Raja 
‘whether he would deny his (the minister’s) having earnestly and repeatedly sup- 
plicated his Highness to abstain from the perfidious intrigues into which he was plunging 
himself. Appa Sahib admitted the truth of the minister’s assertion, saying, moreover, that 
he had been aware of the probable ruin attending his procedure, but that his bond of 
‘obedience to his chief, the Peishwah, was above all other considerations. Orderg were 
issued for the Rajah being sent to a fortress on the banks of the Ganges, where he was to 
be for the present detained, but with respectful treatment. The British officer commanding 
the escort was instructed not to subject the Rajah to restraints, which might be humiliating 
without being absolutely necessary for preventing his escape. This desire on the part of 


‘Government was construed by the offfcer with, such latitude that he left to the Rajah the 


means of getting away. Appa Sahib betook himself to a hilly province of his country, 


‘where he collected a considerable body of mountaineers, and called on the inhabitants in 


general to rise in his favour: this made it expedient for us to lose no time in establishing 
a new Government. The members of the reigning family, and the principal persons of the 
state, were consulted. They unanimously recommended the nearest of blood m the Bhoosla 


‘(the Rajah’s) family for the succession, and he was raised to the musnud in the room of Appa 


Sahib, we retaining the tract along the Nerbudda which had fallen to us after the action at 
Jubbulpore, and which was necessary for the continuity of our territory. The countty has 
since remained in quiet and prosperity under this arrangement. Appa Sahib, forced from 
his strong holds, fled to Asseergurh, where he was secretly received by Jeswunt Rao Lar, 
‘the Governor, who had long instigated his opposition to us.’ Not caring to abide by the 
fate of the fortress, when our troops advanced to besiege it, he quitted it im disguise, and 
‘made his way to Runjeet Sing in Lahore. The latter could not, according to Indian habits, 
refuse him shelter; but well understood, that the granting this refuge to the Ex-Rajah could 
not be offensive to us,,and would not need explanation, if he (Runjeet Sing) prevented the 
Ex-Rajah from collecting any body of armed-adherents. Appa Sahib has, therefore, remained 
in the territories of Runjeet Sing, subsisting on a slender allowance granted to him by that 
chief, and strictly watched, though not declaredly a prisoner. Thus the ‘condition of the 
‘several Mahratta states has been pourtrayed» Each is hemmed round and effectually 
“shackled, partly by the Honourable Company’s possessions, partly by ‘Patan or Rajpgot 
-states of considerable strength, and bound to us by the clearest community of interest. The 
eacé of Central India seems well secured, while the extension of our paramountship to thie 
{Indus has a bearing which ‘shall be noticed hereafter. He ; ; 
When a crisis altogether inevitable had occurred, and unprovoked malignity had imposed 
upon us 4 struggle, not for preponderance, but for the retention of any footing in Indias the 
‘having riseti superior tp the danger, even at heavy cost, would be:a rational ground for self- 
a gratulation. 


GENERAL APPENDIX, "145, 


a 
gratulation. In proportion as the effort had made a recurrence of similar hazard less pro- 
bable, the. charges suffered would be lighty regarded. Should a further advantage have 
‘been acquired ; should a large addition to the annual revenue of the Honourable Company 
follow the removal of the peril which had impended, an& attend the substantiation ofan 
arrangement precluding, as far as human calculations can go, all likelihood of convulsion for 
many years, little might appear remaining to be wished,-and the pecuniary sacrifice at which 
such a position was purchased would not be very strictly considered. The satisfaction, 
however, may admit an ingredient regderiag it more complete.- The bettered condition of 
several millions of the natives, whence our supremacy has been spontaneously and joyfully 
acknowledged by tne great bulk of,the inhabitants, is a pride for the Honourable Company’s 
reflection as well as a security for its interests. It is, y 
I proceed to show, that in the attainment of points every way so important, the Honourable 
Company has not been put to the expense of a single chilis. a 

' Lest any doubt should be suggested on the comparative statements which I intended to 
submit, I required specific answers on certain heads from those public functionaries in India 
immediately charged with the financial details. The letter in the Appendix, signed by the 
Secretary to Government in the Revenue department and by the Accountant-General, is 
evidence equally precise and irrefragable. Each separate exposition which I offer will be 
verified by reference to that document. To be more generally understood, I convert their 
sums of rupees into English sterling. In doing this, the Sicca rupee is estimated at tevo 
shillings and sixpence; because, although that be not the rate at which it is at present 
receivable in England, it is better to take the computation according to which former accounts 
have been discussed in Parliament, than to look to a fluctuating exchange ; while the assumed 
value of the coin is of no consequence in the comparison of sums at different periods, since 
the same rate is made applicable to each. e . 

- The financial year of India commences on the first of May; of course, closes with the 
soth April. Having arrived at Calcutta late in 1813, I regard my financial management 
as having commenced on the first of May 1814¢ thateis, with the beginning of the official 
year 1814-15. On that day the registered Indign debt stood at rupees 21,31,92,502, or 
£. 26,649,052. 15s. ot ‘ . “ 

On the 30th April 1821 the registered debt stood at rupees 25,85,06,549, or £. 32,313,318 
12s. 6d. There was, consequently, an, augmentation of the public debt amounting to 
£.5,664,255, 175. 6 d. Se 

This amount is taken on the 30th April 1821, at which date the increase of debt was at its 
highest; a subsequent operation in finance imvolving the possibility that portions have been 
liquidated at home with money remitted for the eventual purpose, and rendering it imprac- 
ticable to state the point with certainty at a later period. It is now to be seen what was.on 
the same day to be set in the opposite scale to that increased burthen. Sin, 

The cash balance is the money remaining in the different treasuries of the three Presi- 
dencies after' the demands of the official year are defrayed. The aggregate cash balance. of 
the three Presidencies, or Indian cash balance as it is called, amounted on the 30th April 

* 1814 to rupees 4,80,67,149; that is, £.6,008,393. 12s. 6d. 

On the 80th April 1821 the Indian Cash Balance amounted to rupees 9,78,62,227, or 
£.12,232,778. 7s. Gd. 

This latter sum exceeds the sum in hand on the 30th April 1814, by £. 6,224,384, 15s. 

It appears by the abdve account, that on the 30th April.1821, the addition of cash accu- 
mulated in the treasuries exceeded the addition made to the registered debt, by more than 
five hundred and sixty thousand pounds; so that, upon that day, I could have wiped off the 
whole of the additional debt incurred during my administration, and have left the public coffers 
richer by above half a million than I found them.. Though the rapid increase of,our income 
might seem to recommend this measure, while there would have been a striking effect for 
myself, I could not reconcile my mind to a step which I conceived essentially objectionable. 
The augmented value of the Government securities in the market could not affect us-as far 
as respected loss, since we had it at our option to ceaee the bonds at par : “but I oe 

ag nty 


most confidently believe, so felt. . 


AvrenSry, 
Al. 


Lord Hastings’ 
Summary. 


Ap feNDIX, 
II. 


Lord Hastings” 
Summary. 


446° APPENDIX ro REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


"highly impolitic (and I remain firm in the opinion) to break a tie which so obviously secures 


the attachment of the monied class to our Government, in a country where that class has 
peculiar influence.. Latterly I have had reason to betieve that the Native Prinees have fallen 
into the habit of vesting their m8ney in those securities; a motive the more for them: to 
abstain from intrigues against us. ‘ The periodical discharge of the interest never can be an 
embarrassment to Government ;. nor is the magnitude of the debt objectionable in any other 
respect, when the high ‘premium: which these bonds commgand distinctly proves, that the 
‘number afloat scarcely suffices for the convenieace gf our native subjects. When I left 
India, the premium on those bonds, the interest of which was payable in Calcutta alone, 
fluctuated between fourteen and sixteen per cent.; a matgrial difference from the regular dis- 
count of twelve per cent., at which I found them. Although the accommodation of our native 
‘ subjects in such a depository for their money, and thedacilitation to commercial transactions 
advantageous for the Honourable ompany which such a convenience affords, be but a 
secondary consideration, it strengthens the argument for identifying the interest of a leading 
body of the natives with ours, by making such a proportion of their fortunes depend on our 
stability ; and I anxiously hope that these circumstances will be fully weighed, before any part 
of the accumulation shall be worse than wasted, by applying it according to theoretic rules, 
totally unsuitable to the present state of Indian affairs. The fact of such an accumulation . 
during a period of uncommon exertion must appear singular. The solution which might the 
most readily present itself would be, that. the Government in India had, throughout the term 
in question, at least narrowed, if not wholly withheld the usual supplies. to England. How 
that article stands has not been left to conjecture. For the twenty years preceding that 
which commenced on the 1st May 1813, the average of annual supplies from India to England 
(beyond those from.England to India) amounted to rupees 38,83,465, or £. 585,433. 2s. 6d. 
The average annual supply (similarly measured) from India to England, during the eight 


~ years from 30th April 1814 to 30th April 1822, was rupees 1,05,90,515, or £. 1,323,814. 7s. 6d. 


Had the comparison been drawn from what India contributed to England during the first 
five years after the 30th April 1814 (the year within which all the active operations were 
comprized), the result would have: been prodigiously more marked in favour of the local 
Government, It was, however, desirable to bring down the account to the latest day on 
which it would be made out; and thence a very extraordinary and unexpected charge came 
to be included in the description of supplies to Igdia. This shall presently be explained. 
It is first, however, expedient to notice, why the year 1813-14 'is not taken as one of twenty 
pours my administration, lest it should be thought that there was some advantage in 
eaving it out. The year could not, with any accuracy of definition, be numbered as pre- 
ceding my administrations, since during the half of it [ conducted public affairs: I was not 
entitled to assume for myself any merit for management in the earlier months, and in my 
portion of it I remitted to the Honourable Court a large sum in gold (I think about 


. £.300,000.) beyond the ordinary supplies, which sum is not admitted into the credit of my 


statement, and could not, of course, be correctly set against me. Hence the year was 
necessarily a neutral one as regarded the calculation. The secret of the accumulation is 
this. Though the military operations were of immense scale, there was great attention not 
to incur the charge of preparations, other than what were foreseen to be indispensable, and 
constant vigilance was exercised to prevent slatternly expenditure. From that care, the 
yearly income was sufficient to answer the additional demand of the war, and the produce 
of the loans remained in the treasury. The provision of cash from that resource has been 
so strongly urged as a measure of salutary precaution by those most experienced im the 
pecuniary. details of the Government, that I had through deference, though not without 
some doubt, assented: but when a loan was invited by the Council at Calcutta, while I wis 


_ at Cawnpoye, it appeared to me -so decidedly superfluous, that I requested the books 


might be closed as goon as possible. Luckily the accumulation of the sum has not entailed 

any inconvenience, and the money is available for the purposes of the highest importance. 
‘he occurrence to which } luded, as having affected in appearance the balance of 
supplies between England and India, was this. It was an article in the engagement, oe 
the 


GENERAL APPENDIX. . a 


the bond-holder should have the option of receiving the interest in India or from the 
Honourable Court in London, as might suit his convenience. That choice had been given 


to accommodate the British lender, it wever having entered into conception, that the native. 


‘bond-holder could resort to it. In the year 1819-20,°however, the course of exchange 
became heavily disadvantageous for Calcutta. The Eurepeans residing in the city-imme- 


diately perceived the means of profiting by the circumstance. By giving to ¢he native 


_bond-holders something more than would have been receivable at the treasury, they obtained 
from the former bills on the Honourable Qourt in London for the amount of interest due. 
This practice was carried to the extent of the whole debt, occasioning a loss of nearly 
twenty-two per cent. to the Honouyable Company, besides the inconvenience of having such 
_ amass of bills to meet. The abuse demanded instant remedy. When it has been shown 
how low was the credit of Government in 1813-14, our command of the money-market in 
1819-20 may be viewed with some surprise. It was so* complete, that Government was 
enabled to notify bonds to the amount of fifteen millions sterling for immediate liquidation, 
unless the holders would exchange them for new bonds, the interest of which should be 
demandable in Calcutta alone. The new bonds were invariably accepted by persons on the 
spot. An adequate term was allowed to agents to take the pleasure of their principals at 
home, as to beiig paid off, or ceding their title to receive the interest in England; and it is 
this which prevented the state of the debt from being particularized later than the 30th April 
1821. It is obvious that it might be lower on a subsequent day, but could not in the 
interval have received addition. Bonds of a date posterior to those notified as above could 
not be dealt with exactly in the same manner, for Government feared-to produce distress, 
- by diminishing too much the means of remittance. To the holders of those bonds, the choice 
was given of receiving payment or of accepting new bonds, entitling the holder to exercise 
the option of demanding the interest at the Calcutta treasury, or of drawing on the 
Honourable Court for the amount, at the exchange of two shillings and a penny for the 
Sicca rupee instead of two shillings and sixpence. The.new bonds were almost generally 
taken, and I left them bearing a pean of fram eighteen to twenty per cent. The annual 
loss against which the Honourable Company has, been protected by this operation, for as 
long as a rate of exchange similar to the present may last, has been calculated at two 
hundred and fifty thousand pounds. ’ ; 

As a particular in the improved conditign of affairs in India, I mentioned the augmenta- 
tion which the Honourable Company’s revenue has received. The addition is not inconsi- 
derable. The joint receipt of the three Presidencies for the official year 1813-14, excluding 
items which did not arise from Indian sources of revenue, amounted to rupees 14,74,07,322, 
or £. 18,425,915. 5s. : . 

The receipt of 1821-22, restricted in the same manner, was rupees 18,88,09,832, or 
£. 23,601,229. : 

The income of the latter year, consequently, surpassed that of the year 1813-14 by 
£. 5,175,813. 15s. . : ° 

’ Had it not been for a peculiar oversight, the excess would have been much greater. To 
prevent interference with the Honourable Company’s trade in opium, we had made a treaty 
with the several independent chiefs in western Hindoostan, to purchase at a settled price the 
drug from them to the fullest extent in which they had respectively hitherto produced it, 
prohibiting thé admission of any quantity beyond that amount into our territories. As the 
possessions of the chiefs in question were contiguous to the Bombay Presidency, that Go- 
vernment was requested to manage the sale for export of the opium so acquired. From 
being unaccustomed to the arrangement, the Bombay Government made its terms, that the 
whole price for the optum of 1821-22 sold by it should be payable in May 1822, thereby 
excluding that article of income from the official year to which it fitly belonged. As the 
amount was thirty-eight lacs of rupees (or four hundred and seventy-five thousand pounds 


| Appenbix, 
iI ; 


"Lord Hastings’ - 
Summary. 


sterling) the difference occasioned by its omission from the accounts of its proper year is . 


not, trifling. I have no hesitation in saying, that the income of the current year 1822-23, 
may be anticipated as exceeding by six millions sterling that of 1813-14." This increase 
U2 ought 


e e 
APPENDIX, 


Lord Hastings’ 
Summary. 


148° APPENDIX ro REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


° : 

ought to be still further progressive, because wnile none of the sources hitherto productive 
are likely to become less so, but on the contrary exhibit every promise of yielding more, 
there is a deduction which must in its nature be annually diminishing in operation, till at 
length it-shall wholly cease. In the territory of Poona, for instance, in order to secure ace 
quiescence in the extraordinary change which we were effecting, life tenures in lands were 
either confirmed or granted to men of. influence, to the extent of fifty-one lacs, or £. 637,500. 
annually. These are interceptions from the receipt; and it,is to be observed, that all the 
comparisons submitted by me refer not to calculabde ingome but to actual receipt. Life-rents 
of this kind must successively (many of them speedily) fall in, and swell the sum paid into 
the Honourable Company’s coffers. Tenures of the samg description, though not so numer- 
ous, had been granted when Lord Lake subdued the territories around Delhi, and such of 
them as are still outstanding are subject to similar lapse. 

Were this increase of receipfs accompanied by an’ exactly corresponding increase of 
charges, still it would not cease to be an advantage to Britain. It would not be a direct 
gain for the Honourable Company, though much profit from it would, through circuitous 
channels, reach the coffers of that body. I should thence have been little satisfied, had 
I not been able to provide for the safe and undisturbed retention of our newly-acquired ter- 
ritories, on terms which would ensure to the Honourable Company a constant and ample sur- 
plus. After revolving every circumstance with the coolest caution, I cannot find any reason 
why, subsequently to the present year, an annual surplus of four millions sterling should not 
be confidently reckoned upon. This ought naturally to increase; for, the-causes which will 
augment the receipt have nothing in them tending to require further charges. 

Whatsoever melioration the affairs of the Honourable Company may have experienced, 
such efforts of mine as contributed towards it were no more than simply my duty. The 
tenour of my engagement implied, in my construction, my plighted honour, to use my unre- 
mitting exertions for the advantage of those who placed their reliance upon me; and the 
critical nature of any unforeseen objects towards which those exertions could become de- © 
manded, be the risk of my decision what it night, was of course within our mutual under- 
standing. I have, therefore, no merit to glaim, beyond the consciousness of having indefa- 
tigably endeavoured to fulfil that to which, I felt myself pledged. At the same time, I may 
be" permitted to avow my exultation at having been able to conciliate, with the strictest dis- 
charge of my trust, the bettered condition of an, immense population; a circumstance in 
which I regard the character and interest of our country to have gained much. I believe it 
an honest boast, to have been even such an humble instrument as I was in the effectuation of 
that end. Still, the vanity of contributing towards so proud a purpose, might seduce me to 
pay less attention than was due to my more immediate obligation. Thence, I will beg leave 
to recapitulate the points of benefit for the Honourable Company which I consider as estab- 
lished, that if I have been anywhere deficient, the particular neglect may at once be seized. 

Ist. The overweening insolence and hostility of Nepaul, a power dangerous from its posi- 
tion along an extensive and open frontier of ours, has been so completely chastened, as to 
make that people sensible they can only retain their independence as a state through the | 
moderation of the British Government. — 

2d. The Pindarry association, a dreadful scourge to every neighbouring community, and 
stead afflictive to the Honourable Company’s subjects, has been annthilated ; and the 

ruitless armual expense of protective measures against those depredators, together with fre- 
quent heavy loss of revenue, is henceforth precluded. 

3d. A confederacy, aiming at no less than thg total extirpation of the British from India, 
has been so thoroughly subverted, that not a germ is left for its reproduction. ~ . 

4th. Throughout the term. of an administration, during which such unprecedented demands ° 
for services pn the spot were to be met, the Honourable Court has received, on an average, 
annual supplies from India (beyond the amount of supplies from England to India) nearly 
trebling the rate of supplies furnished to it on the average of twenty years preceding. For 


five years-of my administration which demanded most extraordinary effort in India, ,the 


supplies nearly quintupled the former example. | 
4th. The 


GENERAL APPENDIX. .- 149 


Sth. The yearly Indian revenue of the Honourable Company from permanent sources, 
displayed at the close of the last official year an increase of five millions one hundred and 
seventy-five thousand pounds sterling, by actual receipt. For reasons assigned, that increase 
is expected to amount, in the present year, 1822-23, to six millions. There is no probability 
that it should hereafter sink below that rate; but there is every just ground to reckon upon 
its progressive augmentation. 


6th. The clear Indian surplus to be henceforth exhibited is estimated by me at four mil- 


tions sterling yearly. It will probably begmore ample. 

7th. The Honourable Court has been, with a material saving, delivered from an embar- 
rassing provision of the conditions of former loans; while the justice of the operation was so 
‘distinctly recognized, that the credit of the Honourable Company’s Indian securities has risen . 
to a pitch which no speculation could ever have presumed, : 

8th. In the year 1813-14, the mdependent powers*of Iftdia were so numerous and strong 
as to conceive themselves equal to expel the British ;®at present every native state in that 
vast region is in either acknowledged or essential subjugation to our Government.: 

Lastly. These advantages are not counterbalanced by any burthens contracted in’ the 
acquiring them; because there is, at this instant, an accumulation of cash in the treasuries 
beyond what I set out with, more than sufficient to wipe off the additional debt incurred 
during my administration, were it wise so to employ the money. 

The credit sought for this flourishing condition of the finances might be fallacious. The 
exposition is delusive and unworthy, if the plenitude of the coffers be owing to the produce 
of novel and grinding taxes, or to Government’s having kept back from the country those 
issues of money, which every community is entitled to expect shall be applied by its rules in 
furtherance of public convenience. As to the first, it suffices to say that not a smgle new 
impost took place during my administration, while, several teasing demands were abolished, 
as well in the old provinces as in the acquired territories. Itegarding the second, I have 
reason to hope that I cannot be charged with having neglected those facilitations to commer- 
cial intercourse, and those encouragements to agricujtural activity, which I knew would be 
consonant to the just and liberal spirit of the Honourable Company. Readiness of commu- 
nication is, in every country, the chief spur to ndfistry. Roads, of which many approach to 
completion, are in progress, under the superfntendence of the Quartermaster-General’s 
department; and as I do not recollect any of the branches to be of much less extent than 
two hundred miles, with numerous bridges over streams heretofore often impassable for long , 
terms, through the casual swelling of the waters, the degree of accommodation to be thus 
afforded to the inhabitants would be thought important in any part of the world. It is pecu- 
liarly so in Central India, where the prevalence of clayey soil makes the tracks which the 
natives denominate roads frequently impracticable, for even their light carriages, during the 
rainy reason. The transportation of goods has been further promoted by attention to’ canals ; 
though in the latter, an utility has been consulted, far beyond the despatch of articles to 
a distant market. The canal of Ah Murdhun, after beimg devoid of water, and its banks 
,' every where prostrated for above three score ear has been perfectly restored. The city of 

Delhi, although situated on the banks of the Jumna, was destitute of wholesome water. The 
river, in those alterations common to all the greater streams in their course through the wide 
plein of Northern India, had come into contact with such vast beds of natron, that its water 

ecame powerfully impregnated with the salt, and consequently nauseous. ‘To remedy the 
distress, Ali Murdhun conceived the grand design of forming a canal, which should receive 
a large portion of the stream of the Jumna where it issues pure from the mountains into the 
plain, and should convey it to the Mogul Capital. This was achieved. The extensive tract 
through which it passed had been chiefly untilled, because in most parts the wells sunk in it 
fartished only water so saturated with natron, as to be unfit to drink and adverse to vegeta- 
tion. The facility’of irrigating the land with the water of the canal soon colletted settlers 
and produced, cultivation, so that a large expanse, till then desert, displayed the most luxu-_ 
riapt fertility. The gratitude of the inhabitants bestowed on the canal the expressive title of 
“Sea of Plenty.” The feelings of the people of Delhi, on the restoration ofthis canal, my 
nS ’ ‘ ane e 


’ 


ApPrERDIX, 


Lord Hastings’ 
Summary, 


@ 
APPENDIX, 


"Lord Hastings’ 
Sunmary. 


150 APPENDIX ro REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


e e 
be judged, from the fact that, on the day fixed for removing the last intercepting mound, and 
suttering the water to proceed to the city, the whole of them went forth to hail the boon, by 
throwing garlands and sweetmeats into the advancing current. A long branch from this 
most useful work had formerly, utder the name of Feroze Shah’s Canal, been pushed into 
the province of Hurreeana. Its supply was lost inthe destruction of the magnificent source 


‘ whence it shad been fed, and its course remained but partially traceable. At the time of my 


departure from India, this canal was nearly re-established ; every mile of its progress. being 
‘attended with revived teeming cultivation, in a regjon which had been abandoned. A third 
canal, which runs longitudinally through the Dooab, and had been constructed in ancient 
times to accommodate a country where streams were scarce, was also in process of restoration 
when I sailed.. Calcutta was, naturally, not overlooked by me., The causes of the insalu~ 
brity of the city had been carefully -investigated and.ascertained. Contagious distempers 
were unavoidably generated, by the eXcessive closeness with which the houses of the natives 
were huddled together in the hearf® of the city, and the numerous small pools of stagnant 
water concealed among those hovels. Large sums having been advanced to the Committee 
of Improvement, a well-considered plan was adopted for correcting both the unhealthiness 
and the inconveniences. The main remedy lay in piercing Calcutta through the centre, i 
its longest diameter, with a street sixty feet wide. The ventilation of the city, as well as the 
comfort of the inhabitants, was further promoted, by making several squares, withw tank or 
spacious reservoir of water in the middle of each, to be surrounded by planted walks for the 
recreation of the better classes.’ These improvements, however, still, as to ornament and 
convenience, fall short in comparison with the quay called the Strand, destined to extend 
upon the river bank along the city between two and three miles. Much of it is already 
finished, to a height, of about forty feet above low-water-mark, with many gauts, or broad 
flights of stairs, or the accommodation,of the natives in the bathing prescribed by their 
religion, as well as for the landing of goods. Being sixty feet clear at the top, this quay 
will afford great facilitation for the carriage of articles from the shipping to all parts ‘of the 
city. There is another work, which, though pot actually begun,*is fitting to be noticed here. 
Dangerous shoals between the mouth of the Hooghly and Calcutta prevent all ships of con- 
siderable size from coming up to the city; and merchant vessels, of but moderate bulk, are. 
exposed to no little risk in the attempt. At the same time, the violent squalls, and the Bore 
to which the Hooghly is liable, render.the despatch of cargoes back and forward by the river 
sloops, tardy and hazardous. As a remedy bor this difficulty, it has been proposed to form 
from Caleutta to the new anchorage, where the great ships ordinarily moor, a canal competent 
to be navigated by those sloops. A survey having been made by my direction, the plan 
appeared securely and speedily feasible; partly by cuts, partly by availing ourselves of 
favourable reaches in different small rivers. -The length would be about ninety miles. As 
the tolls would furnish a large interest for the money expended, I left upon record my 
opinion, that the undertaking should be earnestly recommended to the Honourable Court of 
Directors. Conviction may be felt from tliis statement, that the fostering attention which the 
Honourable Company would desire should be paid to the immense population over which it 
presides, has not been sacrificed to selfish interests. I do. not particularize the dissemination 
of instruction among the-natives, because atiy impulse which I could lend to its promotion 
was nothing, in measurement by the standard of those most meritorious and consecutive 
endeavours of others, whence visible and increasing impression has been widely made in the 
country. The point is mentioned only, lest I should leave myself open to the impression of 
not having adverted to a duty of such deep concern. —- : 
1 have ventured to suppose the interests of our country at large, as having been promoted 
by the recent settlement of India. In no way could I gratify the Honourable Company mort, 


, than in showing that it did not seek the enjoyment of an exclusive benefit, but prided itself 


' 


on reaping its advantages under the influence of our national prosperity. It is strictly accu- 
rate to cortemplate the case with this extended view. ,The concerns of the Honourable 
Company have, I trust, been solidly improved; but it has only been through arrangements 
which add directly to the power of Britain. . 1 am. prompted uot to let slip the opportunity 

- of: 


GENERAL APPENDIX. #51 Apyentis, 


of making the assertion, from my being aware that, except in a confined circle, ‘the affairs of ov 
India are insufficiently understood in England. The worth of so splendid an appendage to ' Lord Hastings 
the British crown is not adequately estimated. Strange as it may seem, I myself remember Summary. 
to have heard the argument vehemently supported .a few*years ago, that India was an in-* 

jurious drain to the Mother Country. "It is difficult to figure to one’s-self how so loose 

a notion had been adopted. Were we to rest on advantages of an inferior descripgion alone, 

our footing in India affords several to England, unbalanced, as far as I can judge, by any 
inconvenience. An honourable and dignifyed maintenance is provided for branches of many. 

respectable families, thereby removing a burthen from the patrimonial estate, with a prospect 

of ultimate wealth to uphold the name. Then let advertence be given to the fact, that 

almost every one of these functionaries renders assistance to some connexion or other at home. 

The remittances from his liberality, which is fully within my knowledge, may seem of little 

consequence; yet the aggregate of a number of streaihlets; constant in their course, cannot 

be indifferent, especially if the supply from those unobs€rved channels have an obvious ten- 

dency to aid that rapid circulation, which is the secret of general opulence in every country. 

But the magnitude of establishments in India, and that of the military force above the rest, 

has been censured. Perhaps it might. be worthy of reflection, that in proportion to the 

extent of those establishments, will be the scale of those unceasing silent contributions which 

I have described ;: while it is not to be forgotten, that this is not the return of English money 

to England. Whatsoever be the expense of the Indian establishments, the funds for them 

are all furnished from Indian sources. The supplies from England to India, mentioned in 

a former part of this detail, are only advances. made by the Honourable Court, chiefly in 

stores and other articles of consumption, which are repaid by India. An argument founded 

on this consideration would not be valid, if urged agamst any sound objegtion to the expense 

of the establishments, as wasteful or abusive. I know not on what ground the charges 

could justly be so represented. The numerical strength of civil servants has been regarded ' 


. by every one who has considered the subject, as far short of what the service demands. The 


* 


scale of the military force has not been hastily or carelessly determined. It is not in India 
merely necessary to measure the degree of forte requisite to guard against the possible ebul- 
litions of a population, and generally an armed population, which I believe to equal that of 
all Europe. It is indispensable to have stations throughout that wide expanse, which may 
assist the Native Princes in the control of their own soldiery, and thus enable them to fulfil 
their engagements, of keeping the roads in their respective dominions free from robbers ; 
a burthen for which we are amply compensated, by the activity and security of a trade pro- 
ductive to us in a variety of ways. The main consideration, however, still.remains to be ex- 
plained. There is in India a numerous class, by descent and by habit from early youth, 
professedly devoted to a military life. Individuals of this body rarely, and in small numbers, 
find means of subsistence in other situations, such as, according to the prejudices of the 
country, they can fill without disgrace. It is policy, nay more, it is economy, to have an 
adequate opening for the employment of such a proportion of the men in question, as that 
the residue, which cannot be taken into pay, may not be liable to form any where connexions 
requiring exertions and expenditure for their dissipation. ‘The particulars which must deter- 
mine the desirable.extent of force are so complicated and fluctuating, that eae should 
visibly be left to the prudence of the local Government. When the Honourable Court pressed 
military reduction upon me, I could only say that, with an ample force, I could ensure to the 
Honourable Company a revenue yielding a large surplus: should the force be rendered in- 
competent, I could not answer for satisfactory results in any shape. My notion of the proper 
scale may be erroneous, but the issue has not been unfavourable. 

‘ No one can be blind to the circumstance, that the magnitude of a force wholly supplied 
with arms, clothing and equipments, by the British manufacturer, involves somewhat of an 
intelligible set-off against the abstract objection of its burthen on the Indian finances. The. 
quality of that objection, however, is not precisely comprehensible. If it be said that, on the 
present footing, the large provision for the army intercepts sums which might otherwise aug- 
ment the dividends,-I should conceive that the Proprietors would not be milch..disposed 2 

ris 


e 
APPENDIX, 


Lerd Hastings’ 
Sommary. 


152” APPENDIX ro REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


tisk their actual advantages, upon the hazardous experiment of diminishing the force, by 
which advantages of such extraordinary present amount are now secured ; and the individuals 
interested are the most likely to form a salutary judgMent on their own concerns. Should it 
be said that, by the expenditure, the Honourable Company is insomuch the less able to dis- 
‘charge the territorial bonds due to the English creditor, the reasoning would, in the first 
place, gratuitously and improbably assume, that with a scanty force, an equal accumulation 
of surplus would be forthcoming to answer the debt: but I appeal to the proof already given, 
that every one of those creditors who wished for the liquidation of the fonds possessed by 
him, might have had them discharged immediately. The case, indeed, is hardly imaginable, _ 
that an individual would desire payment at par from the Company, when by exchanging his 
old bond for a new one he could, on the same day, sell his security at a great premium. 
Thence the instances in which the ngw bonds were rfot accepted have been simply those, 
where time was aliowed for referenge to a creditor in Europe, who had not left with any 
agent powers applicable to such a contingency. Every bond: that was purchased ten years 
ago in the market, and was transferred as above, became and remains worth a fourth more 
than was paid for it when so bought. This part of the subject cannot be dismissed without 
observing, that it is idle to regard as embarrassing, a debt which scarcely exceeds one’ 
year’s income of the state; the mterest of which, consequently, bears so small a proportion 
to that income, as to render the provision for it a matter of no possible inconvenience. The 
mvVariable condition of the loans leaves discharge of the capital entirely dependent on the 
will of the Hqnourable Company, so long as the interest shall be punctually paid at the fixed 
eriods. 
: I have been solicitous to show, that there was not any thing questionable in the stability 
or affluence of the Honourable Company’s finances, because an unsoundness in that respect 
would detract from the value which I ascribe to India as a portion of the British empire. 
No such doubt being rationally admissible, every statesman must surel paren how many 
of the European sovereigns are held seriously in check, by the powerful armies which it is 
now.known India could rapidly despatch against their possessions. The situation, if it be 
duly considered, makes the command of gp large a disposable force no inconsiderable ingre- 
dient in our national strength. From the relaxation of prejudices among the sepoys, that 
force is not to be deemed available for contiguous objects alone, but is transportable by 
sea to distant parts of hostile dominions. Shoulddt be imagined that, while India contains 
those means of offensive operations, it may, on the other hand, be exposed to insurrections 
or invasion, which would forbid the embarkation of these troops for prolonged enterprize, 
I answer, that experience in times far less tranquil than the present, repels such an assumption. 
Remembrance that an Indian army actually exhibited itself in Egypt, must satisfy every 
one how readily applicable that force is to remote purposes. Were it even granted, that 
the sending those troops up the Red Sea was done at some risk to the territories whence 
the army was drawn, I would say, whatsoever might have been the case then, no danger 
is conceivable now. As to internal commotion, its nature could not be apprehended, as 
passing at the utmost some unconnected attempts at assemblages for the purpose of plunder ; 
an evil which would be provided against by the enrolment of irregular levies, for the time 
during which the disciplined force should be absent. As to attack from abroad, the inten- 
tion must be long previously discovered, so that India could not be found unprepared. 
The project would be futile, did it not embrace the calculation of dispositions and ability in 
the inhabitants of India, to facilitate the undertaking. Such an expectation would, in the 
existing position of affairs, be groundless. Had any Native Prince the wish to abet a foreign 
assailant of our territory, his indulgence of the propensity would be utterly insignificant. 
There is not a chief liable to the suspicion of doubtful inclination, who is not surrounded 
warlike states, bound in the strictest compact to us. The nullity of formal conditions, 
when opposed to strong impulses of frowardness or temptation, is not overlooked by me; 
but the feudatory states have become so, through their own solicitation, ‘on terms princi- 
pally offered by themselves, and from speculations of benefit which our Governmentshas 
been active in realizing to them. There is nothing humiliating inthe relation, since a para- 
oe: ‘mount 


GENERAL APPENDIX. 153 


mount power in India has been for centuries a hotion so familiar, that the exigtence of such 
an authority appears to the natives almost indispensable. This confederation of the feu- 
tory states extends in an unbroken ghain quite to the Indus. There is not in the vicinity 
of that river’s left bank any tribe from ‘which an invader could look to encouragement. 
‘On the contrary, the attempt of any secondary column to pass that river where its stream is 
united, and thereby to distract attention from the main body, which would hold a more 
northerly course, could not fail to experience serious and persevering obstruction from an 
energetic people. I repeat, that I am not relying on the articles of a treaty: my con- 
fidence is in a clearly understood identity of permanent interest, for which no foreign power 
could hold forth an equivalent. There is, however, in India a principle capable of super- 
seding the most thorough convittion of interest, or even the strongest personal wishes. 
Certain acknowledged public obligations are held by the Native Princes so binding on what 
they call their “ Hoonnut,” or plighted honour to so¢ietypthat no consideration can induce 
them to falter with the constructive pledge. Among «hese were the professed, though an- 
tiquated dependencies on the house of Timour. The sovereign of Oude was the nominal 
-viziér of the Mogul empire. It must be obvious that, should any European potentate aim 
at the subversion of the British establishment in India, it would not be with so absurdly 
extravagant a hope as the succeeding to a similar domination. To reduce Britain’s 
strength by depriving her of such sinews as India affords, would be the purpose, and the 
projected course for effecting it would be the exciting some powerful sentiment in India 
against us. Perhaps the only pretence which any forecasting enemy can have imagined, 
likely to waken sensation, would be the restoration of efficient rule to the house of Timour. 
While such a war-cry would have been a call on the fealty of the sovereign of Oude, as 
professedly vizier of the empire, the claim upon him would have had the additional force of 
an ostensibly Mahomedan, cause. To break ties which might eventually be so injurious to 
us, appeared to me of the highest importance. Though Oude had not any army, since our 
subsidiary force supplies the place of one for the defénce and interior regulation of the 
country, that territory required careful attention in a military view. The country contains 
six millions of inhabitants, every adult malesof whom is provided with arms and habituated 
to.the use of them. The durce: owecorer irregular, capable to be thence in the rear of the 
army with which we were meeting the invader 6n the frontier, was a subject not to be re- 
volved without anxiety. The knowledge of an insurrection behind them, to an extent 
which could not be ascertained, as-our aonnmieation with the Lower Provinces would be 
precarious and interrupted, if not wholly cut off, would unavoidably agitate the minds and 
diminish the confidence of the advance troops. I had often ruminated on that chance. I 
thence eagerly availed myself of a mortification, which I could perceive the Nabob Vizier 
felt acutely, from its having occurred within my sight. Two brothers of the King -of 
Delhi resided at Lucknow, supported by allowance granted partly by the Honourable Com- 
pany, partly by the Nabob Vizier.. Notwithstanding their partial dependence on the latter 
for subsistence, etiquette assigned to those princes a decided pre-eminence ; insomuch, that 
when the Nabob Vizier met either of them in the street, it was incumbent that the elephant 
on which he was riding should be made to kneel, in token of homage. It was to an occasion 
of this sort that I have just alluded: I caught at the opportunity of saying to the Nabob 
Vizier, that to continue such demonstrations of inferiority must rest with himself alone ; for 


the British Government did not require the manifestation of such submission to the Delhi 


family, and had itself dropped those servile forms with which it had heretofore unbecom- 
ingly complied. Having reason to think that this instigation would work upon the Nabob 
Vizier’s reflection, I directed the resident to watch and raat any apparent disposition 
in that prince to emancipate himself. The mode which would naturally suggest itself to 
the Nabob Vizier, as being the only one sufficient to account satisfactorily to India at large 
for his rejection of future prostration to the house of Timour, was his assumption of the 
kingly title. It was likely that he would distantly sound the resident on the subject; 
I therefore instructed the latter, that were any supposition of the sort hypothetically thrown 
out, he should seize it, and bring it immediately to a distinct understanding, intimating hjs 

persuasion 


APPENDIX, 


Lord Hastings’ 
Summary. 


App ‘a DIX, 
Lord Hastings’ 
Summary. 


‘ 


154 APPENDIX ro REPORT rom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


persuasion that the British Government wouRl readily recognize such a title, if assumed by 
the sovereign of Oude, provided it made no change in the relationg and formularies between 
the two states, or altered the manner in which Britigh subjects, permitted by our Govern- 
ment to visit Lucknow, had hitherto been received. The expected procedure soon took 
place. The sovereign of Oude’s a ee of the title of king was treated by the court of 
Delhi with undisguised indignation. The offensive animadversions were keenly resented by 
the court éf Lucknow, and an irreparable breach between the two Mahomedan states is 
avowed. . Had it not been for this public reparation, and thé renunciation of all connexion, 
the sovereign of Oude might on some day have pr8ved ‘himself, contrary to his most earnest 
wish, involved in warfare against us, by the general sense of his nobles as well as by the 
prejudices of his people. While the hostility of the country*would have had the inconvenience 
which I have already described, the character of the sovereign, admirable for uprightness, 
humanity, and mild elevation, wquld have bestowed colour on the adverse cause, and his 
treasures might have been efficaciqusly employed in the payment of troops assembled 
against us in other quarters. To have contnbuted towards parrying this contingency 
afforded me extraordinary satisfaction; for at that period there had not been suflicient 
lapse of time to prove that the new arrangements in Central India were so perfectly fixed, 
as to make all contemplation of extraneous hostility indifferent. 

There is not now any inconvenience in exposing these details. Our internal domination 
is firm, from its standing on the surest of all bases, the conviction eee among the ' 
nattves (with exceptions so few as not to weigh against the meaning of the general assertion), 
that their own comforts are inseparably mterwoven with it. In the profession of this senti- 
ment, no sovereign is more strenuous than the king of Oude. His sagacity would immedi- 
ately have discovered, in our encouragement of the line he was disposed to take, any selfish 
design of misleading’ him into the sacrifice of his own solid interests for our advantage, and 
he would have quietly defeated the projett. On the contrary, he felt that relations with the 
house of Timour must be as illusive, with regard to eventual support, as they were humiliat- 
ing in their immediate accompaniments; and he justly comprehended, that he best consulted 
his dignity, as well as his direct gratifidation,"by declaring his kingdom, as he has done in 
a letter to our sovereign, to be a spontaneously attached dependency on the British empire. 
This leaning to intimate union with us has been produced in the minds of the Native Princes 
by a plain and natural policy on our part. Heretofore we had been too prone to assume an 
air of superiority revolting to them. It was not tMe disposition of our functionaries in the 
Mofussil, as the parts beyond the city of Calcutta are termed ; for in numerous instances 
the urbanity of the individuals counteracted the mischief of an erroneous system. A con- 
ception had been entertained by our Government, that reserved manners, and a tone of 
dictation would impress the natives with a wholesome notion of our power, and would. bind 
them to unquestioning acquiescence in our will. There was, further, a confused opinion, 
that what is regarded in Europe as the law of nations was not pleadable by states in amity 
with us, still less by those in alliance, where considerations of ours suggested authoritating 
interposition, provided the interposition observed essential justice, a qualification very liable 
to mistake, when the essential justice was to be determined only by our view of the parti- 
cular case, Undoubtedly, measures must be squared according to junctures, and to the 
habits of the society in which they are intended to operate ; and it would be an unfair 
conclusion, that the facilities which ‘presented themselves to me for the trial of a different 
principle.existed at the dates to which I refer. Whatever were the causes of failure, the 
expectation of extensive influence over the natives had been disappointed. They had been 
subdued, but not conciliated. It was, therefore? desirable to see what might be done by 
abstaining from any conduct which could unnecessarily wound the pride of a chief, or disgust 
his followers. To extinguish the jealousy of the chief, by paying public respect to his 
station ands upholding his authority, was to secure not his attachment alone, but that of his 
subjects, who felt their own pride trampled upon in his degradation. I therefore pointedly 
enjoined the strictest observance of polite and unassuming demeanour, on the part of our 


_ functionaries, tgwards those rulers, with courtesy to the better classes of the people ‘and 
*, : 


2 kindness 


' GENERAL APPENDIX. - 155 


kindness of manner to the lower. Still more particularly, I directed that’ unless whee 


especial provision in a treaty had secured to us a right of intervention, no interference should 


be attempted with the ordinary couye of government in any state; that there should be 
even an affectation of avoiding to notice what was going forward in the interior administration 
of affairs, it being sure that, in cases of embarrassment, the native ruler would apply to the 
British functionary, when ‘he- could do so without incurring in the eyes of hig people the 
‘appearance of subjection. The expediency of that inculcation, as well as the generous 
alacrity with which it was dbeyed, is evinced by the singularly rapid subsidence of all 
Central India into complete tranquillity, after a convulsion which had terminated in such 
unprecedented alterations. I had, indeed, to reckon on the most energetic assistance in my 
views from both the civil and ihilitary servants of the Honourable Company, because my 
‘plan was in exact consonance to their inclinations. Such a tone towards the natives was 
‘what the heart of each of them would have warmly*prompted. I could not forgive myself, 
were I to let slip such an opportunity of rendering t® the Honourable Company’s servants 
that testimony which they have proudly merited from me. No body of men, tak&n gene- 
rally, can be more high-minded, more conscientiously zealous, or more rigidly intelerant of 
any turpitude among their fellows. With these fundamental good qualities, they naturally 
felt pleasure in indulging a benign and conciliatory address towards the natives. I had but 
to sanction the propensity, by declaring that Government comprehended its wisdom not less 
than its humanity. The effect from these measures has been of late so visible throughout 
the country, that no man will be found to doubt it, or to hesitate in saying whence it arises, 
Reckoning thus that it is the equity and amenity experienced from us by the natives which so 
sways their adherence, I cannot be wrong in representing the circumstance as creditable to 
British reputation. And the internal tranquillity, for the permanence of which sucha style of 
intercourse is a satisfactory gage, assures to our country so unreserved a command over the 
resources of India, as will justify the statement, that augmented advantage to Britain has 
resulted from the recent transactions. The simple principle upon which I acted continued 
-in full efficacy when I quitted India; and I cannot,apprehend that, after such proofs of its 
beneficial consequences, it will ever be abartdoned. 


As to myself, I can readily imagine that I m&y not have adequately improved sc 


which fortune presented ; that I may not have &chieved all the salutary purposes which the 
devoted gallantry of the troops at my disposal would have enabled me to secure ; that I may 
not have attained ends profitable for *the Honourable Company, with as little hazard or 
‘expenditure as would have attended their acquirement in hands more skilful. But it is not 
-a claim of ability that Iam maintaining: my engagement was to defend and promote, to 
the best of my capacity, the concerns with which I was entrusted. I have sought to show, 
‘that in a crisis of unparalleled complication, extent, and difficulty, the exertion in which the 
fulfilment of my obligation consisted was not forborne. The issue will bear out my preten- 
sion ; for the settlement of such a violently disturbed mass will never be referred to chance, 
but will be attributed to efforts which, howsoever they might be deficient in judiciousness, 
must have been anxiously pondered, consistent, and indefatigable. 


(signed) HASTINGS.» 
Aboard his Majesty’s Ship, Glasgow, =A , 
5th April 1823. : . es 


APPENDIX, 


‘Lord Hastings’ 


Summarv: 


APPENDIX, 


IIL. 


Calcutta Civil 
FinanceCommittee. 


i 56 \ APPENDIX ro REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


Tit. 


CALCUTTA CIVIL FINANCE COMMITTEE: 
Their Appeintment, with certain of their Reports; and Minutes, &c. of Government thereon. 


e ° 
(3).—MINUTE by Lord William Bentinck, the Governor-general of Bengal, 
dated 7th October 1828, - 


SEVERAL circumstances of late have strongly confirmed an opinion which I -had been 
disposed to entertain, that much good might arise from a general review of the expenditure 
and establishments of the three Presigencies. 

The eircumstances to which I allude are, ‘ 

1. The accidental discovery of an excessive establishment of military cattle under the 
Presidency of Fort William. 

2. The discovery, arising out of a reference to the Governor in Council of Bombay, in 
es eae of the preceding fact, that at that Presidency there exists no establishment of 

ublie cattle, 
j o a similar reference made to Madras we have received no answer, but it is not improbable 
that there a different system may obtain. 

3. The accidental discovery, only in the last Council, that an expense of 5,000 rupees per 
mensem is, and has been for very many years, uselessly expended, as an allowance for the 
maintenance of six billocks for the carriage of spare arms. = 

I use the word accidental as contradistinguished from results produced by positive inquiry 
and investigation. These and many other items of expense in all departments have come 
to the notice of the Government as it were by chance only, and when so presenting them- 
selves have always undergone immediafe inquiry and reduction when expedient. 

If such large and unnecessary charges afe thus accidentally brought to_ light, I think it 
fair to infer that a committee, appointed expressly for the purpose, might unfold many other 
useless charges, and might suggest alterations calculated to produce a great saving of 
expense, as well as unity and efficiency in the genefal administration. 

My idea is that such an inquiry would be most advantageously conducted by two Com- 
mittees, one civil and one military, composed of three members, one from each of the Presi- 
dencies, to sit at Calcutta.. It is by comparison between the establishments of the three 
Presidencies, and in some degree, perhaps, in the spirit of rivalship existing between sepa- 
rate bodies, that we can hope to arrive at true conclusions. We cannot, as in the appoint- 
ment of the Finance Committee in England, select individuals of perfect independence, and 
free from all personal bias in the subjects under consideration ; here the selection is neces- 
sarily confined to the service itself. 

in some respects it would be more convenient and economical for each Government to 
conduct an inquiry by a committee formed of its own servants, but to my judgment a single 
combined committee would be far preferable ; because, besides the greater degree of im~ 
partiality and earnestness which men may be expected to show who are not under the 
influence of local feelings and prejudices, and whose labours may come under the review of 
the Legislature itself, there is this other great advantage, that in no other way can the 
charges and establishments of the three Presidenctes be brought to the test of fair compa- 
rison and impartial revision. ; ° 

It is of. course my intention that the Governments of the several Presidencies should 
choose their Own men. ; y : 

‘In so far as this Presidency is concerned, we shall, I hope, be able to provide members 
for the committee without incurring any considerable charge; the selection of them had 
better, I conceive, be postponed until we know upon whom the choice of the Governments 

of 


yr 


GENERAL APPENDIX. 157. Appennix, 
, TTT. 
of Madras and Bombay has fallen. They will probably select gentlemen holding high sub- 2 —— _ 
stantive appointments, which they shall retain during their deputation to this Presidency ; (3). Minute of Lord 
and we must necessarily be prepared, besides finding them a passage to and from Bengal, William Bentinck ; 
to allow them such an additional inconfe as shall tiberally compensate for any expenses to 7 October 1828. 
which they may be subjected. The precise amount we need not determine in anticipation 
of the appointment of the individuals. 
‘he committees will of course entertain the necessary establishments of clerks, &c. after 
they have met here. But the members deputed from Madras and Bombay will naturally . 
be directed to bring round with them @uch accounts and statements as may obviate the 
necessity ofa frequent reference to those Presidencies for information contained in the public - 
accounts and records; and theyeshould also, I conceive, be vestéd with a discretion of 
bringing with them one or more of the subordinate officers attached to the offices of audit 
and account, in the event of their de&ming the attendance of such persons in the committee 
likely to be useful. go nee 
As to the instructions under which the committee shall act, it does not appear to me to be 
necessary to enter at present upon any detailed explanation. 
Should the Board concur with me as to the expediency of the general plan, the first step 
will be to request the Governments of Madras and Bombay to select the gentlemen to be 
deputed from those Presidencies, and to instruct them to proceed hither with the least prac- 
ticable delay. , 
: (signed) W.C, BentTINcK. 


The Board concurring in opinion as to the expediency of the aang teat proposed in the 
above Minute, resolved that the following letter be addressed to the Gevernments of Madras 
and Bombay respectively. 


. (4). —CIRCULAR LETTER from the Government of Bengal to the Governments _- (4), Circular Letter 
of Madras and Bombay, dated 10th October 1828. from Bengal, to Ma- 


Honourable Sir: ° > erate scarey 
In considering the means of effecting that economical revision of the expenses of British 7° fern earn 
India which the state of our finances urgently presses upon our attention, it has appeared Territorial Depart-. 
to us that very great advantage would result from the appointment of commissioners ment, Finance. _ 
specially authorized and required to make a full and detailed inquiry into the establish- , 
ments entertained and charges incurred in all branches, civil and military, of the admi- 
nistration of the different Presidencies, with the view particularly of unfolding all items of — 
expense uselessly incurred, of exhibiting those which may admit of retrenchment with the 
least public inconvenience, and of suggesting such alterations as may appear calculated to — 
secure to the utmost practicable extent, unity, efficiency, and economy in the general 
management of public affairs. e i 
2. It appears to us that such an inquiry would be most usefully conducted by two 
committees, one civil and one military, composed of three members, one from each of the 
Presidencies, to sit at Calcutta ; and we have therefore to request that you will have the 
goodness to proceed, at your earliest convenience, to select a civil and military officer of 
suitable experience, rank and character,eto take their place in the projected committees 
PO nk) Oe 7 
$n the part of the Presidency of Fort St. George, and that you will instruct them to come 


-hither with the least practicable delay. 


8. Should your choice fall upon any gentleman not holding a substantive-appointment, 
we propose to assign to him such a salary as may appear suitable to the labour, importance 
aitd responsibility of the duties which the members of the committee will have to perio, 

; bd e 


APPENDIX, 


qIL. 


ee 


Calcutta Civil 
FinanceCommittee. 


_ frequent reference to your Presidency for information containe 


1 AN APPENDIX to REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


“We consider, it likely, however, that you will select gentlemen already holding high office 


under your Government; and in that case we beg to recommend that they may still be 
continued in the situations which they hold, a temporary arrangement being made for the 
discharge of their duties during their absence. ‘Phey must of course be provided with a 
passage to and from Bengal; and we are prepared to assign to them such additional income 
as shall liberally compensate for any expenses to which they may be subjected in conse- 
quence of fheir deputation. ; 
4. You will naturally direct the gentlemen whom you may appoint to the above duty to 
bring round with them such accounts and statemenés as may be necessary to obviate a 
in the public records, on 
matters falling within the scope of their inquiries. Andewe would also beg to suggest to 


_you that they be vested with a discretion of bringing with them one or more subordinate 


officers in the departments of audit and account, in*the event of their considering the 
attendance of such persons on the committee here likely to be useful. The requisite 
Mester aie of clerks, &c. will of course be entertained here after the committees shall 
ave met. 
5. It must be altogether unnecessary for us to say a word as to the importance of the 
objects which we now contemplate; and we feel a confident assurance of meeting your 
hearty co-operation towards the successful accomplishment of them. 


We have, &c. 


(signed) W. C. BENTINCK. 
W. B. Baytey. 
C. T. MercaLre. 


e 


(5). Resolution of — (5).—RESOLUTION of the Governor-general in Council at Bengal, in the Territorial 


* Béngal Govern- 
ment ;25November 
1828. 


Department ;«dated@ 25th November 1828. 


e wise 

In the expectation that the members of {he Civil and Military Finance Committees, whom 
the Governments of Madras and Bombay have selected in furtherance of the Resolution of 
the 10th ultimo, may be expected to arrive in Rengal at an early period, the Governor- 
general in Council proceeds to consider, First, What officers shall be appointed as members 
for this Presidency; Secondly, What further arrangements shall be made for giving to the 
committees the utmost practical degree of efficiency ; and Thirdly, What instructions shall 
be issued for their guidance in the prosecution of the important duties to be confided to them. 

2. On the first head, the Governor-general in Council resolves that the Secretary of 
Government in the Territorial department shall be the member of the civil committee; and 
for the military committee, his Lordship in Council deems it proper to select Brigadier 
C. P. Wilson. 

3. In considering the second of the points above stated, it appears to his Lordship in 
Council, that the weight and authority of the committees will be greatly augmented, and 
other important advantages secured, by their acting under the superintendence of the mem- 
bers of the Supreme Council, one giving his attention to the civil and the other to the milttary 
committee; his Lordship in Council accordingly resolves that Mr. Bayley be solicited to 
undertake the superintendence of the civil finance committee, and that Sir Charles Metcalfe 
be similarly requested to superintend the military committee. 

4. It is not of course designed to cast upon the members of Government any part of the 
lInbour of research, which will be necessary for the ascertainment of the facts upon which 
ihe committee will have to report; that will be the duty of the members; and his Lordship 
in Council does not contemplate the necessity of Mr. Bayley, or Sir Charles Metcalfe’s 


_ taking any share in their deliberations, though they. will naturally maintain such a degree 


’ of communication with the committee which they respectively superintend, as may be neces- 
e > a . : 


sary 


N 


! 


GENERAL APPENDIX. .. 159 Arvexbry, 


. . e 
sary for the purpose of removing any difficulties’ which they may meet with, or any doubts a 
they may entertain as to the general views of Government. (5.) Resolution of 
5. The Governor-general will himselfywatch with an anxious interest the progress of both Bengal Govern- 
committees, under a strong sense of the importance of the objects to which their labours are ™ents 25 November 
to be directed,'and a cordial resolution to give his most strenuous co-operation towards their 1828. 
successful accomplishment. ; ae i 
6. It appears to the Governor-general in Council, to be necessary that each of the com- 
mittees should have an officer of “ability attached to them as secretary, and his Lordship in 
Council accordingly resolves, that Mr. P. M. Wynch, deputy secretary to Government in the ° 
Judicial department, shall be secretary to the civil committee, and that Major W. Kennedy, 
first assistant to the military Auditor-general, shall be’ secretary to the military committee. 
7. The arrangements to ke adopted consequently upon the appointment of Brigadier 
Wilson, Mr. Mackenzie, Mr. Wynch and Major Kénnedy, as above, will be separately 
considered. ; ; 
8. Each of the committees will of course require a separate office: to the civil contmittee 
the Governor-general in Council resolves to assign the house now occupied by the superin- 
tendent of stamps, which is about to be vacated by that officer. 
9. The military committee will hold their sittings in the Government-house in Fort 
- William, which his Lordship has been pleased specially to assign to them. 
10. With respect to the instructions under which the committees are to conduct their 
inquiries, his Lordship in Council has, in the first place, to repeat the general exposition of 
the design of Government in the institution of them, as explamed in the letters addressed to 
the Governments of Madras and Bombay: it was therein announced that the committee 
should be “authorized and required to make a full and detailed inquity into the establish- 
ments entertained and charges incurred in all branghes, civil and military, of the adminis- 
tration of the different Presidencies, with the view particularly of unfolding all items of 
expense uselessly incurred ; of exhibiting those which may admit of retrenchment with the 
least public inconvenience; and of suggesting guch alterations as may appear calculated to 
secure, to the utmost practicable extent, unity, efficiency, and economy in the general ma- 
nagement of public affairs.” 
11. In pursuance of this principle, it is the desire of his Lordship in Council that the 
civil committee should, with the following restriction, enter on a complete comparative re- 
vision of the establishments entertained in the several departments of the civil branch of: 
the Government at the three Presidencies, the object being, as far as can be done without an 
inordinate delay, to see that not a man is entertained who is not wanted, that all who are 
wanted are employed to the best advantage, and that not’a rupee is uselessly or unnecessa- 
ril¥ expended. 
12. The constitution of the several governments, and of the King’s courts, having been 
fixed by law, it is not intended that the committee should enter upon inquiry in regard to it. 
13. The number of political residencies and agencies to be maintained for the conduct of 
affairs, arising out of the political relations of the British Government with foreign states, 
is likewise a matter to which it does not appear that their inquiries could with advantage be 
extended, though the revision by them of the subordinate establishments attached to each 
of those officers will be proper and useful. ” , 
14. The commercial branch of the Honourable Company’s affairs, it appears to his Lord- 
ship in Council desirable to reserve for special consideration; as to the ecclesiastical de- 
partment, the committee can only notice the general financial result for the consideration of 
Government and the home authorities. 
e 15. In regard to all other civil establishments, in the general, judicial; revenue, (all 
‘branches included) and marine departments, it is the desire of his Lordship in Council to 
leave the committee altogether free to push their inquiries to the utmost extent to which 
they may consider it necessary or expedient to carry them, with the view of securing unity, 
efficiency, and economy in the establishments maintained, and arrangements made, at the 
several Presidencies, 
oo 16. The 


APPENDIX, 
HI. 


Calcutta Civil, 
FinanceComnnittee. 


4 


160° APPENDIX ro REPORT rom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


16. The committee will also particulafly inquire into and report upon arrangements 
adopted at the several Presidencies, for providing the accommodation required for the public 
offices, and generally as to the course pursued m regard to the construction and repair of 
public works and buildings belonging to the civil departments. 

17. They will likewise direct their attention to the expenses incurred on account of travel- 
ling charges, deputation allowances, diet of prisoners, and all items of contingent disburse- 
ments susceptible of check. And in all branches of civil expenditure, they will investigate 
the system of pay, audit and account followed a) the. diffétent Presidencies, with the view 
particularly of seeing whether forms can be simp ified} whether better checks can be usedj 
and whether adjustments can be expedited. 

18. ‘The Committee will of course carefully consider how far the emoluments assigned to 
the several offices which come under their review, whether held by European or native 
officers, are adjusted on proper*and® equal principles, noticing any that may appear to be 
excessive or inadequate; specially a@verting to all differences that exist in the scales estab- 
lished at the several Presidencies, and examining the reasons of them. 

19. They will also, if they see advantages in the measure, consider themselves to be fully 
authorized to frame and submit to Government an entirely new scale of allowances for the 
different offices in the several departments of the three Presidencies respectively. 

20. As toa reduction of allowances on the grounds of any general financial pressure, such 
a measure, should the necessity unfortunately arise, it will belong to Government to originate. 
His Lordship in Council trusts that the labours of the two committees may tend essentially 
to avert such a catastrophe, and they will contemplate the possibility of its occurrence only 
as a stimulus to exertion in the work of introducing every practicable economy in the expen- 
diture of the public money; an economy distinct alike from the retrenchment which neces- 
sity might enforce, and from the parsimopy which would husband the resources of a country 
by denying the means of defence, or the instruments of good government. 

21. There is indeed one mode of reducing the aggregate allowances of the general body 
of civil functionaries, on which the Governor-general in Council will be most happy to 
receive the suggestioas of the committee, viz. that which will result from the consolidation 
of offices needlessly divided, and the substitution of native for European agency in the ma- 
nagement of details; supervision, directich, and control remaining with the latter., His 
Lordship in Council is particularly desirous of receiving the fullest possible information 
as to the success of employing native agency in the three Presidencies. 

22. In considering the different establishments entertained at the three Presidencies, the 
committee may probably have forced upon them questions relating as much to the means of 
improving the judicial and revenue administration, as to the immediate matter of regulating 
the public charges. : : 

23. The Governor-general in Council will leave it to the discretion of the committee to 
determine, under the general instructions now conveyed to them, how far they will enter 
upon the examination or discussion of points of the first description. They will understand 
that it is not the design of Government to impose upon them the duty of examining the 
subject of taxation and civil government as applicable to India in its general bearings, and 
on the other hand, if it shall appear to them that the more general adoption of any measures 
partially pursued is likely to enlarge the public income or otherwise to prove advantageous 
to the public interests, his Lordship in Council will expect to receive from them a commu- 
nication of their views and sentiments. 

24. There is one important item of establishment, which partakes partly of a civil and 
partly of a military character, and in regard to which more than ordinary diversity of 
scheme will apparently be found to prevail at the different Presidencies. His Lordship m 
Council refers to provincial battalions, Nujeeb and Sebundee corps, irregular horse and 
other armed footmen and horsemen, maintained by or for the immediate use of the civil 
authorities. ; ; 

25. In respect to these, it will probably be found to be desirable for the two committees 
to communicate together, that the precise effect of substituting such a force for regular 

: troops, 


GENERAL APPENDIX. 361 ‘Appeifpix, | 
e ; ’ . . tie 
“troops, and vice versd, may be fully developed,.and that the systems pursued at the several ae, 
Presidencies may be accurately contrasted. ; (G.) Resolution of 
- 26. The object of employing the cheapest description of establishment, in all ‘cases in Bengal Govern- 
which it may appear likely to be equally efficient, or in which the advantage of more expen- ents 25Nov@mber 
sive description is not such as counterbalances the excess of charge, will of course be 1828: 
constantly kept in mind in this as in all other parts of the committee’s investigation. 
27. The military. committee will of course be guided in their proceedings by the same 
. general principles as are prescribed for the civil committee, in so far as they‘may be properly, 
applicable to both branches. ae 
_ 28; With a few exceptions, it ds the desire and expectation of Government that their 
inquiries should embrace all matters connected with military finance. . 

29. As to the strength and distr®bution of the thyee armies, these are questions which 
must necessarily depend on circumstances of a temporary ‘hature, and of which the decision 
must belong to the Government and to the Commande in Chief. 7 

30. So likewise the general constitution of the Indian army is a point which his Lordship 
in Council does not propose for the consideration and discussion of the committee, further 
than may be unavoidable in the development of financial results. But the committee will 
be expected fully to consider and report how tlie public charges could be advantageously 
reduced by eaanloving the troops of Bengal or Madras to occupy any of the stations now 
assigned to those of Bombay or Bengal, or Bombay troops, in leu of those from, Madras, 
or vice versd, substituting one description of force for another. . a 
. 31, They will also revise the scale of pay and allowances assigned to the several ranks 
in the different branches of the three armies respectively (European and Native); examine 
the reason of differences, and suggest, where it shall appear to be expedient, equalization, 
increase or reduction. ; e 

32. a will similarly enter on an examination and comparison of the staff of the three 
armies, with a view to equalization and the retrenchment of any thing that is unnecessary. 

38. As to the other numerous heads of inquiry which the committee’s labours will 
embrace, his Lordship in Council deems it almogt sufficient generally to enumerate those 
that immediately occur to him, it being in this, as in the civil department, understood that 
~ as far as time and circumstances will permit, his Lordship in Council would wish the com- 

mittee to push their inquiries so as to asgertain how every man borne on the public rolls is 
employed, and how every rupee issued from the public treasuries is appropriated, in so far as 
may be necessary to see (or to suggest measures to the end) that not a man may be paid for 
who is not wanted, that all who may be paid for are employed to the best advantage, and’ 
that no expense is uselessly or unnecessarily incurred. 
, 384. They will bring under review the whole scheme of the commissariat in its various 
branches, including the procurement, maintenance and disposal of the public horses, bullocks,, 
elephants and camels. 
35. They will investigate the details of the stud department, and the public cattle. 
farms. #8 : 
. 36. They will inquire into the mode of conducting’ the several agencies for the manu- 
facture of gunpowder, for the construction of gun-carriages, and for the provision of 
timber. : aes , 

37. They will inquire into the supply, distribution, custody and disposal of ordnance, 
camp equipage, arms, accoutrements, and all kinds of military stores. 

38: They will consider and report upon the system pursued in regard to the construction 
and repair of public buildings; and they will ascertain how far all public buildings, main- 
tZined in the military department, are necessary or useful, or might be advantageously 
abandoned or caitailed. ; : Be. . oe 

39. The employment of troops in civil duties, or m duties not necessarily belonging. to 
a camp, garrison, or cantonment, and the means of economizing guards, escorts and sentries 
im all quarters, will be carefully investigated and considered by them. On the first point 
they will communicate fully with the civil committee. : 40. They 


‘ 


e % 
APPENDIX, 
Il. 
“Calcutia Civil 
Finangg Committee. 


162 APPENDIX ro REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


40. They will consider and report upon the system of recruiting, discharging, pensioning 
and invaliding pursued at the several Presidencies. Should any plan occur to them for 
providing economically in peace the means of rapidl§¥ meeting the exigencies of war, they 
will prosecute the inquiry and report the result. 

41. They will carefully investigate the hae of pays audit and account (muster is of 
course incleded), to see whether better checks cannot be applied, whether forms cannot be 
simplified or improved, whether adjustments cannot be expedited, and whether Government 
camot be saved from the risks, and individuals spared the annoyance, incident to every, 
needless delay in the settlement of accounts. ’ 

42. They will go through the several establishments mentioned below, and ascertain and 
report how far they are efficient and economical in their general constitution and in their 
subordinate details: the Military ,Boaud, the Auditor-geheral’s Office, the Adjutant-general’s 
Department, the Medical Board, wit} all the establishments entertained and arrangements 
made for affording medical aid under their direction or control; the Clothing Board, the 
Orphan Institutions, the Judge Advocate’s Department, the Surveyor-general’s Denaranent 
and other branches of the general staff, the staff of corps and their subordinates, servants, 
workmen, labourers, cattle, contingencies. . ' 

43. They will inquire and report on the subject of boat and other travelling allowances, 
batta, rations of provisions or spirits, or money compensation in lieu thereof; the manage- 
mertt of ,bazaars, and generally all points sfecting the military charges, not specifically 
excluded from the scope of their investigation, in so for as may be necessary to secure con- 
sistency and economy in the establishments entertained and arrangements made at the three 
Presidencies. 

44, In inquiring isto the affairs of the Medical Department, should the committee desire 
to have the services of a medical officer'@s secretary, his Lordship in Council will be pre- 
pared to accede to any arrangement they may suggest for the purpose. 

45. As to the powers to be vested in the committees, civil and military, for obtaining the 
information they require, his Lordship in Goyncil deems it sufficient to state, that they 
are to have free access to all public accounts and other documents which they may desire to 
consult, and all public officers at the three Presidencies will be expected to afford the com- 
mittees the fullest information they may be able to convey on the matters on which they may 
be interrogated. Officers stationed at or near the Presidency of Fort William, will be 
prepared to communicate verbally or in writing, as may be deemed by the committee to be 
most convenient. Should the committee desire to communicate personally with any officer 
not stationed at or in the immediate vicinity of the Presidency, they will report the cir- 
cumstance to Government. 

46. The committee will correspond directly with every officer they may see fit to address, 
without using the intervention of the heads of departments or the commandants of garrisons 
and corps, further than may appear to them proper. ; 

47. Any neglect of or inattention to the references of the committees, will be immediately 
reported to Government. 

48. The committees will communicate to Government the result of their deliberations in 
réspect to the several departments and officers subjected to their revision, in separate reports, 
following, where not inconvenient, the order of their instructions; and if they light upon 
any item requiring change, of sufficient importance to merit distinct notice, they will of 
course consider themselves at liberty to bring it to the notice of Government without 
delay. ; 

‘49. The ‘committees will respectively authorize their secretaries to éntertain such an 


' establishment of clerks and other servants as may be indispensably necessary, charging for 


the same inenonthly contingent bills. é 

‘ 80. To the members of the committees who have been called from the other Presidencies, 
his Lordship in Council resolves, in pursuance of the resolution of the 10th ultimo, to assign 
an allowance of s.'rs. 1,000 per mensem, to take effect from the date’ of their arrival at‘the 
Presidency. - - ; ake s Ds 


51. Brigadier 


. GENERAL APPENDIX. - 163 APEenOs 
‘ "¢@ aa - If. 
51. Brigadier Wilson will be authorized to draw, as.a member of the committee, the sum = = ——. 
of Sicca rupees 1,000 per mensem, to take effect from the date on which he may arrive at the (5). Resolution of 
Presidency, besides such a further allovtance as shall compensate any loss to which he may Bengal Govern- 
be unavoidably subjected by relinquishing his command. ae 95 Nov@™&ber 
" 62, To.the secretaries of the committees, Mr. Wynch and Major Kennedy, his Lordship *°** 
in Council resolves that an extra allowance of rupees 500 a month shall be granted ; to take : 
effect from the date on which, they may be directed to enter upon the functions of their 
respective offices. * °@ ; : 
‘58. The expenses of the committee are to be charged to the financial department, and 
their bills audited by the civil auditor. : 
54. The appointment of the committees must of course be notified to all public func- 
tionaries with whom they are likel¥ to communicate. The necessary measures for that 
purpose will accordingly be taken without delay in sg far as concerns the territorial de~ 
artments. : ‘ 
55. Ordered also that a co y of the letter addressed to the Governments of Fort St. George Gen! Department. 
and Bombay, on the 10th ultimo, and of the above resolution, be sent to the several depart- Judicial Ditto. 
ments of Government’ noted in the margin, that the necessary subsidiary instructions Milt ae een Ditto 
may be issued; and particularly that arrangements may be made in the military department p saa Ditto. 
for diene and enabling Brigadier Wilson to proceed to the Presidency as soon as : 
possible. : 


' (6).—Extract LETTER from the Calcutta Civil Finance Committee to the Governor- 
general in Council, dated 1st October 1829. 


Observatory at Madras. 


3. Tuis Observatory was established in the year 1790, and since that period the observa- (6). Letter from 
tions made have been regularly recorded, tables of them being transmitted to the Honour- Committee on Ob- 
able Court of Directors, and to the Asjronomer Royal. The results appear to have been servatory atMadras; 
satisfactory to competent judges; and the institution besides contributing to the general 1 October 1828. 
purposes of astronomical science, is stated to have had a peculiar value in its relation to the 
grand trigonometrical survey. It is also useful as affording navigators the means of ascer-~ 
taining the rates of their chronometers. 

4. On the whole, adverting to the advantage of having at least one Observatory in this 
part of the globe, believing the position of the Madras Observatory to be favourable, being 
informed that the Honourable the Court of Directors, haye recently sent out for its use some 
valuable astronomical instruments, and perceiving that the expense of the institution is 
moderate, we beg leave to submit our opinion that it should be maintained. — . 

5. We observe, however, that, in the absence of the astronomer on leave to Europe, the 
institution has been placed under the charge of the Deputy Surveyor-general, who receives on 
that account an allowance of 350 rupees per mensem. The charge for the establishment is 
rupees 274,.12, and the total expense of the institution, rupees 7,447 per annum. Before 
the departure of the astronomer, including his salary, the annual charge was rupees 
11,370. * 

6. We are of opinion that, in the event, of the astronomer at Fort St. George, Mr. 

Goldingham, not returning to India, or of a vacancy in that situation occurring, the appoint- 

ment of an officer exclusively to perform the duties of an astronomer at Madras js not neces- 

sary, and we would suggest that the Observatory be permanently placed under the charge 

of the Deputy Surveyor-general, who may be expected always to be an officer competent’ 

to the task. By this arrangement a saving would be effected of rupees 3,923 per annum. 

The allowance granted to the Deputy Surveyor-general, viz. rupees 350, wetdo not consider 
, Y2 to 


Aree 164 APPENDIX to REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 
. ° 
—— __— to _be more thah an adequate remuneration tor the trouble imposed on that officer'in super- 
Calcutta Civil intending the Observatory. ’ 
FinangeCommittee. 7. The establishment attached to the institution, &s exhibited in the margin*, does not: 
appear to be susceptible of any- reduction either in the number or the amount of the salary — 
received by the individuals composing it. 


(7). —EXTRACT from a RESOLUTION of the Government of Bengal, 
, dated 22d December 1829. 


e ve 
(7). Resolution of | Unper the circumstances statetl by*the Committee, it appears to the Governor-general in 
Bengal Govern- — Council, that it will be proper to maiain this institution; but as the Observatory has, in the 
ment, on Observa- absenct of the astronomer, on leave to Europe, been placed under the charge of the Deputy 
, tory at Madras; Surveyor-general, on an allowance of rupees 350 per mensem, his Lordship in Council is _ 
22 Dec. 1829. of opinion, that in the event of a vacancy in the oflice of astronomer, it will be unnecessary 
to appoint a successor, and that the duties of that office may be assigned permanently.to the 
Deputy Surveyor-general, and an allowance of rupees 350 assigned to that officer for 
superintending the Observatory, the establishment (amounting to 274..12 per mensem,) 
attached to which does not appear susceptible of any reduction. 


(8).—LETTER from the Calcutta Civil Finance Committee to the Governor-general 
in Council at Bengal, dated 20th November 1829. 


(8). Letter from My Lord, e . 
Committee,onPrins Havine carefully considered the documents received with Mr. Molony’s letter of the 
ciples of Inquiry; 3d instant, and other papers calculated to throw light on the subject, we beg permission to 
20 November 1829. submit to your Lordship in Council the following observations, and to solicit instructions 
upon some pene questions, the decision of which will, we trust, enable us correctly to 
apprehend the nature and extent of the duty which Government have been pleased to 
impose upon us, and will facilitate our devising the most effectual and least objectionable 
means of discharging it. 
_ 2. In your Lordship’s minute, the state of the finances of India, as established in the 
sketch estimate for the current year, is tried by two standards, the one that of providing an 
Indian surplus of two crores of rupees, the other that of reducing the Indian charges to the 
scale of the years 1823-24, as laid down by the Honourable the Court of Directors, in 
their letter of the t2th December 1827. The deficiency, according to the former mode of 
comparison, is shown to be rupees 1,38,40,000, and by the latter, 1,47,79,000. 
‘ 3. Your Lordship in’ Council has resolved that the sphere of our inquiries shall be 
extended to every item and cause of charge without exception, and that we shall submit a 
‘ clear view of the future financial prospects of India, together with the arrangements best 


calculated 
tins ; Per Mensem. 
* 1 Bramin Assistant - a ae! - * - Rs. 122 
2Ditto - dite - + = -* - * = 87 8 
Assistant Calculator and Writer - - - - - 52 8 
rLascar «= - - - woe - - - fan eae: 
- - - - 5 4 


.Contingencies 9 - -- = > 


‘GENERAL APPENDIX. 165 


calculated to secure an Indian surplus of two crores of rupees; and your Lordship in 
Council has also distinctly intimated that the primary and permanent inquiry must be not 
whether particular establishments and 8bjects of public interest and utility be in themselves 
desirable and expedient, but in what mode the necessary reduction of the public expenditure. 
can be effected with the smallest degree of injury and inconvenience. 

4, From the terms and scope of the whole communication made to us, we infer that the 
Government sets out with the figmest conviction, that in the performance of the duty it has 
to discharge, great and unsparing retrenchment will be unavoidable, and with a correspond- 
ingly decided determination that it shall be put in force. ; : 

- 5. It must be scarcely necessary to observe, that the regular estimates of the year may be 
expected to show some abatement in the deficiency exhibited in the sketch estimate, and 
that the measures already adopted b}? Government myst tend to produce a further ameliora- 
tion in succeeding years. But the most sanguine calculations founded on such data would 
still leave so large a deficit as to render it indispensably necessary to act on the above, deter- 
mination, and which consequently we propose, unless otherwise instructed, to make the 
es of every suggestion we may have the honour of submitting to your Lordship in 
ouncil, ; 
. 6. With this conviction we beg, in the first place, to submit-our opinion that the most 
convenient and effectual method of revision and retrenchment will be as a general rule to 
follow the course prescribed by the Court of Directors, by taking the charges of some 
former year as a standard to which those for the future are to be reduced. This mode of 
proceeding possesses several advantages. It presents the object to be aimed at in the most 
distinct possible shape; at each stage it offers us the means of definitively ascertaining the? 
progress made towards its attainment; and it is the more authoritative or not being discre- 
tionary and arbitrary. It does not of course prevent the application of any other principle 
of reduction which may appear necessary or expedient to follow, and the instructioris of the 
Honourable Court may be considered as alone sufficient to require that the method indi~ 
cated by them should first. be adopted. .° 

7. For this comparison the Court of Directors have selected the year 1823-24, which has 
this in its favour, not only that the requisite surplus was then realized, but that our posses- 
sions in India Proper have not been subsequently extended; we are of opinion however that 
in many cases not affected by subsequené extension of territory, it may be preferable to take 


Aprenix, 


- 


(8.) Letter from 


Committee, on 
Principles of 
quiry ; 

20 November 1829. 


the year 1813-14, which followed the last general revision of establishments, and may be . 


regarded as a standard fixed by the Government itself for the circumstances of that period. 

8. We propose therefore, if approved by your Lordship in Council, to begin a methodical 
comparison of establishments and charges in every branch of the public service for 1813-14 
or 1823-24 (as in each case may seem most expedient) with those for the latest year for which 
they have been completed; to scrutinize every material augmentation either in the items or in 
the aggregate, and unless it be supported on grounds of necessity, of security to the public 
resources, of obligations of public duty, or of very urgent expediency, to recommend it to 
Government for immediate reduction. 

9. As it certainly will not be practicable in all cases to bring down the public charges to 
the scale either of 1813-14 or of 1823-24, every opportunity will need to be seized for going 
even below that standard; with a firm purpose to effect the great object in view, such reduc- 
tion may doubtless be in many instances made in every branch of the public service without 
the hazard of any degree of injury or inconvenience which ought to deter Government from 
making it. The hazard of some inconvenience and even injury must unquestionably be 
incurred ; such hazard is, in fact, the price at which economy is always practised, whether 
im public or in private life. In straitened circumstances every person of prudence advisedly 
increases that hazard, in order to keep his arrangements within the compass of his means. 
Government has only to act upon the same principle. Its expenditure has to be reduced 
within its income. This should be done, if possible, without trenching upon the efficiency 
of its establishments, the security and advancement of the public interests, or even the sa 
sonable 


ArvrEn pix, 


III. 


Calcutta Civil 
FinanceCommittee. 


.those who in opposing the retrenchment in the face of bankruptcy, are 


166 APPENDIX to REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


sonable claims ofits servants. If, as is likely, it cannot be done on such easy terms, it should 
then be effected at the least expense of efficiency, security, public welfare and private com- 
fort compatible with its successful accomplishment.* But although there be room for dis-. 
cretion as to the means of retrenchment, there is none as to retrenchment itself by some 
means or other; objections therefore to particular means can carry no weight unless accom- 
panied by éhé suggestion of other means less objectionable, . If the end cannot be otherwise 
achieved, then the fair expectations of the servants of Govgrmment, European and Native, 
the adoption or prosecution of measures of acknowledged public utility, the vigour of our 
establishments, and even the security of our possessions are all considerations which to such 
extent as may prove inevitable must be postponed to the ever-ruling necessity of contracting 
our expenditure within the limits of our income. ae 

10. We conceive these to be the Pinciples by which your Lordship in Council requires 
the proceedings of our Committee to be prompted and governed; and if they be constantly 
kept in, view and steadily acted uponywe trust the great work of economical reform which is 
required for the solvency of British India, may at no distant period be successfully accom- 
plished. But that it may be accomplished without ania delay (and every day’s delay 
must of course in its degree aggravate the evil to be conquered), it is of much importance to 
eek the proceedings of our Committee to the utmost practicable extent. The examina- 
tion which we have already made of the books of establishments has been sufficient to 
satiefy us that of the large excess in the expenditure of the present year above that of - 
1823-24, a great portion consists of items each in itself inconsiderable. It is thence clear 
that if for every item of reduction we are expected formally to submit to Government an 
elaborate explanation of reasons ; and if the reasons submitted by us are to be weighed and 
commented upon as if the adoption or rejection of what is proposed were a matter alte ether 
optional, or one of judicial inquiry, life would be too short for the hundredth part of what 
must be accomplished. And, further, it is evident that if nothing is to be discontinued 
which cannot be proved to be mischievous or useless, independently of financial considerations, 
Government. must sink under its buethens- long before. any adequate reduction can be 
effected. 7 ; 

11. We submit, therefore, that the only,principle which in the present are ey can be 
acted upon with any show of reason is for Government absolutely to abolish all new 
establishments, when pointed out to them, which may not appear to be imdispensably 
necessary; and that the burthen of proof be not in the Committee, for they must necessarily 
suggest many reductions which in other circumstances would be ot. undesirable, but in 

ound to show that it 
cannot be effected without inducing a greater evil, or to suggest some better means of 
adequate relief. 

12. The matter, though at first sight it may seem unimportant, is, we conceive, one of 
considerable moment, since the progress made by the Committee must depend greatly on the 
spirit in which their communications are received, and if the Government were not prepared 
to act on the principle above indicated, but proposed to consider the propositions of the 
Committee apart from the overwhelming financial necessity which suggests them, we should 
humbly submit whether a somewhat different machinery might not better accomplish its 
designs. We infer, however, that Government is entirely prepared to recognise the expe- 
diency of the course of proceeding we should ourselves desire to follow, more especially 
because we have been distinctly instructed to regard ourselves as its confidential advisers, 
We feel sensibly that whoever is employed to prepare the work of general retrerichment; 
ought to act in that capacity, and with confident reliance upon the support of Government, 
It 18 not less essential to their efficiency that the Government should give them its confidence 
in return, and we take the liberty of expressing our hope that the present intimation may 
further be considered to imply that the suggestions alich we may offer are to be between us. 
and the Government. Measures can only be proposed by us, and have to. be decided upon 
by your Lordship in Council; but if they are subsequently announced to the parties affected 


by 


GENERAL APPENDIX. 167. APPENDIx, 
: Hil. 
by them, with the accompaniment of our observations, they must in a great degree lose the —— 
character of authoritative acts of the supreme power in India, and still more of necessary (8.) Letter from 
parts of a stern system of general reduction. nr, Committee, ote 
13. We think it proper to take this occasion of bringing under the notice of your Lordship Principles of 
in Council, the very recent order of the Court of Directors, interdicting the increase of the a a ee ae 
salary or allowances of. any officer, civil or military, without their previous sanction. We, 7? °vember 1929- 
have inserted the order below,¥ and we beg leave to submit, that until the general 
reduction has been carried through toethe sequisite extent, it seems essential that no instance 
of any increase should be allowed, since increase, in fact, frustrates the work of reduction. 
One collateral advantage of such aedetermination would be to enlist the whole body of the 
servants of Government in promoting and completing the general reductions, so that the . 
prohibition against partial increase m&y be withdrawn, We would therefore recommend to 
your Lordship in Council to pass a resolution to the foregoing effect, and to transmit it for 
the guidance of the Governments of Madras and Bomb&y, as well as act upon it invariably 
at this presidency. 
14. We do not consider that it could be at variance with the proposed resolution to follow 
up the system which has already been partially acted upon of raising the allowances of some 
underpaid offices as others fall vacant; provided the allowances attached to them be at least 
ae same degree reduced, the increase is really an integral part of the resolution to 
reduce. : 
15. We. beg leave further to suggest, that it might be attended with benefit if our Com- 
mittee were regularly furnished with the statements which the secretaries to Government at 
the several presidencies were some months,ago required to prepare in their respective 
departments, after every consultation of the Government, for the purpose of exhibiting 
accurately all resolutions by which the financial cordition of the Government might be any 
way affected. Those statements would enable us to watch the progress of the measures 
taken for retrieving the embarrassed state of the Company’s affairs. 
16. The object of the present letter being mainly that of soliciting instructions, we: have 
not thought it necessary to delay its transmission for the purpose of reference to our absent 
colleague. - ? ; 3 


We have, &e. 


Civil Finance Committee, (signed) = Dz. Hiw. 
20 November 1829. Hout MackeEnzig, 


/ 


_* In consequence of various instances of inattention to our former orders, we deem it incumbent on 
us again positively to interdict, and we hereby do interdict the inerease, on any grounds whatever, of 
the salary or allowances at present annexed to any office, civil or military, under your government 
without our.previous sanction. No public inconvenience can be sustained from a strict compliance with’ 
this prohibition, and should, contrary to our just expectation, the salary or allowances of any officer be. 
ingreased without any previous sanction, our subsequent confirmation of such ‘increase, when reported, 
will be invariably withheld. 


APPENDIX, 


Til. 


Calcutta Civil 
F inaggeCommittee. 


168 APPENDIX. ro REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


(9.)—LETTER from the Calcutta Civil Finance Committee to the Governor-general in 
Council at Bengal; dated 2d December 1829. 


My Lord, us 
WeE tae the honour to report that the contingent charges * incurred in the several 
departmerfts of this presidency in the year 1827-28 contrasted with those of 1823-1824, 
exhibit an increase of more than 12,00,000 rupees. Of his, about eight lacs of rupees 
consist in the enhanced value of presents given ¢n the name of the Governor-general, of 
which the larger part was of course balanced by an increased receipt under the same head ; 
but still, whether we look to the aggregate amount of the disbursements in question, or to 
their tendency to increase, unless narrowly watched, the matter appears equally deservin 
of attention. We shall, of course, pregressively examihe in detail the several offices in eac 
of the departments, with the view of ascertaining, as far as possible, the particular causes 
whichemay in each case occasion the disbursement, and of considering how far it may be 
susceptible of reduction by general or special rules. Our present impression, however, is, 
that economy, under this head of charge, must mainly depend on the zeal and care of the 
several functionaries who are in charge of the different offices, stimulated and directed by 
the efforts of the controlling authorities: for though the aggregate sum amounts to nearly 
half a‘ million sterling, it consists for the most part of small items, very difficult, if not 
impossible, to be checked, excepting by those under whose immediate eye the disbursement 
is made. Further, we apprehend that, generally speaking, public officers are by no means 
sufficiently alive to the importance of attending a. and constantly to the object of 
keeping down their contingent disbursements, nor aware how much may be done with little 
trouble, if the necessary check be only applied in time. Jt occurs to us, consequently, that 
considerable and immediate advantage*might result if your Lordship in Council were to 
cause a letter circular to be addressed to the several heads of offices, pointing out’ the 
importance of the aggregate charge, and urging upon each the necessity of his using his 
best endeavours to confine the expefse intcugred in his department, however apparently 
inconsiderable. : ° 
Adverting to the considerable amount which appears under the head of presents, (and the 
practice must almost certainly entail no less’ expense upon those who are parties to the 
interchange,) we would respectfully submit, that if it be the intention of your Lordship, in 
Council that the orders recently promulgated should be applied to the head of the Govern- 
ment, a communication to that effect may be made to Madras and Bombay. 
We have, &e. on 
(signed . HAIL. 
ia Hott Mackenzig. 


) 


*CONTINGENCIES, 1823-24. | 1827-28. 


Rs. Rs, 
9,67,949 18,55»330 
10,52,988 14,02,968 
6,32,743 5233796 
2,06,957 2,26,835 
31979195 4,39,038 
32,575,932 44557,967- 
32,57,832 - 


Increase - | 12,00,135 


TE, 


General Department, including Political 
Judicial Department - - ~ - 
Revenue Department 
‘Saltand Opium - © 
Marine - = 


i | 


GENERAL APPENDIX. - 169 


(10).—RESOLUTION of the Governor-general in Council ‘at Bengal; dated (10.) Resolution of 


tif December 1829. —— 


at Bengal, on Con- 


APPENDIX, 
III. 


—a_— 


Governor-g@seral 


Tue Right Honourable the Governor-general in Council having taken into consideration a tingent Charges ; 


Statement to Government by the Civil Finance Committee, exhibiting a comparative view of 8 December 4829. 


the contingent charges incurred in the several departments of this presidency, in the official 
years 1823-24 and 1827-28, by’whigh it gppears that the increase in those charges in the 
latter year, as compared with the former, amounts to no less a sum than 12 lacs of rupees, 
deems it proper to call the attention of all the officers under Government to the necessity 
of exercising the most vigilant check and control over the contingent disbursements of their 
respective offices, with a view to effact as great a redyction as possible in this branch of the 
public expenditure. eas 
The Governor-general in Council sees much re&son to apprehend, that, generally 
speaking, the officers of Government have not been sufficiently alive to the importance of 
attending carefully and constantly to the object of keeping down their contingent disburse- 
ments, their attention may have been the less directed to the above object from the circum- 
stance of such disbursements usually consisting of items individually of inconsiderable 
amount, and which can alone be checked by the timely care and vigilance of those under 
whose immediate eye the disbursement is made; but that the importance of the duty tow 
enjoined may be properly estimated by the service generally, a statement of the contingent 
expenses incurred in the two years under review, is annexed below *, which will at once 
explain how necessary it is that an expenditure so large in the aggregate should be narrowly 
scrutinized in detail by those who alone can effectually check it. ° 
_ The Governor-general in Council deems it necessgry, therefore, to require that every officer 
in the service, placed at the head of a public establishment, will use his best endeavours to 
-reduce the contingent charges of his office, however apparently inconsiderable they may 
‘appear to be. : 


ma] 
(11.)—LETTER from the Calcutta Civil Finance Committee to the Governor-general in 
‘ Council at Bengdl; dated 3d February 1830. 
. My Lord, 6 


t 


As we have been furnished through our third Member, with a opy. of the Minutes of (11.) Letter from 


the Honourable the Governor of Bombay, in the Judicial and Revenue Departments, which 


Committee, on 


. 


were transmitted on the 4th ultimo to the Supreme Government by the Government of Revenue and Judi- 


Bombay; 


* CONTINGENCIES. (ied. 1827-28. 


Sa.Rs. Sa.Rs. 
9,67:949 18551330 
10,52,988 14,02,968 
6,32,743 | 533,796 
2,06,957 2,26,835 
3970995 _ 439,038 


General Department, including Political 
Judicial Department = - - - 
Revenue Department « - - 
Saltand Opium - — - - + 
Marine) + - - - 


© toepe@¢# 
tobe ob ae 


32,57,832 


44,57,967 
32,57,832 
Increase - 12,00, 185 


cial Systems of 
Bombay ; 
3 February 1830. 


a nae 170 APPENDIX ro REPORT ranom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


——~_ Bombay, we think it proper to lay before your Lordship in Council the accompanying copy 
Calcutta Civil of a Minute of Mr. Bax, dated 16th June last, which Sir John Malcolm has particularly 
FinangeCommittee. yeferred to. We had proposed to defer submitting his document until we should be pre- 
pared fully to state our sentiments upon the details which it embraces, and upon the 
principles by which they are regulated ; this we hope to.do at an early period, and of course 
the first an® second members of our committee, (the latter of whom has already written along - 
paper on the subject), will not be understood as pledging éhemselves ta the scheme sug- 
gested by their colleague. - ; 4 
We have, &c., ‘ an : 
(signed) D. Hint. 
. H. Mackenziz. 


Joun Bax, 
——_e—_—_ 
; (Enclosure.) 
Minute of MINUTE of John Baz, Esq., on’ the Judicial and Revenue System at Bombay, 


J. Bax, Esq. 


16 June 1829, and Civil Allowances at that Presidency ; dated 16th June 1829. - 


¢ fi 
1° Tue question of emoluments enjoyed by European and Native -officers in the Civil 
Department of the Government of Bombay, is so much involved in the system of judicial 
and fiscal administration at that presidency, that in considering the subject of the 18th and 
19th paragraphs of our instructions *, I must anticipate several topics that would more 
conveniently come urfder review at a subsequent period. I shall accordingly lay before the 
Committee a general outline of the existing system, as an essential preliminary to the consi- 
deration of this question relative to Bombay ; and as the system is not uniform, | shall take 
up the several districts separately, commencing with Guzerat. 

2. The province of Guzerat is divided intosfoyr collectorates ; Ahmedabad, Kaira, Broach, 
and Surat; and into two zillah judgeships, the one comprehending Ahmedabad and Kaira, 
and the other comprehending Surat and Beach. 

3. The collectors are the magistrates, and have charge of the police of their respective 
districts, excepting at the above towns, where the police is under the Judicial department. 
The magisterial powers of the collectors extend to sentences of fine ; ordinary imprisonment 
without labour, not exceeding two months; flogging not exceeding 30.stripes, and personal 
restraint. If the exercise of these powers appears inadequate to the offence, the 
magistrate forwards the prisoner to the criminal judge (who is also civil judge) of the 
zillah. m4 - 
4. The assistants to a magistrate may be deputed by him to perform any part of his 
duties, but the magistrate may investigate or annul sentences passed. by his assistants, and 
may recall at any stage of proceeding matters referred to them. : : 

5. The native district police officers have authority to punish trivial cases by fine, not 
exceeding five rupees, confinement not exceeding eight days, or placing in the stocks, or 
other similar restraint, for a period not exceeding 12 hours. The village police officers have 

Y - authority 


' * Extract from the Resolution of the Supreme Government, dated 25 November 1828 :—” 

18. * The Committee will of course carefully consider how far the emoluments assigned to the 
“ several offices which come under their review, whether held by European or Native officer, 
“ are adjusted on proper and equal principles, noticing any that may appear to be excessive or 
« jnadequate, especially adverting to all differences that exist in the scales-established at the several 
“* presidencies, and examining the reasons of them. 
. 19.“ They will also, if they see advantage in the measure, consider themselves to be fully 
“¢ authorized to frame and submit to Government an entirely new scale of allowances for the different 
* offices in the sdveral departments of. the three presidencies.” igi 


GENERAL -APPEN DIX. > 171, 


authority to punish trivial cases of abuse and assault by-confinement, for a period not 
exceeding 24 hours. 


6. The punishments which the crifRinal judge is authorized to inflict, are solitary impri- | 


sonment not exceeding six months, ordinary imprisonment with hard labour for seven years, 
dogging to thé extent of 50 stripes, public disgrace, fine and personal restraint. But if the 
judge passes a sentence of imprisonment for more than two years, he refers the case with 


all proceedings to the Court of Circuit for Guzerat, which ‘court has power to confirm, miti- 


gate or annul the sentence. If the*offertee appears to the criminal judge to require a degree 
of punishment beyond the limit assigned to him, he commits the offender, to be tried by the 
Court of Circuit. TS: 

7. The jurisdiction of a senior assistant to a criminal judge (to whom the criminal judge 

: s : : : . 

may delegate the trial of offences) extends to imprsonment with hard labour for a period 
not exceeding two years; flogging for theft only, to the extent of 30 stripes; fine to be 
limited by the period of imprisonment assigned in commutation not exceeding two years ; 
disgrace; gnd personal restraint. Whenever an assistant criminal judge is stationed else- 
where than at the Sudder station of the zillah, the magistrate refers all criminal cases 
beyond his own immediate jurisdiction, to the assistant criminal judge instead of the 
criminal judge, when they may arise within the limits of the assistant’s local jurisdiction ; 


and it is competent for Government-to invest such assistant criminal judge with all or: 
e 


any part of the authority of a criminal judge. : 

8. The punishment, which a junior-assistant to a criminal judge is authorized to adjudge, 
are ordinary imprisonment, without labour, not exceeding two months, fine and personal 
restraint. 

9. The Court.of Circuit (which is also a court of appeal for Guzerat4 is stationed at Surat, 
and consists of three judges; the sessions are held by them in rotation half yearly at 
Surat, and at the other stations of the province, by one of the puisne judges of the court. 
Sentences passed by the judge on circuit, of death, transportation or imprisonment for life, 
are not executed until confirmed by the Sudder Foujdarry Adawlut at Bombay. 

10, This description of the criminal branche of the judicial administration in Guzerat 
applies to the districts of the Northern ande Southern Concan, excepting that in those 
districts the sessions are held by one of the judges of the Sudder Foujdarry Adawlut, under 
the same limitation as exists with regard to a judge of the Court of Circuit in Guzerat. 

11. The sessions at Darwar in the southern Mahratta country, are also held by a judge 
of the Suader Foujdarry Adawlut, under similar limitation. The Regulations are not yet for- 
mally introduced into that district, where a principal collector, with assistants and a registrar, 
exercises with some trifling variations those criminal and civil functions, which are elsewhere 
exercised by the departments of the magistrate, and judge, and criminal judge. 


12. The districts in the Deccan are divided into three collectorates ; Poona (including 
Sholapoor), Ahmednuggur and Candeish, and into two judgeships, the one comprehending 


Poona with Sholapoor, and the other comprehending Ahmednuggur and Candeish. 

13. The collectors are tlie magistrates, and have charge of the police of their respective 
districts, and of the policé of the Sudder stations. The penal jurisdiction of the magis- 
trates, which they may delegate partly or wholly to their assistants, under the same supervision 
as already noticed, with regard to the magistrates ia Guzerat, extends to fine and imprison- 
ment for two years, with hard labour,: to flogging not exceeding 30 stripes, and personal 
restraint. In the event of these punishments appearing insufiicient, the magistrate commits 
offenders for trial at the sessions. . 

14. The native district and village police officers in the Deccan, exercise the same police 
fowers as in Guzerat and the Concan. ‘ 

15. The sessions are held by the judges of Poona and Ahmednuggur, who, ia the exercise 
of their functions.in the Criminal department, are denominated “ session judges.” The 
i jurisdiction of the session judge extends to the. adjudging of capital punishment, 

ut any case in which he passes sentence of capital puriishment, or of imprisonment for 
above seven years, is referred to. the Sudder Foujdarry Adawlut for its fihal orders. _ The 


Z2 session 
t 


APPENDIX, 


‘IID. 


(11.) Minute of 
J. Bax, Esq., 
16 June 1829. 

Administration of 
Criminal Justice. 


Arvelvpix, 172 APPENDIX 70 REPORT rnom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


—._ __ session judge or roona noias aai-yearty sessions at Sholapoor, and the session judge ‘of 
_Calentta Civil  Ahmednuggur holds half-yearly sessions at Dhoolia, the civil station of Candeish. 

FinanceCommittee. 46, Assistants to a session judge possess no penal gurisdiction, but in the absence of the 
session judge, it is competent for the Governor in Council to confer on the assistant of the 
highest grade, on the spot, such penal jurisdiction, not exceeding that of the session judge, 
as Government may deem expedient. The session } udges of Poona and Ahmednuggur have 
an assistant stationed respectively at Sholapoor and Dhoolia, whose duties with respect to 
the session judge, are’ similar to those which a cgiminal judge in Guzerat performs with 
respect to the Court of Circuit, such as delivering to the session judge the calendar of 
persons. committed or held to bail, holding in attendance at the sessions all parties and 
witnesses, &c. He performs such other duties as the session judge may enjoin in the 
preparation of cases, and in all other matters connected with his office. , 

"17. The Court of Sudder Foujdarry (also a court of appeal) is stationed on the island of 

Bombay, and consists of three judges, exclusive of the junior member of the Government 

as chief judge. I have already had occasion to refer to the duties of this court sufficiently 

to show it is a Court of Circuit for the Concans and Darwar, and it is only necessary to add 

that the general administration of criminal justice and police throughout the territories 
subordinate to Bombay is superintended by this court. 

Administration of | 18. I now proceed to offer a sketch of the civil branch of judicial administration. 

Civil Justice. 1% Civil suits in Guzerat, the Concans and the Deccan are decided by native commis- 
sioners, judges’ assistants and judges. The amount of suits coming within the jurisdiction 
of a native commissioner is regulated by the judge, with the sanction of the Sudder Adawlut, 
but it must extend to Rs.500, and must not exceed Rs. 5,000. Suits not exceeding 
Rs. 500 are also refegred to a_junior assistant judge, and not exceeding Fs. 5,000 to 
a senior assistant judge. The Governor in Council may authorize the judge to refer to his 
senior assistant suits as far as Rs.10,000 in amount, as well as appeals from decisions 
passed by a junior assistant judge or commissioner. Suits above the limited value are 
cognizable originally by the judge. . te 4 , 

20. Every suit tried by a commissioner gr a junior assistant judge, is open to an appeal 
to the judge, whose decree is final ; and every suit originally tried by a senior assistant judge, 
is open to an appeal to the judge, whose decree, if it affirms the first decree, is final ; but if 
it modifies or reverses such decree, a further appeal ig open to the defendant, te the Court of 
Appeal for Guzerat, if more than Rs. 500 is adjudged against him by the zillah judge, and 
to the plaintiff, if more than Rs. 500 of his original demand is disallowed beyond what was 
adjudged or disallowed by the lower court. ; ' 

21. Every suit originally tried by a zillah judge in Guzerat, is open to an appeal to the 
court of aE for that province; and all decisions of the latter court are open to appeal 

to the Sudder Dewanny Adawlut, when that court reverses or modifies the judgment of the. 
zillah court; but where the decision of the court of appeal confirms the judgment of the 
zillah court, a regular appeal does not lie to the Sudder Dewanny Adawlut, unless the amount 
at issue exceed As. 5,000. A special appeal is open for good cause, in all cases where there 
is no regular appeal; such ee appeal lies to the court next above that whose decree is 
appealed from; but if such higher court does not grant the appeal, it may still be granted 
by the court next above that first appealed to, and finally by the Sudder Adawlut. 

22. The system thus described as prevailing in Guzerat, applies to the Concan and 
‘Deccan, with this difference, that there is no intermediate court of appeal between the zillah 
judge’s court and the Sudder Dewanny Adawliut ; appeals lie to this latter court from Darwar, 
and appeals from the Sudder Dewanny Adawlut are open to the King in Council. 

23. The Court of Sudder Dewanny Adawlut, besides its appellate jurisdiction in th? 
decision of .syits, is vested with a general supermtendence over the judicial civil adminis- 
tration throughout the territories. subordinate to Bombay ; but the judges do not personally 

visit the Deccan or Guzerat. aes * 
Suits cognizable by 24, With regard to the fiscal duties of the collectors of land revenue, I may observe, that 


Collectors, and independently of fhe responsible and minute nature of the revenue settlements, the collectors 
duties of Collectors. = * are 


GENERAL APPENDIX. 173 


are invested with the civil cognizance, in the first instance, of all claims for the possession of 
lands, of all disputes in regard to the tenure of land, of all disputes regarding rent, of the 
current or former years, which the ryots on the one hand, or the farmer or superior land- 
holder on the other, may desire to submit ‘to adjudication ; of all questions regarding the 
use of wells, tanks and water-courses, and roads and fields; and of disputes regarding 
boundaries. : . * 

25. In all these cases an appeal against’ the collector’s decree lies to the zillah judge, 
‘and the appeal is subject, both as t6 tria? and to further appeal, to the same rules as apply 
to an appeal from the decree of a senior assistant judge, passed in an original suit. 

26. The department of Sea C@&stoms at the Presidency is under the collector of land 
revenue. In Guzerat, the customs are. under a custom-master, who resides at Surat, and 
has a deputy attached to him. In the Northern and*Southern Concan this department is 
also under a custom-master, who resides in the Nogh Concan division, (on the island of 
Salsette), whilst a deputy under him is stationed on the Northern Concan. The customs in 
Guzerat and the Concans have recently been farmed ; the plan has hitherto been very suc- 
cessful, and is in a train of improvement. 

27. With a view of.affording the fullest insight into the degree of responsibility incurred, 

. the extent of duty performed, and the scale of remuneration received by the covenanted judi- 
cial and revenue officers, under the Bombay government, I annex the reports enumerated 
in the margin, reserving for separate consideration the duties and emoluments of uncove- 
nanted assistants and native functionaries and establishments. 

28. From these reports, and the revizw above taken of the existing judicial and fiscal 
system, it will be seen that some prominent defects require to be remedied. In the judicial 
branch there is no superintendence in the Deccan, and there is one®’system for Guzerat, 
another for the Concans, a third for the Deccan, afid a fourth for Darwar. In the revenue 
branch, on the administration of which so much depends, there is no superintendence, and 
no encouragement to remain in or be zealous about a department which in its fullest 
Bae ig most inadequately remunerated (esfecialty in comparison with Bengal and 

adras), and which offers no well-paid appointments as objects of ambition. The only 
principal collectorate ‘under the Government (Daerwar) is held by a Madras civilian, and the 
only well-paid collectorate (Poona) is held by a military officer, and is to be reduced from 
Rs. 33,600, to Rs. 25,200, whenever he vacates it. 

29. I now proceed to submit to the Committee a general outline of the plan which I 

‘ think best adapted at Bombay to combine efficiency and economy with a just scale of 
remuneration to public servants, commensurate to the value of their services to the general 
administration of the State, and calculated to advance the real benefit of government, by 
creating in all who are responsibly entrusted with the conduct of “its affairs, a substantial 
interest in its welfare and prosperity. 

30. In the ‘civil branch of the Judicial department all original jurisdiction should be 
exercised, I think, by native functionaries, excepting suits in which they or their relations 
are interested, and excepting some at the Sudder stations, where suits should be filed by the 
judge, and a portion of them referred by the judge to his assistant, the deerees of the latter 
being, in respect to appeal, on the same footing as those of moonsiffs. There are 79 native 
commissioners, including two sudder ameens. These might be reduced to 72 (designated 
moonsiffs), and divided mto three classes of 24 each. They should be paid partly by salary 
and partly by ‘fees. Tue saiary of the first class being Axed at Rs. 300; of the second 
class at Rs. 200, and of the third class at Rs. 150; and as to fees, they might 
receive half the amount of the stamp on suits of Rs. 500 or under; Rs. 25, on suits 
bdétween 500 and 10,000; Rs. 50, on suits between 10,000 and 20,000; and Rs. 75 


APPENDIX, 


Caleutta Civil 
FinanceCommigee. 


Sea-customs. 


Defects in the 
Judicial and Fiscal 
system. 


Proposed Plan of 
Judicial and Fiscal 
Administration. 


Civil Justice, 


on suits above Rs. 20,000; but this rate of salary and fees, as well as the nutmber of the. 


moonsiffs, must be raised or lowered as'experience may suggest. 

31. Each judge should have only one assistant, except the judges of Poona, Ahmed- 
nuggur, the Concans, and Surat, who will require another assistant at the detached stations 
of Sholapoor, Dhoolia (in Candeish), Tanna and Broach,sto file all civil shits ner a 

: ~ ecide 


ApPenpix; * 


Calcutta Civil 
FinageCommittee. 


Criminal Justice. 


174 APPENDIX to REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


o e 
decide a portion of them, making over the remainder to the moonsiffs. But assistants to’ 
judges should on this plan have fixed salaries, and no fees in future. 

82. The judges will have to try appeals from then*assistants and moonsiffs. 

33. One judge in lieu of two will suffice for the Concans, and a judge and assistant will 
be required for Darwar, on the full introduction of the regulation into that district. Fs 

84. Thé Court of Appeal in Guzerat may be abolished, and the Sudder Dewanny 
Adawlut should try appeals from the several zillah cougs. A regular appeal may lie, 
where, if the judge’s decree confirms the decree of the *inferior tribunal, the sum in question 
amounts to Rs. 3,000; and if the judge’s decree reverses or modifies. the previous one, the 
sie in question amounts to Rs. 1,000: special appe&ls to be granted on good ¢ause 
shown. : 

35. The ulterior appeal to the “King in Council as at present. - i 

36. The collectors, in cases under their judicial cognizance, should have power to autho- 
rize their native revenue officers to file and decide suits in the first instance, and appeals 
from the decisions of the latter, or from those of the assistants, should lie to the collector. 
The Sudder Adawlut should try appeals from the decrees of the collectors in all original 
suits, but regular appeals from a collector’s decree in appeal should only be allowed, when, 
if the collector’s decree confirms the former one, the sum in question amounts to Ks. 1,000; 
and if it reverses or modifies the former one, the sum in question amounts .to Rs. 200. 
Special appeals to lie, on good cause shown. 

37. In the department of criminal justice, where so much variation is at present observ- 
able, the office of session judge which exists at Poona and Ahmednuggur, should be 
abolished, and these zillahs, as well as Darwar, be placed under criminal judges (the same 
individuals as ‘civil fudges) who would be aided in their duties py their assistants at the 
Sudder stations, and at Dhoolia and Shtlapoor. 


38. The sessions in Guzerat might be held at Ahmedabad, Surat and Broach, and — 


criminal justice generally superintended there, by the present chief judge of the Guzerat 
Court of Circuit, (which court itis prépesed ta abolish), under the denommation of Guzerat 
circuit judge, and agent to the Honourable the Governor at Surat. This arrangement is 
rendered desirable by the local situationeof that province, which cannot conveniently be 
reached during the rains by one of the Sudder judges from the presidency. It is also very 
desirable on many accounts to retain a high civil-oéticer resident in Guzerat. 

39. The superintendence of criminal justice and the sessions for the trial of capital cases in 
the zillahs of Ahmednuggur, Poona, Dharwar and the Concan, and of their subordinate 
stations, Dhoolia, Sholapoor and Tanna, may be held by one or more judges of the Sudder 
Foujdarry Adawlut, to which court another judge must be added, in lieu of a member of 
Government. - os ; 

40. The charge of the police at all the Sudder stations, including Poona, Ahmednuggur 


and Darwar, and of all gaols, should be under the criminal judges, but the charge of the 


police at the towns of Dhoolia, Sholapoor, Tanna and Broach may be under the zillah 
magistrate. : 

41. The magistrates to have charge, as at present, of the police of their districts (except 
ing the Sudder station), and to be authorized to extend in some degree the authority of their 
komavisdar or mamlutdars. This latitude would prevent the necessity of sending prisoners 
for minor offences and witnesses to the Hoozoor, and experience has shown that, under the 


‘presidency of Bombay this class of native officers may be safely entrusted with the 


exercise of authority, for there is scarcely an instance on record, since the transfer of the 

police from the Judieial to the Revenue department, of tyranny or corruption by a komavisdar 

or mamlutdar. . : e 
42. The jurisdiction of the magistrates and their assistantg may remain as at present, or 


be reduced or enlarged if deemed necessary in any particular cases by Government. 


43. The criminal judges and their assistants, as Government may authorize, should try 
all cases beyond the magistrate’s jurisdiction, except capital cases, which would be tried by 
a judge of the ‘Sudder Foujdarry Adawlut, or in Guzerat by the circuit judge; but cases 

, involving 


1 


GENERAL, APPENDIX. 175 Arrennix, 
III. 
involving punishment amounting to seven years imprisonment, should be referred for final — 
orders, in Guzerat to the cireuit judges, and the other districts to the Sudder Foujdarry (1.) Minute of - 
Adawlut, Trials for state.offences shovfid not be instituted except by order of Government, J: Bax, Esq.) 
and should be tried in Guzerat by the circuit judge, and in the other districts by one of the 16 June 182g » 
judges of the Sudder Foujdarry Adawlut: Thesentences on trials for state offences should 
.be referred to Government. ° 
44. To produce the improvement go essential in the revenue branch of the administra- Revenue Adminis- 
tion, | would propose to divide GuzErat into one principal collectorate and two collectorates, tration. 
instead of four collectorates as at present, forming Ahmedabad into a principal collectorate 
by the addition of some of the morthern districts of Kaira. The remainmg districts of 
Kaira, with Broach and Surat, to form two collectorates. 
45. The collectorate of Ahmednuggur, with the addition, of a few villages from Candeish 
and Poonah, might also form a principal collectorate. The principal collectorate of Darwar 
to remain as at present. < 
. 46. The custom-masters, their deputies, and most part of their.establishment in Guzerat 
and the Concans, may be abolished, and the whole of the sea customs placed, as the land 
customs are, under the collectors of land revenue. ; 
47. There should be a superintendent of revenue appointed at Bombay to reside in the 
mofussil, whose duty should consist ‘in visiting every collectorate as occasion demanded, 
receiving and inquiring into petitions, reporting to Government in the first instance, on“all 
applications (to be made through him) for revenue buildings and repairs, conducting 
inquiries in the Revenue department, and exercising in general on the spot that scrutiny and 
supervision ‘which is now totally wanting, whereby a system of mismanagement productive 
of serious loss to Government, and much injury and injustice to the»people, has in some 
cases been allowed to continue unchecked, until ¢he ryots have themselves flocked for 
redress to the presidency. This resulé must often ensue where an executive officer is 
uncontrolled, and is the sole reporter of his own acts and conduct. 
48. The superintendent of revenue would have access to all the records of every principal 
collector and collectors; but it is not of course intended that the latter should send their 
correspondence with Government through him, except in the cases mentioned in the pre- 
ceding paragraph. On the contrary, he should be informed that it is not the desire of 
‘Government to multiply business and correspondence by his appointment, but ‘rather to 
abridge it, by remedying on the spot many matters of complaint which are now referred to 
Government.. It would of course be requisite, however, to frame more definite instructions 
for him than can be laid down here. 
-49. To each principal collector and magistrate there should be attached a sub-collector, 
and first and second assistant, and two other assistants. To each collector and magistrate 
there should be attached a first and second assistant, and one or more other assistants 
according to circumstances, independent of supernumeraries or unpassed writers, who, on 
their arrival, are put under the care of different: collectors. 
. 50, Upon the subject of salaries, I have already laid before the Committee a list of civil Salaries. 
servants at Bombay, and of their respective emoluments; also extracts from the Minutes of 
the Honourable Mr. Elphinstone, and ‘of the members of the government, in the year 
1824, connected with this topic; and I have stated my gentiments* on the principle which 
: should 


‘* Extract from Mr Bax’s Minute, dated 24th “February 1829 -— 
§¢ In the first place, Ihave to observe that the admission of a standard of comparison, whereby 
« the extravagance or economy of an establishment is to be weighed by the rate per cent. it bears to 
« the revenue of the government under.which it exists, would practically lead to false corclusions and 
“ great inequality of remuneration. Individuals who have the least duty to perform, might on this 
« principle be alluwed the largest salaries aud establishments, and a custom master at Agra, Allalabad, 
« Cawnpore or Mirzapore, might be deemed economically paid by receipts double in amount to those of 
-“ a collector of Poona, Ahmednuggur, Candeish or Ahmedabad. ‘ ere 
e@ 
r 


. 


e ‘ 
APPENDIX, ‘ 


; Caleutta Civil 
FinanceCommittee. 


376 APPENDIX ro REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


should in this respect govern us, I think, 1 our deliberations. As the justice of the principle 
there advocated has been admitted by the members of the Committee, I need not dwell 
much upon the question here. = 

51. At our last meeting the maximum of salary to be assigned to civil servants at 
Bombay, was fixed at Rs. 45,000, and the plan of paying certain functionaries equally 
was fully discussed and settled. The officers deemed entitled to this maximum at Bombay 
were the secretaries to Government, the judges of the Sudger Court, the circuit judge and 
Government agent in Guzerat, the superintendast of *revenue and the accountant-general. 
Whether or not the second and third secretaries to Government should receive the maximum 
or be paid by a graduation, is a matter to which I do not myself attach much importance, 
but I have laid before the Committee the opinion of Sir John Malcolm and others on this 
point, and my own wish is that theireentiments in favour of the graduated scale should be 
adopted in this instance; the second and third secretaries should, however, be placed on a 
better. footing, I think, than any principal collector. I am desirous of noticing in this 
place, that as the proposed maximum is to include every kind of allowance, some arrange- 
ment will perhaps be necessary by the Government of Bombay to supply the chief secretary 
with a residence, as his house was very: lately resumed by Government, and Rs. 3,600 
per annum given as rent on his voluntary resignation of the house in question. 

52. The deputy accountant-general would be fairly remunerated with an annual income 
of Rs. 26,400. 

53. In our Report of the 27th April we disposed of the offices of the general paymaster, 
sub-treasurer, and superintendent of stamps, civil auditor, mint master, senior magistrate of 

olice and postmaster-general. With regard to the allowances of judges, principal col- 
ectors, and collectors and their assistants, 1 consider that the scale at Madras ought to be 
adopted at Bombay, taking into consideration the circumstance, that the judges and eollec- 
tors under Bombay, with few exceptions, reside in houses the property of Government, 
which is not the case at Madras. 

54. The collector of land revenue and see cystoms at Bombay Island will be amply paid 
by a salary of 2s.36,000 per annum, forg under the scale and number of maximum salary 
proposed to be introduced, there is no reason for continuing to him an income (Rs. 50,000) 
so far beyond other collectors, who have infinitely more duty and responsibility. 

55. I have here omitted all reference to the political and commercial branches of the 
service, because the former (except as regards the establishments attached to residencies and 
agencies) is excluded from our consideration, and the latter is reserved by our instructions 
for future inquiry. , 

56. There is one point which I think should be adverted to, whilst reviewing the official 
salaries of individuals; I allude to the rate of exchange between England and India, which 
appears to have adjusted itself to a standard from which it is hot likely to vary in any degree 
favourable to residents in this country. The time is passed when we are to fancy that 
a rupee represents half-a-crown, and I assume the exchange between England and Bombay 
to be generally at 1s. 83d. per rupee, and the maximum of salary thereforé proposed for 
that presidency is 3,843 2, 12s. 6d. per annum, or 1561. 7s. 6d. per annum less than the 
Act of Parliament (153 Geo. 3, c. 155, s. 82) contemplates to be within the possible reach 
of attainment after 10 years’ service. ; 

57. Having 


“ The quantity, nature and responsibility of the duty to be performed, constitute in my opinion the 
proper grounds upon which the excess or inadequacy of existing establishments at the three preg- 
, § dencies should be decided, without reference simply to the amount of revenue carried to the 
“€ particular division, whether Bengal, Madras or Bombay, in which the duty is executed. Unity as welt 
“ as efficiency and economy is one of the objects to which our attention is directed by our-instructions ; 
*€ and in eflecting this point it should be borne in mind ‘that each functionary is co-operating for the 
“ management of the affairs of one common empire, and is unquestionably entitled to remuneration in 
* proportion to the value of his services to the general administration.” : és 
: : : ‘ + : 


GENERAL APPENDIX. 177, 


57. Having thus laid before the Committee the result of my own reflections on the points 
embraced in this Minute, after weighing well the sentiment of others whose opinions, from 
local and general knowledge, demand e¥ery attention, I shall concisely state the advantages 
which appear to be comprehended in the proposed arrangement. . 

' 58. In the first place, the plan furnishes an efficient and real control in the judicial and 
revenue departments; it substitutes a reasonable degree of uniformity of syst@m for the 
present variety of modes in which jugtice is administered ; it provides a gradation in the station 
and emoluments of revenue officers,’and *creates a few appointments of value suflicient to 
secure to that branch the continued services of. civilians uP advanced rank, who now quit it 
at the period when they can be erfiployed in it most beneficially to the country and to the 
government; it gives to Darwar the,benefit of an efficient judicial tribunal; and lastly, it 
effects a positive reduction in expense of Rs: 1,35,827 per annum, by the operation of 
abolishing and consolidating offices. e 

59. I annex Schedules exhibiting the financial result of the foregoing arrangements, and 
although, in conformity to the principle laid down at our last meeting, I have introduced 
into the Schedule (B.) the equalizing scale of salary for each secretary, I should more 
willingly concur, in this instance, in the adoption of the graduated scale. 

_ 60. By this Schedule it will be seen, that exclusive of civil servants employed ‘in the 
 seapeaee and commercial departments, there are appointments for 85 instead of 101 servants, 

eing a diminution of 16 in the present number of appointments. This is the natural 
‘result of substituting in a gréat degree native for European agency in the original cogni- 
zance of suits, and it is accordingly in the judicial branch that the demand for cove- 
nanted civil servants is found to diminish. ' Under the present system, the number of 
civil servants employed in the judicial department is 35, whereas the number required 
under the proposed system is 22, so that it-is in this branch of the service where 13 out of 
the 16 appointments before mentioned, are abolished. 


61. It is not perhaps within the province of the Committee to suggest the modes of 


employing gentlemen on the Bombay establishrhent who may be thrown for a time out of 
employ by the adoption of these suggestions. {It is on this account, and not from any 
difficulty im the question itself, that I abstain from making any precise suggestions on this 
point; but I shall frankly record my opinion in this place, that no inconvenience can result 
from immediately adopting the proposed ‘plan, if the rights of the civil servants at Bombay 
are upheld, and they are put in possession of appointments to which they are lawfully and 
unquestionably entitled, but which are now held in some cases by military officers, and in 
others by civil servants, who belong to the presidency of Madras... j 


Calcutta, , (signed) Joun Bax, 
16th June 1829, _ Member of the Finance Committee. 


, Memorandum.—In reference to the 44th paragraph of my Minute of the 16th June last, 
proposing to form Ahmedabad into a principal collectorate by the addition of some of the 
northern districts of: Kaira, leaving the remaining districts of Kaira with Broach and Surat to 
form two collectorates, I have to substitute the following arrangement: viz. that the principal 
collectorate should be composed of the whole of the Broach collectorate (except perhaps 
a small tract south of the Nerbudda, which may be transferred to Surat) and nearly the 
whole of the Kaira collectorate, the portion of the latter not comprehended in the principal 
collectorate being transferred to Ahmedabad. 

It is preferable, I think, to keep Ahmedabad on its present footing, for the population is 
nét easily managed, and from the extent and straggling form of this collectorate, it would 
not unite so conveniently with the Kaira collectorate as the latter will with.the Broach 
collectorate. : 


: Calcutta, . (signed)  Joun Bax. 
' 16th August 1829. 
AA 


APPENDIX, 


——— 
Minute of 
J. Bax, Jasq. 
16 June 1328, 


ArrENDIX, 


Ill. 


Caleutta Civil 
FinancgCommittee. 
eo 


(12.) Minute of 
David Hill, Esq., 
on Judicial 
and Revenue 
Administration ; 


8 March 1830. 
® App. (13-) 


178 APPENDIX tro REPORT from SELECT COMMITTEE, 


In order to exhibit the charges incurred by the above plan compared with those of the 
year 1823-24, upon the principle laid down in the Minute of the Right Honourable the 
Governor-general, datedthe 30th of October last, lann&x a statement, dated 30th April 1824, 
of the charges of the above year, by which it appears that those proposed by me are less 
by £s, 60,860 than those incurred under similar heads in 1823-24. 


{signed) ‘Joun Bax. 
_—— SH —— 
MINUTE of David Hill, Esq., dated th March 1830. 


1. [ HAvE studied with great attention the papers laid before the Committee by Mr. Bax, 
regarding the civil establishments pf Bembay, and by Mr. Mackenzie*, regarding the internal 
administration of India. The alterations proposed by them tend to a general system for intro- 
ducing,unity of purpose into our cfvil institutions, and for rendering them efficient and 
salutary, by placing their operation primarily in the hands of the natives themselves. - In 
these two great principles I cordially concur: they lie at the foundation of all the improve- 
ment of which our civil administration is susceptible. I consider it preposterous alike to 
expect that a despotism can be established like a free constitution, upon a system of balance 
and check among its several parts, and a handful of foreigners, who come to India for a por-~ 
tiort of their lives to carry away a competence fur the remainder, should govern that gigantic 
empire, either physically or morally, otherwise than through the instrumentality of its own 
inhabitants. It is only in subordination to these two principles, which, although they never 
for an instant could in reality fail to a certain degree to be acted upon, have hardly been 
recognised, aud certainly not, avowed till of late, 30 or 40 years, that any essential improve- 
ment in our scheme of internal administrition is practicable. 

2. It was a violation of the furmer principle to make the system of judicature independent 
of the government. In this country it wants the aid of all those appliances and means which 
enable it to stand alone, where tiie pcople sre,free: not only the laws themselves, but the 
mannner of administering them, requires 0 be accommodated to the ultimate object of pro- 
moting the general welfare. This accomodation takes effect in a free country through the 
influence of public opinion, and elsewhere through the control of government, by which 
alone public opinion can in such countries be asaertained and expressed. Without the in- 
fluence of public opinion, or its substitute, the control of government, courts of justice are 
left in the dark how far their ultimate objeet, the general welfare, is either promoted or 
defeated by the course of their proceedings. Upon arbitrary principles of law they may 
revolutionize a whole country by a transfer of the rights and property of the people, and may 
bring them under the most galling bondage by vexatious forms of process. 

3. In rendering the courts of justice mdependent, the Government was led to confide in 
a great measure to their -protection the maintenance of all classes of its subjects in the 
privileges which it intended them to enjoy; but those privileges are so ill-defined and so 
ill-secured, and their possessors are so incapable of standing up for them, that a much more 
vigilant and active protection is requisite than what a court of justice can afford. The 
maxim that no wrong is without a remedy, is suited only to a free country. In the state of 
Indian society, and under an absolute government, the duty of protecting the people cainot 
be committed with effect to any but those officers, under the guise of whose authority they 
are most liable to be oppressed. The system must be preventive, not remedial. In par- 
ticular, it should not be left to one part of the system to supply the defects and correct the _ 
abuses of another; but each part should be well arranged in itself, and the whole directed 
by Government for the public good. : ae 

4. With «egard to the extended employment of native agency, it is due of right to the 
people ; there 1s no apology for excluding them from any situations which they can fill with 
efficiency and without danger. The degradation of a whole people to the lowest offices in 
the state is-an outrage upon reason and moral principle. If it were supposed to be true that 
amongst sixtv or seventv millions of human beings none were fit to occupy the higher 

stations 


’ ’ GENERAL: APPENDIX. . 179 


stations in society, so monstrous a result ought to lead to the abandonment of the system 
from which it followed, But nobody supposes this to be true; and I concur in the opinion 
of Mr. Mackenzie and Mr. Bax, thf a prompt, equal, and economical administration of 
‘Justice is unattainable, unless through the co-operation of the natives. The protection of 
the people from oppression, as I have said, is more a branch of executive than of judicial ad- 
ministration ; and what remains for judicial inquiry of a civil nature relates only to*controver- 
sies among the natives themselws., Even if none besides European officers were duly quali- 
fied for the adjudication of such controversies, the ground of expense alone would present an 
insuperable obstacle toemploying them. But in point of intelligence, of application, of know- 
ledge of the languages, manners afid circumstances volved in the cases to be investigated, na- 
tives have unquestionably a vast superiority over the Europeans whom it is in the power of 
Government to select for such employment. If they are inéerior in point of integrity, that de- 
fect can only be remedied by the exercise and discipline 9f their moral faculties ; and in the mean 
time, under European superintendence, and with proper checks, it need not prove a barsto their 
usefulness. The experience, however, acquired at Madras, where native agency has been largely 
resorted to for more than 12 years in judicial duties, does not justify the apprehension, that na- 
‘tives are liable to prove corrupt judges. Durmg that i gan they have decided on an average 
upwards of 60,000 suits in the year, to the general and growing satisfaction both of the people 
and of their official superiors. Authority has. hitherto been much less freely entrusted to 
the natives in criminal than in civil jurisprudence. I am not aware whether this distinction 
has been accidental or intentional; but I consider it to be unfounded. If it have originated 
in the idea that the natives are prone to a tyranical disposition, I know of no better cure 
for such a propensity in a class of men invested with power, than to accustom them to sub- 
stitute for discretionary severity, on the impulse of angry feeling, a meastfred scale of penalties 
on recorded evidence. Acting under European superintendence, their powers of punishment 
could not be habitually abused, and I feel confident, that on trial they would prove no more 
_ disqualified by cruelty for criminal, than by corruption for civil janeliclon 

5. I should approve ultimately of giving pot? onlyeall primary jurisdiction, but all juris- 
diction whatever in civil cases to native judges.e The proper restriction of their authorit 
seems to be not in the amount to be adjudicated, but in requiring all causes to be filed, 
decisions to be sanctioned, or new trials ordered, and decrees to be executed, under the super- 
intendence of a European officer. ‘If appellate jurisdiction only were exercised by European 
judges, I doubt very much whether their decisions would be entitled to respect. Judges 
who had never tried original causes, and who tried but a small number of appeals, would be 
liable to proceed, not upon judicial principles, but upon notions of expediency; and when 
of totally different habits of mind from the judges, by whom all original causes, and the great 
bulk of appeals were tried, it would be difficult, even ifit were desirable, for their decisions 
to diffuse any prevailing influence over the jurisprudence of the country. Under the check 
of European superintendence, and under the ultimate control of government, it seems to me, 
that gradually civil judicature in all its braaches might be administered by native judges 
and punchayets with perfect safety, and with a degree of intelligence, promptitude and 
economy, which can never belong to European tribunals. Our officers, European and native, 
and the authorities in this country and in England, are not yet ripe for the active transfer of 
judicial functions to natives ; but all of them, as far as Madras is concerned, I believe, are 
fully ripe for allowing natives to participate much more largely than they have hitherto done 
in the discharge of those functions; and I am satisfied that the entire transfer is sound in 
principle, and is the ultimate measure to which all our reforms ought to tend. 

6. 1am, moreover, of opinion, that the great mass of criminal business, which at present 
ig transacted by the magistrate and. the criminal judge, might with advantage be transferred 
to sudder ameens, at the sudder station of the district. Their sentences should be sanc- 
tioned, or be liable to be revised by the criminal judge, and ought only to be executed 
ander that officer’s directions; but; with these checks, it seems to me to be absurd to with- 
-hold from the most discreet and respectable natives whom we are able to select such 
criminal authority as is habitually exercised by young men recently emancipated from the 

oe : AA2 tuition 


APPENDIX, 


ITI. 

(12.) Minute of 
David Hill, Esq., 
on Judicia? 
and Revenue 
Administration ; 

*8 March 1830. 


APPENDIX, 


III. 


Calcutta Civil 
FinanceCommittee. 


180 APPENDIX ro REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


i @ . 7 

tuition of a moonshee. It is not conceivable that the authority should in the latter case be 
exercised with-more judgment and temper and satisfaction to the people than it would be 
in the former. Indeed one great recommendation ofvextending the powers of native judges: 
in civil cases, and granting them criminal jurisdiction, would be, that .of enabling Govern- 
ment to dispense entirely with the office of registrar. Whatever may be said for other parts 
of our judacial system, nothing but necessity, real or supposed, can be urged in defence of 
the powers, particularly in criminal cases, vested in pegsogs of the age and inexperience 
of those who usually hold that office. : i 2 

4. The criminal authority of native judges might gradually be extended, so as in the end 
to embrace nearly all the powers exercised by the criminal judge and the court of circuit. 
The greatest benefit might be expected from the use of, punchayets in criminal judicature ; 
it would operate both as a check and gn aid to the judge, and would also diffuse among 
the people improved notions of truth and justice, and the relative nghts of individuals and 


‘of socigty. The measure ought not & first to be hampered by precise rules, but to be pro- 


bationary and discretionary. Rules ought to follow practice, not to precede it: they could’ 
be introduced by degrees, as experience showed their propriety. I heartily adopt Mr. Macy _ 
kenzie’s sentiments on this branch of the subject, and have nothing to add to them. 

8. My opinion is, as I have already intimated, that the Government was wrong in dis+ 
charging itself of all concern in judicature, which, without any bad intention, may become 
an engine of the greatest oppression and practical injustice when dissevered from the rest . 
of the body politic. Its union with the rest of the body politic cannot, as in free countries, 
be maintained by means of public opinion, or popular institutions, of which the latter do 
not exist, and the voice of the former is not heard, and therefore it-ought to be maintained 
through the control ef Government.’ A member of council should preside and officiate as 
chief judge of the Sudder Adawlut. Phe suits filed, with the cause of action in each, 
should be regularly reported to Government. The Government should have power to stay 
any decree for a time, or altogether, and when it saw fit, to order a new trial. All circular 
orders, and all English correspondence should pe laid before Government. With these pre- 
cautions, the system of judicature would,be guarded against being at variance with the 
general system of internal administration, and the Government would be enabled, in its 
executive or legislative capacity, to exercise all the control over it which the public welfare 
might require. ° ‘ ; 

9. I agree in opinion with Mr. Mackenzie that appeals of right should be greatly limited 
in number, but I consider the amount at issue to be the only definite rule for admitting 
them, or for: determining the tribunal before which they are to be carned. The superior 
courts should in all cases have authority to admit special appeals, and that authority should 
be exercised according to their discretion. They should also, when they saw fit, be allowed 
to substitute a new trial by the court below, for a special appeal, but not for an appeal of 
right. The reversal of the first decree by the superior tribunal should not be ground for 
another appeal of right, but it may be good ground for a special appeal. A reversal cer- 
tainly implies attention and thinking for itself on the part of the superior tribunal, but it 
also implies difficulty in the question at issue. Combined with other considerations it may 
serye to show that the ends of justice require the-cause to be tried again. 

10. The Court of Directors, in their letter of the 18th of February 1829, have raised the 
question as to the comparative advantages of collective and individual agency, and have 
intimated an inclination of opinion, that in certain respects the business of Boards would be 
better done by single commissioners. I am in favour of the extent to which individual has 
recently been substituted for collective agency at this presidency, both because, on the 
principle of unity of purpose, I consider the authority which was vested in boards, at % 
distance from the seat of government, highly objectionable ; and also because, ‘from the 
difficulty which had arisen in effecting a regular and prompt delivery of the ‘jails, it was 
absolutely necessary that some change should take place, and that of subjecting revenue 
and police affairs to the. superintendence of one and the same ‘authority is an essential 

improvement. On motives of economy, I am also in favour of the introduction of individual. 
; agency 


GENERAL APPENDIX. 181 Arrenbrs, 
agency in some other instances. But viewing the general question with reference to the Madras. a 
presidency, I am much more opposed to so fundamental a change, unless under some urgent, (12) Minute of 
necessity, or for some great and unquestionable benefit, and am by no means satisfied, that David Hill, Esq., 
even abstractedly considered, the universal adoption of individual agency would be advisable. 9 ss e 
11. A Board of three or four members is not merely three or four individuals doing the, Pele hela 

: : : pee ? A ministration ; 
same thing instead of its being done by one. They not only correct each other’s qyersights, 8 March 1830 
and temper each others feelings, but they often supply each others defects by bringing varied ° 
qualifications and resources to thei¥task ; accordingly I have seldom, if ever, known any in-'| 
tricate subject under the consideration of a well composed collective body, upon which, in! 
the course of their deliberations, eakh member did not materially and sincerely modify his ; 
original views. Indeed, all human experience confirms the maxim, that in counsel there ig/' 
wisdom. In executive measures, activity and prompfitude are of vital importance, but in 
a superintending and controlling authority they may be too closely allied to an overbearing 
and intermeddling disposition; and valuable as they @re, wherever all depends upon the 
energy and exertion of the moment, it is true alse, that under an organized and settled sys- 
tem, the vis inertie is not without virtue. Moreover, the views and proceedings of a collec-' 
tive body are not perceptibly or speedily affected by changes amongst its individual mem- 
bers. There is no demise of a Board, and its measures acquire a steadiness and stability, 
which cannot belong to those of suceessive commissioners. This steadiness becomes of 
infinitely more value when a Board is viewed not merely as superintending the officers of 
Government, but as advising and sometimes restraining the Government itself. An indi- 
vidual commissioner acting in the same capacity would be liable to be at total variance 
with his immediate predecessor, and (what would be a much greater evil in such a system 
as ours) might, by deference to views entertained in the highest quarters, and by means of 
personal intercourse, be brought to support, or even to suggest, measures against which, as 
member of a board influenced only by such considerations as would appear upon record, 
and fortified by the concurrence of his colleagues, he would not have failed to remonstrate. 
One of the few securities we have for permanence in any of our arrangements would be taken .. 
away if boards and courts were universally supplanted by individual commissioners. 
. 12. Applying the general question to the Madras Board of Revenue, I conceive that the 
benefit of a greater degree of individual agency and responsibility might be obtained by 
a division of the ordinary duties of the Board among its several members, and by frequent 
circuits of inspection. But that benefit would be purchased at much too high a price if it 
eost the existence of an institution, which has never failed to comprise some of the best 
talents and most valuable experience of the public service, and to prove itself capable of 
presenting to its superiors the soundest and most enlightened views regarding the condition 
of the people, the resources of every part of the country, and the science of good government. 
As a body, the Madras Board of Revenue has by its services deserved a better fate than to 
be dissolved ; but if it were otherwise, and if the incapacity of one or more of its members 
lay like an incubus upon the efficiency of the rest, I do not see how the evil would be cured 
by dispersing them, with very unequal qualifications, to undertake equal duties, and to exer- 
cise co-ordinate authority within separate spheres of-jurisdiction. The incapable members 
could not be expected to. become efficient commissioners. The only. evils which the dis- 
persion of the members of a board seems calculated to remedy are those of its business 
falling in arrears from it having too much to do, or of its failing to take a proper interest in 
its duties from the languid feeling of divided responsibility. There is no pretence for im- 
puting the latter evil to the Matias Boasd of Revenue, and if the former exists in any 
degree, I trust that it might be remedied by some less violent and injurious measure than 
the dissolution of the Board. 

13. Commissions of revenue in lieu of the Board would merely be principal collectors\ 
absolved from executive duties, and deprived of the practical experience and minute and’ 
intimate knowledge which can only be gained in the course of discharging them, and at the’ 
same time vested with superintendence over a much wider extent, and therefore with weaker! 
effect than at present. To place the present collectors and princinal. collectors under the; 

; immediate 


Ap#rnpix, 


II. 


; Calcutta Civil 
FinanceCommittee. 


182 APPENDIX to REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


: ry : i 
immediate eye of such commissioners, without responsible duties, but with absolute discre- 
tionary authority to issue. orders to their servants, and to interfere with their arrangements, 
would degrade the most valuable local officer of the Madras Government into another per- 
son’s deputy, and both damp his zeal and diminish his ‘sense of responsibility. Such subor- 
dination of authority, without corresponding superiority of talent, experience or duty, would 
produce yniform disgust and frequent altercation; even where bad feeling did not arise 
towards the commissioner, it could.not fail to be excited towards his native establishment. 
Besides, ‘the constant changes of commissioners, some bf them permanent and some tem- 
porary, would lead unavoidably to constant changes or suspensions in the system of revenue 
management, so that the same system would seldom beéactively pursued m any district for 
a few years together. After all, too, the substantial authority in a district must necessarily’ 
remain in the hands of the officer charged with resporfsible duties, and cannot in effect be 
transferred to any other officer merely exercising supervision over him. The local officer 
may be aided and stimulated in th® discharge of his duty, or he may be thwarted and 
crippled ; but it is upon his exertion that the welfare of the district must depend, and his 
superior cannot serve the purpose of his substitute. It would therefore be a radical mistake 
to improve the controlling part of one system at the expense of the operative, even if there 
were full reason to be convinced that the alterations were improvements. : 

14, If it be supposed that cases of malversation which elude the discovery of a Board. 
would be detected by a commissioner, I believe that there has been no want of previous . 
general information in any case of the kind which has occurred under the Madras Presi- 
dency, but that tenderness for the individual or false delicacy, or aversion to stand forward 
as accuser, (motives which are as likely to influence commissioners as other public officers, 
and the influence of which may be, and I expect will be, overcome by the Board of Revenue 
as effectually as by a. commissioner) haye prevented the suspicions which it excited from 
being acted upon. : 

15. I am quite sure that without the aid of the Board of Revenue the Madras Government 
would be incapable of superintending the psoceedings of the commissioners and collectors 
under them with due effect, unless it took, upoh itself a great portion of the duty now per- 
formed by the Board of Revenue, and for that purpose greatly increased its establishment, 
both European and native. It certainly is onenal ts the efficient discharge of the func- 
tions of Government not to add to the details with which the Governor in Council is already 
encumbered ; and any reference calculated to be attained with that inconvenience must 
necessarily prove fallacious. ’ 

16. I do not comprehend in what manner the principle of individual agency is applicable 
to the Sudder Adawlut; and it does not appear to me that such an application of the prin- 
ciple was contemplated by the Court of Directors. With a great variety of appellate - 
jurisdictions in the last resort, the law could never be settled by a series of uniform deci~ 
sions, and litigation under circumstances precisely similar. might lead to the most contra~ 
dictory result. As the court is already constituted, the judges can decide individually 
under any rules which are found expedient, preserving uniformity in their decisions, and 
still leaving to Government the benefit of their united wisdom and experience in matters of 
legislation of general principle, or of unusual difficulty. I conceive it, moreover, to be open 
to the most weighty objections to establish ultimate or even dominant authorities in any ~ 
general department of public affairs at a distance from the seat of government. The prac- 
tice is at variance with-the principle of a unity of purpose in our internal administration, 


' each authority of that sort being in fact an imperium in imperio, and being lable to assert 


its own independence by counteracting some other part of the general system: such autho- 
rities, too, possess no influence except what their official acts confer upon them; they arf 
shorn of the beams of power, and are apt in process of time to lose the respect and confi- 

dence of the public. ae 
17. I confess, therefore, that under the considerations which I have freely set forth, I 
should, with reference to the Madras presidency, think it an ill-advised and uncalled-for 
“measure to break un 'the Board of Revenue and Sudder Adawlut. In as far as the object 
is 


r] 


GENERAL APPENDIX. - 183 
z : ‘é@ eo 

is to provide a ready and efficient supervision in the remote provinces, I doubt .much 
whether experience has proved that mismanagement is likely to be greatest at the greatest 
distance from the presidency. 1- doulft also’ whether mismanagement has generally been 
prevented by means of supervision, or brought on by the want of it. The great object is 
to raise the qualifications and characters of the executive public functionaries, not to set 
others over them to lie in wait for their errors and imperfections... The system which 
best answers the former purpose,is the best; the system which answers it well-is too good 
to be lightly abandoned. It mayfa8 a theory be defective, and even in practice its faults 
may be great and: numerous; but, if in the main it works well we should be to its faults- 
a little blind, and should Jet them I8 eclipsed by its success. There are many indications of 
good or bad management in a district which are more to be relied upon than the commen- 
dations or censures of any superintending authority. 4fthe revenue be realized with punc- 
tuality and facility ; if there be peace and good order among the people; if the local officer 
displays intelligence and regularity in the discharge of his orey duties ; if the vaice of 
complaint is not heard either fram the oppressed or through the channel of other branches , 
of administration, the Government has reason to be satisfied that the management is good. 
These are tests which cannot mislead, and cannot be suppressed. If the contrary symptoms 
show themselves, the Government have the means of knowing that things are wrong, and 
should take measures to set them right. With this knowledge before it, if the Government, 
owing to the extent and variety of 1ts dominions and its duties, is unable, through its lotal 
officers, to apply a remedy, the state of the case would not be improved though its’ supe~ 
rior boards and courts were dispersed throughout the country. Under such circumstances, 
the Government is too unwieldy, and its provinces ought to be dismembered but not its 
institutions. ; * 

18. The observations which I have made have’ reference to the system and circum- 
stances with which I am best acquainted, and I am ready to admit that in many respects 
they may be inapplicable to the presidencies of Bengal and Bombay. With regard to all 
the three presidencies, I have already urged, tltat the primary consideration is to reduce 
our expenses within the limits of our income. Whatever reforms might be beneficial, the 
urgency of the occasion calls less for reform thay for retrenchment; 1 would therefore wish 
that, in the first instance at least, any alterations to be proposed for Madras should be 
limited to the object of bringing back sour expenditure to the scale of 1823-24. I am 
confirmed in the desire to follow this cautious course of proceeding, and to avoid unneces- 
sary innovation, by the success which has attended the system of civil administration-actd- 
ally in force at Madras. It has been successful according to all the tests by which it can 
fairly be tried. The statement below*, for 20 years,.durmg which there has been no 

accession 


* Actual Collections of Revenue in the Districts under the Presidency of Fort St. George, ‘for 20 Years,, 
averaging 4,23,11,100, ; 


Per Centage, 
above or 
below Average. 


> 2, Cc t 
YEARS. revenues. | Perens | years, REVENUES. 


| below Average. 


1808-9 


- | °4,09,30,000 . 3 4 2 4 1818-19 - 4,20,62,000 - 9 5 
1809-10 ~{  4,04,33,000 4 7 ~ 1 1819-20 - | 4,26,79,000 ~ 1311 
1810-11 -{ 4,21,21,000 -—10 11 [| 1820-21 ~-| 4,28,71,000 15 2 
1811412 «| 3,98,38,000 513 6 | 1821-22 - 4,32,92,000 25 2 
1812-13 -| 4,01,98,000 415 11 | 1822-23 -] 4,47,25,000 511 3 
1813-14 = 4523,51,000 | — .1 6 | 1823-24 - | 4,20,42,000 210 2 
1814-15 +=] © 4,26,83,000 —14 ~ | 1824-25 -| 4,57,12,000 8. 7 
1815-16 =| 4,24,49,000 ~ 5 2 | 2825-26 +1 4,38,93,000 311 10 
1816-17 - | 4,18,06,000 | ~t g 2 | 1826-27 -| 4,34,63,d00 211 6 
1817~18 - {| 4,26,02,000 ~ in — | 827-28 -] 4,01,72,000 5 - 10 


APPENDIX, 
Ill. 
(12.) Minute of 
David Hill, Esq., 
on Judicial 
and Revenue 
Administration ; 
8 March 1830. 


APPENDIX, 


Ill. 
Calcutta Civil 


FinanceCommittee. 


, 


- but in the be ; by : 
Yunder the “orders of” the Foujdarry Adawlut' and Government. In civil cases the Sudder 


184 APPENDIX to REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


accession of ‘territory to that presidency, shows'that the revenue has been collected with 
surprising regularity. In that long period there is only one year in which the collections 
exceed the average by eight per cent. They nevér have fallen so much as six per cent. 
below it. The average of the first ten years falls short of the general average by one-and- 
a-half per cent. ; that of the last ten years exceeds it in the same small proportion. In Eng- 
land, a bed harvest has been stated to make a difference of ten per cent. in the revenues ; 
but the period here taken includes two bad harvests, which did not make much more than 
half that difference. The evidence of successful edmmittration which the statement affords 
must be deemed conclusive, when it is borne in mind that the revenues of Madras are very. 
high, and depend mainly upon annual settlements. No/fnilitary force has for a long course, 
of years been in any district resorted to for the collectjon of the revenue; neither for years 
past has military force been cglledein to preserve peace and guod order; gang robberies, 
tumultuous affrays, and resistance of public authority, are offences of very rare occurrence ; 
add te all this, civil justice is promptly and satisfactorily dispensed, and the whole system 
of internal administration is understood by the people and the officers of Government, and 
has acquired a character of stability which time alone, and not the most skilful contrivance 
can confer. In short, although the institutions of the Madras presidency certainly admit of 
improvement, and in particular ought to be adapted more than they actually are to the 
great duties of ameliorating the condition and character of the people, yet they do so far 
an’wer the main purposes of civil government, that it is unnecessary to hurry on their 
revision, and would be rash to hazard the practical advantages resulting trom them for the 
sake of any speculative reform. 7 : 

19. I may also observe, that if extensive and radical changes should be found necessary at 
either or both of the other presidencies, I deem it most fortunate that the state of things 
admits of at least deferring the introduction of the same changes at Madras. Whatever 
new system may be adopted must at first be probationary, and it is desirable that experi~ 
ments should be varied rather than uniform. The system tried at either of the other pre- 
sidencies may be compared in its effectsewith the system continued at Madras, and the 
benefit of two experiments thus obtained. It is indeed by no means certain that one and 
the same system will even ultimately be found best adapted to the whole extent of India. 
What is necessary for one presidency may be superfluous at another, and injurious at 
the third. The dimensions and compact, or straggling arrangements of the territory, the 
character and habits of the people, the degree of their advancement in civilization, the 
existence or want of particular institutions, may all contribute to recommend a difference of 
system for the different presidencies, or for different parts of the same. Uniformity of 
system, under circumstances essentially unlike, is really the most pernicious species of 
diversity. , ; 

20. ie seems proper that I should explicitly describe the system of civil administration 
, for the Madras territories, which would arise out of the principles I support, and which, in 

my judgment, all our reforms ought at least to tend to. It ought practically to be carried 
on as far as possible by the natives, and ought in all its branches to keep up an intimate 
connexion with the Government. The European officers ought merely to superintend and 
direct the natives in the discharge of their duties, and to form the links by which their con- 
nexion with the Government is maintained. All civil jurisdiction ought to be exercised’ by 
natives; but, beyond a limited amount, ought to be exercised only at the station of an Eu- 
ropean officer, who ought to be empowered to order a new trial, or to admit a special appeal 
to another native judge, and under whose direction all decrees ought to be executed. The 

eat bulk of criminal jurisdiction now exercised by magistrates and their assistants, and 

y criminal judges and registrars, ought to be transferred to natives at the station of the Eu- 
‘yopean judge, under whose direction their sentences ought to be ‘set aside or executed. 

Higher offences ought to be tried by the European judge, with reference in certain cases to 
_the Foujdarry Adawlut. The use of punchayets ought to be freely resorted to in these trials; 
inning unfettered by rules, and left to the discretion of the presidency judge, ~. 


Adawlut 


“4 


GENERAL -APPENDIX. 185 


e 

Adawlut ought to be empowered to receive spécial appeals from the native judge of appeal 
for trial before native judges sitting under their superintendence, and to allow or disallow 
the final decrees of these last judges.e If disallowed, they should order a new trial, and: in 
the end should take the orders of Government before the decrees were executed. In cri- 
minal cases the Foujdarry Adawlut ought to dispose of the‘trials required to be referred to 
them. In both branches of jurisdiction the Sudder and Foujdarry Adawlut ought to exercise 
a vigilant superintendence over the operation of the whole system, and take care to bring it 
constantly and fully under the r8vigwe of Government. 

_ 21. Police ought to be in the safme hands as land revenue, the main-spring of civil go- 

ernment in India; and the aim og&eht to be as much as possible to raise the character and 
qualifications of the local officers to whom they are committed. Although they may not 
come up to the beau ideal of what they ought to be, jt would only degrade and deteriorate 
them, without rendering them more safe or more capable? to treat them with distrust, to 
undervalue them, and employ the choice talent of the eervice to watch over them. : If, too, 
the efficient officers are superintended, who is to superintend the superintendants? The 
efficient officers, whatever system we follow, can be superintended with effect only by them- 
selves, or by others through the medium of the fruit of their labours. All other superin- 
tendence will but serve to embarrass them, and to delude their superiors. The principal 
collector therefore (where there is one) ought to be charged with executive duties as well 
as the sub-collector. When a district is large, it ought to have a principal collector, with 
one or more sub-collectors under him; when it is small a collector is enough: under the 
collectors should be an efficient native establishment; over them, an efficient Board of Re- 
venue at the presidency. The Board of Revenue should watch all indications of good or 
bad management, and its members should occasionally visit the districts for the purpose of 
communicating with collectors on the spot, and satisfying their minds on points which 
may seem to call for local inquiry. The Board ought also to keep Government fully informed 
of the state of all parts of the country. 


e 
APPENDIX, 


oC —— 

(12.) Minute of 
David Hill, Esq., 
on Judicéal , 
and Revenue 
Administration ; 
8 March 1830. 


22. The Government ought to combine the information drawn from the Sudder Adawlut , 


and Board of Revenue, and from all other sofirces, so as to judge how far the whole system 
of internal administration is beneficial and successful, or the contrary, and ought to inter- 
pose its authority as the general interests of the*‘people may require. 

23. If the extent of the presidency, or the scattered position of its district come to pre- 
clude the exercise of concentrated authority, either by the Sudder. Adawlut and Board of 
Revenue, or by the Government, a second or subordinate government, with all its component 
parts, as far as they may be necessary, should be set over a portion of the overgrown or 

‘misshapen territories, rather than break up the unity of the scheme of administration. 

24. The scheme does not pretend to be perfect: perfection belongs not to human institu- 
tions under the most favourable circumstances, and it-would be visionary to look for it in 
the government of unnumbered millions of various kindreds and tongues and nations by a 
slender ephemeral band of foreigners.. It may be objected also that the scheme bears an 
arbitrary character: so it does; but a government founded on the right of conquest, and 
maintained by the power of the sword, must needs be arbitrary. Liberal institutions will 
not coalesce with arbitrary authority, and the attempt to combine the two only frustrates 
the purposes of the government, even when they are beneficial, and puts the people ‘under 
subjection to many tyrants instead of one. , 

' 25. I have confined myself to the discussion of principles and the statement of general 
results, and am desirous of refraining from,the application of them in detail to our existing 
establishments until it be ascertained how far they obtain the sanction of Government. 
lrom that rule I would: only depart to such extent as may be: requisite in order to bring 
down the scale of public expenditure to the standard which the Court of Directors have 
prescribed for it, and which the state of the public finances renders imperative. To that 
extent I propose, in a separate paper, to suggest alterations in the civil establishments of 
the Madras presidency on the prineiples which I have attempted to explain. Witha view to 
such further alterations as on general grounds may be advisable there or elsewhere, or Ks 
' BB e 


Bpeesos, 186 APPENDIX ro REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 
MII. = : ae 
—_ the ground of rétrenchment may be necessaty at either of the other presidencies, I would 
Caleutta Civil recommend that if they are of a radical or sweeping nature, we should state to Government 
FinanceCommittees the principles which, in our judgment, ought to regujate the system of internal administra- 
tion, and should apply for their mstructions for our guidance in drawing up a scheme for 
carrying them into practice. 


Calcuttg, 8th March 1830. : . (signed).  D. Hint. 


(13.). Letter from 
Committee, on Ju- ; 
diciul and Revenue My Lord, a e . : : ; 
Administration ; * N commencing the revision df the establishments of the three presidencies, with the - 


25 October 1830. View of bringing the charges down te the standard of 1823-24, we stated to your Lordship 
in Council that retrenchment of expense, and not general reform, was the primary object 
we had in view, and that in the suggestions offered by us we should adhere as far as pos~ 
sible to the existing system. We at the same time intimated that when no other mode of 
effecting reductions to the necessary extent appeared to be practicable, we should consider 
ourselves at liberty to propose new arrangements founded upon those principles which we 
concurred in thinking it expedient to adopt in providing for the civil administration of the 
country. : 

2. In conformity with the above principles, the only essential changes recommended by 

* Report of ti ‘us in regard to Madras*, were the modification of the Courts of Circuit and Appeal, the 


(13.)—LETTER from the Calcutta Civil Finance Co i ittee to the Governor-general ivf “ . 
Council at Bengal; dated 25th c ctober 1830. ; 


7: : ‘abolition of the office of registrar, and the extension of the powers of native judges. In 
Rea Pate Bengal +, however, i sopaied to us that the requisite reduction of expense could only be 
App. (20.) ' effected by a somewhat more extensive change of system; and at Bombay the arrangements 
+ Ditto,dated actually adopted by the. Government, involving an almost complete alteration of their 
* a2 July 1830. judiciary. establishments, we were compelled, to enter fully { into the consideration of the 
App. (22:) general principles to be followed in all local arfangements for the civil administration of the 
t Ditto, dated country. bd : 
20 September 1830. 3. In'so wide a sphere of inquiry it cold scarcely happen that there should exist an 
App. (18.) entire concurrence of opinion on all points ;.and the views of our second: member in regard 


to some important questions involved in the systenf adopted at Bombay differing from those 
: entertained by the majority of the Committee, we have the honour of submitting herewith 
§ Minute by Mr. 2 OPY ofa Minute §, wherein, as intimated in the postcript ofour Report of the 20th September 
Mackenzie, dated last, he has explained the sentiments entertained by him, together with the observations || of 
1 October 1830, Our senior member on some of the matters discussed in that paper. 
) Minute by Mr. 4, The Committee propose to take an early opportunity of submitting a separate report 
Hill, dated8 March upon the question, how far the agency of individuals could be advantageously substituted 
1830. App. (12.) for that of collective boards. In the meantime, the third member deems it sufficient to refer, 
Ditto, ditto, dated for an explanation of his views regarding the judicial and revenue administration, to hig 
19 October 1830. Minute] of the 16th June 1829, and to the regular Reports of the Committee already. 
{ Submitted to Go- furnished, and to state his concurrence with the second member in thinking that the pro- 
vernment in a Let- vincial judges of appeal and circuit might, without any other delay than would, necessarily. 
ter from the Fi- attend the adoption of the arrangement, be safely abolished at Madras, by still farther en- 
nance Committee, larging, as at Bombay, the criminal and civil powers of the local European and native judges. 
dated 3 February 5. It is satisfactory to find that there is a general concurrence in our committée im regard 
"1830. App. (11-). to the essential principles of reform proper to be applied to the local administration of 
India, and that whatever variety of opinion may exist in following out those principles, doa 
not in any degree tend to bring in question the financial’ results it has been the object of our 
reports to establish. 
: ; We have, &ce. 


signed) D. Hint 
Hout Mackenzie, 
Joun Bax. 


( 


GENERAL APPENDIX. 187 


(Enclosure.) MINUTE of Holt Mackenzie, Esq., dated 1st October 1830. 


1. Havine examined the establishments entertained at the three presidencies, I now wish 
to record the conclusions to which I have been led in regard to the principles to be followed 
in all local arrangements for.the judicial and revenue administration of this country, so long 
at least as it shall be governed according to the system now established by the British 
Parliament; and though I can s@argely expect that much authority will be given to any 


. remarks or suggestions I may ventyfe to offer on so difficult a subject, even with reference 
‘to this presidency, | will not the j\ss freely submit the thoughts that have occurred to me 


in regard to the country generally, béheving that the discussion, though it ed often expose 
my want of information, can scarcety fail to call forth the knowledge of others better 
informed. — , : ; 

2. E shall generally follow the paper which I wrote last year on the first perusal of 
Mr. Bax’s minute, because I still adhere, in its main outlines, to the scheme I then sketched. 
But since that paper was written, Mr. Bayley has recorded his minute on the administra- 


, tion of civil justice, and some important minutes have consequently been submitted by the 


Sudder Court of this presidency, two of the judges of which court (Ross and Tumbull) 
with Mr. W. W. Bird, had been previously good enough to peruse my note,"and to give 
me their opinions on some of the questions discussed in it. Discussions have likewise been 
in progress between the Government and the Judges of the Supreme Court. Our committee 
also has gone -fully into the consideration of points then less perfectly developed, and on 
some the sentiments.of Government have been more or less distinctly expressed. Hence 
has been suggested to me the propriety of modifying and explaining various passages of the 
paper above-mentioned ; and though I have not time, to re-write the whole, still less to refer 
specifically to the several pomts on which my sentiments may agree or differ from those of 
-Others, I beg that this paper may now be considered as supplemental to our report on the 


Bengal civil establishment, referrmg particularly to the statements which constitute the 
eppendix of that report. : . 


3. I would once for all remark, that in the practical application of the principles herein- 
after stated, as of all other general principles, Government must necessarily look to acci- 
dental and temporary circumstances. It is not enough that the general plan be an expedient 
one, there must exist fit instruments in the required quantity to give effect to it. But it 
would be vain to attempt to anticipate all the circumstances which are likely from time to 
time to oppose the universal adoption of what we may recommend. Our recommendation 
must therefore be taken merely as the general rules we should wish to see followed, when 
no impediment exists. The practical application of them with reference to temporary or 
local considerations belongs to others ; I venture, however, to express a, confident assurance, 
that if any project for the better or more economical government of India be impeded, by 
the indiscriminate choice of the persons who are destined to public life here, the home 
authorities will readily adopt the measure necessary to secure a better selection; I assume, 
consequently, that: all the civil servants of the Company are or will be men of fair capacity 
and character, fully qualified to discharge, after a sufficient course of service, the duties 
which attach to the collectors and magistrates of districts, and that a large number of them 
will be found equal to the more difficult and important duties that belong to the adminis- 
tration of civil and criminal justice. ete 

4.. Now, if the case be so, I must, as a general objection against our existing vba 
express my doubts of the expediency of drawing any arbitrary and absolute line of sepa- 
rayon between the revenue and judicial officers of Government, especially in an unsettled 
country : there the acts of the revenue authorities affect most widely the interests of society ; 
they touch at every point the properties and institutions for the protection of which the 
courts are instituted ; their duties are indeed mainly of a judicial character, and on their 
decision depends the worth (I might almost say the existence) of the most valuable parts 
of the property of the country. It would be preportertey therefore, to urge a want of 

" BB2 ; confidence 


ApPEnpix, 
Ill. 


Minute of ; 
Holt Mackenzie, 
Esq. 

1 October 18 go. 


-Dated 16June 1829. 


Apprenpix, 188 . APPENDIX to REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


II. ° : 

confidence in men so trusted, as a reason fér not entrusting them avowedly with judicial 

Calcutta Civil functions. Nor does the separation of the departments operate in fact to establish any real 
FinanceCommittee. check upon either, in so far as concerns the most important interests of Government or of 
the community; for under the plan of separation, both are. supreme in their own sphere, 

and each may, in an unsettled country at least, exert so.wide an influence, as to make all 

that remgins a matter of indifference. The revenue authorities may beggar the people by 

blunders or extortion, or may squander the government resources in ignorance or design, 

ye the matter will never fall within the ate *probably come within the know- 


edge of the courts, and the latter may similarly set fiw and justice at defiance, without, 
interference by the ‘former. Were it not indeed thatfaur system, and the terms used to7) 
describe it, have given a contrary habit of thought, Wy should at once perceive how incon- 
. sistent it is to speak of controlling gur revenue officers by tribunals who are not allowed 
a whisper in deciding the grand question of the quantum of assessment to be demanded. 
Contrasted with the mass of propesty thus left to the decision of the revenue men in the 
unsettled districts, all that becomes matter of litigation in the Adawlut is insignificant ; 
for to the revenue authorities it belongs to say, whether the estate of every landowner in 
those districts shall be valuable or worthless, and whether millions shall cultivate their 
paternal fields in comfort and independence, or shall toil in poverty, or suffer exile ; and in 
the few cases in which our collectors are sued, it may well be doubted whether, as matters 
are now arranged, there be any solid reason to anticipate a better judgment from the judge, 
excepting on grounds that would imply on the part of the revenue functionaries, an entire 
unfitness for the trust actually confided to them. _ 

5. Nay, the existing plan of separation must act powerfully against the efficiency of the 
Adawluts, by depriying them, especially the higher courts, of the means of acquiring and 
maintaining the information necessary tg a just judgment on the matters which they have 
to decide; and it does not less tend to weaken the control of the superior revenue autho- 
rities : for to say nothing of distance, the officers of each department see only one half of 
the societies with which they have to deal., In every. case that occurs there must be an 
ignorance of a number of particulars that Would otherwise be familiar, or they have to 
obtain a knowledge of them through the means of a long and laborious inquiry. 

6. So long, indeed, as England shall govern India on the plan now established by 
Parliament, to which of course we must conform, the only chance I conceive of our having 
such an administration as shall satisfy the just expectations of the people, and as, shall 
contain within itself those seeds of improvement which must be cultivated by their co-ope- 
ration, is to be sought in the completest possible unity of purpose throughout all the depart- 
ments and in all their grades, for it 1s only thus we can hope to maintain that moral 
control, which will enable us safely to delegate to natives those duties which must be 
confided to them, if we would really do justice. Without this, Government must, I fear, fail 
either to maintain its own rights, or to protect those of its subjects. - It will be ey 
vacillating between the two objects, instead of consistently pursuing the course by whic 
they are best to be combined, and the subordinate functionaries will be frequently thrown 
into a position of hostility and counteraction, toiling to effect to-day what to-morrow will be 
destroyed: baffled in every scheme that embraces more than the adjustment of some partial 
and temporary interest; deprived of all means they ought. to possess, of anticipating or 
directing the consequences of their acts, all will- be fully armed for purposes of mischief, no 
one will have sufficient power for protection. In a word, to disjoin the several parts of 
government, in a country which is not self-govgmned™*, is like placing the different members 
of the body in charge of different physicians, severally acting with their respective Me A 

a” ' according: 


= 
* This condition must always be kept in mind, because the self-government of the people will 
introduce entirely new principles of action; and in maintaining what may seem rather arbitrary doctrines, 
1 beg te be understood as urging them only under the system by which all public functionaries are 
arbitrarily appointed by the Government, not as advocating the continuance of such a system. . 


4 


GENERAL APPENDIX. 18g Armes, 


according to individual theory, without referencé to: the treatment of*other'parts, and each —— 
holding in his hand the power of destroying life, but helpless to save, from the blunders of A Lae ate of 
his brethren. It is to animate the lifelags frame with a plurality of souls. ot ‘Esq ena 


7. At this presidency at least, our failures may, I think, mainly be traced to the want of any 
sufficiently strong connecting link between the several departments ; and above all, I would 
deplore the. relinquishment by Government of its proper control over the administration of 

‘ civil justice.- : ; ag 

8. Of police I need. scarcely peg, because every one seems to allow that it, heldhgs to 
the executive government, though afcidentally, and I think against all sound’ princigfle, united 
here with the administration of ciw\and criminal justice. But even supposing ofy judges 
confined to their proper duties, it \eems to me that the theory of a completefseparation 
between the judicial and executive authority, if elsewhere sound, is here misplaced. The 
judicial is the chief branch of the executive administration.’ Though in free countries it may 
belong to the people, in a despotism it must belong éo the auler or his delegates; and to 
put judges arbitrarily over the people, whom.the people cannot control, and to leave them 
uncontrolled, is to abandon the most sacred duty of supreme power ; Government, therefore, 
by relinquishing wholly the judicial functions to inferior agents, must, I think, alienate its 
subject directly, by the denial of a hearing to the injured, and indirectly, by encouraging 
mal-administration. : 

9. Our plan must, I imagine, be utterly incompatible with every notion of government 

. which a native of the country can be expected to entertain. To-day he finds to his cost 
that the revenue authorities have vast and almost uncontrolled power, they are the masters 
of his destiny: to-morrow he is told they can do nothing to secure for him, from the 
meanest retainer of the court, the property they created, after a long and anxious pursuit 
of justice he may have established, by a practical, decision, his, right to his patrimonial 
village. But the tribunal which hag awarded him possession can do nothing to maintain it 
against the invasion of the assessor.. He looks in vain for that completeness of function 
which naturally enters into his idea of a ruler; the subordination of ranks he would under- 
stand; he might comprehend the delegation of powers subject to special restrictions ; 
but a division of authority, which leaves the country without a*master, a delegation of 
power which strips Government of its supremacy, or leaves it supreme only when opposed 
to its subjects, must pass his powers of imagination, and we cannot wonder if he he reduced 
to the alternative of charging his rulers.with indifference to the prayers of the people, or of 
referring to destiny the good and evil they bestow. Practically, the interference necessary 
to maintain on the part of Government a control over its judicial as well as the revenue 
officers, would not be found burthensome; less so probably than the frequent interposition 
in individual cases which is actually exercised in the revenue department, and of which the 
occasions would be rarer if there was unity of action in the different branches; for real 
control is not exercised through a busy intermeddling with the details of individual cases, 
and the efficiency of a ruler is to be measured not by what he does, but by what he causes 
to be done. nf = 

” 10. It may be worth remarking, that while under. the Cornwallis scheme, the supreme 
judicial as well as supreme revenue authority remained with the Government, the sepa~ 

. ration of the inferior authorities under the rules of 1793, was not made until the perpetual 
settlement was concluded ; the same principle was followed in Benares. The terms used 
by Lord Cornwallis show his belief (well or ill-founded is apart from the present question) 
_that the right of the great body of the people had been ascertained and yecorded, and that 
he relied upon the courts for maintaining what was so recorded under the charges incident to 
‘the ordinary occurrences and transactions of private life, not as fit instruments to meet the 
exigencies of an unsettled country, and to bring into order the chaos there existing. He, 
never thought of having separate authorities for the adjustment of matters requiring adjust- 
ment during the progress of a settlement; and after all he reserved, as above noticed, the. 
supreme appellate jurisdiction to the Governor-general in Council. Those, consequently, 


who appeal to him and to his system as, prescribing the separation of Government from 
pean oa. : its 


1 October 1830. 


APPENDIX, 
VL 
Calcutta Civil 
FinanceCommittee. 


190 APPENDIX ro REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


its judicial servants, “and of judicial from revenue functions, pending temporary settle- 
ments, strangely overlook the real facts of the case. Whatever weight be given to his 
authority, it is plain, that, to say the least, his meagures imply nothing m favour.of a sepa~ 
ration of departments, in places wherein no permanent settlement has been made. This - 
distinction it seems to be very important to keep clearly in view; for in the districts per- 
manently settled, our executive revenue officers have so little power or influence, that unless 
we were tg make an entire change in the system of ce ar we need scarcely look with 
much &nyoty tothe means of controlling them. «The eg#ablishment of a good police, and. 
the due @lministration of criminal and civil justice, (thefatter should secure the rights of 
the state\ot less than those of individuals,) are in suchflistricts the objects of paramount 
importancd; ‘and while the revenue management of the ountry is left to the zemindars, and 
our collectors have merely to do withenames and figures, the question of employing them in 
judicial duties may be made to rest chiefly on the mere question of economy and the- 
qualification of judicial officfrs. Ifi so far as the revenue department is concerned, the 
principle of the permanent zemindary settlement seems to be quiescence, and -upon that 
principle (I do not of course mean to defend it,) our collectors ought apparently to have 
but little to do, if not required to meddle with matters in which they cannot usefully 
interfere ; and the means of controlling them should be proportionately simple; they may 
indeed be often advantageously employed as magistrates, as various other classes might 
probably be; but the reason will be, not that their revenue and magisterial duties have 
any thing in common, but that the former are not sufficient to occupy their time. Under such 
circumstances, if Government maintain its place, a separation in the subordinate authorities 
need be little objected to, if it be not found open to objection on the score of expense ; and if 
the plan of separation were maintained, the place of some of our collectors might be filled 
by well paid natives. In ansettled districts, or in districts in which a regular: settlement 
brings the collector in communication with the body of the people, the case is, as I have 
already said, altogether different; there it seems to be of very great importance that the 
management of the revenue and police showld. be im the same hands, and itis scarcely less to 
be desired that the contypt of revenue affajrs, and the administration of civil justice, in sa 
far as concerns landed property, should ba closely connected. By not exercising revenue 
powers, the magistrates must relinquish the means of acquiring the most valuable informa~ 
tion which such, officers can possess: they are deprived of almost the only means through 
which they can exercise a really effective contro] over their native officers, and of all classes 
not avowed plunderers; these are the men whom it is most necessary to watch; for under 
# despotic government, the grand difficulty must always be to protect the people against the 
public officers, and especially against acts done under cover of law, which none but their 
official superiors, acting with the influence and discretionary authority that subordination 
implies, can adequately check. It is thus only that the want of that check to mal- 
administration which is elsewhere applied by public opinion, can be (though imperfectly) 
supplied ; and. the protection afforded by tribunals bound by strict laws, and authorized to 
interfere only upon full legal proof and with specific acts distinctly prohibited, must be very 
imperfect. The above consideration may seem to induce the conclusion, that in the unsettled 
countries there should be no separation of powers whatsoever, and that all officers, in their 
several gradations of function, should have authority in ‘all departments; and to this con- 
clusion I should certainly assent in its application to poor and thinly peopled tracts, where 
little is wanting to ensure the prosperity of the country: but the protection of a good police 
and light and equal taxation. In other places the duties of civil and criminal judges are so 
_important and laborious as to make the separate appointment of such an officer a matter of 
necessity, or at least of urgent expediency, on grounds to which I shall hereafter hafe 
eccasion to advert, and under such circumstances, without denying the advantages of an 
union of powers, we must yield to preponderating reasons, endeavouring to prevent the 


~ 


_mischief of disunion by placing the judges and collectors under a common superior, and by 


such a training of the former as may secure their possessing an intimate and practical 
knowledge of the duties of the latter. ; ae 
. 11. But 


GENERAL APPENDIX. 191 


. 11. But though admitting the propriety of having separate judges, I ami clear that the 
office of magistrate shoukt in all unsettled districts be united with that of collector. 
Where districts are too large or too populous for the collector and magistrate really to do 
the business, or rather to see that it is properly done (details must rest with subordinates), 
they should be divided, not the functions separated *. For among a people little advanced in 
civilization, much divided among themselves, altogether strange to us, with no means of 
expressing the general sentiment in regard to the acts of public officers, distance*of place 
and the want of personal observation are bars to the ascertainment: of truth, in a degree 
not known to countries inhabited by peoplt highly cizilized and free, and governed by men 
_ of the same origin, religion, and geheral habits, since in the latter case the expression of the 
public voice will generally anticipatly the complaints of individuals and the inquisition of 
the ruler; and evidence, written and ‘oral, may be largely substituted for personal observation, 
with little risk of error. Uniting the offices of via Gietieke and collector, we should on 
similar grounds combine those of thannahdars and tehsjldars in all the unsettled districts ; 
and for such an arrangement there is the further reasoh, that in this way only can we,*with- 
out a large addition to the public charges, have men adequately paid at the head of the 

olice establishments in the interior, or bring duly into play the village or parishionary 
institutions it is so important to maintain. TI believe it to be quite a mistake to imagine 
that the tehsildars and thannahdars are of any use in checking each other; on the con- 


5 ® 
APPENDIX, 


Til. 


‘ ‘ 
(23.) Minute of 
Holt Mackenzie, 
Esq. @ 
1 October 183%. 


trary, I believe the people certainly suffer by having two masters, and one of those, with — 


vast power, so miserably paid, that he must of necessity be corrupt. The abuses that 
occurred within some of the western districts in the few years following their acquisition, 
may be an traced to other causes than the union of police and revenue duties; and the 
experience of Madras, I understand to be decidedly favourable to that measure. 

12. In the lower provinces there are few revenue duties that could be” given to the police 
officers, unless the zemindars or their servants cduld be employed in that department. 


Something might possibly be done in the several branches of miscellaneous revenue; but’ 


Government must, I apprehend, be prepared to incur a considerable expense in placing the 
thannahdars on a proper footing: the objecteis ‘well Worth a considerable price. Nothing 
indeed could be a greater blessing to the country*than to improve the character, by raising 
the condition, of the native police officers ; neat much regret being compelled, from the 
want of information, to relinquish all thoughts of suggesting any specific arrangement. In 
such a case, especially, accurate geographical and statistical information is indispensable, 
and this not being attainable, we can only submit the matter generally for consideration ; 
_ with the remark, that in proportion as there may be apprehended the want of funds for the 
due payment of the native officers, must there arise a more urgent necessity of avoiding 
the employment of European functionaries in any situation in which they are not required. 
13. I shall not now go into the question of village or parish police, to do justice to which 
it would be necessary to examine separately the circumstances and institutions of each 
district; but I cannot help expressing my conviction, that in many of the districts of this 
presidency, if not in every one, a great improvement might be effected, if we would only 
give the people credit for common sense in the management of their own concerns, and learn 
to esteem our own plans and arrangements in proportion as they consist with their insti- 


tutions. Of the stranger chokedars frequently imposed upon villages, the least offensive are, _ 


I believe, those who merely occasion a needless expense, and the old officers are almost 
certainly thrown out of their proper place, when they are made to look to the officers of 
Government, instead of being responsible to their natural superiors, the heads of villages. 
I-can conceive indeed nothing more irritating to the high spirited men who compose many 
of the village communities of the west, than the. insolent Aomitaatinn of police establish- 
médnts, acting under magistrates often equally ignorant and careless of the ate 
a an 


> 


_* This would imply a negative upon too extensive a delegation by the magistrate and collector, of . 


duty to his assistant, just as much as upon the express separation of the offices of law. 


e 
APPENDIX, 


III. 


Calcutta Civil 
FinanceCommittee. 


192 APPENDIX to REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


and condition of the people they govern, generally debarred from all that intercourse which 
would beget knowledge and kindness, and nursed in the habits incident to a perpetual 
dealing with fraud and violence. If the cause of the people be the main object’ of pre- 
venting crime, I believe we have failed essentially, however successful we have been in 
checking the more violent offences ; and it seems indeed too plain for argument, that with~ 
out the goodwill and co-operation of the community, the native police must, under the most 
active magistrate, be an evil, second only to the crime it prevents or brings to punish-~ 
ment. That it may be efficient, without being tyrannical, 1t must be made to rest upon the 
people, and amalgamate with their other institutions: qconomy points the same way, espe- 
cially if we look not merely to what the Government dig#urses, but to what the people pay, 
and all the-above objects would, I think, be agreeably promoted, if, as at Madras and 
Bombay, the revenue and police werecombined in all their grades. It seems to be expedient 
that the magistrate who has the police under him should be the officer to commit for offences 
requixing to be prosecuted by Govefhment or on behalf of the community, for he only can 
fully command the means of catching the clues of evidence, and with district judges to try such 
cases, the inconvenience felt by judges of circuit, when there is any want of care or skill in 
making commitments will be in a greater measure avoided. But a good many cases with 
which our magistrates now trouble themselves might apparently, with much advantage, be 
left unnoticed, unless brought forward by private prosecutors, and they should apply not to 
tht magistrates, but to the judges. On grounds to which I shall hereafter advert, it seems to 
be advisable that the judicial powers of magistrates should be restricted within narrow 
limits, and there appear to be stronger reasons why the native police, or revenue officers, 


. should not have any such powers given to them. Of course the objections will not apply 


to their being empleyed as administrative officers of the courts, or in causing the settlement 
by arbitration of matters connected with revenue or police, which are to be best adjusted in 
that way. I should think, therefore, that when the judiciary establishments, European and 
Native, are once fairly established, and the revenue settlement of the country concluded, 
the magistrates and collectors, with their subordinates, ought almost entirely to cease from 
the exercise of judicial functions, excepting inquiries touching their own servants. Whether, 
however, this be done or not, it will be equally necessary to adjust the limits of the collec- 
torships and magistracies so as to obviate any serious delay in a reference to them, in what- 
ever quarter of their districts they may be, and we must, in this case, give more weight to 


’ the circumstance of distance than in settling the jurisdiction of judges fixedly stationed, 


and rarely, if ever, required to act on an emergency. The habits of the people, too, as they 
may be lawless or orderly, must be attended to; and it will thence be necessary, in some 
places, to provide separately for particular tracts of more limited extent and population than 
wil] justify the appointment of a full magistrate and collector; but though the sub-collectors 
and joint magistrates to be employed in such cases should be officers of considerable standing 
and_ experience, and fully capable of acting for themselves on all ordinary occasions, they 
ought nevertheless to be distinctly subordinate, each of them to some magistrate and col- 
lector, and should be required to obey any orders the latter may see fit to issue, and this 
without any attempt formally to define their relative powers. In such a case it seems 
sufficient to say, that the inferior may do whatever the superior may do, when not otherwise 
instructed ; that the latter may or may not interfere, as he judges best, for the good of the 
district, and that his interference shall at once supersede the power, and remove the respon- 
sibility of the former; all persons, however, in all ranks and departments being expected to 
report glaring wrongs or mischiefs to the authority which has the means of redress. Deputies* 
were appointed (and they will apparently be necessary at a few places when the detail business 
of the Sudder station is peculiarly heavy) I suppose to act in immediate communication w&th 
their principal, in duties specifically prescribed by him.,’ It will generally be necessary or 
proper that the magistrates and collectors, and sub-collectors and joint-magistrates, should 
have head assistants of some years standing, who may be unobjectionably employed in the 
conduct of much business under their directions, official and unofficial, and who may supply 
their place. occasionally at the Sudder stations. But of all assistance that can be given to 
the 


‘GENERAL APPENDIX. 143 


the collectors and magistrates, by far the most important is that of good native officera, 
adequately paid, and held to a distinct responsibility for the duties entrusted to them. The 
old Dewan system of Bengal failed® because the functions of those officers and their 
responsibility were very ill defined, and because they were inadequately paid, to say nothing 
of the personal qualifications of many of the collectors. But the existing system, which 
would make factotums of the European officers, seems to render failure inevitable, however 
‘well qualified they may be, since it necessarily renders them the tools of their irresponsible 


and miserably paid subordinateS, by* threwing upon them the necessity of meddling with. 


endless details which they can never really master, and depriving them of the-leisure and 
the means of exercising that geSeral check and control which properly belong to them. 
It would be out of place to ae én the abominable tyranny of systematically keeping 
in a state of degradation the entire body of our nativespublic servants, or on the inconsistency 
of pretending to deplore their want of moral worth, and yet studiously placing them in 
a position in which honesty would be a miracle. But the practical absurdity Js even 
greater; the men in whom we profess not to confide, must, in fact, be largely trusted, 
or all business would be‘at a stand; and being trusted, without confidence, without 
respect, without distinct responsibility, and without emolument, their temptation, and the 
power of abusing the trust, are multiplied tenfold. The best men of our service are thus 
compelled to waste their lives in petty details, and in fighting against the effects of a system 
which makes rogues of all below them, instead of controlling and directing the wonderful 
talent we could cheaply command; and inferior men are left.in the hands of underlings, 
whose talents, when they possess them, Government having réfused to purchase or reward, 
are naturally turned to the acquisition of illicit gains, and who may safely pursue such 
objects under the name of their master, relieved from all responsibibity to their common 
superior. The labours of the former are thus thnown away upon comparative trifles, and 
the latter are more surely and completely made the puppets of those they seem to direct. 
It is not perhaps necessary to say much on this head, because the tide of opinion, both here 
and at home, is clearly in favour of the more extenswe employment of natives in situations 
.of trust and emolument, and because at Madras,an example has been set which Bengal can 
scarcely fail soon to follow. But though the theory be admitted, the practice is not, I fear 
likely to find favour, since it will, of course, naturally abridge a very desirable patronage. 
Therefore must we again and again repeat, that the practical application of the principle is 
quite indispensable to any teal system of economy; and to arguments against the reduction 
of the Civil Service, founded on the results of the present system, it must be sufficient to 
observe, that the admission of natives to their fair share in the administration of the 
country, will produce a state of things to which such arguments must be utterly inappli- 
cable.” The situation of the British officer, indeed, will be changed, and not less for the 

better than that of the native ; and hence possibly an objection, because it will (1 have already 
heard it urged) be impossible, with any face, to find employment for all who now are 

employed in situations nominally of little importance. But if the Government think it rea- 

sonable to maintain a bad system, in order to provide for inefficient civil servants at a vast 

waste of the public resources, and at a great risk of much mischief to the community; it 

is for them to vindicate, not for us to adopt, a policy that seems to us at variance with sense 

and justice. 

if ‘The necessary increase in the allowances of the sheristadars may, in a great measure, 

or wholly, be provided for by a modification in the allowances of the tehsildars, and by the ' 
ere of establishments that will no lenger be necessary when the plan we propose is 

adopted. ; ; a 
* 15. We then come to the question, what authority shall be put over the magistrates and 

collectors? and on this point I should say that the magistrates and collectogs of districts 

should certainly be placed under a superior capable of interposing promptly and decidedly, 


whether it be to correct error, to redress injuries, or to stimulate to exertion. It will never, . 


I think, do to subject functionaries arenes vested with large discretionary and summary 
powers, to superiors who can only interfere a: iy a long judicial inquiry. For the security of 


. APPENDIX, 


III. 


(13.) Minute of 

« Holt Mackenzie 
Esq.* * 

1 October 1830. 


the 


ees 194 APPENDIX ro REPORT From SELECT COMMITTEE. . 


—— the people, the functions.of the directing and remedial authority must bear a close relation 
_Caleutta Civil to those of the executive, whose rapid course in the administration of affairs, admitting of no 
Finance Committee. delay, can never be’ overtaken by the slow progress ®f an elaborate investigation. Hence, 
I conclude: that the directing and remedial power must be vested in some one or more 

having a moderate sphere of jurisdiction, if‘we would protect the people from the mistakes. 

and injustiges of the collectors and magistrates, for the best men must; in the haste and 

excitement of executive police duty, frequently mistake, and gometimes be carried beyond the 

strict bounds of justice; and in the Revenue depawment proximity seems, if anything, to be 

more necessary, because the acts of collectors touch more extensively the bulk of the com- 

munity, and that part of it which can least easily overcgife the obstacles of distance and 

delay. It has been one of the mischiefs of our’system that while it has disjoined functions 

- differing chiefly in name, it has ,unnecessarily joined together, under the same authority, 

regions and communities widely distant from each other, differing in almost everything that 
can distinguish nations. The one evfl, indeed, flows from the other; since, with a given. 

establishment, the sphere of authority must be locally extended in proportion as functions 

are separated. : , eyes é . 

16. It is a mere truism to state that the exercise of authority without knowledge (and 
knowledge minute im proportion as the’authority may extend to details) must be nugatory or 
mischievous ; now the directing and remedial authority placed over magistrates and collectors 
mu&t go greatly into details, and it must mainly depend upon the people for a knowledge of. 
their rights and claims. It follows, that if that authority would really give the people fair 
play, there must be easiness of access, or the means of ready communication, independently 

_ of the party whosé errors are to be corrected, -and the wrongs done by him redressed. 
Excessive extent of gurisdiction.3s, therefore, fatal to the efficiency of him who is placed 
immediately over the executive revenue and magisterial officers, in the multitude of matters 
that turn upon points of local information. The evil will of course be aggravated in pro- 
portion as rights and institutions are various, smce it must be proportionately difficult to 
reason by ahalogy from what is near-te what is distant, and from what is known to what is 
unknown ; and to gain the necessary knowledge mm individual cases without preparatory infor- 
mation touching persons and things in thee same and analogous situations, will generally 
involve a delay fatal to the purpose of its acquisition, to say nothing of the likelihood of our 
officers shrinkmg from the labour. In some cases too it must be expected that there will not 
only be wanting sufficient knowledge, but that vanity and the impatience of ignorance, and of 
the reputation of ignorance, will suggest false deductions from fanciful eee 

17. On every ground, therefore, it seems to me that the jurisdiction of the authority imme- 
diately above the magistrates and collectors, should be limited to a moderate number of dis- 
tricts, and these districts resembling each other as nearly as may be in the physical and 
moral phenomena they present. I have already explained why the same authority should 
have the control both of the police and revenue. Nothing indeed can well be more 
unreasonable than to disjoin in the superior what is united in the inferior authority, thereby 
subjecting the latter to two masters, and affording him a ready means of setting both at 
defiance, by evading in one capacity any distasteful directions he may receive in another. 
I have had occasion elsewhere to observe the inconvenience resulting from this cause in the 
case of our joint magistrates and sub-collectors; and from the Madras and Bombay corres- 
pondence, I should infer that the judicial men there have experienced something similar in 
their revenue police. an 

18. The Commissioner of Revenue and Police should not, I think, be clogged with arfy * 
of the ordinary details.of a collector’s and magistrate’s office; for if he be, it must be 

. expected that his own immediate executive duties will have a disproportionate importanée 
in his ‘eyes,eso tliat he will not exercise ‘an adequate or unbiassed control over his subor- 
dinates ; and in regard to the tract under his immediate management, there will be wanting 
the proper chain of graduated authority. How far he should exercise any, and what judicial 
authority, especially in cases relating to land, its rent and produce, seems to be a question of 
some difficulty.; in so far as such attharity may-be left with the collectors and magistrates, 
the 


GENERAL APPENDIX. 195 “Areas pix, 


(13.) Minute of 

Holt Mackenzie, 
Esy.* 

1 October 1830. 


the commissioner’s powers should, I think, certainly extend, and the numerous cases which it is 
advantageous to have decided on the spot in the course of settling the government revenue 
_will fall within this principle ; so alsd ® regard to the punishment of the official misconduct 
of the native officers under him, and the redress of wrongs sustained from them ; individuals 
‘complaining of such wrongs having still aecess to the judge if dissatisfied. But the exercise 
by the administrative and directive revenue and police officers of judicial powers, groperly so 
called, excepting in the case of their official subordinates, seems to be against principle: it 
must be defended, therefore, Sn speciakgrounds, and should not be extended or continued 
beyond the space or time within which such grounds may be found to exist. The principle 
appears to have been greatly viokjted by the law which gives our magistrates very large 
discretion in determining the questi4n of possession, and is perhaps equally infringed in other 
cases, wherein summary decisions (often exhibiting ald the imperfection, without any of the 
speed the name imports) are substituted for the careful judgments of adequate and well 
ordered judicial establishments ; upon such an establ&hment we must of course ultymately 
rest the rights of the people ;.and I would therefore regard all the judicial powers that may 
be given to magistrates, collectors or commissioners, as accidental and temporary only; but 
copies of all decrees regarding landed property ought, in the unsettled districts at least, to be 
sent to the commissioner, who should be authorized to certify to the Sudder Court for revision 
any that may appear to him to involve erroneous or mischievous principles; and it will of 
course be competent to the superior controlling authority to employ the agency of the distriet 
Judges in prosecuting inquiry into any matters, judicial or revenue, whenever they may deem 
it advisable to do so. Possibly, too, it may be thought to be advisable that the commissioner 
of revenue and police should, until a proper jury system can be organized, be employed con- 
jointly with the criminal judge, in holding a sessions for the trial of persons charged with the 
more serious offences, or of Europeans. These are points that will have to be determined in 
.a great degree by local and temporary considerations ; and they need not, I thiuk, be decided 
before settling the general scheme of establishment; on the contrary, it is, I conceive, a 
recommendation to that scheme, that it admits ef such a varicty in its application. 

19. Above the officers who exercise the directing and remedial power, there must be an 
authority of general contxol for the purpose of mgintaining general principles and of watching 
and reporting upon general results. For this purpose the same minuteness of information as 
is required in the directing and remedial authority, is not of course necessary, nor is the delay 
incident to a lengthened investization of particulars (when that may be callcd for) hkely to be 
attended with the same bad effects, supposmg only that the intermediate officers are fit for 
the duties assigned to them ; and how far the authority in question shall be exercised directly 
by the government of the country, or through the mstrumentality of boards, commussioners, 
reporters or secretaries, ought properly to depend on the extent of its other duties. The 
ultimate control must of course rest with Government, and it may perhaps be thought that 

- when it requires the intervention of any distinct authority for the purpose above mentioned, it 
is a proof that its sphere of dominion is too extensive, and that should be restricted rather 
than an intermediate class of functionaries maintained. It is foreign from my present purpose 
to enter on a full discussion of this point; I shall only, therefore, remark-that I consider the 
retention by Government of the immediate control over all departments to be decidedly advan- 
tageous, when other business of more importance or ‘urgency’ allows it really to exercise the 
‘function ; and that where the intervention of another authority of control is unavoidable, such 
authorities should be required to act in the closest possible communication with the Govern- 
{ ment. In the Revenue and Police departnrent, it does not seem to be necessary to define very 
accurately the powers of the controlling authorities, and the question what way they shall be 
tonstituted when separate from the Government, is one which will be better examined after we 
have considered the establishments required to be entertained for the other greats branch of the 
civil administration of the country ; viz. that which provides for the decision of questions of 
civil right between man and man, or between individuals and Government, and for the decision 
of-cases of criminal justice, wherein any individual or Government, or its officers, on behalf of 

the community, demand the punishment of.an alleged offender. oS 
. arene CC2 . 20. The 


1 


APPENDIX, 


HI. 


Calcutta’ Civil 
FinanceCommitiee. 


196° APPENDIX ro REPORT rnom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


20. The functions of the civil and criminal*judge may of course be kept distinet. But the 
reasons for uniting them, those especially of economy and-convenience, seem, in respect to the 
European establishment at least, to be very strong ; afd there is clearly no mcompatibility of 
the one with the other. The case is very different when we come to unite the duties of a: 
judge with the executive charge of the police or the collection of the revenue*. For when 
these are given to one officer, there must always he great danger lest the deliberative will 
give way to the executive, unless both be very light, since the pressure of the. one is instant, 
the other will always be or seem to be susceptible of*postponement: the one will appear 
easy because the items of it may often be summarily disposed of; the other will seem to be 
burthensome, because requiring more continuous thought Hence it is generally allowed that 
in our Regulation provinces great advantage attends the felieving of the zillah judges from 
magisterial duties. The two functjons,«o far as concerns the civil court, have indeed nothing 
in common, and in the criminal department, the power of judge+, waited with the charge of 
the police, and exercised with the hea® and passion that must sometimes influence a zealous 
magistrate, seems likely to be abused. Similar reasons, with others more likely to find favour, 
may be urged against the union of the powers of judge with those of collector, excepting 
under special circumstances, and the above reasons have of course a twofold force in favour of 
the appointment of a separate judiciary, when we propose to make our collectors magistrates. 

21. Assuming that the European judges shall exercise both civil and criminal jurisdiction, 
it ignecessary to define in each branch the extent of their powers; and this, by necessary 
consequence, leads to the consideration of the question what functions shall belong to the 
native judges under them. Now, whether one looks to the extent of the country, and the 
number of the people, or to the peculiar relations in which we stand towards them, it seems 
to be equally unquestionable that the functions of the European judges should be confined, 
as soon and as far as practicable, to that ef superintendence, direction and control; for thus 
only can they hope to ensure to the utmost possible extent a pure, just and prompt adminis- 
tration of the law; and for this purpose it seems to me to be indispensable that the primary 
jurisdiction ofall cases, criminal as well as civil, should be very largely intrusted to natives. 
European officers can never be jy eee in sufficient numbers to perform what the existing 
law requires of them, and the effect of coutinuing the system must be that much which | 
ought to be done will not be done at all, and that much which the law requires to be done 
by the European judges t, will, in fact, be done by natives, under circumstances infinitely 
more likely to lead to abuse than any extent of power directly vested in them with a cor- 
responding responsibility and suitable remuneration. It seems to be just certain that the 
necessary talent and knowledge may be had in any required quantity. Indeed, let Govern- 
ment demand what qualifications it may, if it will only use its patronage to encourage their 
attainment, the difficulty will be not to find fit candidates for office, but adequate employ- 
ment for the abilities it will call into being. Nor do I see any sufficient reason for thinking 

that 


* Edo not now lay stress upon the notion that the courts can be very. useful in protecting the people 
against the revenue authorities for reasons above explained; but of course I would regard all systems 
which do not rest the rights of the people upon courts of justice as temporary merely. 

+ In some cases summary punishment may be necessary to the good order of society, though involv. 


- ing the risk of injustice. In others, this risk may be small or may be counterbalanced by the advantage 


of prompt decision, and the question what offences shall be punishable by the magistrate, and subject 


‘to what control, will require separate consideration, wigh full advertence to the penal law. But it is 


impossible to glance over the Bengal code without being struck by the great extent of penal jurisdiction 
which has been given to our magistrates since the time of Lord Cornwallis, and one is ferced to the 
conclusion that, consistently with the principles of that statesman, a large addition to the number o 
criminal judges not charged with the executive police, is indispensable; yet those who have thus caused 
the magistrates to encroach on the courts of gaol delivery, seem to have been unconscious of any viola- 
tion. of the constitution of 1793. 

t L apply this term of course to magistrates when employed, as at this presidency they are very 


_ extensively, in the trial of persons charged with criminal offences. 


GENERAL APPENDIX. 197 


- that honesty and a regard for opinion will be w4nting if the proper means of checking cor- 
ruption and creating self-respect be adopted. Even indeed were I forced to admit that, 


e 
ApPENDIx,- 


IIL. 


(13.) Minute of 


in their present state of intellect and merals, the natives cannot be safely trusted with large Holt Mackenzie, 


powers, I should ‘still be in favour of gradually enlarging the sphere of their authority, at 
the risk of some temporary evil, and this apart from all the financial considerations that so 
imperiously call for their employment. Men are every where what their circumstanges make 
them, and if we would raise the character of the people, we must begin with raising their 
condition ; to say they shall be einpleyed gnly in slavish offices until they cease to exhibit 
the characteristics that necessarily belong.to their mean condition, is to condemn them to 
perpetual debasement. Without uedervaluing the efforts made by Government and humane 
individuals for the diffusion of knowledge, it seems to me to be obvious that their success 
must mainly depend on the degree in which objects of generous ambition are held out as the 
rewards of superior attainment. The indirect encouragem@nt to the acquisition of sound 
knowledge which may be given by a proper use of publec patronage, is likely to be far more 
efficacious than any direct measure, however ostentatious and expensive, and the plan of 
promoting education by admitting natives to liberal employment has this financial advantage, 
that it not only involves no additional expense, but will secure much economy. The other 
benefits, on which it must be needless to enlarge, are far more important. On what- 
ever side indeed we regard the question, there is equal ground for the persuasion, now 
happily very general, that our native fellow-subjects must be admitted to offices in all de- 
partments, of much higher responsibility and emolument than they are now permitted to 
enjoy, and in no branch of affairs is the application of the principle likely to be more beneficial 
than in the administration of justice, though it must be confessed that in none are greater 
difficulties to be encountered. ° ' ra 
22. As far as concerns civil suits, little difference of opinion seems now to exist. Those 
who would withhold from natives the jurisdiction. of cases of large amount, do, in fact, give 
up to them so large a share of the field, that, were it not for the vice of the principle and its 
ee tendency on those whom all desire {o-raige, the remainder would scarcely be 
.worth fighting for. I have no doubt indeed tliat there will soon be a general concurrence of 
opinion that for the settlement of disputes of civih right between man and man, the primary 
junisdiction in all cases, of whatever amount, ought to be vested in natives, as soon as fit 
men can be found, and there seems to be |ittle reason to suppose that they will not be every 
where forthcoming on the offer of an adequate remuneration. The advantages presented by 
the Sudder station of the European judge in point of publicity, a main security against mal- 
administration, render it apparently desirable that all cases should be. tried there, in which 
the loss of time to the parties and their witnesses (this, if arrears be kept down, need not be 
great) may not offer a decidedly preponderating objection. Cases in which Government or 
the community are mainly concerned on one side, when not gried by the European officers, 
ought all to be brought to that place; because the risk that the public interests will be sacri- 
. ficed to those of the individual must be very great where there is no public spirit in the com- 
munity: Civil suits, in which the amount_at issue is considerable, should be similarly disposed 
of, at the option of either of the parties, because the loss of time to parties and witnesses is 
in them comparatively unimportant, and may. be compensated out of the matter in dispute: 
And but for a consideration of the inconvenience to which suitors and witnesses in trifling 
cases would be put if there were-no courts excepting at one place.in our extensive districts. 
I should like to see all suits brought to the Sudder station, especially those of the poorer peo- 
ple, for the suits of the rich have the best chance wheresoever they may be tried, and it is 
when the nich are opposed to the poor or to Government, of which the interests have rarely 
a wealous defender, that jealousy is specially called for. Then, though we must probably 
have judges in the interior of the districts, care should be taken not to strew them *, too thickly. 
aes _ over 


_ * Ithink the objection.of distance is generally pressed too strongly. Delay is the main grievance, 
and a day’s journey need not greatly add to this. The miscellaneous executive duties, which native 
judges in Bengal are required to perform, should be separately considered. 


a 


“4 


sq. @ 


1 October 1830: 


e 
-APPENDIX, 


Ifl. 


Calcutta Civil 
Finance Committee. 


. factory administration of. criminal justice; nor wi 


198 APPENDIX ro REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


e 
over the country, especially if the emolumeft of each is to be reduced in proportion as their 
number is increased. ee 

23. Ifit were possible, I would confine the native judges to original * suits, making all 
cases appealable to the European judge; and if one could hope that the general result would 
confirm the statements given from certain districts of Madras, by which it appears that less 
than one,fifteenth part of the appealable cases determined by the district moonsifs were ap- 
pealed, it would not be extravagant to anticipate the establishment of such a system. Bones 

24. At this presidency I fear we cannot generglly #peciflate on such a result. We must 
therefore probably admit into the system native judges of appeal for the minor and more 
numerous cases, reserving a right of special appeal to theeEuropean judge. 

25. In the criminal department many appear to havela strong repugnance to any consider- 
able extension of the powers of natéve judges, yet in this department also it seems to be, 
essentially necessary, that they Should have the trial of a number of cases that now occupy 
the tyme of the European officers, #, without an inordinate expense, we would enable the 
latter actually to discharge the duties that nominally belong to them, and obtain the satis- 

nd it, I imagine, be difficult to provide a 
security against the abuses which are apprehended. These, I suppose, to be the corrupt 
condemnation of the innocent, and the corrupt acquittal of the guilty; no one, I believe, 
anticipates any want of capacity in the natives. The reasons, therefore, that naturally 
influenced Government in determming what cases should be referred to the young assistants 
of magistrates, have no proper application to the case of native judges; and it was pro- 
bably through inadvertence that the criminal functions of our sudder ameens were adjusted 
by the standard assumed in Regulation III. 1821; I see no sufficient reason why it should 
not be competent te the zillah judges to refer to the native judges all cases which they are 
themselves competent to decide, nor indeed why the magistrates also should not exercise a 
similar discretion, when they deem it advantageous, to refer cases brought before them 
directly to the native criminal court. The selection of cases for trial by those tribunals 
ought to be guided by other considerations than that merely of the stated heinousness of the 
crime, the point being, not as in the case of our young assistants, whether they are likely to 
err with honest intentions, but whether they are likely wilfully to pervert the course of 
justice. Of course the native judges should act in entire subordination to the zillah courts, 
and in their case, as m that of all courts of primary jurisdiction, it may be very proper to 
take the severity, and especially the irremediable nature of a sentence as a ground for 
requiring a reference, before execution, to a higher tribunal. A similar security it appears 
to me to be in many cases reasonable to provide against wrong acquittals; though that is, 
I apprehend, a principle less likely to meet with favour. Sentences to corporal punishment 
may already, I observe, in some cases be passed by the native judges, and both at Madras 
and Bombay it, is the nativegrevenue and police officer, not the moonsif, that exercises 
criminal jurisdiction in the interior of the districts. This last arrangement is, [ think, 
objectionable .in principle, though circumstances may outweigh the objection ; all criminal 
trials should, I conceive, be as far as practicable confined to places where an European 
judge or magistrate is stationed ; stripes should not'be inflicted without reference ; and the 
courts of the moonsiffs or native judges will surely be better tribunals than police officers, if 
we must have any tribunals for the punishment of petty offences in the interior of a district. 

26. In extending the powers of native judges, various checks, in the way of reports, 
revisions, new trials, and the like, will naturally suggest themselves as requisite, on which 
it would be superfluous now to enlarge; but is they be treated liberally, and with respect, 
and their superiors be fit men, I see no reason to fear that they will fail to do their tk 

r 


* "The number of summary suits should, I think, be much restricted, if indeed the distinction between 


“then and regular suits need be at all maintained. But on this point, as well in regard te the circum- 


stances upder which new irials should be granted, whether to try the same or different issues, une could 
only hope to do justice in a detailed disquisition, which would new be out of place. 


GENERAL APPENDIX. 199 ArraxDix, 


awe 


Our moonsiffs are generally said to be bad, and ‘the reason is plain; they are most of them (13.) Minute of 


miserably paid, and that not by fixed salaries, but by fees. ‘The experiment of appointing Nol Mackenzi 
begearly judges to administer justice t8 the poor, who are most exposed to injustice, could Holt Esa oo 
have only one result. It will be better to leave the people to themselves than thus to open , o Peay 1830. 
shops for the sale of decisions. The expense of employing respectable men need not alarm 
us, if indeed, in such a case there can be any hesitation on the score of expense; for we 
are not to measure the salaries required by natives with our own.- Taking the ordinary 
price of food and wages of labour, I Should assume, for those whose habits do not require 
imports from Europe nor expensive equipages, that the rupee in India is equivalent to eight 
shillings in England, and the mor@the exchange is against the former, the higher probably 
will silver rise in relation to commodities. Oe 
27. On this basis we may deduce the following congparigon of salaries :— 


: , . neg 
Per Mensem. | Rupees perAnn.} £. Sterling. Per Menseme|RupeesperAnn.}  £, Sterling, 


5 60 24 175 2,100 840 
10 120 48 200 2,400 .- 960 
15 180 972 225 2,700 1,080 
20 240 96 250 3,000 1,200 
25 300 120 300 3,600 " 1,440 
30 360 144 350 4,200 1,680 
40 480 192. 400 4,800 1,920 
50 600 240 450 5,400 2,160 
60 720 288 500 6,000 2,400 
70 840 336 600 7,200 2,880 
80 960 384 700 8,400 3,360 
100 1,200 480 800 9,600 3,840 
125 1,500 600 900 10,800 4,320 . 
150 1,800 ‘920 » 000° 12,000 4,800 


28. As we advance to the higher grades, it becomes of course necessary to look to other 
considerations * than those.above indicated ; the wants to be provided for being more compli- 
cated, and the nature of the calculation-is one not admitting of a minute accuracy. The 
table, however, will, I think, be useful for reference in all discussions relative to the allow- 
ances to be assigned to’ native judges and other native functionaries; and if it be not 
strangely erroneous, it may suffice to show that very extensive financial advantages may 
resuit from the more extended employment of natives. At this presidency, I am of opinion, 
that with an average allowance of 3,000 rupees a year, we may command an abundant 
supply of excellent talent for duties which, in an European functionary, cost at the rate of 
30,000; and that with good control; there will be no want of other qualifications, Here is a 
gain of ten to one. The local jurisdiction of the native judges must of course be finally 
the mere distinction of legal principles may be sufficiently maintained by the tribunal of 
ultimate appeal, even though they should sometimes be overlooked iy, the courts below. : a 

. settle 


* We must exclude from any such scheme those who retain the profuse habits of the old nobility of 
the country, they and their retainers requiring probably an inceme greater than is necessary to meet the 
wants of our European officers ; and we must look chiefly te the learned classes and men of business ; 

. but of course when men can be got, combining with hereditary rank or influence, the other qualifications 
necessary for a judge or arbitrator, their services will be very valuable, and an increase of pay for the 
office will not operate to their exclusion. I would only call to mind the remark, that in a country 
governed as this is, there is no room for that native nobility of office, which, as far as concerned the 
individuals, generally gave place, under native governments, to fresh adventurers with sharper swords or 
keener spirits; and I may further observe, that I doubt whether with native habits wealth is as essential 
to rank as with us, excepting when the rank implies military command over troops raised and paid, as 
almost gtl native troops were, by the commanders. ; 


e 
APPENDIX, 


Ill. 


Calcutta Civil 
Finance Committee. 


20v ~ APPENDIX to REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


' settled by the local officers, and even as*to their number, one can hardly venture to lay 


down any absolute rule. I suppose them to be relieved from the petty executive duties 
now thrown upon moonsifis, and to be paid wholly*by fixed salaries, considering that mode 
of remuneration to be on several grounds preferable to the plan of allowing fees; and con- 
ceiving that the due execution of duty, even if indolence were more to be apprehended 
than it ig, may be sufficiently secured by the fear of losing office, if the salary be adequate, 
and by the hope of promotion with a graduated scale of emolument; advancement being 
made to depend on the number of decisions, and the fewness of appeals and reversals. 
None, I think, should get less than 100 rupees a month, and for a Bengal zillah of average 
population, wealth, and litigiousness, the following are the numbers and the rates of salary 
that have occurred to me. In several districts more‘ will be requisite: in the unsettled 


districts comparatively few will suffice. 


4 at 100 - - ¢ - 400 7 “ - + 4,800, 
4 at 150 - - - = 600 - 7 - - 7,200 
2 at 250 - '- = ~ 500 -* - - ~- 6,000 
2 at 500 - - - - 1,000 ~ os - - 12,000 
1 - - - - - . 2 2,500 - - '- - 30,000 


OT the above, I suppose eight to be stationed in the interior as moonsiffs, with power to try, 
like the district moonsiffs of Madras, origimal suits in which the value at issue may not 
exceed 250 rupees. The rest to be at the Sudder station, with authority to hear appeals 
from the moonsiffs, and to try original suits of a higher value, being also employed in the 
trial of criminal cages committed to them by the magistrate, or referred by the judge. With 
such a native judiciary establishment, and with the power of referrmg from one to another, 
or of associating two or three of them, with or without juries, for the mvestigation of cases 
where the measure may seem to be advisable, I have little doubt that a single Europcan 
judge will be able to cause civil and crintina] justice to be adequately administered to at 
least 1,000,000 or 1,200,000 people, excepting where the population is scanty, or com- 
munication difficult, or other circumstances unfavourable; and this, although the magis- 
trates be almost wholly deprived of their penal powers, and the zillah judges. be clothed 
with such powers to the extent to which they are now exercised by the courts of circuit. I 
have already stated reasons why I consider the union of judicial functions, properly so 
‘called, with the charge of the police to be unobjectionable; and it seems to me that many 
very important advantages would result from giving to the zillah judges the trial of all cases 


‘now committed to the circuit eourts. It will tend to economy and the convenience of the 


community, not less than the grand objects of securing the prompt release of the innocent 
and the more certain conviction of the guilty, will be equally promoted, by getting rid of 
the artificial delays necessarily resulting from the plan of having half-yearly, quarterly, or 
even monthly sessions. It is especially to be desired that the criminal court should always 
be open. , 
29. I do not think it a good plan to have auxiliary or assistant judges, excepting as an ex- 
edient for preventing or bringing down arrears, for we thus in effect constitute an ill-paid 
judgeship ‘to be held generally by some inferior man, or some man of inferior standing, 
whose place I should conceive we may have better filled by a native ; and we break in upon 
the principle which ought to be followed in determining what appointments shall be given 


‘to natives and what to Europeans. The notidn that such offices-are necessary or useful as 


a means of instructing European officers in judicial business; which I observe has been 
‘stated, seems to be an erroneous one. It is a little hard upon the people whose interests%re 
thus exposed, like the vile body of some wretched animal, to the bungling operations of an 
untaught practitioner, and we may surely assume that the functions of a magistrate and col- 
lector will afford sufficient room for the exercise of all the talents necessary to a zillah judge. 
The over-technicality which is apt to attach to men educated to the law and not otherwise 


‘versed in public affairs, seems to. be a defect rather than an.excellence on the bench ; and 


‘too 


GENERAL APPENDIX. 201 Arvaois, 


too the auxiliary judges are not to perform all the duties of judges, they break in upon the ; 
consistency of the system, they occupy a position which in my view ought to belong to (13.) Minute of 
natives, and in so far as they mterfere with the immediate trial of the more serious cases, Holt Steckepaey: 
they will operate to continue the inconvenience which results under the system of circuits O Pati 3 . 
from the want of a tribunal always sitting to dispose of such cases in the manner best cal eb at 
culated to promote the ends of justice. If, on the other hand, they are to perform all the 
duties, civil and criminal, of other judges, the question is one of salary, and the economy 
. would I think be a very false one. [am elear indeed that it will, at least for a long time to 
come, be expedient that judges should pass through the offices of magistrate and collector, 
and on that ground, as ell as with a view to the importance of the office, their salaries 
ought to be on a higher scale. No qualifications can well be too high for him who is to 
discharge the duties of a Judge; as on their proper dfschagge the permanent welfare of the 
‘country must ever mainly depend. _In the existing state of things, both in the revenue and 
police, a constant and minute interference being necessary, the duties of these departments 
cannot perhaps be reckoned much less important or difficult ; so long, however, as the 
‘security of the civil rights of the people does not rest:on the administration of good and 
clear laws by good judges, we must admit things to be in rather a barbarous state, and 
gradually therefore J should hope that the necessity for such interference will cease, and 
that the police and revenue business will assume the same character as it possesses in almost 
all other civilized countries. But every step the country may make in the progress of im-_ 
provement, the office of the judge must become more important; and to this truth we ought 
petpetually to revert, for many things in our system operate unhappily to cause the ad- 
ministration of justice, apart from police, especially civil justice, to be considered as of 
secondary importance; whereas it is, Uaoniehend: of primary i as éven as concerns the 
peace of the country and those other purposes of police to which the duties of the judge 
are so often postponed. Important and difficult as I regard the duties of a judge, I do not 
at ‘all apprehend that the service, unless patronage at home be greatly abused, will not afford 
a sufficient number of fit men to discharge them, if we ‘do not needlessly multiply European 
courts, nor neglect to make due use of our native subjects, since, as above intimated, under 
@ proper system, one judge ought I think to suffice, where local circumstances are favourable, 
for 1,000,000 or 1,200,000 people. Some of our Bengal districts are stated to contain more 
than 2,000,000 *, and under the proposed plan the judges can scarcely fail to become much 
more efficient to the discharge of their required duties. The office of Registrar, :I confess, 
I am sorry to see abolished ; because I think that, properly regulated, it would add to the 
efficiency of the courts, and would be a good school for young men. before being vested with 
the charge of a substantive office. The practice of giving the registrars large judicial 
powers is no necessary part of the system ; but, as explained in our letter to Government, 
the financial exigencies of the time, and the mdispensable necessity of providing an increased 
number of good native courts, appear to require its abolition. That the zillah courts may 
always be in activity, and to provide for occasional pressure of busmess so as to prevent 
the accumulation of arrears, it might be advisable to have one or more assistant judges in 
each division, to' be ordinarily employed. in the districts where business is heaviest, in de- 
ciding cases referred to them by the judge, either singly or in conjunction with one or more 
native 


* The degree in which the files of some civil judges are loaded beyond what even the existing law 
renders necessary may be estimated from the following faets from a Statement for the Jungle Mehals, 
which I received in August 1829: it appears that 1,616 cases were depending before the zillah judge ; 
wiftreas, had the inferior ccurts been fully employed, his file need not have exceeded 81; so of 1,200 
cases pending before the Burdwan judge, it appears that all but 204 might have been otherwise disposed 
of.. Ii Hooghly, where the extent of litigation seems greatly to exceed that of the Jungle Mehals, the 
judge had only 108 cases depending in his court, of which 70 were original suits. Although, therefore, | 
no change of system were proposed, the mere fact that there is a stoppage of justice in many quarters 
would not prove that there are not European judges enough, and to.spare ; but increase of numbers is ' 
the easiest mode of meeting the difficulty. ~ op 


APPENDIX, 


It. - 


Calcutta Civil 
FinanceCommittee. 


202 APPENDIX to REPORT -rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


native judges, and to be ready to proceed without delay to any other district in which their 
services might be needed ; such an establishment, however, may be considered as altogether 
subsidiary to the regular courts, and cannot of courte be required so long as there are any 
unemployed servants eet to discharge the office of judge. 

30. As to the local jurisdictions to be assigned to the several zillah courts, (and the 
observatien is still more applicable to the magistracies), it must be confessed that we have 
not the information necessary to a completely satisfactory determination on the point. The 
schedules will show, in so far as the covenanted officets are concerned, what appears to be 
advisable under the information: we do possess relative to the extent and population of the 
several provinces, and the judicial and revenue business t6 be transacted in each. 

31. In the administration of civil and eriminal justice, there does not appear to be any 
call for the same degree of promptness of intervention on the part of the superior authorities, 
as seems to be requisite in the management of the police and the collection of the revenue. 
The grades of the European courts fay therefore, I conceive, be unobjectionably and ex- 
pediently reduced to two; one authority of control over the European district judge being 
sufficient and all that ought to exist, and the gradation of courts of original jurisdiction, 
courts of appeal in right, and courts of special appeal, fitly taking the place of the 
executive directing and controlling authorities which I have above proposed, to provide for the 
conduct of revenue and magisterial business. At this presidency the provincial courts of ap- 
peal as civil tribunals, have generaily been considered inefficient. The number of judges was 
far too great to give anything like an assurarice that the appeal from the zillah judge would be 
to a superior man, to say nothing of the mode in which they were selected. Even when there 
was superiority of talent, there was generally inferior knowledge. The seniors who remained at 
the Sudder station were not the best men. The others were too much distracted with their circuit 
duties to be able efficiently to discharge those of a civil judge, which cannot be properly 
executed without study and reflection, expecially if we expect fixed aes and general 
views; so that from the very constitution of the courts one might have anticipated crude 
and hasty judgments, often wrong insindivedugl cases, rarely if ever tending to fix the law. 
The number of the judges too was sufficieat to prove that many must have been unfit for so 
important a duty as that of deciding, as they frequently had to decide, in the last resort. 
Their frequent changes gave a great opening to abuse on the part of the omlah, and the 
system was manifestly injurious to parties having just grounds of appeal, for whose benefit 
the courts were established, since a single voice might affirm the decision complained of, 
whereas a judgment of reversal by a single judge left the appellant where he was; and with 
men not of active minds, when not influenced by passion, there will generally be a bias to 
the side of affirmation. I have little doubt therefore that the abolition of these courts will 
be a general benefit, though in Bengal some of the above. objections have ceased to exist. 
It will certainly be financially beneficial, though a very liberal provision be made for native 
judges out of the sum saved by the abolition of the provincial courts, and seeing no ad- 
vantage in having such courts as tribunals of intermediate appeal, and great mischief in 
having them as tribunals of the last resort, I am clear that they ought to be abolished. 

32, On the duties properly belonging to the courts of ultimate appeal I need not enlarge. 
If, of all European officers the functions ought to be those of general direction and control, 
rather than a detailed ministry to the wants of individuals, with peculiar force does the 
principle apply to the highest judiciary tribunal. The Sudder judges should of course be 
men specially selected for their talents and acquirements. Nothing can be so absurd or 
mischievous as to have a court of appeal, and abéve all the highest court, filled by chance or 
by the rule of-seniority, which is perhaps worse than chance. ee ’ 

33. In ‘the civil department I would not give an appeal of right to the Sudder in afly 
ease *: for dt is impossible that they can try all appeals; and the principle of oars 

ere: oe appeals 


. .* The Parliamentary provision regarding appeals to England might, I think, be expediently rescinded 
whether the King’s Courts and Sudder should be brought together, is a question we are scarcely at liberty 
to discuss. ; 


GENERAL APPENDIX. -- 203 APPENDIX, 
I. 


appeals of right according to the sum adjudged*or disallowed, seems to me to be a bad one. — 
A single case of no particular importance 1s thus often allowed to occupy the time that ie) Minute of 
would suflice to correct 10 or 20 wrongédecisions, or by the establishment of a general rule -Holt Mackgnzie, 
-to provide for the settlement of hundreds, and the Sudder Court is led away from its main Oo Esq. Sig 
business, which is that of making others decide rightly, and of fixing general principles, 1 October 1830. 
tather than, of labouring themselves in the determination of individual cases with a view 

merely to.individual interests. I do no think it advisable that their interference should be 

restricted by express law. The‘frequent ghanges which have been made at this presidency, 

in sometimes opening and sometimes closing the door against special appeals, seems to 

show what indeed might @ priori Aave been predicated, that it is impossible to anticipate all 

the circumstances under which it may be necessary for the supreme controlling court to” 

interfere, in order to prevent cruel injustice, or the edenial of justice. Government must 

therefore, I think, rely on the discretion of the sudder judgés; taking care that such men are 

selected as possess the knowledge and the judgment r@quisite to regulate their interference 

on proper principles. They should of course frequently substitute for the admission of an 

appeal a direction for a new’ trial, especially when facts may appear to be doubtful, or 

when the issues tried in the court below may not involve the whole merits of the case; and 

by this means, to say nothing of other advantages, a single judge will be able to effect much 

more towards the distribution of justice, and consequently fewer men will answer, and 

expense will be saved. 4 

34. In the criminal department, it may suffice if the Sudder Court reserve the absolute 
decision of all cases which involve a sentence of death or imprisonment for a period ex- 
ceeding 14 years, or in which, if less serious, they may see special reason to interfere; gra- 
dually, indeed, I do not see why the district judges might not be intrusted with the trial of 
all criminal cases, excepting the very few which onepolitical grounds it might seem expe- 
dient to reserve for the Supreme Court, especially if a jury system were established; and in 
the absence of juries the judges of neighbouring districts and the commissioners of revenue 
and police might, when it were thought proper to have more than one European judge, be 
joined in the commission. . 

35. In the criminal, as in the civil department, I would leave to the Sudder Court a large 
discretion in the exercise of its remedial powers; and I do not ‘think that any variety of 
opinion as to the precise authority to be exercised by the several tribunals will affect the 
general scheme. 

36. Supposing a system for the administration in the interior to be established as above, 
it will remain to be considered whether the court of ultimate jurisdiction in civil and cri- 
minal cases shall be the same authority as that which is to exercise a general control over 
the revenue and police, and this in countries which are not permanently settled, in which 
consequently the courts must at every step be met by circumstances wherein they have no 
authoritative rule, and in which the revenue officers must necessarily exert a very extensive 
interference with the private concerns of the people. I would decidedly answer im the affir- 
mative, for reasons which I have above stated. It seems to be almost impossible otherwise 
to establish a consistent system by which the rights of the people and of the Government 
shall be duly secured ; and. the darkness and confusion of which we complain in Bengal 
appears to be a consequence of the plan we have hitherto followed, from which we could © 
have escaped only by a scheme of revenue management that would virtually, though not in 
name, have excluded from the jurisdiction of the courts almost all matters touching the « 
landed property of the country.. Convinced that the union of powers in the superior grades 
of the judicial and revenue establishment will be thus advantageous, I would further ob- 
serve, that it will go far to remedy, and that unobjectionably, I conceive, any inconveniences 
which may be experienced from their separation in the inferior. ranks, at -least in cases 
wherein instant decision is not required, because the inconsistencies and jarring of two 
inferiors, subject to a common chief, can dea be set right; consequently, if it be thought 

- objectionable on principle to vest the subordinate revenue authorities with the power of 
deciding disputes touching land and rent, the jurisdiction in. such cases may much more. 
DD2 . safely 


APPENDIX; 


Il 


Calcutta Civil 
FinanceCommittée. 


‘dence, on all points of general interest, should be sent up to Government. 


204 APPENDIX to REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


P , 
safely be trusted to a separate civil judge if the court to which the decisions of the judge 
are appealable be the same authority by which the revenue administration is. controlled, 
Thence I conclude that the last-mentioned authorigy should be united with that of the 
Sudder Court, for all districts in which the settlements are still temporary; and if their ju- 
risdiction as a civil court were confined, as I think it ought to be, to the admission of spe- 
cial appeals and the directing of new trials, and their powers in criminal cases_to those 


exercised by our Nizamut Adawlut, a single court could, I imagine, supposing the district. 
judges to be good men, undertake the control of the offigers of both departments within- 


an extensive and populous province. 

37. In the permanently settled districts the control of the police and revenue had better, 
I conceive, be kept distinct from the administration of justice, excepting in so far as both be- 
long to the Government, for in such dis{ricts the two things have little or nothing in common ; 
the functions of the revenue officer taking quite a new character, and the business of the 
judge being extensive and difficult i proportion to the wealth of the people, the reasons in 
favour of a division of labour become strong, while the considerations on the other side 
gradually lose their force. : ; 

38. As to the general control of the revenue administration and police, all will probably 
agree in thinking that it should rest with Government, or in the hands of persons acting 
immediately as its organs or confidential advisers. I am not less strongly persuaded that 
whether the sudder judges exercise revenue powers or not, it would be very advantageous 
to the country, where they may not be actually the members of Government, that they 
should act in much closer communication with it than has been usual in Bengal; that, 
in short, the powers of the court should either be exercised by the members of Govern- 
ment as now constijuted, or that the judges should be considered as a committee of the 
council. 


. 


39. I have already noticed how little the practice of Lord Cornwallis justifies the ar- 


rangements in defence of which his authority 1s usually cited; nor is the principle of sepa- 
park the judicial from the political power justified by the constitution of our own country, 
still less by the system adopted in the colonies? It is plain indeed, that if the court of final 


jurisdiction act in ignorance of the general® views of the Executive Government of the coun- * 


try, it must frequently fall ito very great errors. Now the measures of our Government not 
being publicly discussed, its principles and views can only be fully known to the members 
of it, or to those communicating confidentially with. them, and having full access to the 
records; hence alone a sufficient reason for maintaining a close connexion between the 
Sudder Court and the Government, even though the practice of places differently cireum- 
stanced were, which it is not, opposed to the union. Nor is the matter one of theory only ; 
several instances have occurred in which the Sudder Court of this Presidency have from.the 


above cause been opposed to Government; and in all such cases of opposition the result , 


must be less of due weight and authority to one or other, and probably loss of influence to 
both: further, the Sudder Court has a number of duties which do not ordinarily belong to. 
judicial tribunals, to the effectual performance of which the most intimate union with:-Go- 
vernment would greatly conduce; and even in the decision of cases of the most common 
occurrence, the want of due information as to the designs of Government in regard to pri- 
vate rights will not unfrequently lead into error; but the great and radical evils of. such an 
imperium in imperio throw into the shade all minor inconveniences. The reasons assigned’ 
for the great change effected here in 1801 and 1805 are altogether insufficient to justify it. 
The real cause, want of. leisure, could easily haye been obviated by other means, and it 
‘would, I think, be a great improvement to revert to the system of 1793, with the modifica- 
tions rendered. necessary by. the extent of our dominion; in other words, whether the 
authorities of revenue and judicial control be united or be kept distinct, the Sudder Court 
should be the chief judicial board or committee under Government. It should, I think, 


report all decrees before they are issued, and all sentences of death and perpen imprison-— 


ment, their decision being, however, conclusive as to the facts; and its English correspon- 


40, At 


. GENERAL APPENDIX. " 905 


40. At present the court is under no adequate control: it is, in fact, more independent of 
control than the Government, the judges not being responsible for the consequences of their 
acts, however politically mischievous, got being touched by public opinion, nor in civil 
matters subject to superior authority. The appeal to England is practically nugatory as 
a security to good government, and the court is much less useful to the home authorities as 
a check upon misgovernment than the board ; but by accounting more fully to Government*, 
it would, through its reports, serve every purpose of that kind much more effectually than 
it now does, and at the same timeit would be subject to what all judges should be subject, 

, ~-some efficient check to mal-administratiofi. ‘The establishment of a court so entirely free 
from check is indeed an unexampjed tyranny; and. their duties are such, that unless we 
’ suppose them entirely exempt from the love of ease, passion, and prejudice, we must be 
satisfied of the necessity of their being controlled in prder to prevent injustice, and still 
more the denial of justice to the people. ° 
41, At Madras, and still more at Bombay, the comparatively limited extent of general: 
business which falls upon the Government enables it doubtless to exercise a closer control 
than is here possible over the acts of the court; and that control may be very efficient, 
though not sanctioned by strict law. The’ effect too of a ryotwar settlement, annually re- 
vised, obviously is to take from the civil courts the largest share of the functions that 
would otherwise belong to ‘them; for, directly or indirectly, the revenue officers in making 
such settlements must settle or prevent disputes, which with us occupy by far the largest 
share of our civil files. Still it is in nature that the judges, or some of them, should gradually 
aim at an independence of the Government, which, however excellent in a free country, 
where it is accompanied by dependence on public opinion, must, under the present circum 
stances of India, lead to much mischiefs and I am satisfied therefore of the expediency of 
bringing sudder judges at all the presidencies into the position of a subordinate board or 
committee of the Government, the members of Government, where their other avocations 
porte taking a share in the business. It does not occur to me that if the proper 
unctions of all classes be kept distinctly in view any serious difficulty will be found to 
oppose the adoption of such an arrangement.* The main business of the court of ultimate 
appeal, as of the revenue controlling authority, is *to maintain just general principles, and 
to see that the acts and orders of the subordinate’tribunals are not on the face of them re- 
pugnant to justice or sound policy. With questions of fact, not of general application, but 
relating merely to the accidents of individual cases, they can have little to do; and of course 
the Government must, in regard to such questions, rely implicitly upon the report of its 


sudder judges and commissioners. Hence to discharge its part will require no laborious ‘ 


exertion; whereas now, with a strange mixture of distrust and confidence, it labours use- 
lessly on many trifling details, and leaves many of the weightier matters of civil admini- 
stration unheeded or uncontrolled. In the revenue department it is not necessary to define 
very accurately the powers to be vested in the controlling authority. Even when separate, 
it will generally act in immediate communication with the Government, and the extent of 
its independent powers must in some degree depend upon thesleisure which the members of 
the Government may have or make from other avocations. Itis assuredly most desirable 


that those who are mainly responsible for the good order and prosperity of the country: 


should devote much of their time and attention to its internal administration both in the 
judicial and revenue departments, which, though less pressing, is certainly not less important 
than many matters that now in a great measure throw into the background questions affect- 
ing most nearly the improvement and happigess of the people. a 

42. There is an important question discussed in the recent letter from the Court of Direc- 
togs on which I shall now briefly touch, though the ability with which the matter is there 
handled leaves little room for further argument. I cannot however omit the opportunity of 


remarking, 


.* T will not now stop to inquire how far these remarks would apply to a court holding its proceedings 
in English, having English pleaders and an English audience, with reporters for the English journals. 


s 
APPENDIX, 


Il. 


(13.) Minute of 

Holt Mackenzie, 
Esq. @ 

1 October 1830.° 


-APPENDIX, 
Ill. 
Calcutta Civil 
FinanceCommittee. 


206 APPENDIX ro REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


remarking, that the observations which I Have been compelled to make during a service of 
more than 13 years in the situation of territorial secretary, have led to a decided conviction, 
that the public interests would be essentially promoted by substituting universally single. 
commissioners for collective boards in the superintendence of the officers employed in the civil. 
administration of the country. 

-43. Of the Boards of which I have had experience the business has generally been done, 
when well done, by a single officer, sometimes the secretary, sometimes a member. Occasion- 
ally the leading member has derived great advantage frofh the aid of the secretary, but I 
remember no instance in which the conduct of business has appeared to be improved by the 
concurrence of two members. There are several reasoms, I think, why the case should be 
so. Weare apt to be misled by the notion that numbers are conducive to deliberation, and 
it was not long ago argued that owr western Board was useless as a deliberative body, 
because the members did not fneet to transact business together; now, if by deliberation 
were,meant personal consult, the assertion was of course a mere truism; but the same thing 
might in effect have been predicated of that board when all the members were at the same 
place, and of all the other Boards in respect to all the most important questions decided by 
them. They did not, they do not, meet to discuss matters involving an extensive range of 
research, or the consideration of complicated interests. The main purpose of their regular 


' meetings, and these the Mofussil Boards rarely held even when at the sudder station, was 


to settle numerous trifling points of detail, in which all having concurrent jurisdiction, all 
were required to take a part, or rather perhaps I should say, to sanction the proposals of 
their secretary in regard to such points.. The necessity of meeting for such a purpose may 
well be questioned, especially considering the charge which Government incurs on account 
of every hour of the official time of such higher paid functionaries. Sometimes, no doubt, 
they would thus adjust differences of opinion on more important points. But this I regard 
not only not as an useful, but as a positively mischievous consequence of personal commu- 
nication, since in a multitude of cases. it implies a compromise inconsistent with the truth; 
in others it gives the preponderance, to the worst cause, there being in the country unfor- 
tunately little to enlist any active passion,on the side of right; and if it sometimes may have 
saved Government from trouble, and secyred an appearance of peace, the advantage must 
often have been purchased at the expense of the people, and the apparent unanimity must 
always have been likely to be followed by actual discord. Men of sense and candour and 
temper, with a due respect for each other, will readily adjust all differences of opinion that 
ought to be adjusted, whatever may be their mode of communication (the danger is that 
they will yield too much to deference and affection), and the indolent, the prejudiced, and 
the passionate (the risk of their bemg employed is of course increased by numbers) will not, 
I fear, be found more useful when forced into personal collision. Moreover, deliberation 
and debate are very different things; for the useful application of the latter to public busi- 
ness, there is not, I conceive, any place in this country; everywhere its use is rather to 
enforce an attention to the public sentiment than to promote the cause of truth, and deli- 
beration must depend chiefly on the workings of individual minds. I do not mean alto- 
gether to deny the advantagqof oral discussion, but both theory and experience induce me 
to rate it low in the case of Boards, and in every other respect it seems to me that the 
members composing them are likely to deliberate to better purpose when acting separately 
than when thrown together. The materials of thinking (I mean facts) are to be supplied 
by the local officers, still more by the people. If closed to them the public officers must 
become the sanctuaries of error and ignorance, where names will usurp the place of things, 
and infinite mischief and misery may prevail while all is apparently smooth and prosperous; 
and it is’ precisely the class of facts which it most behoves the Government and the authe- 
rities of general control to know that in this country is most likely to be kept back from 
a body of which the members wanting individual power cannot inspire individual confidence. 
Under any circumstances, indeed, I should think that facts must be best gathered with 
a system of unity. To congregate officers is like hunting-in couples ; for we thus require all 


to have the same information, or we subject the opinions of the well-informed to the judg- 


ment 


* 


- GENERAL APPENDIX. 204 


. é e 
ment of those who are without knowledge; an@ in proportion as members of Boards are 
required to act together, the field of each must be enlarged, and the chance of their disco- 
vering the truth must be diminished. ‘Bhis objection applies: of course with peculiar force 
to the authorities that are placed immediately above ae collectors and magistrates ; but 
it may also be justly urged in regard to those whose function is that merely of general 
control, at least at this presidency ; for it is scarcely possible that any single man or body 
of men can master the questions that must arise in a Court or Board controlling the judicial 
and revenue affairs of the counties between Chittagong and the western extremity of the 
Delhi territory; and at Madras and Bombay, though the limits be comparatively narrow, 
’ and I would chiefly ‘lay stress on tke necessity of having separate commissioners of revenue 
and. police, the chances are greatly against the same man’s having such correct or complete 
notions of matters in the Northern Cirears and in Malebar, or of the state of things in Gu- 
zerat and Darwar, as it is desirable that sudder judges ané commissioners should possess, 
to say nothing of the number of individual cases. ° ‘ se ag 
' 44. I need scarcely observe how much is lost in the quantum of work done by employing 
collective bodies. Not only will two or three when tied together not do twice or thrice the 
work of an individual acting singly, but it is almost certain that the fruits of their united 
labours will fall short of what each could have himself produced. In such a case, two and 
two certainly do not make four. 

45. If our Board failed when the members were allowed to act separately, it was net 
because they consulted too little, but because they were compelled to consult too much ; 
from the insufficiency of the powers which they were authorized to exercise singly. 

46. It is supposed probably that a collective body is able to exert a more rigorous con- 
trol, and with less of personal feeling than an individual; Ido not thigk that experience 
{ewes the notion, on the. contrary, where single pfficers have been employed, there has 

en, I thik, not only more energy, care and consideration on the part of the controlling 
authority, but more ready obedience and hearty co-operation in the subordinates.. The 
former indeed must, in such a case, feel the responsibiljty attaching to him in a degree that 
can never be looked for in collective bodies. He will pursue his plans without bemg com- 
pelled to mutilate them in order to meet the scruples of less informed colleagues, or to 
neglect them in attending to foreign matter. In differing from his subordinates, a single 
functionary will ordinarily be ‘careful, as far as his judgment goes, to have the right side of 
the question. He will convey the expression of his dissent in terms the least likely to 


offend, because, acting singly. he will always be alive to the probability of offence. In’ 
ic 


propurtion to the interest which he takes in the successful administration of the affairs 


intrusted to him (and on this score the individual with undivided praise and blame has ~ 


infinitely the advantage) he will exert himself to guide and, aid and conciliate those who 
have to execute his orders. He will thus have every inducement to make the most of good 
men, without any countervailing motive for sheltering the bad. He will understand clearly, 
and therefore state his views distinctly, free from the doubts that beset the half measures into 
which collective bodies are always more or less liable. to slide. What he does will be his 
own without any opening for counteraction, excepting by a distinct reference to superior. 
authority; whereas in a collective body the efficient member is often considered by those 
under him, sometimes by his colleagues, as an usurper of powers which he is not entitled, or 
at least not required, to exercise; and the discipline of their subordinates is sacrificed, even 
when there is no play of jealousy and intrigue, because they oppose the energy of individual 
excitement, to the comparatively languid interest with which the common concerns of 

@ co-operation are usually regarded. ° 
«7.. It is also, I imagine, supposed that as the controlling authority must have the power 
of overruling decisions of the executive officers, it is therefore necessary to provide a plurality 
of voices. In this, I think, there is not a little fallacy. If indeed we put inferior to control 
superior men, it is not easy to say what principle can fitly apply; but on the opposite, and 
only rational supposition, there seems to be no good reason for refusing to the voice of 
a single commissioner that preponderance which ought to belong to his station; with econ 
; i Maly: 


1 


APPENDIX, 


III. 


(13.) Minute ‘of 
Holt Mackenzie, - 
, Esq. @ 

1 October 1830. ® 


® 
APPENDIX, 


. 
—— 


Calcutta Civil 
FinaneeMommittee, 


208 APPENDIX ro REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


trary plan, we, in fact, place superiors and inferiors nearly on a footing. It is the number, 
not authority, that decides. Further, I should say, that the judgments of superiors which 
confirm decisions of their subordinates are by no fheans those most entitled to respect... If 
the latter put their case tolerably well, it is an even chance that the concurrence of the former 
will be gained without his having really employed any mental exertion; deference, indolence, 
and theJove of peace will constantly carry the day, if furnished only with a plausible pretext; 
whereas, when one differs from another, it is almost certain that the grounds on which the 
notions of both rest will be sifted, and it is prohable “that the ultimate decision will be the 
result of a fair view of both sides of the question. : ; 
48. In their judicial proceedings, which must often be very important, the members of 


‘the boards have always, I believe, acted singly; and the requisition of two voices to alter 


or annul the decision of an inferior, of which I have thus endeavoured to show the error, has 
formed consequently,the only ground of connection between them. 

49, But then it is urged, that tle power of the directing and controlling boards is too 
great to be trusted ‘to single men. Now to this I answer, that with collective bodies it 
constantly happens that the real power belongs to one individual; and this he exercises 
without the check of individual responsibility. Need I say more in proof that the system 
which is preferred, as a security against misconduct, is in fact most open to abuse. Is it not 
certain that all corporate bodies, and that just in proportion to their numbers, are liable to 
imputations, which in the case of individuals would overwhelm the guilty with disgrace? It 
must also be recollected that, especially in our service, the check of the controlling and the 
subordinate authority is mutual. Both have the privilege and the duty of accounting for 
their acts, and assuredly it is executive officers who best possess the means of exposing error, 
when it does occurs to their common superior. 

50. Further, let it be observed, that ¢n regard to police and revenue affairs, where there is 
most room for discretionary power, and consequently error, the system I have advocated of 
a triple gradation of functions, the executive, the directing, and the controlling, constitutes, 
in fact, for each district a Board of three members, not, it is true, of equal rank and autho- 
rity, but not the less qualified perhaps qn that account really to discuss and deliberate, nor 
the less likely to promote the cause of truth and justice. 

51. I confess, sharafore, that Iam strongly persuaded that Government would gain greatly 


’ if it substituted for the collective Boards and Courts commissioners acting immediately as its 


confidential advisers, whether with or without the intervention of secretaries; and unless the 
opposite opinion is clearly the right one, considerations of economy ought surely to predomi- 
nate in favour of the view I maintain. Not only will fewer members suffice, but the secreta- 
riat and other staff (if I may use the term) which is usually attached to boards and 
collective courts may be considerably diminished. 

52. With the Persian proceedings of the Boards (and in the revenue department they are 
very important) the secretary has, I believe, little or no concern: and as to the English cor- 
respondence, I see no reason to thnk that a member of a Board or Commissioner ought to 
experience any difficulty in managing his office, as the secretaries to Government do, with the 
aid of uncoyenanted writers. I suppose of course that he is duly qualified, and has time to 
discharge the duties that belong to him; because of the value of a secretary, if a man of 
superior talent, in a board, or with a commissioner overworked, or otherwise incompetent, 
there can be no question. Of course single Commissioners as well as Boards may have 
covenanted assistants attached to them, and they probably would make better use of them, and 
afford them better instruction. The same obsetvations will apply, with little change, to the 
Sudder Court. The measures necessary to preserve consistency of proceeding, which are 
equally necessary under the present plan, that renders final the judgment of one man wifen 
he concurs,with the court below, may easily be arranged; and it must always be recollected 
that consistency and uniformity are very different things. 

53. On the whole, looking in the revenue and police departments to what is wanted for 
the purposes ‘of local administration, direction and control, and pro osing to have in the 
judicial department courts original, appellate and corrective, the following is the outline a 

the 


a 


the’ offices I should like to see established. The number of each class of offices must of 


course depend on the extent and nature of the country to be governed, and the number and: 
character of the people. 


‘First. For police and revenue, each village or parish to have its police and revenue officer, - 


being the head man, howsoever denominated ; or where the village system has been broken 

down, some person selected by, or appointed in conformity to the wae : 

will of course be a native. In great zemindaries, those especially that are. pefmanently 

settled, he may or may not be jhe person employed to collect the rents of the zemindar; 

but all business connected with the Gui ceient revenue should certainly be in his hands. 
54. The same for each muhullah or minor division of cities and towns. 


55. Each pergunnah or other convenient aggregate of villages, each considerable town, 
‘and, where necessary, the larger sections to the principal cities, to have similarly a magistrate’ 
and collector, to whom of course the former should be subordinate in all matters relating to 
police and public revenue. In the selection of men for ¢his post also (they likewise will, with 
rare exceptions, be natives) every possible means should be taken to ascertain and follow the . 
wishes of the people. For each large city and the adjoining pergunnahs for each district or 
‘section of a district, according to the density and other circumstances of the population, an 
European magistrate and collector, with sub-collectors and. magistrates for particular tracts 
requiring sub-division, and deputies in places where the detail business of the sudder station 
is peculiarly heavy. 8 

56. For each circle of districts, a commissioner of revenue and police. . 

Secondly, For the administration of civil and criminal justice. 

57. In each circle of pergunnahs (the extent to vary according to the wealth and number 
of the people), a native judge. S23 Be . : 

58. In each district an European judge, with several native judges: and thirdly, for the 
joint control of both departments, sudder judges and commissioners. aaa 


59. The last-mentioned functions I propose to have united only in districts not perma- 
nently settled. The control of the revenug and police in permanently settled districts 
ought to rest with the Government and its secretaries; but until Bengal be put under a dis-- 
tinct government, we must, I think, ‘allow one third commissioner of revenue and police, or 
’ add to the secretariat ; and for the sait and opium and miscellaneous branches of revenue, 
I would have a distinct commissioner resident at the presidency. 

60. To the above establishment of paid officers I would gradually add juries, by which 
word I would be understood to mean, anybody selected indifferently from the respectable 


inhabitants of the district or place where the cause is tried, to arbitrate*, advise or decide, | 


without. reference to the particular number employed, or the precise nature of their 
functions. ke 

_ 61. It seems to me quite impossible, that we should by any other means attain the know- 
ledge of facts necessary to anything like a prompt and pure administration of justice. | 
Greatly as our system may be improved, by the more liberal admission of natives to offices - 
of trust and emolument, it seems to be certain that the officers appointed by us will, for 
a long time: to come, be far too great strangers to the mass of the community, to be much 


influenced by public opinion. Though it may possibly in some places be found imprac- | 


ticable to have a larger infusion of popular principle, they will ordinarily be put over the 
people as arbitrarily as ourselves, and the means of controlling and correcting their abuse 
of power must be proportionately defective.. erie : : 
62. In the zillah courts had we angel$ instead of men for judges, those tribunals, if 
required to try matters of fact in the cases coming before them, will still be, as they notori- 
a 2.8 ‘ously 


* The Bombay Regulation seems very wisely to have left the question of the powers of juries unde- 


fined. Different districts will require very different measures, and though independent juries’ must be 
the growth of time, the institution-will not therefore be useless in its immature stages. — 


‘ 


GENERAL APPENDIX. | 909 


es of the people. He , 


Apretpix, 
“oT, 
(13) Minute‘of 
Holt Mackenzie, 


Esqe 
1. October 1839. 


APPENDIX, 


ide 


—— 
Calcutta Civil. 
FinanceCommittee, 


210 APPENDIX ro’ REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


ously are, thefficient. We may establish new courts, we may exact new laws, we may, 
multiply or simplify forms, and our officers may, as many with a generous ardour do, waste 
their strength and sacrifice their lives by labours, alesis the toil of a galley-slave is ease ; 
but any thing like complete success must be unattainable while the people stand aloof or 
are neglected. Life is too short for the formal investigation of all the points of which the 
knowledge may be essential to the just decision of the simplest case ; and if we conclude 
that alleattempts to gain the co-operation of the people will fail, the inference seems to be. 
inevitable, that no rational hope can be entertained of adyninistering civil justice. I trust, 


_ however, it will be found that there is no suffieent ground for so unhappy a conclusion; 
‘ where the experiment has been tried and failed, it seems to have been so tried as to make . 


failure certain. The punchayets have been left to all their native irregularity and ineffici- 
ency; they have been regarded as substitutes for, not as aids to, the regularly trained judges ; 
they have-been kept distinct from dnd almost placed in opposition to the tribunal of the 
British officer, instead of being controlled and directed and supported. The selection of 
the members seems, in many cases, to have been made in a manner entirely vicious. In still 
more numerous instances, have the preliminary inquiries, through which alone the varieties of 
local circumstances could be provided for, been wholly neglected ; for in this, as in other 
matters, we are too apt to reason as if the people of India had been cast in one mould, 
and to act as if they were machines, with no affections to enlist or passions to gratify, merely . 
because they are patient and submissive. They have been denied assistance no less than 


‘instruction ; they have been expected to attain excellence, not by the slow process of self- 


instruction, through which nations every where learn wisdom, but at once, and at our bidding ; 
and they have been said to fail when, on the face of all these and other disadvantages, they 
have not commanded a preference over high paid and powerful, and favoured courts. They 
have, I imagine, had to contend every where with the hostility of our native officers, to whose 
domination any such tribunals, once fairly established, would oppose a powerful check ; but 
through whom, unfortunately, our functionaries are generally compelled to learn almost 
all they know, and to execute all they order, in this as in other branches of their business. 


63. From any general scheme suddenly intréduced I should hope for little good. A Regu- 


. lation of Government may destroy, but*it never can ereate, or even maintain, such an 


institution. It must arise out of the people themselves, ou and aided by the 
European officers who govern, or ought to govern, the districts. It cannot of course be 
expected that all of these should be qualified for such a duty; and that any of them may be 
fully qualified, it seems to be essentially necessary that they should have a much more 
accurate knowledge than is generally possessed of the people undertheir authority... They 


’ will then be able to discover the real nature of the materials with which they have to work, 


and it is therefore, I should say (paradoxical as it may appear), that the best chance of 
freedom for the people of India (I mean of course that measure of civil liberty which may 
consist with political subjection to a free nation) wilt be attained .by sacrificing many of 
‘the forms, and by irae in regard to the higher offices of control, the system of 
divided authority, which have hitherto been relied upon ‘as securities for good government, 
Of the other presidencies, I cannot of course speak: of many parts of the country under 
this presidency I must speak doubtingly. I should expect that in most of the districts of 
our Western Provinces there will be found a great number of men in whom the community . 
will confide infinitely more than they do in any of the natives we arbitrarily put over them ; 
who, with suitable encouragement and respect, may be made to render us invaluable aid in 
the administration of the details of government ; and who, if not always able to decide 
accurately themselves, will at least afford, by their co-operation, a great security for the 
attainment of just and satisfactory decisions. 


64. Therg must not of course be any attempt suddenly to introduce what we—desire to 
establish every where, or: in many places at once. If ina hundred years the object be 
attained, there will be abundant glory for our country. Nor must we think of tying the 
people down too strictly by forms: much’ must. be left, to the discretion of judicial 

: & mG ‘ functionaries, 


* 


| GENERAL APPENDIX. 211 


* functionaries, with the- general understanding, that, as their leading principle, they are to 
study and follow the wishes of the people. 


65. Even in Calcutta, I suspect, if we wish the jury * scheme success, the judges must 
‘be content at first to proceed in a way which it may startle lawyers to mention. They 
_ should select and mvite respectable natives to sit with them as assessors, to aid their 
decision in matters of fact. F 
Justice to the concession of independent authority is too great a stride. Still more prepa- 
‘ration will be necessary in the interior, if we desire the people to assist us either in framing 
or administering the laws; and we must particularly guard against the error of regarding 
punchayets or native juries as a substitute for courts. Into this error many seem to have 
fallen ; one party extravagantly maintaining the excellence of tribunals, which were but the 
shifts of a semi-barbarous people, under the negleat of equally barbarous governors ; 
another rejecting chem as utterly worthless, because beset With the defects inseparable from 
such a state of things; both regarding them in the pesition of entire separation frog our 
judges, European and native. Nor has it been less common for us to look merely to the 
present hour, forgetting the necessarily slow progress which almost all useful institutions, 
and especially popular institutions, connected with civil government, have made to perfection ; 
and not observing the manifest superiority of every scheme which has a constant tendency 
towards improvement, by sowing the seeds of it in the soil of the country, over any plan, 
the excellence of which depends exclusively on individual character.’ At present, on the 
departure of a good judge or collector, nothing remains but the few decisions or orders he 
may have passed in particular cases; and even these his successor may indirectly nullify. 
A bad man restores the reign of chaos: for the omlah are the only class that derive practical 
instruction from the example of their chief, and those, besides that they are often as great 
strangers as ourselves, are too feeble to oppose, ever if they desire it, any barrier to misrule ; 
and the evil may be very great before it will show itself to superior authority in a tangible’ 
shape. On the other hand, with a more popular system, (I need not stop to observe how 
much facility to the discovery of misgovernment would be found in the existence of popular 
institutions), there might be planted in the commpnity, by the wisdom of one man, institu- 
tions, and rules, and habits, and mode of conduct, which would survive through generations, 
which the misrule of no individual could altogether destroy, and which would at once revive 
‘under the influence of a kindred spirit. 


_ _ 66. If it be objected to our plans, that they involve much change, I can only say, admit~ 
ting the expediency of making all alterations gradually, that here at least great changes 
dae to be icon! erased necessary, nay unavoidable. Every where indeed, the causes of | 
change are at work ; and the real question is, not how things can be made stationary, but 
how mischievous, or mischievously sudden, changes are to be avoided. In arguing for 


-ArPENDIx, 
IIL: 
(13,) Minute of: 
“Holt Mackenzie, 


Esq.@ 
1 Octaber 1830. 


rom the absolute denial of any share in the administyation of . 


‘ change, too, I would not rest upon the existence of slight evils, such as must every where ‘ 


prevail, nor upon any vain hope of sudden improvement, such as is no where likely to be 
realized. But it appears to me that the existing evils are very great ; that many of them 
may be traced immediately to the system of government; and that that system contains 
Within itself no elements of improvement, but is calculated to perpetuate and aggravate 
the mischiefs of a foreign and military domination. If not hated by the people, we are at 
least without the slighest hold on their affections: from Benares upwards the fact appeets 
to be generally admitted, and within those limits lies almost all the military part of our 
population. | his seems, it may be proper to remark, to have no connection with the’ 
permanency of the settlement, on which thé very few who were interested never probably 
relied, and of which the great body of the landowners never heard; of some thousand 
petitions which I received when in the Western Provinces, (at Bareily alone I had 500 


. * Fam surprised that the natives were not first admitted to the grand instead of the petty jury, if 
indeed the former be an institution that ought to be maintained. 
i ae . E E 2 7 


m 


APPENDIX, 


Til. 


Calcutta Civil 
FinanceComniittee, 


! 
212, APPENDIX ro REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


in a few day$,) and of many tens of thousapds of petitioners whom I saw and talked with, 
not one touched upon the point. Nor is it, I conceive, to be accounted for by the mere 
circumstance of our being foreign conquerors. , On, this side of India at least the number 
of those who can ever have regarded us as conquerors is very small. The great body of the 
people had for centuries been accustomed to the dominion of foreigners, and the feeling 
evinces itself in-a manner to show that, generally speaking, it is the system rather than the 
‘individuals who conducted it, that is the object of aversion ; still less, I fear, can we flatter 
ourselves that, as seems sometimes to be thought, our unpopularity is only of such extent 
and kind as might naturally be expected to follow.the administration of impartial laws in 
a country where various classes had been accustomed tg domineer over their fellows. 


67. Without denying that some of the dislike under which we labour is inseparable from 
the position we hold, much must, I cgnceive, be charged to measures and arrangements b 
no means necessary of adoption.e Nothing car be more striking than the scorn with which’ 
the people have been practically treaged at the hands of even those who are actuated by’ 
the mést benevolent motives ; for, since the world began, there is probably no example of 
a government carrying the principlé of absolutism so completely through dhe civil adminis- 
tration of a country, if‘that can be called civil which is in its spirit so purely military ; nay, 
which sets the people aside in the management of their own concerns much more than the 
sepahee in the government of the army. The principle pervades every act, from the highest 
exercise of legislative power to the appointment of the meanest public officer. But of all, 
the consequences of our errors I would attach most importance to their effects on the village 
associations, which form the great bond of society throughout so large a part of India, but 
which have been greatly misunderstood and disturbed. These institutions seem to afford 
one of the most important of all the instruments we could use to insure the good govern- 
ment of the country and the comfort of individuals. Without them, or some substitute 
similarly resting on popular principle, we must, I fear, have a miserable and disunited 
people, whom it is scarcely possible to govern otherwise than as the slaves of our native 
servants ; whereas with them, these men might, I conceive, be made, really servants of the 
public; at the same time that our judges and ‘magistratés would assume their proper station 
as governors, according to their several degrees, in all they ought to govern, and would 
leave it to the people to transact, with their protection, support and control, the innumerable 
concerns of civil life, which they alone can tolerably administer. One cannot too often 
recur to the principles which ought to restrain us from the error into which we constantly 
fall of doing too much, both legislatively and executively, under a government which excludes 
the idea of political freedom. The best chance for anything like civil liberty is to be found 
in narrowing the sphere of its interference, and extending that of popular tribunals ; absolute 
power may thus be made consistent with much civil liberty, and this in large and divided 
nations, with no risk of political disturbance; but laws arbitrarily imposed by a despotic 
government can have comparatively little effect in checking the abuse of power, except as 
they restrict the occasions of its being exercised; and it seems to be vain to think that we 
can by any legislative provision secure the community from extortion and vexation, if we 
once allow, or require the government officers to interfere perpetually on the minute details 
of the people’s business. ‘We have unfortunately acted on an opposite principle, interfering 
in almost every thing, neglecting popular institutions where they exist, and never attempting 
to create them where wanting. e .have trusted to laws as a check upon subordinate 
officers which have operated almost exclusively as shackles upon the controlling authorities, 
or occasions of fraud to the few among the community who knew of them. 


68. No time should be lost in correcting this error: we should especially use every 
-endeavour to revive and maintain the system of village or parish government, (to prevefit 
abuse by the head men, when placed on a proper footing, will not apparently be difficult,) and 
we should gradually extend the principle by the use of other local associations of a wider 
sphere and higher function. We may thus, with a true economy, infinitely facilitate the 
administration of affairs, prove ourselves great benefactors to the country, and possibly, with 

é - He moderation 


GENERAL APPENDIX. 213: 


moderation in our taxes, secure the attachment of the people, and so remove one’ great cause 
of our military expenditure. a 

69. In using the words “ moderation ia our taxes,” I must explain, that where the contract 
system prevails, the mere lightness of the Government demand will go for little towards 
securing attachment, or producing happiness, unless we protect the great body of the com- 
munity trom our revenue officers and engagers, and from our police. In ‘several districts are 
to be found combined the most extravagant sacrifices of the public revenue with most glaring 
.violations of private rights. Frone oureunhappy ignorance, and the influence of corruption, it 
frequently happens, that where the Governthent dues have been most extensively relinquished 
- there the body of the people are most oppressed and wretched. Nor, though exaction is under 
our own, as under all native governments, the grand evil to be cured, must we confine our 
views to that object: our whole system of law and the gnode of its administration requires to 
be carefully revised, with a full advertence to the feelings afd circumstances of the people, 
and every possible means should be taken of ascertaingng what they desire, and fee] and 
think, before laws are passed affecting their interests. From the want of such precautions, 
and from too much and -too hasty legislation, several of our laws, which are in appearance 
calculated to secure the rights of the people, have, in their application, without due, know- 
ledge, to countries of vast extent, and to persons standing in a great variety of social relations, 
been perverted to the destruction of their dearest properties and privileges; the mischief of a 
bad law going infinitely beyond the tyranny of individuals, the worst of whom are likely to 
be in some degree checked by shame, or remorse or fear. oa 


70. If indeed I were required to give an opinion as to the practical influence of our code 


in the Western Provinces (the effect of our administration is a very different question), I should | 


say, that just in proportion as it has been enforced, have the people suffered. Of the Ceded 
Districts, those within, or immediately adjoining theejurisdiction of the Benares’ Provincial 
Court, have been most cruelly outraged. As we proceed further to the west we find fewer. 
symptoms of the operation of our code, and the people better secured in their rights and 
properties ; and in the Delhi territory, though the people have, I suspect, often been in many 
cases over-taxed, and though, when we acquired the country, their habits were particularly 
’ lawless, the state of things seemed to me to be faranore satisfactory than in any of our Regu- 
lation districts. The cause appeared to be, that the administration had been conducted in 
a much more popular spirit than had prevailed elsewhere, and this just in proportion to the 
apparent arbitrarmess of the power exercised by the European functionaries. The institu- 
tions of the people had not been destroyed, their properties had not been forcibly alienated, 
their natural leaders had not been slighted ; they had been really ruled by British officers, 
and the native officers, if corrupt and oppressive, had no mysterious legal provisions to. 
facilitate or shelter their mal-practices. The natural leaders of the country had been known, 
and encouraged to make themselves known ; they had been cared for and heard, even when’ 


subjected to excessive assessments; there had been no robbery or confiscation-under laws and’ 


processes which they could not read, and which reading they could not understand. In one 


word, they had in a great degree governed themselves; the power of the European officers, . 


though arbitrary, not being exerted in a spirit of meddling and minute interference. Accord- 
ingly, throughout the Delhi territory the petitions of the people referred to matters wherein, 
if injured, redress, by a simple order of government, could be afforded ; over-assessment 
might be abated ; the head man’s allowance, arbitrarily withheld, might be granted ; unjust 
resumptions might be relinquished; the means of irrigation might be improved or secured ; 
the burthen and annoyance of strange watchmen might be abated.. But on this side the 
Jumma quite a different state of thmgs presents itself; for there the omlah are compara- 
tively everything, the English gentlemen little, the people nothing. Regulations are enforced 
and forms observed, but no one can say with what practical result. ‘The real is constantly 


quite opposite to the apparent result ; many thousand. villages wére alienated under all the’ 


modes of fraud and folly set forth in the Ist Regulation of 1821; and large communities sold, 


~ 2 See al : ‘ 6 


as” 


Appendix, 


(13.) Minute of 

Holt Mackenzie, 
Esq. e 

1 October 18309 


o 
» 
——s 


Calcutta Civit 
FinanceCommittee. 


Armor,” , 244 APPENDIX ro’ REPORT rrou SELEGT COMMITTEE. 


as if they Rad been cattle, for the default of their directors ; no one, from government down- 
wards, being able to say precisely what was sold. A strange, arbitrary and unreasonable 
force being given to the mere record at settlements, made in confessed ignorance, the revenue 
authorities held themselves bound by their own acts to maintain men of straw and paper as 
renters, while the courts frequently refused to interfere; on the ground, that unless possession 
were disturbed there was no judicial cognizance; though exclusion from the Government 
engagement might rob the possessor of all the profits that gives land a money value.. 
Instead of taking the people as they existed, we fprced them into all incongruous posi- 
tions to meet inapplicable laws; and their propérties were necessarily thrown into a state 
of indescribable confusion, from a system of revenye management conducted without ° 
judicial investigation, and of judicial decision without revenue knowledge. Every zillah, 
consequently, presents a great number of wrongs, which every one sees ought to be 
redressed, but for which the most skilful regulationist can scarcely tell the injured in what 
shape they are to seek redress; ayd the people are bewildered amidst the various opinions 
and principles of the public officers. We are everywhere met by people complaining of the 
authorities set over them, and the authorities complaining of the people. The longer we have 
had the districts, the more apparently do lying and litigation prevail; the more are morals 
vitiated ; the more are rights involved in doubt; the more are the foundations of society 
shaken ; the more has the work of civil government become a hopeless, thankless toil, unsatis~ 
factory as to its immediate results, ho ta as to its future effects. With this impression of 
our past management I cannot, I confess, be very scrupulous in advocating change, though 
far fron urging precipitate change; and the main principle of the change to be adopted 
clearly must be the admission of natives to a much larger eee of the civil government, and 
the practical adoption of the often-avowed maxim, that the proper purpose of European 
agency is general direction, check and control, not the executive ministration of details. 

.71. The Statement marked (A) will give a general idea of the manner in which I would 
propose to apply the principles above stated to this prendengy: of course it is to be received 
only as a sketch, and the estimate of expense must be considered open to correction. 

72. The result may be stated as follows :—°* 

e 


CovENANTED Orricers to be employed in the Judicial and Fiscal Administration of the 
' Bengal Presidency, above the Rank of Ordinary Assistants, 


, 


Sudder Judges and Commissioners, Western Provinces - 3 S. Rs, 
Sudder Judges, Lower Provinces - - > - - 4 4 9 at 60,000 - - 5,40,000 
Sudder Commissioners of Revenue, Lower Provinces - 2 Ora 
Commissioners of Revenue and Police - - - - 12 - 42,000,- - 5,04,000 
Judges (includmg Ramghur)- - = - - = 41 - 36,000 - - 14,76,000 
Collectors and Magistrates - - - - - = 54 ~ 30,000 - - 1,62,000 
Sub-collectors - - - +, - «© - - 21 - 18,000 - - 3,78,000 
Deputies - - - - - 2 = = "= , 15+- 12,000 - - 1,80,000 - 
Head-Assistants to Collectors and Magistrates - - 54 - 8,400 - - 4,53,600 
Secretaries to Sudder Judges and Commissioners - - - 9 = 12,000 - - 1,08,000 
Total - - ~ 215, - - + - 52,59,600 


Average - - ~ 24,436. 

73. Now in the places in question we at present have the undermentioned officers of analogous 
rank, exclusive of the resident at Delhi, the collector of sea customs at Calcutta, amd 
his deputy, the salt agents of ,Tumlook and Hidgelee, the opium agents in Behar and 
Benares, thé superintendent of Sulkea Golahs, the special Lakenaj commissioners, the 
commissioner in the Soonderbunds, the commercial servants and officers in the miscel- 
laneous department at the presidency; all ef whom I propose we should’ consider 


separately. . 


GENERAL APPENDIX. - BIg ph de 


Judicial and J udigial Fiscal:: 


& Sudder Judges - - Rs. 2,61,000 


5 Registrars, &c. - = “oo te - —° 73,200 
14 Provincial Judges -) = eC =. «504,000 
21 Commissioners ee ee - 8,82,000 
5 Principal Assistants -.. - -° - = -  1,56,000 
46 Judges and Judges and Magistrates - - - - 13,80,000 
12 Magistrates ~ es 4 tt ee 220,000 
1 Judge, Magistrate and Collectore- - - - = 36,000 
5 Collectors and Magistrates - woe - - 1,850,000" 
1 Ditto for Calcutta - - - - = Gey oe 36,000 
2 Salt Agents, Collectors and Magistrates - - ~- 72,000 
1 Salt Agent and Collector ~~  - -. *- 4+. = 36,000 
47 Registrars - - - - -+ + 2 = =  8,94,800 
10 Ditto and Joint-magistrates - a Ass -  1,27,200 
1 Ditto and Assistant to Judge,. Magistrates and Collector 
and Magistrate - = = eR 12,000 
3 Sub-collectors and Joint-magistrates -. “- - - 58,100 
179 — ; 43,98,300 
Fiscal s 
3 Members ofSudder Board - - .- -~= - Rs 1,56,600 
4 Secretaries, &c. - - - - - - - 91,200 
2 Board of Customs, Salt and Opium =~ - + 1,04,400 
- 8 Secretariat - - - - “ - - - 254,200 
47 Collectors in the Interior - - -. - . - 14,10,000 
1 Collector of Inland Customs and Town Duties Collection 31,200 
-10 ‘Deputy and Sub-collectors ~ = = = = *1,20,000 
4 Salt Agents and Collectors - - - .- ~ =  1,44,000 
1 Superintendant of Salt Chokees -* - ©- = > Q- 19,200 
8 Head Assistants i 67,200 
33. -— } ——-——. 21,98,000 
262 Grand Total - - + - = = = = = = Rs, 65,96,300 
a | eeneertnanel 


74. There thus appears to be a fair prospect of saving 47 officers and 13,36,700 rupees, 
supposing the plan above sketched to be carried into effect. If the resident at Delhi can 
continue the Sudder judge and commissioner of the first division, there would be a further 
saving of Rs. 60,000, but this I do not now reckon upon, thinking it likely that Government 
will make some entirely new arrangement of the political duties of that residency. 

75. I originally proposed to make an addition of about 10 per cent. to the judges and 
other higher offices, in order to provide for the contingencies of occasional pressure of busi~ 
ness, absence and sickness. But it has since occurred to me that with such a provision the 
Lids anes establishment could not fairly be compared with the present, which contains no 
such reserve. oe ; 7 

76. I may take the opportunity, however, of noticing the advantage of having some 
supernumerariés ready to be ernployéd in keeping down arrears of suits wherever they may 
accumulate; the object seems to be of paramount importance in all courts with an ap- 
pellate * jurisdiction; any delay in the decisions of which will always more or less operate 

_@ ‘ : i to. 


_* Thesmall number of cases decided by the superior courts sometimes makes us overlodk the point; 


whereas, in truth, an increased arrear of a single case in the Sudder Dewanny Adawlut may, in reality, 


throw business back more than many hundred cases would do in the lower courts, and it would be well if, . 


in the statements rendered to Government, the arrears were designated not only by the number of cases, 
but by the probable period required for their decision. _ 


. 


(13.) Minute of 

Holt Mackenzie, 
Esq. e 

1 October 18309 


APPENDIX, | 
HL 
‘ Caleutta Civil 
FinanceCommittee. 


216 APPENDIX ro REPORT rxom SELECT COMMITTEE. | 


to occasion ‘embarrassment throughout the,inferior tribunals, and must otherwise be mis- 
chievous in promoting vexatious litigation, and leading to useless expense on the part of 
Government, and still more by the community. _ 

77. It may be proper to remark, that the above arrangements will cause the average 
allowances of the officers specified, to fall somewhat short of the existing rate of those for 
which they are substituted; and though the effect of this upon the service generally will be 
contitertlenced by reducing the number of assistants as hereinafter proposed, it is not an 
effect I was at all desirous of producing; for so long ag European officers are employed. 
-in the several situations specified, it is very important to continue their allowances on a 
liberal scale. With this impression, and considering if, to be proper that the maximum , 
salaries of the highest officers under council should equal those assigned to puisne judges of 
the King’s Courts, (if indeed these should not be Company’s servants), I have ventured to 
propose for the offices in question, 60,000 instead of Sa. Rs. 52,200 *. 

78. In the course of time it seems that the number of officers employed may be decreased ; 
but én this we cannot immediately speculate. We must indeed add to the above list 
a certain number of junior assistants to be attached to the commissioners and to collectors 
and magistrates: but for this the service, as it now stands, will afford more than an 
abundant supply. - ; 

79. The civil auditor informs me that there are now 150 junior assistants and collegians, 
dyawing together Rs.6,55,200+. Of these 21, drawing Fs. 1,00,800, may be set apart as 
being required, under the: existing system, to fill a corresponding number of registrarships 
stated to be at present vacant; there will remain 139 receiving Rs. 5,54,400. 

80. Now the number of civilians employed above the rank of junior assistants in offices 
not falling within the scope of the above schedule, is given in the statements last received 
from the civil auditor at 82, including 22 of the Commercial gh ecto and three em- 
ployed at Madras; adding this number to that of the schedule, we shall have for the aggre- 
gate of civilians actually engaged in the service, above the rank of junior assistants, 297, or, 
omitting the Carnatic commission, which is soon likely to cease, 294. If we suppose nine 
gentlemen to retire annually, and, a8 is likely, the casualties to average seven per annum, © 
there will be an annual demand of about*16; and a supply of junior assistants sufficient to 
meet that demand for three years, or 48, tvith an allowance of the same number in college, 
in all 64, would apparently suffice. The vacancies occasioned by gentlemen taking furlough 
may be expected, one year with another, to be filled by those who return; no allowance on 
that account therefore seems to be necessary; and the strength of the service ought not 
therefore, on the above suppositions, to exceed 358. It actually consists of 473, or, excluding 
the Carnatic commissioners, 470 ; and the supply of junior assistants and collegians would 
apparently suffice for more than four years, besides the supernumeraries in the higher rank. 
of the service. 

' g1. Now if we allow a moiety of the 48 assistants to receive 500, (they may after 

18 months service be very useful assistants to the collectors or sub-collectors), and the 

other half 400 rupees a month, there will be a saving under this head of Rs. 2,37,600 {. | ie 
: : : : 82. 


* The salary of the King’s puisne judges here is Sa. Rs. 61,200. The average salary of the judges 
of the Sudder Court, as originally constituted, was Sa. Rs. 56,666 ; or, Sé. Rs. 59,216, or Fy. Rs. 60,333- 


+ 96 Assistants - - - - - 4,60,800 
34 Collegians - - 2 F - - = 1,94,400 
Rs. 6,55,200 


¢ Present charge, as above - - 5,54,400 
24 xX 6,000 = 1,44,000 
‘24 x 4,800 = 1,15,200 

.16 x 3,600 = 57,600" 


— 


3,16,800 


ee 


64 | Saving + - 2,37,600° 
eT LATENT ETS 


‘ 


GENERAL APPENDIX. * 0% ee 


(13.) Minute of 
Holt Mackenzie, 
Ksq. eo 
1 October 18300 


- 82. If, however, the maximum of Rs. 60,000 pe adopted for the above offices; it will pro+ 
bably be necessary to make a correspondent addition to the salaries of the three secretaries 
to Government and to the accountant-general; hence an additional charge of As. 31,200, 
leaving the ultimate saving Rs. 15,438,100. 


83. The establishment of covenanted officers would, on the above plan, stand as follows: 
viz. 


215 Judicial and Fiscal, as abeve —- -~ Rs. 52,59,600 


20 Judicial and Fiscal officers not*iricluded in the schedule 7,24,400 

17 Political - - - - - - - - - ,82,200 

22 Commercial -  - - - - - -" = 6,62,400 
20 Miscellaneous - - - - -~ e- - - 6,12,000 
64 Assistants and Collegians ~ = = @- -  8,16,800 
para . é Sens 
358 a ee ee ee ee ee a ee 
ae abn SAE RRA RIKEN 


giving an average of Rs. 22,786; or excluding the Commercial department, with which we 
have no immediate concern, we have an aggregate of Fs. '74,95,000, drawn by 336 officers, 
giving an average of Rs. 22,306. 


84. It remains to consider the native establishments. 


85. I have, it will be seen, put down 421* native judges, which though perhaps some 
alteration in the distribution may be proper, would appear to be a suf§cient complement. 
The aggregate salaries will then amount to Zs. 10,52,500 per annum. 


86. The salaries now received by the moulavies, pundits, and other Sudder aumeens 
amount to Rs. 3,55,900, and the accountant informs me that in the past year the fees received 
by the moonsiffs amounted to Rs. 2,18,000 }, giving a total of Rs. 5,73,900; adding to this 
Re. 20,685 on account of that portion which is peid in Calcutta sicca rupees, we have the 
sum of Rs. 5,94,585 to set off against the above charge of Rs. 10,52,500. The excess of 
the latter Rs. 4,57,915 deducted from the saving above-mentioned, leaves a net gain from 
the arrangement, of Rs. 10,85,185, exclusive of the saving which will result from the dis- 
continuance of the establishments belonging to the provincial courts, to the adawluts of .the 
districts which are united with others, and to the registrars, which may be stated at about 
Rs. 4,10,544. ; 


87. In speaking of the other presidencies, I cannot of course pretend to the same precision ; 
I add the schedules chiefly to exhibit the plan in its general application, without imagining 
that in the details it can be otherwise than wanting many essential amendments. 


88. The following is the establishment proposed for Madras :— 
8 Sudder 


? 


* In many of the districts the number of moonsiffs empioyed appears to be quite excessive, and many 
of them are employed in duties which a mohurir might dv as well. 


- + Several of the moonsiffs are also cazees ; the emolyments derived by them as such may be taken at 
abeut Rs. 35,000; and although we cannot entirely recken upon this fund, because some of the men, 
though sufficiently capable as cazees, are not probably very good judges, and it would not, be proper to 
adopt any principle that should give a preference to Moslems, excepting on the score of ability, it will 
yet, I imagine, more than suffice to cover any errors or contingencies not foreseen. 


FF 


, 


Appbxorx, 918 APPENDIX ro REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


Hil, 

Sarath ae 3 Sudder Judges and Commissioners, at Rs. 50,000 - -  &s.1,50,000 
Calcutta Civil 6 Controllers * - - =~ & = 40000 - =~ ~ 2,40,000 
FinanceCommittee. 14 Judges - - - - = at = 39,000 - - = 4,90,000 
20 Collectors - - - - at -- 30,000 - - - 6,00,000 
11 Sub-collectors - - - at - 19,200 - - - 2,11,200 
.6 Deputies - = = = at - 12,000 - - - 72,000 
4 Secretaries to Sudder - at 12,000 - -~' = 48,000 

20 Head Assistants to Collectors and Magis- ‘ 
trates - - - - at -e 8,400 - - - 1,68,000 
———— e See 
84 - se eye el = 19,779,200 
—_ Add, for Mysore - - - 6,000 
19,85,200 


Average - - ~- - Rs.23,633. 


89. At present we have, after taking credit for the reductions recently proposed to the 
Madras government, the following establishments to do the duties for which the above 
would provide :—~ 


Judicial and Judicial and Fiscal: 
2 Sudder Judges - - - - - - - Rs. 98,000 
47 Provincial Judges - - - - - - - 2,80,000 
8 Sudder Re istrars, &e. - - “ - - ~ - 46,450 
12 Judges of Districts - - = = - - 3,36,000 


6 Assistant Judges - - - - - - - - 1,08,000 . 
19 Collectors and Magistrates - - - - - - 6,19,400 
12 Sub ditto - ~ ee 172,800 
19 Head Assistants - - - + - - - - 1,68,000 
90 —— a ———— 18,28,850 
Fiscal : 
3 Members of the Revenue Board} - - = - - as 1,47,000 
4 Secretary, Deputy and Assistants - - 2 52,680 
41 Collector of Madras - - - - - - - 36,482 
1 Deputy - ~ = 2 - - = = = 16,878 
1 Collector of Sea Customs = - - - - - = $3,317 
1 Deputy “oe = = = 2 = = = 20,730 
1 Assistant - - - - - - - - 10,250 
1 Resident at Mysore t - = = = = = = 60,000 
13 —— 3,76,887 
WS 2 ee 22,005,687 
ane Average - - - - Rs. 21,414, 


90. We may therefore calculate upon a saving of 19 officers, and of Rs. 2,20,487 §. 
) 91. The 


® Of these Le suppose one to look after the affairs, of which the charge is now confided to the rei- 
dent at Mysoge, with an addition of Rs. 6,000. 

+ This supposes the maximum salary of Rs. 49,000 to be given te all. 

1 I suppose this residency to be put on the same footing with the others. 

§ If this appear inconsiderable, it will be recollected that when the scheme was first proposed, the 
Committee had not entered on the revision which led to the reductions recently resolved upon. 


'* GENERAL APPENDIX. 219 


91. The number of subordinate assistants apd students appears to have béen reduced 
considerably since this paper was originally written, the latest return showing only seven 
of the former and 10 of the. latter. ame therefore of a saying, it will apparently be 
necessary to allow a small increase under this head: for it seems to me, on the principles 
applied to Bengal, that we should require 24 persons of this class *, and at the rate of pay 
above specified we should have an aggregate peri of Rs. 1,18,800. Now the gentlemen 
above referred to are stated to draw Rs. 63,525 only +, and we should, on the calculation now 
submitted, have to add seven to the number, and Ks. 55,275 to the charge. 

92. The establishment of covenanted officers at Madras would then be as follows: viz. 


84 Judicial and Fiscal * - - - - - Rs. 19,85,200 
1 Political - - = - - - +4 - - 28,000 

6 Commercial - - - - = e- - - 2,12,950 
12t Miscellaneous - - - - - --% - - 4,05,330 
24 Assistants and Students = - - - - -  1,18,800 
27-0 - = - = = = = = = = 27,50,280 


Giving an average of about Rs. 21,655. 


93. We shall thus, I imagine, have abundant funds to meet any increase it may be 
thought necessary to make in the allowances of the native judges. 


94. For Bombay §, looking to the population, the extent and the revenue of the country, 


it appears to me that the following establishment would be pprroptiaies — 


2 Sudder judges and commissioners, at 45,000 - - + 90,000 
3 Controllers, at 35,000 - - - - - ote -  .- —-1,05,000 
7 Judges, at 32,500 - = ~ 7. - - 2,27,500 
9 Collectors and magistrates, at 28, 000 ~ - - - - 2,52,000 
6 Sub-collectors and’ magistrates, at 19,200 - - - - 1,15,200 
2 Sudder secretaries, at 12,000 Se - ~ - 24,000 
9 Head-assistants, at 8,400 - - + - - - - 75,600 
1 Judge, magistrate, and collector, at 32,500 - - - - 32,500 
39 9,21,800 


Average, 23,636. 


95. According to Mr. Bax’s plan, 40 officers above the rank of assistant would be 
employed in the situations: in question, (exclusive of the revenue survey,) at a charge of 


: rupees 
*g x 6,000 = 54,000 
g Xx 4,800 = 43,200 
6 x 3,600 = 21,600 
24 1,18,800 
The above rates, exceeding those now established, may require to be reconsidered. 

+7 Assistants - - - - - 249,240 

10 Collegians - .- . - = 36,285 

2 Rs. 63,525 


e+ This supposes the secretaries to Government and the accountant-general to get the maximum of 
Rs. 50,000. 

§ These salaries should be raised as the wealth of the country increases; and should the Supreme 
Court as a separate tribunal be abolished, or rather consolidated with the Sudder, and the island of Bom- 
bay, with the cities of Madras and Calcutta, be placed each under a single judge, the addition of another 
Judge to the Sudder or presiding Court of Appeal will probably be necessary. 

FF2 


APPENDIX, 


Ii. 


(13.) Minute of 
Holt Mackenzie, 
Esq. @ 

1 October 18300 


e 
APPENDIX, 


ILL. 


Calcutta Civil 
FinanceCommittee. 


es 

220 APPENDIX tro REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 

rupees 9,869000. The assistants specified in his schedule amount to 33, drawing rupees 
1,85,000, or on an average about 5,600. It seems to me to be very important to limit the 
number of assistants and other subordinate covengnted civil servants as much as possible ; 
for ey such servant employed in duties which a native could do as well, beyond what are 
required to be so trained for higher duties, is the occasion of needless expense, and, by lower- 
ing the average of emoluments, in a certain measure degrades the service. I should think 
that 15¢or 16 assistants and students might suffice for Bombay ; and if we allow them to 


draw the same average as in Bengal and Madras, we ghald have, on this account, a charge 
of 79,200 rupees *. e 


96, The Bombay service will then stand as follows:—. 
39 Judicial and fiscal PoC 


9,21,800 
7 Political - -~e - - - - =~ 1,00,000 
3 Commercial * - - - - - - 87,599 
12 Miscellaneous: » - ~ - - 3,33,342 
16 Assistants and students © - - - oe 79,200 
77 15,21,941 


Average 19,765. 


.97. By the latest statement I have seen, the Bombay civil service appears to consist of 1 24 
persons, drawing an aggregate of rupees 17,42,448, or an average of about rupees 14,052. 

98. The arrangement therefore above suggested, while it produces a considerable saving 
of expense, would ultimately prove beneficial to the individuals composing the service. 

99. The immedigte effect, however, at all the presidencies, is to render a number of 
officers supernumerary +, and it seems tg be desirable that the attention of the home autho- 
rities should be early directed to the subject; ‘for to all the presidencies they seem to be 
sending out more writers than are wanted, even supposing no change of system to be made. 

100. The result of the whole, as regards the expense incurred on account of covenanted 
servants, may be summed as follows :— Pat 


Reduction in the 


number of Civil | Diminution of Charge. 
Servants, 
BENGAL - - - - - 10,85,185 
Mapras - - - “4 ” 1,65,212 
Bompay -5  * & os © 1,70,000 
Total - - - 14,20,397 


101. At 


* 6 X 6,000 = 36,000 
6 X 4,800 = 28,800 
4 X 3,600 = 14,400 
: 16 


« 79,200 


+ Many of the supernumerary officers might, I should think, be expediently employed in conductieg 
inquiries regarding lands held free of assessment, which, for the interests of the revenue, the improve- 
ment of the ceuntry, and the quiet of the people, it is very desirable to set at rest. It may also deserve 
consideration whether some of the officers in question might not be advantageously employed as advo- 
cates before the sudder judges, and-of course several situations now held by military men should, as 
vacancies occur, be restored to the civil service. , ; 


' GENERAL APPENDIX. . 221 ae 


s 


- e 

4101. At Madras and eenbey the native judges appear to be already better paid than : 
here; and though, perhaps, the habits of the people and the political circimstances of the (13-) Minute of 
“country may render it expedient to adopt (particularly at Bombay) a higher rate of salaries Holt Mackenzie, 
“than IT have above submitted, it will not apparently be necessary to incur any largeaddi- | 4 ae “ 

tional expense on account of those officers, whose numbers should not of course be multiplied 1 October 18g0- 

unnecessarily ; and in revising our native establishment, [ expect to show hereafter that a 

saving may be effected sufficient to provide liberal pay for the head men, whom the collec- 

tors and magistrates must empley ir the details of their office. But the object of this 

Paper being rather to discuss general principles than to enter on a minute application of them, 

I shall not extend its already wearisome length by further remarks or suggestions. 


102. I shall conclude with a brief comparison of the revenues, supposed population, and the 
charges to be incurred on account of civil functionaries, 4t the three presidencies. 


103. The population may in a general way be stated as follows — 


Bengal - - - 50 10 

Madras - - - 15 } - oras- i 3 

Bombay - - ~ 5 L 1 
Revenues. 

Bengal - - - 125 5 

Madras - - - 50 - or as - i 2 

Bombay - - - 25 1 


104, The inhabitants of this part of India would thus appear to be lightly taxed, in com- 
parison with those of the other presidencies ; and should an increase of taxation be indispen- 
sable for the stability of the general concern, we must probably look chiefly to Bengal, notwith- 
standing the surplus it already yields. On the other hand, in proportion as the people are 
numerous and wealthy, it may be reasonably expected that the charges of their civil govern~ 
ment, especially those for administering justice, should be great; and a reference to the vast 
amount of property in litigation before our courts will show that, in respect to wealth, the 
subjects of this presidency exhibit all that superiprity which the permanent settlement and 
lightness of taxation would lead us to anticipate. If, then, the charges of our establishment 
of civil servants shall not exceed the ratio of the population, it must, I conceive, be regarded 
as proportionately very moderate. . 


105. Now, if we take the Bombay establishment of judicial and fiscal officers, as above 
pope at rupees 9,21,800, the ratio of the population would give us 27,65,400 for | 
adras, and rupees 92,18,000 for Bengal; whereas for Madras I have proposed only a 
charge of 19,85,200, and for Bengal 52,59,600. Again, if we take the aggregate establish- 
ment at rupees 15,21,941, we should have for Madras 45,65,823, and for Bengal, rupees 
1,52,19,410; whereas I have proposed that they should stand at rupees 27,50,280 and 

81,57,400 respectively. ; . 


106. The charges of Madras and Bengal are more nearly proportioned ; still comparative 
- cheapness appears to be on the side of this presidency. 


107. Thus the charge of rupees 19,85,200 would, in the proportion of the population, give 
us a charge of rupees 66,17,333, instead of 52,59,600 ; and that of rupees 27,50,280, a charge 
of rupees 91,67,600, instead of 81,57,400. . : 


108. The main end of all government being the good of the people, I am justified, I think, 
in concluding that whatever defects there may be in my plan, (and there are, doubtless, 
mé@ny), they are not to be attributed to any undue partiality to this presidency. 


ra Calcutta, : 
- Ist October 1830. (signed) Hott Mackenzie. 


222 APPENDIX to REPORT reom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


BENGAL WESTERN PROVINCES. 


2 a 2 = @ 2 
4/2 2 20/2 2 
SUDDER Circles of ante Ey 3 - E anes 3.3 Zee 
DIVISION. |: ei geet | SES [Deputies] judges, | 2 °° | 8 2B 
Police Commissioners. = Sie 2 a $3}/3 64 
a Ole 8 oa 8#/5 3 
e na {S) 4 M oO 
o a 
Delbi,Agra| Hansi - ~~ + ‘fe S 
and North | Paneeput - - = - 3° 9 
Doab. Seharunpore - 2 2 é ; 
Moosuffernagger - <= = - 
Meerut - - - - = 9 
Bolundshahur - a « o 
Total of Circle - - 2 1 


Delhi - 
Rohtuk - 
Goorgron- « 
Ally Ghur . © 
Sydabad - 
Agra - 


tetas 
4 @ § @ 4 86 
tateoeed 
temtbdw 


Total Circle - 
Total of Sudder Division - - 


Central 'Etawah - - ak a 
Doab and | Mynpooree - 2 = = 
Rohiicund. 


Serpoorah - 5 = 
Furruckabad - = - - - 


Belah - - = - “t. 
Cawnpore aR Re 


Total of Circle - - - 


} Shahjehanpore 
Bareilly, - 
Pellebheet 

Surwan - 

| Moradabad, 8. D. - 
Nuggenah, N. D. 


oboe 


4eerta 
aa 
Ne ® 


* Totalof Circle - - - | 
Total of Sudder Division 


_ GENERAL APPENDIX. 225 


e 4 
gz 3 ae eae 
a 8 5 oe wo & 
Circles of Revenue € €(2 8 : 5 3.8 
SUDDER : and e SEs aes b Native Se Sue 
, : ; , 23 ® 2 |Deputies, a ° 2 | gag 
IVISION Police Commissioners. 2 8 = Q froPunese| Judges. £2 313 | 
: a Oo g 3 o 5 i=] oS 
= m oO & n oO 


Allahabad, | Futtehpore - .% °- 4 - 
. Bundlecund| Allahabad - é, we ts 


andBenares.| Banda,S.D. - 2 -~— =~. 
Kameerpore, N. D. - - - 


Total of Circle - - - 


Mirzapore - . - } 
Isanpore “ 

Benares - - a 7 ‘s 
Ghazeepore : 
Azimghur 
Goruckpore ~ - % - 


Total of Cirele - - 


Total of Division -~ - « 


Granp Tota, Western Provinces + 


ey 


aes g 3 
F "2 £18 = ga fe 
SUDDER Circles of Revenue Distict | 2 a8 8 ad 3.2 | sudder 
DIVISION. Eye Jadpes, | 2S] 68S 2° | Jud 
Police Commissioners. adges. tf Ss | a 3 | -UCse 
a ofisss e¢ § 
an 2 1> Es 
& [uneenaenenentnenentl 
Sarun- =e af. fa 1 1 , 
Shahabad - oe 1 1 
Patna - - *- - » 1 1 * 
Behar - = «os a 1 1 
Ramghur ee ee ae | - a 1 
Tirhoot - - ~ P 7 1 4 
Pumea - —  - - 2 oi 1 1 
Malda = a! = - ” ~ - ’ 
Total of Division + - - 6 1 1 


co if 
(continued) : 


224 APPENDIX to REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


* 2 

Fy Pa 

ny F Ba 3 = Ss 

Circles of Revenue : 3 é 3 S B io 

SUDDER and District } § g > | =e @ __| Native | Bu 3 
DIVISION. Police Commissioners. Judges. | "Ss | > Fe Deputies Judges. | By 
2 0/18 8 ge 

—_ vy 

R “Ss io) > 

Lar) v 

I a a fan] 


Moorsheda- Moonghyr 


bad. Bhaugulpore - - = “} : el! f ~ . 
Dimagepore -- - - - 1 1 ~ - 15 
Rajishye - - - -— = 1 1 1 - 12 
Patna - - - - ¢g - - ~ - = 

Buggorah i ~ - 1 - - ‘ 
Rungpore - - ee 1 1 - - 15 
Moorshedabad - - - 1 1 ~ 1 8 
Beerbhoom - - - - 1 1 - - 8 
Nuddia  - - - - - 1 2 ~ _ 12 

Total of Division - - - 7 1 16 1 1 


SoC SS} .)_ eee oo) so =e ees eee 


Presidency | Jungle Mehals- - - = =! 1 “a = 9 
and Cut- | Burdwan - 7 - - 1 = 2 18 
tack. Hooghly - — - Be. 2 1 3 fe tA 
24 PergunnahsyN. D. - + 1 - 1 16 
Suburbs - - - = = } 1 ass ~ ae 1 
City,S.D. - -. - = - ‘sa 1 = 
Jessore - -° - = = 1 - - 14 ? 
Bangundee - - '-  -¢« 1 - _ = 
Balasore - - - - = 1 re _ = 
Cuttack - - - - : 1 = = 8 | 
Khordat - -  - - = ee oe ee { 
Midnapore and Higlee - - 1 a os 10 
Total of Division - - - 11 ~ 2 89 2 1 
=—_—_— 
Dacca- -| Dacca Jelalpore - - *} 1 1 a 1 io 
Dacca - - = = = 
Mymensing -- - - -{ 1 1 ~ ~ | 15 
Sherepore - = = = _ is 1 x i 1 
Backergunge - * -  - 1 1 - - 6 
Sylhet - - - - “fF 1 1 - - 15 1 
Assam = * "= = 7 = - a = = 
Tipperah - -  - 7 = 1 = 1 - 8 
Bullooah - - - - - ~ 1 < 1 * 1 
yee a a 1 1 - 1 18 
Arracan - - = 7 "YG = - - - - 


Total of Division ata? Ao 


Granp Totat, Lower Provinces 


Add, Head Commissioner of Revenue and ‘Police = - - = = 1 
Ditto for Salt.and Opium and Miscellaneous Revenue - -— - 1 
2 


GENERAL APPENDIX. 225 


ABSTRACT: 


WESTERN 
PROVINCES. 


LOWER e 
PROVINCES, 


TOTAL 


Sudder Judges and Cinnttatsuck of Revenue Polis 
Sudder Judges - - - = = - 
Sudder Commissioners - -  - 
Commissioners of Revenue and Police 
Civil and Criminal Judges  .- + 
Magistrates and Collectors - 

Joint Magistrates 4 Sub-Collectors 

Deputies - - = 


potot igt wa 
ove 
Ry 
oo bo 
GK oOwA wr 1 
cs 
— 


MADRAS. 


Commis- . © 
sioners of 
Revenue 
& Police. 


SUDDER DIVISION. Judges. | Collectors, Deputies. 


“LL. 
at 


6 4 2 


Eilts 


Ganjam - 
Chicacole - 
a Vizagapatam 
Northen - ¢( Rajahmundry 
Masulipatam 

Guntore 
Nellore and Ongole 


Cuddapah 

Bellary 

N. Arcot 
Conia &.s S. Arcot 


Chingleput 
Tanjore 
Trichinopoly 


Salem - - 


| 


$ § g £ bt 8 8 ot 


Madura and Dindigul - 
Tinnevelly = - Bs 


Southern and | Coimbatore 


Western. Malabar ° Z . = 


Canara 


Grand Total - -| 6 


226 


* APPENDIX to REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


BOMBAY. 


Commis: Collectors 


Judge, 


: ; Sub- 
CIRCLES. sioners of | Magistrate. “and. - | Gallcetors 
Re ges. and ; omectores 
e & Tieaie Collector. Magistrates. 
re Ete ere pees |e | nn a 
Ahmednuggur - - Z e tn 
Southern - { Poonah - - - ai) ae | 3, 3 $ 
Darwar. “ x r EI 
Candeish - - = 
Bombay et aot Oy 
Centre Southern Concan - a < 1 2 . 
Northern Concan - oh 2 
Surat - - - = Fs 
Broach - - . 4 
Guzerat Kaira - : - é i 1 2 3 a 
\ Ahmedabad - - a - 
Total - 3 | 7 1 9 6 


To the Sudder Court the same two divisions may be taken as have been fixed for its circuits. And 
besides the two Judges and Commissioners mentioned in the proposed establishment, I suppose one 
“of the Members inf Council to take an active share in its business. 


(14) Minute of 
David Hill, Esq., 
onYJudicial and 
Revenue Admini- 
stration ; 

19 October 180. 


* Appendix (12.) 
+ Appendix (13.) 


(14..—MINUTE of Datid Hill, Esq., dated 19th October 1830. 


‘I wave not much to add to what is stated in my Paper* of 8th March last, on the subject 
of the internal administration of India. I have attentively read Mr. Mackenzie’s Minute + of 
the Ist instant, which does not differ essentially from the form in which it was drawn up 
a year ago; and J still adhere to the principles which I formerly attempted to explain. Into 
detailed arrangements I forbear from entering, partly because [am averse to sweeping inno- 
vations, which seldom work as was anticipated, and never fail to derange the system they 
are applied to; but also, in a great measure, because (confining the observation to the 
presidency of Madras) I see little to change which is not already in gradual progress. I have - 
no faith in the superior virtue of any system, be it what it may, by which the present one 
might all at once be subverted and replaced. Toe Tan aie as 

2. In our revision of the Madras Establishments, we have urged the extended employment 
of native agency.in both the civil and criminal branches of the Judicial department. 
When native judges come, as I have no doubt of their doing, to take upon themselves nearly 
the whole of the judicial duty hitherto discharged by the European zillah judges and magis- 
trates, I conceive that there can no longer be any occasion for contimuing the intermediate 
office of provincial judge between that of zillah judge and the Sudder Adawlut. If primary 

jurisdiction in all, or almost all civil cases, and cognizance of all but heinous offences were, 
committed to native judges, the functions hitherto performed by. provincial judges would 
naturally be transferred to the judges of zillahs, upon the system in force under the Bombay 
Ltaanrae To hurry on this change would defeat the success of the other arrangements 
about to be jntroduced ; but it will naturally follow as soon as they come fully into operation. 

. 8. Furthen consideration -on the subject of appeals has led me to think that a great 
alteration is required, not ‘in the machinery, but in the working of that part of our system. 
At present the whole evidence in’ an appealed case is secorded and sent up to the appellate 
court, which has to decide upon every point, of fact, as well as of law, which the case 


involves, 


' GENERAL APPENDIX. aay 


involves, in the same manner as the court 6f original jurisdiction had to do, with this 
_ exception only, that the latter court togk oral evidence, whereas the former has nothing but 
‘written depositions before it. It seems manifest, that the court which examines witnesses 
must, ceteris paribus, possess a great advantage over any court which only peruses a report 
of their testimony. The object of allowing appeals is not to set up the deliberate revision 
of recorded evidence, as a more satisfactory method of trying facts than the hearing of 
evidence orally delivered ; but ejther first to ascertain whether, from unavoidable omission 
on the part of one of the suitors, or oversight onthe part of the judge, the facts have not 
been properly tried, in which cage they ought to be tried over again, not by a revision of. 
recorded evidence, but by a hearing of complete evidence, orally delivered as before; or, 
secondly, to ascertain whether the law has been correctly applied to the facts so established. 
It is on grounds such as these, that in English courts ,of justice a motion is made for 
granting a new trial, or for setting aside a verdict. If, in the primary pleadings in our 
courts, the parties were compelled to join issue with ‘precision and simplicity, it woflld be 
easy, as well as fair, to require the appellant to state explicitly whether he appealed on 
a matter of law or of fact. In the former case, the facts as established by the decree are 
admitted, and the appellate court has no occasion to see the evidence, but has simply to 
declare the law. In the latter case the appellant would have to state whether the facts 
were erroneously established from any omission on his own part, or from any oversight pn 
that of the judge. If from his own omission, he would have to explain how it arose, and 
how it could be supplied; if from an oversight of the judge, he would have to confine 
himself to the fact to which the imputed oversight applied, and to the particular evidence 
which the judge had overlooked. Should the appellate court be satisfied with the grounds 


on which a new trial was applied for, they would simply have to grant ohe, either before the- 


same court or another, as the nature of the ground? on which it was granted might render 
proper. If Iam right in these views, the jurisdiction of our appellate courts would be 
placed upon a legitimate footing, and their business be very greatly reduced. 

4. In the same manner I apprehend thatthe crinfinal trials which are required to be 
referred to the Foujdarry Adawlut ought not to be accompanied with a record of the evidence, 
as if the perusal of that evidence at the presidéncy would lead to a more just conclusion 
with regard to the facts of the case than was obtained by the hearing of it orally delivered 


where the trial took place. According to my judgment, the facts should be ‘taken to’ 


be established by the finding of the judge who conducts the trial, aided, if need be, by 
native assessors in the capacity of jurors, or of men conversant with native testimony. 
In cases which have to be referred, the judge should report the faets which have been 
established to his satisfaction, and the sentence which he proposes to pass upon the prisoner. 
The business of the Foujdarry Adawlut would then be not to put their opmion upon the 
perusal of the recorded evidence in comparison with that of the judge who tried the case. 
upon the hearing of the evidence orally delivered, but to see that the provisions of the penal 
laws were truly interpreted, and equa!ly administered in all cases liable to reference. Their 
labours would be immensely abridged, and, in my apprehension, this branch of their authority 
would be more legitimately exercised than it is upon the present system. 

5. If the suggestions which I have ventured to offer on a branch of the public service, of 
which I have had no practical experience, be well founded, and be acted upon, I should 
confidently expect both that the appellate jurisdiction in our system of judicature would 
be exercised in a much more reasonable and satisfactory manner than heretofore, and also 
that by its very great abridgment, the expense of the courts of appellate jurisdiction would 
admit of being much reduced. 7 

@. In my former Paper I did not refrain from avowing myself an advocate for the supre- 
macy of the Government over the Law. Disguise the matter how we will, it seems to me 
incontestable, that in reality the case must be so. If the Government hadits ofigin in the 
will of the people, or had their good for its end, there would be an anomaly in having their 
rights under its control. The Law ought then to be supreme. Under such a constitution of 
affairs any defect in the law, or in the administration of it, comes instantly to the notice 


APPENDIX, 


HI 


(14.) Minute of. 
David Hille Esq., 
on Judicial and e 
Revenue Admini- 
stration ; 

19 October 1830. 


GG2:. of 


“Appenpix, 228 | APPENDIX tro REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


Ii. » 
—— of the gers and may be corrected. It is &nnecessary therefore for the people to delegate: 
Calcutta Civil to the Government the guardianship of their well-beipg under the law. The people control . 


Finance€ommittee, the law as they control the Government ; and ultimate supremacy over one and the other,” 
resides with them. But when neither the Government nor the Law originates in the will of 
the people, nor has their good, or even their satisfaction, for its main object, matters cannot 
take the Same course. No ultimate supremacy rests with the people; Law and Government 
being without one common control cannot both be supreme., The errors of law, either im its 
provisions, or in its administration, even if they come to the notice of the people, cannot be 
corrected by them. By whomsoever corrected, it must necessarily be done in consistency 
with the principles of the Government. If this authority could be reposed in any body of 
men by whom it would be exercised more in consistency with the principles of law than can 
be expected from the Executive Government, that no doubt would be a material advantage. 
Under the projected changes in the legislative and judicial administration such an improve} 
meut may be practicable. The essential object is, that the administration of law should be 
superintended and controlled so as to peme for the well-being of the people to the 
utmost extent compatible with the general scheme and aim of the government. I certainly 
feel no partiality for a state of society in which the rights of individuals are liable to be set 
aside on grounds of public policy. Every one would prefer living in a free country to 
living in one which is enslaved ; but it cannot be maintained that the institutions of the one 
are applicable to the other. It may be hoped that the time will come when the people of 
this country will be qualified and permitted to take the chief part in the management of 
their own alias The tendency of all improvements of late years in the system of internal 
administration is to bring forward the natives. Whenever they shall cease to be governed 
as a conquered people, and, either expressly or virtually, their voice shall be heard in con- 
trolling both Government and courts of “law, there will remain no longer any reason for the 
supremacy of the Government over the Law. Till then it seems to me the smaller of the 
two evils, that the administration of law should on such occasions, and in such mode as may 
be judged fit, be controlled by Government, rather than that it should be left without 
control. 


Calcutta, 19th October 1830. (signed) D. Hin. 


(15.)—LETTER from the Calcutta Civil Finance Committee to the Governor-general 
in Council at Bengal, dated 24th February 1830. 
My Lord, 


(15.) Letter from We have been engaged for some time past in revising generally the civil charges at the 
Committee, onEsta~ three presidencies, with the view of reducing them to the scale of 1823-24; and we hope, at 
blishment of Civil no distant period, to be able progressively to submit the result of our labours for the consi-~ 
Servants in India; deration of your Lordship in Ciel: In the mean time we deem it proper to represent 
24 February 1830. that we have already satisfied ourselves that the present number of civil servants at each of 
the three presidencies materially exceeds what the revised establishments will require. The 
detailed grounds of this persuasion we shall not be able to lay before your Lordship in 
* Council until we are prepared fully to explain our views on this branch of our inquiries ; but 
if your Lordship in Council should have adopted the same persuation, or should feel disposed 
for the present to take it on trust from us, it might be very desirable to bring the subject at 
an early period ta the notice of the Honourablé the Court of Directors, and to request, that 
until the final opinion of your Lordship in Council be reported, the Honourable Court will 
refrain from sending any writers to India who may not have already been nominated tothe 
Company’ service, 

. 3 _ We have the honour to be, &c., 

(signed) | -D. Hiv, — 

: Hott Mackenzig, 

Joun Bax. 


GENERAL APPENDIX. 229 


(16.)—LETTER from the Caleutta*Civil Finance Committee to the Vice-President in 
- Council at Bengal, dated 16th December 1830. 


Honourable Sir, 


* Ar an early stage of our inguines it appearing to us that the present number of civil 
servants at each of the three presidencies materially exceeded, what the revised establishment 
would require, we had the honouw in our address * of the 24th of args last, to submit to 
Government that opinion, and to suggest that, should your Honourable Board have adopted 
the same persuasion, it might be desirable to bring the gubject to the notice of the Honourable 
the Court of Directors, with a request that, till the final opinion of the Supreme Government 


tshould be reported, they would refrain from sending any writers to India who might not have 


already been nominated to their service. We now proceed to state what number of 
writers it appears to us would annually be required to maintain an adequate body of 
‘covenanted officers for the administration of the civil affairs of each of the three presi- 
dencies. 


APPENDIX, 
III. 
6.) Lettér from 
Committee, on Es- 
tablishment of Civil 
Servants; 
16 December 1830. 


* Appendix (15-) 


2. Supposing the modifications which have been suggested by our Committee in the civil . 


establishments of the several presidencies to be carried into effect, the number of substantive 
appointments to be filled by covenanted servants of the Company in the Revenue, Judicial 
and General branches would in Bengal be 262, at Madras 102, and at Bombay 47, as detail- 
ed in the annexed Schedules. The civil members of Council of each of the presidencies are 
two in number, and the number of civil servants who under the furlough rules may be absent 
from India, at the same time, is 51 from Bengal, 2%from Madras, and 12 from Bombay. As 
it does not from experience appear that advantage is likely to be taken of the furlough rules 
to the full extent, and as the differences may probably be sufficient to supply such vacancies 
as may have occurred by casualties or other cause, and also to provide ibe any temporary 
duty that may arise, no further special provision gf supernumeraries for these purposes seems 
to be required. 


3. Assuming then the effective part of the service at the strength above stated, the number~ 
of junior assistants under the rank of second assistants to collectors and magistrates, whose 
services cannot be regarded as indispensably necessary, and students who together with them 
may be considered to be in course of training, may be taken at 40 for Bengal, 18 for Madras, 
and eight for Bombay, making the total number of covenanted civil servants to be employed 
in the above branches of the public service 355 in Bengal, 149 at Madras, and 69 at 
Bombay. * : ' 


e 


4. Political 


| en 


* Substantive appointments 

Civil members of council - 
Farlough absentees - 7 
Junior assistants and students - 


aeopos 
peas 


Total - ~ + 

Political ~ = ee as ry 
Coummereial - = bi ee - “ 
yO Grand Total . ae 


Vide p. 232. 


APPENDIX, 


Ill. 


Calcutta Civil 
Financegommittee. 


Vide p. 233. 


230 APPENDIX ro REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


4. Political appointments being open both to the civil and military servants of the 
Company, and indiscriminately to those of any pregency, it seems to be sufficient for the 
present purpose to assume the number of civil servants of each of the different presidencies now 
holding political appoimtments as the prabable number who will hereafter be employed in that 
department, and to adopt asimilar principle in regard to the commercial department. Should 
any change be made in the system on which the commercial affairs of the Company are 
carried on, so as to render an increased number of covenanted servants necessary, or to 
admit of their numbers being reduced, to such an extent as materially to increase or diminish 
the ageregate number of the members of the civil servicg at either of the presidencies, the 
necessary allowance cah readily be made on that account; and we accordingly conclude, 
that we shall be sufficiently accurate in supposing the Bengal civil service to consist hereafter 
of 388 members, that of Madras of 158, and that of Bombay of 73 members. 


5. Now it may be expected that ultimately the full number of annuities granted by the 
Honourable Court of Directors will annually be taken, and that nine civil servants will 
annually retire on its terms from Bengal, four from Madras and three from Bombay. 


6. In estimating the casualties by death, we have thought it best to take, as the basis of 
our calculation, a statement prepared with much care by Mr. Prinsep, which exhibits the 
nureber of civil servants appomted during the past 40 years, and the deaths and retirements 
incident to the same. An abstract of that statement we have the honour to annex to this 
Report. And looking to the result of the past 10 years, which period we assume because 
it includes from its commencement servants of 30 years’ standing, we are justified in calcu- 
lating on a mortality,of two-thirds. For premature retirements (we allude to the case of 
gentlemen leaving the service before they. are entitled to an annuity), and for removals on 
account of misconduct, it would be sufficient to allow one-sixth per cent., or three-eighteenths ; 
and on the whole, therefore, we conceive that sufficient provision will be made for vacancies 
arising out of these causes by an allowance of two-and-a-half per cent.* Making provision 
at that rate, and allowing as above for annuitarts, the number of writers whom it would be 
necessary to send annually to the different residencies may be estimated as follows: 


For Bengal - = = = = = 19 
Madras - = = = = -» 
Bombay - - Pe Side oa 


7. But 


. Bengal. Madras. Bombay. 
* Total number of members of the Civil Service, as in p. 229 388 153 73 


Number of annuitants retiring annually . 


. Casualties, ab2$percent. - = 2 = = 
4 


_ Number of avriters annually required - «= = - 


e 


GENERAL APPENDIX. ° 231 ArrENDix, 


—me 


7. But the Bengal civil service consists at*present of 515 members, that of Madras of 13 
204, and the Bombay service of 148 mene so that the adoption of the arrangements (16.) Letter from 
which have been proposed by us would have the effect of rendering a large proportion of Sommitteewn ue 
servants at each presidency supernumerary ; viz. 127.in Bengal, 51 at Madras, and 75 at fea of Ciyi 


- Bombay. ; 16 December 1830.’ 
8. The number of junior assistants of the degree described in paragraph 3, and students, 

on the establishments of the diferent. presidencies, according to the latest lists in our 

possession, appears to be as follows : 


. bs . 4 
In Bengal - = = © 8 139 
At Madras = a Se ~ ay 11 
At Bombay - - - -* =~ = 33 


or, according to the foregoing ‘calculation, there is in Bengal a supply equal to the demand 
during seven years, at Bombay for six years, and at Madras the existing number would 
suffice for rather less than two years. 


9. In conclusion, we would respectfully suggest, that the circumstance of the super- 
abundance of junior civil servants at present on the establishment of this presidency and. at 
Bombay, be brought to the notice of the Honourable the Court of Directors, who will of 
course be aware that the number of civil servants availing themselves of the option of 
retiring on an annuity falls greatly short of that for which we have above made provision. 


We have the honour to be, &c. 


; (signed) D. Hi11, 
Civil Finance Committee Office, Horr Mackenzie, 
16 December 1830. Joun Bax. 


* Senior merchants : - - - - - ' 
Junior ditto - eo et is - “2 + 
Factors - + - - - - - . - - 
Writers - - - - : - - - - 
Total strength of the same at present Sige) ie 
Strength of service as proposed - 8 - * 


Supernumeraries - - - 


APPENDIX, 


all. 


e ——— 
Caleutta Civil 
FinanceCommniittee. 


* Appendix, No. 22. 


232 


APPENDIX ro REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


(No, 1, in Appendix, No. 16.) 


NUMBER OF SUBSTANTIVE APPOINTMENTS. 


e 
BENGAL: 
8 Secretaries to Government. 
3 Deputy ditto. 
5 Judges of the Court of Sudder and 
Foujdarry Adawlut. 
3 Registrars, Deputy and Agsistant to 
ditto. 
12 *Commissioners of Revenue and Circuit. 
41 Judges. 
54 Collectors and Magistrates. 
22, Sub-collectors. 
17 Deputy-collectors. 
. 54 Head Assistants. 
22 Second Assistants. 
1 Accountant-general. 
1 Deputy ditto. 
1 Sub-assistant. 
1 Civil Auditor. 
1 Sub-treasurer. 
1 Assistant ditto. 
1 Postmaster-general. 
1 Mint-master and Superintendant of 
Stam iS. e 
2 Sudder Commissioners of Revenue.* 
2 Assistants or Secretaries. 
1 Commissioner of Customs. 
1 Assistant or Secreta 
1 Ditto, in charge of Sait Golahs. 
1 Opium Agent in Behar. 
1 Ditto - - Benares. 
"3 Salt Agents. 
1 Collector of Sea-customs at the Presi- 
dency. 
1 Deputy ditto. 


258 ' 


Add, with reference to the observa- , | 


tions contained in paragraph 62 of the: 
Committee’s Report*, dated 12th July 
1830: 


2 Sudder Judges. 
2% Bee etats or Deny Renee 


262 


F emamanmnel 


: (signed) 


MapRas: 


© 3 Secrefaries to Government. 
2 Deputy ditto. 
3 Judges of the Court of Sudder and 
Foujdarry Adawlut. 
3 Registrars, Deputy and Assistant to 
ditto. 
1 Accountant-general. 
1 Deputy ditto. 
1 Assistant ditto. 
1 Civil Auditor. 
1 Sub-treasurer. 
1 Postmaster-general. 
1 Mint-master. 
2 Sudder Commissioners of Revenue. 
2 Assistants or Secretaries. 
20 Collectors and Magistrates. 
12 Sub-collectors. 
20 Head Assistants. 
10 Second ditto. 
16 District Judges. 
1 Collector of Sea-customs. 
1 Deputy Collector of Sea-customs. 


Bomaay: 


2 Secretaries to Goyernment. 
1 Deputy ditto. 

4 Sudder Judges. 

1 Registrar. 

4 Accountant-general. 

1 Sub-treasurer. 

1 Mint-master and Civil Auditor. 
1 Postmaster-general. 

3 Principal Collectors. 

7 Collectors. 

3 Sub-collectors. 

10 Head-Assistants. 

4 Second ditto. < 

8 Judges. 


847 
W. V. BANNERMAN, 
Officiating Secretary. 


cs 
b 


ABSTRACT STATEMENTS, showigg the Numsrr of Civit Servants appointed to 
the Bengal Civil Service during the past 40 Years, and the Deatus and RETIREMENTS 
incident to the same, referred to in para. 6 of the Finance Committee’s Report, dated 


16th December 1830. 


YEARS, 


Namber of Individuals, 
appointed since 1st Jan. | Appointments 
1790, in the Service at the TOTAL. “ 
beginning of each Year. 


19 

38 

57 

68 

93 
122 
145 
163 
193 
206 
224 
237 
254 
273 
284 
304 
316 
324 
334 
340 
352 
368 
379 
391 
416 
409 
414 
417 
413 
412 


GENERAL APPENDIX. 
(No. 2, in Appendix, No. 16.) 


umber of 


within 
the Year. 


19 
19 
19 
12 
27 
30 
‘24 
20 
32 
17 
21 
20 
24 


| 
| 


233 


Nomber. | Number Number of the j. 


of 


Deaths. |Retirements.! it the Service atthe |MARKS, 


1 
1 


fal fel fed 
© a 
ao o>) 
1 
—_ 
t 
1 
m bo ho 
1 


e 


69 
> 
oh 
WOASCAVMARMMOVHYAwWAAh ww 
Ce a CRC EC.) 


p 
iC) 
1 
al 
RDA HD ST G mi mi Gr bo 


fe 
eo 
i 

ae 

[) 
nie 


A427 12 5 
423 10 5 
431 » 9 7 
437 13 | 1 
444 12 a fs 
465 9 se pase 
506 12 1 
534 11 2 
565 8 1 
* §69 10 Site 


x 


- W.V. BanneRMAN 


3 


“ , 106 - — = = - 


above Individuals RE- 


| end of each Year. 


19 
38 
57 
68 
93 
122 
145 
163 


1 per-centage 24 


, Officiating Secretary. 


APPENDIX, 


I. 
(16.) Letter from 
Committee, on Es- 
tablishmen@of Civil 
Servants ; ° 
16 December 1830. 


e 
APPENDIX, 


Ig. 


Calcutta Civil 
FiaanceCamumittee. 


Baroda Residency. 
Guzerat and Palam- 
pore Agencies, 


234 APPENDIX to REPORT from SELECT COMMITTEE. 


(17.)—Extract LETTER from Calcutta Civil ‘Finance Committee to the Goyernor-general in 
Council at Bengal, dated 26th April 1830. 


26. We are of opinion that in the present state of Candeish it is unnecessary to continue 
the special appointments of Bheel agents in that district *. The agent at Koohirmoondah is: 
the civil assistant to the collector, and the agent at Kuneer ia military officer exercising, for 
the most part, the duties of an assistant collector afid magistrate. The nature of their func- 
tions does not appear to be such as to require to be specially provided for, and we recommend 
that these appointments be abolished, and all ‘allowances.on this account cease. The duty, 
we think, may be performed by one or pore of the collector’s assistants, as a branch of their 
ordinary avocations, under the general superintendence of the collector; and it may be ob- 
served that the collector will generally have it in his power to select an assistant of some 
experieice for this trust, as the recent revenue and judicial arrangements of the Bomba 
Government have thrown many gentlemen of considerable standing and experience far bac 
in the grade of assistants. If, as it seems probable, the collector will not require any increase 
to his present establishment in consequence of this inconsiderable addition to his usual 
duties, the whole expense of the establishments attached to the agents may also be saved. 

29. The jaaguilade of the political charges + incurred by the Government of Bombay has 
parce demanded our atiention; and in considering the means of reduction in this 

ranch of expenditure, we have carefully perused various recorded minutes of the late and 
present Governors of Bombay which bear on the subject, and especially adverted to the sen- 
timents of the Honoyrable Court of Directors, conveyed to your Lordship in Council in their 
despatch of the 18th February 1829. In conformity with those sentiments, and with the 
opinion therein given, that “these political agencies are considerably more numerous than 
an exclusive attention to British interests either pa or justify,” we shall proceed to 
lay before your Lordship in Council the mode by which we ahould propose to reduce the 
number, and consequently the expense, of the residencies and agencies in question. : 

30. Commencing with the residency at Baroda, we have to observe, as preliminary to our 
proposition respecting it, that Sir John Malcolm has already recommended its abolition, to 
your Lordship in Council, and the substitution of a more general agency; and in his Minute 
of the 19th February 1830, he states, under the operation of measures recently adopted, 
“ T consider the Guicowar.state to have ceased to have any political consequence; and were 
we not embarrassed by our Bhandaree engagements, I should not deem it necessary to keep 
an assistant at Baroda.” Under these circumstances, we have to r@commend the entire abo- 
lition of the Baroda residency, of the present consolidated Guzerat agency, and the agency 
at Palampore, and the substitution of one general agency for the whole, under a civil officer 
of Government, to be denominated “ Political Commissioner in Guzerat.” The head- 
quarters of the commissioner might be at any convenient spot in Guzerat; but he ee 

0 


y 


*BuEreL, AGENTS: 
Bheel agent at Koohirmoondah in Candeish 
Establishment = - ‘ ‘. eee 
Bheel agent at Kuneer - ” - - 
Establishment --  - - - - 


rere 
° 
aoa 
a a 
qe p 8 
+ 1 e ' 
nr 
pane 


+ These are stated to amount, in 1826-27, to Rs.957,600. Vide the Honourable Court’s despatch to 
the Supreme Government, dated 18th February 1829, Paras. 24 to 40.° ‘ : 


GENERAL APPENDIX. © 235 APPENDIX, 
Itl. 
of course perform such circuits within the range of his agency as might be required by the = 
nature of his duties. The consolidated Guzerat agency which we have proposed to abolish (17.) Letter from 
was formed in 1828, by the consolidation of the Myhée Cauntee and the Pauch Mahal Commiteeon Esta- 
-agencies, and was held by the first assistant to the resident at Baroda, under the general ee ue 
control and authority of the resident; and with regard to the resident at Palampore, his ae Banas - 
duties. may easily be executed. by the commissioner, or the assistant whom we propose to 06 auri Babe 
attach to him. We have carefully adverted to the localities of these agencies, and to the e : 
object of. them, as detailed in minutes of the late Governor of Bombay; and it is our full 
conviction that the plan here proposed is*easy of accomplishment, and in every respect pre- 
ferable to the system of maintaimng various petty agencies as at present. The consolidation 
of the present Guzerat and Palampore agencies was also suggested, we observe, by a former 
committee in a report to the Bombay Government, dated 8th June 1827. 
31. Taking the ordinary maximum for Bombay at rupees 45,000, we propose that a salary 
lof rupees 50,000 should be assigned to the commissiogers, “in full consideration,” acgording 
to the principle prescribed in your Lordship’s resolution of the 17th February 1829, “ of his 
services and expenses, with the same liberty to regulate the arrangements of his table and 
household as other officers enjoy.” For the assistant to the commissioners we propose 
a-salary of rupees 12,000 per annum, with the established allowance when on deputation. 
32, We insert below a list of establishment for the political commissioner*, in the 
formation of which we have been guided by a reference to similar establishments; and by 
comparing the present charges with those proposed by our arrangement, your Lordship in 
Council will observe an annual diminution to the extent of rupees 87,124. eS 
33. The military assistant attached to the consolidated Guzerat agency has charge of the 
Guicowar contingent, and in this latter duty he will of course continue éo be employed under 
the political commissioner, though his appointment as assistant will no longer be required ; but 
the office of translator, now held by the surgeon at the Baroda residency, appears to us to be 
totally unnecessary and unusual +. The charge of rupees 100 per mensem, on account of the 
“late Soonderjee Sewjee’s palankeen allowance, continued to he son,” forms an item at the 
Baroda residency which will cease, we presuime, on the death of the present incumbent. 
34, It remains for us to add here, that the fixe( charges of the Baroda residency and conso- 
lidated agency in Guzerat of 1828-29, exceed those of 1823-24 by rupees 6,128. 


35. The 
* Head Clerk ~ - Mw 7° Establishments as they stood 1st May 1829: 
Three Writers at 40 = - - oo, : . ere 
Head Carkoon = = ee Gasask a Nae ae 
Assistant ditto - . - - - PAniinotes: 8° > 7 S 5 bs 
Persian Moonshee - - - ° P (ead 167,124 
: A 2079 
Assistant ditto 2, 2, ws Proposed Scale of Establishment : 
Mahratta Carkoon - - - : Comisissioner = 3 - 50,000] ° 
aj 7] > 
asrnaa pines a a re Assistant to ditto = -- = = —-:12,000 
Guzerattee Carkoon = - =e Beteblehinent gas sia aaa 
Assistant ditto - < - - - Add, : 
Ditto - ditto- - -  - - Officer commanding contingent 
Shroof - - = 2 = @ horse - - - « = 4,800 
Ditto Gomasta - - . - Soonderjee’s tolker allowance 1,200 
Chobdars and Peons - t8 - 80,000 
Total - - - Saving per Annum - - ~- Rs.| 87,124 


+ Extract of a Minute, dated July 1827, by Mr. Warden, late member of the Council at Bombay: | 
Para. 14. The office of translator of Baroda should also be abolished, and the duty perfprmed as else- 
where by the assistant. 
. : ~HH2 


be 


APPPNDIX, 
Ii. 


Calcutta Civil 
FinanceCommittee. 


236 “APPENDIX 10 REPORT rom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


35. The annual fixed charges of the Bhooj residency* for 1828-29 exceed those of 1823-24 
by rupees 8,982, owing chiefly to an increase to the table allowance of the resident from rupees 
500 to rupees 1,200 per annum. : 

36. As the Resolution which we have quoted in the 31st paragraph of this Report directs 
the discontinuance of a separate allowance for table expenses, we recommend that on a vacancy 
occurring at Bhooj the resident should receive a consolidated salary of rupees 24,000 per 
annum, Which is equivalent to hjs total receipts in 1823-24. ; 

87. The appointment of an assistant to the resident in @utch having been recently abo- 
lished by the Government at Bombay, we have onfy further to recommend the reduction of 
certain additions noted below+, which have been made in the establishment of this 
residency since 1823-24, amounting to rupées 2,268 per annum. The proposed modifica- 
tions will produce a reduction of expenge to the extent of rupees 16,668 per annum. 

88. The expense of the office establishment attached to the principal collector in the 
Southern Mahratta Country in his poljfical capacity exceeds what it cost in the year 1824 by# 
rupees “105 per mensem, chiefly in consequence of the officers noted belowt having been 
added to it. We think that the establishment as it was constituted in 1824 is fully adequate - 
to the purpose for which it is intended, and recommend that it be again reduced to that stan- 
dard. The necessity of keeping up a separate establishment expressly for the purpose of 

rocuring intelligence at the stations of jagheerdars appears to us to be very questionable§. 
he jagheers in question being for the most part interspersed throughout the a to 
ve whic 


7 * Buoos ResipENCY: | 
Resident’s salary and allowances 


- - e - - . - - ' - - 
Assistant we - - - - = = 2 - - - s . 
Native Agent - - — = - = - ° - ox 3G - 3° 
Establishment - - - ~ - ra 7 - - - s * 

e 
e 
Total - - 
+ Writers, Moonshees, &c.-# = - « - 4c 7 ra 4 = = 130 
Peons, &c. - - - -. - . - . - - ss “4 44 
Agent at Mandaree - - = 2 Se Set fa - Pa ae ns 15 
. gran oh 


tCarnatic PoLiTicAL AGENT: 


Office establishment and Huzoor Intelligence Department - - 
_ 


Translator and Head Writer -~ - - = = 
English Writer - - * 
Addition to salary of Head Moonshee ~ se se 


§ Establishment for procuring’ intelligence at the stations of Jagheerdars ++. >| 44% 


GENERAL APPENDIX. 237 


which they adjoin, we are disposed to think that the collectors, through the medium of their 
revenue and police establishments, should have no difficulty in keeping themselves acquainted 
with the state of affairs in the different jegheers, and that nothing of importance could occur 
to them without their receiving timely notice. Adverting however to the still unsettled con- 
dition of this part of our territories, we do not venture to recommend that the establishment 
be discontinued ; but from the liberal policy that has been pursued towards these chieftains, 
and under the salutary operation of an enlightened system of administration, it may‘be anti- 
cipated that the’ necessity for magntaming an establishment of this nature will every day 
become less urgent. bs . 

39. The express order containedein the Honourable Court’s despatch of the 8th February 
1829, already mentioned, for the discontinuance of the Sattara residency, renders it unneces- 
sary for us to state the arguments which in the absenge of that order would have led us to 
recommend its abolition. -We presume that the directionsof the Court will be carried into 
fmmediate effect, and we have therefore taken credit forthe amount of the cost of this resi- 
dency as an actual reduction to the extent of rupees. 65,148 *. ° 

40. As the expenses of the Kattywar political agency are entered in the revenue depart- 
ment, with the exception of the officer commanding the Guicowar contingent and assistant 
to the political agent, whose salary (rupees 400) is- entered in the General department, we 
shall notice the agency in our revision of the Revenue branch. 

41. The political expenses in the Gulf of Persia have vastly increased of late years ; 
whilst, according to statements before us, it appears that the trade of India in that quarter 
has been gradually diminishing. The fixed charges of the Bushire residency for the year 
1824 was rupees 48,714, and for the year 1829 rupees 54,684, being an increase in the au- 


AppENbIx, 


III. 


(17.) Letter from 
Committee on Estas 
blishments ie the 
General Depart- e 
ment, Bombay. 

26 April 1830. 


Kattywar Political 
Agent. 


Gulf of Persia. 


thorized scale of expenditure in the latter year. of rupees 5,970, while ip the actual charge 


there was an increase of rupees 16,472. ¢ 
- 42. At Bussorah the fixed expense in the year 1829 was rupees 39,000, which exceeded 
the scale of 1824 by rupees 6,000; which increase has arisen by an addition of rupees 400 
er mensem to the agent’s table allowance, and of rupees 100 per mensem to his estab- 

ishment. ane 
13. In the course of our investigation into the rise and progress of these establishments in 
the Persian Gulf, we have been led to compare the charges at Bushire and Bussorah, with 
which the British Government is. now burthened, with those that sufficed for the same estab- 
lishments at periods when our trade and intercourse in that quarter were more active and 
flourishing than at present ; and the result on our mind is that there is no reasonable ground 
whatever for continumg such costly agencies in the Gulf of Persia as are now maintained. 
The expense of the Bushi@ residency, including the resident’s salary as fixed in 1801, was 
rupees 784, and it is now rupees 4,557, per mensem. It is true that he received half the net 
profit on the sale of the Company’s goods from Europe ; but if that trade has now become 
so unprofitable that the Company has abandoned it, this fact furnishes a strong argument for 
placing the general charges of that residency on a Jess expensive footing in the present than 
the former time. In 1798 the salary and establishment of the agent at Bussorah amounted 
to rupees 965 per mensem; they now amount to rupees 3,250 per mensem, whilst the com- 
* parative circumstances of these two periods do net seem to require even the same expense 
now as in 1798. 
: . 44, We 
meneame cae: Semen cr remanent eel 
7 J *Sarrana RESI@ENCY: 

Resident - - - - - - - - - - r - 3,500 
‘Es@blishment, including intelligence - - ae - - - - 1,929 


Per Mensem - -f+ | 5,429 


Per Annum. oe 


AP@ENDIX, 


Il. 


Calcutta Civil 
Finance Committee. 


r 


238 APPENDIX ro REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


44, Weeare aware that.in most cases the comparison here introduced would be inappli- 


cable; but as regards our intercourse witle the Persian Gulf, we should have expected to | 


find a larger charge in former than in recent years, whereas the contrary is the fact. Regard- 


ing them solely in their present character as political agencies, we are of opinion that they 


may be placed on a very economical footing, upon the principle suggested in Sir J. Malcolm’s . 


Minute of the 22d September 1828, which 1s on the records of the Supreme Government ; and 
we accerdingly recommend the abolition of the Bussorah agency, and the placing of the 
affairs of the Gulf under one authority, denominated “ Political Agent in the Gulf of 
Persia.” The proposal made in the above Minute was 6 procure a grant from Persia of 


Karrack, an island in the neighbourhood of Bushire, apd to consolidate the agencies in the - 


Gulf at that place; but as the acquisition of the island.in question would probably be 
attended with great expense, and at all events must be preceded by considerable delay, we 
te that the agent should residé at Bushire. A native agent might be maintained at 

ussorah, on the same salary and with the same establishment as is now assigned to the native 
agen¢ at Bagdad *. 

46. In confirmation of the justice of the yiew here taken on this subject, we beg to quote 
the following passage from a Minute of the Honourable M. Elphinstone, late Governor of 
Bombay, dated 11th June 1827, subscribed to by the members of his Council : 

“The Bussorah residency might, I think, be easily spared ; but I would not abolish it at 
present, because Sir J. Malcolm is so much fitter to decide on the necessity of the situation: 
we may take it as a prospective reduction.” é 


46. We find also the following remark on the present subject, in a Minute dated 24th July 


1827, recorded by Mr. Goodwin, a late member of the Government of Bombay : 


“ T am of opinion that the Bushire residency should be placed precisely on the footing, in 
regard to allowances and establishment,*which was fixed by the Supreme Government, when 
the Governor-general re-established it about 1807, and appointed Mr. Smith to the office. 
I see nothing in the condition of our concerns in the Persian Gulf at the present moment to 
call for a greater outlay of the public’money im maintaining that residency than was incurred 
at the period to which I have alluded, an@ which was one teeming with remarkable events. 
Our influence in Persia at that crisis was hearly obliterated by French impressions; we had 
no representative at the Court of Tehran, and yet our establishments on the maritime frontier 
of the empire were infinitely less expensive than they are now, when our envoy is narrowly 
watching at Tabrez the course of events, when the King is leaning on our power, when thera 
are no Irasmees at sea or Wahabees on land to apprehend, and when there are no symptoms 
of piracy, if we only persevere in keeping up a squadron in the Gulf adequate to a vigilant 
watch of the ports which have become the domiciles of the pacificated Arabs.” 


47. In regard to the salary and establishment to be assigned under the proposed modifica~ 
tion to the political agent in the Gulf, we have adverted to the nature of the duties of the 
resident, and the grounds on which his salary and establishment were fixed by the Supreme 
Government at the period to which the preceding Minute alludes, so as to be enabled to form 
a correct judgment of the comparative business at the.former and the present period ; and we 
find by the instructions conveyed by the Supreme Government on the 11th December 1806 


to 
* BaGDAD: 
Native Agent - - > - - s ee Sane - 7 s = . 300 
Establishment: 
One Revenue Writer ete. ie tas Bid pe, er” fet wey SS oe. SR 29 
Three Noberchees -~ - > a ge i S = e - i < 50 
Per Mensem - - - 279 


GENERAL APPENDIX. 239 


te the resident, Mr. Smith, that this gentleman was appointed commercial resident at 
Bushire, and vested on the part of the Suprenfe Government with the political intercourse 
between the King of Persia and the Brith Government. We need here only notice the fact 
that there are now no commercial transactions to be performed by the resident, and that the 
- chargé daffaires at Tehrawn is the channel of communication between the British Govern- 
ment and Persia, to convince your Lordship in Council that so far as these two duties are 
concerned, the appointment of resident at Bushire has become altogether nugatory. ° 


48, With regard to Arab chief? in ‘the Gulf, the instructions to the resident in 1806 were 
. as follows: “You will keep up a friendly intercourse, by letters, with the petty Arab chiefs 
of the Gulf, in the vicinity of Bushire; and when any of those commit piracies upon British 
vessels, you will make it your duty to demand restitution, and in the event of its not being 
immediately made, you will, unless you possess the rfeans of enforcing it, either from the 
proffered aid of the Persian Government or the presence of ships of force, transmit informa- 
tion to the Government of Bombay which can enable*it to take effectual means for the 
exemplary punishment of such an outrage *,” 


49. The actual duty of the present resident consists in this surveillance over the Arab 
chiefs in the Gulf, and events in that quarter within recent years, especially the capture of 
. Rasool Khyma and the death of Rumabin Jaber, the chief pirate in the Gulf, have now 

made this duty less irksome, by nearly exterminating that system of piracy which formerly 
prevailed. : . 


50. The Governor-general’s Minute of the 9th October 1806 recites the grounds on which 
the salary and establishment at Bushire were fixed at that period, at a total expense of 
rupees 2,700 per mensem, or rupees 32,400 per annum. 

e 


51. The duties which will devolve on the political agent in the Gulf, by the abolition of 
the Bussorah agency, will be very trifling ; and under all circumstances we beg to propose for 
him a salary of rupees 1,500, as at present, with a table allowance of rupees 500. We have 
assigned this latter item to the political agent contrary to the general rule recently introduced, 
because there seem to be local peculiarities in this instance which do not exist elsewhere. 
By assigning a monthly sum of rupees 700 for the agent’s establishment, which appears to 
be sufficient, and rupees 100 for the rent of the Bushire factory, as paid at present, the 
charges of the agency will be placed, we think, on a footing sufficiently liberal, and at the 
same time consistent with the views entertained by the Supreme Government when it consti- 
tuted this officer a political functionary. i 


52. In regard to an assistant to the political agent, we beg to suggest that the medical 
officer attached to the agency, if judiciously selected, should also be the assistant, ona salary 
of rupees 300 per mensem; and if any precedent be required for this proposal, we beg to 


APPENDIX, 
Tif. 

(17.) Letter from 
Committee on Esta- 
blishments insthe 
General Depart- « 
ment, Bombay. 
26 April 1830. 


observe that the medical officer, Dr. Hine, attached to the late residency at Bagdad, was the 


resident’s assistant. 


53. The repairs of the factory at Bushire are made at the expense of Government; but as 
we find that about seven years ago this building was greatly enlarged and almost rebuilt, we 
recommend that in future such outlays on property which does not belong to the Government, 
“nay ‘be as sparingly made as possible. 


54. The residency at Bussorah, for the gepair of which a monthly sum of 200 rupees is 
now charged, might be sold or occupied by the native agent, who for this privilege would no 


dqnbt undertake to release Government from all charge for repairs. The adoption of our * 


suggestions 


* Letter from the Secretary to the Supreme Government, dated 11th December 1806, to the 
resident, Mr. Smith. 


APRENDIX, 


Hl.- + 


Calcutta Civil 
FinanceCommittee. 


240 APPENDIX ro REPORT raom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


suggestions in respect to Bushire and Bussorah will yield ap annual saving of rupees 
55,188 *, 


55. At Muscat and Mocha there are now only netive agents, the former on rupees 200, 
and the latter on 300 rupees per mensem, and we have no alteration to propose respecting 
them. 


56. ‘bhe salary and medical allowance received by the civil surgeon stationed with the 
resident at Bhooj + considerably exceeds the aggregate allowances drawn by the medical 
officers attached to the several other political nesidencies under the Bombay Government; 
but as there is no sufficient reason for maintaining that appointment on a footing in point of - 
allowances superior to similar offices elsewhere, we propose that the salary and medical 
allowance of the civil surgeon attached to the resident at Bhooj be reduced to the stan- 
dard fixed for other residencies,, viz. ‘rupees 450 per mensem, causing an annual saving of 
rupees 2,400; a further reduction of 13,200 rupees per annum will be afforded by the dié- 
contiauance of the office of civil suwteon at Sattara and Bussorah, which appointments will 
cease in consequence of the abolition of these residencies. 


66. The next point we have to notice is the excess in the expenses of the several political 
residencies beyond the amount of the authorized establishments ; and we select the follow- 
ing instances for the year 1828-29 in illustration of our remarks. An adjustment of the 
items which may be necessary to give a correct result will not interfere with the truth of our 
inference. 


Baroda 


* Present Charge. 


Brought up - - 
Bussorah : 


Agent's salary and allowances, Proposed: 
and factory repairs - - 2,400 Agent’s salary, table and rent - 
Establishment = - - - 850 Establishment = - - - 
Surgeon and assistant - - 
Bushire: Bagdad: 
Agent’s salary, table, rent and Agent and establishment - 
contingencies = « - 3,250 Bussorah : : 
Assistant to ditto - - - Agent and establishment : 
Establishment = - - - 
Surgeon - - - 


Saving Per Mensem 


Carried up - - | Or per Annum 


} Civil Surgeon at the Residency of Bhooj: 
Salary _. Sad = = - - ~ - = - “we - a « 500 
Medical allowance 


‘ e 

Civil Surgeon at the Residency at Sattara : 
Salary - - - . 2 . ey Meo. te hs FSR ee 8 Bat ee 
Medieal allawance « =* 4 am = “ . a = a -. 150 


i 


GENERAL APPENDIX. errr 

Authorized Actual 

Charges, Charges. 

: : : ‘Rupees. Rupees. 
Baroda, including the consolidated Guzerat Agency - = - 1,57,524 2,00,691 
Bhooj —- - - - - - - - - 47,232 @ 65,721 
Sattara - - - - - - - -- = 65,148 89,221 
Bushire - - - Be Bie SE Le TS - os 54,684 65,186 
‘Bussorah - - - - ee - - 39,000 * 47,838 


3,63,588 


4,68,657 


68. With respect to the whole of these charges ofer and above the sanctioned establish- 
ment, we have strongly to urge the expediency of enforcing the rule which we have recom- 


‘mended: No charge whatever should be incurred without previous authority from Govern- 
‘ment, nor passed by the auditor without its express sanction for the specific amount. 


— “}. +. i. 


(18.)—Extract LETTER from the Calcutta Civil Finance Committee to the Governor- 
general in Council at Bengal, dated 20th September 4830. 


2. Your Lordship in Council is aware, from tlfe communication made by the Government 
of Bombay, in their chief secretary’s letter of the 4th of January last, and from the enact- 
ments contained in the first six Regulations passed at that Presidency in the present year, 
that various modifications have been recently introduted in the Judicial and Revenue depart- 


‘ments, the examination of which required the deliberate consideration of several questions of 
general importance and interest. . 


3. The modifications in question may concisely be stated to consist, as regards the admi- 
nistration of civil justice, in assigning to native commissioners the cognizance, with certain 
exceptions, of all original suits, providing, as the case may be, a regular gradation of appeal 
to the judge, his assistant, or the court of Sudder Dewanny Adawlut, to which one judge has 
been added, exclusive of a member of Council, whose functions, as chief judge, are limited 
to his officiating as such when a competent court cannot otherwise be had ; and the court of 
Circuit and Appeal at Surat has been abolished. In the branch of criminal jurisprudence, 


- the magistrates (who are also collectors of revenue) and their assistants are authorized to 


adjudge sentences of fine and ordinary imprisonment, with hard labour, for one year; but 
sentences beyond three, months passed by the latter are referable to the magistrate for con- 
firmation, and all other sentences may be revised by him. District police-ofticers are 
empowered to punish petty offences by fine not exceeding Rs. 15, and confinement not 
exceeding 20 days. The system of session judges, embracing the former functions and juris- 
diction of a criminal judge and court of circuit, has been extended to all the territories under 
the Government, and the number of judges been reduced. . Two judges of the Sudder Fouj- 
darry Adawlut, under the denomination of visiting commissioners of circuit, are directed to 
make an annual circuit’ of inspection; one to Guzerat and the Concans, the other to the 
Peccan, and the Southern Mahratta Country. : 

4, In 


: « 
The sum stated-in the annual accounts for 1828-29 is Rs. 95,677; but as no charge appears under 


the head during the preceding year, half of the above sum is assumed under the supporition that the 
account includes the charge of the previous year. 


| 
AppENDIX, 


I. 


(17.) Letter from 
Committee on Esta- 
blishmen®& in the 
General Depaft- 
ment, Bombay. 

26 April 1830. 


(18) Letter from 
Committee on Ju- 
dicial and Revenue 
Establishments, 
Bombay. .-« , 
20 September 1830, 


Civil and Criminal 
Justice. 


APPENDIX, 


iil. 


Calcutta Civil 
FinanceGommitte® 


Revenue Admitis« 
tration, 


Court of Requests. 


* Petty: Sessions. 


Sudder Dewanny 
and Sudder Fouz 
darry Adawlut. 


242 APPENDIX ro REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


4. In the revenue department, the scheme f administration has been assimilated to that 
of Madras, by the appointment of principal and sub-collectors im certain districts, the Govern+ 
ment having at the same time diminished the number of collectorates; and a revenue com~ 
missioner, with an assistant, has been appointed for the purpose of. general control and 
superintendence throughout the several districts, with the exception of the Southern Mahratta 
Country. *The collectors and sub-collectors are authorized to refer to comarisdars, or head 
native revenue officers, suits instituted before them, under Regulation XVIL., a.p. 1827, 
relating to land, its rent or produce, provided the value af issue does not exceed Rs. 500; 
and an appeal from their decisions is provided for. 

9. The expense of the Court of Requests at Bombay, chargeable to Government, amounts 
to Rs. 5,926 per annum, as exhibited below *; none of the commissioners receiving any 
salary in that capacity. Besides his fixed salary, it would appear that the clerk of the court 
receives the fees leviable from suitors on processes issued ; no part of the receipts under this¢ 
head béing credited to the public accotint. In Bengal, the amount of the fees levied by the 
Court of Requests, (the commissioners of which receive liberal salaries), used formerly much 
to exceed the charges, and though the rate is greatly reduced, still nearly covers the expense 
of the whole court; and at Madras, where the commissioners are also stipendiary officers, the 


' receipts considerably exceed the charges the surplus being carried to the credit of Govern- 


ment. We are not aware whether the rules for regulating the levy of fees in the Court of 
Requests at Bombay are similar to those in force at the other two Presidencies, nor what 
is the amount of fees now collected. Looking to the receipts of the-courts at Calcutta and 
Madras, we should suppose that the amount must be considerable, and probably more than 
an adequate remuneration for the clerk of the court, even if he received no salary. We 
would therefore submit, as a fit matter for the inquiry of the local Government, whether by 
earrying the fees to the public account, aiid assigning to the clerk of the court a suitable 
salary, Government might not be relieved from all expense on account of this establishment, 
10, The Court of Petty Sessions is peculiar to Bombay, and consists of the senior and 
second magistrates of police, and a non“stipendiary magistrate. Its powers and jurisdiction 
are described in Rule, Ordinance and Regvflation II. of 1827. . The excess of charge (rupees 
-7,560) on account of this establishment in 1829+, has chiefly arisen from the appointment of 
‘an assessor, on a salary of rupees 7,200 per annum, who, being a barrister, assists the magis- 
trates with his professional advice. But ifthe magistrates of police are competent for their 
duty, we are not aware of the necessity of incurring the permanent expense of a barrister to 
attend them at the petty sessions, which are held weekly. In ordinary cases the police 
magistrates should certaimly be capable of deciding for themselves, and in cases of extraordi- 
nary difficulty (which are not hkely to be numerous), the advice of the government law 
officers might be easily obtained. The appointment of assessor took place on the 26th of 
May 1826; and as the business of the Court of Petty Sessions was conducted by the magis~ 
trates without a professional adviser for many years prior to that date, we recommend the 
abolition of the office in question. , . ‘ 4 
15. The Court of Sudder Dewanny Adawlut, as your Lordship in Council is aware t, has 
been placed on a footing applicable to the recent changes in the judicial administration at 


: Bombay. 
seerepecemrmnracnttmeantmninetnnteesitn enolic tahiti ean rarities neni itemtettnceenitty— ei thr ft re EN 
Clerk’s salary » . = . “ 300 
Allowance for establishment - 84 
Naiqueand Peons  - %- - 353 
Office rent - - - - i150 
Total - - - 4932 = 5,926 per annum. 
+ 1824; "1829: 


Rs. 10,806 - - ‘ Rs. 18,360. 


° om ‘ 
t Letter of 4th January 1830 to the Supreme Government, with Enclosures, from the Chief Secre- 
tary at Bowgbay. _ ; ‘ . : 


“GENERAL APPENDIX... — ‘ "243 ahr ae 


‘ “Bombay. The salary of the senior puisne judge has been fixed at rupees 45,000; and the 
same principle which now regulates the salaries of the junior secretaries to that Government (18.) Letter from 
is extended to the puisne judges (belSw the senior), that is to say, a salary of rupees 33,000 braces, ie aii 
is assigned to a Sudder judge under 12 years standing; of rupees 37,500 under 15, but cles ane Hevenue 
‘more than 12 years standing; and if above 15 years standing, the salary is increased at the Bomba : 
‘rate of rupees 1,500 per annum, for each additional year, until 20 years shall have elapsed, ., sentenibes 1830. 
when the salary will be rupees 45,000, or the maximum rate assigned to Bombay. We ; 

observe in the proceedings bef$re us, which are also on the records of the Supreme Govern- 
ment, that Mr. Romer, the thjrd member of Council, in a Minute dated the 15th of 
December last, is averse to the introduction of this graduated scale of remuneration in 
respect to the Sudder Adawlut, and is of opinion that the salaries of the judges should be 
equal, “I can easily,” remarks this gentleman, “See the advantage and propriety of such 
wa scheme as applied to the secretaries of the Government, but its adoption to and fitness in 
the Sudder Adawlut is not so apparent, As existing“at Madras, without extending the com- 
parison to Bengal, I continue to be of the opinion formerly expressed, that all the judges of , 
the Sudder Adawlut should at least be placed, on the score of allowances, on the same footing 
as the chief secretary.” , 
16. The principle of regulating salaries, in some degree, according to length of service, 
appears to us to possess many advantages, especially in the case of secretaries to Goyern- 
ment; and if deemed worthy of general adoption, would of course apply to the judges of the 
‘Sudder Adawlut, as well as to other functionaries. The Resolution passed on the 17th of 
‘February 1829, by your Lordship in Council, fixing the salaries of the judges of the Sudder 
-Adawlut at Calcutta, sets forth, “that to the judges of the Sudder Dewanny Adawlut it 
is obviously proper to assign the maximum rate of salary, viz. sonat rupees 62,200. The 
duties of all the judges bemg essentially the samd, there seems to be no reason to maintain 
the distinction of senior and puisne judges. .The higher salary assigned to the former when 
the situation ceased to be held by a member of the Supreme Council, appears to have been 
fixed rather with reference to the emoluments actually enjoyed by the individual than on any 
-general principle, and the difference of denomination and emolument has actually been found 
to occasion claims embarrassing to Government‘in the selection of candidates. “ Besides the Vide para. 4. 
ordinary duties of Sudder Dewanny and Fouzdarry Adawlut, the judges at Bombay perform 
circuits in the districts as visiting commissioners, and should, we are of opinion, receive the 
maximum rate of salary assigned to that aa ear on the same principle as prevails at 
Bengal and Madras; and we have accordingly adopted this rate in our calculation... The 
immediate financial result would, in fact, be nearly the same if we had adopted the graduated 

“rate, for it appears that three of the present judges have served longer than.20 years, and the 

other has served within a few months of that period. 

. 1%. The judges of the Sudder Court at Bombay have, we perceive, duties that do not 

belong to those officers at this presidency, or at Madras. Besides being required to go 
circuits as above mentioned, they are also vested with an appellate jurisdiction in cases 
decided by the collectors, the appeal being of right when the property at stake may exceed 
200 rupees, and a special appeal being open in all cases. In the Judicial department, 
appeals of right lie to them from the decisions of the judges and assistant-judges, .in all 
‘eases in which the judgment may relate to property exceeding 3,000 rupees; and in cases 
wherein the decrees of the native judges are reversed or modified, if the amount exceed 1,000 
rupees. They likewise appear to exercise.a. control in various matters which at the other 

' presidencies more immediately belong to the judges ef circuit; and if, as proposed in a sub- , 

sequent part of this letter, the office of revenue commissioner be abolished, it will probably 
Be thought expedient to transfer to the Sudder judges, when on their tours of inspection, 
some of the functions assigned ‘to that officer. | 

18. Although therefore our impression is that the duties of the sudder judges may admit 
of being considerably abridged by restricting their appellate jurisdiction to cases in which on 
the face of the proceedings there may appear reason to apprehend a denia or failure of 

. justice, the proper function of such a court being general superintendence, with no further 

I2 Sterposition 


Aare, 244 APPENDIX ro REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


_. interposition in individual cases than is ‘required to render that superintendence effectual to * 
_ Caleutta Civit the well working of the subordinate tribunals; and although we are of opinion that acting on 
FinanceCommittee. this principle three judges would suffice, yet we are*uot prepared immediately to object to 
the appointment of a fourth judge. But independently of financial considerations, it will we 
think be a matter of regret if the appointment leads to any further separation of the Sudder 
Court from the Government ; and if the necessity of having a fourth judge can be obviated by 
one of the members of Council taking a larger share in, the business of the court, the office 
ought to be discontinued. In further explanation ¢f our vies on this subject, we subjoin an 
extract from our report, under date the 5th May last,,containing a review of the civil 
charges of the Madras Presidency: 
“ We are strongly of opinion that it is of importance, on grounds distinct from economy, 
that one of the members of Governmént should always hold the office of a judge of the 
Sudder Adawlut, and take upon himself a substantive share of the duties of that court. 
The other functions of a member’ of Government at the subordinate presidencies are not of 
a nature or extent to interfere with this salutary arrangement; and the previous occupation 
of one or both of the counsellors will generally have prepared them to give complete effect 
to it.” 
19. The native establishment attached to this court does not call for any observation on 
our, part, excepting in regard to the number and expense of chobdars and peons, which, com- 
ared with those maintained in the Sudder Adawlut at Calcutta and Madras, is excessive. 
the list inserted below* your Lordship in Council will perceive that the number 
of these servants at Calcutta is 26; at Madras 32; at Bombay 90; and the charge respec- 
tively is rupees 1,632, rupees 2,724, and rupees 9,048 per annum. In Bengal, we are 
informed, each of the five judges of the court has only two of the public chupprassies in 
attendance on him; the registrar has five for the duties of his office, and the chobdars and 
soontabundars are for the court collectively. At Madras the mode in which business is 
transacted may render it necessary to entertain a few more peons than are required in Bengal ; 
but we would: recommend that as far*as practicable the Bengal complement of servants be 
generally adopted, and we see no reason wlwy it should be exceeded at Bombay. We should ' 
thus have an annual saving of rupees '7,416/ 
Provincial Courtof 21. The abolition of the Guzerat Court of Circuit and Appeal, under the arrangements 
Circuit and Appeal noticed in the former part of this Report, yields an annual saving of rupees 132,959. 
in Guzerat. 22. In pursuance of the arrangements shave referred to, the Southern and Northern Concans 
Southern Mahratta have been consolidated under a judge and session judge; and this system of judicial admi- 
Country. nistration, which prevails also at Poona and Ahmednuggur, has been extended to Surat and 
Ahmedabad. , The Southern Mahratta Country has been brought under the ordinary Regula~ 
: 7 ; * tions 


BOMBAY, 
* BENGAL. MADRAS. Including the Addition, at 


Rs. 100 per Mensem, sanctioned on 
23d April 1830. 


ee nnn oe ee > 

9 Chobdars - - 16{24Peons | - - 168] 10Chobdars - - 160 
* 4 Soontaburdars - 24| 7 Policeditto- . -  49{° 6Jemedars ~ - 72 
15 Chupprasses. - - 75 |- 1 Daffedar - - 10 | 2 Havildars = - 18 
1 Chowkeydar- 5 62 Peons - - ~ 434 

4 Barkendazes - 16 ; _{ 10 Hurearrahs + - 70° 
Ld ED en * epee 
ue Ped Mensem : Per Mensem * 227 | go Per Mensem - 754 

sianaameal he 


1,632 ; ee tee L 
petit ey Per Annum © 9,048 


<a 
® - 


+ 
Per Annum * Per Annum - 2,724 


‘GENERAL APPENDIX. = 245 


tions of Government, but the offices of principal golléctor and magistrate are unitea witn those 
of judge, session judge and political agent; an arrangement to which the civil members 0 
Government at Bombay have objected. ©The discussions arising out of this subject are to be 
found on the records of the Supreme Government*, and your Lordship in Council will there 
observe that the appointment of a judge and session judge is contemplated to take place 
after a lapse of two or three years. To aid the principal collector in his judicial funcgions, an 
assistant judge at the sudder station, with the powers of a detached assistant judge, has been 
nominated ;. and a second sub-coflecfor has also been appointed to relieve the principal col- 


. lector from much of the detail of hjs revenue duties. The charge on account of the assistant 


judge and the second sub-collector, with their respéctive establishments, may be estimated at 
rupees 50,206 per annum; whilst the charge for a judge and session judge, with the esta- 
blishment hereafter to be proposed, may be assumed*at rupees 42,000. As there are two 
judges on the Bombay establishment, who are thrown out of employment by the abolition of 
the Guzerat Court of Circuit and Appeal, exclusive of civil servants in other departments 
similarly situated, and these gentlemen continue to receive their former salaries, we would 
recommend, on financial as well as on other grounds, that the appointment of judge and 
session judge be substituted for those of assistant judge and second sub-collector; and in our 
schedule we have accordingly provided for the separation of the judicial and revenue func- 
tions in the southern Maliratta country. 


23. To each of the judges and session judges in the several zillahs, a senior assistant is 
attached, who, in the civil department, is employed in executive duties, and may be specially 
authorized to decide appeals from the decrees of native commissioners in suits where the 
property sued for does not exceed 5,000 rupees; and in the criminal department he exercises 
the functions and penal jurisdiction heretofore vested in senior assistants to criminal judges 5 
that is, he tries offenders, and may pass sentence of*punishment, not exceeding imprisonment 
with hard labour for two years, and stripes for theft not exceeding 30, or fine or imprisonment 
in default of payment for a period not longer than two years; it being competent for Govern- 
ment, where it may see fit, to enlarge these powers to“any extent not exceeding those vested 
in assistants detached from the sadder station, A stout. assistant, possessing more limited 
authority, is also attached to several of the judge8. 


24, The judge and session judge in the Concans has a detached assistant stationed at 
Rutuagherry, having jurisdiction over that portion of the zillah, and vested with the same 


Arranwia, 
° 


— 


f (18.) Letter from 


Committee on Ju- 
dicial and R&venue 
Establishments, ° 
Bombay. © 

20 September 1830. 


Concans, Surat, 
Abmedabad, Poo- 
‘na, Ahmednuggur. * 


penal authority as formerly exercised by criminal judges; viz. to pass sentence of solitary . 


confinement for six months, of imprisonment with hard labour for seven years and 50 stripes, 
or of fine and imprisonment: for the higher classes'of criminal offences he is required to 
commit the parties to take their trial before the session judge, who visits the subordinate 
station half yearly for the purpose of delivering the gaol. In like manner there is an assistant 
judge, with similar powers, stationed at Sholapore, subordinate to the session judge at Poona, 
another at Broach subordinate to Surat, and a third at Dooliah in Candish under the session 
judge at Ahmednuggur. 


25. There appears to us to exist strong objections, as we have already had occasion to 
submit to your Lordship in Council, against the employment under any designation of young 
men of limited experience as judges; and the powers assigned to this class of officers by the 
Bombay Regulations are more extensive, particularly in the Criminal department, than it has 


. been usual to confide to them at the other Presidencies, or than can in our pene be 
ug 


‘prudently entrusted to them. In the civil department the Bombay Regulations already render 
the native judges competent to try and decide all cases, of whatever amount, that may be 
r@erred to them. In this department therefore the discontinuance of the office of assistant 
judge will-not involve any change of system, and we can only anticipate Pew neal a iaiae 

rom 


’ 


* Letter, dated 4th January 1830, from Chief Secretary at Bombay to Deputy Secretary of Supreme 


Government, with enclosures. 


Report of the Fi- 
nance Committee, 
dated 5th May; 
paras 39. App. 20, 


pase 246 APPENDIX ro.REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


— __ . from a change of practice which shall transfer to natives the cognizance of all civil cases that 
Calcutta Civil are now tried by the assistant judges. In the Criminal department it appears to us to be not 
FinancgCommittee. Jess expedient, on the principle explained in our Réport on the Madras Establishment, that 
Report of the Fi- the native judges should be employed in the trial oF cases referred to them by the session , 

nance Committee, Judge: and although, for some time at least, it may be necessary, as intimated in that Report, 

dated 5th May, to maingain various checks upon their conduct, they may, we conceive, be thus made to afford 

para. 39. App. 20. great relief to the European officers; since in a mujtitude of cases, which if tried by the 

latter would occupy much time, the sentence of the nafive judge, though referred to the 
judge, may doubtless be carried into effect without any hegitation or difficulty. We beg leave . 

therefore to suggest that the native judges at Bombay may be vested with criminal powers 

‘to the same extent as we have suggested for the Sudder Ameens, viz. of Madras, or to such 

other extent as the local Government may judge proper; and that all cases not cognizable 

‘by the magistrate may be made over to the session judge, to be tried by himself or referred 

to the native judges, according as h@ may judge best for the public service, subject of course 

to the provisions defining the authority of the latter. With this arrangement (and indeed 

without it) we see no reason to think that the judges and session judges at Bombay, increased 

in number as we propose, will be overburthened with their duties: and as it is our intention 

to suggest an arrangement under which the sessions’ judges will not be required periodically 

to quit their own stations for the purpose of delivering the gaols of their subordinate detached 

«assistants, any necessity which might have existed for having an officer on the spot to execute 

processes, &c. during their absence, will be removed. The reasons which have led us to 

recommend the abolition of the offices of registrar and assistant criminal judge at Bengal and 

Madras, apply with greater force to those of junior and junior-assistant session judge at 

Bombay, and we aécordingly beg to advise the discontinuance of these appointments. 


26. The same objections are applicable in a minor degree, owing to the individuals filling the 
offices being generally of longer experience in the service, to the plan of having detached 
assistants in charge of a portion of a,zillah. This part of the system, however, is open to 
another more serious objection, for all cases of a heinous nature arising within the jurisdiction 
of the detached assistant are postponed for trial by the session judge at his next half yearly 
gaol delivery ; thereby involving the necessity of the attendance of the prosecutor and witnesses 
a second time, and the detention of the parties accused for an extended period ; while in that 
part of the zillah under the immediate authority of the session judge, a similar inconvenience. 
is experienced from the interruption, during his absence, of the exercise of the higher penal 
authority with which he is vested. The distance of the subordinate court at Broach from 
the sudder station Surat, being under 40 miles, it would we conceive be attended with less 
inconvenience to the prosecutor and witness, and hardship to the prisoners, were they for- 
warded at once, to the session judge, by whom the case would be disposed of without delay, 
instead of being’ required, after having undergone a preliminary investigation, to attend again 
at the following half-yearly gaol delivery. It also. appears to us that a separate court at 
Sholapore subordinate to the judge and session judge at Poona, is by no means indispensable, 
in reference to the population or relative importance of that station. 


27. On the other hand, the zillahs of the Northern and Southern Concan have been placed 
under one judge and session judge, with a detached assistant at Rutnagherry; but the 
population and quantity of business arising in this tract of country render it very desirable, 
we think, that there should be a judge and, session judge as heretofore in each of the 
divisions. 

28. Again, in Candeish, though comparatively a poor and thinly peopled district, it seems 
to be necessary that there should be stationed an officer for the trial of the. higher classes of 
criminal offnces, which are unfortunately of too frequent occurrence ; the assistant judge’s 
court at Dooliah, besides being open to the objections already described, does not in our 
opinion syfficiently provide for this object, and we think that the appointment of a separate 
session judge for Candeish is desirable. 

° 29, In 


GENERAL APPENDIX. 247 

29, In the annexed Schedule, provision has aceordingly been made for a judge and session 
judge in the Southern Concan, Candeish and Darwar, and for the abolition of all assistant 
judges. 


30. The salaries of the judges and session judges at Poonah and Surat have been fixed by 
the Resolution of the Bombay Government under date the Ist December 1829, at, rupees 
.30,000 per annum, and those of the other judges and session judges at rupees 28,000. In 
consideration of the high and responsible nature of the duties which the whole of these 
functionaries will have to discharge, and advérting to the convenience and advantage of having 
the office of a judge and session jidge better paid than that of an ordinary collector (from 
which appointment, assuming that all arbitrary separation between the Revenue and Judicial 
lines is discontinued, the natural step will be to the.appointment of a judge), we would beg 
to recommend that the allowances of all the judges and session judges be fixed at Rs.30,000 
per annum. 


1 


31. The financial result of the arrangements here recommended in the Judicial depart- 
ment, is, as regards covenanted officers, an eventual reduction of expense to the extent of 
Rs. 78,870 *. 


32. In the charge for establishments, we are satisfied that no increase will in the aggregate 
be necessary in consequence of the proposed changes ; for, adverting to the Hoojoo judicial 
establishments 


Assistant’s 
TOTAL, 
° Salary and Fees. 


Judge’s 


*DIS TS. 
ses Salary and Allowances, 


S.Concan - - - «={1,—2,000 —- - J} 856 — 66 2,856 - 66 
N-Concan = = + «| 1,2,000 —- — | 2— 788 1 36 2,788 ‘1 36 
Surat - - - - 1 1,—2,333 1 339 | 2— 1,197. 2 - 3539 3 33 
Broach = = © = = =} = = = = | 2pm 1,375 3 33 1,375 3 33 
Ahmedabad - - - - | 1,—2,333 1 334) 3— 1,454 2 663 3,788 ~ - 
Garnatic « - - - -|-  - - - |i 850 = x 850°'= = 
Poonah - . - oo: - | 1,-3,316 2 66 | 31,500 - — 4,816 2 66 
Sholapore - - - -| - - - - |} 1,— 1,050 —- — 1,050 = = 
Ahmednugger - = - -11,—3,316 2 66 |1.— 750 + .~ 4,066 2 66. 
Candeish - a ~ | 2m 1,450 ~ = 1,450 = = 
[Rateteeseemtoet er ocean Seta (rene en AO Ea AOS 
Toran - = -| 61,5299 3 984|19,—11,272 2 12 26,572 2 ~ 
LTR 


Total present establishment, per annum += =. - = = -— = 
by the Committee: Eight J udges : 


. - - - 


318,870 . . 
Establishment and allowances recommended 


at Rs. 30,000 each, per annum + - 2,40,000 o., — 


78,87¢ aia 
{tte atacasTetaieeenaanne sarees 


APPENDIX, 


III. 
(18.) Letter from 
Committee n Jua 
dicial and Revenue 
Establishments, 
Bombay. 
20 September 1830. 


APPENDIX, 
II. 
Calcutta Civil 
FinangeCommittee. 


’ Sheristadar - - - 


- Record-keepers + - 


248 APPENDIX to REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


establishments in Bengal and Madras *, it és obvious that. those at Bombay are on a higher 
scale than is necessary, and that reductions in the establishments of the present judges and 
session judges may be effected, which, conjoined With the saving produced by the adoption 
of the establishments attached to the assistant judges, will fully cover every charge on 
account of establishment for the judges and session judges of the Southern Concan, Candeish * 
and Darwar. We may further observe that no new expense on account of judicial buildings 
will need to be incurred, as there is already a court-house and gaol at each of the places 
proposed as the station of a judge and session jydge. 


33. The number of native commissioners and sudde® ameens employed under the Bom-: 
bay Government, appears from the latest returns in our possession to be 88, and their aggre- 
gate emoluments to have amountéd on an average of years (excluding a period during which 
by the operation of a now rescinded rule their amount was fortuitously swelled) to rupees 
1,4%404, giving rupees 1,675 as the average allowances of each individual 


34. Looking to the quantity of business, the population and extent of territory at Bombay, 
and to the number of native Judges, which, in reference to similar circumstances, we have 
recommended for Bengal ; we are of opinion that 80 native judges will be sufficient, both for 
the trial of afl original civil suits, and for the performance of such criminal business as may 
be assigned to them by the session judge. A graduated scale of salary for native judicial 
officers seems to us preferable to the existing plan of paying partly by fees ; for while through 
the prospect of promotion it holds out a stimulus to good conduct and an industrious dis- 
charge of duty, it has no tendency to cause business to be carelessly hurried over, and takes 
away all ground fpr any imputation that litigation might be fomented by the native judges 
with a view to their own profit. We would recommend, therefore, that the fees now recelv- 
able by the native commissioners, that‘s, the value of the stamp paper required to be used 
in pleadings in their courts, be carried to the credit of Government as stamp revenue, ae 

: : that 


e 


*SCALE of EstannisuMent fixed for the ZinLan Courts under the Madras Presidency, 
in 1816. 


Moofty - | « - «1! 1— 157 8 = |. Broughtup -  - 
Pundit - - - =| 1, 140 — + | Moochey - =| 
Ructavan ~~ = 

Government Vakeel  - - Massaljees - + 
Head Writer - - + 


‘Writers- +» -  -& 


Sweeper . + 0 
Nasir - - 7 
Naib - -. + 
Chobdars =~ 


Native Registrar - - 


Gomastahs - <= = Head Deloyah - 
Persian Moonshees - Deloyets af is 
Persian Writers - - eons =. «+ - 
Native Doctor - - Whipper . - is 
Swearers - = oe Executioner - - 


Shrof = 4 -- 2 - Grave-digger - 


PEatried up--- Toran - - 


GENERAL APPENDIX. 249 saa 


‘that the scale of allowances proposed for similar offices in Bengal, as exhioited below *, 


be adopted at Bombay, the highest rate being Rs. 6,000, the lowest 1,200, and the average a 


_ salary of each native judge Rs. 2,500 jfer annum. 


dicial an 


18.) Letter from 
ommitteg on Ju- 


Revenue 


35. The aggregate of the allowances of this class of officers, assuming the number to be fstablishmen ts, 


80, would therefore amount to Rs. 2,00,000, or Rs.52,596 more than the emoluments here- Bombay. 


tofore received by the present body of native commissioners +. 


36. Two or more of the native judges on the highest rate of salary should be employed at, 
the sudder station in the manner describe in para. 25, and the others be stationed at con- 
venient places in the interior of the several districts. 


37. The scale of allowances above proposed will, we think, afford a sufficiently liberal 
remuneration to the native judges in the first instante; but if their labours prove as useful 
as we are willing to anticipate, it may be proper eventually to reconsider their claims to 
increased. emolument. , , 


20 September 1830. 


38. In our Report of the 30th May 1829, we ‘recommended the abolition of the office of Deputy 


deputy agent for sirdars in the Deccan, and the reduction of the office establishment to the 
scale on which it originally stood; which measure received the approbation of your Lordship 
in Council, but has not been carried into effect for the reasons assigned in the documents now 
before us, which accompanied Mr. Secretary Wilhiamson’s letter of the 24th of October Jast 
to the deputy secretary to the Supreme Goverment but the third member of Council at 
Bombay was in favour, we observe, of the measure, proposed by us. ; 

; 39. In 


Sg 


Where Six are | Where Eight are | Where Nine are 
wanted, wanted, wanted. 


* At 6,000 per annum 2 - 


s 
1,— 6,000 
4,800 _— 


1,— 6,000 } 1,— 6,000 
- «=« = | 1,— 4,800 
2,— 6,000 | 1,— 3,000 


3,000 = 1,— 3,000 
1,800 — 7 - | 2,— 3,600 3: 5,400 | 3,— 5,400 
1,200 — - -/12,—2,400 | 2,— 2,400 | 3,— 3,600 


ToTAL - - -{ 6,—15,000 | 8,—19,800 | 9,—22,800 


Average - 2,533 


Aggregate Amount | Aggregate Amount 
of of 


t+ YEARS. 
; Salary. Fees. 
1826 - - 83,031 51,143 1,534,174 
1829 - 80,844 79,790 1,60,634 
Toran - -- 1,63,875 1,30,933 294,808 


Average - - + 1,47,404 


Aggregate of proposed Allowances - + - 2,00,000 


Excess = + - 52,596. 


4 


KK 


Sirdars. 


Agent for F 


APPENDIX, 


IIL. 


Calcutta Civil 
FinanceCgmmittee. 


250 APPENDIX to REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 

39. In noticing the memorandum of the ageat for sirdars, relative to our recommendation, we * 
by no means intend to offer the slightest objection to the reference made to him; but the result, 
we beg to observe, confirms the correctness of what we*took the liberty of pointing out to your’ 
Lordship in Council, in our address of the 20th November last: “It is clear,” we therein’ 
remarked, “that if for every item of reduction we are expected formally to submit to Govern~ 


. ment an elaborate explanation of reasons, and if reasons submitted by us are to be weighed: 


Revenue Depart- 
ment. 


and commented upon. as if: the adoption or rejection of what is proposed was a matter - 
altogether optional or one of judicial inquiry, life would be foo short for the hundredth part 
of what must be accomplished; and further, it is evident that if nothing is to be discontinued’ 
which cannot be proved to be mischievous or useless independent of financial considerations, 
Government must sink under its burdens long before any adequate reduction can be effected.” 

40. The memorandum by the agent fcr sirdars, accompanying the proceedings to which we 
allude, states that the list of privileged persons in 1828 contained 548 names, We have stated 
them at®*504* on the authority of the Persign secretary to the Bombay Government, and the 
fact of the number being greater than we were informed is so much the more favourable to 
the argument on which our recommendation rested. The memorandum also shows a saving 
of Rs. 1,243 per annum, according to the calculation noted below +, by consolidating the 
agent’s office with the English a native record office; but we may observe, in reference 
to this trifling reduction of Rs. 1,243 per annum, that the amount of saving proposed by us 
was Rs. 29,436, and that the salary of the officer in charge of the records alluded to (and 
now holding the appointment of deputy agent for sirdars) forms an item of Rs. 18,000 per 
annum in the cost (Rs. 22,476) of the above office. We have only to add, that we see no 
ground for altering the recommendation already submitted to your Lordship in Council on 
this subject, and are of opinion that the agent for sirdars does not require a deputy to take 
charge of the English and native records*of the Deccan (which in reality might with equal 
advantage be deposited in the collector’s cutcherry at Poona), or to assist. him in his other’ 
duties as agent. 

41. The changes recently introduced into the zevenue branch of administration at Bombay 
upon the principles adverted to in the 4h and 5th paras. of this letter, and already 
reported t to the Supreme Government, havé been adopted with the view of making a con- 
siderable redaction in the number of collectorates. Exclusive of the Southern Mahratta 
Country, which we have above noticed, the establishment now consists of four principal 
collectors, three collectors, and one collector of sea customs, in lieu of 12 collectors of land 
revenue and customs. Each of the principal collectors has a sub-collector under hfm, who 
has separate charge of a portion of the division; and under the judge and principal collector 

“of 


4 


* Paragraph 24 of Finance Committee’s Report to the Supreme Government, dated 30th May 1829.. 
+ Agent's office - : ~ 


; . - 9,480 
English and Native Record ditto 


22,476 . 


~ 


31,956 
38,796 


Consolidation of above a - 


Actual Increase - - = 


: e 
Saving effected by the Judge of the Poona Adawlut since Mr. Elphinstone framed his 
list of sirdars - - “os - : 3 = 


= - - . . 


Net Saving per Annum, ; - - 


Car) 


{ Letter g the 4th January 1830, with -enclosures, from the chief Secretary at Bombay to the 
Deputy Secyftary in the Territorial Department in Bengal! ; 


GENERAL APPENDIX. 251 Arrivots, 


ai : 7 . . 2 be a . ] 
.40f the Southern Mahratta Country there are wo of these functionaries. Each principa a8) tae ive 


- collector and collector has also one head assistant, and several junior assistants, attached Coins 6a 
to him. es a 
42. In regard to the formation of Guzerat into two pene collectorates, we are disposed ee eae 
‘to prefer, and to recommend for adoption, the principle of the arrangement already laid by Bombay. : 
us before your Lordship in Council *, which consisted in the division of Guzerat ito one 90 September 1830. 
principal collectorate and two collectorates, : 

45. It seems to us that the revenife and police management of the Ahmedabad district, 
which is very extensive and scattered, cannot be conveniently united to that of any of the 
southern districts, and that Kaira would form. too important a charge for a sub-collector. 
We should have been disposed, looking merely to this branch of the subject, to have pro- 
posed that the two central districts of Guzerat, Keaira’ and Broach, should form a prin- 
eipal collectorship; but as Broach has already been united with Surat, and as in the Judicial 
department those districts are placed under one judge, while Almedabad and Kgira are 
similarly united, it appears to us to be on the whole expedient to adopt the following arrange- 
ment in the Revenue department, viz. Almedabad and Kaira to be under separate col- 
lectors and magistrates, and Surat and Broach to continue, as now, under one principal 
collector stationed at the former, with a sub-collector at the latter place. We may observe 
that the officer now in charge of Kaira, under the designation of sub-collector, formerly had 
charge of the same district.as collector, and still draws the allowances he previously reccived. 

41, The same observation, applies to the officer who now holds the situation of sub- 
collector in the Southern Concan. The union of the Northern and Southern Concan under 
one principal collector of land revenue and sea customs, is a measure which we apprehend, 
with reference to the locality and extent of those districts, will prove very injurious and even 
impracticable, and we observe that it was regauded in the same light by one+ of the 
members of the Bombay Government, who has recorded his opinion that the districts are too 
extensive to be converted into one principal collectorate. 

45. The total length of territory under the principal collector’s charge will be 372 miles 
north and south of the Presidency, and its average breadth about 55 miles ; an extent which 
seems to us to be quite at variance with all reasonable expectation of an adequate super- 
intendence; and on making a comparison in this respect with the scale of establishment 
found necessary in the provinces of Canara and Malabar in the same line of coast, under 
the Madras Government, the incongruity of the scheme for the revenue management of the 
Concan is peculiarly striking. The following comparison between the extent, population 
and land revenue of the North and South Concan (now united under one principal collector 
and sub-collector), and of the provinces of Malabar and Canara (which are under two prin- 
cipal collectors), will exhibit to your Lordship in Council the nature of the comparison to 
which our remarks are applied : 


Sees, Length. poe Population, * Land Revenue. 
Malabar and Canara - - -| > 348 | 55 16,70,000 30,84,952 
North and South Concans - 872 | 55 _ 10,483,000 23,29,666 


46. Under the conviction that in this Instance the principle of consolidation has been . 
cyried to an extent calculated to be prejudicial to sound economy,. we recommend reverting 
to 


eT 
* Letter to the Supreme Government, dated 24th February 1830. App. No. 15. : 
+ Vide Mr. Romer’s Minute, dated 15th, December 1829, ertclosed in'a despatch fromgthe Bombay 


Government to the Supreme Government, dated 4th January 1830. 
*. K K2 


8 
t 


a ' 252 APPENDIX ro REPORT From SELECT COMMITTEE. . 


= to the system of placing the North.and Soyth Concans under two collectors as formerly, ,: 
Calcutta Civil instead of one principal collector. In the Southern Mahratta Country it would seem 
FinaneeCommittee. advisable to continue the system of a principal colle@tor ; but if the separation of the judi- 
cial and fiscal functions under that officer be carried into effect, as recommended in 
para. 22, we presume that the appointment of a second sub-collector in that district will 


cease. 
Revenue Commis 47. The appointment of a revenue commissioner under the Bombay Government has been 
sioner. recently created, and the reasons for instituting this office ere stated in Sir John Malcolm’s 


Minute of the ist December 1829; and a copy of the instructions, dated the 19th April 1830, 
for the guidance of the commissioner in conducting his duties, is already on the records of 
the Supreme Government *.  - . 

48. In regard to the appointment in question, our senior member is of opinion that “ it is 
unnecessary, because the Government itself is competent to exercise an efficient superin- 
tendenge over the revenue business of eight districts, which are under the immediate charge 
of five principal collectors and three collectors. This is not the case at Madras, where there 
are twenty districts under the immediate charge of ten principal collectors and ten collectors. 
Without at present inquiring whether the system of superintendence at Madras admits of 
improvement, Mr. Hillis prepared to say, with perfect confidence, that that Government is 
not capable of taking the superintendence of its revenue business wholly into its own hands, 
whith he considers as matter of regret, for he looks upon the system of immediate super- 
intendence by Government to be in every respect preferable to that of Bengal and Madr 
The next objection to this appointment, in Mr. Hill’s opinion, is, that unless when rare 
qualifications happen to be found, the revenue commissioner will be liable to do much more 
harm than good. From the tenor of the instructions addressed to him, Mr. Hill thinks it is 
very obvious that there is in reality noevacant place in the scheme of revenue adminis- 
tration for him to occupy. If the collectors and the Government respectively perform their 
ake there will be little left for the superintendant to do. When he chooses to be active, he is 
ikely to annoy the collectors without assis:ing the Government; and if there be deficiencies on 
the part of those over him, or of those undgr him, it does not seem to our senior member 

_ that the commissioner will have it in his power to supply them. Moreover, one ground on 
which this appointment was suggested has in some measure ceased to exist; as the increased 
number of principal collectors affords promotion in the revenue line which was formerly 
wanting.” 

49. The second member of our committee is of opinion that the intervention of ais 
authority between the Government and the collectors and magistrates, to whom the people 
can look for the prompt redress of grievances they are likely to sustain, or think they sustain, 
even from the best of our executive officers, is essential to the good governmeut of the 
country ; and he would consider it an expedient arrangement to have three local commis- 
sioners of revenue and police, for the three great divisions of the Bombay territory, discon~ 
tinuing the office of principal collector. He objects, consequently, to the appointment of the 
commissioner, not because he is likely to be altogether useless, but because, having an extent 
of jurisdiction that will prevent his exercising adequate control, his utility will not com- 
Sees for the expense.. He conceives that with an authority extending from Ahmedabad to 

arwar (for it may be presumed that the-especial exemption from the commissioner’s control, 
which the principal collector of the latter district possesses, will ultimately be removed), the 

4s commissioner would neither know the people, nor the people him, enough to gain the informa- 
tion and the influence that are necessary to inspire confidence and do justice in individual cases : 
and as to all functions of general control, the institution of the office appears to him to be little 
else than the appointment of an additional secretary to Government, with less prospect Of 
,advantage than might be anticipated from the latter arrangement. , 


50. Our 


%* Vide endpsute to the letter from the Chief Secretary at Bombay, dated 4th January 1830, to the 
’ Deputy Secyttary in the Territorial Department in Bengal. . 


GENERAL APPENDIX. - 253 


. : : e 
.. 50. Our third member, in the document accgmpanying our letter of the 24th February, to 
which he begs to refer *, has stated the reasons Ciak lead him to be favourable to the scheme 
of superintendence now introduced. ‘Phe appointment of revenue commisssioner seems to 
him to promise much benefit in the hands of an able and judicious revenue officer; and any 
arguments against its utility, founded on the circumstance that the office may be conferred 
on an inefficient person, might equally be applied, hé thinks, to any office under the Govern- 
ment. Neither is he disposed to consider that the appointment should cease, because, from the 
extent of the superintendence, the commissioner cannot command such a vigorous control as 
would be the case if his charge wgs smaller. : 

51. Under these views relative to the appointment under consideration, the majority of the 
committee recommend that the office should be abolished ; but if continued, we are unanimously 
of opmon that the establishment is made greatly too expensive, and that the office of assistant 
should cease. The estimated charge under this head, by -the accountant-general, for the 


APPEN Dix, 
JID. 

(18.) Letter from 
Committee on Ju- 
dicial aud Revenue 
Establishments, 
Bombay. 
20 September 1830. 


current year, is Rs.'72,900, but the charge originally contemplated on account of thig office ° 


in Sir J. Maleolms Minute of the 1st December 1829, was Rs. 56,600 ++; and we therefore 
recommend, that if not abolished entirely, the aggregate charge be limited to Rs. 53,000. 

.52. We would also beg to recommend that ‘the separate office of collector of customs of 
Guzerat be abolished, and that the superintendence of the department within this district. be 
transferred, as has been done elsewhere, to the collectors of land revenue; an annual saving 
of Rs. 64,878 will result from this measure f. . 

53. The 


2 


* Extract from a Minute by Mr. Bax, dated 16th June 1829 : 

Para. 46. There should be a superintendant of revenue appointed at Bombay, toereside in the Mofussil, 
whose duty should cunsist in visiting every collectorate as occasion demanded, receiving and inquiring 
into petitions, reporting to Government in the first instance on all applications to be made through him 
for revenue buildings and repairs, conducting inquiries in the Revenue department, and exercising in 
general, on the spot, that scrutiny and supervision which is now totally wanting, whereby a system of 

* mismanagement, productive of serious loss to Government, and much injury and injustice to the people, 
has in some cases been allowed to continue unchecked until the ryots have themselves flocked for 
redress to the Presidency. This result must often ehsue where an executive officer is uncontrolled, 
and is the sole reporter of his own acts and conduct. ‘ 

Para. 47. The superintendant of revenue would have access to all the records of every principal cal- 
Jector, but it is not of course intended that the latter should send their correspondence with Govern- 
ment through him, except in the cases mentioned in the preceding paragraph. On the contrary, he 
should be informed that it is not the desire of Government to multiply business and correspondence by 
his appointment, but rather to abridge it, by remedying on the spot many matters of complaint which 
are now referred to Government. It would of course be requisite, however, to frame more definite 
instructions for him than can be Jaid down here. ; 

+ Commissioner - . = 45,000 
Deputation allowance « - = 3,600 


Establishment - - - - 8,000 
56,600 
t Coliector of Sea Customs in Guzerat : 
Guzerat ; 
Collector ~ - - - - - - - 21,600 
Deputy see ee oe 8,278 
as af 29,878 
- Concan, (already abolished) : 
" Collector ee eee 21,600 
Deputy - “ * -. 8 - © - 8,278 


———| 35,000 


| te 


aN 


Ar ene 254 APPENDIX to REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 
ergcetaee 53. The following number of assistants to, be attached to principal collectors and magi 
Calcutta Civil trates would, under the plan we have suggested, amply provide for the ‘fiscal administration 
FinanceCommittee. of the several districts under the Bombay presidencf: viz. to principal collectors and magis- 
trates, one head assistant and one second assistant; to collectors and magistrates one head 
assistant ; but to the collector of Candeish a second assistant ta be allowed. 
54. The above, we are of opinion, in addition to the sub-collectors, will be found a sufficient 
complement of assistants, and all others who may happen to be on the establishment should 
be considered supernumeraries. ° 
55. In connection with the contemplated revision of the, allowances of judicial officers, we 
beg to propose the following scale of salaries for covenanted officers in the Revenue depart- 


ment 3 viz. 3 
f e Rs. 
To Principal Collectors and Magistrates - + - per annum 36,000 
Collector of Land Revenug and Sea Customs, Bombay - - 30,000 
Sub-collectors and joint Magistrates - = = = «= 14,400 
Head Assistants - - - - - ‘= - - - 8,400 
Second Assistants + - - - - - - - - 6,000 


56. The result of the modifications suggested in the Revenue department will be a saving 
in the salaries of covenanted officers of Rs. 1,52,400 per annum, exclusive of those of collectors ° 
of sea customs noticed above *. 


‘ ; 57. The 
® . i 
* DISTRICTS. e Collectors. AssistantCollectors.|}) TOTAL, 
bp, ania ath seem temmes boats bene amen een meet eee ee one ee 
eo 8 | Dy Collector. 7s 
Bombay - _° * « « « -e- 1— 4,166 3 j — 1,083 4 5,250 
South Concan - - - - - e- 2,— 2,000 4, 2,050 4,050 
North ditto - - - - - - - 1, 2,000 3,.— 1,650 3,650 
Surat - = - = = = = =]  1,— 2,000 3— 1,650 3,650 
Broach - - - - ~ - - - 1,— 2,000 3,— 1,650 3,650 
Kaira = = s+ = =, © = =]  1,— 2,000 3,— 1,650 3,650 
Ahmedabad - - - - - es - 1,— 2,000 3,— 1,650 3,650 
Aten a . by = = = = : 1,— 2,800 5s— 3»300 6,100 
Ahmednuggur- = = = ee =] 1 2,100 4y— 2,500 4,650 
Candeish ee, a ee eS C21) 3,— 2,150 4,250 
Carnatic . .« , JPrincipal Collector 1,— 3,500 
Sub-Collector + 1,— 1,400 4,— 2,550 7,450 
‘Toran = - -| 12,--28,6664| 36,—21,933,4| 50,000 
‘Per Annum ~ ~- =| 6,00,000 
Establishments and Allowances proposed by the Committee : 
1 2 Collector of Land and Sea Customs, Bombay - - - - = 30,000 
3 Principal Collectors = - - - : * e- at 36,000 each 108,000 
6 ae = 4 - os “ - - 26,400 =~ 158,400 
3. Subditto <= -« - - - - = “ 14,400 = 43,200 
10 Head Assistant ditto - - - ae = 8,400 ~— 84,000 
4 Assistant ditto - - - - - - - 6,000 —~ 24,000 ; 
— 4,47,600 
SE eaiser 
Saving - - -| 1,52,400 


. GENERAL APPENDIX. 255. Appunpix, 
? Ill. 
57. The Kattywar agency does not call for any detailed remarks on our part, but from its —. 
mination of apolitical agency, and from the nature of the duties annexed to it, the charge (18.) Letter from 
would appear to belong rather to the Poltical than to the Revenue branch of the administra- Committee on Ju- 
tion; and we would also suggest the practicability of uniting it to the office of political com- dicial and Revenue 


aes i Establishments, 
missioner in Guzerat. Bombay. 


59. It may be useful, before closing this report, to advert to the large amount @nd vast 20September 1830. 
disproportion which, in several of the districts under the Bombay Government, the civil dis- Village Charges. 
bursements chargeable on the revehue bear to the gross collections. The subjomed statement 
will exhibit to your Lordship in C8uncil the amount of the gross collections in each collec- 
, torate under that presidency, and the charges on account of revenue and judicial establish- 

‘ments of every description, distinguishing those denomimated “ village charges,” which have __ 
only of fate years been entered in the annual accounts of receipts and disbursements, and Vide Column 3 
appear even now to have been only partially brought to account. The abstract has been of the Statement, 
framed from accounts furnished to us by the local officers, which apparently include some . 
items that are not exhibited in the accounts rendered by the Accountant-general. It will 

thence be observed that the local civil charges amount in some districts to 30, 40, and in one 

instance nearly 60 per cent. on the gross collections. \ 


‘STATEMENT, 


BERENS 256 °~APPENDIX to REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


Calcutta Civil 
Finan ceCommittee. 


STATEMENT showing the 10ta: Amount or Uollections and Disbursements, 


No. 1. No. 2. No. 3. 

° " Village Charges of | ' 
Gross aggregate | Aggregate Charges | a!! Denominations, 
: Fthe Beenie ei Shere SOEs Ae 


N AMES. Collections, under - pear in the Public 

i bed Magisterial Depart- | Accounts, or are 

every Denomination ments, under the | deducted from the 

or Head. Collector and Zillah | Revenue without 
Manistrate. passing through the 
§ . ‘Treasury. 

Southern Concean - - - = 18,41,845 2,84,133 1,98,028 
‘Northern ditto % - - - 14,15,795 2,83,856 1,91,325 
Surat - as = = - - 22,23,627 1,88,441 3,92,485 
roach - ‘~ - - - 20,30,967 1,82,277 2,30,146 
Kaira - - as = 0 = 24,11,625 4,53,582 2,84,521 
Ahmedabad - -- - + - 17,01,764 2,14,306 1,97,545 
Poonah Be - = = 20,56,106 3,68,610 2,88,098 
Ahmednuggur a - ~ - 21,83,0385 4,01,035 '  2,68,305 
Candeish - - - - - 19,87,683 5,97,129 4,15,581 
Darwar - = + - 23,76,562 2,37,893 34,190 


2,02,29,009 32,11,262 * 25,00,224 
e , 


60. The difference between the rate per cent. which the charges in the Southern Mahratta 
Country bear to the gross revenue of that district, and the rate of the charges to the collections 
in the districts composing the Deccan, acquired about the same period, and which, having 
been under the same government, were at the time of cession in many respects similarly cir- 
eumstanced, is very remarkable: in the Southern Mahratta Country the rate is 11 and 
a fraction per cent., while in the Deccan it varies from 31 to 40 per cent. Thus in the 
Poonah district a gross revenue of 20 lacks and a half is reduced to less than 14 lacks; and 
in Admednuggur it falls from nearly 22 to less than 14 lacks of rupees. The disparity just 
noticed results chiefly, it will be remarked, from the excess under the head of Village Charges 
in the latter districts. 

61. On examining the details of these charges, it is very evident that in regulating them in 
the Southern Mahratta Country, a different course was pursued from that followed in the 
Deccan. The leading distinction is this, that in the Deccan the claims of the district and 
village revenue officers who had been employed under the Mahratta government, to the 
‘hereditary and unconditional enjoyment of their respective allowances, appear to have been 

‘admitted, while in the country settled by Sir Thomas Munro their allowances ceased with 

their services; and, in fact, that in the former territory the British Government has been 

burdened with a heavy expense for the maintenance of an establishment of officers, Who, 
though their allowances are continued to them, render no service whatever to the State: 

_ moreover, the emoluments of hereditary and other village officers, who are still employed, 

appear also to be on a more liberal scale in the Deccan, and the amount allowed for village 

contingeng expenses, embracing in some instances various items of an objectionable seit 

: suc 


a GENERAL APPENDIX. 257 
; 
a gal, 
during the Year 1827-28, in the several®Zillahs under the Bombay Presidency. 


No. 4. No. 5. No, 6. No. 7. Ne. 8. 
: : Rate of Centage 
Charges on Account Aggregate net Collec- | which the Total | Rate of Centage 


Amount of Charges | which the Village. 


Total Amqint : 
t tions, after deducting 


of the of Charges i&the the Total Amount of | i? the serene and | Chargesin Col. 3. 
Zillah and Criminal Revenue and Judicial Charges inthe Revenue ete ee beer to the gross 
¥ and Jodicial Depart- | Aggregate Collec. | Collections — in 
Courts, a ments. Reve dace eimpeubeided Col. 1. 
in Col. No. 4, ; 
e 
1,04,494 5,86,655 '12,55,190 31 1 23 10.3 - 
83,130 5,58,311 8,57,484 39 1 #73 13.2 6 
3,17,231 (8,98,157 13,25,470 40 1 56 17 2 62 
65,626 4,78,049 .. » 15,52,918 23 2 215 11 1 32 
99,277 8,37,380 15,74,245 34 2 80 11 319 
1,27,843 5,39,694 11,62,070 31 2 85 ll 2 43 
1,74,323 8,31,031 12,25,075 40 1 67 14 - 4 
1,42,105 8,11,445 13,71,590 37 -— 68 12 116 
1,63,389 11,'76,099 811,584 69 -— 67 20 3 63 
are Se 272,083 21,04,479 11 1 79 1 1% 
12,77,418 69,88,904 1,32,40,105 12 1 34 


e 


such as extra pay, batta and deputation allowance to public servants, salaries, &c., seems to 
be extravagant. The consequence is, that in the districts in question the village charges 
amount to from 11 to 14 per cent.:of the gross collections: in Darwar, on the other hand, the 
rate of charge is only 14 per cent. 

62. We are not in possession of sufficient information on the subject to enable us to state 
precisely the principles that should be attended to in the investigation and future regulation 
of the charges in question, and perhaps it is not our province to do more than thus generally 
bring the subject under the notice of your male a in Council; but feeling satisfied, from the 
inquiries we have instituted, that by a judicious local scrutiny a wide fidld for retrenchment, 


: immediately or prospectively, will be discovered, if the prmciples that have guided the British 


Government in other quarters be followed, and that, without’any infringement of the just and 
reasonable claims of individuals, the public revenues in these districts might be considerably 
improved, we would respectfully recommend that the attention of the local Government be 
particularly requested to that object. ‘ : 
63. We have adhered to the general amount of allowances adopted by the Government of 
.Bombay, for the appointments proposed toebe maintained; the alterations suggested by us 
operating as a transfer from one class of officers to another ; and looking merely to the duties 
of the several offices, the emoluments proposed for each appear to be appropriate. But in. 
reviewing generally the salaries drawn by the covenanted civil servants of the three presiden- 
cies, we may hereafter have occasion to suggest some modification in the allowances assigned 
to particular situations: on that point, therefore, we would not be understood as pronouncing 
@ conclusive judgment. 


LL 


AppiNpbIx, 
II. 


(18.) Letter from 
Conimittee on Ju- 
dicial and Revenue 
Establishments, 
Bombay. 

20 September 1830. 


Aveetoix, 958 APPENDIX ro REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


Iii 


Calcutta Civil ; 
FinanceCommittee. (19.)—LETTER from the Calcutta Civil Finance @ommittee to the Governor-general in 
Council at Bengal, dated ist May 1830. ' : 


My Lord, 


_ 1. Tx¥ recent arrangeménts made in the Revenue and Judicial departments at Bombay,*, 
m consequence of the enactments contained in Regulations J. to VI. of 1830, have rendered 
a ¥eference necessary on our ‘part to that Government; bAt in the mean time we have the 
honour to submit to your Lordship in Council a suggestioif for abolishing the revenue sur- 
vey and assessment in the Deccan, and to state the reasons which induce us to offer this 


suggestion. , e 


2. The survey in question is a new charge since the year 1823-24, and may be estimated 
at an aggregate annual expense of Kse1,50,000. The principles on which it is conducted, 
and the progress of it, are fully described in the able report of Mr. Pringle, the superinten- 

dant, dated 6th October 1828; and‘ as this document is already on the records of the . 
Supreme Government, we beg to refer to it in conjunction with the present observations. 


3. To us it appears more than doubtful whether any one can assess successfully.on the 
pie explained by Mr. Pringle; it assumes a degree of detailed knowledge which it must 
e impracticable to attain. Moreover, some of these principles seem to be at variance with 
all experience ; as, for instance, the assuinption that all the best land has been first brought 
under cultivation, especially when applied to countries long subject to misrule and disorder; 
for, under such circimstances, it will rarely be found that either the best land or the most 
valuable crops have “been cultivated to the utmost extent. The consequence of acting on 
this hypothesis, we apprehend, must nece$sarily be the under-assessment of the best lands 
and the best villages, and, if Mr. Pringle’s data be correctly established, the under-assess- 
ment also of inferior lands and villages. 


4. It is quite right, we conceive, in places wltere the prescriptive privileges of the people. | 
allow us to do so, to keep in view chiefly the object of leaving a certain proportion of the 
net profit or rent to the cultivators, as far as fluctuations of season and market allow; but 
we greatly doubt whether any calculation, however specious on A aii will lead us so near 
to the attainment of the object as Sir Thomas Munro’s plan of causing what appeared to 
him to be the utmost sum that could be demanded from a given tract, to be distributed 
among villages and over fields, and thence making a rateable deduction for the purpose of « 
creating private property. The process was certainly simpler; but after all, certainty for 
the future, and that the certainty of not having to pay more than can be easily paid on an 
average of seasons, is the main thing to be sought for. But whatever principles of assess~ 
ment be adopted, it seems to us to be a bad plan to vest the duty of superintending the 
application of them in a distinct officer, rather than the collector: for we thus in effect. 
sacrifice the advantages of that local knowledge and experience which seems to be essential 
to anything hike a just and satisfactory settlement. We saddle the Government for an’ 
indefinite period with a double establishment, and while our assessing officer is without the _ 
lights which the course of collection necessarily throws upon the condition and character of 
the people, the subsequent proceedings of the collector must manifestly be conducted under , 
great disadvantage, when he is called upon to apply’an assessment, and to meet the pleas 
arising out of its application, with an imperfect kpowledge of the real grounds on which it . 
has been adjusted. We say the real grounds, because we are quite satisfied that under - 
any scheme which professes to adjust the Government demand by an unvarying rule, the 
records prepared by the native officers will be constantly fallacious. 


5. We are not fully informed of the extent of the powers vested in Mr. Pringle, but from 
the tenor of his report we are- led: to conclude that they exceed greatly what it has been 
usual to entrpst to any single éxecutive officer; and with the highest opinion of his talents, * 
we cannot b@t apprehend that, from want of local information, he must, in avoiding over- 

ce assessment, 


GENERAL APPENDIX. 259 


. e 
‘assessment, be induced to make a large sacrifice to the public revenue. Further, we con- 
‘eeive that the deductions to be allowed with the view of creating a property, should be 
settled on some fixed principle, and epplied uniformly to all the presidencies where the 
hands of Government are not tied up; it is inconsistent, in our opinion, to be allowing 40 
per cent. of the net profit in one place, and nothing in another. Abatements made on 
yaccount of local peculiarities of soil or season, or in consideration of other special circum- 
stances, must of course be differently regulated in each district; but the principles laid 
down in Mr. Pringle’s report appe&r to us to be of. general application, though partially 
applied. { , 
6. On examining the former proceedings which have taken place on the subject of this 
_ survey, we find that its abolition was recommended to the Government by a committee * 
‘which assembled at Bombay nearly three years ag®, “as having only very recently been 
commenced ;” and in regard to the revenue surveys then in progress, the committee, in 
their report of the 8th June 1827, remarks, “ mucleas we doubt their utility, stil where 
the institution has existed for any length of time, and may be presumed to have made con- 
siderable progress in their labours, we have provided for their continuance.” 


7. The late Governor of Bombay did not adopt thie suggestion for abolishing this survey, 
but remarks in a Minute dated 11th June 1827, “ The Deccan and Concan surveys will 
terminate, I shall say, in three years at furthest.” This interval has already nearly,ex- 
pired, and judgmg from the little progress that has been made, we should consider 20, years 
to be a moderate period for its completion. 


8. On the foregoing grounds; as well as on the ground of heavy expense without any 
adequate prospect of benefit (but rather an expectation of evil) we ere clearly of opinion 
“that the Deccan survey and assessment should be,inimediately abolished. 


9. We beg, in conclusion, to state, that Mr. Russell, the late senior member of our 
Committee, having perused Mr. Pringle’s report, and notes on the subject of it containing 
the substance of the above remarks, expressed his full concurrence in the views now sub- 
mitted ; and we shall not of course be understoog as giving an opinion adverse to surveys 
conducted by collectors on the plan followed under the Government of Fort St. George. \ 


We have, &c. 
(signed)  D. Hint. 
H. Mackenzix. 
Joun Bax. 


(20.}—EXTRACT of a LETTER from the Calcutta Civil Finance Committee, to the 
Governor-general in Council at Bengal, dated 5th May 1830. 


€ 


29. THERE has been an addition of about Rs. 11,008, to the expense of the Court of 
Commissioners for the Recovery of Small Debts, consisting of an addition of Rs. 6,000 to 
‘the salaries of the commissioners, and of an addition to the servants of the court in conse- 
-quence of the great increase both of the business‘transacted in that most useful éstablishment, 
and also of the fees realized by it on agcount of Government. Those fees in 1827-28, 
amounted to Rs. 55,141, and exceeded the whole expense of the Court by Rs. 7,199. 


‘@ 31. We have already recommended that on a vacancy; the appointment of third judge of 
the Sudder Adawlut, created since the year 1823, should not be filled up. The saving would 
i amount 


_* The members of this Committee were, the present chief secretary, superintendagt of revenue, 
accountant-general, sub -treasurer. ; 
LL2, 


e 
APPENDIX, 


HL. 


(19.) Letter from 
Committee on Abo- 
lition of Deccan 
Revenue Survey. 


1 May 1839. 


(20.) Letter from 
Committee, on 
Civil Establish- 
ments, Madras. 
5 May 1830. 
Commissioners’ 
Court. 


Court of Sudder 
Adawlut. 


APPENDIX, 


Ill. 


Caleutta Civil 
FinanceCommittee. 


Guntoor Zillah 
Court. 
Auxiliary Court. 


Native Judge at 
Coligall. 


260 APPENDIX ro REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


amount to Rs, 49,000 per annum. In the present state of the finances of Government, we 
are confirmed in that recommendation by ad¥erting to the proportion between the number of 
judges of the Sudder Adawlut and of Zillah Courtsén Bengal, and on the Madras establish- — 
ment. In Bengal there are 47 zillah and city judges, and five judges of the Sudder Adawlut.: 
At Madras there are 13 zillah judges, of whom we are about to recommend that one should 
be discontinued, and six auxiliary judges. Even with only two judges of the Sudder 
Adawlut? the proportion to the number of zillah judges (including the auxiliary judges in 
that class) would exceed that of Bengal. We are further confirmed in the recommendation 
by being strongly of opinion that it is of importance, on grgunds distinct from economy, that 
one of the members of Government should always hold tHe office of a judge of the Sudder — 
Adawlut, and take upon himself a substantive share of the duties of that court. The other ~ 
functions of a member of Government,at the subordinate presidencies are not of a nature or 
extent to interfere with this salutary arrangement, and the previous occupation of one or both 
of the counsellors will generally have prepared them to give complete effect to it. At present 
one of the members of council at Madras, was for nearly 20 years a judge either of the 
Sudder Adawlut or of a provincial court ; and the other was for several years a judge of a 
provincial court. On these grounds we are inclined to be of opinion that under the present 
urgent call for economy, two sudder judges, besides a member of council as chief judge, 
should be sufficient on the Madras establishment. ; 

82. From the civil auditor’s book of 1829, it appears that the present registrar of the 
Sudder Adawlut, besides his own salary of Rs. 26,250, draws also the salary of deputy- 
registrar, being Hs. 10,500. This arrangement is objectionable on principle as well as on 

rounds of economy. A deputy’s duty is merely to afford the aid of which a principal stands 
im need. If the aa eg needs no aid he requires no deputy. On neither supposition can 
he be deputy to himself; but in this case the registrar has two other deputies, independently 
of the one whose salary he himself draws. This extra allowance, if it be still drawn, ought 
to be discontinued. e are further of opinion that one deputy and one assistant ought to 
be sufficient in addition to the registraz, and would therefore recommend that the office of the 
other deputy should be abolished, whigh would produce a saving of Rs. 12,000 per 
annum. ' 

*33. An additional Zillah Court was established at Guntoor, in the year 1828, but owing 
to accidental circumstances, has hitherto transacted scarcely any business. Its jurisdiction 
is very limited, and though on account of the detached position of the zillah, it would be 
desirable to have a. distinct court there, if it were not for the objection on grounds of 
expense, yet, considering the present force of that objection, it seems proper to revert to the 
arrangement, which, except for short intervals, has prevailed since the introduction of the 
judicial system, viz. that of attaching Guntoor to the jurisdiction of the court at Nellore. 
This will produce a saving of Rs. 63,049. 

34, We are not prepared to offer any suggestion in regard to the Auxiliary Courts 
established in the year 1825, and sanctioned by the Court of Directors. They were substi- 
tuted for Zillah Courts, which had previously been abolished, and are attended with only 
half the expense. a 

35. The Government alsa established a native judge in one of the Madras districts, with 
nearly the full powers of a zillah judge. This was intended principally as an experiment, 
and as a step towards the employment of natives in stations of higher trust and emolument. 
The whole expense is only about 1,000 rupees a month; the experiment is so consonant with 
the liberal views towards the natives which begin to. prevail, that we are of opinion that it 
ought not to be given up, but rather persevered in and extended. Of course on any genezal © 
* modification of the judicial system,.the allowances assigned in the individual case would 
come under revision. : ' bap ot 
. 86. Although the courts in question have been established subsequently to 1823, we are 
not compelled on the principle already explained as that now followed by us, to determine 
finally whefher they shall be permanently maintained, because we can suggest the | 


means of 
covering 


GENERAL APPENDIX. 261 


covering the expense attending their institutions, by an arrangement decidedly preferable, in 
our judgment, to their discontinuance. For this*purpose we conceive, that without any essen- 
tial alteration in the structure and workimg of the judicial system, the principle of individual 
agency may be convenieritly and unexceptionably applied to the provincial courts of appeal 
and circuit. There are at present four of these courts consisting of three judges each: for 
these we would substitute seven judges acting singly. Four of these judges would have 
jurisdiction over three zillah or auxiliary courts, and three over two each. In cfvil judi- 
cature it would be an improvemeypt té relieve them from all original jurisdiction: this would 
save time to the suitors in the tril of original suits; and it would also save expense in the 
establishment to be attached tothe provincial judge. Appeals under a certain amount might 
lie from the zillah to the provincial judge; appeals of mght above that amount, and special 

‘ appeals in all cases, might lie to the Sudder Adawlyt. The duties of provincial ju ge of 
appeal and circuit remaining always in the ‘same hands,.much time now lost in the half- 
yearly interchange of those duties, would be saved. Thg duties of gaol delivery being reduced 
nearly one half in each range, and the distance to be travelled over being much dimmished, it 
might be expected that those duties would not occupy more than three or four months of each 
year. The office of provincial registrar would no longer be necessary, as his duties would be 
more satisfactorily performed by the judge himself. The native establishment for a collective 
court of three judges would be more than sufficient for two separate judges. 

.87. The proposed change in the constitution of the provincial courts would afford a con-~ 
venient opportunity for discontinuing the use of Mahommedan law officers in criminal trials. 
By Regulation I. of 1825, and VI. of 1829, the futwah rendered by those officers is nearly 
reduced to an empty form. If the English judge considers the crime laid to the prisoner’s 
charge to be proved, the Mahommedan law officer is required to get ovey the scrupulous dis- 
tinctions of his law, so as to enable him to rendeg a futwah conformable to that opinion. 
This is reasonable, but it would be more so to give up the futwah altogether. On the Bombay 
establishment criminal trials have never been conducted according to Mahommedan law. 
As now used in the Madras courts, the law serves only to hamper, but never to assist. The 
oy assistance derivable from the law officer? is that afforded by the opinion of an educated 
and disciplined native intellect upon the merits ofthe trial. That advantage may be secured 
in @ more direct, and much more satisfactory manner, by the employment of native judges 
and juries. 

38. The salaries of the three judges of a provincial court, are respectively Rs. 42,000, 
Rs. 38,500, and Rs. 35,000 per annum. It probably would not be considered more than 
sufficient to fix the salaries of the new provincial judges at Its. 40,000. In an arrangement 
of a general nature like the present, we think it nee to state that we would not propose that 
the five supernumerary judges should be put out of employ, but rather that they should retain 
their present salaries, and as extra provincial judges should clear off the arrears upon the 
files of the courts to be discontinued, so that the new judges should commence without 
arrears ; or should be engaged on such other duties as the Government might assign to them. 
As vacancies occur among the provincial or zillah judges, the supernumerary judges should 
be appointed to fill them, retaining their present salaries when appotited-gillah judges. In 
this manner, before the expiration of a year, the proposed reduction would probably be carned 
into complete effect. ; 

39. We beg leave to suggest a further reduction of expense of abolishing the office of 
zillah registrar, and transferrmg his duties, both civil and criminal, to sudder ameens.. 
Whatever may be said for other parts of oyr judicial system, nothing but necessity, real or 
supposed, can be urged in defence of the powers, particularly in criminal cases, vested in 

' parsons so young and inexperienced as those who usually hold that office. In criminal trials 
the sentiments of sudder ameens should be liable to be revised, and either sanctioned or set 
aside by the criminal judge, and ought only to be executed under that officer’s directions ; 
but with these checks it seemsabsurd to withhold from the most discreet and respectable natives 
whom we are able to select, such criminal authority as is habitually exercised by young men 
who in England would not probably have entered upon business at all. There. ane a 

wo 


APPENDIX, 


III. 


(20.) Letter from 
Coinmittee, on 
Civil Establish- 
ments, Madras. 
5 May 1830. 


Provincial Courts 
of Appeal and Cir- 
cuit. : 


Zillah Registrars. 


AprrRpix, 
LEI. 
ee 
Calcutta Civil 
FinanceCommittec. 


Revenne Depart- 
ment. Board of Re- 
venue, : 


' of collective or individual agency, raised in the letter from the Honourable the 


. aN 

262 APPENDIX to REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 

two sudder ameens ir each zillah, the Mahommedan and Hindoo law officers of the court. 
We would recommend the addition of a thifd. By raising their jurisdiction in civil snits 
at least to 1,000 rupees, (the limit of the registrar’s @urisdiction) and gradually beyond that 
amount, their fees would be increased ; but, on the other hand, by being employed in criminal 
business, they. would have less time for trying civil suits, and by having one added to 
their number, would have to share the fees among three instead of two. Independently of 


-this last éonsideration, we attach importance to raising the scale of the native-judges’ emolu- 


ments, and with it their respectability. At present thee Mahommedan law oificer receives a 
salary of 175, and the Hindoo law officer a salary of 140 upees per mensem. We would, 


.recommend that the first of the three sudder ameens (whether Mahommedan or Hindoo), 


should receive 250; and each of the others 200 rupees a month. The salaries of 12 zillah 
fegistrars amount to Rs. 75,600, the imcreased expense for sudder ameens would amount to © 
Rs, 48,240, so that there would be a net saving of Rs. 27,360. 

40. We believe that we have sufficiently defined the several changes in the judicial establish- 
ment which we mean to propose. We refrain from entering more into detail until 1t appears 
whether they are to be adopted. Although we bring them forward as measures of economy 
rather than as measures of reform, yet we indulge a confident persuasion that their tendency 
would be in every instance to promote, in none to impair, the efficiency of the system. 


. 41. The twelve judges proposed to be. discontinued, receive an aggregate Rs. 
salary of - - - - - - - - - 4,62,000 
The four registrars - - - - - - - 33,600 
The Mahommedan law officers ~- - - - - - 38,616 
,5,34,216 
The seven new provincial judge8 would receive -  -~ = ‘2,80,000 
as 2,54,216 
The substitution of sudder arheens forezillah registrars - = - 27,360 
Totalsaving - - 2,81,576 
ROS 


42. The Foujdarry Adawlut might probably be able to effect some reduction in the 
charge for law officers in that court, if Mahommedan law were disused in criminal judi- 
cature. The Mahommedan law officers of the Zillah: Courts, who are chiefly employed as 
sudder ameens, would, together with the pundits, serve when necessary as legal assessors 
to the provincial, as well as to the zillah judges under the ‘proposed arrangement, + 

The modifications of the judicial establishment and system which we have recommended, 
particularly the extended use of native agency, will naturally pave the way for further 
alterations. The period for introducing them, their extent and their particular form, will 
depend upon the success and progress of the preparatory measures ; and we deem it sufficient 
to take this notice of them, for the sake of showing that we do not look upon the arrange- 
ments now proposed as being ofa fixed nature. 

' 44, On the principle to which-we have restricted ourselves in the revision in which we 
are at present engaged, we do not propose to take this occasion of discussing the question 
ourt of. 

Directors, dated 18th February 1829. When that question comes under discussion, it will 
at Madras be especially applicable to the Board of Revenue. With the view of rendering 
that institution more efficient, Sir Thomas Munro attached a native cutcherry to it, agd . 
subsequently recommended to the Court of Directors that the salaries of its‘three members 
should be increased, and that a fourth member should be added, in order that.one of its 
members might: frequently be deputed on circuit through the districts. The Court of 


Directors acceded to the whole of this récomimendation. The allowances of the secretary. 


and his deputies have also been increased. The civil auditor accordingly exhibits an excess 
of 


GENERAL: APPENDIX. 263 APPENDIX, : 
IIl. 

of charge in 1829 above 1823, amounting to Rs, 48,708, and as the authorized increase’ of aa 
the members’ salaries has taken effect since the civil auditor’s book of 1st of May 1829 (20.) Letter from 
was prepared, an addition of Fs. 9,600®has to be made to the excess on that account, Nari wee 

raising it to ‘Rs. 58,308. We have already recommended, in our letter of the 24th December Civil aaa 
" 1829, that the first vacancy which may occur in the Board of Revenue should not be filled pase : ry aah : 
up, and, diffident as we feel in interfering with Sir Thomas Munro’s arrangements for the See te 

Board’s efficiency, we deem it incumbent upon us to adhere to that recommendation. 

The discontinuance of the fourth, mémber would be attended with an annual saving of 

Rs. 35,000. 
' 45. The land customs have,-for some years past, been rented with great success through- Collector of 

out the Madras territories, excepiing only at the presidency. At the presidency the duties Madras. 

on betel, tobacco, spirituous liquois, and some other axticles, are usually rented ; and we are 

not aware of any obsiacle to renting the land customs generally, and are of open that the 

measures would probably have the eifect of improving éhe revenue. We take the lderty 

of suggesting that it may be referred for the consideration of the Madras Government; and 

that if it be found advisable to adopt that measure, the ‘office of collector of Madras, with 

that of the deputy, may be abolished. The remaining duties would be so inconsiderable, 

that they could, without inconvenience, be distributed among the secretary to the Board of 

Revenue, the collector of Sea Customs, and the superintendant of police. The saving of 

expense by this arrangement would not fall short of half a lac of rupees ; but we refratn 

from taking credit for it in the accompanying statement, as we have not the means of 

forming a decided opinion with regard to its practicability, and as. its adoption must at 

any rate be attended with delay. ; 

46. We find that the following appointments have been created since 2823, viz. a second Additional Sub- 
sub-collector in each of the three districts of Canara, Cuddapah and Tanjore, an engineer collectors and extra 
on the Neilgherry Hills, and three assistant civil engiveers. . The salaries of the three sub- Civil Engineers, 
collectors amount to #s. 42,000 per annum, and their esiublishments cost about Rs. 24,000 
more. The charge for the extra engineers amounts to Ps. 21,396. All these appointments 
ought, in our opinion, to be discontinued ; the dues of the three districts in which addi- 
tional sub;collectors have been appointed are not heavier than those of other districts, and 
if they were, they ought, in these times of financial difficulty, to be met with better arrange- 
ments and increased exertions, not with an increased establishment. The plea of increased 
duties would never be wanting, if it were always followed by compliance with applications 
for additional officers to perform them. We would therefore recommend, as a standing rule, 
that the number of sub-collectors should not be allowed to exceed what it was in 1823, 
viz. 12. As there is a regular establishment of three civil engineers, and a special arratige- 
ment for the duties of civil engmeer on the Malabar coast, the appointment of assistant- 
engineer, attended with a charge of Rs. 5,532, should be abolished. The ordinary duties on 
the Neilgherry Hills, where the state of the weather does not admit of enginéers’ work being 
carried on more than three or four months in the year, ought in the same manner to be 
performed by the regular civil and military engineer officers in the southern division. If 
this special appointment indicates an intention to execute extensive and costly works on 
the Neilgherries, requiring an exclusive superintendence, the mtention and the appointment 
ought both to be dropped im the present. state of the Company’s finances. In the Sea 
Custom-house at Madras there is an assistant, besides the collector and a deputy. The 
extent of duty in that office does not require more than two European officers, and the 
abolition of the assistant’s appointment would effect a saving of Rs. 10,000 per annum. : 

47. The Government of Fort St. George have recently effected large reductions in the Assistant Collector 
establishments of most of the collectors, and we believe that a considerable portion of those’ of Sea Customs at 
reductions is of a date subsequent to the civil auditor’s book for 1829, and ought therefore Madras. 
to be takersin abatement of the amount of charges exhibited in that book. ‘To whatever ° 
degree this may be the case, the actual charges will fall short of the amount at which they 
are assumed to stand. _ : : 


’ 


*. 
APPENDIX, 


Ii]. 


Calcutta Civil 
FinanceCommittee, 


41.13, 14, 15, 16, 
17-19, 20. 29, 23. 
25. 28, 29. 35. 37. 
39+ 43) 44, 453 46 & 
59. 


264 ‘APPENDIX To REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


: ° 
(21.)—LETTER fromthe Governor in Council at Madras (Judicial Department), 
: ‘ dated 2d November 1830. We 

Honourable Sirs, d e : : 

1. Wrru reference to our despatch in the Financial department, dated the 24th September 
1830, we have the honour to lay before your Honourable Court the accompanying extract 
from tha proccedirigs of the Court of Sudder and Foujdarry Adawlut, under date the 19th 
October 1830, submitting their sentiments as to the best mode of carrying into effect such of 
the reforms discussed in our President’s Minute of the 14th September 1830, on the Report 


_of the Bengal Finance Committee, as we considered expedgnt. 


2. We have approved of the arrangement of the circuits, as suggested in the 2d paragraph 
of the proceedings of the.Sudder and Foujdarry Adawlut, and have resolved to adopt the . 
several suggestions submitted in the paragraphs of the Committee’s proceedings, which are noted 
in the margin ; but your Honourable Court may rely upon our vigilant attention to the effect 
produeed by these changes in the administration of justice in these territories ; and we have 
desired, with reference to paragraph 11, that it may be provided that, whenever a judge of 
circuit shall consider the dismissal of a head of talook police, or other native police ofticer, 
to be necessary, he shall make known the same to the magistrate, tm the first instance, and 
communicate the grounds of his opinion to that officer, who will then be required’ to give 


. immediate effect, in his own name, to the course of proceeding pointed out by the judge of 


Minute of the 
Right Hon. 

S. R. Lushington ; 
14 Sept. 1830. 


circuit. 

3. We have desired the Sudder and Foujdarry Adawlut to prepare and submit, with all 
practicable expedition, drafts of such Regulations as may be necessary to give effect to the 
arrangements which we have sanctioned, and of any circular orders which may require to be 
addressed to the cotirts in the provinces, for their information and guidance on the occasion 
of the commencement of the new systems 

We have the honour to be, with the greatest respect, 
Honourable Sirs, 
Your faithful humble Servants, 
(sighed) S. R. Lusuineton. 
7 G. T. Waker, Lieutenant-general. 
C. Harris. 


(Enclosure.) 


Extract MINUTE of the Right Honourable Stephen R. Lushington, Governor of 
Madras, dated 14 September 1830. 


17. THE most important suggestions of the Committee, both in amount and in principle, 
are the substitution of native judges and juries for the present European registrars, and the 
reduction of the judges of circuit from twelvé to seven persons. 

18, With regard to the introduction of native juries, the Court of Directors have already 
approved of the hesitation of this Government to adopt that measure, and of the suspension 
of the Regulation passed for the purpose of introducing it. My opinions have undergone no 
change as far as regards the inexpedieney of employing native juries to find verdicts in the 
courts of European judges. I continue to think that the assemblage of a great many heads 
of families from different parts of an extensive province at the station of the court; where 
they must come from such distances, attended by a part of their family, and where they 
would be long absent from their homes and their business, and their family and religious 
ceremonies, (a very important part of the life of a Hindoo,) would be felt as a grievdts 
hardship by the natives themselves; and that their contending and corrupt opinioris would 
embarrass rather than assist the European judge in his proceedings. a. + 

19. In a people educated and constituted as they at present are, it is vain to expect that 
the feelings of personal interest shall of a sudden become subservient to the principles of 

_ patriotism 


_GENERAL APPENDIX. 265  Arranpix, 
I 


patriotism and public honour, or that they should take upon themselves what they consider -— 
to be the duty of the sovereign, and for which they know that they pay him well, the admi- (21.) Minute of the 
nistration of public justice, to the sacyfice of their own time and domestic concerns. There Right Hon. 
must be a great change before the feelings and the institutions’ of a free country can be S- R. Lyshington; . 
expected to arise and flourish amongst the people of India; and when we remember that trial 14 Sept 1830. 
by jury, conducted as that noble institution is in our own country by free men, enlightened by 
education and Christianity, is scarcely yet known amongst the nations of the c6ntinent of 
Europe as an instrument of public justice, it is no unkind reflection upon the people here to 
say, that they are not yet figed for it in the provinces. Of this truth there cannot be 
a stronger demonstration than the well-known fact, that out of a population in Madras of 
500,000 souls, only '79 Hindoos have been declared qualified to sit as jurors. 
_ _ 20. Influenced by these considerations, we ere, we the authorities at home our opinion, 
that it would be unwise at present to force the trial by jury into practice in the provinces, in 
the courts of European judges in the manner orepesed ; and they consequently resolved first 
to see how the system may work at the presidencies’ under the fostering care of thé judges, 
where the population have been so much longer habituated to English manners and customs. 
21. But although in the present state of education and morality in these territories I should 
deem it highly inexpedient at once to introduce the system of trial by jury, to the extent to 
_which it was originally proposed by Messrs. Newnham and Dacre, vesting large powers in 
the jurors in cases of life and death, and inflicting upon them and their families all the serious 
inconveniences which I have noticed; still the more limited extent of the power and local 
jurisdictions allotted to native judges and sudder ameens might render attendance on a jury 
ese burdensome and objectionable to the cultivator and the merchant, while the native judge’s _ 
more intimate knowledge of the character of each person would give him facilities in detect- 
ing sinister motives, in attributing its proper weight to the opinion of each, and in shortening 
the proceedings, which no European could ever"hope to possess; and if every practicable 
publicity be given to the merits of each case, and to the sentence, this mighteertrate as 
a wholesome restraint upon the native judge’s conduc... “Sincerely sharing in the Honourable 
Court’s desire to elevate the character ands improve’ the condition of the natives, I shall be 
much gratified if the Sudder Adawlut are able td perfect the details of a plan that shall satisfy 
themselves and this Government that we may eae make the experiment proposed without ~ 
really inflicting hardship upon the people, and without injury to the pure administration of 
justice. 
: 22. It is in this spirit that the reforms and the reductions made by this Government have 
been undertaken ; and in examining the recommendations of the Finance Committee, I have 
had these principles constantly before me. Although we have diminished the expense of col- 
lecting the revenue, we have taken every proper opportunity of bringing forward the natives 
to offices of higher authority than they have been accustomed to fill; and in reforming our 
European establishments we have in all possible instances regarded existing interests and the 
habits and feelings of the individuals affected by these changes. Notwithstanding the great 
peony. relief which these reforms will bring to the Company, I persuade myself that we - 
ave not rashly broken down establishments that are necessary to the good government of the 
country, or forgotten the claims which the mass of the people have upon the Company’s 
justice, generosity and protection. For the accomplishment of these great purposes nothing 
1s more essential than to take care that the offices and the degrees of power granted to the 
upper classes over those who are beneath them, independent of European control, are kept 
within due limits, and that the public duties which we impose upon them are such as they are 
capable of performing without hardship to themselves or injustice to their fellows. 

23. In the revenue part of our administration the duties entrusted to the upper classes of 
he natives are of a most important nature, and the remuneration bestowed upon their services 
has long been greater, both in present pay and in retired allowances, than is enjoyed by the 
fiscal officers of Great Britain, or of any other state ;.and the remuneration granted to the, 
native judicial officers of the higher clasges is upon the same scale of liberality. In extend- 
. ing to them the full powers contemplated in we Regulations for constituting the office of 

native, 


1 


APPENDIX, 


II. 


. Caleutta Civil. 
FinanceCommittee. 


‘ 


Lord Ellen- 
borough’s Speech, 
*19 Feb. 1830, 


266 APPENDIX ro REPORT rrow SELECT COMMITTEE. 


native judge, if has however been deemed necessary to be cautious and sparing ; but if further 

experience should fully justify the employmenteof natives in the high office of judge, it will 
only be necessary to give effect more generally to theJiberal provisions of Regulations VII. 
and VIII., 1827. ; ~~ 

24. Upon the expediency and justice of making reforms, whether as improvements in the 
administration of justice or the collection of the revenue, or as reductions in our expenditure, 
in this gradual manner, except in cases of a very obvious and pressing nature, I have never 
doubted ; and I am rejoiced to find that the expectations of the authorities at home are tem- 
pered by this consideration, as I find clearly stated in the spppeh made to Parliament by the 
noble President of the Board of Control, on the 15th Febrfary, and of which his Lordship 
has been pleased to transmit to me a corrected copy. is - 

25. Applying as it does so directly to the important subject under our consideration, and 
concurring as | do most cordially in the Spirit which pervades it, I beg to call the particular 
attention of the Board to the following extract :— 

“J edn assure your Lordships that it*will be impossible for any government, in this or any 
other country, to issue orders more strongly worded than have been issued for the reduction 
of expenditure in every department of the state in India. That it is most desirable to effect 
an economical reform in every department of the state, is equally felt by the Governments of 
India, and by the noble Lord at the head of administration in that country ; and no individual 
could apply himself certainly with greater zeal and firmness than that noble Lord has already 
done to effect an object which is not more his own than it is that of the Government under 
which he acts. At the same time, I cannot hold. out to the House the prospect of more than 
a gradual and moderate increase in the revenue of the East India Company. Above all, 
I deprecate making an increase in it by the laying on of additional charges upan the internal 
or external trade of that country, or y imposing additional burdens on the people. It is 
only by diminishing the expense of collectiitg the revenue, by the introduction han improved: 
mode oreolcction, and _by effecting all the reductions which can be made without injury to 
the civil or military depactnens of the wovernment, that an increase in the revenue ought to 
be effected. Among the means of reduting the expenditure, is the very desirable one of re= 
ducing gradually the number of European establishments in India, and of bringing forward, 
gradually, however, and with extreme caution, the natives to offices of higher authority and 
trust than they have hitherto been accustomed to fill. If those measures should be-pursued 
firmly, but with extreme caution, always regarding existing interests and the habits and feel- 
ings of the individuals, I confidently look forward to an amelioration of the revenue of India ; 
and I shall be most gratified indeed if, next session, it should be in my power to announce 
to your Lordships that my anticipation has been confirmed and realized. 

“ Since the granting of the present Charter to the East India Company great alterations 
have been effected in the regulations that govern the trade between this country and India. 
Some of those improvements, I believe, are to be attributed to the suggestions of a Committee, 
appointed on the motion of the Noble Marquis (of Lansdowne); and your Lordships should 
bear in mind, that, in consequence of these improvements, not a single restriction exists at 
the present moment upon the commercial intercourse of Great Britain with India, except such 
as are required, not for the interests of the East India Company, but for those of the revenue 
of Great Britain. 1 can assure your Lordships, that since that period the East India Com- 
pany have afforded all the aid in their power to increase the facilities given to the external. 
and internal trade of India. : 

“The import.duties upon British manufactured goods, which were formerly 10 per cent, 
“have been reduced upon woollens and other articles to five per cent. The duties upon cot- 
ton goods have been. reduced from seven and a half per cent. to two and a halfper cent. In. 
the same manner the duties upon exports from India have been removed. The export duty of © 
five per cent upon indigo has been taken off, and the export duty upon cotton has beef also , 
removed. I cam-assure your Lordships, that the attention: of the Government of India is 
‘directed, with the greatest earnestness, to afford every additional: facility to trade in that 
country.; in particular, the aftention of the Government has been directed. to the transit _ 

ani 


GENERAL APPENDIX. © 267, Aeenis 
; Ill. 
and the first fruit of an increased reyenue consequent upon the intended reductions, will be —, 
, the removal of all restrictions whatever upon fhe internal trade of that country. In consider- (21-) Minute of the 
ing this subject, and reviewing the papers which have been laid upon your table, I feel Right Hon. 
assured that your Lordships will see that the first and most important question for Parlia- 8- R- Lara ete 
ment to decide is, whether it will be possible to conduct the Government of India without the 14 Sept. 1830. 
assistance of this country, directly or.indirectly; and the second question is, whether that. 
assistance, if any assistance be necessary, shall be afforded in the manner in which it has 
been hitherto afforded, or in some other way. ‘ 
“Tam fully confident that {our Lordzhins will consider minutely all the details which 
relate to it; that you will make yourselves acquainted with it in all its bearings ; that you 
will approach its consideration with unbiassed minds and with deliberate caution ; and above 
all things, I trust that there will be no disposition en the part of your Lordships to sacrifice 
to the seemingly present advantage of any portion of the population of this country the 
future interests of England, or the happiness of that people whose interests should beas dear 
to your Lordships as hers, and whose appeal to your justice and generosity is so strong,—I 
niean the people of India.” 
26, Feeling, as I do strongly, that we should disappoint this appeal to the national justice 
and generosity, if we deprived the people of the benefit which they derive from having Euro- 
pean judges well qualified to administer those Regulations which have been enacted for their 
protection, I cannot concur in the expediency of wholly abolishing the office of European 
registrar. ie 
7. I agree with the Honourable Court and Sir Thomas Munro in thinking that “a system 
of training* is as necessary in the judicial as in the revenue line.” Ignorance and inexperience 
in the revenue officers injure the public revenue, and are therefore sooner found out and cor-— 
rected ; but these vices in a judge would deeply affect the lives and properties of the people, 
and thérefore to deprive the whole civil service of the opportunity of acquiring a thorough 
knowledge of those voluminous Regulations which form the constitution we have established 
for the just protection of the people, at that season of life when this irksome labour is most 
easily overcome, would not be consistent with ghe benevolent and enlightened views upon 
‘which our whole system of judicature has bean raised. As there are, however, at present 
many vacancies in the office of registrar, from the disinclination which the junior servants of 
the establishment have to the low pay and to the laborious duties of the office, I think that 
the experiment of employing additional sudder ameens may be immediately tried in those 
districts where there is at present a particular press of business ; and as three provincial 
registrars’ offices are now vacant, and out of the 13 zillahs only nine are provided with regis- 
trars, there will be, besides the three provincial registrars, four zillah registrarships to abolish, 
‘which may be immediately done, and the young men now employed as registrars, of whom 
some promise to make good judicial officers, will proceed with their training in that depart- 
ment. I recommend, however, that such small increase be made in their pay as the Sudder 
Adawlut-may think will operate as an inducement to them to remain in their situations, and 
~they will thus be hereafter more capable of discharging the important duties of the higher offices. 
28. By this arrangement, we shall at once effect a saving in the salaries of three provin- 


cial registrars at '700 rupees per mensem each,or - -  - Rs. 25,200 per ann. 
In those of four zillah registrars, at Rs. 525 per mensem each - 25,200 ; 
; ji 50,400 
From this sum we may deduct, as gn increase to the pay of the 
remaining nine registrars of 200 rupees per mensem eac ‘= 21,600 
Which will leave a clear saving of - - - + = Rs. 28,800 per ann. 
4 % . x ‘ ST 
\ : a ; 29. As 


* Minute of Sir Thomas Munro, goth June 1827: “I therefore entirely agree with the Honourable 
Court that a system of training is as necessary in the judicial as in the revenue line.” - 
- MM2 


APPENDIX, 
Tu. 


— Calcutta Civil 
FinanceComm ittee. 


268 APPENDIX ro, REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


29, As a means of entertaining the requisite numbgr of additional sudder anieens, without 
ah increased expense to Government, I recomfnend that the office of pundit to the provingial 
court in the Western Division, and to the zillah cousts of Canara and Malabar be immedi- 
ately abolished, as recommended by the judges on that coast, and ‘that the individuals now 
holding those offices be transferred, either as sudder ameens or district moonsifs, on their 


present pay, to those districts where there is the greatest press: of business. The pundit 


of the prévincial court now receives 210 rupees, and those of the zillah courts 140 rupees 
each per mensem; their successors in office, as district moonsifs, will only receive the 
usual salary. of 70 rupees per mensem each, which will dfect a saving to Goverment of 
rupees 3,360 per annum. The recommendations which have induced me to suggest this 
arrangement, are those offered in the letter * from the provincial court in the western division, 
dated 11th May 1829, and that contaied in the following extract from a report from the 
judge of circuit, dated 31st August 1829: 

“ Every practicable saving being strqngly inculcated, I venture to submit how far it would be 
expedient to dispense with the services of the pundits of the provincial and zillah courts of 
Malabar. Where the general tenure on which land is held in Malabar, the division and inheri- 
tance of property and family, the local customs are so widely different from those on the 
Coromandel coast, the opinions of the pundits are seldom or ever required, and he very few 
to be found on the records of this court offer a suggestion that in the event of any question 
arismg purely on points of Hindoo law, that it be submitted to the pundits of the Sudder 
Court, which need occasion but a trifling delay of no material consequence, or that one 
general pundit for the provinces of Malabar and Canara be retained, say at Tellicherry, to 
whom all questions from the provincial and zillah courts be‘submitted. How far this would 
answer on the other coast I am not competent to pronounce; as moonsiffs the pundits in 
Malabar are not half so effective as the common district moonsiffs, from being ignorant of 
tenures, customs, &c. &c. peculiar to the province.” : 

30. It does not appear to me that there is any objection to the immediate abolition of the 
offices of pundit in all the provincial, and of pundit and moofty in all the zillah courts 
throughout the country, the incumbents contifiuing to be employed, on their present pay, 
either as sudder ameens or district moonsifg, wherever their services may be most raured: ; 
and their successors entering upon their offices, as district moonsifs, on the usual pay. This 
will prevent the proposed reform from operating injuriously to the interests and fair claims 
of the present law officers, who have been educated and trained to their duties at a great 
expense ; and in order to ‘prevent disappointment to those who may have been pursuing 
their studies in the college with a view to future employment in the provinces, I recommend 
that they be selected to fill the offices of district moonsifs, as vacancies may hereafter occur. 
I recommend that the Sudder Adawlut be desired to give the necessary instructions for carry- 
ing these arrangements into effect, to make the requisite communication to the College 
Board, and to prohibit the lower courts from filling up vacancies hereafter in the office of 
Hindoo and Mahomedan law officer in the zillah courts. 

The total saving by the conversion of the offices of the pundits of the provincial and of 13 
Hindoo and Mahomedan law officers of the zillah courts into those of district moonsiff 
will, on the change coming into complete operation, amount to Rs. 34,020 per annum F, while 


the | 
* In letter from the Sudder Adawlut, 13th July 1829, 
+ 4 Provincial pundits, at 210 rupees each pen mensem, is - 10,080 per annum. 
' “13 Zillah mooftees, at 175 rupees each - - - - - 27,300 , 
1g Zillah pundits, at 140 rupees each - - - - - 21,840 ° 
Rs. 59,220 . 
Deduct 30 talook moonsifs, at 7o rupees each - ~ + 25,200 


Rs. 34,020 


GENERAL APPENDIX. 269 eas 
. & S 

the country will continue to have the benefit of the same number of persons actually exer=-  § 
cising the judicial office. ° (21.) Minute of the 

31. With regard to the abolition of fie out of the 12 provincial judges, if the proposition . Right Hon. 
had been made at an earlier period of the establishment of the judicial system at this presi- “* fe men ae : 
dency I should have doubted its expediency, because the collective deliberations of the a fal dah 
members of the provincial courts were then absolutely necessary to ascertain the laws and 
usages of the natives, and for the just application of the new principles and reguiations to 
the cases which came before them for judgment. But in the time which has elapsed since 
the first institution of the courts,,so many sound precedents have been established, and the 
judges have acquired and evinced so thorough a kioaledye of their duties, that every confi- 
dence may be placed in the exercise of their zeal and discretion when employed to act singly 
under the proposed new system. The reports of the judges of circuit on the late jail 
deliveries, contain proofs of talent and of patient investigation, with evidence of a desire to 
correct abuses, and of an unceasing anxiety for the welfare of the people, which reflect great 
honour upon them; and I recommend that copies of a few of their reports be laid before the 
Supreme Government, in explanation of the mode in which the system of criminal justice 
works here, and that the Bengal Government be requested to make a similar communication 
ta us of some of the reports of their judges of circuit for our information. With the favour- 
able opinion. which I entertain of the qualifications, zeal and talents of the provincial judges, 
and of their knowledge of the Regulations, and their duties founded upon them, I think.we 
may now safely give-to the provinces a more speedy administration of justice, from the greater 
number of individual agents acting singly in more circumscribed limits; and this measure, 
when it comes into full operation, will be attended with that most desirable result to the 
Company, in the present state of their finances, of reducing the judicial expenses in the 
amount of 2,54,000 rupees per annum. J recommend therefore that the Sudder Adawlut be 
desired to take these points, with the observation$ upon them, into full consideration, and 
report the result of their deliberations to Government at their earliest convenience. 

32. The Zillah Court at Guntoor, was recently established in compliance with the pressing Proposed Abolition 
representations of the Sudder Adawlut of the want of a court in that part of the country, of the Zillah Court 
and it appears from the letter of the Committee,that “that court’s having transacted little at Guntoor. 
business is owing to accidental circumstances.” To abolish this court, the want of which 
was so tnuch felt a short time since, before its functions have come fairly into operation, 
without at the same time establishing some other means of administering justice to the 
people, would be contrary to that principle of good government to which the Company are 
pledged, and which the people have a right to claim from us, 

33. I propose, therefore, that instead of the zillah court now established there, a native 
judge be appointed, and that he be selected from the law officers of the zillah courts, now 
ordered to be otherwise employed. _I likewise recommend that a native judge, to be selected 
in the same way, be appomted to Verdachellum, where the want of a court has long been 
severely felt, and of which I received abundant testimony in my late tour, on the earnest 
petitions of the people that some means of administering justice to them might be established, 
and that the Sudder Adawlut be requested to submit a list of the most deserving of the Hindoo 
and Mahomedan law officers for the selection by Government of proper persons to fill these 
offices; also that the Sudder Adawlut be desired to submit, for the sanction of Government, 
the necessary-arrangements regarding the local jurisdictions and the establishments of servants 
for these courts. Discontinuance of 

_ _ 84, Upon the whole, I think the addition, of the judge appointed by Sir Thomas Munro, to the third Judge of 
this court, may, after the new. system has come fairly into operation, be discontinued'upon a the Sudder Adaw- 
vacancy, and that it will be proper to notify the same to the Sudder Adawlut. lut, 

_ 35,. The Committee appear to suppose that besides the salary of the junior deputy registrar, Para. 32. Salary of 
which the registrar has-been allowed, under peculiar circumstances, to draw, a charge is incurred Deputy Registrar, 
for “two other deputies independently of the one whose salary he himself draws ;” but this Craw? by ao ae 
is not the state of the case: the fixed establishment consists of a registrar, two deputies, and &'strar Ot the Sud 


; the ; der Adawlut, 
an assistant, and it is the salary of one of these deputies which has been an Bape to be aie 


“ontinued. 


Anegworx, 970 APPENDIX 10 REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


——_, _ registrar, ufider the arrangement above referred to, which has been reported to the Honour- 
Calcutta Civil able the Court of Directors. e 
FinanceCommittee. 3g, No addition hag thus been made to the fixed expense of the establishment, whilst its 
Para, 32 of the efficiency has been greatly promoted. a i : 
Report. Second © 37. In Bengal it is understood that the registrar of the Sudder Adawlutis placed, in point - 
Deputy Registrar of salary, on the footing of a judge of circuit; but at this presidency the established allow- 
. ce ances of the registrar of the Sudder Adawlut are less than those of a zillah judge, and to this 
iden _ . pe A reduced scale the salary of the present registrar will be brought down, if the appointment of 
P oued second deputy registrar is abolished, as recommended by ve Committee ; that recommenda~ 
. tion, however, appears to have been mainly induced by. tHe supposition (erroneous as it will - 
be perceived to be) that a charge for two other deputies is now incurred. ; 

38. The continuance of any allowance which is not proportioned to the duties for which it. 
is granted and fairly earned, I should deem most unwarrantable; but I foresee in the 
approaching operation of the réforms which are about to be introduced into the judicial 
system, a great accession to the laBours of the Sudder Adawlut, both on its civil and 
criminal side,. pe ‘: 

39. Appeals to the Sudder Adavwlut, in civil cases, will naturally be much more numerous 
when:‘the judgment of the lower court is that of a single individual, instead of a collective 
body, as at present; and reference to the Foujdaree Adawlut, in criminal cases, will be more 
‘frequently made hereafter, when the judge of circuit is deprived of the assistance of the 

Mahometan law-officer, which he now enjoys in conducting the trials. The correspondence 
of the court too, already extensive, will hereafter be carried on with seven individual func- 
tionaries, instead of four collective courts, and will necessarily increase the labours of the 
registrar in a great degree. Notwithstanding these additions to the duties of the Sudder 
Adawlut, and the cdnsequent demand for increased exertions, the court will, on a vacancy 
occurring, be deprived of the services of One of its judges, whilst the registrar (who has been 
twice a judge of circuit as well as twice a collector, and once a member. of the Board of 
Revenue) will find his duties greatly increased, his present allowances seriously curtailed, and 
his prospect of promotion materially diminished by the abolition of one of: the highest offices 
in the court and in the service, and to whith the indystry and ability evinced by Mr. Camp- 
bell in discharging the duties of registrar give him a fair claim to look 


’ (Enclosure.) 


Proceedings of EXTRACT from the Proceedings of the Court of Sudder Adawlut at Madras, dated the ; 


Madras Court of. 19th October 1830. 
Sudder Adawlut;' . | ‘ ‘ cit . 
1gth Oct. 1830. Reap letter from the Secretary to Government in the Judicial Department, with extract 


from the Minutes of Council, under date the 14th ultimo, directing the preparation of draft 
of a Regulation for giving effect to such of the reforms in the judicial system discussed in the - 
Minute of the Right honourable the President on the Report of the Bengal Finance Com- 
mittee, as may. be considered expedient. a 

1. Before the Court can proceed to carry fully into execution, the orders of Government 
communicated in the above letter, by submitting the drafts of enactments, to give effect to 
the changes proposed, it is necessary to lay before the Right Honourable the Governor in 

ouncil their sentiments as to the best means of introducing the alterations contemplated in 
the judicial system. When final orders on the suggestions of this Court shall have bene 
obtained, they will frame the details, and give them due legal form. Sages 

2. Subject to the general superintendence of this Court, it is proposed to- place the admi- 
nistration of justice in the provinces of’ the. Madras territory, under the control of seven 
judges of appeal and circuit. The following is the distribution of the subordinate courts 
which seems best fitted for this purpose, 


GENERAL APPENDIX. 444 Abranbry, 


(21.) Proceedings of 
Madras Court of 
Population. Square Miles, Sudder Adaelut; 

: ke 1gth Oct. 1839. 


a a’ 
‘1st. or Masulipatam division : : 
1. Zillah Chicacole - !~ 1,293,576 8,642 
2. Zillah ‘Rajahmundry - - - 716,929 8,216 
3. Aux. Court Masulipatam - - 540,397 8,851 
: 2,550,902 25,709 
ad. or Cuddapah division: | = 
4. Zillah Cuddapah -e- - 
5- Aux.‘Court Cumbum = --~— - 1,038,078 13,337 
6. Native Judge Guntoor_ . - -J 475,842 2,500 


Oe mmtonend 


15,837. 


’ 


1,513,920 


$d. or Bellary division: | 


. Zillah Chittoor - + 909,749 526 
- § Zilla Bellary - - = 927,000 | 17-676 
oe i ee 
i 1,836,749 20,102 
4th. or Chingleput division: 
g. Zillah Nellore - - -— = 17,92 2 
io. Zillah Chingleput - - ~~ : es : sad 
#1. Native judge Cuddalore +  .- apyaar 8,988 


— 


. 1,546,124 16,287 
5tli. or Combaconum division : 

12. Zillah Combaconum - 
13. Zillah Salem - - te 


1,370,419 
875,208 


2,245,620 
6th. or Coimbatore division : : 


14. Aux. Court Coimbatore - 
15. Zillah Madura - - . 
16. Aux. Court Tinnevelly — - - 


942,503 
683,016 


4 


2,576,795 
4th.or Malabar and Canara division + 


17. Zillah Calicut - —- 
18. Aux. Court Tellicherry ” 
1g. Zillah Mangalore - 
20. Aux. Court Honore - ‘ 

, Bi Native judge Soonda 


271,812 


s-e ¢ @ 8 
@b!@eeet 


_ 657597 


ae 272 APPENDIX ro REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


Calcutta Civil 
FinanceCommittee. 


8. It has also been suggested’ that the first sjx divisions might be thus arranged, the 
seventh remaining as above, for the reasoaaehercalier stated :-— 


Extreme 
—_— distance in 
Miles. : 


Average — 


‘Population. Square Miles. 
Criminal Cases: . 


ist. or Vizagapatam division : ; 
1,293,576 |- 8,642" 


Chicacole - - - - } 182 
Rajahmundry -~— - “°° 716,929 8,216 
. : 2,010,505 16,858 
ed. or Masulipatam division: 
Masulipatam ~ 28 «+ « 540,397 8,851, 
Guntoor + - - - « 177 475,842 ‘2,500 * 
Nellore - += + + = 717,923 75299 
1,734,162 | 18,650 
3d. or Ceded Districts’ division : 
e 
Cuddapsth - = - + & ae 
Cumbum - - + «| @ 262 1,038,07 13;337 
Bellary er yen ie! Cay oo 927,728 12,576 


25,913 


4th. or Chingleput division : 
71526 


Chittoor = - = © - 999,749 
Chingleput - - - a 170 — ans 
Cuddalore + + - - - 828,201 8,988 
1,737;95° 16,514 
3th. or Coimbatore division : 
Salem a 40 875,201 75914 
Coimbatore- - «= - = 942,503 8,416 
1,817,704, | 16,330 
6th. or Combaconum division : 
Combaconum - - - ‘ 1,370,419 8,940 
Madura i - - - | 210 683,016 95772 
‘Tinnevelly - - = 8 =@ 951,276 | 4,507 mp 


3,004,711 23,219 - 


ee ee anes 


4, The 


GENERAL APPENDIX. .- 273 ApPENnix, 
ee ; ' ee ; III. : 
4. The Court have most maturely ghed various plans for arranging the 21 subordinate — 
‘courts above-mentioned, under seven judges of appeal and circuit, and the above is the result (21.) Proceedings 
of the best consideration they are able®to give the subject. of Madras Court of 
_ 8. It would no doubt have been desirable to diminish the extent of the western circuit, but Sudder Adawlut ; 
“less than six judges of circuit will not suffice for the rest of the peninsula; and independent 1gth Oct. 1830. 
-of the insulated situation of the western coast, separated by jungle and hills from the 
‘eastern provinces, particular local circumstances oppose the incorporation of the Calicut 
zillah, or indeed of any other portion of the western provinces, into any of the southern divisions. 
The languages of the two coasts are entirely’ distinct, and the union of any part of the 
one with the other would necessarily be attended by the great expense of a double establish- 
‘ment. But their junction is opposed by the insuperable objection of the natives of the 
western coast being a distinct race, governed by laws and customs peculiar to: themselves, 
which a long residence amongst them can alone render familiar, and which can be uniformly 
administered only through a single authority. It kas therefore, after the most deliberate 
consideration, been deemed preferable to leave the western circuit even considerably heavier 
than the others than to attempt to place the different portions of the same peculiar province 
under distinct authorities administering opposite and conflicting laws ; but should experience 
‘prove that arrears of business accumulate in the western division under a single judge 
arrangements may be made for his relief. : 
6. Leaving the crimes cognizable by the circuit courts as they stand at present, it is cal- 
culated, on an average of the last three years, that the arrangement proposed will give to the 
several judges of circuit the following number of criminal cases to be tried annually. 


; Division. Cases per First Plan. - Cases per Second Plan. 
: Ist - - - - - 90 °*- - - - - 75 

2d - - - - 2 95 - - s ~ a ' 87 

3d. - - ~ - = 93 = - - - - 112 

4th - - - - = 093 -~* - - - 97 

bth - - - - - 86° - 7 - - - 63 

6th - - - - 7 s9° - - - - - 112 

4th - - - - - 123 - - - - - 123 


- 9. Although there will no doubt be many difficulties attendant on a change of system, by 
which the duties hitherto performed by three judges will in a great degree devolve on one, 
the judges hope that this number of criminal trials will not in any instance be more than a 
single active judge will be able to complete, particularly under the arrangements to be pro- 
posed for the administration of civil justice. _ The extreme distance between the intermediate 
stations will, in no case, exceed 262 miles under the second plan; the distances of the several 
circuits, as well as the distribution of the criminal trials, will be much more unequal than 
under that first suggested. The second plan has been drawn out principally with the view 
.of keeping the whole of the Ceded Districts within the same division, and to prevent the 
courts of the assistant and native judges being separated from the zillah courts, to which 
they have been hitherto attached. But Madura is not much further from Coimbatore than 
from Salem, and the distance of Guntoor from Cuddapah might be diminished by trans- 
ferring the station of the native judge to Innaconda, or that of the zillah judge to Cumbum, 
placing, in that event, the assistant in charge of the zillah jail at Cuddapah and the adjoin- 
ing talooks. At the same time it is r be considered that it is only in original suits, 
exceeding 5,000 rupees, now cognizable by the more distant: provincial court, and in appeals 

runder 1,000 rupees, that it will be requisite for the parties resident under the jurisdiction of 

‘the*auxiliary or native courts to resort to the zillah tribunals ;‘a change in which, therefore, 
seems hardly to be called for. - - 

8. The population under each circuit judge will vary, according to the first plan, from 15 

‘to’ 25, but according to the second plan, as far as 30 lacs; and the square extent under each 
from 15 or 16 to 25,000 miles, peering 3 both plans. The divisions have, in each 

_ NN instance, 


Arrevorx, 274 APPENDIX 10.REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 
Ill 


. . .e ‘ ? i 
‘ aie ‘ instance, been formed as compact as possible, and allthe districts in the same division adjoin 
Calcutta Civil | each other, except Bellary, under the first pla. Tht particular situation of Bellary, com~ 
FinanceCommitteer bined with the necessity of connecting Guntoor witl¢ the adjoining provinces of Cuddapah 
and Cumbum, left no alteraative, under that plan, than to connect it with Chittoor. 
. ~ 9. It will be requisite, inthe western division, to deliver the prisoners from the unhealthy 
country of Soonda at the jail at Honore. But by leaving the circuit judge, in every instance, 
. at liberty to fix his own residence at any place within his division, he will be able to select 
.the most centrical station, best calculated to shorten his frequent journeys, and to prove per~ 
sonally convenient to himself as well as to the people. 
~ 10. The Right Honourable the Governor in Council under these explanations will, it is 
hoped, be enabled to determine the arrangement to be finally adopted respecting the distri- 
bution of the subordinate courts. ° 

11. The court suggest that there be two jail deliveries in every year, at each of the 21 
stationg first specified, Soonda alone excepted,-and that the new judges of appeal and circuit 
should at all times possess the same powers over the courts of the criminal, joint criminal, 
and native criminal judges respectively, as the circuit court collectively now possess, and 
over the magistracy as the judge on circuit at present possesses. To this it is proposed to add 
the power to direct the dismissal of heads of talook police, or other police officers, for mis- 
conduct in the Police department. 

12. Except the collector and magistrate himself, the Board of Revenue is at present the- 
sole authority competent to dismiss a native servant under a collector and magistrate ; but 
they can do so for misconduct in the Revenue department only. Abuses in the Police 
department seldom come before them, and can at present be punished, by dismissal, by no 
controlling authority whatever at this presidency. This is an obvious and very great defect. 
Improved information respecting the polige will no doubt be attained, by means of the fre~ 
quent movement, through a less extent of country, of the new local judges of appeal and 
circuit ; but all benefit from the improved information will be lost, if they have not the power 
of removing unfit or corrupt servants, which is understood to be vested in the commissioners 
in Bengal, not only in the Police, but in thg Revenue department also. It is not here pro- 

osed to vest these officers with any power avhatever in the Revenue department, but in the 
Police department only, to enable them finally to dismiss police servants, for police abuses, 
subject to the general control of this Court ; and there appears no probability of'such power 
being used less judiciously, or with less regard for the mterests of the public service gene- 
rally than at present. 

13, Under the proposed abolition of the Mahomedan law, it will be necessary to prepare 
a Regulation, specifying the punishment to be inflicted for each crime. Where particular 
punishments have already been attached to certain crimes by the existing code, they can be 
continued, subject to such modification or improvement as may appear necessary ; but as - 
regards the judges of circuit, the Court think it will be necessary to grant them a certain 
latitude, limiting the minimum and maximum of punishment, and leaving them to determine 
the exact extent according to the circumstances of each individual case; for example, not 
less than three nor more than seven years’ imprisonment in cases of theft; not less than ten 
nor more than fourteen years in cases of robbery. This minimum, to which they alone will 
be limited, being liable to be reduced to any extent by this Court, on a reference by the 
judge of circuit for mitigation, as already provided -in the Regulations. 

14. This Court propose that on conviction of any crime involving death, transportation 
.or imprisonment for life, the whole of the trial bey referred to them by the circuit judge, as 

at present, but not all cases of rape, as is now the case, unless they involve one of these 
unishments ; that where the sentence to be passed by the circuit judge exceeds seven years’ 
imprisonment, or where @ case occurs in which the application of the law is doubtful, or -— 
other sufficient cause renders it necessary to consult this Court, the judge of circuit suspend 
the sentence, and report the circumstances of thé case, for the orders of this Court, ina 
letter, as provided in clause second, section 3, Regulation I., 1825, without submitting 
the whole reeord of the trial, But that in crimes punishable by seven years’ imprisonment 
‘ une or 


‘ 


N 


GENERAL APPENDIX. bye Arent 


or under, the sentence of.the circuit jugge be final, unless this Court should deem it requisite = 

to call for the trial. “ (21.)Proceedings of 
15. The Court are of opinion that itvould contribute to the administration of justice, and Madras po ieke of 

greatly relieve the criminal courts from a duty materially impeding their more importaiit panies i iia 

unctions, were the committing officers, so soon as they complete the record of a case in Eee ee 

which a prisoner is committed for trial before the court of circuit, to transmit the original 

record to the circuit judge. This would give the circuit judge time, long previously to the 

trial, to examine the evidence, and to bring to the notice of the lower tribunal any facts’ 

which required further elucidation, or any pomts on which the evidence might be debackve, 

so that further testimony might: be sought for previously to the trial. It would also relieve 

the criminal judges from the preparation of translations, which can be made by thé native 


’ translators attached to the circuit judge’s establishment, framed expressly with a view to 


this duty ; and they can be revised by the assistant proposed hereafter to be attached to each 
cireuit judge. 

_ 16. It is not proposed to alter the extent of punishment adjudicable by the criminal 
judges, but merely to define better the crimes punishable by them, so far as regards those 
for which a specific punishment has not been declared in the Regulations. 

17. Under the increased labour in the civil department, proposed to be thrown on’ the 
zillah courts, it ig absolutely necessary that great relief should be afforded them in the 
administration of criminal justice. At the ‘same time, the Court fully concur in the caufion 
inculcated by the Right Honourable the Governor as to the propriety of only a gradual 
extension of native agency in the administration of justice, but especially pf criminal justice, 
to the people. Where fit natives, however, can be selected, the Court are not inclined to stint 
the powers to be delegated to them. With these views, the Court suggest that the delegation’ 
of criminal jurisdiction be for the present confined, to the native judge of Canara, the two 
new native judges proposed to be stationed in the southern division-of Arcot and Guntoor, 
and the sudder ameens. To all of these the Court propose to delegate the full powers of 
committal and punishment vested in the criminal courts, but it will be necessary to provide 
that the sudder ameens should, at least in the figst instance, be fixed at the sudder station, - 


-and the sentence passed by them not carried intoexecution, except under the special sanction 


of the criminal, joint criminal or native criminal judge, under whose charge they may be 
placed: When this restriction can be removed, they may be,eventually detached to different 
parts of each district, to the great relief of the population in all criminal mattets. 

18. The Court are not prepared to suggest any plan under which the use of juries, in 
trials before the native judges, could be made either safe or practicable. The measure 
indeed appears to therm infistitely more difficult and dangerous than the use of jumes iti trials 
before the European judges; and the inconvenience to the people, from being constant, instead 


- of occasional during the European circuit, would become intolerable. . 


19. With respect to the administration of civil justice, all original jurisdiction being trans~ 
ferred from the provincial to the zillah court, as proposed by the Finance Committee, the 
judge of appeal will be confined to his proper duty of deciding in appeal only. The jurisé 
diotion of the assistant and native judges it is proposed to limit to its present standard, 
viz. 5,000 rupees. 

20. As the duties:of the zillah courts will be much increased by the transfer to'them of 
all original suits exceeding 5,000 rupees from the provincial courts, and as they will at the 
same time be weakened by the abolition of the registrar’s jurisdiction, hereafter suggested; it 
is proposed to relieve them, by raising the jurisdiction of the sudder ameens to 3,000 rupees, 
and by fixing that-of the district snoohsitis ee 1,000 rupees, which last sum was proposed in 
this Court’s ‘proceedings of the 30th of June last. 
~ 21. The Right Honourable the Governor in Council will have perceived that it is not’ 
intended, for the present at least, to confer any etiminal ‘jurisdiction on the district moonsiffs. 
Even if their number be somewhat increased, as proposed by this Court, under date the 
30th June last, the doubling the extent of their ‘civil jurisdiction will-greatly augment their 
labour in that department, especially as it lies in that:particular class of suits, which is by’ ’ 
far the most numerous. Their exertions in ra department have already been highly reine 

2 : cia 


ApreNpix, 976 APPENDIX ro REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


IIT. Be : , 
Calegia iva ial to the public; and.as-it is by their means chjefly that it is proposed to relieve the 
Meee es zillah courts, so as to enable them to undeftake tM new duties to be transferred to them. 


from the provincial courts, it is considered objectiowble at present to impose on them any 
criminal duties. 

22. Under the arrangements thus proposed, a material modification of the existing rules 
respecting appeals in civil suits will become requisite. The new judges of appeal will not 
be stationary, but liable to move about the country on their criminal circuit, or other duties - 
of local supermtendence ; it is therefore necessary that at] appeals to them, and all pleadings 
on such appeals, should be filed before the zillah courts, and thence be forwarded to the 
judges of appeal for their orders, so as not to encumber them with the attendance of vakeels, 
or other fixed establishments now attached to their present courts, and to enable them to 
pass judgment at once, on the record, as transmitted to them by the lower court. 

23. It also seems desirable, on general grounds, when every judicial body under the Madras 
presidegcy, except this court, will be reduced to a single individual, destitute of those advan- 
tages which undoubtedly attend joint consultation with others, that a wider opening should 
be given to the admission of special appeals. The Court think that the zillah, appeal and 
sudder courts, should be authorized to admit them in every case in which it may be shown 
to their satisfaction that the revision of the decree in appeal is “ requisite for the ends of 
justice.” They would also suggest, that the decree of a judge of appeal, reversing the 
dectsion of a lower court of original jurisdiction, shall be open as a matter of right to appeal 
to the Sudder Adawlut; but that his decree confirming that of the lower court be final, 
unless a special appeal be admitted by this court. 

_ 24, This Court entirely concur in the sentiments recorded by the Right Honourable the 
Governor as to the necessity of a system for training young men in the judicial as well as 
in other branches of the public service, and as to the propriety of fixing their allowances 
on a scale sufficiently liberal to induce them to remain in the Judicial department. But 
they think that this may be done with greater benefit to the individuals, as well as to the 
public, by other means than by entrusting persons so young and inexperienced as zillah 
registrars are in general, with the decision of* important law-suits, or extensive criminal 
powers, against which the Finance Commitjee have argued. 

25. The Court conceive that, instead of calling upon a young man entering the judicial 
line to decide on cases on his own inexperienced judgment, it would be pieferable to give him 
a general insight into each of the various branches of the Judicial department, and to place 
his experience under the guidance of a superior of long standing in the judicial line. For 
this purpose, instead of zillah registrars, they would propose to attach an assistant to each of 

' the seven judges of appeal and circuit, shou duty it should be, under the orders of that 
judge, to revise the periodical returns of criminal and civil cases received from the.lower 
courts before they are forwarded to this Court; to draft orders thereon for the judge’s ap- 
proval ; to be deputed by him on local investigations into the conduct of the district moonsiffs 
or officers of police; to revise the translation of, and abstract the record of cases coming 
before him for decision; to correct the translations of the criminal trials referred-by him to 
this court ; and to aid him generally in the. conduct of his office. Such duties will oblige 

a@ young judicial officer to make himself master of all the details of the Regulations affecting 
the: lower tribunals, and thus instruct him the better how to control them hereafter; they 
will give him practical experience in the native languages, and will fix in his mind, when 

most open to impression, many useful lessons respecting the treatment of the natives, and 

_ the peculiarities of native testimony, well sorta to qualify him for the administration of 

: justice to the people, when raised to the bench. The arrangement will also transfer European - 
talent, now wasted in details, to its proper department of superintendence, and give the vigour 
of youth, tempered by the decision of experience and age, to that improved control over th®™ 
district moonsiffs end native officers of police, the want of which is the most obvious defect ‘ 
in the existing system. ue 

26.' Having thus given a brief outline of the arrangements proposed by this Court, they’. 
subjoin a Statement, showing the expense, and the eventual saving attending them, compared 
with that estimated by the Bengal Finance Committee. es 


Estimated by the Finance Committee. 


Sudder, discontinuance 
of third judge - 


12 Provincial judges - 
4 Provincial registrars 


Mahomedan law offi- 
cers - - 


7 Provincial judges - 


Abolition of the Gun- 
toor zillah + - 
12 Zillaly registrars - 
Increase in the num- 
ber and pay of the 
sudder ameens - 


GENERAL APPENDIX. - 


. e ¢ 
ReEbvcTIONS in 8 JupiciaL DEPARTMENT. 


Estimated by this Court. 


Rs. Rs. Rs. 
< - - 49,000 | - S 7s. ta ce ell ose 
1 Sudder mooftee s -|[- - - 
4,62,000 | - = | 12 Provincial judges - - | 4,62,000 
33,600) - °- 4 — registrars - 33,600 
e 
38,616 | - - 4 —  cazees - 15,950 
————— 4 — emooftees - 12,600 
5134216 4 — pundits - - 10,080 
38,640 
52345240 
2,80,000 7 Provincial judges - +] 2,80,000 
—— 2,54,216 }- + = = - = 
- - 63,049 | 22 Zillah registrars - - 75,600 
5,600 7 Assistants to circuit judges, |, 
at 800 rupees each = == | 67,200 
48,240 2 8,400 
—_—_—_—- Fees paid to district moonsiffs 
dy Goverrfment, in addition 
totiteirpay - - - 64,000 
12 Ziltah mooftees =~ - 24,570 
12 Zillah pundits - - 20,160 
1,17,130 
2 Native judges and 
their courts,at 1,000 
. Tupees per mensem 24,000 
36 Sudder ameens, at 
150 rupees per men- 
sem + - - 64,800 
88,800 
27,360 | 
. 6 Native establishments of four ’ 
$193,925 provincial courts - = 64,596 
Native establishments of se- 
ven provincial judges - 64,680 
Asper Account, Not + }—_—— 


". More by Rs. 


APPENDIX, 


2 
o iif. 


(21.) Proceedings 
of Madras Court of 
Sudder Adawlut ; 
19 Oct. 1830. 


254,240 


63,049 


28,330 
3,98,819 


84 
3,983,735 
3,938,625 


Meret, 978 - APPENDIX 1o REPORT rrom SELECF COMMITTEE. 


: ie me 27. The finance Committee in Bengal appear to have calculated that the reduction of 
Ei Ca oo Civil, the 12 zillah registrarships would have been attende by an immediate saving of rupees 75,600 
MaaceCommittge. Her annum, which they accordingly appropriate tg the support of new sudder ameens on 


increased salaries. But there are still one provincial * and nine zillah + registrars employed 
at this presidency, who would, in this event, have been thrown out of employ at once, and 
could not generally have been reduced below their college allowances. The out-of-employ 
salaries,of these ten gentlemen would therefore have cost the Government about rupees 42,000 
per annum, and the saving, to this extent at least, could have been gradual only. 


28. The plan suggested by this Court, on the other hand, will enable the Right Honourable . 
the Governor in Council to employ seven of these, ten as assistants to the judges of appeal 
and circuit, leaving only three unprovided for, as an-extra expense to the Government; but | 
it is submitted. that, until otherwise employed (as two of them now are), they should 
receive the established allowance of registrars. 


29.eWith regard to the seven registtars to be selected for the situation of assistants to the 
judges of appeal and circuit, the Court do not think that their continuance in the Judicial 
department can be ensured on a less allowance than rupees 800 per mensem, as entered in 
the foregoing Estimate ; and, considering that they will be subject to move constantly about 
the country, it is submitted that the tent allowance of an assistant collector might with pro- 
priety be added to this salary, without exceeding the just bounds of economy. 


30. In addition.to their monthly salary of rupees 70, each district moonsiff is allowed 
a fee of one-anna on all suits decided-on their merits, or adjusted by razeenamah, which 
is only partially covered by the levy of half an anna on all suits filed before them, the 
difference| being paid by Government, under Regulation IJ., 1828, as resolved in the Minutes 
of Council of the 30th January 182%, in which it was thought that the difference 
would be amply covered by the “ institution fees carried to the account of Government.on 
suits dismissed for default.” 


31. Great doubt having been entertained whether this were actually the case, this Court 
recently called-for statements to exhibit the result. The accounts for the second quarter of 
the present year have not yet been received from the northern division, and are therefore 
incomplete ; but taking the sum payable by Government, in the northern division only, for 
the second quarter of the present year, at the same amount as it the previous quarter, the 
actual charge to Government, beyond the receipts for district moonsiffs, in addition to their 
fixed pay, will amount to the large sum of rupees 64,000 per annum, which, as it is blended 
with other items in the accounts of the zillah- courts, has not until now been brought to 
public notice. , 


82. The disproportion of suits dismissed to those decreed, and the excessive ratio which 
suits amicably adjusted by razeenamah, bear to those decided by decrees before the district 
moonsiffs, particularly in the Ceded Districts, have long attracted notice, and induced the issue 
of repeated orders by this Court, who have frequently directed the lower courts to call for and 
examine the records in some of these suits. ‘There are grounds to apprehend that many of 
those withdrawn, or settled by razeenamah, are mere fictitious suits, on which half an anna 
in the rupee is lodged, merely to enable the party or parties to divide with the district moon- 
siff the other half anna, which he is to receive from Government out of this annual charge 
of rupees 64,000. As-an' example, the Court take the following from the returns of the 
vailpaud moonsiff. in. Cuddapah, for the second. cS a of this year :— ° 

cee | 


. Mr. C} Bushby, 


+. Mr. Strombom, Mr: Paternoster, Mr. Morehead, Mr. Bruere, Mr. West, Mr. Thomas, Mr. Lock- 
hart, Mr. Strange, Mr. Sparkes. : 


GENERAL-APPENDIX. Q79 0 APPENDIX, 
II 


» 
tg ° 


a Value of Property ‘ (21,) Proceedings 
Number of Suits, claimed. FEES, of Madras Gourt of 
Sudder Adawlut 5 
~~ 19 Oct, 18990. 
. Rs. Rs," 
Dismissed = ng - is ‘ 1,221 No Fees 
Decreed - - - °- = |= 2,582 162 
Razeenamahs - - - ~ - 6,353 395 
e : » 


Total Fees « 3556 


Per Mensem - 185 


33. Here is a moonsiff who dismissed double the number of the suits he decrees, but the 
property claimed under the suits dismissed .is not of half the value of that claimed under 
the suits decreed, notwithstanding they are doubly numerous; he receives 70 rupees pay, 
but 185 rupees fees, making a total of rupees 255 per mensem, and passes only 73 decrees, 
but settles nearly four times that number of suits, or 248 by razeenamah ; his fees from decrees 
are only rupees 161, from razeenamahs no less than 395. Now, to insure the receipt of this 
last sum, of which nearly half, or 197 rupees, comes out of the pale treasury, it is only 
necessary to advance the other half to enter a fictitious plaint and razeenamah, and at the 
close of the month, the sum returns doubled into the hands of the district moonsiff, 
34, The Court will not take upon thémselves to declare that such frauds are systematically 
pursued in general ; but there is strong reason to, suspect their prevalence, and their very 
practicability is sufficient to induce a reconsideration of the payment by Government, whence 
they originate; for if the fees were paid entirely by the suitors, there could be no induce- 
ment to such frands. The amount realized from the parties would go to the moonsiffs; and 
it never would be the interest of to unite plaintiffs and defendants with the moonsiff in 
preying on the public purse. 
35. The new arrangements will, it is hoped, greatly aid in verifying the returns of the dis- 
trict moonsiffs, ‘which, in addition to the control of the zillah aude. can be examined occa- 
.sionally during the progress of the circuit judge through the country, either by himself or 
his assistant; but as the moonsiff’s fees will still depend on the entry of a suit as decreed, 
instead of dismissed, it will require every exertion of the local authorities to check such 
abuses, not only calculated to corrupt the moral character of this important branch of native 
agency, but to vitiate the very returns on which a judgment of their efficiency depends. To 
guard, however, against the temptation to fraud, to which the payment by Government of one 
half of the fees of district moonsiffs is obviously calculated to give rise, the Court recommend 
that it be discontinued altogether. When sanctioned originally, it was not contemplated 
that it would eventually involve any charge on the Government, though it is attended by an 
increased disbursement of no less than rupees 64,000 per annum. Its discontinuance there+ 
fore will prove a clear saving to this exte$t, and, as such, it is assumed in the foregoing 
estimate to cover the increase now proposed in native judicial agency. a ok 
~--66. It is trué that the returns show the number of suits instituted before the district moon- 1825§—51,375+ 
siffs to have greatly increased since the institution fee was reduced one half in Aprit 1828 5 ee 
but, as before explained, the Court consider that measure to have had a direct tendeney to ? Bobo Oe en6. 
. vitiate and exaggerate these very returns, which are not therefore to be depended. on. 1350-260 450: 
37. So long as suits under 16 rupees are cognizable by the village moonsiffs free of fees aa 
altogether, yet continue to be brought before the district moonsiffs, where they are ehiet 
0 


Arrenpix, 280 APPENDIX to REPORT rnom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


ae to fees, the court are satisfied that the levy of thaffull anna in the rupee on suits instituted 
Calcutta Civil before the district moonsiffs never will be felt by ay suitor. The court, indeed, are decidedly 
FinauceCommittee. o¢ opinion that the re-imposition of the tax is advisable, and that accordingly the district 
; moonsiffs need not suffer personally from the discontinuance of the fees paid by Government, 
but may be ensured their present liberal allowances, by the re-imposition of the former fees. 
In ordér, however, to proportion the amount of fees received to the labour actually performed 
more correctly than at present, it seems requisite thaton suits settled by razeenamah, no fees 
should be granted to the native functionaries unless the pleadings have been completed; 
because if, before this period, an amicable adjustment takes place, the settlement can hardly . 
have been promoted by them. At the same time, to prevent this discouraging the mutual 
adjustment of suits, it might be proyided, as in section 11, Regulation XIII., 1810, of the 
Bengal code, that the institution fee be returned to the party on all suits settled by razee- 
namgh before the pleadings are completed. 


38. The stamp institution fee on the superior suits now proposed to be made cognizable by 
the district moonsiffs and sudder ameens, varies from one to about half an anna in the rupee, 
being at one uniform rate of rupees 32, or 512 annas, on suits from 500 to 800 rupees ; one 
uniform rate of rupees 50, or annas 800, on suits from 800 to 1,600 rupees ; and one uniform 
rate of 100 rupees, or 1,600 annas, on suits from 1,600 to 3,000 rupees. In the event of 
ihcreasing the amount of the suits cognizable by district moonsiffs to 1,000 rupees, it will be 
requisite either to grant to them the existing institution fee on suits from 600 to 1,000 rupees, 
as now given to the sudder ameens, or to assimilate the fees to be paid on such suits to those 
now paid on the lower suits, of which they have already cognizance. 


39. In the foreSoing estimate the court have entered the expense of the two native judges’ - 
courts to be established in the southern division of Arcot and Guntoor, at rupees 1,000 per 
mensem each, to cover all contingencies for office-rent, &c. But in addition to the salary of 
rupees 500 per mensem to be granted to each, they propose to attach to them respectively 
the same establishment as has been-sanctioned for the native judge of Canara, being rupees 
383 per mensem, making a total month charge of rupees 883 per mensem for each, being 
rupees 117 below the estimate. A list ofthe proposed establishment is annexed to these pro- 
ceedings. 


40. For the situation of native judge at Guntoor and in the southern division of Arcot, the 
Court resolve to submit to Government the names of the following law officers, as well qualified 
for those situations. 


ist. Sewarama Sastra, first pundit in Sudder Adawlut. 

2d. hee Sastry, second ditto, ditto. , 

3d. Zeekee-oo-deen-Mahomed Khan, cazee of the provincial court Trichinopoly. 
4th. Fuzboollah Khan, mooftee of ditto, ditto. 


_ 41, The Court submit that it is desirable to select one Hindoo and one Mussulman for the 
proposed appointments. : 


42. With respect to the sudder ameens, the Court do not think that they can ever be 
pearetl reduced, as proposed, to the situation and pay of district moonsiffs. It has already 
een fully explained in the letter to Government from the registrar of this court, under date the 
18th July 1829, and in this Court’s subsequent proceedings of the 30th June last, that it is 
necessary to employ a superior class of natives, poe of exercising an appellate jurisdiction 
over the district moonsiffs, from whose decreds the appeals are either too numerous, or not 
- sufficiently important, to be decided by Europe&ns. _ It was also pointed out that the regular - 
education of this superior branch of judicial agency in the native laws of the country, not cakye 
peculiarly qualified them for this duty, but insensibly exercised a wholesome and material 
control over the decisions of the district moonsiffs themselves, who feel that each of their 
decrees.is liable to be revised by a well educated native skilled in the law; and this Court 
dwelt on the high political importance of requiring this standard of qualification from the ~ 
sudder ameens, as the best means of evincing the sincerity of Government in maintaining 
. inviolate 
» 


GENERAL APPENDIX. 281 ArpeNpix, 
: Ii. 
inviolate the solemn pledge to insure to,the natives of India. the enjoyment of their laws agd —, 
religious usages which was given to thdpeople‘n the fundamental enactments of the Madras (21-) Proceedings of 
code. Madras Court of 
Sudder Adawlut ; 


43. Provided that this most important qualification for the office of sudder ameen is strictly 1th Oct, 1830. 


maintained, and none can be promoted to that office but such as obtain a certificate as law 
officer from the college, the Court are of opinion that the Cazee-ool-Coozat, and ong mooftee 
relieved from the duty of giving futwas, by the abolition of the Mahomedan criminal law, 
with two pundits in this court, will suffice for expounding the native law in all cases whatever 
arising in the various courts under this presidency, superior to that of sudderameen. The 
situation of the second mooftee in this court may be abolished on a vacancy, or on his removal 
as a sudder ameen. 


44, The remaining law officers in the provinces will amount to 38*. Of these two will 
either be promoted to the office of native judge in the southern division of Arcot and Guntoor 
respectively, or will succeed to the vacancies caused inthe establishment of this court by these 
offices being filled from it; and the remaining 36 it is proposed to employ as sudder ameens, 
ona salary of rupees 150 per mensem, as entered in the foregoing estimate, with the addition 
of fees on the civil suits they may decide, to be raised from their present limit of rupees 750 
to rupees 3,000, as before suggested. 


45. The proposed fixed salary will augment that of the zillah pundits 10 rupees, but it will 
diminish that of nine amongst the zillah cazees, to the extent of rupees 7}, and that of three 
of them to the extent of 60 rupees ; that of the four provincial mooftees to the extent of 1124 
rupees, and that of the provincial cazees and sudder mooftee to the extent of 200 rupees per 
mensem. But when it is considered that two of the provincial court cazees (very old men from 
Bengal) have recently applied for superannuation pensions, that two of the other highest paid ' 
law officers may be selected for the situation of native judge, and that the fees on civil suits 
of an augmented value, to be decided by the sudder ameens, cannot fail to be considerable, 
there does not appear to be any ground to fear that the aggregate allowance proposed for 
these officers, as sudder ameens, will fall ‘below those hitherto received by dee as law 
officers. If in any case it should, it is submitted that the present incumbents be allowed to 
draw the difference, as an extra personal allowance continued to them alone. 


46. Under this arrangement the class of law students at the college might be gradually 
reduced to five'persons; and those who are qualified there might hereafter be selected to BY 
vacancies in the office of sudder ameen. 


47. The Court have drawn out the annexed list of the native establishment to be attached 
to the seven new judges of appeal and circuit, which exceeds that of the present four provin- 
cial courts to be reduced, by the small sum of rupees 84 per annum, as shown in the foregoing 
estimate. But notwithstanding the retention of seven of the registrars as assistants to the 
judges of circuit, on the augmented allowances proposed, and the addition of two new native 
judges as directed by Government, the net reduction under the arrangements submitted by 
this Court, will, as shown, in the foregoing estimate, eventually exceed the estimate of the 
Bengal Committee by rupees 5,110 per annum. 


48. To the foregoing review of the changes contemplated, and statement of the saving esti- 
mated as eventually to result from them, the Court are bound to add the expression of their 
apprehension, that the reforms proposed will, as foreseen by Government, vastly increase the 

. ‘ labours 
* 12 in the four provincial courts. 


24 in the twelve zillah courts. 
2 in Guntoor. 


—_——, 


38 ‘3 + 
x= 00 


N, 


APPERDIX, 


* HII. 


Calcutta Civil + 
FinanceCommittee. 


Bengallegulations, 
VIIE. 1808; XIII. 
1810; XII. 1825. 


Bengal Regulation, 
XII. 1825, sec. 8. 


Bengal Regulation, 

XIII. 1810, cl. 3d, 

sec. 8. 

BengalRegulations, 

VIIL. 1808, sec. 6; 

XH. 1810, sec. 6, 
. clause gd. 


282 APPENDIX ro REPORT raom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


and native courts, which has already partially been farried into ‘effect, is a mere change of 
name in the local agency, and a diminution of experliture for the administration of justice, 
It can neither reduce the number of crimes nor of law suits in the provinces; and the same 
quantity of business remains to be done, by an agency lesg competent and more corrupt than. 
that ay employed. -Instead of relieving the superintending authority at the presidency, 
as seems to have been imagined by the Finance Committee in Bengal, this alteration in the 
local agency, from the increased errors of its greater inexperience, and its greater liability to 
local influence, partiality and abuse, will considerably augment the duties of this Court. 
These changes are now proposed to be carried still further, and native agency is about to be 
substituted for much of the most important remaining European authority hitherto devoted 

for the last 30 years, to the local adminastration of justice. 


labours and correspondence of this Court. The cen far of the former zillah into auxiliary 


49. Under such circumstances it is evidently of the highest importanee to the due adminis- 
tration®of justice to the people, to str€ngthen rather than diminish the superintending court, 
on the efficiency of whose control the success of these reforms essentially depends. The 
Court remark that it is not contemplated to withdraw from them the -aid of a third judge, 
until a vacancy occurs “ after the systém has come fairly into operation.” But overwhelmed 
as they expect to be by the vast accession of appeals and increased correspondence respecting’ 
criminal trials and other miscellaneous matter likely to accrue from these new arrangements, 
they take this occasion to suggest such a change in the authority of the judges composing 
the court, as appears most likely to facilitate the administration of justice, under the difficul- 
ties to be foreseen, for which it seems only prudent beforehand to provide. 


50. The Court actordingly submit, that, as in Bengal, any single judge of the Sudder and 
Foujdarry Adawlut be competent to hold.a court to pass orders, decrees and sentences, and 
to exercise all the powers now vested in two or more judges of these courts respectively, sub- 
ject to the following restrictions : 


' First.—That in criminal trials, involving @ sentence of death, no sentence shall be passed 
except by two concurring judges. 


Secondly.—That no single judge be competent to reverse or alter any order, decision» 
decree or sentence previously passed by one or more judges of the same court. 


Thirdly.—That a single judge sitting alone, when of opinion that the decision, order or 
decree of any lower civil court, brought before the Sudder Adawlut, should be reversed or 
altered, or then he does not concur with the judge of circuit as to the conviction of a prisoner, 
in a trial of which the record may be submitted to the Foujdarry Adawlut, or in the opinion 
submitted by the judge of circuit, on any other criminal trial, respecting which a reference may 
be made by letter or otherwise, to that court, do not pass any decision until one or more of 
the other judges can sit on the question. wo 


51. Drafts of Regulations founded on the above suggestions are under preparation, and will 
be submitted to Government so soon as the orders of the Right Honourable the Governor in 
Council on these proceedings may be communicated to this Court. 


Ordered accordingly that extracts from the proceeding be submitted for the orders of the 
Right Honourable the Governor in Council, through the secretary to Government in the 
Judicial department. ; 


Estimated 


GENERAL APPENDIX. 


283. 


‘Estimated Expense of the Establishnfent proposed for ‘the J udge of Appeal and Circuit, 


1 Sheristadar 
. Head writer 


- 


~ 


- ~ 


2 Writers (each 20 ee a month) 


2 Native writers (each 10 pagodas a month) — 
2 Translators (each 100 rupees a month) 


12 Peons 

1 Chobdar 
1 Duffadar 
34, Moochee 
1 Masaljee 
1 Sweeper 


Court Establishment for the Native Judges. 


1 Sheristadar - 
1 Record keeper 
Ghomastahs 

Moonshee - 


Delayets  - 
Duffadar- 
Peons - - 
Shroff - 
Masalzee_ - 


Sweeper - 


: -_ 
ee ee ee) 


Nazir - - 


31 in number. 


1 Jailor - = 
1 Native doctor 


Persian inkmaker 


2 Duffadars -: 


20 Peons - =. 


Government vakeel 


Administrators of oaths 


Total per month 


Jail Establishment. 


): 


002. 


' # oe 


- 


- 


. 


'@e 


Rupees per 
Mensem. 


8 
3.8 - 


_APPENDIxX,. 


“ai 


(21.) Proceedings 
of Madras Court of 
Sudder Ad&wlut ; 


1g Oct, 1830. 


APPENDIX, 
III. > 
Calcutta Civil 
FinanceCommittee. 


Resolution thereon. 


11, 13, 14, 15, 16, 
17; 19, 20, 22, 23, 
25, 28, 29, 35, 37, 


39) 43, 44, 45, 46, 
& 50. 


284 APPENDIX.ro REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


The Right Honourable the Goverrfor in Council appgoves of the arrangement of the circuits, 
as suggested ih the second paragraph of the progfedings of the Sudder and Foujdarry 
Adawlut, above recorded. P 

The Right Honourable the Governor in Council approves and resolves to adopt the seve- 
ral suggestions submitted in the paragraphs of the Court’s proceedings which are noted m 
the margjn, but desires that it may be provided that whenever a new Judge of circuit shall 
consider the dismissal of a head of talook police, or other native police officer to be necessary, - 
he shall make known the same to the magistrate in the first instance, and communicate the 
grounds of his opinion to that officer, who will then be required to give immediate effect, in his 
own name, to the course of proceedings pointed out by the judge of circuit. 

The amount of suits cognizable by district moonsiffs berg raised to 1,000 rupees, the , 
Sudder Adawlut will be pleased to introduce into the new Regulations either of the provisions 
referred to at the conclusion of the 38th paragraph of their proceedings as they may deem 
most expedient. 

The Right Honourable the Governor in Council is pleased to resolve that Severamsastry and 
Yakee-oo-deen-Mahomed Khan shall be appointed native judges at Guntoor and in the 


- southern division of Arcot respectively. 


Letter from Madras 
Government to 
sludges of Sudder 
Foujdarry Adawlut; 
2d Nov. 1830.: 


(22.) Letter from 
,Cotnmittee on Civil 
Establishments, 
Bengal ; 


12 July 1830. 


The establishments proposed for the new judges of appeal and circuit, and for the courts of 
the native judges, are sanctioned, as detailed in the lists which accompanied the Court’s 
proceedings. 

The Sudder and Foujdarry Adawlut will be pleased to prepare and submit, with all practi- 
cable expedition, drafts of such Regulations as may be necessary to give effect to the arrange- 
ment now sanctioned, and of any circular orders which may require to be addressed to the 
courts in the provinées, for their information and guidance on the occasion of the commence- 
ment of the new system. 


¢ (Enclosyre.) as 


LETTER from the Secretary to the Madrgs Government to the Judges of the Sudder and 
Foujdarry Adawlut at Madras ; dated 2d November 1830. 
Sir, 


I am directed by the Right Honourable the Governor in Council, to acknowledge the 
receipt of your registrar’s letter of the 19th ult., and to transmit for your information and 
guidance, the accompanying extract from the minutes of consultation under this date. 


‘I have, &c. 


(signed) H, Cuamier, 
Secretary to Government. 


(22.)—Extract LETTER from the Calcutta Civil Finance Committee to the Governor- 
general in Council at Bengal, dated 12th July 1830. 


1. Tx only remains for us to state, as briefly as the subject will permit, the amount of the 
reduction which the Honourable Court’s orders render it necessary to make, and the mode by 
which the object may in our judgment be best accqmplished. On one point we would premise 
afew words. It will be seen hereafter that in the JJudicial and Revenue branches, the arrange- 
ments we propose are founded mainly on the principR of substituting native for European agency 
in the courts of primary jurisdiction, and in the conduct of details. The expediency of acting 
upon this principle, we are happy to believe, is now generally admitted ; and experience having 
shown that in no other way can the charges of the administratén be kept within moderate 
bounds, a regard for economy would alone suggest the policy of gradually raising the fune- 
tions and enlarging ‘the emoluments of our native fellow subjects, even if there were no. 

A”. be 2G higher 


GENERAL APPENDIX. . 285 


not expect that all the arrangements 


: 
higher considerations to induce the nt ap of the measure. But as,on the one hand, we do 
6 


APPENDIX, , 


—_—a 


shall*now venture to suggest can be immediately (22.) Letter from 


effected, so, on the other, we would by u® means be understood to rest upon those arrange- Committee on Civil 
ments, as if they carried the above principle to its fullest possible extent. All authorities at Establishmgnis, 


Fort St. George are, we understand, united in opinion that an entire success has followed the 
plan of giving enlarged powers and better pay to the district moonsiffs; and although, in 
the permanently settled districts of Bengal, where unfortunately nothing is settled aifd little 


Bengal 


12 Saly 1830. 


is known but the government assessntent, peculiar difficulties may present themselves, we see - 


no reason to think that the same consequences will not follow from the same measure: nor 
‘ can we doubt that at all the presidencies the above-mentioned principle may, at no distant 
period, be much more extensively applied. 

28. But after all, until we have secured a clear surglus applicable to the payment of debt, 
the main question must always be, what of the existing establishments can be spared with 
the least inconvenience. . . 

29. Proceeding on this principle, and adopting the summary mode of revision with which 
we have resolved to commence, it seems to us that the following savings might be made with 
little or no sacrifice of efficiency. 

30. In several establishments, additions have been made which are individually of little 
moment, yet which tell importantly in the aggregate. In regard to these, it is impossible for 
us now to enter on a detailed exposition; but in the present condition of the finances, it is 
reasonable to expect that the heads of offices will, in many cases, find it quite practicable to 
do with the same establishment, or at least with an establishment of the same expense, as 
that which sufficed in 1823; a discretion being given to them, to distribute the amount 
allowed as they may judge best, subject only to such restrictions as we proposed in the case 
of copyists, viz. that there should be an average and a maximum of pay not to be exceeded ; 
and we would respectfully submit to your Lordship, that it would have an excellent effect if 
you. ve pleased to instruct your private secretary to revise his own establishment on this 

rinciple. 

32." In entering upon the consideration of this branch ‘of the civil establishments, we are 
abundantly sensible of the peculiar reserve with which it behoves us to declare our senti- 
ments. But it is not the less necessary to submit what has occurred to us; and it must be 
superfluous to add to the bulk of this report by any lengthened explanation of the grounds of 
our opinions, or by any studied disavowal of dogmatism in maintaining them. 

33. Supposing that we are not to exercise a minute intetference with the internal adminis- 
tration of foreign States, we should imagine that the residents at Hydrabad, Gwalior and 
Nagpore, might do with one assistant. AY 

34. At Lucknow, where the necessity of interfering is perhaps most urgent, and the right 
to interfere is clearest, the resident has no more than one assistant. 

35. If this principle be adopted, there will result the following saving : 


Gwalior, 2d Assistant ~ - - - - - Rs. 600 
Nagpore _ ditto a - 600 
Military Assistant - = = = ee 478 
Hydrabad, 2d Assistant - = et ele. 574 
extra ditto - = Ss ee “383 

i 2,635 

a 12 


Per Annum =- - S._Rs. 31,620 


36, At Indore, the resident being also opium agent, and having, we believe, a great many 
people to deal with, will require more assistance; but he might, we should think, do wit 
two, and spare the third and extra assistants. Hence a further saving of Rs. 10,033. a 
Co 37. The 


Political Residen- 
cies and Agencies. 


APP RN DIX, 


‘IIE. 


ee 


Caleutta, Civil 
FinanceCommitiee, 


* Despatch 29 Feb. 
1829, para. 10. 


286 . APPENDIX to REPORT From SELECT COMMITTEE. 


e i : 

37. The assistants at Delhi being available for general purposes in all the adjoining dis-. 
tricts, any decision regarding them will Better k taken when the establishment of. 
covenanted officers is generally revised. 

38. Bat of the political agents under Delhi, we should doubt whether that at Jyepore . 
should be maintained, unless the Government of that State be desirous of having the advice 
of a British officer, and be willing to pay for it, as the Bhurtpore State now does for the. 
agent wfth it. We might thus effect a saving of Rs. 45,443. 

' 89. We are also disposed to think that the politicaP agent at Loodiana might be spared : 
one agent ought apparently to suffice for all purposes connected with the country to the 
north-west of the Delhi territory, on this side the Sutleej, as well as for the adjustment . | 
of any questions arising between us and Runjeet Sing that would not better be immediately: 
taken up by the resident at Delhi. Iteis remarked indeed, by the Court of Directors*, that ° 
this chieftain, with whom we have no resident, is the one with whom matters stand on the. 
most satisfactory footing. * ; 

' 40. From the discontinuance of the Loodiana office, a saving would result of Rs. 12,898. 

41. Further, it appears to be questionable whether the advantages of having separate’ 
agents at Oodupore and Sirowee are commensurate with the expense, Rs. 70,506 ; and with 
this impression, we submit to your Lordship in Council the expediency of discontinuing 
those offices. , 

42. Under the Malwa residency, your Lordship has already abolished the agencies of 
Kanthul and Baugeer, and that of Nepawar® and if the principle of consolidation and: 
retrenchment could be carried further with advantage, we presume it would have been done. 
In such cases it is not easy to say what officers must be employed, until the question of: 
interference or noy-interference be definitively settled. But it has doubtless already: 
occurred to your Lordship in Council, that the mere fact that the agents are busy is no: 
proof that they are wanted; had we one with every petty chief, or in every village, they 
would probably find or make business. The expediency of retaining the detached pergun- 
nahs that are under the agent of Nimar, seems to be particularly deserving of inquiry ; and 
also, whether the duties of that officer, yith‘or without the revenue management of those 
pergunnahs, might not be undertaken by the authorities in Candeish. 

43. We have already in a separate letter submitted to Government the question, how far 
it is necessary or expedient to maintain the irregular troops employed in that part of India. 
at the charge of the British Government. 

44, Of the provincial battalion’, three have already been disbanded; the resolution to 
disband another has been taken; and the expediency of maintaining the others will be 


’ separately considered with reference to the military force which they have been, partly at ~ 


Judicial Depart- 
ment, 


least, intended to supersede. In the mean time, we venture to assume it as certain, that 
the charge will, at least, be brought down to the standard of 1823, and this with a full 
provision for any burkundazes that may be hired to replace the provinctals. Hence. a 
saving of Rs. 6,14,226,. according to the auditor’s book, and of Rs. 5,36,071, according to* 
the receipts and disbursements of 1827-28, 
52. The increase in the establishments for administering justice in the interior of the 
country, arises, it will be perceived, chiefly from the appointment of an additional judge of. 
circuit, the establishment of a zillah court, at Futtehpore, and the creation of various magis- 


_ tracies formerly combined with the office of civil judge; much too of the increase which 


has been made in the Revenue department would appear to have been suggested with a 
view to objects properly belonging to the Judicialedepartment ; and it appears to us clear 
that the revenue establishments may be made t importantly to subserve to purposes of 
police. Indeed, in this country, the two departihents can scarcely be considered apart ;, 
and we shall now proceed to revise the establishments of both jointly. Considerable as the 
increase has been, both in the judicial and revenue establishments, it seems to us certain 
that without some change of system the former willbe still further enlarged. From all 
quarters there is a cry that arrears of business are accumulating, and that justice is denied 
ar dolavad. Accardmoly though insolvency be staring us in the face; yet within these few 
8 


¢ 


weeks 


GENERAL APPENDIX. 287 Arpehprx, 


weeks a magistrate has been appointed to Juanpore;' and the eollectorship of Beerbhoom, ee 
which, looking only to revenue pipe , we should certainly have proposed to abolish, has (22.) Letter from 
had the magistracy united to it. We ‘have little doubt, indeed, that if the existing system Committee on Civil 
be maintained, Government will soon be under the necessity of appoiting a separate magis- Establishnfute, 
trate to every district of the provinces of Bengal, Behar, Orissa and Benares, and that the Bengal ; 
civil courts will yet fail to satisfy the just claims of the people for prompt and efficient 2? July 1830. 
administration of justice. Assuming then that a change must be made, and that the princi~ 
ples of such change shall be the substitution as far as safely practicable of native for Euro~ 
pean agency ; there will remain the question, how that principle is best to be applied. On 4 
' grounds which we have briefly stated in our report relative to the establishment of Fort St, 
George, and on which, as they appear to be now generally admitted, we need not enlarge, 
‘it seems to us that the first step should be to enlarge the powers of the native judges; 
ultimately, we are of opinion, the primary jurisdiction in all civil cases ought to be confided 
to them ; the main business of the European judges being to see that there is no faijure of 
justice through their neglect or corruption, and their interference in individual cases, whether 
by appeal or otherwise, being. limited to what is requisite for this purpose. In the criminal 
department, also, we have no doubt that the native judges might be extensively employed 
with general advantage; the European officer seeing in all serious cases that the orders 
passed had nothing unjust and improper on the face of them, before they were carried into 
execution: and both in that department, and in the police, the quantity of business might, 
we conceive, be very considerably abridged, and the cause of the people promoted, if the 
wishes of the community were more consulted in regard to the discovery and punishment of 
minor offences. Pursuing these principles, we are persuaded that the efficient administra- 
tion of civil and criminal justice might be fully provided for, not only without any increase, 
but with some diminution in the number of European district judges, and that the interven- 
tion of an appellate court between those judgés and the Sudder Court might be wholly 
dispensed with; ultimately, indeed, it may not be too much to expect that one European 
court will suffice for several districts, but the change must of course be effected gradually. 

53. It appears to us to be very desirable to Sepagate, as far as possible, the magisterial and 
judicial functions ; the principle, therefore, of the arrangements which have already with this 
view been adopted more or less extensively, at all the presidencies, has our full concurrence ; 
and we ‘presume, that wherever the office of district judge is separated from that of magis- 
trate, the expediency of relieving the latter from much of the duty which magistrates in 
Bengal are now required to perform as criminal judges, will be recognised. 

54. It remains to consider whether the office of magistrate shall be generally united with 
that of collector ;-or whether, keeping them distinct, we shall endeavour to diminish and 
prevent the increase of the public charges, by reducing the number and pay of the officers 
employed. * 

55. N ow, as far as the magistrates are concerned, looking to the extent and reputed popu- 
lation of the several districts, we see no reason to think that any of the existing offices could 
‘be expediently abolished without providing another similarly superintended by an European 
functionary. For anxious as we are to see natives employed in offices of importance and 
liberal emolument, it would not, we conceive, be prudent, for the present at least, to place 
them in situations to which there belongs any large discretionary authority; and the magis- 
terial functions must therefore, we think, be for the most part confined to European officers, 
so long as our scheme of civil administration partakes so largely as it now does, of the spirit 
of-a despotic and military government. Pe ss 

56. In the districts in which the government revenue is not yet fixed in perpetuity, the 
-game considerations would prevent us froth suggesting any considerable reduction in the 
number of collectors; since in such districts much must be left to the discretion of those 
officers, and that discretion can be properly exercised only by. one possessmg minute local 
knowledge. 

- 57. In the Lower Provinces, indeed, as far as the mere matter of collection is concerned, a 
native tehsildar might, we think, in many districts take the place of the European officer ; 

934. : and - 


Appendix (20.) 


Aprrnpix, 


Mil. 


Calcutta Civil 


Finansal'ammittea, 


Vide Appendix, 


No. 3, MS. 


tion. 


Collec- 


288 APPENDIX ro REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


and when the judicial establishment shall be strengthened and reformed, by enlarging the 
powers of the native courts, and duly regufating ee of the European judges, it will not, 
we conceive, be necessary to continue to collectors “in those provinces the judicial powers 
which they now exercise; still, however, there would remain some duties which it might not 


be altogether safe to confide to natives, excepting under the immediate control of an. _ 
Europegn officer: and even in the Lower Provinces we should anticipate considerable advan- 
. dr 


tage from the union of revenue and magisterial functions. 


58. Against this arrangement we have as yet heard only one material objection, not 
founded on a misconception of the position in which Government and its revenue officers 
stand towards the people; viz. that it will no longer be possible-for Government to find 
employment for indolent or ignorant men, without greater public inconvenience than is now 
experienced from the appointment of &n incompetent collector. But this is an argument 
which, at the present moment especially, it must be unnecessary for us seriously to 
answer. bd 


59. In the unsettled districts, we consider the proposed union of duties to be recom- - 
mended by the strongest possible considerations, the measure being indeed in our judgment 


quite indispensable to the efficiency of either department. We trust it is not necessary to 
enter into any detailed explanation of the grounds on which we hold this opinion, the 
Sypreme Government having itself in many instances admitted the principle, and the 
arrangements adopted at Madras and Bombay, after the fullest discussion, being founded 
upon it. We should indeed do little more than repeat arguments already doubtless familiar 
to your Lordship in Council, those especially so frequently urged by the late Sir Thomas 
Munro; and referring to the papers already on record, in which the matter is discussed, we 
venture, with this general declaration of our views, to assume, that if the union of the offices 
of collector and magistrate be an economical arrangement, it is one which ought on other 
grounds also to be adopted. , 


60. Now it appears to us, that by adopting such an arrangement, a large saving of 
expense may be effected, several magistracies*may be abolished, and the. number of judges 
also.may be diminished. We assume, as glready intimated, that European agency is never 
to be employed beyond what the necessity of the case may justify; that the proper function 
of the covenanted civil servants of the Government is control and direction, not execution; 
that details are as far as possible to be left to the natives, and that we are never to waste 
our labour in attempting to do the business of the country when we can succeed in causing 
it to be done as well or better by the people themselves. We also assume that the integrity 
of the head. native officers shall be secured by adequate pay and well-defined responsibility. 
By this system we are satisfied that the burthen of the collectors’ duties may be so reduced 
as to leave them ample leisure for those of the magistracy, if the latter be properly regu- 
lated. Further, it appears to us, that if the district judges be relieved from magisterial 
functions, and from the cognizance of original civil suits, and that of the less important 
criminal cases, their authority may be so far extended as not only wholly to supersede the 
necessity of maintaining the courts of appeal, but as to enable Government to relieve the 
revenue commissioners from the duty of holding the sessions except in special cases ; and if 
the ordinary duties of those commissioners be restricted to that of controlling the magis- 
trates and collectors, their number may certainly be reduced without any sacrifice of 
efficiency. _ ° 


61. With the above views, we beg leave to stbmit a Schedule of the establishments of 
covenanted civil servants, by which we would Propore that the administration of the Regu- 
lation provinces, and of the Dehli territory, should be conducted. The Ceded Territories gn 


.the Nerbudda, and our more recent acquisitions, we shall hereafter separately considers If 


the plan according to which the Schedule has been prepared is adopted, a saving will be 


effected in the offices now superintended by covenanted civil servants to the extent of — 


Rs. 10,20,940, independently of the courts of appeal, from the abolition of which a further 
saving of Rs. 6,73,600 will result. ‘ os 


’ 62. The 


n 


GENERAL ‘APPENDIX. 289 


62. The last measure would render it necessary either to have an additional Sudder Court,’ 
or to add to the establishment of the prasent cofirt. The latter arrangement, we think, is 
decidedly preferable, so long at least as there shall be no change in the constitution of the 
Government; and although we see reason to’ think that it may be found practicable to 
make a reduction in the expenses of the Sudder Board, and Board of Customs, Salt and 
Opium, sufficient to meet the increase in the Sudder Court, we deem it prudent and, proper 
at present to allow 170,000 Rs. on that account. 

63. We have already, in our Report relative to Madras, recommended the abolition of the 
office of registrars, persuaded that it is m the last degree objectionable to employ under that 

‘name very young men as judges, according to the system now followed. We have not over- 
looked the reasons that might be urged against the proposition, on the assumption that the 
‘registrars were employed as ministerial officers in conformity with the principles of the code 
of 1793. We admit that registrars might be very useful to the judges in seeing that all pre- 
scribed forms are observed, and especially the essentialerule which requires that partieg shall 
be brought distinctly to issue, in superintending the execution of orders and decrees, in making 
local inquiries, in preserving the records, in inquiring into and reporting upon a variety of 
matters that will otherwise occupy much of the judges’ time. They might also, perhaps, be 
employed in advocating pauper suits, and conducting the suits of the great pauper, Govern- 
ment. In some cases, too, it might be advantageous to direct them to sit with the chief 
native judges as witnesses and reporters of their proceedings, and generally they might be 
useful as the staff or secretaries of the judges, being also available for occasional vacancies 
in other departments. 

64. These objects, however, are not of the highest importance. It is clearly more neces- 
sary that the collectors and magistrates should have the aid of assistants of some standing, 
than that judges should have registrars. Such assistants, im the unsettled countries especially, 
or in the management of the particular estates in districts permanently settled, will fave the 
best possible training for any line of duty to which they may be destined ; and as it seems to 
be impossible to have both registrars to the courts and,principal assistants to collectors and 
magistrates, without inordinately increasing the number of civil seryants, and consuming the 
funds that had better be appropriated to the appointment of a sufficient number of native 
judges adequately paid, we conclude that the office of registrar ought to be abolished here 
as at Madras. 

65. The native judges of Bengal appear to be in general underpaid. The moonsiffs 
especially, being in several districts far too numerous, appear in many instances to receive a 
miserable pittance, and their time is often taken up in mere executive duties which a common 
mohurrir might discharge. These defects of the system seem to admit of easy remedy, and 
we doubt not that, with liberal pay, an ample supply of good native judges will soon be at 
the command of Government. But of course, in the application of what we would suggest 
under ‘this head, it is especially necessary to proceed gradually and with caution, the general 
scheme being kept steadily in view, and every fit opportunity being taken of adopting it, 
zillah by zillah, with modifications suggested by local circumstances, but no attempt being 
made to enforce an unnatural uniformity, or to anticipate the existence of fit instruments. 

- 66. It appears to us that the native judges would be sufficiently remunerated, if upon an 
average they received Rs. 2,500 per annum; and a gradation of emolument being desirable, 
independently of differences of function, we would recommend that the highest rate of pay 
be dts. 6,000, and the lowest Rs. 1,200. . ° , 

67. For the trial of civil suits of inconsiderable value, it will be necessary to have some 
stationed in the interior of the districts; but it does not appear to us advisable to carry this 
principle so far as has sometimes been propdsed, under the notion of giving every one justice 
at his own home; and this opinion we hold not on considerations of economy alone. The 
great object, we conceive, is to secure the prompt decision of cases, the settlement of which 
can only be expected through the intervention of a court. If that be accomplished, and if 
all unnecessary detention of parties and witnesses be avoided, a moderate distance of the 
court from the residence of those engaged in litigation, will not be severely felt. The strength 

: PP of 


AppENpix, 


IIl.- 


Court of Sudder |, 
Dewanny and Fouj- 
darry Adavélut. 


Registrars of Zillah 
Courts. 


Native Judges. _ 


APPENDIX; 


Calcutta Civil 


FjnanceCommittee. 


Vide Appendix, 
No. 5 & y, MS. 
Collection. 


4 


| d 


At 6,000 p’ an. 
— 4,800 ditto 
= 3,000 ditto 
= 1,800 ditto 
~ 1,200 ditto 


Total - +]! 6,—15,000 | 8,—19,800 | 9,——22,800 | 10,—25,800 


Average « 


APPENDIX ro REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


e 
of the establishment ought therefore, we think, to be settled chiefly “with reference to the 
population and wealth of the districts, thoagh ey a will also properly form an item in the. 
adjustment; and if the districts of the least extent @nd thinnest population be divided into 
four or five divisions, and the most populous and extensive into eight or nine, there will not,: 
" we imagine, be any just cause of complaint on the score of distance. 

68, Civil suits, in which any considerable amount of property may be at stake, as well'as 
all criminal cases (excepting those of the highest description), should, for obvious reasons, 
be tried at the Sudder station, unless where the parties may prefer one of the pergunnah 
courts. It will also probably be found expedient to employ the head native fadaes in the 
trial of appeals from the decisions of the inferior native tribunals: and generally we may - 
observe that, the European judge being chiefly useful for purposes of control, the plan of, 
ordering new trials, and of referring cases decided by one native judge to the judgment of two - 
or more, and questions of fact to juries, should be adopted as far as possible. But into. 
these gletails it is foreign from our present purpose to enter; and in submitting the Schedule 
of establishment, we do so of course with the full expectation that considerable modifications 
in its several parts may be found necessary. 

69. Looking to the reputed superficies and population of the several districts of this pre- , 
sidency, to the extent of the civil and criminal business, as shown in the statements furnished, 
by the Sudder Dewanny and Nizamut Adawlut, it appears to us that the number of native: 
judges will need: to vary from eight to 12. Fora few places in Bengal 18 may be required, and 
in some of the western districts six may possibly suffice. One-third, or thereabouts, we sup- 
pose to be employed at the Sudder station ; the remainder at convenient places in the interior 
of the several districts; and as far as we can venture to decide on a matter in which some 
latitude must of course be allowed, the wants of the people would be sufficiently provided 
for by the employment in the districts mentioned in the Schedule * of 415 native judges. The 
scale of emoluments might, we conceive, be advantageously adjusted as follows: 


290 


Where 15 are 
wanted. 


Where 12 are 
wanted, 


Where 6 are Where 9 are 


wanted. 


Where 8 are 


Where 1Q are 
wanted, 


veanted. 
eo 


Where 18 are ’ 


wanted, wanted. 


1,— 6,000 
1,-~ 4,800 
2,— 6,000 
3— 5,400 
3,—- 3,600 


1,— 6,000 
1,— 4,800 
1,-— 3,000 
3— 5,490 
3 3,600 


1,— 6,000 2,—12,000 {| 2,—-12,000 


3.-— 9,000 
bi one 
5: 9,000 


3,-—18,000 
BS Fea 9,000 
6,—10,800 
6,— 7,200 


ny 


‘1,~— 6,000 


2,— 6,000 
4,— 7,200 
4:— 4,800 


- 4 - 
1,— 3,000 
2,— 3,600 
2,—— 2,400 


2,— 6,000 


3: 5,400 
.2,— 2,400 


12,-—-30,000 | 15,—36,000 |} 18,—45,000 « 


LE YS 
| 2,580 2,500 2,400 2,500. 


| 2,475 | 2,533 
aR SN ED 


70. If this scale of emolument be adopted, the aggregate pay of the officers in question , 


may be stated at Rs. 10,37,500, being Rs. 3,07,500 + mn excess of the sums now received by 
the sudder ameens and moonsiffs in their judicial capacities. 


ag ae A a a OC rE Te 


7.2? ‘Upper Provinces - - "es 7 - - 129 
Lowerditto - - *° 5 7 "= 2 2 286 
Total « «+ = 415 
+ Aggregate present allowances of Sudder Ameens and Moonsifis + a 7,380,000. 
: Aggregate of proposed allowances to native Judges == - * 10,37,500 
7 —— pose 
Excess - + - — 3,07,500 


Ly 


a emieiamenee aumento aon 


_ ° GENERAL APPENDIX. | 291 


e 
__ 71. It has, we understand, been proposed to employ a considerably larger number, and to 
give higher pay ; and it may be proper to explain, that in estimating the wants of the country 
we have proceeded on the assumption thgt the suits now summarily disposed of by the zillah 
judges and collectors are generally such as to admit of-easy determination; it appearing 
that the judge of Burdwan decided more than 5,000 such suits in one year. The possibility 
of our requiring a larger establishment ought however to be kept in mind, as one of many 
‘obvious reasons for carrying our proposals of retrenchment elsewhere beyond the imfnediate 
necessity of the case. The salaries above detailed have been adopted by us, after a careful 
consideration of prices and the wages of labour, with reference to the duties on which we 


_ Suppose the native judges to beimmediately employed. If hereafter they shall take the place 


of zillah judges, or if the importance of their functions shall be otherwise materially 
enlarged, it will of course be right to reconsider their claims to increased emoluments. 

72. Weshall separately report on the native establishments in the Revenue and Police 
departments. At present we shall only remark that it seems to us to be of the highest 
importance that the collectors, those in the unsettléd districts especially, should” have 
efficient servants, and that for this purpose their head men should, as at Madras, be 
liberally paid. This is equally desirable whether collectors are to be magistrates or not; 
but it will certainly beyond any other measure tend to remove all the difficulties which are 
likely to oppose the plan of uniting the two offices; for a good sheristadar and a well- 
ordered system of record will render the collector’s superintendence comparatively easy. . 

73. The pay of our tehsildars may, we see reason to think, be so regulated as to pro- 
vide a fund for the increase we should propose to the sheristadars ; and if, as is desirable on 
grounds often and unanswerably urged by Sir Thomas Munro, the former have the charge 
‘of the police within their divisions, we shall be able, we hope, without undue parsimony, to 


effect a certain saving in the native establishments. This point, however, we propose to 
e ; F 


‘consider separately. 

74. Besides the offices mentioned in thé Schedule, there is a commissioner for the Sunder- 
bunds ; which appointment, now that the boundary has been settled, ought to cease, and the 
‘duties be transferred to the collector and salt agent of the 24 Pergunnahs, and the other 
collectors whose districts touch the Sunderbunds. ° 

45. Tbe revenue surveyors ought, we think, tobe reduced and employed merely as topo- 
‘graphical surveyors, unless we can satisfy ourselves that their superintendence will ensure 
economy and accuracy in the field measurements, which are indispensable to anything like 
a real settlement of the country. On this subject the surveyor-general is understood to be 
preparing a report, and we shall reserve it, therefore, for future consideration. 

76. The special commissioners, acting under Regulation ILE. 1828, must of course be 
considered as holding temporary and contingent appointments. If they do nothing that 
could not be done by the ordinary courts equally well and cheaply, of course they should 
cease; and however well they may perform their duty, and however large may be the extent 
of property confirmed through their judgments to Government or individuals, we should be 
disposed to think that the establishment of a good judicial system would render unnecessary 
any such special tribunals. It is to be observed, however, that the duty is of a kind which 
it would be rather rash at preserit to entrust to native judges. We do not, therefore, propose 
to take credit for any saving under this head; but we would suggest for consideration the 
expediency of employing several of the officers who may become supernumerary on the aboli- 
tion of the offices proposed to be abolished, as commissioners in districts where there is now 
no special commision, and in which the quaytity of land fraudulently alienated is said to be 
large. This suggestion would equally apply to Madras and Bombay, where the enam lands 
seem to be very extensive. 


PPe2 


APPRE&MDIX, 


Ill. 


(22.) Letter from 
Committee on Crvil 
Establishnyats, 
Bengal; 

13 July 1820 


APPENDIX, 
IIf. 
Calcutta Civil 
FinanceCommittee. 


292 APPENDIX ro REPORT rnow SELECT COMMITTEE, 


(23.)—LETTER from the Calcutta Civig F inance Committee to the Governor-general 
in Council at Bengal, dated 1¢th June 1830. 


My Lord, 

1.67 he marine establishment under the Government of Bombay will form the subject 
of our present ve According to the method hitherto pursued, we furnish a compara- 
tive statement of the ordinary and extraordinary disbursements in this department for 
1823-24 and 1828-29, exhibiting an excess of Hs. 6/62,932, exclusive of steamers, in the 
latter year. We also insert below the charges from 1815-16 to 1828-29, and those esti- 
mated for 1829-30 and 1830-31 *. ; ae 

2. In submitting to your Lordship in Council our remarks upon this branch of expenditure, 
it is not necessary, we apprehend, to describe the several changes which the Bombay marine 
has undergone at different periods, much less to enter into a narrative of the long and 
honotrable public services which they have performed, and which have recently been marked " 
in a special manner by the privilege conferred on the officers of taking rank with those of 
the Royal navy; for these topics could not materially assist the immediate object’ of our 
inquiry, which is to fix the extent of maritime force indispensably necessary to be maintainedr 
by the Honourable Company in the actual circumstances of present times. 

3. At an early stage of our investigation we endeavoured to ascertain, in consequence of 
the correspondence on the subject which had previously passed between the Supreme Go- 
vernment and the Government of Bombay, whether the exclusive employment of His Majesty’s 
ships would prove less expensive than those of the Indian navy (the designation now directed 
to be Sppked: to the Bombay marine); but the answer of Rear-admiral Gage did not lead us 
to expect any dinfinution of expense, supposing it necessary to maintain a distinct force for 
the Persian Gulf service. As the correspondence with the admiral passed through the medium 
of the Supreme Government, we do not enclose a copy of it on this occasion. 

4. Your Lordship in Council is aware that the Honourable the Court of Directors, in a 
despatch dated the 1st of October 1827, to the Government of Bombay, directed that the 
establishment for the Indian navy shouldsn future consist of twelve vessels : 4 
1 frigate 


* Statement of the Charges of the Bombay Marine from 1815-16 to 1830—31. 


. 
4 


YEARS. Local Charges. |; STORES, 
wis 

1815-16 10,27,502 % 2.8 10,27,502 
1816-17 953,696 || & 4 & 953,696 
1817-18 11,28,518 3 fs 11,28,518 
1818-19 10,92,593 oo oe 10,92,593 
1819-20 12,47,649 || So &|| 12,47,649 
1820-21 13,38,200 ||? 2% 2 13,38,200 
1831-22 12,96,344 || 2% o-3. 12,096,344 
1829-23, | 11,45:957 IS. 11,45,957 
1823-24 10,81,509 77,830 11,59,339 
1824-25 10,96,507° 77,300 {| 11,89,257 
1825-26 14,70,228 68,609 16,44,615 
1826-27 14,44,155" 2,71,813 17,15,968 
1827~28 18,79,421 { 2,62,804 ewe 
1828-29 16,15,042 |  2,07,227 eee 
Estimate 1829-30 17,26,000 1,96,900 sees 

. 1830-31 . | 15,932700 2,22,200 {| °17;25:9 


"GENERAL APPENDIX :. 293 
‘1 frigate (the Hastings) - .of 30 guns. 
8 sloops - - = each of@4.—- 
4ditto - - ° =" ditto. 16- —- 
2ditto - @ - ditto 10 — 
2 steamers - -. ditto 5 - 


‘We have not found any information on record to enable us to discover the precise reason 
which led the Honourable Court to order the above scale of force to be maintainedy except 
the one assigned in their despatch, “¢o promote the efficiency of the Indian navy ;” neither 
does it appear on record that any inefficiency had been experienced, or that any calculation 
- of expense was made in reference to the proposed scale: upon comparing this number and 
class of vessels, however, with the number and class of vessels composing the marine when 
. the despatch in question arrived, a list of which we have inserted below *, it will be seen by 

your Lordship in Council that the scale proposed by the Honourable Court is: much larger, 
‘and would consequently be much more expensive, than that existing in 1828. 


_5. In a subsequent despatch, dated the 31st December 1829, the Honourable” Court 
informed the Government. of Bombay that, in the present embarrassed state of the finances of 
India, they did not feel themselves at liberty to authorize the construction of a 24-gun vessel, 
and that every expenditure that could be avoided or postponed, without great detriment to 
the service, must be abstained from. They further added, “we conclude that the Bengal 
Government will have transferred to you the Enterprize steamer, and that the Hastings 
frigate will have been also returned to you; and we should hope that by the addition of this 
strength the marine will be found adequate to discharge all its ordinary duties.” 

6. The superintendant of the Indian navy, Captain Sir Charles Malcolm, has given his 
opinion that ten vessels is “the smallest number that can possibly bedone with, without 
allowing for extra service, or small expeditions against pirates ;” and the services required to 


APPENDIX, 
Iki. *. 
(23.)—Letter from 
Committee on 
Indian Navy; 
14 June 1830. 


be performed by these vessels are also laid down by him as follows: _ 


4 vessels to be in constant circulation, in order to keep up a regular monthly commu- 

nication between the Presidency and Bushire;in the Persian Gulf. 

1 vessel at Bassadore, for the commodore of*the squadron in the Persian Gulf. __ 

2 vessels at the Presidency, one to be kept feady for any service required, and the other 
under repair. ie 

1 vessel for the duties of the Red Sea. 

1 vessel to cruize in the Gulf of Cutch, Cambay, and to the northward, 

1 vessel for the service of the Malabar coast. 


7. With regard to the scale here proposed, we beg to observe, that the employment of 
ships of war does not seem necessary for every description of service thus destined for them, 
and that a steamer may in future supersede the necessity of employmg ships of war in the 
neighbourhood of Bombay, on most occasions in which it has hitherto been customary to 
employ them; neither are we aware of any service for a ship of war in the Red Sea, which 
is so pressing as to justify any expense on that account; moreover, it may be safely assumed 
that in these times a vessel of war may be dispensed with in the Gulfs of Cutch or Cambay, 
on the Malabar coast,.and to the northward of Bombay. If the presence of such a vessel 
should happen to be wanted for any particular purpose, the one destined under this plan 
“to be at the Presidency ready for any service required,” would be available. Even, there-~ 
fore, were we required to form our judgmegt on the facts furnished in Sir Charles Malcolm’s 
letter now referred to, we must conclude that, under the existing financial exigency, a 

strengt. 
i a 


* List of vesselsof war in commission in 1828, exclusive of schooners and smaller vessels ¢ 
4 ships - - - se - 18 guns. 
1 ditto - - - - - - 12 ditto. 
3 brigs e+ - - = 1 *  .10 ditto 


APPENDIX, 
Ifl. 
’ Calcutta Civil 
FinanceCommittee. 


294 APPENDIX ro REPORT rom SELECT COMMITTEE. 7 


strength of the Indian navy ought to be reduced greatly below the standard above spe- 
cified; and this impression is generally strengthened by the other information we have 
obtained. ; 


e... 

8. With the view of assisting our judgment as to the footing on which the Indian navy 
should at present be placed, we requested the opinions of Commodore Sir John Hayes an 
of Captain Ross of that service, and employed under the orders of the Supreme Government ; 
but these officers intimated their inability to afford us any satisfactory information, in con- 
sequence of their long absence from the western side of India. 


9.’ We also consulted Mr. W. Bruce, formerly resident of Bushire, whose long experience 
and local knowledge entitle his opinions to great weight, and we solicit the particular notice — 
of your Lordship in Council to that gentleman’s letter, which accompanied our address of the. 
loth of April Jast to your Lordship m &ouncil, and a copy of which for the convenience of ° 
reference 1s annexed to this Report. 


10. We shall, in the first place, advert to that portion of the letter in which the policy of 
altogether withdrawing our naval force from the Gulf is discussed. On this point we confess 
we are not satisfied that there exists any clear necessity for a minute and constant inter- 
ference with the piratical States in question, such as to require the continued employment of 
a naval force upon the duty which the Indian navy is intended to perform; and if it were 
necessary to provide for an occasional enterprize es we should be decidedly opposed to the 
policy of maintaining for the purpose any other armed naval force than that of His Majesty’s 
navy: even indeed for the regular service which the Indian navy is required to perform, 
were it now 2 question whether such an establishment should be created, we should be 
against the measure, and should deem it preferable to look to the navy of England, of 
which one or two large brigs of war would probably suffice, and over which it ‘would not, 
we presume, be difficult so to arrange that the Governments of India should exercise direct . 
authority.. As an ultimate object, therefore, the discontinuance of the Indian navy ought, we 
think, to be kept in view; and the remarks of Mr. Bruce are well deserving of attention in 
considering that branch of the questiqn which hinges on the state of affairs in the Gulf. 

a 


11, But at present the Company’s Gdyernments in India have no authority over the 
King’s navy, and the actual existence of a large marine establishment at Bombay is an 
important circumstance to be attended to. In that establishment no material change can 
probably be made without a reference to England ; even should it there be resolved to dis- 
continue it, the measure could not be effected otherwise than very gradually, without much 
expense ; and for immediate practical purposes the main point for consideration seems to 
“he, how far the charges incidental to the establishment can be curtailed. If the policy of 
withdrawing our naval force from’ the Gulf appeared to your. Lordship in Council to be 
advisable, and the experiment to be worthy-of trial, our suggestions would resolve them- 
selves into 2 small compass ;}for the immediate wants of a naval force at Bombay would 
mot, in this case, be much greater than those of other parts of India, and all in excess of 
one ship and one steamer might be deemed supernumerary. As, however, we are not 
at liberty to assume that your Lordship in Council may adopt: this view of the. subject, we 
shall proceed on the assumption that some naval force is deemed requisite in the Gulf, and 
then the degree of force there wanted becomes the real object of inquiry: respecting the 


. system and scale on which the Indian navy may require to be maintained, the judgment of 


’ tone in which the future expectations of tl 


your Lordship in Council. will no doubt be materially influenced by the information pro- - 
mised by his excellency Rear-admiral Sir E. Owen, the present naval commander-in-chief, 
in his letter of the 8th ultimo to the Supreme Government 


12. Whether, leaving the Gulf without: any faval force, the marine establishment of 
Bombay be reduced within the narrow limits above indicated, or whether your Lordship in 
Council may hesitate to adopt so neve reduction, we take leave to remark that the 

e Indian navy are mentioned in various docu- 
“ments on the records of that Presidency, which are before us, and even the recent change in 
, its 


GENERAL APPENDIX. 905 


its designation, are rather to be regretted as indicating no disposition to diminish, but rather 
a settled purpose of augmenting the heavy expénse with which it is attended. This is a 
point which, in our judgment, deserves te serious attention of the authorities both in India 
and in England. 


18. With these general remarks we proceed to the consideration of the extent of force 
which Mr. Bruce considers sufficient, if any should be thought necessary in. the Gulf 
of Persia: he has estimated it at one vessel of 18 guns, and one armed steamer, 
provided the resident does not employ them as packets; but the constant presence of a 
steamer in the Gulf may not be necessary ; and as both vessels would require to be relieved 
from time to time by others, this relief in the case of the steamer might be difficult from 
want of an adequate number, and would at all events be very expensive. We have there- 
fore to recommend, that one vessel of 18 guns be &tationed in the Gulf, to be relieved 
periodically by another of the same class; for these two vessels will no doubt be found 
sufficient for every ordinary purpose. 


14. The resident at Bushire has a schooner *, we observe, attached to him, and we would 
propose to assign another schooner for the duty in the Gulf. These vessels, which are of 
a cheap description, will furnish ample means of communication between the different parts 
of the Gulf, and either of them could be sent on packet duty to Bombay, if necessary, but 
the relief of the vessel of war, and the opportunities of communication afforded by trading 
vessels, will propey render the necessity of rare occurrence. The schooner Telica is at 
present attached to the establishment of the Honourable the Governor; but since the intro-. 
duction of steamers on the western side of India, a vessel of the latter description will 
poy be preferred by him on the few occasions in ‘which he has to go to sea, and the 

‘elica might be appropriated to the service above stated. 


15. As the necessity of having a commodore in the Gulf of Persia ceases if the naval 
establishment is put on the footing here ae ee we recommend the abolition of that 
appointment. The office of storekeeper at Bassadore will also become unnecessary. 


16. In regard to the state of the piratical powers in the Gulf of Persia, we had occasion, 
in our report of the 26th April last, to notice intcidentally the rare occurrence of piracy 
within late years in that quarter; and the trifling nature of the cases which have been occa- 
sionally reported, none of which in reality concern British interests, serves to confirm the 
notoriety of the fact. The records of events for a series of years affords indisputable 
evidence that the practice of piracy upon ships sailing under British colours has ceased, and 
that in respect to the other vessels it is infinitely less frequent than at any former period ; 
and hence it seems reasonable to assume that Government may safely reduce its maritime 
strength to a lower degree than formerly. 


17. In applying our attention to the subject under review, we have carefully perused and 
considered the arguments which have been advanced in the despatch of the 20th February 
1829, from the Government of Bombay to your Lordship in Council, and in other documents, 
in proof of the necessity of keeping up a naval force on a larger scale than has appeared to us 
to be indispensable ; and although we are fully sensible of the weight which these arguments 
carry, yet considering them along with the absolute necessity of retrieving the State from its 
pecuniary embarrassments, they have not convinced us that the latter necessity is the least 
of the two. Besides, it does not appear that, sufficient importance has been attached, in the 
arguments to which we allude, to the fact that a squadron of His Majesty’s ships is in India, 
and that their services are procurable, in cases of war or emergency, as well in the Persian 
Gulf as elsewhere, and that they have always been, in truth, the preponderating arm in naval 
warfare in that quarter. 


18. If the Honourable Company’s Government maintains a force sufficient to see that its 
treaties are observed (and for this the best security is dhat commanding impression of its 
power which now undoubtedly prevails, in consequence of the convincing proofs which the 
piratical powers in the Gulf have experienced of its ability to chastise their offences), in that 

case 


APprrn pix, 
lil 
(23.) Letter from 
Committee on 
Indian Nawy; 
14 June 1830, 


* The “ Fly,” com- 
manded by a Na- 
tive, 


APPENDIX, 
Til. 
— me 1 
Calcutta Civil 
Finance Committee. 


296 | APPENDIX to REPORT rxom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


e 
case we think that all is maintained which can reasonably be contended for on the plea of ° 
political necessity: but ifany broader principle is adopted mm deciding on the extent of naval 
force which is required ; if a system of A stag | is parsued, for instance, which binds up our 
responsibility in all the petty politics of the Arab tribes bordering on the Persian Gulf; or 
if we undertake to provide for the complete protection of every one visiting that sea, and to 
call to account every depredator against hier as well as against ourselves, then even the. 
large number of ships proposed by the Honourable Court to be maintained may prove insuf- 


. ficient, for the Aacnnneh| must of course depend on the nature of the objects to which the- 
0 


services of the maritime torce are to be directed. The essential object of inspiring the pirate 
states with a salutary awe of our power has, as above intimated, been attained by operations. ° 
in which the force ordinarily employed in the Gulf could only be expected to take an incon-- 
siderable share ; and the necessity of eundertaking repeated expeditions against those states - 
at a very heavy charge to the Bombay Government, was not, we may observe, obviated by 
the existence of an expensive marine, The whole tenor of Mr. Bruce’s letter affords evidence 
of the existence in the Gulf of that impression of our power to which we have alluded ; and 
the circumstances, recently reported to the Supreme Government, which attended the cap- 
ture of a vessel belonging to Morbut, and the restitution of the captured property on the 
demand of the resident at Bushire, show that this impression continues as much as ever to 
prevail. But as the prevalence of that impression is not to be attributed to the strength of 
our local marine force, and as it must operate to diminish the risk of our being obliged to 
have recourse to measures of coercion, it would surely be very unreasonable to regard its 
existence as a ground for maintaining the Indian navy on an extensive scale. 

19. As the extent and value of the trade between India and the Persian Gulf are of 


importance in considering the present question, we insert a Statement thereof, from the 
year 1821-22 to 1827-28: 


BENGAL. MADRAS. BOMBAY. 
YEAR. e. 
Imports. ° Exports. Imports. Exports. Imports, Exports. 
1821-22 | 36,25,178 47,40,902 92,862 20,90,821 33,85,197 33,59,384 
1822-23 | 38,54,718 | 34,64,404 ' 2,24,240° 85,040 36,79,169 30,91 ,782 
1823-24 | 24,18,321 34,15,597 1,98,144 54,156 39,44,529 41,59,485 
1824-25 | 18,19,883 27,13,344 26,643 83,416 35,31 ,303 37,15,960 
1825-26 | 22,53,338 31,47,972 66,326 3,67,802 31,78,411 43,43,780 
1826-27 | 11,56,276 21,86,501 8,361 1,07,009 | 34,22,128 41,91,831 
1827-28 | 21,27,048 22,54,434 17,960 4,25,958 32,05,662 33,66,175 


20. From the above Statement, it will be observed that the average value of the trade, 
between Calcutta and the Persian Gulf amounts annually to Rs. 55,96,845 ; between the 
ports under the Government of Fort St. George and those in the Gulf of Persia, to, 
Zs. 549,819; and between Bombay and the Gu¥ to Rs. 72,24,971. The amount of customs 


_ levied on the trade in question is small, owing t8 the exemption from duty which is allowed. 


to, the most valuable articles of import, such as treasure, jewels, and horses. The import 
and export duty at Calcutta, on an average of the above seven years, was Js. 1,05,795,; at. 
Madras Rs. 46,610, and at Bombay Rs. 39,777. The py eos Statement shows what 
portion of this trade is carried on in English and what in Arab ships: 


BENGAL. 


GENERAL APPENDIX. 207 a 


—— 


(33.) Letter from 


a 
a ; ARRIVALS. 
. Committee on 


* 


BENGAL 


YEARS, Indian Navy ; 
ENGLISH. 14 June 1m 7 
‘1 
ro Ships. Tons. Shigs. 
. 1821-22) 11 4,466 16 
5 Eee 10 4,071 ll 
1823-24 12 4,617 10 
1824-25 3 956 10 
1825-26 2 505 il 
1826-27 3 902 11 
1827-28 9 3,604 15 
1821-22] 6 2,139 
yj | 1822-23] 10 3,612 
<q | 1823-24 7 2,530 
& 1824-25| 4 1,581 
= | 1826-26| 1 125 
| 1826-27;  - -~ 
1827-28} - -}- - « 
. (1821-22; 24 8,964 4 
p>, | 1822-23} 14. |- 7,665 4 
<i} 1823-24] 13 5,086 8 
4) 1824-25{ 4 1,239 6 
= 1825-26 3 1,283 6 
6 | 1826-27 q 3,092 3 
1827-28 | 14 5,697 3 


21. In a despatch of the 29th August 1821, the Government of Bombay was informed by 
the Honourable Court that it was left to its discretion to maintain the marine on a scale 
suited to the wants of the public service, and not to incur an unnecessary expense during 
a period of general peace ; and in accordance with this view, we think that in a time of peace 
like the present, the Indian navy may at all events be put on a peace establishment, consist~ 
ently with the security of British interests and the preservation of existing treaties; and we 
accordingly recommend that the number and class of ships of war in commission be reduced 
to the following scale, viz. : 

Two vessels of 18 guns for the Gulf of Persia. 

One vessel of 10 guns under repair, or for duty at Bombay. 

One steamer for general duty at Bombay. 

22. In the event of one of the 18-gun vessels requiring any considerable repair, we pre- 
sume that another vessel of the same classgan be put into commission in her place, or that 
the vessel of 10 guns may furnish the relick until the repairs are made, supposing the relief 
cannot conveniently be postponed. ‘ be BA 

23. In the above scale we have not provided for the wants of Bengal and Madras, because 
we understand that there is no immediate occasion for vessels of war at those presidencies ; 
but should the want occur, it can be supplied by putting into commission one or more of 
the ships which will be laid up under the proposed plan. 

24. Besides ships of war, there are others on the Bombay establishment on which we 
have to offer some remarks ; and the first of these is the surveying ship Benares, the “ 

or 


ApPEYyDIX, 


II. 


Calcutta Civil - 
FinanceCommitteeé. 


298 APPENDIX ro REPORT rom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


. 
for which, exclusive of officers, purser, master, captain’s clerk,.and stores, is entered in the 
auditor’s book at Rs. 25,912 per annum, or at Rs. 21,312, beyond the charge incurred, after 
deducting officers and stores, for the surveying vessels employed by the marine surveyor- 
general of Bengal * ; whereas the difference between the two vessels is only 50 tons, the 
former being 250 and the latter 200 tons. We therefore recommend that the complement 
of the Benares be reduced to what is absolutely necessary for the object of her being 
afloat, ahd that she be laid up as soon as that object is accomplished. A similar system of 
exorbitant expenditure is observable in the establishraent maintained at Bombay for the 
pilot brig Palurus. This vessel in point of tonnage corresponds precisely with a Bengal 
pilot vessel, and, exclusive of officers, purser, captain’s clerk, and stores, is entered in the 
auditor’s book at Rs. 10,988 per annum, whereas the latter description of vessels, exclusive 
of pilots and stores, is entered at R. 4400, showing an excess in the former of Rs. 6,388 +. - 
This comparison, too, holds equally good whether we consider the Palinurus to be employed. 
as a pilot brig (which she properly is,or as a surveying vessel (which she is understood to 
be occasionally) ; for the same class of ship, and the same complement of men, are now used - 
in Bengal for both purposes. As a pilot brig for the Bombay harbour (where there is 
an 


* Expense of a Bengal pilot vessel, exclusive of the charge of officers and stores 
One-fourth on account of difference of tonnage - - - - - - 


And one-third on account of higher wages at Bombay - - =< - - - 


° Total - - 


+ Comparative Statement of the Expense of the Crews of a Bengal Pilot Brig, and of 
* the Palinurus. 
e 


‘ 
Pitor Brie. Brie Pauinurvs. 


— y ey 


. 1 Native Carpenter - - 20 - = 1 Gunner = - - - 40 - = 
1 Carpenter’s Mate - - ww = 1 Carpenter + - - 40 - = 
1 Syrang - - - - wo 4 Quarter-masters, or Succa-] { 

1 Tindal + - - oe IZ mw nies, at 25 rupees each -{j, mee 5 
2 Steersmen “ - - 20 - —* 1 Native Steward - - 20 = = 
1 Cook for the Europeans - 8 - - aSyrang - - - -f°> 90 - = 
- 1 ditto for the Natives - 4“ 1 First Tindal - - - 18 - =| 

- 1 Cussaub « - - - 8 —- = _ 1 Second ditto - - - 5~~ = 
1Topaza - - «= - 7 — = 30 Lascars, at 8 rupees each - 240 - —? 
1 Pilot’s Servant - = 2 mie 1 Cook « 3 e o 8 ec 
4 Lascars (able) - - - 2 — = 1 ditto for the Commander - 10 - = 
8 ditto (ordinary) - - 40 - - 1 ditto for the Mates « - Qe -t 
1 Sailemaker = - - = 10 - = 2 Topasses, at 6 rupees each 2 = = 

The charge for provisions ave- 105. 6 =} 1 Commander’s Servant => iwz2- = 

raged during the year 1828 5. 3 1 Chief Mate’s - ditto - 10 - = 

1 Second ditto - ditto - 8 = - 

Gunner’s ditto - “ - J-—- 

‘Total per Mensem - 1 Steward’s ditto - .-} ° 6 = = 
Or per Annum =~ 4 Marne Boys for training, }} ’ 8 

at 12 rupees each i naa aan 

Provision allowance - 7 282 2 98 


- 2 98 


Total per Mensem. « “es . 95 
0,988 + 3 76 


-Or per Annum. + os 


‘GENERAL APPENDIX. 299 


an ample supply of excellent pilot boats) she is understood to be totally unnecessary, 
except in the monsoon. We recommend, therefore, that this vessel (the Palinurus) be 
annually laid up from the 15th October to 15th May, and that. when in commission for 
the remaining five months she have only such a complement of officers and crew as is con- 
sistent with the nature of her duties. The employment of one vessel for surveying at 
ombay is, we think, quite sufficient, especially in reference to the question of expense. 

25. The vessel (Nautilus) which is stationed at Surat for the senior naval officer, we 
propose should be laid up; for as that officer resides altogether on shore, the expense of 
a ‘vessel for him seems very superfluous, and. we find thé same opinion expressed in 
- a Minute * by Mr. Warden, late member of Council at Bombay: moreover, we are not 

satisfied that any necessity exists for having a naval officer at all at Surat, but we shall 
‘ reserve our remarks on this point for a subsequent part of this Report. In our Schedule 
we have taken credit for the sum of Rs. 45,316,+ the amount of reduction which we calculate 
will arise by adopting the suggestions contained in this and the preceding paragraph. 

26. In order to exhibit to your Lordship in Council, at one view, the number and descrip- 
tion of ships maintained at Bombay, exclusive of pattamars and inferior craft, in the present 
‘and two preceding years, we insert the following List, which likewise embraces the scale of 
ape of every description, with the above exception, which are contemplated in this Report 
to be continued in commission: 


1829. 


No. Guns. 
1. Elphinstone 18 
2. Amherst - 18 
3. Clive - - 18 
4 Coote - - 18 
5. Ternate - - 12 


No. Gunus,| No. Guns. 
1. Elphinstone - 18 | 1. Elphinstone 18 
2. Amherst - 18, 2. Amherst - 18 
3. Clive - - 18|3. Clive - - 18 
4. Coote - ~ 18] 4. Coote - - 18 
-§ Temnate- - 1%2{ 5. Ternate- - 12 


1. Clive - - 18 
2. Coote - - 18 
3. Tigris - - 10 
4. Hugh Lindsay 


(steamer.) 


6. Nautilus - 10] 6. Nautilus - 10] 6. Nautilus - 10 | 5. Benarés (survey- 
7. Antelope - 10; 7. Antelope - 10 7. Euphrates - 10 mB ship.) ; 
8. Thetis - - 10] 8. Euphrates - 10 | 8, Tigris - - 10 | & ae (pilot 
9. Benares (survey- | 9. Benares (survey- | 9. Benares (survey- ng.) 
ing ship.) ing ship.) ing ship.) 7. Fy schooner (for 
10. Palinurus (pilot [10. Palinurus (pilot |10. Palinurus (pilot packet service in 
brig.) brig.) brig.) the Gulf) 
(continued) 


* oth July 1827. 


+ Benares: 
Present charge + +  - - - 
Proposed ditto: - eae - 
; Difference -@ + - 
Palinurus; 


e 
Present charge + 


Proposed ditto for five months - = 
Difference - - - 
Brig Nautilus - - - * 7. 


APPENDIX, 


(23.) Letter from 
Committee ou 
Indian Navy ; 
14 June 1830. 


seat soe 300 APPENDIX ro REPORT rrou SELECT COMMITTEE. 


pa gp pg "2 y . + 
Caleutta Civil : 
FinanceCommittee. - 1828. “ 
“ Noo 2 | Gans. No. , .Guns,| No. Guns. | No. . “Gans. 
11. Yaeht Hygeia. 11. Fly (schooner at- 11, Fly (schooner, at- | 8. Telica. 
oS tached to the j. taghed to Resi- | 9, Enterprize (steam 
Resident at Bu- | - - dent, Bushire.) packet.) ; 
shire.) 12. Telica (attached ; 
_ (12. Telica. to Governor.) 
13. Enterprize « 13. Enterprize, } 
(steamer.) 14. Hugh Lindsay, 
; e .  (steamers.) 
In Ordinary : In Ordinary : In Ordinary : 
12, Aurora (receiving (14. Aurora (receiving {15. Aurora (receiving 
vessel.) vessel,) vessel.) 
, 15. Thetis, 16. Thetis 


17. Hastings (frigate.) 


27. Your Lordship in Council will observe, that we have included oné steamer in the fore- 
going plan as a vessel of war, which appears to.us to be sufficient for all ordinary duty in the 
neighbourhood of Bombay, and the othér as a packet. The employment of the latter for 
the conveyance of passengers and letters to the Red Sea, which may be considered a specu- 
lation not necessary for the Government to continue if private individuals enter into it, or 
if it be attended with heavy pecuniary loss, ise an undertaking belonging, we think, to the 
Post-office department, to which the charge of the second steamer should be debited. 

28. We shall now proceed to consider the establishment of officers in the Indian navy: 
the number destined .to serve afloat, by the Honourable Court’s despatches of the 31st. 
October 1827, and 31st December 1829, allowing for furlough and sickness, was five 
captains, 12 commanders, 46 lieutenants, 60 midshipmen. ; 

. The number serving afloat in 1828 was, four captains, eight commanders, 23 lieutenants, 
34 midshipmen. 

And the whole number of officers, afloat and on shore, on furlough or on sick certificate, 
at the latter period, was, eight captains, 10 commanders, 48 heutenants, 48 midshipmen. 

29. It is material to point out to your Lordship in Council, that although by the order 
of the Honourable Court officers holding situations on shore are desired to relinquish them 
and return to the proper duties of their profession, or to resign the marine altogether, yet 
the establishment of officers fixed by the Honourable Court for service afloat only, is nearly 
the same as that which had previously executed all duties afloat and ashore, the reduction 
being three captains and two lieutenants, and the addition two commanders and 12 mid- 
shipmen ; besides, it is to be observed, that the appointments.of pursers, of masters, and of 
captains’ clerks, have been introduced since 1898-24, and that an establishment of pilots 
and volunteers for piloting ships in and out of*the harbour of Bombay, which duty had 
been and continues to be performed by the petty and warrant officers of the marine, was 
directed by the Court to be added to the master attendant’s department. 

+ 80. The number of officers required afloat for the Indian navy, manifestly depends on 
the number of ships deemed necessary for the public service; but as the pay of the officers 
forms & comparatively small item in the expense of a ship at sea, the object of economy 
would be’ much better attained: by continuing to them their pay and emoluments on shore 
until their services are wanted afloat, rather than by keeping ships in scares 

Se . é a uy, 


* GENERAL APPENDIX. | 301 


cessarily, with the view of affording employment. In reference, therefore, to ‘the number 
of ships of war, and of vessels of every kind *,,exclusive of pattamars and other small craft 
which are commanded by natives, the following number of officers will, in our opinion, 
suffice for service afloat, including scualtes, farloustin, &ec.: three captains, three com- 
manders, 19 lieutenants, 28 midshipmen: and as at the commencement of the present year 
(1830) the actual strength of the Indian navy was, nine captains, nme commanders, 46 
lieutenants, 67 midshipmen, it will be evident to your Lordship im Council that there is 
more than an ample supply of officers for every description of regular or miscellaneous 
service that can now be required of them, whether afloat or on shore}. 
. _ 81. In respect to the pilot establishment ordered to be introduced at Bombay, the Marine 
Board at the Presidency, in a Report to the Government, dated the 14th June 1828, 
. observed, that the existing establishment for piloting vessels in and out of the harbour had 
been found fully sufficient to meet every exigency, and the Government consequently con- 
tinued the pilotage in the hands of the warrant and petty officers of the marine; but as 
volunteers for the pilot service had been sent out by the Court in puruance of the intention 
expressed in their ee these gentlemen have been incorporated with the midshipmen, 
whose number at the beginning of the present year amounted to 67. We would therefore 
beg to recommend that no more midshipmen be sent out until the Government finds occasion 
to apply for them. 

32. The number of pursers at the commencement of the present year was 13, and we 
observe that they are attached to vessels of the smallest class, and steamers; as these 
appointments are recent we recommend their discontinuance, for the Indian navy has done 
without them for upwards of half a century; and although, as observed by the Honourable 
Court, “ the practice of victualling the ships by a monthly allowance per head to the 
captain was decidedly objectionable,” yet the system now introduced of furnishing provisions 
by the Government appears to be practicable without the aid of a purser, especially in 
small ships. 

33. The 


*VESSELS. 


Captains or 
Commanders, 


2 vessels.of 18 guns 
1 vessel of 10 guns 
1 steamer of 5 guns 
1 surveying ship 

1. pilot brig - 

1 schooner, Telica 

1 steamer packet - - -- 
Assistant to the Superintendant (*) 


*epnvaee 
@opeasae 
se enne 

oe 6 @ &@ @ 8 

eee en nee 

eee ener 
eee ne eee 
ttrhouses 

tat fm me 0 


Add for contingencies “_ + © « 


_(*) Note.—This appointment being classed among the situations to be filled by officers on the strength 
of the Marine, is included in the above list. 


+ The duties of master-attendant at Calcutta, and Bombay marine surveyor-general in Bengal, and 
assistant master-attendant at Bombay, are those principally embraced in the class of duties bere 
indicated. a 


APPENDIX, 


111. 


(23.) Letter from 
Committee on 
Indian Navy ; 

14 June 1830. . 


APPENDIX, 


Cateutta Civil 
FinanceCammittae, 


302, APPENDIX ro REPORT ‘uom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


33. The number of eaptains’ clerks at the beginning of the present year was 14; and as 
the Honourable Court has limited these gppoitments to vessels commanded by full 
captains, we propose to reduce the number to Diree,conesponding with that of the captains 
in our list, The offices described in this and the preceding paragraph are conferred on 
individuals who are not included on the strength of the Indian navy. The masters are 
selected from the senior midshipmen; but as the Indian navy has hitherto done without 


these appointments, we recommend their abolition. 


34, The expense on account of pattamar and advige-boats has considerably increased, 

we observe, since the year 1823*; but as the establishment formerly kept up ought to be 
found ample for present purposes, we beg to recommend that the existing establishment be - 
reduced to the former standard, whereby a reduction of expense will be effected to the 
amount of Rs.3,472; and, adverting to the expense attending the numerous small craft . 
employed about the harbour of Bombay, and to sundry petty establishments connected 
therewith, into the details of which we could not advantageously enter, we should hope 
that the Government will be enabled to effect a considerable reduction in this respect. 
, 85. The observations which we have thus far submitted to your Lordship in Council ; 
apply to that portion of the establishment which is to serve afloat; but before we proceed to 
otier our remarks on those establishments in the Marine department which exist on shore, 
we beg leave, with great respect, to advert to the orders of the Honourable Court which 
are contained im the 11th paragraph of their despatch of the 31st October 1829: “ In.con- 
sidering the establishment of officers for the marine, our attention,” it is stated, “ has been 
directed to the large number who are employéd in stations on shore; and being of opinion: 
that the practice 1s very objectionable, we desire that all officers now so employed be’ 
ealled upon either to relinquish their offices and return to the proper duties of their pro 
fession, or to resign the marine altogether.” 

36. Now we would here respectfully observe, that the services of every officer employed: 
on shore are undoubtedly at the disposal of Government when required, whether for sea or 
land ;. and if this proposition demanded any precise proof, we would appeal to the case of 
Commodore Sir John Hayes, who, whilst holdigg the office of master attendant in Calcutta, 
was actively employed afleat in the Java eXpedition, and during the late Burmese war; and 
another instance of a similar nature occurréd in the case of the late Captain Barnes, who, 
although a member of the Marine Board at Bombay, took the command of the Hastings 
frigate, and joined the squadron employed in the last-mentioned war. Itis well known also 
to your Lordship in Council that most of the naval situations on shore, whether in England 
or in the colonies, are held by officers on the full or half pay of His Majesty’s navy, 
without their being required to resign their profession. ' 

37. To apply these remarks to our present purpose, we should say, that as the number of 
officers actually on the strength of the Indian navy, as well as the number directed to con- 
stitute its permanent strength afloat, is greater than is now wanted for the ships to be con- 
tinued in commission, the most economical arrangement would be to employ the surplus 
as much as possible on shore, until their’services afloat are required ; because officers willing 
to serve afloat must be paid, whether-or not their services are wanted there, whilst the 
persons, holding marine appointments on shore may be altogether a new class of individuals 
whom the Government is under no previous obligation to employ or to pay. It is true that 
marine officers in the first instance will hold these appointments on.shore, but they are to be 
struck off the strength of the Indian navy; others, however, will then be added to keep up 


the standard number of officers required afloat bythe Court’s order ; and this standard being 


‘ nearly 
POE eS tent EN Ce oN I ee 
* 1829-24 - ; « ‘- - - = ° Rs. 14,387 L 

1828-29 s = > - = =e = = # 17,859 


ey _ _ | Excess'*- « ~ » Rev] 3,472 » 


GENERAL APPENDIX. . 303 


nearly as high as it was when both land and sea duty-was. performed by officers on the 
regular strength of the marine, and infinitely higher than is now wanted for service afloat 
only, the result must be a palpable augmentation of expense. 


38. It is not within the range of our duty, perhaps, to offer to your Lordship in Council 
“any remarks on the apparent hardship and frequent impossibility of an officer’s remaining 
continually at sea until he has acquired a competency with which to return to his natiye land; 
but we may be permitted to suggest the advantage which Government would derive by 
having officers on shore whose servicts, when required at sea, sa! be available; and if the 
advantage is admitted, we think it follows that no division of the land and sea service ought 
’ to have been made. As it is, the Government will in a few years be furnished with marine 
functionaries unconnected with the Indian navy, and superadded to its already superfluous 
‘strength: besides, a system by which the officers of the Indian navy are cut off from all 
appointments on shore which concern their profession, must serve to create unpleasant 
feelings; and on the whole it appears politic as well as economical to confer marine appoint- 
ments on shore, especially those of the highest grade at the several Presidencies, on officers 
of the Indian navy in preference to others. The rule, therefore, by which an officer on shore 
is required to relinquish for ever the active duties of his profession afloat, should, we de- 
videdly think, be annulled. 


‘ 39. We shall now proceed with the marine establishments ashore under the Government 
of Bombay. 

40. Upon the office of superintendant of the Indian navy we have to suggest that it 
should be conferred, when vacant, upon an officer belonging to that service, and that the 
salary be then reduced to rupees 30,000 per annum. As the Marine Board has been 
directed to be abolished, we do not propose any reduction in the superintendant’s native 
establishment ; but we consider it amply sufficient for every duty which can be required of 
it, provided the Indian navy is put on a peace establishment. As the secretary attached to 
the superintendant was sanctioned for a temporary purpose only, we take it for granted that 
his services will be dispensed with as early ag practicable. 


41. The Marine Board having been directed {by the Honourable Court to be abolished, 


Arprpn Dix, 


Hl. 


(23.) Letter from 
Committee on 
Indian Nagy; 
14 June 1830. 


Superintendant. 


Marine Board. 


we have taken credit in our schedule for the cost of that office, including the marine ac-,_ 


countant and his establishment. The business of marine accountant can easily be done, we 
think, by the accountant-general at Bombay, without any increase of establishment. 


42. We also propose to abolish the office of Marme Auditor, and to transfer the duty to 
the civil auditor. In Bengal the business of marine accountant and audit is thus distri- 
buted, and the same system is no doubt practicable at Bombay, rel pee since the division 
of the accountant-general’s and civil auditor’s departments has taken place, and under-the 
diminution of accounts which will follow the adoption of the plans suggested in this report. 


43. The salary of the Master Attendant we recommend to be reduced, on a vacancy, to 
that already proposed for Bengal and Madras, being altogether rupees 15,000 per annum. 


44. We see no occasion for the separate office of Marine Storekeeper, but are of opinion 
that the principle proposed to be followed in Bengal may be adopted with advantage at 
Bombay. 

~ 45. In the first place, it would be desirable perhaps that an examination should be insti- 
tuted into the contents of the storekeeper’s, godowns, that all stores of which ‘there is no 
immediate prospect of being brought into uSe should be disposed of; and if it is deemed 
desirable that any particular description of stores should be supplied for the use of Govern- 
ment from England, the superintendant should be required to furnish an annual indent, to 


Marine Auditor. 


Master Attendant. 


MarineStorekeeper. 


be submitted to the Government, and no stores should of course be sent from England but’ 


im compliance with such indents. 


> 46. With respect to stores procured’ in the country, petty articles, like the trifling 
contingencies of other offices, will best, we think, be provided by allowing a moderate sum 
monthly for each vessel. to the officer commanding her ; other stores and provisions auenks 
. 


Areguoix, 304 _ APPENDIX to REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


e - 
_.. be purchased as for the army by the commissariat, and issued: on indent from the captain of 

_Calcutta Civil — the vessel, countersigned by the superintendent. Such stores, and in ‘such quantities, as are 
FinanceCommittee. likely to be required on emergencies, should be put in eharge of the master attendant. 
A ‘small godown withm or immediately adjoming the dock-yard, in which anchors and other 
bulky articles may be kept under charge of the master attendant, would suffice for their, 
reception; the remainder should continue in charge of the commissariat department till 
requiretl, it being of course a principle to accumulate none that can readily be procured in 
the market. ; A : 

. 47. With respect to the issue of provisions, it appears to us that an order and indent, 
signed by the superintendant, should be sufficient authority to the extent of the established - 
allowance for each individual: and of other stores that officer should similarly be authorized 
to grant a supply to an extent equal tg the ordinary consumption. In all cases of extraor-. 
dinary demand the previous sanction of Government should be obtained, and the Govern- 
ment furnished by the superintendant with a concise quarterly statement of indents made by 
his aitthority under the prescribed limitation. 


Marine Pay Office. 48. The Marine Pay-office is under the general paymaster, and as there is one assistant 
attached to him we see no occasion for another in the separate department of marine. We 
have already, in our report of 27th April 1829, recommended the removal of the Marine 
Pay-office into the office of the general paymaster. 

Boat-master and *42. In the schedule of reduction we have included the offices of Boat-master and Captain 

Captain of Maza- of Mazagon Dock, as we do not anticipate any injury to the public service by their aboli- 

goa Dock. tion. In their despatch of the 31st December 1829, the Honourable Court observed to the 

i Government of Bombay, “in a vacancy of either of the offices of boat-master and captain 

of Mazagon Docks you will take into your consideration the question suggested by Mr. 

* Minute ‘Goodwin*, whether those offices might not be abolished without injury to the public service:” 

19 June 1829. | and with regard to the future conduct of the duties annexed to these offices, those of the 

. boat-master might be transferred to the master attendant, and the care of the timber in the 
Mazagon Dock be also transferred tq him, or one of his assistants. 


Senior Officer at 50. The duties of the Senior Officer at Surat, as described by the late superintendant of 
Surat,” and Agent the Indian navy, consist chiefly “in the &rrangement of the armed vessels, assigning and. 
for procuring Las- despatching them to the different cruizing stations along the line from the Gulf of Cutch to 

cars. Bassein (opposite to the island of Salsette), for the protection of the trade, and to afford 
: convoy to the vessels laden with cotton stores, or troops, proceeding either ‘north or south; 
also in superintending the river (taptee) establishments.’ We cannot suppose that 
convoy between Surat and Bombay is now often necessary; and even if the necessity be 
admitted, still the superintendant, as it appears;to us, can execute all the duties assigned to 
the officer at Surat: as to the river establishments, it may probably be dispensed with alto- 
gether, or if necessary be placed under a subordinate officer of the revenue or custom de- 
partment at that port. The appointment of Agent for procuring Lascars was introduced in 
3828; but if the naval establishment afloat is reduced to the scale which we have proposed, 
there will no doubt be plenty of Lascars procurable, without employing a special agent for 
this purpose, and we therefore recommend the abolition of the appointment of senior officer 
at Surat and of agent for Lascars. 


Signal Officer at 51. The services of the naval officer at the lighthouse seem to us to be quite super- 
the Light-house, fiuous. The present salary (exclusive of the naval pay) is rupees 90 per mensem ; and we 
. beg to recommend that a salary of rupees 100 De given for the duty to an individual not on 
the strength of the Indian navy, and belonging to a class of life more suitable to the.occu- 

pation and equally competent to the discharge of the duty. 


Agent for procuring 52. We would suggest for the-consideration of your Lordship im Council whether the 
Timber in Malabar separate appointment of Agent for procuring Timber in Malabar and Canara might not be 
and Candra. dispensed with: we observe that timber to a large extent is purchased by tender from indi- 
viduals at Bombay. The cost of timber so purchased on account of the Honourable Com- 
pany’s Marine, from 1st January 1827 to the 30th: November 1828, appears from a ihieest 

° _ ao men 


_ GENERAL ‘APPENDIX. 305 


e 

ment before us, furnished by the sécretary to the Marine Board at Bombay, to have 
amounted to rupees 3,04,880, giving an average of 13,255 rupees per mensem; and from 
the statement. below* it appears that the average aggregate expense of the whole of 
the timber procured for the marine for a period of four years ending in 1828-29, was 
rupees 2,40,745 per annum, or rupees 20,062 per mensem; so that the quantity of timber 
- purchased on tender is much greater than what is procured by the agent in Malabar and 
Canara. We refrain, however, from offering any precise recommendation for the “abolition 
of this appointment, as circumstances with which we are unacquainted may exist to render 
‘the measure inexpedient. 7 : 
' 68. Having thus concluded our remarks on all the marine establishments afloat and 
ashore-on which we have at present any recommendation to submit, we request the notice of 
your Lordship in Council to the annexed statemené of the fmancial result of the foregoing 
arrangements, exhibiting a reduction of expenditure tothe annual amount of rupees 6,91,131. 
Now the ordinary charges of 1828-29, compared with those of 1823-24, exhibit an excess 
of rupees 3,11,968 ; and the steamers form a new item not included in either statements, 
the charge on account of which may be estimated at rupees 1,60,000 ; making an aggregate 
increase of rupees 4,61,968. The extraordinary charges of 1828-29 exceed those of 
1823-24 in the sum of rupees 3,50,964. But of this we are not immediately able to dis- 
cover what portion belongs to real-charges of annual occurrence, and what to ad~ 
vances that may be expected to be recovered, or to expenses altogether contingent, which 
no estimate can embrace. We have therefore written to Bombay for further information on 
the subject. In the meantime we can only express our hope that m so far as the disburse- 
ments in question are properly chargeable to the Bombay marine, it may be found practi- 


cable to effect a reduction proportioned to that which we have wee im the strength of: 


the force to be maintained, and that on the whole the expenses of the department will not 
ultimately exceed the standard of 1828-24. This, however, is at best uncertain: and it is 
further to be recollected, that although the arrangements we have suggested, if fully carried 
into effect, would occasion a retrenchment in the ordinary charges beyond the excess of the 
year 1828-29, yet a large portion of the proposed reductions is prospective, and only prac- 

ticable by degrees. ; 
54. In conclusion, it may not be superfluous to remark that a considerable portion of the 
-expense of the Indian navy is incurred for purposes common to all the three a eae 7 
and this circumstance with others should be borne in mind in considermg the deficit of 
Bombay. How far it may be expedient to make any alteration in the mode of bringing to 
‘account this and other charges of a general nature, we may hereafter have occasion to 

submit to your Lordship in Council, when reporting on the general finances of India. 
We have, &c. &c. 
(signed) D. Hitt.” 
, Horr Mackenzie. 
: Joun Bax. 
(24.)—EXTRACT from Sir John Malcolm’s General Minute of 30th November 1830, on 
his Administration of the Bombay Government. 


Inpian Navy. 


89. Tue orders of the Court of DirectSrs regarding the organization of the Indian navy, 
with the nomination of .a captain ofthe Royal navy as superintendant, have effected a ver 
complete reform in this branch of the sarvice. The measures which have been adopted, 
and the success which has attended them, will be found in the several Minutes I have 
‘ recorded on the letters of the superintendant. Suffice it here to observe, that a greater and. 
more beneficial change was never made in.a shorter period. The vessels are in excellent 

‘state 


® 1825-26, 1,04,439; 1826-275 a le a8a7-28, 294,033; 1828-29, 2,96,047- 


° 


APPENDIX, 


IIT. 


(23-) Letter from 
Committee on 
Indian Navy ; 
14 June $830. 


(24.) Extract 
General Minute of 
Sir John Malcolm, 
on Indian Navy; 
30 November 1830. 


ArreNoix, 306 APPENDIX to REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


. 


——~_ .. , State, their-crews are orderly, and the officers of every class have been placed upon a footing 
Pi cinocre ath . calculated to excite a high professional tone, and to elevate the character and respectability - 


of the service. ° . 

90. Regulations have been introduced which have greatly improved the efficiency of the 
service; and where that has been promoted by granting a more adequate remuneration to < 
those who have trust and responsibility, the expense has been already more than met by the - 

_ great saving made on the purchase of provisions, the expenditure of stores, and other items, 
all of which have been placed undera check and control which, combined with that honour- 
able feeling which now pervades the service, will prevent the recurrence of any of those 
abuses that have been remedied. ‘ 

91, The Honourable the Court of Directors, in their despatch of October 1st 1827, 

ordered that the establishment of the Iadian navy should consist of one frigate of 30 guns, - 
three sloops each of 24 guns, four sloops each of 16 guns, two brigs each of 10 guns, two. 
steamers each of five guns. It has been found practicable to fulfil the duties of the Indian 
navy with less than this establishment, and it now consists of four sloops each of 18 guns, 
three vessels each of 10 guns, and one steamer. This does not include the Hastings, 
converted into a hulk in the harbour of Bombay, the Aurora, now a floating chapel, the 
- Palinurus, pilot vessel, now employed with the Benares on survey, nor the two old brigs 
Thetis and Nautilus, which are still in the public employ, though not officered or equipped _ 
like those in the regular line of the service; the former having the commodore’s flag at 
Surat, and the latter, which is not commanded by an officer of the Indian navy, being 
used to carry coal, and for such other purposes as occur when a ship of war is not 
required. 

$e. The expenses of the Indian navy have been greatly swelled, not only: by survey 
vessels and others, in no way connected with this branch in particular, but by being mixed 
up with those of the dock yard, naval sfores, and the whole supply of timber for Bombay. 
Separated from these, however, its cost will (by a statement which accompanies this Minute) 
appear very moderate for an arm of strength which it is so essential to maintain in effi- 
ciency, and which, if the means that ‘have been taken are supported, will prove (as I have 
elsewhere stated) as a local force, useful in any future service the British navy may have to 
perform in India. 

93. The Finance Committee have suggested, and the Supreme Government. have recom- 
mended, on the grounds of economy, and their view of the actual state of the piratical tribe. 
in the Persian Gulf, the reduction of the Indian navy to two vessels each of 18 guns, one‘ 
vessel of 10 guns,and one steamer. On the measures which were recommended by the Com- 
mittee, connected with this reduction, I shall make at present no remark: these embrace details 
which can only be understood by a perusal of their letter to the Supreme Government, 
reference to the data on which that is grounded, the letter of the supermtendant in answer 

* Minute 28 Octo- to the communication of their plan, and my Minute noted in the margin*. 

ber 1830. 94. I have, on grounds that cannot I think be controverted, questioned the whole of the 
data on which the Finance Committee have arrived atthe conclusion that trade would be 
efficiently protected, and our interest not injured, by relaxing our measures to keep down 
piracy in the Persian Gulf. ; 

95. It is to me clear, that if attention to our pledges of faith, as well as policy, are - 
neglected, and we cease to keep down that predatory spirit which we have suppressed but 
not yet destroyed, we shall improvidently cast, away all the fruits of years of war and 

* expenditure; and that loss of customs and the'interruption of commerce, combined with 
insults and outrages upon our subjects, would: soon,compel us to have recourse to those 
expeditions which, without adequate benefits, would early render the measure recommended 
by the Committee one of increased expense, instead of saving. : : 

96. Since writing the Minute to which I have alluded, I have conversed with some of the 
most intelligent European agents‘on the trade, with the Gulf of Persia, who inform me 
that a great portion of the piece goods before sent in English vessels from Caleutta, are 
now conveyed in small Arab. and Indian craft from Bombay, and being at cheaper freight 


the sale of such articles is increased, while the primary object: of Government is answered 
rs m 


"GENERAL APPENDIX. 307 


‘in gradually reducing predatory tribes, by giving to men and vessels formerly employed in 
Piracy, honest and profitable occupation. ‘e eae 
~ 97. This fact, which is satisfactoryeas showing a cause for the increasing sale of British 
manufacture, and.as tending to change the habits of lawless men, is confessedly contrary 
_ to the interests of the owners of British ships formerly occupied in this trade. According 
to the evidence of Mr. Bruce (now a merchant at Calcutta), these had formerly all that 
freight which he states is now carried by Arabs.. Though this change must be to the dtivantage 
‘of our manufactures, and is an object in which policy and humanity are united, as it tends 
to reclaim a race of barbarous men to order and civilization, it has, no doubt, in its com- 
mercial effects, been injurious to the interest of the port of Calcutta, in the same ratio that 
_it has been beneficial to that of Bombay and to the Arab merchants. 

98; On the proposition of the Committee to employ His Majesty’s ships of war in many 
of the services now allotted to the Indian navy, as stated in the 10th paragraph of their 
report, | have already one my opinion*, that beyond sending or aiding expeditions, that 
pe cannot be carried into execution without alterations in the naval service of Great 

ritain and the Government in India which I believe are not likely ta take place. It may 
be urged that this would be more than compensated by the superiority of British vessels of 
war; but it is my decided opinion that for all purposes extept actual Rehting His Majesty’s 
ships-.would be less efficient than those of the Indian navy; they would in fact be hazardous 
instruments to use for either conciliation or intimidation: perfectly ignorant of the language, 
customs and manners of those countries, their officers and men would be coming in constant 
collision with the most cherished feelings and prejudices of the rude inhabitants of the 
Arabian and Persian shores ; and such causes, when combined with the irritability of temper 
and susceptibility to insult of these people, would be constantly committing our Govern+ 


APPENDIX) 


Ill. 


(44.) Extract 
General Minute of 
Sir John Malcolm, 
on India Navy; 
30 November 1830. 


# Vide Minute, 
24th August 1830, 


ment and compromising its character. When, in addition to these considerations, due’ 


weight is given to the manifold evils and inconveniences likely to arise from divided authority, 
constant changes, and the youth and inexperience of commanders, and above all, to the baneful 
and deleterious effects of the climate of the Persian Gulf for many months of the year upon 
European constitutions, it is impossible te come td any other conclusion than that the 
constant employment of His Majesty’s ‘ships would be attended with any thing but advan- 
tage to the public service. I have elsewhere stated my opinion of the progress that may 
be anticipated in the Indian navy, supposing it maintained (as it ought to be if maintained 
at all) as a high and honourable service: its merits will early be recognized by His Majesty’s 
navy as fully as those of the Company’s army are by the King’s troops with whom they 
serve ; its European officers will have the advantage of the continued pursuit of the duties 
of their profession, and I see no reason why the native part of the crews should not in time 
be equal in courage and discipline to our native troops on shore. 

99. On war breaking out these vessels could be soon manned, as they have been before 
on emergencies occurrmg, with the whole or greater part of their crews European; and 
built and fitted out as the vessels of the Indian navy would be, at a port whose resources 
for equipment of a naval force are not surpassed by any in the world, there is no just ground 
to assume future inferiority. There has been, 1 admit, such inferiority, owing to causes 
that no longer operate, but which the plan recommended by the Committee would restore 
‘in full force. I therefore trust that if it be adopted the opmion of the superintendant will 
be acted upon, and that the service in its present state will be abolished, and one of armed 
packets be substituted. 

100. I have on several occasions stated the great importance of having an establishment 


of steam vessels attached to the Indian navy, both for purposes of- war and for aa: up *— 


the communication with Europe: There,is yet only one steamer in the service, the Hugh 
Lindsay. There ‘cannot be a finer vesssl for the purpose for which she was built, that of 
an armed steamer; she has two engines of 80-horse power each, and can carry eight guns, 
with coals for six or seven days, goes very fast, and against any sea. This vessel, thougli 
too-expensive and too large to take packets’ to Suez, has been used for that purpose, and 
erformed the voyage, at a season of the year not the most favourable, in 21 days steaming. 
he actually steamed, at as high a pressure-as could be applied, the first stage to Aden 

. . “RR2 . (1,640 


APPENDIX, 


If. 


Calcutta Civil 
FinanceComunittee. 


308 APPENDIX to REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. | 


; ere : : 
(1,640 miles) in 10 days and 19 hours, and that with a contrary wind; she went. when deeply 


laden with coal five and a half knots, but increased her rate to full nine. knots when light. 

101. It is the opmion of the superintendant of ghe Indian navy, and has been trans- 
mitted as such to the Honourable the Court of Directors, that a class of small vessels like 
those employed in packet service from Milford Haven to Ireland, would be the best to keep 
up the communication with Europe by the Red Sea. This is also, I observe, from his Minute 
on the sebject, the opinion of the Governor-general ; and Captain Wilson, the commander of. 
the Hugh Lindsay, on whose judgment, from his full kgowledge of: the seas and experience 
of navigation by steam, I would implicitly rely, thinks that a vessel of 270 tons, built more 
with a view to the capacity of storing coals than very rapid steaming, would make Suez in 
two stages, taking in coals only at Mocha, where, if she did not draw more than 10 feet, she 
could be at all seasons in smooth water, and with security against every wind. This voyage 
would require that she should carry 13 days coals, as it is a distance of 1,780 miles, and 
cannot be expected to be performed in less than 11 or 12 days. a 

102. Gf this quantity of, coal cannot*be carried, the first stage must be Maculla, and the 
second Juddah, as at present. These are both excellent ports for shipping coals, as a vessel 
can lie close to the shore; but having three stages instead of two would cause a delay of 
at least two days, and with two Captain Wilson calculates that the voyage from Bombay to 
Suez cannot be performed to a certainty under 25 days. It appears to me that if one 
of these vessels was kept at Mocha, and had her furnace lighted as another hove in sight, 
this voyage would be reduced to three weeks, and ample opportunity given to the steamer 
to put in order or repair any slight injury to the machinery, as well as to procure supplies. 
With this establishment of packets the communication might be kept up, by vessels sailing 
every five or-six weeks from Bombay and from Suez, nine months of the year; in June; July 
and August, a steamer would easily come from the Red Sea, but could not return against the 
violence of the south-west monsoon. Phere would be a greater advantage in keeping 
a small steamer at Mocha, from the power the Indian Government would posecee of sending 
on emergency’ a sailing vessel or boat during five months of the year, which having a fair 
wind would be certain of that passage‘in 15 or 46 days. , 

103. With this number of packets, and aftother armed steamer, carrying four or six guns, 
and not drawing more than eight feet water, Bombay would be complete in this essential 
branch of naval establishment. Besides keeping a rapid communication with Europe by 
the Red Sea, that by the Persian Gulf would be improved, and we should, beyond ordinary 
services and putting down piracy, be prepared to give efficient aid in every naval service in 
India; nor is it being too speculative to suppose that emergencies may arise on which the 
ready application of this powerful arm of our force on the Indus or the Euphrates might be 
of the most essential service to the general interests of the empire. 

104. To secure all these objects, it is indispensable, in my opinion, that in whatever way 
steamers are employed in this quarter, they should be exclusively navigated by the Indian 


_havy, for it is of much importance that a scientific knowledge of the engines and of their 


management should be generally diffused throughout this service. We must not omit the 

opportunity to form men capable of performing and directing all the duties which belong to 

such vessels. With the able and intelligent officers this navy can boast, and the number of 
fine youths it contains, I cannot have a doubt but they will very early attain a proficiency 

in this line of service that may prove of much consequence to the general interest ;. and 

I must further expect, that through the instruction given to European and East Indian - 
boys at the mint and in the steamers, we shall be early independent of those engineers now 

sent from England at much expense, and who have proved themselves in several cases so 

unworthy of the liberal treatment and confidence placed in them. 

105. Much revision and reduction has taken place in different branches of the Indian 
navy}; an investigation into some irregularities and alleged abuses by subordinate clerks and 
others, in the Indian naval stores, has led to the nomination of a special committee, which, 
from the instructions given, will no doubt make a report.that will become the ground of 
a thorough reform and saving of expenditure in a department the state of which has for 


_Inany years been a subject of just complaint with the Court of Directors. 
: & + 


‘GENERAL APPENDIX. 309 


(25.)—LETTER from the Calcutta Civil Finance Committee to the Governér-general 
in Council at Bengal, dated 19th June 1830. 
My Lord, at ig 

1. In examining the military disbursements of this presidency for a series of years, our 
attention was particularly attracted to the amount charged under the head of military 
tores *,, which your.Lordship in Council is aware are now included among the items o 
local expense, being credited per contra as a supply from London; and the estimate for the 
year 1829-30 not indicating an abgtement.in the demand at all commensurate with the 
conclusion to be drawn from the reputed state of the magazines, we communicated with the 
* Military Board and the Accountant-general, in order to ascertain the cause of so large a 
supply being required. We have the satisfaction of reporting to your Lordship in Council, 
- that from the information which we have received, it appears that the demand for military 
stores from Europe during the next few years will be very inconsiderable. The large sup- 
plies of stores which have of late years been received were procured, it is stated, with the 
view of furnishing a sufficient stock for the equipment? of the army in time of war; and that 
stock having now been obtained, the future demands on England will be restricted to mere 
expenditure arising chiefly from wear and tear. We are further informed by the Military 
Board that no indents for military stores have been made on*England for the last two 
years. The Accountant-general ahs since reduced the estimated charge under this head 
to Rs. 7,16,328 ; and he further explains, that though this sum may appear large, yet that 
it is warranted by the circumstance of a variety of military stores received during the years 
1825-26, and. 1826-27, not having yet been charged, the supposed value of which should, 
in his opinion, be included in the estimate of receipts and disbursements, to meet the cost 
of these articles when the invoices are received. 

2. The supplies of military stores from Europe amounted on an avtrage of the last six 


years to Rs. 26,32,500, and under the explanatiow now furnished by the Military Board, 


may be expected not to exceed one-third of that sum ; being a reduction probably of 17 lacs 


of rupees, and causing of course a diminution to that extent in the military charges of this’ 


presidency. a , 
3. We have considered it proper to bring the circumstance separately to the notice of 
your Lordship in Council. x 


4. The prays to be observed in framing the indents of stores required from England: 


appear to have .been very fully discussed by the Military Board and by the Honourable 
the Court of Directors, and on that subject no observations will be expected from us. 

5. We understand, however, that several articles} which are included in the Bengal 
indents, are at Madras more. economically procured in the country; probably Bengal may 
have a similar advantage in respect to other articles; and we beg leave to suggest that 
schedules of all articles of equipment which are so procured may be interchanged between 
the several presidencies, in order that each may benefit in this matter by the experience of 


the others. Wis have: &e 
. 3 bd 
(signed) D. Hinz. 
Hott MAcKENZIx, - 
. Joun Bax. 
ne ne een oe 
* Military Stores from Europe: 


1813-14 + Sa. Rs. 4,57,000 . 4822-23 » + Sa.Rs. 3,50,000 
1814-15 - - "= 4,43,000 1823-24 - . - §;11,000° 
1815-16 . * = 13,1},000 1824-25 + - -  14,72,000 

, 1816-17 - - = 10,88,000-6 1825-26 - - -  28,53,000 
1817~18 - - - 16,00,000 1826.27 - - ~  54,17,000 

* 1818-19 - - - 17,06,000 1827-28 - - =  32,51,000 
1819-20 - - + 8,92,000° : - 1828-29 - - -  22,91,000 . 
1880-21 - -  - 532,000 | Estimated “1829-30 - - - 29,925,000: 
1821-32. - - - 22,000 


APpprENDIX, 
Ii. 


(25-) Letter from 

Committee, on ' 

Military Stores, 
engal; » 


¢ 19 June 1830. 


+ Leathern Aca 
coutrements of all 
kinds, and Paint. 


APPENDIX, 


hd . 


Calcutta Civil 
FinanceCommittee, 


* App. (25). 


310 APPENDIX ro REPORT rnom.SELECT. COMMITTEE. 


(26.)—LETTER 


My Lord, ° _ , 

WE have sleet had the honour of bringing to the notice of your Lordship in Council 
the charges incurred on account of military stores. procured. from Europe, of which the 
average cost during the past ten years appears to have been Rs. 17,95,000*. / 
2. The following Abstract of a statement received from the Accountant-general will com- 
plete thé view of the disbursements which the MilitarysBoard at this presidency is expected 
to control, omitting fractions of thousands. & : 1° 
ain : 


from the Calcytta Civil Finance Committee to ‘the Governor-general 
in Couneil at Bengal, dated 30th July 1830.. . - 8 


. ‘ vi oO +) 
* DEPARTMENTS, . of Pours of oat a of a 
Commissariat : Pom 
Chafges for Victualling, &c. H.M. and H.C. , 

Troops = ~ - - - - 46,26,000 42,68,000 
Ditto - War Charges - - = = - 8,66,000 '7,02,000 
Petty Stores supplied to Magazinés - = - 7,29,000 2,65,000 
Charges on account of Foundery - + 20,000 | 9,000. - 
Ditto - ditto -- Gunpowder Agencies - - 22,000 — 22,000 
Ditto ~ ditto - Gun-cariiage ditto - - 1,11,000 8,929 
Purchase of Cattle - - - '- - 3,74,000 "60,895 
Supplies to Marine and other Presidencies - 4,94,000 61,539 
Ditto on account pf Civil Department - 86,000 83,000 
Sudder Bazaars - tet ome 13,000 22,461 
Timber Yards ~ - - - - = 5,96,000 9,00,000 

Total Commissariat. 719,37,000 64,02,824 

Gun-carriage Agencies - -" = . - 1,00,000 
Gunpowder ditto - - - -e- 88,000 2.31.0 
Foundery in Fort William - ae ad 18,000 , ck a 
Arsenal ditto - ~.- - - - 20,000 
Military Buildings - - - - - 12,95,000 | 17,50,000 
Civil Territorial ditto - - - - 7,713,000. 11,77,000 . 
Ditto Commercial ditto - - - - 3,23,000 6,89,975 

' Add, - 1,05,54,000 1,02,50,799 
Stores received for Europe - - =f 10 17,59,000 22,91,000 


1,23,13,000 | 1425,41,700 


v me . 2 

These sums, it may be proper to remark, are exclusive of the heavy expenses incurred 
annually of account of the departments under the Board of Superintendence, but of which, 
until certain information which we have called for shall have been received, it is not prac- 
ticable to say what proportion is a real charge, and what nominal. |: 

8. The statement entered above is sufficient to show, that for the equipment of the army 
and other purposes, in regard to which the Government repose upon the care of the Military 
Board,. the expenses incurred are such as to make it of the highest importance, financially 
speaking, ‘to secure every possible. economy. If is not less a matter of yreat moment for 

overnment to see that its military arrangements are not crippled by an injudicious parsi- 
mony, or by:an unskilful distribution of its means of equipment. . 

4..The papers. we have.read connected with the subject appear to 
evince, that under.the existi 
efficiency. The Military Board 
, oy 


us abundantly to 

system there is no adequate security either for economy or 
disavow, in a great measure, the responsibility. which ought 
: ~ to 


\ 


- - GENERAL APPENDIX, | 311 


APPENDIX, 
; . a G hogs ill. 
to belong to them; and we aré given to understand by théir secretary himself, that it would —— 


not be difficult to show, that in each of the prirfcipal departments under them, the Commis- (26.) Letter from 
sariat, the Ordnance, and the Building department, many lacs of rupees have been yearly Committee, on 
“lost through defective management. _ bs . ” Military Bepen- 
5. What measures should be taken to remedy the evil, whether a new Board should be diture, Bengal ; 
instituted, or existing establishments differently arranged, are questions of which wg could 3° July 1830. 
not undertake the solution without a long and minute inquiry ; and as we are aware that the 
subject has:long been under the consideration of your’ Lordship, we should probably be 
mis-spending our labour in entering on the investigation ; but we can have no hesitation in 
‘ declaring our conviction that some change is essentially necessary. 
6. We respectfully take this occasion of soliciting instructions as to what branches of 
‘military expenditure it is the wish of your Lordship imCouncil that we should inquire into, 
and in what order of preference. Ww 
e have, &c. 


* (signed) D. Hint. 
Hour MackeEnziz. 
Joun Bax. 


(27.)\—LETTER from. Calcutta Civil Finance Committee to the Governor-generale (27.) Letter from 
in Council at Bengal, dated 28 June 1830. : Committee, on 
My Lord, Expense of the 
1. IN pursuance of the intention notified in our report bearing date the 5th ultimo, we Supreme Courts of 
have the heaour to bring under the consideration of your Lordship in Cauncil the expense Judicature ; 
incurred on account of the Supreme Courts of Justice at the three presidencies, in the year 28 June 1830. 
1829, compared with its amount in 1823. ° 
_ In the year 1829 the fixed charge was as follows: 


Rupees. 

Bengal - 7 = “=, - 8,83,120 

Madras - - - 2 2,'78,056 

Bombay - - - - = 2,938,874 ; 

In the year 1823: : | 9,55,050 

Bengal “oo - - - 8,976,568 . 

Madras - - - - - 2,45,334 

Bombay - - - = = 1,27,322 


————— 17,49,224 
Excess in the year 1829 = ~ 2,05,826 
eee eel - 

Of this excess the main part has arisen from the institution of a Supreme Court at 
Bombay, instead of a Recorder’s Court, since the year 1823, and from an addition made 
to the salaries of the judges at Madras and Bombay. 

. 2. We trust that we do not exceed the limits of propriety or of our authority in suggesting 
for the consideration of those who are qualified to form a conclusive judgment on the ques- 
tion, whether the extent of judicial business at the two subordinate presidencies makes it 
necessary that they should maintain Supreme Courts composed of three judges ; and if not 
necessary, whether in the straitened state of the Company’s finances this do not form & fair 
subject of retrenchment. The Supreme Court at this presidency.has of its own motion. 
transmitted to the Government the statement of its business and establishments, which were 
called for by the authorities at home, but we believe that no such statements have been 
furnished to the Governments of the other presidencies, and we do not understand that we 
can: have recourse to any means of obtaining them; nor, if furnished, is it likely that they. . 
would afford to unprofessional persons data for any conclusive judgment beyond what we: 
are justified in forming from notorious facts: from these we are led to believe that the 
quantity of business to be performed at Madras and at Bombay is not more than sufficient 
: to 


Arvexox, 312 APPENDIX, ro REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


——~_., to give employment to a single judge, and that a larger establishment is also out of propor- 
Pisces Civil tion to the value of the property usually at Stake before the court. Our opinion therefore 
inanceCommittee. i. that a single judge at each of the subordinate ®presidencies would prove fully adequate 

to all the duty with which the Supreme Courts are charged. . , 

3. It will belong to others to say whether these judges should have any and what coad- 

_ jutors, as in the former recorder’s courts. are 

4. With the view of making immediate provision for any vacancy in the courts at Madras 
or Bombay, we take the liberty to suggest further, that the Government of each presidency, 
as on the island of Ceylon, ought to have authority on the occurrence of such vacancy to 
select a barrister to officiate as judge until the vacancy should be supplied either temporarily - 
from Bengal or permanently from England. i 

5. If Bengal is to supply such vacancies it will probably be necessary to add a fourth - 
judge to. the Supreme Court here, and at any rate we see no reason to suggest any reduction 
in the number of the judges belonging to that court. Whether its junsdiction might be 
expediently modified, and a single judge appointed for the less important part of the business 
originating within the Mahratta Ditch, is a question that has occurred to us, but is one on 
which we do not feel ourselves competent to offer an opinion :-no such change appears to be 
likely to be attended with an immediate ‘saving of expense, though it may possibly be here- 
after found necessary, in order to prevent an increase, 

* 6. We presume the large amount of the emoluments drawn by some of the officers of the 
‘court will attract the attention of the home authorities ; and should the fees not be deemed 
burthensome upon the suitors, it will deserve consideration whether a portion at least of the 
amount should not be applied to the relief of the finances. ; 

7. If the foregoing suggestions were found worthy of adoption, a reduction of four judges 
and their establishments would be effegted at the subordinate presidencies: and though one 
judge might have to be added to the court in Calcutta, there would still result a saving én 
the salaries of judges alone of Rs. 1,40,000 per annum, besides eventual retiring pensions, 
and the cost of the establishments to be reduced. ; 

* Rs, 1,66,552. 8. Adverting to the excess* in the present charge of the court at Bombay above its 
+ Excess Rs.15,818, amount in 1823, we beg leave to state Pat the charge also exceeds} that of the court of 
Madras, by which it was intended, in the constitution of the former court, to be regulated. 

With reference to the observations contained in a despatch from the Honourable the Court 
of Directors dated the 8th March 1826, an extract of which is annexed, we have the honour 
to submit a comparative statement, exhibiting in detail the establishments of these courts, 
which may probably enable the judges of the former court to effect some reduction in its 

establishment. It will serve to show your Lordship in Council the progressive increase 
ef the expenses of the Supreme Courts, inclusive of the sherifi’s and coroner’s offices, and of 
law and other charges connected therewith, as well as their comparative amount at the 
three presidencies, to subjoin the following Abstract, taken from a statement of the annual 
charge for the last six years, with which the Accountant-general has been good enough to 


furnish us: 
' 


—_—_ 


se 


1823-24. | 1824-25. | 1825-26. | 1826-27. | 1827-28. | 1828-29. 


. Fort William -} 3,91,239 | 4,28,036 3,91,416 | 4,67,578 | 4,41,201 | 4,75,086 

«Fort St. George | 2,69,350 | 2,62,773 | 2,50,711 | 3,05,762 | 3,08,700 | 3,28,612 

Bombay -  - | 2,11,579 | 2,85,500 | 4,11,03% | 4,00,226 | 3,68,399 | 3, 89,831 
eAnree ee a eae ears Te ne foe ee ne 
Total Rs. | 8,72,168 | - 9,76,309 10,538,164 | 11,73,566 | 11,18,300 


11,93,529 


We have the honour to be, &c. 


(signed)  D. Hitt. 
Hour MAcKENZzieE. | 
' . Joun’ Bax. 


GENERAL APPENDIX. — 513 Arrawoin, 


(28.)~-LETTER from. the Caleutta, Civil Finance Committee to the Vice-President  (28-) Letter from 
vs ae Pers Committee on 
in Council at Bengal, dated 25th November 1830. Allowanees for 


: ak oe : F Head Native 
» Honourable Sir, Sern 


‘1. In the 72d para. of our report relative to the Bengal establishment*, dated the 1th July 25 Ne ae 1830. 
last, we intimated the inténtion of submitting our sentiments on the means of providing 
suitable allowances for the head native officers of the collectors and magistrates, without 
any addition to the public expénses; and we now leave to submit to Government the * App. (22.). 
means by which it appears to us that that object may be fulfilled, assuming that the arrange- 
. ments suggested in the above-mentioned report will, as fit opportunities offer, be gradually 
‘carried into effect. ‘ 


2. On the abolition of the situation of registrar, the establishments entertained by those 
_ officers may be discharged, and the union of the offices of magistrate and collector will, we 
conceive, render it easily practicable to effect considerable reductions, as follows :—The esta- 
~blishments of the two departments being no further kept distinct than is necessary for the 
regular transaction of public business, a sheristadar and deputy may take the place of the 
two sheristadars ; and the podars of the magistrates, the nazir, naib nazir, moollahs and gunga 
jullees of the several collectors, with a moiety of the peons and menials attached to their 
sudder office, may, we are of opinion, be dispensed with, In those places, too, where distinct 
establishments are entertained for the Custom department +, similar and greater retrenchments 
may, we conceive, be effected ; and assuming that the magistrates and collectors will not be 
required to try summary suits between individuals, we presume that the,establishments now 
entertained by some of the collectors, to aid them in the trial of those suits, and in other 
jute duties, may be discharged : even, indeed,* although the judicial duties of the col- 
‘lectors were to be continued as at present, we should not consider it necessary to maintain 
the establishments in question. 


3. We should thus have the following suths ayailable for the remuneration of the sheris- 


‘tadars and deputy-sheristadars of the magistrates and collectors, and joint magistrates and 
dephty-collectors, viz. : 


Dewanny 

i Peons end 

CLL. Treasury. Menials. 
+ Dacca - « - . . 
Hooghly - - - . * 
Moorshedabad_ - “ ‘ = 
- Patna - - “ im - 
Allahabad (6) - ° 2 = 
Bareilly - - .« . . 
Cawnpore - - - SF Ma 
Furruckabad 7 - _ an 
Agra - - a ‘a “3 
Meerut - - « a “ 
Delhi - - - - é 


(a) Already the collector has reduced nearly 300 rupees per annum. 


(6) We omit Mirzapore, Benares and Ghazeepore, to provide an establishment for the new office at 
the first-mentioned place. a ; 


APPENDIX, 


Ill 


Calcutta Civil: , 
Finance Committee. 


* Dated 12th July 
1830. Appx. (22.) 


314 APPENDIX 7o REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


Per Mensem. 


Dewanny establishments of registrars °-  - - - - +=, 8,411 
Foujdarry sheristadars and podars - @% - - + = 8,693 
Revenue sheristadars - - - - - ~ - - = 4,895 
Ditto nazirs, naibs, swearers, with a moiety of peons and menials - 4,552 
Collectors’ judicial establishments - - - - .- + = 102 
Custom-house reductions, as above - - “ - -  ~ 2,972 
e . , 
25,225 


4. To this sum a considerable addition may be made by remodelling the allowances of the 
tehsildars. In the salaries of those officérs great inequalities appear to prevail, often without, 
and sometimes against reason, as applicable to the existing circumstances, which of course, 
in many instances differs essentially frem the condition of things that prevailed when they 
were originally fixed. They vary from Rs. 100 to Rs. 300 per mensem, being in several’ 
cases higher than seems to us to be necessary; and the general average will also admit of 
some reduction, if we introduce'in respect to them, as well as the sheristadars, the plan of 
increasing pay according to length of meritorious service. This arrangement, from which 
other benefits will ensue, it may be advisable to effect, not by an absolute rule that a given 
nuthber of years’ servitude shall entitle the individual to a given sum, but by distributing the 
officers in question into classes, and providing that they shall be promoted in order of 
standing, unless when the superior authorities shall see fit to direct otherwise, with reference 
to the merits and qualifications of the candidates. The tehsildars now employed within the 
provinces embraced? by our report *, above referred to, are 187 in number, who receive an 
ageregate allowance of Rs.27,630 per mensem, or on an average about Rs, 147 each; but if 
they were distributed into classes, as specified below +, so as to receive on an average salaries 
of about Rs. 110, they would, we think, be more suitably provided for, and the aggregate of 
their monthly allowances would then amount to Rs. 20,720, or Rs. 6,910 less than the amount 
now disbursed. Gee : 

5. Adding this amount to the sum abovementioned (Rs. 25,225), we have a total fund of 
Rs. 32,135, to meet the charge to be incurred on account of the sheristadars and their 
deputies. 

6. Now to the sheristadars of collectors and magistrates, we would propose to assign 
salaries averaging Rts. 350 per mensem ; and though the management of the land revenue is 
of course much more important and difficult in the unsettled districts, yet, considering the 
populousness of the provinces permanently settled, the large amount of the miscellaneous 
revenue therein realized, and the other duties of the collectors and magistrates, it seems to 
be expedient to have one scale for the whole. 

7. To the sheristadars of the sub-collectors and joint magistrates, salaries of Rs. 250 per 
mensem, and to the deputy-sheristadars Rs.60, might appropriately be assigned; and for 
neither of these does it appear necessary to have a graduated scale of allowance,’since, ‘if 
deserving, they will of course be promoted to the higher situations in the department. The 
sheristadars might be divided into the three following classes : ; 


First class to receive 500 rupees a month. 


Second - ~ - 350 - - 
Third - = - 200 - ” 
8. If 
F a? 2 . 4 
} First Class ;1,th o-oo 8 18 X 200 = 3,600 
Second Class 44, ths - oe os 36 X 150 = 5,400 


Third Class 3,ths ‘ee 54% 100 = 5,400 
Fourth Class ;4,ths and the odd number 79 x 80= 6,320 


187 20,720 


Semel 
momma 


GENERAL APPENDIX. - 315 ATE ENE, 
8. If these suggestions be adopted the aggregate menthly charge will be Rs. 28,960, as .,. ; 
specified below ae bein Rs. 3,175 less than the amount above ahaa to be available for the rhe feenigetias 
urpose. e , 
‘ oF Among the savings + for which credit was taken in our report of the 12th July, there renee areas 
was an item of Rs. 699, on account of the establishments of registers. The arrangements now Servants - 
submitted give, therefore, a further retrenchment-of Rs. 2,476 per mensem, or per annum 95 November 1830. 
' Rs. 29,712 ; but as they involve details connected with a very great many officds, on the 
heads of which the execution of them must mainly depend, and as in constituting new offices, 
or in modifying the duties of old offices, there always arise occasions of expense that cannot 
be clearly foreseen, we do not assume that result as of certain attainment ; and in carrying 
these suggestions into effect we beg to recommend that Government should only give its 
sanction to that part of the plan which goes to raise the emoluments of the native officers, 
according as the local officers may distinctly show that the savings necessary to meet the 
charge have been effected. m a 
10. It appears to us, indeed, that one of the most essential of the reforms in the revenue 
establishments at this presidency, is to place the head native officers of collectorships on a 
respectable footing in regard to salary; and under ordinary circumstances it seems to us that’ 
‘it would be advisable for the Government to take measures for that purpose, though they 
had involved a considerable increase of charge; but the exigencies of the present period 
require that the rule against increase, not covered by retrenchment, should prevail ;.and 
under any circumstances we should not have proposed that the arrangements now suggested 
should take place all at once. In many cases the incumbents must have a title to consideration 
which it would be harsh and unjust to disregard by an immediate retrenchment ; but a con- 
siderable part of the establishments above referred to may doubtless, be immediately dis- 
charged or reduced, and as vacancies occur in the situations marked for reduction, the new 
men should be brought in on allowances of the fowest class. Then, according as the fund 
: accumulates, 


18 xX 500 = 9,000 


e 
* Sheristadars to Collectors and Magistrates, Fitst Class 


Second Class - - - 18x 350= 6,300 
Third Class - - - 18 x 200 = 3,600 


54 X 850 = 18,900 


Sheristadars to Joint Magistrates and Sub-Collectors - - - = 22X 250 == 5,500 
Deputy Sheristadars - - - - “ - - - - 75x 60= 4,500 


28,960 


Per Mensem. Per Annum. 


+ Saving shown in paragraph3 ss - - = 
Ditto- -in paragraph4 = - - - - 


Total - -. - 32,135 
Proposed Salaries of Sheristadars - oe - 28,960 
‘ , 
. Difference -. - - 


Deduct Amount previously taken Credit for - —- 


Net Saving - - « 29,712 
. 882 oe gee Sore 


“Avpenpix, 316 APPENDIX to REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE... ° 
AL. : 


; accumulates, the sheristadars should, in the order of seniority, bé raised, first to the second 
‘Caleatta Civil -and afterwards to the first class, always supjfosing that they are really efficient men, and 
FinanceCommitrees that the controlling authorities take care to prevent @buse of patronage, while they support 
the proper authority of the heads of offices. nS 
We have the honour to be, &c. - i 
- (Signed) OD. Hin. 
H. Mackenziz. 
Joun Bax. - 


(29.) Letter from  (29.)—LETTER from the Calcutta Civil Finance Committee to the Vice-president in 

Committee,on Indi- - Council at Bengal; dated 13th December 1830. 

vidual Agency for H6nourable Sir, bd ‘ 

Collective Boards; = WE purpose on this occasion to fulfil the design intimated in our letter, under date the 

13 December 1830. 95th October last, of submitting a separate Report on the question how far the agency of 
individuals could be advantageously substituted for that of collective Boards. For this pur- 

ose it does not seem necessary that we should enter into any detailed description of the 

fonctions assigned to the several Boards, these being fully explained in the Regulations and 
Orders of Government, but we insert below a statement of charges for these esta~- 
blishments at the three presidencies * to which our observations are intended to apply. In 
this statement the Military Boards are not included, because the Board at this presidency has 
_ been remodelled by the General Orders of the 26th ultimo, and the Board at Madras is 
understood to be under the consideration of the Right Honourable the Governor-general ; 
and at Bombay the Military (as well as tht Marine Board) has been recently abolished. We 
have likewise omitted the Board of Trade in Bengal, and the Medical Boards at the three 
presidencies, each of the establishments appearing to stand on distinct grounds, and the 
expense of the one being charged to the Commercial, and that of the other to the Military 
department. ° : 

2. You will have observed, Honourable Sir, by the documents accompanying our letter 
above referred to, that the present question has already undergone some discussion in our 
committee, and the Honan Court of Directors, in their dispatch to the Supreme Govern- 
ment of the 18th of February 1829, adverting to the increase which has taken place of late 
years in the number of controlling Boards under this Government, and in the number of 
members composing them, have introduced some remarks on the present subject, which, for 
the sake of convenient reference, we shall repeat here. They observe (para. 65), “ connected 
with the duties of superintendence is an important general question, namely, whether Boards 

; . are 


* Benoa, Boarps: © 


Revenue - -— = - - —-3,05,859 
Customs 
Salt + - - = 3 - - 2,47,710 
Opium 

arine ~- - - - - os 44,880 

——— 5,98,449 
Mapras Boarps: ° 
Revenue - - “ - * 2,75,560 
Marine - - se - 4,622 ; . 
seq 2,80,182 fics Foz 


Total . - + | 8,78,631. 
eal 


GENERAL APPENDIX. 317 Arraons, 


are the fittest instruments either of improvement or contré], and whether both objects might 
not be. more ‘effectually attained by individual afency. “It is a common but trite observation, (29-) Letter from 
that responsibility is lessened by being d&ided, and there is, we believe, no doubt that more seria ase mee 
business can be done by the same number of persons acting separately than in conjunction. Gallese ph oa 
-If the business of your Revenue Boards is now divided, and a distinct portion allotted to edch | 3 De pe b — 8 3 pa 
member, then the utility of such division is already practically admitted, and the Boayl may : : 
be deemed to exist principally for the purpose of receiving collectively praise or blame for 
measures, the merit or demerit of which belongs exclusively to one of its members. If the busi- 
hess is not divided it can hardly fail to be impeded in its course by incompatible tempers, con- 
' flicting opinions, and the frequent occurrence of useless discussions. We feel no disposition to 
underrate the benefits which may sometimes be derived from a free communication of senti- 
‘ments between persons possessing different opportunities of experience and various kinds of 
information, associated by station, and animated by the same zeal for the public good; nor 
do we overlook the consideration that where great inteyests are at stake and important grysta 
reposed, it is not always expedient that they should be committed to the intelligence and 
probity of a single individual, even under the check of subordinate functionaries. , But we 
nevertheless think it deserving of mature consideration on which side the balance of advantage 
upon the whole preponderates.” Seen 
3. In estimating the relative merits of the agency of collective Boards and of individuals, 
there are certain advantages usually ascribed to the former system, which, if admitted to be 
found in it, weigh considerably in its favour. These advantages are said to consist in the 
opportunity which it affords of a free interchange of opinions between persons possessing 
various kinds of information; in the means it offers for the correction of errors and oversights ; 
in the security it gives that prejudice or passion will not influence its proceedings; and in the 
ein at it holds out of steadiness and consistency,in all measures within the range of its 
control. ; 
4. How far the foregoing advantages are justly claimed for the system of Boards, appears 
to us however to be more than questionable, for without instituting an invidious scrutiny 
into the actual detailed management of each, *we gre led by experience and observation to 
the conclusion that the existence of these advantages is rather imaginary than real. We 
‘observe, that in several cases the members of the Revenue Boards at this presidency have 
\transacted business separately, and resided in different places. In all instances:in which 
special deputations have been thought necessary (and these are generally ordered with 
a view to matters of importance), the agency of individuals has been preferred; and in point 
of fact it will generally, we believe, be found in practice, either that a particular branch of 
the business is done by each of the members separately, or that one member of pre~ 
ponderating talent or activity, or the secretary, performs the whole. In cases that are simple 
in their issues, and easy of determination, a collective body may indeed act together, but 
for such cases it would surely be unreasonable to provide so cumbrous and expensive 
a machinery; and in cases of intricacy and difficulty it can rarely happen in a body not 
influenced by party spirit that more than one will so master the facts as to be fully qualified 
to form a competent judgment. Supposing, therefore, a Board to consist of gentlemen equal 
in talents and qualifications, and possessing that mutual respect and deference which would 
arise out of such equality, we have little or no doubt that practically they would establish 
as complete a separation of functions as if each acted for himself, and that interchange of 
opinion would extend no further than what every able and candid man is likely to hold 
with his inferrors and superiors, as well as with parties interested and others not officially 
connected with him. ° 
&. No rules or restrictions can enforce real deliberation and concert, and it must therefore, 
we apprehend, be vain to attempt to prevent the above results im collective bodies when 
most happily constituted. But still more mischievous consequences must, we apprehend, 
result. when there is neither the preponderance or mutual deference to which we have 
alluded; and when those differences, disputes and compromises which are to be expected 
among men acting each on his own view, with very different degrees of prcidbacs as 
alent, 


aay 


APPENDIX, 


III. 


Calcutta Civil 
FinanceCommniittee. 


318 APPENDIX to REPORT From SELECT COMMITTEE, 


talent, must necessarily be of freqhent occurrence. Further, it seems to us to be almost certain 
that the selection of members for collecti¥e bodies will often be less careful and judicious 
than that of individual functionaries ; for so long & one able member or secretary are main- 
tained at a Board, the presence of an inefficient person will be overlooked and produce 
little apprehension of evil on the part of the Government. It is not therefore to be ordi- 
narily,expected that the choice of a member will be such as to bring to the aid of his 
colleagues that proportion of talent, temper and information which is requisite to render his 
association with them productive of public advantage; and we are satisfied that numerous 
instances could be cited in which an increase of members has proved anything but an 
addition to the zeal, efficiency and influence of the body. 5 

6. We can readily understand that the several members of a Board, if influenced by con- 
tending passions of party or other prejudice, might afford some eetany, each against the’ 
errors and oversights of his fellows, but the object would be dearly purchased by the evils 
that must flow from such a state of feeling, and when acting cordially together, it will 
rarely or ever happen that the members will not confide in each other upon almost all the 
points of fact, in regard to which errors and oversights are likely to occur; even supposing 
the purpose of preventing them, further than will be done by subordinate officers, to be 
much more important than it really is. 

7. With the views which we entertain as to the mode in which the business of collective 
Boards is likely to be conducted, we confess we see little reason to anticipate that’ their 
measures will be more free from unsteadiness, inconsistency, and the influence of hurtful 
passion and prejudice, than those of individuals. On the contrary, just in proportion as 
they depart from the principle ‘of individual agency, we should fear the prevalence of those 
defects, because there will be wanting the check of individual responsibility, and the acces- 
sion of each new member, if he meddle with the functions of his fellows, will introduce into 
the whole body the elements of change and vacillation. 

8. It may be urged, that the effects we have above noticed, apply to the manner in which 
most Boards have been constituted, and not to the system itself; ue if experience establishes, 
as we think it does, that these defects are inhtrent in the system, and unsusceptible of prac- 
tical remedy, and that the best-constituted Boards are those in which each member singly 
undertakes the portion of business with which he is most conversant, the advantage of 
maintaining such expensive instruments of control must be admitted to be theoretical. 
We do not intend altogether to deny the general advantages of oral discussion, but we 
cannot rate it very high in the case of Boards, nay, we are disposed to think that where 
employed in matters of much interest and importance, it leads oftener to disputes or inju~ 
rious compromises than to beneficial results, and the advantage in trifling cases is surely 
purchased at too high a price. : 

9. We are also free to acknowledge that in cases in which the main duty of the Board is 
the control of functionaries whose acts and arrangements are likely to affect; exclusively or 
chiefly, the interests of the Government, or in which it has to authorize or superintend large 
disbursements, involving much matter of discretion, there do exist strong reasons for 
desiring to confide the function to more than one individual. But such does not appear to 
be the nature of the duties that chiefly occupy the Boards to which we now refer ; and it is 
almost too plain for remark, how much must be lost in the quantity of business done by 
employing the agency of a collective body, a consideration which it is important to keep 
especially in view, when discussing the expediency of maintaining establishments whose 
frequent interposition is called for in the conduct of ordinary business, or in the decision or 
individual cases of eommon occurrence, such as are the Boards in question. 

10. But the principal objection to Boards, and especially to those which are not solely or 

chiefly used as checks upon the conduct of others, is, exclusive of the expense, the absence 
of clear and direct responsibility ; for whilst on the one hand, the desire of praise operates in 
a less degree upon the members of a Board, than on an individual; so on the other, the 
checks and control created by the apprehension of blame, act weakly where the stigma of 
reproof does not attach to one, but is divided amongst many. : fi 

: ; 11, ihe 


GENERAL APPENDIX. 319 Appenpix, 


; lil: 
* 11. The usual'and most specious argument adduced agdinst the agency of individuals, as — 
a directing and controlling authority, is founded 6n the inexpediency of committing important (29.) Letter from 
interests and trusts to the probity and inttlligence of a single person; but this objection. Committee, on Indi- 
cannot in the present case be considered to apply, for, as before observed, the real power vidual Aogey for: 
generally belongs to one member of a Board, or to the secretary, which is exercised without Collective (Boards; 
the check of individual responsibility, so that the system which is preferred. as a security is 13, December 1830. 
.in truth most open to abuse; and it must be recollected that the check of the contfolling Loo 
and the subordinate authority is mutwal, for constituted as the civil service in India is, both 
have the privilege and duty of accounting for their acts. oy 
12. It is supposed, perhaps, that a collective ror is able to exert a more vigorous con- 
. trol, and with less of personal feeling than an individual. We do not think that experience 
justifies the notion, but we cannot better convey ovr sentiments on this point, than in 
quoting the following passage from the Minute of the second member of our committee, 
which is already on the records of Government: ‘Where ‘single officers have , been 
employed, there has been not only more energy, care and consideration, on the part of the 
controlling authority, but more ready obedience and hearty co-operation in the subor- 
dinates. The former, indeed, must in such a case, feel the responsibility attaching to him, 
in a degree that can never be looked for in collective bodies. He will pursue his plans 
without being compelled to mutilate them in order to meet the scruples of less-informed 
colleagues, or to neglect them ‘in attending to foreign matter. In differing from his subar- 
dinates, a single functionary will ordinarily be careful, as far as his judgment goes, to have 
the right side of the question, He will convey the expression of his dissent, in terms the 
least likely to offend, because, acting singly, he will always be alive to the probability of 
offence. Tn proportion to the interest which he takes in the successfuJ administration of 
the affairs entrusted to him, (and, on this‘score, the individual with undivided praise and 
blame has infinitely the advantage), he will exert himself to guide and aid, and conciliate 
those who have to execute his orders. He will thus have every inducement to make the 
most of good men without any countervailing motive for sheltering the bad. He will under- 
stand clearly, and therefore state his views ‘istinctly, free from the doubts that beset the 
half measures into which collective bodies are always more or less liable to slide. What he 
does will be his own, without any opening for counteraction, excepting by a distinct refer- 
ence to superior authority; whereas, in a collective body the efficient member is often con- 
sidered by those under him, sometimes by his colleagues,.as an usurper of powers which he 
is not entitled, or at least not required to exercise, and the discipline of their subordinates is 
sacrificed, even when there is no plea of jealousy and intrigue, because they oppose the 
energy of individual excitement to the comparatively languid interest with which the com-. 
mon concerns of a co-operation are usually regarded.” - 
13. On referring to the proceedings of Government in 1828, relative to the’ mode 
in which the business of the Board of Revenue in the Western Provinces was transacted, it” Minute, 5 April - 
is satisfactory to find that the principles which we advocate were then supported. The 1828. 
third member of the Council observed, on that occasion: “I am not of opmion that the 
-business of the Board will be better done by the congregating of the members, or so well as 
by their separate employment in distinct divisions of territory ;” and although the same 
opinion was not held by the other members, yet it was admitted that “if Government could 
place full reliance on the judgment, knowledge, zeal and conciliatory disposition of each 
member of Boards or superior courts, it would be expedient to entrust to each of those 
members undivided authority and control over a defined tract of country, in preference 
to the system then in force.” The subsequent substitution of Commissioners of Revenue 
and Circuit for the Boards of Revenue may, to a certain extent, be considered a practical 
admission in favour of individual agency ; and we are quite satisfied that if the Government 
cannot find, throughout its extensive field for selection an adequate number of competent 
and upright functionaries, for the purpose of efficient superintendence and control over 
“executive officers by individual agency, the attempt to effect the object by associating 
together as Boards the competent and mcompetent, must be still more Hable to miscarry. 
: Entertaining 


APPENDIX, 
HII. 


Calcutta Civil 
FinanceCommittee. 


320 APPENDIX to REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


Entertaining these sentiments, we*are led to the conviction, that the public interests would 
be essentially promoted by substituting uhiversally single commissioners for collective: 
Boards, acting under the immediate control of Gdévernment in the superintendence of the 
officers employed in the civil administration of the country, and we shall now proceed ‘to 
apply the principle to each of the Boards contemplated m this Report, assuming for the 
Judicial department the scheme of establishments which our committee has already had 
the-honour to recommend. ae ; e. 2% 
. 34. The Sadder, or head Board of Revenue in Bengat, consists of three members, for whom 
we should propose to substitute two Sudder or head Commissioners of Revenue, viz. one for 
the Upper and another for the Lower Provinces ; and having had the advantage of commu- 
nicating on the subject with Mr. W. W. Bird, we are happy to find that the experience he has 
had in the Sudder Board of Revenue, f which he is now m charge, leads him fully to concar’ 
with us in opinion, so far as concerns the provinces subject to his authority. The com- 
missipners should possess all the powers and functions of the present Sudder Board, drawing 
the same allowance as is assigned to members of that Board, and to'each of them we should 
propose to attach a secretary or assistant, on a salary of Rs. 18,000 per annum. Should 
the territories subordinate to the presidency of Bengal be eventually placed under two 
distinct Gevernments, it seems to us that the office of Sudder Commissioner for the Lower 
Provinces ‘would not be necessary, but that the Government at Calcutta ought to cor~ 


‘respond through its secretary with the several local commissioners in that part of the 


country. - * ; 

15. The Board of Customs, Salt and Opium consists of two members, and was instituted 
in 1819, previously to which period the control of the Custom department was vested in the 
Board of Revenue, and that of the Salt and Opium in the Board of Trade. The union which 
Government has recently directed in the interior of the executive duties of the land revenue 
branch with those of the customs, seems to render it highly desirable that the Sudder Com- 
missioners of Revenue, proposed to be appointed in the preceding paragraph, should, with 
exception of the Calcutta Custom-house, be charged with the supermtendence of the depart- 
ment of customs within their respective divisiéns. They might also, we conceive, advantage- 
ously exercise the appellate jurisdiction in regard to i against the revenue which now 
belongs to the Board ; and, with this exception, the management of the Salt and Opium 


* departments, with the control of the Custom-house of Calcutta, should, we think, be placed 


Resolution of 
Government ; 
dated 24 August, 


in the hands. of a single commissioner, on a salary of Sonat rupees 52,200 (with an assistant, 
on a salary of Rs. 18,000), to whom Government might also commit, as at present, the 
superintendence of the stamps, and the abkarry, and of such other miscellaneous sources of 
revenue as appeared desirable. i ; 
16. The Marine Board is composed of the same members.as the Board of Customs, Salt 
and Opium, with a separate secretary, who is ordinarily a professional gentleman, and whose. 
functions we formerly proposed to assign to the ordinary secretary to the latter Board, an 
arrangement which was not adopted, “ owing,” as it was stated, “ to the members of the 
Marine Board having to perform various duties altogether foreign to their habits and 
education as civil servants,” and therefore requiring the assistance of a scientific officer. 
The Honourable Court, in their dispatch of the 18th of February.1829, wherein the origin 
and progress of the several Boards arefully described, suggests (para. 94), “ if three members 
be allotted to the presidency Revenue Board, that it should be vested with the superin- 
tendence of the salt, opium and customs, and that the Marine Board might be dispensed . 
with altogether by transferring part of their duties to the master’ attendant, and contriving 
@ new arrangement of the Pilot establishment, on the principle, that instead of being, as it is 
now, a heavy expense to Government, it ought to be chargeable to the general commerce of 
the country.” .In our report of the 13th of August 1829 we suggested the,assignment of 
an enlarged authority to the Master attendant, by which the Marine Board would, be 


‘relieved from various detailed duties, and it occurs to us that the Military Board is the most: 


convenient authority in which the control of the Marine department can be vested, especially 


-since stinendiarv. members ‘have heen attached to that Board. The necessity of keeping 


distinct 


GENERAL APPENDIX. 321 ArpENpix, 


distinct the controlling and executive branclfes is obvious; and considering the frequent 


III. 


occasions on which the Military and Marine departments communicate with each other, we (29.) Letter from 
think that much convenience and more efficiency will result from adopting this than from: Commit, on Indi- 


‘continuing the present arrangement. 

17. The marine affairs at Madras cannot, we think, be of such an extent as to require the 
superintendence of a separate Board, consisting of a member of council, the .commercial 
superintendant, and the master attendant; and although no salary is assigned to any of the 
members, or to the secretary, under the head of Marine Board-office, yet in other depart- 
* ments a larger salary is probably attached to some of them in consideration of this duty. 
The master attendant, for instance, (who being a member of the Board, is both a controlling 


-. and executive officer,) has a salary in that capacity of Rs. 2,275 per mensem ; and the secre- 


tary has a salary of Rs. 1,429 per mensem, exclusive of commission, (averaging Rs. 628 per 
mensem), in the Commercial department, of which gne-half was formerly charged eto the 
Marine department. The controlling authority in the Marine department at Madras ean be 
exercised, we should think, by the Government itself, aided by one of its secretaries, and we 
accordingly recommend the abolition of the Marine Board and its establishment, at that 
residency. . ; 

c 18. The Revenue Board at Madras is the only remaining establishment of the description 
under review, which requires to be noticed, and by a Minute of our senior member, now befére 
Government, you will have observed, honourable Sir, that he is favourable to its continu- 
ance, and has assigned the following grounds for his opinion :— 

“A Board of three or four members is not merely three or four individuals doing the same 
thing, instead of its being done by one. They not only correct each otlrer’s oversights and 
temper each other’s feelings, but they often supply each other’s defects, by bringing varied 
qualifications and resources to their task. Accordingly I have seldom, if ever, known any 
intricate subject under the consideration of a well-composed collective body, upon which, in 
the course of their deliberations, each member did not materially and sincerely modify his 
original views. Indeed all human experiencé confirms the maxim that in council there is 
wisdom. In executive measures activity and premptitude are of vital importance; but in 
a superintending and controlling authority they may be too closely allied to an overbearing 
and intermeddling disposition, and valuable as they. are whenever all depends upon the 
energy and exertion of the moment, it is true, also, that under an organized and settled 
system the vis inertie is not without virtue. Moreover, the views and proceedings of a 
collective body are not perceptibly or speedily affected by changes among its individual 
members. There is no demise of a Board, and its measures acquire a steadiness and 
stability which cannot belong to those of successive commissioners. This steadiness becomes 
_ of infinitely more value when a Board is viewed not merely as superintending the officers of 
Government, but as advising, and sometimes restraining, the Government itself. An indi- 
vidual commissioner acting in the same capacity would be liable to be at total variance 
with his immediate predecessor, and (what would be a much greater evil in such a system as 
ours) might, by deberehes to views entertained in the highest quarters, and by means of 
personal intercourse, be brought to support, or even to suggest measures, against which, as 
a member of a Board, influenced only by such considerations as would appear upon record, 
and fortified by the concurrence of his colleagues, he would not have failed to remonsttate. 
One of the few securities we have for permanence in any of our arrangements would be 
taken away, if Boards and Courts were universally supplanted by mdividual commis- 
sioners. ; ' “ 
~ “ Applying the general question to the Madras Board of Revenue, I conceive that the 
benefit of a greater degree of individual agency and responsibility might be obtained by 
a, division of the ordinary duties of the Board among its several members, and by frequent 
circuits of inspection. But that.benefit would be purchased at much too high’a price if it 
cost the existence of .an institution, which has ‘never failed to comprisé some of the best 
talents and most valuable experience of the public service, and to prove itself.capable of 
presenting to its superiors the soundest and es enlightened views regarding the condine 

oO 


. 


vidual Agency for 


Collective Boards; 
13 December 1830. 


App. (12.) 


APPENDIX, 


WI 


Sloman . 
Caleutta Civil 
F eae. aca 


322 APPENDIX ro REPORT yrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


of the people, the resources of every part ofethe country and the science of good govern- 
ment, As 3 body, the Madras Board of Revenue kas by its services deserved a better fate 
_than to be dissolved: but if it were otherwise, and if the incapacity of one or more of ita 
members Jay like an incubus upon the efficiency of the rest, I do not see how the evil 
would be cured by dispersing them, with their very unequal qualifications, to undertake 
equal duties, and to exercise co-ordinate authority within separate spheres of jurisdiction. 
The incapable members could not be expected to become efficient commissioners. The 
only evils which the dispersion of the members of a board seems calculated to remedy, are 
those of its business falling in arrear from its having too much to do, or of its failing to take - 
a proper interest in its duties from the languid feeling of divided responsibility. There is 
no pretence for imputing the latter evil to the Madras Board of Revenue, and if the former - 
exists in any degree, I trust that it may be remedied by some less violent and injurious 
measure than the dissolution of the Bgard. 

“‘ Commissioners of Revenue, in lieu of the Board, would merely be principal collectors, ab- 
solved from executive duties, and deprived of the practical experience and minute and in- 
timate knowledge which can only be gained in the course of discharging them, and at the 
same time vested with superintendence over much wider extent, and therefore with weaker 
effect than at present. To place the present collectors and principal collectors under the 
immediate eye of such commissioners without responsible duties, but with absolute dis- 
cretionary authority to issue orders to their servants and to interfere with their arrange~ 
ments, would degrade the most valuable local officer of the Madras Government into 
another person’s deputy, and both damp his zeal and diminish his sense of responsibility. 
Such subordinatioy of authority, without corresponding superiority of talent, experience oF 
duty, would produce uniform disgust and frequent alteration. Even when bad Deling did 

_ not arise towards the commissioner, it could not fail to be excited towards his native estan 
blishment, Besides, the constant changes of commissioners, some of them permanent and some 
temporary, would lead unavoidably toconstant changes or suspensions in the system of revenue 
management, so that the same system would seldom be actively pursued in any district for 
a few years together. After all, too, the dubstantial authority in a district must necessarily 
remain in the hands of the officer charged with responsible duties, and cannot in effect be 
transferred to any other officer merely exercising superyision over him. The local officer 
may be aided and stimulated in the discharge of his duty, or he may be thwarted and 
crippled ; but it is upon his exertion that the welfare of the district must depend, and his 
superior cannot serve the purpose of his substitute. It would therefore be a radical mis- 
take to improve the controlling part of our system at the expense of the operative, even if 
there were full reason to be convinced that the alterations were improvements. 

“ If it.be supposed that the cases of malversation which elude the discovery of a Board 
would be detected by a commissioner, I believe that there has been no want of previous 
general information in any case of the kind which has occurred under the Madras pre~ 
sidency; but that tenderness for the individual, or false delicacy, or aversion to stand for 
ward as accuser, motives which are as likely to influence commissioners or other public’ 
officers, and the inffuence of which may be, and I expect will be, overcome by the Board 
of Revenue as effectually as by a commissioner, have prevented the suspicions which it 
excited from being acted upon. 

“ I am quite sure that without the aid of the Board of Revenue, the Madras Government 
would be incapable of superintending the proceedings of the. commissioners and collectors 
under them with due effect; unless it took yeas itself ~ great portion of the duty now per- 
formed by the Board of Revenue, and for that purpose greatly increased its establishment, 
both European and native. It certainly is essential to’ the efficient discharge of the func- 
tions of Government not to add to the details with which the Governor in Council is already 
incumbered, and any reform calculated to be attended with that inconvenience must neceg- 

- sarily prove fallacious.” ; 

19, Mr. Hil] hag further remarked as follows: “I am confirmed in the desire to follow 

this, cautious course of, proceeding, and to avoid unnecessary innovation, by the success 
_* which 


GENERAL APPENDIX, : 353° Aevaiorx, 
- which has attended the system of civil administration actually in force af Madras. Ithag 9 = -—— 
been successful according to all the tests by which it can be fairly tried. The statement (29.) Letter from 
below*, for 20 years, during which there has been no accession of teftitory to that cinta peed: 


; : re p vidual Agency for 
residency, shows that the revenue has been collected with surprising regularity. In that Qoneciye Bsarde: 


ong period there is only one year in which the collections exceed the average by 8 ger cent. 
they bevel have fallen A much as.6 per cent. below it.. The average of thé first to years se Deneaber age 
falls short of the general average bye 1 $ per cent., that of the last 10 years exceeds it in the 
same small proportion. ' In England a bad harvest has been stated to make a difference of 
- 10 per cent. in the revenues, but the period ‘here taket includes two bad harvests, which 
did not make much more than half that difference. The evidence of successfal administra- 
. tion which this statement affords, must be deemed conclusive when it is borne in mind that 
.the revenues of Madras are very high, and depend mainly upon annual settlement.” 
. °20. The second and third members of our Compittee, without questioning theability 
with which the business of the Revenue Board at Madras may have been conducted, do 
not concur in the arguments or reasoning advanced by the senior member tor retaining that 
Board at Madras. The reasons assigned in the former part of this report appear to them 
to apply as much to one Board as to another. They can scarcely recognise any clear proof 
of superior management in the circumstance that there has been no great variation in thé 
amount of revenue when they advert to the sanguine and apparently well-founded expett- 
ations of increased resources which are expressed in the records of the Madras Government, 
and reflect upon the natural course of things in countries that had long suffered from thé 
misrule.of native governments. They perceive, in the selection of papers which have been 
printed by the Honourable the Court of Directors, abundant proof of the existence of abuses 
that would, they hope, be very unlikely to occur under a plan of individual responsibility 
and personal supervision, such as they advocate. The same papers appear to show that the 
. : employment 


> 


e 
* Actual Collections of Revenue in the Districts¢ander the Presidency of Fort St. George, 
for 20 Years, averaging Rupees 4,23,11,100. 


® 
Per Centage, 


YEARS. REVENUES. above 
or below Average. 
1808-9 4,09,30,000 3 4 2 
1809-10 4,04,33,000 4 7 - 
1810-12 4520,21,000 - 1011 
1811-12 3,98,38,000 § 13 6 
1812-13 . 401,98, 000 41511 
1813-14 "| 4523,51,000 “4. 2066 
1814-15 4,26,83,000 “4 
1815-16 4;24,49,000 se 
1816-17 4,18,06,000 Pe ae 
1817-18 4,26,02,000 age. 
1818-19 4,20,62,000 ees 
1819-20 4,26,79,000 ~ 9 5 
1890~21 © 4,28,71,000 71312 
1821-22 * 4:3%92,000 ee. 
1822-23 4,47525,000 751 
182324 4,20,42,000- 531 3 
1824—25 © 4:57,12,000° 8 ee 
1825-26 4,38,93,000 a oe 
1826-27 4,34,63,000 311 10 
1827~28 4101,72,000 ae cS 
: 5 ~10 


TT2 


- 
APPENDIX, | 


Il. 


ee 


Caleutta Civil 
Finance cals 


324. ABPENDIX ro REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


e “ 
employment of collective Boards: affords no assurance of consistency of principle or pre- 
cedure; nay, if the internal administration of Madrag has in later years been, as they believe 
it has been, distinguished by vigour, energy and success, the result must, they think, be 
mainly ascribed to the circumstance that the working of the system was thoroughly con- 
trolled and directed by one man, certainly no ordinary man, Sir Thomas Munro; nor do 
they supose, as contemplated by Mr. Hill, that inefficient men will be appointed single 
commissioners ; on the contrary, the positive necessity of rejecting an inefficient functionary, 
where only one is employed, will insure, in their opinion, the appointment of the most able 
officers to be found on the list of the service. The majority of the Committee therefore 
recommend the substitution of two revenue commissioners, on a salary of Rs. 48,000, (with 
an assistant to each on a salary of Rs.,18,000,) for the present Revenue Board at Madras, . . 
ae in their respective divisions may separately exercise all the functions now vested in the 

oard. — 

21..In the observations which we Have introduced on the present subject we have not 
laid any particular stress on the economy of substituting the system of individual agency 
for that of Boards; this, however, is one of the most important and beneficial results to be 
anticipated. from the measure. The reduction of expense, as regards European covenanted 
officers, may be estimated, according to the comparative statement bélow *, at Rs. 2,76,380 
per annum, exclusive of some saving which may be anticipated in the native establish- 
ments, and we are quite satisfied that the alteration will promote efficiency and improvement 
as well as economy. 

22. Although our senior member does not concur in the view taken by the majority of 
the Committee, either on the general question as to the comparative advantages of collective 
and individual agency, or on the application of that question to the Board of Revenue at 
Madras, yet as his colleagues have so fully cited the grounds on which he rests his opinion, 
he does not feel himself entitled to occupy further time in discussing the subject. He 
thinks it incumbent on him, however, with respect to the Madras Board, expressly to dis- 
claim the admission that experience establishes, as the majority of the Committee thinks it 

: does, 


e 


7 


* PRESENT. PROPOSED. 
BENGAL: , 
; Board of Revenue; : : 
3 Members - - _.* 1,56,600 2° Sudder Commissioners = 1,04,400 
4 Secretaries and Assistants 91,200. 2 Secretaries or Assistants + 36,000 . 
2,477,800 1,40,400 
. : 1 Commissioner, and Salt and 
Board of C : : 
Osher he unos: Opium Departments and 
2 Members” - - = 1,04,400 ‘ Miscellaneous Revenue - 52,200 
3 Secretaries and Assistants 54,000 s 1 Secretary or Assistant - 18,000 
—_———._ 1,58,400 an , ———————= "70,200 
Mapras: 
Board of Revenue: oe 
4 Members - -  ~ 1,60,100 2 Commjssioners of Revenue 96,000 
4 Secretaries and Assistants 52,680 ' 2 Secretaries or Assistants - 36,000 
212,780. ———— 1,332,000 - 
' + ; rt ‘ . reine 
- Grand Total - - - 618,980 ; Grand Total - - - 3,42,600 


. 7 : en meeseal 
; Difference or Saving - - - 2,76,980 


t 


: t 
GENERAL APPENDIX. 325 APPENDIX,, 
ork age | a IIL. 
does, either that the defects which they impyte to collective agency are inherent in the  . _——~ 
system and unsusceptible of practical remedy, or that its views and proceedings have (29-) Letter from: 
fluctuated according to changes among its individual members, as would have happened Committee.on Indi- 
with respect to the views and proceedings of successive commissioners. In his view of the pte A "Boe ai , 
matter A the main duty of the Board of Revenue at Madras, to which detailed settlements, | : Den fae iy 
embracing the whole statistics of by far the greater part of the country, and involving the Ber eee 
exercise of most extensive discretionary authority, are annually submitted, is virtually such 
as the majority of the Committee acknowledge to constitute an expected case; and although 
. the proposition is self-evident, that ““ more business can be done by the same number of 
persons acting separately than in conjunction,” yet it is hardly relevant to the question 
. to be decided: for the paramount object of such an institution as the board of Revenue is, 
that the Government and collectors may be able to confide in its knowledge, experience, 
means of information and weight of character, not that it may dispatch business in the most 
expeditious manner. Finally, in as far as the propo&ed change would throw immediately 
upon the Government any part of the present functions of the Board of Revenue, and also 
with regard to the abolition of the Marine Board at Madras, and the transfer of its duties to 
the Government, which the majority of the Committee recommend, the senior member. is 
desirous of expressing tn the strongest manner his deliberate conviction, that of all changes 
that which is most required for the efficiency and success of our system of administration, is, 
that the Council Board should be relieved from a large portion of the details by which its. 
time and attention are at present overlaid; and that of all schemes of collective agency and 
divided responsibility the most open to objection is what must ensue if those details are 
added to; viz., that of allowing the name and authority of Government to be implicitly 
delegated to the organs through whom its resolutions seit merely to be communicated. 
23. Our senior member does not feel himself qualified to offer any remarks upon the 
application which the majority of the Committee have made of the general question of collec- 
tive or individual agency to the Boards at this presidency, further than by observing, that if 
the duties of the Bengal Board of Revenue ,correspond with those at Madras, the proposed 
change seems to him Jiable to the same objections at the one presidency as at the other. 


We have, &c. 


(signed) Davin Hixt. 
Hott Mackenzis. 
Joun Bax. 


(30.)—-MINUTE of W. Blunt, Esq., Member of Council at Bengal; — (30.) Minute of 
‘ dated 6th January 1831.- ; William Blunt, Esq., 


on Individual 
In forwarding to the Right Honourable the Governor-general, for his Lordship’s con- Agency for Collec- 


sideration, the Report of the Civil Finance Committee on the question as to the comparative. tive Boards ; 
advantages of individual agency, or that of collective Boards, and in expressing our 6 January 1831. 
concurrence generally in the opinion entertained by thé majority of that Committee, I think 
it necessary to state that I am not prepared to give un unqualified assent to the expediency 
of extending at present that principle of revenue management and control throughout the 
provinces immediately dependent on this presidency. 
‘Whatever inefficiency may have been found to exist in collective Boards, that evil is not, 
I think, necessarily inherent in the “system. There cannot be any doubt that, individual 
_ responsibility may sometimes be necessar} to call forth exertion, and that a divided or ill- 
defined responsibility has a tendency to induce a relaxation in that respect. It is also, 
- I think, unquestionable that more work can be performed by means of individual agency 
than by that of a collective body; but an incapable or inefficient member of a Board will not 
make a more able or better commissioner, and the.same caution with which it will be neces; 
sary to select persons to be entrusted singly with the powers of control vested in commis- 
' sioners 


+ 


APPENDIX, 


Ul. 


nee 


Caleutta Civil 
FinanceCommittee. 


"326 APPENDIX ro REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


sioners would have insured an efficient Board, There seems indeed reason to believe that too 
reat a facility in the selection of persons to constitute the Boards, arising probably from 

a difficulty of passing over claims of seniority even in cases of doubtful qualification, has 

been a principal cause of that inefficiency which has given rise to the present question. 

The chief advantage to be derived from the establishment of a collective Board, as ¢edn- 
nected evith the revenue administration of the country, appears to me to consist in the means 
it affords of aiding. Government by its deliberations and matured opinions in questions of 
difficulty and importance, eapedialls such as are likely*to arise in the progress of the settle- 
ment of our extensive and valuable Westen Provinces, and in which the interests of Govern~ - 
ment and the welfare of the people may be materially involved. Whatever information might 
be necessary to guard againt error would be concentrated in a Board placed in immediate . 
communication with the local authorities, and composed of the most able and experienced 
of the Revenue officers of Government. A greater degree of consistency of procedure and of 
principle must thereby be insured that could be expected if the local commissioners were 
placed in direct communication with Government, and whose conflicting views and opinions 
would frequently tend to embarrass rather than to aid its decisions. 

The establishment of a controlling Revenue Board in the Western Provinces likewise appears 
to me to be the only means by which Government can secure the requisite degree of exertion on 
the part of the collectors, in expediting the revision of the settlements, to which the judicial and 
otlfer duties of the commissioners, it appears to me, must preclude their giving much of their 
attention; and I am of opinion that it is by means only of a controlling Board that full 
and satisfactory reports can be obtained of the progress of the settlements, and of the 
results of the labour and money expended in furtherance of this important work. 

It seems likewise’desirable and necessary in those remote and unsettled provinces that 
more ready means of redress be afforded against any erroneous or unjust proceedings or 
orders of the local commissioners than would exist if an appeal could only be preferred at 
the presidency, or direct to Government. And it is also desirable to relieve the Government 
from the necessity of hearing and deciding on such appeals, for which oceasion is more 
likely to arise in provinces under Huctuating assessments, and on which the rights and 
interests of various classes of the agricultufal community are as yet imperfectly understood, 
than in our permanently settled provinces. . 

I should not, therefore, be disposed to advocate the plan of substituting individual agency 
in those provinces for that of a collective body, until a settlement for an extended term of 
years shall have been completed in every district; and till such period I conceive that the 
presence of a Board, composed of the most approved and efficient of the revenue officers of 
Government, is indispensably necessary to the welfare of the country and to the security of 
the public interest. re ; 

But in the Lower Provinces, where it can scarcely happen that any question of importance, 
or any matter of difficulty can occur, which a revenue commissioner is not fully competent 
to decide, or to dispose of without reference to Government (except in cases in which - 
reference is presented), I concur entirely in opinion with the Finance Committee that a Board: 
is not necessary, and that the revenue administration of those provinces may be conducted 
by means of individual agency, the Commissioners corresponding directly with the territorial 
secretary to Government, though under that arrangement it might be found necessary to: 
give additional assistance to that officer. ; 

The arguments adduced by the senior member of the Finance Committee. against the 
plan of substituting individual agency for that of a Revenue Board at Madras, appear to 
me to render the expediency of the measures at that présidency very questionable. 


(signed) W.Buunr. . 


GENERAL APPENDIX. _ géj Appuxmix,: 
| ec : Ur 


7” 7 : 
(31.)--MINUTE of Sir C. T. Jlfetcalfe, Member of Council at Bengal; *-  (31,} Minute of * 
; dated 9 January 1881, Sir C. fe 
; . : , » _ on Indivjfuat 
‘ Havine before repeatedly expressed sentiments in favour of superintendence by indi« Agency 1dr Collec- 


viduals, as preferable to that exercised by collective Boards, according with those récently tive Boards : 
submitted by the Finance Committee, in their Report of the 18th December, I shall confine.9 January 1831. 
myself on the present occasion to the declaration of my, concurrence in the reasoning of the, 
ABR OY of the Committee on that subject. 
With respect to their specific propositions, without meaning to urge the immediate adop-~ 
. tion of any of them, I concur in them generally, as calqulated, in my opinion, to promote both 
efficiency and economy, with the exception of that regarding the Marine department, to 
which department the system of individual superintendence, might, I conceive, be as well 
»applied as to any other, by placing it at a suitable perfod under a superintendant of Marine, 
substituted for the master attendant, instead of transferring it to the control of the Military 
Board, as proposed by the Committee. 
: (signed) C. T, Metca.re. 


a en Ee OE ny 


. (32.)}—MINUTE of the Governor-general of Bengal; dated 24 January 1831. (92.) Minute of 
LordWm.Bentinck, 
‘Havine already, in my Minute on the re-modelling of the Military ‘Board at this pre- on Individyal 
sidency, given my opinion on the relative advantage of individual and collective agency, Agency for Collec- 
I need not here say much more upon the subject. tive Boards ; 
Where the duties are principally executive, like those belonging to commissioners of 24 January 1831. 
revenue and circuit, much benefit is obviously to be derived from the dispatch, vigour and _ 
unity of bia sete which a single hand can best achieve. But, on: the other hand, ‘when, 
council, deliberation, the careful revision of a great system, with its details, are required ;; 
when, moreover, functions are to be delegated partaking partly of a judicial.character, when ' 
investigating charges of default against a large body of revenue servants, and partly of! 
‘ a legislative character, when suggesting the Regulations by which the rights in the soil are: 
to be determined, it strikes me that there cannot. be a doubt of the superiority of a collective! 
body. In all my experience of public business, both in and out of Parliament, I have never: 
‘seen am occasion where discussion. did not produce great improvement in the original \ 
measure. In this country, where the revenue system 1s' of such vast importance to the: 
community at large, it seems.to me that Goverliment can never hope to arrive at a complete. 
knowledge. of its management, except by that free interchange and honest collision of opinion 
that can, only grow out of a jomt supermtendence. The Board of Revenueis-to the Supreme 
Government what the latter'is to the Home Authorities. I beg to ask, if it were not for the 
able and honourable individuals who sit in council in independence of the Governors ‘of : 
the different presidencies, what security would there be, even. fora true and fair record of the « 
administration, much less that: the public affairs were conducted with efficiency and honout,, 
and in the true spirit of the orders and intentions of so very distant an authority. 
The Finance Committee. have recommended that.there shall be two commissioners of- 
revenue, one for the Upper, and one for the Lower Provinces. It! is not stated whether they: 
are to act separately. or together, but as the principle of individual agency is maintained by: 
the majority, I conclude that they are to act separately.” « 
My opinion upon this subject is very much in conformity to that of Mr. Blunt. I quite * 
agree with him that a. Board of Revenue is indispensable for the regulation of the settlements _ 
in the Upper Provinges. I think with him that two members would be sufficient; and I am 
further of opinion. tat this Board should hereafter, under any circumstances, be stationed 


at Allahabad. : af 


APPENDIX, 


—yoene 


Calcutta Civil 
FinanceCgmmittee. 


328 APPENDIX ro REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


. 


If an arrangement shall hereafter be madeefor dividing the administration of the Upper 
and Lower Provinces, then I agree with Mr. Blunt éhat the secretary in the Revenue depart- 
ment may conduct the whole correspondence with the commissioners in the Lower Provinces; 
but if no such separation should take place, the details would too much overload the Govern- 
ment, and the appointment of a single commissioner would become necessary. : 

‘To the recommendation of the Finance Committee for the substitution. of a single com- 
missionér for the Board of Salt and Opium, and for the, transfer of the duties now exercised | 
by the same Board, under the designation of Marine Board, to the Military Board, and of all 
the executive duties of the Marine department to the master attendant, I see no objection. - - 

’ T agree with Mr. Blunt and the senior member of the Committee, Mr. Hill, in the expe- 
diency of maintaining the Revenue Board at Madras, but the reducing the number to two - 
members would, in my opinion, promote economy, without in any degree impairing its 
efficiency. : : 

I ie not recommend: the immediate adoption of any of these measures as they regard esta- 
blishments which have long had the sanction of the Honourable Court ; and as the whole frame 
of the Indian Government is about to be brought under public review, it may be more con- 

* venient to leave the decision of these minor details to follow any general arrangement which 
the Legislature, in its wisdom, may think proper to adopt. *: 


*. Camp, Oude, - (signed) W.C. Bentinck. 
24th January 1631. 


* TV. 


I V. , . . 
(33-) Civil Servants, .(33.)— LETTER from the Governor-general in Council at Bengal to the Court of Directors, 


(Judicial Departmenty; dated 3 July 1823. 


Honourable Sirs, 

We have the honour to transmit to your Honourable Court, as separate numbers in the 
pee the accompanying Minutes by the Governor-general and Mr. Harrington, which have 

een recorded on our proceedings of the 19th ultimo. 

2. The measures proposed by the Governor-geheral having been approved by the Board, 
will be immediately carried into effect. ; 

8. They are directed to the object of separating the office of magistrate from that of the 
civil judge in some of the districts in the Lower Provinces, in which that measure appeared 
chiefly desirable, either from the heavy arrear of civil business or from other considerations. 

4. The grounds of the several ‘measures adopted for that purpose are so fully explained 
in the Governor-general’s Minute, as to render it unnecessary to recapitulate the details of 
the arrangement in this place; but we trust that the motives by which we have been in- 
fluenced on this occasion will be approved by your Honourable Court. ; 

5. We think it necessary, however, earnestly to solicit-the attention of your Honourable 
Court to the present state of the civil service, as described in the Minutes of the Governor- 
general and Mr. Harrington ; and to request that your Honourable Court will take into your 
early consideration the expediency of making.such addition to the number of your civil ser- 
vants on the Bengal establiahinent as may tend to remove or diminish the difficulty and 
embarrassment which we now experience in providing for the efficient administration of the 
civil affairs of this presidency. es = . ; 

, or - We have the honour to be, Honourable Sirs, - 
Your most faithful humble Servants, 
tae: (signed) © JyApam. 
_ Fort Willian, Tia FEenDALL. 
3 July 1823. | JH. Harrington. ° 


4 


GENERAL APPENDIX. a0 


(34.)—MINUTE of John Adam, Esq., Govtrnor-general of India; dated 12 June 1823. 


APPENDIX, 


el 


34.) Minute of 


(¢ 
John Adam, Esq. ; 


In the consideration of the measures best calculated to facilitate the administration of 12 Juneg 823. 


civil and criminal justice in the territories subordinate to this presidency, the importance of 

augmenting the number of European functionaries employed in the jadical department 
has been always felt and acknowledged. The necessity of a rigid adherence to economy, 
however, has hitherto prevented the Government from having recourse to that most obvious 
ee improving the efficiency of the Judicial administration to the extent which was 
‘desirable. 

2. Since the year 1810 the number of judges in the higher courts has been increased ; 
four zillah courts have been newly formed or re-established, a superintendant of police has been 
appointed in the Western Provinces, the new office of superintendant and remembrancer of 

‘Jaw suits has been established, and several joint magistrates have been created. oe 

3. Other joint magistrates have during the same period been dispensed with, and the 
offices of assistant judge and of registrar to the provincial courts have been abolished. 

4. The total number of judicial situations is not materially greater now than in 1810, 
while, in point of fact, the European functionaries actually employed in the administration of 
justice in the districts under this presidency is less than it was at the period adverted to. 

he annexed Statement, No.1, furnished from the civil auditor’s office, shows the number of 
European officers who stood appointed to situations in the Judicial department in the years 
1810, 1816, 1822 & 1823 respectively ; and it will be observed, that at the present time the 
number of officers so appointed is less by 10 than the number appointed in the year 1810. 

5. In the orders recently passed on the’ Report of the Sudder Dewanny Adawlut, relative 
to the state of civil business in the several courts of justice, we have had occasion to notice 
the very serious inconvenience experienced from the impossibility of pevdus registrars in 
many districts where the pressure of business rendered the services of officers of that class 
highly important. / 

6. Although the powers of the moonsiffs in the cognizance of civil suits have been recently 


‘ extended, and provision has been made for the éxercise of more responsible functions by the 


‘Sudder ameens, still there are numerous duties in the Judicial department, the execution of 
which cannot with propriety be transferred to the native officers, and which therefore, if there 
is no registrar or assistant, must devolve exclusively on the judge and magistrate. 

7. The details with which the latter officer is in such cases burthened preclude him from 
performing any portion of his business with due care and deliberation. He cannot attend 
properly to one department without neglecting another; and he is unable to superintend the 
conduct of the subordinate officers with that vigilance which is essential to the prevention 
of abuse. 


8. Under these circumstances, and with ‘reference to the present flourishing state of our © 


finances, 1 should be disposed to augment very considerably the number of European func- 
tionaries employed in the Judicial department, if the state of the service and the urgent 
demands of other branches of the administration would admit of it. 

9. We have now before us an application from the Board of Revenue in the Western Pro- 
yinces, urging that 11 additional ofticers be supplied for the service of the Revenue depart- 
ment in those provinces, as a measure essentially necessary for the due formation of the 
-settlements in the division under their superintendence ;. and though we are sensible of the 
scribe which would result from the adoption of the Board’s suggestion, we have not the 
means of complying with it to the eytent desired, except by withdrawing some of the officers 


duties on which they are engaged. 
10. The same difficulty has been experienced in furnishing to Mr. Molony, the agent at 
Saugor and the territories on the Nerbudda, the aid of covenanted civil officers ; and we have 


" how employed in the Judicial department, and whose. services can ill be spared from the 


in consequence found it necessary to supply the recent vacancies which have occurred by - 


the appointment of military instead of civil officers to be assistants to the commissioner. i 


APPENDIX, 


IV. 


— 


Civil Servants. 


330 ARPENDIX to REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


11. It appears from the accompanying Statement, No. 2, that the number of civil ser- 
vants attached to this presidency, alter dedfcting those absent at sea on account of their 
health, is actually less now than it was in the year 1811. Our territorial acquisitions and 
extended political relations, consequent upon the war with the Pindarries, and with Nepaul, 
have, in the inter, involved the establishment of new offices and have proportionately aug 
mented ¢he demand for the services of civil functionaries. 

12. The arrangements which have been so beneficially carried into effect during the same 
period for securing a more efficient control over every départment of the Revenue adminis- 
tration have likewise been attended with a similar result, and the serious difficulties to which. 
we are now so constantly exposed in providing officers to fill important situations, both in 
the Revenue and Judicial departments, seem to me to impose upon the Government the duty 
of earnestly soliciting the attention of the Honourable the Court of Directors to the actual 
state of the service, and of pointing out the necessity which exists for a very considerable 
augmertation of the number of civil servants on this establishment. 

13. The more immediate object, however, of the present communication is to bring under 
the consideration of the Board the importance of adopting such partial arrangements as our 
inadequate establishment will admit for facilitating the administration of civil and criminal 
justice in some of the districts of the Lower Provinces, in which, whether from the heavy. 
arrear of civil suits, or the defective state of the police, or the pressure of criminal and mis- 
celfaneous business, or from the joint operation of those causes, some further assistance seems 
indispensably necessary. 

14. From the annexed Statements, and from the remarks which I have already offered in 
regard to the state of the civil service generally, it is obvious that the wants of the Judicial 
department cannot be supplied by withdrawing from the other departments individuals now 
employed in them. I am of opinion, however, that a partial relief might be obtained by 
transferring the duties of some situations hitherto held by covenanted civil officers to indi- 
viduals not in the service, and that the officers above alluded to might be employed in the 
administration of justice in the districts where such aid is most essentially requisite. 


15. The offices to which I allude, are thé following :— 


ist. Deputy-registrar of the Sudder Dewanny Adawlut and Nizamut Adawlut, and trans- 
lator of the Regulations. 

2d. Assistant to the superintendant of police Lower Provinces. 

3d. Ditto to the secretary in the Judicial department. 

4th. Ditto to the secretary in the Territorial department. 


16. The duty of translating the Regulations might be transferred without inconvenience 
to the professors of the Persian and Bengalee languages in the College of Fort William, or 
to other individuals skilled in those languages, with a suitable remuneration for their labour. 
I am disposed to think that this js a plan which it would be expedient to adopt on its own 
merits, independently of the other considerations which have led me to propose it. It may 
be presumed that generally the professors of the college must be better qualified to perform 
the work with accuracy, and without reliance on native assistance, than the comparatively 
young scholars who must, in the ordinary course of the service, fill the post of deputy- 
registrar. The former are less liable to frequent change than the latter, by which means 
a greater degree of uniformity in the language and style of the translations will be secured ; 
an object which I conceive to be of considerable importance, and the want of which has, 
I believe, been regarded as a defect in the translated code. _ : 

17. In lieu of the %ivil servants now attached as assistants to the superintendant of police 
in the Lower Provinces, and to the secretaries in¢the Territorial and Judicial departments, 
T would propose that the latter officers be respectively authorized to employ as their private 
assistant any person not in the service of the Honourable Company, whom, from his talents, 
education and character, they may consider properly qualified to assist them. 

18. With respect to the secretaries’ offices, the duties assigned to persons holding the 
appointment of assistant are not such, generally speaking, as to prepare the individual S ie 

igher 


GENERAL APPENDIX. 


331 


higher or more active functions of the service ; and there’is no advantage derived to Govern- 
ment from the labours of covenanted servants iff the offices in question to compensate for the 
loss of their services in the Mofussil. This is not the case to the same extent with regard to 
the office of assistant to the superintendant of police ; but on a eomparison of the utility of his 
services in that situation with that of the office to which I propose that he should be trans- 


ferred, there can be no room to question the expediency of the measure. 


APPENDIX, 


IV.. 


(34.) Minute of 
John Adam, Esq. ; 
12 June 1823. 


19. I am aware that the orders of the Honourable the Court of Directors are opposed to _ 
the further employment of uncovenahted servants, but those orders were issued under a view 
_.of circumstances very different from that exhibited in the Statement now laid before the Board, 
and the imperious necessity of the case must justify our deviation from the. letter of the 

orders, at least to the extent proposed, while the present state of things continues to exist. 
‘20. The situation of the uncovenanted assistants will be a confidential one, and the super- 
intendant and secretaries must be held responsible for the due performance of any duties which 


may be entrusted by them to such assistants. 


To enable them to engage really useful and 


qualified assistants, I am of opinion that an allowance of 500 rupees-per mensem should be 


granted to the latter. 


21. The Board are aware that the assistants to the superintendant of police, and to the 
secretaries in the Judicial and Territorial department, are also magistrates of the town of 
Calcutta; and it will be necessary, if the proposed arrangement is carried into effect, to supply 


their places at the police office by the appomtment of at least one additional magistrate, fot 


being a covenanted servant. 


22, The abolition of the offices above specified, would place at our disposal the following 
gentlemen: Mr. D. C. Smyth, Mr. Morris, Mr. Macfarlan, Mr. Shaw; and I propose that 


those gentlemen be employed as magistrates of the under-mentioned districts : 
Hooghly, Mr. Smyth. 


Nuddea, Mr. Macfarlan. 


Jessore, Mr. Morris 
Purnea, Mr. Shaw. 


23. The very heavy arrears of civil business depending before the judges and registrars of 
those districts, according to the latest statements received by 


overnment, are shown 


below *. In all of them the criminal duties are Rrborious, and the management of the police 
demands vigilant and active superintendence ; by relieving the judges from all duties con- 


nected with the office of magistrate, those officers will give their undivided attention to the 
civil court, and will be enabled to reduce the depending arrear of business, and to superintend 


with efficiency the lower courts. 


24. The magistrate will in like manner have it in his power to devote his whole time to the 
management of the police, and to the duties of the Foujdarry department. He will not be 
precluded from occasionally proceeding in person to those parts of the district which may 
appear to require his particular attention, either from the local prevalence of heinous crimes, 
the misconduct of the police officers, or from other causes. I would propose that the monthly 
salary of the separate magistrates be fixed at 1,600 rupees*per mensem, including charges for 
travelling, or for other extra expenses incurred by them on occasions of visiting the interior 


of their districts. 


- 25. There are several other districts, both in the Lower and Western Provinces, into which 
ervice , 


I am desirous of seeing the same system introduced ; but in the present state of the s 


I can 


* Depending before the Judge and Registrar on the rst February 1823 — 
a : 


Hooghly 
Jessore 
Nuddea 
Purnea 


a 


* Regular. 


1,469 
1,140 

931 
1,120 


UU2 


Summary. 


729 
2,895 


3,416 > 


547 


Total. 


2,198 
4,035 
41347 
1,667 


APPENDIX, 


IV. 


Civil Servants. 


332 ARPENDIX tro REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


I can suggest its further extension to one distyict only, Tirhoot*. The circumstances which 
have compelled Mr. Moore to relinquish the office oe. acting judge and magistrate of Sylhet, 
and to apply to be removed to some district beyond the limits of Bengal, are stated mm his, 
letter of the 3d April last; and while they justly entitle him to the indulgent consideration 
of Government, they placed at our disposal an officer peculiarly qualified by his experiencé 
and ‘abdities for the office of magistrate of Tirhoot, to which situation I propose that he 
should be appointed. 

26. In considering the means of facilitating the administration of justice, I have not 


failed to advert to the question, how far it might be practicable to relieve the judges of any- 


of those: districts in which the judicial business is particularly heavy, by transferring the 
functions of magistrate to the collectors, 

27. Whether the general introduction of that system, even if it were practicable, would 
be desirable, is a question which I do not propose to discuss on the present occasion; but 
I see n® reason why the experiment should not be tried in any particular district in which 
the collector may not only be well qualified for the task, but may have sufficient leisure to 
execute it, without interfering with his duties in the Revenue department, and where, at 


the same time, the business devolving upon the judge and magistrate is particularly - 


laborious. 3 

28. The duties of the collectors in the Western Provinces, in Benares and in Behar, appear 
to me much too laborious to admit of those officers being employed as magistrates also. 
The same obstacle occurs in many of the Bengal districts: in others the qualifications or 
state of health of the collectors do not encourage the attempt. After a careful consideration, 
I am prepared at present to suggest the following arrangements only: 

ist. That the dutfes of magistrate in the district of Rungpore be placed in the hands of 
Mr. Nisbet, the collector. - ° 

2d. That Mr. N. Smith, the collector of Ramghur, be vested with the powers, and be 
directed to exercise all the functions of magistrate in that district. 


3d. That the functions of collector and magistrate in the Jungle Mehals be vested in the 


hands of one officer. ° 

_ 29, The arrears of civil business dependihg before the judge and registrar of Rungpore 
are noted below}. The state of the police has for some time past been far from efficient. 
Mr. Nisbet is understood to be well qualified to discharge the functions of magistrate 
with effect, and his duties as collector are not heavy. 

30. The duties of judge, magistrate and collector of Ramghur, have for a considerable 
period devolved almost exclusively upon one officer. 

31. The arrears of civil business, though less heavy than in some other districts, are still 
very considerable}. The police requires vigilant superintendence, involving frequent per- 
sonal visits and local inquiries on the part of the magistrate. 

32. Mr. N. Smith, 


> Depending before the Judge and Registrar of Tirhoot on the 1st of February 1893 :— 


Regular Suits. Summary. Total, 
2,748 - - 4290.- + 3,168 
+ Regular suits - + - ga0 
Summary ditto = - ~, 19795 
Tota? - 2,645 
{ Regular suits - - - 525 
Summary ditto - - . 878 
_ 1,403 


—— 


’ 


GENERAL APPENDIX. . ° 333 Appendix, 
2 IV. 
32. Mr. N. Smith, the collector of this district, is already joint magistrate in the extensive — 
tract of country called Chota Nagpore, gnd I am of opinion that essential benefit may be (34.) Minute of 
- expected: from pees, in his hands the general charge of the police and the execution of John Adam, Esq. 5 
«the functions of magistrate. - ; + 12 June 1722. 
33. The registrar of the Jungle Mehals has hitherto conducted the revenue business of the 
district as assistant to the collector of Burdwan. I think it would be desirable to place the 
revenue administration of the Jungle Mehals on the same footing as at Ramghur, and to 
invest the collector with the powers of magistrate. 
84, The arrears of civil business have rapidly accumulated of late years*, chiefly in con- 
sequence of the revenue and judicial duties having frequently and for considerable periods 
devolved upon one individual. a ‘ 
85. The reasons which render it desirable that the magistrate of Ramghur should 
. uently visit in person the interior of his district, operate with equal force in the Jungle 
ehals. s _ 
36. Many of the estates are very large, and situated at a considerable distance from the 
Sudder station. These zemindars are generally vested with ten powers in their respective 
estates. The feuds between neighbouring proprietors, and between the latter and their 
subordinate jageerdars, frequently involve desperate affrays and inroads, which can be best 
prevented and settled by local inquiries ; and the vesting in one individual the united powers 
of collector and magistrate would greatly facilitate such adjustments. The gentleman at 
present officiating as registrar and assistant collector at Bancoora is too young to’ be entrusted 
with the proposed pore of collector and magistrate, and the arrangement, if approved of 
by the Board, may for the present be suspended. j “ 
37. The expense attending the several arrangements above suggested, would be confined 
to the salaries of the European officers, as it would not, I apprehend, be necessary - to. 
augment (or at all events in a very. trifling degree) the present establishments of native 
officers. The following rough Statement will show the probable additional expense to be 


incurred : 
‘ e Rs. 
Separate magistrates at Kishenagur, Jessore,. Hooghly, Tirhoot, Purneah, 
at Rs. 1,600 - - - - - - - - - - - - 8,000 
Extra allowance to the collector of Rungpore - - - - - = 500 
Salary to be granted to the collectors and magistrates of Ramghur and the 
Jungle Mehals, at Rs. 1,600 - - - - - le - - 3,200 
11,700 
Deduct: 
Salary of deputy registrar of the Sudder Dewanny Adawlut and Nizamut 
Adawlut, and translator of Regulations - - - - - - 1,300 
Salary of the assistant to the superimtendant of eae and the secretaries 
in the Territorial and Judicial departments, including their extra allow- 
ance as magistrates of Calcutta, at Rs. 1,000 ~ - - - - 3,000 
Present allowance of collector and joint magistrate of Ramghur mi 1,500 
Present registrar and assistant collector of Jungle Mehals - = 900 
6,700 
= 
(continued) 


* Regular suits - - = 1,203 
Summary ditto - -- - 1,065> 


APPENDIX, 


"IV, 


Civil Servants. 


334 APPENDIX ro REPORT rnom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


‘ 


Rs. 
Deduct from -~° - - = = = = 11,700 
The sum of - = . = 2 - 


To this must be added: Net Expense - ~ - - = 


Salary*of three uncovenanted assistants to the secretaries in the Judicial and 
Territorial departments and the superintendant of pqlice, at’ Rs. 500 - 
Allowance to the Persian and Bengalee translators, for: translating the 
Regulations, say - - - - - ~ - - - - 
Salary of an additional magistrate in Calcutta - = = =  « 


Total additional Expense - - Rs. 


38.°No deduction is made on account of the salary of one of the registrars at Tirhoot, 
whose services may now be conveniently employed in another district. 

39. If the present measures should operate so as to reduce very materially the arrears 
depending before the judges of the several districts above specifigd, and to improve the 
efficiency of the police, the functions of judge and magistrate may again be united in the 
same hands, and an arrangement similar to that now proposed, be introduced into other 
districts which may chiefly require such relief. 

40. I am not aware that any new legislative enactments will be necessary on this occasion. 


Judicial Department, 3 July 1823. (signed) J. Apam. 


e 
(No. 1.) 
STATEMENT showing the Number of European covenanted Servants in the Judicial Department 


employed in the Sudder Dewanny Adawlut, Prowincial Courts, and in each District of the Lower 
and Western Provinces, on the 1st of May of the years 1810, 1816, 1822, 1823. 


1810. | 1826.) 1822.| 1823.) + Remarks on the Column for 1823. 
Sudder Dewanny 9 9 M1 12 | - - Twojudges, partly employed onthespecial 
Adawlut. commission ; two assistants on deputation. 
Provincial Court - 5 5 2 4 | -- One judge, absent at the Cape of Good 
- | Burdwan - - 4 4 2 2 | Hope, for bis bealth. ; 
3 Jungle Mehals~—- 2 2 2 2 | -- Registrar, employed also in the Revenue 
-2 | Midnapore - - 3 3 3 2 department. j : 
& ¢ Cuttack - - 2 | §$ 37 3 | -- Two registrars, employed also in the 
3 Revenue department, 
= | Jessore - - 4 3 2 2 | -- The registrar absent on deputation. 
3 Nuddea mre a 4 3 3 3 | -- Assistant absent on deputation. 
a 
Hooghl - - 3 3 2 2 
ae | 24 Perens -}- - 3 3 3 | -+~ Judge absent on deputation. | 
SuburbsofCaleutta | 4 2 3 2 | -- Registrar absent on deputation. 
“( Provincial Court -{ 4 5 4 4 : , 
¢ | Mymensing ~ - 2 2 3 2 {-- os ai absent on deputation. 
-=.} Sylhet - = = 2 2 2 1 - - No registrar or assistant. . 
a yinhet ° . : 
‘= |-Tipperah — - 2 3 2 1° 3 "| -.- Registrar absent on deputation. The as- 
ae. os sistant to the salt agent employed as joint: 
my : el ces 2 2 2 | magistrate at Noocolly. 
3) pneme : 2 2 2 | -- Judge absent at Cape of Good Hope. 
a | Backergunge - 2 Pp’ 
Qj Dacca Jellalpore -| 2 2. 2 1 | ++ Judge absent at Cape of Good Hope. 
Dace City P ‘ 3 2 2 2 |--- Judge absent on leave. - 


"GENERAL APPENDIX. Le B58 


1816, | 1822. Remarks on the Column for 1823. 


e 
oe 


Append pix, 
IV. 


(34:) Minute of 
John Adam, Esq. ; 


“+ Provincial Court - 4 | 4 4 | -~- One of the judges absent at the Cape of 12 June 1f23. 

AL Bhangulpore - 3 2 2 | Good Hope. 

es | Purneah = - 2 ‘1 ‘| @ | --~ Registrar'absent on deputation. 

 ) Dinagepore- ~ - 3 2 2 |: ; 

“3 | Rungpore - - 3 1.3 2 | -- Registrar absent on deputation. 

= | Rajeshahye - — - 3 2 2 

= | Beerbhoom - - "3 2 2 | - - Judge absent on deputation. 

S Moorshedabad = - 3 2 1 | - - Registership vacant. 

-, ¢ Provincial Court - 5 4 4 o- 

§ | Shahabad -~ - 3 a 3 | --» The assistant employed both in the Judi- 

@7]Sarun- - - 2 2 } 2 | cial and Revenue departments. 

5 § Tirhoot - oe 3 2 2 | ~- The assistant absent on deputation? 

= | Behar - 2 2 3 | +- Judge at the Cape of Good Hope. 

§] Ramghur - - 2 2 | 2 | -- Registraremployedalsoon revenue duties. 

& { Patna City - 3 2 2 

_ | Provincial. Court - 5 4 4 7 

_| Mirzapore - - 2} 2 2 | -- Registrar absent at the Mauritius. 

& | Allahabad - - 3 3 3 wiees: 

‘2 | Bundlecund, S. D. 3 2 2 

PS Bundlecund, N. D. - 2 2 | -~ Registrar absent on deputation. 

~ \ Juanpore - = 2 2 2 | -- Judge absent on deputation, 

® | Ghazeepore- - 2 a2 | -- Registrar recently employed in the Reve- 

g pue department, and has not yet rejoined his 

9 | Goruckpore - 2 3 station. 
Benares City - 3 3. 3 | -- Registrar absent on deputation. 
Provincial Court - 5 4 -- One judge officiating as agent to the 


Governor-general and senior member of 
the Revenue Board at Delhi. 
Cawnpore ~ 


g - - - Registrar absent on deputation. 
8 | Furruckabad - -- Registrar employed in the revenue de- 
id partment. 
q | Etawah - - - - Judge absent on deputation. 
p, | Agrah - - - - Registrar employed also on revenue duties. 
mB Allyghur—- - ; ; 
® | Seharunpore - - - Registraremployed also on revenue duties 
FQ | Meerut - - x ; 

Moradabad --- -- The magistrate and assistant employed 

emporatily on revenue duties also.” 
Bareilly - - - - Registrar absent on deputation. 
Toran - - 


Deduct, absent at sea on 
account of their health 


Judicial Department, 3 July 1823. — 


ae . 336 APPENDIX to REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


Civil Servants. 


(No. 2) 


STATEMENT showing the total Number of Civit Servants on the Bengal Establishmeftt, 
in each year, from 1st May 1811 to the 1st May 1823; the Number of Servants absent at Sea for 
their Health; the Number of Writers who arrived in eaeh year; and the Number of Deaths and 
Resignations in the Civil Service in each year. , 


e 
Deduct the Number 
of Civil Servants absent 
at Sea for Health, 


Number of Writers 
who arrived in Bengal 


Number of Deaths 
and Resignations daring 
the preceding 12 Months. 


Number of 
YEARS. Civil Servants on the 


Bengal Establishment. staring the 


last 12 Months, 


Absent. Present. 


Deaths, | Resignations. 


15t May 1811 374 365 1k 
1812 368 362 18 
1813 « 382 374 10 
1814 381 371 15 
1815 390 381 13 
1816 387 ° 374 12 
1827 395 380 19 
18:8 400 390 6 
1819 "304 385 12 
1820 387° 370 14 
1821 384 | 362 
1822 375 
1823 "370 


Total - - 
Yearly Average 


‘Judicial Department, 
3a July 1822. 


GENERAL APPENDIX. | 337, Arrexoix 


(35.)--MINUTE of J. H. Harrington, Esq., dated 18th June 1823. (a5) Minute of 


~ THe defective state of our civil service with respect to the inadequate number of cove- J. H. Hagrington, 
nanted servants of the Company, for the execution of the public duties appertaining to the Bag piers. 
Ynternal administration of the country, especially in the Revenue and Judicial departments, . 
is indeed a most serious evil ; and I fully concur_in the Governor-general’s suggesti6n, that 
we should earnestly solicit the attention of the Honourable Court of Directors to the actual 
state of the service in this respect, as urgently requiring a very considerable augmentation 
of the number of civil servants on this establishment,-as soon as circumstances may admit 
of it. 
In a:memorandum from the chief Secretary, dated,the 1st January 1821, and recorded in 
the Judicial department (with drafts of Regulations 2, 3 and 4, 1821) on the 19th of that 
month, it was stated that “the administration of civil and criminal justice, and the manage-~ 
ment of the police within the provinces into which out code of Regulations has been #ttually 
introduced, would require, under ,the full operation of the system now in force, the employ- 
ment of 191 covenanted civil servants, according to the following statement : 


“ Sudder Dewanny and Nizamut Adawlut judges - - - - = 4 
A registrar, deputy registrar and translator of the Regulations, a reporter 
of civil and criminal cases, and three other assistants - - - - 6° 
Total - 10 
1 Ps Seemed 
“Six Courts of Appeal and Circuit, each consisting of four judges and 
a registrar - - - - - -*° - - - ~ - 30 
46 Zillah and City Courts, including each one judge and magistrate, 
a registrar, and an assistant - - - - - ~ - - == 138 
Eight joint magistrates - - ~. - - = - a te, exe 8 
Two superintendants of police and two ase{stants = - - + - > 4 
Superintendant and remembrancer of legal affairs - - -= 2 2 1 
191” 


Since the date of the above statement a fifth judge has been added to the courts of Sud- 
der Dewanny and Nizamut Adawlut, and the number of joint magistrates is increased to 
12*; but, on the other hand, the registrars to the six provincial courts have been discon- 
tinued. The total number therefore may still be assumed, as before, at about 191; and, 
including some additional magistrates whom it wgyld be dgsirable to appoint, if we had the. 
means of doing so, as well to relieve the zillah civil courts as for the improvement of the 
police and more ready administration of ‘criminal justice, the compliment of European 
judicial officers required for this presidency may be fairly computed, on the result of actual 
experience, to be not less than 200. : 

But of this number it appears, from the Statement No. 1, accompanying the Governor- 
general’s Minute, that 137 only are at present employed in the Judicial department, and of 
these, six are absent at sea for the recovery of health. ; 

The Governor-general ‘has further noticed the want of civil servants to supply an aug- 
mentation to the establishment oferevenue officers, which is urgently called for in the 
Wester Provinces ; as well as the necessity which now exists for our employing military 
instead of civil servants in the Political department. . ; 

t 


* Azeemghur, Balasore, Bagundee, Buggoorah, Boolundshehur, Deyradoon, Futtehpoore, Khoordhah, 
Maldah, Mongheer, Nuggeenah, Shahjchanpore. 


APPENDIX,’ 338 APPENDIX ro REPORT rrom SELECE COMMITTEE. 
IV, 


‘It therefore appears advisable that a separate letter should be immediately addressed to 
Civil Servants. © the Honourable Court on this subject ; ana that, with reference to -the facts adverted to, as 
well as to the average number of annual deaths and® resignations in the civil service, as spe-~ , 
cified in the Statement No. 2+, accompanying the Governor-general’s. Minute, the Court of~ 
Directors should be requested. to adopt, as soon as practicable, the necessary measures for! » 
supplymg the actual deficiency im the civil service of this establishment, which should con- 
sist of at least 450 civil servants, as well as for keeping up a full complement to that extent 
in future. : 

In computing the aggregate number of civil servants required for the various duties of 
the public service under this presidency at 450, I have referred to the actual number, as 
stated in the accompaniment to the Governor-general’s Minute, No. 2, viz. 370, and to the _ 
deficiency above mentioned, in the Judicial department alone, viz. 63+, making together 
433, which leaves 17 only to supply deficiency in the Revenue and Political departments. 

Theeseveral arrangements proposeé by the Governor-general for the immediate relief of 
some of the civil courts, and for facilitating the administration of eriminal justice, and im- 
proving the police in particular districts, appear to me judicious and expedient under actual 
circumstances, and have therefore my entire concurrence. 

The most important of those arrangements, viz. that of appointingedistinct mdgistrates in 
five zillahs where the combined duties of judge and magistrate have been found more than 
cotld be performed by the same officer, and where consequently the business of the civil 
court has fallen much in arrear, corresponds with the sentiments I have already expressed 
as applicable te such cases of emergency, in paragraphs 168 and 169 of the Report of the 
Sudder Dewanny and Nizamut Adawlut, dated 9th March 1818, on the amendments of our 
existing judicial s¥stem and police, discussed in a general letter from the Honourable 
Court of Directors, under date the 9th November 1814. 

Paragraphs 164 to 167 of the same Report contain also my declared sentiments, with 
those of the other judges of the courts of Sudder Dewanny and Nizamut Adawlut, on the 
general question of transferring the charge of the police, and execution of the duties of 
magistrate, to the collectors under this pregideticy. 

But whilst the Governor-general’s remarks on the present impracticability of uniting the 

offices of collector and magistrate in the Western Provinces, in Benares and Behar, and in 
many of the Bengal districts, confirm the opinion given by the courts above mentioned, on 
the expediency of any general arrangement of this nature, in the present state of the country, 
I fully agree with him, that there is “ no reason why the experiment should not be tried in 
any particular district im which the collector may not only be well qualified for the task, 
but may have sufficient leisure to execute it, without interfering with his duties m the 
Revenue department, and where, at the same time, the business devolving upon the judge and 
magistrate is particularly laborious.” I therefore entirely concur in the proposed adoption of 
this experimental measure in the Jistrictygf Rungpore, Ramghur and the fungle Mehals. 

I will only add that the proposed appointment of an additional magistrate for the town of 
Calcutta, instead of the three assistants in the civil service, who are to be employed else- 
where, appears to be indispensably necessary ; and that I doubt not the Honourable Court 
of Directors will admit the sufficiency of the reasons assigned for a temporary unavoidable 
deviation from their general instructions relative to the employment of uncovenanted servants 
im the three subordinate offices which are specified in the Governor-general’s Minute. 


June 18, 1823. ; (signed) J. H. Harrinerton. 


{ Complement, as stated - - - - 200 
Now employed in Judicial department - - 137 
63 


cai 


GENERAL APPENDIX. 339 


(36.)—~MEMORANDUM by Mr. Lief Secretary Bayley, dated 1 January 1821. 


In submitting the accompanying drafts of Regulations for the consideration of the Board, 
the Chief Secretary has the honour to offer the following remarks as to the object and ten- 
dency of the more important provisions contained in them. Ps 

The administration of civil and criminal justice, and the management of the police, withia 
the provinces into which our code of Regulations has been actually introduced, would require, 
under the full operation of the system now in force, the employment of 191 covenanted civil 
servants, according to the following statement : . 


Sudder Dewanny Adawlut and Nizamut Adawlutjudges - - - - 4 
A registrar, deputy registrar and translator of the Regulations, a reporter of 
civil and criminal cases, ahd three other assistants _ - - - 6 
me — 
Total - - 10 


Six Courts of Appeal and Circuit, each consisting of four judges and 


aregistrar - - + - - + - 80 
46 Zillah and City Courts, includiag each one judge and magistrate, a 
registrar and assistant - Sage 7 = = -" = - 138. 
. Eight joint magistrates - - - - ~ -  - - - 8 
Two superintendants of police and two assistants - - - - - 4 
Superiatendant and remembrancer of legal affairs —- - - - 1 
~ : e ‘ ars) 
191 
But the actual number of covenanted civil sérvants attached to the Judicial 
department at the present date, amounts only to 156; and of those 156, 
14, chiefly of the higher ranks, are absent on sea, on account of ill health, 
leaving applicable to the public service - = = = = = 142 
e 
en 
49 


Which is 49 less than the number the system supposes to be employed. 


In fact, however, a still further deduction must be allowed: eight gentlemen are absent 
from their stations for short periods, on account of their health or their private affairs ; 
14 are employed on commissions or other special duties, either partially or wholly uncon- 
nected with the ordinary judicial administration. The number actually employed indeed at 
one time in the Judicial department will be found seldom to exceed 130 individuals ; on the 
present date it amounts only to 126, being one-third less than the number which the system 
supposes to be employed. ra °. 

The Government, then, may be stated to have about 130 European functionaries ordinarily 
engaged in-the administration of civil and criminal justice, and in the management of the 
police, in a tract of country which can scarcely be computed to contain less than 45 or 
50 millions of habitants. ; 

On the present date, not one of the provincial courts have the services of a registrar ; 
18 zillahs or city courts have no registrars; and 41 have no assistants. 

This want of junior officers in the lower departments of the judicial administiation 
necessarily imposes on the higher officers the discharge of much business of a petty nature, 
which prevents the application of thtir time to duties of great importance ; arrears accumu- 
late, and the operation of the system is ifmpeded. The reports of the last year show an 
increase in the arrears of depending suits in the files both of the judge and registrars, and 
a diminution in the number decided when compared with the two or three preceding 

ears. ' 
Z The deficiency is however still more deeply felt in the administration of criminal justice 
and in the police. Under the existing rules, neither the most trifling breach of the peace, 
XX2 nor 


APPENDIX, 


iV 


(36.) Memorandum 
by Chief_ Secretary 


Bayley ;91 
1821 ay 


w 


January 


APPENDIX, 


IV. 


Civil Servants, 


340 APPENDIX to REPORT rrom SELECT, COMMITTEE. 


nor the most petty theft or fraud, can be inquired into by any other functionaries than the 
.covenanted civil servants in the Judicial depaftment. ‘ 

It is become necessary, therefore, either to allow a Yery considerable increase of covenanted 
civil servants in the admmistration of police and civil and criminal justice, or that their” 
place be supplied by native agency. 

.To tke first of these alterations the objections appear at present insuperable ; and the dif- 
ficulty of regularly supplying the judicial branch of the service with such a number of civil 


" servants as would be required for the effectual discharge of all the duties imposed by the . 


existing laws on the European judicial functionaries, is generally acknowledged. . 

Opinion seems to be equally general in favour of the extension of native agency. Even 
with the contracted powers at present vested in the native judicial officers, most essential 
assistance is acknowledged to have beén derived from them, and abuses have been seldom 
experienced where the zillah and city judges have been enabled to exercise over them a vigi- 
lant ang unremitting superintendence.e By extending their powers, and thereby relieving 
the European functionaries to whom they are immediately subordinate from much of the 
details with which they are now burthened, the latter will have more leisure to exert such 
a superintendence, and thus will the native officers be placed in the state best adapted to 
their character and circumstances; namely, in the discharge of important and laborious 
duties, subject to vigilant examination and control. The propriety of augmenting the 
eflieiency of the native judicial officers is supported by numerous authorities both here and 
at home. The measure has been tried at Madras with acknowledged benefit, and the 
Governor-general, Mr. Dowdeswell and Mr. Stuart, in their several Minutes, dated the 
2d October 1815, the 22d September 1819, and the 2ist August 1820, have recorded senti- 
ments favourable to4ts extension in the provinces under this presidency ; it has been attempted 
with success in the Delhi territories, as both Mr. Metcalfe and Mr. Fortegcue have fully 
attested in their respective reports; it has been recommended by the Court of Sudder 
Dewanny Adawlut, in their detailed report on the points stated in the letter from the 
Honourable Court of Directors, dated the 9th November 1814, and the views and reasoning 
contained in that letter itself are entirely consistent with such a measure. 

Of the chief defects at present incident ¢o the judicial administration of the country, the 
great part may be remedied by the employment of the natives to a sufficient degree in the 
management of the details, and the conduct of the less important civil and criminal business. 
Considering the extent and immense population of the country, it is obvious that 191 Euro- 
pean functionaries, even were it possible, which it is not, that such a number should be 
constantly on duty in the judicial branch of the service, can do little more with effect than 
exercise a general superintendence ; yet minute details and the most laborious and even infe- 
rior duties are imposed upon them: hence that want of active control over the conduct of 
the native officers, without which the latter cannot safely be trusted in matters of importance, 
and hence that accumulation of arrears, and those embarrassments of other descriptions, 
which have counteracted the unc@Asing endeavours of the most able men to infuse into the. 
executive branch of the judicial administration an adequate degree of general and permanent 
efficiency. ; 

at seers therefore necessary to employ the agency of respectable and well-qualified natives 
to a greater extent, both in the administration of civil and criminal justice, and to make such 
alterations in the existing Regulations as are conformable to that measure: 

For this purpose it is proposed to provide for the increase of the number both of the 
sudder ameens and moonsifis; to authorize the moonsiffs to decide the civil suits for money 
or personal property to the amount of 150 rupees; toeempower specially such of the law 
officers and sudder ameens as may be duly suai’ to try suits to the amount of 
500 rupees, also to authorize the registrars and sudder ameens to execute their own decrees ; 
to empower, the judge to refer to either of those officers thé execution of the decrees of the 
moonsiffs ; and to authorize the law officers of ‘the zillah and city courts, and the sudder 
ameens vested with the special powers above mentioned, to try and determine criminal cases _. 
of a petty nature. » 


+ 
4 


--This 


“ 


GENERAL ‘APPENDIX: 341 APPENDIX; 
IV. 


This arrangement may enable judges and magistratés, in some of the courts where business 
is not heavy, to do without an European assistant altogether; in others, where the business (86.) Memorandum 
is heavy, the registrars and assistants wiff have leisure to afford more extensive aid than can by Chief Secretary 
be at present derived from them ; and with this view, it is proposed specially to empower them Bayleys P January 

‘o hear summary civil suits to any amount, and to exercise in Foujdarry cases referred to >?! ”“ 

them, the same powers in regard to punishment as were exercised by the magistrates prewously 

to the enactment of Regulation XIIZ. 1818; it is moreover proposed, in order that they may 
not suffer in their emoluments by beirtg employed in such duties, to allow them fixed salaries 
instead of the fees which they now derive from the decjsion of regular suits.” 
Connected with this new distribution of labour, are several other modifications of the exist- 
ing rules for .the transaction of judicial business, which will be found in the drafts of the 
‘ Regulations herewith submitted : of these it is only Necessary particularly to advert, 1st, to 
the rules proposed for the execution of the decrees of the provincial courts in certain original 
. suits; 2d, to the encouragement held out to the selincnahiacat of summary process before 
the judge, in cases of complaints for the recovery of arrears of rent, or of excessive demand ; 
3d, the provisions for uniting occasionally either in the collector or the magistrate the powers 
of both officers ; and 4th, the limitation of the period of appeal in Foujdarry cases. 

When the provincial courts were not vested with original jurisdiction, their decrees, being 
in all cases connected with suits that had originated in the zillah or city courts, were properly 
referred to the judges of those courts for execution, and may be so still; but of the origin’l 
cases decided by the provincial courts, the zillah and city judges can know nothing, and to 
have imposed upon them the perfecting of such decisions seems to be a very unnecessary 
addition to their labours: in the districts at a distance from the Sudder stations of the pro- 
vincial courts, it is of course unavoidable; but within the limits of the dfstrict in which the 
cutcherry of the provincial is held, the judges of those courts may easily execute their own 
decrees by means of their own native officers, and decide upon all matters arising out of such 
process. The zillah and city judges at the Sudder stations of the provincial courts, who 
more than any others are burthened with miscellaneous business, will thus be relieved from 
a great portion of intricate and laborious duty, Which in fact does not properly belong to them. 

The rues for summary process in questions of rent have not been found to answer: the 
smallness of the amount in most cases at issue, the great distance at which the parties fre- 
quently reside from the Sudder station, the delay which unavoidably takes place in the 
determination of the question befure the judge, especially since the cases have been required 
to be referred for report to the collector, secm to suggest the propriety of a different pro- 
cedure. If the procedure must be summary, it would be more advisable perhaps to let it 
begin and end with the collector, making his decision subsidiary to regular suits in the 
Adawluts ; but there can be no objection to the parties bringing their suit in the first instance 
regularly, should they think proper; in fact, it has been found in some districts the most 
effectual and satisfactory way of adjusting them, Poreciaily in suits of small amount, cogni- 
zable by the mounsiffs. The existing Regulations "indeed already admit of this course of pro- 
ceeding ; but it is now proposed to require the zillah and city judges to recommend that 
course of procedure in all practicable cases. 

_The Regulation empowering a collector or other officer employed‘in the management and 
collection of any branch of the territorial revenue to exercise the authority of a magistrate, 
and authorizing a magistrate, jot magistrate, or the assistant to a magistrate, to discharge 
the functions of a collector, will, it is. presumed, greatly facilitate the public service when the 
judicial or revenue state of a district should require in the interior for any considerable 
period of time the presence of either of those officers. : 

A limitation. to the period of appeal in Foujdarry cases will prevent complaints of a trifling 
nafure from being intentionally protracted to the great injury of individuals, and will save the ° 
time of the courts, without opposing any obstacle whatever to the due consideration of all 
matters fairly and properly brought forward: : 

The only further pot which appears to require notice in this place, is the suggested abo- 
lition of the office of registrar of the provincial courts of appeal and circuit. a 

; ose 


ArPrENDIXx, 


ons 


Civil Servants. + 


(37.) Letter to the 
Bengal Govern- 
ment; 23 July 
1824. 


App. Nos. 34, 35- 


342 APPENDIX 1o-REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


Those officers are so frequently called from their regular duties to act as zillah and city 
registrars, that the provincial courts seldom have the benefit of the services of theit registrars ; 
and, as already noticed, there is not at the present moment a single individual doing duty as 
registrar of @ provincial court. ; : j : 

Their functions are ministerial and formal, and the chief part of their duties might be well 4 
performed by an intelligent clerk or head writer. B 

Supposing the salary of such clerk to be 200 rupees per month, the abolition of the office 
of registrar of the provincial courts would make a saving of 1,800 rupees per mensem, and 
would prevent any material addition af the charges of the Judicial department from the fixed 
salaries proposed to be given to the zillah registrars in liew of their fees. 

The amount of those salaries might be regulated as follows :— 


Joint magistrates and registrars residing at places not being the fixed 


station of the zillah or city courts, per mensem’ - = = = &s. 1,000 
Zillah and city registrars who havé quitted college three years or upwards - 700." 
Registrars who have quitted less‘than three years- =  - - -  - 600 


The present allowance of the first class are 860 rupees per mensem, exclusively of fees. 
Those of the second and third classes 500 rupees per mensem, exclusively of fees. | 
The amount of those fees varies in different districts: in some few it may amount on an 
average to 300 rupees per mensem ; in others to 200; in ‘others to 100; and in some to about. 
50 rupees per mensem only. — 
(signed) _W. B. Baytey, 
Chief Secretary to Government. 


. 7) 


(37.)—DESPATCH in the Judicial Department to the Bengal Government, 
' dated 23d July 1824. ; 


4, Ovg last despatch from this department tvas dated the 28th April last. 

2. We now reply to that part of youreletter of the 3d July 1823 which relates to the 
present state of the Bengal civil establishment. : 

3. You inform us that you experience difficulty and emharrassment in providing for the 
efficient administration of the civil affairs of your presidency, and you request us to take 
inte our early consideration the expediency of adding to thé number of civil servants on the 
establishment. 

4. From the Minutes of Mr, Adam and Mr. Harrington, to which you have particularly 
drawn our attention, we learn that military officers, stead of covenanted civil servants, 
have been appointed assistants to the commission in Saugur; that you have resolved te 
nominate uncovenanted Europeans to sexeral offices held hitherto by civil servants of the 
Company; and that you requiré’ of us, to meet the actual demands of the service, no fewer 
than 80 writers. 

5. Nearly 12 years have now elapsed since an application was made to us by the 
Gowernor-general in Couneil for an additional supply of 60 writers*; and the application 
avaa accompanied with a remark, “that if the solicited relief was proposed to be met by the 
usual course adopted in the supply from Hertford College, it could not answer the exigency.” 
In reply to that application, we acquainted the Government}, that though more than the 
usual number of students had been taken from the College in the seasons 1812-13 and 
1813-14, for. the purpose of being sent as writers #0 Bengal, we had nevertheless, been 
induced to send out five gentlemen who had not passed through the College, but who, after an 
examination by the principal, had been certified by him to be very satisfactorily qualified Yor 

- the 


* Public Letter from Bengal, 18 Dec. 1812, 
+ Public Letter to Bengal, 18 Feb. 1814. ° 


‘GENERAL APPENDIX. 343 perens 
the appomtment, besides transferring two others from the military to the civil establishment. a 
We at the sime time expressed a hope that*those appointments, although im the whole (37.) Letter to the 
falling short of what had been required? would obviate the apprehended mceonvenience of Bengal Govern- 
’ not appointing the full additional number which had been apphed for ; adding the following rape ag July. 
, portant intimation :—“ By the 46th clause of the Act 53 Geo. 3, cap. 155, you will observe, + 24 § 
that no writers can be appointed for India, from and after the 10th April 1814, wh have 
not been four terms in the East India College; consequently no appointment can take place 
in future but in strict conformity with the directions contained in the said Act.” The only 
notice taken of these paragraphs by the Government* was, that they required no reply, 
feaving us to infer that no mconvenience was apprehended from only a limited compliance 
with its requisition. 
', 6. The provisions of the Act of 1813 ought to ha¥e impressed our Government with the 
importance of giving the earliest possible intimation of the existing or apprehended deficiency 
m the number of our civil servants ; and had we received timely notice, that unless a greater 
than the ordinary supply were furnished, there would be a necessity for calling in the aid of 
military officers and uncovenanted Europeans, we should have had an opportunity of deter- 
muning whether these expedients were allowable, or whether some other arrangement might 
not be devised to meet she exigency. 
4. It cannot fairly be alleged, that an additional demand. for writers to any considerable 
extent, and much less to the extent specified, has arisen out of the events of the late wars; 
because the accession of territory to your presidency, consequent on those wars, has not been 
very considerable, and at any rate the increased demand, if any, likely to be occasioned by 
such accession might have been foreseen six years ago. 
8. In requiring now an immediate supply of 80 writers, you have requiréd of us that which, 
under the het ot 53 Geo. 3, cap. 155, It is impossible for us to perform. Still we shall use 
every endeavour to comply with your application to the full extent of the means we possess 
under the existing law, and we hope to be able to add considerably to your usual annual 
supply. 
b. But whatever may be the urgency for inergasmg your European civil establishment, 
and to whatever extent it may be found necessary* to carry that increase, we cannot let the 
present opportunity pass without again inculcating that which we have endeavoured to 
impress upon you on various occasions in’ the course of the last 1¢ years, viz. the advantage 
and necessity of a more extensive employment of native agency in the Judicial department 
of the service. The Regulations passed by. you with this object in the beginning of 1821 
have our cordial approbation, and we were greatly pleased with the valuable memorandum 
which was then submitted to you by your chief secretary, Mr. Bayley, explanatory of the App. No. 36. 
policy which had influenced the framing of those Regulations. But though under the 
provisions then made the powers of moonsifis and sudder ameens were igcreased, and their 
number may be increased indefinitely, we apprehgnd, fram the large arrear of undecided - 
causes stated in Mr. Adam’s Minute to-be depending in some of the zillah courts, that both 
the number and powers of those functionaries are still inadequate. 
10. We are satisfied, that to secure a prompt administration of justice to the natives of 
India in civil cases, native functionaries must be multiplied so as to enable them to dispose 
in the first instance of all suits of that description, and, as appears to us, without regard to 
. the amount at stake; their decisions being of course liable to revision under appeal, where 
this check may be deemed indispensable, and what perhaps is of no less importance, their 
general conduct being subject to a constant and vigilant supervision on the part of the 
European functionaries in the districts where they are stationed.. It should be the duty of 
“the latter not only to hear appeals, but to imquire mto and to report to Government periodi- 
calfy on the efficiency of the native agents employed more immediately under their eye, and the 


7 degr 


* Public Letter from Bengal, Nov, 29, 1814, para, 15. 


APPENDIX, 


IV. 


Civil Servants. 


344 APPENDIX ro REPORT nom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


degree of estimation in which they are held by the community; whilst it should equally be . 
the care of Government to reward the deserving, and to testify in the most marked manner 
its displeasure against persons of an opposite character... 

11. The policy of restricting, as is done by the existing Regulations, the powers of the, 
native judicial functionaries to hear and decide on causes. where the interest at stake is of a 
limited value, appears to us to be questionable, for this reason, that a suit, of 500 rupees - 
may be more difficult to decide, and with reference to the circumstances of the litigant 
parties, of more importance, than a suit involving ten times the amount. We are doubtful 
too whether corruption is not more likely to occur in small causes than in those which from: 
their magnitude attract more general attention, and the progress and issue of which are 
more narrowly watched. | 

12. The adjudication of appealed ci¥il suits, the 7b supervison ‘of the native judicial ' 
agents, the superintendence of the police, and the administration of the higher departments 
of crminal justice, with the settlentent and. collection of the revenue, will afford ample 
occupation to those of our covenanted European servants who devote themselves to the 
internal administration of the country. By aiming at more than we can accomplish, we 
endanger the attainment of that which is within our reach: and it is justly observed in the 
memorandum of Mr. Bayley already alluded to, that, in consequence of “ minute details, 
and the most laborious and even inferior duties being imposed on our European judicial 
servants, there is a want of active control over the conduct of the native officers, without 
which the latter cannot safely be trusted in matters of importance: hence also that accu- 
mulation of arrears, and those embarrassments of other descriptions, which have counter- 
acted the increasing endeavours of the most able men to infuse into the executive branch of 
the judicial adminfstration an adequate a aa of general and permanent efficiency.” 

13. It has frequently been objected tq the employment of the natives of India in judicial 
offices, that they cannot be safely trusted with the. administration of justice. To this 
objection it might perhaps be a sufficient answer to say, that they are already so trusted. 
But our principal reason for noticing the objection is, that we may impart to you our decided 
conviction, that, when we place the natives of“India in situations of trust and confidence, we 
are bound under every consideration of justice and policy to grant them adequate allow- 
ances : we have no right to calculate on their resisting temptations to which the generality 
of mankind, in the same circumstances, would yield. But if we show a disposition to 
confide in them, and liberally to. reward meritorious services, and to hold out promotion to 
such as may distinguish themselves by integrity and ability, we do not despair of improving 
their characters, both morally and intellectually, and of rendering them the instruments of 
much good. It will be gaming a most important point if we can substitute a well-regulated 
and responsible agency, for that unauthorized and pernicious influence which there is reason 
to fear that the native officers of the Adawluts are in the habit now of too frequently exer- 
cising over the proceedings of thase oo 

14. The sentiments above expressed art in perfect conformity with the views which were 
communicated. to you in our despatch from this department of the 9th November 1814, and 
which had been in like manner imparted to the Madras Government, in a despatch dated the 
29th April preceding. On some of the suggestions contained in those despatches there 
were, as might have been expected, differences of opinion among: our servants in India; the 
experiment, however, of. employing native agency in the administration of justice has been 
tried with success on a larger scale-in the Madras provinces, where it has greatly relieved 
the zillah courts from a pressure of business, to the expeditious despatch of which they had 
‘been found unequal, besides having, as we believes been attended with other important 
benefits; and we have derived much satisfactien from observing a spreading conviction of 
its utility. Mr. Secretary Bayley, in the memorandum already quoted, describes this ém-: 
‘ployment of natives, subject to vigilant examination and control, as one of. the “ best 
adapted to their character and circumstances. The: propriety,” he adds, “ of augmenting 
the efficiency of the native judicial officers is supported by numerous authorities, both here 
and at home. The measure has been tried at Madras with acknowledged benefit, and the 

Governor- 


GENERAL APPENDIX. 345 


Governor-general, Mr. Dowdeswell and Mr. Stuart, in ,their several Minutes, dated the 
2d October 1815, the 22d September 1819, and the 21st August 1820, have recorded senti- 
ments favourable to its extension in the provinces under. this. presidency. It has been 
attempted with success in the Delhi tétritories, as both Mr. Metcalfe and Mr. Fortescue 
shave fully attested in their respective reports; it has been recommended by the Court of 
Sudder Dewanny Adawlut, in their detailed reports on the points stated in the létter from 
the Honourable Court of Directors, dated the 9th November 1814, and the views and 
reasonings contained in that letter itself are- entirely consistent with such a measure.” 
You have not, however, made any distinct reply to our letter of 9th November 1814; an 
omission on your part which we now desire may be supplied. We required you to recur to 
the practices of native Governments, and-to make use of the ancient institutions of the 
country in the manner we pointed out. It was to the extensive employment of punchayets, 
"heads of villages, and heads of caste, and to the transfer to the collectors of an important 
portion of the functions, both civil and criminal, hitherto exercised by the judges and ma- 
gistrates, that we chiefly looked for a substantial improvement in the administratien of 
justice under your presidency. 

15. You have, indeed, transferred to the collectors of certain districts the functions of 
magistrates. In this respect you have acted in conformity with our declared wishes; but 
in constituting in other districts a separate office of magistrate, you have pursued a course 
unsanctioned by us, and have thereby multiplied your demand for European agency, at a 
‘time when you found your establishment unequal to the ordinary wants of the service. 

16. You will conclude, from the tenor of the foregoing paragraphs, that in notifying to 
‘you our intention to increase the number of our European civil servants as circumstances 
‘may permit, we are actuated solely by a desire to add to your means of active and vigilant 
superintendence and control, and not by the vain expectation or hope of enabling them to 
transact the details of administration, a duty for whjch their superiority of qualification may 
be doubted, and which would occupy much of that time which may be more usefully em- 
‘ployed : still less have we been influenced by the “ present flourishing state of our finances,” 
-which has been adduced as a consideration in favour of the measure. 

When the revenues of a State are more than gufficient to defray the necessary expenses 
incurred on account of its government and defencé, the people are entitled to look for relief 
from part of their burthens ; and you will besides have seen, from our recent despatches in 
the Military and Financial departments, that according to the best view which we can take 
of the actual state of our affairs, it is not such as to exempt you from the strictest attention 
to economy in every department of your administration. 

17. In regard to the expedients to which you have resorted for the purpose of supplying 

- the present alleged deficiency in our civil service, we do not object to your employing the 
-professors of the College in the business of translation. The placing of uncovenanted Euro- 
,peanis in the. most important departments of Government, immediately under the secretaries, 
was a measure which the most urgent necessity alone could justify, and we desire that they 
-may not be continued in those situations beyondthe- duration of the exigency which occa- 
sioned their appomtment. This class have not the same claims on us as natives, and we 
have not the same hold on them as on covenanted servants. 

18. We desire that you will, with the least possible delay, transmit to us a hist of all the 
uncovenanted Europeans now in your service, specifying their names, occupations and 
‘salaries, and the extent and value of the services which they may have rendered. We are 
anxious to preserve a control.over every class of persons in our employment, and above all 
to possess the means of determining on the expediency or otherwise of increasing or dimi- 
nishing the number of any particular elass so employed. 

We are, &c. 
(signed)  W. AsreLy. 
t . ©, Marsoripanks. 
; &e. Xe. 


APPENDIX, 
IV. 


(37-) Letter to the 
Bengal Govern- 
ment; 23 July 
1824, 


APPENDIX, 


ia 


ra 
Settlement of 
Europeans in India. 


346 APPENDIX ro REPORT from SELECT COMMITTEE. 


Vv. 


—— 


SETTLEMENT OF EUROPEANS IN INDIA. 


(38.).—LETTER from John Jebb and James Pattison, Esqrs., to the Right Hon. 
George Canning, dated 27 February 1818; with an Enclosure. 


Sir, 

IN consequence of the numerous applications which have been received from individuals 
for leave to proceed to, and remain ifi India, under the provisions contained in the Act of 
the 53d of the King, c. 155, s. 33, the Court of Directors have been induced, by a strong 
sense of duty to the East India Company, to the natives of India residing in the territories 
under its authority, and to their own country, to take the subject generally into their most 
serious consideration. In the Court’s name, and by their direction, we now submit to you 
the result of their deliberate reflections upon this important subject, in the anxious hope 
that the communication which we are about to make may lead te a concurrence of senti- 
ment between the Board and the Court as to the line of conduct to be observed, with 
the view of carrying into effect the intentions of the Legislature in the enactment above 
referred to. 

By sect. 33. of what is commonly termed the Charter Act, provision has been made for 
granting permission to persons desirous of going to and remaining in India, for the pur- 
pose of introducfhg among the natives useful knowledge, and religious and moral improve- 
ment, and also to persons desirous of going to India and remaining there for other lawful 

urposes. 
P it may be proper that we should enumerate the different descriptions of applications 
which have been made by persons desirous of proceeding to India under the above-men- 
‘tioned provisions, and shortly explain what ‘has hitherto been the practice of the Court in 
disposing of those applications. — ° 

The applications which have been preferred belong to one or other of the following 
classes :——Persons desirous of going out to India, 


ist. As missionaries or schoolmasters. 

2d. As barristers, attorneys, or clerks to attorneys. 

3d. As partners or assistants in mercantile houses already established. 

4th. As shipwrights, coachmakers or other mechanics. 

5th. As agents on board of licensed ships to sell the export cargoes, and to procure 
investments in return. 

6th. As temporary residents,te settle private affairs. 

"th. As commercial speculators, whether in the character of principals or factors, or 
agents for persons m Europe; and candidates for employment in any line in which it may 
be found. . 

8th. Applications of ladies. 

9th, Applications of menial servants. 


In respect of applications coming from each of those classes, the following has been the 
practice of the Court : 


Missionaries or Scho8lmasters. 


Tue Court have invariably, except in two or three instances, permitted applicants of this 
description to proceed to India, after being satisfied of the respectability of their character 
by the production of proper testimonials from persons of repute, or from the societies with 
which they were more immediately connected. ; 


GENERAL APPENDIX. 347 0 AppEnnrx, 
; Vv 


. 


Barristers, Attorneys, or Clerks to Attorneys. (98.) Letter from 


Tue Court have been influenced in granting ‘or refusing applications from persons in the Company respect- 
.. profession of the law, by the representations of His Majesty’s courts of justice in India, ing the Grant of 


hrough the channel of the local governments, as to the sufficiency or otherwise of the prac- erie tf proceed 
titioners in point of number, about the time when such applications were received. With (0 °RO# 
27 Februafy 1818, 


respect to attorneys’ clerks, we have no such guide; but it is well known to pérsons 
acquainted. with India, that*few Europeans of this description are requisite, as native copying 
and éngrossing clerks are to be procured on moderate terms. ’ 


‘ ‘ 6 2 
Partners or Assistants in Mercantile Houses already established. 


Tue Court have always been desirous of enablingeevery established house of business in 
India to provide for casualties, and to obtain such additional assistance as they might require 
in consequence of the opening of the trade. Accordingly, when applicants of this class have 
‘been found on inquiry to be individually respectable, and when it has appeared thaf they 
were invited to join persons of good character in India as partners, or with a reasonable 
expectation of becoming partners, the Court have acceded to their applications. Clerks 
perfectly competent to the subordinate details of a counting-house are to be found in abun- | 
dance among the half-caste and the native Portuguese, as well as among the Hindoos; and- 
the introduction of a considerable number of European clerks would clash with the employ- 
ment of: people of this description, particularly of the half-caste, whom it is good policy to 
‘engage in peaceable occupations. 


Shipwrights, Coachmakers and other Mechanics 


Licenses have been granted in a variety of instances to persons of this class; but the 
Court are desirous of limiting the number to what may be sufficient for the instruction and 
improvement of the natives in the useful arts. The latter are known to be great adepts in 
imitation, and their frugal habits render it impossible for Europeans to rival them in pursuits 
where success depends chiefly on the cheapness ef manual labour. 


Agents to manage the Sale of the Cargoes of Licensed Ships, and to procure Investments in 
return. ‘ 


WHEN applications have been made by parties actually concerned in’any ship or ships 
licensed under the Act of the 53d of the King, for permission for some person named by 
them to proceed to India, and there to remain during such limited periods as their interests 
might require, it has been the general practice of the Court to comply with those appli- 
cations. 


Temporary Residents to settle Privgte Affairs. 


In cases of this sort, the Court have required the applicants to explain the affairs upon ' 
which they desired to proceed, and, when the Court have been satisfied that they were of a 
nature to require the presence. of the applicants in India, leave has been given to them to 
Pe thither, and to remain as long as appeared to be necessary under the circumstances 
of each case. 


Commercial Speculators, whether in the character of Principals or Factors, ‘or Agents for 
Persons in Europe; and Candidates for employment in any line in which it may be found. 


Tue Court have always looked with vonsiderable jealousy to applications from ‘this 
description of persons, because a general compliance with them would afford a wide opening 
for the indiscriminate resort of Europeans to India, contrary to the principles.upon which 
the administration of that country has hitherto been conducted, and to which we shall take 


the liberty of particularly soliciting your attention in the sequel of this letter. » To show, 
. YY2 however, 


APPENDIX, 


¢ 


Settlement of 
Europeans in India. 


348 APPENDIX to REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


however; the spirit by which they have been actuated on these occasions, we take the liberty 
of mentioning that the authority vested in the Court by the Act of 33 Geo. 3, to license the 
residence of persons at the several settlements in gIndia under free merchants’ indentures,. 
has, since the last renewal of the Company’s Charter, been limited in its exercise to the nomi- __ 
nation of eight free merchants annually. This arrangement was made, in concurrence with “ 


_ the late President of the Board, expressly for the purpose of extending the opening for com-~ 


-plianc® with applications which might be preferred upon reasonable grounds by persons: 


desirous of proceeding to India under the Act of the 53d of thé King, c. 155, s. 33, and 
will, we doubt not, be considered as indicative of the Court’s disposition (at the expense of 
all minor considerations) to carry inte full effect the provisions contained in that section of 
the Act. ; . 

Applkications of Ladies. 


Ir has been the practice of the Court, before complying with applications from ladies, in 
the first place, to ascertain that the applicants are persons of fair reputation, and next, that 
they have received invitations to proceed to India from friends or relations residing in that 
country. : 


Applications of Menial Servants. 


Tue Court have always had strong objections to European meniaf servants of either sex 
sqing to India. They are generally found themselves to require the service of natives, over 
whom they are prone to tyrannize, whilst, in point of comparative usefulness, they rank far 
below the native servants. : : 


TueE foregoing detail will, it is hoped, convey a tolerably distinct notion of the mode in 
which the Court fiave exercised the discretionary power which has been confided to them, 
of licensing persons applying to procead to India pursuant to Parliamentary enactment. 
Their uniform wish has been, on the one hand, fairly and honestly to promote all the 
objects which appeared to them to have been contemplated by the Legislature in prescribing 
an extension of moral, intellectual, and commercial mtercourse between the two countries ; 
and, on the other hand, to avoid any further departure from the principles of the long esta- 
blished system of Indian administration than was essentially necessary for the attamment 
of those objects. In the responsible, delicate, and somewhat invidious situation in which. 
they are placed, they have thought it equally inconsistent with their obligations to grant. 
unlimited facilities, and to start captious objections; they have endeavoured to proportion 
means to legitimate ends, to distinguish between reasonable and groundless applications, 
and to consult the wishes of individuals, as far as was compatible with the paramount 
interests of the public. _ 

In the discharge of this necessary though sometimes unpleasant duty, it was not to be 
expected that the Court’s decisions should always prove satisfactory to disappomted appli- 
cants; but the Court would have submitted patiently to any unpopularity which they might, 
have incurred in such quarters, had their proceedings been fortunate enough to meet with 
the more frequent concurrence and sanction of your Board. 

The Board have unquestionably the power of acceding to applications which have been 
rejected by the Court, but we are confident that we do not mistake your disposition in pre- 
suming that it is a power which you would at all times wish to exercise with considerate 
reserve. 

Among the many applications which the Court have received, some have appeared to 
them to be wholly unfounded, whilst others have been preferred in a spirit of adventure by 
persons of ruined fortune and questionable character With such applications the Court 
of course considered themselves bound to refust compliance, yet we are sorry to say that, 


‘in more than one instance, they have subsequently been acquiesced in by the Board. The 


frequent reversals of the Court’s decisions, which have recently occurred, are the more 
remarkable, because the usual Nace of the late Board was to decline passing any orders 
upon such applications as the Court had reported to be, in their opinion, inadmissible. 

mt , : The 


‘GENERAL APPENDIX. 349 «APPENDix, 
V. 
The general profession of“ lawful purposes” is'easily made: it requires bit little inge- 
nuity to find plausible reasons in support of itseeality ; and attestations to character, even (38.) Letter from 
when undeserved, are too often obtained without much difficulty. A corroboration of this Company respect- 
-, remark will be found in one of the-reported cases from the Court, on which the Board have "8 the Grant of 
not yet been pleased to signify their pleasure. It is that of a person who solicited leave to pee loprocacl 
proceed to India for the purpose of arranging with .his brother some family concerys on md Febrrar 1818 
behalf of his mother. The request appeared plausible, but it came to the knowledge of thé 77 “S™8'Y , 
Court that the applicant meant to go put as an “ adventurer,” and he afterwards confessed 
that his real intention was to seek service in the army of the, Nizam. 
We trust that we do not assume too much on behalf*of the Court in respectfully submit- 
ting to you that the number, the wide association and various connections of its members, 
' - give them means which the Board may not possess ia the same degree, of ascertaining the 
real grounds of applications, and of making themselves acquainted with the characters and 
views of those by whom they are preferred. 1t may pot, however, be always expedient for 
the Court explicitly to assign in writing their precise reasons for rejecting applications, 
although fully satisfied of the impropriety of granting them. \ Upon this ground, therefore, - 
particularly when supported by an assurance that it is the cordial disposition, as well as the 
stedfast determination of the Court to act in strict conformity to the views of the Legisla~ 
ture, in so far as they are able to comprehend those views, we venture to claim a liberal 
share of confidence from the Board in their revision of the Court’s proceedings. ‘ 
We would, likewise, beg leave to submit to you, Sir, not only that in. proportion to the 
facility of obtaining licenses will the demand for them increase, but that the evils likely to 
result from a large influx of Europeans into British India will, in the apprehension of 
some, be considerably aggravated by the circumstance of their compoging two separate 
classes, holding their respective lcenses from two distinct authorities. This consideration 
may Beau have suggested the proposal made by Mr. Courtenay, in his letter to 
Mr. Cobb of the 21st ultimo, of devising a common form, to be used indiscriminately, for 
licenses granted by the Court in the free exercise of their discretion, and for certificates 
issued by the Court, contrary to their own qpinion, in obedience to the direction of the 
Board. The proposal has been attentively consigered, but, fromthe tenor of this address, 
you will readily perceive the grounds on whieh the Court hesitate in adopting it. An 
ae in principle would greatly facilitate any proposed arrangement upon matters of 
detail. 
The Court understand and believe, that it never was the intention of the Legislature, by 
the 33d section of the Charter Act, to prescribe a total change in the principles of Indian 
government, which had been acted upon down to the 21st July 1813, and which have been 
regarded by all the first authorities, both abroad and at home, as indispensable to the tran- 
quillity of our possessions, and the stability of our power. It is true that the trade with 
‘India was then laid open to the merchants of this country, and that special and express 
provision was made for permission being granted, té perséns desirous of going to India, for 
the purpose of introducing among the natives useful knowledge, and religious and moral 
improvement, and for other lawful purposes, (such as may be considered fairly to come - 
‘within the scope of those applications to which the Court have been in the habit of acced- 
ing.) But there is nothing, either in the correspondence between the two successive 
ministers for India and the Court of Directors, before the bill for the renewal of the Charter 
was brought into Parliament, or im the discussions which took place in Parliament pending 
.the progress of the bill, or in the provisions of the Act as definitively passed, to warrant an 
opinion that any greater innovation upon the Indian system was contemplated than was 
necessarily involved in the specific measures to which we have alluded ; on the contrary, it 
was admitted by the proposers of those medsures that they might be attended with dangers, 
against which it would be expedient to guard; and precautions adapted to the nature of each 
case were accordingly taken to avert the ill consequences which might result from the pro- 
secution of interested speculations, injudicious‘ though benevolent designs, and lawful 
purposes, whether real or pretended. . an The: 


APPENDIX, 


Settlement of 
Europeans in India. 


350 APPENDIX to REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


The trade, instead of being made’completely free, was subjected to certain regulations and 
restrictions, which were promulgated for the information of all whom they might concern. 
The conditions imposed upon commercial adventwrers were precisely defined, and rendered . 
easy of performance, so that no person should have reason to complain that his speculations 
were liable to be thwarted by a will over which he had no control. Neither were unlimited 
oe held forth to such as might be desirous of resorting to India for. purposes pro- 
fessedly consonant to law, and prompted by benevolence; but a different sort of security 
was devised in regard to persons of this description, from those which were required from 
houses of trade. It being a task of much more difficulty to discover the motives and inten- 
tions of individuals than to ascertain the tonnage of a ship, or to examine a manifest, a 
discretionary power was given to the Court of Directors to comply with or to reject 
applications, of which the ostensiblee objects might be found, upon investigation, ‘not to - 
correspond with the real ones, or to be otherwise unworthy of continuance; the negative 
pronounced by the Court being in aj} cases subject to reversal by the Board of Commis- 
sioners. 

Another reason occurs for the obvious distinction which exists between such regulations 
as affect the conduct of the trade, and those which have been framed with reference to indi- 
viduals soliciting permission to proceed to India for benevolent or other lawful purposes. 
Although a minimum for the tonnage of each ship respectively sailing to India has been 
fixed by law, yet no restriction has been imposed upon the total amount of tonnage to be 
employed in the trade, because every branch of commerce will learn by experience to respect 
the natural limits of supply and demand; or if it does not, the worst that can happen is the 
ruin of thoughtless or obstinate speculators. The same considerations do not apply to the 
emigration of indjviduals (whether in smaller or larger bodies) who go in quest of a settle- 
ment in a foreign country, and in the pursuit of objects, legitimate perhaps in themselves, 
but which they may fail in attaining. Mere the consequences of failure are not confined to 
the persons immediately involved in it; they extend to all around them. The disappointed 
adventurers, being unable either to return to their own country, or to gain an honest liveli- 
hood in that which they have adopted, have racourse to fraud and violence ; and the natives, 
who were no parties to the mistake, becdme the greatest sufferers from it. Hence it has 
been deemed expedient by the Legislature, that a discretionary power should be lodged in the 
authorities directing the affairs of India, to negative the applications of persons desirous of 
proceeding thither, where such applications may appear to come from improper quarters, to 
be founded upon unreasonable expectations, or to be excessive in pdint of number. 

To constitute a “lawful purpose,” it is necessary, not only that the motive in which it 
originates should be sincere and blameless, but that the object contemplated should be 
attainable through legitimate means, and that the field of enterprize should, in point of 
extent, correspond with the number of competitors. An hundred persons may be usefully 
employed where double the number might barely contrive to exist, and where 1,000 would 
be driven to absolute want andedésperafiog. ; : ‘ 

The very terms employed in the 33d section of the Act clearly show, in the judgment of 
Court, that the expression “or for other lawful purposes,” was never meant to have a largely 
extended application. That part of the clause which provides for the introduction of useful 
knowledge and moral improvement, and for sufficient facilities being afforded by law. to 
ale desirous of going to and remaining in India for the purpose of accomplishing these 

enevolent designs, is prefaced by a solemn declaration, that it is the duty of this country 
to promote the interest and happiness of the native inhabitants of the British dominions in 

Taclia and notwithstanding this declaration, it is provided, that the prosecution of such 
benevolent designs shall not, either interfere with the authority of the local governments 
ed aie the intercourse of Europeans with the interior of the country, or in the slightest 
ict infringe the principles of the British Government, on which the natives of India have 
hitherto relied for the free exercise of their religion. But to the second part of the clause, 
which makes provision for granting permission to persons desirous of going to India, and 
remaining there “ for other lawful purposes,” there is neither preamble nor annexed con- 

; dition 


GENERAL APPENDIX. 351, APPENDIX,. 
dition. It is highly improbable, we had almost said it is, impossible, that in a provision so —_— 
worded, the Legislature intended any serious innovation upon the system of Indian govern= 38.) Letter from | 
ment, as established and aeted upon for half a éentury. , Company respect-- 

Having thus’ submitted to you the inf€rpretation which the Court put upon the statute, Le the Grant of a 

"Sand having endeavoured to show that, by its enactments, a discretionary power has been ,°Tai0 - iprocerd. 
. vested in the Court of Directors, subject to the control of the Board of Commissioners, ta < Febtuay 1818 
negative, on any reasonable grounds, whether of character, object or number, applicétions 4 . : 
which they may receive frem persons desirous of gomg to and remaining in India, we 
proceed to explain the general consiferations by which the Court have been influenced in 
the exercise of their legal and official discretion. < 
From the year 1764 down to the last renewal of the Company’s Charter in 1813, there 
has been but one opmion among the many eminently distinguished persons who, in the 
_ course of that period, have acted a prominent part, either in conducting the local adminis- 
tration in India, or in superintending and directing the Company’s affairs at home, concern- 
ing the impolicy and danger of allowing Europeans (not in the King’s or Company’s sewvice) 
in any considerable number, to resort to and settle in India. Not only has India never been 
considered and administered as a British colony, but the system applicable to this species 
of dependency has always, and justly, been regarded as singularly ill adapted to a country 
rich, populous and powerful in itself, and the inhabitants of which are so dissimilar from 
Europeans in their customs and manners, in their social institutions and religious belief, that 
any general and strict amalgamation of their respective opinions and habits can never Be 
expected. But in proportion as facilities are needlessly multiplied to Europeans to proceed 
to and remain in India, we depart from those principles of policy which are consecrated by 
all authority, and we incur both the immediate inconvenience and eventual risk incident to 
a new system, which the wisdom and experience of the present and the past age have 
combined to deprecate. - 

Were we to bring before you all the facts, opinions and admonitions which might be col- 
lected from the Company’s records connected with the subject in question, they would form 
a very voluminous document ; but we take the liberty of soliciting your attention to a small 
selection of papérs which we transmit as an Appepdix to this Letter, and which will at once 
illustrate aa corroborate the views which the Gonrt entertain. We would also feel eee 
beg leave to refer to the valuable mass of authentic testimony to the same effect which will 
be found recorded in the Minutes of Evidence taken before the Committees of the two 
Houses of Parliament, preparatory to the last renewal of the Company’s Charter. Consi- 
dering the state of public opinion, and the measures which were in contemplation at that 
time, we cannot help thinking that the evidence then given may be received unreservedly as 
a vehicle of accurate information and useful instruction; and, in the judgment of the Court, 
it clearly establishes the following propositions :— 

That the natives of India, though, generally speaking, weak in body and timid in spirit, 
are very susceptible of resentment, and of peculiarly quick sensibility in all that regards 
their religion and women. 7 ne Oe 

That Europeans, particularly on their first arrival in India, are occasionally liable, from 
ignorance, to give involuntary offence to the natives. , 

That Englishmen, especially those of the lower order, are addicted to excesses disgusting 
to the natives, and which frequently lead to acts of violence and. outrage; and. that, in 
general, they are prone to domineer over and oppress the natives from a sense of their own 
personal and national superiority. - ice 

That the natives, if they have not the ready means to obtaining legal redress for the inju- 
ries which they sustain, will be dispostd to take the law into their own hands. , 

» —_ That the natives, when aggrieved, will often be deterred from seeking legal redress by the 
distance of the Courts, the expenses attendant upon prosecutions, the difficulty of procuring 
the attendance of witnesses, and the delays of judgment. 

That when legal redress 1s sought for injuries inflicted, the affinity of the country, lan- 
guage, manners and dress of the Judes with those of the person against whom the complaint 

is 


APPENDIX, | 


Settlement of 
Europeans in India. 


‘latter have agreed not to engage 


352 APPENDIX ro.REPORT rnom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


is lodged, and possibly the social jntercourse subsisting between them, will somewhat shake 
the confidence of the prosecutor in the justice of the sentence, when it does not exactly 
accord with his wishes and expectations. yay ; 

That the frequent punishment of Europeans, Although it may give to the administration __, 
of justice an air of impartiality, will tend to degrade their character in the eyes of the” 
natives, and greatly diminish the respect in which it has been hitherto held. 

Titt among the British residents in India there is a strong disposition to assert what the 
conceive to be their constitutional and indefeasible rights, a general leaning towards se 
other, and a common jealousy of the authority of Government. . 

That an unrestrained ingress of Epglishmen into the interior of the country would be pro- 
ductive of the most baneful effects upon the comfort of the inhabitants and the peace of 
society, and would be fatally injurious to the British name and interests. 

That the number of Europeans who gain admission into the interior, whether clandestinely 
or from misplaced indulgence on the part of the local governments, will always be proportioned 
to the number who are permitted to proceed from England or elsewhere to India. 

That, notwithstanding the stipulation which has been introduced into most of the treaties 
subsisting between the Company and the principal native powers in India, by which the 

usopeans in their service without the consent of the Com- 

pany’s Government, it is very probable that inferior chieftains and jaghiredars, and even 

princes of more note, may employ such persons without its coming to the knowledge of the 

Company’s residents, and very possible that Europeans may make their way into the native 
States, in spite of all the restramts which can be devised. And lastly, 

That colonization, and even a large indiscriminate resort of British settlers to India, would, 


-by gradually lessening the deference and respect in which Europeans are held, tend to shake 


the opinion enterfained by the natives of the superiority of our.character, and might excite 
them to an effort for the subversion and, utter extinction of our power. 


Such were the concurring opinions delivered not five years ago by a considerable number 
of experienced, intelligent‘and able men, of whom some had acted a conspicuous part in the 
Government of India, and others had filled high situations under it. The Legislature was so 
far influenced by them as to restrict skips engaging in private trade from sailing without 
licenses, and from frequenting any other fhan the principal ports in India. Masters of ships 
were required, before the ships should be cleared, to prepare and deliver attested lists of all 
persons whom they might carry out with them, which lists were to be transmitted to the 


‘Court of Directors and to the Government of the place for which the ships were respectively 


bound. And the local governments were empowered, either to prosecute to conviction, or 
to send home in a summary way, all British subjects residing in India without licenses, or ° 
exceeding the terms of their licenses. : 


These were no doubt useful and necessary regulations, but they all, with the single excep- 


‘tion of that which relates to the terms of the license, have reference to the circumstance of 


persons getting out clandestinely*to India, not to their behaviour while there. We conceive 
that it is altogether vain to expect that Europeans may be permitted to throng to Calcutta, 
Madras and Bombay, and that they may also be prevented from procuring, by some means 
or other, access to the interior; and the consequences of such an admixture to the native 
population are easier to be foreseen than averted. It may, at least, be confidently affirmed 
that the'result will not be the introduction of useful knowledge, and the advancement of 
moral and religious improvement among the natives. . 

There is one more consideration to which we must advert before concluding this letter. ¢ 


A despatch has lately been received from Bengal communicating a memorial, signed 


_ by a great number of persons belonging to the class usually denominated in India ‘ Half- 


caste,’ claiming redress for certain grievances under which they conceive themselves -to 
labour. The memorial was addressed to Lord Hastings, and was, in consequence of the 


_ importance of the subject, submitted by his Lordship to the Governor-general in Council, 
. who have taken it into their serious consideration, and given to it a very judicious reply. 


The 


- GENERAL APPENDIX. 353 


The Court cannot but perceive among these memorialists indications of a spirit which, 
were it supported by numbers of their own description sufficient to form a strong physical 
force of themselves, or by power and imfluence to command an adequate physical force of 
ema natives, might soon give birth to events which cannot be contemplated without 
alarm. 
~The half-caste will increase in numbers more rapidly in proportion as facilities are extended 
to Europeans ta settle in India, and it is far from improbable that they may be. supported in 
any pretensions they may set up bythe bulk of those Europeans who are not in the civil, 
or military service of the King or Company, whether they be persons originally born in 
Europe, or the descendants of European fathers and nfothers. 

Of the Europeans who proceed to India, few in proportion to their numbers can ever 
‘ return to Europe as their ultimate residence, ‘Fheye will, thereforc, be more likely to con- 
gregate in India, to form populous assemblies, and to fall in with any sentiments or project 
which may waken ideas of consequence, ambition, and independent government. In this 
view, every proceeding which would tend further to perplex and embarrass the Indian admi- 
nistration (already sufficiently complicated), and to accelerate a crisis which may happen 


APPENDIX, 
(38.) Letter from 
Company respect- 
ing the Grant of 
Licenses to proceed 
to Ingia ; 

27 February 1818. 


notwithstanding the most prudent precautions on the part of the governing power, should, 


in the judgment of the,Court, be carefully avoided. 

We have thus, by desire of the Court, brought fully before you the view which the Court 
entertain of the meaning and intent of the provisions Pontained: in the 33d clause of the Act 
of the 53d of the King, cap. 155, and the general principles upon which they have acted in 
disposing of the various applications which have been made to them under those provisions, 
from persons desirous to proceed to India. The certificates which have been granted ‘by the 
special directions of the Board, in some recent instances of applications with which the 
Court had not felt themselves justified in complying, appear to indicate a disposition on the 
part of the Right honourable the Commissioners for Affairs of India to give a latitude of con- 
struction to the Act, which, in the Court’s opinion, it does not fairly bear, and to dispense 
facilities from which, if multiplied, dangerous consequences may result. a 

We doubt not the subject will receive from you, Sir, all the consideration to which it is 
entitled from its importance; and it is the ankious wish of the Court, for the sake of the 
public interests, to obtain the co-operation of the Right honourable Board over which you 
preside, in the formation of regulations which shall, as far as may be practicable, define the 
grounds on which applications shall in future be either acceded to or rejected. 


We have the honour to be, Sir, with great respect, 
Your most obedient humble servants, 


East India House, ° Joun Bess, 
27 February 1818. oe Jas PatTison. 


eee 


(Enclosure in Letter to the Right Hon. G, Canning.) 


EXTRACTS relative to a more extended ResipENcE of Europeans in India. 


Extract Bengal Revenue Consultations, dated 12th May 1775. 


In consequence of the request made by the Committee to deliver an opinion on the 
orders of the Court of Directors, and on a clause in the late Act of Parliament, Mr. Francis 
begs leave to give in his opinion. 
7 , Extract Mr. Francis’s Minute. 

Tue general principles which establish the necessity of such restrictions (of Europeans 
from holding lands) have not, in my opinion, lost any part of their force by the increase ot 
confirmation of the British influence in Bengal. ite 


, 


13 Geo. 3, ¢. 63, 
827. 


APPENDIX, 


“Settlement of 
Europeans in India. 


354 APPENDIX to REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


1. If nothing ‘but grants of waste lands were in question, it would still be an object of 
serious consideration, first, to the British Gévernment. whether or no it would be advisable 
to encourage colonization here. 

4. The soil of right belongs to the natives. Former conquerors contented themselves with 
exacting a tribute from the lands, and left the natives in quiet possession of them. 

To “dienate them in favour of strangers may be found a dangerous as well as an unjust 
measure. We cannot understand the arts of cultivation in this soil and climate,so well as 
the natives. The landholder will consider us with jedlousy and hatred, as the invaders of 
his rights and property. The ryots, attached by custom, religion and prejudice, to the 
authority of their ancient masters, will not readily submit to labour for new ones, to whom 
they are not bound by any natural relation of manners or religion, or by reciprocal obliga- 
tions of protection and dependence. A few Europeans will be thinly scattered over the 
face of the country; the native inhabitants will desert it. 


10. & measure which tends to throw the farming of lands into the hands of Europeans 
must, dependently of every other consideration, be attended with difficulties prejudicial to 
the Company’s revenues. The mode of collection in this country must at once be rigid, 
regular and summary. The natives have at all times been subject to the decisions of the 
Dewan, or of the Courts instituted by his authority. If British subfects, or their servants, 
are,permitted to rent farms, there will be no way of recovering any arrears or balances due 
from them to the Company, but by instituting suits against the parties in the Supreme 
Court of Judicature; the delays and expense of such a mode of proceeding are obvious. ~ It 
appears to me that, under such a system, the revenues could not be realized, the col- 
lections would universally fail, and in the end our possession of the country would be very 


precarious. F 
Me. Monson. 


Ir the paragraphs in the general letter of the 17th March had been attended to, and the 
poe orders then given by the Court of Directors had been observed as invariable laws, 

should not have found myself now in the unpleasant situation, either to censure the acts 
of the late administration, or to give a sa§ction to their conduct in opposition to the man- 
dates of my honourable employers. 

The question now before the Board, on which I am required to give an opinion, may be 
considered in a political view: 

ist. Whether it is for the interest of Great Britain to colonize in East India. 

2d. Whether such a colony would be of advantage to the India Company. ‘ 


The migrations to countries believed to be the regions of wealth would be so considerable 
that the mother country would soon feel the dire consequences of them. ‘ 

Every person who comes into this country is impressed with the idea of making, in 
a short time, a very considerable ingepergslent fortune. ata 

The means to be pursued for this end opetate to the impoverishment and destruction of 
the country. If Europeans were allowed to hold farms, as their influence is great, they: 
would in some degree oppress the natives, as in the instance now before us; such checks , 


‘on the cultivation of the lands will occasion them to fall considerably under their, value : 


besides, they are entirely unacquainted with the mode of culture m this country; the 
language, the customs and manners of the people are so dissimilar to theirs, that it is impos- 
sible for foreigners to cultivate on equal terms with the natives. ; 

Their manner of life will not permit them to give equal profits to the Government with 
the natives, as their expense on every article of subsistence is more considerable; conse- 
quently, the Europeans will be in a worse condition than the natives, or Government must 
be satisfied with a less revenue from the lands, in order to enable them to live. . 

The few wants of the natives, who are satisfied with the mere necessaries of life, will 
pllow them to pay larger taxes to Government from the same quantity of land, in the same 
state of culture, than an European can afford to do; it is evident, therefore, that it cannot 
be for the interests of the Comvanv to allow Europeans to become landholders, 

The 


| GENERAL ‘APPENDIX. _ 355 


The uncultivated lands, under a mild and fixed government, might soon be brought into 
culture by giving premiums and making advances of money to the natives. 

Providence has ordained, by her forgation of the constitution of Europeans, that they 
should not become the cultivators of this country; they can only be taskmasters; and will 
enrich themselves, having no permanent interest here, to the prejudice of the natives, and 


to the loss-of Government. , 


Extract Bengal Revenue Consultations, 18 May 1785. 
Extract Mr. Shore’s Remarks, accompanying Governor-general’s Minute. 


' Ir is very obvious, that within the last 10 or 12 gears, a considerable alteration has taken 
place in the manners of the people. This alteration is the natural consequence of a greater 
degree of intimacy with Europeans than they formerly were admitted to. Those parts of our 
character which first drew their attention were bravery, clemency and good faith; they have 
since found that we are not wholly destitute of weaknesses and vices, and that Europeans, 
like all others, are open to temptation. The respect they entertained for us as individuals, or 
as a nation, is diminished, and they now consider themselves upon a more equal footing. 

The introduction of the Supreme Court of Judicature has largely contributed to the ele- 
vation of the natives, and to the depression of Europeans. This system, which was meant 
for the relief of the natives, has in very few respects answered that object. In many 
instances it has been a heavy grievance to them, and the natives themselves have found out 
the art of making the powers of the court the means and instrument of forwarding their own 
views of interest and oppression, of eluding the power of the Government, and of weakening 
its authority, by engaging the two tribunals in contests with each other. 

Such are the inhabitants of Bengal over whont the European jurisdiction is established. 
Prudence may, no doubt, render it permanent, but prudence and policy alone can effect this, 
on a comparison of their numbers with ourselves. 


eoeeneneomeceimnenenmenemenrecnencctrmanwrecnesa fA nasesnanemrmaaceareneemenrenpanane 


e 
Extract Commercial Letter from Bengal, dated 1st November 1788. 


Para. 29. Ir the proposed * scheme were adopted, multitudes of Europeans would flock 
into the interior parts of the country ; they would naturally possess themselves of the seats 
of the manufactures abandoned by the Company; eager competition must immediately 
arise; enhanced prices and debased fabrics follow. The weavers would receive advances 
from all, each would be ready to take redress into his own hands; disputes between mer- 
chants, as well as between them and the manufacturers, would be inevitable ; and the country 
thus, in all probability, become a scene of confusion, and disorder, which the distant situation 
and other avocations of the collectors would little permif them to rectify. How far a salutary 
freedom and extension of commerce would be promoted by such means, it cannot be hard to 
determine. ; 


Extract Proceedings of the Board of Trade in Bengal, the 28th April 1789. 
; Read the following: letter from Dacca. 
To the Honourable Charles Stuast, President, and Members of the Board of Trade. ° 


Gentlemen, , 


In my reply of the 21st February last to the address of the 8th December 1788 of 
Mr. Barnard M‘Cullum and other Europeans of Dacca, I took occasion to question on 
general grounds, in opposition to the spirit of their address, the service which private Euro- 

‘ peat traders rendered to the country, or to - commerce, meaning its internal omme ‘ 
5 i 


= 


APPENDIX, 


(38.) Letter from 
Company respect- , 
ing the Grant of 
Licenses*to proceed 
to India ; 

27 Febr@ary 1818. 


* Free Trade. 


‘APPENDIX, 


Settlement of 
Europeans in India. 


‘356 APPENDIX ro-REPORT srom SELECT. COMMITTEE. 


The question I believe to be new upon the Company’s records in India, but arguments 
partly applicable thereto are, in a wide fiel@ of policy, discussed in the 9th Report of a 
Committee in the House of Commons, to which myeletter refers. : 

My particular opmions were formed from my observation and experience. I stated that they 
were not singular: when I asserted this, I alluded merely to conversations I had held with dif- 
ferent iatelligent men conversant with the country, and without knowing that any corroborative 
opinions had been published other than those which I have referred to in the 9th Report. 

Since I transmitted my letter, I find that two men who filled high stations in this country, 
-who were versed in its history, and conversant with its general state, who had deeply reflected 
on ifs revenues, commerce, resourcés and connections, have given to the public their 
opinions on the same question. These men are the late Colonel Dow, an officer bred up in 
the Bengal army, and Mr. Francis, formerly a member of the Supreme Council, and now 
a Member of Parliament. .. 

‘That, their opinions may officially cogne before you and the Governor-general in Council, 
and the Court of Directors, I beg leave to insert, as a part of this address, extracts from 
their publications, and to beg that the same may be considered as though I had introduced 
them into my reply of the 21st February. 

Colonel Dow, in an essay, intituled, “ A Plan for restoring Bengal tq its former prosperity,” 
after saying that every possible encouragement should be given to the export trade, 

roeeeds * : 

Pe Free merchants ought to be encouraged, neither must they be excluaed from inland 
trade, as that circumstance would place the subjects of Great Britain on a worse footing 
than foreigners, whom we cannot, without violence, prevent from trading wherever they 
“ please. Let, however, the residence of free merchants be confined to Calcutta, as the 
“ influence which all the natives of Britoin have acquired over the inhabitants of Bengal is so 
“< great, that the selfish can convert it inté the means of oppression.” 

Mr. Francis, in an introduction to a publication, intituled “ Original Minutes of the 
“ Governor-general and Council of Fort William, on the settlement and collection of the 
“ Revenues of Bengal, with a Plan recommerrded to the Court of Directors in January 
“ 1776,” says, 
“ As a question at least it deserves to be considered whether it may not be essential, not only 
to the internal prosperity of the country, but to its dependence on Great Britain, that the 
Europeans in Bengal should be limited to as small a number as the services of the Govern- 
“ ment will admit of. 

“ The acquisition was made, and has hitherto been preserved by a British force which 
“has borne no proportion to that of the natives. Under a mild and equitable 
“ government, under such a one as it is our own greatest interest no less than our duty 
“ to give them, they are incapable of rebellion or defection. Their patience and submis- 
“ sion to their rulers in the last twenty years are sufficient to show how much they can 
“ endure. On the other hand, as we increas¢ the number of those who can. only exist at the 
“ expense of the country, we load our Government with useless weights, and add to its embar- 
“ gassments without adding to its strength. : ow 

“ Whether these Europeans are directly employed or not in the service of Govern- 
“ ment, there is no fund but the public revenue out of which they can derive a subsistence. 
“ One way or other it is paid for by the. country, and one way or other must become 
“ chargeable to Government. : 

“ Exclusive of public employments or contracts with.the India Company, there is no 
“ fair occupation for the industry of Europeans in Bengal. Every enterprize they engage 
“ in, whether of foreign commerce or internal improvement, leads them into distress if it 
“ does not end in their ruin. Even of adventurers pursuing every mode of acquisition that. 
« offers, very few, if any, have succeeded. Bnt these are people to whom no encourage- 

: sé ment 


* Seé page 127, 36 vol. History of Hindostanee, by Col. Dow, published in 1772. 


“ 
“ 


GENERAL APPENDIX. 357 AREETOOs 


“ ment should be given. Their residence in the country, especially in the remoter parts, , aarti 
“« harasses the people and alienates them from their natural habits of submission to any power (38.) Letter from 
“ that protects them.” : Company ee 
‘These gentlemen, it is probable, spoke from their own observation of the acts of violence J'S the eee 4 
which Europeans not immediately under the eye of Government, perhaps unknown to it, are se Tne ia ie 
prone to commit in the remote parts of the country. The actions of Mr. Bernard M‘Cullum, 24 February 1818. 
and his confederates, sanction their opinions on this head. Mr. Francis takes a further 
broader ground, and states that Eurapeans in Bengal, beyond the number the services of 
Government required, are an useless weight and embarrassment to the Government, and 
injury to the country, and that they are people to*-whom no encouragement should be 
iven. 
= ; ; : ’ Tam, &e. 
14 April 1789. (signed) Joun Bess, Res‘, Dacca. 


i] 


- Extract Observations of the Court of Directors on a Letter from the Right honourable 
Henry Dundas, dated 16th February 1793. 


Ir is moreover extremely desirable, and even of the last importance, to prevent individuals 
from interfering with the interior of India as much as possible. 


¢ 


' Extract Letter from the Right honourable Henry Dundas, to the Chairman, 
dated the 15th April 1793. 


e 
THE objection to it is, that inconveniences and perhaps dangers might arise to our Indian 
, empire if such unrestrained intercourse was to be admitted, as might take place, if ships of 
that description were to be allowed to sail to India; and I feel the weight of this objection 
very forcibly, from the opinion entertained By eyery body possessed of local knowledge with 
whom I have conversed, and who have all stated that the utmost delicacy is requisite in guarding 
against an unrestrained intercourse with the natives of India. 

After what I have now and throughout explicitly stated as my opinion as to the consequence 
of preserving the European character in India, and the propriety of preventing a free and 
unrestrained intercourse with the natives of India, it would be superfluous for me to enter into 
any examination of the authorites referred to by the Court of Directors. I do not differ in 
those principles, and my proposing that both the Government and trade of India should 

- continue to be conducted through the medium of the East India Company, entirely rests on 
the basis of those principles which have not escaped my most attentive consideration. 


SEEN EERE EEE rn sen onant Se ee 


Extract Letter from Marquis Cornwallis to Mr. Dundas, dated London, 
7th November 1794. 


34, Anp I am strongly impressed with a conviction that it will be of essential importance 
to the interests of Britain, that Europeans should be discouraged and prevented as much as 
possible from colonizing and settling in our possessions of India. I look upon it to be highly 
expedient that it should be a fundamental principle in the ‘new system, not only to relieve 
the corps of European troops frequently, but also to secure the return of all military men 
who may be entitled to any provision fron the public to their mother country, by rendermg 
all pensions and allowances to them after they are worn out or may have been permitted to 
retire from the service, payable to those only who shail actually claim them in Europe. - 


APPENDIX, 
Vv. 
Settlement of 
Europeans in India. 


358 APPENDIX ro REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


Extract Public Letter from Lord Cornwallis, Governor-General in Council, to the Court, 
ee tye dated 3d S&ptember 1792. 


‘Letter to 8th February 1792. 


(58.) One hundred and four persons 37. This subject, which we deem of more than 
permifted to proceed to India this sea- ordinary consequence, having been brought before 
son as free mariners. Desire oursenti- us, we should ill discharge the duty you have as- 
ments as to the expediency of allowing — signed to us if we did not deliver our opinion upon 
persons of this description to go out it without the leastreserve. Weshall not therefore 
annually, and whether the commerce*of hesitate in assuring you, that we think it extremely 
the country or the Company’s interests advisable under the present circumstances of the Com- 
are promoted thereby. e pany’s trade and situation in India, that you should - 

. not only confine to very few instances every year (we 
could wish that the number should not, exceed five or six, or at the utmost ten) your license to 
indivitluals to proceed to this country as free merchants or free mariners, but that particular 
care should be taken, when you grant it, that the persons on whom you bestow this mark of 
favour are from their characters entirely deserving of it. 

38. We beg leave to take this occasion to observe, that although many years ago a dis- 
tinction may have been and we believe was maintained between thése who visited India as 
free merchants, and those who came to it as free mariners, a distinction revived in late 
despatches from your Honourable Court, who have not often given licenses to free mariners ; 
the habits obtained in’a long period of time, and circumstances connected with the policy, 
upon which men vary in their judgments, of bounding the mercantile speculations of indi- 
viduals or allowing, them full scope, while the latter, which is certainly the most liberal, 
has seemed also to prevail in the opinion of men who wish well to the people of this country, 
have gradually brought upon a level the*persons who came out with your leave as free mer- 
chants to exercise their discretion in trading from one part of India to another, or residing 
at any fixed place to engage in commerce, and the free mariners, whose license, according - 
to the old and original intention, was limited te the maritime trade, in the pursuits of which 
they were themselves to travel from place fo place, without being entitled by their covenants 
(as they were intended to be understood) to take up their abode and settle for commercial 
purposes in one part of India in preference to another. 

39. It seems impossible to renew this distinction in practice, without exercising a very 
great degree of severity, which we believe not to be in contemplation; and we think, that 
although it were renewed, you could never be quite certain of its being rigidly adhered to. 

40. The situations of free merchants and free mariners being thus supposed to be not 
dissimilar, it seems to be of little consequence whether the licenses be granted under one 
denomination or the other, but a restraint upon the number is extremely necessary, for 
there is not a part of India that is not principally inhabited among the Europeans by 
persons who are not upon the ciwil* or military establishment of your service; many have 
not the means, and some not the inclination to carry on trade, and they become a burthen 
to the society in which they live. 

41. It may certainly be said, that it were better to give an express authority to persons to 
trade in India, than that a great variety of people from England should be here without any 
license whatever; and we should admit the position if it stood by itself; but as it is very 
easily practicable to remove from the country all those who are in it without your permis- 
sion, and those who have that permission sometimes assume rights and pretensions that are 
not perfectly justifiable, and cannot under their covenants be sent away but upon a notice 
of not less than 12 months, we hold a more direct control over the unlicensed European 
who may be forced to quit the country on a day’s notice, than we are thought to possess 


, over the man who produces his indenture to show that he trades on an authority superior to 


our own. 
42. There are many instances to prove the importance of your being perfectly satisfied upon 
pufficient evidence in England, as to the characters of the persons to whom alone your licenses 
; ; should 


GENERAL. APPENDIX. 359 


should be granted. A very recent case was lately before us, of.a Mr. Michael M‘Namara, 
who went to England ni 
a full assurance of his very improper confluct in different parts of Bengal. He probably 
stated his situation as deserving of compassion, and himself as much oppressed, and the 
humanity of the Court perhaps was interested to allow of his return. He came to Bengal 
with ‘the indenture of a free mariner, and he had not been many weeks here when he bréught 
forward the very same complaint of ill usage that had been rejected in 1789, after an- 
inquiry, the result of which induced us to order him out of the country. 

43. We have given Mr. Michael M‘Namara notice, that he must be prepared to leave 
Bengal at this time twelve ‘months; and we trust that he will not be allowed to return 
to it. 
' 44, The papers that have a reference to his complaints and conduct are recorded on our 
proceedings of the annexed dates. 


—_—— 


Extract of Mr. Dundas’s Letter to the Chairman, dated 2d April 1800, 
respecting the Trade between India and Europe. 


Ir is immediately connected with the observations last offered, to consider by what agenc 
is the trade of individuals in India to be carried on. If the question was to be decided on 
the principles of an open and free trade, the answer to the question would be, that every 
individual should send out or employ any agent he thought best to manage his own busi- 
ness. But from what I have already stated, on a former point, you will anticipate my opinion 
on this; namely, that no agent should be employed in India, or permitted to reside there, except 
with the license of the East India Company, and subject to the control of such regulations as the 
habits, prejudices and trade of the country may render expedient. In addition to every other 
consideration, arising out of the peculiar nature of the trade and manners of the country, 
there is one decisive circumstance against the tolerance of every unlicensed adventurer in 
India; it would rapidly, though insensibly, leadeto the settlement and colonization of the 
worst kind of adventurers taking root in that country, than which there could not be a more 
fatal blow to the permanence of the British power and pre-eminence in India. Vo principle 
ought ever to be tolerated, or acted upon, that does not proceed on the basis of India being con- 
sidered as the temporary residence of a great British establishment, for the good government of 
the country upon steady and uniform principles, and of a large British Factory, for the bene- 
ficial management of its trade upon rules applicable to the state and manners of the country. 


Extract First Report of the Special Commistee af the Court of Directors, 
ms dated 27th January 1801. ° 


A conTINvAL course of detached commercial adventurers would entail the residence of 
great numbers of Europeans abroad ; many others would be tempted to resort thither in the 
hope of establishing themselves gradually ; in consequence of these changes they would be 
enabled to strike out new modes of employment, and spread themselves in the country. 
Even now the Society of Merchants in India discover a wish to be emancipated from every 
material restraint ; that spirit would live, and be more powerful in a larger society. Govern- 
ment then would find it a new and grduous task to maintain order and subordinatian. 
Every port in India would be accustomed tg the visits of adventuring Europeans; connec- 
tiqns between them and the country powers could hardly be prevented ; part might go into . 
the service of those powers; all could not expect fortunes to return ; and those who saw no 
prospect of this kind would naturally commence colonization. That the rights and usages of 
our native subjects might not be encroached upon in its progress ; that these people, though 


passive, might not be at length exasperated; and that they might not, from example, 
gradually 
+ . 


APPENDIX, 


— 


e year 1789, in cons€quence of an order from Government, upon (38.) Letter from 

Company respect- 
ing the Gré@nt of 
Licenses to proceed 
to India; @ 


27 February 18138. 


Consultations, 
1 & 24 April 1789, 
20 August 1792. 


Apprennixt, 


ey 


Settlement of 
Europeans in India. 


360 APPENDIX to REPORT .rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


gradually lose their habits of submission to Government, no man can-be warranted to deny; 
nor is it less probable that a vast mass of nafive subjects, thus put into a new state of agita- 
tion, a numerous European community, progressive?y enlarging its views with its importance, 
and the combinations of Indian politics influenced by and influencing these circumstances, 


’ might render it extremely difficult for this country to maintain, in that remote quarter, 


a govérnment sufficiently strong and energetic to contain all these interests within their due 
bounds. ; 


At a Court of Directors held on Wednesday, the 4th February 1801. 
The following Resolutions were then read; and the Court approved thereof. 


Resolution Second.—Tuat it is equally the interest of the nation, and the duty of the 
Company, to guard against all princiBles and measures which, by an indefinite enlargement 
of the diay channel of communication, in their nature tend to the introduction, immediate 
or gradual, of such an open intercourse, and its probable consequent dolonization. 

Eleventh.-—That if to this aggregate capital, which may be termed the present maximum 
of the native stock of British India for a trade to Europe, it becamesa practice to add capital 
bglonging to private residents in Great Britain, and transplanted to India for the purpose of 


forcing the productions of that country beyond the ability of its own means, this would be’ 


the introduction of one of the first principles of the Colonial or West Indian system; and 


_ if-it were sanctioned, directly or impliedly, by any public regulation, it would tend greatly 


to extend the relations and intercourses between those countries, and this, as well as to 
supersede covertly, if not openly, the prohibition to Europeans to occupy lands there, 
which prohibition is already, in a variety of instances, dispensed with; and thus, without 
any certainty of ultimate commercial benefit to the British empire at large, a change would 


be commenced in the present system of Indian policy, which is allowed to be the best for. 


the maintenance of those distant possessions. - 


Extract Letter from the Right Honourable Henry Dundas, to the Chairman, 
dated 21st March 1801. 
Upon the First, Second, Third, Fourth, Ninth, Tenth, Eleventh and Twelfth Resolutions, 
1 have only to’ observe, that my opinions entirely accord with the general principles 
detailed therein. 


Extract Report from a, Special Committee to the Court of Directors, 
* dated 25th March 1802. 


In a letter from Lord Cornwallis, dated the 7th November 1794, his Lordship says, 
“ T am strongly impressed with a conviction, that it will: be of essential importance to the 
“ interests of Britain, that Europeans should be discouraged and prevented as much as 
“ possible from colonizing and settling in our possessions in India.” 


ae 


- Extract Letter from the Right Honourable Robert Dundas, to the Chairman and Deputy | 
Chairman, dated 28th December 1808. 


In the detail of any legislative proceedings which might be expedient on this subject,it 
would be absolutely necessary to guard against the abuses which would arise from facilities 
thus afforded to persons attempting to settle and reside in the British territories, without a 
license from the Company, or without the sanction or knowledge of the local governments. 


_. GENERAL APPENDIX. 367 


the Chairman and Deputy Chairman to the Right Honourable. 
Robert Dundas, dated 13th January 1809. 


Bur a more serious consequence than alf these would still remain: a free trade to India 
would unavoidably draw after it the residence of numerous and continually increasing Euro- 
eans there, whatever prohibitions might at first be opposed to their settlmg in the céuntry. 
hen all restraint to the importation of ships and goods is taken off, men must be allowed to 
follow their property, and to remain at the place where they land it, till they have disposed: 
of it; they must be allowed to navigate the Indian seas, and to return to the same place 
when their business calls them; they will thus imsensibly, and with hardly reasonable 
grounds for opposition, domiciliate themselves, nor would an unsuccessful trade prevent 
’ them, but many would seck to indemnify themselvés on shore for their losses by the voyage. 
The instances of such settlements will be numerous, and it will be impossible for any police 
to follow up the cases of individuals, and continualby to exercise a rigorous systemeof &R- 
clusion. This has not hitherto been done, though attended with comparatively little 
difficulty, and the #ttempt would soon, under the new order of things, be abandoned as 
hopeless. Colonization must in such case follow. Large communities of Europeans will 
struggle for popular rights. New.feclings with respect to the mother country, new interests 
and attachments, will then spring up; and in a region so remote, so rich and populous, and 
-8o accustomed to yield to the ascendency of the European character, the tendency dnd 
process of these. things cannot be difficult to conceive. 


Extract Letter from 


Extract Hints approved by the Committee 
of Correspondence, and submitted to the 
consideration of the Right Honourable 


Extract Observations, by. the Right Hon. 
Lord Melville, on Hints suggested by the 
Deputation of the Court of Directors, 


Lord Melville. 


18. AN unrestrained intercourse with’ 
India to’ be prevented, and the existing 
restrictions with respect to residence in India 
to be confirmed. 


3d arch 1812. 


* 
. 18. Lt will be indispensably necessary, for 
the purpose of guarding against the incon- 
venience herein alluded to, that the existing 
restrictions shall be continued, with such al- 
terations as may be requisite in the new 
system of trade. 


Extract Letter from the Deputation to the Right honourable the Earl of Buckinghamshire. 
dated 15th April 1812. » 
4 omm « 


Hints, 18.—Observations, 18. 


. Tue existing regulations, as to ingress and settlement of unlicensed Europeans into the 
Company’s establishment and territories, to be continued. No British subject to be allowed 
to settle in any country. within the Company’s limits, and not under the government of the 
Company. : 

Hints, 25.—Observations, 25. 


The maintenance of the Molucca Islands, which produce no. valuable: commodity- but 
spices, occasions to the Company a heavy expense; and™can only: be compensated by a 
monopoly of their trade ; and if private merchants are to participate in that trade; they 
eught also to bear a preportionable share of the charge of establishment in. those islands. 
But the spice trade is not the most interesting consideration belonging to this question. If 
in any of the islands in the Eastern Seas not belonging to the Company, British subjects were 
to settle, (a thing which the Company, even if armed with legal powers, would find it difficult 

3A 


Arpanonrs, 

Vv. 

(38.)' Letter froth 

Company respect- 

ing the G@nt of 

Licenses to proceed 

to India; 

27 February 1818, 


' 


to’ 


Arrexoix,, 362 APPENDIX ro REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. . 


s rane to prevent, after those seas should be open to all the ships of this country,) it wowa seem 
pe of dia, UBPOStible to hinder them from obtaining by one means or other a supply of the teas of China 
‘ nelas for the purpose of being smuggled into Europe. gThat object alone might be tempting. 
enough to induce a stttlement, where no other circumstance was sufficiently inviting. And 
if from this motive, or a concurrence of others which might be supposed, a number of. 
Englishmen were once to unite themselves. in that quarter, whither new individuals might 
continually resort, and whence again they might repair to all the ports of the Indian con- 
‘tinent, it would seem scarcely practicable to preserve the efficiency of regulations formed, 
either here or by the Indian governments, for the exclusion of unlicensed persons from their 
territories. Such would be the danger especially of any British settlement in the Eastern 
Archipelago, not subjected to the government of the Company, a danger very seriously to. 
be deprecated ; and even in those Feld by them, as the Moluccas, if they were open to all | 
British ships, it may well deserve consideration, whether there might not be some hiabilit 
taslanger of the same kind. On all these grounds it really seems advisable that Britis 
ships trom Europe should not have access to the spice islands. 


Extract Letter from the Right Honourable the Earl of Buckin§hamshire to the 
Chairman and Deputy Chairman, dated 24th December 1812. 


‘LHE justice of the observations respecting the additional number of Europeans that 
would find their way to India in consequence of the extension of the trade, must be admitted 
to a certain extent; but it is obvious that this danger would arise from the extension of the 
export trade to Indfa, and would scarcely be lessened by confining the import trade to the 

port of London. Every individual during his residence in India would of course be subject 
to the existing regulations of the local governments. ‘ 


Extract Letter from the Chairman and*Deputy Chairman to the Right Honourable 
the Earl of Buckinghamshire, dated 30th December 1812. 


* Wiru respect to the resort of Europeans to India, if we do not misunderstand the scope 
of your Lordship’s observations, it seems to imply that their numbers might be in proportion 
to the export trade from this country. If, indeed, they were to be regulated by this scale, 
our apprehensions would be the less; but we have no difficulty in acknowledging that, in 
addition to alt our other arguments against admitting importations to the outports, we think 
that the granting of this privilege would increase the spirit of rash speculation from Great 
Britain and Ireland, and thereby the number of adventurers in search of fortune in India; 
for it is to. be remembered that tho8e @@venturers would naturally seek. for new establish- 
ments, even out of the Company’s territories, and there endeavour to acquire real property. 


Ata General Court of the United Company of Merchants of England trading to the 
East Indies; held on Tuesday, the 26th January 1813. 


That any unrestrained intercourse of Europeans with our Indian empire is highly to be 
deprecated s that the unlimited competition of commereial agents would, from the peculiar 
circumstances of the country, produce “a boundless scene of confusion and fraud, and ulti- 
“ mately the ruin of the manufacturers themselves ;” and that tempting opportunities would. . 
be held out to the agents to maintain illicit intercourse with the native powers, and to 
conduct a dangerous system of communication with China from the eastern islands. 


Tae i | a way : ry , 2 
' ‘i 


GENERAL APPENDIX. 363 -Arenxors,' 
£uxwact seport or the Committee of Gorrespondence, dated 9th July 1813. - (38.) Letter from - 
Ler it never be forgotten, too, that the Indian people are concerned in this question. a iy 
The Court have already, in their letters to Lord Melville and Lord Buckinghamshire, stated Licenses to proceed 
their apprehensions that the opening of the outports to imports from India might increase toIndia;g 
the resort of European adventurers to India. Jt has been advanced in return, fron?some 27 February 1818. 
quarters, that the police of India is so excellent as to obviate every danger of this kind. 
Your Committee are sorry to observe, that they find in the records of the Bengal Govern- 
ment informations concerning the police, which do nof warrant them to conclude quite so 
favourably of it; for in fact, with all the progressive improvements in the system of the 
government there, they have not yet been able to bring the police into a state of perfect 
’ efficiency. The Fifth Report: of the Committee of the House of Commons has entered 
- much into this subject, and one quotation from the conclusion of it may suffice to justifi 
this observation: “ It does not, therefore, appear to &ave been from any want of inéoriff 
“ tion in regard to the imperfect state of the police, that the Government was unable to 
«prevent its becoming worse; but rather, as your Committee should suppose, from the 
“ difficulties which presented themselves to the application of an efficacious remedy.” 


Extract Letter from the Chairman and Deputy Chairman to the Right 
Honourable the Earl of Liverpool, dated 27th May 1813. 


We have stated, in our correspondence with the President of the Board of Commissioners - 
for the Affairs of India, the ruimous consequences that would be prodticed by this great 
innovation. The course of evidence since adduced before the House of Commons, and 
through the prottacted inquiries of the opponents of the Company, only just closed, has 
abundantly confirmed our statements, by showing 

That a large influx of Europeans into our Indian territories (an influx which will unavoid- 
ably follow the permission of an open and general trade) must prove dangerous to the peace 
and security of those invaluable possessions, now so highly improved under the Company’s 
administration. 


At a Court of Directors, held on Wednesday, the 16th May 1815. ~ 


On a Motion, Resolved, That from and after the 1st July next, the number of Free 
Merchants to be nominated by the Court in one year be limited to eight, and that the 
nomination thereof commence with the chairman, the deputy chairman, and the six senior 
members of the Court. 


‘ 


renner et 


(39.)—LETTER from the Right Hon. George Canning to the Chairman and Deputy” _(39-) Letter from 


Chairman of the East India Company, respecting Permissions to proceed to India. ne ah Hon. 
eo. Canning $ 
Gentlemen, India Board Office, 22d August 1818. 22 August a 8. 


Tue Letter which I had the honour to receive from Mr. Bebb and.Mr. Pattison, in the 
month of March, on the subject of licenses to reside in India, has remained so long unan~ NB. It was dated 
swered, and I have had so many opportunities in the interval of communicating: with you 27 Feb., but not re- 
personally on the subject, that | might perhaps feel inclined to abstain from any written cetved tll the 3d 
ar were not the letter itself necessarily matter, of record, and as such liable to reference “2? 
ereafter. 
I acknowledge the importance as much as I feel the difficulty of the whole subject; but 
that part of it which alone can be usefully discussed between -you and me, is of much less 
magnitude than the writers of the letter appear to have imagined. eS 8a 
eee 3A2 The 


z 


APPENDIX, © 
.V. 


Settlement of 
Europeans in India, 


364 APPENDIX ro REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


The object of that letter was to femonstrate against the reversal by this Board of several 


refusals by the Court of Directors of applications for permission to resort to India. 


By an account which I have obtained from the jndia House, it appears that there have 
been made to the Court of Directors, in the whole, 318 applications for leave to go and 
reside in India, since the beginning of the operation of the Act of the 53d. Of these 318, 
231, er something less than three-fourths, have been granted by the Court ; and upon them, 
as there has been no exercise of the authority of this Board, there has of course been no 
oppo for a difference of opinion. “ 

here remain 87 cases, in the course of near five years, upon which the Court have exer’ 
cised their right of refusal, and upoti which the Board have had imposed. upon them the 
duty of reconsidering, and of either aflirming or reversing, the Court’s decisions. Of these 
87 decisions, 68, or rather more tham threc-fourths, have been affirmed by the Board; - 
19 only have been either reversed or modified. a - 
eo far from thinking this an extragrdinary proportion, I should rather acknowledge my 
surpmise that any two authorities, or almost any two minds, applying themselves to the con+ 
sideration of cases so various, and so little susceptible of being measured by any precise 
general standard, should in so few instances have‘ come to different conclusions. 

The only way in which a more complete concurrence could have been produced, would 
have been by the Board’s treating the references to them as mere matter of form; as if the 
Legislature had intended these references for no other purpose than to reconcile the disap- 
pointed applicant to the decision of the Court of Directors. Some phrases in the letter to 
me might perhaps be construed as implying a wish that they should be so treated ; but on 
this point the intention of the Legislature cannot be mistaken. 

It is not to be denied that Parliament was led to apprehend the existence, in the Court 
of Directors, of a disposition, in respect to the granting these permissions, the very reverse 
of facility and profusion. Jf the number of permissions granted by the Gourt of Directors,’ 
compared with the number of their refusals, invalidates (as it undoubtedly does in a great 
degree) those suspicions on which the apprehension of Parliament was founded, it must be - 
admitted, on the other hand, that the proportron of the affirmations to the reversals of the 
Court’s decisions by the Board, affords préof of the extreme caution and reserve with which 
the Board has discharged its superintending and corrective duty. 

The grievance specifically complained of by the Court being thus reduced to its real dimen- 
sions, the portion of evil of which that grievance is alleged to have been productive must be 
diminished in a corresponding degree. x 

Two hundred and thirty-one persons appear to have gone out to India in five years, by 
permission of the Court of Directors ; 19 within the same period upon the authority of the 
Board of Control. Were there any question as to the right of the Board, the permitting 
19 persons to go to India without the consent of the Court of Directors would be as objec- 
tionable as the permitting 1,900. But it cannot be intended seriously to argue, that the _ 
deren dangers to India would arise, not from the 231 strangers whom the Court of 

irectors have sent into that country, but from the comparatively trifling addition to that 
number which has been made by the Board of Control. ‘ 

As to the general reasoning of the letter, therefore, I am afraid it will be found, on careful 
examination, to be directed, not against the conduct of the Board under the Act of the 53d, _ 
but against the provisions of the Act itself. ; 

The letter recapitulates the recorded maxims of old and able governors and magistrates 
of India, and refers to the opinions of those. eminent servants of the Company who were 
examined before the Committee of the House of Commons on the renewal of the Charter 
in 1813. But it must not be forgotten, that all these arguments and authorities against 
laying open India to the influx of uncovenanted Europeans, were manifestly and notoriously 
brought forward to prevent the opening of the trade. Parliament, not in consonance to 
these arguments and authorities, but in spite of them, decided to adopt the measure. The 
resort to India allowed by the Act, either in furtherance of that measure or concomitantly 


‘ with it, if it be an evil, is one which the Legislature with its, eyes open determined to 


a) encounter 


a 


GENERAL APPENDIX. 365 SUERTE: 
encounter, rather than leave the new experiment imperfect. Upon this point, therefore, i soray el 
neither the Court of Directors nor the Boardeof Control, whatever their own opinions of (39-) Lewter from 
the expediency of the system may be, haye any option but to carry into effect the intentions the Right Hon. 

- of the Legislature. - . ; i . Sense Copning ; 
In every permission which the Board has given since I have held my present. situation, 2? Aegust 1°18. 
I have believed myself to be acting in conformity to those intentions. The few instances 
(and, 1 have shown them to be very few) in which the decision of the Board has differed 
from. that of the Court, havé been, however, enough to show that cases will inevitably arise 
on -which,no previous agreement upon general principles could by possibility ensure an 
-undeviating concurrence. _ I must also confess, that afer maturely reflecting upon what is : 
suggested in the letter of the 3d March, as to the advantages to be derived from such pre- 27 February. 
- vious agreement, it appears to me liable to an objegtion which would’ more than counter- 
balance those advantages, inasmuch as by substituting a compromise in lieu of a revision, 
it would render the appeal from the Court to the Board altogether unsatisfactory for the 
‘purposes which the Legislature had in view. : men 
\ I have, &e. 
The Chairman and Deputy Chairman. (signed) ~ Grorer CaNnine. 


nee ee ma a ve! 


(40.)—LETTER from P. Auber, Esq. to T. Hyde Villiers, Esq., transmitting Statement 140.) Letter from' 
of Number of Licenses to proceed to and reside in India, granted since 1814. Peter Auber, Esq. 


Sir, East India House, 4th February 1832. ta Villiers, 
-In reference to your letter of the 30th December, I am commanded by the Court of 4 February 1832. 

Directors of the East India Company to transmit to you the accompanying statement of the. 
number of licenses to proveed to and reside in India, granted by the Court in each year from 
"1814, the number of applications refused by the Court, and the number of the latter granted 
by the Board ; with a general classification a& to,trades, &c. ‘of the whole. 

In reply to the Board's request for a statement of the general principles on which such 
licenses have been granted by the Court, I am directed to refer you to the letter from the 
Chairman and Deputy Chairman to the President of the Board, dated the 27th February 
1818, as containing the views of the Court upon this subject at that time. * 

In his reply to that letter, it was remarked by Mr. Canning, that out of 87 applications 

up to that time refused by the Court, the Board had in 68 cases confirmed. the Court’s 
refusal, leaving 19 cases only in which the Court’s decision had been modified’ or reversed. 
“ So far” (Mr. Canning observed) “ from thinking this an extraordinary proportion, I should 
“ yather acknowledge my surprise that any two authorities, or almost any two minds, apply- 
“ing themselves to the consideration of cases so varjgus, and so little susceptible of being 
“ measured by any precise general standard, should in so few instances have come to different 
“ conclusions.” , ‘ 

. Since the correspondence above alluded to, the number of applications refused by the 
Court has decreased by more than one-half in proportion to the number complied with, whilst 
the proportion of decisions reversed by the Board has scarcely excéeded that which 
Mr. Canning considered as less than was to be expected in such a case. 


I have the honour to be, Sir, » 
Your most obedient humble servant; 


P. Ausar, Sec. 


PEP EIDY 366 APPENDIX ro REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 
a om rt Z . 

Settlement of 
Europeans in India. 


(Enclosure. ys ‘oe - oe 


STATEMENT of the Number of Licineus to prageed to and reside in India, granted by the 
refused by the Court; and of the Number of the latter granted by the a, gre ye : 


-{ 1814. | 1815. | 1816. | 2817, | 1818. | 1819. | 1820. 


renaenaerepa | 


eS RS ORR 


Advocates and Autores: at Law, te -jo- 2 - 2 2 8 
Agents - - - -| - 2 1 « 8 | 4 3 
Apothecaries - - - ~ - < Z 2 . = 
Auctioneers - - . - = as é . 2 = « 
Baker - - - - - - - - 1 - - - 
Bishop’s College at ‘Caleutta - -°- - - - ” - - - 
Broker - - a . - - = . s <6 os 
eaneCabinet Maker -  - - -~e- ° : = - 7 2 5 
Carver and Gilder - - FS - - 7 * = « = 1 
Chemist and Druggist - - - -| + - - 7 - - ae 
Clerks, &c. Mercantile - - - - - - 1 7 1 4 3 
Coachmakers - 7 - iz 7 - a e } 3 e 
Confectioner = « - - 2 ” - « 7 - = < 1 
Cooper - - - - - - - - - - 1 “ - 

* Dentist - - - - . ‘- = - es . = +8 re 
Distiller - = - . 's - = S, = : . Pee 
European Servants = 8 8 ef - - - ay 3 - 
Gardener - - = - - - - - ° 1 « a o 
Grooms - ea 7 oe - is “ - 1 = 7 1 = - 
Gunmaker - - - 7 - - - - . is zs : 
Horticulturist - a “i 7 . 7 - - is a 5 a 
Hotel Keeper - © © »@ @f = - fo : “ = 
Indigo Planters - - 7 - - 1 - - 5 6 | 4 
Jewellers == - - - - = ° “ = - 1 2 . 
Leather Manufacturer - SS - - - - 1 e é as 7 
Linguist and Schoolmester = - - - - - - % “ : 
Lithographic Printer - - - - - - - - - - a 
Midwife - - - - < - = oe - - is 7 FS 
Milliner = S 7 - a - 7 Z < e aa s ‘ 
Miniature Painter | - - - - - - - = 7 1 - és 
Miscellaneous . - - - - 3 3 7 10 6 10 
Mission College at Gileutia - - - - - - - - - 2 
Missionaries - - - 7 - - 4 " 8 9 12 18 3: 
Music Master - - - - - - - - « 1 - va 
Musical Tnsuument Maker - - —-] = - - - . en 
Organist - -_ =. “ie = = 1 a ss e 
Orphan Institation i in Bengal - - - - - - - - - = 
lect ei aedist in} reel ta hae trecae - 5 6 14 14 8 11 

ersons allowed to proceed to their Friends 

and Relatives, cs = - ‘I si 6 : 8 7 . ». 

Persons permitted tu reside ~ - - - - - 2 1 4 2 
Pianotorte Maker ‘= - - - af ve. - - . = - - 
Portrait Painter’ - - - - “ - - 1 2 é . 

Private Affairs = - - - - 3 10 10 9 9 4 |'10 
Roman Catholic Bishop _ = - - - -e - 7 1 = - 
Rope Manufacturer - - . -| - , t < - - jo: 1 
Saddler . - = - = os ‘“ s ee . = = 
‘Saiimaker -  - - 3 - - - l oe z 2 = - 
Schoolmasters , - - = . = = rs 2 1 3 1 2 
Shipbuilders - - - - - - « - - - - 1 
Shopkeepers - - - s is é s as _ S - - 
Silversmith /- - = . a Ps ee 2 = 2 . . 


i 


GENERAL APPENDIX. 367 Appenors, 


* : Vv. 
= 2 = ‘= 2 + «= — (Enclosure.je (40.) Letter from 
Court of Directors in each Year, from 181% to 1831, inclusive; of the Number of Applications phe oe 
for the Affairs of India; with a General Classification as to Trades, &c. of the whole. Es ¥ eer? 

1821. 1822. | 1833. | 1824. | 1825. | 1826, | 1827. | 1828.| 1829. | 1830. | 1831.} TOTAB. 4 Februarye832 
4 1°17 3:4 10. 6 10 6 24-4 2 3 48 
2} § 5 5 4 3 6 6.| 4 2 i 59 
- - - i - 1 . - -- - - 2 
« - - . - 4 - -- 1 - - 1 
4 - - * = as - % io a. QZ 
- - 1 e - - - - s - - 1 
= ° i. 7 aa 1 - e . >, . a 
= - - ‘o - 1 ° - -- - - 1 
- - - - -. - - - - - . 1 
- - -" - 1 - - 2 ae - - ” 3 
1 - 1 3 +2 3 1 1 5 2 3 41 
1 4 2 eo - - 1 1 - 2 1 16 
- - - - . ° - - - - - 1 
. - - 7 o is os i s - ~ - 1 
- - - - - - i | _ - - 1 2 
- - - « 1 - : - - - - 1 
3 3 3 3 1 1 1 1 4 § 7 15 
im » * = - ‘o. * - - - e 1 
4 1 - - ‘- 1 - - {oe - ° 8 
- - - - - - 1 - - - - 1 
“ - 1 - - - - - - - - 1 
- - - - - 1 - - - - D} 
2 4 7 4 12 13 ji 11 15 6 4 106 
- 1 - - - 1 - 1 1 - - 9 
- - a - -. ° Le - - - 1 
1 - § - - - - - - - - 1 
- fo. - - - = 1 .- - - - 1 
- - - - - - 1 - - - - 1 
- - ry . = eo =: - - 1 - 1 
: 1 - - bee - = ea a a ., 4 2 
9 10 12 11 6 8 iW 12 13 10 il 152 
- r * Pa = ‘ot > = - - - 2 
| 14 11 10 9 19 4-15 14 7. 15 14 11 192 
. - 1 - - 1 - 2 - - - 1 6 
doe 1 - {,- - - a - 2 
ho - - - - - ie - - - 1 
- - 1 - - - od, - - - 1 
16 17 13 14 17 13 14 13 20 36 250 
3 - 8 5 |. 2 - . - a) 2 5b 
1 2 1 2 1 3 2 . - 4 go 
1 - - - - -" - - - - 1 
- - 2 - 1 - 1 * +. = 5 
8 6 10 4 4. q 7 ne ee 116 
- - - - o = en. = ha - I 
Ps ° - = 3 - - oe ee ve 3 . 
i - - - - 1 - = *, - FT 
- o - - - - 2 iad - Ll 
1 - 1 1 - - - 1 1 “ 13 
. ~ 1 1 nt = 1 = * - 5 
| 3 - - 1 - - - - - . 2 
- i - - = ~ Hye: - - - I 
(continued) 


APPENDIX, 


rer 


Setthement of 


Euroneaas in India. 


368 


Stablekeeper- 


Supracargoes: - 
Tailor - - - 
, Panner - - 
Tobacconist - - 


Veterinary Surgeon 
Watchmakers. - 
Wine Merchants - 


Wine Cvoper 


Advocates and Avorney 


Agents - - 
Auctioneers « 
Carpenter - 
Chemist - 
Civil Engineer 


Clerks in Mercantile Houses 


Coachmaker - 


Cultivator of Sugar and Coffee 


European Servants 


Indigo Planters 


Ladies - - 
Land Surveyor 
Miscellaneous 
Missionaries +: 
Musician 
Natives - 


ow 


s 86s 


Partners’ and Assistants 


Houses’ - 


Perzons dilowed to proceed to their Prone 


and Relatives - - 
Persons permitted to reside 


Private Affairs 
Sailmaker - 
Shipwright - 


Soda-water Maker, &c. 


Supracargoes 
Surgeon - 


Surveyor and Architect 


~ 


co 
. 
= 
- 
= 
= 


- East India House; ): 


31 Jan. 


1839. ‘} 


ore ee eens 
(pepe sp oe 


eemes 6 © opt 


° - - 
- - - 
os - - 
« - _) 
- - - 
- . ad 
- - Ps 
- = - 
= - 
- - 
a e 
in - 
ew. 


‘ 


re er 


in Mercantile 


e ~ 


steeeef8 8 
eevaseans 


aenoneve evans 


1814. 
3/8 
So 
Oe 
BIL 
313 
3/5 
oe s 
i 
“alo 
= e 
~ o 
Les * 
oo + - 
- ~ 
be | 
- =? 


| Refused by Court. 


be @ 8 mt & 8 & 8 8 pet ot 8 et BOD 


ee | 


aloyalola 
BI BIR|B|S 
1 E13 2/3 
rf eieaig 
eisje13] 
Slaidslelo 
| 
-{1 «| e—1 
- I - 2——3 
- |1 © fF Lael 
-fa «72: ~ 
- 1 - —2 
- on ss I - 
- « a 1 om 
o 1 e - - 
-] 5~1 J1-- 
-{*s «fast 
efx «|. -« 
-|4 -}| 3-71 
= t - - - 
wy}? <«|4' - 
- 1 « iis 
- l‘te- - » 
a - tent 


1817, 


1818: 


| Refused by Court. 
Granted by Board. 


| 


APPENDIX 1o REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


| Refused by Court. 
| Granted by Board. 


Toe tee 
oe Sa Se Oe ee De 


om too Th 9 oO 
L 


Pees | 
BOO ROR ee age t 


| Refused by Court. 
| Granted by Board. 


i} 


—1: 


i) 


@ee6@ 8 t & & 


te Peg t 8 wom d 8 Fe be ee 


ay 
4 
t t 


feet 1g99 =m 
o 


Led 
nn 
| 
> 


= 


ot 
7 Eso’ 9 
re) Ems ef 
x EAR o 
4 ee 
Zz C) 
ze [Ses = 
a Sng 
< Ee ok 
Se ow 
Soa Sa + . . 
pe ee i 
im] 1 Wet Oe et ts ewe ON INO eo gs OO CO IO mM 8 ot mt oe 
ra) an oD Qn Vey =~ +t 3s 
Fi | aimog Aq posozay & 


“pavog £q pasueig | i ry 1 » 


ung Kqpanoy | ee ee ee Oo 2 
ER SE mer Or a a a re aS ee a 


“pavog £q parweig | Ceres a ere etree eee ee 8 pe cmcal 


‘uno £q pasnyoy | Pr er --  2 


Sal Same 
~ 


smog £q pasnjay | Weeet ess epQWrresOvers ww 


185 [13 —3 | 9Q—1 


3 m™ 6 @ @# 8 8 8 8 
e 
a | ra “pavog £q payaein | poeuetatrue | eae rn Or or) ' T7 err tee 
, Ss 7 a | a ee et ee ee | Be io jinog fq pasnyay oo a = 7 Co ven e 
5 a we 
Au ' rh | ‘Preog fq pamein | i vree 7 
per ) cy ae i ‘s . | | > | : 
a & Cn en » 16 = | nog fq pasnjay ee i t+ 6a ee pene be Q 
~ . 
Sane ic} 
a ’ [ : eS | *pavog 4q paren | Cr j 7 1 7 s@eue st t 
ea ™ a fon a0 js |- 3 
x 2 | a wna | = oS “ianog fq paso | ee ee ee oe ee | Wo meters tee by 
Sener ; 8 
A aw ro) spavog Sq payuein 5 7 os © 6 @ ee ee ae er 1 aos ® ] eetaonae ri 
a. Og he Ob. et aw 
ne’ oan . a x “unog £q pornyay | | oe ee > 
a pee eeprom entenntp teenage prerpenaL ea, - : 
+ ee re ae Py + “puzog £q Bowery | 17 pst eeeen ri ouunuas 6 i osteo anee 
oe) 
al me nod &q pasnjay | i | st $8 § tte eee 
. oe aD 
& Ceiba eased eS “a *pavag fq panteag | tsb eren 17 eee ; a 
Oe = sysn0g &q pasngay | ao 10 
3 | Cn ha i = “pusog fq payuticg 
Z : aes syunog fq pasnyay | 
& | eo 8 ave or a tf et ae a *puvog kq payuriny | er er ’ ' ' es 5 © ee oo a e. 
ra al ~ a ci 
Sanne 2S | yanog £q pasnjay | | ol 


Arrenpix, 370 APPENDIX ro REPORT From SELECT COMMITTEE. 


Settlement of (41.)—Extract LETTER from the Court of Directors to the Governor-general in Council 
Enropeans in India‘ at Bengal (Revenue Department), gated 8th July 1829. 


2. WE now address you on a subject which, although it has not been brought regularly 
before us by any direct communication from you, is of so much importance, that we deem 
it impefative upon us to make you acquainted with our sentiments upon it without delay. 
We allude to the application which appears to have been made to you, on the part of certain 
merchants and indigo planters, to extend the power of holding land on lease for the culti- 
vation of indigo; and the measures ugon which you have resolved in consequence of that 
application.. . is 

3. You well know that the authorities in England, as well as your predecessors in the 
Government of India, have always reg&rded the question whether Europeans should be 
permitted to hold any permanent interest in land as one of the most serious in Indian 
ie ;enor has there been any measure, in their opinion, which required more mature deli- 

eration and cautious proceeding than one by which Europeans would be permitted and 
entitled to mix themselves with the natives, to acquire a power among them liable to abuse, 
and, at the same time, to acquire an interest which did not immediately depend upon the 
connection between India and England. e ; 

4. You have decided this important question for yourselves, and have carried your con- 
cesgions upon it to an extent which, as far as we are at present informed, is almost unli- 
mited ; you seem to have done so without previous deliberation, and you have certainly 
done so without waiting the result of that reference to us, which upon a matter of this 
paramount importance it was your duty to make. There are undoubtedly questions of im- 
portance which must occasionally arise which will not admit of the delay of a previous 
reference to us, and when great advantages may be gained by a speedy decision; but this 
case was one in which nothing was to be gained by precipitation, and which every consi~ 

-deration should have dissuaded you from. . 

5. The permission granted by you in 1824 to certain Europeans to hold portions of land. 
on lease, for the purpose of making the expgriment whether coffee could be advantageously 
cultivated in Bengal, cannot, and must not, be drawn into a precedent. The duration of 
the leases granted even for that purpose, we deemed unnecessarily long ; but as the quantity 
of land applied for was: limited, and a. doubtful experiment stood .in need of peculiar 
encouragement, we by oug letter of the 10th September 1828, sanctioned the indulgence 
which you had thought expedient to grant. We also considered that the case of coffee was 
peculiar; a considerablé outlay being necessary to form the plantation, and a number of 
years elapsing before it yields any return. A certain length of tenure is required by these 
circumstances for the profitable cultivation of coffee; but these circumstances do not exist 
with regard to ndigo. The cultivation of indigo is annual, and a single year, or at most 
a few years, will indemnify the cultiygtar for the expense he has incurred. We observed, 
that at the time of granting the leases for the experimental. cultivation of coffee, @ strong 
line of distinction was drawn, and very properly, by the officers of your Government, 
between the case of indigo and: that of coftee. By the Minute of Mr. Trower, under date 
the 25th of March 1823, we see that the utility of any lease to the cultivator of indigo was 
‘altogether denied. 1 

6. But it is not merely because you have permitted the granting of leases to Europeans 
of too extensive a duration, that we disapprove the measure which you seem to have 
recently adopted. The Resolution, of Government, under date 7th May 1824, passed on 
the occasion of the leases granted for the experiment of the coffee planters, laid down, 
a system of rules which were very well adapted ,to obviate the evils and inconvenierices 
which were likely to arise from the presence of Europeans as landholders among the native . 
population of India.. Among the securities thus provided, that contained in sec. 19 of the 
above-mentioned Resolution appeared to us of peculiar importance, as it enabled you at 
once to relieve the, Government and the people from the presence of any person who might 
make a mischievoys use of the-privileges granted-to him. This section, with the two which 

gy. Mote i are ; follow 


GENERAL‘ APPENDIX. 371 APPENDIX, 


. 


follow and are connected with it, you ha¥ most unadvisedly omitted in the Resolution to ; 
which we are now adverting. .  (41,) Letter to Ben- 
7. Whatever may be the future miseonduct of a planter which the ordinary operation of 83! Government on 
the law may not reach (and you know to what an extent of annoyance and oppression such Permiss@n to hold 
misconduct may proceed), you have left to yourselves, under the system which you have now aie a ; 
adopted, no remedy but that of sending the individual out of the country; a remedy which ° *“"'Y 4°29: 
ought not to be resorted to except in extreme cases, and the application of which to the case 
of an European leaseholder you have rendered peculiarly delicate, by not reserving to your- 
selves the power of cancelling, in the event of hi misconduct, the lease you have given him 
the power of possessing. 
8. We do not think it necessary to state at any greater length our opinion of the errors 
involved in the proceeding to which we are now referring. It remains, however, that we 
communicate to you distinctly the course which we desire you hereafter to pursue. 
9. We direct that all the rules laid down and all,the securities provided by the Rigamds- 
tion of Government, dated 7th May 1824, shall be strictly observed in the case of every 
-permission granted to an European to hold land on lease for the purpose of cultivation. 
10. Under these securities we do not object to your granting permission to Europeans to 
hold lands on lease ig their own names, for the cultivation of indigo and’ other agricultural 
roducts. — 
11. The length of the leases must in all eases be regulated with reference to the natuee of 
the cultivation, and must. not be greater than may be necessary to afford the undertaker. the 
prospect of a fair remuneration for the capital he may expend. The leases must not in any 
case exceed the duration of 21 years. without a previous reference to us, and our express 
approbation. . 
12. It is not less important, in the case of the transfer of leases than ‘in that of the original 
grant, that Government should be satisfied in regard to the respectability and good character 
of the individuals who are to hold them ;, and therefore the permission of Government must 
‘be rendered necessary to every transfer of a lease held by an European. : 
18. We trust that the extent to which*Goyernment may be committed by any actual 
engagements under the proceeding which we have thus been compelled to disapprove, will 
not be extensive at the time when this letter shall reach you. We doubt not that you will 
be anxious to retrace your steps as far as it is practicable; and we are sure it is altogether 
unnecessary to direct that your future proceedings relative to-this important affair shall be 
regulated in strict conformity to the instructions you have now received. 
14. The opinion we have intimated to you upon this mportant question has been formed 
by us deliberately, and is in entire unison with that of His Majesty's Government. 


(42.)—LETTER from the Secretary to the Governiffnt ef Bengal to the Secretary at the (42.) Letter from 


East India House, dated 1st September 1829. BengalGovernment 
, ; to the Court. of 


f Directors ; 
September 1829. 


Sir, ; 
Jam directed by the Governor-general in Council to transmit to you, for the purpose o: 
being laid before the Honourable the Court of Directors, copies of the under-mentioned 
apers, VIZ: : . . 
i it Memorial from the principal mercantile firms in Calcutta, praying an extension and 
_ modification of the rules under which, Europeans were permitted to hold lands in the interior 
.of the country for commercial purpases. oe P38 
2d. Resolution of Government on the above meniorial. 
3d. Minute by Sir Charles Metcalfe. 
4th. Minute by the Governor-general on the general question of giving increased facility 
+ to Europeans to settle in the interior. . 
2. The Governor-general in Council proposes at an early period to bring the subject of 
those papers:to the notice of the Honourable a in 2 separate dispatch ; and he hopes - 
3B2 the’ 


i 


APPENDIX, , 


Settlement of 
Europeans in India. 


(43.) Memorial 
from Calcutta Mer- 
chants to Bengal 
Government ; 

28 January 1829. 


372 APPENDIX ro REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


the same time to be able to lay before them the result of" the deliberations relative to the 

amendment of the law, in which the Government has for some time past been engaged in 

communication with the judges of the Supreme Hourt. But his Lordship in Council 

considers it proper that the Houoursbls Court should be put in possession of the above-~ 
mentioned Minutes without further delay. 3 

T have, &c. ; 
(signed) R. M: TirguMan, 
Officiating Deputy Secretary to the Government. 


. 


(43.)~MEMORIAL from the principel Merchants at Calcutta to the Governor-general 
in Council at Bengal, dated 28th January 1829. 

emably Lord, ; 

THE various inconveniences experienced by indigo planters, from their inability to hold 
lands in their own names, have opposed such obstacles to the successful prosecution’ of 
their industry as could never have been compensated but by extraordinary fertility of soil 
and cheapness of labour. The losses resulting from the insecurity of lands held in the 
names of natives, from the failure of ryots who have received advances, to perform their 
contracts, and from the litigation and affrays. they are liable to be involved in by the rela- 
tions in which existing Regulations compel them to stand to such persons, are an unneces- 
sary expense, which cannot be estimated at less than 25 per cent. on the total outlay, and 
a serious bar to all experimental improvements in agriculture. Notwithstanding the dis- 
advantageous naturé of the tenure, about one-third of the entire quantity of indigo plant 
is grown by the planters themselves, and two-thirds purchased on contract from ryots. 
The number of begahs appropriated to this crop is between 35 and 40 lacks. 

The value of the indigo annually produced is from two-and-a-half to three crore of 


rupees, whereof perhaps two crore are expended in this country for rent, stock, wages, 


interest on capital, &c.; and a large portion, probably three-fourths of the ‘balance, is re- 
mitted to England. Competition among planters has increased the cost of production from 
80 to 100 per cent., so as greatly to reduce the superiority which ‘this country has long 
_possessed over the other countries from which Europe is supplied with indigo, namely, 

anilla, Java, Caraccas, Guatimala, and the West Indies, The necessity of removing arti- 
ficial obstructions, in order to secure the success of this most important branch of trade, 
and to promote the manifest. interests of this country and of England, is thus continually 
rendered more urgent. : 

Until Parliament shall be pleased to apply a more adequate remedy to the disadvantages 
of our position, we are satisfied that there is no measure which would tend so immediately 
to give a new impulse to the trade, agg to augment confidence in its stability, as the exten- 
sion of the provisions of a Resoltttion passedeby the Right honourable the Governor-general 
in Council, on the 7th May 1824, for the encouragement of the cultivation of coffee. We 
do therefore respectfully solicit that your Lordship in Council will be pleased to pass a 
Regulation, rendering the same provisions, with the exception of those contained in the 
19th and 20th paragraphs, applicable to the cultivation of indigo and all other agricultural 
produce. \ 


We have, &e. 
(signed) Palmer & Co. Bruce, Allan & Co. 
. Alexander § Co. J. Scott § Co. 
Mackintosh & Co. ¢ Shedden & Co. 
Colvin & Co. - Bush & Co. 
Cruttenden, Mackillop & Co. Stewart, Robertson § Co. 
Fergusson & Co, _ Bagshaw & Co. 


‘Trotter, Gordon § Co. Aliport, Ashburner & Co, 


GENERAL APPENDIX. 373. Aprennix, 


ne 


(44,)—RESOLUTION of the Govem ént of Bengal, (Revenue Department), 


(44.) Resolution of 
dated 17th February 1829. Bengal Govern: - 


Tue Governor-general in Council remarks, that the present restrictions on the occupancy Ment; 
of land by Europeans have notoriously failed of their purpose; and their effect in inducing '7 February 1829. 
a recourse to fiction and concealment has been manifestly mjurious. e 

2. When the tenures are avowed, there will no longer be any difficulty in defining their 
extent and nature; and an essential security may be obtained against the fraud, inconve- 
nience and litigation which the present system is calculated to occasion, and which must 
be alike injurious to the success of trade, to the peact of the community, and to the cha- 
racter of our countrymen. 

3. Every day the great importance of facilitating the production and reducing the cost of 
articles of export from India becomes more apparent: but with the above opinion of the 

‘practical effect of the prohibitory system, it appears go his Lordship in Council unnieceggayy, 
to dwell at length on such considerations. | i 
4. They would indeed evince that the matter is one of great national interest ; but apart 
‘from any such argument, the practical results of the prohibition seem to afford ample 
‘grounds for its discontipuance. 

5. Although the provisions contained in s. 107, c. 155, of the 53d of his late Majesty, 
in regard to the administration of civil justice, seem to require explanation and amendmaat; 
and though the state of the law relative to the trial and punishment of criminal offences 
committed by British subjects in the more distant provinces is still more seriously defective ; 
these circumstahces do not appear to constitute any sufficient ground for postponing a com- 
pliance with the prayer of the memorial above recorded, since, as already observed, the 
measure appears likely in its consequences to diminish litigation, and to obviate the causes 
of violence and crime. 

6. Actuated by the above sentiments, his Lordship in Council resolves that the Resolu- 

‘ tion of the 7th May 1824 shall no longer be confined to lands required for coffee planta- 
tions, but that the same principle shall be applied to all cases in which Europeans may 
desire to occupy lands for the-cultivation of indigo or other agricultural purposes. 

7. His Lordship in Council further resolves that the 19th, 20th and 21st sections of the 
above-mentioned Resolution shall be rescinded. 

8. The rules contained in Regulation 38, 1793, and other corresponding Regulations, 
requiring only that before Europeans occupy land they shall obtain the permission of Go- 
vernment, no new enactment appears to be necessary; and his Lordship in Council considers 
it to be advisable to postpone any measure of that nature until the exigencies of the case 
shall be practically developed. In the mean time the above Resolution will sufficiently 
define the canditions on which the required permission is to be granted. 

9. On the application of Messrs. Alexander & Co., relative to the Nujifgurh estate, 
his Lordship in Council deems it unnecessary tg pass any special order, it being undesirable 
that Government should interfere with individual claims. 


(45.}—-MINUTE of Sir Charles Metcalfe, dated 19th February 1829. . ; (45-) Minute of Sir 


ConcuRRING cordially in the proposition for extending to Europeans, engaged in the cul- Charles Metcalfe ; 
tivation of indigo, and in other speculations, the privileges already granted to coffee planters, ee 
I beg leave to submit my reasons for advocating that proceeding, as I am not quite satisfied 
with those stated in the Resolution of Goternment. 

I have long lamented that our countrymen in India are excluded from the possession of 
land, and other ordinary rights of peaceable subjects. a 

I believe that the existence of these restrictions impedes the prosperity of our Indian 
empire, and of course that their removal would tend to promote it. 


Lam 


A¥PEN DIX, 


Setthement of 
Europeans in India 


n 
46.) Minute of 
Governor-general ; 


30 May 1829. 


374 APPENDIX to REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


I am also of opinion that their abolition is necessary for that progressive increase of 

revenue, without which our income cannoé keep pace with the continually increasing 
* expense of our establishments. — 

{ am further convinced that our possession of India must always be precarious, unless 
we take root by having an influential, portion of the population attached to our Govemment 
by cqmmon interests and sympathies. : Pb. th : 

Every measure, therefore, which is ealculated to. facilitate the settlement of ouv country- 
men in India, and to remove the obstructions by which it is umpeded, must, I, conceive, 
conduce to the stability: of our rule, and to the welfare of the people subject to our 
dominion. . 

The proceeding now adopted being a step forward in what appears to me to be the right 
course, has. my hearty concurrence. 

“The only. objection that strikes me to the spread, of a British Christian population in India, 
is the existing discordance. of the laws by which our English and, our native subjects, are. 
respe€tively governed. This objection will no doubt in time be removed,.and the sooner 

the better, by framing laws equally binding on both parties, in all concerns common to 
both, and leaving to all their own suitable laws, in whatever peculiarly concerns themselves 
alone. The present system of judicature in India, by which the King’s Court is rendered 
entirely separate from the local administration and institutions, and often practically. subver- 
siye of their power and influence, is fraught with mischief; and that part of the system 
which makes our native subjects under some circumstances liable to the jurisdiction of the 
King’s Court, under some to that of the Company’s Court, under some to that of both, 
without regard to residence, or any clearly defined limitations. by which our native subjects 
can know to what Jaws, or courts they are or. are not amenable,is replete with. gross. injustice 
and oppression, and, is an evil loudly demanding a remedy, which can only be found in.a strict 
local limitation of the powers of His Majesty’s Court with regard to the persons and pro- 
erty of native subjects, or in an amalgamation. of the King’s Courts with the local judicial 
institutions, under a code of laws fitted for local purposes, and: calculated to bestow: real and 
equal justice. on all classes of subjects under, British dominion in India. 


(signed) C. T. Mercanre. 


(46.)\—MINUTE. of the Governor-general, dated 30th May 1829. 


THE sentiments expressed by Sir Charles Metcalfe have my entire concurrence ; and when 
we adopted the recent Resolution to permit the occupancy of land by Europeans, it was by 
no means my intention to rest upon that measure as a final one, still less that the grounds 
assigned for its adoption should be regarded as embracing the general question of the policy 
to be observed in respect to British Settlers.. Believing the diffusion of European. knowledge 
and morals among the people of India to be essential to their well being, and convinced that 
the development of the natural resources of the country depends mainly on the introduction 
of European capital and skill, it has always been. my wish. and intention. that the above 
question should be fully considered and discussed, and that the result of our inquiries and 
deliberations should be submitted at an early period to the authorities at home. But the 
resolution referred to did not seem to require that we should enter upon so wide a field: 
our immediate purpose was merely to enlarge the operation of certain rules already partially 
in force, and the effect of our determination will only be to permit that which is now doné 
covertly, to be done openly. I feel however much indebted to Sir Charles Metcalfe for 
having thus brought the general subject before the Board, and I gladly seize the opportunity. 
of recording the views and sentiments with which I regard it. ; 

We need not, I imagine, use any laboured argument to prove that it would be infinitely 

+advantageous for India to borrow largely in arts and knowledge from England. The Legis- 
lature has expressly declared the truth: its acknowledgment. is implied in the daily acts 


and 
arcs ‘ a 


ok 


GENERAL APPENDIX. . 375 


and professions of Government, and in all the efforts of humane individuals and societies for 
the education of the people. Nor will it, 1 conceive, be doubted that the diffusion of useful 
knowledge, and its application to the arts Gnd business of life, must be comparatively tardy, 

“unless we add to precept the example of Europeans, mingling familiarly with the natives in 
the course of their profession, and practically demonstrating by daily recurring evidence the 
nature and the value of the principles we desire to inculcate, and of the plans we seek to 
have adopted. It seems to. be almost equally plain, that independently of their influencing 
the native community in this way, various and important national advantages will result from 
there being a-considerable body of our countrymen, and their descendants, settled im the 
country. ‘To question it is to deny the superiority which has gained us the dominion of India: 
it is ‘to doubt whether national character has any effect on national wealth, strength and 
‘good government: it is to shut our eyes to all the perils and difficulties of our situation: it 
is to hold as nothing community of language, sentiment and interest, between the Govern- 
ment and the governed :' it is to disregard the evidence®afforded by every corner of the 81She 
in which the British flag is hoisted: it is to tell our merchants and our manufacturers that 
the habits of a people go for nothing in creating a market, and that enterprise, skill and 
capital, and the credit which creates capital, are of no avail in the production of commo- 
dities. . 

It is possible, however, that the actual condition of things may be regarded by many ag 
sufficiently satisfactory to render questionable the wisdom of any great change, of which the 
effects are not precisely anticipated ; and probably the effects of the measure of giving in- 
creased facility to Europeans to settle in the-interior, with permission to hold land, may be 
more generally considered to mvolve so much hazard of evil as to counterbalance its ad- 
mitted advantages. Now what is the actual state of the country? Is it not true that the 
great body of the people is wretchedly poor andignorant ? Do we not every day perceive how 
little our officers possess the knowledge necessary to their good government, and how much 
there is wanting between them that community of sentiment and purpose, without which 
there can be no good government? Are not the files of our civil courts loaded with arrears 


of business? Does there not prevail so much tying and litigation as to prove either great - 


defects in- our tribunals, or a lamentable demoralization in the people, or more truly both ? 
Is it not generally considered to be impossible, without a burthensome stipendiary police 
(almost as strange to the people as ourselves), to contrive the means of preventing the orga- 
nization of gangs of plunderers, such as once spread terror through many of our districts ? 
Do not the police establishments, which, chiefly from the want of courage and concord in 
our native subjects, are thus thought necessary for the prevention of crime, lord it oppres- 
sively over the communities of whom they ought to be the aids and instruments? Are not 
the native officers in all departments alleged to be guilty of much extortion and corruption ? 
Do not the zemindars and revenue farmers often cruelly grind the cultivators? Do not 
several revolting and brutalizing practices still prevail among the people? _Is there anywhere 
the prospect of our obtaining, in a season of exigexcy, that co-operation which a community, 
not avowedly hostile, ought to afford to its rulers? Is it not rather true that we are the 
objects of dislike to the bulk of those classes who possess the influence, courage, and vigour 
of character which would enable.them to aid us? Do our institutions contain the seeds of 
self-improvement? Has it not rather been found that our difficulties increase: with length of 
possession? In the midst of financial embarrassment, are we not constantly called upon for 
‘new establishments involving fresh burthens? Is not the agriculture of the country, in most 
places, conducted with a beggarly stock and without skill or enterprise? Are not its manu- 
factures generally in a degraded conditifn? Is not commercial intercourse spiritless and ill- 
informed? Is there a single article of produge, excepting those which Europeans have im-~ 
proved, that is not much inferior to the similar productions of other countries, and can the 
difference. be traced to circumstances of soil and climate? One great staple manufacture 
being supplanted, is there not reasonable ground to i acm a failute in the means of 
effecting the returns, without which no profitable trade can exist, especially in a country 
tributary to another, as India is to England? Do not the cultivators and son iar 
. merchants 


* 


APPENDIX, 


(46.) Minute of 
Governor-ggneral ; 
30 May 1829, 


’ 


APPENDIX, 


376 APPENDIX to REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 
aera merchants alike labour under an oppressive gate of interest, which, with a languid condition 
Settlement of of trade, unequivocally evinces poverty and want of credit? Is there not, as indicated in 
Europegns in India. Sir Charles Metcalfe’s Minute, imminent danger cf our failing to-realize the income which is _ 
necessary to maintain the establishments required for the protection and good government of 
ae country, to say nothing of roads, canals, seminaries, and public improvements of every 
ind? . | ; ‘ 

The answers to these questions must, I apprehend, be suchas to imply that the present 
condition of things is far from being that with which we could justifiably sit down contented. 
They must equally, I am satisfied, if rendered in full sincerity and truth, evince that the 
required improvement can only be sought through the more extensive settlement of European 
British subjects, and their free admissjon to the possession of landed property. . __ 

No stronger argument can be adduced in favour of the present proposition than is exhi- 

,bited by the effects which European skill and machinery have produced against the prosperity 
oflitdia. In the last despatch in tlte Commercial department from the India House, dated * 
3d September 1828, the Coutt declare that they are at last obliged to abandon the only 
remaining portion of the trade in cotton manufactures, both in Bengal and Madras, because , 
through :the intervention of power-looms the British goods have a decided advantage in 
quality and.in price. Cotton piece-goods, for so many ages the staple manufacture of India, 
seem thus for ever lost. The Dacca muslins, celebrated over the whole world for their 
beauty and fineness, are also annihilated from the same cause ; nor is the silk trade likely 
long to-escape equal ruin. In the same despatch the Court describe the great depression of 
price which this article sustained in consequence of the diminished cost of the raw material 
in England, and gf the rivalry of British silk handkerchiefs. The sympathy of the Court is , 
deeply excited. by the Report of the Board of Trade, exhibiting the gloomy picture of the 
effects. of a commercial revolution, productive of so much present suffering to numerous 
classes in India, and hardly to be paralleled in the history of ecommerce. 

If all the ancient articles of the manufacturing produce of India are’ swept away, and no 
new ones created to supply this vacuum op: the exports, how will it be possible for com- 
merce to be ‘carried on, and how can any remittances on private or public account be made 
to Europe? If bullion alone is to supply the balance, soon will the time arrive, when, 
under the increased value that scarcity must give to money, it will no longer be possible to 
realize the revenue at its present nominal amount. It is therefore the bounden duty of 
Government to neglect no means which may call forth the vast productive powers of the 
country, now lying inert from the want of adequate encouragement. ‘It may be confidently 
asked, whether to the natives singly we may look for success, and whether any great im- 
provement has been ever introduced not exclusively due to European skill. To those who 
so feelingly deplore the misery of the Indian manufacturer, it will be consolatory to know 
that a prospect exists of better days, with a hope also that her staple commodity, the 
cotton manufacture, may still be rescued from annihilation. Mr. Patrick, an “ English- 
man,” is at this moment erectmg a very large manufactory for the spinning of cotton-twist 
by machinery, to be moved by steam ; and it is not irrelevant from the object of the present 
paper to observe, that these great works are erecting upon his own estate, held in fee- 
simple, under a grant from Warren Hastings. Hitherto the Bengal cotton has been held 
unfit for conversion into twist, but an improved kind has been lately cultivated, which it is 
supposed will be quite fit for the purpose. An improved species of tobacco has also been 
grown, bearing double the value of the native tobacco, and likely to vie with that of 
Ameriea. To whom again is the commerce of India indebted for these new resources in 
her commercial distress? To Englishmen only, is the triumphant answer. Specimens of 
both these articles have been sent to the Vice-president of the Board of Trade. ¢ 

It remaims to inquire whether the giving more facility to Europeans to settle in the - 
interior, with the power of acquiring landed property, is likely to be attended with any, and 
what, hazard of evil. On this point I confess my present sentiments differ considerably _ 
from those I once held, and the circumstance makes me with the more confidence oppose 
myself to opinions held by persons for whom I cannot but entertain a sincere respect. 

: The 


t 


GENERAL APPENDIX. 377. Aprwnix, 
: V 


The apprehension of evil from the extensive settlement of British subjects in the interior — 
of the country seems to rest chiefly on the supposed ‘character of the natives, and on the (46.) Minute of 
_ assumed disposition and conduct of ofr countrymen. {It has been stated that the former Governorgeneral ; 
are exceedingly jealous of any interference by strangers, and singularly averse to change; 30 May 1829. 
and it has thence been ante that the frequent resort of our countrymen, while it ,would 
fail to produce any useful alteration in the habits and sentiments of the people, would 
almost certainly occasion dlarm and discontent, if not disturbance. 
The views of the native character in which such references have been founded must, I 
think, be now admitted to require considerable modification. I shall not dwell on facts 
-drawn from their history under the dominion of our predecessors, nor on the various 
changes which Hindoo communities. appear to have undergone, independently of any 
-impetus from without. Yet the facility with which they have submitted to the successive 
conquerors of the country; the relation in which many of the most influential persons an 
.classes among them have stood ‘to foreign rulers; the habits which many of therf have 
borrowed: from the Moslems; the divisions existmg among them; the rise of new sects in 
comparatively modern times; the frequent instances that are met with by our revenue 
officers of numerous village zemindars professing the Moslem faith, though they distinctly 
.trace their origin to a Hindoo ancestor, and still retain the name and pride of high caste ;— 
all these circumstances powerfully contradict the notion that there is something immutable 
in their sentiments and condition. Recent events, and the occurrences now passing under 
our eyes, still more clearly justify the persuasion, that whatever change would be beneficial 
for our native subjects we may hope to see adopted, in part at least, at no distant period, 
if adequate means and motives be presented. I need scarcely menjion the increasing 
*demand which almost all who possess the means evince, for various articles of convenience 
and luxury purely European ; it is in many cases very remarkable. Even in the celebration 
of their most sacred festivals, a great ehange is said to be perceptible in Calcutta. Much 
_of what used, in old times, to be distributed among beggars and Brahmins is now in many 
instances devoted to the ostentatious entertajnment of Europeans, and generally the amount, 
expended in useless alms is stated to have been greatly curtailed. The complete and cordial 
co-operation of the native gentry in promoting education, and in furthering other objects of 
‘public utility; the astonishing progress which a large body of Hindoo youth has made in 
the acquisition of the English language, literature and science; the degree in which they 
have conquered prejudices that might otherwise have been deemed the most inveterate ; 
(the students in the medical class of the Hindoo college under Dr. Tytler, as well as in 
the medical native school under Dr. Breton, in which there are: pupils of the highest 
castes, are said to dissect animals, and freely to handle the bones of a human skeleton) ; the 
. freedom and the talent with which in many of the essays we lately had exhibited to us, old 
customs are discussed; the anxiety evinced at Dehli and at Agra, and elsewhere, for the 
means of instruction in the English language; the readinegs everywhere shown to profit by 
such means of instruction as we have afforded$ the facility with which the natives have 
adapted themselves to new rules and institutions; the extent to which they have entered 
into new speculations after the example of our countrymen ;—the spirit with which many are 
said to be now prosecuting that branch of manufacture (indigo) which has alone as yet been 
fully opened to British enterprise; the mutual confidence which Europeans and natives 
evince in their transactions as merchants and bankers ;—these and other circumstances leave 
im my mind no doubt that our native subjects would profit largely by a more general inter- 
course with intelligent and respectable Europeans, and would promptly recognise the advantage 
of it. i 
As to the practical effect, much must of course depend on the circumstances, character 
and conduct of the persons who might settle in the country.. Let us then consider how far, 
on this head, there is any just ground of apprehension. “It has been supposed that many of 
“the indigo planters resident in the interior have miseonducted themselves, acting oppres+ 
‘ sively towards the natives, and with violence and outrage towards each other. Had the case 
‘been so; I must still have thought it just to” ae large allowances for the peculiar position 
3 - m 


APEERDS, 378 APPENDIX to REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


— in which they stand. They have been denied permission to hold lands in their own names. 
Settlement of | They have been driven to evasion, which has rendered it difficult for them to establish their 
Europeans in India. just claims by legal means, or they have had to precure the plant required by them through 
a system of advances, which in all branches of trade is known to occasion much embarrass- 
ment, and to lead to much fraud. They have possessed no sufficient means of preventin 
the eftcroachment of rival establishments, still less of recovering their dues from needy an 
improvident ryots. Further, we must not forget that the restrictions imposed upon the resort 
of Europeans to this country have operated to compel the houses of business often to 
. employ persons in the management of their concerns in the interior whom they would not 
have employed if they had had a wider scope of choice. It would not be wonderful if 
abuses should be found to have prevailed under such circumstances, or if the weakness of | 
the law should have sometimes led to Violence in the assertion of real or supposed rights. 
But under all the above circumstances of disadvantage, the result of my inquiries is, a firm 
Ppetwuasion (contrary to the conclusiens I had previously been disposed to draw) that the 
occasional misconduct of the planters is as nothing when contrasted with the sum of good: 
they have diffused around them. In this as in other cases, the exceptions have so attracted 
attention, as to be mistaken for a fair index of the general course of things. Breaches of 
the peace being necessarily brought to public notice, the individual jnstances of misconduct _ 
appear under the most aggravated colours; but the numerous nameless acts, by which the 
_pfudent and orderly, while quietly pursuing their own interests, have contributed to the © 
national wealth, and to the comtort of those around them, are unnoticed or. unknown. 
I am assured that much of the agricultural improvement which many of our districts 
exhibit may be directly traced to the indigo planters therein settled ; and that as a general 
truth it may be stéted (with the exceptions which, in morals, all general truths require to be 
made), that every factory is in its degree the centre of a circle of” improvement, raising the 
ersons employed in it, and the inhabitants of the immediate vicinity, above the general 
evel. The benefit in the individual cases may not be considerable, but it seems to be suffi- , 
cient to show what might be hoped from a more liberal and enlightened system. 

It is imagined, however, that British suljectS, if admitted freely to resort to India, and to 
occupy land, would colonise in great numbers ; that, becoming too strong for the Govern- 
ment, they would violently invade the rights of the people, and at no distant period throw 
off their allegiance. It is supposed, in short, that we should have exhibited here results 
similar to those which occurred in the Americas ; that the original inhabitants of the country 
would be subjected toviolence and oppression ; and that the colonists, if not swept away by 
insurrections of their own creating, would soon claim independence, and assume an attitude of 
hostility to England. 

Now, without presuming to pronounce what the course of centuries may produce, under 

“the great changes which British India is, I trust, destined to undergo, we may, I think, 
confidently assert, that there is no analogy to support the above anticipation of the effects 
which will flow from an increased facility to Europeans to settle in the interior of this 
country. , 

In weapeet to climate, India may be described as a tropical country, in which the Euro- 
eo cannot safely labour in the field, excepting at particular times, and in which the 

orthern races appear, after a few generations, to lose much of their physical hardihood. 
The mountainous tracts, in which a more congenial climate is to be found, present no surface 
to support any large population. It is already, in all the districts that would invite the 
adventurer, a densely-peopled country. The iand is in most places distinctly appropriated 
by individuals. The hehe of private property areerecognised not less clearly than in 
Europe, and the modes of transfer not less fully defined. Its inhabitants are industrious, 
accustomed to.all kinds of severe toil, readily turning their hands to new arts, frugal in~ 
their habits, patient of exertion in the pursuit of gain. Living and rearing families upon litle, 

,in a climate suitable to their constitutions, they present: to the manufacturer and the agri- 
culturist a singularly eheap supply of labour. They seem to -have a peculiar aptitude in 
accommodating themselves'to the various tempers of their masters, and fidelity to their trust 
: ; aa is 


GENERAL APPENDIX. 379 Arpexorx, 


is generally held to distinguish them, even-when otherwise ranking low in the scale of = 
morals. In the more warlike classes, there if presented to the Government the means of (46) Minute of _ 
maintaining a large force of excellent sobdiers. In almost all classes, excepting the lowest, te ia Soa 
’ it may find able instruments of civil government. With strong local attachments, there is 3° @¥ 1929 
no feeling of patriotism to excite their enmity to strangers, or to bind them together in one 
common enterprise. Their paternal village is dear to them. The name of country, in a large 
sense, is unknown. Their seligion (I speak of the Hindoos) is even more a cause of division 
among themselves than of separation from others. Rival sects may contend, but, undis- 
turbed, they will never apparently find cause of hostility in the religious practices of those 
who profess a different creed. The spirit of Hindooisin is exclusive, not offensive. These 
last-mentioned circumstances, which have in all ages rendered it comparatively easy to 
’ subjugate India, seem calculated to facilitate the setttement of our countrymen among them ; 
but they must at the same time operate to prevent such settlement from assuming the shape 
ordinarily exhibited on the introduction of a new rage into a country. While the Himdooy 
religion 1s maintained there can be no mingling of races, such as has occurred in other 
countries ; and the line of separation would probably long survive after the origmal cause 
had ceased. The Christian rajpoot is not more tikely to forget his origin than those who 
are now found profesging the religion of Mahomed; and all the circumstances above 
enumerated appear to render it in the highest degree unlikely that Europeans would fill 
Jndia in such numbers as to colonise, in the ordinary sense of the word, or as to acquire the 
power of setting Government at defiance; nor is it more probable that the habits and 
pursuits of the settlers would incline them to violence. 

. Without adverting to the difficulty of transporting any large number of labourers to so 
distant a country, India, I may remark, offers no advantage to the Eurépean who has only 
his labour to bring to market. In providing himself with the comforts necessary to his 
existence, he must here expend a sum that would much more than purchase an equivalent of 
native labour; and the comparative value of the latter must increase with improved skill and 

‘knowledge. In agriculture, the chief branch of national industry, and that on which the 
population mainly depends, it is impossible fo egonomise labour to the same extent as in 
manufactures ; especially where a tropic sun and*periodical rains exert so powerful an effect 
on the vegetable world. And the climate must, in almost all our districts, confine the 
European husbandman to the work of general superintendence. In all branches of industry, 
indeed, it is European capital, skill and example which India requires, and for which she 
offers a market. European labour is not wanted, and could not be maintained. The settlers 
therefore must be men of capital and skill. They must consequently be few in number, 
contrasted with the population of the country. A labouring class who should attempt to 
settle would perish. There is no scope for wild adventure. The acquisitions of the settlers 
must be made in the face of an established Government, and under fixed laws. Wealth can 
be found only by industry working with superior skill or superior credit. 

So far indeed from fearing too great an influx pf Europearts, I confess my apprehension is 
that no encouragement we can hold out will induce them to resort to India in the number 
that seems to be desirable. Nor does there seem to be any sufficient reason to assume, that 
even if much more numerous than I conceive possible, they would be disposed, or if disposed, 
able, to resist the Government and oppress the people. He who looks to derive an income 
from such speculations as would occupy them, 1s not likely to find his advantage in scenes 
of violence and civil commotion: Excepting to the wild tribes, who can bear the climate of 
unhealthy fastnesses, there is no country in the world perhaps that presents fewer facilities 
to those who would enter upon a centest with the established Government, even though 
commanding the active co-operation of a considerable proportion of the people; and such 

co-operation could scarcely be looked for by those who had raised themselves by oppressive 
means. Ages indeed must elapse before the descendants of Europeans can be so numerous 
as to be formidable toa Government that consults the mterests and possesses the attachment 
of its subjects, even supposing them to retain the vigour and distinctive characteristics of 
their ancestors. While they are few in number, no one seems to deny that they must a ; 

“ 302 > with 


“ 


‘Vy. 


APPENDIX, 


Settlement of 
Europeans in India. 


' 


380 APPENDIX ro REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


with the Government: and the argument I am contesting seems to admit that the natives 
will suffer from injustice only when the newesettlers and their.children are strong enough ta 
set them and the Government at defiance. ; - 
But is there, in truth, any reason for considering the interests of the two parties distinct? - 
have we not hitherto found, that where the field has been equally open, the accumulation of 
wealth by the natives has fully kept pace with that of our countrymen; nay, that the 
former, as being the most necessary to their joint concerns, and the most keenly alive to the 
means of forwarding his private interests, has generally had the advantage? Is it not extra- 
vagant to suppose, that within any period of time on which it would be reasonable to 
speculate in prospective legislation, ¢he natives can be superseded by Europeans, or their 
co-operation slighted ? 
_ The whole indeed of the objections eo the settlement of our countrymen which I have | 


_been now considering rest on a train of argument, in meeting which the chief difficulty ig 


atof so stating it as to bear the semplance of sound reason. If an enemy to our faith and, 
nation ‘were to urge it, starting with the assumption that the Government would league with 
the settlers in a scheme of injustice and spoliation, one could easily imagine that he might, 
find materials of plausible and insidious declamation; but it does seem to be strangely 
aradoxical when the same conclusion is drawn by an Englishman loving his country, and 
justly proud of it. 7 
But it may be said that the danger lies in the union of the British settlers with the 
natives of the country; and this is a more intelligible ground of argument. It assumes, 
however, a vast change to have occurred in the frame of society, such as can scarcely be 
looked for in centunes to come; I might almost say a vast improvement, which would 
imply that the time.had arrived when it would be wise in England to leave India to govern 
itself. For assuredly, if we suppose the distinctions of tribe and caste to have ceased, and 
conceive these rich and extensive regions to be filled with an united fone capable of appreci- 
ating and asserting political freedom, we must complete the picture by imagining that England 
has (voluntarily or involuntarily) ceased to withhold privileges she has taught them to exercise. 
So long, however, as our countrymen and theer Chastan: descendants are few m number, 
and that must be for centuries, they mug cling to the Government, even supposing, what 
is not likely, that they have no closer connexion with England. Nay,even community of faith 
and language, or of language alone, will, I conceive, tend to bind the possessors of it to 
our interests (if we do not utterly neglect theirs) by a tie stronger than that which connects 
the Hindoos of different castes and sects, and will, if they be numerous, greatly strengthen 
our hold of the country. The British settlers and their descendants, at. least the more 
wealthy of them, will probably maintain a very close connexion with the mother country. , 
Some will reside in it; many will visit it; many will send thither their children to be: 
educated ;-many will look to it as the place of retirement from active life; all will‘depend 
upon it for much of their comfort and wealth. Their relation to the Government will be 
proportionably close. And that the residence in the interior of the country of any consi~ 
derable number of such persons in the capacity of landholders and merchants would add to - 
the efficiency and strength of our Government seems to me to be certain. They would open 
to us much useful information now difficult of attamment. The complaints of mismanage- 
ment on the part of the local authorities would be made with comparative freedom. The - 
growth of discontent might thus be nipped in the bud; projects of disturbance would be 
more readily discovered ; the local influence of our countrymen, and the sentiments of those 
who had acquired from them our habits, our language, our knowledge or our creed, would 
operate to break the current of any general feeling advgrse to our rule. In each individual 
we should, on the occurrence of any emergency, have an active and well-informed agent for 
local purposes. Their number, though altogethér feeble when opposed to the arms and _ 
unaided by the resources of the state, might powerfully reinforce our means of putting down 
internal or resisting external hostility. In the civil branch of Government, they’ would 
present a cheap ae excellent substitute for much of the existing expensive and inefficient 
establishments. Our police might then really be founded on the only good foundation, the 
73 ia a 8 “influence 


oa GENERAL APPENDIX. - 58h. APrEN oS 
influence and authority of iocal residents. In our courts of pao we might then hopé = = t= 
‘to introduce, with comparative facility, the besf institutions of our country. Can we doubt (48.) Minute of ©. 
that they would add largely to the wealth of the country, and greatly facilitate the realiza- Governor-general ; 
tion of the revenue necessary to its security and good government?’ or can we imagine that 3° May 1829. 
they would not powerfully contribute to the diffusion of knowledge, which would raise. the 
moral -and intellectual condition of our native subjects, and to the introduction of arts, 
machinery and works of skill, calculated to enlarge the productive powers and correct the 
physical disadvantages of the country? i ae * 
I have not particularly adverted to the Mussulman portion of our subjects, because I do, 
not: imagine that any stress has ever been laid upon the class in the present argument, 
_ because it appears to me to be self-evident that an.increase in the number of British or . 
Christian inhabitants must diminish the risk of danger and trouble from them, and because 
I believe that, so long as they profess the intolerant doctrines of their prophet and remember 
the station they once held, their hostilitity can only be neutralized by their interest#and™ 
their fears and by their knowledge of our power. 


I do not of course overlook the circumstance, that in proportion as: Europeans resort to 

the country in greater numbers,. the increase of the mixed race must be accelerated. But: 
' this I by no means regatd as a source of danger. Quite the contrary. The race in question 
must necessarily be much more closely connected with the nation of their fathers, by com- 
munity of language, habits and religion, than with the people to whom their mothers may 
have belonged, among whom, if Hindoos, they must hold the lowest rank, and by whom, if 
Moselmens, they are little likely to be respected. It is, indeed, from association with the 
governing class that they must chiefly lodk for station, wealth and influence, within any 
period to which we can reasonably extend our speculations. r 


. I am aware that there exists in many quarters an uneasy feeling in vespect to the East! 

Indians. It seems to me to be greatly misplaced. Their number is inconsiderable. The 
- evident disposition of all who raise themselves to opulence and. consideration is to take their 
tts with Englishmen according to their rafk. The lower classes are not politically to be 

istinguished from natives, excepting that, as Christians, they are of course nearly allied to us. 
That many individuals of the class are discontented and unhappy is, I fear, true. Their con- 
dition is in several respects an unhappy one. Their education has not, I believe; been 
hitherto, generally speaking, judicious. There has been little opening for their enterprise, 
and they have not shown much enterprise in using the opportunities afforded them. There 
are some striking exceptions, but these are themselves the first to admit the general truth. 
I should greatly rejoice to see a wider field opened for the industry and skill of the class in 
question ; and such will, I think, be one of the happy effects of affording a greater facility to 
Europeans to settle in the interior and to occupy lands. Fathers will thus have the means - 
of giving useful and profitable employment to their children to a much greater extent than 
they now have ; and the wants of European settlers and theirfamilies will soon create various 
demands now unknown to the country, in supplying which the industry of all classes will find 
a ready market. : 

On whatever side therefore the subject is considered, the more does it present the pros- 
pect of advantage from the free resort of Englishmen to India. On one supposition only 
can I entertain the apprehension of danger. Undoubtedly, the presence of our countrymen, 
and the knowledge which they are likely to diffuse, will render the people more conscious of 
their rights and better able to understand the duties of their governors. Were it our pur- 
pose to pursue a course of injustice, ¢o withhold from the people the privileges they may 
fairly claim and could advantageously exergise, to sport with their lives, their properties or 
their feelings, by arbitrary acts, by grinding extortion, or by capricious innovation, we should 
act most unwisely in permitting one British subject to enter the country, excepting as an 
accomplice in the scheme; we should be acting madly in spreading abroad the lights of ~ 
knowledge. But our designs being benevolent towards India, let us not withhold what best 
would serve her. Our duty being to maintain the dominion of England, let us not fe hae 

est 


\ A 
APPENDIX, 


Settlement of 
Euroneans in India. 


(47.) Letter from 
Bengal Govern- 
ment; 

1 January 1830. 


382 APPENDIX ro REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


best means of confirming it. Our tare being equally the interests of both countries, let us 
not exclude those who would best promote amd combine them. 

With the above sentiments, I must of course fe@l most anxious that the state of the law 
should be so amended as to oppose no obstacle to the settlement of British subjects in the ~ 
interior, It is clear that.if any large number of that class become proprietors of land, or 
residedor other purposes at a distance from the emus many serious inconveniences may 
be experienced, unless they be subject, with the rest of the inhabitants, to the authority of 
the local courts. The defects in the legislative provisions relative to civil suits must there- 
fore be amended. The jurisdiction of the. criminal tribunals now confined to trespass and 
assault must be extended. The doubts that attach to both branches must be removed. It 
would be the height of absurdity to argue, from the inefficiency of our existing institutions, 
against the admission of Europeans.. The remedy, it is clear, 1s not the exclusion of these, 
but the reform of our system. 

Fyrther, it appears to be no less evident that the authority to be exercised by the Supreme 
Court should be better defined, and its process regulated. How this can best be done I do 
not now propose to discuss. Before leaving Bengal, I desired the secretary to prepare 
materials for our deliberation ; and I hope soon to learn that considerable progress has been 
made in the work. My present impression is that the Supreme Court, instead of standing 
isolated from the Government and from the local tribunals, should be rendered a com- 
ponent part of our judicial establishments, the whole being remodelled, with many altera- 
tions, into one harmonious system; and that the Government (in conjunction possibly with 
one or more of the King’s judges) should be vested with power to legislate equally for all 
classes, Europeans and native. By such a plan all difficulties might easily be conquered, 
and all the doubts and embarrassments now incident to the acts of a legislative body, 
separated by half the globe, would be obviated. But even should Parliament, in its wisdom, 
reserve to itself the power of legislating for India (the local legislature would in any event 
remain subject to the control of the home authorities), there may not, I trust, be any serious 
difficulty in obtaining the enactment of such laws as may afford to all classes equal protec- * 
tion, and as may secure for all the cheap and ptompt Saminieteation of justice by able and, 
independent judges adequately controlled. ¢ 

: ; (signed) W.C. Bentinck. 


(47.)—Extract LETTER from the Governor-general in Council at Bengal to the 
Court of Directors (Revenue Department); dated 1 January 1830. 


2. We propose to confine the present communication to the subject of your Honourable 
Court’s despatch of the 8th July last relative to the permission granted to Europeans to 
hold lands in the interior of the country. ; 

3. The papers transmitted to you on the fst September last will have sufficiently apprized 
you of the sentiments entertained by the Governor-general and by Sir Charles Metcalfe 
respectively, in regard to the advantages to be anticipated from the freer resort of Europeans - 
to this country, with increased facilities of acquiring the possession of lands. We have the 
honour of forwarding (numbers in the packet) copies of Minutes recorded by the Governor- 
general and by Mr. Bayley and Sir Charles Metcalfe, on a consideration of the despatch 
now acknowledged. : | 

4. The Governor-general’s Minute containing a full exposition of the scope and purport 
of the Resolution passed by us on the 17th February 1829, it appears to be unnecessary to 
trouble your Honourable Court with any detailefl explanation on that point; and it can 
searcely be necessary for us to expatiate on the benefits which England and India would, in ~ 
our judgment, alike derive from the more extensive application of the skill, enterprise and 
capital of British subjects, to the improvement of the agricultural and commercial resources 
of the latter country. On that head there is. we imagine. but little difference of opinion; 

ua and 


“GENERAL APPENDIX. 383 
and the sentiments ‘entertained by us are fully stated in the papers, of which copies will 


‘accomparty this despatch. 
5. It may be proper, however, to say% few words on the subject of that part of your 


" despatch wherein you intimate doubts as to the utility of long leases.on an assured tenure 


for the cultivation of indigo. After stating the cireumstances which render a certain length 
of tenure requisite for the profitable cultivation of coffee, you observe that “these circum- 
stances do not exist with regard to indigo. The cultivation of indigo (you add) is annual, 
and a single year, or at most a few years, will indemnify the cultivator for the expense he 
has incurred.” This subject you will find paseney noticed in the 13th and 14th 
paragraphs of the Governor-general’s Minute, to which we beg to refer you. The opinion. 


_ entertained upon it by those connected with the trade is strongly-expressed in the Memorial 


which led to our Resolution of the 17th February, and every information we possess induces 


the belief that they have not exaggerated the disadvantages to which they were subjected 


by the eam law. The notorious fact that alm®st all the European planters fouftd it‘ 
necessary to rent lands in the name of their servants, subject to all the risks and embarrass- 
ment of such a proceeding, might be sufficient to establish the benefit of a legalized occu- 
pancy. ‘The understood practice of establishments, pelons ns wholly or in part to persons 
born in the country, leads to the same conclusion; and a brief consideration of the nature of 


_the trade and of the circumstances of the country, with the detailed explanations which 


your Honourable Court can readily obtain from gentlemen practically conversant with the 
subject, will serve to indicate the naturé and extent of the benefits contemplated. Every 
magistrate in Bengal can attest the litigation and other demoralizing effects which have 
frequently resulted from the competition of rival factories ; a competition, which, instead of 
pone mischievous to the community, and often ruinous to the parties, would be greatly 

eneficial to the country if the indigo planters were generally permitted to stipulate for the 


possession and usufruct of defined fields ; and so could give precision to their contracts with 


_ the cultivators, and provide the means of promptly enforcing their fulfilment. The expe- 


rience of your Honourable Court in regard to,that part of your investment which is provided 
by advances, will afford you the means of estimating the losses and difficulties to which an 
indigo planter is exposed, who has to trust to ‘engagements with needy and improvident 
ryots for the produce of fields on which he is not allowed to have any legal lien, and the 
rent of which is payable to another, under the ill-defined relations of the zemindarry system. 
And where the native zemindars have turned their attention to this speculation, as they 
have of late years done to some extent, it is plain that the European is roe on a footing 
of great disadvantage, if denied the best, indeed the only means by which he can effectually 
and honestly counteract the intrigue, chicanery and fraud by which, in the present state of 
morals in the bulk of the native community, he must expect to be assailed. Even without 
any such influence or temptation it is eee happens, we are told, that the ryots take 
advances from two parties, and cultivate for neither: and the outstanding balances belonging 
to almost every factory that is exposed to sale nray be taken as conclusive proof that large 
losses are sustained by their undertaking what they can not, or will not, fulfil. It is not 
surely necessary to suppose the exercise of any improper influence, in order to show that 
the planter would be able to make advances with much increased security, if standing 
towards the cultivator in the character of landlord, possessing a well-defined lien on the 
articles produced with his capital. The same cause would, we doubt not, greatly ameliorate 
the condition of the ryots; for if the planters did not grossly misapprehend their own inte- 
rests, they would certainly, we conceive, pursue them through a course of fair dealing and 


liberality, since no one can hesitate if preferring the advantage of having to deal on terms 


of mutual benefit, with comfortable and cheerful people, well supplied with agricultural 
stock, and enjoying a just share in the fruits of their industry, to any pecnlan ee of forcing, 
through the employment of a host of native servants, a dissatisfied and beggarly tenantry to 
fulfil the stipulations of a hard-driven or unequal bargain ; and in proportion as Europeans 
are allowed to hold lands on an assured tenure, we should confidently anticipate a gradual 
rise in the circumstances of the agricultural community, and ¢he more adequate supply of 

agricultural 


APPENDIX, 
(47-) Letter from 
Bengal Govern- 
ment 5 


1 January 1830. 


APPENDLE, 384 APPENDIX ro. REPORT From SELECT COMMITTEE. 


pare . ‘ : ; 
; " agricultural stock, now generally obtained by the ryots at a ruinous charge of interest, and 
Settlement of often but scantily supplied. Further, it appears to us that nothing could be more beneficial 
Europeans in India. than the gradual relinquishment of the system of*advances; under which it can scarcely be | 
said that the cultivators are the owners of any of the produce raised by them; a system 
which cannot but lead to improvidence, carelessness and expense. Now this end will, we 
think; be greatly promoted by the more extensive occupation of land by Europeans’ and 
their descendants; and no class is likely to benefit more than the ryots by the increased: 
value and certainty which will, we trust, be given to their rights and interests as the occu- 
pation of our countrymen is extended. te 
6. Your Honourable Court appear to doubt whether, in so far as concerns indigo, an im- 
proved tillage can be contemplated from the removal of the restrictions to the oc¢upancy of 
land by Europeans. We understand, however, that even in Bengal many intelligent indivi- 
duals already speculate on such improvement. We are not prepared to say how far skill 
7and™stience can in this case be apptied to an improvement of the process of culture and 
dressing land ; but there are, we believe, extensive tracts, now of little value, which might 
probably be made productive by irrigation, or by the admission of the waters of the Ganges 
and other streams when loaded with alluvial deposit; and in Behar and the Western Pro- 
vinces it is, we conceive, certain that planters would be disposed to ensure and extend irri- 
gation by a considerable outlay of capital, if vested with an assured tenure under a long 
lease, 
7. Your Honourable Court will best be able to judge how far the indigo trade of Bengal 
‘is liable to suffer from the competition of other countries. To whatever extent, and in what- 
ever quarter the danger may exist, it is plain that of all means which can be taken for 
averting it, the best, indeed the only effectual one, must be sought in keeping down the cost 
of production. The high prices which have recently prevailed, however advantageous to 
individuals, have been consequently regarded by us ath some anxiety: the evil of over- 
production, though the individual loss is of course to be deprecated, may safely be left to, 
_work its own cure. But in a commercial view nothing could be more calamitous than to 
lose this great staple’; and if there be the slightest ground for the apprehension of foreign 
-competition, which some intelligent gentlemen have ramen we can conceive nothing more 
mortifying and discreditable to the administration of this country than to discover, possibly 
too late for remedy, that, yielding to speculative fears, they had fostered the trade of our 
rivals by withholding from our countrymen the facilities which they required in order to 
po this important branch of national commerce. We shall most deeply therefore 
‘lament if it shall appear to your Honourable Court (contrary to our hope and trast) that. 
‘ paramount considerations require you to deny to the British settlers those privileges in 
-regard to the occupancy of land by which they expect permanently and unobjectionably to 
‘diminish the expenses at which the indigo of Bengal and its dependent provinces is now 
‘produced. Soe ; 
: 8. We shall not further dwell on the advantages likely to follow the freer admission of 
Europeans to the possession of landed property ; as already observed, they are, we imagine, 
generally admitted. The question how far the measures proposed to be adopted for the 
.purpose of securing the contemplated benefits are likely to be attended with the risk of 
preponderating evils is one upon which a greater diversity of sentiment may be expected to 
-exist. On that question, therefore, it may be pope that we should submit some remarks, 
in addition to the observations contained in the Minutes now and formerly transmitted to you. 
9. In the first place, we may observe, that the circumstances of the’ country (at least of 
" those districts in which Europeans are at all likely tf'settle) have greatly changed since the 
‘prohibitory rules were first adopted. In the provinces of Bengal, Behar and Orissa, a large 
. portion of the zemindaries formerly held or managed by natives, has, you ‘are aware, been - 
transferred, by public or private sale, to persons having no hereditary connexion with the 
‘tracts of: whieh they have so acquired the property or management. Of the purchasers 
many are inhabitants of Calcutta, who or ‘whose families acquired wealth, either by com- 
“ mercial speculations, conducted in close communication with Europeans, or in the service of 
the 


¥ 


GENERAL APPENDIX. 385 eres OR 
the Government under European superiors. The habits‘and notions of such men are neces- Saleen 
sarily very different from those of the persons Whose tenures they have acquired. Several (47:) Letter from 
of them are well acquainted with our lenguage; all are familiar with the system of our Bengal Govern- 
government; and the progress of education which, you are aware, has been singularly an 8: 
rapid among the Hindoo youth of Calcutta, will every day tend to create a community of sca Maka 
sentiment between the natives and Europeans, and to remove impediments to their free 
intercourse. Already, indeed, we are informed, that there are instances of the employment 
by native zemindars of European gentlemen in the superintendence of indigo factories 
established on their estates. Gecsilly, too, it is to be observed that in our old provinces 
the people have now long been accustomed to a plan of government, according to which 
every situation of importance and high emolument is vested in European officers, while the 
subordinate offices are generally held by men of their selection, guided by their instructions 
and example, or trained in the execution of laws wholly of our enactment. The interference 
of the European functionaries (direct or indirect) pasvades every corner of their digigictsa 
The character of the functions which they are required to discharge, whether as judges 
and magistrates in crowded cutcherries, or as collectors entering into detailed inquiries as to 
the minutest particulars of the rights and interests of the people, is equally calculated to do 
away that strangeness with which in new countries the Asiatic must necessarily regard the 
European. Our native officers are the creatures of our will. In many districts, too, the 
British settlers are already numerous. Howsoever multiplied, their residence could no longer 
occasion the fears and jealousies that might be supposed to follow the introduction of a race 
of strangers, even if the system of our Government, and the course of proceedings pre- 
scribed for its officers, had not operated to accustom the community to the European 
character. In so far as these observations are applicable, it seems to be clear that there is 

little room for the apprehensions that might be entertained if it were proposed suddenly to 
introduce a body of British adventurers into countries recently conquered or acquired, and 
_still possessed by natives of influence and rank, reared under the despotic government of 

‘ Indian rulers. 
10. Even less reasonable do we consider* the supposition that the- possession of lands 
would be acquired by Europeans in a manner ‘alculated to excite disturbances. Of all 
property it is the least likely to be wrongfully taken from its owner, excepting through the 
operation of bad laws, or laws badly administered; and as the eyes of Government, of its 
magistrates, and of the community, would be specially directed to the conduct of the Euro- 
pean settlers, they are of all classes the least hkely to be shrouded in the obscurity which 
must cover usurpations resulting from such a cause. Public sales in liquidation of arrears 
of revenue are in the Lower Provinces now rare, though numerous estates are advertised. The 
rules under which they are conducted are such as afford every reasonable security against 
abuse ; and any abuse practised by or in favour of an European would be much more easily 
detected than malpractices to which natives alone were parties; since of the latter, generally’ 
speaking, our European functionaries can know ttle but thé name. In the Wester Pro- 
vinces sales for arrears are now happily almost unknown. None are made without the 
express sanction of Government ; and the errors and misapprehensions in regard to the rights 
and interests of the several classes connected with the land, to which mainly are to be 
ascribed the extensive alienations of property that occurred in several of those provinces, are, 
we trust, in a great measure corrected. It does not consequently appear to us that any 
argument is ap encouraging Europeans to settle in the interior, by granting to them the 
privilege of holding landed property, can be drawn from the unhappy prevalence of sales in 
ormer periods ; on the contrary, the more we see reason to apprehend that our institutions 
have hitherto failed to secure the nights of the people, or that our native officers have 
oppressed or defrauded them, the stronger 1s our persuasion of the advantages of granting 
the privilege in question to our countrymen, because the presence of a considerable number 
of them in the interior of the districts must tend essentially to secure for our judges and 
collectors (if not wilfully blind) that information, to the want of which past failures must 

chiefly be ascribed, 7 

3D 11. We 


APPENDIX, 


— 


Settlement of” 
Europeans in India. 


386. APPENDIX ro REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. — 


11. We freely admit, that in- préportion as European settlers multiply, the necessity of 
modifying the law relative to the administratién of civil and criminal justice will be more 
urgently felt; but the changes which the utmosé conceivable increase in their numbers 
would render necessary may, we conceive, be easily made, without any essential alteration * 
in the general system establishéd for the administration of affairs. On this subject we shall 
have occasion at an early period again to address you. In the mean time it cannot, we 
conceive, be necessary to use any laboured argument to satisfy yaur Honourable Court that, 
with suitable laws, the servants of the Honourable Company will, under your directions and 
control, be found abundantly competent to meet the exigencies of the case, consistently with 
the best interests of England and of* India. To imagine that the European settlers will 
violently invade the rights and disturb the possession of the natives in the face of. established 
law, would be to admit a supposition equally discreditable to your Government and remote — 
from probability. So far indeed from expecting that the admission of Europeans to the pre 
wilege of purchasing and holding landed property will prove injurious to the several classes 
connected with the land, we should confidently anticipate that the latter will gain decidedly, 
and in proportion as the competition extends, since every thing by which the land can be 
rendered more productive, or by which the demand for it is enlarged, must be advantageous 
to the owners of it ; ard of land already owned and occupied, the European speculators must 
seek to acquire the possession by offering to those who now possess it advantages beyond what 
they at present enjoy, while their extensive acquisition of it, under the rules that have been 
prescribed (and independently of those rules), will, we conceive, tend greatly to promote the 
ascertainment, and consequent security, of the rights and interest of the ryots, and of ali 
classes connected with the land. .  - 

12. If it be alleged that the power and influence of a landlord are liable to be abused, we 
must of course admit the truth ; but we would submit, that in proportion as landlords are 
enlightened and capable of fully understanding and steadily pursuing their true interests, in 
the same proportion may it be expected that their conduet will be distinguished by kindness 
and moderation towards their tenants. We are not aware of any case in which an European * 
oe lands has‘been complained against by those holding under him (the affrays and 

itigation that are complained of have arisen chiefly out of causes which a legalized occu- 
pancy of land would obviate). It has been stated to us that instances are not unfrequent in 
which the tenantry of a village have in a body requested that the planter with whom th 

had dealings would take the farm of it; and Lagviae as your Honourable Court. well does, 
the oppresion often practised by the native zemindars and renters, and still more by their 
omlah, when the hereditary manager is, as they too often are, imbecile or profligate, we do 
not surely ask too much for our countrymen when we would have it believed that, by their 
admission to the privilege of holding land, the agricultural classes would generally be 


ers. 

13. It is no doubt true that in many places, especially in the Western Provinces, a careful 
advertence must be had,.in all atrangements,relating to landed property, to the peculiar local 
nghts and customs connected with the law of succession, vicinage, and the usages of the several 
village communities. All such laws and usages it is one main object of the settlement now ‘in 
progress to ascertain and record, on the basis of a detailed census and a field measurement. 
The result will, we trust, be such as to enable our officers distinctly to comprehend and 


. Maintain alj the rights which the people possess er justly claim; and possibly in some 


cases they may prove to be inconsistent with the admission of Europeans to the possession of 
any beneficial interest in the soil: in such cases of course the privileges we have proposed 
‘to grant would be inoperative.. In others, again, the énterest which a stranger ean acquire 
from the actual occupant, or from the renter, will,be variously modified by the rights belong- 
ing to other individuals or to the community. But all such considerations equally apply to . 
Christians born in the country, to Moslems in their relation to Hindoos, and to the different 
castes, tribes and families of Hindoos in relation to each other; and as a considerable number 
of villages in the Western Provinces are already held by gentlemen bora in the country, 
there is no reason to conclude that they will be found to oppose any obstacle to the settle- 

ment 


GENERAL APPENDIX. 387, Artxors 


ment of Europeans, though few of those probably will desire to settle in the. remoter 
districts. ‘ 8 : (47.) Letter from 
14. In the case in question, there seams to be no room for the misuse of that superior Bengal Govern- 
* vigour of character and influence which may be supposed to attach to the British character, ney 24 
unless we admit the supposition of a misconduct on the part of those who have to administer + “*"4*Y ' a 
and enforce the laws, inconsistent with all security for the persons and properties of the 
people. In all branches of commerce and industry, not affected by special restrictive laws, 
we find the natives and Europeans pursuing their several interests without anything lke 
hostile collision; and if in such pursuits as require superior science, energy or credit, the 
adyantage is on the side of the latter, it is an advantége fairly won by the superior know- 
ledge and the higher morals that distinguish our country. This ground of distinction will, 
we trust, gradually be narrowed, and at length disappear; and on the other hand, the 
natives of Fadia have many peculiarities which Europeans can never be expected to acquire, 
and which in several lines of life already give them the advantage in a competition wit? they 
latter. Already, too, landed property bears a high value in the market; instances, we 
understand, not bemg wanting of sales, to natives at 20 years’ purchase of the net rent. 
Excepting, therefore, in cases im which an European -may see clearly the means of intro~ 
ducing some essential improvement, there can be no prospect of such extensive gains as will 
tempt to wild speculation.. In proportion as.the country improves and wealth accumulates, 
the value of land must be expected to rise, especially if, by an improved administration of 
the law, all classes shall be better maintained in the possession of their just rights, and in 
the enjoyment of the fruits of their industry; and the natives of the country may before 
long be expected to emulate their European neighbours ir all improvements introduced by 
them, especially in agriculture. Supposing, therefore, for the sake of argument, that a large 
increase of European settlers would be disadvantageous, there is, we conceive, no reason- 
able ground for the notion that if the land be freely opened to their speculations, a crowd 
of adventurers of that class will resort to this country. And satisfied as we are that the 
* best interests of England and India will be promoted by the free admission to the latter 
of European industry and enterprise, our persuasion is scarcely less strong, that with every 
possible encouragement, the settlement of our countrymen will fall far short of the number 
which is to be desired, whether regard be had to the extension of commerce and agriculture, 
to the good order of the country, to the prompt, cheap and equal administration of good 
law, to the improvement of the people in knowledge and morals, or to the strength and 
' security of our power. 
15. With the sentiments above stated, and those more fully explained in our several 

Minutes,, we earnestly hope and trust that your Honourable Court and His Majesty’s 
Government will see reason to relax the restrictions you have judged it necessary to impose 
on the admission of Europeans to the privileges of holding landed property. 

‘16. We do not understand the orders now under consideration to have any reference to 
the unoccupied forests and islands of the Sunderbunds, on the subject of which we shall do 
ourselves the honour of reporting separately. You may of course rely upon our regulating 
our future conduct in regard to all other parts of the country by the structions you have 
now given to us; and much as we must lament your disapprobation of the measures adopted 
by us, we have satisfaction in stating that the extent to which the Government is com- 
mitted by any actual engagements under the proceeding disapproved by you, is altogether 
inconsiderable. 


3D2 


4 
-_ 
APPENDIX, 


ee 


Settlement of 
Europeans in India. 


18 Feb. 1829. 
3 June 1829. 


388 APPENDIX tro REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


(48.)\—MINUTE of the Governoregeneral, dated 8th December 1829. 


I am desirous of recording some observations®on the despatch which we have lately 
received from the Honourable Court, regarding the Resolution passed on the 17th February 
last, by which certain facilities conceded to Europeans in regard to holding leases for coffee 
plantations, under a Resolution passed by Government in May 1824, were, with somewhat’ 
modified conditions, extended to lands held for the culture of indigo and other products. 
But first it may be right briefly to notice the causes which prevented an earlier communi- 
cation than was made to the Honourable Court. 

2. It will be in the recollection of the Board, that when on the 17th of February we 
unanimously agreed to comply with the request made to us by the merchants, it was in the 
full persuasion that the measure woultl receive the concurrence of the home authorities. 
Their approval of the Resolution of May 1824, and of the measures adopted in regard to 

Sauger Island, their understood sentinsents as to the vast importance of rendering India as 
far as possible the source of supplying the articles for which England is mainly dependent 
on foreign countries, which have since been so fully explained in their commercial despatches 
to this presidency and to Bombay, left on my mind no doubt as to the point. Prior to my 
assuming charge of the government, the above-mentioned Resolutgon had been in certain’ 
cases extended to lands required for the cultivation of sugar-cane and cotton, as reported to the - 
Hohourable Court in a despatch dated the 26th June 1828 ; and, as I shall hereafter more par- 
ticularly notice, the recession of the 19th and two following clauses did not appear to me to 
involve any important consequences. Although, therefore, I must now regret that a copy 
of our Resolution of the 17th February last was not transmitted home immediately on its 
being recorded, and I propose that it be hereafter a standing rule separately to address the 
Honourable Court in all similar cases without any delay, it did not occur to me at the time 
{o issue special directions on the subject. And Sir Charles Metcalfe having in his Minute 
of the 19th February entered on the general question of the settlement of British subjects , 
in the interior, I was naturally desirous of placipg pet record, with that paper, an exposi- 
tion of my own views upon so important a sybject ; this I found it impossible to do with the . 
care and deliberation which the matter calltd for, before the date of my Minute of the 30th 
May, having intermediately proceeded to the Straits of Malacca. I was of course anxious that 
those Minutes should reach the Honourable Court as soon as possible, but it was not less 
my wish that they should be accompanied by a statement of the views of Mr. Bayley ; and 
as I understood the opinions of that gentleman to be favourable to the measure advocated. 
by myself and Sir Charles Metcalfe, although he doubted the sufficiency of the existing law, 
and the strength of our judicial establishments, to meet the exigencies that would arise out 
of its adoption, I further wished that if possible we should at the same time lay before the 
Honourable Court the result of the deliberations relative to the amendment of the law, in 
which we had been engaged in communication with the judges of the Supreme Court. 

8. Finding that indisposition and the pressure of other biaeis prevented’ Mr. Bayley 
from fulfilling his intention as soon as I had expected, and that the discussion with the 
Supreme Court was also likely to be protracted for some time, I directed the secretary to for- 
ward the papers already on record to the secretary to the India House; this I find was done 
on the 1st September last. ; - 

4. It appears to me that the Honourable Court have attached greater importance than a 
practical consideration of them requires, to the modifications made in the Resolution of the 
7th May 1824, which they entirely approve in its application to coffee land, and the exten- 
sion of which they have now authorized. __. . 

5. As I have already observed, that Resolution, had been extended by my predecessors to 
the cultivation of cotton and the sugar-cane ; and from the papers forwarded to them on the 
ist September last, the Honourable Court will perceive that all the most important rules and 
conditions laid down in it have been maintained. The licence to hold land is still confined to 
persons duly licensed as to residence. In each case a special application is to be made to 

“Government. The land to be held is in each case to be specifically defined ; all rights attach- 


ing 


- GENERAL APPENDIX. 389 


‘ing to it are as far as possible to be ascertained and recorded ; all disputes are to be settled, 
and the European planter is still, as before, to Be subject to the award of the revenue autho- 
rities. The tenure is still oné of leasehold only: as to the period of the leases no new 
“Regulation has been passed ; and the Court having approved of the licence given to Messrs. 
Laruletta and Gordon, whose leases were stated to be for 99 years, no objection on that 
score was anticipated. * 8 
6. The rule laid down in¢he 19th clause of the Resolution appeared to Government to be 
needlessly harsh, and indeed altogether unnecessary. It was calculated to deter persons the 
best intentioned from availing themselves of the Resolution, and therefore practically to 
nullify it. It was fatal to the expectation of any ifmprovement requiring a considerable 
outlay; and the Government having still the power of ordering the planter to the Presidency, 
" or, if necessary, removing him from the country, and %f preventing any other European from 
undertaking the local management, to whom there might be valid objections, the penalty of 
a forced sale, excepting in liquidation of demands against the planter, seemed to ba quite 
uncalled for. 
7. The 20th rule, appears to me to be very unimportant when considered as a check on 
the European leaseholder ; though in as far as it gives a general discretion to the Board of 


a 


AprENDIX, 


(48.) Minute of 
Governor-general; - 
8 Decembe® 1829. 


Revenue, which might gven be carried the length of preventing the acquisition of leases - 


- applied for, its provisions were such as would naturally be objected to. The requisition of 
security beyond that which the tenure itself presented was not intended to be general, ahd 
cannot indeed, I conceive, be necessary, when the power of sale in the execution of any 
award under the previous rules, and of cancelling the licence to reside, still exists, and since 
no transfer of the lease can take place without the individual to whom it is to be transferred 
first obtaining such local licences. a, oe 

8. The 21st rule could scarcely be applied under a Resolution of the character of that 


ofthe 17th February, having reference particularly to lands leased for the cultivation of . 


_asingle article. 

9. But though the 19th, 20th and 21st rules were cancelled, I do not, I confess, see 
how the inference which the Honourable Court ave drawn therefrom, can be supported. 
The permission which the Government proposed to give to Europeans to hold leases, 1s con- 
ditional upon the fulfilment by the applicant of all the stipulations and conditions of the 
Resolution, by the 13th clause of which all proceedings held by the local revenue officers 
are to be reported to the Board of Revenue, who are only authorized to confirm the arrange- 
ment if all claims have been duly attended to and properly adjusted. It follows of cotrse, 
that where the requisite stipulations had not been fulfilled, the Board would report to 
Government, and the permission granted to an individual would, in the event of the failure 
lying with him, be cancelled. ° 

10. On the whole, therefore, as stated in my former Minute, the immediate purpose of 
Government was merely to enlarge the operation of certain rules already im force, and the 
effect of its determination could only be to pesmit that wltich is now done covertly, to be 
done openly. 

11. ein the nature of the forms to be observed, the understood sentiments of the Euro- 
peans most immediately concerned, and the known aversion of natives to any minute scrutiny 
by public officers, it appeared to be certain, that however ultimately beneficial, the measure 
would not come into extensive operation for a long time to come; and the sanction given by 
the Court to the arrangements adopted for the clearing of Saugor Island, their full approval 
of the Resolution of May 1824, and the instructions given by them to the Bombay Govenk 
ment, seemed to leave little doubt of ets meeting with their concurrence. 

12. This last hope has indeed been disappomted, but the anticipations of Government in 
respect to the limited extent to which the Yesolution would be called into operation, have 
been more than realized: Six applications only have been received, of which five have been 
complied with, and one rejected in consequence of the applicant being desirous of obtaining 
a permanent and proprietary interest in the soil. The whole extent of land comprised in 


three of the five applications is 15,000 bereh- 
.3. The 


APPENDIX, 


Settlement of . 
Europeans in India. 


390° + =APPENDIX ro REPORT ¥rom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


13. The remarks of the Honotfrable ‘Court relative to the peculiar.cireumstances of the 
coffee cultivation, are in the main just; bu® it is certain that several other articles require 
at least in an equal degree the security of an assurgd tenure and long leases. For the pre- 
paration of coffee no expensive buildings or apparatus are required ; the berry may, J ima-- 
gine, be dried on mats, and a moderate-sized godown would hold a large cargo. When 
gathered, it may be carried to a considerable distance without being injured; so that once 
fairly introduced, the article might probably be produced in spots of land scattered through 
the villages in the vicinity of the factory, and left to the care and ownership of the native. 
With indigo and sugar the case is different. For indigo a considerable outlay is necessary. 
in the construction of vats and requisite buildings; still more expensive machinery may in 
all likelihood be required for sugar. The indigo-weed will not bear carriage of many hours. 
without injury, to say nothing of the expense of conveying so bulky an article; the same, 
observation is in its degree applicable to sugar; and indeed, in regard to all articles, tobacco, 
silk gnd cotton, and others to which if is not applicable, it is obvious to remark how essen- 
tially economy and efficiency of superintendence (always a heavy item here) must be sacri- 
ficed by the distance of the places of growth from each other or from the residence of 
the superintendant. . 

14. I need not state how little, in estimating the advantage of long leases, we can refer 
solely to the particular crops intended to be raised, nor need I specify the various improve- 
ments necessary alike to every branch of agriculture, which can only te undertaken by per- 
sons possessing an assured tenure. But in respect to indigo, I must observe, that from all 
the information, I have been able to collect on the subject, I am forced to conclude, that 
many if not all of the evils complained of, as incident to the extension of cultivation, have 
their origin in the ansecurity of the tenure possessed by the planters ; and I believe it will 
be found that just in proportion as they have been enabled to hold lands (though under the 
disadvantage of doing so in fictitious names), the disorders to which the Honourable Court 
have adverted have been of rare occurrence. To this subject we shall have occasion to 
advert more particularly when the returns that have been called for from the several magis- 
trates in the Judicial department are complet, and I shall not now enter further on the 
discussion. : 

15. On the general question of the policy of encouraging the introduction of European 
skill and capital in the production of articles calculated for the home market, I have already 
stated my opinion in my former Minute; I need not therefore repeat the arguments there 
stated, but there are one or two points connected with the discussion to which I am desirous 
here to advert.  . ; 

16. The objections to the admission of Europeans into the interior of the country were 
originally urged, and justly urged, under circumstances very different from what now exist ; 
and there can be no doubt that their mtercourse extensively would have been offensive to 
most of the natives of rank and influence whom we found in the country on first acquiring 
it. Even the natives whom wéemployed in the administration of the country required time 
to become accustomed to our habits and mode of acting. 

17. A great. change, however, has now taken place, at least m this part of India. Here, 
excepting in rare cases and in tracts likely to be the seat of European speculation, we no 
longer employ in the public service natives of rank and influence derived from preceding 
rulers; we have long intermeddled in all the minutie of judicial and revenue manage- 
ment affecting the persons and property of our subjects ; the present generation have grown 
up under and are accustomed to us; many indeed of the wealthiest and most influential are 
of our own creation, and are sufficiently conversant with the general habits and character 
of Europeans to benefit instead of suffering by the intercourse. 

18. It would surely be very illogical to apply to such a state of things arguments derived 
from the structure of society and of government that existed under native rulers, and which 
for a time survived their fall. a i: ‘ ; 

19. Further, | would observe, that of all places in India, Bengal, independently of its 
having been the longest subjected to a regular English government, presents the least pos- 

nae sible 


GENERAL APPENDIX. : 391 


sible ground of apprehension from the settlement of ‘Buropeans, whether we look to the 
character of the inhabitants or the nature of the‘country. e 
20. Lastly, I would remark, that. if the authorities in England entertain any alarm lest 
‘Europeans should be induced in any corisiderable numbers to resort to India, and to settle 
in the interior on the mere speculation of holding land with a view to the profits of rent, I 
have no hesitation in avowing my conviction that such alarm is wholly groundless. The 
European capitalist can, inany opinion, only find his advantage in India in the production 
of articles for the home market, or in affecting some great improvement, which accomplished, 
he will rarely find any advantage in retaining land merely for its rent, Such indeed is the- 
value which J am given to understand natives set updh land, that I think it probable that 
they would be enabled to buy out all Europeans holding tenures in which some great im- 
provement had not been made, or which were not Held in connection with some valuable 
mercantile concern. 
(signed) W. C. BENTINGK. 


{49).—MINUTE of Sir C. T. Metcalfe, dated 13th December 1829. 


I concur generally in the Governor-general’s remarks on the recent orders from the 
Honourable the Court of Directors, regarding the encouragement offered to Europeans by” 
the Government for their settlement in lands, with a view to the improvement of the pro- 

. ducts of India; and I have only to add the expression of my deep regret at the resolution of 
the Honourable Court to obstruct the establishment of Enropeans in the possession of lands 
lawfully acquired, as I thoroughly believe that their unrestricted establishment is essential 
to the prosperity of this country, and necessary for the future security of our Indian’ 
empire. 

ay (signed) ©. T. Mercanre. - 


(50.)}~-MINUTE of W. B. Bayley, Esq., dated 31st December 1829. 


I recret that the Honourable Court of Directors should have seen reason to disapprove 
the measure adopted by this Government in February last,for permitting Europeans to hold 
lands on lease for the cultivation of indigo and other articles. The rules and restrictions 
with which that measure ‘was accompanied, did not indeed correspond in dll respects with 
those prescribed in the former Resolution of May 1824; but I concur with the Governor-. 
apa in Opinion, that more importance has been attached tp the modifications than they 

eserve, and that the rules which were retained, provided all the securities which were 
necessary. , 

2. In truth the remaining restrictions were abundantly embarrassing, and involved so 

much previous inquiry and the adjustment of so many minute interests, that the mtended 
indulgence of Government would have been called into operation very gradually and less 
frequently than was to be desired. 
‘ 3. But anxious as I am that much greater facilities should be granted with the object of 
encouraging European British subjects to mvest their capital and employ their skill in im- 
proving the products of India, I still fel that under the present state of our laws of judicial 
mstitutions, they could: not be permitted to,occupy extensive landed property in the interior 
of the country, except upon conditions corresponding with those which were retained in the 
Resolution of Government of February last. . 

Whenever the British Legislature shall see fit to declare that all persons, European or 
native, residing in the interior of our provinces in India, shall be subject to the same regu- 
lations and to the same local tribunals, civil and criminal; and shall, by the aelee of 

suticient 


APPENDIX, 


(48.) Minute of 
Governor-general ; 
Decembé? 1829. 


(49.) Minute of 
Sir C. T. Metealte; 
13 December 1829, 


(50.) Minute of 
Mr, Bayley; 31 
December 1829. 


APPENDIX, 


* 


Settlement of 
Europeans in India. 


(51.) Letter to 

Bengal Govern+ 
ment; 6 April 

4831, 


392 APPENDIX ro REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 
sufficient powers for that purpose, enable the British Government in India to modify and 
improve our judicial institutions to the exten® which may from time to time be found neces- 
sary ; from that moment the unrestricted admission of European British subjects, and the 
free permission to acquire and hold landed property on an equal footing with the natives of” 
India, may be conceded, not only without inconvenience, but with the most important bene- 
fits to India as well as to Great Britain. 

Even with the limited powers now possessed by our local tribunals to prevent or punish 
offences on the part of European British subjects, and with the obvious disadvantages which 
result from a divided jurisdiction, and from restrictions which go to encourage acts of fraud 
and violence, I am of opinion that the most solid benefits have resulted and continue to 
result from the residence and employment of European British subjects in the interior of 
the country, and that the mischiefs an@ inconveniences have in practice been of much less - 
importance than has been commonly supposed. The measures sanctioned by Government 
in thg FResolution of February last, would have operated, gradually but certainly, to diminish 
those inconveniences, and to extend and augment those benefits. 

Concurring generally in the sentiments which have been expressed by the Right honour- 
able the Governor-general and by Sir Charles Metcalfe, in regard to the great moral and poli- 
tical advantages to be anticipated from the extensive employment of British skill and 
capital in India; I will only say, that this object may, in my judgment, be safely accom- 
pltshed without injustice or injury to the native inhabitants, and without exciting dissatis- 
faction on their part, provided always. that the European British resident be subject to the 
same laws and arcetable to the same tribunals as the native, and that the Supreme Govern- 
ment be vested with sufficient powers to modify and improve our laws and judicial institu- 
tions to the full extent which circumstances may render desirable. 


(signed) 


W. B. Bayury. 


 (51.)—Extract LETTER from the Court of Directors to the Governor-general in Council 
at Bengal (Revenue Department), dated the 6th April 1831. 


: Occupation of Lands by Europeans. 


Government of opinion that the grant of 
long leases would obviate the necessity of 


Para. 1. We shall now reply to your letter 
dated Ist January 1830. 


2. We have given to this letter and its 


Europeans renting lands in the names of their 
servants, diminish litigation, improve the con-* 
dition of the ryot, enhance the value of land, 
supersede the system of advances, bring wastes 
under culture, keep down prices, avert the 
evils of foreign competition, and preserve the 
indigo trade to India. Government anticipate 
no evils from the free resort of Europeans to 
India, on the following grounds: that their 


accompanying documents that attention which 
the importance of the subject demands ; but, 
on consideration, we are not disposed to sug~ 
gest any other course than that which we 
communicated to you in our despatch dated 
the 8th July 1829; you will therefore con- 
tinue to act implicitly on the instructions 
therein conveyed. 


being under the eye of Government is a guarantee for their good conduct ; that education is 
pee: that European agency already exists to a great extent; that no complaints. 
ave reached Government of the conduct o European holiers and because of the superior 
knowledge, and “the higher morals that distinguish our countrymen.” If a free resort to 
India were allowed, Government think there would rather be a deficiency than a redundancy 
of European settlers, On all these grounds, Government urge the Court to relax they 
restrictive orders, : 


+ 


GENERAL APPENDIX. 393 Arex oi, 


(52.)—Extract LETTER from the Court of Rirectors to the Governor-general in Council”. (52.) Letter to 
at Bengal (Financial Department), dated 2d April 1828. Government of 


’- We feel great indignation at the facts disclosed in the statement recorded by your acting eee ra 


secretary, of the circumstances attending the failure of a mercantile house at Calcutta; {nhabitants; 
from which it would appear, ‘that the house was long insolvent, and sold by a judgment April 1828. 
bond t6 another firm, which supported it while it was gathering up, mostly upon credit, large 
quantities of produce of all kinds in the interior; and just at the moment when all had been 
collected, or was in transit to the Presidency, judgment was entered on the bond in the 
Supreme Court, and the whole community of the intérior saw the goods they had provided, 
and looked upon as their security, torn from tinder their eyes, without hope of a fraction of 
their value being set apart to satisfy their claims. * Unfortunately’ the failure of this firm, 
though the largest, is by no means the only one of the same kind.” 
We are not surprised that such transactions had the effect of irritating “the natiygcom- 
munity of the country against the European character and mode of transacting business,” 
‘and we think that the law ought effectually to provide agaist these practices. « 
. We have thought it right to place the papers upon this subject in the hands of our law 
officers, for their opinign upon the present state of the partnership and bankrupt laws, 
as applicable to India; it being our intention to consider the propriety of applying for 
a legislative enactment, to remedy so far as may be practicable all existing defects, and* to 
guard the Indian community against losses in their transactions with Europeans, whether 
arising from improper collusion, or from the failure of firms the partners in which may have 
transferred their property to England. . : 


(53.)—EXTRACT from Judicial Letter to Bengal, dated 6th August 1828. _ (53.) Letter to 
Government of 
Para. 10. Tue lawless violence of Indigd planters in the interior of the country was Bengal, on Inter- 
strongly animadverted upon in the circular order$ issued by Government on 13 and 20 July course with Native 
1810 ; and we see with regret that it has not yet been repressed. \ . Inhabitants ; 
11. In some places these persons keep large armed establishments for supporting their 6 August 1828, 
claims by force, and. they or their servants become involved in violent affrays or other breaches 
of the law. 
_ 12. The officiating judge of circuit, Mr. Steer, in his report after the first session for 1824, 
speaking of Dacca Jelalpore, says, “There is a class of persons very common in this district, 
and who are emphatically designated latteals, or bludgeon-men. They have of late years. 
become numerous, their conduct extremely vidlent, and subversive of the peace of the coun- 
try; they hire themselves out on occasions of affrays; sets of them are attached to almost 
every indigo factory, for the purpose of protecting its property’ and cultivation, but more espe- 
cially to enforte payment of outstanding balances from the ryots, to secure and hold in seisin 
their crops, and not unfrequently to lay hold of. and carry off the produce of neighbouring 
cultivators.” This account is confirmed by Mr. Mitford, another officiating judge, and by 
Mr. Ahmuty, the chief judge of the Dacca circuit. In Mr. Ahmuty’s letter to the registrar 
of the Nizamut Adawlut, dated 7th August 1823, we find the following passage: “ Some of 
the indigo planters and their native servants,. with a view to enforce their advances to the 
ryots for cultivation of the indigo plant, frequently have recourse to the most violent mea- 
sures, without the consent of the landed proprietors, to take forcible possession of their lands, 
and to seize and confine the cultivators according to their option, which generally produce 
vaffrays, assaults and homicides in the. mofussil,. between the indigo planters and the zemin- 
dars, talookdars and ryots. .Such cases are constantly brought for investigation before the 
Foujdarry court, and ultimately appealed to this court.” Their misconduct and oppression 
in‘other districts were represented to Ph from Rajeshaye, Nuddea and Jessore, and petitions 
against them were presented to the Nizamut Adawlut. 
: 3E 13. In 


APPENDIX, 


Settlement of 
Europeans in India, 


. the charges were not prosecuted. The magistrate of Jessore said of Mr. Dunlop, “Such is. 


394 APPENDIX ro REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


13. In your letter of the 5th October 1826, you have brought to our notice certain pro- 
ceedings in regard to complaints against Mr. “Dunlop, an indigo planter in Jessore, the result 


of which however you say was not such as to justify*your depriving Mr. Dunlop of his licence _ 


to reside in'the interior of the country. We are by no means satisfied with those proceedings. 
It is clear that many charges of gross oppression had been made against Mr. Dunlop and his 
servants ; some preferred to the magistrate, and others to the acting cultivator, but that very, 
few of them had been fully investigated. In one case five servants of Mr. Dunlop were con- 
victed of attacking a man’s house, wounding him with a bludgeon and spear, and plundering 
him of property to the amount of 25 rupees ; and they were sentenced each to imprisonment, 
with hard labour, for six months. Tlfere were several other cases, but they were dismissed, 


either because the evidence was not believed, ‘or because they were not fully prosecuted. In . 


regard to one of these, in which ‘the sefvants of Mr. Dunlop were acquitted on a charge of 
setting fire to a man’s house, forcibly destroying his crop, and sowing the ground with indigo, 
the aveing mer trate says he was, nevertheless, strongly impressed with the belief that the 
outrages had actually been committed,’ and that he entertained not the slightest doubt of the 
prosecutor’s erop having been destreyed, and the ground forcibly sowed with indigo. In one 
instance Mr. Dunlop or his servants appear to have been convicted of an act of illegal vio- 
lence, but the case was not considered of so aggravated a nature as to render the accused’ 
parties liable to punishment ; Mr. Dunlop was merely warned against the exercise of violence 
tofvards the ryots, and those who might have sustained damage from his acts were referred to 
prosecute for the same in the civil court. In transmitting his report, the magistrate adverted 
to a statement by the acting collector, who said it had been represented to him, m a place 
where a considerable number of Mr. Dunlop’s factories were situated, that many of Mr. Dun-’ 
lop’s outrages were’never brought to the notice of the court, and that the reason assigned was, 
that attempts to seek redress had been met by destruction of property by fire, and ruin and 
loss of character to the families of many, which deterred others from exposing themselves and 


families to similar risks. On this statement the acting magistrate remarks as follows: “That . 


Mr. Dunlop’s name does inspire terror into the breasts not only of the poor ryots in his 
vicinity, but even in those of the opulent zqnindars, is a fact which I am sufficiently ready to 


admit, and that this terror must have its fotindation in Mr. Dunlop’s violence seems a legiti- 


mate inference; but I may be allowed to remark, that it might be the consequence of 
Mr. Dunlop’s past conduct as well as of his present, and that it is for his Lordship in Council 
to determine whether a circumstance of this kind, or even the character for violence which is 
generally ascribed to Mr. Dunlop, is sufficiently definite to be received as proof against him.” 
it was obviously of consequence to ascertain whether there was any foundation for the impu- 
tations of the acting collector, and whether in the particular cases referred to in the correspond- 
ence, the proceedings of the magistrate had been properly conducted. You justly remarked in 
a letter to the superintendant of police, dated 10 July 1823, that although the mstances in 
which the magistrates had reported to Goverament their havmg taken cognizance of acts of 
‘violence committed by British subjects against natives, were not numerous, it could not thencé 
‘be inferred that such acts were of infrequent occurrence. The mere fact therefore of nothing 
having been judicially proved against Mr. Dunlop in the Jessore court, without a full assur- 


‘ance that justice was effectually and equally dispensed in cases where that gentleman was 


concerned, would afford no presumption that he was not an unfit person to be allowed to 


reside in theintertor. But if the official statements to which we have referred could be at all. 


relied on, it was to be feared that the natives were not properly protected against him by the 
ordinary tribunals of the district. ; poner me 

- 44, There are other circumstances however respectitg the same individual, which in our 
estimation are of importance, although you have not noticed them in your communication to 
us. In 1820, charges against Mr. Dunlop and his servants, for seizing, imprisoning, forcibly 
carrying away, beating, wounding and plundering the natives, were submitted to you by the 
magistrates of Jessore and Dacca Jelalpore, and those outrages had been complamed of many 
years. The accused were in some instances punished, but the ehief‘offenders escaped, because 


R his 


~GENERAL APPENDIX. 394. 


his influence that a plaintiff is frequently intimidated by *him from persevering in legal pro- 
’ cess, and it is for this reason that so many causts have been struck off the file.” The magis- 
trate of Dacea Jelalpore used similar language. In a report, transmitting a list of 15 cases 
inst Mr. Dunlop and his assistants or servants, he said, “ If further evidence is necessa 
to establish their continued exercise of such arbitrary measures and unvaried defiance of all 
legal restraint, I could transmit a list of perhaps a hundred of such cases, and it is notorious 
that the neighbouring distri¢t of Jessore has greater cause to deprecate the residence of these 
persons within its jurisdiction, ’ Few of the complaints preferred against these British subjects 
have been brought to issue ; a circumstance owing to the little respect the defendants have 
evinced to the orders of the court, and the easy means they possess of evading its processes,” 
It certainly does not appear to us that the report furnished by Mr. Dawes, the acting magis- 
trate of Jessore, in March 1821, was sufficient to give any reasonable satisfaction to Govern- 
ment that Mr. Dunlop was not implicated in any of the transactions referred to. We have 
not found any further report from that magistrate,in regard to a case of great oufrage 
charged against one of Mr. Dunlop’s principal Eyropean superintendants; nor cah we 
account for the little attention bestowed on the representation of the acting magistrate of 
Dacca Jclalpore, who applied for the removal of Mr. Dunlop and one of his assistants from 
the district, on the ground of their misconduct. You directed that officer to make a full 
inquiry into such of thé cases as were still under investigation, and to submit afterwards to 
Government a report on the subject. We cannot however discover that any such repert 
was made; and we find that, on the 28th December 1821, Mr. Dunlop, who it is to be 
observed had not our permission to be in India, applied for a licence to reside in Dacca 
Jelalpore, and that on the same day you granted it, without any reference whatever to the 
charges against him. We have observed with much regret this instanee of remissness on 
the part of your Government. Adverting to the character and conduct of Mr. Dunlop, and 
to the experienced difficulty of controlling Europeans not in the service, when, at a distance 
from the Presidency: you should not have given that individual permission to reside in the 
interior without due caution, and an ample assurance that by granting it you would not 
endanger the rights of the natives whom yot. were bound to protect. We think the Niza- 
mut Adawlut should have been directed to sen’ for the official proceedings from Jessore 
and Dacca Jelalpore, and to issue to the magistrate or court of circuit such orders as the 
several cases required. But when it was made known to you by the statement of the acting 
magistrate of Dacca Jelalpore, that in a great number of instances the most serious charges 
against Mr. Dunlop and his assistants remained uninvestigated only because the accused 
had evaded process, it was incumbent on your Government to take notice of so open a dis- 
regard of the obligations of public duty. This was a complete denial of justice to the 
natives, under a shameless pretence: it was quite impossible that the parties in question 


; 
APPENDIX, 
a V ‘ g 


(53-) Letter to 
Government of 
Bengal, ongInter- 
course with Native 
Inhabitants; 

6 August 4828. 


could have evaded the process of the magistrate unless from some criminal neglect or con- . 


nivance of the public officers. 

15, We desire to know whether Mr. Dunlop ,has the perfnission of Government to hold 
lands in Jessore. It is distinctly stated by the acting collector that he has not such per- 
mission; yet that he holds lands to @ considerable extent. We conclude that when a direct 
violation of the law is thus brought to the notice of Government, it is your practice as it is 
your duty to take the necessary steps for its enforcement; but we are unable to discover 
that anything was done in regard to the above allegation against Mr. Dunlop. 

16. In your Resolutions on the Dacca circuit report for the first sessions of 1823, you 
remarked that Government must look for the effectual suppression of outrages such as those 
which we have noticed, to the vigilance of the magistrates, and to their steady resolution to 
exercise with firmness and vigour the powers vested in them. But unless these officers 
happen to be particularly able and zealous; it is in vain to expect that they will discharge 
their duties so-vigilantly and resolutely, without a constant superintendence: of the deficiency 
of the superintendence in the present instance there could be no doubt, if, as you believe to 
be the case, acts of violence were frequently eee by the indigo planters, notwithstand- 

. $2 mg 


* 


APPENDIX, 


Settlement of 
Ew opeans in India. 


396 APPENDIX ro-REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


-ing the magistrates had, under the law, ample means of protecting the natives against them ; 
if, with those means at their command, any of your public functionaries are found inadequate’ 
to the great purposes of their appointments, they ehould be removed, and men willing and’ 
able to execute the laws appointed in their room. We must here refer you to an occasion’ 
on which the acting magistrate of Dacca Jelalpore was manifestly chargeable with a neglect. 
of duty, in regard to complaints made to him against an indigo planter and his dependents ; 
instead of instituting an immediate inquiry and preventing injustice, he contented him-' 
self with ordering that the petitions should be recorded. For this neglect he was very’ 
properly censured by the judge of circuit, but neither the Nizamut Adawlut nor the Govern— 
ment appear to have taken any notite of his proceedings. As the degraded state of the’ 
administration of justice in Dacca Jelalpore required particular attention, we think you 
should have enforced the censure by yo@r sanction, and pressed it upon the attention of the’ 
Nizamut Adawlut; for it is obvious that if the business of a district is conducted with so 
little gggard to the due execution of the laws on the part of the magistrate, there can be no 
general protection of person or property. 

17. An application having been made by Messrs. Palmer & Co. and other principal mer- 
cantile houses in Calcutta, in behalf of the indigo planters in Dacca, who were represented. 
as agerieved by certain orders of the Court of Circuit issued through the magistrate, the 
interference of Government was readily obtained with no longer delay than three days; the 
Governor-general in Council directed the Nizamut Adawlut to give such immediate instruc- 
tions to’ the magistrate as should prevent him from giving effect to those orders, which 
appeared to Government to be equally unauthorized and injudicious. The planters must have’ 
known that they might have had an explanation or revision of the proceedings of the Court 
of Circuit, merely bY petitioning that court at Dacca; and when they. sought to attain their 
object by the ielp of powerful patrons at Calcutta, who could procure the direct interference 
of Government in their favour, it might have been presumed that they had some particular 
reason for so doing: we know no cause why the applicants in this case should not have been 
referred to the regular judicial authorities: the truth was the orders of the Court of Circuit * 
were perfectly proper, although they had been thisinterpreted by the magistrate. The Niza- 
mut Adawlut, with their reply to the comménication from Government, forwarded to you the 
explanations furnished by the Court of Circuit, and copies of two petitions which they had 
‘recently received containing many serious charges against the indigo planters. It certainly 
does appear to us that the wrongs of the natives, as set forth in these papers, were entitled 
to a degree of attention no less prompt than that which had been given to the intérests and 
allegations of those whom they charged to be their oppressors; yet the subject was not 
noticed for six months; it was then intimated to the Nizamut Adawlut that the Governor- 
general in Council was satisfied that the representations contained in one of the petitions, 
which was anonymous, were grossly exaggerated : the satisfaction of Government on the ac- 


’ quittal of an indigo planter, in case of an affray mentioned by Mr. Ahmuty, the circuit judge, 


was also expressed, but no inquiry was mgde respecting the remaining allegations in Mr. 
Ahmuty’s letter, and in the other petition, which was signed by 63 persons. 
18. On your consultations of 12 April 1827, we find recorded an engagement which the’ 
magistrate of Dacca Jelalpore had taken from all the indigo planters in his district, begin-: 
ning as follows: “ Whereas it has come to the knowledge of this court, that at the time of 
cultivating, sowing and cutting the indigo-plant, the proprietors of indigo factories in this dis- 
trict are in the habit of assembling and temporarily entertaining in their service a number of 
men, inhabitants of this and other districts, armed with clubs, spears and other weapons, by 
whose aid they take forcible possession of disputed crops and lands, and cause, serious affrays 
in which people are frequently killed or wounded, and by which the peace of the country is 
seriously disturbed : also, that these armed bandé frequently watch the opportunity to com- 
mit decoities and other heinous offences.” The party to the deed then engages, under a 
penalty of 3,000 rupees, that he will abstam from various acts of violence and oppression 

which are therein enumerated, and that he will submit to the laws, 
: 19. As 


, GENERAL APPENDIX. . 397, APPENpix, 


We 
t 


19. As the planters were fully aware that the magistr¢te had no power to exact such an — 
engagement from them, and as they might either have*refused to execute it, or protested (53-) Letter to 
against it to the Government or to the Cogrt of Circuit, the act must be considered as volun- Government of 
tary on their part ;.it is therefore with surprise that we have seen such an admission of their Bengal, ‘th ne 
notorious criminality; but we cannot sufliciently express our concern on observing that a Tints evallye 
magistrate should have acknowledged, with seeming indifference, that the administration of ¢ AScask ab 28 
justice in the district under bis charge was in so feeble a state as is implied in this document ; : ° 
that instead of enforcing the laws, he should have had recourse to the device of penalty 
bonds to induce men to obey them; and that all this should be passed over by the Nizamut 
Adawlut and even by the Government without comment, as if it were a matter of course. 

20. You have very properly directed that all cases in which a. British subject residing in 
- the interior has been guilty of violence, oppression oreinjustice towards the natives, in prose- 
cution of indigo or other cbmmercial transactions, shall be brought to your notice, and have 
_ declared that in every instance of a serious nature you will recal the licence under which 
the individual may be residing in the interior ; we are of opinion, however, that every ciffe of 
violent affray attended with aggravating circumstances, in which the servants of an indigo 
factory have been engaged, whether the European head of the establishment has been 
included in the charge or not, should be examined by the circuit judge, and that the super- 
intendant of police should be required to furnish with his annual report a specific statement 
of those cases. F ae 

21. We desire to be informed whether the superintendant has ever supplied the reports, 
required of him by your orders of the 9th March 1821. 

22. Regulation VI. of 1823, having for its object the more prompt adjustment of disputes 
and enforcement of contracts for the cultivation of indigo, is very proper asfar as it goes; and, 
the remarks and orders contained in your letter to the superintendant of police, dated 10th 
July 1828, respecting the violence of. the European planters, appear to us to be generally, 
judicious ; but if, as vou admit to have been the case, the planters were frequently in the 

abit of obliging the ryots to receive advances, and of adopting illicit and other improper’ 
means to compel them to cultivate indigo, *it was of importance that the most effectual 
means should have been used to put a stop to suth unwarrantable proceedings. We are of 
opinion that the discretionary power of Government in granting licences to Europeans to 
residé in the interior, and also the power vested in them by the provisions of section 3, 
Regulation XX XVIII. of 1'793, have not been exercised with that caution which the general 
conduct of the Europeans demanded, and that the proceedings of the magistrates have not 
been superintended with the necessary vigilance and severity. f 

23. We direct that, immediately on the receipt of this letter, you” prepare for our in- 
formation a special report of the British subjects and other Europeans residing or holding 
lands or factories for the cultivation or manufacture of indigo in the several districts under 
your presidency; we desire to know the names and descriptions of those persons, and the 
nature and extent of their establishment, as far as it may be “in your power to ascertain the 
same; you will state whether they have permission to hold lands, or to reside in the interior ; 
and you will furnish us with a list and summary of all cases recorded in the civil and criminal 
courts, since 1810, in which they, or their principal or armed. servants, have been concerned 
as plaintiffs or defendants, in regard to disputes connected with their indigo business. 
Finally, we desire to be distinctly told, whether,in the-opinion of your Government, or of 
the judicial authorities generally, it is necessary, for the effectual subjection of the digo 
planters and their servants to the control of law, that any further legislative provisions 
should be made in addition to those which already exist. 


APPENDIX, 


. 


Settlement of 


Europeans in India. 


(55+) Letter from 
Government of 
Bengal, on Inter- 
course with Native 
Inhabitants ; 

8 September 1829. 


398 | APPENDIX ro REPORT rnom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


(54.}-~EXTRACT Bengal Judicig! Consultations, 24th March 1829. 


No.1. Reap a Letter from the Honourable the Court of Directors in the Judicial’ 
Department, dated the 6th August 1828. ; 


holding 


5S $25E9522% 
» soSsee5. 8 
SE | BES 2 e288 
we fOS TAREE ES 
& P<] aE OBOE & 2 
SS (|*5giahezs 
| Sea5g2hse 
af |} Pasosyess 
S te (esos ga°8. 
3° eee er eee 
me S35 Ze 
ee SEP aSAzEa 
= 8S = : . 
e & ¢. eee eer a 
33 Za The Vice President in Council desires that an 
3? g.24 : ‘extract from paragraph 23 of the Honourable 
oe oe 3 eS Court’s letter be sent tS the magistrates and 
os 2 8 a joint magistrates throughout the provinces, direct- 
2 - er ing them to furnish the information required, ac- 
38 fz¢ cording to the form given in the margin, 
Ey, 3s F 3 
3 F & * 
aes; gp § 
3-3 
Fe 52 
ae 
Cans vo 
eas 
& ed 
a s 
2 :5 60 
ee sS 
Sa5 
wn 


(55.)—-Extract LETTER from the Govemor-genertl in Council at Bengal (Judicial 
; Department), dated 8th September 1829. 


a 6 

Letter from Court, 6 August 1828, paras. Para. 5. Wz are concerned to observe that 
10 to 23.~—Violent affrays originating in the your Honourable Court saw reason to be 
misconduct of European indigo planters or dissatisfied with the proceedings of Govern- 
their servants. ment in the instances noticed in these para- 
: aphs, particularly in respect to certain 
complaints preferred against Mr. Dunlop and his servants, for acts of violence committed in 

the districts of Jessore and Dacca Jelalpore, during the year 1820. , 


6. Adverting to the remarks of your Honourable Court in paragraph 14, on the subject of 

a licence pe been granted to Mr. Dunlop to reside ih the district of Dacca Jelalpore, not- 
withstanding the unfavourable reports of his character and conduct, it is proper to explain 
that the proceedings noticed in the general letter to your Honourable Court, dated the 5th 
October 1826, appear to have borne reference to the conduct of Mr. Alan Campbell Dunlop, 
whereas the licence granted on the 28th of December 1821 was granted to another indi- 
vidual named Alan Colquhoun Dunlop. 
a Ue “ 7, Mr. Dunlop, 


GENERAL ‘APPENDIX. 399 Aprenois, 


‘ . . e . 

7. Mr. Dunlop, whose removal the magistrate of Dacca Jelalpore recommended in his ae 
letter of 18th July 1820, is represented in that letter as residing at that time in the district, (65.) Letter from 
under licence; and from the proceedings 8f the. annexed date, it appears that he (Mr. Alan oe of 

, Campbell Dunlop) obtained leave to reside in that district on the 26th March 1819, Bensél on tater- 

» Mr. Dunlop is reported to have returned to Europe in the year 1826. onl ue a ative 
8. We are sorry to find that the report called for from the acting magistrate of Dacca 8 September 1829. 

Jelalpore (Mr. T. D. Gordon) on the 1st December 1820, does not appear to have been 

furnished. 


9. In pursuance of the opinion expressed by your Monourable Court, we have directed 

the Nizamut Adawlut. to instruct the several magistrates and joint magistrates to submit to 

’ the commissioners of circuit, for their examination, eevery case of violent affray, attended 
with ageravating circumstances, in which the servants of an indigo factory may hereafter be 

- engaged, whether the European at the head of the establishment shall have been inglyded 
in the charge or not, and each of the commissioners has been desired to furnish a specific 
statement of such cases. ae te 


‘10. We beg leave to refer your Honourable Court to the documents noted in the margin, 
forwarded as separate numbers in the packct, for the information required in this paragraph. 
11. The provisions of Regulation VI. 1823, and the state of the law affecting engagements 
for the cultivation of indigo, have been lately under our consideration; and @ reference has 
been made to the Sudder Dewanny and Nizamut Adawlut on the subject, the result of 
which will be reported hereafter to your Honourable Court. 


12. In the mean time the magistrates and joint magistrates throughout ¢he provinces have 
been called upon to furnish, in a prescribed form, the details necessary to enable us to pre- 
pare the special report required by your Honourable Court in this paragraph. 


nr tanh een enena naneeenenantamtamteanttntinnstnesnweenscuensatnatinee Rlamynsstanse nt feneashvvthenrenennstethvreytntgataientunsntntntnnyenieesneehannnvaqsntnoensninninveannostuipathain 


(56.)—LETTER in the Judicial Department, from the Governor-general in Council , 6.) Letter from 


of Bengal, to the Court of Directors, dated 1st of June 1830. Government of 
Bengal, on Inter- P 
course with Native 
. Inhabitants - 
- To the Honourable the Court of Directors for Affairs of the Honourable the United 1 June 1830. 


Company of Merchants of England trading to the East Indies. 


Honourable Sirs, 
Para. 1. Our last despatch in this department was dated the 18th ultimo. , W.P. 


2. In the 12th paragraph of our letter of the 8th September 1829, we informed your 
Honourable Court that the magistrates and joint magistrates throughout the provinces 
had been called upon to furnish, in a prescribed form, the details necessary to enable us to 
prepare the special report of British subjects and other Europeans residing in the interior, 
or holding lands or factories for the cultivation or manufacture of indigo, required in the 
23d paragraph of your Honourable Court’s letter, dated the 6th August 1828. 


. 8. The information was called for en the date noted in the margin; but up to the month Criminal Consul- 
of December the returns had been only partially rendered; and, in pursuance of the tations, 24th March 
Governor-general’s Minute, recorded on the 16th of that month, further information was 1829, No. 48. 
called for from the local officers, and they, as well. as the commissioners of circuit and. 
the Nizamut Adawlut, were required to state their opinion, whether it is necessary, for the 
effectual subjection of the indigo planters and their servants to the control of law, that any 


further legislative provisions should be made in addition to those which alreadv exist. Th 
4. € 


APPENDIX, 


Settlement of 
7 Europeans in India. 


Appx. No. 60. 


400 APPENDIX ro REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


4, The returnsreceived conformably to the foregoing orders are entered separately: the 
first series, from No. 1 to No. 98, in reply to the orders of the 24th of March; the second, 
from No. 108 to No. 262, in reply to those of the 29th December. 


5. The whole are recorded on our proceedings of this date, and are herewith submitted _, 
as separate numbers in the packet, together with an Abstract Register, prepared in the 
secretary’s office, with reference to the last series of returns received from the magistrates 
and commissioners of the several divisions. Ci 


6. It will afford satisfaction to your Honourable Court to learn from those documents, 
that the local officers generally entertain a very favourable opinion of the character of the 
European planters. They are represented as kind in their treatment of the natives around 
them; and, with few exceptions, thee local officers do not consider any new enactments - 
necessary for their subjection to the control of law. 


Iqdhe Court of Nizamut Adawluteobserve, that “‘ the only measures calculated, in the 
judgment of the court, to secure the proposed object, would be either to enhance the 
powers conferred on the justices of the peace by section 105, of the 53d Geo. 3, c. 155, 
or to make it lawfuf for the Government to appoint commissioners for the trial of British 
subjects charged with affrays, from time to time as occasions may,arise for such proceed- 
ings. The court are, however, by no means prepared to advocate the expediency or 
nécessity of either of those measures. The instances which have been brought to the 
notice of this court, in which British subjects have been personally implicated in cases of 
affray of a serious nature, have been rare. For the suppression of minor offences of this 
description, the magistrate, in his capacity of justice of the peace, is already armed with 
sufficient powers,°while the establishment of any anomalous jurisdiction, authorized to 
inflict heavy penalties, without the intervention of trial by jury, would obviously be 
regarded with extreme jealousy, and be attended with many inconveniences,” ‘ 


8. Mr. Ross is of opinion, that British subjects residing out of Calcutta should be ren-. 
dered amenable to the criminal laws of the eountry enacted by the Government, in com- 
mon with the natives. He thinks, that, in the very few instances that would occur of 
Europeans being brought to trial, a jury, composed half of natives and half of Europeans 
or descendants of Europeans, might even now be assembled ; and that, were Europeans 
freely permitted to settle in the country, any difficulty in assembling a jury so composed 
that might at first be experienced, would soon cease to exist. The subject has engaged 
our serious attention, and we hope to be able to submit, in a very short time, the result of 
our deliberations, in concurrence with the judges of the Supreme Court, upon this very 
important question. — 


We have the honour to be, honourable Sirs, 


Your most faithful humble servants, 


(signed) W. Bentinck, 
_ W.B. Bay.ey. 
Fort William, 1st June 1830.’ C.T. MetcaLre. 


_| GENERAL APPENDIX. 401 Arrexnix, 


. 


(57.)--Extract of a LETTER in the J udicial “Department, from the Governor-general in (54.) Letter from 
Council at Bengal, to the Cow of Directors, dated 9th November 1830. Governinegt of 
a ; Bengal, on Inter- 
Para. 8. A mEMorIAL from the Indigo Planters of Jessore, and a representation from the course with Native 
» ‘house of Messrs. Alexander & Co. of Calcutta, are recorded on the annexed date*; these Inhabitanes ; 
documents have reference tp the Regulations in force relative to the cultivation of indigo, 9 November 1830. 
’ and the contracts between planter and ryot, which are represented by the above-mentioned * Criminal Consul- 
parties as not affording a just or sufficient protection to individuals engaged in the culture of tations, gth June 
indigo, and praying therefore for some legislative interference on their behalf. 18g0, Nos. 1 to 32 


9. Regulation VI. 1823, was.enacted with a view to support the indigo puauure in 

' their just interests in contracts with the cultivators who had received advances: adverting, 

however, to certain pomts noticed in the above documents, it appeared to us that some 

» further provisions might be necessary to accomplish*vhat was intended by the ena@#ment 

of 1823. We therefore transmitted the whole ‘of the papers to the Nizamut Adawlut, and 

directed the court to take the existing law relative to the transactions between indigo 

planters and ryots cultivating under engagements, into their consideration, and to report 

their sentiments on the propositions submitted m the application, and generally, on the best 
means of affording protection and security to the parties concerned. < 


10. Several other documents recorded on the same date, having reference to the ques- 
tion, were likewise forwarded to the Nizamut Adawlut. 


11. On the proceedings above referred to are likewise recorded several réports respecting 
the disturbed state of the district of Dacca Jelalpore, originating in thdigo transactions 
between rival factories. 


12. The registrar of the Court of Nizamut Adawlut submitted the several Minutes of 
the judges of the Sudder Dewanny Adawlut, with the draft of a Regulation prepared by 
‘Mr. Ross, in the provisions of which the coyrt concurred generally, though on the point 
of Europeans becoming landed proprietors the court declined giving any opinion. To 
these Minutes we beg to refer your Honnurable Court, as well as to the several documents 
connected with our proceedings of the date already specified, for the grounds on which we 
considered it advisable, after mature deliberation, to amend the provisions of Regula- 
tion VI, 1823, and provide more effectually for enforcing the execution of contracts 
relating to the cultivation and delivery of indigo plant, in pursuance of which purpose we 
passed Regulation V. of 1830, the usual number of copies of which were transmitted to 
your Honourable Court. : 


gy 


(58.)—LETTER from the Registrar to the Nizamut Adawlut, to the Secretary to (58.) Letter from 
ae Government, dated 3d April 1830. Nizamut Adawlut 
Si, to Government of 
I am desired by the Court of Nizamut Adawlut to acknowledge the receipt of your Bengal, on Inter 
letters, dated the 29th of December and 23d ultimo, with the extract enclosed in the former hick ie Native 
from a letter.from the Honourable the Court of Directors, under date the 6th of August .” Parkers 
1828, requesting the court’s opinion as to whether any further legislative provisions should id 
be made, in addition to those already existing, for the effectual subjection of indigo planters 
and their servants to the control of the law. , 


2. In reply, [ am directed to observe, that the only measures calculated, in the judgment 
of the court, to secure the proposed object, would be, either to enhance the power con- 
ferred on the justices of the peace by section 105, Act 58 Geo. 3, ¢c. 155, or to make it 
lawful for the Government to appoint commissioners for the trial of British subjects 
charged with affrays, from time to time as occasions may arise for such proceedings, = 

3 F 3. The 


APPENDIX, 


Settlement of 
Europeans in India. 


(59.) Mr. Ross’s 
Minute, on Inter- 
course with Native 
Inhabitants ; 

1 April 1830, 


APPENDIX to REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


402 


3. The court are, however, by n$,means prepared to advocate the expediency or neces- 
sity of either of these measures. The instances which have been brought to the notice of 
this court, in which British subjects have been pewonally implicated in cases of affray of 
a serious nature, have been rare. For the suppression of minor offences of this description - 
the magistrate, in his capacity of justice of the peace, is already armed with sufficient. 
powers ; while the establishment of any anomalous jurisdiction, authorized to inflict heavy 
penalties without the intervention of trial by jury, would obviously be regarded with 
extreme jealousy, and be attended with many inconveniences. . 

4, Mr. Ross directs me to submit, for the consideration of his Lordship in Council, the 
accompanying copy of a Minute, whith he has deemed it necessary to record on the pre- 
sent occasion. ' 

I am, &e. 


Fort William, 3d April 1830. (signed) W. H. MacnacutTen, Registrar. 


(59.)—MINUTE by Mr. Ross. 


In the remark contained in the 3d paragraph of this reply to the Judicial Secretary’s 
letter, viz. “that British subjects are rarely charged with the commission of serious affrays,” 
I entirely concur; and it should be added, that they are even more rarely charged with the 
commission of offences of any other kind. 1 am of opinion, however, that British subjects, 
residing out of Calcutta, should be rendered amenable to the criminal laws of the country 
enacted by the Government, in common with the natives. The tribunals appointed to 
administer those laws, if competent to administer them justly to the natives, and to 
Europeans not British subjects, must surely bg considered competent to administer them * 
also to British subjects. 


British subjects, choosing to reside within the jurisdiction of the country tribunals, 
could not object to being rendered amenable to them, on any other ground hen that of 
their d fective constitution or character; but that is an objection which might be urged 
against them with more reason by the natives, who cannot withdraw from their jurisdiction ; 
and it is one which, if well founded, may be and ought to be removed. i 

A British subject, brought’to trial for a serious offence before a court of circuit, might 
have the option of being tried by a jury; and indeed the same option might be allowed to 
natives, in cases in which a trial by jury might be deemed necessary to ensure the attain- 
ment of justice. 


In the very few instances that would occyy of Europeans being brought to trial, a jury, 
composed half of natives and half of Europeans or descendants of Europeans, might even 
now be assembled ; and were Europeans freely permitted to settle in the. country, any 
difficulty in assembling a jury so composed, that might at first be experienced, would soon 
cease to exist. , . 


Fort William, 1st April 1830. (signed) A. Ross, 


6 
a 


GENERAL APPENDIX. 403 


” jqrmnctanrovespugurvtinerers eters Sp SSUES a a RRS 


Tur following Srarem@nr is presented by the Secretary : . 


0.)\—STATEMENT of European Inpvico Pranrers in the several Districts of the Western 
and Lower Provinces; the number of Factories, and the extent of the Cultivation ; the number 
of Civil and Criminal Cases decided for and against them and their Servants, during the last 


Five Years; with Abstracts of the Opinions recorded by the Magistrates and Commissioners 
of Circuit, regarding the necessity of further Legislative Provisions for the effectual subjection 
of the Indigo Planters and their Servants to the control of Law. 


» NUMBER OF NUMBER OF 


a 
& 3 CIVIL CAUSES. CRIMINAL CAUSES. 
uel n 
q a : 
a 8 ; @ a 
a F 3 3 Bo 5% @ | 5.5 a fos 
33 o S 3 ao o 58 Q 
: ge 7 @ 3 8s s 3 BS 3 +} 
2 DISTRICTS. ar S a = ° 3 g an 3 $ 
° 5s 3 S 3 “5 2 B. sp 5 i's Bt 
- e o = a as 3 as 
io Sa, Last it es Sn 2 rn a 3 3:8 
nN re See Set roy PRA Ba vi} cs oOo . oD 3 
rr on r=) ° 2 3 3 g § a3 ) 2 & 
> ge | 8 8 2 |3es| 8 | 8 |B2e| B | Fe 
P ae] 3 3 2 |seel & | bS (BRP; BY 5S 
Q es 2 g § Sub 3 fn. | Bud 3 Sa 
za“ | 2 z e@ jAe=] & 1 Se [AF] & | S89 
1.] Seharunpore - - 7 = = 
e 
| Mozuffernugger - - = iy 
For and 
Against. 
Meerut - - 2 4 2 a 
Bolundshuhur - 3 55 37 -, 


a.| Agra 


RrMARKS :—~There are no indigo planters in Seharunpore and Mozuffernugger. 

The magistrate of Meerut is not of opinion that any new provisions are necessary for 
the control of planters and their servants. Unrestricted permission to Europeans to 
purchase lands, and to resort to the Upper Provinces, desirable ; the advantages are 
great and certain, and should not be foregone on account of an evil comparatively 
small and remediable. The rule prohibiting the civil courts from trying suits in which 
both parties are Europeans should be rescinded. The acting joint magistrate at 
Bolundshuhur has reason to believe that the transactions of the planters are conducted 
on fair and liberal principles. No new rules necessary ; trespass of cattle the chief 
cause of dispute between planters and the people. 

The Commissioner, when superintendant of police, never had occasion to bring the 
conduct of the planters to the notice of Government. The courts have sufficient power 
to control them and their servants. ‘The rule which prohibits the cognizance of suits 
between Europeans should be amended. : : 


~ +f 3 ]- -f- -[-  -] 507} .3 |- +] 13 | a9 | 2 


Allygbur -- =|” - = 2 ie = Aces ace 2 my fe 


Remarks :—The Statement fer Agra is imperfect, in consequence of the absence 
of the planters. The acting magistrate does not consider any further legislative pro- 
visions to be required ; the planters, finding or fancying summary redress hopeless by 
complaints to the courts, often take the law into their own hands; the character of 
the planters very good. The return from Allyghur has not been received ; the acting 
commissioner expresses himself to the same effect. 


3Fe2 al (continued) 


a 
APPENDIX, 
Vv. 
(6c.) Statement’ 
respecting,the 
Indige Planters. 


APPENDIX, 


V. 


Settlement of 
Europeans in India. 


404 APPENDIX ro REPORT gro SELECT COMMITTEE 


ame aerate ee . 
ae eR TST Ap SE A sO te SC A EEN cree re AREA 
: 5 4 T : 
3 NUMBER OF . NUMBER OF 
2 3° CIVIL CAUSES. | CRIMINAL CAUSES. 
3 A " 
ss g a i. 3 ms ‘¢ = boo Ss = 
. . <«f & $ a = Ban 5 3 5 
a DISTRICTS, ze | 3 2 £ ss i-e |g [22 £\3 
a eel 2 lal a | (8) Sees | oa es 
4 See | dee es Sf jse | & les | se 5 | 3s 
> oe) 8 8 = 2a). 2) eS Sal & 23 
5 3 5 2 wag 3 2B |USe 3 SB 
a Zz; 3 3 3 Zee) 3 Ee |ess] 3 Ss 
ro ae ae @ sce) 3 | SZ 3a] 8 | Bs 
aa Zz | Pa) f<) a 30 fas 5s aon a rs) 
Fb ean menan ee ra | | § 
’ Begahs. | For ard : , 
. e Against. “ 1g 
3. Futfuckabad 5 32,300 ; 1 o6 - -|{- ° | bor ana 1 - 
For and j - 
F Against. Against, ; 
‘My nporee - «| 13,000 | 12 - ete = 1 os - 
rm # 2 
Etawah x - | - = ra é = - a; a 


oe :—The acting magistrate of Furruckabad during the short time he has 
been in charge of the district, has had every reason to be satisfied with the conduct of 
the planters ; further provisions unnecessary. 

Altlfough no European planters reside in the Mynporee district, there are several 
factories situated in it. The transactions of the proprietors with the natives are fre- 
quently brought before the judge and magistrate, and from the knowledge of their 
characters so obtained, he is disposed to think favourably of them. 

In the joint magistrate’s division of Etawah there are no European planters. The 
Commissioner is of opinion “ That a faw in analogy to the Hindoo laws, of the general 
responsibility of the house and pagtnership, should render the indigo factory responsible 
for acts ad transactions directly or indirectly connected with it.” Indigo factories 
going to ruin from the failure of firms. Not apprised of any great improvement in cul- 
tivation, in manufactures, arts and sciences by the planters. (Qn the general scale, is 
inclined to believe that the character of indigo planters is not high. 


| | 


i ‘ 
: For and For and 
| Agaiust. Against. 
.| Moradabad -j-oo- 3 1 13,840] 50 |- -|- = 6 ~ a 


Nugeena 


* 


e 

REMARKS :—The magistrate of Moradabad does not conceive any further provisions 
requisite to control the European indigo planters and their servants. The number in - 
the district is small, and there is consequently little or no competition ; they are highly 
respectable and well conducted in their transactions with the natives 

‘In the northern division of the district (Nugeena) there are no planters. 

The Commissioner formed his opinion on what he knew of the planters in the district 
of Allyghur, where there were altogether 36 factories, and where he held the office of 
judge and magistrate for six years. He ome the laws, as they at present stand, 
sufficient for the control of the planters and their servants ; should be doing injustice 
to a highly respectable and industrious elass of men if he did not take this opportunity 
of publicly recording his opinion of the uniform good conduct, of the honourable and 
upright dealings, of the kind and conciliatory treatment of the natives, on the part of 
_the indigo planters with whom he has hitherto come in contact. Instances of miscon-_ 
duct of v very rare occurrence ; ‘that the country at large derives great benefit from the’ 
residence of respectable Europeans in the interior is proved beyond doubt, by the 
sh - 9 eagernesg 


‘GENERAL APPENDIX... ° 405 


j 4 ° ees 
= NUMBER OF NUMBER OF 
Ss 
& 3 CIVIL CAUSES. CRIMINAL CAUSES. 
3 3 - 
met < 2 : oa PRS Riana ORG 
se] 2) § = les 1 € |S tee | € TS 
: - of = ° 3s og 3 7° 58 g& 7c 
va DISTRICTS. ee s Ey 3 & “ ie 3 2 & | . 3 . 
NS ge] @ | 2 6 1.5 | 2 | eo] e } 2 | Be- 
a AE -: a , S ‘S pei sa Fy 3.2 
a ee ee te on “3 “7 ep —e a eo 3 
iS se | 5 S b gs 25 |_e2 g8 
~ 35 = 3 2 Zee +} toa |Bss z "eo 
6 ak 3 2 € ises| & £3 |sae| = E23 
, oo: ‘S 3. OF 3 v 
e = = 2 5 5 D905 & 2s } 353 3 ay 
a z z & 1as3/ a isd A alé 
heat acento _— | 
z * 
4.| Moradabad, &c.—continued. Begahs. 


eagerness with which the large zemindars apply to the planters to build factories on 
their estates. -Has’ found the lower classes of the natives better clothed, richer and 
more industrious in the neighbourhood of the factories than those at a distance from 
them ; cannot bring to his recollection a single instance of a native having suffered 
cruelty or eppression from an indigo planter. , 
e 
For and For and 
Against, Against. 
19,295} 8 |= -}* ={ 2 


5.| Bareilly - -|- 6 4 


Shajehanpore - 


if 
' 


| 
Pillibheet- —- - | 
Remarks :—The acting magistrate of Bareilly considers the statute-law sufficient. 
The planters are very well-behaved, int8lligent men, and anxious to avoid any cause of 
complaint or dispute. te , 
There are no European planters in the other division. The Commissioner has 
always found the existing powers conferred by Act of Parliament for controlling 
European indigo planters sufficient; but if the power of removal was withdrawn, it 
would be necessary to render them generally amenable to our courts. The character 
of the planters he has met with of late years has generally been respectable. - 


6.| North Bundlecund 


Cawnpore -[- - 6 | 32,850 | 385 gh |- - 
° 


Belah - 


Remarks :—There are no indigo planters in North Bundlecund, nor in the division 
of Belah. The magistrate of Cawnpore is not aware of the necessity of any new legis. 
lative enactment for the control of the planters and their servants, and his opinion of 
them generally. is decidedly favourable. 

The Commissioner is digposed to bear favourable testimony to the general conduct 
of the planters. They probably imagine, he observes, “ that in taking a farm of 
a zemindar, they have a right té compel the cultivators of every description to sow 
indigo seed, concluding the record proprietor of the estate to be the absolute owner 
thereof, and that they have succeeded to his right. Those who refuse to sow indigo 
seed are deprived of their fields which have been cultivated by their families for 
generations. Such practices however are not allowed to pass unnoticed by the local 
authorities; and he considers the laws sufficient to restrain them.” 


(continued) - 


APPENDIX, 


(60.) Statement 
respecting the 
Indigo Planters. 


APPENDIX; 


Settlement of 
Europeans in India. 


to REPORT 


APPENDIX 


406 rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


a : ; 
‘4 °e NUMBER OF NUMBER OF 
2 2 CIVIL CAUSES. CRIMINAL CAUSES. 
t)) = ; = : . 
eae a : F : 
‘ 206 a f-] 2 te te i= =, te r=] ‘Ss 
“ go £3) g ea 3s 5 5.8 
2 | DISTRICTS, ae) 3 | ¢ |¢2 | 2]3 |32 | 2 /¢ 
° = > 3 2 = &u of 9 an Sim ~ So 
4 Ej ° 3 wD 
2 me ee 3 2S 3 ® {est jes. *S a 
bee os 3 S 23 a oo 22 3 o 9 
> «2 ie o > 8g 2 a, aa 2 oe 
93 oS my = Ses a ° S88 = a) 
= ; Ba 3 4 S |she] 3 Fu [/sREb| 3 tg 
A 5u& | & 5 S$ (Bsa; 8 | 25 [ssa} 8 | ss 
a a 4 <4 A a ° A A ° 
Begahs, 
7. South Bundlecund - - 1 2 = a ae 
Futtehpore = 68,000 | 58 tf- -{ 13 = 
Allahabad - 23,217 4 wie - 6 = 


Remarxs.—There are no Europeans actually residing in South Bundlecund. The 
acting magistrate of Futtehpore does not consider any further legislative provisions to 
be necessary; has an excellent opinion of the behaviour of the indigo factors in his 
district in regard to their treatment of the natives around them ;' considers the pre- 
sence of indigo factories to be an advantage to the district. 


The acting magistrate of Allahabad expresses similar sentiments. 
The Commissioner is not of opiniop that any new laws are required for the control 
of the planters and their servants. 


e 


. | Forand For and ; 
: : | Against. Against. 
8.| Benares +  -/- ~+{ 15 9g | 16,297} 68 | - - -| 83 -~{ - 


t 


Forand For and 
Against. Against. 


Mirzapore - 5 19800 | 17 [= -|+ =| 22 


Juanpore- +] 6 4%522 | 34 |- - f= -1 54 


+ 


i ‘ ‘ e 


Remarxs.—The magistrate of Benares does not think any additional penal enactments 

: called. for, but that it would be desirable to cause all planters or individuals in charge. 
of factories to register the names of their chief native agents, jemadars and chuprassees 

in their employ, in order that the magistrate might be able,-when necessary,.to call 

‘on some acknowledged and avowed servant? belonging to the factory, in case of 
complaints. Suggests that indigo crops should be liable to attachment in the event of 

. , the malgoozar, or person liable to government or to a civil court for the amount of the 
revenue, instituting a suit for the rent or balance due for the current year. Has 

‘tio reason to’ believe that the transactions of planters are not fair and creditable 

*, towards all parties; does not believe that.any numerical increase of European resi- 
~”. dents occupied in agricultural pursuits would be beneficial.to the natives in his neigh- 
» bourhood ; 


GENERAL APPENDIX. 407 APPENDIX, 


NUMBER OF NUMBER OF 


a 
4 
< S 
& g CIVIL CAUSES. CRIMINAL causes, 60.) Statement 
3 3 respecting the 
Pe PA <s 3 ee ¢ “f a ¢ 3 Indigo Pidtters. 
Be hee eg € i383 | 2[3 {22 | 213 
; , 5 e 4B <= /%3 $a a] 
Zz DISTRICTS. ee 8 a 3 go s 2 le- Pe 2 
= og ae 3 ee Suse 2 | Be jos 2 | Bs 
Se fm es = 25 a = 28 
2) Set Se 5S j|se_.| & | = lee 3, | 22 
m ea eae ee eee Tees] Seg 
> 58 o 3 £ Tse] 3 ea /38s) B | ee 
m 2 2 2 g Zope 2 5a | eae a4 ov 
a 2a, 3 5 Z 258) 8 | Ss 183d} 2 | Zs 
Zz a Z g 1A ais a aA 16 


8. Benares, &c.—continued. 


bourhood ; the price of labour operates against the introduction of machinery, and the 
European capitalist would find difficulty in procuring a remunerating and safe return, 
should he be disposed to embark in speculation. 


The magistrate of ‘Mirzapore will submit the return hereafter. 


Reports that the indigo planters in his district conduct themselves with propriety, 
there are but few complaints against them; has not heard that their treatment of the 
natives is in any way oppressive. No further legislative enactments required for. the 
control of the planters ; would suggest the expediency of their being allowed to hold 
lands in their own name; the rules lately enacted to that effect are of no avail, they 
are encumbered with such restrictions as to render them nugatory. 


The magistrate of Juanpore does not think any further provisions are required; the 
planters in his district are respected and trusted by the natives, and are just and 
equitable towards them; they are of the greatest possible benefit to the district, 
giving employment to thousands; if the capital put in circulation by them were 
withdrawn, crimes would greatly increase. -In the opinion of the Commissioner, 
no further legislative provisions are ne€essary ; is not able to speak to the character 
of the planters. 


. 


Begahs. 
9. Goruckpore -|{- - 9 3 9,200 | ° = - - ~ _. - 
Azimghar + - 2 22 5 12,900 | 21 5 |- -{ 50 6 - 
For and] - 
Against. ; 
‘Ghazeepore -| 8 | 35 6 | 21,645 | 297 | 18 |- -| 59 es es 


Remarxs.—The magistrate of Goruckpore observes, that the character of the 
planters is shown by there not having been any complaints against them. 


The joint magistrate of Azimghur does not think any additional legal provisions 
necessary ; is inclined to view the conduct and character of: the planters in a favoure 
able light. 


The magistrate of Ghazeepore expresses himself to the same effect. 


- The Commissioner says, *<¢ in fourteen years’ experience in Ghazeepore and Goruck- 
pore, I have never had reason to consider the British indigo planters in any other 
light than as a great benefit: to the people, in expending much capital among them,- 
raising the value of Jand and labour, and accommodating ‘them in their. necessities on 
much more liberal terms than they could obtain from any other quarter.” Advocates 
a permission to Europeans'to hold lands openly; does not Gander any further legal 
provisions to be required for the control of the planters and their servants. 

(continued ) 


ry 


APPENDIX, 


a 


Settlement of 
Europeans in India, 


APPENDIX ro REPORT.-rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


4 : 
se -e NUMBER OF NUMBER OF 
3 z . CIVIL CAUSES. CRIMINAL CAUSES. 
- Pay ee aad 2 te | ge | 3 
: s 3 a 3 ag s | 2 a5 & = 
Zz DISTRICTS. ES e 2 £ oe eg ce 4 | 3% 
co) 2 = S Bi fi ae 2 & 5 3 
s a Ee} ° a a yt. n A 
a a al a nd af ‘3 5 2. ct 2 3 2 2 
“ a ee S res) 2 jess |* Sul Fi ee 
is ge 5 % > jvpbe] 3s | 28 | oee] a ae 
- 43 a) 2 3 Sue 3 zo | ge ¢ 3 Ey 
a 2a, g a $ jess) 3 | BV lecsl 2° 
s s s s ooR ou 5+ Se 2 3 foc 5 
4 a Ze e a a O29 [OEP A ih ca BS 
10} Sarun - - -| 13 19 12 | 34,843 | 55 |- -]- -} 118 4 = 
e For aud For and 
r Agaiust. “| Against, 
Shahabad - - 1 13 8 14,910 | 21 }- -{- +] 20 - - 
Tirhoot - = 5 48 43 [121,900 |- -|- -|- °- | go2 38 ~ 


Remarks.—The magistrate of Sarun has found the laws in force fully sufficient 
for controlling the indigo planters and their servants, in the very few cases that have 
come before him in the last four years. The character of the former stands very high 
in general estimation for liberal and kind treatment of the natives, and for their 
peaceable and neighbourly conduct towards one another. .They prefer adjusting 
their disputes privately to bringing them into court. 

The magistrate of Shahabad also thinks any further legal provisions unnecessary. 
The planters are always ready to abide by the awards of the court, and most obedient 
to the constituted authorities. : 

The acting magistrate of Tirhgot states, that the existing provisions for the subjec- 
tion of the European indigo planters are quite sufficient, and their native servants are 
under the same control as any other natives. The character of the planters is in 
favourable estimation with the natives in general, and their conduct fair and consi- 
derate ;' attributes the origin of most of the disputes that occur, to the native servants. 
The acting magistrate explains the nature of the transactions between the indigo 
planters and natives in this district, and concludes by suggesting some provisions 
which he has reason to know would be acceptable to both parties. 

Regulation VI. of 1823 (extended to ‘lirhoot by Regulation V. 1824) is insuf- 
ficient, and never acted upon. ' 

Proposes that a malik or ryot wilfully failing in his contract should be punished for 
a misdemeanor, as in Regulation VII. 1819, and the planter punishable by fine for mal- 
treatment or non-payment of rent’ Eighteen lacs of rupees expended annually in this 
district, chiefly in the rent of land and wages of labour; and it cannot be doubted 
that the introduction of so much capital by Europeans is of considerable benefit both 
to the people and the Government. Thinks it advisable that Europeans should be 


a allowed to hold lands. 
N\ ? } 
| Begahs, | For and [ : ' For and \ 
; 2 ' |Against. ‘Against.’ 

31’ Pama . “le - 1 1 1,000 | Ye l- cle - 0) - - 
Behar -_ =| - 6 4 800°} a2 -}- -/- - 7 ~ ~ 
tamghur - - - o = ~ = = es a - ~ 

is oa : 


4 


* 


Remarks.—The Commissioner has been only a few days in charge of the office. 
; The 


ra 


pa 


GENERAL APPENDIX. | 4og 


3 e 
s r= _ NUMBER OF NUMBER OF" 
= a CIVIL CAUSES, CRIMINAL CAUSES. 
a . 
Ss s ana 
mE < s : at : ut 
ge 3 g 2 55 8 3 5.8 ‘é 3 
: o.8 2 o s of = a] on a Ss 
2 DISTRICTS. Be = Qa = bs = 2 5s vat @ 
te ° Oo ° =i & ~~ eS & Pod 
® ao 2 tA = te 2 Qo. pg g 
3S 3 3 3 ° & & sb 2 a * ob 
Lads G Ro & fo] oO Sa “3 2g 22 4 2 
wR se x i on ie PN Vig FO So Us 
» oF 3 oS ° 3 3 3s Qa es os ee 
= se] 8 $ 2 (ERs) 3 | Fe (see] B | es 
a oe 3 qe j|See} B | se [eee] B | gs 
A ee 8 3 3 esa 8 23 /8s3| 8 25 
a Se . A ° A A °o 


11) Patna, &c—.continued. 


The district of Patna is stated not to bean indigo district, and no information is 
afforded. F 

The acting magistrate of Behar is not aware that any further legislative enactments 
are necessary for controlling the planters and their servants; has had little experience 
in the distrfct ; complaints against them very rare. 


The native gentlemen whom he has consulted “ express themselves without reserve, 
that to the best of their belief they know nothing to the prejudice or disparagement 
of the indigo planters established in this district, and that in their general dealings 
with and treatment of the natives around them, no pzrt of their conduct has been 
found reprehensible; but on the contrary they think well of them as honourable and 
‘upright men, and believe them to be well spoken of by the majority of the people with 
whom they are in any way concerned.” 


Is favourable to the admission of Europeans into the interior, and to their being 
allowed to hold lands. 7 
There are no European planters’ in Ramghur. 


The Commissioner observes that thee are few planters in the division, and that no 
new laws appear to be required. 


4 
\ 


For and For and 
Against. . ‘J Against. : 
12| Bhaugulpore - - -{| 32 { 11 | 69,191 | 48 | - -]- -] 18 - - 
\ For and fi For and 
Against. Against. 
Monghyr - = 5 17 7 | 26550} 86 |- -}- +] gg fo - - 
e 
Maldah_ - - 3 1. 24 7 | 70,797/ 19 |- -]- =~ 4 1 (- 
For and For and 
Against. Against. 


Purneah - - 8 65 12 {131,436 | 314 | - 42 - - 


APPENDIX, 
(60.) Statement 
respecting the 
Indigo Pl&hters. 


Remarxs.—The acting magistrate of Bhaugulpore was prevented from filling up 


the form, as the indigo planters were absent from the district. No further legislative 
enactments are necessary.. The planters bear the highest character; their transac- 
tions with the natives are’ conducted with fairness and justice, and they treat them 
with due consideration and kindness; has every reason to believe that they are 
very much respected by the inhabitants of the district. The magistrate has subse- 
quently submitted the list of planters, &c. in the form required. In Monghyr, the 
* planters are stated to be, generally speaking, exceedingly peaceable. The joint magis- 
trate thinks it would be desirable to restrain the erection of other factories within 
a certain distance of those which are already established, and to enact that the he 
actory 


“4 


APPENDIx, 


Settlement of 
luropeans in India. 


410 APPENDIX ro REPORT from SELECT COMMITTEE. 


RS a AS ESTAS SD SP FIT SE AA EASA SO LP A IAS TES EOL 


| Divsoirvar, 


12] Bhaugulpore, &c.—continued. 


DISTRICTS. 


3 : 
: eB NUMBER OF . NUMBER OF 
° 4 
: BP 3 CIVIL CAUSES. CRIMINAL CAUSES. 
2. : ie : 
eae 2 a . 
= ton 
es 1g F 2 12s | 2 | 88 g |‘ 
S ~~ 
ue 2 3 $ 8s -& 3 $a 4 3 
se) $ ay 2 |e 3 | 38. ([& 2 | Bo 
sD - =x) 2 3 te a a. i wn 2 
2S $ i=} ° S 3) 
5 x 3 oO Amt a tO a a 
iss me al Ea g s.E | oo S 28 
= te fue = 7 i bo 3 Beg ao | 
2 . os vu 
o8 5 Foy x. £3 <3 $§ wnt oC ges 
b. — o wm 
Se 3 by] 2 ZEas ° zea [oas 2 Bm 
ij && 2 ae} = ssjJoré cs Eo Cr > S & Y 
Es 8 a a BME SG ST Peel go 
ss) 3] 3 £ |/gsa| & | ss |gsa| 2 | gs 
a a 2 [<4 Aa = ° Qa a ne) 
j i as 
| Begahs. . 


factory had the primary right of taking an engagement from the cultivator, provided 
the manager agreed to the samie terms that were offered by the neighbouring planter. 
This would not preclude a fair competition, as regarded the ryot, and at the same 
time it would define the right as regarded the planter. ’ 


The joint magistrate at Maldah is of opinion that no new legal provisions are neces- 
sary for the control of the planters and their servants. 


Provisions of Regulation VI. 1823, insufficient. The most frequent cause of dispute 
is, the ryot after receiving advances, refusing to cultivate ; a clause required to compel 
thenf, under a heavy penalty recoverable by a summary process; also, to prevent the 
erection of new factories within a certain distafce of cach other. 


The planters bear a good character, and in their transactions with and treatment of 
the natives, generally conduct themselves with propriety and moderation ; complaints 
against them very rare. 


The returns for Purneah wege at first delayed on account of the absence of some of 
the planters. In his letter of the 5th April he expresses a favourable opinion of the 
planters ; the statement submitted from this district includes the names of servants, 
foreigners and persons born in the country, which are omitted in this register ; but it 
has not been practicable to distinguish the number of civil and criminal suits in which 
they may have been engaged. 


’ 


The Commissioner mentions a case of serious affray in the Maldah division, between 
the dependents of two factories, one belonging to an European and the other to an 
Indo-Briton, in which several persons were killed and wounded. The people of the 
latter are stated to have been the aggressors. Does not consider any new laws neces- 
sary; on the conttary, in so very extended a line of country, it will be found that the 
conduct of the European planters has been quiet and peaceable; and in many 


’ instances the magistrates avail themselves of the local information which they are able 


to give, and on which dependence may be placed, respecting the perpetration of 


_ offences not made known by the zemindars and the police officers. 


13 Dinagepore ej" - 3 2 821 .[ = - - ~ - - 
Ruiigpore- —- ~ a - e“ ss “ = = & 
' | Rajshahye - - = « a - - = ~ ~ - 
Pubnah & 1g | gg | 38 |169,347}- -[- -|- -]tt4 | 182 a 


e 


DIVISIOX. 


13| Dinagepore, &c.—continued. 


DISTRICTS. 


GENERAL APPENDIX. Ail’ 


Remarks.—The magistrate of Dinagepore states, that the planters in his Mstrict 
bear exemplary charactets, and he has therefore nothing to suggest for their better 


* government. 


The magistrate of Rungpore does not think any additional penal rules necessary for 


‘controlling the planters. Ryots wilfully evading their engagements should be punished 


for a misdemeanor ; rules to compel cultivation not desirable, as they would endanger 
the rights of third parties ; bargains between planter and ryot are usurious, and the 
advantage almost all on the side of the planter. 


In the treatment of the natives, illegal acts are committed, but these are not confined 
to Europeans ; notwithstanding the clamour raised against indigo planters, the records 
of the criminal courts prove, that from the same causes the same effects arise amongst 
the native population; the native merchant, equally with the indigo planter, has 
recourse to the illegal restraint of his debtor. 


The magistrate of Rajshahye Aas called on the planters to supply the details 


_ required, and will report hereafter. 2 


The joint magistrate of Pubnah is of opinion that further legislative provisions are 
necessary ; that the judges have not leisure to give immediate attention to the enforce- 
ment of Regulation VI. 1823; that the planters are frequently guilty of acts of vio- 
lence towards the ryots, in. compelling them to receive advances and cultivate their 
lands with indigo ; still the character of the planters is much improved of late years, 


-and by their assistance the ryots are in some measure able to protect themselves 


against the oppression’ °f the zemindars and mahajurs. Thinks that the magistrates 
should have power to decide on disputes regarding the possession of farms and lands 
held by planters in the names of their servants. 


’ 


The acting magistrate of Bhagoora, owing to the short time he has been in charge 
of the office, has had no opportunity of judging of the character of the European 
planters. 


The Commissioner of the division does not conceive any further legislative provi- 
sions to be necessary; instances are very rare of contumacy or disobedience of 
orders ; can speak most favourably of the planters residing in Dinagepore and Rung- 
pore ; not so well informed of those in Rajshahye, including the Pubnah joint magis- 
tracy with its Jessore thannahs. The number of planters ‘in the latter district is very 
great, and the magistratesghave occasion sometimes to interpose their authority be- 
tween them and the natives. Since he took charge of the division 10 months ago, only 
one case has been serious enouglt to render his decision necessary ; that the natives 
were most unquestionably to blame. 


The natives with whom he has conversed on the subject, have invariably expressed: 


.4 strong dislike to indigo factories, and he has always found a prejudice to be enter- 


tained by them against European speculators residing in the interior. 
. . 3G2 (continued) 


’ 


APPENDIX, | 


owceee 


= Indigo Plarfers. 


i e 
2 NUMBER OF NUMBER OF 
3 ; (6c,) Statement 
2) ‘ 3B CIVIL CAUSES. CRIMINAL CAUSES., A 
3 a . respecting the 
As < 8 : of : 
3 s 2 bb Mk 
ge] 218] 2 |88 | § |e |22 | 2 18 
ae 3 = 87 s g on ent 4 
os 2 2 = ee : oO. — : oe 
Bo $ 5 5 9 q &. do r} a 2. 80 
ac ior i] gp “S 2 8 7 ‘3 28 
saris | & Ss IS.| 8 | Sf (78a). & | 3 
oy ro) 3 a 2a a 
sS-] § | -k 2 |323| 3 | eR (S3s| 3 | Fe 
28 3 2 = sh 3 zn tre s a) 
23 8 a € {ocsl 3 ee beergl os a 
5a s S 3 5h Oo: = os RB 2 os 
ig Z Zz oe {Aa a | 6? ta ajo 


APPENDIX, 412 AW PEN DIX to REPORT From SELECT COMMITTEE. 

. a ne a aE ial 
| NUMBER OF NUMBER OF: 

CIVIL CAUSES. CRIMINAL CAUSES. 


Settlement of 
Europeans in India. 


favour 
Decided against them. 
eo 


~ 
ry 


DISTRICTS. 


ar 


of European Assistants. 


> 


of Planters or their 


Servants. 
or depending, 
Servants. 
or depending, 


Number of European Indigo 
Planters. ; 


Number of Factories. 
Nomber 
Quantity of Cultivation. 
Decided iu 
of Planters or their 
Otherwise disposed of, 
Decided in favour 
Decided against them. 
Otherwise disposed of, 


| DIVISION. 


| 


Begahs. | For and For and 
Against. - J. Against. 


16, | 129,966 | 80 {- - 18 me 


14 Mogrshedabad ~[- - 


Beerbhoon -] 1 - -| 15,195] 12 J+ -~[- =] 2 a 


Nuddea - -]| 1g 18 | 159,517 | 66 | 166 | - |} 1393 | 312 - 


RemaRKs.—The magistrate of Moorshedabad is impressed with a favourable opinion 
of the character and conduct of the planters of his district. Some of the planters are 
stated to have neglected to furnish the information required from them. Mr, Magniac 
has omitted to state that Mr. P. Trazenant, the person mentioned in his letter as an 
exception to the favourable opinion given of the planters, is an American. , 


__ The magistrate of Beerbhoom reports, that the only European proprietor of indigo 
factories quitted that district, since which his establishments have been managed by .- 
his son, a native of India ; cannot spéak from actual experience, of the efficiency of 
the laws to control European ee at A law embracing both European and native 
planters might be of use, prohibiting one planter from wilfully advancing for indigo 
cultivation to a ryot previously engaged by another, and making the same punishable 

' as a misdemeanor both im. the aggressing planter and ryot; limiting the distance 
between factories would be still more effectual. ‘The magistrate adds, “ As to Bri- 
tish subjects (if the question extends to them), the law as it at present stands must 
always be weak, and I presume inefficient. 


‘* From the redress obtainable by a civil action, where both parties are British, they 
are virtually precluded by the distance, throughout the greatest part of India, of the 
court to which alone they can resort ; it is not to be wondered at, therefore, if on such 

, occasions seif-interegt should appeal to violence for satisfaction. 


“ On the ground of criminal lawthey stand at too great advantage, as regards other 
Europeans and the natives of the country ; with every facility for bringing to punish- 
' ment those who may have forcibly molested them, as aggressors in aggravated cases 
they are amenable only to a tribunal, the general distance from, and consequent 
inconvenience of attending which, would be sufficient in many cases to deter the 
injured from prosecuting them to effectual conviction; over delinquents of this nature 
the local. authorities can exercise only diminished control, and if they were frequently 
to be found, the evil would be severely felt; but as I have before stated, my own - 
experience furnishes me with no instance of outrage either on the part of British or 
European manufacturers.” 
_ The magistrate of Nuddea thinks that. many more legislative provisions might be 
, Made in addition to those which already exist, relative to the more effectual subjection 
of,indigo planters and their servants.to the control of the law. : 


1. The planters should be held responsible for the appearance of their servants when 
required, in failure of which they should be declared liable to a heavy fine. 


2. That 


DIVISION. . 


15) Mymensing 


DISTRICTS. 


14] Moorshedabad, &c.— continued. 


GENERAL APPENDIX. . 413 


g4- yUMBER OF NUMBER OF 
& 3 CIVIL CAUSES. ~ | CRIMINAL CAUSES, 
3 3 2 SS 
oe a 2 o =| — fe bet 4 < 
gei2)]21{1 2 [88 | €13 [88 | 8 13 
23/61; 2] € |g2 | 2]E [85 | 213 
Pei} @] £1 3 |@s | #]éel*s | 3 | gs 
= one = 4 = 5 
suds | 3 | = jess] & | Seel78.) & | 33 
A ~ — 4 a 
ss} 8 | & 2 (B53) 3 | #2 lees] B | Fe 
25 2 a 3 SHE oo] 2 jones Bs} 59 
ea) 3 | 8 es |3s8| 8 | 23 |#sd) @ | 25 
z z Z oe |ms") 616% 448 a |6 
. - ae emammeaamd 
Begahs. 
2. That they should furnish the magistrat® with lists of their servants. * 


3. That they should be made answerable for the misconduct of their servants. 


4. That magistrates or justices of the peace should be empowered to punish planters 
for non-compliance with such ruJes as might be enacted for the above purposes. 


Considers the general character of the European planters, in regard to their personal 
dealings and transactions with the natives, to be fair and upright, and their treatment 
of them kind and conciliating ; but much oppression and extortion are practised by their 
servants; mentions four cases of affray which have occurred in his district in the last 
five years, wherein European planters have been implicated; thinks that Europeans 
ought always to be prosecuted for such offences in the supreme*court, when there is 
a probability of their being convicted. The provisions of Regulation VI. 1823, are 
seldom or ever resorted to ; suggests that planters should be put in possession of land 
engaged to be cultivated, when the ryot refuses to fulfil his engagement to cultivate. 


The Commissioner is of opinion that for the effectual subjection of the indigo plan- 
ters to the control of the law, they should be made amenable to the criminal courts 
in the mofussil, for all offences excepy¥ng such as would render them liable on con- 
viction to suffer death, or to be transported ; if this were done, the affrays which now 
so frequently occur in some districts between the servants and dependents of neigh- 
bouring indigo planters would be much less common, if not entirely put a stop to. 


Is disposed to judge favourably of the general character of the European indigo 
‘planters residing within the division, ; 


Q w | For and] ° For and 

; Against. Against. 
Sherepore- -/- -! 3 2 43971 2 |-° ele -] 7 = 2 

bd For and 

: Aguinst. 
Tipperah - = - | 7 7 |- =] 19,200} - “-f- -1- ~] at - - 
Dacca Jelalpore | - -| 74 38 |122,151 | 68 | 2 |- ~{ 239 | 405 ~ 
Dacca - -{- +] .10 | 11 | 34,392 rye -f2o-fou 20, = 


. 
Remarxs.—The return from Mymensing has not yet been received. 
The magistrate of Tipperah thinks that some enactment is required to prevent 
‘one factory from being built within a certain distance of another; as too close 


@ proximity, instead of producing useful competition, is the source of contention, ill 
will, and bloodshed. ; T 
he 


APPENDIX, 


(60.) Statement 
respecting the 
Indigo Planters. 


ee 434 APPENDIX to REPORT From SELECT COMMITTEE. 


ag eM aE & NUMBER OF NUMBER OF 
ere EG OF ow & z : CIVIL CAUSES. | CRIMINAL CAUSES. 
Eurepeansin India. 3 3 4 
a 5 5 
gf ‘ g 2. & dad is Se a | 3 
; gg} 2} 3 2 (82 | 2 ]s [EB | 2 Is 
z DISTRICTS. oe. 3 = 3 & - = 3 & is = 3 r 
= i a ee 8 |.3 | 2 | #2122 | 2 | Be 
m2 el & | 8 ~ tae ® |e jee | & | 38 
= S ra ‘S 3 e -S., bd 2a 2u r=) ee 
“_— 35 s & = Bag 3 aR }Uae =) 22 
=|: ze] 212 3 [2881 2 | 88 |S8—| € | be 
: x 2 Su. oS 
: Ze | 2 | 21-6 [ac8| & | 5% (d4] 2 | 85 


15 Mymensing, &c.—continued. 


The joint magistrate at Slferepore (which forms part of the first-mentioned (district) 
thinks the present legislative provisions sufficiently effective for the subjection of the 
indigo planters and their assistants; has the highest opinion of both the European 
planters in his division; their influence often successfully exerted in settling petty 
disputes in an amicable way—a proof of the estimation in whéch they are held. 

The magistrate of Dacca Jelalpore states that the European indigo planters residing 
in this district are generally a very respectable body of men, and seem inclined, from 
ae of policy as well-as of humanity, to treat the natives round them with 
kindness. oo = 

The price of indigo induces the planters to make advances to any ryots who will 
take them; great temptation to men of little or no principle to take advances for the 
same portion of ground from as many planters as they can. Consequently, at the 
cutting and sowing seasons complaints are frequent, and sometimes serious breaches 
of the peace occur. Advances sometimes forced on the ryots, and similar oppressions 
committed, for the purpose of obtaining the plant. These, however, are generally to 
be imputed either. to the zeal or rascdlity of the native servants of the factory. No 
further legislative provisions necessary for the subjection of the planters. Submits the 
following suggestions : 

ist. That ryots taking double advances for the same piece of ground ; 2d. That per-~ 
sons knowingly making advances for ground already advanced for; 3d. That ryots 
refusing or neglecting to fulfil their engagements, without good and sufficient cause ;— 
sliould in each case be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and punished accordingly. 

Upon the whole, is of opinion that the residence of Europeans in the district has 
been of the greatest advantage to the inhabitants, The comforts of all classes have 
been increased, from the large capital circulated; the zemindars’ rents have been 
realized with greater facility; and the immense tracts of jungle that overspread this 
district, before the cultivation of indigo was introduced, have totally disappeared. 

The magistrate of Dacca has entered very fully into the subject of indigo cultiva- 
tion. He has been led to form, upon the whole, rather a favourable opinion of the 
general character of indigo planters, in regard to their transactions and treatment of 
the natives round them. Among so numerous a class, instances of oppression, and 
a resort to brute furce for the accomplishment of their views, have in some cases 
originated with the Europeans themselves, but in most instances they are the tools of 
interested landholders or their own servants. ‘ That-some of the planters are held in 
much estimation by the natives; that they are constantly applied to, to arbitrate dis- 
putes between relatives or neighbours; that they are the frequent dispensers of medi- 

7 cine to the sick, of advice to those in difficulty, of pecuniary aid to those in need, on 
the occasion of family events which would involve them for life with native money- 

_ lenders; and that their never-failing acquiescence in the wants and wishes of their poor 

. . neighbours has thus tended in some measure to exalt the British name and character— 

! 1 ean vouch from my own knowledge of the facts; nor need I remark how very much 
-.the prosperity and happiness of our native subjects would be increased by the resi- 
dence of European gentlemen among them, were such a description applicable to 


After 


+ 


a large proportion,” 


GENERAL. APPENDIX. | 415 


DIVISION. 


15| Mymensing, &c.—continued, 


+ 


DISTRICTS... 


+ 


a . 
3 NUMBER OF NUMBER OF 
: & a CIVIL CAUSES. CRIMINAL CAUSES. 
E 4 
mg ¢ : < a a 
es 3 g 3 Jes g ‘S gb € |% 
83 2 § re =8. = 3 52 3 so . 
oe S 2 a Eid = g as 2 e 
ae B34 = Soe a4 © eb- bk : 2 og 
Sa ae a ae 3 5 | El epics Zz 1 Se 
Bea Ge i) S 2 “Ss 3 a4 ‘s 33 
se ‘S S ¢ “3 2 os |" 23 2 o 3 
25 S - Pa ee 2 Oe §3 2m 
t ee - WBE cc ‘Ss © SEa 3 Q 
og S 2 S on £ 3 2 os ¢ o BS 
ea| 2 2 S (soe tee pera) et ee 
BES E g s goa; 8 | £5 | Bsa; Bg | es 
a Zz z e Ae | A fo) A A o) 


After explaining the system, and stating” the difficulties and grievances whith each 
party complains of, whether planter, zemindar or ryot, the magistrate concludes his 
remarks by suggesting various rules for the protection of the rights and interests of all 
the parties concerned. _ 

Mr. Wakters is adverse to restrictions on the erection of factories, and to any in- 
terference with open and free competition, but would enforce engagements voluntayily 
entered into between planters for fixing’a boundary line between their respective fac- 
tories; is inclined to think that the provisions contained in Regulation VI. 1823, 
although seldom resorted to, afford the planter all the remedy that can be safely 
granted for compelling the ryots to fulfil their engagements. 

Amongst the grievances complained of by the zemindars, the most important, 
Mr. Walters says, is the difficulty they experience in not being allowed quietly to erect 
factories on their own estates, in consequence of the arts used, and the open violence 
oo unfrequently resorted to by their European neighbours to suppress all competition 
of the kind. 

ad. That if a zemindar refuses fo accede to the terms of the planter, he frequently 
obtains a pottah for their lands for somg other claimant. 

3d. That the pottahs taken do not specify the quantity or boundaries of the lands; 
and, consequently, possession is taken- of any Jands which may best suit the planter ; 
and that they experience difficulty in obtaining their rents from the planters. 

The greatest evil of which the ryots complain, is the almost utter impracticability of 
being able to free themselves, should they once have the misfortune to receive indigo 
advances, either by their own free-will or by compulsion. : 

2d. That their cattle is constantly pounded by the planter; on the plea of their straying 
among the indigo, and the cattle not being released except on payment of fine. 

gd. That they are compelled by threats and ill usage to enter into indigo engage- 
ments; that more land is -taken by the factory servants than that contracted for, 
being obliged to execute engagements with one factory after having engaged to give 
it to another; and although having*no concern with any factory, still having: their 
lands forcibly ‘sown; without any pretence or colour of right. 

Under the head of evils of a general nature, Mr. Walters instances the custom of 
entertaining, at European and native: factories, bands of armed men, often of bad 
character ; also the system of holding lands in the names of their servants, by whiclt 
the European planters are subject to no tangible responsibility. 


The following is an abstract of the remedies which Mr. Walters suggests for the 
evils set forth in his report: . ae 

1. That Europeans permitted to hold lands should be required to hold them 
in their own names, and should be required to deposit a list of them, and of such as 
are now held in the names of their servants, in the zillah court, 

2. That they should be required t6 enter ‘into a-bond to submit to all awards of 
the local authorities in matters touching such lands. ae : 

3. That they be: required to register in the zillah court all engagements ‘relative to 
occupation or cultivation of land exceeding 50 begahs, and in the moonsiff’s oo 

a 


APPENDIX, 


(60.) Statement 
respecting the 
Indigo Planters. 


APPENDIX, 


Settlement of 
Europeans in India. 


.* 
DIVISION, 


416 


a ancy 


15, Mymensing, &¢c.—continued. 


» 


‘DISTRICTS. 


__ or screen offenders. 


APPENDIX to. REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


NUMBER OF ; NUMBER OF 


7 
[= bi g 
ss . 
2 = CIVIL CAUSES, CRIMINAL CAUSES. 
E| a : 
i a Fy 
as “ So . a . —- 
gel g q 3 | ee g@ 13 ses gis 
oo oe s og 3 2 2 a=] 
a2 5 z 2 Sa 3 g $s 3S g 
28 8 2 = & ¥ 3. |& Pe ae 
eel 212] 8 |2: | 2) geles | 2 | es 
+ -— - = -_ 
a a ae Ss |e ®'$ Oe | ez &® | os 
8 3 3 S by 28 o 2 £4 o ga 
he ~ —_ 
BS 3 3 7 tal 8 Ea | Sasl 3 Eo. 
a4 4 2 q Bue) 3 su {Sap | & 53° 
5 2 3 3 O 3 aa) Que o g Su 
zm Zz & @ fae re ae oe Me  ta 


| 


e 

all engagements for a less quantity; that previous to the registry the lands should be 
advertised and proclaimed, and marked, in order that persons interested may have an 
opportunity of objecting. 

4. That all leases and other engagements should specify boundaries and quantity 
of land. 

§- That zemindars should have a lien on the manufactured produce, in satisfaction 
of arrears of rent, to be attached, and if necessary sold. , 


6. On the expiration of a lease the zemindar to be at liberty to renew it or not, but 
if let, the old tenant to have the preference on equal terms. 

7. At the expiration of his contract the ryot to be allowed to compel the adjustment 
of his accounts by summary process. 

8. In the event of disputes between factories, the local authorities to appoint arbi- 
trators for the purpose of fixing boundaries. Private boundary agreements to be. 
enforced.’ , ’ 

g. Collectors to take possessgon of choc lands, the property of Government, and to 
lease them to planters in their own names. ; 

1o. Lands of khoodkhast, or hereditary ryots, not to be transferred by zemindars to 
indigo planters, without the consent of such parties. 

11. All subordinate Iandholders to be at liberty to transfer their lands to indigo planters 
Gf warranted by the nature of their tenures) without the consent of the superior 
zemindar ; and all ryots to be at liberty to cultivate indigo or any other crop they like. 

12, Europeans to be eligible to be appointed guardians to minors, and managers of 
their estates. 7 

13. Euronean indigo planters to be held personally responsible for breaches of the 
peace arising out of, or connecteg with their manufacture, or the possession of lands. 

14. All complaints connected with indigo cultivation to be made in the name and 
on the responsibility of the planter. 

15. All planters to furnish the magistrate with lists of their servants, and to be 
held responsible for their conduct and appearance; and not to retain notorious 
offenders in their employ. 

16. Not to engage bands of armed men. 

17. Not to pound cattle and levy fines. 


e 3 . 
18, Cattle trespassing to be sent, with évidence of the fact, to the nearest police 
thannah moonsiff’s cutcherry, who would levy the fine on the part of Government. 
Proprietors of crops to recover damages by a summary process. 


"1g. European planters to render assistance to officers of police. 
20. To give information of crimes committed within their estates, and not to harbour 


* 


fe 8, 21. False 


GENERAL APPENDIX. 417 Arpenpix, 


V. 
g NUMBER OF NUMBER OF aoe 
: 2 : 0.) Statement 
g g iy CRIMINAL CAUSES, ( . 
a 3 al a as respectingghe 
aa n : . 
es § P F § ee d g st e ae Indigo Planters. 
a. rs 3 35 8 g 2 
= 2 gs o3 4 o 4 oe 4 <3 
2! DISTRICTS. ee] 8 $ = {3° 2 | 2. l#. ae ae 
= gm E g 3 s I & S = zw 
¢ a | 28 lee ‘3 3.8 
wa Si 3 S 3 ie 8 & & ° e 8. ey 3 3 
a ge] 3 5 £& |Bse| @ |B /Bss] B | Fe 
ae 4 r= Waa b 3 Sco joe = pe] 
A ga | § § Z Ses! B | Se | BysSi B | ss 
a a a eo JATVFtT A} 6° 1A A |] o° 


| 


: Begahs. 
15) Mymensing, &c.—continued. 


e 
21. False and vexatious a pong aud prevarication of witnesses, to be punished 
by two years imprisonment and 200 rupees fine, commutable to one year more. 


Mr. Walters adds, “ Let the door but be thrown open for the free expression of 
British feelings and principles, as well as of British capital, and 1 will venture to say, 
that in five years a greater improvement will take place in the social and moral 
condition of our subjects than has accrued from thirty years of trial under the vld 
system.” : 


The commissioner of the division is of opinion that the existing legislative pro- 
visions are fully adequate to the effectual subjection of the planters and their ser- 
vants to the control of law. Has not had sufficient experiemce to judge of the 
characters of the Europeans residing in this division. Gives two statements, taken 
from the books of a factory, illustrative of the effects of the present system on the 
condition of the ryot; one in which the ryot refusing to cultivate, the cultivation 
was carried on by the planter, the ryot involved in ruin, and his lands alienated 
‘from him; the other, in which the ryot was enabled to pay off a former debt, and 
to obtain a profit on the settlement of accounts. 


16! Arracan « 7 se = = 2 = = S = ee a 
Chittagong = - yas - eles Aves Ss a - - - ea 
Noacolly - - a _— ~ a ack as = - = os 


Remarks.—-No report was called for from Arracan. 

The magistrate of Chittagong and joint magistrate of Noacolly report that no 
indigo planters reside in their districts. ~ Es 

The Commissioner has inadvertently furnished statements of civil and criminal cases, 
decided in the Chittagong district, in which Eurepeans appear to have been parties, 
but which have no connection with transactions regarding indigo. 


“17; Assam « - a a = — “= - = as eo 
N. E. Rungpore s = = pe = = ss - = zs 
Sylhet: sty we feu deca tebe Py wee UI ec weet see nee) dec 

e 


Remarxs.—There are no European indigo planters residing in these districts. 

The Commissioner is of opinion, that further legislative provisions are requisite for 
the due control of all British subjects residing in the interior of the country, and that 
it is obviously expedient that they should be subjected, like other European settlers 
similarly situated, to the local tribunals civil and criminal, without any other restriction 
or appeal than is allowed by the Regulations of Government to other individuals. 


3H (continued) 


APPENDIX, 
V. 
Settlement of 
Europeangjo India. 


418 APPENDIX ro REPORT rrou SELECT COMMITTEE. 
ee. 
€ NUMBER OF NUMBER OF 
& 3 CIVIL CAUSES, CRIMINAL CAUSES. 
z ‘ 3 3 ; —— 
© 4 3 . < 3: 3 > ie FA s 
ssl gi¢| 3 ite | B15 [se 1 EIS 
“| ‘DISTRICTS. a2) 3 a = |&4 Ss |e |22 2-13. 
She, 4 pei P| B] @ fe 7 2 | Be l*s-| F | bs 
a ete 5 [42 | & lee ise | & | 82 
= Sais Se aie ma 241 2 | g8 |,23| = | 33 
g2) 2) 8) © [222] 212s (228) 2 | es 
: ez | 3 5 S$ [Seal @ | Se lEe8! BY Se 
: la a Go JAP GB FSS [AeF| & ISS 
= _— ern Aermomencommay 
‘ i e 
Begahs, 
18! Suburbs of Cal- - | = oo - - - = 7 a, <a 
cUtta, ‘ ‘ ‘ i 
b * a af . - a 
Twenty-four Per- f= -!' § 2 5100 fe -" - - 7 7 
gunnahs. 
For and 
. Against. 
Burosut - -fe - 2 g 1,480 f- cafe - 2 - es = 
For and For and 
; Against. oh Against. 
Backergunge -)- -/ 4 @ {+ -| §2 fo «f- «| 76 = = 
Jessore - -| 2 { 63 | 30 {120,633] 206} 11 [- -| 37 | 309| = 


¢ ' 


Remarxs.—-No European plfnters in the Suburbs. 


The magistrate of the Twenty-four Pergunnahs offers no opinion op the general, 
question. 


The joint magistrate of Burosut considers 'no further legislative provisions necessary. 


The magistrate of Backergunge reports favourably of the European planters in his 
district. Is not prepared to offer an opinion as to the expediency of enacting further 
laws applicable to planters and their servants, 


The magistrate of Jessore cannot speak to the character of the planters, having been 
lately appointed to the district. Return imperfect. 


Was formerly magistrate of Nuddeah. Europeans less violent and rapacious than 
natives. Introduction of improved mode of culture. Steady supplies of capital. New 
laws Jess required than the sure and speedy application of existing laws. Best remedy. 
for the évils complained of is to facilitate to Europeans the holding of estates. Magis- 
trates should be cautious in iat earn with planters, so as to ensure the appear- 
ance of perfect impartiality. ‘Che’ Commissioner has had little experience in districts 
where indigo is cultivated; recommends either that the number of magistrates should 
be increased, or the number of Europeans lirgited ; inclines to the latter. The rights 
and prejudices of the natives are interfered with by Europeans. Speaks favourably of 
the general character of the planters i Jessore, but their servants commit oppression. 
. The natives are averse to the extended cultivation of indigo. Submits a letter from 
the acting magistrate of Jessore, who attributes the inefficiency of the existing rules 
to the want of Igisure possessed by the magistrate. Increase of disputes and breaches 
of the ’ ‘ 7 - , - Ze : : , ts ; ‘ a ee i 1  ¢ 


a 


¢ 


DIVISION. 


19| Midnapore 


* 


2o' Burdwan - 


DISTRICTS. 


Balasore - - ~- 


; Cuttack + 


. GENERAL APPENDIX. - tg 


ge ‘NUMBER OF NUMBER OF 
& 3 CIVIL CAUSES. | CRIMINAL CAUSES. 
= 3 - 
wt oe <a 3° : . 
g a 3 P 21 
diaial a le] /2/e lela: 
-- 5 2. 3 a= = 2 ge * g 
5 By 3 E o “S Ey Bs, 5. a Bee 
7 2 ‘S 3 o 3 2 3 
sols 3 % |72.| 2 | a |fEbat & 22 
he = ee pas wae i] 25 3 g S B=) 23 
23 ¥ 2 $ on 8 o Fo (SSa) 2 za 
¢ @ 2 | 3 3 Eg g ou om # 3 53 
sm] 3 5 s 353 g 25 | 38s3 3 as 
A a a oe {RF A fo) a A .s) 
Begahs. For and 
Against. 
< 2 6,870 | @3 i 
3:000 | - ~ 
-} - . 


Remarxs.—The magistrate of Midnapore cannot say whether additional rules’ are 
necessary. They sometimes take the law into their own hands to recover debts; but 
complaints on that score are speedily adjusted. = 

The joint magistrate of Balasore considers no further provisions required. Speaks 
well of the planters in his district. 7 

There are no European planters in Cuttack. . 

. The Commissioner has heard no complaints against the few who reside in the 
ivision. 


- 6 
~f-e «] 84 6 22,258 | 10 [= +] 26 ei a _ 
® | For and For and ‘ 
gainst, Against. 


Jungle Mehals - | - - 22 4 46,500} 14 J- -J|- « 2 “ S 


- - - -~ ~ - - ~ - ~ -” 


Remarks.—The magistrate of Burdwan has found the planters peaceably and kindly 
inclined towards the natives; and he does not think any additional legislative provi- 
sions necessary for their effectual subjection. 

The magistrate of the Jungle Mehals is not awarg that any further legislative provi- 
visions are necessary for the effectual subjection of indigo planters, in addition to those 
which already exist. Conduct of tht Europeans kind and conciliatory. 

There are no European planters in the district of Hooghly. 

The Commissioner expresses the same sentiments as the magistrate of the Jungle 
Mehals, and from his experience, has always found them forbearing and kind in their 
demeanour to the natives, as well as fair and liberal in their dealings with them, notwith- 
standing the bad faith they too often experience in return. Instances of misconduct 


rare. - ; 


s 


Judicial Department, (signed) - ‘H. Siaxusrrdr, 
i June 1830. : . : 


Secretary to Government. 


4 tog a 


‘The Governor-general in Council remarks, that the foregoing Papers will pe transmitted to : 
the Honourable Court of Directors. SNe ee ee a 


3He 


. APPENDIX, 
Y. 


(60.) Statement 


__. respecting the 
“Indigo Phaters. 


Remarks. 


ae 420 APPENDIX to REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


——ee 


anaes of . 7 (61.)—MINUTE, by Mr. Leycester. 


Europeans in India. As far ag I can judge of the order of the magistgate of Furreedpore in its English dress, 
(61.) Mi? Leyces: it appears greatly misconstrued, and that it is anything but an “instruction not to sow 
ter’s Minute. their stipulated land unless agreeable to themselves.” 

The exact purport of the order can only be clearly understood. in its original. _ 

I much suspect that the provisions of Regulation VI. of 1823 have very seldom if ever 
been resorted to by our indigo planters. Under this Regulation they can get summary 
awards, and having got them, they are entitled to place a watch*over the said “defined 
spot of land,” and to the “aid of the police in their favour.” 

I know of no possible further aid that it could be desirable to grant ; indeed the only two 
which occur would be quite inadmiss#le, violation of the property of the contractor, or 
violation of his person. : 

The above process too is equally cogclusive against interlopers who wish to tamper with 
peopl@ who have entered into contracts ; the summary award shuts the interloper out. 

The great difficulty is assumed from the excessive poverty of the tenant, and the exces- 
sive wealth calculated to be made out of the produce of his labour. This certainly is a very 
unnatural state of affairs, and not paralleled in any other article of produce, and which 
must, I suppose, remedy itself by relieving the poverty of the ryot, through a reduction in the 
prefit of the indigo planter; and it may be calculated that then the ryot will be actuated by 
the stimulus of interest to fulfil his contract. 

It should be recollected that the whole or nearly the whole cultivation of the country is, as 
specified in the preamble of Regulation VI. of 1823, carried on with borrowed: capital ;. and 
that the capitalists*who so lend their money to ensure a certain produce, are entitled to the 
same protection from the Legislature as the speculator in indigo. But it seems to me that 
there is no fair proportion preserved in awarding penalties, when the failing and bankrupt 
contractor, without any impeachment of dishonesty, is declared liable to a penalty amount- 
ing to 300 per cent. ree 

In legislating to secure the just rights of indigo planters, we must-not lose sight of the 
fact, that there are two parties concerned § and if the conditions imposed on the ryot are 

. such that no reasonable person purposing to act an honest part would engage under them, 
I think we may be certam that we are legislating im favour of one class at the expense of 
another, and that from natural causes such a system of legislation must prove inoperative 
and ineffectual: and such seems to me the rule of imposing on a failure, involving no im- 
putation of fraud, a penalty of 300 per cent. 


(signed) W. Leycester. 


(62.)IndigoPlanterss *  (62.)—ADDITIONAL ‘MINUTE, by Mr. Leycester. 


Additional Minet e, , 1,DESIRE to add a few words to the foregoing observations. It has been remarked that 


the Regulation VI. of 1823, authorizes indigo. planters holding summary decrees, to place 
a watch over the indigo crop; that it does not do so if no such crop is produced ; in other. 
‘words, that the Revalation affords no aid in the extreme case of the contractor omitting to 
cultivate altogether. . 

._ Such perhaps is the letter; but we are considering a remedial law and not a criminal one: 
that such law, admitting that the indigo eps has a lien on the land, should exclusively 
allow.a watchman to be placed over that land fer the protection of the crop, and not, for the 
production of the same, would, I think, be a wrong construction. 

That a man holding a lien on any land for its cultivation with indigo, should sit quietly 
by and see it cultivated with potatoes, would only show that a man may have a lien with- 
out any tie, or a tie without any lien. oe a 

: ' Section 


GENERAL APPENDIX. 


Section 5, Regulation VII. of 1819, declaring contracting workmen guilty of any wilful 
breach of contract liable to punishment bya magistrate, is, I should suppose, as applicable 
to an indigo contract as to any other. Buta great trade will never be carried on or benefited 
by a bill of pains and penalties and I apprehend the section quoted has never been acted 
on since it was promulgated; and it does not seem to have been considered that there are two 

» parties to a contract, and that there can be no justice in declaring one party liable to 
punishment as for a misdemeanor or for a breach of contract, and not the other party also, 
as, for instance, in making advances, &e. 

I should, with Mr. Ross, very much like to see British subjects allowed to acquire landed 

property by free purchase or other contract, not merely for indigo or coffee, but for general 
purposes. The rules however which he would establish for the regulation of contracts 
between the indigo planter and the cultivator, however good in themselves, are I fear far too 
‘intricate and too complex for practical use, nor do I see whence the public functionaries 
required are to come from; with any people like the present moonsiffs I apprehend it would 
be fearful odds for the poor ryots. I think it would be far more desirable if thesMdigo 
plants were produced without the intervention of contracts and advances, and the crop 
brought into the market, and the price regulated by the demand, as other crops are. There 
would then be some reciprocity of interest between the producer of the plant and the con- 
sumer of it, which cannot be said to be the case at present. 

But whatever is resolved on, I trust it will be made of a general nature, including cotten, 

sugar, and all other articles, and not be restricted to indigo alone. 


(signed) 


421 


c 


W. LrycesrTer. 


(63.)}—MINUTE by Mr. Ross, dated 21st September 1829. 


Ir is undeniable that the evils which induced the enactment of Regulation VI. of 1823 
- are still experienced, and it must also, I think, be admitted that the provisions of that 
Regulation are not calculated to obviate those evgls. 

sion however, the Regulation referred to is defective, 1 apprehend that the conti- 
nuance of the evils complained of is not so much attributable to its defects as to the ineffi- 
‘ciency of the tribunals authorized. to carry its provisions into execution; and that were it 
amended, it would still be as inoperative as it has hitherto been, if left to he enforced by the 
same tribunals. 

It must be kept in mind that the courts at the sudder stations of the several zillahs are 
the only tribunals authorized to take cognizance of disputes arising between European 
indigo manufacturers and the ryots who contract to supply them with indigo plant; and 
that those courts are from their situations, and the great extent of country over which they 
have jurisdiction, inaccessible to the majority of the ryots, and from accumulation of. business, 
obstructing and retarding their proceedings, of tittle avail to the manufacturers. 

There is in reality no provision made for administering any law to these two classes, and 
that fact alone is sufficient to account for the disorder that prevails in the indigo districts. 
The ryots, feeling no assurance that they will be allowed to reap the produce of their labour, 
are easily induced to engage to cultivate their lands for the manufacturers on any terms; 
but they do not seem to consider the contracts entered into under such circumstances as 
voluntary on their part, and it may therefore be believed, that they have little scruple in 


. 


APPENDIX; 


* 


(62,)IudigoPlanters: 


Mr. Leycester’s 
Additional Minute. 


App. No. 63. 


(63.)IndigoPlanters: 
Mr. Ross’s Minute; 
21 September 182g, 
—ntin SO 
Letter from the Secre- 
tary to Government, 
Jadicial Department, 
dated 5th May 1829, 
relative to Regulation 
VI. of 1823, for en- * 
forcing the execution 
of contracts for the 
cultivation and del~ 
very of indigo plant. 
Letter frum Ditto, 
dated 29th May, on 
the same subject. 
Letter from Ditto, 
dated gth June, og 
the same subject. 
Letter from Ditto, 
dated 25th August, 
on the same subject. 


employing all the means they are said to resort to, in order to evade performance when any . 


advantage can be gained by so domg. The manufacturers too find that they have nothing 
to depend on but their own means for preventing the loss of the capital and of time to 
_ which they would be subjected by the non-execution. of the ryot’s contracts ; and they 
therefore maintain large establishments of armed: men, to enforce the. execution .of those 
contracts. Thus the two classes are compelled to resort to the means of self-protection 
which they are both blamed for employing. " 


ae 422 | APPENDIX ro REPORT riom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


i 


It may be observed, that it-is owing to this non-existence of any provision for administer- 
ing justice, that in the districts possessing tlt advantages of soil and climate adapted for. 
the produetion of indigo, the establishment of rivel factories has not been always followed 
by so much benefit to the native population as might have been expected. Competition 
has doubiless raised the cost of the indigo plant to the rival manufacturers 5 but the increase, 
instead of being received by the cultivators of the plant, in the shape of an advance of its. ° 

_ price, as it ought to be, and as it would be were they duly protected, is consumed by the 
armed establishments, which, as I have above mentioned, the want of other protection, 
obliges the manufacturer to maintain. ; . 

. It seems to me, therefore, that the first thing necessary to be done to remedy the evils 
complained of is, to make provision for ensuring to the cultivators as well as to the manu- 
facturers that protection which the law ought to afford to them ; and that, I conceive, can 
be accomplished in no other way than by raising the qualifications and powers of the courts 
of the moonsifts.. Those courts are ghe only tribunals so situated as to be accessible to 
both farties, and capable of administering justice equally to both. In them only can poor 
suitors, as well as rich, personally attend to the investigation of their suits; an advantage 
essential in trials, in the first instance, to thé attainment of justice, and which the due 
performance of the functions of investigation requires that all courts of original jurisdiction 
should be capable of affording. They alone, in fact, possess the’ most important of the 
requisites to the competency of courts of original jurisdiction, and they are as susceptible 
of being rendered competent in other respects to discharge the functions of such courts as 
any of the other established tribunals. 

From the foregoing observations, I. would not be understood to think that the establish- 
ment of an efficieftt system of local judicature would be sufficient to relieve the indigo 
manufacturers from the difficulties they have to contend against: a prompt administration’ 
of justice would doubtless remove those difficulties in the few cases in which the persons 
who contract to supply the indigo plant are men of substance; but in the numerous cases 
in which the contractors are needy ryots, without any property whatever, the existing laws, 
if enforced, would increase, and not remove, the difficulttes complained of. I will, therefore, 
beg leave to suggest the measures, which with reference to these last-mentioned cases, 
I conceive it would be advisable to adopt for amending the laws affecting indigo manu- 
facterers, supposing an efficient system of Judicature to be established. , 

The cases referred to may be classed under two heads: ist, Those in which ryots, after 
receiving advances of money and contracting for the cultivation and delivery of indigo plant, 
do not sow any land with indigo seed, and consequently have no plant to deliver. 2d, Those in 
which contracting ryots, after having sown land with indigo seed, refuse to deliver the produce 
to the manufacturer who advanced his money for it. In the cases coming under the first 
head there is no remedy whatever provided in any Regulation in the judicial code. In 
those coming under the second head, Regulation VI. of 1823 allows a process intended 
to secure the growing plant to the mannfacturer entitled to it; but that process, although 
summary, cannot be issued with the celerity requisite, and consequently is unavailing. In. 
both classes of cases, therefore, neither Regulation VI. of 1823, nor any other enactment, 
contains any provision calculated to protect the manufacturers against possible dishonesty 
on the part of those with whom they must deal. In regard, indeed, to the European 
manufacturer, the law, as it now stands, is, as I before observed, worse than defective. It 
compels him to resort to the system of making advances for is indigo plant, and at the 
same time debars him from availing himself of the only security he can have against the 
losses to ‘which that system exposes him. It places Bim in the predicament of having té 
choose either passively to submit to those losses, or to incur the consequences of acting 
Hegolty in order to avert thém. : ij 
' "Tn endeavouring to provide a remedy for this obvious injustice, there are two considera- | 

tions te be-attended to, and they suggest the measures by which the remedy sought for may 

be afforded. One is, that a ryot who requires an advance of capital to enable him to cultivate 
his land, has nothing to offer as security he its repayment but the eapability of kis land to yield 

Pe , _ produce 


Settlement of. 
Europeans in India. 


_ GENERAL: APPENDIX: 433 Appanpiy, 


* 


produce of value equal to the amount of the advance: thé other is, that the security will be = 
unavailing if any. delay be made in providing tither for ploughing or sowing the land at the (63.)IndigoPlanters: 
proper season, or for preventing the produce, when ripe, being carried off. The measures Mr. Ross's Minute} 
, suggested by those considerations, are, the removal of the prohibition against Europeans 2+ September1829. 
holding lands ; and the empowering indigo manufacturers to attach and take the usufruct of . 
* land to the produce of which they have acquired a right by contract with the occupant, imme- 
diately upon the latter refusing to plough or reap, or to do any act necessary to enable him to 
fulfil the conditions of his contract. 
By the adoption of these measures, not only would difficulties which the existing laws 
- Oppose to the indigo manufacturers in the conduct of their business be removed, but other 
important advantages might be expected to result; among which may be mentioned the 
' discontinuance of the practice of Europeans rentfhg lands in fictitious names, and of 
the evils which that practice gives rise to; the introduction of a respectable and intelli- 
- gent class of indigo-plant farmers, who, being able tg maintain their rights, would got be 
induced to enter into contracts on terms lower than the demand for their produce would 
entitle them to, and whose self-interest would be sufficient to induce them to fulfil their 
contracts ; and, lastly, the general improvement of the agriculture of the country, and an 
increase of all the valuable products of its soil and climate. 
I have put into the form of a draft of a Regulation (and which is herewith submitted to the App. No. 67. 
Court), the rules which I conceive it would be proper to enact to give effect to the measurts 
above suggested. In the event of its being deemed advisable to adopt them, the notes 
appended to the draft afford all the explanations in regard to the rules proposed that seem 
to be required ; and I have, therefore, only to request in this place, that it may be kept in 
mind that they have been framed on the supposition that the local court8 of judicature, by 
which only they can be carried into execution, will be raised to the footing on which those 
courts should be placed to qualify them to perform the functions assigned to them; and 
I may add, that until the local courts shall be rendered fit to be entrusted with the discharge 
of those functions, it is not to be expected that any amendment of the existing law that can 
be proposed with a view to the correction of the evils under consideration, will be produc- 
tive of advantage. 


(signed) A. Ross. 


(64.).—MINUTE by Mr. Sealy, dated 28th May 1829. (64.)IndigoPlanters: 


Mr. Sealy’s Minute ; 


By clause 3, section 5, Regulation VI. 1823, the indigo planter who has made advances 54 May 1899. 


to a ryot who has disposed of the weed to another, is at hberty in a regular suit to prosecute 
the ryot, and the individual to whom such produce was sold or delivered, conjointly. I do 
not see why he should not be allowed to do the same in a summary suit, as the evil com- 
Saari of appears to be very extensive; that is, the ryots who have received advances 
eclining to sow their lands with indigo seed. I would extend the powers contained in 
section 5, Regulation VII. 1819, to contracts for the cultivation of indigo. This will go 
a great way .to put a stop to the frauds now practised by ryots and their evil advisers, and 
may in the end diminish the number of affrays.that now annually take place for indigo 
lands, which are invariably attended, with severe wounding, and frequently with loss of 
, life, in consequence of planters entertaining bodies of fighting men for the express purpose 
of fighting their battles on such occasions. 


(signed)  , T. Sgaty. 


‘ 


Arrenix, "424 APPENDIX 70 REPORT rxom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


Settlement of .(65.)--MENUTE by Mr. Rattray, dated 30th May 1829. 


Europegns in India, yy preamble to Regulation VI. of 1823, admit& that it seems reasonable that the person 
who advances seed and capital, or capital only, for the expense of cultivation on a defined 
parcel of land, should be considered to possess a lien and interest in the indigo plant pro- . 
duced on that land, when so stipulated in a written engagement between the parties, and 
especially in cases in which such written engagement may have*been duly registered under 
the provisions of Regulation XXII. 1812; and that it should not be in the power of a ryot* 
who has already conditioned for the delivery of the produce of his land to one. person, to 
break the condition by a clandestine ‘and fraudulent transfer of such produce to another. 

With a view to the accomplishment, of what is here admitted to appear reasonable, the 
above Regulation was enacted ; and experience has proved that it has, if not entirely, so 
far failed im its object, as to render a modification of it obviously expedient. 

T ennot better exhibit the loss and’vexation to which indigo planters now stand exposed 
than by quoting an anonymous writer (one of themesloes I presume), a communication 
from whom lately appeared in one of the public prints of this presidency. “It must,” this 
writer observes, “ be considered that the sowing of indigo admits of no delay. When the 
lands are prepared for the reception of the seed, and rain fallsy no time must be lost. 
Delay, that in all cases is dangerous, in this instance is ruinous; either the lands must be 
sown at once, or not at all. Hence it will appear, that the speculative redress of the 
Regulation (VI. of 1823) teems with consequences to the indigo planter which would be 
more aptly expressed under the term grievance ; the means would infallibly entail the very 
evil sought to be removed. During the progress of the litigation, the sowing season 
passes away; and the issue at best must prove disadvantageous to the planter, who sues 
a fraudulent defendant who can prove himself insolvent, in the event of being cast, by the 
aid of a few oaths, which he can procure as cheap aseggs. By way of exemplification, 
I will put a case, neither scrprdtabla nor of unusual occurrence in different degrees, which 
will show how this Regulation is likely to opetate on the interests of the planters :—I make 
advances to 2,000 ryots, who agree to su ste to and cultivate for me two or three beegahs 
of indigo each, on receiving at the rate of two rupees per beegah. The money is paid four 
or five months before the sowing season commences, during which time I am much gratified 
by the care and attention they evince in preparing the lands; and I already begin to calcu- 
late the probable balance that next manufacturing season will place to my credit in the 
agent’s books. Rain comes, but no ryot appears for seed ; when, after a little patient 
delay, I send to them, and proceed to compel them, a few atatime. Away two of them 
hie to the magistrate, and complain that I have taken away their paddy lands (they 
having become acquainted with a Regulation which prohibits compulsory measures being 
used towards them in such cases), and I am summoned and appear. The fact of ad~ 

‘vances having been made is ‘not denied; but the complainants swear that the lands in 
question were not those intended for indigo; and so I become, by the fiat of the court, 
‘subject to the consequences of an infringement of the Regulation. The conquering ryots 
repair home,- where the news of my defeat emboldens the rest to persevere in their original 
resolution of withholding the lands; and the only remedy left me is to enter 1,998 separate 
actions for damages, which the defendants cannot make good.. The glaring injustice 

‘here done me need not be dwelt upon. The very prosecution of my actions would occupy 
at least six months, if the judge should happen to be* very assiduous; during which time 
the season has slipped away, the lands he fallow, or have yielded other crops to their 

, Yoguish ee and I am grinned at as a fool, antl advised to be more cautious for the 
‘fature im making advances, when perhaps those I have already made, and the expenses ‘ 
incurred in prosecuting my right, render the advice quite superfluous. Sonte may think, 
that’ by referrmg disputes of this nature to the darogahs for their report, the evil might 
‘be averted, and the ends of justice attained; but this arrangement would prove as little 
calculated to promote impartial justice as the Regulation, so long as the office of darogah 
is filled in the manner it now is.” ; ; ; 

. Now 


“GENERAL APPENDIX. 425 aeeDiar) 


* Now if this be a fair exhibition of facts, and I believe it to be without any exaggeration, _ 
it must be admitted that legislative interference is urgently called for. All the obligation (65.)IndigoPlanters: 
I would impose is, that of an hone performance of a voluntary contract; and after Mr. Ratyay's | / 
affording to the subject much thought, and making myself as fully acquainted with it ag eee § 
opportunity has permitted, I venture to suggest the following rules, as calculated to relieve 9° “4Y 1°29- 
the planter, without any hardship or injustice towards those who now oppose such fearful 
odds to all fair dealing, ufider the very law enacted to promote and preserve it. - , 
, €: ; 


2 ON 


Proposep Monirication of Section 5, Regulation VI. of 1828. 


ist. In cases in which a ryot or other cultivator of the soil, who may have received : 
advances and entered into written engagements for the cultivation of indigo or other plant 
or produce of the soil, in the manner indicated in Regulation VI. 1823, shall have iled to 
cultivate the land specified, or having cultivated it, shall have failed or refuse to complete 
his engagement, or shall have sold or made away with or transferred the produce to another 
person, the party with whom such agreement was first made shall be at liberty to apply for 
redress to the magistrate or joint-magistrate within whose jurisdiction the land may be; 
or to institute, at his option, either a summary or a regular suit in the civil court against 
the said ryot or cultivator, or the: party at whose instigation the said ryot or cultivator 
shall have so failed, or both, as shall appear to the plaintiff expedient. 
' Qdly. If the application be made to the magistrate or joint-magistrate, the case shall be 
disposed of under sect. 5, Regulation VII. 1819; and pending the imprisonment of the 
ryot, if the charge be substantiated, and after his release, till such time as he shall pro- 
ceed to ‘a due performance of his engagement, the plaintiff shall be put in possession of 
the land the cultivation or produce of which he may have contracted for, with liberty to 
complete the said cultivation, or to reap or collect the said’ produce at his own expense, 
having his remedy for the said expense by a summary or regular civil action against the 
said ryot, or the party at whose instigation the latter shall be proved to have so failed, or 
both, in the manner hereinafter provided. for. 
3dly. If a summary civil process shall be adopted in the first instance, and the cause 
super the grounds stated in the next following section) be decided in favour of the plain- 
tiff, the defendant or defendants each ‘shall be subject to the payment of the amount of 
the advances actually received by the said ryot or cultivator, with interest on the same, 
and the costs of summary process; the claim for the amount of any further loss sustained 
by the nonperformance of the contract being cognizable only under a regular suit. But 
in ‘this case of summary process the plaintiff shall not be entitled to possession of the land, 
as provided in the preceding section, the suit being considered as instituted solely for the 
recovery of loss already sustained by the advances or expense above mentioned, and not 
with a view to any prospective benefit to be derived from the soil. But nothing herein 
shall prevent a prior application to the criminal court, as provided for by the preceding 
section, if the party aggrieved shall seek his remedy in the manner and to the end therein 
stated. a - 
4thly. If the plaintiff shall seek the remedy by a regular suit, the case shall be tried and 
decided ander the principles and provisions of the generat Regulations; provided, how- 
ever, that where a ‘ryot shall have voluntarily executed a deed of engagement, stipulating 
to cultivate indigo or other plant or produce of the soil on a specified portion of land, and 
to deliver the produce of such land’ to one individual, and shall have subsequently sold or 
delivered such produce to another, or haye failed to prepare or cultivate such land at the 
instigation of another, the aggrieved party shall be at liberty to prosecute the ryot and 
‘the individual to whom such produce may have been sold or delivered, or who shall so 
have mstigated the contractor, conjointly; and if it be established that the individual 
‘receiving the produce, or so instigating, was at the time aware of the prior engagement, 
such individual, and the'ryot or cultivator, shall be jointly or severally ea a Ler ad 
. 4 3 e 


¢ 
Repeaty: ae: APPENDIX ro REPORT rom SELECT. COMMITTEE. 


i the full amount of the penalty spectfied in the original agreement, together with all costs 
E Settlement of - and expenses of the suit. ° Oe 
uropeans in India.  sthly. If no fraud or dishonest dealing be establighed, and the failure of a ryot or other 
contractor to’ execute the stipulations of his engagement be owing to accident or other 
cause not implying fraud or dishonesty, the remedy shall be as in common cases of con- 
tract failure, provided for by the Regulations generally. -Appeals must of course be pro- 

vided for, as should facilities to the registry of contracts. . 


(signed) R.H. Ratrray. 


(66,)IndigoPlanters: (66.)\—MINUTE by Mr. Turnbull, dated 2d July 1829. 
Mr. Turnbull's Tue eager competition noticed in the preamble to Regulation VI. 1823, commenced 
Minute ; . in the preceding year ; and holding, asel then did, the situation of judge and magistrate of 


2 July 1829. Nuddea, I had some opportunity of witnessing the scenes of contention and strife ensuing 


from the various and conflicting interests to which that competition gave rise. The disor- 

ders which then prevailed in that and the neighbouring indigo districts, have, I believe, 

nothing abated to the present day, and they are certainly such as to call for the serious 

interposition of Government. From the moment of ploughing the land and sowing the 

seefl, to the season of reaping the crop, the whole district is thrown into a state of ferment. 

The most daring breaches of the peace are committed in the face of our police officers, and 

even the magistrate himself. In utter defiance of all law and authority, large bodies of 

armed men are avowedly entertained for the express purpose of taking or retaining forcible 
possession of lands Or crops. Violent affrays, or rather regular pitched battles ensue, at- 
tended with bloodshed and homicide. Our police establishments are corrupted, ,and the 
darogahs are said notoriously to be in the pay of the planters, European or native, to secure 
their good offices. Private assassinations occasionally occur, and forgery and perjury have 
their full sway ; in short, every species of crimeeis committed, and in the list f should not 
omit false charges of murder, arson, &c. which are very common, and are the most harassing 
of all to the accused as well as to the magistrate. If such are the consequences of the 
present system of indigo cultivation in the Bengal districts, and that they are so will not, 
I think, be disputed, it is certainly high time that decisive measures should be adopted to 
put down evils of such magnitude, independently of the question more immediately under 
consideration, of affording protection to the nghts and interests of the numerous indivi- 
duals concerned. The practices noticed in the papers which have originated the present 
discussion, no doubt prevail to a considerable extent, and are the common subject of com- 
plaint. I particularly remember one ‘instance in which a ryot acknowledged before me, 
that he had in quick succession taken advances from and entered into engagements with 
three separate establishments for the same parcel of land. This was clearly an act of fraud, 
and would, I take it, be criminally punishable ynder the Mahomedan law and the Regulations 
already in force, as well in the ryot as in any others who should be proved to have know- 
ingly participated, and wilfully aided and abetted therein: but would this reach the evil? 
I fear not; on the contrary, if such a power were at all abused or indiscreetly applied, if 

resort were had to it frequently and vexatiotsly to harass or intimidate the ryots; if it were 
not restricted to cases of a glaring and flagrant character, the planter would soon discover 
that he had used an instrument to his own destruction. The principal source of all the 

mischief may, I fancy, be traced to the contract formed with the ryot, which is sometimes 

not in writing, is frequently insufficiently defined, andeis generally extremely unfavourable 

to the ryot, rendering him in fact a slave to the establishment with which he has once en- 
gaged, and thereby preventing an open and fair competition to all, which would afford the 

only true and effectual remedy. Too much also, it is said, is entrusted to dewans, naibs, 

gomashtas, and numerous others employed by the planter, who I fear looks but little beyond 

the quantity of land procured for him, and does not pay sufficient attention to the means 

by which it has been obtained, so that at the critical period there is a general scramble... 

- fe In 


‘GENERAL APPENDIX. 427 APPENDIX, 
V. 
In such a state of things it cannot be matter of much syfrprise that the ryot, who is acknow- 
ledged to be in poverty, and has perhaps been fabouring in vain for years “ to work off his old (66.)IndigoPlanters. 
balances,” as it is called, should readilg yield to the temptation of an offer of money from Mr. Turnbull’s 
a rival factory to pay off his old score, and thereby liberate himself from thraldom, as well Minute; ® 
as engage on more favourable terms. The evils, therefore, being inherent in the system 2 July 1829. 
itself, this must undergo a change before any real good can be done by legislative provi- 
sion. The planter must be prepared to admit a Bi and open competition; he must not 
seek to undermine his neighbour by allowing his native agents to interfere secretly with 
ryots already under engagements, or to put him down vi et armis with hired Lutheeals ; he 
must secure his ryot by other means than a contract which bears him down so heavily 
that he can have little hope of fulfilling its obligation, and which drives him therefore to 
artifices and intrigues for immediate relief, thouglf ultimately leading to his own ruin as 
well as to the injury of his employer. He must, in short, endeavour to attach him to his in- 
terest, not by force, but by indulgence, kindness ang liberality; and if his neighbour rises 
higher in terms than himself, he must either meet him by corresponding hberality’on his 
own part, or leave the ryot free to act as the latter may deem most conducive to his own 
interest. The difficulty of framing rules calculated to ameliorate the system, so that it 
shall work beneficially, to all concerned, and afford prompt redress for the various grievances 
complained of by either party, has been always felt and acknowledged. The Regulations 
already provide that a preference shall be given to registered deeds of contracts; but*the 
obstacles are so great, in expense of stamp-paper, fees of registry, distance from the sudder 
station, &c. that it is seldom or never resorted to; indeed it is impracticable. If any 
eae could be devised to encourage a more general resort to the practice of registry, 
y reducing the expense and ‘rendering the means more accessible tothe parties, a great 
point would no doubt be gained; not only that a contract thus formally sanctioned has 
greater force with the parties, and would perhaps deter many from an attempt to violate 
it, but also because it would generally enable the court to determine more readily on the 
validity of the engagement, without being compelled, as they frequently are at present, to 
enter into a lengthened investigation, the result of which depending upon conflicting testi~ 
mony, must always be doubtful, and often errofieous, and the delay of which generally de- 
feats its whole object. In the difficulties which present. themselves, the only remedy 
which occurred to me, is the establishing subordinate offices of registry in each thannah divi- 
sion, to be held by natives or others specially appointed for the purpose, and placed under the 
general superintendence and control of the registrar of the district, or other European officer 
at the sudder stations, to whom a daily report should be made of all registered deeds, and 
by whom they should be forthwith entered in a general registry book kept separately for the 
purpose, under such forms and checks as should be found paciereat to render it an au- 
thentic and useful public record. I can however but throw out the hint, as I am sensible 
that many obstacles may occur in the details (even if Government should be willing to incur 
the additional expense) to render any plan of this nature practically efficient and useful 
with the means we have at our disposal. Unfortunately the same difficulty opposes every 
suggestion which offers itself: let us consider the vast interests that are involved in the 
matter under discussion, not merely in the lacks of rupees that are annually at stake, but 
as variously affecting the greater part of a large and populous district, and consider at the 
same moment the means we at present possess of affording prompt and effectual redress in 
the countless disputes which cannot but arise from such a state of things. A single factory 
may have formed upwards of a thousand contracts ; the party may be distant from the only 
courts now open to them, from 5040100 miles; those courts are already overwhelmed ; 
the matters in dispute press for decision, and cannot wait the ordinary course, for delay 
would render the decision nugatory, and worse, as the parties would have been needlessly 
subjected to annoyance and expenss. . What then is the remedy? I confess that I am at 
-aloss to propose any other than the appointment of a respectable sudder ameen in each 
_thannah division, with a salary or authorized-emoluments, such as would incite him.to a 
faithful and honest discharge of the important trusts which must necessarily be. confided 


to him. ' . . ea . (signed) M. H. TurnBvuuy. 
312 = 


APPENDIZ, 


° 
4 


(67.)[ndigoPlanters; 
‘Regulation pro- 
posed by lr. Ross 3 
2 July 1829, 


” Preamble. 


428 APPENDIX ro~REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


(67.) REGULATION, proposed by Mr. Ross. 


A RecuxaTion to provide more effectually fo! enforcing the execution of Contracts 
relating to the cultivating and delivery of Indigo Plant ; to remove the existing pro- 

, hibition against Europeans occupying Land for the cultivation of Indigo Plant or other 
purposes ; to make all Suits relating to the cultivation and to Contracts for the deli- 

_ very of the said Plant cognizable in the Courts of the Mobnsiffs, and to declare the 
cutting down or damaging of Indigo crops in certain cases an offence punishable by 
the Courts of Criminal Judicature: passed bythe Governor-general in Council, &c, ~ 


_ Wurreas Regulation VI. of 1823, for enforcing the execution of contracts relating 
to the cultivation and delivery of indigo plant, having failed _to diminish in any degree the 


: evils which induced its enactment, it has become necessary to make more effectual pro- 


Regulationse 
rescinded, 


Parts of Regulations 
declared not applica- 
ble to cases coming 
within the provisions 
of this Regulation. 


Europeans permitted 
to purchase, rent and 
-occupy land. 


Europeans occupying 
land declared amen- 
able to the loval 

civil courts, 


“permission. Unlimited permission, by 


vision Ser remedying those evils: And fvhereas it is necessary to that end that Europeans 
should be authorized to occupy land for the cultivation of indigo plant; and also expe- 
dient, with a view to the general improv-ment of the agriculture of the country, that 
permission should be granted to them to purchase, lease and hold land for that and other 
purposes: And whereas it is at the same time necessary for the protection of the ryots 
and, other oocupants of the soil, that all complaints and suits relating to contracts for the 
cultivation and delivery of indigo plant, and to the possession and produce of lands cul- 
tivated with that plant, should be cognizable in the courts of the moonsiffs, the only esta~ 
blished tribunals accessible to the great body of the cultivating’ classes: And whereas it is 
moreover judged proper, that the cutting down or wilfully damaging indigo crops for the 
purpose of injuring any individual having an interest therein, should be declared an offence 
punishable by the courts of criminal judicature ;—the following Rules have been enacted, 
to be in force from the date of their promulgation throughout the territories subject to the 
presidency of Fort William. 


II. First.—Sections 3, 4, 5 and 6, of Regulation XXXVIII. of 1793; Regulation 
XXXIII.; and Sections 3, 4, 5 and 6,.of* Regulation XLVIII. of 1795; Sections 3, 4, 5 
and 6, of Regulation XIX. of 1803; Regulation VI. 1823, and Regulation V. of 1824, are 
hereby rescinded. 


Second.—Such parts of Regulation XXIII. of 1814, of Regulation XIX. of 1817, and 
of any other Regulation in force, as may be inconsistent with any of the Rules hereinafter 
enacted, are to be considered as null and of non-effect in regard to cases coming within the 
provisions of this Regulation. 


_ III. Europeans -are hereby permitted to purchase, rent and occupy land for the culti- 
vation of indigo plant or any other purpose; and all Europeans, as well British subjects 
as others, who may avail themselves of this.permission, shall be held to be amenable in 
common with the natives of the country to the courts of the moonsiffs, and the other civil 


courts of the district in which the lands purchased, rented or occupied by them may be 


situated, in all matters relating to such lands which may be cognizable in those courts under 
this or any other Regulation in force *. me : 
. TV. It 


;* The; considerations which appear to render it advisable toegrant a general permission to Europeans 
to hold lands are the following: 4 

tay : > : e . 7 4 . 
* ast, .Without allowing indigo manufacturers to occupy lands in the particular cases referred to in 
this draft, it is impossible to make any effectual provision for obviating the evils sought to be 


remedied. - an 


_ ad. Those evils are much more ikely to be effectually. remedied by unlimited: than by limited 
mitting of leases bemg taken by men possessing capital and 
intelligence 


s 


_° GENERAL APPENDIX, 429° prea 


' JV. It is hereby declared, that ‘ryots and all occupants of lands, while their right of Ryots, and other 
~oceupancy exists, are at liberty, so far as may be conSistent with the conditions of their occupants of land, 
‘tenures, to eultivate any article of prodyce, and to engage for : ut liberty to cultivate 
the cultivation of indigo plant with the owner or manager of 2"Y articles of produce they please, coesistently 
sae ae SEE . © with the conditions of their tenures, and to engage 
any. indigo factory wheresoever situated, or with any Person for the cultivation of indigo plant with whomsoever 
* with whom they may judge it to be most conducive to their they may think it most conducive to their jnterest to 
interest to engage; and yt is hereby further declared, that engage. ; 
owners or managers of indigo factories shall not be considered to have any right to the Owners and managers 
produce of lands wheresoever situated, but what may be derived to them by purchase, sp area ed 
jease or other contract, voluntarily entered into by the owners or other persons having legal tg have any right to 


occupancy of the lands *. . the produce of lands, 
wheresoever situated, nt what may be derived to them by contracts entered into by the legal 
occupants of the lands. 


V. First.—Persons engaged in the manufacture of jndigo dye, who may advance capital : 
for the cultivation of indigo plant, or parcels of land of certain defined limits, shMl be Heesons ees 
considered to have a lien or interest vation of indigo plant, or defined parcels of land, to be seneiderea to have an interest 
in the produce of such parcels of in the produce of such land, aud entitled to adopt the means authorized by this 
land, and shall be entitled te avail . Regulation for sccuiing that interest. 
themselves of the means authorized by this Regulation for protecting that interest ; pak 
provided that in each case the conditions on which the advance of capital may Be bee preted abieak 
made shall be recorded in a written deed or instrument, and conditions on which the advance may be ale 
agreed to by the party receiving the advance before two or more shall be executed in the manner herein prescribed. 
witnesses, not being servants or dependants of the other party; and provided also, that the And shall specify 
deed shall contain a specification of the particulars mentioned in the fotlowing clause, and ©¢rtain particulars, 

shall - 


intelligence, and capable of adopting the best mages of cultivation, would lead to the establishment 
of a class of growers of indigo plant, from whom ‘the manufacturers of the indigo dye could reckon 
with confidence on being supplied with the quantity of plant they required, without resorting to the 
objectionable and expensive means which. they must now use to obtain it. Thé advantages which 
would result from the establishment of such a class of growers of tbe plant, both to the manufacturers 
of the dye, and to the owners of the indigo lands, need not be here detailed. 


3d. Unlimited permission, by,rendering European energy and intelligence available, would accelerate 
the general improvement of the agriculture of the country, and add greatly to the amount of its most: 
valuable productions. This consideration may, I submit, be opposed to the objection that will perhaps ° 
be urged against the proposed enactment, on account of the expense which it would render necessary for 
a reform of the local courts of judicature. 


> 
* I have thought this declaratory Section necessary, to obviate the prejudicial effects likely to 
‘result to the ryots from a notion which seems to prevail, that by the establishment of an indigo 
factory near to lands fit for the cultivation of indigo plant, an exclusive right is acquired to the plant 
grown on those lands, and that this right is encroached upon by the subsequent establishment of 
another factory near to and dependent for its supply of plant upon the same Jands; ia other words, it 
would seem to be assumed that all the ryots who have been in the habit of cultivating for the factory 
first established in their vicinity, are the ryots of that factory, and not at liberty to cultivate for any 
other: df such an assumed right were recognized, every factory would be enabled to command, on its 
own terms, all the plant produced within a circle round it, including the ‘most distant lands from which, 
it had at any time drawn its supplies; and the owners and occupants of indigo lands, every, where, 
would be deprived of the advantage arising from the establishment and competition of néw and rival 
factories, an advantage to which they are unquestionably entitled, and which, if duly protected by the 
laws, they could not failto obtain. Itis true that the quantity and quality of indigo lands round. a 
factory, and ibe favourable disposition of the ryots occupying these Jands (termed in the letter of . 
Messrs. Alexander & Co. the “ good-will of the coneern,”) constitute the great part-of the yalue of the 
factory ; but it is no Jess true, that such value can be legitimately preserved only by a liberal and con-, 
ciliatory treatment of those on whose will it depends. = rs 


REsesnty 430 \WPPENDIX 70 REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 

4 

and shall beregistered shall be registered in the court ef the moonsiff of the jurisdiction in which the parcel - 
in the court of the — of land engaged for may be situatdd, and advertised in the village in which the land may 


moonsiff, and adver~ he included, at least three months before the datg fixed for commencing the cultivation of 


tised in the village in 
which the land to the land *. 


which it relates may be included. e 


Particulaw required’ — Second.—The particulars required to be specified in deeds of contract of the nature 
fo be Specihier 1p referred to in the foregoing clause are the following : 


deeds of contract. 
1st. The name of the village in which the parcel of land to be cultivated is included. 
‘ 2d. The boundaries of the said parcel of land, and the number or name under which it 
is recorded in the accounts of the village. 
3d. The rate or price per bundle ofeplant, with the dimensions of the bundle, at which — 
the produce of the land is to be delivered by the contracting ryot or cultivator, and the 
amount of the advance received by him. 
4tl. The date on which the cultivdtion of the land is to be commenced, and the date on 
which it is to be completed. 
ith. The amount of penalty to be incurred for non-performance of the contract. 


pec ot eonuAchs F Third.—On an original deed of contract being produced in the moonsiff’s court, by 

pothemoonat’.  @ party desiring to have it registered, the moonsiff shall cause a correct copy of the deed 
e moonsiff ’s .o : . 

court. td’ be entered in a book to be kept for the purpose in his court; and shall cause an adver- 


tisement or notice containing the substance of the contract, and exhibiting the names of 
the contracting parties, and the name or number, and the boundaries of the parcel of land 
engaged. for, to be stuck up by an officer of his court in a conspicuous place in the village 
in which the land is included, and on a bamboo erected in the field or parcel of land 
described, and also on the door of the house of the contracting ryot, if it cannot be per- 
sonally delivered to lim. 


Moonsiff, after com- | Fourth.—On the registry and advertisement being completed, the moonsiff shall return 
pletion of registry — the original deed to the person from whom # may have been received, with a certificate 

sat advelipesnent of under his signature endorsed on it, specifying the dates of the registry and advertisement ; 
bi oS ‘a soreoa fran and immediately after shall transmit a copy of the deed and of the certificate endorsed on 
whom it may have _}t, to the judge of the zillah or city to whose authority he may be subject +. 


been received, with a certificate endorsed on it ofits having been registered and advertised ; and 
fo transmit a copy of the deed, and of the certificate endorsed on it, to the judge of the zillah or 
city to whose authority he may be subject. ‘ Fifth.— 


How to be advertised, 


* The intention of the provisions of this section is to facilitate the decision of disputes arising out of, 
contracts of the nature referred to, by requiring the specific lands engaged for to be so clearly defined 
in the deeds of contract that their identity may be easily ascertained ; and also to give such publicity to 
the contracts as will enable individuals, considering themselves injuriously affected by them, to prefer 
their objections before the time arrives when the ‘manufacturer will be entitled to adopt the means pro- 
posed to be authorized for securing the produce of the lands. ; 

+ The court of the moonsiff is selected for the place of registry, as being from situation the most 
convenient for all parties, and the only court accessible to the mass of the cultivating classes. 
The being easy of access is essential te the usefulness of an office of registry, and the court of the - 
moonsiff affords that advantage, without greater risk of false registry, or of alteration of deeds after 
tegistry, than would be incurred in any other office against such risk ; indeed, the rule directing a cer- 
tificate to be endorsed by the moonsiff on the original deeds registered, and the immediate transmission 
of copies of the deeds, and of the endorsements on them, to tht judge of the zillah, to be recorded in his © 
court, seems to provide every possible security. ‘ : : . 

I have not made it necessary that the contracting ryots should acknowledge before the moonsiff 
their consent to the conditions of their contracts at the time of registry, because the number of 
ryots engaging every season with a factory may be so great as to make it impossible to procure the 
attendance of all of them at the moonsiff’s court simultaneously ; and it might be exceedingly inconve- 

-nient to the manufacturer, or his agent, to have to attend with some of them at one time, and some at 
. another 3 


GENERAL APPENDIX. 431  AppPunpsz, 


. Vv. 

Fifth—To defray the expense attending’ the ‘registry.ind advertisement of indigo con- cies 
tracts in the manner directed in the foregoing cl&use, the moonsiffs are hereby authorized to 
demand a fee of rupees for every deed so registered and advertised, and to refuse 


the official acts required from them until the fee be paid. 


. Sixth.—All persons shall’ be allowed to inspect and search the register books kept in the Register books kept 
moonsiff’s courts under this Regulation, on payment of a fee of half a rupee for each inspec- pa apie ip atthe 
‘ . » to be open 
tion and search. to inspection on payment of prescribed fee. 
VI. First.—If any person object to a contract registered and advertised as directed in Any person who may 
the preceding section, it shall be competent to such person, within a month from the date ee? a repel 
of the advertisement of the contract, to pre- a petition stating his objections, to the court of the moonsiff rd Late 
‘sent a petition to the moonsiff. in whose the contract may have been registered. 
court the contract may have been registered, stating his objections thereto: on the petition Summons to answer 
- being filed, a summons containing its substance shall he issued to the party to the dispyited to the objections, to 
contract, by whom it may have been registered, requinng him to attend and answer to whom tu be issued. 
the objections preferred against it, either in person or by an authorized agent, within 15 
days. The summons shall be served by delivering a copy of it to the party to whom it is And how to be 
addressed, or if that cannot be done, by affixing a copy of it to the outer door of the said °*Y at 
party’s house, and also in the cutcherry of the village in which the land specified in the 
disputed contract may be included. - - 


Second.—After the period allowed to the party summoned to file his answer shall have ygoonciff to examine 
expired, the moonsiff shall immediately proceed to examine the objections urged against the the evidence offered 
contract in question, and after taking all the evidence adduced . in support, and in 
support ‘of those objections, and also all that may be offered _ refutation of the objections to the disputed contract 5 
in refutation of them, if he shall deem the objections established, and shall consider poe ee eee 
them sufficient to warrant the annulment of the contract, he shall adjudge it to be null, adjadge the contact 
and shall award to the petitioner such reasonable sum to be paid to be null, and award to petitioner a reasonable 
by the party who registered the contract as faay be thought an compensation for his expenses and trouble. 
adequate compensation for the expense and trguble to which the petitioner has been Ifthe objections 
thereby subjected. If, on the other hand, the objections urged to the contract shall appear Pali eurounaed ag 
to be unfounded or invalid, the complaint shall be dismissed, and the petitioner made {eble uae disrtiesed aad 
to the payment of costs, and such sum in addition as may seem to the moonsiff a proper the petitioner nade 
compensation to the party complained against, for any trouble to which he shall have been liable to the payment® 
subjected by the complaint having been preferred *. of costs, and a rea- 

: Proviso 8°able compensation 
to the party com- 

2 . plained ayainst, for 
another; and, moreover, considering the possibility of one person personating another, or engaging the expense to which 
for the cultivation of fand in the occupancy of another, it is by no means certain that a rule re- he may have been 
quiring the attendance of the ehgaging ryot would be more effectual for ascertaining that actual subjected. 
occapants of the lands specified had engaged, than ahe advertisements of the contract which I have 
proposed to substitute. 

* It is obvious that to refer a ryot who has to support himself and family by his labour, to a tri- 
bunal at a distance from the place of his abode for redress, when an act of injustice has been done 
to him, is in effect to deny him redress; and it is therefore indispensable to the attainment of the 
object which this. Regulation has in view, that suits relating to contracts between the manufacturers 
and the cultivators of indigo, should be made cognizable in the first instance by the courts of the 
moonsiffs, or by courts equally accessible to both parties. It appears to me to be impossible otherwise to 
devise means whereby both security to the manuiacturers for the due application of the capital advanced. 
by them, and also protection to the cultivators in the possession and disposal of the produce of their 

* lands, can be afforded. ° 

On these considerations, I have proposed to make all suits under this Regulation cognizable in the 
courts of the moonsifis, assuming those courts to be (as they should be) fit to be entrusted with such 
suits, or that they will be rendered fit by the appointment to the office of moonsiff of men of respectable 
character and requisite qualification, with adeqyate salaries, and by the establishment of an effective 
system of control over their proceedings. ; 


’ 


“Avrunpix, 432 APPENDIX tro REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. . 
V . 


ait _ Proviso Third.—Provided, how%ver, that_an objection to a contract registered in confor- 
Settlement of  mity with the Regulation, grounded on thé allegation that the contracting ryot is not the 
Europgans in India. occupant of the land specified, or on the allegatign that the contracting ryot, although the 
occupant of the land, was not competent to contract for the cultivation of it without the. 
consent of the zemindar or person entitled to the rent thereof, shall not be held sufficient 
to warrant the annulment of such registered contract, unless, in the case of the first alle~ 
ation, it be satisfactorily established by the original accounts of the village in which the 
and is included, and by the testimony of the gomashtah or putwarree, and of the mundel 
or head man of the village, and of the occupants of the adjoining lands, that the person 
objecting to the contract himself cultivated the parcel of land in question in the preceding 
year, and was in the actual occupancy thereof at the time the contract objected to was _ 
made ; and unless, in the case of thé second allegation, it clearly appear from the village 
accounts and the contracting ryot’s cabooleent, or other authentic document, that thé 
objegtor is the zemindar or personeentitled to the rent of the land, and has a right to' 
Further proviso. prescribe the articles of produce to be cultivated thereon: provided also, that no deed of 
contract executed by a ryot for the delivery of indigo plant or other article of produce, 
which does not stipulate for the produce of a specified parcel of land, or deed so stipulating, 
which does not clearly define the parcel intended, shall be deemed sufficient to authorize the 
annulment of a deed executed by the same ryot which shall have been prepared and regis~- 
tered conformably to the rules of the Regulation. : 


When a ryot, whhse VII. In cases in which a ryot having contracted for the cultivation of indigo plant om a 
contract to cultivate defined parcel of land, and whose contract has been registered and advertised as directed in 
pata pete iM __ this Regulation, and has not been subsequently declared null by a judicial decision passed 
ted shall vehi as under the preceding section, shall refuse to cultivate with indigo plant the parcel of land 
cultivate or fulfil his SPeCtfied in the deed of contract, or, after having cultivated it, shall refuse to deliver the 
engagement, the ma- es to the manufacturer with whom the contract was made, such manufacturer shall 
nufacturer withwhom have the option of taking the usufruct of the* specified parcel of land for the then current 
the contfact hasbeen year, subject to the conditions mentioned in the following section; or of prosecuting the 
ee defaulting ryot for the amount of the penalty conditioned in his engagement *. 

current year, of the land specified, or prosecute the defaulting ryot for the : 

penalty conditioned in the deed of contract. 


VIM. First.— 


’ * It is evident that so long as the great body of the ryots who occupy the soil are without property, 
the practice of making advances for the cultivation of the indigo plant must be continued, and that 
the manufacturer‘ can have nothing but the land to look to as security that the capital which he 
advances for its cultivation shall not be misapplied. It seems equally evident, that to render the 
security of the land available, the manufacture® must .be empowered, without previously applying to 
a court of justice (under liability to be compelled to make ample reparation for au undue exercise 

-of the power), to attach and take possession of the land immediately that the ryot who has engaged 
to cultivate it commits an act of default, showing his iftention not to perform his engagement ; for it 
must be remembered, that when the time for ploughing and sowing, or the time for cutting the crop 

‘arrives (at either of which times only the contracting ryot’s intention can be known), the delay of 
aday might render possession useless, and that it is impossible to devise a judicial process which could 
be applied for and issued with the requisite celerity. ' 


Nor does it appear to me (the existence of tribunals capable of affording prompt justice to the ryots 
being always assumed) that any solid objection to vesting the powers of immediate attachment in the 
manufacturer can be urged on behalf of the ryots. It is optional with the latter to engage to cultivate 
or not ; atd therefore they cannot complain of a law which declares that after they have engaged they 
shall be considered to have given the only security they had to offer for the performance of their 

-engagement, especially when the same law affords to them the ample security of the manafacturer’s 
property that he will justly perform his part of the contract. es i: oe ore ee ae 


GENERAL APPENDIX. 433 


VII. First.—In cases in which a manufacturer may deem it advisable to follow the first 
of the courses mentioned in the preceding section, it shall be incumbent upon such mann- 
facturer, 10 days previous to the date fixed by the deed of contract 
for commencing the cultivation, to cause a written notice of his inten- 
tion to adopt that course in the event of the cultivation not being commenced on the 
day fixed, to be served on the contracting ryot, and also a copy of it to be affixed to the 
door of the said ryot’s hduse; and if the cultivation be not commenced on the date, or 
af after being commenced, it be not completed on the date stipulated for its completion, 
it shall be competent to the manufacturer to take possession for the current year of the 
fee of land defined in the deed of contract, and toecultivate it by means of his own or 

ired servants. In case of the land being cultivated by the contracting ryot, it shall be 
incumbent upon the manufacturer, when the plant growing thereon shall be sufficientl 
ripe for ens cut, to cause a written notice to be served on the ryot, and also affixed to 
the door of his house, requiring him to commence the cutting and delivery of the plant on 
a given day; and if the cutting and gelivery of the plant be not commenced on that day, 
and continue till the whole be cut and delivered, it shall be competent to the manufacturer 
to take possession of the plant, and to employ his own or hired people to cut it down 
and carry it to his factogy : provided, however, that a manufacturer who in any year shall 
take possession of a defined parcel of land, or of indigo plant growing on a defined parcel, 
as above authorized, shall be held to have taken possession of such land or plant subject*to 
the payment of whatever rent may be due for the land on account of that year, to the 
zemindar or other person entitled to the rent thereof under existing Regulations, and also in 
satisfaction of all the conditions of the ryot’s contract for the same year *. P 

: econd.— 


* The intention of the provision contained in the conclusion of this clause, is to prevent dispute 
about the quantity of the produce .of the land taken possession of by the manufacturer, and to 
preclude the possibility of a balance being exhibited against the ryot, which would hold him per- 
petuaily bound to cultivate for the manufacturer on such terms as the latter might choose to prescribe. 

The provision may perhaps appear objectionable othe ground that in cases in which a ryot, after 
having received an advance, does not cultivate the land he engaged to cultivate, the expense of the 
cultivation will fall upon the manufacturer, in addition to the advance already made by him for that 
purpose, which advance will consequently be lust to him, But this is an objection which cannot, 
I conceive, be maintained; for the provision allows the manufacturer, in the cases supposed, to take 
all that he can justly claim, and in fact all that there is for him to take. He will, it is to be 
observed, obtain the whole quantity of plant the land is capable of producing, and of course the whole 
value of that quantity ; which value, if the plant be estimated at a fair price, must be sufficient not only 
to cover the rent payable for the land, and the expense incurred in cultivating it, but also to give @ profit 
to the culticator. ‘This profit the manufacturer will have in repayment of the advance made by him to 
the-ryot. Its amount may, indeéd, fall short of the amount of the advance ; but for this there can be no 

‘remedy, and the deficiency must be given up by the manufacturer as an irrecoverable loss, wholly 
ascribable to his own imprudence, in having advan€ed a larger sum than, with reference to the circum- 
stances of the ryot, and the capability of his land, it was safe to do. ' 

In regard to the ryot, the provision seems also unobjectionable. its operation will be most unfa- 
vourable to him when the advance received by him shall be expended in the cultivation of the land, 
of which the produce shall be afterwards taken by the manufacturer. ‘he ryot, in this case, will lose 
the profit which the produce would yield if delivered according to the terms of the contract, supposing 
those terms to be advantageous to him. But the loss will be owing to his own fault, and will be no more 
than a just penalty for his not performing his engagement. 4S 

I would further observe in regard to te provision in question, that it is likely to have a beneficial 
tendency iu two ways. On the one hand, it will make it necessary for the manufacturers to inquire 
more particularly than they now do, as to the extent and capability of the lands occupied by the ryots 
with whom they deal, and to apportion the amount of advance to each, aécording to the probable pro- 
duce of the land which he engages to cultivate. On the other hand, it will tend to induce contracting 
ryots (supposing the terms of contract made with them to be equitable) to keep to their engagements, 
by rendering it difficult for them, without the consent of the parties with whom they contract, to deliver 
to others the produce of the lands contracted for. - e . 

’ ‘* 3 


APPENDIX, 


Vi 


A manufacturer in- 
tending to adopt the 
first course mention- 


ed in the foregoing section, how to Proceed; 


Tn case of the con- 
tracting rygt refusing, 
to cultivate the land. 


In case of the con- 
tractiug ryot refusing, 
after having culti- 
vated the land, to 
deliver the produce. 


Proviso. 


Arvennix, 434 APPENDIX to REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


Police darogahs, Second.—It shall be the duty of the police darogahs in whose jurisdictions land or 
after inspection of | indigo plant may be taken possession of by*an indigo manufacturer under the foregoing 
registered deed of — clause, upon inspection of the deed .of contract ugder which possession is claimed, and 
haat ole aba the certificate of registry required to be endorsed thereon, by section 5 of this Regulation, 
sh ce area and his tO support the possession of the said manufacturer, and to prevent opposition to his servants 
servants taking poss or other people employed by him in cultivating the land and reaping its produce. 

session of land or indigo plant under the foregoing clause. 

Police darogahs also, - It shall also be the duty of the police darogahs to prevent any indigo manufacturer, or. 
to preven 0y dndige the servants of any indigo manufacturer, ploughing land, or taking possession of indigo 
sorruiite of aityaniiin® plant growing on land, for which a vajid deed of contract, with the prescribed certificate of 
manufacturer,plough- Tegistry endorsed thereon, shall not be produced. , : 


ing land, or taking possession of indigo plant growing on land, for which’a registered deed of contract shall not be produced. 


A ryot, considering Third.—In cases in which a ryot shall consider himself aggrieved by having been dis- 
ese ene by possegged by an indigo manufacturer of land, or of indigo plant growing on land in his 
eth ab indigo cecupancy, such ryot shall be at liberty within three mgnths from the date of the disposses~ 
manofacturer of land, Sion complained of, if the estimated value of one year’s gross produce of the land from 
or of the produce of which he may have been dispossessed shall not exceed 100 rupees, and within three years 
‘landinhis occupancy, from that date, if the said value shall exceed 100 rupees, to instjtute a suit against the 
at liberty to sue the manufacturer for compensation for the injury done ‘by him, in the court of the moonsiff in 
manufacturer for Oo ees asc ; ; : ; : 

compensation, in the Whose jurisdiction the land in question may be situated. 


court of the moonsiff in whose jurisdiction the land may be situated. 


On suit being filedin = Qn such suit being filed in the moonsiff’s court, a summons containing the substance of 
seen eae it shall be issued and served in the manner directed in clause 1, of section 6, of this 
issued to the manafacturer complained against, Regulation, requiring the manufacturer complained against to answer 
to answer to the plaint within 15 days. to the complaint, either in person or by an authorized agent, within’ 
Summins how to be tte Period of 15 days, reckoning from the end of the month which usually: concludes the 
served,and the period S€480n for manufacturing indigo, if the summgns be issued during that season, and from 
specified ineit from what date the date on which the summons ma be served, if issued at any other time 
to be reckoned. - of the year. After the period ablowed for filing an answer to the plaint shall 
After expiration of — have expired, the moonsiff shall take the evidence adduced by the complainant in support 
cae he of his allegations, and any evidence that may be offered in refutation thereof; and if on 
plaint, the moonsiff to take the evidence adduced,both @ Consideration of the whole evidence the moonsiff shall be of 
for and against the plaintifi’s allegations ; opinion that the complainant was deprived of the possession 
And if of opinion that of the land specified in his plaint, or of plant growing thereon, by the manufacturer com- 
Pa eee plained against, or by his servants, without the complainant having rendered himselt 
apeciied inhis plant ororul . liable to be dispossessed under the provisions of this Regulation, he shall 
9 plant growing . f ° : 
thereon, to adjudge compensation to be adjudge the said manufacturer to pay to the complainant as compensation 
paid to him by defendant, with costs of suit. for the injury suffered by him, over and above the costs. of the suit, a sum 
Amount of compenu- - of money equal to the value which the land specified, if cultivated with the most valuable 
sation, how to be product of the village in which it is situated,*may be estimated to be capable of yielding in 
estimated. ? : 

a favourable year, and a further sum equal to the full amount of the penalty to which the 
complainant under the deed of contract executed by him would have been liable had he 
refused to perform its conditions ; or, if he shall not have executed any deed, a’sum equal 

; to the highest rate of penalty specified in the deeds of the neighbouring ryots. On the 
Ifthe complainant other hand, if the complainant shall be deemed by the moonsiff to have rendered himself 
be deemed bythe liable to be dispossessed of the land or plant in question, under the provisions of this 
RTCA etiad Regulation, his complaint shall be dismissed, and he shall be adjudged to pay, the costs of 
to be dispossessed, the suit, and such sum in addition as may seem to the moonsiff a proper compensation to 
costs of suit and the party complained against, for any trouble to which he may be subjected *. ; 
compensation for ‘ “oy ; so 1X. First, 
trouble to be ad~ 


judged to the party . : : ‘ we : re : : fats es 
complained against. Tt seems expedient that the time allowed for instituting suits under this Regulation, arising out ef 


transactions of small value, should be limited toa short period after the cause of action may arise, with 
i. a view to the prevention of the obviously objectionable practice of allowing such claims to lie dormant 
‘ until 


GENERAL APPENDIX. 435 


APPENDIX, 


_IX. First.—In cases in which an indigo manufactureg may not think it advisable to avail 4 manufacturer, not 
himself of the option given to him of taking possession of land, or of the pfoduce of land taking possession of 


- in the occupancy of @ cultivator refusing to perform the con- 
ditions of a contract agreed to by him; and also when that 
course cannot be adopted, in consequence of the deed of con- 

+ tract not stipulating for the produce of any particular portion 
of Jand, such manufactuger shall be at liberty to institute a 
suit in the court of the moonsiff in whose jurisdiction the alleged defaulter may reside, for 

* the amount of the penalty conditioned in his engagement, provided the petition of plaint 


shall be preferred within three months from the date of the alleged default, in case of the 
penalty claimed not exceeding the sum of 100 rupees, and within three years from that 
’ date, m case of the claim exceeding the said suga of 100 rupees. On such suit being 
filed in the moonsiff’s court, a summons containing the substance of the plaint shall 
be issued and served in the manner directed im clause 1, of section 6, of this Regula- 
tion, requiring the alleged defaulter to answer to *the claim preferred, either in erson 
-or by an authorized agent, within 15 days, reckoning from the end of the month which 
usually concludes the season for manufacturing indigo, if the summons be issued during 
that season, and from the date on which the summons shall be served, if issued at any 
other time of the year. " After the period allowed for filing an answer to the claim shall 


have expired, the moonsiff shall take the evidence adduced by the manufacturer in support’ 
of his claim, and also any evidence that may be offered 
by the alleged defaulter in support of his objections 


thereto; and if on a consideration of the whole evidence, the moonsiff shall be of opinion 
that the deed of contract filed by the manufacturer was agreed to by the cultivator, and 


that he dishonestly refused to fulfil his engage- 
ments in the manner stipulated, the moonsiff shall 


land, or of the produce 


of land in the occupancy of a cultivator refusgig to per- 
form the conditions of his contract, at liberty to in- 
stitute a suit in the court of the noonsiff in whose ju- 
risdiction the defaulter may reside, for the amount of the 
penalty conditioned in his engagement. 


Period within which 
such suit must be 
instituted. 


On suit being filed, a 
summons to be issued 
requiring the alleged 
detaulter to answer to 
the claim preferred 
in 15 days. 

From what date the 
period specified in the 
summons is to be 
reckoned. + 
After the expiration 
of the period allowed 
for filing an answer, 


the moonsiff to take the evidence both for and against the claim. 


If it be established 
that the defendant 
agreed to the deed of 


contract filed by the plaintiff, and that he refused to fulfil its con- 
ditions, the moonsiff to adjudge him to pay to the plaintiff the 


adjudge him to pay tothe manufacturer the fullamount full amount of penalty specified in the deed, or to be imprisoned 
of the pouty conditioned by the contract, with the _ fora limited period. 


costs o 


suit, or to be imprisoned in the dewanny gaol of the zillah for such limited time as 


-may be deemed an adequate punishment. for his dishonesty: provided, however, that 
in cases in which a contracting cultivator prosecuted under this section, shall plead 
inundation, or other calamity of season which he could not prevent, as the cause of his 
failure to fulfil his engagement, and the truth of the plea shall be satisfactorily proved, 
and it shall not be expressly stated in the deed of contract that he agreed to take the 
whole of such risk himself, he shall not be held to have incurred the penalty specified m the 
deed, and such award shall be passed as under all circumstances may be deemed to be 


equitable*, — 


Second.— 


until they accumulate to an amount not easily satisfied, and give a legal power of compelling the 
consent of the debtors to terms disadvantageous to them in the negociation of future contracts. 

The limitation proposed would also tend to encourage the establishment of substantial indigo plant 
growers, by operating as a discouragement to manufacturers dealing directly with the inferior classes of 


cultivators. 


* It was obvious that the penalty conditioned in deeds of contract, executed by ryots who possess no 


property, will have little or no effect in inducing them to fulfil the conditions of their engagements, if 
the courts be only empowered to adjudge them to pay the penalty, and if imprisonment in execution of 
the decrees passed against them may be evaded by claiming the benefit of the Regulation for the relief 


of insolvent debtors, to which they must be admitted, or suffer imprisonment for life. On this con- 
sideration, I have thought it expedient to provide, that ryots dishonestly evading the fulfilment of their 
engagements, shall be adjudged either to pay the pecuniary penalty conditioned in the engagements, or 
in lieu thereof, to undergo such a limited term of imprisonment as may be deemed an adequate punish- 


ment for the dishonest act committed by them. 


This provision, I beg to remark, will. have the same effect as ‘the measure recommended in the 


memorial of the Jessore manufacturers. 


3K2 


Proviso, 


Arrepix, 436 APPENDIX ro REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


Any person not being = Second.—In cases in which a rygt, who has contracted for the cultivation of indigo plant 
@ party to a registered : 


.,. 01. a defined parcel of land, and whese contract has been registered and advertised in con- 
deed of contract, in- ‘ : oe : . : 
ducingthe contracting formity with the provisions of this Regulation, shall have been mduced by a person not 
cultivatowto evade a party to such contract to evade the performance of its conditions, it shall be competent 
performance s a to the party injured thereby to prosecute such person in the court of the moonsiff for his 
aN Oy : undue interference, in like manner as it-is competent to him -to ° 

e prosecuted in the court of the mounsif for such 2 he defaulti ath he. : 
interference, by the party injured thereby ; prosecute the defaulting ryot in that cpurt under the oregoing 
clause of this section; andif it shall be established by the evidence , 

And on its being adduced, that the defendant received any part of the produce of the parcel of land which 
kia pane nance the defaulting ryot was bound by his registered deed of contract to deliver to the prose- 
parcel atiand ani sci. cutor, the moonsiff shall adjudge the defendant to pay to the prosecutor the amount of the 
fied in the registered Penalty specified in the said deed, together with all costs of suit *, 
deed of contract, to be adjudged to pay to the prosecutor the 
amount of penalty specified therein, with costs of suit. . 


Every decision passed  X. @First.—Any person who may ‘be dissatisfied with a decision ‘passed by a moonsiff 
by a moonsiff, under under this Regulation, shall he at liberty to appeal from it to the judge of the city or 
this Regulation, may ziliah to whose authority the moonsiff who 


be appealed from, to the city or zillah judge to whose authority the moon- <8 : . 
siff passing the decree may be subject, provided the petition of appeal be passed the decision may be subject, provided 


preferred within three months fiom the date of the decree appealed trom.- the petition of appeal be presented to the judge 
° within the period of three months from the 
The decision of the date of the moonsifl’s decision. The decision of the city or zillah judge on the appeal 
pans te ae shall be final, unless the Sudder Dewanny Adawlut shall see special reason for revising 
final ; PP his proceedings ; in which case it shall be competent to that court to admit a special or 
But SudderDewanny second appeal, and to annul or alter the decision of the city or zillah judge, as may be 
Adawlut may admit deemed epee 
a second appeal on special grounds, : 
City and zillah ©. + Second.—lIt shall be competent to a city or zillah judge, to whom an appeal may be 
juteor) 1a appeals q preferred under the foregoing clause, and also *to the Sudder Dewanny Adawlut, in a case 
ae Bidder Dewauiy in which a special appeal may be admitted by that court under the same clause, to affirm 
Adawlut, in special appeals admitted by that the decision appealed from, without calling upon the party interested 
court, competent to affirm the decision ap- in‘ its being upheld to file an answer to grounds urged for the appeal, 
pealed from, without calling for an answer to’ if after a revision of the whole of the proceedings -held in the case 
the grounds urged for the appeal. — those grounds shall be deemed insufficient to warrant the reversal 
Bae epierieea eae or alteration of the decision; provided, however, that no decision appealed from shall be 
Lapapain ae reversed or altered without notice of the appeal having been given to the party in whose 
without notice of the favour the decision may have been passed, and a. reasonable time allowed to such party 


appeal havingbeen given tothe partyin whose _ to file an answer to the objections urged against it by the appellant. 
favour the decision may lave been passed. 


The rules in forcein XI. The rules in force in regard to the value of stamp paper to be used, and the fees 


regard to stamp paper : ; : . : : 
a feces sti pumuauty chargeable in summary suits and summary afpeals, and also the rule which requires that 


suits and summary appeals, and also the rule requiring sum- SUMmary suits and BUrIaaLy. appeals shall be taken up 
mary suits and summary appeals to be tried before suits and and disposed of before suits and appeals standing on the 
appeals standing on the regular file of the courts, to be appli- regular file of the courts, shall be applicable to suits 
cable to suits and appeals instituted under this Regulation ; and appeals instituted under this Regulation ; provided, 
But the decrees however, that the decrees passed in suits and appeals under this Regulation shall .have’ 
err nene e equal force and validity as decrees passed in‘ regular suits; it being hereby declared, 
Haiaioa tohave _ that the said suits shall be subject to the rule in regard to regular suits which enacts that . 
equal validity as de. the cause of action in such suits, after having been tried by a court competent. to take cogni- 
crees passed in regu- ‘ ° zance ° 
lar suits and appeals, leas est ote os edhe 


* The provision contained in this clause, it will be remarked, is in effect the same as that suggested 
in the letter of Messrs, Alexander & Co. 


GENERAL APPENDIX. 437. APPENDIX, 
zance thereof, shall not be tried a second time by the same court, and shall not be open to —_— 
further litigation in any shape but that of appeat to a suptrior court *. 


XII. First.—Whenever a party obtafnmg a decree in the court ofa moonsiff, under A patty obtaining a 

the provisions of this Regulation, shall be desirous of having it enforced,. he shall present decrée pas beanie 
a petition, either in person or by an authorized agent, to the moonsiff who passed the sae ee, a 

decree, praying for its exeeution, either by the arrest and imprisonment of the party a petition for execu- 
_ answerable for the amount adjudged, or by the attachment and sale of any property that tion to the moonsiff 

may be possessed by him, a specification and description of which shall be annexed to the who passed the 

petition. The moonsiff, after comparing the petition with the decree in the original record laa hei 

of the suit, shall cause the party against whom executton is applied for to be served with 5 aiieeh ay pie 

a written demand for payment of the amount adjudged be served upon the party against whom execution is applied 

against him, within the period of 15 days: the demand - for, requiring him to pay the amount of decree in 1§ days. 
. shall be served by a peon of the moonsiff’s court, and The written demand, how to be served. 

if it cannot be served personally on the party to who it is addressed, it shall be agfixed 

to the outer door of his usual place of residence,. which shall be deemed to be 4 sufficient 

service of it. 7 


Second.—If the amount due under the decree shall not be satisfied within 15 days, the If the amount of the 
moonsiff, immediately after the expiration of that period, shall report the case to the judge decree be notsatisfied 
of the city or zillah to whose authority he may be subject, transmitting with his report 15 day eae 
copies of the decree, of the petition applying for its execution, of the demand served upon to the tadge se 


the party answerable for its amount, and of the return made thereto. city or zillah towhose authority he may be subject. 


Third.—On the receipt of the moonsiff’s report by the city or zillah judge, the latter, if The city or zillah 
the person answerable for the amount, of the decree possess property “of value equal to judge, on ieceipt of 
the amount, shall cause such property to be attached and advertised for sale in satisfaction the moonsift’s re- 
of the decree, conformably to the rules prescribed in Regulation VII. of 1825, and shall Ph 0 See ns 
order the property to be,sold on the day appointed answerable for the amount of the decree to b pitnehed and yonEht 
for the sale to take place agreeably to advertise~ to sale, conformaily to the rules of Regulation VII, 1825. 
ment, should the decree not be previously satisfied. 

If the poe answerable for the amount of the d&cree possess no property, the judge shall If the person answer- 


cause him to be arrested and committed to the dewanny gaol, to be there confined for the a peer ne pre 
as ; : , the judge to 
limited period adjudged by the decree. cause him to be arrested and imprisoned for the period adjudged by he se 


Fourth.—In cases in which an appeal shall be preferred from the decree of the moonsiff In cases in which aw 
within the time allowed for appealing, it shall be compe- appeal may be preferred against the moonsiff’s decree, 
tent to the judge to stay execution pending the appeal; execution may be stayed pending the appeal. : 
provided property answerable for the amount of the decree shall have been attached, or if Proviso. 
no property be forthcoming, provided the appellant shall give sufficient security for his 
appearance when required, m the event of the decree being atlirmed. 


Fifth.—Petitions for the execution of decrees passed under this Regulation shall be Petitions for the exe- 
presented, if the amount of decree do not excted 100 rupees, within the period of three ree of airs 
months, and if the amount exceed that sum, within the period of one year from the date of Passer mnter “ils 

- : Pours ; A : egulation, within 
the decree for the execution of which the application is made. In cases in which execution what period to be 
shall not be applied for within the prescribed period, the decree-holders shall be considered preferred. 


to have relinquished their rights to. demand execution *. 
: ’ XIII. No 


* It is to be observed, in regard to the s@its intended to come within the provisions of this Regulation, 
that although made subject to the rules applicable to summary suits for reducing law charges and 
ensuring speedy decision, they will be in every other respect the same as regular-suits ; that is to say, 
the whole evidence on both sides will be examiwed, and the whole merits of the dispute investigated 
before decision. 

t For the reason of the provision contained in the last clause of this section, see the Note marked (*), 
jn explanation of Section VIII, ; ; 


Arrenpix, 438 APPENDIX to REPORT rrom SELECT.COMMITTEE. 


- 


Explanation in re- XIII. No objection shall be taken against any deed of contract for the cultivation, and 
gard to ne ne delivery of indigo plant on accoun¥of its nos bearing the proper stamp, provided ‘that it be 
Fseneai forthe executed on fener Dealing a, stamp of such an amognt as would be required under the rules 
cultivation and de- in force for a bond of the amount actually advanced, or acknowledged to be advanced, as 


livery ofindigo plant the consideration for entering into the agreement. 
may be written. A : ‘ : 
The cutting down by XIV. The cutting down and taking away by force or otherwise, or the damaging or 
force, or damaging © causing to be damaged by means of cattle or otherwise, indigo plant growing on land, 
indigo plant, tothe — for the cultivation 6f which an advance of capital has been made by an indigo manufac 
pe oF ery eee turer or other person, to the injury of such manufacturer or other person, or of the ryot 
the ba declared to DY Whom the plant may have been cfiltivated, is hereby declared to be a criminal offence, 
he an offence punish- punishable by the magistrate with imprisonment and labour for a term not ,exceeding 
able by the magis- one year. . ; 
trate. i 

Gasia desided Sith In cases attended with severe wougding or homicide, or other aggravating circumstances, 


aygravating circum- the persons charged with having been concerned in the commission of the offence shall be 
stances to be made brought to trial before the commissioner of circuit, and shall be liable, on conviction, 


over for trial to the tg such punishment as the commissioner, under the general Regulations, may be competent 
commissioners of- to award : 
circuit. ° 


~e ate near = ——. nr 


(68.)IndigoPlanters: (68.)—Mr. H. T. Prinsep’s NOTES, dated 26th October 1829. ‘ 


Mr.Prinsep’sNotes; — Vote.—1I HAVE made an Abstract of Mr. Ross’s Regulation for disputes regarding indigo 
26 October 1829. plant which is aimexed hereto, having deemed it impossible to judge of a matter of this 
‘description without having the substance of the rules in a compressed form before me, so as 
to. allow ready comparison one with another, and that the scope and effect of the whole 
» might be seen by having ajl the parts in a small compass under view at the same time. 
What is new in principle in the Regulatien may be summed up shortly under the fol- 
lowing heads: me 
Section III. ist. Europeans have full liberty given them to purchase, lease and occupy all manner 
_of tenures of land, under the condition of liability to all the civil courts, whether adminis- 
tered by native or European judges. 
Sections IV. & VI. 2d. Ryots are declared_to have the right of determining what crop shall be taken from 
Third. land, unless the contrary can be proved by the zemindar, and of disposing of their crop of 
indigo plant at pleasure. 


Sections V.& VI. 3d. Indigo manufacturers engaging with ryots for plant grown on defined parcels of 
land, and registering their contracts with the moonsiff, have a hen, and may enforce it on 
their own authority, over the land for cultivation, if they please, and over the crop for reap- 
ing, being answerable however for the zemigdar’s revenue. 

(WV. B.—By Regulation VI. 1823, they have only a lien on the indigo crop, enforce- 
able by summary process to be taken out in the zillah adawlut.) 


Section VIII. | 4th. For abuse of the authority so granted, the manufacturer may be sued before the 

, Clause Third. moonsiff, and cast in the same penalty as the contract stipulated against the ryot, besides 
costs; the suit, however, is not to be proceeded in till after close of the indigo season, and 

then to be tried after 15 days. : 


+ 


Section IX. First. 5th. Manufacturers may sue out the penalty of their contracts before the moonsiffs, in 
€ lieu oa poses against the land or crop, in which case the calamity of season may be 

pleaded in bar, unless the contrary is specially stipulated:. If decreed against the ryot, the 
decree to adjudge a term of imprisonment in commutation. 


4 


Section 1X.Second.. 6th. A third party sao ge a ryot to fail in his contract, to be liable for his penalty, on 
proof of receipt of any part of the crop. 


¥ 


7th. One 


GENERAL APPENDIX. 439 


ith. One appeal allowed to the zillah judge, who ray dismiss without calling on the 


decree-holder to plead, if not satisfied with the grounds of appeal. Second appeal may be 


allowed by Sudder Dewanny Adawlut to¢hat court only. 


8th. Exemption from institution fees and other stamp duties levied in regular suits; also 
*the advantage of priority of adjudication is granted as in summary suits, with the full effect 
of a regular decree. ‘ : 


+ 9th. Making away with plant proved by a registered contract, or damaging it by turning 
‘ im cattle, is made a criminal offence cognizable by the magistrates. 


The other provisions are of detail, prescribing forms’ to be observed. These Government 

. may adhere to or vary at pleasure. The first questiow is, whether the above principles are 

sound, and ought they to be admitted wholly or in part as the basis of an enactment; will 

, they remove the evils complained of, or do other good to the parties whose interests are at 

stake, or to either or any of them, without prejudice to®others? In so far as these que@tions 

can -he answered affirmatively, the rules proposed may be adopted, but if the benefit be 

doubtful and injury to any class apparent, Government will not, it is presumed, entertain 
propositions which threaten such a result. o 


First.—The unrestricted authority for Europeans to hold land without bemg subject to 
the local criminal law, is a measure this Government can scarcely venture upon at present. 
There are many well-informed people who do not consider the nght of holding land to be 
at all connected with the necessary local control of ere residents; who think the 
latter equally indispensable whether the Europeans hold land or not; nay, who go the 
length to argue that the confusion which calls for the remedy of a local tribunal ig greater, 
because of the shifts and expedients resorted to in consequence of the restrictions to their 


holding lands: I am not of this opinion. The unqualified removal of the restrictions of ” 


Europeans holding land, would open to them a new branch of speculation not entered 
upon by them hitherto, because of their legislative exclusion, viz. land jobbing or other 
zemindarry jobbing. The purchase of tenures sold by the courts or collector for arrears 


¥ 


or for private debts, with a view to profit from enltancing the revenues drawn from the ryots, - 


.is, and most fortunately for the credit of the Government and nation, has been since 1793, 
confined to natives. Had the old families holding rajugees and zemindaries, which to the 
extent of more than half of the Government janie. Or Bengal, were sacrificed to the 
inflexible rigour of the Cornwallis system, seen their estates, one after the other, fall into the 
hands of English adventurers; had they seen these Poe watching about the collector’s 
cutcherry fora bargain purchase at each public sale, their feelings, and those of the great body 
of the people, towards their governors, would have been widely different from what they now 
are. It cannot however be necessary to enter on this ground; suffice it that hitherto, notwith- 
standing that natives have carried speculation in zemind: purchases to a mischievous 
extreme, so as to call for a legislative remedy for the evils which ensued, there has been no 
land jobbing by Europeans; there have mdeed been occasional purchases and more fre- 

uent farms be namee, that is, in the name of native dependants or children, but these have 

‘all been subsidiary to other speculations, to aid the extension of indigo cultivation, or to 
afford facilities for more chimerical projects, which have been attempted everywhere with 
various success, and the farms have been taken and the purchases made with an anticipa- 
tion of loss on the bargain more frequently than the contrary; nothing of the kind has been 
entered upon’ as a primary object of speculation, and that simply because it was forbidden, 
and because no capitalist at Calcutta would advance the funds for engaging in such a line 
of adventure so long as it was so. If the restriction were at once to be wholly removed; 
this line of adventure must be’ expected to be superadded to the other inducements to reside 
and seek fortune in the interior which now exist; and while the number of adventurers 
would be augmented beyond measure, their relations with the people would be more 
complex, and the materials of collision would be infinitely multiplied, while the single 
restraining authority at present possessed by Government, in its power of removing Euro- 

” " peans. 
s 


APPENDIX, 
td 


Section X. 


Section XL. 


Section XIV. 


Aerenvix, 440 APPENDIX ro REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 
Vz. 


— peans without trial, would becomé wholl inefficient. With what face could the Govern- 
Settlement of | ment ask to reserve to itself a power of removing a man from his inherited or purchased 
Europegns in India. f-eehold? And how can it be reconciled to the 4aws and prejudices of England, whence 
confirmations of this authority will have very shortly to be solicited, to leave in the hands. 
of Government the means of separating the proprietor from his fee simple, and the tenant, 
who has been encouraged by the law to embark capital freely in a speculation for increased ‘ 
produce from his tenure, at the moment perhaps when it begins‘ o yield return. What has 
been said hitherto applies only to born subjects of England ; their legitimate descendants 
born in this country, with the rights of their parents in respect to law and those of their 
country for location, will be muchemore embarrassing. In short, what is meant to be 
urged is simply this, that wholly to remove a restrictions on the residence and 
occupation of land by Europeans before we have a local law strong enongh to control 
Europeans, or a legislature competent to make such a law, would be beginning at the 
wrong end; to say nothing of theedoubtful competency of this Government legally to * 
make a great alteration in the constitution of the Government and its system of admi- 
nistration, as established under orders from England, and as confirmed by the Legislature 
‘of England, nor of the obligation to obtain from the same authorities some previous sanc- 
tion for every departure from the fundamental principles they Jave laid down for our 
guidance. © 


Section III. of Mr. Ross’s draft may, however, be omitted without injury to other 
principles of his proposed enactment; and it is to be considered how far these also will 
stand question. 


The second point noticed above is, the declaration of the ryot’s right to cultivate what 
Pee he pleases, and to engage to deliver his crops to whomsoever he pleases. 

believe it would be of the best effect,.and no more than their just right, to make this 
declaration in behalf of the khoodkosht ryots of Bengal; but in the draft it is put much 
too generally. When land is assessed with a money rent according to its quality, nothing 
can be fairer than to leave the occupant cultivator to settle what he will grow each year, 
and how dispose of his crop; but nearly half the land of Bengal is rated Sy its produce: 
rice land paying so much, and sugar land, &c. its different rate. In such cases no change, 
can be made without an arrangement between the parties; and to allow sugar land to be 
turned to indigo at the will of the ryot only, would deprive the receiver of the rent or 
revenue of more than half his income. In like manner, when the zemindar’s rent or revenue 
is drawn as a proportion of the crop, or as commutation for the same, a change made to 
indigo without his knowledge would wholly disorganize his relations with the tenant, who | 
might yet be an hereditary occupant entitled to hold, without power in the zemindar to 
remove him. The remedy afforded in Section VI. third clause of the draft, throws the onus 
of proof on the zemindar, and is sharp practice against him, seeing that he will be con- 
cluded in perpetuity if the manufacturer’s contract be once admitted to registry. If 
Mr. Ross’s rule had been drawn as applitable only to ryots paying fixed money rents for 
defined portions of land, there eould be no objection to it; on the contrary, it would be 
a highly beneficial provision, as tending to declare their rights and establish their inde- 
pendence, but it will do mischief if left general. 


Third.—The extension of the len granted by Regulation VI. 1823, to the usufruct of 
the land, instead of confining it to the crop of indigo growing thereon, is a beneficial pro- 
vision, and I think manufacturers might be allowed to enforce planting and reaping, where 
they have contracts for defined parcels of land, uf some manner analogous to that laid 
down. But the condition of registry and advertisement in the moonsiff’s court, according ‘ 

‘to the process of the draft, will quite defeat the provision of any good effect it is calculated 

_ to produce: for, in the first place, engagements are seldom entered into, and advances 

never made, so much as three months before the commencement of the time for cultivation; 
nor’ is the time of’ cultivation anywhere fixed and certain; im Bengal, it is always , 

dependent on the fall of rain. Again, the engagements are counted by thousands for each 

. ‘ factory 


GENERAL APPENDIX. 441  Avrenpix, 
air vs 


factory of any size,and in amount run for the most part from two and three rupees to eight ; 
and ten advanced on each: the expense and trouble of I creer and advertising, and of (68.)IndigoP lanters 
making the copies prescribed of so many deeds? not to niention. the stamps, would amount Mr.Prinsep’s Notes; 
to 50 per cent. at least on the total adwances of a factory, and would consequently be an 26 October 3829. 
expense both of money and (what is of more importance) of time, such as no concern 
could bear. Doubtless, specification of the land with its boundaries, so as to be capable 
*of identification, must be a condition of a manufacturer’s obtaining process against land 
‘ or against its crop. The farther condition of registration, with notice served both on the 
ryot and upon the land, is superfluous and impracticable, and calculated to render abortive 
the whole provision. Dsl ; 
The remedy afforded by this part of the draft seems to proceed upon the principle, that 
all the affrays, violence and bloodshed that take place, have their origin in the difficulty 
’ experienced by indigo manufacturers in holding rydts of acknowledged occupancy, who 
have allowed their land to be measured off and defined, and have publicly signed contracts 
‘ for growing indigo there for delivery at a given factowy, to the terms and stipulatiogs of 
their engagements ; but it is not on account of such ryots that affrays occur; it is where, 
_in the eagerness to extend cultivation, the manufacturer presses money upon a half-unwilling 
ryot, or. on one of several jomt ryots, or on ryots who have no right to change their cultiva- 
tion without the zemindar’s permission, or on ryots not in possession; in all which, 
and 500 similar cases that might be cited, the manufacturer has not the land measured 
out to him and specified, but relies on the ryot’s word as to his possession, and as to the 
jJand’s fitness for the plant, confirmed perhaps by a dishonest. gomashta. Ryots, in any 
of the above predicaments, will get advances from as many factories as they can, intending 
to be dishonest to all. The remedy should be sought, not by increasing the power of the 
manufacturer over his good ryots, about which there is no dispute, but by applying checks 
to the practice of entermg: into loose contracts, and making advances to unknown persons, 
‘without seeing the land engaged to be cultivated. With Mr. Ross, I would give no redress 
to a planter who made advances without visiting the land in person, and having it mea- 
sured out te him, and in whose contracts the boundaries were not specifically described 
and laid down, so as to be capable of identification: a rule of this kind would do infinite 
good, provided the police and courts were strong enough to prevent people from thriving 
by violence; but the manufacturers trust, at present, to their lutheeal to supply the defi- 
ciency of their contracts. The stronger party benefits always by’ the looseness of an 
engagement; and while this is the case, that is, while through the inefficiency of the 
existing law to protect the weaker, the manufacturers can bear down the ryots by hired 
ruffians, it may be part of their policy to cry out against the system, as compelling them 
to resort to such means of righting themselves; but Government will not readily be per- 
suaded that they are the oppressed class who require to have their hands strengthened by 
farther legislative provisions. I do not say this would be the effect of Mr. Ross’s proposed 
Regulation; for Mr. Ross has’ very properly required a contract, with specification of 
boundaries and other clear stipulations, as the condition of a manufacturer’s exercising 
the powers he has conferred; but for this very feason it will be ineffectual for the purpose, 
and will neither prevent affrays and fights for the growing crop, nor afford facilities in 
settling the disputes when brought afterwards mto court by parties, none of whom will be 
found to have the pukka.engagement Mr. Ross has assumed as a preliminary to the 
application of his remedy. . 
Fourth.—The fourth point noticed as new in the draft is, that it opens the moonsiff’s 
.courts for redress. The class of persons who fill the sttuations of moonsiff throughout the 
country are unfortunately not of the frst credit and respectability. It is said that every 
large manufacturer makes a point of having the police darogahs in his pay: it would be 
inuch more worth his while, if this Regulation were to pass, to pay for the moonsiff’s good 
will; and unless the situation were differently filled from what it is at present, he would 
assuredly do so. If local pergunnah courts could be provided of good character, and filled 
with men of the class who are now generally appointed sudder ameens, I should see no 
3L . objection 


APPENDIX, 


V. 


Settlement of 
Europeans in India. 


442 APPENDIX tro REPORT trom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


objection to. making them the arbiters of quarrels between indigo manufacturers and their 
ryots and neighbours, or even wh zemindars; and if it be intended to substitute such 
ersons for the present moonsiffsf the rulé or something similar might be passed; but 
Vshould prefer to see it drawn for making the gases cognizable by sudder ameens, with 
power to the Government to increase their number and locate them when required, because 
of the good repute these officers enjoy, which the moonsiffs do not. 
With respect to the fifth point, the summary process for recovery of the penalty, when" 
the manufacturer prefers this to proceeding against the land or erop, and the admission of 


_ the plea of calamity of season in bar to such an action, with the adjudication of a term of 


imprisonment for default of payment, are new provisions. There is one objection, however, 


. which occurs in limine to the grant of any special favoured process in respect to contracts 


for delivery of indigo. Why confine the rule to indigo, when the same principle will apply 


to advances for sugar, cotton, rice, or Any other produce? The summary process should be © 


abe to all or none; and for this reason, the consideration of this part of the draft should 
e taken up along with the determination as to the expediency of passing a Regulation of the 
kind proposed by me, some time ago, for the purpose of opening the summary courts to all 
simple-contract debts, agreeably to the instructions to that effect issued by the Honourable 
Court of Directors. Supposing Mr. Ross’s rule to be made general for all contracts, and 
assuming the moonsiff’s court to be put on the respectable footing of the present sudder 
ameen’s courts, I see no objection to the principle of these provisions of this draft, nor to 
tie admission of the plea of calamity of season, and the fixing by the decree a limit to the 
term of.imprisonment in default of payment, the defaulter being then released under the 
rules applicable to insolvents. 


Sixth.—I see also nothing inequitable in making an interloper, who has induced a ryot to 
fail in his contract, answerable jointly and severally with him for the penalty; nor in making 
proof of the clandestine receipt of ihe article contracted for to another, by the interloper, 
sufficient evidence of his being the inducing party to warrant decree against him; but this 
also should be extended to all articles, and not confined to indigo. 


Seventh.—The single appeal to the zillah judge, with special appeal to the Sudder Dewanny 
Adawlut when the failure of justice is glaring, are manifest improvements on the present 
system, which leaves cases to be observed for years in the most defective of all civil 
tribunals, the provincial courts of appeal. I should anticipate, however, that both before 
the moonsiff’s and in the zillah court, cases instituted under the Regulation would frequently 


be found to involve new points of law and complex interests, such as it would be the . 


height of injustice to decide summarily, and pass a conclusive decree upon, without allowing 
both the time to plead and produce evidence, and the process of investigation laid down for 
disputes of a formal character, when made matter of regular action. The rule, therefore, 
of my draft allowing transfer of a case by the judge, whether native or European, to the 
regular file, will deserve consideration, if the draft should be approved, or a Regulation 
founded on it be ordered to be prepared. | . 


Eighth.—-Europeans can be allowed no eemption from stamp duties for their cases which 
may not be granted to natives. The quarrels of indigo planters are not, par excellence, 
entitled to indulgence in this respect; so long, therefore, as the institution fee is paid for the 
court’s assistance in recovering any kind of contract debt, the manufacturers of indigo must 
pay it on their suits, whether the process of investigation be shortened or not. This ques- 
tion, like that of the expediency of opening the summary courts for the recovery of simple- 
contract debts, must be taken up and considered as a general.one, not as connected merely 
with. the disputes between indigo manufacturers and gheir ryots. 


Minth.—There cannot be the least objection to the ninth and last-mentioned rule; viz. that 
for making the abstraction, or wilful damage by cattle, of digo crops punishable as a 
criminal offence: if imdeed the act were proved against a stranger,-it would be so now; 
the difficulty is in the proof. Mr. Ross, I presume, intends to include the contractor 


2 


. 


amongst the parties so liable criminally ; for in him it is equally a‘fraud committed against . 


the 


GENERAL APPENDIX. 44g Arrexouy, 


the party to whom he had engaged to deliver the plant” The wording of the rule as it (gg IndigoPl . 

now stands leaves this doubtful ; indeed it would, by a sfrict interpretation, exclude him. (68.)IndigoP tanters: 

The above observations on the new principlés adopted in Mr. Ross’s draft have extended 

to such length as to preclude any presemt reference to the detail of the rules of process. 

The first question, indeed, for Government to decide is, whether to adopt the principles 

,advocated by Mr. Ross, and made the foundation of his draft; if the determination on this 
point be affirmative, it will then be time to examine the rules in detail. 


. 26th October 1829. . (signed) ~—s HL. T., Prinsep, Secretary. 


Mr. Prinsep’s Notes; 
26 October 1829. 


- Abstract of Mr. Ross’s Inpi¢o REGULATION, Section II., Sections III. IV. V. and Vi 


REGULATION XXXVIIIL. and corresponding, rescinded ; also Regulation VI. 1823, and 
Regulation V. 1824. 


_IL. Parts of Regulation XXIII. 1814, and XIX. and other Regulations, so far as incon- 
sistent with this Regulation. 


III. ‘Europeans may purchase, rent and occupy land; thereby become amenable to moon- 
siffs and the civil courts. 


IV. Occupant ryots may, so long as occupant, cultivate any article they please, and may 
engage to deliver plant to whomsoever they please. Planters have ne right, except as 
derived under special engagement voluntarily entered into by owners or occupanis. 


V. First.—Indigo ‘planters advancing for plant on defined land, to have a lien or interest 
in the produce of that land, provided their engagement be uniform, and recorded and 
witnessed as prescribed; also that particulays be specified as laid down, and the deed be 
registered with the moonsiff, and advertised in the village three months before com- 
mencing cultivation. ° 

Second.—Particulars: ist., Name of village; and, 2d. Boundaries of the land, and its | 
name, if any. 38d. Rate or price per bundle of plant, with dimensions of the bundle, and 
amount of advances. 4th. Date for commencement of cultivation, and date for completion. 
5th. Penalty of non-performance. , 

' Third.—Moonsiff to register by entering a copy ina book, and by sticking up the substance 
in his cutcherry, and a bamboo on the field, also on the ryot’s door. x : 

Fourth.—Original to be returned after registry and advertisement, with certificate under 
seal, and moonsiff to forward copy to the judge of the zillah. 

Fifth.-—Fee of rupees leviable as condition of registering each deed. 

Sixth.—Registers to.be inspected for fee of eight annas. 


VI. First.—Moonsiff to receive and determfne objections to registry. Registering con- 
tractor to be summoned to reply to objections within 15 days, by notice in usual form. 

Second.—Evidence to be entered on by moonsiff; and if objections be established, he 
may annul the contract, and award compensation to objector, and vice versd, costs and 
compensation against him if not proved. ; 

Third.—But no objection admissible on ground of non-occupancy by contracting ryot, or 
non-competency to contract, if occupant, without consent -of zemindar, unless it be estab- 
lished, by original accounts of the village, with gomashta’s or putwarry’s and mundul’s 
evidence, and occupants, of adjoining lands, that the objector himself cultivated in the 
preceding year, and was occupant at the date of contract, or unless, in the second case, the 
objector is the zemindar or rent-receiver, and is entitled to prescribe cultivation. 

Further,-no prior deed to be ground for annulling a registered deed, unless the same 


parcel of land be specified and defined therein. 
BL VIL On 


APPENDIX, 


Settlement of 
Europeans in India. 


444, APPENDIX ro. REPORT Fron SELECT COMMITTEE. 


VII. On a ryot under registered engagements refusing to cultivate indigo, or refusing to 
deliver plant, the planter to have the option of taking usufruct for the year, subject to the 
conditions of the following section¥or of pro&ecuting for the penalty of the contract. 


VIII. First,;—If taking usufruct, planter to g4ve written notice of intention ten days 
before the day fixed for commencing cultivation; copy to be affixed to ryot’s door. If not 
commenced and completed by the date fixed in the contract, the planter may seize and. 
cultivate with his own ploughs and people. If the ryot have cultivated, similar written 
notice to be given to cut and deliver; failing which, the planter may; provided, however, 
that if so taking, the planter shall be liable to the rent for the year, and other conditions of 
ryot’s contract. ‘ 

Second.-—Darogahs, after inspectihg planter’s registered deed, to support his assumption 


of usufruct or crops as above, and to prevent any ploughing or reaping by planters, except - 


under process as above, and with registered contracts. 


Third.—Ryots aggrieved by abuse of above powers to sue planters before the moonsiff; 
if gress annual produce of the land stized or reaped does not exceed 100 rupees, summons 
to be served with notice of suit as in section 6, requiring answer in 15 days from last day of 
the last month of the indigo season, if issued during the season, or 15 days from date of 
summons at other periods. If wrong is proved, moonsiff is to decree, besides full costs, 
damages equal to value of the most valuable product the land of the village is estimated to 
yield, and a further sum equal to the penalty of the contract leviable on the ryot for 
failure; if the plaint be dismissed, plaintiff to be amerced, besides costs for compensation 
to planter. 


1X. First.—If the planter do not seize land or crop, or be unable from non-specification 
im the deed, he nfay sue before the moonsiff for the penalty of the contract, at any time 
within three months from date of default if not exceeding 100 rupees, and three years if 
above. . Summons of notice to answer 15 days after close of season, &c. as in section 8, 
to issue, and moonsiff to decree penalty with costs, commutable to imprisonment in 
dewanny gaol. oe 

Proviso, that if inundation or calamity, of season be established, and the deed do not 
specifically throw this on the ryot, no penalty will be incurred. 


Second.—If a contracting ryot have been induced by a stranger to evade or refuse per- 
formance, the party imposed may prosecute the stranger in the moonsiff’s court, and recover 
the same penalties as against the ryot, on proof that defendant received any part of the 
produce of the land. 


X. First—Appeal to lie from moonsiffs to zillah judge, if lodged within three months, 
and ue judge’s decree to be final, unless appeal be permitted by Sudder Dewanny Adawlut 
to itself. 

Second.—Moonsiff’s and judge’s decrees may be affirmed, without calling for answer 
to the vajoohat, if the grounds appear insufficient, but not altered without argument and 
hearing. 

XI. Stamps and priority to be regulated as for summary suits, both in original and appeals, 
under this Regulation ; but judgments to have effect as in regular suits, and not to be levied 


a second time. 


XII. First.—To enforce decrees, petition to be lodged with moonsiff, for arrest or attach-- 
ment, and sale of property, with specification annexed. Moonsiff to serve a written demand 
on defendant for payment in 15 days; this to be affixed to the house, failing service on 
the person. : 

- Second,—Failing payment in 14 days, case tobe reported to the zillah judge. 

Third.— Who will order property to be attached, and advertised for sale under Regulation 
VII. 1825. Failing property, the person to be arrested and sent to gaol for the period 
allotted in commutation. ; ; : 
; , Fourth.— 


GENERAL APPENDIX. — 445 


Fourth.—In case of appeal from moonsiff, the judge may stay execution if attachment of 

~ sufficient property have been made, applicant giving ae ee ; 
Fifth.—Application to enforce decrees must be presented in three months if not exceeding 
100 rupees, and one year if exceeding ; failing application in time, decree-holders to forfeit 


right to demand execution. 


+ XIII. No objection to indigo deeds on account of stamp not being proper, if on stamp as 
per scale for bonds. ©, 

. XIV. Cutting and taking plant by force by other than a registered contractor, damaging 
crops re cattle, declared criminal and cognizable by magistrates; penalty, imprisonment 


with labour for one year; commitment for trial by commissioner of circuit, in case of. 


wounding or affray. 


(69.)—Mr. Shakespear’s NOTES, d&ted 1st January 1830. 


Mr. Ross in his Minute argues, that no protection being afforded by the laws, either to 
the cultivator or manufacturer of indigo, they are left to follow the course which they each 
conceive to be most conducive to their own interests and gain. 

The cultivator endeavours to evade the performance of his contract when any advantage 
can be gained’ by so doing; while the manufacturer, on the other hand, left to his own meahis 
for the protection of his nghts, is prepared to ry sa or defend them by force. 

Mr. Ross proposes to remedy these evils and afford legal protection to both parties, “ by 
raising the qualification and powers of the courts of the moonsiffs ;”—- The only tribunals 
so. situated as to be accessible to both parties, and capable of administering justice equally 
to both.” ; 
~ © On them only,” Mr. Ross adds, “ can poor suitors, as well as rich, personally attend 
the investigation of their suits; an advantage essential in trials in the first instance to the 
oe of justice, and which all courts+of original jurisdiction should be capable of 
affording.” : 

The ao eiialineat: however, of an efficient system of local judicature, would not of itself, 
in Mr. Ross’s opinion, be sufficient to relieve the indigo planters from the difficulties they 
have to contend against: First, when the ryot, having received advances, will not sow or 
cultivate his land; Secondly, when he refuses to deliver the produce of the land to the 
manufacturer who advanced his money for it. 

After pointing out the insufficiency of the existing law to afford redress in either of the 
above cases (for the first of which, indeed, the law does not profess to afford any), Mr. Ross 
suggests “ the removal of the prohibition against Europeans holding lands, and the empow- 
ering indigo manufacturers to attach and to take the usufruct of land, to the produce of 
which they have acquired a right by contract with the occupant, immediately upon the latter 
refusing to plough or reap, or to do any acts necessary to enable him to fulfil the conditions 
of his contract.” ‘ 

As the Regulation framed by. Mr. Ross is intended to give effect to the measures above 
suggested, I shall ease to examine the several provisions of it in detail; merely noticing 
in this place, that Mr. Ross lays great stress at the conclusion of his Minute, on the neces- 
sity of raising the qualifications of the local courts of judicature, without which no 
amendment of the laws with a view to correct the evils complained of will be productive of 
advantage. : 

On the preamble I remark, that ne mention is made of one of the principal objects, of the 

Regulation, viz. empowering the manufacturer to attach and cultivate the land, in the event 
of the ryot’s neglecting or refusing to do so. 

II. The clauses of this section go to rescind the Regulations which prohibit Europeans 
from holding lands ; also the Regulations relating to the cultivation of indigo, and to annul 
all existing rules which might interfere with the exercise of the powers proposed to oi 

erre 


APPENDIX, 


VG 


(68.)IndigoP lanters: 
Mr. Prinsep’sNotes ; 
26 Octoher 1829. 


(6g.)IndigoPlanters: 
Mr. Shakespear's 
Notes ; 

1 January 1830. 


APPENDIX, 


Settlement of 
Europeans in India. 


446 APPENDIX ro REPORT rrou ‘SELECT COMMITTEE. 


ferred on moonsiffs, all which must depend on the proposed Regulation standing or not in its 
present shape. 


III. I conceive that Government will consider te facilities now afforded to Europeans to 
hold lands to be sufficient, and that they are not prepared to adopt Mr. Ross’s suggestion 
for removing in toto the prohibitory laws made in that respect. : 
~The rule in clause 2; section 18, Regulation XXIIJ. 1814, which restricts the’ 
cast fom hearing suits in which Europeans, &c. are parties, should. be specifically 
rescinded. g ‘ 


IV. As this Regulation requires much pruning, I would leave out the whole of this 
séction, declaratory of a ryot’s right to do what he pleases with his own land, and of a 
manufacturer not being. entitled to the produce of lands which he may not have contracted 
for, or which may not have been legally assigned to him; all of which appears rather 
gs roan = . 

f ¢he sentiments expressed in this section are intended, as Mr. Ross’s note to it imports, 
to teach the ryots proper ideas of independence, there is too much reason to think that they 
would have the very opposite effect to promoting good-will between the planters and ryots. 
Whatever the Regulation might proclaim, no planter, I suspect, if he could possibly prevent 
it, would allow a ryot who had formerly cultivated lands contiguous to, and for the benefit of 
his factory, to carry the produce to another. 

“The ryot is unquestionably at liberty to do what he chooses with the produce of his own 
land, but I doubt much whether the happiness of the ryot (certainly not the prosperity 


, of indigo making) would be promoted by promulgating the rule of independence proposed 


by Mr. Ross. Rivalry amongst indigo establishments requires no additional excitement ; 
wherever it has been carried to any great extent, the effects have proved .alike destructive to 
the morals of the people, the tranquillity of the district, and ths pecuniary interest of the 
parties concerned. j 


.V. First.—I see no objection to this clause, which is an pul saber upon section 2, 
Regulation VI. 1823, excepting as to the manner of advertising the particulars of contracts 
entered into the village three months before the cultivation commences. Advertising many 
thousand contracts is a serious task; and not to be able to engage for lands at any time 
antecedent to cultivation seems a hard and unnecessary restriction. 


Second.—The 4th item of the deed of contract had better be omitted, as a fruitful source 
of dispute. The commencement of cultivation must depend on rain; how then can it be fixed 
beforehand, or its completion calculated ? 

I would recommend that the deed should contain clauses empowering the planter to 
sow, cultivate and cut the crop, if the ryot neglect or refuse to-do so at the proper season. 
This would at all events make the ryot aware of the consequences of his idleness or dis- 
honesty. . 

Third, Fourth, Fifth and Sixth.—The machinery of this Regulation is too minute and com- 
plicated to work well. After the deed is régistered (that is, a copy entered in a book), an 
advertisement containing the substance of it is to be stuck up in the village, and on a bamboo 
to be erected on the spot, and on the door of the contracting ryot (which implies that he had 
not attended the registry.) ' 

Here is an original deed, a copy of it, and. three abstracts, and three processes for notifica- 
tion, besides.a second copy of the deed to be transmitted to the judge. No planter nor ryot 
(on whom a large share of it would fall) could possibly bear the expense, which in many 
thousand beegahs of cultivation would amount to manyethousand rupees. 

I quite agree with Mr. Ross that the moonsiffs might be made extremely useful in the 
registry of the deeds. But it would not, I think, be too much to expect, that the ryot and 


‘the factory gomashta should attend before the moonsiff in open court for the registry ; and 


IT should hope that the publicity so given would be sufficient to prevent frequent frauds, 
without the precaution of notifications and bamboo marks. i é = 
y 


GENERAL APPENDIX. 447. Are: 


My idea is, that the registry book should be signed and paged by the judge, or his assist- —— 
ant, and that the entries should be made subject to the sae forms as are prescribed for the (69-)IndigoPlanters: 
registry of deeds at the zillah stations by registrars. Mr. Shakespear's 
As to the fees for registry, I should say éhey ought not to exceed four annas for each deed, Notes ; re 
and the same fee for consulting the register. : 1 January 1830. 


¢ VI. First, Second, and Third.—This rule for inquiring into and deciding on objections 
made to a registered contract seems good, and may stand equally well, although the adver- 
tisement before objected to should not be published. But I would not attempt to lay down 
ay rules for the moonsiff’s guidance in the decision of particular cases, as in the third clause. 
It would be utterly impracticable to prescribe rules to meet every case that might come before 
them; and if thought worthy to be trusted, I should pfefer leaving them to the exercise of 
. their own judgment and discretion. oo as 
In the note to the last clause, Mr. Ross seems to contemplate the appointment to the 
. office of moonsiff of a more respectable and better qualified class of natives than those now 
employed. I confess I am at a loss where to look for $8uch a number of men as woultl be 
required to fill the places of- the present moonsiffs; the most that could be done would 
be for the zillah judge to select the best mensto fill the office in parts of his district, where 
the powers conferred by the Regulation are most likely to be called into play. 


: e 

VII. This is an important section, empowering the planter to take possession and cul- 
tivate the lands during the current year, for the produce of which he may have advanced, 
should the ryot himself refuse to cultivate; and authorizing him also to take the plant, 
should the ryot refuse to deliver it. 

The rule very properly applies only to lands for which the contract hag been registered, 
and has not been subsequently annulled. 

The two things might, I think, be more distinctly defined. First, the mode of procedure 
to be adopted by the planter in case of the ryot’s refusal to sow and cultivate. Secondly, 
the process by which the former should attach the crop, in the event of the latter refusing 
to deliver the produce. . 


VIII. First.—The rules in these two cases, epplying as they do to such very different 
and circumstances, appear to me to be inconveniently mixed up in the next section and 

ause. 

Moreover, they should expressly refer to cases in which the planter “shall have just 
reason to believe that an individual under engagement with him is evading, or about to 
evade, the execution of his contract,” (as in section 3, Regulation VI. 1823.) 

As the rule stands in clause 1, section 8, it would seem that in every case of cutting the 
or a ryot must be served with a written notice to cut, which would be very inconvenient. 

believe the rules proposed by Mr. Ross are no more than are already acted upon by planters 
when ryots refuse to cultivate or to deliver the produce of their lands; and I see no just 
reason why the practice should not be sanctioned by law; more especially if, as I have sug- 
gested, conditions to the effect authorized be entered in the contract. 


If it is objected that the power is open to abuse, I would answer that it would be much- 
less so if exercised under prescribed rules, particularly if it is restricted to lands engaged 
for under written and registered contracts. If not abused, there can, I imagine, be no 
question as to the justness of the abstract principle on which the power is granted, 

' viz. that the planter is entitled to the produce of the land for which he has advanced his 
money. 

I aries with Mr. Ross in the fairness of the rule at the conclusion of clause 2, which 

e declares that if the planter takes the crop, he takes it in satisfaction of all the conditions 
' of the contract, and moreover that he must défray the rent of the fend to the person entitled 
to it. ; ; ; , 
Second.—This clause provides for the support of the police officers, when the planters 
may take possession of land or plant under registered deeds.. iid 
ird.-— 


APPENDIX, 
7 


Settlement of 
Europeansin India. 


448 APPENDIX ro REPORT rnow SELECT COMMITTEE. — 


Third.—I see no necessity for the distinction here made in the amount of claim of a ryot 
against a planter, ‘and in the peripd of limitation in bringing it forward: would it not be 
better simply to rescind the rule Which préhibits moonsitfs from trying suits in which an 
European is a party, and to say that in all transaetions regarding the cultivation of indigo, 
whether the demand be for the recovery of advances or the penalties specified in contracts, 
or for damages sustained by a ryot by the exercise of the powers vested in planters under 
any of the provisions of this Regulation, it shall be competent to the moonsiff to receive, 
hear and decide the case, subject to the rules prescribed for his Suidance in other cases? , 

It is already contemplated to extend the powers of moonsiffs to the trial of suits in which 
the amount may not exceed 300 rupees, which will cover nine out of ten of the suits 
brought forward either by planters ar ryots. 

T am not however aware of any objection to requiring that a claim under 100 rupees 


should be preferred within three months ; but I cannot help thinking that the whole of this ’ 


clause is unnecessarily complex, especially in the adjustment of the penalty recoverable by 


the ryot, viz. “asum of mony equalsto the value which the land specified, if cultivated with ‘ 


the most valuable product of the village in which it is situated, may be estimated to be 
capable of yielding in a favourable year, and a further sum equal to the full amount of the 
penalty to which the complainant, under the deed of contract executed by him, would have 
been lable had he refused to perform its conditions.” om 

Let the ryotcultivate and state his own damage, and the award be left to the moonsiff, if 
Within his competency. 

IX. First.—-In like manner, these detailed rules of proceeding on the complaint of 
a planter to recover the penalty of an unperformed contract, are to my apprehension equally 
superfluous. . ; 

he power given to the moonsiff in the concluding part of this clause to sentence a 


ryot, for breach of his engagement, “ to be imprisoned in the dewanny gaol of the zillah | 


for such limited time as may be deemed an adequate punishment for his dishonesty,” in 
addition to the penalty and costs of suit, does appear to me a very extraordinary power 
given to a moonsiff. . : 

Second.—By this clause persons not a party to the contract between a ryot and planter, 
who shall induce the former to evade the: performance of his contract, and shall receive any 
part of the produce contracted for, may be sued for the penalty specified in the contracts. _ 
_ 1 think this will be a salutary check to the practice which it is intended to guard 
against. 

X. First.—Provides for an appeal from the decision of the moonsiff to the zillah judge, 

and a special appeal to the Sudder Dewanny Adawlut. . 
. Second.—Allows either of the appeal courts to affirm the decision of the courts below, 
without calling on the respondent to answer, unless there appear grounds to reverse the 
decision of the court below, in which case notice shall be given to the respondent, who shall 
be allowed to file his answer. 

I must say, I do not see any special grounds for taking indigo suits decided by a moon- 
siff, out of the established routine of appeals. It will always be optional to the judge to 
reserve cases of more than ordinary importance for his own hearing, and that mode of 

proceeding appears to me preferable to the one suggested. 


XI. I object also to this section giving a preference to indigo suits over others,. in their 

“tum of hearing, and in amount of the stamp paper and fees chargeable to such suits. 

The planters ought to be satisfied with the facilities afforded to them by the Regulation, in 

enforcing their contracts and securing the produce ta which they are entitled under them. 

n granting these facilities and allowing access to the local courts to both parties, the law 
‘will have done all that canereasonably be expected. 

XII. First to Fifth —I foncur with Mr. Ross, that moonsiffs should be allowed to execute 

- their own decrees not appealed against, not only in indigo, but in all suits ; but there seems 

no necessity for the detailed rules proposed in these clauses. It will be sufficient to sa ati 

: them 


* 


GENERAL APPENDIX. 449 AppEnoix, 
Vz 


ry 


them competent to do so without reference to the judge, to whom however a report should 
be made of the execution of the process, and to whom Lr course every defaulter would be (69 )IndigoPlanters: 
- sent for confinement in the zillah gaol ugder the general Regulations. Mr. Shakespear's, 


‘XIII. This-rule regarding the stamp on which a deed of contract for the cultivation Aas 1830. 
. and delivery of indigo should be written, corresponds with that prescribed in section 7, 
Regulation VI. 1823. 


: XIV. I believe this rule, for declaring the cutting and taking away by force, &c., or 
*(wilfully should be inserted) damaging indigo plant, punishable by the criminal courts, 
will have a good effect in restraining such practices. 

Upon the whole, it will be gathered from the foregding remarks, that some of the provi- General Remarks. 
‘sions and some of the details into which Mr. Rosg has entered in the draft prepared by 
him, may, in.my humble opinion, be dispensed with ; but that the plan of requiring deeds 
to be registered by the moonsiff, and the rules proposed for authorizing the planter to sow 
and cultivate and appropriate the crop of a recus&nt ryot, are necessary to the support 

’ and maintenance of the just rights of the parties concerned. 

A very short time will suffice to show the emoluments derived by moonsiffs from the 
registry of contracts. In many jurisdictions it will perhaps be something considerable, 
and will. enable the judge to select from the officers of his district, or elsewhere, persons 
most competent to discharge the heavy additional duties which the registry and cognizayce 
of suits relating to indigo concerns, will involve. 

Integrity and impartiality, and firmness to decide in favour of the weak against the 
strong, when justice dennnde it, are the qualifications most needed for the office ; and if it 
is liberally paid, it isnot, I hope, too much to expect that they may be feund. 


1st January 1830. (signed). H. Suakespzar. 


(70.)—Mr. Shakespear's ADDITIONAL NOTES, dated 24th April 1830. Se a eee i 
» Sha 
As the Governor-general in Council does not appear to approve of the provisions suggested Additional Notes; 
either by Mr. Ross or myself, for authorizing indigo planteys to have possession of lands 24 April 1830. 
when the ryot refuses to sow and cultivate, or the rules proposed for establishing registry 
offices under the moonsiffs, and allowing them to try suits between planters and cultivators ; 
I beg leave to submit the following suggestions for the consideration of Government, by 
which some of the grievances complained of may be remedied to a certain extent. 
In section 2, Regulation VI. 1823, it is stated that a person making advances for the 
cultivation of indigo, shall be considered to have a lien and interest in the indigo plant 
produced, and shall be entitled to avail himself of the process prescribed in the two 
following sections for the protection of his interests. . 
The provisions of those sections, however, proceed on the assumption that the plant has ~ 
actually been produced on the land for the cfiltivation of which the advances were made. 
They provide no means to compel the ryot to cultivate, nor to punish the first and most 
important breach of his engagement, on which the whole interest of the person advancing 
depends, and for the protection of which the Regulation professes to have been enacted. 
The only remedy afforded by the Regulation in case the ryot fails to cultivate, is to be 
found in section 5, and consists in a summary process for the recovery of the advance, 
with interest, or in a regular suit for the enforcement of the penalty specified in the agree- 
ment. But the objections taken to ¢hose rules, on the manifest inutility of suing paupers 
either in one way or the other, are so unanswerable, that the argument does not require to 
be enlarged upon. 
Is there no remedy then for a pefSon who advances his money under specific contracts ? 
or can it be just, that the receiver should take the money on false pretences, without the 
remotest intention of fulfilling his engagements, while he escapes punishment, and leaves 
the advancer to sue him in the civil court? a 
- 3M _ Surely 


as 450. APPENDIX.ro REPORT rrom-SELECT COMMITTEE.  ' 


: Surely this is contrary to the cqmmonest principles of equity and good faith. It is’ 
"Settlement of | acknowledged to be so ‘in contract for work, section 5, Regulation VIL. 1819; why not 
Europeagg in India: in contracts for ploughing and sowing, and deliverieg of indigo plant. , 

The following rule is proposed on this part of the subject: “In addition to the riles 


nde VLiB ig, Provided in Régulation VI. 1823, it is further declared, that in cases in which a ryot who | 


Section 5. The Cal- Shall have received advances, and entered into a written agreement for the cultivation and 
cutta bye-law for the delivery of indigo plant in the manner indicated in the Regulatitn, shall wilfully neglect, 
punisifment of work- or refuse to sow or cultivate the ground specified, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, . 
ce lilap apa A and on conviction before a magistrate or joint magistrate, shall be liable to a sentence of 
work; 8 theriacse -Nprisonment not exceeding one morth; the magistrate or joint magistrate may likewise 
fine of 100 rupees,or Tequire the person so convicted to sow_or cultivate the ground specified, if it shall appear 
imprisonment in the just and proper to require the same; and any subsequent conviction of wilful neglect er 
house of oe refusal to comply with such requisition, shall be punishable by a further sentence of im- 
ae labour for isongnent not exceeding two monthss’ 
cts A rule of this nature would meet the complaints which have been madc of ryots 
ploughing up seed already sown, or sowing the, ground with rice after it had been sown by 
them with indigo. 

In short, next to allowing the planters to take possession of the ground during a season, 
it seems to be the only remedy which can be given to the planter against a fraudulent 

ot. ‘ 

The next point to be considered, is the best means of preventing the interference of 
a third party between the planter and the ryot who has taken his advances. 

It is stated in the letter from Messrs. Alexander & Co. to Government, with which this 
discussion commenced, that, “ If Government would be pleased to consider the contracts of 
the indigo planter as forming the good-will of concerns, and introduce a rule to punish the 
party interfering with the contracts during their existence, by summary process, instead of 
the ryots, or interfering after notice having been given that previous contracts exist, an’ 
immediaté stop would be put to the present uafair competition, and an! infinity of trouble 
and labour saved to the officers of Government.” , 

The following clause is proposed to remedy this grievance: “In addition to the rules 
prescribed in clause 3, section 5, Regulation VI. 1823, it is hereby provided, that in 
cases in which a ryot who has contracted for the cultivation of indigo plant on a defined 
parcel of land, shall have been induced by a person not a party to such contract, to evade 
in any manner whatsoever the performance of its conditions, it ‘shall be competent to the 
party injured thereby to prosecute the defaulting ryot, and such person for his undue 
thterference ; on proof of which to the satisfaction of the court trymg the case, the said 
person and the ryot shall be jointly and severally held answerable for the full amount of 
the penalty specified in the original agreement of the ryot, together with all costs and 

. expenses of the suit.” ° : 

This is merely an extension of the rule referred to in Regulation VI., which provides only 
for cases in which the contracting ryots may Rave sold and delivered the produce of the land 
contracted for to a third party, whereas the objection is to restrain third parties from 
illegally interfering at all durmg any stage of existing contracts. Or the amendment may 
run thus: “The rules contained in clause 3, section 5, Regulation VI. 1823, are hereby 
declared to extend to all eases in which it shall be established that a third party has 
knowingly and wilfully interfered to induce a ryot to evade in any manner whatsoever the 
performance of his contract for the cultivation and delivery of indigo plant.” 

The process by which pecuniary penalties are liable to be adjudged, cannot, as desired 
by Messrs. Alexander & Co., be made summary consistently.with the general Regulations. 

The foregoing remarks are confined to the two points specially referred for consideration 
to the sudder court. If Iam not misinformed, the remedies suggested will (though not to 
the full extent of their expectations) be satisfactory to the parties who have applied to 
Government for redress ; there is nothing in thefn contrary to the spirit of our Regulations ; 

“and when it is considered what vast interests are at stake, the immense population a 
ported 


. GENERAL, APPEN DIX. : 451 Pee 


ported by the advances, the assistance those. advanges afford in the realization of the - 
public revenue, and the value of the trade, it may reasonably be expected that the Govern- eek er 
ment will not withhold from those engaged in it such aid as can be properly and legally ie Shakespear's 
granted to them, without endangering the rights of others. : eerad OUet 
It has occurred to me, on reading some of the reports lately received from the lotal 4 sy 
authorities, on the subject of indigo cultivation, that the ryots ought to possess some mode 
of extricating themselves érom the factory books, on the expiration of their contracts, when 
‘no longer desirous of cultivating their land with indigo. : 
It is stated that when a ryot once takes advances, a planter will not allow him to eman- 
cipate himself, and that he is reluctantly compelled tg continue the cultivation. 
The following remedy in substance is suggested by Mr. Walters, the magistrate of 
Dacca, and seems open to no objection, unless it ig the trouble that it may occasion to the 
European local officers, already sufficiently burthened with business: ‘Any person who 
may have received advances under written agreement for the cultivation of indigo, and 
may be desirous, on the expiration of the period of his contract, to settle his accoun® with 
the person or factory from whom or from which he may have received the said advances, 4 
shall be at liberty, in the event of the projrietor of the factory, or the person acting in his 
behalf, refusing to settle the same, to apply to the zillah judge, who, after a summary 
inquiry into the merits 8f the case, shall receive in deposit the amount of the balance which 
may appear to be due from the ryot aforesaid, and shall grant him a release from his en- 
gagement, paying over the amount of the balance to the proprietor or the person acting in 
his behalf.” Clause 2: “Should the proprietor or person aforesaid, however, refuse to 
receive the balance awarded to him by the summary process above provided, the judge 
shall return the amount to the plaintiff, leaving the A clendacit to séek his remedy’ by 
a regular suit.” 
The only remaining point which I shall notice is the severe damage suffered by both the 
lanter and the ryot by cattle trespassing on indigo fields; for the prevention of which - 
Twauld suggest the following clause : : aie 
‘€ Persons wilfully damaging or causing to be damaged indigo plant, by allowing cattle 
to trespass thereon, or by any other means, shalb, on the complaint of the ryot'to whom the 
crop may belong, or of the manufacturer by whom advances may have been made for the 
cultivation and delivery of the said plant, be liable, on proof of the offence, to such punish- 
ment by fine and imprisonment, as the magistrate is competent to inflict under section 19, 
Regulation IX. 1807, due regard being had to the nature of the case, and the circumstances 
in life of the offender.” 
Should the Governor-general in Council approve of all or any of these suggestions, a very 
short preamble would suffice for their introduction in the shape of a Regulation. 


(signed) H. SuHakEsPear, 
“Secretary to the Government. 


(71.)—RESOLUTIONS of the Government. (71.)Indigol’lanters: 
: ; . F . Resolutions of the 
Reap a Memorial from certain Indigo Planters in Zillah Jessore, dated the 16th of Bengal Govern- 


March 1829, and its Enclosures: . 
Read Letter from Messrs. Alexander & Co. dated the 29th April 1829: 

, Read Letter written to the Registrar of the Nizamut Adawlut, by order of Government, 

sth May 1829: re 
Read Petition from Indigo Planters in Pacca Jelalpore, dated the 11th May 1829: 

~ Read a Letter written to the Registrar of the Nizamut Adawlut, on the 29th May 1829: 

é Read Letter from the officiating Magistrate of Jessore, dated the 29th May 1829, and its 
nclosure : re 

Read Letter written to the Registrar Neamt Adawlut, on the 9th June 1829: 

3M 2 : , 


ment. 


Read 


t= 


APPENDIX, 


V. 


Settlement of 
Euroneans in India. 


to therein : 


452 APPENDIX to REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


Read Letter from the Magistratg of the city of -Benares, dated the 8th August 1829, 
and its Enclosures : ‘ - 

Read Letter written to the Registrar Sudder Devganny and Nizamut Adawlut, on the 25th 
of August 1829: 

“Read Extract from the Territorial Department, dated the Ist of September 1829; con- 
taining-a Letter from Indigo Planters in Jessore: ' 

Read Letter written to the Registrar Sudder Dewanny and Nizamut Adawlut, on the 
5th September 1829: . 
Read two Letters from the Magistrate of Dacca Jelalpore, dated the 5th and 11th May 
1829: eB : 

Read Letter from the Magistrate of the City of Dacca, dated the 7th May 1829: 

Read three Letters from the Comm®sioner of Circuit of the 15th or Dacca Division, 


.dated the 7th and 16th May, and 25th November 1829, and Enclosures: 


Read a Letter from Registrar Suddgr Dewanny Adawlut, dated 9th October 1829, with 
Minut€s and Draft of Regulation: 
Read Notes by Mr. H. T. Prinsep, dated the 29th October 1829, and Abstract alluded 


Read two Letters by the Secretary, dated the 1st January and 24th April 1830: 


« RESOLUTION: 


Ir is sufficiently manifest in the foregoing papers, and from the information obtained 
from other sources in the course of the inquiries: lately instituted on the subject of indigo 
cultivation, that-most, if not all of the evils complained of by the planters, are inherent in 
the system by whith large sums of money are advanced to an indigent population, without 
security to the manufacturer, or adequate remuneration to the cultivator to ensure the 
cheerful and honest performance of his contract. Hence he endeavours to evade it 
when any advantage can be gained by so doing, while the manufacturer, on the other 
hand, knowing the futility of itistituting legal proceedings against a pauper, seeks to support 
his claims by unauthorized and violent means. 

The most advantageous change for both parties that could be introduced in indigo 
transactions would doubtless be the abolition of the system of advances ; but the cultivating 
classes are, generally speaking, so poor, and the custom is so deeply rooted in the habits 
of the people, that there is little probability of that change being effected. The present 
state of the market may, however, of itself have a beneficial tendency in checking the 
eager competition which prevailed in the manufacturing districts in 1823, when it was last 
deemed necessary to legislate upon this subject. The planters will probably bring their 
cultivation within narrower limits; there will no longer be the same inducement to make 
indiscriminate advances; and it may be hoped,-that by confining their dealings to the 
most respectable class of ryots, and admitting them to more liberal terms of contract,. 
the difficulties. which the manufacturers have complained of will, in a great degree, be 
obviated. . 

His Lordship in Council is encouraged in these expectations by the favourable testimony 
almost universally borne by the local authorities to the character of the present European 
planters, and their treatment of the natives around them. 

The report of the Sudder Dewanny and Nizamut Adawlut, and the provisions suggested by 
Mr. Ross for the improvement of the laws relative to transactions between the planters and 
persons cultivating indigo under engagements, have been deliberately considered. 

There are several of Mr. Ross’s suggestions which, appear judicious, and may at some 
future period be adopted, whenever it may have become practicable to raise the character 
and qualifications, of the native local officers, both civil and police. His Lordship in Council 
apprehends that it would not be safe to entrust the present class of officers, with the arbi- 
trament of disputes between European planters and the native cultivators. . 

_ Moreover, the Government is not prepared to remove, to the extent recommended by 
Mr. Ross,:the prohibition against Europeans holding lands. They: have, in fact, been 
to oo conditionally 


GENERAL APPENDIX. : 453 


conditionally relaxed of late by the Resolutions passed in the Territorial Department on 
the 17th February 1829; and the existing rules will,-it ig hoped, afford the facilities to the 
planters which are contemplated in the mgasure suggested by Mr. Ross. 

But while the Governor-general in Council is adverse to the provisions above noticed 
of Mr. Ross’s: draft, and to the permission proposed to be given to the manufacturer tb 
“take. possession of a contracting ryot’s lands, in the event of his refusing to sow or culti- 
vate, or deliver the produce, he is sensible of the hardship -to which the manufacturer is 
exposed by-acts so destructive to his prospects ; and he deems it just that the manufacturer 
should be protected against them so far as may be consistent with the rights of others, and 
with the principles of Regulation VI. 1823, which recognises the lien and interest of the 
planter in the produce of the lands for the cultivation of which his money had been 
advanced. : ° 

The only remedy afforded by that Regulation, in case the contracting ryot refuses to 
cultivate, 1s contained in section 5, and consists in a summary process for the recovery of 
the advance, with interest, or in a regular suit for the enforcement of the penalty spe®ified 
in the agreement. 

The inadequacy, however, of these remedies is sufficiently proved by the documents under 
consideration; and his Lordship in Council concurs in the opinions expressed by some of 
the judges of the Sudder Dewanny Adawlut, that the principles of section 5, Regulation VII. 
1819, might with propriety and good effect be made applicable to such cases. ° 

Another grievance complained of is the undue interference of third parties between the 
planter and cultivator, in the performance of. the contract entered into by the latter. This 
evil is only partially provided against in the third clause of section 5, Regulation VI. 1823, 
when the contracting ryot shall have sold and delivered the produce *of the land con- 
tracted for to a third party ; and it seems equally just to prevent as much as possible such 
interference during any stage of existing contracts between the planter and the ryot who 
has received advances from him. 

In, addition to the defects in the present sygtem adverted to*in the foregoing remarks, it 
has been stated by some of the local authorities in their reports on the subject of indigo 


cultivation, that ryots who have once taken advatices from an indigo factory are unable at. 


the expiration of their contracts to emancipate themselves from their connexion with the 
factory, and are reluctantly compelled to continue the cultivation of their lands with indigo. 
This is a very serious grievance, and calls for the intervention of the Legislature. 

It appears also desirable to adopt the rule suggested by Mr. Ross for the prevention of 
trespass on indigo fields, which is represented to be the source of much injury and ill-will 
between the planters and the people. 

With these sentiments and views, the Governor-general in Council is pleased to pass the 
following Regulation, which is directed to be printed and published in the manner pre- 
scribed by Regulation XLI. 1793, to stand as Regulation V.. pf 1830. 


. 6 : 


(72.)—A. D. 1830—REGULATION V. 


A Recutation for amending the provisions of Regulation VI. 1823, and for pro- 
viding more effectually for the enforcing the execution of Contracts relating to the 
cultivation and delivery of Indigo Plant; passed by the Governor-general in Council 
on the 9th June 1830, corresponding with the 28th Jéyte 1257, Bengal era; the 

3d Assar 1237, Fusly; the 29eh Jeyte 1237, Willaity; the 3d Assar 1887, Jumbut; 
and the 17th Zehijja 1245, Hegeree. , 


’ 


Whereas the rules contained in Regulation VI. 1828, (extended to the provinces of 
Orissa, Behar and Benares, and to the Ceded and Conquered Provinces by Regulation V. 
1824,) for enforcing the execution of contracts relating to the cultivation and delivery of 
indigo plant, have been found in a great measure ineffectual: And whereas it is deemed Lh 

an 


APPENDIX, 


(71.)lindigoPlanters: 
Resolutions of the 
Bengal Gowern- 
ment. 


(72.)* 
Regulation V. 
1830, 


Preamble. 


Arvenvix, 454 APPENDIX ro REPORT rrom. SELECT COMMITTEE. 


. 


; and proper to extend the penalties prescribed by section 5, Regulation VII. 1819, to con- 
Settlement of — tracts for the cultivation of indigp plant, and to provide for the punishment of persons 
Europeans in India. convicted of damaging indigo crops: And whereag it is desirable in certam cases to afford 
to persons who may be unwilling to renew their contracts for the cultivation of indigo, the 
means of obtaining by summary process a release from their engagements; the following 
Rules have been enacted, to be in force from the date of their promulgation throughout thet 
territories subject to the Presidency of Fort William. e 
Persons instigating 


ead ae: II. In addition to the rule prescribed in clause 3,:section 5, Regulation VI. 1828, it 
uducing ryots to . ; : . 

evade the perform- #8 hereby declared, that in cases in which a ryot who shall have voluntarily executed a deed 
ance of their en- of engagement, stipulating to cultivate indigo plant on a specified portion of land, and to 
gagements, may be deliver the produce of such toxone individual, shall have been instigated and induced by 
prosecuted aH - another person to evade the performante of its conditions, it shall be competent to the party 
obpeidacienets injured thereby to prosecute such person for his undue interference, as well as the default- 
"ing ryot; on proof of which to the safisfaction of the court trying the case, the said person ‘ 

and the ryot shall be jointly and severally held answerable for the full amount of the penalty 

specified in.the original agreement of the ryot, together with all costs and expenses of 


the suit. 
Persons contracting III. It is hereby further provided, that all persons who may ehave received advances, 
for the cultivation of 


indigo plant who and have entered into written agreements for the cultivation of indigo plant, in the manner 
shall wilfully neglect indicated in Regulation VI. 1823, and who without good and sufficient cause shall wilfully 
or refuse tosowor neglect or refuse to sow or cultivate the ground specified in such agreement, shall be 
cultivate the ground deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and on conviction before a-magistrate or joint magistrate 
pL play ban hb Shall be liable to g sentence of imprisonment not exceeding one month. The magistrate 
a cced guilty of a OF joint magistrate may likewise require the person so convicted to sow or cultivate the 
misdemeanor, and be ground specified, if it shall appear just and proper to require the same; and any subse- 
liable to punishment. quent’ conviction of wilful neglect or refusal to comply with such requisition shall be 
‘punishable with a further sentence of imprisonment not exceeding two months. 
Persons damaging in- 


Aico lancsioe ae be IV. Persons wilfully damaging or causing’ to be damaged indigo plant, by allowing 

procesdedagsiontand cattle to trespass there, or by any other means, shall, on the complaint of. the ryot to 

punished. whom the crop may belong, or by the manufacturer by whom advances may have been 
made for the-cultivation and delivery of the said plant, be liable, on proof of the offence, 
to such punishment by fine and imprisonment as the magistrate is competent to inflict under 
section 19, Regulation IX. 1807; due regard being had to the nature of the case, and the 
circumstances in life of the offender. , : 


Persons wishingto be =V. First.—Any person who, having received advances under a written agreement for 
released from their the cultivation of indigo, shall be desirous on the expiration of the period of his contract 
cia the jails ia care to settle his account, shall be at liberty, in the event of the proprietor of the factory or 
tain cases,~ the person acting in his behaJf. refusing to settle the same, to present a petition to the 

. zillah court; and the judge, after a summary inquiry in the: presence of the parties or their 
The judge to hold a authorized agents into the merits of the case, shall, on proof of the expiration of the 
Suramary inquiry. —_ contract, if there be no balance. due from the petitioner, or if the petitioner shall deposit 
If no kalance be due in court the amount of any balance that may be adjudged to be due from him, grant: the 
ot eae said petitioner a release from his engagement, and shall pay over the amount, of any 


posited in court, the balance that may be deposited by him to the proprietor, or to the person acting in his 
judge to grant a re- behalf. . 
lease, and pay the balance.to the proprietor of the factory. 


The judge how to -Second.—If the. proprietor or person, aforesaid shall refuse to receive the balance 
Droceed a ae ate awarded to him by the summary process above provided, the judge shall return the amount 
peive the balance, t0 the petitioner, leaving the defendant to seek His remedy by a regular suit. 


Orperep, That a copy of the foregoing Resolution be sent for information to the Court 
of Sudder Dewanny Adawlut, in reply to their Registrar’s letter of the 9th October last. 


- 


i 


GENERAL APPENDIX. 


455 Appenorx, 


 mecinal 


SUPPLEMENTARY STATEMENT of Evropgan Inpido Puantens in the several Districts (79 )IndigoPlanters: 
of the Lower and Western Provinces ; the Number of Factorits, and the extent of the Cultivation ; Supplementary 
the Number of Civil and Criminal Cases. decided for and against them and their Servants during ‘Statement. @ 
the last Five Years; with Abstracts of the Opinions recorded by the Magistrates and Commis- ° 
sioners of Circuit, regarding the necessity of further Legislative Provisions for-the effectual 


** subjection of the Indigo Planters and their Servants to the control of the Law. 


engender 9 ele ten fi ne nineteen three nnn 


Rajeshahye — - 5 10 11} 68,700 1 1 2 7 10 


; : g NUMBER OF ° NUMBER OF 
= 3 CIVIL CAUSES, CRIMINAL CAUSES. 
2 % . : : 
$ "3 gel og & Pe F 3 5 a | 3 
e ; aej 2 8 € (88°) 3 13 182 1-243 
Zi DISTRICTS es | $ Ey 2 cia : 3 Fa S 
° nae ge Be; g | & a |“s 3] Beis | # | bs 
2 Be] = | a 2 lee | £188 jae | 2 | 88 
2 sel ee | = (78) Fae fea & lees 
> ss] 8 % B |BSs} B [ES IS2a) 3 | FS 
al a2] € ¢ 5S [Se ET & {| bo Tee) & | gs 
a Bs 5 s ¢ Su by $8 Qn Sun OD 2 Su 
241 aw | & 9. jace4) & 1S * ine" Bf 6% 
a Gemened 
; Begahs. 
2| Allighur - — - - - - a a = a -s 
RemARK :—The report from this district has not yet been received. 
For and Fr and 
d Against Against. 
13} Rungpore - - 2 24 “9 | 21,4051 41 |= -]+ -|]} §2 Fo = 
35 


Remarks :—The magistrate of this district (Rungpore) furnished his opinion before 
on the character and conduct of the indigo planters in his district, and a copy of it 


was transmitted to the Honourable Court. 


The magistrate of Rajeshahye had not obtained the necessary information at the 
time when the former statements were transmitted. The acting magistrate has now 
furnished the statement required, but it is in many respects defective ; and his letter 
does not contain the information required by the orders issued on the 29th December 
1829, as to the character of the planters, owing probably to the short experience which 


‘Mr. Halliday has had in the district. 


- -| 5 | 2 | 29500) - | * | ~ - 


14, Moorshedabad - 


)- 


Remarxs :—This is an additional” statement furnished by the acting magistrate, in 


continuation of the magistrate’s letter dated the 27th of March, =~ 


15, Mymensing = - L ig |. 64,945 | 141 


35 


_ | 26 


ReMARKS:—The return from Mymensing had not been received at the period of 
the last report to the Honourable Court. The magistrate is of opinion that further 
legislative provisions are rfecessary to render indigo planters and their servants more 
‘effectually subject to the judicial Jocal authorities. Mr. Cheap has assigned his reasons 
for this opinion at considerable Jength. This report, however, on the character of the 


indigo planters is generally favourable. 


Judicial Department, ot (signed) H. SHAKESPEAR, 


14 December 1830. -. Secretary to Government. 


APPENDIX, 
V. 


(74.)IndigoPlanters. 


Para. 5 to 12, letter, 
dated S*Sept. 1829; 
whole letter, dated 
1 June 1830; para. 
8 to 12, letter dated 
9 Nov. 1830.— 

Indigo Planters. 


456 APPENDIX to REPORT From SELECT COMMITTEE. 


r 


(74.)—LETTER from the Court of Diréctors to the Governor-general in Council at 
.. + Bengal (Sudicial Department)g dated 10 April 1832. 


1. We proceed to reply to the paragraphs of your letters noticed in the margin whiche 
relate to mdigo planters. 


2. The two first of these letters are in answer to our orders of the 6th August 1828, 
requiring you to furnish us with some information respecting the indigo planters, and the 
last refers to memorials presented toeyou on their behalf, and the consequent enactment of 


- Regulation V. of 1830. 


3. You say it will afford us satisfaction to learn from the reports of the magistrates and 
commissioners that the local officers generally entertam a very favourable opinion of the 
charecter of the European planters, ahd that they are represented as kind in their treatment 
of the natives. Such undoubtedly is the opinion expressed of them by most of the magistrates, 
and commissioners in the papers you have tfansmitted to us. Yet, although we are not 


disinclined to give credit to those favourable reports of the planters, it is obvious that such 


accounts must be received with some allowance for the delicacy of the inquiry, and for the 
disposition which men naturally feel to speak favourably of those with whom they are in 
habits, of familiarity and of social'intercourse. ‘ The habits of private intercourse,” says 
the commissioner hi the fifth division, “ existing between the planter and the public 
officers is a point of considerable moment, but it is a delicate matter to interfere with. 1 have 
known the appearance of intimacy deter the natives from bringing forward their complaints, 
and [ incline to agreé with them (meaning no doubt the natives with whom he had con- 
versed) that the idea of throwing aside our habitual private feelings in public business is, 
with most of us, more specious than real.” This consideration suggests the propriety of 
ee as faras may be possible, the opinions of the officers from-the facts to which 
they refer. , . 


4. We do not, however, mean to question that among the indigo planters there are many 
peaceable, good, and highly respectable persons, who obey the laws, are just in their 
dealings, and kind to the natives; nor can we doubt that the disappointments and the losses 
to which they are subject from the frauds and the violence of neighbouring planters, and 
others who have an interest opposed to theirs, are considerable, while many contracts 


‘entered into fairly on their part may have been broken most dishonestly by ryots. 


5. One of the magistrates speaks of indigo planters who had been 20 years in a district 
without a complaint against them; while, on the other hand, we hear of planters who cannot 
hold a factory a few months without numerous complaints being made against them or their 
servants. There is too much reason to believe that the ryots are to a great extent oppressed 
and defrauded, if not by indige planters themselves, by agents employed by them, acting in 
their names and for their advantage, while breaches of the peace, attended with violence, 
(often with wounding, and sometimes even with murder,) are committed, the chief actors in 
which are hired armed men, engaged by the planters for the express purpose of enforcing 
their claims in defiance of the law. These facts are affirmed even by those who have borne 
strong testimony to the personal good character of the planter. 


6. It was represented to your Government by many of the planters, and by the house of 
‘Messrs: Alexander & Co., that under the existing Ré@zulations relative to the cultivation of 
indigo, and the contracts between planter and ryot, a sufficient protection was not afforded 
to individuals engaged in the business, and they prayed for some legislative interference in 
their behalf. : 4 oS 


7. The memorialists complained that the judicial authorities had put a different construc- 


tion on. the Regulation from that which had been generally acted upon both by ryots and 


*' planters ; 


= 


| GENERAL APPENDIX. 457. Abrexprs, - 


‘Vv. 
‘planters; that those parties had understood that the Regulation gave the planter a lien on : 
the land for which he had contracted, and imposed on the ryot the obligation of cultivating .(74.)IndigoPlanters; - 
that land according to the terms of the agreement, but that the Sudder Court had decided that Letter to Bengal 
the Regulation conferred no such lien until the land had been sown; and left the planter, in Government ; 
ease of non-cultivation, to his choice of a summary suit, to recover the advance with interest, '° Aprit 1832. 
-or of a regular action for the penalties stipulated in the contract. ma 


8. The objectionable part of the Regulation as construed by the Sudder Court, was,’ 
according to the planters, that it afforded them no means of enforcing specific performance of 
the contract entered into by the ryot; that (except through the medium of a regular suit, 
which was almost out of the question) the Regulation professed to afford no assistance to 
the planter except in recovering his advance with interest, without any compensation for 
expense of establishment, or for loss on contracts which he might have made to deliver 
the dye; and that the poverty of the ryot, and the expense and delay attendant even on a 
summary suit, rendered the recovery even of the advance impossible. We fear that there is 

_ too much truth in these allegations. _~ : e 


9. The remedies which the planters proposed for the evil complained of were, that the ryot 
should be compelled to execute his engagement, not by the civil court, but by the aid of the 
police; that he should be punished criminally for his default; and that if he failed to sow the 
groun' which he had contracted to cultivate forthe produce of indigo, the party with whom 
he had engaged should be permitted to take possession and cultivate it himself. It will 
be seen that the former part of this application has been complied with, but not the 
latter. , 


10. It seems to be the general practice of the planters to advance money to ryots to cul- 
tivate indigo on lands, the boundaries of which are specified in the engagements. The ryot 
engages to deliver the plant at the factories at a fixed rate ; and the planter considers that 
he has a right to such lands for the term specified in the engagement. The mode in which 
these contracts are made is thus described by Mr. G. Smith, assistant magistrate of Jessore, 
who appears to have had experience in sonie of the districts where indigo is chiefly culti- 
vated. “ They are generally entered into by the gomastah of the factory without any inter~ 
ference on the part of the proprietor, who, provided he has cabooliats for the produce of a 
certain quantity of land, does’ not stop to inquire how they were obtained. They are 
generally, if not always, witnessed by the inferior servants of the factory, who are in most 
cases dependants of the gomastah, and who, so long as they are allowed to participate ina 
small degree in the harvest which the gomastah makes by appropriating a share of the 
advances to himself, are not particular as to whether the agreements they witness are bond 
Jide the voluntary contracts of the ryot, or extorted by or forged by the gomastah. 

“ The ryot, on the contrary, availing himself of the suspicion which 1s generally attached 
to documents of this nature, and thus attested, frequently takes advances from two or more 
manufacturers, and gives agreements to both for the produce of the same piece of ground. 
The omlah of the factory last contracting, of gourse take care that their agreement shall be 
antedated, in order that the preference may be given to them when the different parties 
come to issue about the cutting of the plant. 

“ The effect of this mutual want of faith is, that it constantly causes serious affrays, filling 
the court with causes and the jail with prisoners. 

“‘ It appeared from the jail darogah’s report, that on the 15th May there were 142 per~ 
sons in jail in indigo cases; but at the season for cutting the plant the number is consider- 
ably greater.” 


. e 
‘11. A copy of a contract in Tirhoot has been given by the magistrate of that district. In 
other places the engagements may be diff¢rently framed. . 


12. The corrupt and fraudulent proceedings of the gomastahs and other principal native 
agents at the factories are acknowledged by the planters themselves, who describe them as 
extorting from the ryots, and cheating them as well as the planters. 

3 N° “18. Mr. Turnbull, 


Arenxox, 458 APPENDIX ro REPORT. rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


13. Mr. Turnbull, one of the judges of the Sudder Dewanny Adawlut, says, “ The con-. 
Settlement of _ , tract formed with the. ryot is sometimes not in writing, is frequently insufficiently defined, 
Europeans in India, and is generally extremely unfavousable to the ryot, rendering him, in fact, a slave to the 
establishment with which he has once engaged, and thereby preventing an open and fair 
competition to all, which would afford the only true and effectual remedy. Too much also,. 
it is said, is entrusted to dewans, naibs, gomastahs, and numerous others employed by the 
planter, who, I fear, looks but little beyond the quantity of the land procured for him, and 
does not pay sufficient attention to the means by which it has Been obtained.’ In such a 
state of things (says Mr. Turnbull), it cannot be much matter of surprise that the ryot, who 
is acknowledged to be in poverty, and has perhaps been labouring in vain for years to work 
off his old balances, as it is called, should readily yield to the temptation of an offer of | 
money from a rival factory to pay off his old score, and thereby liberate himself from thral- 
dom, as well as engage on more favour&ble terms.” The contracts are said to be generally 
for two and three to eight and ten rupees advanced on each, and some of the factories have 
thousands of such engagements. 


_ 14. The greatest evil of which the ryots complain (says Mr. Walters), “is the almost utte? 
impracticability of being able to free themselves should they once have the misfortune to 
receive indigo advances, either by their own free will or compulsion.” 


e 
15. The Commissioner of revenue and circuit, in his report, after an inquiry into the dis- 
turbances connected with indigo concerns in a neighbouring district, says, “ I examined the 
accounts of the ryots, and though some of the items placed at their debit appeared to me 
not strictly just, yet on inquiry I found the same custom prevailed throughout the 
district. : Ty 


16. Itis further said by Mr. Walters, that if a ryot should possess the means of paying off 
his balances, and desire to emancipate himself from indigo cultivation, there is at present no 
Jegal process by which he can compel the planter to settle his account and Side him his dis- 
charge. “ The planter will not receive the money, and the ryot generally finds -himself 
reluctantly compelled to continue the cultivation. 


“ Other grievances” (says Mr. Walters) “ complained of by the ryots are their being forced 
by threats aid ill-usage to enter into indigo engagements ; their having other or more lands - 
than those contracted for taken from them by the indigo servants, and being thus unable to 
raise other crops intended for the de ae of their families; their having entered into engage-, 
ments, perhaps voluntarily, with one factory, and being obliged to execute engagements with 
another for the same lands, or although they have no concern with any factory, still having 
their lands forcibly sown without any pretence or colour of right. These are evils all 
of too common occurrence, and which it is not in the power of any magistrate to prevent. 
They are to be attributed more to the factory servants than to the planters: themselves, 
though the latter do not perhaps trouble themselves much to ascertain how things are’ 
carried on, so long as a certain quantity of land is sown,-and a certain produce is to be- 
expected.” 28 : 
« « As magistrate of Nuddeah,” (says Mr. Turnbull) “ I had some opportunity of witnessing 
the scenes of contention and strife ensuing from the various and conflicting interests to which — 
that competition gave rise. The disorders which then prevailed in that and the nee nvounne 
indigo districts have, I believe, nothing abated to the present day, and they are certainly suc 

as'to call for the serious interposition of Government. From the moment of ploughing the 
land and sowing the seed to the season of reaping the crop, the whole district is thrown into 
a state of ferment. Tho most daring breaches of the peace are committed in the face of our 
police officers, and even of the magistrate himself, In utter defiance of all law and authority, 
large bodies of armed men are avowedly entertained for the express purpose of taking or 
retaining forcible possession of lands or crops. Violent affrays, or rather regular pitched 
‘battles ensue, attended. with bloodshed and homicide. . Our police establishments are cor- 
rupted, and the darogahs are said notoriously to. be in the pay of the planters, European or 
: Se? Sere ‘ native, 


GENERAL APPENDIX. | (459. Arrexon, 


native, to secure their good offices. Private assassinations occasionally occur, and forgery and — 
perjury have their full sway ; in short, every species of trime is committed, and in the list I (74-)IndigoPlanters: 


should not omit false charges of murder, arson, &c., Which are very common, and are the ieee to Bengal 
most harrassing of all to the accused, as*well as to the magistrate.” VEE OE 


é ; 10 April 1532. 

17. This statement is confirmed by Mr. Walters, who says, “ I will not here put on record : 
acts which have come to my knowledge of open daring violence directed to the destruction 
of rival factories, but willeask where is the instance in this part of the country of the native 
‘zemindar, who, unaided by European partners or influence, has erected indigo factories, and 
successfully carried on the speculation without being in the end either entirely ruined or 
obliged to admit his more. powerful neighbour to a share in his concern, or being himself 
perhaps cast into jail for standing up in defence of his own rights?” 


18. The practice of indigo planters maintaming lrge bodies of armed men is noticed by 
other judges of the Sudder Dewanny Adawlut-as well as by Mr. Turnbull. Mr. Ross says 
they are kept to enforce the ryots’ contracts, and Mr. Sealy speaks of “ the number of 
affrays that now annually take place for indigo lands, which are invariably attended with 
severe wounding, and frequently with loss of, life, in consequence of the planters entertaining 
bodies of fighting men for the express purpose of fighting their battles on those occasions.” 


19. Mr. Walters reftrs to the custom of entertaining, at European and native indigo 
factories, a number of persons of various descriptions; sometimes proclaimed offenders, 
escaped convicts, or persons discharged from jails. “These people” (he says) “find a secure 
asylum in indigo factories, from whence they issue under cover of the night, and are guilty of 
hemous offences. Decoities, thefts, and even murders have been brought home to such 
‘factory retainers.” The police officers, he says, are afraid to enter am indigo factory, the 
planters in general not bemg ready to assist the police, especially when suspicion falls on 
their own servants. It appears from a statement accompanying Mr. Walters’ report, that one 
of the indigo planters in his district has in his service 240 persons under the denomination of 
ameens and. clossees. As yo 


20. The affrays on which the planters engage, and their open violation of the laws are 
freely admitted by the planters themselves. A4dressing the Governor-general in Council, 
* your memorialists” (they say) “are far from wishing to conceal from your Lordship that 
disputes in regard to these lands, and the rights possessed over them by the planters, have 
frequently arisen both between neighbouring planters and between the planter and zemindar, 
talookdar and other natives having, or pretending to have, a right in the land, and are willing 
to admit, that occasional instances have occurred of violence and oppression on the part of the 

_ planter, which they are far from justifying.” In another place they refer to the sources, 
under the existing system, from which originate “too many of the scenes of violence, and 
even bloodshed, with which your Lordship in Council cannot be unacquainted :” and speaking 
of the good effects which they think would follow from the adoption of their suggestions they 
say, “ many of the evils now so prevalent will speedily disappear, and the peace of the indigo 
districts be at once restored and preserved weth comparative facility, where hitherto lawless 
violence and force have too frequently leper as your memorialists would earnestly press 
on your Lordship’s attention, because force and violence alone have been found able to pro- 
tect private property from spoliation and ruin.” Nor is this violence confined to the native 
agents of the planter; the notorious corruption of these persons having been noticed, the 

.memorialists add, that the planter is “ too ‘often compelled to overlook, or sanction 
proceedings necessary. to the protection of his property, but which unavoidably lead to broils - 
and quarrels.” ip Os 


21. Mr. Prinsep, the secretary in the Geperal department, to whom some of the papers con- 
nected with this subject were referred, made the following remarks: “ It is where, in the 
eagerness to extend cultivation, the manufacturer presses money upon a half-unwilling ryot, or 
on one of several joint ryots, or on ryots who haveno right to change their cultivation without. 
the zemindar’s permission, or on ryots not im Daas in all which, and in 500 similar 

BN 2. cases 


ApPENnrIX, 
V. 
3 Settlement of 
Europeans in India. 


460 APPENDIX ro REPORT raom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


cases that might be cited, the manufacturer has not the land measured out to him and speci- 
fied, but relies on the ryot’s word, &s to the possession and as to the land’s fitness for the 
plant, confirmed perhaps by a distrohest gomastah.” Mr. Prinsep says, the courts are not 
strong enough to prevent people from thriving by @iolence, and the manufacturers trust at 
present to their lutheeals (bludgeon men) to supply the deficiency of their contracts. Mr. . 
Prinsep adds, “ the stronger party benefits always by the looseness of an engagement, and 


' while this is the case, that is, while through the inefficiency of the existing law to protect the 


weaker the manufacturers can bear down the ryots, by hired ruffidhs, it may be part of thei: 
policy to cry out against the system, as compelling them to resort to such means of righting 
themselves, but Government will not readily be persuaded that they are the oppressed class, 
who require to have their hands strengthened by further legislative provisions.” 


22. Mr. Walters says, that falsecomplatnts are made, and witnesses are suborned, but that the - 
planter’s name does not appear, though the case is brought forward by his servants, and at his 
expense, he himself most probably knowing nothing of its truth or falsehood. “ Many 4 
a pla@ter” (says Mr. Walters) “ has confessed to me that he has been an accessary to acts, 
of which he would have felt himself ashamed in his own country ; acts which he was driven to 
permit, or to lose the capital he had embarked?’ He remarks, that the European planters 
holding lands in the name of their servants are subject to no tangible responsibility. They 
may direct brigands to be entertained, they may plan and order att&icks to be made, but if 
not personally present as principals, it is difficult to bring them to justice. “ Instances have 


“occurred” (says Mr. Walters) ‘‘ in which the mere warning a European planter against being 


accessary to a breach of the peace, on the information of a police officer that armed men on’ 
his part were collected, has called forth a threat of prosecution in the Supreme Court; so that 
magistrates are réally afraid to act against British subjects except on the strongest 
grounds.” ; 


23. We desire to be informed whether you have any reason to believe that the fear of. 
prosecution in the Supreme Court, operates to prevent magistrates from executing their duties 
in respect to British subjects. At this distancé we have not the means of forming a correct 
judgment on such a point; the importance, of it, however, is obvious, and if Mr. Walters’ 
imputation is well founded, an effectual remedy for so intolerable an evil should be sought 
without delay. 


24. The memorialists represented to Government that in consequence of the influence 
exercised by the zemindars, talookdars and others, their dependants were often compelled 
to rise in a body, and arm themselves against the servants of an obnoxious planter, 
who were thus: prevented from ploughing, sowing, or otherwise working the land. After 
describing the peruicious influence of the monibe (meaning no doubt the zemindar) over the 
ryots, they say, his object is to extort bribes from the planter; “ where this bribe is refused,” 
(they add), “ and the interference.of the monibe prevents the sowing of the lands, the planter 
is then reduced to the necessity of taking forcible possession with his own people, or con- 
templating the loss of his advances, and hisetime, the blighting of the hopes of profit he 
indulged, and perhaps the prospect of utter ruin. When he is driven to the former course 
(and your memorialists feel assured it will excite no surprise if he should sometimes betake 


-himself to-it) and is resisted, as frequently happens, your. Lordship in Council will be at no 


loss to diseover the cause of scenes of occasional: violence and disturbance, which the 
Regulation now solicited would, in the humble opinion of your memorialists, so efiectually 
prevent.” = ~ 

25. The planters complain of the native zemindars#talookdars and others, as evét ready 


to prompt their ryots to a breach of contract, and they declare to the Government that they 
consider legislative interference necessary. for the ‘protection of their interests against the 


+ machinations of those persons, and even for.the prevention of their utter ruin. In the repre- 


sentation of Messrs. Alexander & Co. it is stated.that a native, interfermg with an indigo | 
‘planter in Dacea Jelalpore, had persuaded the ryots-not to sow their lands, that the factories 
be A Be i, "were | 


‘GENERAL APPENDIX. 401 Armen, 


4 


were shut up, and that the expense and trouble of instituting a suit against every individual ae 
_contractor, with the certainty that nothing coyld be récSvered from a population so wretch- (74-)lndigoPlanters: 
‘edly poor as the ryots of Bengal, made it a hopeless case for the indigo planter to seek poet to Bengal 
redress by suits against them in the cow. . This unfair competition is represented as the | esti 
cause of those disputes from which affrays, breach of the peace, and often murder arise ; Sale ges 
. and it is proposed that the party interfermg with contracts, mstead of the miserable ryots, 
should be punished by sypmary process. ; 


‘+ 26. In one of the memorials from Jessore it is proposed that the police officers should be 
required to give immediate assistance in arresting a servant. or labourer refusing to work 
under his contract ; that it shall be declared criminal in zemindars, talookdars or others 
to shield or protect him, and that for so doing they sltall- be punishable by fine and impri- 
sonment. It is further proposed, that lands which can be proved to have belonged to a fac- 
tory for a number of years, the planters shall not be dispossessed _of “ by virtue of any species 
, of tenure whatever ;” this the memorialists call “an equalization of rights.” They object to 
the consent of the zemindar being required for a lease from the ryot to the planter, and they 
propose that the planter should satisfy himself of the ryot’s right to grant .such lease, other 
. parties having, or pretending to have, an interest, being left to make good their claims by 
ordinary process in the zillah courts. Thus, say the memorialists, the zemindars would have 

. “all the protection to which in fairness and justice they are entitled.” 


27. These propositions seem very extraordinary from persons who admit that farms are 
extensively held by the European planters, in the name, and through the agency of natives, 
generally their principal factory servants or gomastahs, a set of men whose fraud and 
oppression they acknowledge to be notorious, although they often overlogk or sanction their 
proceedings ; who declare they conscientiously believe that almost all the grievances of 
which they complain, and almost all the disorders which have so long prevailed in the indigo’ 
districts, have arisen out of the defective state of the law and the notorious corruption of its 
subordinate agents ; who avow that the planters bribe the omlah of the-courts, as the only 
means of securing a fair representation of their cases, and that force and violence alone can 
protect their private property from spoliation and ruin. 

28. Mr. Walters says, that the European planter, if zenindars refuse to accede to his 
offer, frequently obtains a pottah or ijareh for their lands from some claimant or sharer, 
real or fictitious, not in possession, or perhaps from some unauthorised gomastah, and on 
that plea, if he cannot succeed in turning them out, at least deprives them of their rent. 
The planter on such occasions takes on himself all the expense of the litigation to which his 
ally may be exposed, and the zemindar finds himself involved in a law-suit, or is perhaps 
driven to commit a breach of the peace, or to look for a protector in some more powerful 
indigo planter; at all events the peace of the district is most generally broken, and serious 
consequences not unfrequently occur. “ This,” says Mr. Walters, “ is a common practice:” 


29. The extent to which these disturbances go may be well understood from the Report 
of the Commissioner who inquired into the tréubles in Dacca Jelalpore in 1829, occasioned 
by disputes between a European indigo planter and a native zemindar. The European col- 
lected 500 men to sow his indigo seed, and the villagers had 1,000 to oppose him. When- 
ever the police officers appeared the people assembled in bodies of 2,000 or 3,000; they 
were summoned together by regular signal guns. . On one occasion the police officers, who 

- were attacked by a body of 2,000 men, were beaten and taken prisoners, and the magistrate 
thought it necessary to apply for a military force to assist him. 


30. Mr. Ross very justly remarked,*that to refer'a ryot who had to support himself and 
family by his labour to a tribunal at a distaycé from the place of his abode for redress when 
an act of injustice had been done him, was in effeet to deny him redress. The zillah courts, 
from their distance, and their being so few in number, were inaccessible to the ryots, and 
from their accumulation of business, of little avail to the manufacturer. The want of pro- 
-vision for administering the law was, in Mr. Ross’s opinion, sufficiént in itself to account 

- . 7 : t @ 


APPENDIX, 
r ’ 


em 
Settlement of 
Europeans in India. 


462 . APPENDIX ro REPORT: rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


the disorder prevailing in the indigg districts ; and although Mr. Ross proposed some altera- 
tions in the law, he insisted on the necessity of having- adequate local courts of judicature, 
without which no amendment of the law would ,be of any advantage. In Mr. Turnbull’s 
Minute we find the following passage: “ Let.us consider the vast interests that are involved 
in the matter under discussion, not merely in the lacs of rupees that are annually at stake, 
but as variously affecting the greater part of a large and populous district, and consider at thes 
same moment the means we at present possess of affording prompt and effectual redress in 
the countless disputes which cannot but arise from such a state of things. A single factory 
may have formed upwards of 1,000 contracts. The parties may be distant from the onl 
courts now open to them from 50 to 100 miles. Those courts are already overwhalned: 
The matters in dispute press for decision, and cannot wait the ordinary course, for delay 
would render the decision nugatory, and worse, as the parties would have been needlessly 
subjected to annoyance and expense. What then is the remedy? I confess I am ata loss to 
propose any other than the appointment of a respectable sudder ameen in each tannah divi- 
sion,¢vith a salary or authorized emoluments such as would incite him to a faithful and 
honest discharge of the important trusts which must necessarily be confided to him.” The 
appointment of local sudder ameens was also recommended by Mr. Prinsep. 


31. These suggestions, however, you did not think proper to adopt, for you were of opinion 
that native local officers were not yet fit to be trusted with the arbitrament of disputes 
between European planters and the native cultivators; neither did you approve of the plan of 
establishing a registry for contracts between the ryots and planters, which had been strongly 
recommended by some of the public officers, and objected to by others. 


82. In Regulation VI. of 1823, it was stated that the delay and difficulty of obtaining 
redress by a regular action in the eivil courts, in regard to the enforcement of engagements 
made by indigo planters with ryots, had not unfrequently led to acts of violence, and even to 
serious affrays, and the main object of that Regulation was to authorize the institution of 
summary suits to enforce such engagements., Now it is said that the rules adopted have 
been found, in a great measure, ineffectual; and Regulation V. of 1830 has been enacted 
* for amending the provisions of the fornfer Regulation, and for providing more effectually 
for enforcing the execution of contracts relating ‘to the cultivation and delivery of indigo 
plant.” 


33. Itis first provided, that he who instigates or induces a ryot to evade the performance 
of his contract with the planter, shall be held, jomtly with the-ryot, answerable for the full 
amount of the penalty specified in the original agreement of the ryot, together with all costs 
and, expenses of the suit. But no provision is made for inflicting penalties, costs and 
expenses on him who instigates or a ae the planter to evade the performance of his con- 
tract with the ryot, notwithstanding it may so happen (in the case, for instance, of a disputed 
right of occupancy) that the ryvt is properly and legally advised, that the ‘party mterfering 
has a perfect right to interfere, and_ that on the planter’s side there is nothing but injustice. 
Although it may be true that the planter is mich less likely than the ryot to attempt to evade 
the contract, it would. still have been right to apply the clause to both. 


34., By the next provision of the Regulation, a ryot who has entered into a contract under 
certaig specific penalties to sow and cultivate for an indigo planter, is made hable for a breach 
of his part of the engagement, not only to the payment of the preseribed penalty, but also to 

unishment as a crimmal. He may, im the first instance, be imprisoned by the magistrate 
ora month. The magistrate or joint magistrate may also require him to sow or cultivate,: 
and any subsequent convictions of wilful neglect or refusal to comply with such requisition 
are punishable by a further imprisonment not exceeding two months. This is the case of a 
contract for the mutual benefit of two parties, voluntarily entered into with a specific penalty 


‘to which both have agreed.’ We are not aware of any principle on which in such a case the 
‘Jaw, instead of recognising the terms of the agreement and the equality of the parties, should 
‘make a distinction between them. If for non-performance of an engagement one party - 


should 


* 


‘(GENERAL APPENDIX. - 463 © Aveuxniy, 
V 


should be punishable by imprisonment for one, two orgthree months, or perhaps (under =... -—-~ 
repeated convictions) for a longer time, it is not very obyjous why. the other party, however (71-)IndigoPlanters: 
fraudulently or unjustly he may have actgd, should go free; nor do we perceive why such a Letter to Benga 

’ rule, if in itself just, should be confined to indigo or any particular species of cultivation. Ala ; 

We feel also a strong objection to this clause, because it attaches punishment on those who 1° APT! 1832. 
appear by the statements scarcely to be free agents. The ryot, from poverty, abjectness of 

spirit, intimidation, or bribery, is the victim of others far more guilty than himself. It may 

not be easy to visit those persons with a corresponding infliction, but it is hard that he alone 

should be singled out for punishment. % 


° 


35. By another provision, persons wilfully damaging, or causing to be damaged, indigo 
plant, “ by allowing cattle to trespass thereon, or by any other means,” are punishable to 
the extent of a fine of 200 rupees, or one year’s imprisonment. We cannot help fearing that ° 
the infliction of penalties of such severity, when considered with reference to the means of 
the parties on whom alone they are likely to be intposed, may be productive of much 
oppression and injustice. 


36. It appears by the preamble of the Regulation, that ryots. who may be unwilling to 
renew their contracts with indigo planters require the assistance of the courts to obtain a 
release from their engagéments. hat the consequence would be to a ryot, the period of 
whose contract was expired, if he refuses to renew his engagements, is not stated; but sone 
protection, it seems, was thought necessary. For this purpose he may apply to the judge, 
who will settle the account by a summary sce But after all, if the planter does not. 
agree to the judge’s decision, no release can be given to the ryot, and the parties are referred 
to the civil court, that place of delay and difficulty, where attempts to obtain redress are so 
ineffectual. For ‘the possible case of a balance being due from the indigo planter to the 
ryot on a settlement of accounts no provision is made. 


37. It seems to us that the effect of this Regulation is to give advantages to the indigo, 
planters, in their dealings with the ryots, by*dispensing’ in their favour with the ordinary 
course of the law, to which all other persons in the,state are subject. We are not insensible 
to the difficulties of this subject. The planter who has already sunk a large capital in his, 

‘works, and who is obliged to maintain an establishment of servants at a considerable expense, 
must be ruined if those with whom he contracts fail in the performance of their engagements; 
while the ryots having, as is customary, received advances of money from the planter, have 
nothing to lose but that on which, we fear, in such transactions, they set no great value— 
character; but on the contrary, enjoy a present advantage by selling the plant to some 
other person than him for whom it was originally intended. We cannot, however, sanc-' 
tion any legislative measure which appears, like Regulation V. of 1830, not to extend 
equal protection to all. It seems to us that the subject ought to have been more thoroughly 
sifted before you enacted this Regulation. An inquiry should have been made by one or 
more commissioners, specially appointed for the purpose of investigating and reporting upon 
the matter, examining all parties mterested, and all who were cognizant of facts, or likely to 
offer useful suggestions, and carefully distinguishing facts from inferences, and accurately 
tracing the authority of every statement. 


38. It is further obvious that the same rules cannot, as a matter of course, be assumed as 
applicable alike to goat standing in positions so different from each other as those of 
Behar and Bengal, and again, as any of these from the inhabitants of the Western 
Provinces. 


39. The detail into which we have entered, though embracing many mportant particulars,. 
and especially the opinions of many gentlemen, to whose sentiments much weight must. be 
attached, leaves, it is obvious, many points unexplained, which-it is very desirable to, have - 
fully developed, with a view to a clear comprehension of the actval and relative condition of 
the parties terested. 

40. We 


EIS: 464. ‘APPENDIX TO" REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


‘40. We should wish you therefore to tee the means by which the circumstances of 
this important branch of trade, in sp far as they are likely to bear upon judicial or territorial 
arrangements, may be thoroughly investigated andgreported upon, the different parts of the 
country in which different plans of management are understood to be followed, being dis- 
tinctly considered; all classes of persons interested having a full opportunity of stating “what 
‘they may desire to urge, and the matters reported being given with a specific reference to the 
documentary, or oral evidence on which they rest. 


41. Without, however, deciding how far the views and statements given in the papers now 
under consideration are to he admitted or disputed, we can haveno hesitation in concluding that 
they do not afford sufficient grounds for enforcing the engagements of the indigo ry ot, bya 
special penal Regulation. So: far from it indeed, the facts before us suggest strong doubts of 
the policy and justice of the measure. 


42. We therefore direct that you rescind the second and third clauses of Reealation V. of 
18303 and that you will revise the othtr clauses with reference to the remarks which we have 
made on them in a preceding part of this letter. 


43..We cannot conclude without impressing on you the expediency of applying some 
remedy to the evils disclosed in the reports to which we have referred. 


44. In this despatch we have dwelt mainly on the dark side of thé case, because it is hes 
such an exhibition that the necessity of some immediate interposition on the part of Govern- 
ment becomes apparent. We feel that the prevalence of such flagrant misdoings in any part 
of the country is a reproach to our administration. We doubt not that you have seriously 

Bad the means by which they can be finally suppressed. 


On our part, our best attention is given to the various suggestions of the gentlemen 
hose opinions you have transmitted to us. One great desideratum, unquestionably, is a 
facility of access to courts of justice. When we advert to the power now exercised by the 
sudder ameens, and the generalhigh character of that class of persons, we cannot but feel sur- 
prise that you should have hesitated to entrust them with the authority which was suggested. 


46. It is much to be lamented that it is so common for Europeans to hold land in other 
names than their own. The planters allege that this practice is in some measure owing to 
the forms and restrictions enjoined by your Resolution of May 1824 on Europeans desirous 
to take leases of land. If this should appear to you to be the case, we authorize you to 
relax, though with proper caution, such of the securities prescribed in that Resolution as in 

' your opinion may be safely dispensed with. 


47. We desire you will take into consideration the expediency of sdlanicnne a complete 
registry of all lands held by Europeans in each district, either in their own names, or in the 
names of others, and of taking the necessary steps to prevent, as far as may be practicable, 
their occupying any unregistered lands. 

48. We have only to add, that all Europeans who are permitted to remain in the interior 
must be taught, practically, ‘that obedience t the laws is an indispensable condition of their 

' licence:to reside there. 


Settlement of 
Europeans in India. 


t 


We are, your affectionate-friends, 


(signed) R. Camprett, H. ALEXANDER, J. Forges, 
J. G.-Ravensuaw, J. Locn, J. Sruart, 
W. Wicram, H.S. Crarxgs, * N. B. EpMonstone, 
H. Linpsay, G. Lyra, J.R. Carnac, ~ 
J. Morris, ‘Hy. Snanx, Hy. St. G. Tucker. 
W. Youne, 


London, loth April 1832. 


- GENERAL. APPENDIX. 465 


(75)—A STATEMENT, showing the Number of Invic6 Facrortes in the several Districts under the Bengal 
Presidency; also, the Number of European Indigo Planters, Proprietors of Estates, and the Number of European | 
Assistants.resident in the severat Districts under the Bengal Government. 


ar 2 i 
: : eee 
: Number of | Namber of ; Number of Number of 
DISTRICTS. Number of] European | European " DISTRICTS, , Number of) European | European 
| Factories. )Proprietors.| Assistants. | Factories. Proprietors.’ Assistants. 
First Division : i Twelfth Division ; 
Seharunpore-  -_—. = - Bhaugulpore - 32 - : vw 
Mozuffernuggur_ - = hs ie - - = 17 5 7 
Meerut - - - : aldal . - = 24 3 7 
Bohundshehoor __, - - - Purneah - wy, fe 65 8 12 
Second Division : Thirteenth Division : ss 
Agra = + - - Dinagepore- ‘+ -!| 3 - - 2 
- Allighur - - = Rungpore - - “ | ms —_ _ 
. surat Rajishahye - - - = _ 
Third Division: ee y 
Furruckabad ae : , Pubnah 7 * 2} 99 19 38 
Mynpooree - 7 . Bugorah - 7 " 18° 4 7 
*- Etawah - - . Fourteenth Division: - 
Soe ae Moorshedabad - — - 35 - < 16 
fo o Nees ; s Beerbhoom - - - 4 1 _ 
Nigeena: oe ee Nuddeah - ° + =| 56 19 18 
saps pasos Fifteenth Division : 
Fifth Division ; Nismentine ‘« a _ ae 
Bareilly = - = 7 Shere ore “— AS 
j - 7 nerep : - 7 3 2 
Shajehanpore Wiiserahe. ote oe 7 = 
Phillibheet - + - Decca Jelalpore - = - ne 7 ° 38 
Sixth Division: Dacca - - - - 10 * -{ a1 
ae oe oi. Sixteenth Division : 
7 * . . Arrakan - 7 _ = = 
Belah - > ee sa Chittagong - - : —_ - — 
Seventh Division: Noacolly - - . - < — = * 
S. Bundlcund OS Seventeenth Division: 
Futtehpore - . - Assam « - - . — _ panes 
- Allahabad - 5 : N.E. Rungpore - —  - ~ — _ 
- Eighth Division; Sylhet - = 7 > _ _ 

_ Benares - fs = Eighteenth Division : 

_Mirzapore - - — - ; Suburbs of Calcutta + _ _ _ 
Juanpore - - = Twenty-four Pergunnahs 5 - - 2 

Ninth Division ; Bavaset: Sr ait «Ss 2 > > 2 
Goruckpore- - = *- : Backergunge . 7 4 2 = 2 
Azimghur  - - - Jessore - - - 63 2 30 
Ghazeepore- += Nineteenth Division: _ 

Tenth Division ; _Midnapore - — - ° 24 a ‘ 
Sarun-  - - = 1g Balasore - - ~~ 1 1 _ 
Shahabad - oe + 13 Cuttack . - - — ei wt 
Tirhoot - - 48 |° Twentieth Division : 

‘anth Division + Burdwan - - - 8 . - 6 

ie Dyin oe, oye > FS “Jungle Mehals -  « 22 : 5 "4 
Behar - 2 6 |- Hooghly = - 7 . sii ors — 
a | Torat Facrorizs - - | 899 119 354" 


; Totat EvROPEANS «< ~ - 47§ 
There are no Returns of Indigo Factories under the Presidencies of Fort St. George and Bombay. 


East India House, : J. Minx, 


6 August 1832. Examiner of India Correspondence. 
30 


Arrenvix, 466 APPENDIX ro REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


Settlement of 
Europeans in India. 


76.—REMARKS by Rammohen Roy, of SETTLEMENT in India by EvRoPeans; 
dated 14 July 1632. 


Mocuw has been said and written by persons in the employ of the Honourable East India 
Company and others on the subject of the settlement of Europeans in India, and many ° 
various opinions have been expressed as to the advantages and disadvantages which might 
attend such a political measure. I shall here briefly and candidly state the principal effects - 
which, in my humble opinion, may be expected to result from this measure. 


2. I notice, first, some of the advantages that might be derived from such a change. 


“Advantages. 


First.—European settlers in India wjl introduce the knowledge they possess of superior 
mode#of cultivating the soil and improving its products (in the article of sugar, for example), as 
. has already happened with respect to indigo, and improvements in the mechanical arts, and in 
the agricultural and commercial systems generall¥, by which the natives would of course benefit 

| Secondly.—By a free and extensive communication with the various classes of the native 
mhabitants the European settlers would gradually deliver their minds from the superstitions 
and prejudices, which have subjected the great body of the Indian people to social and 
domestic inconvenience, and disqualified them from useful exertions. 

Thirdly.—The European settlers being more on a par with the rulers of the country, and 
aware of the rights belonging to the subjects of a liberal Government, and the proper mode 
of administering justice, would obtain trom the local Governments, or from the Legislature 
in England, the introduction of many necessary improvements in the laws and judicial sys- 
tem; the benefit of which would of course extend to the inhabitants generally, whose con- 
dition would thus be raised. 

Fourthly.—The presence, countenance and support of the European settlers would not 
only afford to the natives protection against the impositions and oppression of their landlords 
and other superiors, but also against any aVuse of power on the part of those in authority. 

Fifthly—The European settlers, from motives of benevolence, public spirit and fellow- 
feeling towards their native neighbours, would establish schools and-other seminaries of 
education for the cultivation of the English language throughout the country, and for the 
diffusion of a knowledge of European arts and sciences; whereas at present the bulk of. the 
natives (those residing at the Presidencies and some large towns excepted) have no more 
opportunities of acquiring this means of national improvement than if the country had never 
had any intercourse or connexion whatever with Europe. 

Sixthly.—As the intercourse between the settlers and their friends and connexions isi 
Europe would greatly multiply the channels of communication with this country, the public 
and the Government, here would become much more correctly informed, and consequently 
much better qualified to legislate on Indian matters than at present, when, for any authentic 
information, the country is at the mercy of the representations of comparatively a few 
individuals, and those chiefly the parties who have the management of public affairs in their 
hands, and who can hardly fail therefore to regard the result of their own labours with 
a favourable eye. 

. Seventhly.—In the event of an invasion from any quarter, east or west, the Government 
would be better able to resist it, if, in addition to the native population, it were supported by 
a large body of European inhabitants, ed connecéed by national sympathies with the 
ruling power, and dependent on its stability for the continued enjoyment of their civil and 
political rights. : ; 

Eightly.—The same cause would operate to continue the connexion between Great Britain 
and India on 4 solid and permanent footing ; provided only the latter country be governed 
in a liberal manner, by means of Parliamentary superintendence, and such other legislative 
checks in. this country as may be devised and established. India may thus, for an unlimited 

: , period, | 


GENERAL APPENDIX.  _ 467 APPENoIx, 


V. 
-period, enjoy union with England, and the advantage of*her enlightened Government ; and in we, 
return contribute to support the greatness of this country. - -, (76.) Remarks by _ 


Ninthly.—If, however, events should eccur to effect a separation between the two countries, Rammohyp Roy; 
then still the existence of a large body of respectable settlers (consisting of Europeans and 14 duly 1822. 
their descendants, professing’ Christianity, and speaking the English language in common 
with the bulk of the perk, as well as possessed of superior knowledge, scientific, mechanical, 
and political) would bring that vast empire in the East to a level with other large Christian 

“countries in Europe, and by means of its immense riches and extensive population, and by the ~ 
help which may be reasonably expected from Europe, they (the settlers and their descendants) 
may succeed sooner or later in enlightening and civiliging the surrounding nations of Asias 


3. I now proceed to state some of the principal disadvantages which may be apprehended, 
with the remedies which I think calculated to prevent them, or at any rate their frequent 
occurrence. 

Disadvantages? 


First.—The European settlers being a distinct race, belonging to the class of the rulers of 
the country, may be apt to assume an ascendancy over the aboriginal inhabitants, and aim at 
enjoying exclusive rights and privileges, to the depression of the larger, but less favoured 
class ; and the former being also of another religion, may be disposed to wound the feelings 
of the natives, and subject them to humiliations on account of their being of a different creed, 
colour and habits. 

As a remedy or preventive of such a result, I would suggest, 1st. That as the higher and 
better educated classes of Europeans are known from experience to be legs disposed to anno 
and insult the’ natives than persons of a lower class, the European settlers, for the first 
twenty years at least, should be from org educated persons of character and capital, 
since such persons are very seldom, if ever, found guilty of intruding upon the religions 
or national prejudices of persons of uncultivated minds; 2dly. The enactment of equal laws, 
placing all classes on the same footing as te civil nghts, and the establishment of trial by 
jury (the jury being composed impartially of both classes), would be felt as‘ strong check on 
any turbulent or overbearing characters amongst Europeans. 

- The second probable disadvantage is as follows: the Europeans possess an undue advan- 
tage over the natives, from having readier access to persons in authority, these being their 
own countrymen, as proved by long experience in numerous instances; therefore, a large 
increase of such a privileged population must subject the natives to many sacrifices from this 
very circumstance. ' . 
would therefore propose as a remedy, that in addition to the native vakeels, European! 
leaders should be appointed in the country courts in the same manner as they are in the 
King’s courts at the Presidencies, where the evil referred to is consequently not felt, because 
the counsel and attornies for both parties, whether for a native or a European, have the samé 
access to the judge, and are in all respects on an equal footing in ‘pleading or defending the 
cause of their clients. ™ ; 

The third disadvantage in contemplation is, that at present the natives of the interior of 
India have little or no opportunity of seeing any Europeans except persons of rank holding 
public.offices in the country, and officers and troops stationed in or passing through it under’ 
the restraint of military discipline, and consequently those natives entertain a notion of 
European superiority, and feel less reluctance in submission ; but should Europeans of all 
ranks and classes be allowed to settle in the country, the natives who come in contact with 
thein will materially alter the estimate now formed of the European character, and frequent 
collisions of interests and conflicting prejudices may gradually lead to a struggle between’ 
the forvign and native race till either one or the other obtain a complete ascendancy, and’ 
render the situation of their opponents so uncomfortable that no government could mediate 
between them with effect, or ensure the public peace and tranquillity of the country. 
Though this may not happen in the intenor of Bengal, yet it must be kept in mind, that no 
inference drawn from the conduct of the Bengalese (whose submissive disposition and want 

302. of 


APPENDIX, 


Settlement of . 
Europeans in India. 


468 APPENDIX ro REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


_of energy are notorious) can be apjlied with justice to the natives of the Upper Provinces, 
whose temper of mind is directly the revers®.. Among this spirited race the jarrings above 
alluded to must be expected, if they be subjected ¢o insult and intrusion—a state of things 
which would ultimately weaken, if not entirely undermine, the British power in India, or 
at least occasion much bloodshed from time to time to keep the natives in subordination. 

The remedy already pointed out (para. 3d, art. 1st. remedy 1st.) will, however, also apply to ° 
this case, that is, the restriction of the European settlers to the respectable and intelligent 
class already described, who in general may be expected not only to raise the European’ 
character still higher, but also to emancipate their native neighbours from the long standing 
bondage of ignorance and superstitiop, and thereby secure their affection, and attach them 
to the government under which they may enjoy the liberty and privileges so dear to persons 
of enlightened minds. . 

Some apprehend, as the fourth probable danger, that if the population of India were raised 
in wealth, intelligence, and public spijt, by the accession and by the example of numerous 
respectable European settlers, the mixed community so formed would revolt (as the United 

States of America formerly did) against the power of Great Britain, and would ultimately 
establish independence. In reference to this, hdWever, it must be observed that the Americans 
were driven to rebellion by misgovernment, otherwise they would not have revolted and 
separated themselves from England. Canada is a standing proof that an anxiety to effect a 
sefaration from the mother country is not the natural wish of a people, even tolerably well 
ruled. The mixed community of India, in like manner, so long as they are treated liberally, 
and governed in an enlightened manner, will feel no disposition to cut off its connexion with 
England, which may be preserved with so much mutual benefit to both countries. Yet, as 
before observed, if events should occur to effect a separation, (which may arise from many 
accidental causes, about which it is vain to speculate or make predictions), still a friendly and 
highly advantageous commercial intercourse may be kept up between two free and Christian 
countries, united as they will then be by resemblance of language, religion, and manners. - 

The fifth obstacle in the way of settlement in India by Europeans is, that the climate in 
many parts of India may be found destructive, or at least very pernicious to European con- 
stitutions, which might oblige European fafnilies who may be in possession of the means to 
retire to Europe to dispose of their property to disadvantage, or leave it to ruin, and that 
they would impoverish themselves instead of enriching India. As a remedy [ would suggest 
that many cool and healthy spots could be selected and fixed upon as the head-quarters of the 
settlers, (where they and their respective families might reside and superintend the affairs of 
their estates in the favourable season, and occasionally visit them during the hot months, if 
their presence be absolutely required on their.estates), such as the Suppatoo, the Nielgherry 
Hills, and other similar places, which are by no means pernicious to European constitutions. 
At all events, it will be borne in mind that the emigration of the settlers to India is not com- 
pulsory, but entirely optional with themselves. 

To these might be added some minor disadvantages, though not so important. These (as 
well as the above circumstances) deserve fair consideration and impartial reflection. At all 
events, no one will, I trust, oppose me when I say, that the settlement in India by Europeans 
should at least be undertaken experimentally, so that its effects may be ascertained by actual 
observation on a moderate scale. If the result be such as to satisfy all parties, whether friendly 
or opposed to it, the measure may then be carried on to a greater extent, till at last it may 
seem safe and expedient to throw the country open to persons of all classes. 

On mature consideration, therefore, I think I may safely recommend that educated persons 
of character and capital should now be permitted andeencouraged to settle in India, without 
any restriction of locality or any liability to banishment, at the discretion of the government ; 
and. the result of this experiment may serve as a guide in any future legislation on this 
subject. bara “A 


London, July wath 1889, (signed) ‘  Rammouun Roy. 


’ GENERAL APPENDIX. © 46g. AepeNDsx, 
Vv 


(77. CONDUCT OF EUROPEANS IN INDIA. (77.) Conduct of 


Europeans in India. 


THE following Paper having beer#drawn yp by a person in the temporary employ of 
the Board of Control, after examination of the voluminous documents Which had been 
laid before thé Committee, relative to the conduct of Europeans in India, and having 
been submitted to the Committee, they have thought proper to include it in the 
Appendix, without hdéwever holding themselves et all responsible for any views which 
it may be found to contain. 


ee ; - 

Tue purpose of the present Report is, to pass in review the various considerations which 
bear upon the question, whether the restrictions imposed on the settlement of Europeans 
in India should be relaxed, or any alteration made in the regulations to which Europeans 
’ are subject while residing in that country. i , 5 

They who entertain opinions favourable to the continuance of restrictions on emigration 
to and residence in India, maintain that the evils which the misconduct of the European 
-settlers creates greatly exceed the advantages which result from their residence, and that 
any considerable increase of their numbers would augment, in an increased ratio, the evils 
already produced, and lead to others of still greater magnitude. 

By those who take the opposite view of this question, it is on the contrary alleged, tHat 
the settlement of Europeans in India has been productive of a large balance of advantages 
to that country, to England, and to the consumers of Indian productions; that the advan- 
tages have been rendered less, and the disadvantages increased, by the restrictions in 

uestion ; and that the removal of these restrictions would be followed by an increase of 
the advantages in a much greater ratio than the increase of immigration by which it would. 
be accompanied. 0 » S 
' It has been thought convenient to treat the subject in the following order :— 


“I. To give an abstract of the Laws and Regulations which enforce restrictions, either on 
the settlement of Europeans in India, or on their proceedings while residing there. 


II. To examine all the evidence that has been obtained respecting the effects which have 
resulted from past emigration, with the particular causes to which those effects have been 
attributed ; and, 


III. To consider the prospects which the removal of some or all the restrictions in question 
would afford, were the best practicable alterations which have been suggested, or which 
suggest themselves, made in the Laws and Regulations relating to European settlers. 


J. Assrract or THE Laws AND REGULATONS RELATING TO EUROPEAN SETTLERS 
IN InpIa. 


By 53 Geo. 3, c. 155, it is provided, that a licence or certificate from the Directors of 
the East India Company should be requsite to entitle any person to proceed to the East 
Indies. But if the Directors do not “think fit to comply” with any application made to geot, 33. > | 
them for such licence or certificate, they are bound to transmit the application, within one a) 
month from the receipt thereof, to the Board of Commissioners for the Affairs of India; ‘ 
who, if they see no sufficient objection thereto, may instruct the Directors to furnish the 
applicant with a certificate, permitting him to proceed to India, and entitling him, “so 
long as te ag properly conduct” hithself, to the countenance and protection of the Com- 

any in India. ‘ 
J The Governor-general, or Governor of any presidency, may, “ for extraordinary reasons to Sect. 37+ 
be entered upon the Minutes of Council,” authorize the residence of any subject of His 
Majesty in any place under the government of such presidency, until the pleasure of the ~ 
Directors shall be known in that behalf. 
Section 


V. 470 APPENDIX to REPORT From SELECT COMMITTEE. 

APPENDIX,, a Z 
PO nas Section 36 provides, that if any @erson shall at any time so conduct himself, as in the 
Settlement of — judgment of the Governor-general, or Goverwor of the presidency in which such person shall 
Furopeans in India, he found, to have forfeited his claitn to the ‘countepance and protection of the Government, 
the Governor-general may declare his certificate or licence void, after which such person 
shall be deemed to be a person residing in India without licence or authority, “ and may 
be sent forthwith to the United Kingdom.” ° 

But no such person is subject to any prosecution for residing in India without licence 
until two months after notice shall have been given to him, either personally or by publica* 
tion in the Gazette, of the order by which his licence shall have been declared void. 

By section 101, residence in India without licence or authority is made punishable, for the 
first offence, by a fine not exceeding 25000 rupees, with imprisonment for a term not exceeding 
two months, unless the fine shall be sooner paid; and for the second offence, by a fine not, 
exceeding 4,000 rupees, with four months’ imprisonment, unless it be sooner paid. The 
offence is also punishable as a misdemeanor under previous statutes. : 

Tlee licence or certificate obtained from the Directors under the provisions of this statute, 
merely authorizes the person to whom it is granted to reside at one of the principal settle- 

Sect. 108. ments in India. To empower him to reside ateany place distant more than ten miles from 
the presidency to which his license from the Directors relates, he must obtain permission 
from the government of that presidency, specifying the particular district in which he is per- 
mitted to reside. 

This permission may either be granted for a limited time, or during the pleasure of the 
Government, 

The Directors of the East India Company, strongly impressed with the idea that the 
residence of Europeans in India would be followed sy very mischievous consequences, if 
very effectual precautions were not taken to exclude improper persons, have governed them- 
selves by the following Rules in the increase of the power conferred on them by the Legis- 


lature :— 
“ Missionaries, or Schoolmasters. 
Setter from the “ The Court have invariably, except in two or three instances, permitted applicants of this 
Chairs to Mr Can- description to proceed to India, after being satisfied of the respectability of their character 
ning, of 27 Fe- by the production of proper testimonials from persons of repute, or from the societies with 
brary 1818. which they were more immediately connected. 


“ Barristers, Attorneys, or Clerks to Attorneys. 


“ The Court have been influenced, in granting or refusing applications from persons in 
the profession of the law, by the representations of His Majesty’s Courts of Justice in India, 
through the channel of the local Governments, as to the sufficiency, or otherwise, of the’ 
Tera in point of.number, about the time when such applications were received. _ 

vith respect to attorneys’ clerks, we have no such guide; but it is well known to persons 
acquainted with India, that few Europeans of this description are requisite, as native copying 
and engrossing clerks are to be procured on moderate terms. 


_ “ Partners, or Assistants, in, Mercantile Houses already established. 


“ The Court have always been desirous of enabling every established house of business 
in India to provide for casualties, and to obtain such additional -assistance as they might 
require in consequence of the opening of the trade. Accordingly, when applicants of this 
class have been found, on inquiry, to be individually respectable, and when it has appeared. 
that they were invited to join persons of good character in India-as partners, or with a 
reasonable expectation of becoming partners, the Court have acceded to their applications. 
Clerks, perfectly competent to the subordinate details of a counting-house, are to be found 

. in abundance among the half-caste and the native Portuguese, as well as among the Hindoos ; 
and the introduction of a considerable number of European clerks would clash with the 
employment of people of this description, particularly of the half-caste, whom it is good 
policy to engage in peaceable occupations. : : 


_GENERAL APPENDIX... | ay 


“ Shipwrights, Coachmakers, and othér Mechanics. . 
“ Licences have been granted, in a variety of instances; to persons of this class: but the 
‘Court are desirous of limiting the number%o what may be sufficient for the instruction and 


improvement of the natives in the useful arts. . The latter are known to be great adepts in. 


APPENDIX, 


“(77,) Conduet of 


_ Europeans inIndia. 


imitation; and their frugal habits render it impossible for Europeans to rival them in’ 


pursuits where success depends chiefly on the cheapness of manual labour, 


« Agents to manage the Sale of the Cargoes of licensed Ships, and to procure Investments 
in return. — a 


“ When applications have been made by parties actually concerned in any ship or ships, 


licensed under the Act of the 53 Geo. 3, for permission for some person, named by them, 


’ to proceed to India, and there to remain during such Rmited periods as their interests might 
_ require, it has been the general practice of the Court to comply with those applications. 
“ Temporary Residents, to settle Private Affairs. 


« In cases of this sort, the Court have required the applicants to explain the affairs upon 
which they desired to proceed ; and when the’Court have been satisfied that they were of 


a nature to require the presence of the applicants in India, leave has been given to them to. 
proceed thither, and to remain as long as appeared to be necessary, under the circumstances: 


of each case. 


“ Commercial Speculators, whether in the character of Principals, or Factors or Agents 


for Persons in Europe, and Candidates for Employment in any line in which it may 
be found. 


“The Court have always looked with considerable jealousy to applications from this 


description of persons; because a general compliance with them would afford a wide 
opening for the indiscriminate resort of Europeans to India, contrary to principles upon 
which the administration of that county has, hitherto been conducted, and to which we 
shall take the liberty of particularly sohciting your attention in the sequel of this letter. 
. To show, however, the spirit by which they have been actuated on these occasions, we take 
- the liberty of mentioning, that the authority vested in the Court, by the Act of 33 Geo. 3, 
.to license the residence of persons at the several settlements in India, under free merchants’ 
indentures, has, since the last renewal of the Company’s Charter, been limited in its exercise 
to the nomination of eight free merchants annually. This arrangement was made in con- 
currence with the late President of the Board, expressly for the purpose of extending the 
opening for compliance with applications which might be preferred, upon reasonable 
grounds, by persons desirous of proceeding to India under the Act of 53 Geo. 3, cap. 155, 
sect. 33, and will, we doubt not, be considered as indicative of the Court’s disposition (at the 
expense of all minor considerations) to carry into full effect the provisions contained in that 
section of the Act. 


“ Applications of Ladies. 
‘It has been the practice of the Court, before complying with applications from ladies, 
in the first place to ascertain that the applicants are persons of fair reputation; and, next, 


that they have received invitations to proceed to India, from friends or relations residing 
in that country. ; . 


“ Applications of Menial Servants. 
“The Court have always had strorfg objections to European menial servants, of either 
‘ sex, going to India. They are generally found themselves to require the service of natives, 


over whom they are prone to tyrannize; whilst, in point of usefulness, they rank far below 
the native servants.” , ‘ 


While residing in the interior of India, the Courts to which Europeans are subject, are as 
follow :— . 
By 


APPENDIX, 


VY 2 : 


Settlement of 
Kuropgans in India. 


‘472 APPENDIX to REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


By section 107, British subjects‘residing in, carrying on trade, or being in the occupation 
or possession of immovable property in any part of the British territories in India, at a 
distance of more than ten miles foul the presideneies, are “subject to the jurisdiction of all 
courts ” within the district in which they shall so reside, carry on trade, or possess or 
occupy immovable Brey, “in all actions and prone of a civil nature, and in all 
matters of revenue, in the like manner as natives of India.” But all persons having cause 
of action against any British subject, may, at their election, tither sue in the provincial 


_courts or in the Supreme Court at the Presidency. 


Some difference of opinion has existed among the various law authorities to whom the 
question has been submitted, respecting the applicability of this clause to suits arising in the 
interior of India, in which both parties are British subjects. But the opinion which has been 
acted upon is, that the Company’s Cofrts have no jurisdiction over such actions, but that they © 
must be brought in the Supreme Court at the ibeetonp 

Section 105 subjects British subjects residing out of the towns of Calcutta, Madras and* 
Bombay, to the jurisdiction of the Company’s criminal courts in the provinces, in all cases 


‘ not being felony, and empowers the courts to inflict “a suitable punishment by fine not 


Bengal Reg. 
1793 3 28, Sec. 3. 


Sec. 4. 


Mr. Trower’s Min. 
25 March 1825. ' 
Lords’ Rept. 1830, 
on India, App. 
A. 5, No. 2. 


Res. Bengal, 
4” May 1824. 


: ’ ” 
exceeding 500 rupees, 


exceeding two months. z 

In cases which call for greater punishment than the Company’s Courts are thus em- 
powered to inflict, Europeans are abject exclusively to the jurisdiction of the King’s Court 
at the Presidency. . 


and to imprison the offender, if the fine be not paid, for a term not 


The foregoing are all the provisions which the Legislature has seen fit to make with rela- - 
tion to the residence of Europeans in India; those which follow emanate from the Governor- 
general in Council. 

By a Regulation of the Bengal Government, in 1793, it was provided, that “No European,. 
of ss Gi nation or description, shall purchase, rent or occupy, directly or indirectly, any . 
land out of the limits of the town of Calvutta, without the sanction of the Governor-general 


.in Council ;” nor should those who might make loans to natives “on the security or mort- 


gage of their lands or leases, be allowed, directly or indirectly, to hold possession of the 
lands, the proprietary right in which, or lease whereof, may be mortgaged to them in security 


-for the loan.” By Regulation V. of 1794, Europeans were permitted to hold land in Benares 


to the extent of 50 begahs each, for buildings. 

Until 1824 the Bengal Government appears to have scrupulously avoided granting per- , 
mission to Europeans to hold land. The exceptions made by the Government were very 
few in number, and always founded on a consideration of the peculiar circumstances of each 
individual case. The indigo planters had “ often fruitlessly prayed for this indulgence.” 

In 1824 the Government of Bengal, being desirous of encouraging the cultivation of coffee, 


which could not be undertaken by Europeans without permission to hold land, established 
the following Regulations :— 


- - “ Europeans of respectability, being persons, of course, duly licensed as to residence, shall 


be authorized to take leases of land for the cultivation of coffee, under the following con- 
ditions and restrictions : 
“7, Persons desirous of establishing coffee plantations, shall, in the first instance, apply 


' for the permission of Government to do so, stating. the district in which they propose to have . 


to possess an interest in the lands; this statement shall be in English, Persian and Bengalee, 


the establishment, and the quantity of land they wash to include in their plantations, and 
each of them. Such applications to be submitted through the secretary to Government ine 
the Territorial department. : ; 
“8. When permission is granted, the parties shall submit to the collector of the district a 
detailed statement of the lands which they desire to occupy, and of the terms which they 
may have’ settled with the owners and occupants, including every one whom they may know 


it 


GENERAL APPENDIX. 473 Arpaspix, 


if in Bengal; and in English, Persian and Hindoostanee, ¢f in Behar or in the Western Pro- 
vinces; and in English, Persian and Orysa, if iff Cuttack, 


nearest hant or village, and shall likewise stick up in his cutcherry, an ishtahar, notifying 
the contents of the application, and requiring all persons who may desire to submit any 
*representation in the matter, to come forward in person or by vakeel, within the period of 
one month. 

* “410. Any representations which may be made to the collector in consequence of such 
notice will be duly investigated by him, and the result recorded in a regular proceeding. 

“11. If the result of such investigation shall appear to him to render objectionable the 
establishment of the proposed coffee plantation, the collector shall report the circumstances 
to the Board of Revenue, and be guided by thtir instructions as to his further pro- 
ceedings. - 

ie 12 At the end of the period fixed in the ishtahay, if there shall not appear to be any 
objection to a compliance with the application of the party, the collector shall eithe? pro- 
ceed himself to the spot, or shall depute the pergunnah canongoe, or other ameen, to 
measure and mark off the land proposed to be. appropriated as a coffee plantation, and to 

' take from the several parties interested therein the necessary deeds in favour of the planter, 
and from the planter thé requisite engagements in favour of the parties. 

“13. When the whole is concluded, the collector shall submit his proceedings to the 
‘Board of Revenue, who, if satisfied that all claims have been duly attended to and properly 
adjusted, will finally confirm the arrangement. 

“14, Persons licensed as above to hold lands, will, of course, be chargeable with all 


expenses attending the measurement and demarcation of the same, and fhe other necessary — 


investigations. 

“15, Lands occupied by khoodkasht ryots, or other cultivators enjoying an hereditary 

right of occupancy, must not, of course, be transferred without the consent of those 
ersons. . 

Pe 16. Where the rents may be receivable by a talookdar or other middleman coming 

between the ryots and the zemindar or sudder m&lgoozar, the right of the latter to object 

to the arrangement will depend on the nature of the intermediate tenure ; but, in wetcral it 

is the desire of Government that no lands should be taken by Europeans unless all parties 

possessing an interest in the soil or in the rents shall consent to the engagement. 

“17. Europeans permitted to hold lands as above must bind themselves to submit to the 
award of the collector of the district, subject only to appeal to the Board of Revenue, in 
all matters relating to any rent or other consideration demanded from them, on account of 
the land occupied by them, as well as in all disputes touching the possession of the lands, or 
any wells, watercourses, tanks, reservoirs, or the like. 

“18. The coffee plantation shall be liable to sale by the collector, in satisfaction of any 
award passed by him, if not otherwise satisfied, within such time as may be appointed by 
the Board of Revenue, to whom in all caseserequiring a recourse to sale a reference shall 
be made. — ' 

“19. If any European, licensed to occupy land for a coffee plantation, shall violate the 
engagement into which he may enter, or shall usurp or violently disturb the possessions of 
his neighbours, or shall be otherwise guilty of any act in breach of the peace, the Governor- 
general in Council reserves to himself the power of cancelling the licence, and of directing 
the interest possessed by the offender in the plantation to be sold. 

“20. The Board of Revenue will be authorized to take such further security as they may 
deem necessary ; but, in general, his Lordship in Council would presume that the plantation 
itself will afford sufficient security. Parttes who may suffer in consequence of the annul- 
ment of a planter’s licence will also have their remedy in a suit in court. : 

“21. It will frequently, his Lordship in Council presumes, be necessary to include in th 
planter’s possession, a certain quantity of land on which coffee cannot be grown, besides 
tanks and the like; and the plant requires the oe of other shrubs or trees, which may 

‘ ; 3 at 


(77-) Conduct of 
“ 9, The collector shall’cause to be pwblished, on the land desired to be taken, or in the Europe 


as ip India. 


APPENDIX, 474 APPENDIX ro REPORT rrom S#LEUT COMMITTEE. 


_ at the same time be otherwise tumtd to profit. A certain latitude is therefore necessary, 
Settlement of | but the Board will see that it is not abused. ¢ 
Europeans in India. “« 99. Jt will, of course, be the business of theecollector to see that an adequate rent is 
paid for all malgoozaree lands included in a coffee plantation; and the tenure will be 
secured from the operation of a public sale for arrears of revenue, under the provisions of 
sect. 31, Reg. IT. of 1822. . 
“23. When a lease may be taken from a subordinate talookdar, the planter must take 
the precaution of making the superior holder or holders parties to his engagement, that he* 
may be secure from the consequences of default on the part of the lessor.” 
n 17th February 1828, the Goyernor-general in Coane resolved to extend the per- 
mission to hold land, granted by the Resolution of 7th May 1824, for coffee plantations, 
to all cases in which Europeans might Yesire to occupy land for the plantation of indigo, or 


for the growth of any other agricultural produce. . 
At the same time he rescinded thg 19th, 20th and 21st sections of the Resolutions in 
questton. 


The Directors have objected to the rescission of these articles, and directed “ that all the 
rules laid down, and all the securities provided by the Resolution of Government, dated 
7th May 1824, shall be strictly observed in the case of every permission granted to an 
European to hold land on lease for the purpose of cultivation. . 

#‘ Under these securities we do not object to your granting permission to Europeans to 
hold lands on lease in their own names, for the cultivation of indigo and other agricul- 
tural products> 

- The length of the leases must, in all cases, be regulated with reference to the nature of 
the cultivation, and must not be greater than may be necessary to afford the undertaker the 
prospect of a fair remuneration for the capital he may expend. The leases must not, in any 
ease, exceed the duration of 21 years, without, a previous reference to us, and our express 
approbation. 

“It is not less important, in the transfer of leases, than in that of the original grant, that 
Government should be satisfied in regard to the ep pec and good character of the 
individuals who are to hold them, and therefore the permission of Government must be 
rendered. necessary to every transfer of a lease held by an European.” 

The Regulations, therefore, which now regulate the permission granted to Europeans to 
hold land, are those of 7th May 1824, extended in their application to indigo and all other 
agricultural produce. ~ . 

But few persons have availed themselves of the permission conceded by these Regulations. 
In two years, from May 1824 to June 1826, 11,000 begahs only were applied for, to grow 
coffee. And the applications for land have been equally inconsiderable, since the permission 
to hold land has been extended to the planters of indigo, and to the growers of all. other 

species of agricultural produce, During almost the whole of the year 1829, the important 
habilities imposed upon the holders of land by the 19th, 20th and 21st sections of the Regu- 
lations now in force, did not attach to the persons obtaining land ; yet we are informed by the 
Government of Bengal, that the applications for permission to hold land were, even during 
that period, “altogether inconsiderable*,” : 
The indigo planters allege, as‘the cause of their not applying for permission to hold land 


Petition from under the Regulations, that the restrictions with which they are encumbered render “ the 
Indigo Planters of obtaining of a lease, if not impracticable, so tedious, troublesome and expensive, as to deter 
Jessore. many from seeking it, and induce them rather to submit to the present system, objectionable 
MS. Return to _-as it is.” : aoe 


Orders of Comm. jiv.120,127. Mr.Cheap, Judge of Mymensing, Return to Circular, v. 44. 
: . : Most 


*It appears from a Minute of the Governor-general, which accompanies the Revenue Letter of 1 Ja- 
nuary 1830, that only six applications were made, of which five were admitted. ‘The whole extent of 
land comprised in three of the five applications was 15,000 begahs. 

* cA : ' 


e , 
GENERAL APPENDIX. 475 
Most of the magistrates, commissioners of circuit, aed other servants of the Company in 
India, seem tacitly to assume that this allegatjon is correct; and Mr. Taylor, the magistrate 
of Mirzapore, expressly states that “thg Regulations ltely enacted for permissior. to hold 
lands are of no avail; they are encumbered with such restrictions as to render them 
nugatory.” _ . . 

‘ There is, however, one exception to this general agreement in opinion. Mr. Cheap, the 
judge of Mymensing, congders that “the forms to be observed (where so many interests are 
-concerned) are in themselves far from protracting the object contemplated and sought, to an 
indefinite period; and my scepticism on this point,” he adds, “is such, that, were the facili- 
ties ever so great, still the boon would not be received as one, or.the planters avail them- 
‘selves of it.” : 

“ Mr. Cheap gives several reasons for his opinion,ewhich in fact amount to this: that the 

planters, notwithstanding their assertions to the contrary, prefer the risk and loss attendant 

~ on holding land in the name of an Indian servant, with the consequent irresponsibility of the 

eet for all acts connected with the land, to the s€curity which they would enjoy ef the 

and were held in their own names, coupled with the responsibility which they would 
then incur. e tiple wets 

The majority of opinions are, as has been already said, strongly against Mr. Cheap’s view 

of this matter. 

from the misconduct of their servants, in whose names they hold land, can be overbalanced 


APPENDIX, 
V. 


My. Taylor, Ma- 
gistrate of Mirza- 
pore, Retum to 
Circular MS. ii. 
311. 

\ 
Mr. Cheap, Magis- 
trate ofMymensing, 
MS. v. 45. 


And i is difficult to believe that the loss which the planters must sustain | 


- by any advantage derived from the acts of oppression which they are thus enabled to permit” 


those servants to commit. ; 

The merchants of Calcutta estimate “the losses resulting from the insecurity of lands 
held in the-names of natives, from the failure of ryots who have received advances to perform 
their contracts, and from the litigation and affrays they are liable to be involved in by the 
relation in which the existing Regulations compel them to stand to such persons, at not less 
than 25 per cent. on the total outlay.” 


‘¢ * ’ e 

Ul. Errecrs wHicH HAVE RESULTED FROM THE SETTLEMENT OF EUROPEANS IN 
INDIA, UNDER THE RESTRICTIONS AND OTHER PECULIARITIES OF THE Law 
RELATING TQ EUROPEANS, DESCRIBED IN THE PRECEDING SECTION. 


Tue persons who have settled in India, unconnected with the service either of the Com- 
pany or of the King, are of two classes: 

1. Those who inhabit the. principal towns, in the capacity of merchants, tradesmen or 
artisans ; and, 

2. Those dwelling in the interior, who are almost exclusively engaged either as principals 
or assistants in the production of indigo. 

The total number is very small. A statement furnished to the Committee on Indian 
affairs in 1831, by the East India Company, éstimates the number of Europeans resident at 
the several presidencies in India, in 1828, as follows: : 


Bengal - = = = - - =~ = 1,695 
Fort St. George - - - - - - - -116 
Bombay - - - - - - - - 286 
Other parts - - -. - - ~- es 19 
2,016 


Of these 2,016 persons, a large majority are engaged in-trade in the principal towns. It 
appears, from certain returns obtained by the Governor-general, from the magistrates and 
joint magistrates of the provinces subject to the presidency of Bengal, that the Europeans 

3P2 engaged 


Petition from Mer- 
chants of Calcutta 
to Governor-gene- 
ral.—-Asiatic Mag. 
July 1829, p. 86. 


Accounts and 
Papers, No. 51. 
Select Committee 
on East India Come 


pany, 1831. 


ArrENDix, 476 APPENDIX ro REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


. 


— 


Settlement of 
Europeans in India. 


engaged in the indigo factories, whether as principals or,as assistants, do not amount to 
one-third of the number mentioned above as gesident in Bengal. _ 

Against those resident in the téwns, that is, against two-thirds of the whole number, 
scarcely a word of complaint is to be met with. Natives and Europeans concur in agreeing 
that nothing but benefit has resulted to India from their presence. 

Their capital has furnished employment for the working classes and enriched the country. « 
New trades and manufactures, and knowlédge of various sorts,have been communicated 
by their means to the natives, and their conduct appears to have been perfectly unex-- 
ceptionable. : 

The inhabitants of the towns in which Europeans chiefly reside, appear to have derived 
great benefit from the intercourse which has taken place. Their progress in knowledge, 
social, moral and political, is universally spoken of as very considerable, both by the more 
enlightened of the natives themselves, and by the European population of Calcutta. 

Rammohun Roy, an illustrious native, who is at present in England, expressed this 
opinign, in a speech delivered at a public meeting of the native inhabitants of Calcutta, in 
the following manner: 

“< From personal experience I am impressed with the conviction, that the greater our 
intercourse with European gentlemen, the greater will be our improvement in literary, social 
and political affairs; a fact which can easily be proved by comparieg the condition of those 
of, my countrymen who have enjoyed this advantage, with that of those who have unfor- 

‘tunately not had that opportunity.” 

Similar opinions are either expressed or tacitly assumed in every paper which issues from 
the Indian press, that has any relation to the subject. 

Instances may indeed be found, in which native writers charge the European tradesmen 
with having superseded their native rivals. ‘ The editor of the Chundrika (a paper con- 
ducted by a native) instances five cases, that of house-builders, carpenters, goldsmiths, 
tailors and boatmen, and observes, that the profits accruing to persons in the above occupa- 
tions have considerably diminished from the present competition of Europeans, and that 
many natives who formerly followed the same ¢allings had made their fortunes.” 

The answer to the argument involved in¢his complaint is so obvious that none could have 
Calcutta Journal, been thought necessary in this place, if the following had not been found in a Calcutta 
Jan. 1830, p-154- journal. The writer of it professes to be “ an impartial zemindar.” 

After stating the complaint of the Chundrika, in the language just quoted, the zemindar 
thus proceeds: “ In adducing this instance to support: the favourite opinion of the editor, 
he has not considered the real circumstances of the case, but has looked to the mere surface 
of things. The truth is, that when a large body of Europeans came into Calcutta, and 
established themselves in different trades, people began to learn their business, and, after 
acquiring sufficient skill, were employed by these Europeans on advanced wages. Before 
this, an individual or two, who excelled in their profession, had monopolized the whole 
business from the absence of suitable competitors, and had thereby made an immense profit. 
Let us only consider the numbers of house~builders living in each division of Calcutta ; how 
many carpenters’, goldsmiths’ and tailors’ shops have been established, and to what an 
extent boats have multiplied ; and all these people are not in want of business, far from it: 
when we have occasion to employ any of them, we find them seldom agreeing to any 
terms which fall short of what they wish to get. The number of workmen in this town is 
not easily calculated; and even with this increase in their number, the present lowest rate of 
tailors’ wages is from seven to eight rupees, and the highest not less than sixteen rupees 
a month: fifteen years ago their rate was four rupees, and the highest not more than eight 
rupees. Formerly carpenters made large pestles and fnallets, and at the most were able to 
earn three or four rupees only; whereas, from dhe extensive business now carried on by 
Europeans, some of the carpenters eam forty, others fifty rupees; and the case is the same 
as to goldsmiths, house-builders, boatmen and others. 

“The editor further observes, that ‘ the establishment of Gibson & Co. as tailors, of 
Holt & Co..as carpenters, and of Hamilton & Co. as jewellers, has impoverished the 

nativés 


GENERAL. APPENDIX. we 477 


‘natives who were engaged in those occupations.’—I beg of the editor to go a little about 
the shops of those gentlemen, and see how many hundreds of natives arg employed by 
them at fair remunerations. Such a large-pértion of the community were never so well 
supported, even in the times of the greatéSt princes, nor have we heard of an instance. The 
fact is, that formerly, the whole business having been engrossed by oné or two persons, 

they made the greatest profit. At present, the trades being left free to general competition, 
there is a numerous body of competitors, and each of them cannot of course be expected ‘to 

-make the same degree of pfofit as was done before. All of them, however, find employment, 
owing to the extensive business of Europeans, and, on the whole, they earn more. now. 
Their earnings are comparatively greater now than before. We hence conclude, that no one 
will, after ascertaining the general opinion on the subject, and making proper inquiries into 

“the matter, be disposed to enter into such a perverse dispute about the benefits which will 
arise from the free settlement of Europeans in this country.” me 

The doubt that exists respecting tlte benefit which Europeans have conferred on India 
turns entirely on the conduct of those who reside in ghe interior, the indigo planters. The 
present inquiry, therefore, relates almost wholly to them. : > 

The plant from which indigo is manufactured is indigenous. in India, and the dye 
extracted from it has been “ined in the East ‘from the earliest ages. But until British skill 
and capital were applied, to its production, the quality of that produced in India appears to 
have been very inferior to the indigo of other countries, and the quantity exported to foreign 
markets consequently small. Since the attention of British capitalists has been directed to 
its culture, the quality of Bengal indigo has been so much improved, that it now supplies not 
only almost the whole consumption of England, but a large proportion of that of the whole 
world. This proportion has been estimated so high as four-fifths. 

During the five years ending 1789, the quantity of indigo imported into Great Britain was 


as follows: 
From British Possessions in E. Indies. Total. 


1785 - - - 154921 - - = 1,693,509 
1786 - - - 258,845 - - - 1,978,290 
1787 - = - = 868,046 = -s«,8°77,830 


1788 - = = 622,691° - - = 2,096,611 
1789 - = - = 871,469 = = = «1,966,687 
During the five years ending 1830, it was: 
1826 - - - %652,946 - - = 8,085,751 
1827 - - + 5884998 ~- - = 6,067,747 
1828 - - - 9,660,152 - - = 9,913,010 
1829 - - = 5,965,128 - + =~ 6,748,281: 
1830 - - = %920,172 - - = 8,216,440 


In the former period no indigo was imported from any forejgn pos8ession in India ; during 
the latter, the following quantities were imported from such possessions : 
1826 - -* - 26,709 


1827 -, > - 21,520 
1828 -  - - 24,669 
1829 = - = 19,268 


1830 - - - 16,685 


The merit of having introduced the improvements by which the indigo.of Bengal has been 
enabled to command the extensive sale which it now possesses, is universally attributed to 
the planters of Great Britain. ° r 

It appears, indeed, that even now, when the improved methods of manufacture introduced 
by them have been adopted by the natives, the indigo manufactured by the latter is generally 
decidedly inferior to that produced by the factories conducted by Europeans. The inferiority 
has been estimated at 15 per cent., while the indigo manufactured ‘by the old native process 
is said to be wholly unfit for foreign markets. — : Th 

€ 


APPENDIX, 


e 


(77.5 Conduct of 
Europeans in India. 


Mr. Rickards’ Evi- 
dence before the 
Committee of 
1831, p. 240. 


Mr. Rickards’ Ev. 
Com. 18931, p. 240. 


APPENDIX, 


. 


_ Settlement of 
Europeans in India. 


See Mr. Bracken’s- 
Ev. Com. H. C. 
1831, who considers 
that about one-fifth 
part of all theIndigo 
exported from Cal- 
cutta is manufac. 
tured by Native 
Planters. 


“ Free Trade,” &c. 
p. 24, 


478 APPENDIX ro REPORT rrom’SELECT COMMITTEE. 


The advantages resulting directly from the employment of British capital in the cultivation 
of indigo, have, therefore, two sources :—1. The quantity of capital employed by the planters; 
and, 2. The improvement made iw the quality of the commodity produced, and the field 
consequently opened for the employment of Britis capital in India. — 

' The source of almost all the advantage which the natives of India derive from the cultiva- 


‘tion of indigo by European planters, is the amount of capital employed in it. The benefits, 


which result from the improvement of quality, or from any saving of labour in the production 
of the indigo, are wholly reaped either by the consumer or the planter. If the competition. 
between the planters has been sufficient to reduce the price of indigo to the point at which it 
yields no more than the rate of profit ordinarily obtained from capital in India, the whole 
advantage of the improvement is obtained by the consumer. If the competition have not. 
attained this point, extraordinary profitg are reaped by the planter, which are either consumed 
by him, remitted to his principals in England, or go to increase his capital. The natives of 
India share in this advantage, as consumers or planttrs, but only to a very limited extent. , 
The quantity which they consume is mot great, and the native planters form but a small pro- 
portfon to the whole number engaged in the trade. As consumers, the people of England 
share in two ways: in the diminished price of. improved quality of the articles which they 
wear; and, secondly, in the encouragement afforded by diminished price and superior qua- 
lity to the more extended consumption of the staple manufactures in which indigo is employed. 
As capitalists, they are benefited by being enabled to employ ‘a considerable amount of 
cfpital at the high rate of profit current in India, instead of employing it at a lower rate at 
home or elsewhere. 

That these advantages result to England, to the planters, and to the consumers at large, 
is denied by no one. No materials, however, exist for forming any estimate of their amount. 

The planters claim the merit of much greater services to their country. They point to the 
total value of the indigo produced, and assert that “a property worth 3,000,0001. per 
annum” has been “ created solely by the skill, capital and enterprise of British-born sub- 
jects living in India on mere sufferance.” To which they add, “the benefit conferred by the 
manufacture of Indian indigo on the manufactures and commerce of this country amounts to 
this, that it is the principal, and nearly the only means to be depended upon, which the 
monopoly principle leaves open, to enable India to pay for the manufactures of this country, 
and that it does so to the yearly value of three millions sterling.” This language is ina me 
degree inaccurate, and calculated to mislead. The planter is not entitled to credit for 
creating the value of the indigo he produces, in any other sense than that in which every 
manufacturer at home is entitled to similar credit in relation to the product of his capital. 
The indigo is not produced from nothing ; it does not add by the whole amount of its value 
to.the wealth of the world. The capital which has produced it would have produced some- 
thing if it had not been employed in the manufacture of indigo ; ‘and the only value “created 
by the skill, capital agd enterprise” of the indigo planter, which would not have been 
created if the capital had renrained in Europe, is the difference in profit which the planter 
himself has reaped. For opening the way to this gain, he is entitled to credit, but not for 
creating a property equal to 3,000,000. pef annum. Neither is the demand for British 
manufactures increased by that amount, in consequence of the extended cultivation of indigo | 
with English capital ; and this for several reasons. 

In the first place, supposing it even to be granted that British capital could not have 
found any other employment in India, and that indigo for exportation could not have been 
eae without its aid, it by no means follows as a necessary consequence, that the demand 

‘or British manufactures has been increased by the whole amount of the value of the indigo 
produced through its means. The improvement of indigo may have prevented other com- 
modities from being exported: this, indeed, is the only necessary effect of canal adding 
a new article to the kinds previously exported. The commodities which would otherwise 
have been paid for with the old articles of export, are then paid for with the new. But 
unless some peculiarity of the latter prevents the free competition of capitalists in the pro- 
ducing country, and keeps it at a monopoly price in the exporting market, no encouragement: 
; : is 


2 


GENERAL APPENDIX. 479 APPENDIX, 


is given to the consumption of imported commodities; they cannot be obtained for less labour. 
The indigo which represents a day’s labour, &xchanges,for no more than the product of (77-) Couduet of 
a day’s labour in the article which woulé otherwise have been exported; but at that price ““Topeansin India. 
the new article is preferred by the importing nation to the old. The consumers obtain the 
whole seas. of the improvement. Even if the new export bear a monopoly price, no 
Yacility is thereby afforded to the consumers in general, of obtaining foreign commodities. 
The monopoly profit eed ‘into the pocket of the capitalist, and the increase of demand, 
which takes place for foreign manufactures, is measured by the extra quantity of them which 
he (the capitalist) may consume. se oe 

If, as in the case in question, the article is one for which there is a more extensive foreign 
demand at remunerating prices than for those previously exported, it will, besides super- 
seding the export of those commodities, invite an incréased import of foreign goods. 

This the extension of the indigo trade has doubtless effected in some measure, but not 
nearly to the amount of 3,000,000 1., as the following gtatement clearly proves: 

In the six years ending 1796, the exports from Great Britain to India and China amotfnted 
on an average to 2,520,871 2. At that time the Bengal indigo trade was in its infancy, the 
quantity of indigo imported into Great Britain*from India annually being only 1,690,000 Ibs. ' 

For the six years ending 1814, the annual average import of indigo from India was 
4,550,000 lbs.; while the export of British goods to that country, so far from having been 
increased in’ proportion to the value of the additional quantity of indigo imported, héd 
decreased to 1,740,137 J. . 

It is clear, therefore, that the indigo planters have not added 3,000,000 /. to the Indian 
demand for British manufactures. f 
. It must further be considered, that that which has been added is not so much clear addi- 
tion to the total aggregate of demand. The capital employed by the British plantersin India 
would have occasioned a demand for our manufactures, and moreover maintained our labourers 
also, if it had been employed in England. 


a e 

That the cultivation of indigo in India is beneficial to England, and to the consumers o 
the article, is never denied, though differences of opinion may exist respecting the nature and 
extent of the benefits which it confers. 

The point upon which the whole question of settlement or colonization turns, is the effects 

_ on India, on the prosperity and happiness of the native inhabitants, and on the stability of 

our Eastern empire. Now all the advantages which flow to the natives of that oor from 
the cultivation of indigo by European planters, have their source in the amount of foreign 
capital employed * ; which creates a demand, 


1. For their labour, and 
2. For their land. 


The materials at hand for estimating the amount of capital engaged in the indigo manu- 
facture of Bengal, or the quantity of land or labour employed by that. capital, are very 
imperfect, perhaps necessarily so. The only estimates obtained are derived from the planters 
themselves ;.none other have been met with in any of the papers submitted, nor have any 
means been discovered of verifying or correcting those thus obtained. 

2,000,000 J. is the amount stated by the planters of Jessore as the annual expenditure of MS.Return, vol. iv. 
the indigo factories. Another estimate, published by the planters, is somewhat lower. It p. 10. 
assumes, “that in the Bengal territories the average yearly produce of indigo at present is, Petition of Plan- 
and in future will probably continue to be, about 9,000,000 lbs., produced at a prime cost of ters of Jessore to 

. 3s. 84d, the Vice-President 

of Bengal in Coun- 


* If the cultivation of Indigo has caused capital to be retained in India, which would otherwise have a po Maien 


been remitted tu England, that capital must be looked upon in the same light as capital actually ex- ete from British 
ported from England. ; 


APPENDIX, 
? 


Settlers in the inte- 
rior of India, with 
notes By J. Craw- 
furd, p- 93. 


Circular Letter, 
29 Deocmber, MS. 
vol. ii. ppe115, 116. 


480 APPENDIX ro REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


: e 
3s. 83d. per lb., equal to 1,680,000 ; selling in Calcutta at 5s. 4d. per Ib., or 2,400,000 2.; 
producing a net profit of 720,00Q/. to the planter, and re-selling in Europe‘at 8s. per lb. 
including expenses, which is equal to 3,600,000 1.’* , 

The addition of so large a capital as that undoubtedly engaged in the indigo manufacture, . 
to the native capital of the country, supposing it really to be an addition to all that would 
otherwise have existed in the country, must obviously have conferred on India benefits of* 
great magnitude. : 7 

Of the demand for labour created by such an amount of capital, the following considera- 
tions will suggest an approximate conception : 

In consequence of the low price which the provisions and other articles consumed by the 
ryot bear in India, the quantity of capital represented by a given number of pounds sterling 
is much larger there than in England. 

The same sum of money would furnish a much *larger number of men with food and 
clothing, on a given scale, in the former than in the latter country. But the customs of the * 
country, the abstemiousness of the gic hi and the warmth of the climate, render a much 
smaller quantity of food, clothing and shelter requisite to maintain a given degree of comfort 
in India, than would be necessary to produce an equal effect in England. A given quantity 
of money would therefore properly support a much greater number pf people; but supported 
as the labourers of India in fact. are, the difference is greatly augmented. 

* A large number of witnesses examined before a Committee of the whole House on Indian 
affairs in 1813, agreed in stating the ordinary wages of labour in India to be from 3s. to 5s. 
or 6s. per month. Since that period the advance which has taken place seems not to be 
very considerable ; 5s. to 8s. per month are mentioned in several of the letters from planters 
heture quoted, as the wages now- usually given in the districts where indigo is grown. 
Whether an equal rise of wages has taken place in other districts does not appear. 

Attempts have been made by the Governor-general to obtain an accurate account of the 
number of natives in the immediate employ of the factories. With this view the magistrates 
and joint magistrates of the provinces subject éo the presidency of Bengal were instructed to 
fill-up, with the assistance of the planters in their respective districts, a statement of the 
native establishment employed at each factory, distinguishing that part which was perma- 
nent, “or kept up all the year round, from the servants, &c. entertained during the growing 
and manufacturing season.” 

But the labourers in the immediate employ of the factories form but a small part of those 
maintained by the capital of the planters. They do not even include those employed in 
the cultivation of the plant itself, when it is grown by the ryots for the factories, which 


‘two-thirds of the whole quantity produced is. Neither do they include any of the numerous 


classes maintained indirectly by the factories. Further than this, the information required 
has not been understood in the same sense by all the parties who have made returns ; some 
have included the common labourers, or coohies, others have omitted them. These returns, 
therefore, afford but little assistance to the inquirer. 

The increased demand for labour may hate benefited the native population of India in 


‘either of two ways, or, to a certainextent, in both. It may have found employment for the 


number of persons whom it employs, in addition to the population which would otherwise 
have been employed by the native capital of the country: or it may not have found employ- 


‘ment for a greater number, but drawn its supplies from other occupations, by the allurements 
. of higher wages, and thus improved the condition of the labourer. If the population of the 


- country has kept pace with the growth of demand for their labour, the former has been the 


consequence ; the aggregate production of the country must have acquired a proportionate . 


increase ; the demand for land in that case has been increased by means of British capital, to 
the extent, not only of the quantity required fot the cultivation of indigo, but also of that 
required to supply, either directly or indirectly, the wants of those employed by the factories, 
‘and of the families dependent on them. New Jand has been brought into cultivation to 
meet this demand, or old more carefully tilled. Rents have risen, and the revenue derived 


_ by Government from land has been increased, if proportional, and paid with more facility, if 


fixed. 


GENERAL APPENDIX. 481 


fixed. These are the necessary consequences of an ihcrease of capital, accompanied by 
a proportionate increase of population. = . 

If, on the other hand, the supply of labour, the number of labourers, have not increased at 
all, or not in proportion to the augmentation of capital, the advantages above described have 
resulted in a degree proportionally diminished ; but the condition of the people must have 

* been improved, they must be better fed and better clothed. 
In either case, besides ¢he demand for labour and land, arising directly out of the capital 
- employed in the cultivation and manufacture of indigo, the country weuld also be indebted 
to it for the demand created by accumulation from the wages paid by the planter, or from 
the rent brought into existence through his means, and by the impulse thus afforded to the 
general prosperity of the country. a 

The advantages just enumerated are those which a, series derives trom the influx of 
foreign capital ; they are those which.India must have reaped from British capital, unless an 
equal quantity of native capital has been prevented by the operations of the indigo factories 
from being accumulated. e 

They who believe that. the oppressive conduct of the planters of indigo works mischief 
which more than counterbalances the beneftts that the natives derive from their presence, 
must suppose, either that the capital employed by the indigo planters is not an addition to 
the capital of India, %r, that the uncertainty, vexation and suffering which they spread 
among the natives, beyond what the native zemindars would have occasioned, are more than 
equivalent to the benefits conferred by the addition. 

If the capital of the planters is not an addition to the capital of India, it must either have 

, been itself wrested from the natives by the planters, or the conduct of the latter must have 
prevented the accumulation of an equal quantity of native capital. 

Before any inquiry is instituted into the extent of the benefits which the capital employed 
by the planters has conferred on India, it is therefore necessary to inquire into the conduct 
of the planters, with a view to discover-what ground exists for assenting to either of these 
propositions. " _ 

The proposed inquiry will show what the evils inflicted on the natives by the planters are, 
and furnish some materials for a comparison betWeen them and those which would probably 
have been suffered at the hands of the native zemindars. 

From this an opinion may be formed, with more or less confidence, respecting the side to 
which the balance of consequences to India inclines. 

A further question remains to be considered with relation to England; viz. whether 
the conduct of the indigo planters has disgusted the natives, rendered them discontented 
with British dominion, and thus shaken the stability of the power which England possesses 
in the East. 


° 


Conduct of Indigo Planters. 


e 

With a view to obtain information on this topic, the Governor-general in Council issued’ 
two circulars, one on the 24th of March 1829, and the other 29th December 1829, to the 
magistrates and joint magistrates of the provinces subject to the presidency of Bengal. The 
latter of these letters was substituted for the former, because it was found, after returns had 
been received from several of the magistrates, that the details obtained were little calculated 
to effect the purpose in view. : 

The functionaries in question were, by these circulars, directed to state, “ whether it is 
necessary, for the effectual subjection of the indigo planters and g¢rvants to the control of 
the law, that any further legislative provisions should be made in addition to those which 
already exist.” : 

They were also requested to report their opinion “on the general character of the 
European indigo planters residing within their jurisdiction, in regard to their transactions 
with, and treatment of, the natives around them. You have doubtless,” it was added, 

fork, Pg oo” syed “ many 


Appenprx, 4 


(77-) Conduct of 
Europeans in India. 


MS. Return, vol. ii, 
p. 112. 


“Mprennrx, 


. 


Settlement of 
Europeans in India, 


. 


MS. Return, iii. 


p. 187-189. 
Mr, Walters, Mag. 
City Dacca. - 


MS. Return, ii. 
Be 175. 


* 


MS, Ret. ii. 154. 


482 APPENDIX ro REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


“ many opportunities of learning the tstimation in which they are held; and it will be satis- 
factory to Government to be informed of your sentiments on the general question.” 


They were further instructed to fill up the following form : 


o> 
on 
[eve] 


1,- | 2. 4. 5 | 9. 
' 1 
i 
| > ss $ te d 
= — cS : 2 BS @ 4s 
_| €3 | 3 esa! 5 g o~ ce 
— - .: ~~ Py 
. Ee m3 gs ogG | e& S © a RQ vi 638 
S S oS oy) moe Ss 
3 ® 5. 3 2eas aes i oO 3S = co 
p=) g 3 OD om RD > Ss RQ m= oO oS 
3 Sa | BB | BE | Bs s S ee | By == 
3 Ea BE | Fowl sg 3 z As | O's a= 
+ By an by ~ 00,5 uw is) < § = > ‘Eos 
Sus me 4) 7a Fa a2 3 = 
= o e tU ee 7 
“oe as es 225 ez g 9 < sta) Sg 
oe 3 ® — Cont = me OS 
[a4 . se 0 wn s ° om oo 
3 be 7 
3 5% e2 /2es| 2 3 3 se | SBP] 22 
Zz, a9 gy 3.8 & ae i a a0 S56 
ox a &8 o Rus fot 2-5 
se | s bea| ~ “a E s8g/| 85 
3 
& wn | z | & z 
fad oe ty get ee eae te 


Anfl informed, “ should you not be able to fill up the columns from the materials now in 
your possession, there can be no reason why the manufacturers should not be furnished with 
a copy of the form, and requested to fill up the items wanting.” 


In reply to this circular, much highly useful information was obtained beyond what falls 
within the strict limits of the questions. , 


Several of the gentlemen addressed went at great length into the consideration of the 
causes and character of the disputes which occur in the indigo districts, the disturbances 
to which they lead, and the various preventions of these evils which suggest themselves. 
These opinions, coupled with returns of the nutmber of suits, and summary descriptions of 
their nature, furnish a very complete view of the conduct of the planters, and of its causes. 
The evidence is, however, defective in instituting no regular comparison between the con- 
duct of the planters and that exhibited by the zemindars where there are no planters, and 
where, therefore, there is no pretext for saying that they are driven to acts of violence and 
fraud by the misbehaviour of their European neighbours. 


A large majority of the opinions, too, respecting “the conduct of the planters in regard 
to their transactions with, and treatment of, the natives,” are general and vague; and many 
of them seem to have reference rather to their personal conduct and demeanour, than to 
the conduct of the native servants, by whom their affairs are managed. 


The cultivation of indigo appears to be conducted in four different ways :—the first is 
called “tuia dadun,” in which the planter advances a certain sum per begah to the ryot, 
whd merely ploughs the land, and sows it with seed provided by the planter, the latter 
cutting the plant and carrying it to the vats, the profit or loss being his own. 


The second mode of cultivation is called “bundle dadun.” In this, the planter advances 
to the ryot a certain sum per begah, for which he agrees to bear all the expenses of culti- 
vation, and to deliver the plant at a certain number of bundles ofa given circumference per 
rupee. Sometimes, but rarely, the advance is made to the zemindars, who make their own 
terms with the tenantry. a 

The third mode is .“neezehar,” or home cultiv&tion, the land being drained and cul- 
tivated by the planter;at his own expense and ysk, by means of hired labour. The land 
employed in this way is holden by the planter in the name of some native servant, to 


_evade the Regulations which prohibit Europeans from holding lands. 


The fourth mode is rarely adopted: ‘it is that of buying the plant of those who grow it, 
without receiving advances. . : . 
ae “ A great 


‘GENERAL APPENDIX. 8g Areexo/ 


' A great portion of the lands under indigo cultivation is held virtually by Europeans. MS, iv. 228. - 
. The tenures are registered either in fictitious names,.or in the name of some native depen- Sudder Dewanny 
dant of the factory.” : id Adawlut to Government of Bengal. 


The merchants of Calcutta estimate tne proportion of indigo plants, grown by the Petition of Mer: 
planters themselves, at one-third of the total produce. ’ chants of Caleutta 
Of the remaining two-thirds, almost the whole is cultivated on’ the system above de- to Lord W. Ben- — 
scribed, under the namé of “bundle dadun.” . tinck, Asiatic Mag. July 1829. 


The ryot by whom land is cultivated on these terms enters into a contract, on stamped yg, Ret, vol. iv. 
paper, binding himself to cultivate indigo on certain land, the boundaries of which are spe- p49, Memorial 
sified in the contract, and to deliver the plant at the factory at a certain fixed price. The from Indigo Plant- 
contract is conditioned for the payment of a heavy penalty in case of breach. ers of Jessore. 

Petition of Indigo Planters at Dacca Jelalpore. Id. 42, 43. See form of Contract used in Tirhoot, MS. Ret. vol. ii. 997. 


Most of the disputes by which the indigo districfs are so constantly disturbed, arise out MS. Ret. vol. v.57. 
of the “bundle dadun” mode of cultivation, which seems to be considered the mosf disad- Mr. Cheap, Mag. 
vantageous to the native: indeed it is stated by one of the magistrates, who has gone most Mymensing. 
into detail on this topic, that “except by cbmpulsion or from dire necessity, advances of this MS. Ret. vol. iii. 
nature are rarely received by the ryot.”’ 190, Mr. Walters, 

The same authority states, “that the home is by far the least objectionable mode of cul- Mag. Dacca. 
tivation, and provided the farms are airly obtained from the rightful owner, and the beun- 
daries well defined, seldom leads to any complaint, or breach of the peace.” 

The subjects of the disputes which disturb the indigo districts are : 

1. The neglect or refusal 6f the ryot to plough the land for which he has received an 
advance, to sow it with indigo seed, or to cut the crop when fit to be gathered. 

2. The receipt, by the ryot, of advances from two or more planters for the same crop. 

3.- Questions respecting titles to land, or the boundaries of estates; and, 

4. The destruction of the growing indigo by cattle or otherwise. 


All these are exceedingly fertile sources of dispute. The breaches of contract produce 
‘the greatest number of questions, but those which arise out of the other causes are also 
very numerous. In the pravinces to which the permanent settlement extends, the titles of 
the zemindars are clearly established, and the boundaries of their estates, or zemindaries, 
defined perhaps with sufficient accuracy; but the rights derived by the ryots who inhabit 
these zemindaries, from local custom, and confirmed to them by the Regulations which 
established the permanent settlement, differ in almost every village. . ' 


And it is a matter of general complaint, that “the great pressure upon our tribunals Letter from Bengal. 
arises from the mass of litigation connected with the rights, tenures and interests of the 
proprietors and occupiers of lands, and to the want of accurate definition of the rights and 
interests intended to be conveyed under the permanent settlement.” 
In the Ceded and Conquered Provinces, the uncertainty which exists in this respect is still 
greater. Many large tracts of the finest soel are described by some of the planters as lying 
waste, “in consequence of the feuds of different. claimants,” whose affrays, “to obtain pos- 
session, supply the provincial gaols with more than two-thirds of their prisoners.” 


The proprietary rights of those villages which are under culture, are stated to be scarcely 
‘better ascertained, and the planters‘complain that it is impossible te ascertain who is the 
legal owner of any land which they may wish to rent. : ° 
The disputes respecting titles are rendered more numerous than they would otherwise be, 
-in those districts in which indigo*is grown on land not subject to annual mundation, by 
.the necessity which the planters lie undey, in that case, of obtaining a constant change of 
and. = 
In other districts, “indigo is grown chiefly on churr lands, within the limits of the annual MS. Ret. vol. iii. 
inundation ;” and as the rivers changé their courses yearly, innumerable disputes arise 211. Mr. Walters, 
respecting the titles to the land left by the a. when they subside. : Mag. Dacca. 
3Q2 : n 


, APPENDIX, 


Settlement of 
«Europeans in India. 


MS. Ret. ii. 144. 
Mr. Lowther, Mag, 
Bolundshuheer. 


Ibid. 


MS. Ret. iv. 118. | 
Memorial of Plant- 
ers of Jessore to 
Governor-General 
in Council. 


484 ° APPENDIX ro REPORT: sro SELECT COMMITTEE. 


In consequence of these several éauses the planter frequently finds, after he has made his 
advances, or cultivated the land, perhaps even not until the crop has arrived at maturity, 
that the title of the person with wifom he contractgd is disputed. 

In some districts “the chief cause of contention between the indigo planter and the vil- 
lagers arises from the frequent trespasses committed by cattle on the indigo fields, and 


I believe those acts to be more frequently intentional on the part of the herdsmen, than: 


accidental. The loss which the manufacturer is subjected to ky the invasion, upon the 
plant, of a herd of cattle (whether such trespass be intentional or otherwise), must 


. obviously prove a source of great annoyance.” 


The magistrate of Mymensing, one of the districts in which most acts of violence occur, 
says, “It 1s incalculable the number 6f disputes and complaints to which these trespasses 
give rise, and no inconsiderable time is eccupied in investigating the latter.” 

The great cause of these trespasses is, the want gf hedges and inclosures. “ In India 
hardly a fence of any sorteof strength is to be seen, with the exception of those round 


mulberry fields, and patches of ground*adjoining dwelling-houses.” 


The planters complain vehemently of the serious evils “ to which their lands are subjected 
by herds of cattle being turned loose upon them, generally during the night. Whole fields 
of promising plants are thus suddenly eaten up and destroyed, and when resistance is made 
by factory servants, the villagers frequently oppose, and serioug conflicts ensue. The 
records of the zillah courts will, your Memorialists believe, show fhat from this cause innu- 
merable quarrels and disputes arise between the planters and ryots.” : 

Whatever be the ground of any dispute which arises between an indigo planter and 
eet or between two planters, force appears to be appealed to, in most instances, for its 

ecision. 


MS, Ret. II. p. hey Mr. dente Mug. Pe lentehuhiest: The explanation of this fact is not to be found in any parti- 
pea Race a Heuserpeons cular turbulence of character, either on the part of the planters 
387, Campbell = Tirhoot. or of the natives, but in the impotence of the law to protect 
UI, p. 28 to42 Smith ~ Rungpoor, either, to which many causes contribute. 

180 g - - Millet, - Beerbhoom. : 
IV. 264.213.215, Tucker, Commr. Dacca. The planteys of Jessore state, “that lawless violence and 
a See Mea calie P ees Tek Jeno force have too frequently prevailed (in the indigo districts), 
. 6 emeria: anters of Jessore. ; als , 
243. 251. Mr, Ross's Minute, Jud. 5th May 1829. and prevailed, as your Memorialists would earnestly press on 
IV. 69, & 1. 98. Mag. Benares. zoe Lordship’s attention, because force and violence alone have 
; Vv. 114, Memorial of Planters of Jessore to Governor-general. ne ey able to protect private property from spoliation and 


Defects in the law itself are complained of, as are also faults in the mode of procedure, 


and corruption among the police and native officers of the courts; but the principal cause - 


appears to be the want of a sufficient number of judges. 


I. Defects in the law itself. . 

The only remedy which the law, until altered in 1829, professed to provide for the infrac- 
-tion of indigo contracts, or for acts of trespass; committed either by the natives or planters, 
and the only means of determining any questions respecting the title to land, was a regular 
action in the zillah court, except in the following cases : 

1. Disputes between British subjects can be decided by action in the Supreme Court at 


" the Presidency only. The zillah court has no jurisdiction over such suits. 


Reg. VI. of 1823. 


‘ 2. If any person shall have given advances to a ryot, or other cultivator of the soil, under 
a@ written engagement, stipulating for the cultivation of indigo plant on a portion of land of 
certain defined limits, and for the delivery of the produce to himself, or at a specified factory 
or place,.such person shall be considered to havg a lien or interest in the indigo plant pro- 
duced on such land, and shall be entitled to avail himself of the process hereinafter provided 
for the protection of his interests, and for the due execution ofthe conditions of the contract. 

3.. First.—If any person who may have made advances on conditions of the nature above 
described, shall have just reason tq believe that an individual under engagement with him. is 


evading, - 


GENERAL APPENDIX.: 485 


evading, or is about to evade, the execution of his contrdct, by making away with and dis-’ 
posing of the produce otherwise than is stipulated ; or that he has engaged secretly or openly’ 
to supply the same to another; it shall be competent to Such person to present a petition of 
complaint to the zillah or city judge, or to a registrar exercising the powers of jomt magis- 
trate, within whose local jurisdiction the land stipulated to be cultivated with the indigo 


APPENDIX, 


(77) Conduct of 
Europeans in India, 


plant may be situated ; filing with the same the original deed of engagement by which the - 


produce may be assigned and engaged to be delivered to himself or at his factory, and cer- 
ifying in his petition that such deed was voluntarily and’ bond fide executed by the indi- 
vidual complained against. 


Second.—On such petition and original deed of engagement being filed, a summons or 
tulub chithee shall be immediately issued through the nazir in the usual form, requiring the 
individual named in the petition to attend and answer to the complaint, either in person or 
by an authorized agent, within such specified period as may in each instance appear reason- 
bie. and which period shall in no case exceed 20 days,” hut 


Third.—The officer entrusted with the execution of the process shall also be entrusted to 
- affix a copy of the summons in the village cutcherry, or other place of public resort, and to 
erect a bamboo on the specific parcel of ground on account of which the claim may: have 
been preferred, and whick it shall be the duty of the plaintiff or his agent to point out. By 
these means sufficient publit notice of the claim will be given, to enable persons desirous of 
contesting the plaintiff’s cy ies or of establishing a prior right to the produce of the land, to 
appear, éither in person or by an authorized agent, before the court for that purpose; and 
the failure so to attend, before the summary decision be passed, will be held to bar the claim 
of any third party, founded on any contract for the produce of the land in question, unless it 
be established by a regular suit. 


Fourth.—If the officer serving the process shall not be able to execute it on the person of 
the defendant, he shall nevertheless publish the claim in the manner above directed; and if 
the defendant shall not appear to answer to the a eae within the period specified in the 
summons, and no other claim be preferred in Var of that of the pluinti the judge or other 
officer shall, after taking evidence to establish the deed and other allegations of the plaintiff, 
proceed to the adjudication of the claim, in the same manner as if the defendant had per- 
sonally appeared. 


Fifth.—If the defendant, or his authorized agent, should attend within the period specified, 
and should deny the execution of the deed of engagement filed by the complainant, proof 
of the same shall be taken, and if its voluntary execution be established to the satisfaction 
of the court or other tribunal trying the case, and no preferable claim be established by 
a third party, a summary award shall be made, adjudging to the plaintiff the right of receiv- 
ing the crop, according to the terms of the agreement. The same principle shall be applied, 
if the engagement be admitted, and no satisfactory reason be shown why the defendant 
should not be held to the performance of his contract. 


The cases specified in these Regulations dre*the only onés in which a summary suit was, 
till lately, sanctioned by the law. It appears, however, to have been the general practice 
of the magistrates, without the authority of any law, to impose a fixed fine per head upon 
cattle found trespassing, instead of leaving the occupier of the land to his action for 
damages. The fine “generally” adopted was one of four “annas” for each animal. 


In all the cases, however, in which it has been intended to provide peculiar facilities for 
the protection of rights, the summary remedy afforded appears to be very insufficient. 


The planters assure the Governor-general in Council “that the mumerable quarrels and 
lisputes which arise” (from trespasses onthe indigo-fields) “between the planter. wid 
ryots, cannot, under the present state of the law, be expected to cease; the fine of four 
annas per head for cattle thus found trespassing affording no adequate compensation to the 
olanter, considering the difficulty of prosecuting the offending parties to conviction. When 
your-memorialists state, that a herd of 100 cattle will, in the course of a few hours, panied 

: plants 


MS. Ret. vol. ve | 
p- 37. Mr. Cheap, 
Mag. Mymensing. 
—Ib. 136. 
Memorial of 
Planters of Jessore. 
MS. Ret. iv. 118. 


Tb, 119. 


Arrenntx, 486 APPENDIX ro REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 
¥, 
plants capable, if preserved, of pfoducing indigo worth many thousand rupees, your Lord- 
_ Settlement of ship will at once see and acknowledge thatefines, to the extent of 25 rupees, can be no com- 
Europeans in India» pensation for the enormous loss sustained, even were the facilities of punishing the offenders 
all that could be desired.” 


The lien given to the planter on growing indigo, and the summary suit for non-cultiva- 
tion, which is provided for him by the Regulations of 1823, are equally insufficient fo 
effect their purpose. , 
MS. Ret.iv.212, , The planter hasno lien, and “the magistrate cannot interpose his authority till the crop 
Mr. Tucker, is on the ground, when, if a dispute arise who is to have it, the magistrate, on a summary 
Commr. Dacea. — inquiry, may give it to that party,establishing the best claim to it. But this is of very 
little use. The cases of disputed titles to crops on the ground are of rare occurrence,” com- 
ared with those of refusal or negfect to cultivate. “The only remedy afforded by the © 
: egulation, in ease the ryot fails to cultivate, consists ina summary process for the recovery 
"Myr. Ross, Judicial of the advance, with int€rest ; or ing. regular suit for the enforcement of the penalty speci-* 
Minute, MS. Ret. fief in the agreement,’’ provided it does not exceed treble the amount of the advance, unless 
iv. fraud be proved. , 
Let. Sec. of Gov. But “the return of the advances, with intérest, even supposing that the award could im- 
Bengal to Register mediately be realized, would prove a very trifling compensation Fox the injury sustained by 
of Sudder Dewanny the loss of the expected produce of the season; more especially when, by a general combi- 
Adawlat ; *nation amongst the ryots, a factory may be altogether disappointed of the produce on which 
MS. Ret iv. 40. it depended.” The vats and building necessary for the manufacture have been erected ; 
See also, a considerable establishment kept up all the year, and advances made, perhaps not merely 
IL, age Mr. Camp- for indigo, but for the labour which the planter had calculated on requiring during the 
Weiner growing and manufacturing season. The ryot, under the Regulations, may retain the 
Mac. Nuddeah, | 2¢vance until the season for sowing; and if he then repays it, with interest, he has done 
i ° all that can be required of him, except through the medium of a regular action. The 
period for obtaining other land has elapsed, the season for sowing being very short ; and 
‘the planter is left without plants to emplgy his factory, or compensation ‘br his great 
outlay. : 
Mr. Ross, Judicial es Aithoughs, however, the Regulatiow referred to is defective, I apprehend,” says Mr. 
Minute, MS. Ret. Ross, “ that the continuance of the evils complained of is not so much attributable to its 
iv. 240. defects as to the inefficiency of the tribunals authorized to carry its provisions into execu- 
tion; and that, were it amended, it would still be as inoperative as it has hitherto been, if 
left to be enforced by the same tribunals. ; 


“ It must be kept in mind that the courts at the sudder stations of the several zillahs 
are the only tribunals authorized to take cognizance of disputes arising between European 
indigo manufacturers and the ryots who contract to supply them with indigo plant; and . 
that these courts are, from their situation and the great extent of the country over which 
they have jurisdiction, inaccessible to the majority of the ryots; and, from accumulation 
of business distracting and retarding their proceedings, of little avail to the manufacturers. 
There is, in reality, no provision made for @dministering any law to these two classes; and 
that fact alone is sufficient to account for the disorder that prevails in the indigo districts.” 
This opinion of Mr, Ross is fully borne out by other opinions. 


Mr. Rattray’a Judicial ©The Regulations in question are allowed on all hands to have failed of their object.’ In 
Hey Ae oreo, Some districts they have never been acted upon, even in one instance ; of this the great 
Mag. Tirhoot. poe’ indigs district of Tirhoot is believed by its magistrate to be an example; that of Dacca is 
U1. 207. Mr. Walters, mentioned as another ; and the principal cause of their failure appears to be justly refer- 
Mag. Dacca City. able to “the circumstance of the judges not being Sible to give that immediate attention to 
111, 313. Mr. Barwell, ear ° : ” 

24 Pergunnahs. the suits instituted, on which the efficacy of the Regulation depends. 

Ill. 48, Mr, Mills, Mag. Pubnahs See also Mr. Ross’s Minate, iv. 250. Mr. Turnbull’s Minute, iv. 287. : 

Queries from the Court The population of each judicial district has been computed, by various officers of the 
of Directors, with Re- last India Company, in answer to queriés from the Court of Directors; at from 600,000 or 
lice ormisomeeF cir 700,000 to 1,000,000 or 1,200,000. - The area of each district varies from 350-to 22,000 square 


Officers in England, in miles. 


GENERAL APPENDIX. 487 


miles. . Parties may, therefore, be “distant from the onl} courts open to them from 50 to 
100 miles *.’ ; . 

From the great magnitude of the distrigts, the courts @re, with few exceptions, always 
overburthened with business ; the delay attendant on a regular suit is very considerable, 
and much time is necessarily consumed in obtaining even a summary decision. 

« The complaints of the planters, in relation to the judicial establishments of the country, 
are not confined to the number of judges, The proceedings are all conducted by writings 
in the Persian language, of which both the planter and his opponent are, in most cases, 
completely ignorant, and the judge himself has at best but an imperfect knowledge. It is 
also complained that the judges are too often young and inexperienced men, who have pos- 
sessed no opportunities of acquiring knowledge of the Several systems of law which they 
. have to administer, or of the habits, manners, or transactions of the persons subject to their 
jurisdiction; and who therefore rely, in a great measure, on the native officers appointed to 
-assist them. These officers are sai a very generally accessible to bribes ; their corrup- 
tion appears to be matter of general notoriety ; and t@e planters declare that such is ¢he 
extent of corruption, that no prudent man ever ventures to institute proceedings without 
bribing all the subordinate native officers concerned. At every stage of the proceedings 
fresh presents'are required ; and the circumstances of the case are ultimately presented to 
the judges in a point of view determined rather by the comparative amount of the bribes 
than by any fair consideratfon of the merits of the case. 


Venality appears to pervade all ranks of the native’ officers, beginning with the lowest, 


and ascending through all the grades to the highest. All appear to be frequently leagued 
together ; the constables at the outer stations paying for the countenance of their superiors, 
and advancing their interests by promoting litigation. 

The class whose corruption is most complained of is the Police. Many of the planters 
assert that the extortion committed by these men is so gross and notorious, that when a su- 
gee enters a village to investigate a murder, a robbery or a homicide, a large num- 

er of the ryots run away till the inquiry is over, not because they are guilty, but to avoid 
ae arrested under pretence of suspicion, afid made to pay a rupee or two each for their 
release. e 

Another evil loudly complained of is the great prevalence of perjury. One planter, 
whose statement is quoted by Mr. Rattray, (one of the judges of the Suddee Dewanny 
Adawlut) as a “ fair exhibition of facts without any exaggeration,” expresses his opinion 
of the facility with which false witnesses may be hired by the following passage, which is 


APPENDIX, 


—— 


Mr. Turnbull’s Minute, 
MS. Ret. iv. 288, 


Petition of Planters 
of Jessore, MS. 
Ret, iv. iii. 196. 


Mr. Rattray’s Mi- 
nute, MS. Ret. iv. 
262. 


fully corroborated by other accounts. “The ryot can prove himself insolvent, in the event ° 


of being cast, by the aid of a few oaths, which he can procure as cheap as eggs.” 

The expense, inconvenience, delay and uncertainty produced by these various causes 
acting in combination exclude the poor natives almost entirely from the courts, and leave no 
possibility of redress in most of the cases which occur, even to the planter. The distance 
of the court, and the performance of the various steps prescribed by the Regulations, would 
alone, without the aid of any other causes of expense and uncertainty, be sufficient to 
deprive the remedies offered to the planter of all efficacy. 

he truth of this proposition will be sufficiently evident, when it is considered that the 
contracts entered into by the planters with the ryots are generally for small patches of land 
of from two to five begahs each; that the advance usually made to the ryot is two rupees 
per begah, and that the contracts entered into annually by a single factory often amount to 
several thousands. The expense of sending to the court would alone often greatly exceed 
: the 


* This paragraph was written before the returns oi the area and population of British India were 
printed. The minimum and maximum of extent of the districts have been supplied from those returns. 
The average area of a zillah, under the Bengal presidency, is more than 4,000 square miles; and the 
average population, in 1822, was more than 1,300,000; the population of some districts exceeding 
2,060,000. . 


ok 488 APPENDIX ro REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 
PPENDIX, ° : 


Settiewent of 


the amount of the advances, or thf value of the indigo which the oie ryot had con- 
Europeans in India. 


tracted to grow. The outlay required for éhe purpose, when a large number should fail, 
would be ruinous to the planter ; ‘and the decisiop, after all, would frequently come too late, 
even if no unnecessary delay should interpose itself between the commencement and the 
MS. Ret. iii. p. 35. termination of the suit. For the intention of the ao not to deliver the indigo plant to the 
Mr. Smith, Mag. _plariter entitled to it rarely becomes known until the crop is fit to be cut, when a very littla 


Rungpore. delay would leave it valueless. — 
DISS. Ret. ij, 388. ae coe Mee Tirhoot. . The suit for the recovery of the advance, besides affording né 
ee Rutrays Mint. sufficient compensation to the planter, is rendered completely 
. =~ 465. Resolution, Bengal Government. nugatory by the poverty of the ryots. the planter finds, on ob- 
— 7. Petition of Planters of Jessore. taining. a verdict, that the defendant possesses no means either 


Pane pa ieee Alexander to Mr. of satisfythg his claim or paying the costs which have been in- ~ 


— 47. Petition, Planters of Dacca Jelalpore. .curred. Or'ifless poor,ehe has frequently left the village, made 
over his property to another, or is ready to bring false witnesses* 
to Prove that he is insolvent. ; 

When proceedings are instituted against ryots for breaches of their contract, the object 
which the planters have in view is not to obt&in compensation, but to inflict punishment on 
the defaulter, in the hope of deterring others from similar conduct, 

Reg. v. 1830, S. iii. | By late Regulations the law relating to indigo contracts has been improved by the addition 
Ms, Return, iv. of the following, among other provisions : 

The wilful refusal or neglect, without good and sufficient cause to cultivate land on which 
advances have been made for the growth of indigo, is constituted a misdemeanour, punish- 
able with one month’s imprisonment. On conviction, the judge may also order the specific 

erformance of the contract under the penalty of imprisonment for two months. Damaging 
indigo plant is also made punishable by fine and imprisonment. 


one ai ee rite pleek ; But little can reasonably be expected from amending the pro- 
nea Me Piingle Gitte. visions of the law itself. The principal defect, as many of the 
e— 313, Mr. Barwell, Commis. Allypore. judicial authoritiés whose opinions are referred to in the margin 


iv, 240, 856, £91, 316. Mr. Ross’s Minute and = have strongly stated, is in the tribunals. The magistrate of 
PTe PPE pose RenalatOn ss. Jessore expresses himself in the following manner: «The grand. 
objects for the Government to aim at do not consist in the making new laws for the manage- 
ment of their concerns, but in providing for them a speedy and sure application of the laws 

as they stand.” : . 

Complaints have already reached England of the inefficiency of the new Regulations, in. 
consequence of the delay attending the proceedings requisite to enforce them. 

The impotence of the law compels those who possess just claims to have recourse to vio- 
lence for their maintenance or enforcement, and encourages fraud and oppression on the 
part of all persons who have either in their power. | 

Of this encouragement the ryots, the zemindars and the planters seem all to have largely 
availed themselves. The disputes however,which arise out of these causes are much more 
numerous, and tend to more mportant consequences in some districts than in others. 

-Wherever the planters are few in number and widely spread, the questions which arise 
between them and the natives appear to be neither numerous nor productive of much vio- 
lence. The planter makes his contracts with the more substantial ryot only, and finds 
plenty of land which it is equally beneficial to him and to the natives to have cultivated 
with Mdigo, since much of it is frequently unfit for most or all other purposes. 

In some of the districts in which indigo factories are numerous, and situated near to each 

other, the. disputes arising out of the cultivation of indigo are few, and rarely followed by any 

‘MS. Ret. ii. p. 387. very gross acts of violence. Of these the district of Tirhoot is always pointed out as a signal 
Mr. Campbell, example ; Sarun and Allyghur are also mentioned with distinguished praise. But most of 
Mag. Tirhoct. the districts where the number of planters is considerable, exhibit constant scenes of fraud 
and . oppression, terminating frequently in'the most serious affrays. Dacca Jelalpore is, 
perhaps, the most unfavourable specimen of this ‘class. The cause of the difference baat es 

, the 


GENERAL APPENDIX. 489 Arrnpixt 


the effects produced in Tirhoot, and those which are exhibited by Dacca and most of the 
other populous indigo districts, is nowhere stated. ; (77-) Conduct of 
, Where the indigo factories of a distri@t become so numerous as to give rise to competi: EvTopeangin India. 
tion among them for the land in their neighbourhood, the planter becomes less scrupulous 
in selecting the ryots with whom he contracts, and scrutinizes less carefully the titles of the 
land offered to him for cultivation ; he requires more land than the ryots are desirous either 
_ of leasing to him, or of tultivating with indigo; and consequently avails himself of every 
“favourable opportunity of obtaining leases or contracts. ie makes’ advances to. all who 
apply, takes advantage of their distress or weakness to tempt the ryots to sign contracts, 
and accepts leases from any persons who possess even the colour of a title. When these 
: sources fail, he is tempted to have recourse to compylsion. _ - 

The disputes between the planters and the ryots, and those between the different factories, 
then become frequent, and lead to cofisequences of increased importance. 

The ryot receives advances for the cultivation of ingligo, and either neglects to plough his Mr, Sealy’s Minute, 
land, or, when he has ploughed it, refuses to sow it at the proper season with indigo; and iv.257. __ 
perhaps sows instead rice, barley, sugar, or some other crop for his own use. iv. 46; Petition of 

; ul ‘ : Planters of Dacca Jelalpore. 

Sometimes the seed yeceived from the planter is parched before it is sown, to destroy its Mr. Prinsep. 
germinative power, and @fter sufficient time has been allowed to elapse for the growth, of 
good seed, the land is resown by the ryot-with some other crop, and the failure of the indigo | 
is attributed to the badness of the seed furnished by the planter. At other times the indigo 
seed is ploughed up by the ryot, or the seed of other crops sown with or upon it. 

Advances are received in respect of land to which the ryot has no title, or of which he is 
but a joint tenant. Land to which the title 1s doubtful, is frequently offered to the planter MS. Ret, iii. p. 32. 
with a view of interesting him in supporting the claim of the party from whom he obtained — ii. p. 363 
the land. And advances are constantly received from two planters for the same crop: in 
which case, when the indigo is fit to be cut, a dispute arises between them respecting their 
respective rights to the crop. .e ; 

The zemindars, and sometimes the native offigers of the courts, with a view to extract IV. 8. 106. 109. 

bribes from the planter, employ their influence with the ryots, to induce them to combine Petition of Planters 
and refuse to cultivate the land for which they have received advances. For this purpose, of Jessore. 

bonds not to cultivate indigo fre frequently taken by the zemindar from the ryots. In other IV. 46. Petition of . 
cases they erect factories and compel the ryots to receive advances from them, though Planters of Dacce 
already under agreement to cultivate the same land for other planters. Here, as before, tlte Jelalpore. 

object’ in view frequently is to obtain money from the planters, and not to manufacture /£l-295.Mr.M‘Far- 
indigo. lan, Mag. Jessore. 

Sometimes they lease villages to the factories, and refuse, after they have received the MS. Ret, ii. 440? 
advance agreed upon, to deliver them up. In other cases, though they deliver them up the Mr, Wells, Mag. 
villages, they instigate the ryots to stop the planter’s ploughs when he proceeds to till the Monghur 
land, and sometimes they collect large bodies of men together, to prevent the planter from MS. Ret. iv. 115. 
cultivating even that land which he bas obtaified from other parties. Petition of Planters 

In one case a zemindar and a planter seem to have raised a combination of .7,000 of Jessore. 
men, who agreed not to sow indigo themselves, and to prevent other ryots from sowing MS. Ret. iv. 142. 
it, for a certain British factory. Sas 174. 175. 

hen the season arrives for ploughing the land, the ryots who have agreed to cultivate 
indigo for the factory neglect to plough, or the planter finds a body of men assembled to 
poe him from ploughing that of which he has obtained leave for home cultivation. 
ometimes the land, instead of being*retained for indigo, is sown with rice or other crops for 
the ryot’s own use; still more frequently, the land is properly prepared by the ryot, but 
when the rains commence, and the seed should be sown, some or all of the ryots refuse’ or 
neglect to sow. “ The sowing of indigo admits of no delay: when the land is prepared for Mr. Rattray’s 
the reception of the seed, no time must be lost. Delay, that in all cases is dangerous, in Minute, iv. 
this is ruinous ; either the lands must be sown at once, or not at all.” The planter has made 
advances, not only to the owners or occupiers of the land, but frequently to the sa 
3R whem 


BEEN ES, 490 APPENDIX ro REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


ee whom he had expected to employ during the season of manufacture. His factory, with its 
E Settlement of establishment, have been kept up at great®expense; the law does not even profess to 
uropegns in India. afford him assistance, except to recaver his advanges, and even these he can never hope to 


obtain, in consequence of the poverty of the ryots. During the delay necessary to procure 
the’ assistance of the Court, the season would pass away, and leave the planter perhaps 
wholly ruined. ; 

-Finding the law incapable of affording him redress, he takes the matter into his own 
hands and proceeds to plough the land, or sow it, by means of his own people, overturning 
‘and destroying the rice ‘or other crop which the ryots may have sown in the stead of indigo. 
If large bodies assemble to impede thg proceeding, an aftray ensues, in which lives are not 
unfrequently lost. . 

When the land is sown, the ryot sometimes ploughs it up again, and sows it with other 

‘crops. At other times herds of cattle are driven amongst the growing indigo, to consume or 
destroy the plant; then again the planger finds himself obliged to look to his own resources 
for protection. : . 

In the same manner, when the indigo has arrived at maturity, the ryot refuses to cut it, 
or the crop is claimed by another planter, fronf whom also advances upon it have been re- 
ceived, The indigo must be gathered immediately, or it will be spoiled. In the first case, 
the planter cuts the indigo by means of the factory servants;, ih the second, the two - 
planters assemble large bodies of men, each bringing into the field as many as he can collect 
together, and the strongest party cuts and carries the crop, perhaps after a violent affray. 

"When the planters are the aggressors, the natives. are compelled, by a necessity equally 
pressing, to appeal to force; and that the planters are the aggressors in a large number of 
instances, is fully established. 

The same impotence of the‘law, which invites the native to injure the planters, holds out at 
least equal encouragement to the planter to oppress the natives, particularly the ryots, to 
whom the expenses of a suit amount in most cases to a denial of justice. 

The conduct of the planters, as has been already stated, appears to be very different in 
various districts. In those where there are but few planters, acts of violence appear to be 
very rare. The planters, probably, do little worse than take advantage occasionally of the 
distress or necessity of the ryot, to induce him to take advances on somewhat unfavourable 

. terms. Insome districts, where factories are numerous, instances of oppressive conduct on 
MS. Ret. iv. 343; the part of the planters and their servants are rare. Of Allyghur, the Commissioner of 
Mr. Bolders, the Moradabad division says, “So far as my experience goes, and it is founded on a 
residence of six years, in a district (Allyghur) filled with indigo planters, I have found 

the lower classes of the natives better clothed, richer and more industrious in the neighbour- 
hood of the factories than those at a distance; and at the same time I cannot bring to 
my recollection a single instance of a native having suffered cruelty or oppression from 
an indigo planter or his servants.” ros 

In other populous indigo districts, the acts of misconduct committed by the planters, 
though not so rare as they are described to be in Allyghur, are still not very numerous ; 
while, in a few of the most populous districts, no act seems to be avoided which can 
in any way forward the interests of the planters. Dacca Jelalpore may be cited as the 
most striking example of this state of things. The summary of suits brought against 
the indigo factories exhibits, in the case of most districts, few instances of oppression 
of an aggravated nature committed by the planters, and all the acts of that nature are 

. gonfined to a few individuals. In Dacca Jelalpore, on the contrary, and in some other 
districts, the summary exhibits charges of every degree of violence against almost all the 
planters. The following description of the acts committed by the planters applies, there- 

, fore, with different, degrees of force, to different districts. 
Mr. Manck tot, Comme, In their eagerness to obtain indigo, the planters probably take advantage of the cupidity, 
acd Couns distress, or timidity of the ryots, to a greater or smaller extent, in all or most of the dis- 
Pergunnalss, iii. 320, ° tricts, to induce them to enter into disadvantageous eontracts. ; 
Mr, Walters, Mag, S08 Pounding’ 
Dacca, iii, 223. : . & 


e 


GENERAL APPENDIX. 49) 
Pounding their éattle on a’ charge of straying among the indigo appears to be a method 
very frequently had recourse to for this nurno$e.  ~ - 


When this is insufficient, compulsion, more or less violent, is employed ; the ryot is. 
seized, and confined or beaten. Instances of misconduct to this extent appear to be more 
or less plentifully spread over most of the indigo districts; but in some of the worst the 
misconduct goes much fatther. Every’means which can be contrived of attaining the end 


'. in view, appears to be put in requisition; they are scourged and confintd until they consent 


‘ indistinctness in the pottah, to seize the field which he thus prefers. : 


to enter into contracts; money is thrown into the houses of the ryots, as advances; their 
bullocks are impounded, their houses burned, or otherwise destroyed.. Instances of arson 
frequently occur in the summary of the criminal suits connected with the indigo factories of 
Dacca Jelalpore, and one or two other districts. hen contracts cannot be obtained b 

any-of these means, or it is found more convenient to forge them, or to cultivate the ryot’s 
land by force, torgery is had recourse to; or, more frequently, the land is seized and culti- 
vated by the planter’s servants, either under the pretence afforded by a lease from some ryot 
out of possession, who has a real or pretended claim to the land, or without any colour of 
right. The ryot’s paddy, sugar, or other cfop, if any happens to be growing, is ploughed 
up, and the land forcibly sown with indigo. Not unfrequently the planter prefers some other 
land belonging to the ryet to that which he intended to lease, and avails himself of some 


When the factories are numerous, the ryots are frequently compelled to enter into engage- 
ments with one factory, after having contracted with another for the same land. Sometimes 
a planter obtains the lease of a village from the zemindar, and compels the ryot to cultivate 
indigo, without consideration of the rights which custom confers upon them. Occasionally 
this appears to be done in ignorance of the nature or existence of their rights. “Sometimes, in 
these cases, the indigo lands are said to be thrown out of the rent-roll, and the whole burthen 
of the revenue cast on the other lands. 

. When a zemindar quarrels with*his tenants, he sometimes alleges that their rents are in 
arrear, seizes their land, and grants it to the factory for the growth of indigo. The tenants 
sometimes act in a similar manner when they quarrel with the zemindars. 

But of all the various grievances of which the ryots have to complain, that which they are 
said to consider the greatest, is the impossibility, almost complete, of freeing themselves from 
their connexion with the factories, when once they have received an advance for the growth 
of indigo. The advance which they are compelled, or induced to take, is frequently one 
which they can never repay ; and when even they do possess the means of paying off all debts 
due to the factory, and desire to relinquish the cultivation of indigo, the planter frequently 
refuses to settle their accounts, and compels them to continue to grow indigo. 

If, from this or any other cause, a ryot refuse to cultivate his land for the factory, the 
planter cultivates it with the factory servants, and charges the expense to the ryot’s 
account, and otherwise contrives to brmg him into- debt to an amount which renders him 
little better than a bond slave to the factory. , 

The acts of which the zemindars complain are, that the planters, in their eagerness to 
obtain lands, accept pottahs or leases, without scrutinizing with sufficient care the title of 
the grantor, trusting to their armed men to remedy any defects in the contract. That they 
take pottahs which do not specify the quantity. or Pokidaries of the land conveyed jo them, 
and thus obtain an excuse for seizing on any neighbouring landlord’s property which suits 
them best. That it is, at least in sqme districts, “ a common practice,” when a zemindar 
refuses to accede to the offer of a planter who wishes to obtain a pottah, for the planter to 
obtain a pottah from some sharer or claimdnt, real or fictitious, who is in most cases not in 
possession, or from some unauthorized gomastah, upon the authority of which he either 
seizes the land, or causes a suit to be instituted, which suspends the payment of the zemin- 
dar’s rent. That they occasionally find difficulty in obtaining their rent from the planters ; 
and that the latter employ every exertion, frequently to the extent of committing acts of 

3R2 open 


APPENDIX, 


. 


——— 


Mr. Walters, Mag. of 
Dacea, iii. 226. 
Mr.Barwell,@oinmr. 24 
Pergunnahs, iii. 321. 
Mr. Walters, iii. 227. 
Mr. Cardew, Mag. 
Dacca Jelalpore, ii. 
35. 42 ; iii. 177. 
r-—, Joint Mag. | 
Pubnah, iii, 51. , 


_ ti, p. 64, 
See Report from Mag. 
of Dacca, ii., for many 
instances. 
Mr. » Joint Mag. 
Pubnah, iii. 51. 
Mr. Smith, Mag. of 
Jessore, iv. 61. 
Mr, Cardew, Mag. of 
Dacca Jelaipore, ii. 65. 
Mr. Walters, iti, 228. 
iii, 51. 
Mr. Cheap, Mag. My- 
mensing, v. 17. 


Mr, Ainslie, ii. 270" 


MS. Ret, ii. 224, 
Commissioner of 
Furruckabad. : 


Vol. ii. 309. 


Mr. Walters, iii. 
P» 225. 


Mr. Tucker, 
Commr. Dacca, iii. 
264. 


Mr. Hamilton, Mag. of 
Benares, iv. 67. 

Mr. Cardew, Mag. of 
Dacca Jelalpore, iii. * 
176. 

Mr. Smith, Mag. of 
Jessore, iv. 56, 
Mr.Blackburn, Mag. of 
Juanpore, ii. 330, 

* Mr. Walters, Mag. of 
Dacca, iii. 216. 

Mr. Walters, Mag. of 
Dacca, ili. 215. 

Mr. Cheap, Mag. of 
Mymensing, v. 17. 

Mr. Walters. Mag. of 
Dacca, iii. 


pAPPENDIX, 


Mr, Hamilton, Mag. of 


Benares, ii. 293. 

Bir. Walters, Mag. of. 
Dacea, iiig?is. 

Mr. Walters, iii. 230. 
Mr. Cardew, Mag. of 
Dacca Jelalpore, it. 
31, 35. 40. 44. 58. 62. 


68. 

Mr. Ross’s Minute, iv. 
243. 

Mr. Sealey’s Minute, 
iv, 258. 

Mr. Turnbull’s Min. 
&c. iv. 276. 

iii, 230, Mr. Walters. 


Mr. » Mag, 
of Pubnah, iti. 51. 
Rev. Letter from _ 
Bengal,1 Jan. 1830, 
Mr, Walters, Mag. of 
Dacea City, iii. 231. 
Mr. Turnbull’s Minute, 
iv. 282. 
See ii. p. 45 

=. iv. p. 175, Dacca 

Jelalpure. 

— v.17, Mymensing. 
Mr. Walters, iii.235. 
Mr.Hamilton,Mag. 
Benares, iv. 65. 


Mr. Turnbyll’s Mi- 
nutes, iv. 276. 


Mr. 
251; 
Pl&nters of Jessore, 
iv. 129. 


Walters, iii. 


Mr. Walters, iii. 194, 

228. . 

» Mr.Cardew, Mag. 
Dacca Jelalpore, iii. 
178. 


Petition of 


492 APPENDIX ro REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


open and daring violence, to prevent the zemindars 


established, to ruin the owners. ‘ 

_In the two or three districts in which the opfressive acts of the planters are most 
common, and in which alone those of the most aggravated kinds occur at all frequently, the 
planters maintain bodies of men, frequently 100 or 200 or more in number, to protect them 
from aggression, and to enable them to conduct their affairs in the manner which has been 
described. These men are frequently strangers to the neighbourhdod, of the worst possible 
character; sometimes convicted criminals, who do not confine themselves to the exercise of 
the degree of force required for the purpose of the planter, but sally forth under. cover of the 
night, and commit heinous offences, decoities, thefts, and even murders. , 


from establishing factories, and, when 


Among the cases which appear in the Report from Dacca Jelalpore and Dacca City,: 
there are many charges against servants of the factories, which would appear from their nature 
to be referable to this source, such as robberies, “ snatching money,” and similar offences. 
The pfactice, however, of employing atmed men to any considerable extent is said to have 
greatly diminished, and to be now nearly obsolete, except in one or two districts, where, as 
the returns justify, it is still almost universal. * 


Organized gangs of brigands, denominated Luteeals, consisting gf from 100 to 200 men, 
under regular sirdars, who live by hiring themselves to fight the battles of indigo planters, 
it is to be hoped, are not. now so peek had recourse to as formerly in this part of 
Bengal. A few instances, however, are to be met with among thé suits mstituted during 
the last five years in the various indigo districts. 


Many instances occur, in the few districts which are in the worst state, of false complaints 
made by the factory servants against ryots; and the subornation of false testimony 
on behalf of the factories is alleged, with great appearance of probability, to be frequently 
practised. 


The police are frequently in the pay of the planters. 


The planters allege, in mitigation of the offences conimitted on behalf of the factories, 


. that they are for the most part committed By their servants, without their knowledge. 


They also complain that the incapability of holding land in their own names places them 
completely in the power of the gomastah, in whose name the lands leased by them are 
held, and obliges them to connive at his misconduct. 

For both these assertions there appears to be sufficient foundation in part, at least to 
a great extent. 

Several of the magistrates consider that the oppressive acts which are committed are 
rather attributable to the servants of the factories, than to the planters themselves ; and 
that where the latter do countenance the oppression, they are more frequently the tools of 
wily gomastahs, or other natives, than intentional oppressors. > . 


Mr. Smith, Mag. Jessore, iv. 57. Petition of Planters of Jessore, iv, 129. Commissioner of, Bouleah, iii. p. 108. 


MS. Ret. iii. 253. 


The influence which the gomastah acquires “over the planter by means of the leases held 
in his name, is forcibly stated in the following extract from the Returns of Mr. Walters, the 
magistrate of Dacca City, to the Governor-general’s Circular of 29th December 1829. _ 

_“ So long as he (the planter) is debarred from a straightforward course, by openly. 
leasing lands in his own name, and on his own responsibility; so long as he continues: 
subjected to the control of a wily gomastah, whom he-cannot shake off, whatever may be 
his conduct and character, without destroying his own fair prospects, by losing the lands 
leased in his name, so long he will be obliged to submit to be an unwilling accessary to all 
the chicanery and oppression which the crooked policy of his servants may suggest. Many. 
a planter has confessed to me that he has been an accessary to-acts which he would have 
been ashamed of in his own country; acts which he’ was driven to permit, or to lose — 
the capital he had embarked; and which he invariably attributed to a necessity arising out. 
of the anomalous situation in which he found himself. The nominal holder, perhaps, of 

; 50,000 


GENERAL APPENDIX. | 493 Aveaxoin, 


50,000 begahs of land, at a cost of three lacs of rupees, a muropean planter, finds himself 
the real proprietor of a few pucka vats and dtying-houges only, over which alone he has (77-) Conduct of 
any real control.” Europeans jp India. 
_At the same time, it appears to be placed beyond doubt, by the facts and opinions 
adduced, that the planters ‘shield themselves under their alleged dependence on the 
-gomastahs, and ignorance of what is done by their servants, to permit acts to be committed 
on Lamers the factory, which could not be ventured upon if the planters were themselves 
* responsible. : 

Many of the magistrates complain that the planters are too careless what their servants do ; 
that, provided a certain quantity of indigo be obtained, the planter. cares little about the 
means which are adopted to effect its cultivation, The whole matter is left to the native yi’ un 4y 
servants of the factory, and the proprietor avoids specific knowledge of. the acts which he erueeeh 3: #6: 
cannot but be aware will be committed - Mr. Walters, iii. 

228. Mr. Shgw, Mag. Nuddeab, iii. 139. 


Several of the magistrates attribute a large proportion of the disputes which occur 
between the factories and the ryots, to the wayt of care manifested by the planters in superin- 
tending the conduct of their servants. 
Had this carelessness ao other motive than the love of ease, the stances which occur of it 
would be much more rare® The offences with which the factories have been charged in the 
foregoing description of their conduct, are, for the most part, not such as the servants of a 
factory have any other interest in committing than to please their masters, by increasing the 
_cultivation of indigo. Had the planters no interest in the performance of the acts in question, 
the servants would only risk their situations by committing them. Their interest would be 
to avoid anything of the, sort. : 
The native servant has an interest in extorting money from all whom he can reach, and, 
consequently, of adopting any contrivances which seem calculated to assist him in effecting 
that object ; but the offences charged upon the factories in the foregoing statement are not 
of this nature. The servants of the factories seem generally to compel the ryots to pay them Mr. Smith, Mag. of 
a proportion of the advance received from the facfory, and to extort money from them on Jessore, iv. 57. 
many pretences; but the evils which the ryot suffers from this source, form an addition, and Petition of Planters’ 
one of no small importance, to those already mentioned. : of Jessore, iv, 129 
In concluding this description of the conduct of the various classes connected with the 
cultivation, and particularly of the planters, it may perhaps not be altogether superfluous to 
caution the reader against an exaggerated notion of the bad state of the country, which 
a catalogue, containing no particulars respecting the number of each crime committed, is cal- 
culated to produce. Even in the worst districts, though crimes are excessively. frequent, 
a very large majority of the contracts made with the ryots must be free from all taint of 
injustice, except perhaps some little advantage taken of their poverty or cupidity. And the 
number of araye and crimes of any considerable magnitude committed by each of the 
factories, in the worst districts, would not amount to more than a small number in the year. 
The conduct of the planter is not marked, at every step, by the crimes we have described, as 
the catalogue has a tendency to lead the reader to imagine. The crimes, even in the worst 
cases, form but a small, though far too large, list of exceptions. 
Although the conduct of the planters, or of their servants at least, in some of the indigo 
districts, 1s undoubtedly oppressive, and evidently divergent from the standard adopted in 
more civilized countries, it may be questioned how far it is worse than that of the natives of 
India to each other, rarticulitty of the zemindars towards the ryots. 
The papers which have been submitted do not afford materials for-any direct comparison 
‘between the conduct of the planters and,that of the zemindars. A summary of the suits 
instituted against the former during five years, is given, with many elaborate opinions on their 
demeanor; but nothing of the sort exists relating to the zemindars. 
Few of the magistrates have made any comparison between the two classes, in the opinions 
which they have given. 
The 


Mr.Hamilton, Mag. 
Benares, iv. 67. 


APPENDIX, 


. Settlement of 
Europeans in India. 


MS, Ret. vol. iii. 
292. 


~ Ibid. 41. 


MS. Acct. vol. iii. 
p. 193. 


portion. © 


-due to himself as a British subject and as a Christian. 


494 APPENDIX ro REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


The two or three, however, who Have done so, incidentally, give opinions decidedly favour- 
able to the planters. ° 

Thus, the magistrate of Jessore (Mr. M‘Farlan)estates, “that the natives of the country 
are equally violent and rapacious, and I think more so; whilst, at the same time, there is 
unquestionably a superiority among Europeans, in the qualities of openness, liberality, and 
adherence to engagements.’ 

Mr. Smith, the magistrate of Rungpore, concludes a long lett8r with this: “After what 
I have ventured to submit above, my opinion regarding the treatment of the natives must be 
ualified. Illegal acts are committed, but these are not confined to Europeans, notwith~ 
standing the clamour that is raiseq about indigo planters. The records of the criminal 
courts prove, that from the same causes the same effects arise amongst the native popula- 
tion; and the obstacles that oppose themselves to the effectual enforcement of civil contracts 
drive the native merchant, equally with the indigo plenters, to seek redress by subjecting his 

creditors to illegal restraints.” ° ° . 

Tife opinion that the conduct of the European planters is not worse, or at all events not 
much worse, than that of the native zemindars, derives considerable support from the 
answers given by the magistrates and commissicners to the questions asked them, as before- 
mentioned, respecting the “character of the European indigo planters,” residing within their 
respective jurisdictions, “in regard to their transactions with, aad treatment of, the natives 
afound them.” 

Among the answers received from the magistrates, joint-magistrates, and commissioners 
of circuit, of all the provinces subject separately to the presidency of Calcutta, amounting to 
112, there is not one which gives a decidedly bad character of the planters in general, and 
only two or three which do not speak of their general conduct with praise. 

Tost of the opinions charge them with committing illegal acts, and many give long 
catalogues of the crimes and misdemeanors sometimes committed by them and their servants ; 
but, with the few exceptions above-mentioned, they all conclude with praise of their conduct, 
considered as a whole. 


Thus, Mr. Walters, the magistrate of the City of Dacca, who gives a longer list of the 
classes of crime and misdemeanors committed on behalf of the factories, than any other 
magistrate, and paints the occasional conduct of the planters and their servants in the most, 
unfavourable colours, expresses his general opinion of them in the following passage :— 


“T have been led to form, upon the whole, rather a favourable opinion of the general cha- 
racter of: European indigo planters, in regard to their transactions with, and treatment of, the 
natives around them. Among so numerous a class of persons, it is not to be expected’ that 
instances of misconduct should not occur, and that the dictates of self-interest should not 
occasionally urge an individual to overstep the bounds of propriety, and to forget what is 

Mithough: therefore, it cannot be- 
denied, that instances of oppression, and a resort to brutal force, for the accomplishment of 
their views, have, in some cases, originated wjth the European planters; they have, in fre- 
quent instances of recorded misconduct, been made the tools of mterested landholders, or of 
their own wily gomastahs, who, by exciting them to breaches of the peace, have turned the 
laws, which they have caused, to be violated, into a source of advantage to themselves. 

“That some‘of the planters are held in much estimation by the natives; that they are con- 
stantly i dae to. to arbitrate disputes between relatives or neighbours; that they are the 
frequents dispensers of medicine to the sick, of advice to those in difficulty, of pecuniary aid 
to: Chose in need, on the occasion of family events, which would otherwise involve them for 
life with native money-lenders; and that ‘their never-failing acquiescence in the wants and 
wishes of their poor neighbours has thus tended, in some measure, to exalt the British name 
and charaeter, I can vouch from my own knowledge of the fact: nor need I remark how 
very much the prosperity and happiness of our native subjects would be increased by the 
residence of European gentlemen among them, were such a description applicable to a large 


“ The 


. the case, they must mean that, 


_ GENERAL, APPENDIX. 405 Arpeenix) 


, 


“The chief evil complained of by indigo planters, and’ the fertile ‘source indeed of serious 
breaches of the peace, is the interference of ~ival factories with each other, and the injury to (77.) Conduct of 
which planters are constantly exposed, frogn new factories*being erected within the bounds of Europeans in India. 
the old-established concerns in their possession, either by native proprietors or leaseholders, 
or some European planter.” 

Dacca is one of the districts in which the cultivation of indigo occasions the most dispute 
and the greatest number ofgrimes. Of these ertmes, and of the misconduct of the planters 
in many cases, the magistrate whose opinion has just been stated, gives a very forcible 
description ; yet his opinion of their general conduct is still, on the whole, favourable ; yet it is 
at least one of the most unfavourable which was given by any of the magistrates or commisr 
sioners. . ° 

Unless this, and the other general answers given, eefer solely to the personal conduct of 
the planters, which was obviously not the intention of the question, and which can scarcely be 

alesouste the conduct of the planters is constantly illegal, and 
frequently violent, criminal, and oppressive, their mfsconduct is greatly mitigated by the 
state of the law, and their deportment not worse, but probably better, than that of the natives 
possessed of similar power—the zemindars and others. The language in question could not be 
used by persons who considered the conduct of the British planter as much, if at all, more 
oppressive than that of tke wealthy natives. — 
' The object of the question to which these answers were returned, was to learn the 
character borne by the planters in the various districts; in other words, their reputation. 
A large proportion, indeed by far the larger proportion, of the persons addressed, misled pro- 
bably by the ambiguity of the word character, have not said anything of their reputation 
among the natives, but characterised them according to their own notions. They have given: 
na planters the character which they think they deServe, and not collected that which they” 
bear. 
‘ The answers that distinctly refer to the opinions of the natives on the subject are but few, 
which is much to be regretted. These, however, represent the character borne by the plan- 
ters for kindness, liberality, and fairness, and g@od faith, in very favourable colours, and state 
that they are looked up to by the natives with respect and esteem. 

‘The differenee between the conduct of the planter and that of the zemindar consists pro- 
bably in this, that the exactions of the planter are limited to those made for the purposes of 
his trade, while those of the zemindar have frequently no limit but the capacity of the ryot 
to gratify his rapacity. 

So long as the law remains inefficient, the interest of the planter will frequently lead him. 
to. adopt unjustifiable means of obtaining, at the smallest possible cost, all the indigo which Mr. Smith, Mag. of 
he is capable of manufacturing. He will drive hard bargains with the ryots; take advan- Rungpore, iii. p. 34. 
tage of their wants, their weakness, or cupidity; and occasionally, when necessary for, his Commis. of Bareil- 
purpose, employ force. But here his oppression ceases. oe ; ly, ii. 255 

e probably never thinks of using fraud or violence except ih the way of trade. Provided . 
he obtain a sufficient supply of indigo at a low price, he is satisfied, and thinks not of 
interfering: with the accumulation of the ryots from. other sources. Though he seizes the 
ryot’s land, he would never think of taking from him a rupee to which he had not some 
claim. . 
On the contrary, his interest combines with his inclination to render him favourable to their 
progress in wealth, and the improvement of their condition, whenever it is consistent with 
obtaining the quantity of indiga which he requires ; for it is more to his advantage that the ; 
ryots who cultivate for him should possess ploughs and bullocks, to enable them to fulfil Minutes of Gov.- 
their contracts without difficulty, than fhat they should be sunk in extreme poverty. gen. attached to 

The native zemindar too often extends his rapacity to everything which the ryot possesses. Rev. Letter from 
He is not always content with squeezing out of his tenant the greatest rent which he can Bengal, 1 Jails. 
obtain ; but if, notwithstanding the amount of the regular extgrtion, the ryot should find means - ; 
of accumulating anything, he contrives to obtain it from him under some pretence or other» Mr. Sisson’s Report 
“ Nota child can be born, not a head religiously shaved, not a son married, not a daughter on Rungpore, April 
-_ given 2, 1815. 


APPENDIX, 
» 


Settlement of 
Europeans in India. 


496 APPENDIX’ro REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


given in marriage, not even one of the tyrannical fraternity dies, without an immediate 
visitation of calamity upon the ryot. Whether the occasion be joyful, or whether it be sad, 
in its effects to the cultivator it is alike mournful and calamitous.” ' 

__. The English planter protects the ryot from the “zemindar and village malik; and althoug 
his own servants commit great extortions, they are probably little, if any, worse than those 
of the native wealthy classes. Mr. Barwell, Commissioner of Allypore, speaks of “ tha . 
extortions which, under sanction of their (the planters’) names, are frequently practised by 
their retamers and dependents, in common with all other native servants, whether public or 
private, in our employ.” 


1 
potion of Planters of Jeéssore, iv. 116, He assists the ryot with advances to pay his rent, and saves his land and 
Bae Cue oon 3 b4,  Dbullocks from being seized for arrears. The terms of repayment in indigo _ 
Mr, Walters, Mag. of Dacca, iii. 195, which he exacts are indeed far from favourable to the ryot in many instances; 
Mr. Smith. Mag. of Jessore, iii. 293. but they appear to be less burtheasome than those of the native usurer, 


Petition of Planters of Dacca Jelalpore, iv. 


to whom the ryot woyld otherwise be obliged to have recourse, and “involve” 


46. p 3 
Mr. Walters, Mag. of DaccaMii. 195. himself “ for life.” 


Mr. Smith, Mag. 
of Jessore, ii. 262. 


Magistrate of Dac- 
ca, iii. 195 and 161. 


Mr. Barwell, Com- 


One of the planters states, that the native money-lenders advance the cultivators such monies 
as they require at 37 4 per cent. interest per annum. This advance, given for the peasant and 
his family, for every bushel of which they receive back a bushel and a half; and for seed~ 
corn they get back two bushels for one, or 100 per cent. intere$t. Not content with these 
profits, they are said, by the same person, to cheat the poor people most shamefully ; which 
they can, it is said, easily do, as all the eae raised by the cultivator go into the usurer’s 
granary the moment they are ready, and he takes good care never to grant a receipt, or 
render an account of any kind. 


Another planter, whose letter is in the same collection, page 66, says, that whenever th 
ryot is obliged to borrow of the money-lender, his cattle are mortgaged for the principal, 
while interest is charged at 50 or 60 per cent. 


Although the bargains which the planter drives with the ryot are genes nearly, or 
quite, as hard as those of the zemindar, he*behaves towards them with better faith, and 


pays him. more regularly, and is less rigerous in enforcing his claims when a bad season or 


other calamity falls upon him. 


He treats the ryot, too, with less violence and more humanity in matters not immediately 
connected with business ; shows more kindness to him in his distresses ; supplies him very 
commonly with medicine when sick ; affords him assistance occasionally when disabled, and 
sometimes lends him money to buy bullocks, and carry on his agricultural pursuits, or to 


support his family when in want. ‘In many instances the planters appear to have so much 


personal influence with the natives, and command their respect to such an’ extent, that they 
are constantly referred to, to settle disputes between them. 


It would appear, therefore, on the whole, that there is little or no ground for considering 
the conduct of the planters to be more oppressive than that of the native zemindars ; and 
that the magistrates and commissioners’ of gircuit of the Bengal provinces in ‘general do 
not believe it to be worse, but rather better. 

' This conclusion, it is true, is founded to a great extent.on inference, in the absence of 
sufficient direct testimony, and therefore is advanced with some hesitation. 

It seems to be tacitly assumed by most persons, that the indigo districts are those in 
which fhe greater quantity of disturbance takes place. This, however, would necessarily 
follow from the increase of the number of transactions, whether the planters acted oppres~ 
sively or not. .Where all disputes are settled by effrays between the parties, whatever 
increases the number of transactions will increase the number of affrays, although one of 


the parties may always act fairly. 


It is, however, stated by two or three of the magistrates, that, “ the natives generally are 


missioner Allypore, averse to the extended cultivation of indigo, and more especially to the cultivation of it by 


vol, iii. pe 319 


uropeans,” 


“ The 


: 
we C 


GENERAL APPENDIX. 497 Appennix, 


. © The natives. with whom I have conversed on the subject, (says Mr. Nisbet, com-- —— 
missioner of Booleah,) have invariably expressed a strong dislike to indigo factories ; and (77-) Conduct of. 
I have always found a prejudice to be gntertained by them against Europeans residing Europeans in India. 
in the interior, my endeavours to dispel which have been fruitless.” 
_ Other magistrates remark that the natives dislike the cultivation of indigo on any other 
«than the Chan lands, which are unfit for the growth of any other crops. (See v. 56, magis- 
trate of Mymensing, and i. 283, magistrate of Bararat.) = 
On the other hand, the magistrate of Jessore cannot think that the patives look on the 
" cultivation of indigo as productive of more harm than good to them, (ili. 291); and instances 
are adduced by the Governor-general in Council, in thee Revenue letter, 1st January 1830, 
of great eagerness on the part of the ryots to induce planters to settle in their respective 
neighbourhoods. — : i ° . . 
n the whole, there seems to be no pretence for maintaining that the conduct of the 
. planters has either prevented the accumulation of native capital to any considerable extent, 
or that their oppressions have added anything to the @vils suffered by the native population, 
which can be for a moment compared with the advantages which their capital has conferred 
on the country. Ber Ad ° 
_ It is even doubtful whether the conduct of the planters has been at all worse than that of 
the zemindars would have been if the former had not settled in India, and consequently, 
whether any deduction shotld be made from the positive advantages on this ground. None 
of the magistrates or commissioners draw any comparison between the amount of benefits 
which the natives derive from the employment among them of European capital, and that 
of the evils by which they are alloyed. Their whole language, however, seems to indicate 
that this omission arose from a feeling that such a comparison was wholly unnecessary, the 
_side to which the balance inclines appearing to them not to admit of a doubt. 
_ That this is a correct interpretation of their silence on the point, and of the indications 
which pervade their reports, would appear to be established, or at least ‘rendered highly © 
probable, by the fact that ‘those who reside in the worst indigo districts, and who con- 
sequently have had occasion to een the most unfavourable pictures of the crimes, oppres- 
sions and disturbances connected with the indigo factories, those, in short, from whose reports 
the catalogue of crimes and charges ‘against planters has been compiled, are precisely the 
persons who seem to be most profoundly penetrated with and convinced of the balance of 
advantages which the country derives from the culture of indigo, by means of European 
capital and skill. 
Among the districts most distinguished for misconduct connected with indigo factories, 
those of Dacca, Dacca Jelalpore, Mymensing, Jessore, with perhaps one or two more, stand 
pre-eminent. The most formidable list of charges agaist the planters, to be found in the 
whole of the reports, is brought by Mr. Walters, the magistrate of Dacca city. His tone, 
in many places, indicates what is certainly no partiality towards the planters, by whom, 
almost all the labour and trouble of his office are created. Yet after making his charges, he 
remarks: “ I do not consider it necessary to descant on the general advantages derived to Vol. iii, p. 192. 
the country from the introduction of the indigo manufacture on its present extended scale. 
These are palpable, and an estimate of their value will be best found from the informatidh’ 
furnished. by the returns called for, as well as from other data doubtless in the possession 
of the Government. What appears to me to be required is, to point out the existing evils 
which have grown up with the manufacture, and to suggest rules for their amelioration.” 
The magistrate (Mr. Cardew) of Dacca Jelalpore, which appears by the repofts and 
returns to be the.district in which more aggravated crime is committed by the planters than 
in any other, concludes his report thu?: — 7 
fg Uses the whole, Iam of opinion that the residence of Europeans in this district has Vol. iit. p. 180. 
been of the greatest advantage to. the inhabitants. The comforts of all classes have been 
increased from the large capital circulated ; the zemindars’ rents have been realized with 
greater, facility, and the immense tracts of jungle that overspread the district before the 
cultivation of indigo was introduced, have totally disappeared.” 
3s Mr. M‘Farlan, 


‘ 


SeAPBENDIX, 
Vv. 


“Settlément of 
Buropedns in India. 
Vol iji.pp.2g 1-293. 


Vol. v. pp. 58, 59. 


Vol. iii. p. 312 


Vol. ii, 25-27. 


498 APPENDIX ro REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


* Mr. M‘Farlan, the magistrate of Jessore, another of the most disturbed districts, says, 
“ I can hardly think that the establishment ®f European Indigo planters in the interior of 
the districts is looked upon by the natives as a sousce of evil rather than of good. 

“ Rapacious and violent men there no doubt are among them ; and the uncertainty of the 
speculation, which approximates their enterprises to gambling transactions, must have an 
important influence in fostering such evil propensities. But natives of the country are 
equally violent and rapacious, and, I think, more so; whilst, at the same time, there is 


unquestionably a superiority among Europeans in the qualities of openness, liberality, and ° 


adherence to engagements: 
» “ Tf, therefore, the capabilities of the country are to be called out at all, it seems clear 
they had better be under the management of Europeans than of natives.” 
The following extract from the repoit of the magistrate of Mymensing (Mr. Cheap), will, 
at the same time, show the high opinion entertained by that gentleman of the advantages 


which India derives from the residence of Europeans, and his freedom from partiality towards - 


the fflanters : 


“Great benefit has been derived from their (the planters’) speculations to the country < 


but they are apt to entertain a much higher opMion of the benefits conferred on the natives, 
than those mutually received and conferred. That the capital invested in indigo is immense, 
it is not necessary to mention; but, generally speaking, with thé exception of a few ill- 
finished factories, as far as external appearances go there is little in the way of the useful 
or ornamental to be seen in those parts of the country principally occupied by indigo plan- 
ters, and no improvement in the means and implements required for agriculture; the only 


counterpoise in the scale being the employment of a considerable number of hands in the 


manufacture of the raw produce, and the skill acquired by those engaged in the mechanical 
part of the process: but that greater comforts and conveniences have been dispensed to the 
ryots and lower orders, from the introduction of this now most valuable staple of the 
county, admits of doubt, or at any rate is confined to districts which I have never 
visited. : 

No distinct opinion that the balance of effects is disadvantageous to India, has been met 
with iti any of the reports. The two foll»wing extracts are those which have the strongest 
tendency to that view. The first is from the report of Mr. Monckton, commissioner of 
Furruckabad ; and the second from that of Mr. Barwell, commissioner of Allypore, who 
commences his report. by a declaration that he has had “ very little experience in the ad- 
ministration of the criminal jurisprudence and internal police of the country, and has never 
resided in districts where the cultivation of indigo was carried on to any extent,” until his 
then recent appointment to the office of commissioner. 


_ Mr. Monckton says :—“ There is reason, therefore, to think that the profits of indigo are 


not, as represented, the clear and honest results of European skill. A portion is drawn from 
-the funds-fairly due to the revénue of the State ; and a portion is more exceptionably drawn 


from forcing ryots to grow indigo in a proportion beyond what the Indian cottage-farm can 
maintain, and to give that indigo, with the °perquisites, at terms which do not repay the 
grower, I fear that there is not a village mortgaged in these parts, to indigo factories or their 
native agents, which, in the ruined state of the houses, the poverty of the people, their 
discontent, despair; and, more particularly, loss of their native manner, do not offer proof of 
the injury done by the indigo trade to the interior of the country. , ee 

_ “Tee general personal character of the European planter, separated from the advantage 
taken of revenue laws and landed tenures, is fair. Coolies, day-labourers, carriage and boats, 
-are regularly and fully paid for, but not from anyother reason than what actuates the 


- world at large—a feeling that, if not paid, people will not work. Of any great improvement 


* Vol. ili, 16, 19. 


in cultivation, in manufactures, in arts and sciences, being imputable to the indigo planters, 
I am not apprised.” - : 


Mr. Barwell expresses himself in the following words :—“ Accustomed as I have been, 
from my youth upwards, to regard with reverence the sentiments and opinions entertained by 
qe eg the 


_ GENERAL APPENDIX. — 499 


the late venerable Warren Hastings (the wisest ruler and the best friend to the interests of his 


APPENDIX, , 
r 


rents 


Honourable Employers that British India ever Saw) upon, this subject, I strongly incline’ to (77-) Conduct of 


the latter measure, as affording the best means ‘of securing the stability of our eastern empire, 
and of promoting the peace and prosperity of its native inhabitants, whose rights and interests, 
privileges, customs, and even prejudices, we are bound, by every obligation of good faith, to 
preserve inviolate and entire. ' ? 

“ That those rights and ‘interests are interfered with, those prejudices offended, and those 


* customs infringed upon, wherever, as in.the Jessore district for instance, Europeans have 


. 


been permitted to occupy lands for the cultivation of indigo to any considerable extent, no 
one who has had opportunities of conversing generally with the natives, and of ascertaining 
their real sentiments, can doubt for an instant.” i 

These opinions, even if intended to signify that th€ir authors considered that the advan- 
tages attendant on the residence of Eusopeans were overbalanced by the-disadvantages, do 
not exhibit any of that superior care in the investigation of the subject which could alone 
entitle two or three opinions to outweigh a much greater number. 

On the whole, the view taken by Mr. Bayley, member of the Council of Bengal, of- the 
evidence adduced on this subject, coincides with our own : 

“ Even with the limited powers now possessed by our local tribunals (says Mr. Bayley) 
to prevent or punish offenges on the part of European British subjects, and with the obvious 
disadvantages which result from a divided jurisdiction, and from restrictions which go to 
encourage acts of fraud and violence, I am of opinion that the most solid benefits-have 
resulted, and continue to result, from the residence and employment of European British 
subjects in the interior of the country, and that the mischiefs and inconveniences have in 
practice been of much less importance than has been commonly supposed.” This view: 
derives some additional confirmation fram the speeches of two emment natives to the inha- 
bitants of Calcutta, Dwarkanauth Tagore and Rammohun Roy. The former said, “ With 
reference to the subject more immediately before the meeting, I beg to state that I have several 
zemindaries in various districts, and that I have found that the cultivation of indigo, and the 
residence of Europeans, have considerably benefited the community at large; the zemindars 
becoming wealthy and prosperous ; the ryots nfaterially improved in their condition, and 
possessing many more comforts than the generality of my countrymen, where indigo cultiva~ 
tion and manufacture are not carried on; the value of land in the vicinity to be considerably 
enhanced, and cultivation rapidly progressing. I do not make these statements merely from 
hearsay, but from personal observation and experience, as I have visited the places referred 
to repeatedly, and in consequence am well acquainted with the character and manners of 
the indigo planters. There may be a few exceptions, as regards the general conduct of 
indigo planters, but they are extremely limited, and, comparatively speaking, of the most 
triflng importance. I may be permitted to mention an instance in support of this statement. 
Some years ago, when indigo was not so generally manufactyred, one of my estates, where 
there was no cultivation of indigo, did not yield a sufficient income to pay the Government 
assessment; but within a few years, by the méroduction of indigo, there is now not a begah 
on the estate untilled, and it gives me a handsome profit. Several of my relations and 
frends, whose affairs I am well acquainted with, have in like manner improved their pro- 
perty, and are receiving a large income from their estates. If such beneficial effects as these 
I have enumerated, have accrued from: the bestowing of European skill on one afticle of 
production alone, what further advantages may not be anticipated from the unrestricted 
application of British skill, capital and industry, to the very many articles which this*country 
is capable of producing, to as great an extent, and of as excellent a quality, as any other in 
the world, and which of course cannot be expected to be produced without the free inter 
course of Europeans.” : , 

Rammohun Roy confirmed this view in the following language:—“ From personal 
experience I am impressed with the conviction, that the greater our intercourse with 
European gentlemen, the greater will be our improvement in literary, social-and political 
affairs ; a fact which can be easily proved, by comparing the condition of those of my coun- 

352 trymen 


Europeans in India. 


Mr. Bayley’s Mi- 
nute, 318t Decem- 
ber 1829, 


‘ 


See also opinion of 
Mag. of Meerut, ii. 
128. 


Arrexoix, 500 APPENDIX ro REPORT rnow. SELECT COMMITTEE. 


Settlement of 
‘Europeans in India. 


trymen who have enjoyed this advantage, with that of those who unfortunately have not 
that opportunity; and a fact which I could, to the best of my belief, declare on solemn 
oath before any assembly. I fulfy agree with Qwarkanauth Tagore in the purport of the 
resolution just read. As to the indigo planters, I beg to observe, that I have travelled 

. through several districts in Bengal and Behar, and I found the natives residing in the neigh- 
bourhood of indigo plantations evidently better clothed and better conditioned than those 
who lived at a distance from such stations. There may be some partial injury done by the 
indigo planters; but, on the whole, they have performed more good to the generality of ° 
the natives of this country than any other class of Europeans, whether in or out of the 
service.” 

The objection which was urged by the witnesses examined before the Select Committee 
of the whole House on Indian Affairs fh 1813, was not, however, that the advantages which 
India would derive from the settlement of Europeays in India would be overbalanced: by 
any’ pecuniary disadvantages ; but that Europeans would violate the religious and social - 
prej@dices of the native population, Sppress and ill-treat the natives, degrade the British 
character by vice and debauchery, and thus excite and encourage the natives, if not to 
insurrection, to avail themselves of any occaston which should offer to join any powerful - 
invader or insurgent. These evils, however, were predicted by most of the witnesses, only 
in case the immigration should consist of the poorer and less edugated classes. The settle- 
maent which has hitherto taken place has not been drawn from those classes; the case sup- 
posed has therefore not occurred. 

It may be well, however, to observe here, notwithstanding, that the violation of the pre- 
judices of the natives does not form one of the charges brought against the planters by any 
of the magistrates, except by Mr. Barwell, in the single paragraph cited a few pages back ; 
that no traces of any such offences appear in the summary of criminal cases which has 
been returned for the five years ending with 1829, one or two of the cases being all which 
appear to involve any such offence ; that the people are nowhere said to have been rendered 
discontented with British rule by their conduct, nor does the British character appear to_ 
have been lowered by them in the eyes of thénatives, in any way calculated to weaken the 
hold which England has on India; at least, nothing of this nature is anywhere alleged 
against them in the papers which have been submitted. 4 

Having taken a view of the conduct of the indigo planters, for the purpose of discovering 
how far it is more injurious and oppressive to the natives of India than that of the zemindars 
would otherwise have been, and arrived at the conclusion that the evidence does not warrant 
an opinion that it is much if any degree worse, and consequently that it does not seem 
necessary to make any deduction on that score from the advantages undoubtedly conferred 
by the large capital which they employ, and by their superior knowledge and. morality; it 
remains to endeavour to form an estimate of the advantages which the various classes have 
derived from these sources. 


- Effect which the Cultivation of Indigo by*European Capital has. had on the class of 
Ryots. ; 


This class includes the whole country population of India, with the exception of a very 
‘small number of persons, who come under the class of zemindars. The ryots are of two 
kinds: those who possess a customary title to hold the lands which they occupy, so long as 
‘they pay a certain fixed rent; and those who have no other title to their land than that 
: oo they derive from the zemindar whose tenantg they are, either on short leases or 
at will.. : 

When land is held by tenants of the former class, Khood-khasht ryots as they are termed, 
they are of course the parties that benefit by any increase in value of the land itself, or of 
the produce which it bears. They are not, however, like the large landholder under similar 
circumstances, necessarily benefited by any increased value which their land acquires. If 
they sell or let the land, they. obtain-a higher price. os more rent for it; if they ae a 
: surplus, 


GENERAL APPENDIX. 501 


surplus, more manufactures may ‘be obtained in exchange for that surplus; but on so much 


APPENDIX, 


a 


of their property as they retain to produce their own sustenance, or to grow agvicultural (77-) Conduct of 
produce of one sort to exchange for that gf another whick is required for their own consump- Europeans in India 


tion, they derive no benefit from the increased value of land or of its produce.. 

As the portions of land held by the ryots are very,small, those even of the Khood-khasht 
class obtain: but a small share of advantage from any rise of the value of land, or of agri- 
cultural produce ; exceptewhere, within the bounds of their village, there are portions of 
land unfit for the growth of ordinary crops, but. suited to indigo, or which, having’ remained 
from some other cause in an’ uncultivated state, come into demand in consequence of 
the rise. es 

Those of the ryots who are not included in the clags just described, and who form the 
great bulk of the population, derive no benefit frofa the increased value of land: if land 
becomes more valuable, the zemindar ,of course augments the rent. The condition of the 
ryot is wholly dependent on the wages of labour which he receives, either. under.that name, 
or in the price of the indigo or other articles that he Produces for sale. 

It has been already stated, in the commencement of this report, that the quantity of 
capital annually expended by the indigoeplanters is estimated by themselves at fro 
1,200,000 7. or 1,600,000 7. to 2,000,000 /. sterling ; and that the wages of labour in India 
appear to be from five t gight shillings per month. : 

No materials have been found for forming an estimate of the proportion which the persons 
paid at this rate of wages bear to the whole number employed, or of that which the total 
amount paid to the former class bears to that paid to the latter. 


It is obvious, however, that the number of persons maintained by this outlay, either as 
labourers themselves or as the families of labourers, is very great. It has still, however, to 
be considered, in which of the two ways possible the additional demand for labour has been 
1 see whether by a corresponding increase of the 9 ara growing up with the growth 
of the trade, or by an improvement of the condition of the labourers. Is a number greater, 
by the amount of the new demand, maintained in the same condition, or the same number, or 

‘one which, though increased, is not increased in an equal ratio with employment, in a better 
condition? Few of the magistrates, or other Indian authorities, have expressed any distinct 
opinion on this point. There is, however, some difference of sentiment between, ces who 
have. That the principal effect has been to maintain an increased population, does not 
admit of a doubt. The only question is, not whether the whole of the demand created by 
the indigo trade has gone ta improve the condition of the people, but whether any part of it 
has ; whether the condition of the people has been at all improved in consequence ? 


Rammohun Roy, an authority of great weight in such matters, considers the condition of 
the ryots has not been improving in any degree within his recollection ; to which he adds, 
that 1s of so melancholy a description, “ that it always gives him the greatest pain to allude 
to it.” ° 

This opinion would, however, seem to relate to the mass of ryots, and to exclude some 
improvement in the condition of those engagéd in the cultivation of indigo ; for in the speech 
already quoted, Rammohun Roy stated, “I have travelled through several districts of 
Bengal and Behar, and I found the natives residing in the neighbourhood of indigo planta- 
tions evidently better clothed and better conditioned than those who lived at a distance 
from such stations.” » ' : 

Dwarkanauth Tagore, himself possessed of, or connected with several indigo factories, 
expressed on the same occasion a similar opinion. He stated that in the indigo districts 
he found the “ ryots materially improved in their condition, and possessing many more 
comforts than the generality of his countrymen, where indigo cultivation and manufacture is 
not carried on.” ne ae 

Mr. Hamilton, the magistrate of Benares, says, however, “It is argued that the ryots, in 
those districts where indigo is cultivated, are most substantial. Speaking of those divisions 
which have come under my observation, I cannot say that I have seen anything that could 

at 


Evidence before ° 
Committee of 1844. 
Evidence before. 
this Committee, A. 
to G. 


Vol. i, p. 93. 


sArrenoix, "502 APPENDIX ro REPORT rom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


*. 
ome 


Settlement of 


Euroneans in {ndia. 


Vol. li, p. 225, 


Vol. v. p. 89. , 


Mr. Lind, Mag. of 
Futtehpore, ii. 281. 
li. 389, 331,359. 
Mr.-Morris, Mag. 


« Behar, ii. 423 


Vol, iii, p. 180. 
y 


* 
t 


* 


at all lead me to: suppose such‘the casé; but on the contrary, I am inclined to assert, the 
ryots are far better otf in the zemindaries wherein the proprietors will not hear of indigo 
being grown, and resist every application for pottaks from factories. The rajah of Benares 
openly declares, that until the introduction of indigo there never was dissension in his jag- 
heers, (the finest cultivated tracts in his neighbourhood); that all the late disputes had 
their origin in indigo transactions, to which he never willingly consented, but from which he 
has seriously lost, and must permanently suffer.” : . 

This opinion seemé, however, to be rather the result of inference than of observation; and 
the inference, at least if intended to apply to more than some few districts, is obviously 
founded on an erroneous notion of the facts. The paragraph quoted is followed by this :— 
“ More land is not brought into cultivation by the introduction-of indigo ; it is not grown on 
ground that would otherwise be fallow, or on which other produce could not be advan- 
tageously raised; neither is the rent paid by planters higher than what could be obtained 
from other persons. If then the quantity of cultivated land is not increased by the culture 
of infigo, or a higher rent is not paid®for the lands on its account, how then is the ryot to 
be benefited? He must obtain enough from the planters to cover all expenses, and leave 
himself a profit to maintain him through the year; and if he only gain this, it matters little 
whether it be derived from indigo or anything else.” 

The commissioner of Furruckabad takes a view of this question still more unfavourable 


‘té the opinion that the condition of the ryots has been improved. He says, “I fear that 


there is not a village mortgaged in these parts to indigo factories, or their native agents, 
which, in the ruined state of the houses, the poverty of the people, their discontent, despair, 
and more particularly loss of their native manner, do not offer proof of the injury done by 
the indigo factories to the interior of the country.” It must, however, be observed that at 
the time to which this opinion relates the planters in that part of the country were in great 
distress and failing. 

The only other opinion which has been met with on this side of the question, is that of the 
magistrate of Mymensing (Mr. Cheap), who attributes to the “immense” capital invested in 
indigo, the “employment of a considerable number of hands ;” but adds, “that greater com- 
forts and conveniences have been disperfsed to the ryots and lower orders, from the intro- 
duction ofthis now most valuable staple of the country, admits of doubt, or at any rate is 
confined to districts which I have never visited.”’ 


On the other side of this question may be ranged the opinions of a larger number, though 
still but a small proportion, of the magistrates and commissioners, Several of the opinions 
are, however, expressed so generally, that it is difficult to decide whether those by whom they 
were given considered the benefit derived to be employment for a greater number only, or an 
increase of the comforts enjoyed by each. : 


The cultivation of indigo, for example, is said to be very beneficial to the “district and 
native inlfbitants,” The introduction of so large a capital, “is of considerable advantage 
both to the people and to the Government.” |“The great body of the ryots have already 
benefited by the diffusion of capital, the extension of cultivation, and the enhancement of 
rents,” Even with respect to those opinions which do distinctly assert an improvement of 
condition, it is in some cases doubtful whether the opinion is founded on inference or 
observation. ; 

Several of the magistrates seem to feel that the increase of comfort among the working 


' elasses4s a necessary consequence of any large increase of capital, and to estimate the benefit 


done to the labouring class by the evil which they would suffer if European capital were 
now suddenly removed. °. 

“The comforts of all classes have been increased from the large capital circulated,” is 
the statement of Mr. Cardew, magistrate of Dacca Jelalpore ; and it is difficult to determine 
‘whether the effect is here deduced from observation or inference. The opinions which at the 
same time assert that the comforts of the working classes are augmented, and leave no doubt 
that the ground of the assertion is observation, are few. ip 

so The 


V 


‘GENERAL APPENDIX. 503. Arranvns« 


° . 
The commissioner of Moradabad (Mr. Boldero) says, “ So far as my experience goes, and —— 
it is founded on a residence of six years in a district filled with indigo planters, I have found Vol. ii.243. - 
the lower classes of the natives better clothed, richer, and ‘nore industrious, in the neighbour. : 
‘hood of the factories than those at a distance from them.” ” 


Mr. Mills, magistrate of Pubnah, says, “ Although many planters are undoubtedly oppres” Vol. iii. p £3. 
sive, yet at the same time it must be observed that the condition of the ryots has ‘been 


greatly improved since their introduction in the mofussil.” 


Evidence to the same effect was given before the Committee of the Ehouse of Lords which 
sat on the affairs of the East India Company in 1830.. ° * 


Mr. Harris, who had been an indigo planter in India, stated that “their (the ryots’) Minutes Lords’ 
better condition in the districts where indigo was chigfly cultivated, enabled them to keep a Rep. 1830. 
greater number of bullocks for their ploughs, and the ground was better cultivated as they 
improved in means.” ‘ 


The following question was put to, and answer returned by Mr, Davidson, who hadealso Minutes of Evi- 
been a planter in India: : dence. 

“Ts the situation of the ryots, who cultivate indigo for the indigo planters, superior to that 
of other ryots engaged in the cultivation of other articles of agricultural produce?” oe 

“T do not know that ¢here is any very material difference. I think, in the comparison 
between those who do culfivate and those who do not, that those who do cultivate indigo 
are rather best off.” ° 


The planters allege, in the pamphlets and letters which have been published by them in 
this country, that wages have greatly increased, and that the condition of the ryots has been 
most materially improved. They state many instances of the rise of wages, that is, of 
money wages; but say nothing of the rise which must at the same time have taken place in 
agricultural produce. 

In one instance, indeed, it is stated that “Old individuals often speak of rice selling 
formerly at from 3s. to 4s. per quarter; now it sells at from 10s. to 14s. per quarter.” But 
as nothing is said of the rise which has durihg the same time taken place in money wages, 
the rise of price in this case, like the increase of wages in the others, affords no foundation for 
any conclusion respecting the condition of the ryots. They also assert that much of the 
labour of cultivating indigo, the ploughing and the weeding, is performed, at least in some 
districts, at seasons when the women and children, ploughs and bullocks, would otherwise 
have no occupation. 

The conclusion which seems to result from a consideration of the evidence adduced, and of 
the various probabilities of the question, is, that the labouring population of India is in a 
state of great poverty and wretchedness; that their condition as a body has been but little, 
if at all ameliorated ; that the wages of labour are extremely. low in all parts of the country ; 
but that those employed by the indigo factories have more constant employment at those 
wages, and receive the pay more regularly than their fellows in other parts of the country. 
The factory also affords permanent employment to a number of persons engaged in occupa- 
tions somewhat superior to that of a common labourer, who naturally increase the apparent 


. wealth and comfort of the district. 


But this, it is feared, is the whole improvement which has been made in the condition of 
the labouring class by the employment of European capital. 


Effect which the Settling of Eurgpeans in India has produced on the Interests of the 
Zemindars. 


The capital of the planters creates a demand, in the first place, for the land required to 

_gtow their indigo. 
The returns made by the magistrates from information furnished to them by the occupiers 
of each factory, give 1,844,715 begahs, as the quantity of land thus employed. a8 
; esides 


eft eEnpix, 
cf] 
Settlement of - 
Europeans in India. 


Vol. iii. 211, 220. 

¥.43,57,Mr.Cheap, 
Magistrate of My- 

mensing. 


April 1831, p. 144. 


Vol. ii. 180, 


Mag. Dacea City, 
iii, 19t. 


504 APPENDIX ro REPORT rom SELECT COMMITTEE, 


: e a iy 

Besides the land required to bear indigo, the capital of the planters creates a demand for 
the quantity necessary to produce food and other requisites for the supply of those employed 
by it, whether directly or indirectly; which includes pot only the cultivators of indigo and the. 
labourers in the factories, but the persons engaged in supplying their wants. 

To the capital of the planter the inhahalder is also indebted for the contributions which 
accumulation from so large a source must have made to the general progress of the country 
in wealth and population, and consequently to the demand for land. 

The demand for land thus created by the. culture of indigo has brought into cultivation 
large quantities which were either covered with jungle, or unfit, from their quality, for the 
growth of the crops ordinarily grown in India. 


The magistrate of Dacca states, “indigo, moreover, is chiefly grown on churr lands, within 
the limit of annual inundation, and whith will frequently yield no other produce.” 


A writer in the Calcutta Monthly Journal says,*“ 99 out of 100 factories are built m 
the immediate vicinity of large tracts of particular kinds of land, which, from the nature of 
their soils and liability to sudden inundations, or the waters passing in too strong a current 
over them, and other causes, have from time immemorial never been cultivated for ‘ rice,’ 
the ostensible primum mobile of all commotion in Bengal. These tracts are either 
those in which the soil is too-clayey for the imperfect husbandry, of the Bengalese, and 
which would require a northern frost to dissolve and pulverizey or else they are mants, or 
dans, or churs, which the inundation assails and runs over in so abrupt and violent a manner 
that no rice-crop can stand against it. Again, there are tracts where the inundation is too 
slight for the purpose of raising the aumeen rice, and at the same time too much for the pur- 
pose of raising the ouze dan; the first of these crops requiring a friable soil and still inunda- 
tion, and the latter the same kind of mould and no inundation. To these may be added 
extensive tracts of sandy soil too poor for rice, but which occasionally afford a crop of 
indigo. Of these descriptions of lands totally unfit for rice, at least four-fifths of the 
lands occupied by planters consist.” 


This statement is probably, however, considerably exaggerated, unless indeed the term 
“occupied by planters” includes that landonly which is held by them for the purpose of 
home cultivation. ; 

The magistrate of Dacca Jelalpore says, “that the immense tracts of jungle that over- 
2 iors the district before the cultivation of indigo was introduced, have, totally disap- 

eared.” : ; 
Other magistrates speak of similar results in the districts with which they are respectively 
acquainted. 

And many allege, as proofs of the advantages which indigo planting has rendered to the 
country, the progress of cultivation and the increase of rent. None of them, however, make 
any estimate of the amount of increase. The planters give statements of the rise in the value. 
of land ue many parts of the country; but care must be taken not to found on these state- 
ments, conclusions which they are insufficient to support. 

The rent usually spoken of in them is tHe rent of the species of land cultivated with 
indigo; and where this is of a quality wholly or nearly unfit for the growth of other produce, 
the rise in its value affords no criterion of the effect on rents in general. 

_ Far too little importance also is attached, in the statements of those who favour the cul- 
tivation of indigo, to the causes which have co-operated with it, in the extension of cultiva- 
tion an the augmentation of rents. - 

The circumstances of a country must be bad in the extreme, to prevent altogether its 
population from increasing and extending cultivation over land previously waste. Under 
the comparatively mild and secure rule of the East India‘Company, the country could not 
have failed to make much progres in these respects, without any assistance from British 
capital. But in addition to the causes which operate permanently, the extension of cultiva- 
tion has been greatly encouraged by the fixed settlement of the land-tax under Lord Corn- 


wallis, in}1’793, which made an addition of 80 or 100 per cent. to the motive for cultivation of 


. land 


GENERAL APPENDIX. > gos 


' 2. 

land then waste; for, previously to that time, land in cultivation was assessed to the revenue 
at from 40 to 50 per cent. of its gross produce. e The cultivator of new Jand would therefore 
have paid half, or nearly half his crops tethe Governmeftt. But after the tax payable by 
each estate was fixed, the whole produce of any land newly brought into cultivation formed 
the reward of its reclaimers; —- - 

So powerful.an addition to all the motives which previously existed, must have had great 
effect in encouraging the eultivation of -waste land; and it can scarcely be doubted, that a 
large proportion of the progress-which the country has made, is justly attributable to this 
cause. The zemindars in general seem fully aware of the great advantages which they have 
derived from the settlement of Europeans in India, 

The opinions of Dwarkanauth Tagore and Rammohun Roy, already quoted, evince the 
convictions of the richer natives. Mr. Boldero, cémmissioner of Moradabad, says, “that 
the country at large derives great benefit from the residency of respectable Europeans in the 


. interior, is proved beyond doubt, by the eagerness with which the large zemindars apply to 


the planters to build factories on their estates; to indifce them to do which, I know instances 
of their offering to supply plants, for which they were not to be paid until the indigo was 
made and sold.” Every increase in the rent of land necessarily augments the facility with 
which a fixed land-tax like that of India is levied. The operations of the planter seem also 
to facilitate the collectidh of the revenue, by supplying the ryot with means of paying his 


-rent, in the shape of an advance for indigo. 


. The introduction into a comparatively uncivilized country, of persons who have been 
educated in one much farther ened: is calculated, undoubtedly, to improve the morals 
and augment the knowledge of the former. But the whole number of Europeans dwelling 
in the interior of India is so perfectly insignificant when compared with, the native popula- 
tion, that but little effect in this way can reasonably be attributed to them. 


“ Of any great improvement in cultivation, in manufactures, in arts and sciences, being 
”» 


- imputablé to the indigo planter, I am not apprised,” is the remark on this subject of 


Mr. Monckton, commissioner of Furruckabad. 

Mi. Cheap, magistrate of Mymensing, says; “ Generally speaking, with the exception of 
a few ill-finished factories, so far as external appearances go there is little in the way of the 
useful or ornamental to be seen in those parts of the country principally occupied by indigo 


* planters, and no improvement in the means and implements required for agriculture.” 


Their example may have had. some effect in introducing better faith into the transactions 
of business, and more humanity into the treatment of the poor; they may in some cases have 
checked, to a small extent, the corruption of the native officers to whc * the administration 
of the law is entrusted, and imparted information to the few individuals with whom they come 
into immediate and frequent contact; but the only‘art which they have had an opportunity 
of spreading extensively is, the improved mode of manufacturing indigo, which has been 


oe adopted by many of the talookdars and zemindars. 


e 
ee F , e 
The Europeans residing in the towns have indeed introduced among, and taught, the 
natives many trades and manufactures, oar 
, 59, 70; Kyd,79; Sir T.Munro, 89, 125,127; 


APPENDIX.9 
MN: 


(77.) Conduct of 
Europeans in India. 


Vol. ii. 242. 


Vol. ii. 227. 


Vol. v. 57. 


Mr. Walters, Mag. 
of Dacea. 

III. 212. 

Mag. Pubnab. 

See Evi. before Com- 


mittee of whole House 
1813; Sir J. Malcoin, , 


Vanderheden, 21; Lind 


say, 106; Farlie, 115; Malet, 247; Cockburn, 281; Sydenham, 332 


III. Propasite ConsEQUENCES OF REMOVING OR RELAXING EXISTING 
2 REsTRICTIONS.. . . 


1. Restrictions on holding Land. 


Mucu of the crime and disorder that disturb the districts in which indigo is chiefly culti- 
vated, are attributed, ag has been already shown, to the restrictions on holding land which 
are imposed on Europeans. ; : 

. These restrictions operate to.the production of disturbance in several ways. They compel 
the planter to connive at the misconduct of oe in whose names his land is holden, 
3 towards 


APPENDIX, 


Settlement of 
Europeans in India. 


Vol. iv. 465. 


Vol. ii. 191. 


Vok. ve 57. 


506 APPENDIX ro REPORT rom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


towards the ryots and other natives, and free him from a degree of responsibility, both moral 
and legal, for the acts of those employed on ghe land, which would otherwise oblige him to 
exercise a much more careful surveillance over thejr proceedings. 

These restrictions also afford a large premium on cultivation by means of that system of 
advances, to which the magistrates concur in attributing the great mass of the disputes and 
affrays which now occur. 

_“ The most advantageous change for both parties (says the Bengal Resolution) that 
could be introduced jin indigo transactions, would doubtless be the abolition of the system of 
advances.” F 

The evils which arise out of this system, both to the parties concerned and to the peace 
of the country, greatly exceed those produced by the system of home cultivation, even under 
all the disadvantages to which it,is subpected by existing restrictions. 

“ From‘all the information which I have been able to collect (says the Governor-general, 
in his Minute of 8th December 1829) on the subject, I am forced to conclude that many, 
if nat all of the evils complained of as incident to the extension of cultivation, have their 
origin in the insecurity of the tenure possessed by the planters; and I believe it will be 
found that just in proportion as they have been enabled to hold lands (though under the 
disadvantage of domg so in fictitious names), the disadvantages to which the Honourable 
Court have adverted have been of rare occurrence.” a 

» The magistrate of Dacca (Mr. Walters) says, speaking of’ the system of home cultivation, 
“ This is by far the least objectionable mode of cultivation; and provided the farms are fairly 
obtained from the rightful owners, and the boundaries well defined, seldom leads to any 
complaint or breach of the peace. It is under ‘neezehas’ (home cultivation) alone that 
jungle and waste lands to a great extent have been brought under cultivation of indigo.” 


Mr. Cheap, the magistrate of Mymensing, speaking of the same system, says, ‘ Wher- 
ever it (that is, the cultivation of indigo) is conducted on the mode last mentioned, there are 


fewer disputes and complaints; and the only drawback to the latter being extended and 


Vol. ii, 390. 


4 


Petition from Mer- 


aah Senerally adopted is, the heavy outlay incurred at first” in making improvements on 
the land. 

“. In this district,” says the magistrafe of Tirhoot (Mr. Campbell), speaking of the 
evasion by the planters of the Regulations prohibiting them from holding land, “they now 
do so generally, and the practice is certainly attended with great advantage.” 

It. is probable that the superior tranquillity of Tirhoot is partly accounted for by the 
greater prevalence of home cultivation. 


The merchants of Calcutta estimate “the losses resulting from the insecurity of lands 


chants of Calcutta held in the names of natives, from the failure of ryots who have received advances to per- 


to Gove general, 
Asiatic Mag., July 
1829, p, 86, . 


Vol. iii. 233-236. 


form their contracts, and from the litigation and affrays they are liable to be involved in, by 
the relation in which the existing Regulations compel them to stand to such persons, at not 
less than 95 per cent. on the tetal outlay.” Yet a large proportion of the indigo grown is 
cultivated on land held under these disadvantages. The same authority estimates the 
proportion so cultivated at one-third. _ . 

If these calculations approach the truth, it is obvious that the removal of the restrictions 
would be followed by a substitution, almost universal, of the system of home cultivation for 
that of advances. ; 

The Government of Bengal state, in their Revenue letter to the Court of Directors, 
ist Janyary 1830: 

‘“ Jt appears to us that nothing could be more beneficial than the gradual relinquishment 
of the system of advances, under which it can scarcely be said that the cultivators are the 
owners of any of the produce raised by them ; a system which cannot but lead to improvi- 


" dence, carelessness and expense. Now this end will, we think, be greatly promoted by the 


‘more extensive occupation of land by Europeans and their descendants.” ; 

« Another evil of a gencral nature (says the magistrate of Dacca, Mr. Walters) is, that 
from the present system of holding lands in the name of their servants, the planters are sub- 
. hy F ject 


- GENERAL APPFNDTIX, gig 


ject to no tangible responsibility. ‘They may direct brigands to be entertained ; they ma 


APPENDIX, € 
Vv. 


plan and order attacks to be made}; but, if not®personally present as principals, it is difficult (77-) Conduct of 


to convict them of being accessaries. ‘ estances have occurred, in which the mere waining 
a European planter against being accessary to a breach of the peace, on the information of 


Europeans ig India. 


a police officer that armed men on his part were collected, has called forth a threat of a aba ‘ 


cution in the Supreme Court; so that magistrates are really afraid to act against 
subjects, except ort the strongest grounds. 4 

“ Again, false complaints are made, and witnesses suborned. Theeplanter’s name does 
not appear, though the case is brought forward by his servants and at his expense; he 
himself most probably knows nothing as to its truth gr falsehood. Were all cases relating 
to indigo concerns carried on in the planter’s own name, he would be personally responsible, 
and would be cautious to ascertain the truth of a matter‘before he brought it, forward in 
court. In this event, one-half of the present indigo litigation would be put a stop to.” 

Other magistrates express similar opinions. ‘ ; 

“« By the present system,” says Mr. Taylor, magistrate of Nurgapore, “the indigo pfanter 
carries on his transactions in the name of the head native of his factory, and thus avoids the 
responsibility which would directly attach té him, should he engage lands without having 
made the necessary inguiry respecting the right of the person who offers to let them. 
I think thisis liable to mugh objection.” 

“ The only inconvenience which I have experienced,” says Mr. Bird, commissioner of 
Goruckpore, “connected with the indigo planters, has been, that, in all matters relating to 

land, one cannot have recourse to principals.” 

The evils complained of by Mr. Walters, in the preceding extract, do not appear to be all 
referable to the restrictions on holding land, but many of them to the planters not being 
made responsible to a sufficient extent ae the acts of their servants in general. 

The removal of the prohibition to hold land would not, therefore, by any means furnish 
a complete remedy for all the evils complained of in the paragraph in question, though it 
doubtless would put an end to many of them., 

Consequently several of the magistrates, and among them Mr. Walters, propose to render 
the planters responsible for the appearance, and*in some cases liable for the misconduct of 
their servants. ' With a view to render that liability more efficient, they farther propose, that 
the planters should furnish the courts with lists of the natives employed in any situation 
which exposes them to be involved in the disputes of the factory. 

Besides the advantages which have already been mentioned as calculated to result from 
the removal of the restrictions on holding land, there are several others which, though per- 
haps not of less importance, are so obvious, that they will require fewer words to explam 
them. 5 , 

If Europeans in India were enabled to obtain with facility land, either on long leases or 
as proprietors, they would be able to repay themselves for the application of capital to their 
land, in the execution of permanent improvements. Drains, and canals for irrigation, might 
then be constructed by them with advantage, and much land which now lies waste cleared 
and brought into cultivation. : 

. The Government of Bengal say, “There are, we believe, extensive tracts, now of little 
value, which might probably be made productive by irrigation, or by the admission of the 
water of the Ganges and other streams, when loaded with alluvial deposit; and in Behar and 
‘the Western Provinces, it is, we conceive, certain that the planters would be disposed to 
‘ensure and extend irrigation by a considerable outlay of capital, if vested with an assured 
tenure, under a long lease. e . : 

Under these circumstances, it would scarcely be too much to expect a “ general improve- 
ment of the agriculture of the country, and an increase of al] the valuable products of its soil 
and climate.” . ; — 

In India, irrigation appears frequently to confer on land, which without it would yield but 
one poor crop, and that uncertain, the capability of yieldmg two abundant ones with 
certainty. , 

3T2 “ The 


ritish” 


Vol. ii. 307. 


Vol. ii. 361. 


Letter fom Bengal, 
Jan. 1, 1830. 


Mr. Ross, Judge of 
Sudder Dewanrv 
Adawihut. 

Vel, iv. 254. 


eAPPENDIX, 


Sketch of the 
Ryotwar system, 
p- 54 


Letter from Bengal, 
1 Jan. 1839, 


Vol. iii. 255. 


See Baber’s Evid. 
Com, Lords, 1830. 


508 APPENDIX ro REPORT rrom SELECT COMMITTEE. 


“ The conversion of a field, dependent for its produce upon the falling rains, into a garden | 


' or rice-plot, artificially watered, is a, change frém uncertainty to certainty, from one poor and 


2 
° 


precarious to two rich and sure crops : 

Hitherto the restrictions under which the settlers have laboured, have compelled them to 
confine their exertions to the cultivation of but one crop of indigo. Most of the productions 
to which they would otherwise have turned their attention require several years to obtain 
maturity, or more careful cultivation than a ryot could be trusted to perform on contract. 
Were the restrictionseabolished, European skill would be applied to the cultivation of such 
productions, and one of the consequences would, in all peobabilit , be as great an improve- 
ment of their quality as that of indigo has acquired under the hands of the British planter. 

‘ Sugar, coffee, cotton and silk, are productions to which attention has already been attracted 
by the ine et of success they hold dut; and many more would probably soon be added 
to the list, if motive were afforded to the capitalist for seeking them. , 

A considerable diminution of the cost of production would be another consequence of 
rémofing or relaxing the restrictions. ° We should obtain the commodity at a lower price, 
and strengthen the security of the Bengal producer against competition. 

On this last topic, the Government of Bengalssay : 

“ In a commercial view, nothing could be more calamitous than to lose this great staple ; 
and if there be the slightest ground for the apprehension of foreigg competition, which some 
intelligent ‘gentlemen have expressed, we can conceive nothing more mortifying and dis- 
creditable to the administration of this country, than to discover, probably too late for a 
remedy, that yielding to speculative fears, they had fostered the trade of our rivals by with- 
holding from our countrymen the facilities which they required in order to preserve this im- 
portant branch of national commerce. We shall most deeply, therefore, lament if it shall 
appear to your Honourable Court (contrary to our hope and trust), that paramount con- 
siderations a you to deny to the British settlers those privileges in regard to the occu- 
pancy of land, by which they expect permanently and unobjectionably to. diminish the 
expenses at which the indigo of Bengal and its dependent provinces is now produced.” 

r. Walters (magistrate of Dacca) concludes the list of remedies which he proposes, the 
principal of which 1s the relaxation of the festrictions on holding land, with this paragraph : 

“¢ Let the door be but thrown open for the free expanse of British feelings and principles, 
as well as of British capital, and I will venture to say that in five years a greater improve- 
ment will take place in the social and moral condition of our subjects than has accrued from 
thirty years of trial under the old system, gigantic as have been undoubtedly the strides made 
in extending and bringing to perfection the manufacture of what has become the great staple 
export of British India.” : 

The evil which has been thought by some persons to counterbalance these advantages, is 
the danger that Europeans would strip the natives of their land, if they were permitted to 
become prgprietors or leaseholders. 

In the numerous papers which have been received from India during several years, but one 


- opinion has been met with to oppose the relaxation of the restrictions on holding land, viz. 


Vol. iv. 419. “ 


Ibid. 372 to 380. 


that of Mr. H. T. Prinsep, secretary to the Government of Bengal, unless indeed a state- 
ment of Mr. Shakspear’s, that he conceived that Government would consider the facilities 
then afforded to Europeans to hold jands, to be sufficient, and that they were not prepared 
to adopt Mr. Ross’s suggestion for removing zn toto the prohibitory laws made in that 
respect, can be considered as expressive of an opinion adverse to any further ‘relaxation. 

Mr. Prinsep’s objections are couched in the following language: “ The unrestricted autho- 
rity of Europeans to hold land, without being subject tp the local criminal law, is a measure 
this Government can scarcely venture upon at present. There are many well-informed 
people who do not consider the right of holding band to be at all connected with the neces- 
sary local control of European residents ; who think the latter equally indispensable, whether 


.the Europeans hold land or not; nay, who go thé length to argue that the confusion which 


catls for the remedy of a local tribunal is greater, because of the shifts and expedients 
resorted to in consequence of the restrictions to their holding lands. ; 
Q ‘ . “Tam 


GENERAL. APPENDIX. | . . 509: wai DIX, ¢ 
‘ y ° . ry 
“TI am not of this opinion. The unqualified’ removal of the restrictions of Europeans —— 
holding land would open to them a new branch of speculation, not entered upon by them (77+) Conduct of, 
hitherto, because of their legislative exqlusions, viz. lahd jobbing, or. other zemindarry Europeans in India. 
jobbing. The purchase of tenures sold by the courts or collector for arrears, or for private 
debts, with a view to profit from enhancing the revenue drawn from the ryots, is, and most 
fortunately for the credit of the Government and nation, has been, since 1793, confined to 
natives. Had the old families, holding rajugees and zemindaries, which, to the extent of 
- more than half of the.Government jumma for Bengal, were. sacrificed to {he inflexible. rigour 
of the Cornwallis system, seen their estates, one after the other, fall into the hands of 
English adventurers; had they seen these people watching about the collector’s cutcherry 
for a bargain purchase at each public sale, their feeling, and that of the great body of the 
people, ireaide their governors, would have been widely different from what it now is. It 
cannot, however, be necessary to enter gn this ground; suffice it, that hitherto, notwithstand- 
. ing that natives have carried speculation in zemindarry purchases to a mischievous extreme, 
so as to call for a legislative remedy for the evils Which ensued, there has been no dand 
jobbing by Europeans: there have indeed been occasional purchases, and more frequent 
ae be namee, that is, in the name of themative dependants, or their children; but these 

ave all been subsidiary to other speculations, to aid the extension of indigo cultivation, or to 
afford facilities for more*chimerical projects, which have been. attempted everywhere with 
various success ; and the farms have been taken, and the purchases made, with an anticipa~ 
tion of loss on the bargain more frequently than the contrary. Nothing of the kind has 
been entered upon as a primary object of, speculation, and that simply because it was for- 
bidden, and because no capitalist ‘at Calcutta would advance the funds for engaging in such 
a line of adventure so long as it was so. If the restrictions were at once to be removed 
wholly, this line of adventure must be expected to be superadded to those other inducements 
to reside and seek fortune in the interior which now exist; and while the number of adven- 
turers would be augmented beyond measure, their relation with the people would be more 
complex, and the materials of collision would be ‘infinitely multiplied, while the single re- 
straining authority at present possessed by Government, in its power of removing Europeans 
without trial, would become wholly inefficient. « : 

“With what face could the Government ask to .reserve to itself a power of removing 
a man from his mherited or purchased freehold? And how can it be reconciled to the laws 
and prejudices of England, whence confirmations of this authority will have very shortly to 
be solicited, to leave in the hands of Government the.means of separating the ,proprietor 
from his fee-simple, and the tenant, encouraged by the law to embark capital freely in a spe- 
culation for increased produce, from his tenure, at the moment perhaps when it begins to 
yield return? What has been said hitherto applies only to born subjects of England ; their 
legitimate descendants, born in this country, with the nghts of their parents in respect to 
jaw, and those .of their country for location, will be much, more embarrassing. In short, 
what is meant to be urged is simply this; that wholly to remove existing restrictidns on. the 
residence and occupation of land by Europeans, before we haye a local law strong enough 
to control Europeans, or a legislature competent to make such a law, would be beginning at 
the wrong end.” / . ; as : 

On these objections the Bengal Government remark: “ Even less reasonable do we con- Letter from Bengal , 
sider the supposition that the possession of lands would be acquired by Europeans in a 1 January 1830, 
manner calculated to excite disturbances. Of all property it is the least hkely to be wrong- par. 10. 
fully taken from, its owner, excepting through the operation. of bad laws, or laws badly 
administered ; and as the eyes of Government, of its magistrates, and of the community, 
would be ely directed to the cofduct of the European settlers, they are, of all classes, 
the least likely to be shrouded in the obscurity which must cover usurpations resulting from 
such a course.- Public sales in liquidation-of arrears of revenue are.in the Lower Provinces 
naw rare, though numerous estates are advertised.. The rules under which they are con- 
ducted are such as afford every reasonable security against abuse; and any abuse practised 
by or in favour of an European would be much more easily detected’ than sia) at ee 2 

i i : . Which « 


APPENDIX,’ 


° 


Settlement of 
Europeans in India. 


s10 APPENDIX ro REPORT rtosi ‘SELECT COMMITTEE. 


which natives alone were parties; since of the latter, generally speaking, our European 
functionaries can know little but the name. dn the Western Provinces, sales for arrears are 
now happily almost unknown ; nore are made without the express sanction of Government, 
and the errors and misapprehension in regard to the rights and interests of the several 


’ classes comected with the land, to which mainly are to be ascribed the extensive alienation 


Rev.Letter, Bengal, 
1 January 1830, 
$. 14. 


-of property that occurred in several of those provinces, are, we trust, in a great measure 


corrected. It does not consequently appear to us that any argument against encouraging 
Europeans to settle in the interior, by granting to them the privilege of holding landed pro- 
perty, can be drawn from the unhappy prevalence of sales in former periods.” 

In a Minute which accompanied the letter just quoted, the Governor-general remarked, 

“ If the authorities in England entertain any alarm lest Europeans should be induced in any 
considerable numbers to resort tp India, and to settle in the interior on the mere speculation 
of holding ‘land with a view to the profits of rent,.I have no hesitation in avowing my con- 
viction that such alarm is wholly groundless. The European capitalist can, in my opinion, « 
only gfind his advantage in India in tle production of articles for the home market, or in 
effecting some great improvement, which accomplished, he will rarely find any advantage in 
retaining land merely for its rent. Such indeed is the value, I- am given to understand, 
natives set upon land, that I think it probable that they would be enabled to buy out all 
Europeans holding tenures, in which some great improvements had thot been made, or which 
were not held in connexion with some valuable mercantile concern.” 

"In another place it is stated, “ Already, too, landed property bears a high value in the 
market ;' instances we (the Governor-general in Council) understand not being wanting of 
sales to natives at 20 years’ purchase of the net rent.” 

The correctness of this opinion seems scarcely to admit of a doubt. . The skill and talent 
of the European capitalist enable him to employ his capital in undertakings which yield 


‘a much greater interest for his money than he can derive from simply holding land. 


In corroboration of this opinion, it is asserted by the planters that Europeans hold but 
@ very smal] proportion of land in Calcutta and the few other parts of India in which alone 
they are permitted to become proprietors. *° 


If as much profit could have been derived from “jobbing” in land as from indigo planting, 


. the law which prohibits Europeans from holding land would have been evaded for the one 


Mr. Bayley’s Mi- 
nute p. 3. 


Mr. Leycester, 
Judge of the Court 
of Nizamut Adaw- 
lut, was favourable 
to granting the 
power of holding 
‘lands for general 
purposes, iv. 237. 


purpose as it hag for the other. The proportion between the two modes of employing 
capital will not be altered by the removal of the restrictions, or if at all, it will be altered 
in favour of the cultivation of indigo. 

Although.Mr. Bayley (member of the Council: of Bengal) signed the letter, from which 
so many extracts have been made, favourable to the abolition of restrictions on holding land, 
yet he considered’ some alteration of the laws and judicial institutions of the country requi- 
site before any considerable relaxation could safely take place. 

“ But, anxious as I am,” he says, “that much greater facilities should be granted, with 
the objec? of encouraging European British subjects to invest their capital and employ their 
skill in improving the products of India, I sti] feel that, under the present state of our laws 
and judicial institutions, they could not be permitted to occupy extensive landed property in 
the interior of the country, except upon conditions corresponding with those which were | 
retained in the Resolutions of Government of February last. : 

““ Whenever the British Legislature shall see fit to declare that all persons, Europeans or 
natives, residing in the interior of our provinces in India, shall be subjected to the same regu- 
lationsy and to the-same local tribunals, civil and criminal ;: and shall, by the delegation of 
sufficient powers for that purpose, enable the British Government in India to modify and 
improve our judicial institutions to the extent which may from time to time be found neges- 

sary ; from that moment the unrestricted admission of European British subjects, and the 
free permission to acquire and hold landed property on an equal footing with the natives of 
India, may be conceded not only without inconvenience, but with most important benefits to 
India as well as to Great Britain.” 


GENERAL APPENDIX. | SUL ARrERDIXy 


Effects which would probably result from removing or relaxing the existing Restrictions on. (77.) Conduct of 
os Immigration to and Residence én India,, ; eas in India. 
re a 


7 e = , 
On-this topic a great change of opinion appears to have taken place in the minds of the » yo, j, 9,3, 7, 23,24, 
-‘Company’s Indian servants since the question was examined by a Committee of the whole 38, 35, 55, 14, 75, 79, 
House in 1813. All the witnesses examined on that occasion entertained great apprehension 85) 88, 94, 94, 261, 
of danger, should immigragion to India be freed from restriction*. The evils which they feared fy’ jo pie et 
were, that many of the English colonists who would then settle in Indja would ill-use and 46, 54, 74, 76, 85, 88, 
oppress the natéves; violate their social and religious prejudices, from ignorance or con- St 122, 138, 242, 207, 
tempt; degrade the British character by drunkenness, misconduct, or the frequent punish- S.. 75, 91, 122, 289 
ment to which they would subject themselves; and thus render the natives discontented, 294 : : 
weaken their respect for the rulers of the countrf, andeeither drive them into actual 95: 275, 284, 295. 
insurrection, or predispose them, at Jeast,-to avail themselves of any invasion, or other 52) A0 ay CPOs 

. favourable opportunity of casting off the power of England. Some of the witnesses appre- 35. 54,76, 88, 91, 1v2. 
hended also that settlers might join the armies of th@ native princes, or enter into int#gues 
at their courts. By several of the witnesses belonging to the military profession, the danger Sir J. Malcolm, 68, 6%; 
to be apprehended from this latter source was not, however, esteemed of great importance. Poh Lhe ag 

a : 3 $ g, 298. 

Another ground of alarm was that free settlers, whose right to reside in the country should O49 243, 249. 
not be dependent on the*will of the East India Company, would despise its authority, bring jyp. Malet, 243. 
its power into discredit with the natives, and thus encourage the native princes to rebel. « : 

These apprehensions were founded, in general, on the supposition that the influx of Euro- 
peans would be large, and that they would continue subject, in criminal cases of an aggra- 
vated character, to the courts at the Presidency exclusively. 

It was considered by several of the witnesses that British subjects could not be placed in 94, 261, 262. 
all respects under the jurisdiction of the native’ courts without great inconveniences. Some 276. 
feared that such a measure would degrade the European character in the minds of the 
natives. : ; 

But few of the witnesses who gave evidence before the Committee of the House of Lords 
in 1830 were examined on this point. Those Who were, expressed sentiments favourable to 
a oe settlement in India of respectable Europeans, capitalists, and persons possessed 
of skill. 

From the immigration of individuals of these descriptions, the witnesses expected great 
advantages to the country; but most of them entertained strong apprehensions that Euro- os 
peans of the lower, and perhaps even of the middling classes, would do great harm; that Mr. Robertson, Mi- 
they would be “apt to lose all that is good in the European character, and to acquire all nutes of Evidence. 
that is bad in the native character in India.” ; 

These ,gentlemen considered that any very extensive influx of settlers would greatly 
endanger the Government of India, and_be productive of evils of considerable magnitude to 
the native population. One of them (Mr. Elphinstone) says that “‘ any very considerable 
community of Europeans in India would be very unruly, and very difficult to thanage on 
the part of a Government which must always, be arbitrary in its character. If there were 
a great body of discontented colonists, such as at the Cape, for instance, I think their 
clamours would probably weaken the Government very much with the natives. Their Hon, M.S. Elphin- 
disagreements with the natives would also be very dangerous; and I think there would be stone’s Evidence. 
a great increase of the feeling, which there is now only among the lower orders of Euro- 
peans in India, of contempt and dislike for blacks.” a ae 

Mr. Elphinstone, however, considers “ that too much facility cannot be given*to the 

ettlement of capitalists in India, supposing the Government to retain the power of sending 
them out of the country, and of sending them from one district to another, in case of their 
being guilty of any oppression, or creating any great disturbance.” 

Another witness, Me Chaplin, thought the extension, if limited, of the system of license, 
might produce advantage; but that “the entire control of Government must always be 
preserved ” over the European settlers, “ otherwise they will -brmg'the Government into 
constant collision with the courts of judicature at the Presidencies: and that een ; 

: 4 , tends 


. Aeraxprs, 512. APPENDIX ro REPORT rom’ SELECT COMMITTEE. 


tends not only to degrade the Government, but very much to lower the dignity of the court 
Settlement of itself.” 
Euroveans in India. In another answer to a question’ the same gentleman uses the following language: “ If 
Europeans were allowed unrestrictedly to settle in the interior, I have no doubt it would 
lead ultimately to the stripping the natives of their lands, depriving them of every office 
or employment however subordinate, and ultimately reduce them to the most degraded 
. state of a conquered people.” ; 
Several of the witnesses point out the necessity of subjecting the European settlers to ; 
the local criminal courts, especially if their numbers are to be greatly increased. 
The only judicial authority who has said anything on this subject, in the returns so often 
quoted in this report, is Mr. BarweX, commissioner of Allypore, whose remarks have been 


already quoted. 
Rev. Letter from The Government of Bengal express opmions decidedly favourable to the encouragement 
Bengal, 1 January of European settlers in India, though, as the occasion which gave rise to these expressions . 
1846. -wasgi discussion on one of the points on which the question turns only, viz. the relaxation 


of the restrictions on holding land, it remains somewhat doubtful what other relaxations 
they would approve of, with a view to such engouragement. 
hey consider, in the first place, that the number of Europeans who will settle in India, 
can never be large, which at once removes the principal source of danger. On this point 
Ibid, p. 14. they say, “ Satisfied as we are that the best interests of Englafid and India will be pro- 
; moted by the free admission to the latter of European industry and enterprise, our per- 
suasion is scarcely less strong, that with every possible encouragement, the settlement of 
our countrymen in this country will be far short of the number which is to be desired, 
whether regard be had to the extension of commerce and agriculture, to the good order of 
the country, to the prompt, cheap and equal administration of good law, to the improve- 
ment of the people in knowledge and morals, or to the strength,and security of our power.” 
Gov.-general, Rev. In his Minute accompanying the letter just quoted, the Governor-genteral, says, “ The 
Minute, pars. 16 & Objections to the admission of Europeans ito the interior of the country were originally 
17. urged, and py urged, under circumstances very different from what now exist ; and there 
can be no doubt that their intercourse extensively would have been offensive to most of the 
natives of rank and influence, whom we found in the country on first acquiring it ; even the 
natives whom we employed in the administration of the country required time to become 
accustomed to our habits and modes of acting. A great change, however, has now taken 
place, at least in this part of India: here, excepting in rare cases and in tracts little likely 
tu be the seat of European speculation, we no longer employ in the public service natives 
of rank and influence denve from preceding rulers. We have long intermeddled in all 
the minutiz of judicial and revenue management, affecting the persons and property of ‘our 
‘subjects ; the present generation have grown up under, and are accustomed to us; many, 
indeed, of the wealthiest and most influential are of our own creation, and are sufficiently 
conversart with the general habits and character of Europeans to benefit instead of suffer- 
ing by the intercourse.” 
A paragraph on this subject in the letter of the Bengal Government, to which the above 
. Minute is attached, points out more at length the circumstances which have existed in 
Rev. Letter from! India, “ calculated to do away that strangeness with which, in new countries, the Asiatic 
Bengal, : January must necessarily regard the European ;” and proceeds thus: “ Our native officers are the 
1830, par. 9. creatures of our will. In many districts, too, the British settlers are already numerous, 
and, however multiplied, their residence would no longer occasion the fears and jealousies 
that might be supposed to follow the introduction of a race of strangers, even if the system 
of our Government, and course of proceedings prescfibed for its officers, had not operated 
to accustom the community to the European character. In so far as these observations are 
applicable, it seems to be clear that there is little room for the apprehensions that might 
be entertained if it were proposed suddenly to introduce a body of British adventurers 
into countries recéntly ecnquered or acquired, and still possessed by natives of influence and 
rank, reared under the despotic government of Indian rulers.” - ste vs 
Another 


GENERAL APPENDIX, 513. APPENDIX,e 
V. 


« Another reason given by the Bengal Government tor desirmg to see the number of Euro~ = = —— 
peans in India increased, is, “because the puesence of a considerable number of them in Rev. Letter, 1 Jan. 
the interior of the districts must tend esgentially to secure for our judges and collectors 1830, pars. 9, 10. 
(if not wilfully blind) that information, to the want of which past failures must chiefly be 
ascribed. 7 a 

“ We freely admit, that in proportion as European settlers multiply, the necessity of 
modifying the law relative*to the administration of civil and criminal justice will be more 
urgently felt. e* : NS od 

“ But the changes which the utmost conceivable increase in their numbers would render 
nécessary, may, we conceive, be easily made without ayy essential alteration in the general 
system established for the admininistration of affairs <’ 


Mr. Bayley’s opinion on this subject is, as has been shown by an extract alreaily quoted 


. from his Minute, limited by certain conditions. , He is not of opinion that it would be safe 


to venture upon any considerable relaxation of restri€tion in the existing state of aflmirs, 
but confidently advocates the unrestricted admission of European British subjects into 
India as soon as certain modifications may have been made of the laws and institutions of 
that country. 


“ Concurring (he say$ ip another part of the same Minute) generally in the sentiments Mr. Bayley’s Mi- 
which have been expressed by the Right hon. the Governor-gerieral, and Sir Charles. nute. 
Metcalfe, in regard to the great moral and political advantages to be anticipated from the 
extensive employment of British skill and capital in India, I will only say that this object 
may in my judgment be safely accomplished, without injustice or injury to the native 
inhabitants, and without: exciting dissatisfaction on their part; provided always, that the 
European British resident be subject to the same laws and amenable to the same tribunals 
as the native, and that the Supreme Government be vested with sufficient powers to modify 
and improve our ‘laws and judicial institutions to the full extent which circumstances may 
render desirable.” é ge % : 

The opinions which have just been quoted haying been expressed incidentally while dis- 
cussing another question, it nowhere distinctly appears whether the views by which they. 
were dictated extended to the abolition of the system of internal licences, and with it, 
consequently, of the power now possessed by the Government of removing Europeans from 
the interior at will. | , : 

The various opinions here brought together, considered in conjunction with the evidence 
which has been adduced respecting the effects that have been produced by the settlement of 
Europeans in India, seem to establish the following propositions : j 


That the immigration to India of capitalists and men of education is considered by all pyigence Lords’ Come 


arties as calculated to confer advantages of great importance on that country as yell as on mittee, 1830, 
Ensledd. Prong Elphinstone, 157, 158, 


' 169, 173. 
_ Chaplin, 186. Robertson, 104, Rickards, 284. 
That, even in the most complete state of freedom, ‘common labourers could not go ta India’ Rev. Letter from Ben- 
at all, and artisans only in such riumbers as could find employment in teaching and super- 221 1 January 1830, 


: 3 : See also Min. of Evi- 
intending native workmen. dence, Committee of 


That the only persons from whom mischief could be feared, who would emigrate to that ie ae 
country, are adventurers from classes considerably above the common labourer, in edueation, meee : 
That the restrictions on émigration to India ‘are rendered necessary, if at all, only by the 
difficulty of restraming such adventurers while living in the interior. 
These propositions appear to be universafly, or almost universally assented to, but here 
opinion divides. : ; : 
’ The Governor-general considers that all the persons who would ‘go to India, if every. 
restriction were removed, might be restrained uy. the powers at present possessed over 
; : 3 ; : eee Europeans 


APPENDIX, 
@ 


Mr. Rickards’ Evi- 
dence, Lords Com- 
mittee. @ 


Sir T, Munro, 127, 
155. 
Buller, 291. 


Evi. Commit.1813. 
Cockburn,269-276, 


Opinion of Nizamut 
Adawlut, Jud. Let. 
from Bengal, 

1 June 1830, p- 7; 
Mr. Ross, sane Let- 
ter, p. 8. 
®eerbhoon, iii. 

p. 130. 


Jud. Letter from 
Bengal, 1June1830, 


par. 7. 


514 EVIDENCE ow EAST-INDIA AFFAIRS: 


Europeans. by the Company’s courts. Other opinions, among which is that of Mr. Bayley 
(member of the Council), consider that it woyld be necessary, to effect this purpose, to render 
Europeans subject to the local cofirts, and to the same laws as the natives of India; bus 


that this alteration of the law would render the freest immigration safe, and in a high degree 


beneficial. 


Several of the witnesses examined in 1813 considered that the power of removal from the 
interior, and from the country, which the Company now possesses, must be retained; and 
some are of opinion ghat this power would be insufficient, unless accompanied by limitations 
on immigration. 


The subjection of Europeans to the local courts, in the same manner and to the same 
extent as natives are subject to them, 5 certainly desirable in one point of view. It would 
remove an.appearance of partiafty in the law towards Europeans, of which the natives fre- 
quently complain. It may be doubted, however, whether either the complete subjection of 
Europeans to the local courts, or the gystem of licences, and the power of removal attached 


to it?are calculated to'afford any important check on the misconduct of European settlers. 


Crimes committed by Europeans with theiy own hands are rare; and it is only with 
relation to such of them as amount to felony, or at least to gross misdemeanor, that Euro- 
peans are exempt from. the jurisdiction of the Company’s criminal courts. To the civil 
courts they are already liable, in all cases arising between them and natives; and the only 
difference ‘between the two classes, in respect to civil suits, is, that actions between parties 
who are all Europeans are cognizable by the Supreme Courts exclusively, and that native 
plaintiffs have their choice of bringing any civil suit against an European, either in the. King’s 
Court at the Presidency, or in the local court of the Company. 


Of the distinction made in civil suits, the effects appear to be unalloyed mischief: their. 
abolition would perhaps enable redress to be obtained by legal means for some injunes 
which can now be decided only by force, and consequently tend to prevent affrays and dis- 
turbance ; but, at the same time, there seems to be no reason to believe that either such 
abolition, or the subjection of Europeans to *the local criminal courts, in all cases, would 

revent any considerable proportion of the disputes and affrays that would otherwise arise. 
he cases of felony or gross misdemeanor committed by Europeans, which alone would be 
affected by the alteration, are, as has been already stated, very rare. ; 


The power of withdrawing (at the will of the Government) the licence to reside, is of so 
invidious a nature, and its exercise subjects the Government of India to so much clamour 
and obloquy, that it can rarely be resorted to, even in cases which would fully justify its 
employment. For all useful purposes it is almost perfectly null. Its occasional enforce- 
ment crushes the individuals on whom it falls, without prodieiae any considerable effect in 
deterring others, ; 


To substitute, however, for this power, the mere subjection of the planters to the local 


' criminal and civil courts, would, if the former has any effect at all in the way of restraint 


on their conduct, be insufficient. One principal use of the power of removal is to provide 
for the cases of: misconduct, which, from being performed through the medium of third 
persons, or from some other cause, cannot be brought home to the planters.’ To provide for 
these cases it is cléarly insufficient to make the planters simply subject to the local courts for 
their own acts. 


» Commr. Moorshedabad, iii. «57- It is desirable, and even necessary, to make them subject to those courts, 
Mag. Beerbhoom, iii. 129. “as a preliminary step to enable the Government of India, which alone can 


Jud. Letter from Bengal, 1 June, 
1830, par. 8. See also opinion of 
_ Court of Nizamut Adawlut, same 


-have sufficient formation for the puryfose respecting details, to provide the 
_laws necessary to- subject them to proper control. 


Letter, par. ‘7. Commr. Bareilly, ii. 254. ° 


_ But beyond this, it will be requisite to erect into crimes many acts, or rather to consider 
as evidence of crime many circumstances, which it would.be unnecessary and highly improper 
to 


SELECT COMMITTEE or taz. HOUSE OF COMMONS. = 515 


to treat in this manner, in a country provided with more efficient means of restraining 
offenders. noe a 


APPENDIX,¢ 


eed 


Thus it would probably be highly demrable to adopt the plan suggested by Mag. Dacca, iii. 1780-279. 
several of the magistrates and other judicial authorities, of rendering the planters Commr.Furruckabad, ii. 222. 
‘liable, under many circumstances, for the misconduct, at least when frequently Mag. Nuddeab, iii. 136. 
repeated, of their servants in the-conduct of the affairs of the factories. Mag. Mymensing, v. 25. 


Such a law, accompanied by provisions for compelling the planters to register the names 
of their responsible servants in the local courts, and tg answer for thtir appearance when 
required for the purposes of justice, appears to be calculated to have great effect in prevent~- 
ing disturbances. : 


There is no reason why expulsion from the district, or eyen from the country, should not 
be inflicted as a punishment for misconduct of a gross kind, or frequently repeatéd, on the 
. part either of the planter himself or of his servants, if connected in the latter case with the 
affairs of the factory. 


And it can scarcely be doubted that such expulsion, or even a smaller punishment, 
inflicted by a court of justice after trial, and in pursuance of a distinct positive law, would 
be a aatich more efficient instrument than any arbitrary power, because it would be less 
obnoxious to complaint, ‘ang therefore capable of more frequent application. 


It has been objected, that to give the power of inflicting heavy punishments to courfs 


acting under a body having interests in some respects opposed to those of the private 
settlers, would be productive of great inconvenience. That the power would occasionall 
be misused, and its exercise constantly subject. to suspicion, and looked upon wit 
jealousy. 


But the substitution of such ‘a power for that of withdrawing the licence of settlers, and 
removing them from their property, without trial or reason assigned, cannot be objected to 
by the private settlers (except in respect of capital cases or others, in which the punishment 
is greater than that of removal from the interior or from the country), on any other ground 
than this, that the power of removal is so unpopular that it affords little or no check upon 
their conduct, or in other words, that in practice it is at least in a great measure’ inefficient, 
and that the power proposed to be substituted would be more effectual. 


To obviate the evils of subjecting private settlers to the Company’s judges in criminal 
cases of importance, it has been proposed by Mr. Ross, that Europeans should “ in the 
very few instances” in which their trial would be necessary, be tried bya jury composed of 
natives and Europeans in equal numbers. 


The difficulty to be overcome is to obtain, as jurymen, persons who have no strong interest 
either for or against the planters. : 


It is to be feared that Europeans for the jury could, in most districts, be chesen from 
indigo planters only, persons having a strong interest to protect any European charged 
with an offence committed in the conduct of*his business; while, on the other hand, little 
reliance could be placed on the integrity or firmness \of natives.in the exercise of such’ 
a function. ane 


With a view to avoid the variaus difficulties which surround the question, it has been 
proposed by some persons to maké an exception of capital and other cases of a heinous 
nature, leaving them, as at present, in the exclusive jurisdiction of the Supreme Cofrt, but 
extending the power of the Company’s judges to all others.  - 


Either with or without a jury, the substitution of punishment by law, for the present 
system of licences, might certainly bé madé with great advantage, both. to the settlers and 
to the peace of the country. The former would acquire security from arbitrary expulsion, 
while the efficient power of Government to restrain crime would be augmented. 

. Us ng The 


Opinion of Nizamu? 
Adawlut; Jud. 
Letter, 1 June 1830, 
par. 7 


See Jud. Letter, , 
1 June 1830. par. 7. 


™ 
APPENDIX, 


Settlement of 
Europeans in India, 


Chaplin’s Evidence 
before Lords’ Com- 
mittee, 1830. 
Harris’ Evidence 
before Lords’ Com- 
mittee, 1830. 


 , ~ ° 
516 APPENDIX to REPORT From SELECT COMMITTEE. 
The permission to-hold land would prevent many disturbances, by diminishing the number 
of individual transactions in which the Ruropean capitalist would find it necessary to 
engage in the prosecution of his undertakings, gnd consequently diminish the number of 
disputes. The subjection of the planters to heavy punishment, sometimes even to expulsion 
from the country, for the misconduct of themselves or their factory servants, would discou~ 
rage the practice of recurring to force to settle those disputes which would occur. And the 
‘combined influence of these two causes would probably be sufficient to admit of the restric- 
‘tions on emigration into, as well as those on residence in India being removed, without 
increasing the disturbances and evils which now arise out of the residence of Europeans in 
‘that country. On the contrary, it.is probable that, with these alterations, the residence of 
the greatest number of persons who «vould be induced to go to India, in case all restrictions 
were abolished, would be accompaniedewith fewer and less acts of violence than the residence 
of the instynificant number which now reside there is under the present system. 

The great increase which would take place in the quantity of European capital and skill 
attracted to India, and the facilities wifch would be afforded for their freer and more beneficial 
employment, would greatly os ea the advantages which India, England, and all con- 
sumers of tropical productions have derived from the employment of European capital and 
skill in India. 
. Employment would be provided for a greatly increased populatior? ; the morality and know- 
ledge of the people would be mproved; waste land be brought into cultivation; improve- 
ments introduced in agriculture and manufactures; rents augmented; the revenue of the 
country increased and rendered. more easy of collection ; a wide field would be opened for 
a more profitable employment of British capital than it finds at home; new products for 
exportation may confidently be expected, as well as great improvement in the quality, or 
diminution in the cost of those already produced. 

The demand for British manufactures would be increased, not merely by an augmented 
demand from India, but by the encouragement afforded to their consumption by the decreased 
cost or improved quality of materials employed in their production. 

‘But little ‘hope can reasonably be entertained of raising the condition of the Indian 
labourer to a point in the scale of comfortewhich would. enable the mass of the population to 

-become consumers of British manufactures, or of puttmg an end to the general practice of 
appealing to illegal acts for the decision of disputes, until the law is rendered’ capable of pro- 
tecting the ryot from oppression and spoliation, and of affording legal means of redress for all 
injuries. 

"To effect this object perfectly, many alterations are required in the law itself, in the system 
of procedure, in the judicial establishments of the country, and in the police which act under 
them. . To the execution of some of these alterations difficulties of great magnitude oppose 
themselves, some of which, such as those connected with the difference of language, are in 
fact insuperable. Many suggestions have been offered for improving the law itself, but the 
amendmefit of this branch is that which offers least difficulty ; it will also be of little efficiency 
until the judicial establishment is rendered more efficient. The most important alteration, 
that which would produce the greatest effect, is the increase of the numbers of judicatories. 
The expense of sending from England the number of judges required to render justice acces- 
‘sible to the mass of the population would be enormous, and so utterly beyond the means 
afforded by the revenue of the country, that none of those who have given opinions on the 


, subject have proposed it. 


See Rev. Letter, 

1 January 1830. 
Mill’s History. 
MS. Ret. iv. p. 247, 
Vp. 30. 


Among the principal advantages which have always been expected from the encouragement 
of private settlement in India are the facilities which it would afford for increasing the number 
- -judicatories, and the efficiency which the presence of-numerous Europeans would lend 

em. : : ‘ . ‘ 

Mr. Ross is of opinion that natives might be found to fill the office of moonsiff or judge 
of a very small district, of sufficient integrity and ability to-be entrusted with all causes arising 
‘ between the planters and the native cultivators. 2 Mr. Turnbull 


‘ 


GENERAL APPENDIX. . 517 


Mr. Turnbull and Mr. Prinsep consider that the persons who now fill the ottice of moon-: 
siff are not in general of a character to ‘be entrusted with such powers; but they are of 
opinion that those powers might be confded: to natives of the class now employed as 
sudder ameens. oe S patiynaw 1 
‘ To amend the police, many of the planters propose that a European should be appointed 
to superintend several stations, and to stay a month or two in ‘the year at each of those 
entrusted to his care. amas 

A plan has been suggested by an Indian periodical, which seems worfhy of serious consi- 
deration, namely, to lay a tax, on the planters of the districts in which their operations give 
rise to numerous disturbances, for the purpose -of maintaining such an additional number of 
ie boa judges or magistrates as night be found netessary to ensure the peace of those 
' districts, =~ : : 

The expense would fall on those pergons whose. operations render it necessary, and the 
splanters would avoid the burthen of maintaining the fighting men whom they now employ, 
the expense of the law-suits ‘in which their affrays inYolve them, and also the ‘heavy losses 
which they frequently suffer, notwithstanding the expensive establishments which they main- 
tain to protect their property. ° 

The appointment of additional judges might be extended from time to time to the various 
districts as they became Uigturbed, if the mnflux of Europeans should be found to produce 
that effect. ; ML ae ° 

Supposing the judicial establishments to be improved in any considerable degree, most of 
the objections to ‘the immigration of Europeans into India fall to the ground. 

Lord Cornwallis, who was strongly opposed to relaxation in the present state of the insti- 
tutions of India, considered that if judicial establishments were umproved, free settlement 
would be beneficial. , . 

Were the judicatories rendered sufficiently numerous to protect the ryot in the secure 
enjoyment of the produce of his industry, it is probable that the population of India would 
rise in the scale of wealth, civilization and happiness with extreme rapidity. The people 
appear to be industrious, economical and intelligent, and to be kept down only by the absence 
of all security for the produce of their industry, and the poverty in which they are plunged 
by the oppressive conduct of the rich around them. 

Their situation is very different from that of the red Indians of such countries as Mexico, 
or of the population of many other nations. The Hindoo is kept down by a force which, 
being removed, would leave him with industry and enterprise capable of making rapid 
advances. The red Indian requires not merely the removal of a weight, but the application 
of exciting causes. Industrious and enterprising habits must be inculcated by a tedious and 
slow process before any considerable progress can reasonably be expected from a people in 


such a situation. 


APPENDIX, 


’ 


— 


iv. 286, 
iv. 393. 


See Mr. Leycester’s 
Plan, vol. iv. 


Evidence before the 
Committee of the 
whole House, 1813, 


P. 47s 


518 (78. ay ACCOUNT of the Quantity of Inp1c0 Imported into Great Britain and Ireland, 
i ; specifying the Countries from which Imported, 


QUANTITIES IMPORTED INTO GREAT BRITAIN. 


Foreign 


From the Foreign et : j; 
British Possessions Poxsessfong British United States alae as 
in the East Indies, fin the West Indies, Foreign 7 : 
: . East Indies : of Florida, Brazil. 
vEARs. Ic eas Se and the including | West Indies. Ameri ° 
« ‘| Cape of Good Hope} Philippine Abad 
and St. Helena. Biands. Banderas: Oe aie pH 

1780 te 

1781, - lbs. lbs. lbs, | lbs. los. ibs. 

aie - {>The Records for these Years wer€ destroyed by fire. 

1783 - e 

1784 : : 
1785 = 154,291 J -  - 302,011" 1,800 | 682,441 11,000} - + | -— = 
1786 - 253,345 [=  - 93857] - - | 765,241) 48,000; - - | ~~ 
1787 - 363,046 Jf - 62,253 458 | 940,857 1,070{ = - f= « 
1788 “ ‘622,691 - - 39,025 565 | 1,060,164 60,600 |. 7 - S 
1789 = 371,469 | - - 28,848 2,749 | 828,194 8,000] « af oe . 
1790 - 531,619 - - 46,687 6,343 | 626,042 | %78,800] - a5 ee 2 
1791 ++ |* 465,198 | - a 38,8071 . 263] 589,132 8,883 | - - | - - 
ka 581,827 f = - 57,094 4,621 | 659,725} 48,469) - -f|-~ - 
1793s 881,854 | -  - 350132 17,415 | 625,945 42,964] - - | « - 
17940 > 1,364,620 | - - 119,059 | 47;809 | 720477} - 7 | « -|-  - 
1795 - 2,862,684 | -" - 115,569 4,735 | 574429 24,479 | - -|- - 
1796 3,898,157 J - + 36,572 7,655 | 402,382 38299 | - -}- = 
1797,—i 157545233 - - 69,072 226 | 276,507 6,344 | - - - - 
1798 * 3,862,1 88 3 he 63,753 8,778 51,81 L Fe . = * 2 i 
1799 - 2,634,070, ] - - 92,978 122,080 97,000 535 4° = - = 
1800 - 2,674,317 | - = | 339.9451 78,352 | 437,809 4273, = = | = « 
1301s 2,112,045 - - 580,029 | 025,000 | 166,136] - - - - - - 
1802 - 2,267,411 - -- 207,288 9,547 172,528 12,340 | - - - - 
1803 - 2,529,508 J - = 39:777 15,013 2,861 574 - = |e = 
1804, - 2,641,019 - - 55.576 15,780 10,215 | - - - - - - 
1805 - 4,608,871 - - 255132 28,229 25,513 | - - = - - 
1806 2,612,181 - - 69,599 82,697 94,594} - - - - - 
1807 - 52323,147 . - 335,633 | 159,584 | 139,819} - : . 48,757 
1808 - 5,216,040 - - 163,278 46,079 25,031 - - 42,036 30,433 
1809 ~ 2,108,086 - - 513,163 18,115 3,018] - - 74,167 5,019 
1810 - 5,077,906 - 164,529 1,207 972,738 | - - 18,104 12,437 
1812 - 4,382,642 - - 325,411 14,794 26,672 | - - 20,511 433337 
1812 - 44479047 - - 165,163 | - - 6,100 {| = - 1,599 21,628 
1813 = | The Records for this Year were destroyed by fire. 

1814 e 6,752,540 - - 219,111 10,291. 81] - - - - 43,712 
18150 5543222 fs . - 30,494} 36,846) - - | - = 253 2,959 
1816. 9,238,114 |. - ~ 35,115 | - - 2,128 | - - - -° . 188 
1817 = { = 4,964,843 J - - 10,428 2,247 65591 2 =} = = fe - 
1818 5:450,645 - + 27,243 | 30,422" 8,514] - = 176 418 
1819 = { | 3,688,694 f.- = - 54,250 | 43,110 6,284 |" - 948 _ 241518 
1820 4,922,750 | - - | 121,568 30,330 04,727 | = -|[- - 
18@100— 3,935,833 '[ - - 78,305 5,799 2,770 | = - | - - we 
1822 0—O- 2,484,356 J - «= 254,989 64,253. 33919 Se ee L "13,388 
1823s - 6.553.354 J.- | - 530,552 392445 8,044 | « - 50 62,078 
1824—Cie 4,584,969 | - — - 307,777 | - 61,105 37,903'| - - 1,097 12,211 
1825 - 6,159,785 1,650, | * 281,026 29,025 100,600 | - - 11,130 132,199 
1896: = | 7,652,946 26,709 283,571 |. 9,271 7089} - = 5:490 | 63,548 
1827" - 5:384,998 21,530 | 32009: 127,417 | = 8,666 | - - 2,063 | 129,517 
2828 - 9,660,152 24,669 77,80 - 26,107 | - on a 99,311 
1829. - 5,965,128 17,263 pais 70,502 66,318 | - “ 12,877 | 336,687 
18300—( 7,920,172 6,685 87,285 5,156 3972] - -« f = = 


238,575 


6 


in each Year, from 1780 to the latest period up to which the Account ean be made; 
and the Quantities received from each, —- 


“QUANTITIES IMPORTED INTO GREAT BRITAIN. 


Germany. 


lbs. 


3:039 
3,624 
15,870 
1.793 
7,962 
15,000 
2,797 
20,316 
8,153 
17,576 
6,285 


33491 - 


9,192 
21,034 
8,168 
23,597 
12,470 
4,597 
5,964 
181 
1,025 
9,668 
2,853 
42,259 
74,980 
15,973 


5 
2,282 
1,179 

15,834 
14,171 


The 
Netherlands. 


lbs. 


12,878 
11,096 
8,340 
6,700 . 
244,015 
. 16,678 
10,224 
15,934 
17,325 
100,406 
37.454 


1,319 
48 


44,707 


France. 


lbs. 


40,601 
11,452 
17,231 
18,764 
60,748 


, 51,322 4 
105,541 


15,606 
19,013 


——- 


Portugal, 
Madeira and 


the Azores, 


roeaie 


re ee 


Spain 
and the 
Canaries. 


393,100 
666,979 
300,643 
204,461 
. 319,066 
355,859 
287,389. 
385,339 
187,936 
312,647 
534,649 
107,049 
18,270 
1,225 


6,023 

* 4,000 
207,848 
399,076 
168,842 
21,962 
4334 
269 


7,991 
428,804 
111,968 
101,732 


* 29,317 
733 


82,189 
85,265 
3 

4597 
23,661 
80,401 
17,760 

. 10,253 
- 8,903 


10,625 


yee ener ee et pue 


Gibraltar. 


Other 
Countries, 
and 
Prize Indigo, 


295,922 
90,591 
234,286 
101,492 
3406 


54,677 
2,944 
306 

3 
19,099 

. 32 


3 
2,496 
$7,458 
330 
3,091 
21,650 
6,889 
6,271 
5,231 
1,936 
1,564 


59 


TOTAL. 


1,693,509 
1,978,290 
1,877,830 
2,096,611 
1,966,087 
1,838,707 
1,606,787 
1,856,365 
1,957,583 
2,891,292 ~ 
4,287,625 


' 4,578,035 


2,290,078 
4,054,248 
3,041,836 
32750734. 
2,951,295 
2,933,878 
39154935 


- 3,161,129 


5:353)614 
2,931,575 
6,041,841 
51792494 
2,853,131 
6,126,674. 
5,112,509 
4,815,964 


7431,945 
§,523,105 
7,286,502 
59135,593 
5,685,025 
3,818,732 ° 
5,085,886 
4,063,109 
2,923,514. 
7,221,704 
5,080,817 
6,793,631 


8,035,751 


6,067,747 
9,913,010 
6,748,281 
8,216,440 
(continued) 


520 


The preceding Account—continued. 


QUANTITIES IMPORTED INTO IRELAND FROM PLACES OTHER THAN THE EAST INDIES. 


Foe ate ae Prot The Spain : : Guern- 
WestIndies, North States a ase Nether- | Prancey Portugal. and Gitte Italy. | sey and | TOTAL. 
. | includin erican of many. > tar. : 
YEARS ; Fisnduree ape ast Atmericas | = lands. : Canaries. ; Jersey. 
lbs. lbs. Lbs. lbs. lbs. lbs. lbs. lbs. 1Bs lbs. lbs lbs. 
1780 -| 8,374] - e|- oT, = @:'| = -{-° =] 21,681] - - - 20,055 
1781 - 1,792 | - -{ 3,188 |. - 720 237 | - . 2,000 - = : 13,937 
1782 766 |. - - | $528 - 3316 | 2,806 | 1,365 | - -[ = - - 11,781 
1783 -~ 200 | - =| 5,983 - g6o | 05,475 | - -| 2,896) - - - 15,514. 
1784 -| ."456)-- -{ 2016 | - {=  ,-) 129955 |-  -| 6,753] - - - | 21,580 
1785 -}=  “}- =f. 8026 | - [= =| 12,055. 84 { 33,639] = - - | 32,804 
1786 - | - ele - | 6,760 - 660:} 47,818 160 2,596 - © te 17,994 
1787 - 621 | - - | 10,673 | - |-  --7] 9544 350 1,760 | - S - | 18,948 
1788 - 170 /~- © -| 8,194 | - 114 | 6,376 | 440 | 5,995} - - - | 21,289 
1789 - 160; 336 | 18,947 | - [-  ~-| 11,347 | 4,704 | 28,544] + - - | 64,038 
17990 -J=, -=[- - | 5,143 | 2,722 | - -| 1,624 | *300 | 25,880] - = 7 35,669 
1791 - 530| 178 | 3,486} - |[- -| 3,420 868 | 30,427} - >] - - | 36,909 
1792 -{ 12,290 | - - | 2,380 - f- - §26 150 | 14,438) ¢ 450 | - 19,234 
1793 =| 4:146 Ig - | 3,368 - |e -|- - 868 18,704 - - “ 24,086 
1994. ¢- 490 - | 5,569 - - ee |p - | 6,776 31,607 - 896 1,400 46,738 
e957 fe -{- - | 19,340 - - a te - 32 32,123 - © - 51,495 
"1796 =| 15761- =| 3033] = Je -{- -| 122 | 24,136] - : - | 29,767 
797 -{- 7}- -{ 3446 f = |-  -7- =| 464 [ 1,000) - : . 4,910 
1798 -| §,080 | - ~[- “fo. |- - 224 { 1,312 | - -| - - - 6,616 
17999 {+ <-[- *f 2400} = |=  -fe =f ete eye 7 - 2,400 
1800 =| 4,010 | - -f 2,676 - |- -|- -|- -~|- -| - - - 6,686 
1802 = 2,240 | = o's «“j} - . -| 1,792 | + ~|- 3 . a, “ 4,032 
1802 -| 4,232 | « “| 4544 ]> = [e -|- -{.- ~| 6,202 / = s ~ | 11,978 
1803 -d 3,626 | « - goof = f- -«]- ~|- - | 13,536 | = -} - « 17,462 
1804 - 800 | - ate - < “ Siva efi. - | 15,906 - - - 16,706 
1805 - a56 | - - 600 - - =|. e|- ~ | 10,000 “ - - 10,856 
1806 -| 23,816/- -| 329] - |= -|- -| 2902 | 5,760) ~ - | 32,807 
1807 - 840 | - ‘< 200 - |e e js a}- - - - 1,042 
P808 - 2,885 | - oj}. “ : - ‘wl - 142 | - -| 78 - 83 3,188 
1809 =| 13,267 | - - 380 a fe yet - 400 | - - - - - 14,047 
18:10 - 329 | - -| 13775 - - ef-s -]- -j* - - = - 2,104 
1811 ~ | 2,409 | « -| 5729 | ~ fe -|- -|- -|- -| os . 650 | 8,488 
1812 - 7,539 | « + 644 - - ~[ = «fe - 300 - - 806 5289 
Es ie ae LY Dec Cae Ce rem (ee A | Pe I a Ca = [1,500 | 5,214 
1814. -|- ‘oJ. ~be “ « = owle wfe ee) es - - - Se 
115 «{* «fe «f= ef - fe efe- «fe -te of = - - i 
1816 « 1,173 | - - 212 - - «| - -ls -}| $875 - 7 - ,760 
1817) 4 | - e|- «fe ~{o- [- «|. -|- -[- -~{ - {1,097 ] = 9097 
wi8 -jenr fe - 625 - - -j- -|- - 392 - - - 3017 
wig «f+ “|- ‘we fee 2 - “ ete -j[e af oo - - — 
i820 -| 3408)- -|- -[> + f- ete fe ctr or] - . 3,406 
1821 -j -|[- awe - - < ms ee aia «|= - «= - 7 Fe mt 
1822 -{[- “|- ete » e -- a a a | o . Fs i 7 — 
1823 -| 7446 $- ~-[e wf = fe ete ete tte ott - : 7,446 
1824 ” 195 4° a {e - - - e]a -]- « |e - - - ~ 155 
1825 - j =“|[- ate jak 8 - es, nce -f- sie = - - - sees 
1826 -|- -{- «fe oy mers é eile wfe o ete -} . - 7 ph 
1824 -~ - ~[- - - « ~ e - oy a or] . - « =o. «- - oy 
1828 -|- =) - of s - - afe ef. oh _. - - - ~~ 
1829 - = s = ate a ~ ‘as ae - = eto - . - ~ poy 
18390: «| - ~ ef- - - - oie «fe «]- - ° - - eu 


' The 


Inspector-general’s Office, Custom-house, London, 
28 December 1831. 


WELLIAM IRVING, 


[ 521 ] 
‘al 


INDEX 


_TO THE 
e 


REPORT AND GENERAL APPENDIX. 


NV. B.~-The wosd Rep. refers to Report, the Figures following to the page thereof; Appz. p. refers 
to the Appendix, and the Figures following to the page in the Appendix. © « 


A. 
ABKARREE. See Sayer. 


Account. East-Indid Company are required, within fourteen days ates the 1st of May, to 
lay before the Houses of Parliament, accounts, Territorial and Commercial, made P, 
according to the latest advices which ghall have been received, Rep. p. 39. 


Adam, John. Minute of John Adam, Esq., Governor-general of India, dated 12 June 1823, 
Appr. p- 329. 

Addiscombe. By the charter 1813, rules and seealetions for the government of Addiscombe 
are subject to revision and approval by the Board of Control, Rep. p- 16. 


Administration of Justice. See Justice, Administration of. 


Adultery. Specimens of Hindoo laws, showing the punishment awarded to different castes 
’ for adultery, Appz. p. 53- 


Advances. Whole of the advances made in India for the purchase. of investment for 
Europe, from 1814~15 to 1826~2%, inclusive, Rep. p. 63. 


hpaa. Letter from the Calcutta Civil Finance Committee to the Vice-president in 
Council at Bengal, dated 13 December 1830, on individual agency for collective boards, 
Appz. p. 316. 

‘Minute of W. Blunt, Esq., Member of Council at Bengal, on individual agency for 
collective boards, Appr. p- 325-—+-+Minute of Sir T. Metcalfe, Member of Council at 
Bengal, on individual agency for collective boards, Appx. p. 327 Minute of Lord 

: W. Bentinck, Governor-Seneral of India, on individual agency for collective boards, 


Appz. p. 327. 
Agents. See Political Agents. 


Agriculture. Miserableeystem of agriculture in India, Appz. p.86. 
3X .  Ahmuly, 


524 AHM AUB _ [Report on 


‘ee UD i se EE APE I CDE AE PSE A AOE 


F 

Ahmuty, Mr. Extract from his letter to the registrgr of the Nizamut Adawlat, 1823, on 
the outrages committed by indigo plantets against the natives in pursuing their supposed 
rights, Appz. p. 393- : ; ; 

Akber. Institutes of Akber, compiled by his intelligent minister; one volume of which is 
employed upon the religion and science of the Hindoos, Appx. p. 44. 


Alexander the Great. Principles upon which he formed his policy after his conquests in 
India, Appx. p.114. ; ; 


Alexander & Co. Representations of this firm to the Government, that under present laws, 
sufficient protection was not afforded to planters of indigo, Appz. p. 456. 


Ali Murdhum. See Canals. 
Aliverdi Khag. Wars consequent on his usurpations, Appz. p. 17. 


America. Quantity of indigo imported into Great Britain from the United States, 1780- 
1830, Appz. p. 518. 
_ +See also Political state of India. 
Appa Sahjb. See Nagpore. 
Arcot. Wretched condition of the people, Appz. p. 6. 


Army: 
1. King’s. 
2. Native. 
1. King’s: 

Expenses of King’s regiments serving in India, which are defrayed in this country, are 
repaid to His Majesty’s Government by the East-India Company, Rep. p. 48 ——-Number 
of King’s trsops in India limited to 20,000, Rep. p? 48. ‘ 

2. Native: 4 

In addition to the military retrenchments ordered by the Finance Committee, 1828, 
Court of Directors issued orders for a specific reduction of the army, Rep. p. 46——--Com- 
plicated duties of the soldiery in India, Appx. p. 130. 

See also Commissariats. Military. 


Arsenal. Expenses of the arsenal at Fort William on an average of the last ten years, 
Appz. p.310. 


Artillery. Improvements introduced by the Marquis of Hastings in the transport of. 
mortars, &c. forethe purposes of sieges, Appz. p. 135, 136. 


Asiatics, Are not well qualified to make a beneficial use of delegated or mixed power, 
Appr. p. 6——Inquiry into the measures which might be adopted by Great Britain for 
the improvement of the condition of her Asiatic subjects ; and answers to objections, 
App. p. 82. : 

Astrology. Practised to a great extent among the Hindoos, App. p. 73-—-Magistrates 
are bound to have skilfut astrologers about them, Appz. p. 74 o affair of importance 
is at this day undertaken without consylting a soothsayer, Appz. p- 74- 


Attornies. Circumstances under which the Court of Directors have granted or refused 
licenses to attornies or attornies’ clerks to reside in India, Appz. p. 347+ 


Auber, Peter. Letter from Peter Auber, Esq. to T. Hyde Villiers, Esq., transmitting 
- statement of number of licenses to proceed to .and reside in India granted since 1814, 
Appz. p.365- a : ! ) 


E. India Affairs, 1832.] AUX © BE n 523 


mae easieeeae . : ee pane : ini 


Ausziliary Courts. Established in plage of zillah courts, which had been abolished ; these 
courts are only half the expense of zillah courts, Apps. p- 260. 


Ava. See Extraordinary Receipis. 


Azores. Quantity of indigo imported into Great Britain from Por tugal, padetee, and the 
Azores, 1780-1830, Appz. p. 518. 


B, 
Bagdad. Expenses of the native agent to the East India Company at Bagdad, Appx. 
p- 238: 
Bajee Row. See Peishwa. 
Baldeus. See Ceylon. 


Banians. Banigns and all the-trading part of the community are capable of long seden- 
tary applicationg Appr. p. 42. 


Bank. Statement of the amount of revenue derived from*the establishment of the Madras 
Government bank, 1828-29, Rep. 40. M 


Bankruptcy. Extract letter from the Court of Directors to the Governor-general in 
Council at Bengal, (Financial department) dated 2 April 1828, on the subject of: the 
failure of a commercial house; sold by a judgment-bond to another firm; effects 
upon the natives in the interior whose produce was aelzed; having been sold to the 
failing house, 4ppz. p. 393. 


Barker, Colonel Sir Robert. Neither promises nor oaths have been able to bind thees 
Hindoos to their engagements, Appz. ‘p. 36. 


Baroda. Recommendation of Sir John Malcolm for the abolition of the office of Baroda 
resident, Appz. p. 234 Proposal for carrying its reduction into effect, and consolidat- 
ing the office with one to be named the Political Commissioner at Guzerat, Appz. p. 235. 


Barristers. Circumstances under which the Court of Directors have granted or refused 
licenses: to barristers desiring to settle i in India, Appz. p. 347- 


Bayley, Mr. Memorandum by Mr. Chief Secretary Bayley, dated 1 January 1821, on 
the subject of the civil seraaaie employed by the,East-India Company, Appx. Pp. 339- 


Baz, J. Minute of John Bax, Esq. on: the Judicial and Revenue system at Bombay, and 
civil allowances at this Presidency; dated 16 June 1829, Appx. p. 1 70. 


Becher, Mr. Was the first person who had the integrity and resolution to call the attention 
of Government to the falling-off of the revenue and the state of the country, 1769, Appz. 
p.- 10——~-Value of his suggestions during the famine, 1769, Appz, p. 11. 


Behar, War with Cossim Ali, and consequent ecauis ement of this provinge by the British, 
Appt, p.7 
Benares. Annexation of this district to the British provinces, Appr. p. 4 


the full benefits of the improvements made in Bengal, Appz. p. 22. 
See also Navy. 


Has received 


Bengal Ceded and Conquered Provincés. Revenue of the Ceded and Conquered Pro-~ 
vinces of Bengal, Rep. Ps 83 -—— Population of these Upper or Western Provinces by 
_gkXe : returns 


' 


_5F4 BEN t BOA [Report on 
Bengal—continued. 
returns of 1826, Rep. p.83-——Settlement is now in progress in these provinces, depend- 
ing upon a very detailed inquiry into the state of the ryots, and the various dealings and 

‘rights in the villages, Rep. p.84. 
+ War with Cossim Ali, and acquirement of the Dewannee of Bengal, Apps. P7- 
See also Local Government. Revenue. 


Bengal Civil Service. See Civil Establishments. 


Bengal. First seat.of the .British Empire in the East, Appz. p. 3——-Right of the British 
to their territories in that country, Appz. p. 4 Outline of the effects of our power 
upon the population of Bengal, Appr.ep. 22*——Low quantity of produce extracted by 
this country annually from Bengal, Appz. p. 23 Number of circles of revenue and 
police commissioners, district judges, magistrates, and collectors, joint magistrates and 
sub-collectays, deputies, native judges, confmissioners of revenue’ and police, sudder- 
judges and commissioners in Bengal Western Provinces, Appz. p. 222 Average value 
of the trade between Calcutta and the Persian Gulf, Appz. p. 296. : 


Bentinck, Lord W. Minute of the Governor-general of Bengal on individual agency for: 
collective board, Appr. p. 327. 


Bernier. His opinion of the degfaded state of the Hindoo character, 1670, Appz. p. 33. 


Betel. No monopoly of betel ; salé’ and cultivation both free; advantage of this to the 
inhabitants of Malabar, who are much oppressed by the tobacco monopoly, Rep. p. 95. 


Bhopaul. Reward to the Nawaub of Bhopaul for the liberality with which he had sold all 
his jewels to maintain the British troops, Appz. p. 141. 
See also Mahratta. 


Birman Empire. Concurrence of the sovereign withe the Mahrattas in their intention to 
drive the British from India, Appz. p. 138 Nessage from that sovereign demanding 
the cession of provinces, Appr. p. 138 Answer of the Governor-general, Appx. 

4 


'p. 139. 
Bishop of Calcutta. Warrant for nominating must be countersigned by the President of 
‘the Board of Control, Rep. p. 17. 


Blunt, Mr. Minute of W. Blunt, Esq. on individual agency for collective boards. Appz. 
Pp- 325- ; 

Boards. General administration of public affairs is carried on by boards, Rep. p. 21—— 
At Calcutta there are Boards of Reverfue, Salt and Opium, and Trade, Military, Marine 
and Medical ;‘at Madras, Medical, Marine and Revenue, Rep. p. 21——-General tenor 
of evidence proves they are practically inefficient, Rep. p. 21, 

Letter from the Calcutta Civil Finance Committee to the Vice-president. in Council 

at Bengal, dated 13th December 1830, on individual agency for collective boards, 

‘ Appz. p. 316-——;Minute of, William Blunt, Esq. on individual agency for collective 

boards, Appx. p. 325——~Minute of Sir C. T. Metcalf, Member of Council at Bengal, 

on individual agency for*collective boards, Appa. p.327——--Minute of Lord W. -Ren- 

tinck, Governor-general of India, on individual agency for collective boards, Appz. 
‘Pp. 327- , , 

Board of Control.. Pawer of the Court of, Directors materially limited by. the Board of 
Control, Rep. p. 12—-—Despatches for India prepared by Directors are. supervised by the 
‘Board, Rep. p. 12——-In case of collision between the Court and Board, an appeal lies to. 

‘ the King in Council, Rep. p. 12—-—Despatches which they have originated ; alterations 
made in despatches of the Court of Directors, Rep. p. 12,13--—-Their power with the Secret 
; . Committee, 


E. India Affairs, 1832.] -BOA 7. 525° 
SERA enon eaten rere mnes! Row tt aera oan ns iersevoee PO + 
Board of Control—continued. on ny : : : 
Committee, and influence in cgses of war, pedce, and negociations with [ndian princes, 
Rep. p.14 Constitution of the Board, Rep. p.15—-—Whole responsibility rests with the 
-. President, Rep. p.16——Acts by which appointed and regulated, Rep. p. 16———Power of 

Commissioners, Rep.'17, 18 Collisions have taken plaee between the Board and 
Court of Direetors; inconveniences of these differences of opinions; suggestions for. 
a remedy, Rep. p. 1g——-Suggestion that one or two commissioners should be persons 
who have served in India, Rep. p.20~—-Patronage exercised by the Board and the Pre- 
sident, Rep. p.27.* : ; 

Board of Customs. Present and proposed establishment of the Board of Customs at 
Bengal, Appz. p. 324. - i ee 

Board Rates of Exchange. Fates of exchange at the commencement of the Company’s 
present term, Rep. p.62———Grounds on which the East-India Company have objected.to 
these rates, Rep. p.62--—-Advantage derived from the Territory from the useof Board’s' 
rates to 1828-29, according to the computation of the Company’s Accountant-general, , 
Rep. p. 62. : z 

Board of Revenu@. Present and proposed establishment of the. Board of Revenue at 
Bengal and Madras, Appz. p. 324. : 


Boat-Master. Recommendation for the abolition of ahis office, which might be done 
without injury to the public service, Appr. p. 304. 


ombay. Number of commissioners of revenue and circuit, judges, magistrates, and col- 

' lectors and sub-collectors, Appr. p. 226-———-Expenses of the court of requests at Bombay, . 
Appz. p. 240——Petty sessions a court peculiar to Bombay ; recommendation for the 
abolition of the office of assessor, Appx. p. 242 Number of native commissioners 
employed under the Bombay government; amount of their emoluments; average allow- 
ance of each individual, Appz. p. 248y3——Average annual value of exports and .imports 
to and from Bombay and the Persian Gulf, 1821-22 to 1827-28, Appr. p. 296. ~ 


Seé also Judicial Officers. Local Government. 


Brahmins. Mr. Bernier’s opinion of their conduct, Appr, p- 33———~ Brahmins are’ 
generally the worst of all the Gentoos, Scrafton, Mr., Appr. p. 33—-—Gentoos generally 
crafty, superstitious and wicked ; the Brahmins pre-eminently so, Appz. p. 34—“+Who 
have cultivated learning, have certainly evinced themselves an acute, sabile, and pene- 
trating order of men, Appr. p. 42 Specimens of laws which establish distinctions in 
favour of the Brahmins and the other superior castes, Appz. p. 50. —--Profess a science 
called Kurrembeypak, by whicb pan ha dicnnedvod .arhar waa Anna her man in « farmas ! 
state, Appx. p. 78. 

See also Castes. Endowments 

Breton, Dr. See Medical Schools. ; 

‘Brazil. Quantity of indigo imported into Great Britain frew Brazil, 1780-1830, Appr. 
p.518. 

Bridges. Numerous bridges built during the administration of the Marquis of Hastings 
in India, Appz. p. 149. 

Buckinghamshire, Earl of. His opinions .on the probability of an extended permission to , 
Europeans to reside in India, Appz. p. 361, 362. 

Buildings and Fortifications. Charge for buildings and fortifications, 1814~15, and several 

, subsequent years, Rep. p. 43. Sy a 

See also Military Buildings. 


ON 
— ne BUL CAS [Report on 
Reranch mtn Lane SSE 


Bullovieh. Is a tax upon fees in kind which the yillage artizans receive from the culti- 
-vators, Rep. p. 95. 
Burmese Cessions.’ Statement of the amount of revenue derived in India from this source 


in the year 1828-29, Rep. p. 40. 


Bussorah. Expenses which might be saved by following’ the suggestions of the Finance 
Committee relative to the gesidency at that place, Appz. p. 239. 


Buying and Selling. Specimens of Hindoo law as to the settlement of payments for taxes 
on buying and selling, Appz. p. &4.- a 


C. 

Calcutta College. See College at Calcutta. 

Calcutta. Improvements made in the city during the administration of the Marquis of 
Hastings ; squares formed; tanks built ; new streets, &c. Appr. p. 150-——Quay called 
the Strand; advantages thereof for the purposes of transport of megchandize, Appz. 
p. 150-*-——Calcutta Civil Finance Committee; their appointment, with certain of their 
reports ; and minutes, &c. of Government thereon, Appz. p. 156——- Circular letter from 
the Government of Bengal to the Governments of Madras and Bombay, 10 Oct. 1828, 
Appx. p. 157. 

See also Bengal. College at Calcutta.- 

Canals. Attention given to these means of internal communication during the administra-. 
tion of the Marquis of Hastings, Appz. p. 149 Restoration of the canal of Ali 
Murdhun, Appz. p. 149——Proposal to form a canal from the Hoogly to Calcutta, for 

oan purpose of enabling merchandize to’ be transported with greater security, Appa. 

a pe 50.. : , e i 

Canaries. ‘Quantity of indigo imported into Great Britain from Spain and the Canaries, 
1780-1830, Appz. p. §18. 5 

Canning, Right Hon. George. Letter.from the Right Hon. George Canning to the Chair- 
man and Deputy Chairman of the East-India Company respecting permissions to proceed 


to India, Appz. p, 363. 


Capital Stock. Amount of capital of the East-India Company, 1708, 1786, 1789, 1794, 


_ Rep. p. 34———Manner in which their capital was raised, Rep. p. 34. ; 
Captain-general. This power has on one occasion been superadded to that of Governor- 
general; is an appointment from the king, Rep. p. 21. ' 


Cardamums. 1s a production of the, mountains of Malabar, Canara, and Coorg, Rep. 
p- 94———Process of cultivation, Rep. p. 94 Land on. which they are produced pays no 
assessment, Rep. p. 94 Collection of duties farmed by the government, Rep. p.94 
——In Canara a disposition*has been shown to abandon the cultivation, Rep. p. 94. 


Carnatic. Consequences of the first interference of the British, Appr. p. 3, 4-——War 
against Hyder-Ali and the French, Appz. p. 20. 


Cashmere. See Holy Places. 


Castes. Belief of the Hindoos as to the origin of. the*four great classes of Brahmins, 
Kheterces, Vyse, and Sooders, Appx. p: 47-——Baneful effects of these distinctions in 
discouraging all liberal exertions, Appx. p. 47———The whole fabric is the work ofa 
crafty and imperious priesthood, Appx. p. 48——~Specimens of laws which establish dis- 
tinctions in favour of the Brahmins, and the other superior castes, Appr. p. 50. : 


E. India Affairs, 1832] © CAT . Cv 527 
fe 
Cattle. Great loss oceasioned to indigo planters by the eruption of herds of cattle which 
frequently devestate large tracts, Appr. p. 484 Pounding cattle on a charge of stray- 
ing among the indigo appeafs to be a method very frequently had recourse to, Appz, «| 
p- 491. _ a ute ; 
Ceded and Conquered Provinces. Many large tracts of lands are lying waste in conse- 
quence of the feuds of different claimants, Appz. p. 483. 4 ¢ 
See also Bengal. ; . 


Ceremonies. Worship and ceremonies practised by the Hindoos, have the effect of vitiat- 


ing as well as stupifying their minds, Som. n. 7>———Description of the ceremony of 
Poojah, Appz. p. 72. 


Certipore. Treachery shown éo the nobles of by Gainprejas, from whom they had solicited 
assistance, Appz. p. 38. ; 


F ° 
Ceylon. Authority of Baldeus as to the number of Christians in Ceylon, 1633; number 
of children in the schools at that period, Appr. p. 93. 


Chaplains. See, Church Establishments. 


Charter. Charter” granted by King William, 1698, foundation of the privileges noav enjoyed 
by the East-India Company, Rep. p.34——Acts of Parliament which have continued the 
Charter under certain limitations, » Pe 34. “ : 


Christianity. Importance of the introduction of the English language into India, as 
a medium of conveying the knowledge of our religion, Appz. p. 86, g8-119——— Reasons 
for the practicability of the introduction of Christianity among the Hindoos,Appz. p. 88. 
———Opposition that may be expected from the Brahmins, Appz. p. 89 ——Means by which 
Christianity might be forwarded in India, in spite of the strongest opposition which could 
be offered, Appx. p. geo——State of. Christianity among those denominated Portuguese, 
in India, Appx. p. g2——Opinion of Dr. Robertson as to the number of Christians jn 
India, Appx. p. 95 Want of missionaries, Appr. p. 95——Christianity formerly 
more spread, in India than at present, Appr. p.g6———Manne¥ in which Christianity 
should be introduced into India, and its necessary results, Appz. f. 98, 99, 104-120. 

See Ceylon. Dutch. Roman Catholics. Swartz,Mr. Xavier. 


Christian Knowledge. Extract from the Transactions of the Society for promoting Chris- 
tian Knowledge, 1795, Appr. p. 124. , 


Christians. See Religion. Syrian Christians. 


Church Establishment. Number of chaplains at pfesent: in service, not sufficient for the 
wants of the people, Rep. p. 27 Want of additional bishops, Rep. p. 27. 


Circuit and Appeal. Abolition of the Court of Circuit and Appeal at Guzerat ; and saving’ 
of expense by the arrangement, Appz. p. 244. . 

Civil Affairs, Specimens of Hindoo law as to their awards ,in'cases connected therewith, 
Appr. p. 54 , 

Civil Allowances. See Bax, J. 


Civil Buildings. Expenses 6f civil, territorial, and commercial buildings on an average. 
for the last ten years, Appz. p. 310. 


o- 


Civil Cases: See Indigo Planters. . 


Civil Charges. Increase of civil charges, Rep. p. 43—-—~Heads of accounts under which the 
civil charges were so largely increased, Rep. p. 43, 44. 


528 CLV COM * =. * [Report on” 


a ee enone ean) 


Civil Engineers. Recommendation to abolish the offices of the civil engineers at Canara, 
Cuddapah, Tanjore, &c. Appz. p. 263. « sf 


: e 

Civil Establishments. Letter from the Calcutta Finance Committee to the Governor-general 
in Council at Bengal, dated 24 February 1830, on establishments of civil servants in 
India, Appx. p. 228——Greater number in India than are required, Appr. p. 229 —~ 

Number of substantive appointments in Bengal, Madras and Bombay,*4ppz. p. 232. 
‘Abstract statement shqwing the number of civil servants appointed to the Bengal 
civil service during 40 years, and the deaths and retirements incident to the same, re- 
ferred to in Finance Committee Report, Appr. p. 233—-—Extract of a letter from the 

Calcutta Civil Finance Committee on the tivil establishments, Madras, Appz. p. 259. 

a 


Civil Justice. See Bax, J. 7 


Civil Servants. Number of civil servants at the three Presidencies is calculated at 1,100 or 
1,200, Ref. p. 28 Letter from the Govethor-general in Council at Bengal to the Court 
of Directors, (Judicial department,) concerning civil servants, Appr. p. 328 Minute 
of John Adam, Esq., Governor-general, 1823, Appre p. 329——Fewer in 1823 than in 
1811, Adam, Appz. p. 330——Necessity for augmentation of the number, Adam, Appz. 

. P+«.330-———Statement showing the total number of civil servants on the Bengal establish- 

“ ment ift each year from 1811 to 1823; number of servants absent at sea for their health ; 

‘ number of writers who arrived in each year; number of deaths and emigrations in the 

civil service in each year, Adam, Appz. p. 336——Minute of J. H. Harrington, Esq., 
dated 18 June 1823,p. 337 Memorandum by Mr. Chief Secretary Bayley, Appz. p. 339 
——Despatch in the Judicial department to the Bengal government, dated 23 July 1824, 
Appt. p. 342. 


‘Civil and Military Government. Board of Control superintend all acts which in anywise 
telate to the civil and military government or administration of revenues in India, Rep. 
a: p- 16. Ld : 


: Clergy.. See Bishop of Calcutta. -Church Estabitshment. 


‘Chive, Lord. Restoreg' to Shujah Dowlah the dominion of Oude, Appz. p. 19 ——The 
inhabitants of India bave no attachment to any obligation, Appz. p. 34. 


Coals. See Steam Vessels. 


“Cochin: Statement of the amount of revenue derived in India from the subsidies from this 
source in tHe year 1828-29, Rep. p. 40. 


Collective Boards. See Boards. 
‘Collectors. See Judicial Officers. 


‘College at Calcutta. Young men for the Bengal service enter. the college of Calcutta on 

‘ ‘arrival in India, Rep. p. 29 -——-They are there maintained at the Company’s expense, 
Rep. p. 29 Has been a source of more debt than knowledge in the civil service, and 

«an expensive establishment, Rep. p. 30 The institution considered disadvantageous 
to the public service, Rep. p. 30. 


- Colonization. “Beyond the Europeans requisite for public service, and merchants, naviga- 
. tors, Xc., who are useful and important; beyond this theig ingress ought not to be per- 
’ mitted, Appz. p. ioo——Improbability of any attempt to colonize India from permitting 

the free residence of Europeans, from the nature of ¢he climate, the dense population, 
and legal appropriation of the soil, Governor-general, Appr. p. 378. 


‘Commander-in-Chief., Power of nominating the commander-in-chief vested in the Directors, 
subject to the approval of the Crown, Rep. p, 12.. wie = 


E. India Affairs, 1832] _ COM Hs COT ‘529 


Commerce. See Trade. : 


Commercial Capital. Statement concerning “the amount of the’ East-India Company’s 
commercial capital, Rep. p.72———Loss upon the Indian trade, gain upon the China trade, 
_ Rep. p. 73 ise tN ote Pen Se: 
Commercial Progt. Amount of profit remaining after payment of dividends constitutes that 
surplus commercial profit which is applicable by law to the discharge of Indian debt, or 
of home-bond debt, Rep. p. 62——Ainount of surplus conimercial profit which has been 
realized from 1814 to 1831; statement showing the amount for each year, Rep. p. 6o—— 
The Court claim the right to propose the appropriation of surplus profits at such times as 
may appear to them consistent, Rep. p.60. . 


Commercial Property. Comparative view of the commercial property, 1814, 1829, 
Rep. p.75- i ‘s | oa 

Commercial and Political. ‘Mode in which separation is made between the Political and 

_ Commercial finances of the Campany, is under the absolute control of the, Board of 
Control, Rep. p. 17. 


Commissariat. Average of the charges for several years of victualling, for war charges, 
for petty stores supplied to magazines, charges on account of foundery, ‘gunpowder 
agencies, gun-carriage, purchase of cattle, supplies to marine, civil department, sudder 


bazaars, timber-yards, Appx. p- 310, 
Commissioners. See Judicial Officers. 
Competition. See Patronage. , 


Conquest. British conquests in India cannot be renounced without guilt, though great 
guilt may be contracted in the government of them, Appr. p. 23. 


Contingent Charges. Letter from the Qalcutta Civil Finance Committee to the Governor- 

general in.Council at Bengal, on contingent charges (2 Dec..1820), Appz. p. 168. . 
Resolution of the Governor-general at Bengal, on contingent charges (8 Dec. 1829), 

Appx. p. 169. ; : oo 

Cornwallis, Lord. . Benefits arising from his administration of the government of Bengal, 
Appx. p.20-———By the measures of his Lordship’s government, important rights of 
property have been conferred upon the Asiatic subjects in Bengal, Appr. p. 21-———-His 
opinion, that it will be of essential importance to the interests of Britain that Europeans 
shall be discouraged from colonizing and settling in India, Appz. p.’357. 


Correspondence. Number of letters received by the Court ‘of Directors, the Board of 
Control, and interchanged between them since 1784; manner in which correspondence 
and the details of the local governments of India is received by the home authorities, 


Rep. p. 17. 
Correspondence, Committee of. Number of members of which it consists; each member 
must have passed through the Committees of Buying and Warehouses, and Shipping, 
Rep. p. 12——All that relates to the preparation of depatches for Wndia belongs to 
the Committee of Correspondence, Rep. p. 12——-Possible disadvantages of the present 
mode of forming this consnittee, Rep. p. 19. 


‘Cotton. + The Company’s principal export from India to China is cotton from Bengal and 
Bombay, Rep. p. 74. : 


Cotton Piece-Goods. Formerly the staple manufacture of India, now almost superseded by 
British manufactures, aided by machinery, Governor-general, Appz. p. 376: 


3 Y 


539 * , COT . Cus - [Report on 
* : 


Cotton Twist. A large manufactory erecting by Mr. Patrick for the manufacture of cotton 
twist by machinery; probable effect of euch impfovements in India, Governor-general, 
Appr. p. 376. . ; 

Councils. Are stated to be.no check upon the Governor, when he chooses to exercise 

independent power, Rep. p. 21 They are considered useful in arranging material 


points of correspondence for the Governor-general, and relieve him*from a load of 
detail, Rep. p.22. 


Court of Directors. Consists of 24 proprietors, who conduct the affairs of India; are: 
elected by the proprietors; 13 form a coust; have the power of nominating governors 
and commanders-in-chief, Rep. p. 12——Ie. case of collision between the Court and 
Board of Control, an appeal lies to the king in council, Rep. p. 12 Are divided 
into three principal committees ; duties thereof, Rep. p. 12—*~ Collisionsjhave taken place 
between the Court of Directors and the Board of Control; inconvenience of these 
differences of opinion; suggestions of remedies, Rep. p. 19. 


Courts of Justice. Venality of them under the nabobs, “Appz. p. 1o—— Were scandalously 
corrupt in the early stages of the British power, Appz. p. 10. 


e 
See also Circuit and Appeal. Court of Requests. Dewannee. Moonsifs. Petty 
Sessions. Phousadary. Sudder Dewanny Adawlut, Zillah Courts. 


Court of Requests. Expenses of the Court of Requests at Bombay, Apps. p. 242. 


Covenanted Officers. Covenanted officers to be employed in the judicial and fiscal adminis- 
tration of the Bengal Presidency, above the rank of ordinary assistants, Mackenzie, 
Appr. p. 214. 

Statement showing the number of European covenanted servants in the Judicial 
department, employed in the Sudder Adawlut, Provincial Courts, and in each district of 
e the Lower and Western Provinces, ‘on 1st May ‘1810, 1816, 1822, 1823, Adam, Appr. 
P- 334- = 
_ Covenanted Servants. See Judicial Department. 


* * e . e . . # . ° 
Crime. Specimens of Hindoo Jaw concerning punishments for crimes of various descrip- 
tions, Appr. p. 52. 
See also Law. 


Criminal Cases. Average number of criminal cases in one year before the Circuit Court, 
Madras, Appx. p. 271-——-Punishments proposed by the Madras Court of Sudder Adaw- 
lut, in lieu of those at present awarded by the Mahomedan law, Appz. p. 274. 


+ See also Indigo Planters. 


Criminal Law. Alterations proposed by Lord Cornwillis, 1790, Appr. p. 36-——Power of 
Hindoos to be forgiven the punishment of crimes by the next of kin, Appz. p. 37. 


Cruelty. Shocking barbarity of Hindoo punishments, App. p- 29. 


Customs. Statement of the amount of revenue derived from this source to the Indian 
treasury in the year 1828-29, Rep. p. 4o—— Revenue from customs, although fluctuating, 
has exhibited a steady improvement, Rep. p. 41 Sea customs are collected under the 
same Regulations, by the direct agency of Government officers, Rep. p. 93———-Amount at 

._ which they are collected in Bengal, Madras,-and Bombay, Rep. p. 93 Collection of 

iduty on cardamums, farmed by the Government to the highest bidder, Rep. p. 94 
Hardships endured by the cultivators under this system, Rep. p. 94~—~System checks 
production ; in Canara a disposition has been shown to abandon the cultivation, Rep. 
P 94. ee ae , 


Land 


E. India Affairs, 1832.]_ CUS ' _ DEW Bal, 


enna i pe Ss AAD 


‘ Customs—continued. . 8 oh . oe 

‘Land customs of the Madras territories have been rented with great success, Appr. » 
p-: 263~—— Proposal for arrangements which would. render the abolition of the office of 
collector and the deputy expedient, Appr. p. 263——Recommendation of the abolition 
of the sub-collectors and extra civil engineers appointed at Canara, Cuddapah, and 
Tanjore, Apps. p. 263——Abolition of the office of assistant collector of sea customs at 
Madras recommended, Appz: p. 263. 


a 


Dacca Muslins. See Muslins. 


Danes. Conversions effected by their ‘exertions and preaching at Tranquebar, under the 
patronage of the English Society. for the Promotion of Christian Kno@ledge, Appr. 


P- 94. : 
Death, Punishment of. Indifference with which: it is met by the Hindoos, Appr. p. 28 
Punishment by the Hindoo code for designing to procure the death of another, 
Appx. p. 58. * : a: , , e 
Debt. . Specimens of Hindoo law as to awards of punishment in cases of debt, Appz. p. 54 
Modes warranted by the Hindoo Jaw in recovering debts, Appz. p. 59. 


Debt of India: 


Home Bond: - : 

This debt is composed of securities issued by the Company on their seal, upon which 
they have been empowered by Parliament to borrow money, Rep. p. 67——Time for 
which bonds can be issued, Rep. p. 68 Limitation to the power of the Company 
raising money, Rep. p.68——~Antount of debt 1750, and at various periods to 18295 
Rep. p. 68--——Rate of Interest paid on debts from 1773 to 1783, from 1783 to 1787, and 
at different periods to 1831, Rep. p. 68. ; ; 

Statement of the finance balances, 1814-15 and 1820-21, showing no increase from the 
expenses of the Mahratta war, Appz. p. 145 Policy of not lessening the debt from 
the connexion it cements between the monied interests of the natives and the govern- 
ment, Appz. p. 145 The princes of India now invest their riches, Appz. p. 146. 


Deccan. Letter from the Calcutta Finance Committee to the Governor-general in Coaricil 
. at Bengal on the abolition of Deccan revenue survey, Appr. p. 258. 


Deities. Character of the whole multitude of Hiadoo deities, male ang female, is a source 
of immorality, Appz. p. 69 Character of Brahma, Vishnew, Mahadeo, to whom the 

* most enormous villanies are impyted, Appz. p. 69 Hideous appearance of the gene- 
rality of Hindoo idols, Appz. p. 72. 4 


Dependent Princes. State of those governments which are ‘dependent upon the English, 
Appx. p. 4-7—-—Impolicy of adding to their number, Appz. p. 7. ; : 


: » 
Deportation. “Power of arbitrary deportation upon alleged charges, foyms an important 
feature in the local administration. of India, ep. p. 24 Measures which might tend 
to lessen the power withaut danger, Rep. p. 24, 


Despatches. Generally originateewith the Court of Directors; power of the Board of Con- 
trol, and how exercised, Rep. p. 12, 13 Usual form of making up despatches, Rep. 
Pp: 13 Frequent necessity for the secrecy of, Rep. p.14. — 


Dewannee. Nature of the office ; title of the provincial collector of revenues under the 
Mogul emperors, Appz. p. 7——Im 1772 the Company first took upon themselves the 
3Y¥2 - office 


532 DEW ECL * [Report on 


¢ 


Dewannee—continued. e 


office of Dewan, Appr. p« 15 Removal of the Exchequer to Calcutta, Appr. p. 16 
~~ Abolition of the court properly so called, that is, the court of the collectors for the 
trial of revenue causes, Appr. p.21.5 - + - 


Dewannee Adawlut. Power of that court, Appz. p. 16——Former malagministration of 
Justice in this court, Appz. p. 16. 


Directors. Every Director has full cognizance of the affairs of the Company, Rep. p. 12 
Every Director does not sit on the Committee of Correspondence, Rep. p. 12 
Consideration as to the possibility of conducting the business of the East-India Com- 
pany with fewer Directors, Rep. p. 19-—-Advantages and disadvantages of the change 
of Directors by rotation on committees, Rep. p. 19 Patronage exercised by them to 
‘ which no responsibility attaches, Rep. p. 27—,—No imputation upon the manner in: which 
Directors hdVve exercised their patronage, though the mode of nomination not the best 
mode for securing high ability, Rep. p. 28—~ Compensation proposed for Directors in 
, the event of any change in the present mode of patrdhage, Rep. p. 28. 


Diseases. Diseases which according to the Hindoo religion are punishments for crimes in 
a formerstate, Appz. p. 78. 


Dividends, Mode of declaring the dividends by the Court of Directors, Rep. p. 74. 


Dundas, Right honourable H. His opinion that the utmost delicacy is necessary in guard- 
ing against an unrestrained intercourse with the natives of India, Appz. p. 357, 360, 
361. 


Dunlop, Mr. Circumstances attending this gentleman’s conduct as an indigo planter, 
Appz. p. 394. 


Dutch. State of the Dutch settlements in India, as to the introduction of Christianity into 

their Governments, Appr. p. 93—~—Correspondefice with Professor Lewsden of Utrecht, 

- on the state of Christianity at Colombo, Appx. p. 93——~Their empire in India,. cause 
‘ of its progress and downfal, Appz. p. 123. 


East-India Company. Power in India; date at which they acquired their political power 
in Hindostan, Appr. p. 3 Alterations which took place in 1773, in their government 
in India, Appx. % 19———Further alterations established by the legislative enactments of 


1984, Appx. p. 20. 
See also Investment. ° 


. East Indians. Testimony adduced concerning the acquirements and abilities of the Anglo- 


Indian population ; recommendation to remove invidious distinctions, and their exclu- 
sion from office, Rep. p. 31. err ee 

Misplaced jealousy of these people; their inconsiderable number, want of judgment 
‘hitherto in their education ; want.of a wider field for their profitable employment ; use 
to them of European settlers, Governor-general, Appr. p. 38» 


Eastern Governments. . Generally careless as to the interests of their subjects, Appr. p. 6. 
Ecclesiastical Affairs, See Church Establishment: ae 
Eclipses. «Ridiculous belief of the uneducated Hindoos as to the cause of eclipses; their 


: ¢ 


‘religious ceremonies on these occasions, Appz. p. 72. 


~ 


E. India Affairs, 1832.] ..-EDU SEUR ‘ +593 ; 
SE RE EET SP TED a PP OA IA IES | 


Education. Desire for thé knowledgeef European science and literature has been awakened 


in the natives by the encouragement of education among them, Rep. p. 26+——Schools 
established by: the missionaries, Rep. p: 26-——General diffusion of instruction - pro- 
ducing the most salutary effect, Rep. p.. 26—+—Company -obliged annually to expend 
a lac of rupees in promoting the education of the natives of India, Rep. p. 3o2——Gene- 
ral cultivation of the English language ‘highly desirable, Rep. p. 30-——Moslem and 
Hindoo colleges lave been established at various fplaces, Aep. p. 31———Schools have 
been established at various places, Rep. p. 31. ~ . i 
Madras : ; a 9 é : ; ee 
Proposed by Sir T. Munro to establishnative schools in every tehsildary ; ‘manner in 
which masters were to be paid, Rep. p. 31. bn nthe 
Great and increasing pramotion of the education of all classes of natives of India 
during the government of the Marquis of Hastings, Appr. p. 150-——-—Easy manper and 
slight expense with which schools might be: established in India, for the purpose of 
gratuitous instruction in reading and writing English, Appr. p. 85——Literature would 


{ 


_ necessarily follow the introduction of language, Appr. p. 85.——Plan by which 


* the study of the 


general education might be introduced, and lead to most beneficial results, Appz. 
Pp- B97 eeiebing progress which a large body of Hindoo youth have made in 
nglish language, Governor-general, Appx. p. ‘377———Complete 
and cordial co-operation of the native gentry:in promoting education, and in furthering 
other objects of public utility, Governor-general, Appx. p. 377-———Progress of education 
has been exceedingly rapid among Hindoos at Calcutta, Appz. p. 385. aoe so 
See also College at Calcutta. Haileybury. Hindoo College. Moslem College. 


Endowments. To the Brahmins and pagodas are all esteemed highly meritorious, 


Appz. p. 66. 


English Language. Encouragement and cultivation of the English language in India is 


deemed to be bighly desirable, Rep. p.25———General cultivation thereot highly desirable, ° 
Rep. p. 30-——Great partiality exists mong natives for English in favour of the English 
language and literature, Rep. p.30——A powerful stimulus to inquire would be to make 
a certain degree of proficiency a condition of qualification for civil employment, 
Rep. p. 31-—Value of the general education of the natives of India in the English 
language, and of the introduction of our literature, Appz. p. 84 Importance of its 
being taught in India to give the people a knowledge of our religion, Appz. p. 86-— 
Great progress made by the Hindoo youth in the acquisition of the English language, 
literature, and science. Governor-general, Appx. p. 377- 


Establishments. See Civil Establishment. 


° 


Estates. Statement showing the number of indigo factories in the several districts under 


the Bengal government; also the, number of European indigo planters, proprietors of ° 
estates, and the number of European assistants in the several districts under the Bengal 
government, Appr. p. 465. ; oe , 


Europeans. Regulations 1766, as to British-born subjects holding lands in India, Rep. 


P- 32 Europeans hold farms in the names of natives, and are sued in the names of 
natives, Rep. p. 32 Principally indigo farms, Rep. p. 32 Most wétnesses do not 
recommend an indiscriminate admission of British-born subjects into our Indian posses- 
sions, Rep. p. 33 Chiéf reason against their admission arises -out.of the defective 
state of the judicial establishments, Kep. p. 33; Facilities of intercourse have of late 
years greatly increased, Rep. p. 33——Apprehensions entertained, 1813, that free trade 
would cause great influx of Europeans, disproved by returns, 1815—1828, Rep. p. 33. 
Subject to the authority of the provincial laws, Appz. p. 21 Beyond the Europeans 
requisite for public service, and merchants, navigators, &c. who are useful and important, 


* beyond this, their ingress into India should not be permitted, Appz. p. 100-———~Statement 


of 


, 334 . EUR . EXT’ ‘(Report on 
Europeans—continued. ? ; 
of the number. of licenses to proceed to and reside ig India, granted by the Court of 
Directors in. each year,.1814—1831; of the number of applications refused’ by the 
Court; and of the number of the latter granted by the Commissioners for the Affairs 
of India; with a general classification of trades, &c.; Appx. p. 366——Extract letter 
from: the Court of Directors to the Governor-general in Council at Bengal (Revenue 
department) 1829, on permission to Europeans to hold land in India, Appz. p. 370 
Resolution of the Government of Bengal as to the present restrictions on the occu- 
pancy of lands in India by Europeans, having notoriously failed of their purpose, Appz. 


» 373: 

Minute of Sir C. Metcalfe concurring in*the proposition for extending to Europeans 
engaged in ‘the cultivation of indigo, facilities for holding lands, Appr. p. 374— 

Entire’ concurrence of the Governor-general in the sentiments expressed by Sir 
C. Metcalée on the subject of occupancy of lands in India by Europeans, Appz. p. 374- 

Required improvement in India can only be sought through the more extensive 
settlement of Europeans, British subjects, and theis free admission to the possession of 
landed property, Coueircepeal Appx. p. 376 Causes which would render it 
impossible to attempt to colonize in India from the nature of the climate, dense popula- 
tion of natives, and legal appropriation of lands, Governor-general, Appr. p. 378 
So far from too great an influx of Europeans, it is feared no encouragement that can be 
offered will induce sufficient numbers to resort, Governor-general, Appx. p. 379 ——Most 
anxiously feels that the state of: the law should. be so amended as to oppose no obstacle 
to the settlement of British subjects in the interior, Governor-general, Appr. p. 382. 

In proportion as European settlers multiplied, the necessity of modifying the law 
relative to the administration of civil and criminal justice will be more urgently felt, 
Appz. p. 385 Minute of the Governor-genera!, dated 8 December 1829, relative to 
the settlement of Europeans in India, Appz. p. 388. 

Any alarm that Europeans should be induced*in any considerable numbers to resort 
to India, and to settle in the interior, on a speeulation of holding lands to gain a profit 
by rent, wholly groundless, Governor-general, Appr. p. 301. 

Minute of Sir T. Metcalfe,’ dated 13 Dec. 1829 on settlement of Europeans in India, 
Appt. p. 391 ——Minute of W. B. Bayley, dated 31 Dec. 1829, Appz. p. 301 Various 
correspondence on the subject, Appx. p. 393-402———Minute of Mr. Ross, Appz. p. 402 
Letter from John Jebb and James Pattison, Esqrs. to the Right hon. George 

Canning, February 1818, zespecting the grant of licenses to Europeans to proceed to 

India, Appr. p. 346 Remarks by Rammohun Roy on the advantages and disadvan- 
tages likely to result to India, and the government thereof by the British, from per- 
mitting Europeans to settle or colonize in India, Appz. p. 466———Paper drawn up by 
_ order of the Board of Control relative to the conduct of Europeans in India, containing 
abstract of laws and regulations relating to Eurogean settlers in India; effects which 
have resulted from the settlement of Europeans in India, under the restriction of the 
law relating to Europeans, Appx. p. 459———Statement by the East-India Company to 
the Committee on Indian Affairs, 1831, of ‘the number of Europeans resident at the 
several Presidencies in India, 1828, Appr. p, 475.. a 
See also Licenses. Patrick, Mr. 


Evidence. Specimens of Hindoo laws concerning evidence, Appz. p. 55- 
‘ Expulsion from India. See Deportation. es 
' Evil Spirits. Lower castes of Hindoos endeavour to canciliate evil spirits, to deprecate 
their malice, and implore their friendship, Appz. p. 71. 
Expiation. See Sin. . 2 _ , 
Extraordinary Receipis. Amount received by the Indian treasury from the extraordinary 
receipts from Ava, Bhurtpore,.and Scindiah, Rep. p. 40. 


1 


E, India Affairs, 1832.) - “FAC . | FOO. 536 


e Ld 


F, ° 


Factories. Number of indigo factories in the several districts of the Western and Lower 
Provinces; number of factories, and extent of cultivation; number of civil and eri- 
minal cases degided for and against them and their servants, during the last five years; 
abstracts of opinions recorded by magistrates and commissioners of circuit regarding the 
necessity of further legislative provisions for the effectual subjection of the indigo planters 
and their servants to the control of the law, Appr. p. 403 Statement of the number 
of indigo factories in the several districts under the Bengal presidency; also the num- 
ber of European indigo planters, proprietors of, estates, and the number of European 
assistants resident in the several districts under’the Bengal Government, Appz. p. 465. 

See also Indigo. — ° : 


Famine. Narrative of the great famine in Be&igal, 1769-70, Appz. p. 11-——Séveral Hindoo 
children purchased by a charitable individual during the scarcity; mothers desired to 
return for their children when famine should cease; five, number that reclaimed their 
offspring, Appa. p. 30. : ¥ 

Farming Lands. eThis first great financial measure, 1772, produced the most, unhappy 
effects, Appx. p.17. — a ; 

See also Tobacco. 


Fees. Manner in-which moonsifs are paid ; how the payment is evaded, and arranged by 
the decrees of the Razeenamah, Appx. p.279——Regulations proposed regarding the 
stamp institution fee on superior suits proposed to be made cognizable by the district 
moonsifs, &c. Appz. p. 280. 


Finance Committee. Two Finance Committees appointed, one civil, one military, 1828,, 
by the Supreme Government in India, Rep. p. 46 ‘Duties of the Civil Finance Com-, 
mittee, Rep. p. 46. 

Appointment of the Caléutta Civil Finance Committee, with certain of their Reports, 
and Minutes of Government thereon, Appr. p. 156 Circular Letter from the Govern- 
ment of Bengal to the Governments of Madras and Bombay, 10 Oct. 1828, Appr. p. 157 

Resolutions of the Governor-general in Council in Bengal, in the Territorial Depart- 

ment, 25 November 1828, Appz. p. 158. 

See also Military Finance Committee. 


Finances, Prospective Estimate of. Modes of computing the prospective condition of the 
Finances, Rep. p. 69. ; 


Financial Transactions. Nature of.the financial transactions of the Eatt-India Company 
pion the public since they were established under the authority of the 10 Will. 3, 
ep. p. 48. ° ‘ 


_ Finance. See also Customs. Extraordinary Receipts. Pilgrim Tax. Post-office. Revenue. 
Sayer and Abkarree. Stamps. Transit Duties, Tobacco. Town Duties. Wheel Taz, 


Fines.’ Injustice of the Hindoo code ‘iin their mode of receiving fines in lieu of the 
punishment awarded by law to a crime, Appz. p, 63. 7 


Fiscal Administration. See Gudicial Officers.” : 

Fitler, Dr. See Medical Schools. « 

Florida. Quantity of indigo imported into Great Britain from Florida, 1780-1830, Apps. 
Pp. 518. : roy, ‘ : 

Food. Difficult for Hindoos to avoid daily pollution in their food, Appz. P+ 77 


536 FOR - GUN [Report on 


tee . : s © 

Forgery. See Stamps. 

Foreign Independent States. See Native States, 

Foundry. Expenses of the foundry at Fort William, on an average of the last five years, 

_ Appz. p. 310. 

France. Quantity of indigo imported into Great Britain from France, 2780-1830, Apps. 
p. 518. 5 Na 

Francis, Mr. Extract front a minute of Mr. Francis, respecting the grant of licences to 
Europeans to proceed to India, Appz. p. 353+ \— 

Franking. See Post-office. iJ 

French. Their policy obliges the East-India Company to interfere in contests which had 
arisen among the native princes, Appx. p. 4 Their empire in the East; its rapid 
decline, Appr. p. 123. 

‘Fullarton, Colonel. See Swartz, Mr. 


‘| 4 


G. 
Gaming.* Punishment for gambling in the Hindoo code, Appz. p. 58. 


Ganges. Virtues of the Gangesas a holy river universally allowed to be pre-eminent; d ying 
are carried to its edge that they may have a happy passage out of life, Appz. p. 65. 


‘Germany. Quantity of indigo imported into Great Britain from Germany, 1780-1830, Appr. 
p- 518. 

Gibraltar, Quantity of indigo imported into Great Britain from Gibraltar, 1780-1830, Appr. 
p. 518. 

* Goorka. Treacherous conduct of the King of Goorka in the wars in Nepaul, Appz, p. 38. 

oe e 

‘Government of India. One of the most important considerations for Parliament is the 

improvement of the government of India, in India, Rep. p. 22 One supreme: govern- 

ment proposed for all India, aided by lieutenant-governors at the several presidencies, 


Rep. p. 22 Reasons urged against these alterations, Rep. p. 22 Brief view of 
British territorial administration in the East, Appz. p. 4. 


Government of Nabobs. Their government of provinces, as sanctioned by the East-India 
Company, Appr. p. 6 Power reserved by the English, Appx. p. 6——Evil conse- 
quences of the nature of their government on the Asiatic people, Appz. p. 6, 10——In 
1772, the auth8rity of the English pérvaded the interior of the provinces, and the native 
government, saving the prerogative of the Nabob as chief criminal magistrate, Appr. 


ip. 15. ° 
Government.’ See Home Government. Local Government. 


Governor-general.. Power of nominating the Governor-general is vested in the Directors 
subject to the approval of the Crown ; Court can recal a governor, Rep. p. 12-——Has 
a supreme controlling power over the government of Madras and Bombay, Rep. p. 20 
——Can proceed to the subordinate presidencies and assume command, Rep. p. 2o—— 
In Council may bring forward any business he thinks fit, Rep.-p..2o——Can act on his 
own responsibility, independent of Council, Rep. p. 23———General duties of the Gover- 
nor-general in Bengal, Rep. p. 21, 22. i ; 


Grant, Mr. State‘of society in India, ‘Appz. p. 4: 


‘Gun-carriage Agencies. Expenses of, on an average, for several years, Appr. p. 310. . 


E, India Affairs, 1832.] ° GUN HIN 537 


# 

Gunpowder Agencies. Expenses of these agencies, on an average of the last ten years, 
Appr, p. 310. ° 

Guntoor, Zillah court established 1828,; proposal to attach Guntoor to the jurisdiction of 
the court at Nellore, Appr. p.260———Cause of the formation of a Zillah court.at this 
place ; disadvantage of its immediate abolition; proposed alterations, Lushington, Appz. 
p- 269. * . 

Names of law officers proposed for situations in the native,court of Guntoor, as qualified 

for those situations, Appz. p. 280. 


Guzerat. Proposed abolition of the office of eesident. at, Appx. p.234—+-Abolition of the 
Guzerat court of circuit and appeal ; sawing acgruing therefrom, Appz. p. 244. 
See also Appeal. Circuits. 


° 


iad 


Haileybury. By Act 1813, rules 4nd regulations of this college subject to revision and 
approval by the Board, Rep. p. 16 Design of this college, which was established 1806, 
Rep. p.29.——A d visable to increase the age of the students as to their admission, Rep. p.29 

Bad effect of the Act of Parliament of 1826,.which is stated to have shaken and 

rautilated the whole collegiate system, Rep. p.29 College has had various difficulties . 

to contend with, but has fairly answered what could be expected from its foundation 

Rep. p. 29 ——Proficiency of its scholars well attested by those who have experienced its 

benefits, Rep. p. 297 ——Civil servants better qualified since the establishment of the col- 

lege than before, Rep. p. 29. 


Half-castes. See East-Indians. 


Harrington, J. H. Minute of J.H.,Harrington, dated 18th June 1823, on the defective 
state of the civil service with respect to the inadequate number of covenanted servants, 


Appt. p- 337: ; 

Hastings, Marquis of. Character of decoits or robbers; general litigiousness of the natives 
of India, &c. Appx. p. 35 The Marquis of Hastings’ summary of the operations in ' 
India, with their results, from goth April 1814 to 31st January 1823, Appa. p. 129. 

Hill, David. Minute of David Hill, Esq. on Judicial and Revenue administration at 
Bombay, Appx. p.178——Minute of D. Hill, Esq. dated 19th October 1830, 226. 


Hindoo Colleges. ave been established at various places, Rep. p. 31. 


Hindoos. The proportion of the Hindoo population to the Mahomeddh is stated as eight 
to one, Rep. p. 26——Expediency of framing a law for defining and regulating the civil 
rights of natives in case of a change of religion, Rep. p. 26. 

They. are a people exceedingly depraved, Appz. p. 26, 120-———And destitute to a won-- 
derful degree of those qualities which are requisite to the security and comfort of society, 
Appx. p. 26 There are castes of robbers and thieves, who consider themselves acting 
in their proper profession, Appz. p. 29 Benevolence wrongly imputed to the Hindoo 
character, Appx. p. 29-——Cruelty practised by their laws, and to thei enemies, Appz. 
F 29-30 ‘Their want of natural affection, Appz. p. 30 False views entertained by 

uropeans of the Hin@oo character, Appr. p. 31 Character, as drawn by the 
author of the British Transactions in Hindostan, Appz. p. 105 Slavish disposition 
of the people, and their want of attachment. to their rulers, Appr. p. 112——-A race 
of men lamentably degenerate and base, retaining but a feeble sense of moral 
obligation, Appr. p. 41-~—-How influenced by the despotic mode of government 
which is prevalent in the East, Appz. baer none views of native character 

must 


§38 HIN : “TY N C - [Report on 
Semamaxersrwar nec nT oe — = a a = ie ia Neen ene pened 


w 

Hindoos—continued. te ane . 
miust now be.admitted to require considérable modification, Appz. p. 377-——~Numerous 
zemiudars professing the Moslem faith, though descended from Hindoos, Appr. 
YP. 377 Have had no sovereign of their own faith for many centuries; their laws 
therefore not properly defined ; consequently when the state of society among Hindoos 
calls for any new provision, it must be proper to interfere, Appz. p. 24——View of the 
state of society among the Hiudoo abject: of Great Britain, particularly with respect 


to morals, Appx. p. 26 Their religion is exclusive, not offensive, Appr. p. 379. 
See also Education, Schools. 


Hindoo Widows. See Suttees. 


Holwell, Mr. Considers the Gentoos a race of people who from their infancy are utter 
strangers to the idea of common faith and honesty, Appz. B. 33. 


Holy Places.® Spread through all parts of Hindostan ; sanctity of these places; names of 
the principal towns of this description, Appr. p. 65 Cashmere particularly regarded 
as holy, Appz. p. 65 Juggernaut, in Orissa, is a placé of great sanctity, Appz. p. 65. 


Holy Rivers. Number in Hindostan, Appz. p. 65 
pre-eminent, Appx. p. 65. ; 


Virtues of the Gangés allowed to be 


Home Government. Nature of the Home Government ; authorities of which it is com- 
posed ; manner in which Directors are elected ; number of which the Court consists ; 


election of Chairman, Deputy Chairman, &c., Rep. p. 10-12. 


Hugh Lindsay. Efficiency of this steam vessel; voyages performed by her to Suez, Mal- 
colm, Appx. 307. : 


Human Sacrifice. Hindoo code of laws according to the Vedes, undoubtedly enjoins 
, human sacrifices, Appz. p. 62——Formerly offered to Kallee the goddess of destruction, 
_ Appx. p. 62. 


e 


Hyder Ali, War with him and the French, Appz. p. 20. 


I. 
Idols, See Deities, 


Imports, East-India Company. Since 1824-25, the Company have ceased to export mer- 

*  chandize to Indja;_ their only exports, since that period, have been military and political 

_ Stores, Rep. p. 73 Motives of the Company for’ discontinuing theif export wade, 
Rep. p. 73 Articles imported by the Company igto England from India are raw silk, 
some silk piece-goods, saltpetre, and indigo, Rep. p. 74 Company’s principal export 
from India to China is cotton, Rep. p. 74-———Their only import is tea from China, Rep. 
p-74 Import trade from India to England is carried on only as a remittance, Rep. p.74- 

’ Extent and value of the trade between India and the Persian Gulf, from the year 
1821-22 to 1827-28, from Bengal, Madras, and Bombay, Appz. p. 296. 


Imprisonment. Little heeded by the Hindoos as a punishment, Appz. p. 37. 


‘Improvement. Inquiry into the measures which might be adopted by Great Britain for the 
improvement of the condition of her Asiatic subjects, and” answers to objections, Appr. 
Pp. 82. re a "4% a 
Incantations. Form a very large branch in: the occult arts of the Hindoos; object of them 
‘ualimited.; to procure all good, and avert all evil, Appz. p. 74. 


E, India Affairs, 1832.] IND IND 539 


India. With the exception of Bengal Proper, where a general feeling of protection. is. stated 
to prevail, the British tenure of India is a tenure of the sword, resting on the. belief of 
natives in our power and milit&ry strength, Rep. p. 23. ‘ 

The Marquis of Hastings’ summary of the operations in India, with their results, from 
the 30 April 1814 to 31 January 1823, Appr. p. 129. _ ns 


India Stock. Qualification for voting for East-India Directors - motives of persons in hold- 
ing stock ; amount of annual dividend, Rep, p. 11. . 


Indian Expenditure. Orders from the Directors of the East-lndia Company for a reduction 
of the Indian expenditure, Rep. p. 44 These orders, though extensively acted on, not 
yet fully carried into effect, Rep. p. 45—*—Cause of the increase of Indian expenditure, 
as characterized by the Court of Directors, Rep. p. 45. os : 


Indigo. Lands held by Europeans chiefly fpr the cultivation of indigo, Rgp. p. 32—— 
Introduction of capital and employment of a great number of people has been very 
beneficial, Rep. p. 32. ; Fen, 

Improvements introduced in the manufacture of indigo in India by European skill and 
industry, Appr. p. 89 Plant from whith indigo is manufactared is indigenous in 
India, and the @ye extracted from it been used in the East for ages, Appx. p. 477 
Advantages derived to India from the employment of British capital in the cultivation of 
indigo, Appz. p. 477 Estimates of the amounts annually expended at the indigo. fac- 
tories in India, Appa. p. 479. 3 Oe - 


Indigo Cultivation. Carried on in four different ways; -description. of the various modes, 
Appx. p. 482————Great portion of the lands under indigo cultivation virtually,,held’ by 
Europeans, Appr. p. 483——Subjects of dispute which disturb indigo districts, Appr. 
p: 483———The law relating to indigo contracts has been improved by regulations ; pro- 
visions of the regulations, Appx. p.488——-Effect which the cultivation of indigo by 
European capital has bad on the olds of ryots, Appr. p. 500. nn . 

® 


Indigo Planters. State of planters as to holding lands; hardship of their. position, 
Governor-general, Appr. p. 377-378, 383-———Occasional misconduct of planters as 
nothing compared with the good they have spread around them, Governor-general, Appz. 
p- 378 Losses to which an indigo planter is exposed who has to trust to engagements 
with needy ryots for the produce of fields on which he has no Jegal lien, Appz. p. 383 

Willingness of planters in Behar to a considerable outlay of capital for the purpose 
of irrigation, if vested with an assured tenure under a Jong lease, Appr. p. 384-—— 
@eport of Mr. Steer on the lawless conduct of, indigo planters in Dacca Jelalpore, Appz. 
Pp: 393 Of Mr. Ahmuty on the same subject, Appr. p.393——-Conduct of Mr. Dun- 
lop, Appr. p. 393, 398 Statement of European indigo planters in the several districts 
of the Western and Lower Provinces; factories and extent of cultivation; number of 
civil and criminal cases decided for and ‘against them for the last five years ; abstracts - 
of opinions recorded by magistrates and commissioners of circuit regarding the necessity: 
of legislative provisions for effectual subjection of the indigo planters and their servants 

* to the control of law, Appr. p. 403, 455———Representation of Alexander & Co. of the, 

osition in which planters were placed by the existing regulations, Appr. p..456—— 

xtract containing Mr. Turnbull’s opinions on the law and regulations between ryots 
and indigo planters, Appr. p- 458 Mr. Walter’s opinion on the present laws and 
regulations established bétween ryots and indigo planters, Appz. is 458-——Statement 
showing the number of indigo,factories in the several districts, under the Bengal presi= 
dency ; also ve numben of European indigo planters, proprietors of estates, and number 
of European? assistants resident in the several districts under the Bengal Government, 

_ Appx. p. 465 Average estimated loss, calculated by the merchants of Calcatta, to the 
indigo planters from the insecurity. of Jands held in the names of natives, Appr. p. 475 

: 3Z2 Conduct 


gio  sTND ; JAU [Report on 


ea SENT SI RPGR OS ALAIN EL ILO EEE IRN RT IE BA TICS AEA OEE BIOESSAYS SIE 
° 


* 

Indigo Planters—continued. . Fi fs 
Conduct of indigo planters, being a digest of papers prepared by the order of the Board 
of Control, Appz. p. 481 Complaints of planters of the injury they sustain from berds 

‘of cattle being driven over the grounds planted. with indigo crops, Appz. p. 484 
Grand objects for the government to aim at, not laws for the management of their 
concerns, but in providing for them a speedy and sure application of,the Jaws as they 
stand, Appx. p. 488 Ditferent conduct of planters in various districts, Appx. p. 490. 


Indigo Planters, Native. Spirit with which they now prosecute that branch of manufac- 
ture which has hitherto been open only to British enterprize, Governor-general, Appr. 
P> 377~—-—Many instances of zemindars employing European gentlemen in the superin- 
tendence of indigo factories established on th8ir estates, Appa. p. 385. 


Indigo Trade. Resolutions of the Government of Bengal cohcerniny the indigo Regula- 
tions, Appx p. 451 Regulation for amenaling the provision of Regulation VI. 1823, 
and for providing more effectually for the enforcing the execution of contracts relating 
to the cultivation and delivery of the indigo plant, Appz. p. 453 Letter from the 
Court of Directors to the Governor-general tn Council at Bengal (Judicial Department), 
April 1832, on the indigo trade, Appz. p. 456 Quantity of indigo imported into 
Great Rritain, 1785-1789, 1826-1830. Quantity of indigo imported from possessions 
in India, 1826-1830, Appr. p. 477——Minute by Mr. Leycester on the ‘indigo 

- trade, Appx. p. 420 Minate of Mr: Ross concerning the indigo trade, and the rela- 
tive rights of planters and ryots in their advances and contracts for serving and delivering 
indigo, ms p- 421——Regulation proposed by them to remedy the present evils, Appx. 
p- 428 re peneere notes on this proposition,, Appr. p. 438——-Mr. Shakspear’s 
notes and remarks on Mr. Ross’s proposed Regulation, Appz. p. 445 Minute by Mr. 

' Sealy on the indigo trade, concerning the protection of planters with ryots who have 
neglected to sow their seed, Appr. p. 423——-Minute of Mr. Baiey on the indigo 
trade; loss and vexation to which planters are subject by the difficulty of procuring 
redress for breaches of contract, Appx. p. 424-s—Proposed modification of section 5, 
Regulation VI. of 1823, Appz. p. 425 Minute of Mr. Turnbull on the indigo trade, 
concerning the evils arising from the system carried on by planters and ryots during the 
planting and gathering the crop, Appz. p. 426——~Account of the quantity of indigo 
imported iato Great Britain and Ireland in each year, from 1780 to the latest period up 
to which the account can be made, specifying the countries from which imported, and 
quantities received from each, Appr. p. 518-520. 


Individual Agency. See Agency. 


Inheritance. Oppyessive Jaw of the Hjndoo code in regard to the law of ‘inheritance, 
Appz. p. 59 


Investment. Consequences of the compulsory measures necessary to be used in providing 
the investment of the Company, Appz. p. 9. 


Maly. ay of indigo imported into Great Britain from Italy, 1780—1830, Appz. 
‘pe 518. ’ 


—_—- & be abe 


Jaffer Khan, Flourishing state of Bengal ‘under ‘his government, Appx. p. 17-——His 
. conduct towards the zemindars, Appz. p. 18. A : 


Jauts. Conduct of Dyaram, who occupied the fortress of Hattrass ; Lies by him 


’ of our police officers; representations of the ‘council on the subject ; preparations for ~ 
_' War; reduction of Hatorass, and several other Jaut fortresses, Appa. p. 135- 


E. India Affairs, 1832.] | SEB ; JuD 54%: 
tet eR YE AR ASF RCT IIT TE TES TT ST TT 


* 
Jebb, J. Letter from John Jebb and James Pattison, Esq., to the Right. hon. George. 
Cenuing, February 1818, respecting the grant of licenses to proceed to India, Appz. 
P- 340. 
Fones, Sir William. Wonderfal for his stores of knowledge, Appz. p. 44. ae 


Joseph, Father. His account of the disputes in the Nepaul, and the cruelty and duplicity of 
alt the parties concerned, Appz. p. 38. 


Judges. Bad conduct of the. Mussulman judges, 1786, Appx. p. 20 Nabob then 
appointed the Company his delegates in the office of supreme criminal judge, Appz. p. 20 
Opinions of witness as to the separatién of criminal and civil. judges and revenue 
causes, Mackenzie, Appx. pe 187-196——°Increase in the number of judges since 1810, 
Adam, Appx. p. 329. . , 
See also Judicial System. 


Judges, Native. Caution necessary to be used in giving natives employment in the high 
office of judge, Lushington, Appr. p. 265-—-—-Court establishment proposed by the 
Madras Sudder Adawlut for the native judges, Appa, p. 283——~-Native judges of Bengal 
generally under-paid, Appx. p. 289-——-Moonsiffs receive a miserable pittance; useless 
manner in which their time is often taken up, Appx. p. 289 Remedy for this defect, 
Appr. p: 289———Pay which would be fair remuneration for native judges, Appz. p. 289 

Number required in Bengal, Appa. p. 290——-—Remuneration proposed in future to be 

paid to native judges ; scale as to population in district, Appx. p. 290. 

See also Moonsiffs. Zillah Courts. 


Judicial Department. Statement showing the number of European covenanted .servants 
in the Judicial department employed in the Sudder Dewanny Adawlut, Provincial Courts, 
and in each district of the Lower and Western Provinces, on ist May 1810, 1816, 1822, 
1823, Appa. p. 334+ ts 

Judicial Officers. Doubts as to the expediency of drawing an absolute line-of separation” 
between the revenue and judicial officers of Government, Mackenzie, Appx. p. 187-—— 
Covenanted officers to be employed in the judicial ‘and fiseal administration of the Ben- 
gal Presidency above the rank of ordinary assistants, Mackenzie, Appx. p. 214. 

Number of district judges, *magistrates, and collectors, joint magistrates and sub- 
collectors, native judges, commissioners of revenue and police, sudder judges and com- 
missioners in Bengal, Madras, and Bombay, Appz. p. 223-226-——Reductions in the judi- 
cial system at Madras, as estimated by the Finance Committee, and as estimated by the 
Madras Court of Sudder Adawlut, Appz. p. 277+ 


Judicial Revenue. Statement of the amount of revenue derived from this source in India, 
1828-29,. Rep. p. 40. 


Judicial System. Letter from the Calcutta Civil Finance Committee to the Governors 
general in Council at Bengal on revenue and judicial system at Bombay, 3 February 
1830, Appx. p. 169——Minute of John Bax, Esq. on the judicial and revenue system at 
Bombay, and civil allowances at that Presidency, dated 16 June 1829, Appr. p. 170-—— 
Minute of David Hill, Esq., on judicial and revenue administration, Appx. 1783-——- 
Letter, signed by D. Hill, H. Mackenzie, and John Bax, on judicial antl revenne admi- 
nistration, 25 Oetober 18g0, Appz. p. 186——-Proposed alterations as to the mode of 
administering ciyil and criminal justice, Appr. p. 241 Proposed to place the admini- ' 
stration of justice in the provinces of the Madras territory, under the contro] of seven 
judges of appeal and circuit, Appz. p. 270-——Estimated expense of the establishment 

' proposed for the judges of appeal and circuit at Madras, Appz. p. 283. 
See also Courts of Justice. Court of Requests. Justice, Administration of. Magis- 
trates. Moonsiffs. Petty Sessions. Sudder Adawlut.- Zillah. 


* 


542 JUG - LA D [Report on 


‘ 


Juggernaut. See Holy Places. 


Jury. The jury system is confined entirely within the lnguts of the supreme courts, Hep. 
p- 24. a : 
_ Reasons against the adoption of a system of native juries, on account of inconvenience. 
to Hindoos, and the ‘effect of their contending and corrupt opinions, Lushington, Appz. 
p- 264. . eat 
Court of Sudder Adawlyt not prepared to suggest any plan under which the use of 
juries in trials before native judges could be made either safe or practicable, Appx. 
P- 275: , 


Justice, Administration of. Alterations which have taken place at various periods in the 
three Presidencies, Rep. p. 99 And list of papers laid before the Committee: 1. Con- 
cerning the instructions of the East-India Company: 2. Discussions relating to the 
measures recommended by the Home authgrities, 1814, and changes in Madras, 1816: 

- 3. Grounds on which the appointment of Commissioners of Revenue and Circuit took 
placg¢: 4. Documents relative to dlterations suggested by the Calcutta Finance Com- 
mittee: 5. Papers showing the extent and expense of Judicial establishments : 6. Abstract 
of the judicial regulations of the Bengal code, and of the Bengal Revenue Regulations, 
Rep. p..100 Benefits conferred on India by British sway, Rep. p. 28———Two systems 
of judicature in India, the Company’s ‘courts and the Supreme courts, Rep. p. 23 
In Company’s courts are district, provincial, and sudder courts, Rep. p. 24. 

Hindoo and Mahomedan codes were in general the standard for the respective subjects 
of these laws, but tempered by the mildness of British sentiments, Appz. p. 21 Maho- 
medans for centuries had introduced their system of Jaw into Bengal, which was the 
standard of decision in all cases, civil and criminal, Appz. p. 16 Great, reforms made 
by Lord Cornwallis in the administration of justice, Appz. p. 20 Law is now made the 
arbiter in all matters of property, even between the Government and its subjects, Appz. 
p21 Should Europeans be allowed to settle freely in India, the necessity of modify- 
ing the law relative to the administration of givil and criminal justice will be more 
urgently felt, Appz. p. 386. 

See also Courts of Justice. Judicial Officers. Judicial System. 


K. 


Kallee. See Human Sacrifices. 


Kattywar. Recommendation for the abolition of the office, and that the administration be 
. Joined to the oféice of political commissioner in Guzerat, Appr. p. 255. 


Khoodkast. Are ryots who possess a customary title to hold the lands which they occupy, 
as long as they pay a certain fixed rent, Appx. p. 500. 


Ty. 


Labour. Great® cheapness of labour in India; impossibility of any competition from the 

permission of Europeans to reside in India, Appz. p: 379 ——dn India, in 1813, from 3s. to 

6 s. per month; no considerable advance has taken place since that period, Appz. p. 480 

Manner in which the native population of India have benefited.by the increased 
demand for labour, Appz. p. 480. : 


Ladies. System under which licenses are granted by the Court of Directors to ladies to 
proceed to India, Appr. p- 348. Sy es. 


E.India Affairs, 1892] “" LAN = LEU ge 


Land Revenue. Statenient for the year 1828-29, of the amount of revenue derived from 
the land in India, Rep. p. 42——Has materially increased of late years, Rep. p. 41 
Forms the principal income of the State, Rep. p. 79. In 1786, taxes payable by pro- 
prietors to Government, was equitably and unalterably settled in Bengal, Appz. p. 20. 

See also Ryotwar. Village System. Zemindary. . 


Lands; Tenure of. Constitution was established, 1786, for the land tenures in Bengal, 
whereby hereditary property has been secured, and the occupant of the soil protected, 
Appz. p. 20. 


Lands in India. Extract letter from the Court of Directors to the Governor-general in 
Council at Bengal (Revenye department) 18297 on permission to hold lands in India, 
Appx. p. 370 Memorial from the principal merchants at Calcutta’ to the Governor- 
general in Council at Bengal, January 1829, concerning the inconveniences which arise 
from the present law as to Europeans holdtmg lands, Appr. p. 372 Resolution of the 
Government of Bengal as to the present restrictions on the occupancy of land in India, 
having notoriously failed of their,purpose, Appz. p. 373 Minute of Sir C. Metcalfe, 
concurring in the proposition for extending to Europeans engaged in the cultivation of 
indigo, facilities for-holding lands, Appr. p: 373———Entire concurrence of the Governor- 
general in the séntiments expressed by Sir C. Metcalfe, on the occupancy of lands by 
Europeans, 4ppz. p. 374———Minute of the Governor-general in India, on the subject of 
European settlement, Appr. p. 374——-Required improvement in India can only be 
sought through the more extensive settlement of European British subjects, and their 

’ free admission to the possession of landed property, Governor-general, Appx. p. 376 

Extract letter from the Governor-general in Council at Bengal, to the Court of 

Directors (Revenue department), 1 January 1830, on the subject of the tenure Jands in 

India, Appz. p. 382——Abstract of the laws and regulations relating to European settlers 

in India, Appz. p. 469 Effects which have resulted from the settlement of Europeans 

in India, under the restriction and “other peculiarities of the law relating to Europeans, 

Appx. p. 47 “Opinion of the merchants of Calcutta as to the average loss to indigo 

planters, from the insecurity of ‘holding lands in the names of natives, Appx. p. 475. 


Languages. Study of oriental languages most readily promoted by sending the young men, 
directly on their arrival, into the provinces, and attaching them to some public office, 


ep. P. 30. 
See also English Language. ' 


Lateals, Organized gangs denominated lateals, live by hiring themselves to fight the 
battles of indigo planters, Appz. p. 492. 


. . ° 
Law. Specimens of laws which establish some of the prerogatives and duties of the chief 
magistrate or ruler, Appr. p. 50--~—Specimens of laws which establish distinctions in 
favour of the Brahmins, and the other superior castes, Appz. p. 51 Laws concern- 
ing authority, respect, and crimes, &c., Appx. p. 51, 52———Specimens of those laws 
. which without a reference to caste, give a direct sanction to immorality. Appz. p. 55 
Of laws which without reference to caste, go upon principles of oppression and injustice, 
Appx. p. 59 Of laws which without reference to caste, discover a spirit of cruelty, 
Appx. p. 60 ——Effect of their laws upon the Hindoos, Appz. p. 43——~—Nature of the 
Hindoo laws, Appz. p. 45--——Hindoo law stands upon the same authority as the Hindoo 
religion, Appx. p. 44——And is regarded with .a superstitious veneration, Appz. p- 46 
ahomedatis and Europeans have.equally respected the prejudices of the Hindoos, 
Appx. p. 46. S eee 
Leather Accoutrements. See Military Disbursements. 


Leusden, John. See Dutch. 


4 


. “3 aad ° 
544 : fr Y MAD si [Report on 


an a eee el 


Leycester, Mr. Minute by him on the indigo trade, as far as relates to the connexion 
etween planter and ryot respecting crops, Appz. p. 42g. 


Licenses, Board of Control can give permission to proceed to India even after the Court 
have refused, Rep. p. 147 Are said never to be withheld, if the applicant can show 
any reason for wishing to proceed, other than mere speculation, Rep. p. 33. 

Letter from John Jebb and James Pattison, Esqrs. to the Right hon. ‘George Canning, 
dated 27 Febraary 1818§ respecting the grant of licenses to proceed to India, Appr. 
p- 346—~- Extract from a minute of Mr. Frances, respecting the granting of licenses to 
proceed to India, Appz. p. 353 Extract of a minute by Mr. Monson, respecting the 
granting licenses, Appr. p. 354 Extract from Mr. Shore’s remarks on the settlement 
of Europeans in India, 1785, Appz. p. 355———Extracts ffom proceedings of the Board 
of Trade in Bengal, 1789, on the subject of licenses, and permitting traders to frequent 
India, Appr. p. 355 Opinion of the Mgrquis Cornwallis that it will be of essential 
importance, that Europeans should be discouraged and prevented from settling in India, 
Appx. pr 357 Extract of a letter from the Right hon. H. Dundas, 1793, on the 
subject of European residence in India, Appa. p. 357, 360, 361 Earl of Buckingham- 
shire’s opinions on this subject, Appz. p. 362 Letter from the Right hon. George 
Cannigg to the Chairman and Deputy Chairman of the East-India Campany, respecting 
permissions to go to India, Appz. p. 363 Statement of the number of licenses to 
proceed to India granted by the Court of Directors in each year, 1814—1831 inclusive; 

_ af the number of applications refused by the Court; and of the number of the latter 

' er by the Board of Control; with a general classification as to trades, K&c., Appr. 
p- 366. 


Life, Preservation of. Commission of a bad action allowed by the Hindoo code for the 
purpose of saving life, Appr. p. 58. 


. Lighthouse. Alterations recommended in the mode of procuring an officer to perform the 


duties, which should be done by a person ngt on the strength ‘of the Indian navy, 
Appr. p. 304. 

Loan. In 1773 ‘Company applied to Parliament for a loan, which was granted, Rep. 
P- 35- ; 

Local Government. Nature of the local governments of India, Rep. p. 20 Power of | 


making and enforcing laws rests in the Governors of the respective Presidencies, and the 
three members in council, Rep. p. 21. 


M. 


Machinery. Great effect of machinery in this countr} used in manufactures in superseding 
the labour of India, Governor-general, Appz. p. 376. 


Mackenzie, Holt. Minute of Holt Mackenzie, Esq. on judicial and revenue administra- 
tion, Appz. p. 187.. ; 


Macpherson, Sir John. Low ebb at which the popular virtues of the Bengalese deserve to 
be placed, Appz. p. 36. 


: e 
Madeira. ‘Quantity of indigo imported into Great Britain from Portugal, Madeira, and the 
Azores, 1780-1830, Appz. p. 518. _ \ : 
Madras. ,, Actual collections of revenue in the districts under the Presidency of Fort 
_ St. George for 20 years,’ 1808~g—-i827-28, Appr. p. 183; Number of commissioners 
of revenue and police, judges, collectors, sub-collectors, and deputies, Appz. p. 225 
: Proposed 


E. India Affairs, 1832.] MA D . MAR 545 


e 
‘Madras—continued. 
Proposed to place the administratfon of justice under the control of seven judges of 
appeal and a p. 2#0———Average number of criminal cases in one year before 
the Circuit Court, Madras, Appx. p. 271 Reductions in the judicial department at 
Madras, as estimated. by the Ricacive Committee at Calcutta and the Madras Court of 
Sudder Adawlut, Appz. p. 277 Average annual value of exports and imports fron 
and to the Persian Gulf from the ports under the Presidency of Fort St. George, Appx. 
p- 296——Actual collections of revenue in the districts under the Presidency of Fort 
St. George for 20 years, 1808-g—1827-8, Appx. p. 323. 
See alsu Bank. 


Mahratta. Conduct of Scindia towards the Rajah of Bhopaul; expostulations of the 
British resident; abandonment of the enterprise, 4ppz. p. 133 ——~ Preparations for 
the campaign; secrecy with which they were conducted, Appa. p. 136 Charge of the 
war, Appx. p. 137 Confessions of a priSoner of the confederation of natwe powers for 
driving the British from India, Appz. p. 138 Terms offered to Scindia; his position 
obliged him to accept the humiliating terms offered, Appz. p. 138. 

See also Birman Empire. 


e ‘ . 
Magistrates. Colectors of districts invested with the powers of magistrates, Appz. p. 21. 
See also Astrology. Judicial Offices. 


Mahomedans. Mahomedan rulers generally careless as to the interests of their subjects, 
Appz. p. 6—— Great care taken by them.to introduce their language into India when 
they conquered the country, Appx. p. 84———Originally proud, fierce, and bigoted; they 
are rendered by success yet more proud, sanguinary, sensual, and bigoted, Appz. p. 40 

Regulations as to punishment of crimes on the abolition of the Mahomedan code, 

_as recommended by the Madras Court of Sudder Adawlut, Appz. p. 274. 


Mahratta. Alterations -in the judicial system and the administration of justice, Appx. . 
Pp- 244, 245. ; . : 
Malabar. Conquest of territory on the Malabar coast by the British, Appz. p. 5. 


Malcqjm, Sir Charles. Estimate given in by him of the number of vessels considered by 
him as absolutely necessary for performing the duty in the Indian seas, Appx. p. 293-——— 
Objection of the Finance Committee to the plan, Appz. p. 295. 


Malcolm, Sir John. Extract from Sir John Malcolm’s general Minute of goth November 
1830; On his administration of the Bombay Government; On. Indian Navy, Appz. 
P- 305. 

Malwa Opium. See Opium. 


Manufactures. Conviction of many Indians of the immense superiority of our manufac- 
tures over their productions, Appz. p. 86. 


Manufactures, Indian. Effects European skill and machinery have produced against the 
prosperity of India, Governor-general, Appz. P. 376 Abandonment of cotton manu- 
facture in India from the competition of English goods, Governor-general, Appx. p. 376. 


. = . . e c . Z 
Marine. Statement of the amount of revenue derived from the marine and paid to the 
Indian Treasury, in the year 1828-29, Rep. p. 4o. 


Marine Auditor. ,-Proposal for tha. abolition of the office of marine auditor, and to transfer 
the duty to the civil auditor, Appz. p. 303. 


Marine Board. ” Abolition of this establishment; business of marine accountant. can, be- 
done by accountant-general at Bombay, Appr. p. 303. 


+ 


546 ‘£°MAR *MIL . , [Report on 


Marine Pay Office. Regulations recommended for the future management of this depart- 
ment, Appz. p. 304. . 

Marine Storekeeper. No occasion for the office of separate marine storekeeper at Bombay; 
ptinciple proposed to be followed at Madras and Bengal applicable to Bombay, Appz. 
P- 303. : 

See also Navy. 
Marquis of Hastings. See Hastings, Marquis of. 
Marriages. ‘Manner in which they are arranged among the Hindoos of the higher orders, 


Appr. p. 30 Doubts as to the precautions used preserving the female character in 
reality so much as appearance, Appz... 31. ¢ . 


Master Attendant. Recommendation for the reduction of, the. salary of this officer at 
Bombay to that proposed for Bengal and Madras, Appz. p. 303. 


Mechanics. Introduction of the principle of mechanics would effectually enlighten the mass 
of the Hindoo people, Appr. p. 86—--System andeg which licenses have been granted, 
with a view to limit the number to what may be sufficient for the instruction of natives.in 
the useful arts, Appz. p. 347. 


Medical School. Proficiency of Hindoo scholars under Dr. Tytler, and in the native school 
under Dr. Breton; the pupils of which. schools are said to dissect animals, Governor- 


gqreral, Apps. p. 377- : 


Menu. The Institutes of Menu leave a latitude to the sovereign, with the advice of the 
Brahmins, to make new regulations according to occurrent necessities, Appz. p. 24. 


Merchants. Every reasonable facility given to partners or assistants in mercantile houses, 

desiring to procure license to reside in India, by the Court of Directors, Appx. p. 347 
Memorial from the principal merchants at.Calcutta to the Governor-general in 
Council in Bengal, 1829, on the inconveniences which arise to the prosecution of their 
affairs from the regulations of, to holding lands in India, Appz. p. 372. 


Metcalfe, Sir T. Minute of Sir T. Metcalfe, Member of Council at Bengal, on individual 
agency for collective boards, Appz. p. 327 Minute of Sir T. Metcalfe, concursing in 
the proposition for extending to Europeans engaged in the cultivation of indigo, facili- 
ties for holding lands, Appr. p. 373 Entire concurrence of the Governor-general in 

. the sentiments expressed by Sir C. Metcalfe as to the occupancy of land in India by 
Europeans, Jppz. p. 374- 


Military. Effect, of the system of divided government of the provinces on the military 
establishments, Appz. p.7.——-Nature of the military castes, their willingness to be 
engaged by any adventurer; take up arms as a labourer would his spade, dppz. p. 112. 

Improvement of natives in military skill since otr first conquests, Appz. p. 114. 


Military Buildings. Expenses of military buildings in India, on an average for the last ten 
years, Appx. p. 310. 


‘Military Disbursements. - Demand for military stores from Europe in future will be very 
small, Appz.*p. 309.——-Average amount of the supplies of military stores for the last 
six years, Appx. p.309-— Leathern accoutrements and en are more economically 
supplied in the country than by purchase from England; Schedules should be ex- 
changed between the presidencies, in order to progure the cheapest, articles, Appz. 
Pp. 309. 

Military Finance Committee. Appointed 1828, by the Supreme Government in India to 
revise the expenditure of the three Presidencies, Rep. p. 46, 


be 


E. India Affairs, 1832.] MIN NAT: 547 
, Sees eshte 


Mint. Statement of the revenue derived’ from this establishment in India during the year 
1828-29, Rep. p. 40. 
e 7 
Missionaries. Failure of Roman Catholic missionaries, Rep. p.26. Progress of Protestants, 
becoming daily more successful, Rep. p. 26.——-Schools established by them; number of 
scholars in Bengal, Rep. p. 26. 
Circumstanées under which licenses have: been granted to missionaries to reside in 
India. Appz. p. 346. : 


Monopoly. See Opium. Salt, Tobacco. 


Monson, Mr. Extract from a minute of Mr. Manson, respecting the rent of licenses to 
Europeans to proceed to India, Appz. P- 354. 


Montesquieu. His opinion of the effects of Ciuistianity on a community, Appr. p. 103. 


Moonsifs. Not intended by the Madras Govemmeat to confer any criminal jurisdiction 
on the district moonsifs, Appr. p. 275 Regulation of their fees, how interfered with 
by judgments of razeenamahs, Appz. p. 278 Moonsifs in Bengal far too numerous, 
and receive & miserable pittance; defects in the system of easy remedy, Appx. p. 289 

Extension of the power of moonsifs in civil suits, Appr. p. 329. ‘ 


Morals. View of the state of society among the Hindoo subjects of Great Britain, par- 
ticularly with respect to morals, Appr. p. 26. , 


Moslem Colleges have been established at various places, Rep. p. 31. 


Moturpha i is a tax upon professions and implements; collected in the Deccan with some 
trouble to the village officers, Rep. p.95. 


Munro, Colonel. See Syrian Christians. 

Munro, Sir T, See Education. Madras. 

Muslins.. Manufacture of India destroyed from British competition, Governor-general, 
Appt, p. 376. ; 

Mysore. Acquisition of provinces of this country to the British Government, Appr. p. 5 


Statement of the amount of subsidies from this source derived by the Indian revenue 
in the year 1828-29, Rep. p. 4o.: 


N. 


Nee Their government of provinces as sanctioned by the East-India Company, 1757- 
1765, Appz. p. 6-+—Power reserved, by the English during their power, 4ppr. p. 6—— 
Litile concern of the Nabobs for the prosperity of the country, Appz. p. 6. ; 


Nagpore. Conduct of the Rajah Appa Sahib ; treacherous behaviour; attempt to marder 

_ the British resident; infringement of treaties ; conduct towards him %n discovery of 
his duplicity, Appz. p. 14g, 143+ Sa 

Natives of India., How far the exclusion of natives from places of trust and emolument 
operates as a cause of discontent, Rep. p. 25-——Are employed in subordinate situations 
in the revenue, judicial, and military departments, Rep. p.25-—Reasons why they should 
be employed in higher offices, Rep. p. 25 Probable effects on the minds of the natives 


of pany extensive change in the present administration of India, Rep. p. 23- 
4A2 Consequences 


548 _ NAT NAV. [Report on 


Natives of Indea—continued + 
Consequences to the natives of the gransfer ofthe financial rights and profits of the 
country to the British, Appx. p. 8——Oppression they ere, subject to from the mode of 
collecting the revenue, Appz. p. Manner in which we may maintain that moral 
control, which will enable this country to delegate to natives those. duties which should 
be confided to them, Mackenzie, Appz. p. 188. 


- e 

Natives. Every opportunity taken of bringing forward the natives to offices of bigher 
authority than they hav® been accustomed of fill, Lushington, Appx: p. 265 
The Court of Sudder Adawlut concur with the Governor in the propriety of only a 
gradual extension of native agency in the administration of justice, Appr. p. 275 —— 
Letter from the Calcutta Civil Finance Committee to the Vice-president in Council at 
Bengal on allowances for head native subjects, 4ppz. p. 313 —— —Recommendation to 
remodel the allowances of tehsildars, Appz. p. 314 Of sheristadars, Appr. p. 314 
Opinion of Rammohun Roy, expressed gt a public meeting at Calcutta, as to the 

. value to the natives of India of the increased intercourse with the British, Appz. p. 476. 


atipe Agents. See Bagdad. Bussorah. 


Native States. List of native states not under British protection ; native states with which 
subsidiagy treaties exist; native states under British protection, but Without subsidiary 
treaties ; state pensioners, Rep. p. 103, 104. 


‘Navigation. The commerce of India in relation to the general interests of trade and 
navigation, Rep. p. 76. 

Navy. The expense of the King’s naval force employed in the Indian seas is paid by the 
public ; but if augmented on application from the Court, the expense is chargeable upon 
the territorial revenues, Rep. p. 48. 

Statement of the charges and stores of the Indian navy at Bombay, 1825-26—1830-31, 
Appx. p. 292—-Number of ships and other vessels composing the force of the Indian 
Navy, Appz. p. 293—— Expense of the surveyjng ship Benares ; recommendation that 

. the complement be reduced, and that she be laid up as soon as possible, Appx. p. 297 

Exorbitant expenditure on the pilot brig Palinurus, dppz. -p. 298 Com- 

parative statement of the expense of the crews of a Bengal pilot brig and of the 

-Palinures, Appz. p. 298 List shewing the number and strength of vessels main- 

tained by the Bombay Presidency 1828-1830, Appr. p. 299 Letter from the 

Calcutta Civil Finance Committee to the Governor-general in’ Council at Bengal, 

on the Indian navy, Appr. p. 202 Extract from Sir John Malcolm’s general 

minute of 30 November 1830, on his administration of the Bombay Government, on 

Indian navy, Appx. p. 305 Estimate given by Sir. C. Malcolm, superintendant of 

the Indian na¥y, of the smallest. ndmber of vessels that can possibly be done with, 

without allowing for extra service, or small expeditions against pirates, Appz. p. 293 

Employment of ships of war not always necessary for services here mentioned, Appr. 

Pp. 295 Strength of the navy ought to be greatly reduced below the above estimate, 

Appx. p..294 No necessity for constant interference with piratical states; His 

Majesty’s navy fitter than the Indian navy for managing them, Appz. p. 294 Com- 

pany’s Government have no authority over the King’s navy, Appz. p. 294 Alterations 

proposed to be made in the marine force kept in the Gulf of Persia, Appz. p. 2044 

Number of officers belonging to the naval service, Appz. p. 301 Which is greater 

than that required for the ships to-be continued in commissfon, Appx. p. 301 Regu- 

lations have been introduced, which have greatly improved the efficiengy of the service, 

Matcolm, Appr. p::306——~-Found practicable. to perform the duties of the Indian navy, 

with a less establishment than that proposed, Malcolm, Appx. p. 306—-—Doubts as to 

trade not being injured by ‘our relaxing to keep down piracy in the Persian ..Gulf, 

Appz. p. 306. ~ ; 7 g 

‘ ; ee 


Fy 


E. India Affairs, 1832.]  N AV oUD 549 
cqemenremnnsns cvs conemnstnnnennsenttrchenres titi i seer AEE TIE DS ES GY 


Navy—continued. on 
See also Boatmaster. Lighthouse. Marie Auditor. Marine Board. Marine Pay 
Office. Marine Storekeeper: Master Attendant. Storekeeper. Superintendant. 
Surat. Timber. ; : . 
Nepaul. Conduct of the war by the Marquis of Hastings; result of the struggle; loans 
obtained by the Governor-general from the sovereign of Oude, Appr. p. 132. 
Nerbuddah. Statement of the amount of revenue derived,in India from this source, 
1828-29, Rep. p. 40. : . 
Netherlands. Quantity of indigo imported into Great Britain from the Netherlands, 1780- 
1830, Appa. p. 518. . F ; . 
Nomination. Objections to the present mode of nomination for Indian offices, Rep. p. 28 
No evidence casting atly imputation on the manner in which Directors have used the 
power ; nomination by individuals not thaest mode of securing bigh taleng, Rep. p. 28. 


Suffered 


Northern Circars. Acquirement of these provinces by the British, Appz. p. 4 
extremely from the mal-administtation of the natives, Appz. p. 22. 


O. 


Observatory. Extract of a letter from the Calcutta Civil Finance Committee to the 
Government in Council, recommending the retention of the observatory at Madras, 
Appx. p. 163. | 

Opinion. How far the authority of our government in India depends upon, public opinion, 
Appx. p. 24. 

Opium. Amount of revenue supplied to the government of Bengal by their monopoly of 
vpium, Rep. p.89———Iu the present state of the Revenue not advisable to abandon sq 
important a source of revenue, Rep. p. 89 —— Methods suggested for collecting the duty 
in lieu of that at present practised, Rep. p. go Plan of levying an additional assess- 

- ment on lands under poppy cultivation appears consistent with justice to proprietors and 
cultivators, Rep. p. 90 Plan of assessing the standing crop when ripe according to 
its value appears impracticable, Rep. p. go——Plan of allowing free cultivation of poppy 
subject to an excise duty. would be liable to insuperable objections, Rep. p.go—— 
Custom duty on the exportation of opium appears a desirable mode of taxation, which 
would fall exclusively on the foreign consumer, Rep. p. 90 Monopoly does not 
appear to be productive of very extensive or aggravated injury, Rep.’p. qi Revenue 
derived from opium of the most precarious kind, Rep. p. 91~—~Monopoly much affected 
by the competition of Malwa opium, Rep. p.g1 Satisfactory results of the transit 
duty on Malwa opium, Rep. p. 91 Statement of the amount of revenue derived from 
this source to the Indian Treasury, in the year 1828-29, Rep. p. 40 Large augmen- 
tation of revenue from the opium monopoly, partly owing to the increased demand from 

' China, Rep. p. 412——Revenue derived from opium is endangered by the competition of 
opium grown under a system of free cultivation in Malwa, Rep. p. 71. 

Oriental Languages. See Languages. . 

Orissa. War with Cossim Ali, and consequent acquirement of the province by the British, 
Appx. p.7- y 
Oude. Dependence ot the territory.of Oude upon the British, Appx. p. 5.—-~Wretched 
condition of the: population, Appz. p.6——-Shujah Dowlah restored by Lord Clive to 
that government, Appr. p.19.—--Nominal] fealty of the Nabob Vizier to the house of 
Timour; throwing off his dependence encouraged by-the British ; his assumption, with 

the countenance of the Governor-general, of the title of king, Appx. p.153- 


550 PAG PIN [Report on 


*P, 
Pagodas. See Endowments. 


Palampore. Proposed abolition of the office of resident, and its incorporation with a new 
office, to be called Political Commissioner in Guzerat, Appr. p. 234. 


Palinurus. See Navy. 


Patrick, Mr. Cotton twist manufactory erecting by him on an estate held in fee-simple 
under a grant from Warren Hastings, Governor-general, Appz. p. 376. 


Patronage. Power in whom vested, Rep. p..2 Board of Control have no share in the 
distribution of Iudian patronage, Rep. p. 27 Patronage exercised by the President 
of the Board of Control, Rep. p. bP aotage exerciseg! in India amounts to a large 
share of the whole, Rep. p. 27— —No public responsibility attaches to the patronage of 

- Directors, Rep. p.27.——Amount of patronfge fluctuating, Rep. p. 28 Objections to 
the present mode of nomination, Rep. p.28——If competition were acted on, and natives 
more generally appointed, amount of patronage would be greatly abridged, Rep. p. 28 

Suggestion that it might be given as reward of talent at public schools, Rep. p. 28 

——Compensation proposed for Directors in the event of any change,Kep. p. 28. 

e 


Pattison, James. Letter from John Jebb and James Pattison, Esq. to the Right hon. 
George Canning, dated February 1818, respecting the grant of licenses to proceed to 
India, Appr. p. 346. 

“Peishwa. Murder of the minister of the Guickwar by his favourite ; safety guaranteed by 
the British; apprehension of the murderer ; his escape, Appx. p. 137——-Treachery of his 
conduct in the murder of a minister of a neighbouring state, and of British officers tra- 
velling in his dominions ; impossibility of trusting him, Appz. p. 142 His present 
residence, and allowance of the British Government for his maintenance, Appz. p. 143. 


Persia, Gulf of. Great increase in the political expenses of the Gulf of Persia within the 
last few years, Appz. p. 237-——No reasonable grounds for continuing such costly agen- 
cies as are now maintained, Appx. p. 237 Proposed alterations as to future establish- 
ments, Appz. p. 238——-Opinion of the Finance Committee at Calcutta, that there 
does not exist a necessity for a constant interference with the piratical states, Appr. p. 293 

Alterations proposed to be made in the marine force kept in the Gulf, Appx. p. 294 

Officers who will become unnecessary by proposed alterations, and saving thereby, 
Appr. p. 295 Statement of the extent and value of trade between India and the 
Persian Gulf, 1821-22, 1827-28, Appz. p. 206: Doubts as to the poy of with- 
cune our oaval protection, and not keeping down the piratical powers, Malcolm, Appx. 
p: 306. 

Petty Sessions. Court peculiar to Bombay, Appr. p. 242 
abolition of an officer called the assessor, Appz. p. 242. 


é 
Recommendation for the 


Phousdary. Criminal court of India, which raised arevenue by the imposition of fines upon 
crimes and misdemeanors, Appz. ‘p. 15. 


Pilgrim Taxes. Nature of these taxes, Rep. p.98 No. shops, booths or stalls can be 
erected during festivals, without paying a fee tor the license, Rep. p. 98 No pilgrim 
taxes in the Madras Presidency ; offerings to |i temples applied to usages of the 
State, after paying the expenses of the temple, Rep. p. 98. ed , 


Pindarries. Atrocious conduct of these robbers, Appa. B. 130—-- Necessity of the extinc- 
tion of so intolerable an evil as the hordes of Pindarries, Appx. p. 138———Offers of assis- 
tance to the Pindarries from Scindia,. Appz. p. 138--—Their constant pillage of the 
Rajpoot states, Appz. p. 139. -, 


E. India Affairs, 1832.] PIR POR 551 


Pirates. Opinion of the Finance Committee, that there does not exist a necessity for a 
constapt interference with the piratical states, Appr. p. 293——- His Majesty’s navy the 
best force for managing pirates, Appz. p. 294——-— Rare occurrence of pirates within late ‘ 
years in the Gulf of Persia, Appx. p. 295—-——Practice of piracy on vessels bearing the 
British flag has ceased, Appx. p. 295 And in respect of, other vessels infinitely less 
frequent than at any former period, Appz. p. 295 Doubts as to the policy of not pro- 
tecting trade 4nd not keeping down piracy in the Persian Gulf, Malcolm, Appz. p. 306 

Goods formerly conveyed in British vessels now taken ky Arabs ; good effect of this 
in ceveying piracy, by giving other employment to men and shipping, Malcolm, Appz. 
p. 306. : 

Planters. Statement of European indigo planters in the several districts of the Western 
and Lower Provinces; factories, and extent of cultivation; number of civil and criminal 
cases decided for and against them for the last five years; abstracts of opinions recorded. 
by magistrates and commissioners’ of cirapit regarding the neeessity of legislative pro- 
visions for the effectual subjection of the indigo planters and their servants to the control 
of the law, Appz. p. 403, 455——Statement, showing the number of indigo factories in 
the several districts under the Bengal Presidency ; also the number of European indigo 
planters proprietors of estates, and number of European assistants resident in the 
several districts*under the Bengal government, Appz. p. 465. 


Police. See Judicial Officers. 
Political Finances. See Commercial and Political. 


Political Agents. Opinion of the Court of Directors that political agencies are considerably 
more numerous than an exclusive attention to British interests either requires or justifies, 
Appx. p. 234——Alteration as to the Baroda, Guzerat and Palampore agencies, Appz. 
p- 234——Great increase in the political expenses of the Gulf of Persia within the last 
few years, Appr. p. 237 No reasonable ground for continuing such costly agencies as 
are now maintained, Appz. p. 237—+-Regulations proposed respecting the reduction of - 
the expenses of political agents, Appr p. 285. 

See Bagdad. . Baroda. Guzerat. Palampore. 


Political state of Hindostun. Probabilities of changes likely to take place by the intro- 
duction of Christianity, Appx. p. 98-106——Small probability of Hindoos ‘possessing 
any desire for English liberty, Appz. p. 106 No analogy between the Indian settle- 
ments and the United States, Appz. p. 106, 110 Necessity of the country remaining 
under the power of the principal maritime state, Appr. p. 109. 


Political and Foreign. List of the several States, arranged according to the nature of their 
relations to the British Government; viz. Foreign independent States; Native States 
not under British protection ; Native States with which subsidiary treaties exist ; Native 
States under British protection,, but without subsidiary treaties; state pensioners, 
Rep. p. 103, 104. , : 

Poojah. Account of the religious ceremony of the Hindoos called Poojah, Appr. p. 72. + 


Poorannee. Description of the reading of the holy writings of the Hindoos by a pooran- 
nee, and the effect thereof upon the sooders. Appz. p. 67.) 

Poppy Lands. See Opium. 

Population. OF various territories of the British in India, Appz. p. 4, 5- 

Portugal, &c. Quantity of indigo imported into Great Britain from Portugal, Madeira, and. 
the Azores, 1780-1830, Appz. p. 518. 

Portuguese. Their empire in the East, acquired by romantic bravery, was unsystematic 
and rapacious, Appr. p,123.. 


552 PQS | RAT _ [Report on- 


° 
Post-office. Manner in-which mails are carried by runners, Rep. p. 97——Horse post 
was tried in-Deccan, but was discontinwed, Rep.%p. 97—-—Not much used by natives; 
Government despatches sent free ; public servants are alfywed to frank without restriction 
as to weight or number, Rep. p. 97 Statement of the amount of revenue derived from 
this source in India. during the year 1828-20, Rep. p. 4o. 


Power-looms.’ Effect of their use in England on manufactures of India, Governor-general, 
Appz. p. 376. r 

Prerogative, Specimens of laws which establish some of the prerogatives and duties of 
the chief magistrate or ruler, Appz. p. 50. : 


Press. Regulations relative thereto, Rep. p. 31——Native press at Calcutta under the 
same restrictions as the English press there, Rep. p.31*—Power of the Government 
over the press, Rep. p. 32-——Intelligence has been received of the removal of the cen- 
sorship at Madras, Rep. p.32. os : 

Prinsep, Mr. Mr. Prinsep’s Notes on the indigo trade, and his Remarks on Mr. Ross’ 

. proposition for amending Regulations between plantgrs and ryots, Appz. p. 438. 


Property. Specimens of Hindoo law as to gifts, and succession to fhe property of 
Brahmins, Appz. p. 55. ee 

Promotion, Is regulated on the principle of seniority, as a general rule, or by selection, 
as exigencies may require, Rep. p. 27. 


Provincial Courts. Code of criminal law in force in provincial courts ; reciprocal circum- 
stances of Europeans and natives with respect to administration of justice, Rep. p. 24. 
Effects of the judicial system as to security of persons aud property of natives; expe- 
diency of subjecting Haplihiien to the Guriadjetion of the provincial tribunals, Rep. 

24, 25. 
i Alterations recommended in provincial courts of appeal and circuit, Appz. p.261 
No objection to the immediate abolition of the offices of pundit in all provincial courts, 
Lushington, Appx. p. 268 Expenses of the*native establishment of four provincial 
courts at Madras, Appz. p. 277. 


R. 


Rajpoot. General feature of our engagements with the Rajpoot princes, Rep. p. 109 —— 
Rajpoot chiefs men of high military spirit, and would be likely to revolt from vexa- 
tious restraints, Rep. p. 1o9——Our policy to interfere as little as possible in their 
affairs, Rep. p.gog. se 

Treaties entered into with these states by the British Government ; their reciprocal 
estrangements prevented their ever forming any union, Appx. p.139.——Nature of their 
engagements with the British, Appz. p. 140. " 


Rammohun Roy. Remarks by him on the advantages and disadvantages likely to occur 
to India and the government thereof by the British, by permitting Europeans to settle or 
colonise in India, Appz. p.'466 His opinion expressed at a public meeting at Calcutta 
as to the adyantages to be derived by the natives of India from intercourse with Euro- 
peans, Appx. p. 476——His opinion that the condition of ryots has not been improving 
in any degree within his recollection, Appz. p. 501 Hiseopinion that in the districts 
of Bengal and Behar natives residing in the neighbourhood are better conditioned than 


~ 


those who live at a distance, Appz. p. 501. 
Rattray, Mr. His minute on the indigo trade; loss and vexation to which planters are 
‘subject by the difficulty of procuring redress for breaches of contract; Appr. -p. 42 
Proposed modification of sect. 5. Reg. VI. of 1823, Appz: p. 425. . 


E. India Affairs, 1832.] REC REV 553 


e 
Recovery of Debts. See Debts. 


Red Sea.’ Best method of keeping up communication between India and Europe; ports 
at which steamers should touch; places at which coals should be taken in, Malcolm, 
Appz. p. 307. 

Registered Debt. Consists of sums raised from time to time .on loan, at interest, Rep. 
Pp- 54——The first creation does not appear to have been directly authorized by the 
Charter of the East India Company, or by Act-of Parliaurent; but subsequent enact- 
ments of the Legislature have fully recognised it, Rep. p. 54 Arrangements since the 
year 1808 for reduction of the interest, &c. pf the debt, Rep. p. 54, 55——Nature of the 
remittable: and non-remittable debt, Rep, p. 56, 

e 


Religion. Expediency of framing a law for defining and regulating the-civil rights of the 
natives in the case of change of religion, Rep. p. 26 Desirable to extend perfect 
toleration to native Christians, and to rem ve disabilities to their prejudices Rep. p. 26. 

Nature and correctness of the informatiun at present possessed of their religion, 
Appz. p. 44, 45 Institutes of Akber; partly employed upon the religion and sciences 
of the Hindoos, Appz. p. 44 View of the tenets and institutions which have a direct 
influence upofi the morals and sentiments of the people, Appz. p. 64-81. 


See also Bishop of Calcutta. Christianity. Missionaries. 


Remittance. Remittance of Territorial funds; Territorial charges, for which remittances 
must be annually made from India to England, Rep. p. 63 Remittances are effected 
Banepa by payments to the Commercial branch, Rep. p, 63———Since 1814 the Com- 
pany have remitted through. their trade more advantageously than if they had resorted 
to private bills, Rep. p. 64——-Peculiar importance attaches to the command of the 
China trade, as_the channel through which nearly half the remittances to England. have 

., been effected, Rep. p. 64——-Opinions have been confidently expressed that no material 

’ difficulty would exist in making the remittances in question, independently of the, 
Company’s trade ; modes by which this might be done, Rep. p. 64. 


Rent. Principle upon which a landholder in Hindostan regulates his rent, Appz. p. 8. 
Residence of Europeans in India. See Europeans. . 


Revenue. Gross revenues ‘of the three presidencies and the subordinate settlements during 
15 years, ending 1828-29, Rep. p. 4o———Statement for 1828-29 of the proportions in 
which the revenue is derived from different sources, Rep. p. 40———Gross revenues of 
India have progressively increased, Rep. p. Amount 1811-14 and 1828-29, Rep. 

‘ p. 40-——Causes which have contributed to tWe increase, Rep. p. 40. » - 
In Hindostan : 5 
Principally arises from land, Appr. p. 7—Share of the Government not unfrequently 
paid in kind, Appz. p. 8 Evils of the present system, Appr. p. 8——-Consequences of 
the change to the natives of Bengal of the revenue becoming the right of the Kast-India 
Company, Appz. p.9 Fall-off of the revenue of Bengal, 1757-69, Appz. p. 10—— 
Alteration§ made in 1772 produced most unhappy effects, Appz. p17, 
Madras: . ° 
Actual collections of revenue in the districts under the presidency of Fort St. George 
for 20 years, 1808-9 to 4827-28, Appz. p. 184——Letter from the Calcutta Civil 
Finance Committee to the Governor-general in Council at Bengal, on Revenue and 
Judicial system, Appx. p. 169. * 
Revenue of. the Ceded and Conquered ‘Provinces of Bengal, Rep. p. 83. 
Actual collection of revenue in the districts under the presidency of Fort St. George 
for 20 years, 1808-9 to 1827-28, Appr. p. 323. 
* - 4B See 


554 RE Vv “RYO. [Report on- 


Revenue—continued. 


See also Bax, J. Customs. Extraovdinary Receipgs. Farming Lands. Finance: 
Hill, D. Land Redenue. Mackenzie,H. Opium. Pilgrim Tax. Post-office. Ryotwar. 
Salt. Sayer and Abkarree. Stamps. Supervisors. Transit Duties. Tobacco. Town 
Duties. Village System. Wheel Tax. Semindary System. 


Revenue Officers. Laborious investigation necessary to prevent frauds ‘on the revenue, 
Appx. p. 8——Exactions ef these officers, Appz. p. 123 Doubts as to expediency of 
drawing an absolute line of separation between the revenue and judicial officers of Go- 
vernment, Mackenzie, Appz. p. 187 Present expenses of the Revenue department at 
Bombay, Appr. p. 250———Reduction in the number of collectorates, Appz. p. 251—— 
Duties intrusted to the upper classes of natives are of a most important nature, Lushing- 
ton, Appx. p. 265. 


Revenue, Collgction of. Since the fall of Mogal empire the collection of the revenue has 
been a most debasing struggle between the superior and inferior in every gradation, 
_ Appx. p. 8. : s 
Revenue Surveyors. In Bengal ought to be reduced, and employed merely as topographical 
surveyors, Apps. p. 291. ot 
Roads. Great improvements which took place in the formation of roads during the admi- 
nistration of the Marquis of Hastings, Appz. p. 149. 


Robbers. Castes of robbers and thieves who consider themselves acting in their proper pro- 
fession, Appx. p. 29 ——Destruction of thugs; bands of robbers in conjunction with 
Scindia’s forces, Appr. p. 141 Mode of sharing among robbers, Appr. p. 56 Orga- 
nized gangs, denominated Lateals, under regular sirdars, live by hiring themselves to 
fight the battles of indigo planters, Appz. p. 492. 


Robertson, Dr. His opinion as to the number of Christians at present in India, Appe. p. 95. 


*Roman-catholics. Zeal of the Roman-catholics in gheir attempts to propagate Christianity 
in India, Appr. p. 92. , 
See also Missionaries. 
Roman Syrians. See Syrians. 


Ross, Mr. His minute on intercourse betweeu European and Native inhabitants, Appx. 
p- 402— —His Minute concerning the indigo trade, and the relative rights of planters and 
ryots, in their advances and contracts for sowing and delivering indigo, Appz. p. 421 
Regulation proposed to amend the law, Appx. p. 428 ——Europeans to be permitted'to 
purchase, rent and occupy land, Appr. 1p 428. 


Ryois. Effects Which the cultivation of indigo by European capital has had on the class 
of ryots, Appr. p. 499 Nature of khoodkast ryots, Appr. p. 500 Ryots are those 
who have no title to their land than what they derive from the zemindar, Appx. p. 500 

Opinion of Rammohun Roy, that the condition of ryots has not been improving in 

any degree within his recollection, Appx. p. 501 His opinion that in the districts of 

Bengal aid Behar, natives’ residing in the neighbourhood of indigo plantatiogs are better 

clothed and better conditioned than those who live at a distance, Appz. p. 501. 


Ryotwar Syste®. Nature of this.system of collecting the land revenue, Rep. p.80 System 
introduced by Sir T. Munro, of paying in sums valued on eagh field, Rep. p. 80~-—- Views 
of Lord Hastings as to the introduction of this system into the Upper Provinces of 
Bengal, Rep. p.83 This assessment could not be made without actual survey ; manner 
in which this work was conducted by Sir T. Munro, Rep. p. 86-——Amount of revenue in 
‘1807, as compared with the increase in 1827, Rep. p. 86-——— Working of the ryotwar sys- 
tem in Coimbatoor, which was established in 1815, and has been successful, Rep. p. 86. 


~ 


E. India Affairs, 1832.) “SAC SHE 555 
A SE ES EDV PC 


S.e 


Sacrifices, With the Hindoos aredeemed eminent means of obtaining absolution from guilt, 
Apps. p. 66. 


Salaries. Propo8ed Regulations regarding salaries of judicial officers, Appr. p. 175. 


Salt. Statement of the amount of revenue derived from the alt monopoly in India in the 
year 1828-29, Rep. p. 40 There has been a large augmentation of the revenue from 
this monopoly, Rep. p. 40 Manufacture of salt held as a Government monopoly for 
the purpose of raising a reyenue, Rep. pe 88—.-Manner of disposing of salt in Bengal, 
Rep. p. 88 Average amount of net revenue from these sources during three years, 
Rep. p. 88 Difficulty of any change in the mode of collecting the revenue, Rep. 
p- 88 Manufacture of salt by privateyndividuals would endanger the gecurity of the 
revenue, Rep. p. 89-——Desirable to encourage a supply of salt by importation, Rep. 
p- 89 Changes which might be introduced to benefit the population without hurting 
the Government, Rep. p. 89 ——Benefit which the natives would derive from a cheap 
supply of salé is of the utmost importance, Rep. p. 89. 


Sayer and Abkarree. Statement for the year 1828-29, of the amount of reverfue derived 
in India from this source, Rep. p. 40 Sayer duties as distinct from abkatree, are 
town duties, and duties in bazaars and markets, Rep. p. 94——Pilgrimage duties 
included in the term sayer, Rep. p.94——Fixed customs duties in lieu thereof have been 
established in many places, Rep. p- 94——~Nature of moturpha and bullooteh duties, 

. p- 95——In many cases it is suggested they might be consolidated and thrown 
upon the land, Rep. p. 95 ———Nature of the term abkarree, and articles subject to this 
duty, Rep. p.95——These taxes cause little complaint, Rep. p. 95. 


Schools. .Ease and slight expense with which schools might be established in India, for 
the purpose of gratuitous instruction dn reading and writing English, Appz. p. 85. 


Scrafton, Mr. Cruelty and rapacity of the Gentoos ; infamous character of the Brahmins, 
Appx. p- 33+ , 

Sealy, Mr. His minute on the indigo trade; concerning the protection of planters with 
ryots who have neglected to sow their seed, 4ppz. p. 423. ; 


Secret Committee. Manner in which it is formed; committee and officers sworn to 
secrecy ; control of the Board in issuing’ orders and instructions relating to war and 
peace, Rep. p. 13,14. 

Secretary of State. Suggestion that the desBatches now sent by the’ Board of Controi 
through the Secret Committee might emanate from a secretary of state for India, Rep. 
p- 20. ° 


Seeks. Rise of this religious order, who have abjured the’ Brahminical faith, Appr. p. 88. 


Servants. Punishment of servants, according to the Hindoo law, committing crimes by 
order of their masters; divers cases of licentiousness, Appx. p. 57———Objections of the 
Court of Directors to grant licenses.for the residence of menial sarvants in India, 
Appr. p. 348. 

Settlement of Europeans in“India. See Europeans. 


Shakespear, Mr. Mr. Shakespedt’s Notes on the indigo trade, and his Remarks on Mr. 
Ross’s proposed Regulations for the adjustment of questions between planters and ryots. 
Appx. p. 445. 

Sheristadars. See Natives. 

4Bea 


556 SHI ‘STE . [Report on 
Shipping. Statement showing the number of vesselg employed in the trade of the Persian’ 
Gulf, 1821-22, to 1827-28, from the different Governments of Bengal, Madras and 


Bombay, distinguishing the English and Arab shipping, and showing the arrivals and 
departures in each year, Appx. p. 297. : 


Shore, Mr. The natives of India are timid and servile; they make. no scruple of lying ; 
and their greatest disgrace is excommunication, Appr. p. 35———Necessary to be long 
acquainted with them before their character can be understood, Appz. p. 35 Extract 
from Mr. Shore’s remarks, 1785, concerning the granting license for the residence of 
Europeans in India, Appr. p. 355+ : 


Silk. -Method, of winding silk according to theeItalian methgd successfully introduced into 
India, Appx. p.88 Probable annihilation of the silk manufacture in India from 
British competition, Governor-general, Appz. p. 376. " 

See also {mports. ; 


Sin. ‘Ceremonies, according to the Hindoo religion, for the expiation of the guilt of sin, 
Appx. p. 64 Which generally consist in pilgrimages, ablutions, penances, &c. Appz. 
p- 65 Methods devised for the benefit of those who have not been sufficiently careful 
during their own lives, to insure the pardon of their sins, Appz. p. 66. © 


Slander. Panishaients awarded by the Hindoo code of laws for scandalous and bitter 
expressions, Appz. p. 58. 


Slavery. Specimens of Hindoo law as to the regulation concerning slavery, Appz. p. 55. 
Society for promoting Christian Knowledge. See Christian Knowledge. 


Soneasses. A set of vagrant devotees, whom the Hindoo law allows females to converse 
with, Appz. p. 31.° 


Spain. Quantity of indigo imported into Great Britain from Spain and’ the Canaries, 
1780—1830, Appz. p. 518. vs 

Spanish Colonies. Quantity of indigo imported into Great Britain from countries on the 
Continent of America formerly under the dominion of Spain, 1780—1830, Appz. p. §18. 


Spirits. Nature of the duties levied on spirit, which are chiefly levied by means of licenses 
to open shops, Rep. p. 95 Still-head duty on spirits manufactured in the English 
fashion, Rep. p. 95. 


Stamps. Statement of the revenue deriv! from this source in India during the year 
1828-29, Rep. 40 This tax establish in Bengal, 1797, Rep. p. 97 Towns of 
Bombay and Madras within the jurisdiction of King’s courts are exempted, Rep. p. 97 

-Instruments which are liable to this duty in Bengal, Rep. p. 97 Distribution 
takes place as in this country, Rep. p. 97 In Madras duties were imposed, 1808, on 
legal proceedings,.in 1816 on bonds, &c.; revenues from this source stationary, Rep. 
p: 98 —— Use of stamped paper considerably checks forgery of deeds, &c. Rep. p. 98 
Established at Bombay, Hes. p- 98. 


State Pensioners. List of the royal families of India who have, ‘under various circum- 
stances, become state pensioners to the East India Company, Rep. p. 104——Are greatly 
attached to the remnant ‘of dignity which is left to them, Hep. p. 110—No apprehen- 
sion of their disturbing India, Rep. Pp. 110. 


State of Society. View of the state of society among the Hindoo subjects of Great Britain, 
particularly with respect to morals, Appz. p. 26. 


Stealing. Specimens of Hindoo laws, which award punishment for stealing, App: p- 53- 


E. India Affairs, 1892] STE SUP 557 


e 
Steam Vessels. Importance of having an establishment of steam-vessels attached to the 
Indian navy, for purposes of war, and keepingeup communication, Malcolm, Appr. p. 307 
——Best manner of keeping hp the communication between Europe and India by the 
Red Sea ports, at which depdts of coal must be kept, Malcolm, Appz. p. 307-———Import- 
ance of teaching Indians to navigate steam vessels, Malcolm, Appr. p. 308. 


See also Hugh Lindsay . 


Steer, Mr. Officiating judge of circuit; his report of the Igwless conduct pursued by 
indigo planters in the province of Dacca Jelalpore, Appr. p. 393- 


Stock. See Capital Stock, Dividends. 7 


Subsidiary States. List of the native states of*India, with whom subsidiary treaties exist, Rep. 
p; 104———Leading features which are common to all treaties of this nature, Rep. p. 105 
——Opinions as to whether the subsidiary system be favourable to the happiness of the 
great body of the people, are greatly div@tsified, Rep. p. 106 ——Constan? interference 
of the British Government necessary, Rep. p. 107 To abandon the system would be 
attended with difficulty and danger, Rep. p. 108. 


Sudder Dewannee Adawlut. This court has been placed on a footing applicable to the 
recent changes ® the judicial administration at Bombay, Appz. i 243———One of the 
members of this court,should always be a member of Government, Appz. p. 260 Salary 
of the Registrar of the Sudder Adawlut, who also receives the salary of a deputy; ob- 
jectionable natute of this arrangement, Appr. p. 260 ; Lushington, Appz. p. 260——Dis- 
continuance of the third judge of the Sudder Adawlut, Lushington, Appz. p. 260-—— 
Extract from the proceedings of the Court of Sudder Adawlut at Madras, dated 19th 
Oct. 1830, Appz. p. 270--——Proposed to place the administration of justice in Madras, 
under the control of seven judges.of appeal and circuit, Appr. p. 270. 


Sudder Ameens. The Madras Court of Sudder Adawlut do not think that these officers can 
be gradually reduced to the situation’and pay of district moonsifs, Appr. p. 280. 


Suicide. Description of divers kinds of “suicide, held by the Hindoos to be meritorious, 
Appz. p. 67.. 

Supercargoes. Generally the practice of the Court of Directors to grant licences to persons 
for the purpose of trading for a limited period, Appz. p. 347. 


Superintendent of the Navy. Recommendation that this office, when vacant, should be 
conferred upon a naval officer, and that the salary should be reduced, Appz. p. 303. 


Supervisors. Their institution was the first ste(§towards an English provincial administra- 
tion, and the remote beginning of a new syst@ more open to the influeace of the British 
principles, Appz. p. 11. 

Supreme Courts. Extends to Europeans generally, Rep. p. 24——Jury system is confined 
entirely within the limits of the Supreme Courts, Rep. p. 24 Severity of the criminal 
Jaw, and expense of the civil law in these courts, Rep. p. 24 Evil effects of collisions 
between the locel courts and King’s courts, Rep. p. 24 Expenses incurred on ac- 
count of the Supreme Courts of Justice at the three Presidencies, 1829, compared with 
the amount 1823; cause of the excess pf charge at Bombay, Appz. p. 341 Sugges- 
tions for the reduction of the establishment of three judges of Supreme Courts at Madras 
and Bombay, Appz. p. 311%—-Authority to be exercised by the Supreme Court should be 
better defined, and its process regulated, Governor-general, Appx. p. 382-——Should be 
rendered a component part of tiie judicial establishment ; Government should be vested 
with power ta legislate equally for all parties, Europeans and natives, Governor-general, 
Appt. p. 382 Disputes between. British subjects can be decided by action in the 
Supreme Court at the Presidency only, Appz. p. 484. 


558 SUR TER [Report on 
e 
Surat. Abolition of the offices of senior officer at Surat and agent for procuring lascars, 
recommended by the Calcutta Finance Committe€, Appt. p- 304. 


Survey. Letter fron the Calcutta Civil Finance Committee to the Governor-general in 
Council at Bengal, dated 1 May 1830, on the abolition of Deccan revenue survey, Appz. 
p- 258-——Motives which determined the Committee .to recommend this reduction, 
Appr. p- 259. . 


Surveyors. See Revenue Sirveyors. 


Suttee. Laws relating to the burning of Hindoo widows on the death of their husbands, 
Appz. p. 6o———Probable number of yomen ganually destroyed in Hindostan far exceeds 
the general conception of Europeans, Appr. p. 61 Seealso notes to pages 61 and 62 

Indifference with which this rite has been looked on py Europeans, Appz. p. 83. 


Swartz, Mr.» His zealous conduct as a miss®@nary; estimation in which he is held by all 
parties; his refusal to become the guardian of the son of the King of Tanjore; Colonel 
Fullerton’s opinion of his merits, Appx. p. 94-——Kxtract from the transactions of the 
Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge for the year 1795; letter from him to the 
Rev. D. Gaskin, secretary to the society, Appz. p. 124. 


Syrian Christians. Sketch of the state of Christianity in India in the early ages, and of 
Syrian Christians ; benefit received by them from the institution of a college by Colonel 
Munro, one 26——-Roman Syrians have a college at Verapoly, Rep. p. 26——-Roman 
Syrians and Syrians about equal in numbers, Rep. p. 26. . . 


si 


Tamerlane. . His character of the. natives of Hifidostan, whom he represents as equally 
debilitated in their corporeal and inert in their mental faculties, Appr. p. 40. 
e 


Tanjore, King of. See Swartz, Mr, 


Tea. Is the only article imported from China by the East-India Company, Rep. p. 74. 
Tehsildars. See Natives. 


Territorial Administration, Brief view o% British territorial administration in the East, 

Territorial Charges. In what territorial clfarges consist ; charges at the three presidencies 
during the fifteen years ending 1828-29, Rep. p. 42 Gross charges of the Indian 
territory have augmented ia a greater proportion than the receipts, Rep. p. 42 
Charges for buildings and fortifications, 1814-15, and several subsequent years, Rep. 
P: 43 Increase of the civil charges ; heads of account under which the civil charges 
were so Jargely increased in Bengal, Rep. p. 43, 44+ : 


Territorial Charges in England. Nature . of, these charges, Rep. p. 47 Average 
amount of these charges for fifteen years, Rep. p. 47 Annual average investment 
‘from ‘tertitorial funds, 1814-15, 1821-22, 1822-23 to 1826-%7, Rep. p. 63 Territorial 
charges, interest on debt, and other demands, Rep. p, 64. 


Territorial Debt. Amount of the debt in India, 1792, 1809, 1814, 1829, Rep. p. 53—— 
Territorial debts owing by the East India Company consist of two déscriptions, Rep. 
P: 54 


E. India’ Affairs, 1832] TER TRA 559 
a ee ee ee 2 


Territorial Deficit. Surplus revenue in Bengal, which has always supplied the deficits ot 
Madras and Bombay, Rep. p. 494——-Aimount Of deficit at Madras, on.an annual average, 
Rep. p. 50 Amount of deficit at Bombay, on an annual average, Rep. p. 50—— 
Accounts for the subordinate settlements exhibit a deficiency of revenue to meet charges, 
Rep. p. 50 At Bencoolen, Prince of Wales’ Island, Singapore and Malacca, there was 
a deficiency, Rep. p. 50——sinnual average deficiency at St. Helena, Rep. p. 50.— 
Manner in which deficiencies have been supplieds Rep. p. 52, 


Territorial Finances. The connexion of the Territorial Finances with the coinmerce of the 
East India Company, Rep. p 60.——Advanjage derived by the finances of India from 
their existing connexion with the commeyce of the Company, Rep. p. 60. 

zs 


Territorial Possessions. Legislative enactments respecting Territoriak possessions com- 
menced 1767, Rep. p. 34———Sums paid to the public by the East-India Company, Rep. 
P- 35- 


Territorial and Commercial Branches. State of accounts between the Territorial and Com¢ 
mercial branches, Rep. p.65——*Separation of. the accounts between the two branches 
during the prgsent term was effected in conformity with a plan prepared by the Court of 
Directors, and approved by the Board of Commissioners, 1814, Rep p. 66 Steps taken 
by the Company with a view to separate the accounts, Rep. p.66——Balance, 1829, 
according to the view taken by the Court, in favour of the Territorial branch on one 
hand, and the Commercial on the other, leaving a net balance due from Territory to 
Commerce, Rep. p. 67 In the event.of a separation between the two branches, the 
territory would cease to derive any extraordinary advantage from trade, Rep. p.71 
It is alleged that the Territorial branch will stand indebted to the Commercial branch to 
a large amount at the expiration of the Charter, Rep. p. 71. 


Timber. Question as to the abolition of the office of agent for procuring timber in 
Malabar and Canara, Appz. p. 304*——Quantity of timber purchased by tender greaters 
than what is procured by the agent, Appz. p. 305. . 


Tobacco. Statement of the amount of revenue derived from this source by the Indian 
treasury in the year 1828-29, Rep. p. 4o-——Monopoly confined to the provinces of Coiim- 
batoor, Canara and Malabar, Rep. p. 97-——Ryot cultivates under license, and is compelled 
to deliver the produce to government, Rep. p.94 By the operation of the system the 
lower classes are deprived of the legal use of a commodity which is considered in Malabar 
as a necessary of life, Rep.p. 96: Consequent encouragement to smugglers, Rep. p.96 

Lawless conduct of smugglers, who ee whole villages, Rep. p.g6——Land- ~ 


tax in Coimbatoor upon lands which yieldjM™ tobacco, Rep. p.97—eln Malabar and 
Canara land revenue lighter than in other diMtricts, Rep. p.97——Extensively cultivated 
in Guzerat and the Northern Provinces, Rep. p. 97. 


Toleration. Desirable to extend perfect toleration to native Christians, and to remove 
’ disabilities that exist to their prejudice, Rep. p. 26. 


Town Duties. Were formerly, now merged in the general revenues of the countsy, Rep. 
P95 Town duties in the presidency of Madras are levied in Madras only, Rep. p. 95. 
Trade, The connexion of ¢he territorial finances with the commerce of the East India 
Company, Rep. p.60 Advantages derived by the finances of India from their existing 
connection with the commercé of the Company, Rep. p.60 Loss upon the Indian, 
and amount of profit on the China trade, Rep. p.73—-—-Effects upon commercial profits 
if mercantile rates of exchange had been used in the\account between the two branches, 
Rep. p. 73 ‘Total profit derived from various sources, and called Commercial receipts, 
Rep. p.73—Since 1824-25 the Company have ceased to export to India, ae p.73- 
otives 


oui; TRA VER [Report on 
a 
Trade—continued. . 
Motives for discontinuing export trade, Rep. p. 73~g—Commerce of India in relation 
to the general interests of trade and navigation, Rep. p. 76. 
Statement of the exports to and imports to and from the Persian Gulf to Madras, 
Bengal and Bombay, 1821~22, 1827-28, Appr. p. 296. 
See also Imports. 


Trade, Free. Apprehensioits entertained, 1813, that the opening the trade would lead to 
a dangerous influx of Europeans ; returns from 1815—1828 prove bow far the addition 
has been, Rep. p. 33. 


Tranquebar. Conversions to Christianity effe@ted through the medium of the missionaries 
of that settlement under the patronage of the English Society for promoting Christian 
Knowledge, Appz. p. 94. 


Transit Duties. System of inland duties existed throughout India under the native rule, 
- Rep. p. 92 In some of our recent acquisitions the native system is retained, Rep. p. 92 
Dates levied by the Company lower than thost of Native powers, Rep. p. 92— 
Duty is generally ad valorem, « p- 92 Goods imported by sea,pass free in the 
interiog 3 on goods for exportation inland transit duty is either wholly or in part repaid, 
Rep. p. 92 Collection of duties in many districts has been farmed to the highest 
bidder; advantages both to revenue and merchants of this system, Rep. p. 93-—— 
Difficulty, owing to the farming system, of obtaining correct accounts of the trade of the 
country, Rep. p. 93———The whole system a fertile source of vexation and annoyance, 
Rep. p. 93. ; 

Transmigration. Effect of this doctrine upon the minds of Hindoos, Appr. p. 68—— 
Doctrine tends to weaken the idea of future responsibility, Appx. p. 68——-Brahmins 
profess a science called Kurrembeypak, by which can be discovered whatever was done 

* by men in their former state of existence, Appz. p. 78. 


Travancore. Statement of the amount of revenue derived in India from the subsidies from 
Travancore in the year 1828-29, Rep. p. 40. 


Treaties. List of the several] States, arranged according to the nature of their relations to 
the British Government; viz. Foreign independent States; Native States not under 
British protection ; Native States with which subsidiary treaties exist; Native States under 
British protection, but without subsidiary treaties; state pensioners, Rep. p. 103-104. 


ple, but the tribute paid to us extracts @ery year a large portion of the produce of that 
country without the least return, Appz. . 23. 


Turnbull, Mr. His minute on the -indigo trade, cgncerning the evils arising from the 

system carried on by planters and ryots during the planting and gathering the crop, 

ippx. p. 426 Extracts, containing Mr.Turnbull’s opinions on the law and regulations 
between ryots and indigo planters, Appe. p. 458. 


Tribute. Formerly paid to Indian wae Qo however oppressive, returned to the peo- 


U~. 
United States. See Political State of India. 
V. 


Verelst, Governor. Gentoos are Atsteas in the highest degree; are faithless themselves, 
and consequently suspicious of the faith of others, Appr. p. 34. 


ory 


E. India Affairg, 18323 ° “VIL | . ZEM 661 


Village Systent - Nature of this system of land revenue, Rep. p. 79—~In some cases indi-g 
viduals or families claim a right to be the instruments for paying the sum, Rep. p. 80 
In other cfses agents are chosen by the village, or officers of Government, Rep.p. 80 —— 
Mouzawaf-system affords facilities for coecting the revenue at a trifling expense,.and 
tends to #phold and encoutage the pgttels, Rep. p. 87.-— 


W. 


Wages. { In India, in 1813, from 3@ to 6s. per month ; no considerable advance bas taken 
placf since that period, Appz, p. 480. ; 
Walter's, Mi. His opinions'on the present laws and,regulations established between: ryots 
a iy indigo planters, Appx. p. 458. . . 
Wr. Board of Control empowered by law to issue orders and instructionain all matters 
elating to war; and Secret Comihittee bound to transmit such orders to India, Rep. p. 14 
{———In case of war finances are provided by wwe Secret Committee, in commuaication 
with the Board of Control, Rep. p. 14 Chances of war in India creatly diminished. 
[ Rep. p. 46. 
Warrants. See Bishop of Calcutta. 
West Indies. Quantity of indigo imported into Great. Britain from the West Indies from 
1780—1830, Appr. p. 518. ; 
Wheel Tax. Appears to be confined to Bombay, Rep. p. 95 Is represented as very 
‘oppressive in amount; hardship and uselessness of a tax upon peasant’s carts, Rep. p. 96. 
Widows. See Suttee. 


Wilkins, Mr. Value of the Bhagvad-Geeta, translated by him from the Sanscrit work, 
Appx. p. 44. 

Writers. Qualifications required for a writer as fixed by Regulations framed by the Court 
of Directors and Board of Commissivners, Rep. p. 28 Number of writers who arrived 
in Bengal, 1811—1823, Appr. p. 336. 


X. 


Xavier. Roman-cathotic missionary in India, 16th eentury; extent of his suecess in pro- 
pagating Christianity, Appz. p. 92. 


Z. 


Zemindars. Demands on them for revehue, made the grounds of still more excessive 
demands upon the inferior tenants, Appr. p. g——Severe conduct of Jaffier Khan 
towards the zemindars, Appz. p. 18. 


Zemindary System : 
Bengal: . : = 

Nature of the system of land revenue, Rep. p. 79~-——British Government had intro- 
duced a new variety by recognifing all the zemindars as hereditary, Rep. p. 80——Does 
not appear to have answered the. purposes for which it was benevolently intended by 
its author, Rep. p. 801 ——No efficient measures appear to have been taken to define 
ot limit the demgads of the zemindar on the ryots, Reo: Py 81. 

4C 


56 ZEM LLY, [Rep. E. t Affairs, 1832. 


Zemindary System—continued. 
Madras : : 
Portion of Madras territory which is. under zemindary settlement ; amount of revenue 
derived therefrom, Rep. p. 85——*Comprizes the whole of the five Northirn Circars, - 
Rep. p. 85——*-Circumstances which prevented thé alienation of these hereditiry tenures 


by public sale, on account of arrears of payment, Rep. p. 85. 


Zillah Courts. Statement showing the total amount of colleétions and disbursements, 
during 1827-28, in the several zillahs under the Bombay Presidency, Appr. p. 56 
There can be no objaction to the abolition of. pundit@ad moofty in all the Zillal’ Courts 
throughout the country, Lushington, Appx. p. 268——-Arrangements necessary in vonse- 

quence of the additional labour which is to be thrown on the Zillah Courts, Appr... 275 

Arrangements to be made as to salaries on account of additional labour, ypr. 


Pp: 275 easons for the reduction af the registrars of Zillau Courts, Appr. p¥ 589 
Scale Vf establishments fixed for the Zillah Cgurts under the Madras President, 


Appx. p. 248. 


UMNO CMU AN 
001 


10527 


Digitized with financial assistance from 
Shri Brinad Bhartiya Samaj 
on 31 October, 2019 


Ber am yl >... 
es et eae 
- Ce 


