u 


PAPERS 


RESPECTING 


THE      NEGOCIATION 


BETWIXT 


HIS  MAJESTY'S  GOVERNMENT 


ANB 


THE    EAST    INDIA    COMPANY, 


FOR 


A   RENEWAL   OF  THE    EXCLUSIVE    PRIVILEGES 

THAT  COMPANY  HAS  ENJOYED. 


Ordered  to  be  printed  i^th  April  1812. 


/ 


31 


LIST  OF  PAPERS. 


No.  I.  Minute  of  a  Secret  Committee  of  Correfpondence,  the  5ih  Oftober  i8o8. 

No.  II.  Letter  from  the  Right  Honorable  Robert  Dundas  to  the  Chairman  and  Deputy  Chair- 
man, dated  the  30th  September  1808,  referred  to  in  the  preceding  Minute. 

No.  III.  Minute  of  a  Secret  Committee  of  Correfpondence,  the  12th  October  i8c8,  and 
Letter  from  the  Chairman  and  Deputy  Chairman  to  the  Right  Honorable  Robert  Dundas» 
dated  the  fame  Day. 

No.  IV.  Minute  of  a  Secret  Court  of  Direiflors,  held  on  Wednefday,  the  7th  December  1808. 

No.  V.  Minute  of  a  Secret  Court  of  DireAors,  held  on  Friday,  the  16th  December  1808, 
and  Letter  from  the  Chairman  and  Deputy  Chairman  to  the  Right  Honorable  Robert  Dun- 
das, dated  the  fame  Day. 

No.  VI.  Minute  of  a  Secret  Court  of  Dire£lors,  held  on  Friday,  the  13th  January  1809, 
aad  Letter  from  the  Right  Honorable  Robert  Dundas  to  the  Chairman  and  Deputy  Chair- 
man, dated  the  28th  December  1808. 

No.  VII.  Minute  of  a  Secret  Court  of  Dire£tors,  held  on  Tuefday,  the  1 7th  January  1 809. 

No.  VIII.  Letter  from  the  Chairman  and  Deputy  Chairman  to  the  Right  Honorable  Robert 
Dundas,  dated  the  13th  January  1809,  noticed  in  the  preceding  Minute. 

No.  IX.  Minute  of  a  Secret  Committee  of  Correfpondence,  the  38th  February  1809, 

r   ' 

No.  X.  Minute  of  a  Secret  Committee  of  Correfpondence,  the  5th  December  1809. 

^      No.  XI.  Letter  from  the  Chairman  and   Deputy  Chairman  to   the   Right  Honorable  Rober^ 
^  Dundas,  dated  the  5th  December  1S09,  noticed  in  the  preceding  Minute. 

No.  XII.  Minute  of  a  Secret  Court  of  Directors,  held  on  Friday,  the  3d  January  1812. 

No.  XIII.  Letter  from  the  Right  Honorable  Lord  Vifcount  Melville  to  the  Chairmun  and 
Deputy  Chairman,  dated  the  17th  December  181 1. 

No.  XIV.  Minute  of  a  Secret  Court  of  Diredors,  held  on  Friday,  the  28th  February  1812. 

No.  XV.  Minute  of  a  Secret  Court  of  Direftors,  held  on  Saturday,  the  29th  February  iSi  2. 

^      No.  XVI.  Minute  of  a  Secret  Court  of  Direclors,  held  on  Monday,  the  2d  March  181 2. 

No.  XVII.  Letter  from  the  Chairman  and  Deputy  Chairman  to  the  liight  Honorable  Lord 
Vifcount  Melville,  dated  the  4th  March  1812,  with  Enclofures,  marked  A,  B,  C,  D,  and 
E,  noticed  in  the  preceding  Minute. 

No.  XVIII.  Minute  of  a  Meeting  of  the  Deputation,  the  3d  March  j  8 12. 

No.  XIX.  Minute  of  a  Secret  Court  of  Diredors,  held  on  Friday,  the  6th  March  18 12. 

No.  XX.  Hints  approved  by  the  Committee  of  Correfpondence,  and  fubmiited  to  the  Con- 
fideration  of  the  Right  Honorable  Lord  Vifcount  Melville,  noticed  in  the  preceding  Minute. 

No.  XXI.  Minute  of  a  Secret  Committee  of  Correfpondence,  the  i8th  March  18 12. 

No.  XXII.  Correfpondence  with  the  Right  Honorable  Lord  Vifcount  Caftlereagh,  noticed  in 
the  preceding  Minute,  viz. 

Letter  from  the  Chairman  and  Deputy  Chairman  to  the  Right  Honorable  Lord  Vifcount 
Caftlereagh,  dated  3d  December  1803. 

(59-)  A  2  Letter 

270654 


1^ 


•a: 


(     4     ) 

Letter  from  the  Right  Honorable  Lord  Vifcount  Caftlereagh  to  the  Chairman  and  Deputy 

Chairman,  dated  the  20th  December  1803. 
Letter  irom  the  Chairman  and  Deputy  Chairman,   to  the  Right  Honorable  Lord  Vifcount 

Caftlereagh,  dated  7th  July  1804. 
Letter  from  the  Right  Honorable  Lord  Vifcount  Caftlereagh,  to  the  Chairman  and  Deputy 

Chairman,  dated  the  I2th  September  1804. 

JHo.  XXin.  Minute  of  a  Secret  Court  of  Diredors,  held  on  Wednefday  the  i8th  March  i8iz. 

No.  XXIV.  Letter  from  the  Deputation  to  the  Right  Honorable  Lord  Vifc9unt  Melville,  dated 
the  18th  March  i8i3,  noticed  in  the  preceding  Minute. 

No.  XXV.  Letter  from  the  Deputation  to  the  Right  Honorable  Lord  Vifcount  Melville,  dated 
the  19th  March  18 12,  alfo  noticed  in  the  preceding  Minute. 

No.  XXVI.  Minute  of  a  Secret  Court  of  Diredors,  held  on  Tuefday  the  24th  March  1812. 

No.  XXVII.  Letter  from  the  Right  Honorsible  Lord  Vifcount  Melville,  to  the  Chairman  and 
Deputy  Chairman,  dated  the  21ft  of  March  18 12,  noticed  in  the  preceding  Minute. 

No.  XXVIII.  Obfervations  on  the  Hints  fuggefted  by  the  Deputation  of  the  Court  of  Direc- 
tors, the  3d  March  18 13,  adverted  to  in  the  foregoing  Letter. 

No.  XXIX.  Letter  from  the  Right  Honorable  Lord  Vifcount  Melville  to  the  Chairman  and 
Deputy  Chairman,  dated  the  23d  March  1812,  alfo  noticed  in  the  Minute  above- 
mentioned. 


PAPEES,   &c. 


No.  I. 

At  a  Secret  Committee  of  Covrefpondence,  the  5th  Odober  1808. 

T>EAD  a  letter  from  the  Right  Honorable  Robert  Dundas  to  the  Chairs,  dated  No.  I. 

the  30th  September,  defiring  to  afcertain  the  opinion  of  the  Court,  as  to  the  

propriety  and  expediency  of  bringing  forward,  in  the  next  feflion  of  Parliament,  the  Secret  Committee, 

lubject  of  renewing  the  Company's  Charter.  ^  ^^-  '^°^ 

The  Committee  having  deliberated  thereon,  agreed  on  the  fubllance  of  an  anfwer» 
tc  be  further  £onfidered  at  their  next  meeting. 


■» 


Mr.  Dund»s*» 
Letter. 


No.  II. 

Letter  from  the  Right  Honorable  Robert  Dundas  to  the  Chairman  and 
Deputy  Chairman,  noticed  in  the  preceding  Minute. 

Gentlemen,  _  _  Melville  Caftle,  30th  September  1808.  No.  II 

"nr^HE  propriety  and  expediency  of  applying  to  Parliament  for  a  renewal  of  the  pri- 
vileges of  exclufive  trade  enjoyeti  by  the  Eafl  India  Companv,  with  fuch  modi- 
fications as  may  be  deemed  neceiiary,  and  for  the  continuance  of  the  fyftem  of  go- 
vernment in  the  Briiilh  Territories  in  India  on  its  prefent  bafis,  but  with  fuch 
amendments,  alfo,  as  the  experience  of  its  eiFeds  may  appear  to  demand,  having 
lately  been  the  fubjed  of  frequent  confideration  and  difcuflion,  you  will  probably 
concur  with  me  in  opinion,  that  it  is  advifeable  now  to  afcertain,  whether  the  Court 
of  Direftors  are  defirous  of  agitating  the  queflion  at  prefent,  and  of  fubraitting  it, 
in  all  its  details,  to  the  early  confideration  of  ParJiament. 

I  haye  the  honour  to  be,  Gentlemen, 

Youi*  moft  obedient  and  humble  fervant, 

(Signed)         ROBERT  DUNDAS. 
To  the  Ghairman  and  Deputy  Chairman 
of  the  Eafl:  India  Company. 


No.  in. 

At  a  Secret  Committee  of  Correfpondeitce,  the  isthOdober  i8o8. 

^^GREED  to  the  following  Draft  of  an  anfwer  to  the  letter  of  the  30th  ultimo,         Nc  m, 
from  the  Right  Honorable  Roba-t  Dnndas.  ' 

Sscret  Committee, 
(.Secret.)  12  Oft.  1808. 

Sir,  Eaft  India  Houfe,  12th  Odober  1808.  chairman  and 

WE  now  propofe  to  do  ourfclves  the  honour  of  replying  to  your  letter    Deputy'*  Ltuer. 
of  the  30th  of  iaft  month. 

From  the  communications  we  have  at  different  times  had  with  the  Members  of 

the  Coui  t  of. Direct-  .rs,  we  are  well  affured  it  is  the  general  fenfe  of  that  bodv,  that  it 

will  be  for  the  intereft  of  the  Public  and  the  Companv,  that  the  Charter  fliould  be 

(59)  B  early 


No.  III. 

•Chairman   and 
Deputy's  Letter. 


(     6     ) 

early  renewed.  Convinced  that  this  is  their  opinion,  and  apprehenfive  left  incon- 
venience might  be  produced,  by  fetting  this  important  fubieft  afloat  before  it  -was  in 
fome  degree  matured,  we  havt  not  tlioiight  it  neceflary  formally  to  relort  to  the 
Court  for  a  declaration  of  their  judgment  upon  the  queftion  you  are  pleafed  to 
propofe  to  us ;  but  we  have,  in  order  to  obtain  Ayhat  we  conceive  to  be,  with  the 
knowledge  we  before  pofl'eiTed,  fufficient  warrant  to  us  to  give  an  anfwer  to  your 
preliminary  enquiry,  laid  your  letter  before  a  Secret  Committee  of  Correfpondence : 
and  we  are  authorized  to  ftate  it  to  be  their  opinion,  as  .it  is  our  own,  not  only  that 
the  interefts  of  the  Public,  as  well  as  of  the  Company,  will  be  beft  confulted,  by 
continuing  the  prefent  fyftem  of  Indian  adminiflration,  but  that  it  is  material  the 
Charter  fliould  be  fpeedily  renewed. 

With  refpeft  to  any  modifications  which  you  or  His  Majefty's  Government  may 
have  it  in  contemplation  to  propofe,  we  Ihall  be  happy  to  be  made  acquainted  with 
them,  and  to  bring  them  under  the  moft  ferious  conlideration  of  this  Houfe.  We 
can  at  prefent  only  flate,  that  we  trull  there  will  be  no  difpofiiion  to  introduce  any 
.change,  that  would  alter  or  weaken  the  main  principles  and  fubftance  of  the  prefent 
fyftem,  which,  in  the  opinion  of  the  Company,  is  eliential  to  the  due  management 
and  prefervation  of  Britifli  India;  and  that,  with  refpeft  to  minor  pohits,  as  far  as 
they  may  be  realiy  compatible  whh  thofe  effential  objefts,  the  Court  will  not  be 
influenced  by  any  partial  views  to  withhold  from  them  the  fair  confideration  due 
to  them. 

Glad  that  you  have  feen  it  proper  to  bring  forward  this  weighty  fubjeft,  and 
defirous  to  be  favored  with  your  further  communications  upon  it,  as  foon  as  may 
fuit  your  convenience. 

We  have  the  honor  to  be,  Sir, 

Your  moft  obedient  humble  fervants, 

(Signed)  EDWARD  PARRY, 

The  Right -Honorable  Robert  Dundas,  CHARLES  GRANT, 

SiC.  cic.  &c. 


No.  IV, 

At  a  Secret  Court  of  Direflors,  held  on  Wednefday,  the  7th  December  1808. 
No. IV.  T^HE  Chairman  laid  before  the  Court  Minutes  of  a  Secret  Committee  of  Corre- 


Secret  Court, 
7  Dec.  1808. 


fpondence,  held  the  5th  Oftober  laft 

Letter  from  the  Right  Honorable  Robert  Dundas  to  the  Chairs,  dated  the  30th 
September  laft,  referred  to  in  the  Minutes  above-mentioned ; 

Minutes  of  a  Secret  Committee  of  Correfpondence,  held  the  1 2th  Oclober  laft  4 
and 

Draft  of  a  Letter  from  the  Chairs  to  Mr.  Dundas,  dated  the  fame  day. 

It  was  then,  on  a  motion,  refolved  unanimoufly.  That  this  Court  approve  the  pro- 
ceedhigs  of  the  Secret  Committee  of  Correfpondence,  of  the  5th  and  1 2th  October, 
and  the  Letter  to  the  Right  Honorable  Robert  Dundas  of  the  laft-mentioned  date. 


No.  V, 
At  a  Secret  Court  of  DireGors,  held  on  Friday,  the  i6th  December  1808. 

No.  v.  JVJiNUTES  of  the  7th  inftant  were  read  and  approved. 

Secret  Court.  Draft  of  a  letter  from  the  Chairman  and  Deputy  to  the  Right  Honorable  Robert 

/6  Dec.  1808.  Dundas,  offering  fome  fuggeftions  of  a  general  nature,  as  the  principal  foundations 
on  which  a  new  agreement  between  the  Public  and  the  Eaft  India  Company  may 
i>e  placed,  was  read  and  unanimoufly  approved,  being  as  follows,  viz. 

SiA, 


(    7    ) 

Sir,  Eaft-India  Hou'e,  the  i6th  DeccmbenSoS. 

IN  confequcnce  of  a  conference   which  wc  lately  had  the  honor  to  No.  V. 

hold  with  you,  we  had  hiid  before  the  Court  of  Direftors  the  letter  which  you  were 

pleafed  to  write  to  us,  under  date  the  30th  September  laft,  on  the  fubjeft  of  renewing  Chairman  and 
■the  Company's  Charter,  tof!;ether  vvith  tlie  aniwer  which  we  returned  to  that  letter,  '^"^^  *  "'"' 
on  the  12th  Odober  following  ;  and  we  are  now  intruded  by  the  Couit  to  Rate  to 
you,  that  they  approve  of  that  anfwer,  and  are  ready  to  enter  with  you,  through 
the  medium  of  their  Committee  of  Correfpondence,  into  a  confideration  of  the  va- 
rious objeds  to  which  it  may  be  proper  to  attend,  and  bringing  forward  fo  im- 
portant a  meafure. 

At  the  prefent  momeni:  it  would,  in  the  opinion  of  the  Court,  be  premature 
in  them,  to  proceed  to  any  detailed  ipecification  of  tJiofe  objefts,  to  which  it  may- 
be proper,  on  the  part  of  the  Conipany,  to  attend,  or  to  anticipate  any  difcuflions, 
which  it  may  be  the  wifii  of  His  r-.lajefty's  Minilters  to  propofe  ;  but  the  Court  beg 
leave  to  offer  fome  fuggeftions  of  a  general  nature,  as  the  principal  foundations  on 
which  a  new  agreement  between  the  Public  and  the  Eaft-lndia  Company  may  be 
;|)laced. 

iff.  The  fyftem  by  which  the  Legiflature  has  continued  to  the  Company  the 
government  of  the  territories  acquired  by  it  in  the  Eaft,  with  regulated  monopoly 
of  the  trade,  has  been  held  iy  the  mofl;  eminent  perfons  converfant  with  that  quarter 
and  its  affairs,  to  be  the  moft  expedient,  both  for  the  toreign  and  domeltic  interests 
of  this  country.  Under  it  thofe  territories  have  been  improved,  and  the  fecurityand 
■happinefs  of  the  vaft  population  they  contain  have  been  fignally  increafed.  It  is  alfo 
a  fyftem  which  eftablifhes  falutary  checks  for  the  excrcife  of  the  authority  lodged  in 
this  country  over  the  Indian  adminiftration,  and  for  all  the  local  details  of  that  ad- 
miniftration,  in  its  politic:'!,  judicial,  financial,  and  commercial  departments  ;  and 
provides  with  fmgular  ielicicy  for  a  fucceffion  of  a  body  of  able  and  honorable 
European  fervants,  who  yield  in  general  charader  and  utility  to  no  clafs  of  public 
funfti'jnaries  under  the  Empire.  In  Hke  manner,  the  conftitution  of  the  Indian 
army  has  proved  itfelf  calculated  to  produce  a  body  of  officers  of  high  mihtary  fpirit, 
and  of  very  diftinguifhcd  fkill  and  conduft.  The  Court,  therefore,  trufls  that  no 
riaterial  chivnge  in  this  fyftem  ; — no  change  which  would  afFe£l  its  principles  or  ini- 
pdir  its  efficiency,  will  be  propofed. 

2d.  In  this  cafe,  it  will  be  unnecefTary  to  enter  into  any  difcufTion  of  the 
right  of  the  Company  to  the  territorial  pofTeffions  ;  a  right  which  they  hold  to  be 
clear,  and  muft  always  maintain,  as  flowing  from  their  acquifition  of  thofe  territories, 
•under  due  authority,  and  after  long  hazards  and  vicifTitudes,  and  great  expenfe, 

3d.  The  fituation  of  the  Company  is,  at  this  time,  very  different  from  what 
it  was  at  the  laft  renewal  of  the  Charter,  in  1793.  European  war,  with  hardly  any 
incermiffion,  through  the  whole  of  the  period  that  has  fince  elapfed,  has  exceedingly 
encreafed  the  expenfes,  and  reduced  the  profits  of  the  Company  at  home  ;  and  has 
likewife  enlarged  the  fcale  of  expenfes  abroad  ;  where,  nioreover,  wars  with  the 
Native  Powers  have  been  repeatedly  carried  on,  to  the  vaft  accumulation  of  the  Indian 
debt,  now  advanced  from  eight  million  ftcrhng,  at  which  it  Itood  in  1793,  to  about 
thirty-two  millions.  Without  meaning  at  all  to  advert,  in  this  place,  to  the  quef- 
tion  concerning  the  policy  of  ibme  of  thofe  wars  with  the  Princes  of  India  ;  it  is  fafe 
and  proper  to  affirm,  that  they  were  not,  in  any  degree,  direfted  by  the  Executive 
.Body  of  the  Company,  but  proceeded  from  caufes  which  that  body  could  not  con- 
trol. As,  in  confequence  of  all  the  events  which  have  happened  fince  the  vear 
J  793,  the  benefits  intended  to  the  Proprietors  of  Eafl-India  Stock,  by  the  Charter 
then  paffsd,  have  not  been  realized  ;  fo  the  Court  truft,  that  in  the  formation  of  a 
new  C.hajter,  due  care  will  be  taken  to  fecure  their  proper  ihare  of  advantage  in  any 
future  amelioration  of  the  Company's  affairs,  and  elpecially  that  no  meafure  will  be 
adopted,  which  can  have  the  effect  of  reducing  the  value  of  their  capital  ftock.  The 
dividend  on  that  ftock,  which  is  only  equivalent  to  the  legal  intereft  of  monev,  is  all 
that  the  Proprietors  have  ever  received  from  the  united  fources  of  Indian  revenue 
.and  Indian  commerce,  whilfl  the  country  has  been  enriched  by  the  long  contiiiued 
influx  of  private  wealth,  and  raifed  in  the  fcale  of  nations  by  the  poll  ical  importance 
of  the  Indian  empire. 

4th.  The 


No.  v. 
Deputy'*  iicUer. 


(      S      ) 

4th.  The  Hquiddtion  of  the  Indian  debt  is,  on  all  hands,  agreed  to  be  a  mea- 
fure  of  indifpcnfable  neceflity.  From  the  magnitude  to  which  the  debt  has  now  rifen, 
and  the  circumftances  of  theprefent  unexampled  time,  the  aid  of  the  Public  will  pro- 
bablybe  neceflary  to  the  attainment  of  this  moil  defirable  objeft.  For  the  aid  that 
may  thus  be  afforded,  the  Court  conceive  that  fufiicient  means  of  reimburfement 
from  the  Indian  territory  and  revenue  may  be  found  ;  and  the  arrangement  of  a  plan, 
forthefe  purpofes,  might,  as  the  Court  conceive,  form  a  very  material  part  of  the 
yrovifions  of  the  new  Charter. 

5th.  To  apportion  duly  between  the  Public  and  the  Company  the  militaiy  ex- 
■penfes  of  the  Indian  empire,  is  another  meafure  now  become  unavoidable.  For  wars 
■growing  out  of  the  Indian  fyftem,  or  out  of  fources  purely  Indian,  the  revenues  and 
•other  means  of  the  Company  were  long  made  to  fufifice,  including  even  the  charges 
of  occafional  attacks  upon  the  Indian  fettlements  of  Eurorean  nations ;  but  the  in- 
fluence of  European  war  has,  in  the  prefent  protradted  period  of  hoflility,  extended 
itfelf  more  and  more  to  India,  occalioning  the  expenfe  of  various  diftant  expeditions, 
and  the  encreafe  of  the  military  eftabhihment,  particularly  in  the  European  troops  of 
his  Majelty,  which,  from  being  twenty  years  ago  only  a  very  few  regiments,  now 
amount  to  above  twenty  thoufand*  men,  and  thofe  of  the  molt  expenfive  defcription 
of  troops  compofmg  the  military  force  of  Britifli  India  :  nor  is  at  all  improbable,  that 
from  the  avowed  defign  of  France  to  invade  our  Indian  pofleflions  with  great  armies 
by  land,  it  may  be  neceffary  iUU  largely  to  augment  our  European  force  in  that 
quarter.  For  a  war  of  this  defcription  the  Indian  revenues,  it  unincumbered  with 
debt,  would  be  very  inadequate.  It  would  be  an  European  war  for  European  objects ; 
a  ftruggle  between  Great  Britain  and  France,  on  the  foil  of  India,  for  the  main- 
tenance and  fupport  of  their  power  in  Europe.  For  fuch  an  objed,  to  which  the 
national  funds  only  are  commenfurate,  the  national  funds  undoubtedly  ought  to  pro- 
vide^  .and  as  we  know  that,  in  this,  we  (late  only  what  your  own  mind  has  already 
perceived  and  approved,  we  the  more  confidently  hope,  that  in  a  new  Charter  proper 
attention  will  be  paid  to  the  due  regulation  of  fo  important  a  concern. 

6th.  As  the  early  renewal  of  the  Charter  will  ferve  to  flrengthen  the  hands  of  the 
Company  in  the  ti-anfacfion  of  their  affairs,  and  improve  their  credit,  fo  its  renewal, 
for  the  like  period  as  the  prefent  one  run,  and  from  the  Time  of  its  expiration,  would 
conduce  to  the  fame  ends ;  and  the  Court  are  not  aware  of  any  objection  to  the 
propofition  of  this  term. 

We  have  the  honor  to  be,  Sir, 

Your  moft  obedient  humble  fervants, 

(Signed)  EDWARD  PARRY, 

The  Right  Honorable  Robert  Dundas,  CHARLES  GRANT, 

&c.  &;c.  he. 


No.VL 

Secret  Court, 
13  Jan.  1809. 

Mr.  Diindas's 
Letter. 


No.  VI. 

At  a  Secret  Court  of  DireSors,  held  on  Friday,  the  ijth  January  1809. 

Letter  from  the  Right  Honorable  Robert  Dundas,  dated  the  28th  December 
lad,  to  the  Chairman  and  Deputy,  in  reply  to  their  letter  of  the  i6th 
December,  was  read,  viz. 

Gentlemen,-  Downing  Street,  28th  December  i8o8« 

IN  fubmitting  to  your  confideration  fuch  obfervations  as  have  occurred  to  me  on 
your  letter  of  the  16th  inftant,  it  is  neceffary  that  you  fhould  undeiftand  them  to 
be  merely  preliminary.,  in  contemplation  of  future  difcuiiions,  and  by  no  means  as 
the  refult  of  any  plan  or  projefted  fyftem,  matured  in  concert  with  His  Majefty's 
confidential  Servants.  It  will  depend  on  the  judgment  which  the  Court  of  Directors 
may  form  on  the  propriety  or  neceffity  of  adhering  to  the  prefent  fyftem  of  their 
Indian  trade  and  adminiftration  in  all  its  parts,  whether  1  fliall  be  enabled  to  hold  out 
to  them  any  expeftation,-  that  their  application  to  Parliament  for  a  renewal  of  the 
Company's  Charter  will  meet  with  the  concurrence  of  Government. 

Ilhall 


Mr.  Unndai's 
Lei  It  r. 


(    9    ) 

lihall  follow  the  order  adopted  in  your  letter,  in  rcfped  to  the  fubjefts  which  you         No.  VI, 
have  particularly  mentioned,  and   Ihall  offer  fome  additional  remarks  on  any  other 
important  branches  of  the  prefent  fyfteni,  in  which  alterations  may  probably  be 
deemed  indifpenHibly  necelTary. 

ift.  Concurring  in  fubfrance  with  the  propofition  contained  in  the  firfl:  article,  I 
fiiall  not  enlarge  upon  its  details.  I  have  not  yet  heard  or  read  any  arguments  againrt 
the  continuance  of  the  fyftem  under  which  the  Britifli  Pofleffions  in  India  are  governed, 
of  fuffieient  weight  to  counterbalance  the  practical  benefits  which  have  been  derived 
from  it,  in  their  increafed  and  increafmg  profperiiy,  and  the  general  fecurity  and 
happinefs  of  their  inhabitants.  It  is  polTible  that  the  fame  efFetts  might  have  been 
produced  under  a  government  immediately  dependent  on  the  Crown ;  but  for  the 
attainment  of  thofe  objedts,  the  experiment  is,  jit  Icaft,  unneceffary,  ;md  it  miglit  be 
attended  with  dangers  to  the  Conftitution  of  this  Country,  which,  if  they  can  be 
avoided,  it  would  be  unwife  to  uncounter.  Any  alteration,  therefore,  which  may 
be  fuggefied  in  tliis  part  cf  the  fyftcm,  will  probably  be  only  in  its  details.  It  may, 
however,  be  deem.ed  advifable,  to  extend  the  controuling  authority  of  the  Board  of 
Commiilioners  to  fuch  proceedings  of  the  Court  of  Directors  in  England,  as  are  im- 
mediately conneiSled  with  the  govenuTient  or  revenues  of  the  Company's  territorial 
poflellions  in  India,  more  efpecialiy,  if  the  fuggeflion  contained  in  your  fourth  article 
fhould  be  adopted. 

2d.  In  the  view  which  I  have  already  taken  of  the  propofition  contained  in  the  pre- 
ceding articie,  it  is  certainly  unneceffary  to  difcufs  the  qi-ie'lion  of  the  Company's     ' 
right  to  the  permanent  poflefiion  of  the  Biitifli  territories  in  India.     It  is  impofllble-   ■ 
that  this  right  fliould  be  relinquiflied  on  the  part  of  the  Public,  or  that  a  ciaiin  can  be' 
admitted  en  the  part  of  the  Company,  to  the  extent  which  has  fome  times  been  main- 
tained, and  to  which  you  feem  to  have  adverted  in  the  fecond  article. 

3d.  It  is  equally  impoflible  to  acquiefcein  all  the  reafoning,  though  I  am  perfe£lljr. " , 
wilhng  to  concur  in  the   conclufion  deduced  from  it   in  the  third  article.     I  think!' 
it  very  defirable,  that  ro  meafure  fhould  be  adopted,  in  the  renevv.Tl  of  the  Charter^ 
which  would  have  the  effect  of  reducing  the  value  of  the  capital  ftock  of  the  Eafl-^"* 
India  Company,  and   that  due  care  fliould  be  taken  to  fecure  their  proper  Oiai-e  of 
advantage,  in  any  future  ameliorauon  of  their  affairs ;  but  as  the  law  has  regulated 
rhe  mode  in  which  thofe  affairs,  at  home  and  abroad,  fhould   be  admiailtered,  I 
cannot  enter  into  tlw;  ditlinction  which  is  ftated  in  this  article,  and  which  I  have 
met   with  on  other  occafions,  as  to  the  equitable  claim  of  the  Company    to  any 
remuneration   from  the  Public,    or  other  benefit,  on    account  cf  wars,    or  other* 
events  which,  as  reprefented  in  your  letter,  did  not  origin-ate  in  "  the  Executive 
"  Body  of  the  Company,  but  proceeded  from  caul^es  wliicii  that  Body   couid  not 
*'  contruul." 

It  would  he  permature,  in  this  flage  of  the  difcudion,  to  enter  into  any  details, 
as  to  the  proportion  of  benefit  to  be  derived  by  the  Company  or  the  Public,  refpec- 
tively,  from  ar.y  future  amehoration  in  the  fla'.e  of  your  finances  ;  and  any  contingent 
expectation  of  that  nature  mufl,  at  all  events,  be  poltponed,  till  a  large  portion  of  the 
Indian  debt  has  been  difcharged. 

4th.  The  liquidation  of  that  debt  is  undoubtedly  a  meafure  of  indifpenfable  ne- 
cefTity,  not  only  to  the  Coriipany  but  to  the  Public.  If  wc  were  now  called  upon 
to  difculs  the  ri^^ht  of  the  Public  to  the  territorial  revenues  v.'hich  have  been  obtained 
in  India,  either  by  cefhon  or  conqucfi,  it  would  be  impoflible  to  relieve  the  queflion 
from  the  fair  claims  of  the  Company  and  their  creditors  to  a  reimbuifcment  of  the 
expences  which  have  been  incurred,  and  the  difcharge  of  the  debts  which  have  been 
contrafted,  in  the  acquifition  and  m.aintenance  of  thofe  pofTcfiions.  Entertaining, 
that  opinion,  and  convinced  that  the  liquidation  of  the  Indian  debt,  in  the  molt 
fpeedy  and  effectual  mode,  would  be  a  merfure  of  mutual  intercft  and  advantage, 
I  do  not  fuppol'e  that  your  fuggeflion  in  the  .fourth  article  would  be  objeded  to  by 
Government,  provided  the  necefTity,  or  at  leafl  the  expediency  of  fuch  an  inter- 


Tor  .that  pmpofe.     1  need  not  remind  you,  however,  that  any  fuch  aid  from  the 
(590  C  Public 


{  10  ) 

NoAl.         Public  will  be  ahavailiflg,  and  the  relief  afforded  by  it  will  be  temporary  and  deluTive, 

,       unlefs  by  the  zealous  exertions  of  your  Governments  abroad,  and  the  minute  and 

T  t't'-r  ^  *      detailed  invefligation  and  unremitting  attention  of  the  Court  of  Diredors,  the  or- 
""       '  dinary  expenditure  in  India,  including  the  interefl:  of  debt,  fliali  be  brought  within 

the  limit  of  your  annual  income.  The  mofl:  fanguine  expeclafions  of  a  refult  even 
more  favorable,  and  of  a  large  furplus  revenue  above  your  ordinary  expences  in  time 
of  peace,  have  recently  been  conveyed  to  you  by  Lord  Iviinto;  but  I  trufl;  that  the 
Court  of  Directors  will  not  be  induced  by  thofe  hopes,  however  well  founded,  to 
relax  in  their  exertions.  Every  item  of  thofe,  or  any  other  eflimates,  which  the 
Court  may  exhibit,  muil  be  llriclly  fcrutinized  and  compared  with  the  actual  refuhs 
of  former  years,  and  with  the  deiailcd  account  of  any  reductions  which  may  have  been 
ordered  or  carried  into  effedt. 

^.t'ii,.5th.  I  can  have  no  hefitation  in  acceding,  with  fome  limitations,  to  the  principle 
for  which  you  contend  in  your  fifth  article.  It  is  abfiu'd  and  unrcafonable  to  fuppofe, 
that  the  Eafl  India  Company,  out  of  tbtir  own  revenues,  can  long  maintain  a 
contefl  againll:  the  power  of  France,  aided  by  the  greater  part  of  Europe  and  a  large 
portion  ot  Afia.  If  the  principal  theatre  of  the  war  between  European  nations  is 
to  be  transferred  to  Hindoit;ni,  it  mufl  be  fupported,  to  a  confiderable  extent,  by 
European  refources  ;  and  if  our  empire  in  India  is  an  objeft  worth  preferving,  this 
country  muft  contribute  to  its  defence,  againft  any  attack  of  the  defciiption  which 
we  have  been  taught  to  expeft.  The  extraordinary  expences  incurred  in  the 
iiecelfary  preparations  for  fuch  a  warfare,  or  in  the  adiual  contefl,  ought  not,  in 
{uilice,  to  be  impofed  as  a  burthen  on  the  Company  alone,  even  if  they  were  able  to 
.fu  (lain  it. 

6tb.  lam  not  aware  of  any  reafon  for  extending  the  duration  of  the  Charter 
beyond  fuch  a  limit,  as,  with  the  unexpired  term,  will  be  equal  to  the  period 
£;ranted  in  1703  ;  but  I  ilate  this  merely  on  the  firfl  confideration  of  the  fuhjccl ; 
and  if  the  general  queftion  is  to  be  dilcuffed,  I  fliall  pay  due  attendon  to  auy 
fuggeflions  which  the  Court  may  think  it  right  to  offer  on  that  particular  point. 

Having  thus  adverted,  at  greater  length  perhaps  than  was  neceffary,  to  the 
various  topics  introduced  into  your  letter,  I  fhall  proceed  to  itate  fuch  oblervations 
as  appear  to  me  neceffary  to  be  fubmitfed  to  the  confideration  of  the  Court  of 
Diredors,  for  the  purpofe  of  enab!J!;g  them  finally  to  decide,  whether,  under  the 
circumdances  of  the  prefent  fituation  of  the  Company's  affairs,  and  of  the  ex- 
pectations which  will  probably  be  entertained  by  the  Public,  and  fandioned  by 
Government,  they  will  adheie  to  their  intention  of  applying  now  to  Parliament  for 
a  renewal  of  the  Company's  Charter. 

It  will  readilly  occur  to  the  Court,  that  whenever  an  opportunity  is  afforded  of 
deciding  in  Parliament  on  the  propriety  of  continuing  in  the  Company  any  privi. 
Jeges  of  a  commercial  nature,  it  will  be  important  to  confider,  whether  the  I'yftein 
Citabliihed  by  the  Ad  of  179';,  for  the  trade  of  private  individuals  between  Britain 
and  India,  has  anfvvered  the  eXpedations,  or  fulfilled  the  intendons  of  the  Legiflature. 
It  is  wholly  unneceiTary  for  me,  at  prefent,  to  enter  into  any  detail  of  the  various 
difcuflions  which  have  taken  place  on  that  fubjed.  The  arguments  on  both  fides  of 
the  queftion  mufl  be  familiar  to  the  Court,  and  the  opinions  of  thofe  perfons  who 
have  turned  their  attention  to  it  have,  in  all  probability,  been  long  fince 'fixed  and 
fettled  :  it  is  fit,  ther€fore,  that  the  Court  fhould  now  underltand  dilHndly,  that  I 
cannot  hold  out  to  them  the  expedation,  that  His  Majefly's  Minifters  will  concur 
in  an  application  to  Parliament  for  a  renewal  of  any  privileges  to  the  Eall-India 
Company,  which  will  prevent  liriti&  merchants  and  manufadurers  from  trading  to 
and  from  India,  and  the  other  countries  within  the  prefent  limits  of  the  Company's 
exclufive  trade  (the  dominions  of  the  Empire  of  China  excepted),  in  ihips  and 
veffels  hired  or  freighted  by  themfelves,  inflead  of  being  confined,  as  at  prefent,  to 
ihips  in  the  fervice  of  the  Company,  or  licenfcd  by  the  Court  of' Diredors.  la 
the  detail  of  any  legiflative  provifions  which  it  might  be  expedient  to  enad  on  this 
fubjed,  it  would  be  abfolutely  necefl'ary  to  guard  againll  the  abufes  which  would 
arile,  f  om  facilities  thus  afforded  to  perfons  attempting  to  fettle  and  refide  in  the 
Britilh  territories,  without  a  licenfe  from  the  Company_,  or  without  the  fandion  or 
knowledge  of  the  local  Governments. 

There 


(  "  ) 

There  are  vai-lous  other  points  to  which  it  would  alfo  be  neceffaiy  to  pay  due         No.  VI, 

attention,  not  only  as  being  important  to  the  Company  and  to  the  general  trade  , 

of  the   country,  but  elFential  to  the  fecurity  and  eafy  ■  colleflion  of  the  publfc       Mr.Dundat'g 
revenue.      It  would  obvioufly,  however,  be  piemature  on  this  occafion  to  enter 
into  any  further  detail,  and  I  have  confined  myi'elf  to  a  mere  fetement  of  the 
general  propofition.  -    •'': 

■  Another  point,  which  would  probably  be  deemed  indifpen fable,  is  an  altera- 
-tion  in  the  military  fyltem  in  India,  for  the  removal  of  thofc  jeaioufies  and  divifions, 
•which  have  unfortunately  been  too  prevalent,  between  the  ditl'ercnt  branches  of  the 
'-military  fervice  in  that  quarter,  and  which  mult,  at  all  times,  be  highly  prejudicial 

to  the  public  interefl ;  and  for  the  correction  of  the  anomalous  fyftem  of  divided 
refponfibility,  which  prevails  at  prefent  iu  this  country,  in  every  thing  that  relates  to 
.the  military  defence  of  India.  The  only  eiJeftual  remedy  for  thcfe  evils  will,  pro- 
bably, be  found  iji  arrangements  for  confolidadng  your  Indian  ai-niy  witii  the  King's 
troops,  four. Jed  upon  the  plan  fo  ftronTly  recommended  by  Lord  Cornwallis, 
with  fuch  nicdificalions  as  the  actual  conllitution  ofyt)ur  fervice  may  render  ex- 
pedient or  neceflai-y.     Thefe  arrangements  need  not  be  attended  wiih  any  altera- 

■  tion  in  the  fyftem  of  promotion  now  in  operation  among  the  officers  of  the 
native  branch  of  the  fervice,  or  with  any  diminution  (they  might  more  probably 

•  produce  an  increafe)  of  any  other  profeflicnal  advantages  which  thofc  officers 
now  enjoy;  neither  would  they,  in  any  degree,  interfere  with  the  general  authority 
now  poHefled  by  the  Court  of  Directors  and  the  Governments  in  India  over  all 
His  Majefty's  forces  ferving  in  thofe  parts,  or  with  their  controul  over  ail  difburl'ements 
■of  a  military  nature.  I  am,  moreover,  not  au'are  of  any  reafon  againft  continuing 
in  the  Court  of  Direftors  the  nomination  of  all  cadets  deftined  to  hold  commiffions  .• 
-in  the  Indian  armv. 

Having  thus  ftated  to  you,  for  the  confideration  of  the  Court  of  Diredors,  the 
.principal  points  to  which  I  was  defirous  of  drawing  their  attention  upon  this  occa- 
sion, I  have  only  to  alTure  you,  that  it  will  be  the  earnefl  defire  of  His  Majefly's 
Government,  to  fugged  to  Parliament  fuch  a  fyftem  only,  as  fhall  be  conformable 
to  the  principles  on  which  the  regulations  of  1784  and  1793  were  founded, 
as  will  fecure  to  this  kingdom  all  the  benefit  that  can  pradicably  be  deiived  from 
its  trade  with  our  poiTeihons  in  India,  and  to  the  natives  of  thofe  countries  a 
•government,  and  an  aJminiilration  of  laws,  fuited  to  their  cuftoms,  habits,  and 
prejudices,  and  confiftent  with  the  Britilh  character,  and  which  fliall  atfo  be 
ilrong  and  efficient,  without  adding  unneceifarily  to  the  authority  of  the  Execu- 
tive Government  at  home,  or  increafiug,  to  any  dangerous  extent,  the  influence  of 
the  Crown. 

I  have  the  lionour  to  be,  Gentlemen, 

Your  moft  obedient  humble  fervant. 

To  the  Chairman  and  Deputy  Chairman  (Signed)  ROBERT  DUNDAS. 

of  the  Eaft-India  Company. 

Draft  of  a  propofed  letter,  in  reply,  prepared  by  the  Committee  of  Corre- 
fpondence,  was  alio  read, 

Refolved,  That  the  faid  draft  be  taken  into  confideration  on  Tuiffdar  hext,  th^ 
17th  Inftant.  ■*■-'.  ^f  .r  ' 


No.  VII. 

At  a  Secret  Comt  of  Dire-Slors,    held  on  Tuefday,  the   17th  January  1809. 

n^HE  draft  of  a  propofed  letter  to  Mr.  Dundas,  which  was  read  the  13th  inftant.        No.  VII. 
being  again  read  ;  ' 

Refolved  unamioufly,  That  •  this  Court  approve  the  faid  letter  fj'jIn.^.'S 

No.  VIII. 


(  12  ) 

No.  VIII. 

Letter  from  the  Chairman   and  Deputy  Chairman  to   the  Right  Honor- 
able Robert  Dundas,  noticed  in  the  preceding  Minute. 

Sir,  Eaft  India  Houfe,  13th  January  1809. 

^°  rn-Aj^E  letter  which  you  did  us  the  honor  to  addrefs  to  us,  on  the  28th   of  lafl 

Chairman  and  month,    on    the  important   fubjeft   of  a  renewal  of  the  Company's  Charter, 

Deputy's  Letter,    has  received  the  mod  ferious  confideration  of  the  Court  of  Direftors,  and  we  are, 

by  their  unaminous  relolution,  inftruded  to  fubmit  to    you  the  following  anfwer 

to  It. 

The  Court  having,  in  the  letter  which  we  had  the  honor  to  addrefs  to  you 
on  the  1 6th  of  laft  month,  thought  it  fufficicnt  to  fl^etch  the  outlines  of  thofc  prin- 
ciples and  propofitions  which  fnould,  in  their  opinion,  form  the  bafis  of  a  new 
Charter,  and  the  reply  you  have  been  pleafed  to  make  to  it,  declaring  the  fame 
intention  of  dating  obfervations  merely  preliminary,  and  '•  not  the  refult  of  any 
"  plan,  or  projeded  fyftem,  matured  in  concert  with  His  iMajefty's  confiden- 
"  tial  Servants,"  our  prefent  letter  will  abftain  from  any  difcuflion  of  minor 
points,  thnfe  efpecially  relating  to  the  proceedings  of  the  Court  of  Dire6lors 
with  fervants  of  the  Company  returned  from  India,  to  which  article  your  letter 
is  underftood  to  allude  ;  and  likewife  from  feme  other  points,  connefted  with  the 
exercife  of  their  authority  at  home,  which  may  be  found  to  require  revifion 
and  modification.  Neither  can  it  be  neceifary  to  go  now  into  the  fubjeft  of 
Indian  Expenditure,  although  it  is  impoflible,  after  the  notice  taken  of  it  in  your 
letter,  to  omit  faying,  that  the  Court  feel  with  the  livelieft  folicitude,  how  indii- 
peufable  it  is  to  reduce  that  article  far  below  the  income,  and  are  determined  to  ad 
accordingly. 

The  attention  of  the  Court  will,  tlierefore,  be  confined,  at  prefent,  to  two 
propofitions  ol  the  highefl  im.portance,  contained  in  your  letter  ;  the  one  fuggeif  ing 
fuch  an  enlargement  of  the  trade  of  individuals  with  Briiilh  India,  as  Ihall  admit 
into  it  indifcritninately  the  merchants  and  the  fliips  of  this  country  ;  and  the  other 
the  transfer  of  the  Company's  Indian  army  to  His  Majefty.  If  thefe  propofitions  had 
not  been  accompanied  by  the  declaration  with  which  your  letter  concludes,  they 
-would  have  filled  the  Court  with  the  deepeft  concern  ;  but  you  are  pleafed  to  clofe 
the  whole  of  your  obfervations  with  an  aifurance,  '•  that  it  will  be  the  earneft  defire 
"  of  His  Majefly's  Government  to  fugged  to  Parliament  fuch  a  fyftem  only,  as  Ihall 
*'  be  conformable  to  the  principles  on  which  the  regulations  of  1784  and  1793  were 
*'  founded,  as  will  fecure  to  this  kingdom  all  the  benefit  that  can  prafticably  be  derived 
*'  from  its  trade  with  our  polfeiTions  in  India,  and  to  the  natives  of  thofe  countries  a 
*'  government  and  an  adminillration  of  laws,  fuited  to  their  cufloms,  habits,  and 
"  prejudices,  and  confident  with  the  Britifli  charafter,  and  which  fhall  alfobedrong 
"  and  efficient,  without  adding  unnecefiarily  to  the  authority  of  the  Executive 
*'  Government  at  home,  or  increafing,  to  any  dangerous  extent,  the  iiifluence  of 
"  the  Crown."  Satisfied,  by  this  declaration,  that  His  .  JVIajedy's  Government 
underdand  the  intereds  of  this  country  and  of  Britifn  India  too  well,  to  intend  any 
alteration  that  would  fubyert  or  endanger  the  fydern  by  which  thofe  vail  polTeflions 
have  been  acquired,  governed,  and  improved,  and  by  which  alone  they  can  be  held, 
to  the  mutual  benefit  of  their  immenfe  population  and  of  the  paramount  ftate,  the  Court 
mud,  of  courfc,  believe,  that  the  propofitions  whicii  have  jud  been  quoted,  are 
fuppofcd  to  be  compatible  with  the  continuance  of  that  fydem,  or  reducible  to  a 
confidency  with  it.  Thefe  fuppofitions  the  Court  are  now  called  upon  to  examine, 
and  they  will  endeavour  to  do  lb  with  the  rcfpecl:  due  to  the  authority  with  which 
they  have  to  ticat,  with  the  duty  which  they  owe  to  their  condituents,  and  with  that 
regard  for  the  intereds  of  their  country,  which  they  do  not  intend,  nor  feel  them- 
lelves  required  to  fink,  in  fupporting  the  integrity  of  the  prefent  Indian  fydem. 

If  either  of  the  two  propofitions,  refpeSing  the  Indian  trade  and  the  Indian 
army,  were  to  be  afted  upon,  in  the  fcnfe  which  the  terms  of  it  feem  obvioufly  to 
convey,  the  Court  have  no  hefitation  in  declaring  their  decided  convidion,  that  it 
would   ellec^ually  fuperfede  and  dedroy,  not  merely  the  rights  of  the  Ead  India 

Company, 


(     »3    ) 

Company,  but  the  fyftem  of  Indian  adminiftiation,  eflablinied  by  the  Acts  of  1784       No.  VIII. 

and  1793  ;  and  with  refpccl  to  the  latter  propofuion,  for  the  transfer  of  the  native  ■ 

army,  it  appears  to  be  incapable  of  any  modification,  which  would  not  dill  make  the      Chairm-.n  and 
overthrow  of  the  prefent  fyftem  the  certain  confequence  of  it.     The  Court  will  take    ^^P^'X"  ^'^^'^f- 
the  liberty  to  flate  the  rcafons  on  which  thefe  opinions  are  founded,  with  as  much 
fulnefs  as  the  bounds  of  a  letter,  and  the  difpatch  neceffary  at  this  period,  will  permit, 
premihng  only,  that  in  the  time  and  fpace  to  which  they  muft  now  confine  themfelves, 
many  things,  belonging  to  the  confideration  of  ooth  iubjefts,  muftbe  omitted. 

With  refpeft  to  the  Private  Trade,  the  Company  are  not  governed  by  narrow 
confiderations  of  commercial  profit  or  commercial  jeaioufy  ;  and,  in  faft,  the  Indian 
trade,  as  rai  objefi  of  gain,  has  gradually  ceafed  to  be  of  importance,  either  to  the 
Company  or  to  individuals.  Fhe  admiflion  into  it  already  accorded  to  Britilh  rcfidents 
in  India,  with  the  prodigious  increafe  of  the  cotton  manufactures  of  Europe,  the 
changed  circumilances  of  the  European  Continent,  and  the  almofl  incefTant  wars 
which  have  prevailed  for  the  la[l  fixteen  years  (warsflill  without  any  near  profpect  of 
termination)  have  reduced  the  value  of  that  trade  to  a  very  low  point.  The  Court 
are  actuated  by  a  thorough  perfuafion,  that  the  unlimited  freedom,  for  which  fome 
perfons  have,  of  late  years,  contended,  would  have  political  confequences  more  inju- 
rious to  the  power  of  this  country  and  of  Britilh  India,  than  the  advantages  anticipated 
by  fanguine  minds,  from  an  enlargement  of  the  commerce,  could  compcnfate,  if 
thofe  advantages  vvere  to  be  realized  ;  and  tliat,  moreover,  the  expeclation  of  fuch 
advantages  is  unfounded,  refulting  from  general  prefumptions,  which  are  contradiifted 
by  the  nature  of  the  Indian  people,  climate,  and  produtlions,  and  by  the  experience 
of  more  tlian  two  centuries. 

In  any  fcheme  of  intercourfe,  purely  commercial,  between  this  Country  and 
India,  the  leading  objects  mult  be  to  export  as  many  as  poffibleof  our  home  manu- 
faftures,  and  to  import  thofe  commodities,  which  would  either  beneficially  fupply 
our  own  confumption,  or  the  demand  of  other  countries,  European  or  Tranfatlantic: 
iind  it  is,  no  doubt,  imagined  by  many  perfon?,  that  if  the  trade  to  India  were  per- 
fectly free,  thefe  objeds  could  be  attained,  in  a  degree  extending  far  beyond  its 
prefent  fcale.  The  ardour  of  hidividual  enterptize,  it  will  be  thought,  could  find  out 
channels,  which  the  fettled  routine  of  a  C'onipany  cannot  explore,  and  carry  on 
commercial  operations  more  economically  and  expeditioufly  than  I'uits  with  the  habits 
of  monopoly,  whillt  our  moit  active  rivals  in  the  Indian  trade  would  thus  be  beft 
counteratted.  The  prefent  times,  it  will  alfo  be  faid,  peculiarly  demand  new  attempts 
and  difcoveries  in  commerce,  and  His  Majefty's  Government  may  very  naturally 
.vvifl],  at  fuch  a  crifis,  to  procure  for  the  country  every  polhble  facility  for  the  Ex- 
ertion of  its  commercial  fpirit,  and  the  employment  ot  its  commercial  capital.  But 
before  a  change  in  its  principle  altogether  novel,  and  obvioufly  connefted  with 
.national  mterelts  'of  the  highelt  importance,  is  adopted,  it  ought  to  be  feen,  not 
only  on  what  rational  grounds  the  expectation  of  advantages  entertained  from  it  reftj, 
but  to  what  confequences  fo  material  a  change  might  expofe  the  country  and  its 
Indian  dependencies. 

Now,  with  refpe£t  to  the  benefits  fuppofed  to  t>e  derivable  from  opening  the  trade 
with  India,  it  is,  in  the  firft  place,  to  be  obferved,  that  no  material  enlargement,  if  any 
enlargement  at  all,  is  to  be  expelled  in  the  exports  of  our  manufattures  to  that 
quarter.  The  records  of  the  Company,  for  two  centu-ies,  are  filled  with  accounts 
of  their  endeavours  to  extend  the  fale  of  Britifh  products  in  India,  and  of  the  little 
fuccefs  which  has  attended  them.  The  French,  Dutch,  and  other  European  nations 
tiading  thither,  have  equally  failed  in  introducing  the  manufactures  of  Europe  there. 
This  was  not  owing  to  their  trading  chiefly  in  the  form  of  Companies  :  the  Americans, 
who  within  the  lait  twenty  years  have  entered  into  the  Indian  commerce,  and  traded 
largely,  not  as  a  Company,  but  by  numerous  individuals,  each  purfuing  his  own  fcheme 
in  his  own  vi^ay,  in  which  courfe  no  part  of  the  Eaft  is  left  unexplored,  carry  hardly 
any  European  m.anufaclures  thither,  their  chief  article  for  the  purchafe  of  Indian 
goods  being  filver ;  and  fuch  has  been  the  ftate  of  the  trade  from  Europe  to  India 
fmce  the  time  of  the  Romans.  This  ftate  refults  from  the  nature  of  the  Indian 
people,  their  climate,  and  their  ufages.  The  articles  of  firft  neceinty  their  own 
country  furnifhes,  more  abundantly  and  more  cheaply  than  it  is  poflible  for  Europe 
(59.)  D  .  to 


(      14     ) 

No.  VIII.        to  fupply  them.     The  labour  of  the  gre:\t  body  of  the  common  people  only  enables 

•— them  to  fubfilt  on  rice,  and  to  \vear  a  flight  covering  of  cotton  cloth  ;  they,  there- 

Chiirman  and  {q^q^  cjin  purchafe  none  of  the  fuperfluities  we  offer  them.  The  comparatively  few 
Deputy  s  Letter.  .^  better  circumftances,  reftrifted,  like  the  reft,  by  numerous  religious  and  civil 
cuftoms,  of  which  all  are  remarkably  tenacious,  find  few  of  our  commodities  to  their 
tafte,  and  their  climate  fo  diffimilar  to  ours,  renders  many  of  them  unfuitable  to  tlieir 
ufe ;  fo  that  a  commerce  between  them  and  us  cannot  proceed  far  upon  the  principlo 
of  fupplying  mutual  wants.  Hence,  except  woollens,  in  a  very  limited  degree,  for 
mantles  in  the  cold  feafon,  and  metals,  on  a  fcale  alfo  very  limited,  to  be  worked  up 
by  their  own  artizans  for  the  few  utenfiis  they  need,  hardly  any  of  our  ftapic  com- 
modities find  a  vent  among  the  Indians  ;  the  other  exports  which  Europe  fends  to 
India  being  chiefly  confumed  by  the  European  population  there,  and  fome  of  the 
defendants  of  the  ear'ly  Portuguefe  fettlers,  all  ot  whom,  taken  coUeQively,  form 
but  a  fmall  body,  in  view  to  any  quellion  of  national  commerce. 

What  is  here  faid  does  not  relate  only  to  thofe  parts  of  India  where  the  Company 
liave  fettlements  or  fa£tories,but  to  all  the  (hores  that  embrace  the  Indian  Seas,  from 
the  Gulfs  of  Perfii  and  Arabia  to  the  Eaflern  Archipelago.  Many  advocates  for  a 
free  trade  may  fuppofe,  that  in  fo  vaft  a  range,  numerous  pofitions,  favourable  for 
the  vent  of  European  commodities,  are  ftill  unexplored ;  but  they  are  not  aware, 
that  in  the  Britifh  Settlements,  which  thcmfelves  extend  on  the  weft  to  Cambay,  and 
on  the  €aft  to  China,  there  are  a  number  of  merchants,  native  and  European,  who 
carry  on  what  is  called  the  coafting  trade  of  India,  with  great  fpirit,  fending  their 
fnips  to  every  mart,  infular  or  continental,  where  any  profitable  commodities  can  be 
either  fold  or  bought.  At  all  thofe  marts,  European  CDmmodities  have  been  tried  by 
the  enterprize  of  individuals.  The  little  demand  that  has  been  found  for  them  has 
been  fupplied  ;  and  refidents,  fettled  in  India,  can  carry  into  fuch  parts  the  trade  in 
European  commodities,  which  it  is  now  open  to  them  to  receive  from  this  country, 
with  mote  facility  and  advantage  than  merchants  fettled  in  England. 

To  thefe  facls  and  obfervations,  arifing  from  the  nature  and  circumftances  of  the 
people  and  countries  of  India,  one  remarkable  argument  may  be  added,  furniflied  by 
our  own  experience  at  home.  In  the  Charter  of  1793,  provifion  was  made  for  the 
export  of  Britifh  nianufaftures  to  India,  by  any  individuals  who  might  choofe  to 
em.bark  in  that  trade.  The  Company  were  required  to  find  them  tonnage  to  a 
certain  extent,  which  has  always  been  allotted  at  a  rate  of  freight  cheaper  outward, 
as  well  as  for  the  returns,  than  the  Company  themfelves  pay,  or  as  the  Court  think, 
than  private  fliips  could  furnilh  it.  But,  in  all  the  time  that  has  elapfed  fince,  very 
few  applications,  and  thefe  10  a  finail  extent,  have  been  made,  for  leave  to  export 
the  woollens,  metals,  and  other  ftaples  of  this  country,  on  private  account,  the  chief 
applications  having  been  for  the  freight  of  wine,  for  the  confumption  of  Europeans : 
and  this  is  not  properly  a  Britifli  production,  nor  is  it  fo  much  an  increafe  in  the 
trade,  as  a  transfer  of  it  to  I'nc  private  merch  mts  from  the  commanders  and  officers 
of  the  Company's  Ships,  parr  of  whofe  advantage  ufed  to  arife  from  being  the  carriers 
of  this  commodity. 

All  thefe  circumftances,  to  which  other  corroborations  might  be  added,  the 
Court  truft  will  fully  evince,  that  the  entire  opening  of  the  Indian  trade  to  the  mer- 
chants of  this  country  would  not,  in  reality,  extend  in  any  confiderable  degree,  if 
at  all,  the  confumption  of  Britilh  manufaftures. 

Let  it  be  inquired,  in  the  next  place,  whether  the  adoption  of  fo  great  a  change 
in  our  Indian  fyftem,  would  be  followed  by  the  difcovery  of  fuch  new  and  valuable 
produdions  of  the  Eaft,  as  v/ould  ferve  materially  to  augment  the  trade  of  this 
country  with  the  Continents  of  Europe  and  Ameiica  ;  for,  with  regard  to  the  fupply 
of  our  home  confumption  of  Indian  commodities,  it  cannot  be  aflerted,  that  the  im- 
portations already  made  by  the  Company  and  individuals  do  not  abundantly  fuffice 
for  it,  or  nny  not,  at  any  time,  be  extended  to  the  exigencies  of  the  market ;  in 
which,  it  m?.y  be  noted,  that  a  preference  is  given  to  the  cotton  and  filk  manufactures 
of  our  own  country,  and  to  fome  of  the  tropical  produftions  brought  from  our 
Weft  Indian  Colonies.  Nor  can  it  be  aflerted,  that  new  adventurers  in  the  Eaftern 
trade,  fitting  out  from  Great  Britain,  could,  with  any  profit  to  themfelves,  furnilh 
the  home  confumption  on  cheaper  terms  than  it  is  now  fupplied  ;  for  both  the  Com- 
pany, 


(     15    ) 

pany,  and  Britifli  individuals  refident  in  India,  muft:  have  an  advantage  over  fuch       No.  VIII. 

adventurers  in  the  provifion  of  goods  there  (Britifh  refidents  in  the  Freight  alfo), 

and  yet,  of  lare,  the  great  Indian  ftaple  of  cotton  piece  goods  has  been  a  lofing  d^  utX  Lcuer 
article  in  this  country. 

Now,  as  to  the  produ£tions  of  India  valuable  for  foreign  commerce,  the  trade  of 
Europeans,  of  different  nations,  to  all  parts  of  it,  in  the  courfe  of  the  laft  three  cen- 
turies, may  well  be  prefumed  (o  have  left  little  for  difcovery  in  that  way.  The  Por- 
tuguefe,  who,  in  their  early  time,  ipread  themfelves  along  all  the  fliores  of  the  Eaft, 
explored  every  confiderable  part  of  it,  and  they  were  followed  by  the  Dutch,  Englifli, 
and  French  Companies,  with  their  numerous  eftabiiihments,  fome  of  which  extended 
inland  to  the  Upper  India.  But  the  modern  European  merchants,  refident  in  the 
Eaft,  who  have  long  been  the  chief  navigators  and  adventurers  in  what  is  called  the 
coalting  trade,  have  become  well  acquainted  with  the  commercial  capacity  of  every 
region  walhed  by  .tl-.e  Indian  feas  ;  fo  that  many  countries  fuppofed  here  to  be  little 
known,  becaufe  little  vifited  by  the  (hips  of  Europe,  are  iamiliar  to  them,  and 
whatever  Articles  thofe  countries  furnifh,  valuable  for  the  commerce  of  the  Welfj 
are  already  conveyed,  through  the  medium  of  private  or  foreign  trade,  to  Europe. 

The  chief  commodities  fuited  to  the  European  market,  which  India  has  hitherto 
been  found  to  produce,  are  fpices,  pepper,  drugs,  fugar,  coffee,  raw  filk,  faltpetre, 
indigo,  raw  cotton,  and  above  all,  cotton  manfacfures  of  fmgular  beauty  and  in 
cndlcfs  variety.  Thefe  hft  have,  as  already  intimated,  formed,  from  time  immemo- 
rial, the  grand  ftaple  of  India ;  but  from  the  rife  and  excellence  of  fimilar  manu- 
fadfures  in  Europe,  particularly  in  our  own  country,  and  from  the  general  impo- 
verifhment  which  wars  and  revolutions  have  brought  upon  the  Continent  of  Europe, 
with  the  Obflrucfions  oppcfed,  in  much  the  greater  part  of  it,  to  our  Commerce, 
the  Confumption  of  the  fine  Fabricks  of  India  has  confiderably  decreafed,  and_  it  .- 
is  not  likely  that  it  can  be  reltored  to  its  former  ftandard.  Spices,  fugar,  and  coffee,' 
have  been  furnifhed  chiefly  from  the  Moluccas  and  Java,  Dutch  iflands  not  in  our 
poffefTion,  nor,  in  a  commercial  view,  worth  the  expenfe  of  conquering  and  keeping 
them.  The  cinnamon  of  Ceylon,  now  ours,  may  be  brought,  in  fufficient  quantity 
for  the  fupply  of  all  Europe,  in  one  or  two  of  the  Company's  lliips.  Pepper  is  a 
very  lofing  article.  Sugar  has  been  of  late  imported  from  our  territories ;  but  the 
neceffary  expenfe  of  conveyance  from  fo  great  a  diftance,  prevents  it  from  being 
profitable,  and  it  can  be  much  encouraged  only  at  the  expenfe  of  our  Weft  India 
colonies.  Raw  filk  and  indigo,  now  produced  in  great  pcrfeftion  in  Bengal  and  its 
dependencies,  have  been  brought  to  that  ftaie,  by  the  expenfe  incurred,  and  the 
fupport  afforded  by  the  Company.  Both  are  articles  occupying  little  fpace,  in  pro- 
portion to  their  value.  The  factories  where  the  former  is  coUedfed  and  prepared 
are  in  the  hands  of  the  Company,  who  have,  in  the  courfe  of  many  years,  eflabhfhed 
them  with  great  labour  and  expenfe.  They  can  furniih  not  only  all  the  raw  filk  this 
country  requires,  but  much  for  the  confumption  of  the  Continent,  if  it  was  poffiblc 
to  bring  it  there  into  competition  with  the  raw  filk  of  Italy,  and  the  tonnage  already 
employed  by  the  Company  is  quite  fufhcient  for  its  importation  from  India.  The 
indigo  produced  in  Bengal  and  the  adjacent  Provinces  isequal,  probably,  to  three- 
fourths  of  the  demand  of  all  Europe,  and  may  eafily  be  raifedto  the  whole  demand  ; 
but  the  manufatlure  of  this  article  is  entirely,  and  the  trade  in  it  chiefly,  in  the  hands 
of  individuals,  who  need  and  require  no  Ihipping  from  this  country,  except  v/hat  the 
Company  provide,  to  convey  to  Europe,  all  that  Europe  can  confume  of  it.  Salt- 
petre, furnifhed  only  from  Bengal,  is,  for  political  reafons,  prohibited  to  foreigners, 
and  exported  exclufively  in  the  fliips  of  the  Company  ;  for  the  fame  realons,  it 
could  never  be  prudent  to  allow  the  private  {hips  of  this  country  to  carry  it  away  at 
pleafure.  Where  then  is  the  fcopefor  the  admiffion  of  new  fliipping  and  new  adven- 
turers,  without  limitation,  into  the  trade  of  India  with  Great  Britain  ?  In  general, 
it  may  be  obferved,  that  the  commodities  which  have  hitherto  come  from  that  coun- 
try, in  a  ftate  prepared  for  ufe,  fuch  as  the  great  ff  aple  of  cotton  piece  goods,  being 
articles  of  luxury,  can  have  only  a  limited  confumption,  arid  that  the  demand  for 
them  could  not  be  encreafed  at  all  in  proportion  to  the  number  of  new  competitors 
that  lliould  enter  into  the  trade.  The  lame  niiiy  be  faid  of  all  kinds  of  fpices  and 
drugs,  which,  from  their  nature,  have  a  limited  confumption  ;  and,  with  regard 
to  the  important  articles  of  raw  filk  and  indigo,  which  require  a  further  preparation 

before 


(     i6     ) 

"No.  Viri.  efore  they  are  ufed,  there  is  already  abundant  provlfron  made  for  their  impor-tation, 

-; to  the  utmoft  extent  of  demanc'. 

Chairman   and 

•  JDcputy's  Lciter.  There  remains  then  to  be  confidered,  of  all  the  commodities  above  enumerated,  only 
the  raw  material  of  cotton ;  and  to  this  may  be  added  another  of  high  importance, 
which  India  is  in  time  likely  to  produce  abimdantly,  namely,  hemp.  Now,  with 
refpedt  to  the  former  of  ihefe,  the  Company  have  formerly  imported  it,  and  per- 
jnitted  private  merchants  to  do  fo  ;  but  it  was  found,  that  the  cotton  of  hidia  could 
not  enter  into  competition  with  that  produced  nearer  home,  in  the  Brazils,  the 
Weft  Indies,  and  North  America.  Of  late,  fmce  the  interrupdon  of  our  trade  with 
the  laft  mentioned  country,  the  Company  have  themfelves  commiflloned  cotton 
•from  India,  and  have  been  willing  to  encourage  individuals  to  export  it  from  thence  ; 
but  that  it  can  fupport  a  competition  with  the  cotton  of  Georgia,  when  the  Ameri- 
can embargo  is  taken  off,  or  become  an  article  of  extenfive  demand  in  this  country, 
■fupplied  with  it  fi-om  fo  many  nearer  quarters,  is  not  very  likely.  The  culture  of 
hemp  .in  India  is  yet  in  its  infancy.  A  change  in  the  circumftauces  of  Europe  may 
check  it  ;  but  if  it  is  not  checked,  years  mult  elapfe,  before  the  quantity  produced 
can  form  a  confiderable  article  of  exportation.  And  with  regard  to  both  thefe 
commodities  of  cotton  and  hemp,  it  is  to  be  obferved,  firft,  that  cargoes  for  Europe 
cannot  be  compofed  of  them  only,  fome  other,  more  ponderous  for  its  bulk,  being 
neceffary  for  dead  weight,  and  fugar,  almoft  the  only  article  of  this  nature  that 
India  can  fupply,  muft  generally  be  rather  a  loling  one  :  fecondly,  it  is  to  be  ob- 
ferved, that  the  private  fliips  ready  to  be  employed  in  India,  mult  be  abundantly 
Sufficient  for  the  fupply  of  ail  the  tonnage  that  can  be  required  for  thefe  articles, 
which  could  hardly  abforb  any  very  large  amount  of  capital.  Thus,  then,  it  is  alfo  ap- 
parent, that  the  country  and  produ'ilions  of  India  aflbrd  no  new  field  of  importance 
for  the  commercial  enterprize  of  the  merchants  of  Great  Britairu 

But  were  it  indeed  othervi'ife,  where,  in  the  prefent  circumftances  of  the  European 
Continent,  could  new  commodities,  imported  into  this  country  from  India,  find  a 
vent,  when  many  of  thofe  already  made,  and  of  articles  which  the  Continent  ufed 
to  take  off,  remain  in  our  warehoufes .''  And  hence  may  appear  the  inapplicability 
of  that  argument,  which  has  lon;etimes  been  urged  in  favour  of  enlarging,  or  rather 
opening  the  Indian  trade  to  individuals,  "  that  they  fiiould  be  allowed  to  bring 
"  home  the  furplus  produce  of  India  v/hich  the  Company  did  net  require."  There 
can  be  no  room  lor  additional  importations,  vvhtn  the  ordinary  fcale  proves  too 
large.  But  in  the  ufe  of  this  plaufible  plea,  refpetting  furplus  produce,  there  was 
always  a  great  fallacy.  It  ftcmed  to  imply,  that  there  was  a  ftock  of  commodities  in 
India  which  continually  remained  undilpoicd  of,  whereas  nothing  is  more  evident, 
than  that  the  produfliioas  of  any  country  will  be  regulated  by  the  demand,  and 
that  no  agiicalturifts  or  minufadurers  will  go  on  from  year  to  year  to  produce 
that  ior  which  they  have  no  fale.  The  term,  as  connefted  with  the  Company, 
might  alfo  convey  the  idea,  that  they  were  the  only  purchafers  in  the  country ; 
whereas,  at  that  very  time,  Britifli  refidents  and  foreign  nations  had  the  privilege  of 
exporung  goods  to  the  weftern  world,  and  there  was  a  great  coafling  and  internal 
trade  from  one  part  of  India  to  another.  But  the  argument  tor  permitting  individuals 
to  export  the  furplus  produce,  included  fully,  though  not  profeffedly,  the  principle 
of  tranfplanting  Bridffi  capital  to  India,  in  order  to  raife  produce  there  ;  a  principle 
which,  it  may  be  thought,  this  country  has  already  carried  fufficiently  far  in  its 
other  diftant  dependencies,  "and  which  could  not  be  appacd  to  India  without  poli- 
tical  cocfequences. 

But  it  has  been  alledg  d,  that  the  refufal  of  the  Company  to  make  a  conceffion, 
which  appeared  to  them  to  be  claimed  on  unfound  preinifes,  and  to  be  pregnant 
with  danger,  threw  that  trade,  which  might  have  been  brought  into  the  Thames, 
into  the  hands  of  foreigners,  particularly  the  Americans,  whofe  great  progrefs  in  the 
Indian  trade,  of  late  years,  has  been  charged  to  an  erroneous  policy  on  the  part  of 
the  Company.  Nothing  can  be  more  miftaken  than  the  whole  of  this  ftatement. 
Several  European  nations  having  from  the  native  fovereigns  of  India  the  right  of 
pofl'elhng  fettlements  and  carrying  on  trade  there,  a  right  which  we  had  confirmed, 
we  could  not  interrupt  the  exercife  of  it  whilll  they  remained  at  peace  with  us  ; 
nor,  therefore,  divert  from  them  whatever  portion  of  the  trade  their  means  enabled 
t.hem  to  embrace.  And,  .with  refpeft  to  the  Americans,  they  owe  their  advance- 
ment- 


(     »7    ) 

ment  and  fuccefs  in  the  Indian  trade  to  the  treaty  made  with  them  by  our  Govern-       No.  VIII. 

nient  in  1794,  to  the  belligerent  ftate  of  Europe  fince  that  time,  and,  above  all,  to         ~ 

the  neutral  charafl:er  they  poflefled,  which  enabled  them  to  navigate  more  cheaply,    jv*'^."^'^*"i /„  ^ 

more  expeditioufly,  as  well  as  more  fafely  than  our  merchants  or  the  Company        ^* 

could,  and  to  fupply  many  parts  of  the  European  Continent  and  of  South  America, 

to  which  our  fhips  had  no  accofs.     I'hefc,   with  tlie  increafe  of  tlie   cf)nfumption 

of  eaftern  commodities  among  themfelves,  are  the  true  caufes  of  the  growth  of  the 

American  trade  with  India ;    and  even   the  abolition  of  the  Company's   privileges 

would  not  have  transferred  the  fliare  they  acquired  of  it  to  our  merchants,  becaufe 

it  could  not  have  Icfiened  the  advantages  under  which  the  Americans  then  carried  it 

on,  nor  have  gained  us  either  the  fupply  nf  their  internal  demand,  or  admiffion  to 

many  ports  which  Vv'ere  open  to  them.     What  ths  Company  could  do,  in  the  way 

of  regulation,  to  reduce  the  inequality  between  the  American  traders  and  our  own 

iperchnnts,  you  know,  Sir,  was  cflefted,  as  fcon  after  the  expiration  of  the  treaty  of 

J  794  as  His  Majefty's  Government  thought  expedient. 

Among  the  fpeculations  of  the  prefent  day,  the  idea  may  perliaps  be  fuggefted, 
of  carrying  the  produftions  of  India  directly  to  the  porrs  of  Portuguefe  and  Spani(h 
America  ;  and  eagernefs  for  relief  from  the  prefl'ure  which  our  commerce  now  feels, 
may  be  ready  to   make  fo  j/reat  a  facritice  of  the  naviojation  lav/s.     But  fuch 


^•^„u    „    •- w^     —     ...»,     ..„..^^ 


meafure  would  eilentially  exclude  the  mother  country  from  being  the  meJium  and 
emporium  of  our  Indian  trade ;  and  whiKt  it  ferved  to  enrich  Imlia,  rather  than 
Britain,  would  facilitate  the  progrefs  of  the  former  to  independence.  If,  however, 
fo  dangerous  an  innovation  were  not  adopted  into  our  commercial  code,  it  is  alto- 
gether probable  that  EnoliOi  fliips,  admitted  without  hmitation  into  the  Indian  S-^as, 
would  take  the  liberty  of  failing  to  thofe  markets  which  woukl  be  thought  the  molt 
promifing  ;  fo  that,  in  effeft,  the  opening  of  the  Indian  trade  v/ould  be  not  folely 
or  chiefly  for  this  countiy  alone,  but  for  other,  perhaps  for  all  parts  of  the  world. 

Having  thus  fhev/n,  that  the  opening  of  the  Indian  trade  to  the  fubjeds  of  Great 
Britain  could  not  materially  increafe,  either  the  export  of  the  manufadlures  of  this 
country,  or  its  commerce  in  the  produ£tions  of  India,  it  will  next  be  proper  t& 
confider,  what  the  effefts  of  the  propofed  change  would  be  upon  the  Ealt  India 
Company  and  upon  Britifh  India. 

And,  in  the  firft  place,  it  would,  in  fubftance  and  in  form,  entirely  abolifh  the 
qualified  monopoly  which  the  Company  (till  enjoys  of  the  Indian  trade.  The  ad- 
miflion  of  all  private  merchants,  at  their  pleafure,  and  of  their  Ships,  into  the  trade, 
would  make  it  as  perfedly  free  as  the  trade  to  our  American  or  Weft  Indian  colo- 
nies. There  would,  as  to  India,  be  an  end  of  all  exclufive  privilege  of  trade. 
This  would  not  be  any  modification  of  the  A&  of  1703,  but  ai^  effential  departure 
from  it.  That  a£l  permitted  only  the  export  of  Britifh  manufadtures,  and  intended 
only  to  provide  for  the  returns  to  them,  and  for  the  remittance,  in  goods,  of 
Britifli  fortunes  fi'om  India ;  both  on  the  fhips  of  the  Company.  The  propofed 
meafure  muft,  in  the  nature  of  it,  make  the  trade  from  India  not  merely  a  vehicle 
for  the  remittance  of  fortunes  acquired  there,  or  the  produce  of  BridOi  manufaftures, 
but  a  general  trade;  and  what  is  a  ftill  more  radical  change,  inftead  of  a  limited 
amount  of  tonnage  not  incompatible  with  the  Company's  fyftem,  it  admits  all  fliips, 
without  any  iinntation,  or  opdcn  on  the  part  of  the  Company  :  it  throws  all  India 
open  to  thofe  /liips,  and  thus  fets  afide  the  Company  from  being  the  fole  channel 
and  medium  of  the  trade,  through  their  own  {hipping,  or  fliipping  engaged  by  them, 
which  completely  divefts  them  of  the  lalt  remnant  of  exclufive  privilege  in  that 
trade. 

It  would  be  no  argument  to  fay,  that  in  a  trade,  by  which  they  now^  gain  little, 
they  might  admit,  without  much  facrifice,  the  reft  of  the  commercial  world  to  fliare. 
The  lofs  of  the  Indian  monopoly,  fuch  as  it  was  left  by  the  A61  of  1793,  would 
lead,  by  no  flow  procefs,  to  the  entire  fubverfion  of  the  Company,  both  in  their 
commercial  and  political  capacity,  and  of  that  fyftem  which  the  Legiflature  has  ap- 
pointed lor  the  government  of  Britifli  India,  of  v.hich  fyftem  the  Company  forms 
an  integral  and  effential  part. 

If  the  Indian  trade  were  thrown  <"pen,  fhips  would,  at  firft  no  doubt,  fwarni  into 

it,  and  there  would  be  a  ruinous  competition  in  the  markets,  both  abroad  and  at 

(59.)  E  home. 


(     i8     ) 

1^0.  ^in."       home.     Gootls  would  be  enhanced  in  cod  there,  as  well  as  deteriorated  in  quality: 

the  felling  prices  at  home,  already  too  low,  reduced   ftill  lower,  and  the  market 

Chairman  and  Qverflocked.  '1  his  was  the  effeft,  in  ferae  nieafure,  produced  by  throwing  open  the 
OJeputy  s  citer.  ^^^^^  .^  ^^^  ^.^^^  ^^  Oliver  Cromwell,  who,  after  the  experience  of  a  few  years, 
revived  the  Company.  The  fame  efleft  follov/sd  from  die  collilion  of  the  Old  and 
New  Companies,  in  the  beginning;  of  the  lail  century,  which  forced  them  to  unite, 
and  their  union  received  the  fanilion  of  government.  It  is  not  fufficient  to  fay,  on 
this  head,  that  increafed  demand  abroad  will  produce  increafed  fuppiy,  and  the 
diminilhecl  price  of  goods  at  home  increafc  the  fales,  fo  that  things  will,  at  length, 
in  both  countries,  hud  their  due  level.  From  the  nature  of  the  Indians  and  their 
divifion  into  cades,  it  is  not  lb  eafy  among  them,  as  in  Europe,  to  meet  an  increafed 
demand  bv  increaied  production  ;  and  it  is  flill  lefs  eafy  when  they  can  fubfid  by 
furnifuing  things  of  low  or  ordinary  quality,  to  make  them  aim  at  excellence,  which 
the  fuppofition  of  increafed  fales  at  hi^ne  would  require.  But  of  fuch  an  increafe, 
in  tile  prefent  and  profpective  ilate  of  the  trade  in  Indian  imports,  enough  has  been 
above  faid  to  (hew  the  improbability  ;  and  before  that  i'uppofition  could,  in  any  cafe, 
be  realized,  the  ruin  of  the  parties  immediately  embarked  in  the  trade  (a  trade  fo 
diftant,  requiring  large  capitals,  and  making  flow  returns)  might  be  completed,  with 
the  ruin  alio  of  the  Company,  whofe  edablifliments  would  have  been  deranged  by 
this  great  change.  If  the  change  itfclf  did  not  ocrafion  the  fall  of  the  Company, 
the  difappointmcnts  which  the  private  adventurers  could  not  fail  to  experience  would, 
by  them,  be  charged  to  the  influence  of  the  remaining  privileges  of  the  Company, 
a-nd  they  would  not  reft  until  the  whole  were  extinguifhed.  But  it  may  be  ob- 
terved  here,  and  it  is  an  obfervation  which  might  be  urged  more  formally  and  fully, 
that  although  the  Company  have  the  juflefl  claim  to  thofe  territories,  which  the 
powers  veiled  in  them  by  the  laws  of  this  land,  the  ability  of  their  fervants,  and  the 
hazards  they  have  encountered,  have  enabled  them  to  acquire,  and  that  this  right 
was  never  quedioned,  until  the  acquifitions,  and  confequently  the  merit  of  making 
them,  became  great  ;  yet  that,  in  a  more  peculiar  fenfe,  all  the  principal  marts  and 
fadories  of  Britilh  India  are  their  property,  acquired  in  their  purely  commercial 
period,  either  with  their  money  or  by  grants  from  the  native  princes  of  the  country, 
and  that  the  power  of  admittiiTg  fettlers  and  traders  to  them  itriftly  belongs  to  the 
Company. 

One  part  of  the  prefent  fydem,  and  a  beneficial  one  for  all  parties,  is  to  have 
only  one  place  of  fale  for  Indian  goods,  that  is  London  ;  to  make  all  fales  by  public 
auction  at  dated  periods,  and  thefe  fales  to  be  regulated  and  conduced  by  the 
Company.  With  the  propofed  enlargements,  it  would  feem  hardly  pofhble  to 
continue  that  praftice.  Dilferent  tov/ns  would  have  their  own  fales,  at  their  own 
times.  Individuals  might  frequently  chufe  to  difpofe  of  their  goods  by  private 
bargain.  The  general  refort  of  buyers  which  the  fales  were  wont  to  bring  to 
London,  a  refort  often  produttive  of  other  commercial,  fpeculations,  would  thus 
be  at  an  end  ;  and  the  benefit  derived  from  public  auftion,  when  that  was'the  fole 
mode,  would  be  lodj  in  the  midd  of  many  private  fales  and  competitions  :  but  to 
difpofe  of  the  goods  of  the  Company  by  private  negociation,  might  open  a  door  to 
many  abufes,  which  would  render  that  mode  totally  unfuitable  for  their  bufinefs. 
The  Company,  with  fuch  a  competition,  could  not  go  on  to  purchafe  the  goods  of 
India.  With  the  ceffat ion  of  their  Indian  trade,  their  Indian  fubordinate  faftcries, 
which  have  been  reared  in  the  courfe  of  more  than  a  century,  and  which  are  the 
feats  of  the  bed  manufaftures  produced  in  the  country,  mud  be  abandoned,  and  all 
the  commercial  branch  of  their  civil  fervants  be  thrown  out  of  employ.  Their  pur- 
chafes  of  goods  at  home,  for  the  Indian  market,  mud  alfo  ceafe,  with  the  circula- 
tion of  money  which  has  enabled  them  to  fupport  their  credit  in  England,  and  to 
provide  for  the  payment  of  bills,  which  it  has  been  long  and  necellarily  the  pratticc 
to  draw  on  them  from  India ;  a  prafticc  which,  under  fuch  a  change  of  circum- 
fiances,  could  not  be  conthmed  :  and,  in  general,  the  great  aid  which  the  political 
affairs  of  Britifh  India  have,  at  all  times,  derived  from  the  commercial  credit  and, 
refources  of  the  Company,  with  the  reciprocally  beneficial  co-operation  of  the  dif- 
ferent parts  of  the  Company's  fydem,  mud  thus  be  deRroyed.  In  like  manner,  the 
Company  mud  ceafe  to  employ  the  numerous  clafs  of  excellent  ihips  they  have 
engaged  for  the  Indian  trade,  fhips  condruded  for  warlike  defence  as  well  as  for 
commerce,  and  rendered  expenfive  only,  by  being  neceffarily  dedined  and  fitted  for 

the 


(     19     ) 

the  performance  of  political  fervices.     Thofe  fliips  the  Company  have  contrafted  to  No.  VIII. 

employ  for  the  terra  of  their  duration  :  there  is  a  large  capital  embarked  m  them,  ■- 

and  they  can  be  employed  in  no  other  way  than  in  that  for  which  they  were  built.  ^  ''^'^"J^"  ^^""^ 

When  they  can  no  longer  be  kept  up,  the  means  of  conveyance  they  have  hitherto  "^^  '^ 
lo  well  afforded  for  troops,  and  the  large  fupplies  of  naval  and  military  (lores  an- 
nually fent  to  India,  muit  be  loft. 

But  there  is  no  reafon  to  believe  the  evils  would  end  here.  The  monopoly  of 
the  China  trade,  which  it  is  propofed  to  continue,  would  not  be  fafe  ;  Britifli 
Ships,  when  permitted  to  range  at  pleafure  through  the  Indian  Seas,  however 
interciifted  from  that  trade,  would  attempt  to  participate  it  in  either  by  reforting 
to  it  as  the  country  Ihips  do,  under  color  of  carrying  on  the  coafling  trade,forby  other 
means  obtaining  teas,  and  the  other  produftions  of  China,  at  the  moft  convenient 
Indian  ports.  Love  of  gain,  difappoiutments  in  other  ways,  the  hope  of  impunity 
would  ftitnulate  their  conductors  to  break  through  reftrictionsimpofedin  this  country. 
Britifii  fubjeds,  who  now  navigate  the  Indian  Seas,  fail  from  fome  one  of  our  eftabliflied 
fettlements  there,  and  are  amenable  to  the  laws  of  it :  it  would  not  be  fo  with  men  hav- 
ing no  domicile  in  India.  In  ranging  the  numerous  iflands  and  coate  of  the  Eaftern 
Seas,  where  they  would  be  unknown,  and  whence  they  could  not  be  follovv-ed  to 
England  by  complaints,  the  probability  of  impunity  might  tempt  them  to  commit 
upon  the  weak  natives  accuftomed  to  repofe  conlidence  in  Engliftanen,  atts  of  in- 
juftice  and  licentiouinefs,  which  v/ould  wound  the  national  charafter,  raife  complaints 
throughout  India,  and  fet  the  people  again  ft  us.  In  this  manner  the  Portucuefe 
formerly  rendered  themfelves  odious  in  the  Eaft,  and  contributed  to  the  downfall  of 
their  own  power.  In  China,  where  the  efl'ccts  of  fuch  a  fpirit  would  be  moit  to  be 
feared,  we  could  exercife  no  authority,  furlicient  to  controul  men  not  within  the 
reach  of  the  Indian  Governments,  or  to  defeat  their  fchemes  and  affociations  for 
elud'ng  the  laws.  Pradice  would  emboldem  them,  and  time  increafe  their  numbers. 
It  is  hardlv  conceivable  they  would  not  venture  upon  irregularities  which  would  offend 
the  ChiuLfe  Government,  who,  whilft  the  delinquents  efcaped  to  England  with  im- 
punity, would  doubtlefs  take  fatisfaflion  of  the  national  factory,  and  the  pride  and 
jealoufy  of  that  Government,  alarmed  by  repeated  inftances  of  this  nature,  from  the 
defultory  vifits  of  a  new  order  of  Engliflimen,  iniubordinate  to  the  reprefentatives  of 
the  nation,  might  determine  to  difmifsthe  whole  together.  If  this  extreme  cafe  be 
not  fuppo'ed,  which  however  is  too  probable  and  too  momentous  in  its  confequences  to 
be  hazarded,  can  it  be  doubted,  that  whilft  the  duties  on  tea  continue  at  even  the 
fourth  part  of  v/hat  they  are  at  prefent,  private  Englilh  fhips  adventuring  to  the  Eaft- 
ern Seas  will  not,  by  means  of  country  veffels  and  intermediate  ports,  if  by  no  other 
means,  procure  teas,  and  revive  the  practice  of  fmuggling  them  into  this  kingdom.'' 
The  confequence  feems  inevitable,  and  the  fliips  of  our  own  country,  efpecially  if 
allowed  to  chufe  their  port  of  difcharge,  as  the  propofed  change  feems  to  require,  would 
-have  facilities,  which  thofe  of  foreign  Europe  or  i^merica  could  not  command. 
Inthefeways,  the  China  monopoly  of  the  Company,  reduced  in  its  profits,  would 
be  rendered  likewife  infecure,  and  in  the  end  untenable  ;  an  .i  the  noble  fleet  of  Ihips, 
employed  in  that  trade  by  the  Company,  muft  be  alfo  laid  afide.  Flow  the  immenfe 
revenue,  now  derived  by  Government  from  the  very  high  duties  on  tea,  could, 
under  fuch  circumflances,  be  realized,  or  a  fubftitute  found  for  them,  may  be  an  im- 
portant, and,  to  all  appearance,  a  moft  difficult  fubjecl  of  enquiry. 

But  a  more  ferious  confequence  than  ail  thefe  woidd  ftill  remain.  A  free  trade 
to  India  would,  unavoidably,  draw  after  it  the  refidence  of  numerous  and  continually 
increafing  Europeans  there,  whatever  prohibitions  might,  at  flrft,  be  oppoied  to  thejr 
fettling  in  the  country.  When  all  reftraint  to  the  importation  of  fhips  and  goods  i  s 
taken  oft',  men  mult  be  allowed  to  follow  their  property,  and  to  remain  at  the  place 
where  they  land  it,  till  they  have  difpofed  of  it ;  they  muft  be  allowed  to  navigate  the 
Indian  Seas,  and  to  return  to  the  fame  place  when  their  bufmei's  calls  them  ; 
they  will  thus,  infenfibly,  and  with  hardly  reafonable  grounds  for  oppofition, 
domiciliate  themfelves;  nor  would  an  unfuccefsful  trade  prevent  them,  but 
many  would  feek  to  indemnify  themfelves  on  fhore  for  their  loffcs  by  the  voyage. 
The  inftances  of  fuch  fcttlem.ents  will  be  numerous,  and  it  will  be  impoffible  lor 
any  police  to  follow  up  the  cafes  of  individuals,  and  continually  to  exercife  a 
rigorous     fyftem   of    e.xciufion.     This     has     not    hitherto   been     done,    though 

attended 


(      20      ) 

Is'o.  VIII.        attended  with  comparatively  little  difficulty  ;  and  the  attempt  would  foon,  under  the 
~.  new  order  offhin;;s,  be  abandoned   as  hopelefs.     Colonization    muft,  in  fuch  cafe 

D^putv^s  LeUtr.  f°Jl*^^^'-  Large  conininnities  ot  Europeans  will  Urug^h  for  popular  rights  :  new 
feelings  with  refpect  to  the  mother  country,  new  inferefts  and.  attachments  will  then 
fpring  up  ;  and  in  a  region  fo.  remote,  fo  rich  and  populous,  and  fo  aceuftomcd  to 
yield  to  the  afccndancy  of  the  European  charadler,  the  tendency  and  proccfs  of  thefe 
things  cannot  be  difficult  to  conceive. 

With  the  profpc^  of  all  thefe  confequences,  commercial  and  political,  before  the 
Court,  it  is  impoffible  that  they,  as  faithful  guardians  of  the  interefts  committed  to 
their  care,  or  as  men  truly  folicitous  for  the  welfare  of  their  counti-y,  which  they 
•  profefs  themfelves  to  be,  can  advife  their  conftituents  to  feek  a  renewal  of  their 
Charter,  on  conditions  v/hich  would  defpoil  it  of  all  its  foiid  advantages,  deprive  the 
Company  of  their  moft  valuable  privileges,  and  incapacitate  them  from  performing, 
for  themfelves  and  tne  nation,  the  part  hiiherto  afligned  to  them  in  the  Indian  fyftem. 
Such  a  further  enlargement  of  the  Indian  trade,  in  favor  of  individuals,  as  may  be 
compatible  with  the  prefervation  of  thefe  effential  objects,  the  Court  will,  in  prefent 
circumftaitces,  certainly  be  difpofed  to  reconnnend.  'I'hey  will  be  ready  to  enter  into 
a.fcrious  inquiry  concerning  the  conceflions  which  may  be  made,  without  trenching 
■iipon  the  principles  edr.bhihed  by  the  Ad  of  1793  ;  and  they  truft  that  the  juftice 
iind  wifdom  of  His  IVIajelty's  Minifters  will  not  require  the  Company  to  make 
jeffential  facrifices,  for  th.e  lake  of  giving  to  the  public  what  would,  after  all,  be 
more  an  idcrd  than  a  real  benefit,  and  be,  in  other  relpefts,  productive  of  incalculable 
difad  vantages. 

The  other  important  propofition  which  is  next  to  be  confidered,  is  the  transfer 
oT  the  Indian  Army  to  the  King.  The  reaibns  afligned  for  this  propofition  ax"e, 
■that  an  end  may  be  put  to  the  jealoufies  and  divifions  which  have  too  much 
prevailed,  between  the  officers  of  His  Majefly's  army  and  thofe  employed  by  the 
Company,  and  tlxat  the  refponfibility  in  the  country,  of  providing  for  the  military 
defence  of  India,  may  be  afcertaiaed  and  flrengthened. 

The  Indian  army  is  the  main  inftniment  by  which  the  Company  have  acquired 
and  retained  the  territorial  pofleffions  they  have  added  to  tliC  Britifh  Empire.  The 
people  of  thofe  countries  lubmitted  more  eanly  to  an  authority  exercifed  by  means 
pf  a  body  formed  from  among  themfelves.  We  fought  battles  and  governed  pro- 
vinces as  the  native  powers  did ;  and  our  new  fubjecfs,  undifgufled  with  the  fight  of 
a  foreign  conquering  army,  fuppofed  the  government  to  continue  fubilantially  the 
fame,  and  the  principal  change  to  be  in  the  individuals  who  exercifed  it.  The  con- 
ftitution  and  character  which  this  Indian  army  his  acquired,  have  been  the  fubjeft  of 
jufl.  admiration.  Thefe  have  been  owing,  efientially,  to  the  h.ippy  mixture  of  bravery 
and  generofity,  of  firmnefs  and  kindnefs,  exerciled  towards  the  Sepoys  by  their 
European  officers.  The  fuperior  lights  and  energy  of  the  European  charafter  have 
directed  the  powers  and  conciliated  the  prejudices  of  the  native  troops  ;  bu;  it  was 
becaufe  the  officers  knew  the  people  and  their  prejudices  well.  Thefe  officers  had 
been  trained  up  among  them  from  an  early  age :  the  nature,  the  ufages,,  and  the 
language  of  the  natives,  u'ere  become  fan.iihar  to  them;  and  the  natives,  remarkably 
the  creatures  of  habit,  in  return,  from  being  accuftomed,  became  attached  to  them. 
Without  fuch  knowledge,  however,  on  the  part  of  ihe  officers,  they  might  eveiy  day 
have  revolted  the  minds  of  io  peculiar  a  race,  and  have  alienated  them  f;om  our 
ifervice  and  government. 

An  Indian  military  education,  from  an  early  age,  is  effential  to  the  formation  of 
a  good  Sepoy  officer;  and  gradual  rife  in  the  fervice  by  feniority,  is  no  lefs  indifpen- 
iable. .  In  this  way,  the  hulian  army  has  been  conftituted  and  rendered  eminently 
efficient ;  and  all  meainres,  tending  to' change  or  weaken  the  conllituent  parts  of  this 
fabrick,  arc.  to  be  deprecated.  When,  excepting  a  few  regiments  of  European 
artillery  and  infantry,  the  whole  military  force  of  Britifh  India  was  compofed  of 
Sepoy  corps,  the  ofEcers  of  that  aimy,  of  courfe,  pofTeifed  entire  the  emoluments 
.and  advantages  which  the  fervice  afforded.  The  intruduftion  of  European  troops 
■from  His  Majefly's  army  into  India  altered  this  ftate  of  things.  Young  officers,  of 
jio  Indian  experience,  who  had  obtained  their  commiffions  by  purchafe,  took  rank 
of  men  of  long  and  tried  fervice:-  the  King's  officers  were  thought  to  come -in,  alfo, 
...  for 


(      21       ) 

for  too  large  a  fhare  of  employments  and  advantages-     To  redrefs  the  complaliits        Ko.  VIII. 

which  the  Company's  officers  made  of  fuperceffions  and  partialities,  and  to  give  them 

a  better  fliare  of  the  benefits  of  the  fervice,  was  the  leading  object  of  Lord  Coinwullis's     /''''»"''^3"  '"'^ 
Military  Plan  of  1794,  and  with  him  a  pi-incipal  motive  for  propofing  to  transfer  the       "'"  ^  * 
Indian  army  to  the  King,  no  other  prafticable  means  having  then  occurred  to  him. 
But  the  objed:  was,  in  fubftaiice,  attained  by  the  Military  Regulations  of  i  796,  paflld  in 
concert  with  His  Majefty's  Government,  without  that  transfer,  of  which  hisLordfhip 
did  not  revive  the  idea  on  his  lalt  return  to  India,  thofe  regulations  having  given  in- 
creafed  rank  and  retiring  pay  to  the  officers  of  the  Company's  army.     'Ihe  caufes  of 
complaint,  however,  did  not  entirely  ceafe.     To  avoid  the  collifion  of  authorities,  the 
Company  had  adopted  the  nfage  of  appointing  the  Commander  in  Chief  of  the  King's 
troops,  alfo  their  Commander  in  Chief ;  and  one  confequence  of  this  has  been,  that  the 
Companv's  officers,  refident  from  early  youth  in  India,  poffeffing  little  influence  in  Eng- 
land, unknown  to  officers  ot  high  rank  inHisMajefty's  fervic?,  have  thought  themfclvts 
treated  with  lefs  favour  and  diftinclion,  than  younger  officers  of  that  fervicft  recently 
arrived,  but  better  patronized.    You  know,  Sir,  that  there  have  been  indances  of  this 
fort,  which  the  Court,  with  the  fanftion  of  your  Board,  have  interpofed  to  reprefs  :  but 
as  long  as  the  Britifh  force  in  India  is  made  up  of  two  armies,  fo  differently  conflituted, 
with  fo  large  a  portion  of  King's  officers,  the  whole  commanded  by  generals  of  His 
Majefty's  fervice,  there  will,  probably,  be  real  or  apprehended  ground  for  the  like 
complaints.     They  do  not  arife  becaufe  one  army  has  the  honour  to  belong  to  His 
Majefty  and  the  other  ferves  the  Company,  but  becaufe  the  conltitution  of  the  two 
armies  are  radically  different,  and  muft  continue  fo,  whether  the  armies  are  under 
one  head  or  two.    The  Indian  army  cannot  be  maintained  without  officers  attached  to 
it  from  an  early  age,  and  rifmg  by  feniority.     Frequent  changes  of  King's  regiments 
ferving  in  India,  and  the  confequent  frequent  arrival   of  young  men,  promoted  in 
them  by  purchafe,  cannot  be  avoided :  the  former  clafs  will  be  comparatively  un- 
known to  the  King's  commanders,  the  latter  will  have  among  them  the  connetl:ions 
of  thofe  commanders,  or  of  men  of  influence  in  England.     It  is  not  difficult  to  fee, 
therefore,  to  which  fide  the  cxercife  of  military  patronage  will  lean ;  and  to  prevent 
caufes  of  complaint,  and  to  keep  the  balance  even,  raufl  be  an  important  objeft  in 
the  Government  of  India.     It  does  not  feem  the  way  to  effeft  this,  to  put  the.  Indian 
army  wholly   in  the  power  of  the  Commander  in  Chief.     It  is  of  the  partiality  of      '• 
that  ftation  of  which  the  Company's  officers  have  fometimes  complained;  and  the 
Court  fee  no  reafon  whatever  to  fuppofe,  that  their  jealoufy  and  diifatisfadion  would" 
be  removed,  by  putting  them  entirely  under  its  control :  and,  indeed,  by  placing  two 
armies,  of  fuch  different  races  and  fo  differently  conflituted,  under  the  fame  mafter, 
it  would  feem  difficult  to  avoid  attaching  the  idea  of  permanent  inferiority  to  that 
which  was  Indian.     Nor  is  it  a  thing  to  be  taken  for  granted,  that  the  Sepoys,  fo 
much,  as  already  obferved.  under  the  influence  of  habit,  would  chufe  to  be  tranf- 
ferred  from  that  fervice  to  which  they  have  been  always  accuftomed,  to  one  of  wliich 
they  have   little  experience,  and  that  experience  not  always  of  a   conciliatory  kind. 
To  place  the  officers  of  the  Indian  army  wholly  under  that  authority  of  which  they 
have  hitherto  complained,  does  not  certainly  appear  to  be  the  way  to  render  them 
eafy.     It  might,  on  the  contrary,  lead  to  ferious  difcontent ;  and  though  the  Court 
would  be  far  from  countenancing  that  fpirit  among  their  officers,  or  yielding  to  anv 
irregular  exertion  of  it,  yet  it  muft  be  faid,  on  the  other  hand,  that  thofe  officers  are 
a  body  of  men  who  have  defcrved  too  well  of  the  Company  and  their  country,  to  have 
real  caufes  of  difcontent ;  and  that  it  would  be  impolitic  to  adopt  any  fyftem,    likely 
to  generate  iuch  caufes,  either  among  them  or  the  men  they  command. 

With  regard  to  the  other  reafon  affigned  for  the  propofed  change,  the  Court  I 'eg 
leave  to  obferve,  in  the  firft  place,  that  they  do  not  perceive  the  neceffary  connedion 
between  the  inconvenience  which  is  alleged,  and  the  remedy  fuggelled  for  it ;  fince, 
if  it  were  true  that  the  queftion  of  refpoufibility  in  England,  refpecting  the  appoint- 
ment of  Commander  in  Chief,  lay  under  obfcurity  and  uncertainty  detrimental  to 
the  public  fervice,  it  does  not  appear  to  follow  that  the  Indian  army  ought  to  be  tranf-  ■ 
ferred  to  the  King,  to  remedy  this  defect.  But,  in  the  humble  apprehenfion  of  the 
Court,  no  oblcuniy  hangs  over  that  queftion.  The  appointment  ot  Commanders  in 
Chief  of  the  Kmg"s  lorces  there  refts  with  His  Majeiiy,  and  the  officer  chofen  by  him 
will,  by  virtue  of  his  coniniillion,  generally  command  the  Com.pany's  army  on  fer- 
vice. The  appointment  of  Commanders  in  Chief  for  the  Company's  army  is  placed, 
(59-;  F^  by.. 


(       i2       ) 

No.  VIII.        by  law,  in  the  fivti  inftanec,  in  the  Court  of  Directors,  bur  w'nh  a  power  veftcd  in 

IHs  Majcfly  to  annul  Inch  appointments.     This  neceiTarily   points   to  an  aereenient 

Chaiiir.an  and  between  His  I\l;ijeily's  Governn-.ent  and  the  Court  of  Diredois,  in  refpcd  to  thofe 
Deputy'.  Letter,  appointments,  and  the  Couit  are  not  aware,  that  they  have,  on  any  occafion,  ufed 
the  fliare  of  power  left  to  th.eni  by  t!n»  arrangement,  for  the  exerciil*  of  which  they 
feel  that  they  are  refponfiblc,  to  the  prejudice  of  the  public  fervice.  Ihey  mull,  at 
the  fame  time,  humbly  cxprefs  their  opinion,  that  the  law,  as  it  now  Hands,  is 
wifely  conceived,  fince  it  d:es  not  halve  the  refponfibiliiy,  but  double  it,  making 
both  His  Majedy's  Government  and  the  Court  of  Directors  fully  anfwerable  for  the 
appointment  cf  the  Company's  Commanders  in  Chief:  and  if  it  fhould  ftill  be  faid, 
that,  in  point  of  fafl:,  the  ftleclion  of  a  Coinniander  in  Chief  for  His  Majefty's  forces 
maybe  rendered  difficult,  by  reluftance,  en  the  part  of  the  Court,  to  accept  of  the 
lame  officer  for  the  command  of  the  Company's  army,  it  may  be  juftly  replied,  that 
they  make  a  facrifice  to  the  public  intercft,  in  agreein^■  that  the  Commander  in  Chief 
of  His  Majefi.'s  {hail  alfo  be  the  Company's;  and  when  he  is  not  only  to  command 
their  army,  but  expeds  to  be  made  a  Member  of  their  civil  and  political  Government, 
it  cannot  be  deemed  unreafonable,  that  they  Ihould  poffefs  the  right  of  fatisfying 
themfelves  as  to  his  competency  for  filling  thofe  high  offices  :  neither  is  it,  as  they 
think,  to  be  (hewn  from  theoretical  reatoning,  or  by  an  appeal  to  facts,  that  the 
Icrvice  will  fuffer,  or  has  fullered,  by  their  alfertion  of  this  right. 

But  the   flrongefl:  objedions  of  the  Court  to   the  propofed  transfer   arife  from 
political    confiderations.     They  conceive  the   continuimce  of  the   Indian  army  in 
the  hands  of  the  Company  to  be  effeniial  to  the  adminiilration  of  the  civil,  financial, 
and  political  affairs  of  Britifli  India,  according  to  the  prefent  fyftem.    The  Company's 
Government    has   hitherto  been  refpefted,  both  by  its   own  fubjefts   and   foreign 
powers,  becaufe  it  poffeffed  a  great  mihtary  force.     Organizing  this  force,  enlarging 
or  reducing  it  at  pleafure,   appointing  its   officers,  rewarding  merit,  puniffiing  the 
unworthy,  providing  for  the  comfortable  retirement  of  the  veteran  foldier  and  officer, 
and,  in  fhort,  exercifing  all  the  funftions  of  a  governing  power  over  a  very  numerous 
body  ot  men  of  high  mihtary  fpirit,  it  has  poiVeffed  all  the  refpeftabihty  and  the 
benefit  of  their  attachment  and  fidelity.     Looking  upon  the  Members  of  the  civil 
Government  and  the  body   of  civil   fervants  as  belonging  to  the  fame  mafter  with 
themfelves.  and  as  the  fiilt  order  in  the  Itate,  they  have  paid  a  wiHing  obedience  to 
their  authority,  and  have  thereby  upheld  their  internal  adminiilration  and  their  con- 
iequence  abroad.     The  introdudion  of  certain  King's  regiments  has  been  under- 
ftood,  as  ii  was   interided,  to  be  merely  in  fupport  of  the  public  interefl  under  the 
exiiliijg  fyftem;    but  if  the    Company  were  to  be  diverted  of  the  whole  of  their 
military   force   and  power  ;  if  they  were  to   be  no  longer  mart ers  of  a  fingle  re- 
giment, Tio  longer  capable  of  entertaining  any  foldiers  nor  of  giving  one  fubaltern's 
commiffion  ;    if  the  immenfe  body  of  men,  who  have  fo  long  looked  up  to  them, 
were  to  be  transferred  from  them,  the  people  muft  confider  their  power  as  fallen 
and  di-avving  rapidly  to  a   clofe.     Continuing  llill  to  their  Gr-vernments  a  general 
controul  over  the  employment  of  the  army,  and  to  t'neir  civil  fervants  the  internal 
adminiftration  of  their  affairs,  would  give  the  people  no  affurance  to  the  contrary. 
Thofe  ervants,  in  the  dil'charge  of  their  different  funclions  of  judges,  magillrates, 
colletlors,  could  not  exptcl  the  fame  refpect  and  fupport,  either  from  pubhc  opinion 
or  the  attachment   of  the  native  troops,  as  when  all  looked  to  the  fame  head  for 
protecficn,  patronage,  and  reward.     Indeed,  to  make   fo   wide  a  reparation  of  the 
military  from  the  civil  power  ;   to  take  away  the  organization,  the  interior  regulation, 
and  with  thefe,  the  patronage  of  the  army,  from   the  local  Government ;   to  place 
all  thofe  powers  in  the  hands  of  the  Commander  in  Chief,   fubjed   only,  in  the 
exercifc  of  them,  to  an  authority  at  the  dillance  of  half  the  globe,  v.'ould  throw  the 
means  and  the  temptation  of  a  dangerous  afceudancy  into  the  fcale  of  the  military 
department,  which  conftituted  by  His  Majefty,   might  eafily  be  led   to  flight  the  . 
civil  fervants  of  a  meaner  mafter,  and  their  chance  of  difla  it  reJrefs      Among  the. 
natives  of  India   it  has  been   ufual    to    confider    the   military    power,  and    thofe  . 
■poffeiling  it,   as  pre-eminent ;  and    they  fee,  in  fome  examples  of  the  prefent  day, 
that  power,  under  the  idea  of  affifling  the  civil  and  political  adminiftration,  actually 
controuling   it.      The    Company's    Government,    in    fhort,    lowered    and    over- 
fliadowed  m    this  way,  would  not,  in  the  opinion  of  the  Court,  continue  to  poffefs  . 
the  authority  nec!.ffciry  For  the  proper  adminiftration   of  the  affairs  of  that  great 

empire  J 


(     23     > 

empire;  and  it  might  then  be  conceived,  that  a  further  change  only  could  fupply        No.VIIL 
what  was  defedive.  ' 

.  CKairman   and 

But  this  is  not  the  only  way  m  which  the  meafure  in  queltion  appears  to  the  Deputy"*  Letter. 
Court  to  be  pregnant  with  danger.  It  propofes  to  place  in  the  entire  difpofal  of 
the  Crown,  a  regular  army,  amounting  to  one  hundred  and  forty  thoufand  men, 
commanded  by  above  three  thoufund  European  ofEcers,  having  a  great  variety 
of  places  of  honor  and  emolument  ;  and  ail  the  vafl:  patronage  attaching  to  fuch  an 
.ariny  (faving  the  nominati.^n  of  cadets)  would,  mediately  or  immediately,  be  under 
the  influence  or  controul  offomeof  the  Members  of  His  Majefty's  Government. 
This  would  be  a  fignal  departure  from  the  fpirit  and  letter  of  the  Ads  of  1784  and 
1793,  a  profeffecl  principle  of  which  was,  that  the  Indian  patronage,  civil  and 
military,  fliould  be  kept  entirely  out  of  the  hands  of  the  fervants  of  the  Crown.  It 
is  not  for  the  Court  to  enlarge  upon  a  propofition  Co  momentous ;  but  they  beg 
leave,  with  the  utmoll  deference,  to  ftate,  that  they  would  deem  it  a  dereliction  of 
their  duty,  to  which  no  confideration  could  induce  them  to  fubmit,  to  recommend 
any  meafure  of  this  defcription  to  the  adoption  of  their  conflitucnts.  Knowing 
however.  Sir,  your  concern  for  the  promotion  of  the  public  interclt,  a  concern 
which  we  have  frequently  witneffed,  the  Court  ftill  flatter  thcmfelves,  that  the  con- 
fideration of  the  renewal  of  the  Company's  Charter,  a  meafure  which  they  believe 
to  be  for  the  intercfl  of  the  nation  as  well  as  of  the  Company,  will  go  on  without 
your  infifiing  on  this  propofition,  or  any  further  on  the  other  which  has  been 
above  dii'cuiled,  than  may  be  really  compatible  with  the  prefervation  of  the  prefent 
Indian  fyflem. 

We  have  the  honor  to  be.  Sir, 

Your  moil  obedient  humble  fervants, 

(Signed)  EDWARD  PARRY, 

The  Right  Honorable  Robert  Dundas,  CHARLES  GRANT. 

&c.     &c.    &c. 


No.  IX. 
At  a  Secret  Committee  of  Correfpondence,  the  28th  February  \Sog. 

n[^HE  Chairman  and  Deputy  Chairman  reported  to  the  Committee,  than  in   confe-  No.  IX. 

quence  of  an  invitation  from  the  Prefident  of  the  Board  of  Commiflioners,  they 

had  yeflerday  an  interview  with  him,  in  which  he  difcourfed  with  them  on  the  prefent   Secret  Committee, 
ftate  of  the  negotiation  for   the  renewal  of  the  Company's  Charter.     He  inquired,  i?o9> 

in  the  firft  place,  whether  the  Company  would  have  occafion  to  apply  to  the  Public 
for  pecuniary  aid  in  the  courfe.  of  the  prefent  year.     'I'o  this  inquiry  the  Chairman 
and  Deputy  anfwered,  that  from  an  eflimate  lately  made  up  of  the  Company's  re- 
ceipts and  payments,  till  the  month  of  January    1810,  it  appeared   probable  they 
might  be  able  to  do  without  any  public  afliuance  till  that  period  ;  but  that  this  could 
not  be  pofitively  affirmed  by  the  Chairs  without  further  and  more  certain  invef- 
tigation.     Mr.  Dundas  then  faid,  that  if  the  Company  were  not  under  a  neccffiry 
ot  coming  to  Parliament  this  feflion  on  the  fcore  of  their  finances,  he  thought  it  would 
be  expedient  to  delay  the  agitation  of  the  fubjeft  of  the  Chu;  ;er  in  Parliament  tiil 
next  feiLon,  becaufe  the  Committee  of  the  Houfe  of  Commons  for  inquiring  into 
the  ftate  of  the  Company's  affairs,  recently  re  appointed,  being  about  to  examine 
into  all  the   great  branches  of  thofe  affairs,  which    would  neceffarily  engage  the 
public  atteiuion  on  the  renewal  of  the  Charter,  it  would  be  expcfted  by  the  Houfe, 
that  the  reports  of  that  Committee  fliould  be  fubmitted  to  them,  before  the  queftion 
of  the  renewal  was  brought  forward,  and  from  the  number  and  weight  of  the  fubjeds 
to  be  invefligated,  it  would  be  inipraff-licablc  to  report  upon  them,  foon  enough  to 
afford  fuificitnt   time  to  the  Houfe  to  go  through  the  confideration  of  them  in  the 
r^maii.der  of  the  fcflion  :  it  was,,  therefore,  Mr.  Dundas's  opinion,  t!:at  it  would 
be  advifable  to  poffpc.ne  the  agitaiion  of  the  queftion  until  next  ftilion  ;  but  before 
he  fixed  his  determination,  he  wilhed   to  receive  the  fcntiments  of  the  Chairs  and;,  i 

the; 


r  24  ) 

Jvo.  IX.         the  Committee  of  Correfpondence  on  this  important  point,  and  thofc  fentiments  would 

—  ■-  probably  influence  him  in  fliaping  his  anfwer  to  the  lafl  letter  of  the  Court,  dated 

Secret  Compiittee,  j^^jj  January   i5og,  on  the  renewal  of  the  Charter.     The  Chairman  and  Deputy 

18  F«b,  iivc9.      (Chairman  beg   leave   to   ftate,  that  they,  in  reply,  exprefled  their  opinion  to    be 

clearly  in  favor  of  proceeding  with  the  bufinefs  ot  the  Charter  this  fefiion,  if  it  fhould 

be  praflicable  for  the  Committee  of  the  Houfe  to  make  the  reqiiifite  reports  in 

due  time. 

The  Committee  having  deliberated  on  this  communication,  are  of  opinion,  firft, 
that  it  will  be  neceffary  to  form  as  accurate  an  elfimate  as  poflible  of  the  home 
finances  of  the  Company  for  the  current  year  ;  fecondly,  that  it  is  very  defirable 
the  renewal  of  the  Company's  Charter  fliould  be  brought  forward  in  Parliament  this 
fellion,  even  if  the  Company  ihould  ftand  in  need  of  no  pecuniary  aid  ;  but,  thirdly, 
that  if  the  Select  Committee  cannot  prepare  their  reports  in  due  time,  and  His 
Majefty's  Miniiters  deem  it  proper  to  wait  till  next  feffion,  the  Court  muif,  of 
courfe,  acquiefce  ;  yet  in  the  wifh  and  hope,  that  if  any  circumflances  fhould  occur 
in  the  courfe  of  the  prefent  feffion,  favorable  to  the  agitation  of  the  meafure,  it 
may  flill  be  brought  forward  ;  and  if  not  in  this  feffion,  as  early  as  poflible  in  the 
next }  to  which  end  the  Committee  will  be  very  ready  to  proceed  with  the  Prefadetit 
of  the  Board  of  Commiflioners  in  the  difcuffions  already  commenced. 


•  No.  X. 

At  a  Secret  Committee  of  Correfpondence  5th  December  1809. 

No  X  T?^"'^^  ^^^  approved  draft  of  a  letter  to  the  Right  Hon.  Robert  Dundas,  propofmg 

'_J_     .  that  the  difcuffions  between  him  and  the  Court,  on  the  fubjeft  of  the  Charter, 

Secret  Committee,   be  refumed.  from  the  point  at  which  they  were  left  by  the  letter  from  the  Chairman 
5  Dec.  1809.  ...and  Deputy,  dated  J3th  January  laft. 


■."»?: 


No.  XI. 


No.  XL 

Letter  from  the  Chairman  and  Deputy  Chairman  to  the  Right  Honorable 
Robert  Dundas,  noticed  in  the  preceding  Minute. 

(Private) 

Sir,  Eaft  India  Houfe,  5th  December  1809. 

"pROM  the  conference  the  Chairs  had  the  honor  to  hold  with  you  on  the  13th  of 

February,  on  the  fubjeft  of  a  renewal  of  the  Company's  Charter,  we  were  given 

Chairman  and      to  underftand,  that  although  His  Majefly's  Miniflers  did  not  deem  it  expedient  to 
Deputy's  Ltticr.    bring  that  fubjeft  under  the  confideration  of  Parliament  in  the  feffion  then  pre- 
ceding, it  might,  in  their  opinion,  be  proper  to  prepare  for  tlje  agitation  of  it  in  the 
•  next  following  one. 

We  now,  therefore,  by  the  Authority  of  the  Committee  of  Correfpondence, 
whom  the  Court  of  Diredors  have  empowered  to  condud  the  details  of  negocia- 
tion  on  the  fubjeft  in  queftion,  beg  leave  to  ftate  to  you,  that,  in  their  ophiion,  it  is 
defirable  the  difcuflion  concerning  the  renewal  of  the  Charter  fliould  be  brought  on 
in  the  enfuing  feffion,  both  on  account  of  the  general  fituation  of  the  Company's 
affairs,  and  jdfo  on  account  of  the  particular  prellure  on  their  finances  (arifing  chiefly 
from  the  transfer  of  certain  fums  of  the  India  debt  to  England;  which  we  have  already 
had  the,  honor  to  reprefent  to  you  and  to  Lord  Harrowby ,  and  which  renders  neceffary 
fuch  an  application  for  public  aid,  as  may  of  itlelf,  be  e.xpeded  to  lead  to  a  general 
confideration  of  the  Company's  affairs. 

We 


(      25      ) 


•  •  We  .thet'efore  take  the  liberty  to  propofe,  that  the  difcufllons  between  you  and 
the  Court,  on  the  fubjed  of  the  Charter,  be  refunied,  from  the  point  at  which  they 
-were  lefc  by  the  letter  the  Chairs  addrcfled  to  you,  under  date  the  i  ith  January 
laft. 

We  have  the  honor  to  be,  Sir, 

Your  moft  obedient  humble  fervants, 

(Signed)         CHARLES  GRANT, 
The  Right  Honourable  Robert  Dundas,  WILLIAM  ASTELL. 

&c.  &c.  &c. 


No.Xr. 

Chairman   a  id 
Deputy'*  Lcltcr. 


No.  XII. 

At  a  Secret  Court  of  Directors,  held  on  Friday  the  3d  January  i8i;. 

n^HE  Chairman  laid  before  the  Court,  a  copy  of  a  letter  from  Lord  Melville 
to  the  Chairs,  dated  the  17th  of  lail  month,  upon  the  fubjeft  of  continuing 
to  the  Eafl  India  Company,  for  a  further  term,  their  privileges  of  exclufive  trade  and 
the  government  of  the  Britifh  territorial  poffeflions  in  India,  in  which  his  Lordlhip 
adverts  to  his  letter  addrefled  to  the  Chairman  and  Deputy  Chairman,  on  the  28th 
December  1H08,  and  to  their  reply,  dated  the  13th  January  1809,  ^""^  adds,  that 
If  theCourt  ofDiredors  are  willing  that  the  (hips,  as  well  as  goods  of  private  merchants, 
may  be  admitted  into  the  trade  with  India,  under  fuch  reftriftions  as  may  be  deemed 
neceffary,  he  fliall  be  ready  to  difcufs  with  the  Chairs  all  the  other  details  of  the  fyllem: 
and  his  Lord  (hip  alluding  to  two  points  of  confiderable  importance,  adverted  to  in 
the  above  mentioned  letters,  viz.  the  (irft  relating  to  the  transfer  of  the  Company's 
army  to  the  Crown,  upon  which  fubjed  circumftances  may  poflibly  fuggeft  the  ex- 
pediency of  adopting  other  meafures,  for  promoting  the  difcipline  and  efficiency  of 
the  army  in  India ;  and  the  fecond  point,  being  the  Indian  debt,  upon  which  fubjeO: 
his  LorcKhip  obferves,  that  the  period  he  (hould  hope  is  arrived,  for  providing,  out 
of  the  Company's  own  refources,  without  any  pecuniary  aid  from  the  Public,  the 
means  of  enabling  them  to  fatisfy  all  the  Claims  of  their  Indian  Creditors. 

Ordered,  That  it  be  referred  to  the  Committee  of  Correfpondence,  to  confid^r 
what  reply  it  may  be  right  and  proper  to  make  to  the  letter  from  Lord  Melville,  now- 
read  ;  and  to  report  their  opinion  thereon  to  the  Court. 


Ko.  Xll. 

Secret  Court, 
3d  Jai!.  1811. 


No.  XIII. 

Letter  from  the  Right  Honorable  Lord  Vifcount  Melville  to  the  Chair- 
man  and  Deputy  Chairman,  dated  the  17th  December  181 1,  noticed 
in  the  preceding  Minute. 

Gentlemen,  India  Board,  17th  December  18 11. 

UNDERSTANDING  from  you,  that  it  is  the  wi(h  and  opinion  of  the  Court  of 
Direftois,  that  a  propofition  (hould  be  fubmitted  to  Parliament  in  the  courfe  of 
the  next  feinon,  for  continuing  to  the  Eaft-India  Company,  for  a  further  term,  their 
privileges  of  exclulire  trade  and  the  government  of  the  Britilh  territorial  po(re(Iions 
in  India  ;  it  will  be  nece(rary,  before  I  can  proceed  with  you  to  the  difcu(rion  of  that 
queftion  in  all  its  details,  that  certain  preliminary  matter  fliould  be  again  brought 
under  your  confideration. 

In  a  letter  which  I  addreffed  to  the  Chairman  and  Deputy  Chairman,  on  the  28th 
December  1808,  the  outlines  of  fuch  a  fyftem,  in  regard  to  the  trade  between  this 
countiy  and  the  Eafl  Indies,  were  (tared,  as  His  Majelty's  Government  at  that  time 
were  willing  to  propofe  to  Parliament.  In  a  reply  to  that  letter,  dated  the  13th 
January  1809,  detailed  reafons  were  urged,  for  the  Court  of  Direftors  declining  to 
"  advife  their  conftituents  to  feek  a  renewal  of  their  Charter,  on  conditions  whicJi" 
(59-)  G  (as 


No.  XIIL 

Id.  Melville'* 
Lrlter. 


Ld.  Melville's 
Letter. 


(      26      ) 

No,  XIII.  (as  afferted  by  the  Chairman  and  Deputy  Chairman)  "  would  defpoil  it  of  all  its 
"  foliJ  advantages,  deprive  the  Company  of  their  rnoft  valuable  privileges,  and  in- 
"  capacitate  them  for  performing  for  ihemftlvcs  and  the  nation,  the  part  hitherto 
''  alhgned  to  them  in  the  Indian  fyftem." 

I  do  not  feel  it  requifite,  in  this  ftage  of  thebufinefs,  to  enter  upon  a  minute  ex- 
amination of  the  arguments  from  which  that  couclufiou  was  drawn.  Many  of  them 
have  reference  to  poflible  dangers,  which  might  arife  from  a  fyllem  of  trade  wholly 
unreftrifted  ;  againft  which  liangers,  however,  it  was  exprefsly  admitted  in  my 
letter,  that  it  would  be  eifentially  neceffary  to  guard.  A  confiderable  portion  of  their 
reafoning,  alfo,  would  lead  to  the  inference,  as  a  general  propofition,  applicable  to 
all  cafes  of  foreign  and  dillant  trade,  that  a  monopoly  was  more  beneficial  to  both 
countries  than  an  unreftrained  commerce  ;  and  that  the  facilities  intended  to  be  af- 
forded to  private  trade  with  India,  by  the  Aft  of  1793,  were  inexpedient  and  im- 
politic. There  are  (everal  ftatements  in  the  letter,  in  which  I  fully  concur  ;  but  it 
is  unneceffary  to  advert  to  them  at  prefent,  becaufe  if  the  Court  ot  Dire£tors  adhere 
to  the  above  mentioned  determination,  I  cannot  hold  out  to  you  the  lead  expedia- 
tion,  that  His  Majelly's  Government  will  be  difpofed  to  depart  from  the  propofal 
contained  in  my  letter,  or  that  they  will  concur  in  any  application  to  Parliament, 
for  the  continuance  of  a  fyRem  of  trade,  conducted  under  all  the  reltraints  now 
impofed  upon  it,  and  for  the  permanency  of  which  the  Court  of  Direftors  have  fo 
flrenuhufly  contended.  If  they  are  willing,  on  the  other  hand,  that  the  fhips  as  well 
as  goods  of  private  merchants,  may  be  admitted  ijito  the  trade  with  India,  under 
fuch  reRriftions  as  may  be  deemed  neceffary,  1  Ihall  be  ready  to  difcufs  with  you  ail 
the  other  details  of  the  fyftem. 

There  are  two  points,  however,  of  confiderable  importance,  which  are  adverted 
to  in  the  above-mentioned  letters,  and  oa  which  it  may  be  advifable  that  1  fliould 
liatp.to  you  fhortly  whatocoiu  sto  me. 

■  I'he  firfl:  relates  to  the  transfer  of 'the  Company's  army  to  the  Crown  ;  a  meafure 
which  has  been  frequently  fuggelted  by  perfons  iutimately  acquainted  with  the  mili- 
tary concerns  of  the  Company,  and  whofe  opinions  are  entitled  to  great  confideration. 
It  is  ■  impoffible;  however,  not  to  admit,  that  feveral  weighty  objeftions  to  fuch  a 
change  are  iiattd  iii  the  Letter  cf  the  i  3th  January  1809.  Events  which  have  fince 
occurred,  mufl:,  alio,  have  an  iniluence  in  deciding  this  queftion,  and  may  poffibly 
fugged;  the  ex;pediency  of  adoptini^  other  meafiu'es  for  promoting  the  difcipline  and 
efficiency  of  tlie  army  in  India.  Further  difcuflion  on  this  fubjed  may  be  deferred  till 
a  future  opportunity,  and  any- arrangements  which  may  be  deemed  proper  can  be 
carried  into  eiTecl,  without  having  recourfe  to  fpecial  legiflative  enaftments. 

The  other  point  to  which  I  allude,  is  the  propofition  for  enabling  the  Company 
to  meet  the  heavy  demands  which  were  then  expected,  and  which,  to  a  certain  extent, 
have  fince  come  upon  them,  by  the  transfer  of  their  Indian  aebt  to  this  country. 
All  uncertainty,  as  to  the  poffible  amount  of  thofe  demands,  is  now  removed  ;  and 
the  period,  I  Ihould  hope,  is  arrived,  to  which,  during  Ibme  years,  we  have  looked 
forward  with  anxiety,  for  providing  out  of  the  Company's  ovm  refources,  without 
any  pecuniary  aid  from  the  Public,  the  means  of  enabling  them  to  fatisfy  all  the 
claims  of  their  Indian  creditors.  Tlie  {anciion  of  Parliament  will  probably  be  necef- 
fary for  cahying  into  effe£l:  any  arrangement  for  that  purpofe  ;  and  if  the  Court  of 
Direftors  are  willing  that  thefe  difcuflions,  on  the  renewal  of  the  Charter,  fliall  pro- 
ceed,  in  fo  far  as  releites  to  the  queftion  of  the  trade,  on  the  principle  to  which  1 
have  adverted,  I  fhali  be  ready  to  receive  from  you  any  fuggeftions  you  may  have 
to  offer  on  the  fubjecl  of  the  debt,  and  on  the  mode  by  which  you  propofe  that  funds 
for  its  liquidation  ila;ill  be  provided. 

I  have  the  honor  to  be,  Gentlemen, 

^our  mofl  obedient  humble  fervant. 

The  Chairman  and  Deputy  Chairman  (Signed)         MELVILLE, 

of  the  Eafl-Indir.  Company. 


No.  XIV 


(      27      ) 


No.  XIV. 
At  a  Secret  Court  of  Diredtors,  held  on  Friday  the  28th  February  1S12. 

TTHE  Chairman  from  the  Committee  of  Correfpondence  laid  before  the  Court  the 
draft  of  a  reply  to  Lord  Melville's  letter  of  the  17th  of  December  laft,  which 
was  read  : 

Ordered,  that  the  fame  be  taken  into  confideration  to-morrow. 


No.  XIV. 

Secret  Court, 
28  Feb.  1812. 


No.  XV. 

At  a  Secret  Court  of  Directors,  held  on  Saturday  the  29th  February  181 2. 

'T'HE  Court  proceeded  to  take  the  propofed  draft  of  a  reply  to  Lord  Melville's 
letter  into  confideration. 


No.  XV. 

Secret  C'Hirt, 
ap  Feb.  1813. 


No.  XVI. 

At  a  Secret  Court  of  Direilors,  held  on  Monday  the  2d  March  1812. 

'TpHE  draft  of  the  propofed  reply  to  Lord  Melville's  letter,  of  the  17th  December 
■*-    laft,  was  unanimoufly  approved. 

Refolved,  1  hat  a  Deputation  of  this  Court  be  appointed  to  wait  on  His  Majefty's 
Minilters,  in  coafequence  thereof ;  and  that  the  laid  Deputation  do  confift  of  the 
Chairman,  Deputy  Chairman,  Charles  Mills  Efq.  the  Honourable  William  Elphin- 
ilone,  and  Edward  Parry  Efq. 


No.  xvr. 

Secret  Court, 
2  March  181Z. 


No.XVil. 

Letter  from  the  Chairman  and  Deputy  Chairman  to  the  Right  Honor- 
able Lord  Vii'count  Melville,  with  its  Enclofures,  noticed  in  the  pre- 
ceding Minute. 

My  LoRi),  Eaft  India  Houfe,  4th  March  18 12. 

''E  duly  received  and  laid  before  the  Court  of  Directors  your  Lordfliip's  letter 
of  the  17th  of  December  laft.  We  truft  that  the  great  Importance  of  the 
Matter  contained  in  it  will  explain,  in  a  fatisfadtory  Manner,  to  your  Lordftiip  aiid 
to  His  Majefty's  Government,  why  an  Anfwer  has  not  been  prepared  at  an  earlier 
Period. 

By  that. letter  \ve  think  it  is  to  be  underftood,  that  His  Majefty's  Minifters  have 
made  up  their  minds,  not  to  hold  out  to  the  Eaft  India  Company  an  Expeftation  of 
theia-  being  difpofed  to  concur  in  an  offer  to  Parliament  of  any  propofition  for  the 
continuance  of  the  prefent  fyftem  of  trade  with  India,  at  the  clofe  of  the  term  limited 
by  the  Act  of  1793,  which  is  now  nearly  expiring,  without  a  previous  confent,  on 
the  part  of  the  Eail  India  Company,  as  the  bafis  of  fuch  concurrence,  that  the  trade 
with  India  ftiall  be  extended  to  the  ftiips,  as  well  as  goods  of  private  merchants, 
under  fuch  rellriclions  as  may  be  deemed  neceffary  ;  but  that  His  Majefty's  Minifters 
are  of  opinion,  with  refpeft  to  the  fabjed  cf  the  Indian  army,  that  the  idea  which 
was  hild  out  in  your  Lot dfliip's  letter  of  the  28th  of  December  1S08,  relative  to 
the  transfer  of  the  Company's  army  to  the  Crown,  will  not  be  contended  for ;  and 
that,  upon  thefo  grounds  of  underftanding,  your  Lordfliip  will  be  prepared  to  receive 
from  the  Court  of  Dire6lors  any  fuggeftions  which  they  may  have  to  offer  on  the 
fubjefl:  of  the  Co.iipany's  debt,  and  upon  the  mode  by  vvhic'n  the  Court  propofe 
that  funds  for  its  liquidation  fliould  be  provided. 

From  the  terms  in  which  the  firft  propofition,  refpc£ting  the  trade  with  India, 
has  been  brought  to  the  notice  of  the  Court,  they  conceive  that  it  is  intended,  on 

the 


No.  XVII. 

Chairman   and 
Deputy's  Letter. 


(     2S     ) 

No.  XVII.      the  part  of  His   Majcfty's  Government,  to  preclude  the  Court  from  any  further 

agitation  of  a  qucftion  already  fo  fully  difcuffed.     The  Court,  indeed,  cannot  avoid 

Cliairir.an  and      coufidering  this  as  the  obvious  interpretation  of  your  Lordfhip's  letter  refpeding  a 
Deputy  I  Letter.    pgjjj[-^  upon  wliich,  perhaps,  it  might  be  out  of  their  power  to  offer  any  arguments, 
not  contained  in  the  letter  of  the  Chairs  to  your  Lordfhip  of  the  13th  of  January 
1809. 

Whatever  opinion,  therefore,  the  paft  experience  and  daily  obfer\'ation  of  the 
Court  may  have  jullly  induced  themjto  form  upon  this  fubjecl:,  or  however  incontro- 
vertible they  may  believe  many  of  the  arguments  to  be,  that  are  made  ufe  of  in  the 
letter  of  the  Chairs  to  your  Lordfliip,  to  which  they  have  referred,  they  think  it 
their  duty  to  ftate,  that  if  this  alteration  be  made  an  indifpenfable  condition,  on  the 
part  of  His  Majefty's  Minifters,  of -their  propofing  to  Parliament,  the  renewal  of 
the  Company's  privileges,  the  Court  v.ill,  though  reludiantly,  ofi'er  this  meafure  to 
the  coniideration  of  the  Proprietors,  with  whom  alone  the  power  refls  of  confenting 
to  fuch  a  fundamental  change  in  the  conilitution  of  the  Company.  But  they  mud, 
at  the  fame  time,  beg  leave,  in  the  mofl  unequivocal  manner,  to  declare  their  con- 
viftion,  that  though  this  alteration  may,  and  probably  will,  be  attended  with  many 
ferious  inconveniences  to  the  whole  frame  oi  that  Government,  which,  whatever 
opinion  may  h^ve  been  formed  of  its  imperfections,  has,  beyond  all  difpute,  acquired 
and  maintamed  for  Great  Britain  a  paramount,  and  almoft  undifputed  fovercignty 
in  the  Eaft,  it  will  not  give  to  the  nation  thofe  commercial  advantages,  which  it 
has  been  the  habit  of  many  of  the  commercial  interelts  of  this  Country  to  con- 
lemplate^ 

.  The  Court,  however,  hope  it  will  be  underflood  by  your  Lordfnip,  that  they  have 
entertained  this  opinion,  not  upon  the  narrow,  and  now  juilly  exploded  ground, 
•which  they  are  forry  to  fee  has  been  imagined  by  your  Lordfliip  to  exift,  that  the 
Company  have  ever  confidered  a  monopoly  to  be  more  beneficia',  in  all  cafes  of 
"  foreign  and  diftant  trade,  than  an  unreftrained  commerce,"  but  upon  the  con- 
vi<51ion  v/ith  which  they  have  been  imprefled,  that  an  exclufive  trade  with  India  is 
'the  only  one  really  applicable  to  the  maintenance  of  the  public  interefts  with  that 
country,  interwoven  as  that  trade  is  with  the  very  frame  and  integrity  of  thofe  pof- 
feflions,  and  refting,  as  it  does,  upon  many  highly  important  confiderations,  which  are, 
in  no  wife,  applicable  to  other  commercial  eitabliihments. 

•  .  In  fupport  of  thefe  opinions,  the  Court  beg  leave  to  enclofe  abftraft  copies  of  the 
Accounts  (A  and  B),  which  have  been  called  for,  and  laid  before  the  Committee  of 
the  Honorable  Houfe  of  Commons  upon  Eaft  India  Affairs,  eftablifhed  in  iSoS,and 
.continued  to  the  prefent  time,  which  they  imagined  will  afford  a  fair  reprefentation 
of  the  trade  in  bullion  and  in  goods  carried  on  with  India,  as  well  by  individuals 
as  by  foreign  nations  ;  and  thefe  accounts  will,  they  truft,  eftablifli,  in  a  con- 
clufive  manner,  the  corredlnefs  of  the  fentiments  entertained  by  the  Court  refped- 
ing  this  trade. 

In  communicating,  however,  thofe  fentiments  of  reluflance,  by  which  the  determina- 
tion of  the  Court  to  fubmit  the  propofition  in  queflion  to  the  proprietors  of  Eafl 
India  Stock  is  accompanied,  the  Court  hope  it  will  be  clearly  underllood,  that  this 
determination  arifes  from  a  prefumption,  that  fuch  military  powers  as  are  now  veftcd 
in  the  Company  will  be  left  unimpaired,  which  can  alone  induce  them  to  entertain 
an  expeftation  of  their  being  able,  in  a  manner  fatisfactory,  either  for  the  Company  or 
the  Public,  to  perform  the  part  which  has  hitherto  been  alTigned  to  the  Company  in 
the  government  of  a  diftant  empire  ;  and  alfo,  that  fuch  regulations  will  be  adopted, 
as  will  prevent  the  highly  dangerous  intercourfe  of  Europeans  with  the  Eail ;  and 
that  fuch  arrangements  will  be  made,  in  refpeft  to  pecuniary  matters,  as  will  enable 
the  Company  to  meet  with  confidence  the  prefent  flate  of  their  affairs.  The  Court 
alfo  hope,  that  in  the  extenfion  of  the  trade  which  the  Company  now  enjoy,  His 
Majcfty  s  Minifters  h,ave  not  had  in  view  the  hazardous  experiment  of  diirperfing, 
over  all  the  ports  of  England  and  Ireland,  a  trade  now  brought,  with  fo  much  ad- 
vantage, both  to  the  Company  and  the  Public,  to  the  fmgle  port  of  London. 

If  the  private  intercourfe  with  India  fiiould,  in  future,  be  extended,  it  may  natu- 
rally be  expefted,  that  upon  the  return  of  peace,  a  number  of  Britifh  feanien  will 
be  thrown  oiit  of  employ  ;  and  the  Court  are  apprehenfive  that  fuch  an  uitercourle, 

carried 


C    29    ) 

carried  on  through  the  medium  of  Indian  ftiips  and  Indian  failors,  relaxing  as  it       No.  XVII. 

would  do  the  fpirit  of  the  navigation  laws,  which  have  always  been  confidered  to  be • 

the   bafis  of  the  maritime  flrength  of  this  country,  may  be  viewed  by  the  nation     Cliairman   :ii.J 

with  extreme  alarm,  and  will  probably  give  rife  to  many  diforders.     The  Company's     1^'T"')''«  I-'"*''- 

papers  and  offices  might  furnifli  material  information,  by  which  the  relation  of  the 

Indian  trade  with  the  navigation  lyflem  could  be  appreciated,  and  the  Court,  if.  it 

Ihould  be  thought  likely  to  be  of  public  utility,  are  ready  to  have  that  information 

collected  ;  but  without  fuch  call,  and  without  prefling  their  reafons  at  length,  either 

upon  your  Lordfhip  or  the  other  Members  of  His  Majeity's  Government,  they  will 

content  themfelves  with  the  declaration  thty  have  already  made  of  their  opinion  upon 

this  fubjeft. 

The  Court  arc  defirous  of  taking  this  opportunity  to  offer  fome  remarks,  and  to 
anfwer,  in  a  curlbry  manner,  part  of  thofe  put;lic  accufations,  which  have  been  fo  af- 
fiduoufly  urged  againft  the  Eall  India  Company,  and  agaudl  the  further  continuance 
of  a  fyftem,  which,  they  hope,  will  appear  to  reft,  not  upon  the  grounds  of  individual 
intereft,  but  upon  the  firm  bafis  of  national  advantage. 

Whatever  opinions  the  Court  may  deliver,  upon  a  fubjefl:  in  which  they  are  maiii" 
fellly  interefted,  will  doubtlefs  be  received  with  circumfpedion;  but  the  Court  think, 
that  they  may  be  allowed,  and  widi  juiUceupon  the  prefent  occafion,  to  sffcrr,  that  the 
leading  difpofition  of  their  minds  is,  to  preferve  the  empire  obtained  in  India  to  t!ie 
parent  flate. 

The  firft,  and  the  mofl:  prominent  of  the  charges,  which  have,  at  various  times, 
been  brought  againit  ihe  Company,  is  the  repeated  calls  which  they  are  accufed  of 
having  made  upon  the  public,  tor  money  for  the  profccution  of  ruinous  concerns  ; 
as  if  they  had  diffipated  large  fums  in  ufelels  and  improvident  undertakings.  Upon 
this  head  it  may  be  fuflicient  for  the  Court  to  obferve,  that  their  commercial 
affairs  (and  to  thofe  alone  was  the  Company's  management  reftriifced)  have  been 
invariably  attended  with  fucctfs,  as  they  are  prepared  to  fhew,  if  the  proof  fhould 
be  called  for;  and  that  thcfe  advantages  have  been  fufficient  to  allov.'  of  a  mode- 
rate dividend  to  the  Proprietors  of  Ea(t  India  Stock.  Over  and  above  this  dividend, 
a  furplus  fum  has  been  applied,  arifmg  from  this  fource,  towards  the  extenficn  of 
that  territory,  the  acquifition  of  which  has  been  under  the  immediate  diredion  of  His 
Majefty's  Minifters. 

But  the  Court  are  perfuaded,  that  the  magnitude  of  the  afi'airs  which  the  Company 
have  had  to  manage,  has  been  little  known  and  little  attended  to,  otherwife  it  would, 
at  once,  have  been  feen,  that  one  of  the  principal  difficuhies  with  which  the  Company 
have  had  to  contend,  is  a  capital,  not  in  any  refpect  equal  to  the  great  extent,  variety, 
and  importance  of  thofe  affairs. 

The  diflaurfement  of  the  Company  upon  the  fingle  article  of  com- 
merce in  goods  and  wares,  &c.  or  of  articles  necefTary  for  its 
management,  a  difburfement  of  fums  going  from  and  returning  to 
the  Company,  from  one  moment  to  another,  was,  at  the  clofc  of  the 
year  18 1 1,  not  lefs  than  about  -  -  -  ^£14,847, 678 

To  this  muft  be  added,  the  amount  of  advances  in  India  and  at 
home,  for  Stores  of  various  kinds,  applicable  to  the  purpofes  of  Go- 
vernment, and  in  conftant  ufe  for  military  equipments,  &c.  ;  of  cafli, 
arms,  &c. ;  and  of  debts  due  to  the  Company  from  various  ftates 
and  princes,  Sec;  and  other  articles,  making  at  the  clofe  of  the  Indian 
year  18 lo, about  ....  21,282,279 

If  to  thefe  fums  be  fubjoined  the  abfolute  expenditure  made  by 
the  Company,  for  the  acquirement  of  a  territory,  with  forts,  am- 
munition, &c.  and  the  aftual  purchafe  of  many  taiStories  and  territories, 
building  of  docks,  purchafe  of  forefls,  &c.  including  a  confidorable 
fum  which  has  been  paid  by  them,  at  various  times,  to  the  Public,  or 
difburbed  for  expeditions,  and  the  maintenance  of  captures  afterwards 
furrendered  up  to  the  enemy,  ws.  -  -  15,052,170 

They  form  altogether  an  aggregate  of       -     ^■'51,182,127 

(59-)  "  The 


Deputy's  Letter. 


(      30      ) 

No.  X\Mr,                     Aggregate  diiburfements  brought  forward  -                •     5^51,182,127 

~ The  capital  ol"  the  Company  is  :— 

Demi't™!"  ^nt     ^"  money  advanced  by  the  adventurers,  about         -  ^7,780,000 

And  they  receive  from  the  aid  of  bonds  at  home         -  7,000,000 
And  from  other  contingent  credits,  at  home  and  abroad, 

about                »                ...               -  7.787»953 

Together 22,567,953 

Leaving  a  balance  of        -        ^28,614,174 

Conftituting  at  this  raoment  a  permanent  debt  in  India  and  in  Europe.  (See  C.) 

This  aggregate  of  ^i; 1, 1 82, 1 2 7,  a  part  of  which  fum  only  has  been  employed 
upon  the  territorial  acquifitions  of  the  Company,  forms  an  outlay,  beyond  the  capital 
of  the  Company,  of  fo  large  an  amount,  as  to  make  it  more  matter  of  wonder,  how 
the  Company  have  hitherto  been  able  to  carry  on  the  concern  at  all,  than  to  rendei- 
it  extraordinary  that  they  ihould  have  been  conftrained,  refpeclfuUy  and  at  various 
times,  to  reprefent  the  urgency  of  their  affairs,  and  to  prefs  upon  the  Public  for  the 
mere  return  of  thofe  funis,  which  had  been  fairly  expended  by  the  Company  abroad 
for  the  public  fervice ;  a  return  which  has  never  yef  been  granted  to  the  Company, 
to  the  extent  to  which,  in  juftice,  it  ought  to  have  reached.  In  every  war  which 
has  taken  place  fince  the  Company  became  poffeffed  of  the  territorial  acquifitions, 
large  fums  of  money  have  been  expended  in  capturing  the  fettlements  of  the  French, 
Dutch,  and  Danes,  and  heavy  expenfes  incurred  in  keeping  the  fame,  till  the  political 
views  of  the  Public  occafioned  thefe  fettlements  to  be  reftored,  in  return  for  other 
objeds,  in  which  the  Company  had  no  particular  intereft.  The  Company  have  alfo 
been  compelled  to  pay  part  of  the  expence  of  capturing  and  maintaining  an  ifland, 
afterwards  referved  for  theexclufive  benefit  of  the  Crown  ;  to  difburfe  a  confiderable 
fum  for  a  force,  of  which  the  Public  have  derived  all  the  benefit  at  home ;  and  even  to 
contribute  to  the  Egyptian  expedition,  the  whole  of  which  expenfes  the  Company 
have  always  thought  ought  to  have  fallen  upon  the  State. 

This  large  and  neceflary  outlay,  in  faft,  now  conftitutes  the  fource  of  the 
Company's  embarraffment.  A  confiderable  part  of  the  money  railed  in  India  upon 
periodical  loans,  to  meet  this  outlay,  has  (as  your  Lordfliip  well  knows)  by  the 
terms  of  thefe  loans,  which  made  them  payable,  if  required,  in  England,  and  in 
confequence  of  a  general  reduction  of  intereft  from  eight  to  fix  per  cent,  been 
at  once  thrown  upon  the  Company  for  immediate  payment  in  Europe ;  a  fum 
which,  without  the  aid  of  Parliament,  it  is  impoffible  for  the  Company  to  difcharge. 

Of  this  large  expenditure,  fanftioned,  and  in  many  cafes  fpecificaliy  directed  by 
the  Minifters  of  the  Crown,  it  may  with  juftice  be  afked,  what  part  ha^  been  in- 
curred for  the  partial  or  exclufive  advantage  of  the  Company  ? — It  is  evident,  that 
the  whole  concern  has  been  begun  and  continued  by  private  exertions  alone  ;  nor 
have  the  Proprietors  received,  by  any  means,  an  adequate  recompence  for  thofe  ex- 
ertions ;  they  have  fcarcely  derived  more  benefit  than  the  common  intereft  of  money. 
And  if  India  be  an  objedi:  of  regiu-d  to  the  world,  the  Company  may  have  the  fatis- 
faftion  of  thinking,  that  they,  at  their  own  rifk  and  expenfe,  have  refcued  it  from 
contending  Nations,  and  may  claim  the  merit  of  having  land  it  at  the  feet  of  their 
country  ;  acquired  and  preferved,  it  is  true,  at  a  great  pecuniary  £xpenfe,  and  by 
fuch  abilities  and  fuch  exertions,  both  civil  and  military,  as  not  only  to  reflefl  the 
hlgheft  credit  upon  the  Eaft-India  Company,  but  alfo  to  raife,  as  the  pageof  hiftory 
•will  teftify,  the  national  charafter.  They  venture  to  hope,  that  when  all  the  great 
political  lelations  of  this  acquifition  are  confidered,  the  price  paid  for  it  will  not  be 
deemed  as  out  of  proportion  to  its  intrinfic  value. 

The  wifdom  of  Parliament  will,  the  Court  make  no  doubt,  be  applied  to  pre- 
ferve  what  has  been  fo  acquired,  and  finally  do  juftice  to  thofe,  at  whofe  rilk  it 
has  been  obtained  ;  and  net  be  induced  to  barter  pofitive,  and  very  large  immediate 
advantages,  againft  fpeculalive  notions  and  theoretical  plans. 

In  the  fecond  place,  it  has  been  often  urged,  that  the  Company  have  been  favoured 
-during  thefe  exertions,  with  an  exclufive  trade,  and  that  the  nation  has  thereby 
loft  an  opportunity  of  extending  their  commercial  enterprizes  over  a  large  quarter 

of 


(    3»     ) 

of  the  globe.     It  is  true,  that  the  Company  have  been  f.ivoured  with  this  cxcUifive       No.  XVU. 

trade ;  but  it  may  fairly  be  afked,  would  India  have  belonged  to  Great  Britain  if 

this  exclufive  trade  had  not  exifted  ?     That  this  trade  would  have  been  of  greater    ^'i*'™*™  ««"' 
magnitude  in  the  hands  of  individuals,  is  yet  a  matter  that  remains  to  be  proved  :        '"'^  *     ''*^"^'' 
but  it  is  obvious,  that  during  part  of  the  above  period,  viz.  from  the  year  iy68  to 
1812,  the  Public  have  received,  in  direct  contributions  from  the  CompaHV,  a  funi 
not  falling  Ihort  of  .i^'5,135,319,  as  will  appear  by  the  accompanying  Account  (D.) 

With  refped  to  the  immediate  produce  of  this  trade  to  the  Public,  the  Court  believe 
it  will  bear  a  compariibn  with  that  arifing  from  any  other  diftant  pofleflion.  It  pro- 
duced lad  year  to  the  Public  the  large  fum  of  _4^4,2i3,425  (E),  viz.  in  culloiu 
«^759>595'  ''"^  '"  excife -^3,453,830 ;  and  though  this  return  to  the  Public  be 
larger,  as  the  Court  have  reafon  to  think,  in  refpeft  to  the  capital  employed,  than 
the  return  from  any  other  trade,  it  has  at  the  fame  time,  been  colkfted  with  a 
facility  unknown  to  other  concerns ;  an  advantage  which  has  been  obtained,  oartlv 
by  the  progreffive  enadment  of  regulations  the  fruit  of  many  years  experience,  and 
partly  by  the  concentration  of  the  trade  in  a  fingle  port,  and  the  prevention  of 
fmuggling,  which  has  been  the  confequence  of  it. 

But  what  has  never  yet  been  fairly  eftimated  in  the  exiftence  of  the  Ea.l-India 
Company  is,  that  the  whole  of  thefe  returns  have  been  brought  into  the  exchequer 
of  the  Public,  without  the  Public  having  been  called  upon  lor  any  direct  contribu- 
tion for  the  prefervation  of  the  fource  from  whence  they  have  had  their  rife,  w^j;ilil 
the  pofTefiions  of  the  Crown,  in  every  quarter  of  the  globe,  have  drawn  fron;  theiu 
a  confiderable  fum  for  their  fupport  in  troops.  What  has  been  faved  to  the  State 
has  thus,  the  Court  conceive,  been  gained  by  the  Public,  and  would  amount,  as 
the  Court  are  fatisfied,  in  only  twenty  years,  to  a  fum  of  a  very  great  magnitude. 
From  the  Navy,  indeed,  the  Eail-India  Company  have  received  important  afiiitance  ; 
but  fuch  afiiitance,  it  mufl  be  recolieded,  has  been  afforded  to  them  only  in  com- 
mon  with  the  reft  of  His  Majefty's  fubje£ts. 

That  the  trade  of  the  Company  has  been  highly  beneficial  to  the  Public,  In  afford- 
ing a  nurfery  for  feamen  in  time  of  war,  and  employment  for  them  in  tiine  of  peace, 
and  that  the  Company's  m.aritime  fervice  has  contributed  materially  tov/ards  thofe 
benefits,  cannot,  the  Court  apprehend,  be  doubted  ;  nor  that  the  fortunes  of  indi- 
viduals, acquired  either  in  the  fervice  of  the  Company,  or  by  their  indultry  and 
exertions  under  the  Company's  protedtion,  have  gradually  contributed  to  the  accu- 
mulation of  that  public  btcck  of  national  weslth,  which  has  enabled  this  country 
to  Hand,  almoft  alone,  againft  the  uiuted  exertions  uf  nearly  all  Europe. 

Having  offered  thefe  curfory  obfervations  upon  matters  of  fuch  obvious  impor- 
tance, we  are  direded  by  the  Court  to  ftate,  that  as  the  pecuniary  arrangement? 
neceffary  for  the  fupport  of  the  Company  cannot,  with  propria  ty  or  with  effed, 
be  made  the  fubjett  of  correfpondcnce,  they  beg  to  refer  tin  fe  poiiits,  ,is  well  as  all 
thofe  of  inferior  detail,  of  which  there  are  a  great  many,  to  a  perlbrial  conference 
between  your  Lordlhip  and  the  Deputation  of  the  Court,  which  had  the  honor  to 
wait  on  your  LorJihip  this  morning.  » 

We  have  the  l;onor  to  be,  My  Lord,  ; 

Your  Lordfiiip's  moft  obedient  humble  fervants, 

(Signed)      JACOB  BOSANQUEl", 
HUGH  INGLIS. 
The  Rijjht  Honcurrfble  Lord  Vifcount  Melville, 

kc.  Siz.  &c.  : 


^vN 


No.  XVII. 


Chairman  and 
Dt-puty's  Letter. 


(      32      ) 


A. 


AN  ACCOUNT,  fhewing  the  Total  Amount  of  the  Official  Value  of  the  Bullion 
and  Merchandize  imported  into,  and  exported  from  Britifh  India  (Bengal,  Madras, 
Rnd  Bombay)  to  London,  America,  and  Foreign  Europe,  for  Six  Years,  viz. 
from  1802-310  1807-85  both  inclufive. 


London  : 

By  the  Eafl  India  Company 

By  Commanders  and  Officers  of  the 

Company's  Ships 
By  Britifli  Private -Traders 
Americans             -                  -            - 
Foreign  Europeans 

Total  Imports  and  Exports           £ 

Total  of  the  Imports  into  India. 

Total  of  the 
Exports. 

Bullion. 

£  Sterling. 
4,939,128 

179.756 
1,167,460 
4,543,662 
2,051,093 

Goods  and  Stores 

£  Sterling. 

5.547.501 

2,640,000 

1,83^,980 

667,654 

1,072,960 

Total. 

£  Sterling. 
10,486,629 

2,819,756 
3,000,440 
5,211,316 
3,124.053 

Of  Goods  only. 

£  Sterling. 
8,108,897 

1,939,000 
5.6^1,740 
4,803,283 
2.437.752 

12,881,099 

11,761,095 

24,642,194 

22,970,672 

Memorandum. — There  has  been  a  fmall  quantity  of  Bullion  exported  from  India 
to  Europe  and  America,  to  the  extent  of  Sicca  Rupees  1,75,316,  but  which  is  not 
material  to  the  prefent  account. 

Note. — The  value  of  the  Company's  Imports  into  India  is  taken  from  the  invoices 
of  the  fliips  as  they  arrived  in  India,  with  the  addition  of  ten  per  cent,  upon  the  in- 
voice price  outwards.  The  value  of  the  Britifli  Private-l'rade,  as  alfo  the  Ameri- 
can and  Foreign  European,  is  the  Indian  official  value,  and  which  appears  to  cor- 
refpond  pretty  nearly  with  the  market  prices  in  India.  In  order  to  make  a  juft  com- 
parifon  between  the  amount  of  the  Company's  and  the  Private  or  Foreign  Trade,  the 
goods  fhouH  be  exaftly  reduced  to  the  fame  denomination  of  value ;  but  this  is  not 
ftriftly  pradticable. 

Errors  excepted, 

(Signed)         ROBERT  WISSETT. 
iaft-India  Houfe,  4th  March  1812. 


B. 

AN  ACCOUNT,  (hewing  the  Amount  of  the  Official  Value  of  the  Bullion  and  Mer^ 
chandize  imported  into,  and  exported  from  Britifli  India  (Bengal,  Madras,  and 
Bombay)  to  London,  America,  and  Foreign  Europe,  on  an  average  of  Six  Years, 
viz.  from  1802-3  to  1807-8,  both  inclufive. 


»■ 

the 

£ 

.'Annual  average  of  the  Imports  into  India. 

Aimual  average 
of  the  £.xports. 

London  -. 

By  the  Eaft-India  Company 

By  Commanders  and  Officers  of 

Company's  Ships 
By  Britilh  Private  Traders 
Americans 
Foreign  Europeans 

Bullion. 

£  Sterling. 
823,188 

29,959 
'94,576 

757.277 

341. «49 

Geodscnd  Stores. 
£  Sterling. 

924,5»3 

440,000 

305.496 

111.275 
178,826 

Total  of  Imports. 

£  Sterling. 

1,747.771 

469,959 
500,072 
868,552 
520,675 

Mercliandize 
only, 

£  Sterling. 
1.351,483 

323.167 
946,956 
800,547 
406,292 

Total  average  Imports  and  Exports 

2,146,849 

1,960,180 

4,107,029 

3,828,445 

The  Proportions  of  which  are 
Exported  to  England 
Ditto      to  America 
Ditto 


•sVo,  or  upwsrds  of  4ths. 


3-5^,  or  let's  than      -Jths. 
to  Foreign  Europe  Vo^  or  lefs  than      ith. 


The 


(    33     ) 

The  exports  of  individuals  from  Britain  are  :  No.  XVII. 

Bullion  jf  194,576  

Goods        305,496  Chairman  and 
•  500,072     Deputy's  Letter. 

The  imports  of  ditto  into  Britain  -  -  -  .  940,956 

Difference,  per  annum         -         -  ^^446,884 

being  not  a  trade  but  a  remittance,  dedu£ling  the  amount  of  the  profit  on  exports. 

Errors  excepted, 
Eaft  India  Houfe,  (Signed)         ROBERT  WISSETT. 

4th  March  i8ia. 


OUTLAY,  Commercial  and  Territorial,  of  the  Eafl;  India  Company  at  Home  and  Abroad, 
made  up  in  rcfpeft  to  the  Indian  Accounts,  to  the  30th  April  1810,  the  Home  Accounts 
to  the  1  ft  March  1 8 1 1 . 

COMMERCIAL  OUTLAY. 

No.  I,  Cafh ^460,738 

Value  of  goods  fold  and  unfold         -     5,053,417 
Vrdue  of  goods  afloat  -  -  3>379j3^9 

Houfe  and  warehoufes         -  -         1,207,090 

Balance  of  property  at  China  and  Cape 

of  Good  Hope         _         _         _         1,240,65a    ■ 
'Cafli,  goods,  and   debts,    commercial 

department  India  _  .         _     3,071,637 

.€14,412,923 

Balance  of  Property  at  Bencoolen  and  St.  Helena: 
the  outlay  at  thefe  places  being  of  an  anomalous 
nature,  it  is  ftated  fcparately         -         -  -         434>755 

Total  Commercial  Outlay         -  .€14,847,678 

TERRITORIAL  OUTLAY,  INDIA,  viz. 
Ho.  II.  Cafh  in  the  feveral  departments,  30th  April  1810  . 
Bengal,    S.  R.  4,11,38,439,    at  2s. 

per  C.  R.  -         -         -         €"4,772,058 

Madras,  Pags.  1,16,24,307,  at  8s    -  4,649,723 
Bombay,  B.  R. 53,58,932,  at  2s.  3d.     602,879 

€"10,034,660 

Debts  owing  to  the  Company  : 

Bengal,    S.  R.  1,33,49,444,    at  2s. 
perC.  R.         -  €'1,548,535 

Madras, Pags.  94,93,034, 

at  8s.  -  -         3,797,214 

Bombay,  B.R.  54.01,917 

at  2s.  3d.         -         -        607,716 

Stores,  Kc.  : 

Bengal,  S.  R.  97,82,1 14,  1 

at  2s.  per  C.  R.    -    €'1,134,725 
Madras,Pags,33, 16,927, 

at  8s.         -         -  1,326,771 

Bombay,  B.R.  3  8, 3 1,083, 

at  2s.  3d,         -         -       430,997 

2,892,493 

8,845,958 


Balance  of  property  at  Prince  of  Wales's  Ifland       -     224,406 
Indian  territorial  outlay         -         -         -         .    €19,095,024 

T£RRlTORL\L  OUTLAY  AT  HOME, 

ill  .vlarch  1811. 

Debt   due  from    Government,    the 

balance  of   the   original   debt  of 

€■"4,200,000         _         -         .      €"1,207,560 
Debt  due  from  Government,  the  ba. 

lance  of  the  account  for   troops, 
iS9-)  I  ftorei, 


(    34  ■) 


Ko.XVII. 


Chairman  and 
Deputy's  Letlur. 


Brought  forward  j^*!, 207,560     19,095,024 

ftorcs,  fupplies,  &:c.         -         -  960,000 

Advances  to  feveral  perfons  in  India, 

to  be  repaid         -  .         _         -       19,695 

7,187,255 

Total  territorial  outlay  -  ,  _      


No.  III.  The  expenditure  at  home  and  abroad,  for  the  acquifition  of  terri- 
tory, he.  being  the  balance  of  the  flock  account,  iftMirch 
1811 


Sum  total  of  capital  neceffary  to  carry  on  the  concern 


14,847,678 


^^21,282,379 
■=^36,i29>957 

i5>o52»»70 

^€51, 182, 137 


No.  IV.  The  capital  advanced  by  the  Adventurers 

The  capital  raifed  by  bond  _  _         . 

Other  capita!,  being  a  floating  debt  generally  due 

on  various  accounts : 
Borrowed  of  the  bank         -  -        j€'70o,ooo 

Edimated  commercial  floating  drafts       6oo,coo 
Sundry  fums  owmg  to  individuals  in 

England  -         -         -  -        2,155,922 

-Debts,  depofits,  arrears  of  interelt,  and 
allowances  and  loans,  not  bearing 
intereft : 

Bengal  .         -         -         ^'2,843,134 

Madras  -  _  _  1,017,238 

Bombay  _         _         _  408,792 


•=£7,780,000 
7,000,000 


Debts  in  India,  commercial 


4,269,164 
62,867 


Total  of  capital,  without  the  Bond  debt  of  India, 

No.  V.  Difference  5  being  the  balance  neceffary  to  remain  in  permanent 
loans,  for  the  purpofe  of  carrying  on  the  concern 


Eaft' India  Houfe, 

4th  March  1813. 


Errors  excepted, 

(Signed) 


7.787.953 
^"22,567,953 

38,614,174 
.5^5 1, 1 82,  r  27 


CHARLES  CART  WRIGHT, 

Accountant  General. 


D. 


STATEMENT  of  the  Contributions    from  the  Eaft  India  Company  to  the  Public,    from 

the  Tear  1768  to  the  Year   iSia 

Paid  from  1768  to  1775,  ''^  confequence  of  an  agreement  concerning   the 

territorial  poffeffion,   ^7.  Geo.  III.  cap.  57,  and  9  Geo.  Ill,  cap.  24.) 
Paid  from  1769  to  1773,  for  indemnity  on  tea  -  -  • 

Paid  in  1779,  bounty  for  feamen  raifed  for  the  fervice  of  Government 
Paid  in  1780  and  1781,  three  fliips  of  the  line   prefented  to  Government 
Paid  in  1781  and  1787,  per  agreement  for  a  new  charter  in  1781 
Paid  in  1789  and  1790,  for  victualling    the  navy,  and  charges  of  His  Ma- 

jefty's  troops  in  India  _  _  -  _  _ 

Claim  of  the  Company  for  fubfiftence  of  French  prifoners  of  war,  and  other 

expences  incurred  by  the  Company   on  account  of  Government,    written 

off  in  1793  per  Atl  of  33  Geo.  III.  cap.  52,  fee.  127. 
Paid  in    1793  and    1794,  for   participation,   purfuant  to  the  Charter  AG. 

of  1793  -  -  -  -  -  - 

Paid  in  1795  and    1796,  expence  of  3,000  feamen  raifed  for  the  fervice  of 

Government  _  _  _  _  _ 

Paid  in  1803  and  1804,  armed  fiiips,  hired  for  the  fervice  of  Government, 

and  employed  in  defence  of  the  country 
Lofs,  from  1793  to  181 1,  by  faltpetre  fuppiied  t6  Government  at  lefs  than 

prime  coft,  as  per  obligation  of  the  Charter 


^3,169,399 

483,050 

-       13.653 
95.349 

400,000 

5c®,ooo 


443.632 

500,000 

57,000 

67,330 

405,906 


Eaft  India  Houfe, 
4th  March  1812. 


•^'5.135.319 

Errors  excepted, 

(Signed)        CHARLES   CART  WRIGHT, 

Accountant  General. 


(    35     ) 

E. 

AN  ACCOUNT  of  the  Duties  of  Cuftoms  and  Eiclfe   received  on  Goods  imported  and 
exported  by  the  Eaft  India  Company,  in  the  Year  ending  January  iSu. 

Cuftoms  on  Tea            -             -  ^2r9,322 

— Other  Goods  -  -      498,901 

Export  Duty  -  -     ^li^SS 

Tonnage  Duty  -  23,719 


Excife 

Total  Cuftoms        -            -            7,59i59J 

Total  Cuftoms  and  Excife           j^4,3 13,425 

Eaft  India  Houfe, 
4th  March  18 13. 

Errors  excepted, 

(Signed)                  CHARLES  CARTWRIGHT, 

Accountant  General. 

No.  XVIII. 

Minute  of  a  Meeting  of  the  Deputation,  the  3d  March  1812. 

npHE  Deputation  appointed  by  the  Court  to  confer  with  the  Prefident  of  the  Board" 
of  Commiflioners  for  the  Affairs  of  India  ailembled  this  day,  in  confequence  of 
their  appointment  of  the  2d  inftant ; 

The  Chairman  bid  before  the  Deputation,  Minutes  of  a  conference  which  the 
Chairs  had  with  Lord  Melville,  on  the  20th  February,  and  alfo  with  his  Lordlhip, 
Mr.  Perceval,  and  Mr.  Long,  on  the  24th  of  February  ;  likewile  feveral  Accounts, 
fliewing  the  prefent  and  profpeclive  fituation  of  the  Company's  pecuniary  affairs. 

The  Chairman  then  fuggefted  certain  propofitions,  as  hints  to  be  fubmitted  to 
Lord  Melville,  which  after  full  deliberation  the  Deputation  refolved  to  adopt,  and  to 
wait  upon  his  Lordlhip  to-morrow,  at  half  paft  ten,  for  the  purpofe  of  offering  them 
to  his  confideration. 


No.  XVIL 


Chairman  and 
Deputy's  Letter 


No.  XVIII. 


Minute  of 
Deputation. 


Chairman  and 
Deputy's  Letter. 


No,  XIX. 

At  a  Secret  Court  of  Diredors,  held  on  Friday,  the  6th  March  1812. 

'pHE  Chairman  acquainted  the  Court,  that  the  Deputation  appointed  the  2d  inftant 

had  waited  on  Lord  Melville,  with  a  paper  containing  hints  for  his  Lordfliip's 

•  confideration,  which  had  been  approved  by  the  Committee  of  Correfpondence. 


rence 


The  Chairman  gave  fome  general  explanations,  as  to  what  paffed  at  the  confer- 
ice;  and  added,  that  Lord  Melville's  opinion,  on  the  various  propofitions  fub- 
mitted to  him  by  the  Deputation,  would  be  ftated  by  his  Lordflilp  in  writinc-,  and 
IhoulJ  be  communicated  to  the  Court  as  early  as  poffible.  "' 


No.  XIX. 


Secret  Court, 
6th  March  1S12. 


No.  XX. 

Hints  approved  by  the  Committee  of  Correfpondence,  and  fubmitted  to 
the  Confideration  of  the  Right  Honorable  Lord  Melville,  noticed  in  the 
preceding  Minute. 

'J^HAT  the  renewal  of  the  Charter  fliall  proceed  upon  (hebafis  of  the  Ad  of  1707, 

and  that  no  greater  extenfion  of  the  trade  fhall  be  granted  than  what  was  allowed 

oy  that  Act}  but  the  Deputation  are  ready  to  recommend  to  the  Court  of  Directors, 

and 


No.  XX. 


Hinu 


^Htnt^ 


C    36    ■) 

No.  XX.        and  ultimately  to  the  Court  of  Proprietors,  to  admit  fuch  modifications  as  may  be 
deemed  neceffary  to  give  greater  facilities  to  the  private  trader. 

I  ft.  No  Britifh  or  Indian  fliip  to  fail,  direftly  or  circuitoufly,  from  a  Britifii 
port  in  Europe  to  China. 

ad.  No  Britifh  fubjeft  to  be  permitted  to  refiJe  rn  China,  without  the  Com- 
pany's licence. 

3d.  No  goods,  the  growth  or  produce  of  China,  to  be  imported  into  any 
of  the  ports  of  the  United  Kingdom,  except  l>y  the  Eafl  India  Company. 

4th.  The    power    of  levying  duties  in    India    upon  Britifh  fubjeas,    and  the 

i  fubjects  of  foreign  nations,  to  be  continued  to   the   Company,  upon  the  footing 

■on  which  it  at  prefent  exifls ;  and  the  fame  power,  with  refpeft  to  Britifh  fubjecls,  to 

be  extended  to  the  diflrids  within  the  jurifdi^tion  of  the  courts  of  Calcutta,  JVIadras, 

Bombay,  and  Prince  of  Wales  Ifland.  .    .. 

5th.  Saltpetre  to  be  confidered  as  a  political  article,  and  to  be  confined  exclu- 
■fively  to  the  Company. 

6th.  The  whole  of  the  Indian  trade  to  be  brought  to  the  port  of  London,  and 
the  goods  fold  at  the  Company's  fales,  and  to  be,  as  at  prefent,  under  the  Company's 
mana-jement. 

7lh.  The  three  per  cent,  now  paid  to  the  Company  by  the  private  traders,  for 
the  warehoufing  and  management  of  the  private  trade,  to  be  increafed  to  five  per 
icent. 

8th.  No  private  fliip  to  be  permitted  to  fail  for  India,  except  from  the  port  of 
London. 

9th.  No  fhip  to  be  permitted  to  I'ail,  except  under  a  Licence  from  the  Eafl  India 
Company.  Ships  obtaining  this  licence,  to  deliver  one  copy  of  their  journals  at  the 
Eafl  India  Houfe  ;  and  the  licence  to  contain  fuch  claufes,  as  may  be  likely  to  prevent 
an  unlimited  or  unproper  inlercourfe  of  individuals  with  India. 

loth.  Fire-arms,  military  and  naval  flores,  to  be  prohibited  articles. 

I I  th.  Exifling  reflridions,  with  refped  to  the  article  of  piece  goods,  to  be 
continued. 

1 2th.  It  being  defirable,  as  well  for  the  Public  as  for  the  Company,  that  the  quality 
of  the  filk  grown  in  India  fliould  not  be  deteriorated,  it  is  fubmitted  that  this  article 
be  confined  to  the  Company. 

13th.  The  fhlps  of  private  perfons  to  be  fubjeft  to  the  fame  regulations,  in  refpeft 
to   convoys,  &:c.  as  thole  belonging  to  the  Company. 

14th.  No  private  fhip  to  be  permitted  to  fail,  either  from  Great  Britain  to  India, 
or  from  India  to  Great  Britain,  of  a  lefs  burthen  than  four  hundred  tons. 

1 5th.  The  Company  to  be  fubject  to  no  obligation  with  refpect  to  Exports  to 
India,  except  in  comnvm  with  the  private  traders. 

16th.  The  Lafcars  and  Chinefe  failors  brought  home  in  private  fhips,  to  be  placed 
under  proper  regulations.  Not,  upon  any  account,  to  be  fulfered  to  wander 
about  the  ftreets  of  London.  Good  treatment  to  be  fecured  to  them,  and  the 
Company  to  be  enabled,  by  fome  funnnary  procefs,  to  recover  the  expences  to 
which  they  fliall  be  fubjeded,  in  the  event  of  negled  on  the  part  of  the  owners  of 
fuch  fhips  in  thefe  refpefts. 

17th.  The  Company  to  be  indemnified  for  their  unexpired  engagements  for  extra 
ihipping,  provided  for  the  accommodation  of  the  private  traders. 

i8th.  An  unrcflrained  intercourfe  with  India  to  be  prevented,  and  the  exifling 
-reflriiSlions,  with  refpeft  to  reiidence  in  India,  to  be  continued. 

19th.  The  number  of  His  Majefly's  forces  in  India  to  be  in  future  maintained 
by  the  Eafl  India  Company  to  be  now  fixed,  and  any  troops  fent  beyond  that  number 
(except  at  the  exprefs  requifition  of  the  Eafl  India  Company)  to  be  at  the  charge  of 
the  Public. 

20th.  The 


Hinls. 


(    37    ) 

loth.    The  Company  to  be  releafed  from  any  future  accouftt  with  the  Pay  Oftlcc,        No.  XX. 
and  to  be  henceforward  charged,  either  fo  much  per  regiment  of  a  given  force,  or  fo 
much  per  man. 

a  I  ft.  The  prefent  heavy  current  and  poflponed  demands  of  the  Pay  Office  againft 
the  Company  to  be  arranged  upon  fome  footing  of  general  equity,  and  fome  adver- 
tance  in  fettling  this  account  made  to  the  (hare  which  the  Company  have  been  obliged 
to  bear  in  foreign  captures  not  retained  by  them,  and  to  their  iiaviiig  been  conftrained 
to  maintain  anEuropean  and  native  force,  larger  than  what  was  required  for  the  defence 
(jf  the  Peninfula,  and  other  heavy  expences. 

22d.  The  Proprietors  to  be  fecured,  as  at  prefent,  in  the  receipt  of  their  dividend 
of  ten  and  a  half  per  cent.,  upon  the  faith  of  which  dividend  the  capital  in  1793 
was  raifed. 

23d.  The  v/hole  of  the  furplus  of  the  Eaft  India  Company  to  be  appropriated  to 
a  diuihiution  of  their  debts,  until  the  debts  be  reduced  to  the  fum  of  ten  millions 
llerlino;. 

a4th.  The  funis  required  by  the  Eaft  India  Company  to  liquidate  tlie  debt  tranf- 
ferred  from  India  to  Europe,  and  becoming  payable  in  1812  and  1813,  to  bcfunded 
by  the  Minifter,  the  intereft  of  which  fhall  be  regularly  paid  into  His  Majfcfty's  Ek- 
chequer  by  the  Company,  together  with  iuiy  fuch  per  centagc,  for  tlie  gradual  liqui- 
dation of  tlie  capital  or  redemption  of  the  fund,  as  fl:iall  be  deemed  proper  by  His 
Majefty's  Minifters. 

The  I'wcnty -fifth  article  did  not  form  a  part  of  the  propofitions  fubrtiitted  to  Lord 
Melville,  but  is  nov/  introduced  by  the  Committee  of  Correfpondence,  and  is  as 
follows,  viz, 

25th.  That,  in  order  to  give  the  utmoft  poffible  extenfion  to  the  commerce  of 
private  merchants,  and  at  the  fame  time  to  fecure  the  Company's  exclufive  trade  to 
and  from  China,  private  fliips  be  not  permitted  to  go  farther  eaftward  than  Point 
•Romania,  at  the  entrance  of  the  China  Seas,  and  to  the  northward,  not  beyond 
the  equinoftial  line. 

N.  B.  Should  it  be  the  intention  of  Government  that  private  traders  fhall  be 
excluded  f  om  the  Spice  Iflands,  the  limits  ought  then  to  be  for  them  not  to  go 
to  the  eaftward  of  the  Straits  of  Bally,  nor  to  the  northward  of  the  Line. 


No.  XXI. 

At  a  Secret  Committee  of  Correfpondence,  the  i8th  March  iSie. 

fyHE  Chairman   acquainted   the  Committee,  that   the   Deputy  and   himfelf  had        No.  XXI. 

yefttrday  waited  on  Lord   Melville,  and    that   his  Lordihip  had  appointed  to- 

-morrow,  at  one  o'clock,  for  a  conference  with  the  Members  of  the  Deputation.   Secret  Committee, 

18  March  l8i3. 

The  Committee  agreed  to  recommend  to  the  CoQrt  to-day,  that  the  Quarterly 
General  Court,  to  be  held  on  Wcdnefday,  the  25th  inllant,  be  made  fpecial,  for 
the  purpofe  of  laying  before  the  Proprietors  the  Communications  which  have  taken 
place  between  His  Majefty's  Government  and  the  Court  of  Dire>Sors,  rofpeding  the 
renewal  of  the  Company's  Charter. 

It  was  alfo  refolvcd.  That  the  Papers  containing  the  faiJ  communications  he  printed 
for  the  information  of  the  Proprietors,  and  under  the  fuperintendance  of  the  Affiftant 
Secretary. 

Draft  of  a  Letter  to  Lord  Melville,  to  be  figned  by  the  Members  of  the  Deputation, 
requefting  that  a  longer  term  than  that  which  was  fixed  in  1793,  may  be  granted 
for  [he  lenewal  of  the  Company's  exclufive  privileges,  was  read  and  approved. 

The  Chairman  calling  the  attention  of  the  Committee  to  the  correfpondence  which 

had  paffed  between  Lord  Caftlereagh  and  the  Chairs  at  a  former  period,  as  to  re- 

(.59-)  i^  lieving 

270654.  '^ 


iS  starch  iSj  J. 


(    38    ) 

No.  XXI.       licvirtg  the  Proprietors  of  Eall  India  Stock  from  the  payment  of  the  Income-tax  oa 

their  dividends, 

Sfcret  Co™mj"«.  The  fame  was  read,  viz. 

Letters  from  the  Chairs  to  Lord  Cadlereagh,  dated  the  2d  December  1803 
and  7th  July  1 S04  ;  and. 

Letters  from  his  Lorddiip  to  the  Chairs,  dated  coth  December  1803  and 
1 2th  September  1804. 

Draft  of  a  letter  to  be  figned  bv  the  Deputation  and  addrefTcd  to  Lord  Melville 
upon  that  fubj eft ;  and  alio  fuhmitting  to  his  Lordfiiip's  confideration,  the  expe- 
diency of  providing  that  the  adciitional  dividend  of  ten  fliillings  per  cent,  paid  on  the 
Company's  ftock  under  the  Aft  of  the  Thirty-lhird  of  His  prefent  Majefly,  cap.  52, 
fee.  124,  may  be  paid  out  of  the  general  profits  of  the  Company. 


No.  XXII. 

CORRESPONDENCE  wiih  the  Right  Honourable  Lord  Vifcount  Caftlereagh, 

noticed  in  the  preceding  Minute. 

No.  XXII.  Letter  from  the  Chairman  and  Deputy  Chairman  to  the  Right  Honourable 

■ Lord  Vifcount  CalUercogh. 

Correfpondence  t-    n  t     v    t 

with  Lord  My  Lord,  Ealt  India  Houfe,  Dec.  2d,  1803. 

CaiUereagh.  TV-^  ^^"^^^  waited  until  we  had  obtained  a  diftinft  legal  opinion  from  the  Company's 
liw  advifer,  with  refpeft  to  the  power  poiTeffcd  by  the  Company  of  paying  the 
Property-tax  out  of  the  Profits  t;f  the  Company,  previous  to  the  declaration  of  a  divi- 
dend to  the  Proprietors  of  Eaft-India  Stock. 

But  that  opinion  having  been  lately  returned  to  us  in  a  fhape  unfavourable  to  our 
hopes  and  expeftations,  we  have  received  the  injunftions  of  the  Court  of  Direc- 
tors to  fubmit  this  opinion  to  your  Lordlhip's  confideration,  and,  at  the  fame 
time,  to  exprefs  their  hopes,  that  your  Loidfliip  and  the  refl  of  His  Ma,- 
jefly's  Miniflers  will  think  it  juft  and  aJvifeable,  that  the  power  to  which  we 
have  above  referred  fhould  be  granted  to  the  Company  by  fome  legifiativc 
provifion. 

Upon  this  cccafion  we  have  to  obferve  to  your  Lordfliip,  that  as  the  law  at 
prefent  ftands,  the  Company  are  obliged  to  deduft  the  full  amount  of  the  tax  in 
queftion  from  all  the  dividends  payable  to  foreigners  or  other  pcrfons,  however  finall 
the  amount  of  their  capital  flock  may  be  ;  although  it  is  fairly  queflionable,  how  far 
the  former  is  legally  chargeable  to  this  tax,  in  refpeft  to  thofe  profits  that  may  be 
prefumeJ  to  arife  from  the  Company's  foreign  pofTeiiions,  and  whether  the  latter,  in 
ibme  cafe*:,  may  not  be  entitled  to  a  partial,  and  in  others  to  an  entire  return  of  the 
tax  fo  retained,  in  refpeft  of  the  finallnefs  of  the  proprietors  incomes.  We  mufl  alfo 
fubmit,  that  as  the  greater  part  of  the  other  public  Companies  poflefs  the  power, 
and,  £s  we  underftand,  are  difpofed  to  exercife  the  means  of  difcharging  this  tax  out 
of  their  furplus  pre  fits,  it  mull  appear  doubly  irkfome  to  the  Proprietors  of  Eaft- 
India  Stock  tafeem  an  almoft  folitary  exception  to  this  general  praftice,  particularly 
when  they  advert  to  the  difpofition  which  has,  at  all  tunes,  been  evinced  by  them, 
cheerfully  and  voluntarily,  to  come  forward  for  the  fervice  of  the  State,  even  when 
their  own  immediate  interelfs  have  thereby  been  placed  at  flake. 

We  feci  the  more  freedom  in  prefTing  this  point,  becanfe  we,  in  common  with 
your  Lordfhip,  have  entertained  an  expeftation,  that  the  public  (after  a  w.4r  which 
has  exifled  almoft  fince  the  lad  renewal  of  the  Company's  exclufive  tradej  would 
have  been  placed  in  pcfl'eflion  of  the  fhare  of  the  Company's  profits,  fecured  to  them 
by  the  aft  of  1793,  ifthe  enormous  taxes  which  the  neceffities  of  the  State  have  ren- 
dered i"  nec(.(Iiiry  to  impofe  upon  teas  and  the  other  articles  of  the  Company's  Trade, 
and  the  inevitable  expences  of  another  war,  had  not  placed  a  bar  to  thofe  expectations, 
which  we  think  might  otkerwife  reafonably  have  been  formed. 

Wc 


(    39    ) 

We  tha-efore  venture  to  exprefs  a  fanguiite  hope,  that  under  a  proper  cpnfidcra-       No.  XXII. 

tion   of  all   the  circumftances  of  the  prefent  cafe,    under    a  review  of  the  very 

large  Sums  annually  paid  to  Government  out  of  the  Company's  trade,  amounting  °J|t^hTord"" 
tonotlefs  than  ;f. 3,200,000,  as  appears  by  the  enclofed  account,  and  which,  in  faft,  c«(lleTMgh. 
ought  in  part  to  be  confidered  as  an  anticipated  partition  of  the  Public  out  of  the 
Indian  revenues,  fince  nothing  fhoit  of  a  furplus  in  India  would,  we  conceive,  have 
enabled  the  Company  to  fupport  them  to  the  extent  they  are  now  impofed ; — that, 
under  a  due  attention  to  the  benefits  which  even  the  Public  themfelves,  (when  we 
advert  to  their  intereft,  in  the  ukiinate  profperity  of  the  Co;npany)  may  derive  from 
an  increafed  value  to  the  price  of  the  Company's  Stock,  which  may  be  affixed  by 
fuch  a  meafure,  in  cafe  a  commerce,  extended  beyond  its  prefent  amount  (an 
event  not  at  all  improbable),  fhould  hereafter  demand  additional  funds  to  carry 
that  commerce  on; — and,  finally,  that  under  a  confidtration  of  what  is  due 
to  the  known  and  experienced  liberalitv  of  the  Company's  efforts  in  t'ne  pub- 
lic ferviee,  your  Lordihip's  interference,  with  the  re!l  of  His  Majelly's  Minillers, 
will  be  given,  to  ailiil  what,  we  hope,  may  be  confidered  in  the  li;^htof  the  neither 
unjuft  or  the  unreafonable  pretenfions  of  the  Court  of  Directors,  in  behalf  ot  the 
body  they  reprefent  upon  the  prefent  occafion. 

We  have  the  honor  to  be.  My  Lord, 

Your  mod  obedient  humble  fervants, 

(Signed;        JACOB  BOSANOUET, 
JOHN  ROBERTS. 
The  Right  Honorable  Lord  Vifcount  Caftlereagh, 
ice.  Sec  &c. 


Letter  from  the    Ri^ht    Honorable  Lord   Vifcount    CaRlereaoli  to  the    Ld.CnAIc-cagS't 
•^  ^  Letter. 


Chairman  and  Deputy  Chairman. 


ul 


I 


Gentlemen,  Whitehall,  20th  December  i8oj'. 

HAVE  to  acknowledge   the  honor  of  your  letter   of  the  2d  inftant   on  the 
fubjeft  of  which  I   have   had  a  very   full  and  deliberate  difcullion  with  Mr. 
Addington. 

We  {hould  both  feel  an:tioufly  difpofed  to  lend  our  aid  to  the  accompiilhment  of 
any  meafure  which  had  a  tendency  to  accommodate  the  holders  of  Ea(t  India 
Stock,  but  under  all  the  circumftances  of  the  prefent  cafe,  regard  being  had  to 
the  exifling  appropriations  under  the  aft  of  1793,  the  degree  in  which  the  funds  at 
home  and  abroad  may  be.  aflecled  by  the  peculiar  circumllances  of  the  prefent  year, 
:*nd  the  difHculty  that  muii  necdiariiy  attach  to  the  propofition,  whether  it  be  con- 
fidered in  the  light  of  relieving  Irom  the  tax  a  particular  delcriplion  of  income  arifing 
from  property,  by  throwing  the  fame  on  other  funds,  or  in  that  of  a  temporary  and 
fpecial  increafe  of  dividend  to  the  Proprietors,  we  do  not  feel  ourfelves  warranted  in 
advifmg  the  Court  to  fubmit  a  bill  for  this  purpofe  to  Parliament. 

.  We  are  further  of  opinion,  that  the  relief  fought  by  the  meafure  is  not  of  that 
magnitude,  which  fhould  induce  the  Company  to  folicit  this  indulgence  from  Par- 
liament, under  the  diinculties  above  fiated  ;  nor  are  we  perfuaded  if,  in  point  of 
■faft,  other  corporate  bodies  have  fo  relieved  themfelves  from  the  tax,  that  the  pro- 
ceeding, on  their  part,  however  warranted  by  law  affords  a  precedent,  which  in 
principle,  the  Eaft  India  Company,  witrt  an  enlarged  view  to  their  own  interefts, 
■  Ihould  be  foliciious  to  follow. 

1  have  the  honor  to  be,  Gentlemen, 

Your  molt  obedient  fervant. 
The  Chairman  and  Deputy  Chairman  (Signed)  CASTLEREAGIL 

Of  the  Eaft  India  Company. 


Letter 


.  No.  XXIT.  Letter  from  t1ie  Chairman  and  Deputy  Chairman  to  the  'Right  Honorable 

.^  ■;  v:     ■■.  '   Lotd  Vifcount  Caftkreagh. 

Deputy'*  Letter,  My  Lord,  Eafl:  India  Houfe,  the  7th  July  1804. 

tT  is  in  conlVquence  of  the  inflrudlions  of  a  General  Court  of  Proprietors  which 
^  lately  affcmbled  co  take  into  confidcration  the  tax  levied,  in  virtue  of  the  43d  of 
.  the  King,  on  the  dividends  payable  on  Eaft  India  flock,  that  we  now  lake  the  liberty 
to  addrefs  your  Lordfliip  again  on  that  fubjeil. 

Notv/ithftanding  the  anfwer  returned  by  your  Lordlhip  to  the  application  which 
our  predeceflbrs  in  office  made  to  you,  under  date  the  2d  December  laft,  for  the  aid 
ot  His  Majelly's  Minifters,  in  order  to  relieve  the  holders  of  the  Company's  flock 
from  the  payment  of  the  Property-tax  out  of  their  dividends,  the  Proprietors  ftil! 
think,  that  whether  regard  be  had  to  the  defign  and  fpirit  of  the  Aft  of  1793,  to  the 
general  ftate  and  circumflanccs  of  the -Company,  or  to  the  peculiar  fituation  of  the 
■Stock-holders,  thcv  are  a'j:grieved  by  the  operation  given,  in  their  cafe,  to  the  A'ft 
impofmg  a  tax  on  property.  '  ^   sd^  ^'; 

It  -was  after  a  full  coniideration  and  adjuftment  of  the  intereft  of  all  parties,  the 
.  Public,  the  Company,  and  individuals,  that  on  the  renewal  of  the  Charter,  the 
dividend  of  the  8lock-holders  was  fixed  at  ten  and  a  half  percent,  per  annum.  The 
law  then  made,  in  allowing  it  to  rife  to  that  rate,  forbade  it  to  go  higher  ;  and 
the  reduction  of  it  below  that  rate  was  left  to  the  diicrclion  of  the  Proprietors  ihem- 
■  felves.  /I'his  was,  therclore,  underltood  to  be  the  fixed  certain  income  ailigned  to 
the  Members  of  the  Company,  out  of  al!  its  funds,  territorial  and  commercial.'  Aird 
hence  we  think  it  may  fairly  be  argued,  that  fuch  a  deliberate  formal  fettlvrmeiif 
cannot  juftly  bedifturbed,  but  by  a  proceeding  equally  diredt  and  appropriate  ;  and 
that  no  mere  meafure  of  taxation,  having  only  a  general  aim,  without  any  cog- 
nizance of  the  ptculiar  circun'iftances  under  v^'hich  this  arrangement  was  concluded, 
ought  to  defeat  it,  becaufe  if  the  contrary  principle  be  once  admitted,  whilft  the 
Public  is  ftill  imnienfely  benefitted  by  Indian  revenue  and  trade,  and  all  the  ether 
■clafles  of  fubjedts  connected  with  them  continue  to  derive  the  advantages  provided 
for  them,  the  Proprietors  of  that  flock,  which  has  been  the  foundation  and  fupport 
of  the  whole,  may  abfolutely  be  divefted  of  all  the  dividend  they  were  to  receive  from 
it.  We  think,  therefore,  it  may  be  contended,  that  conformably  to  the  fpirit  of  the 
Act  of  1793,  the  Property-tax  fhould  not  operate  upon  the  dividend,  but  be  acharge 
upon  the  general  funds  of  the  Ccmpany, 

This  will  appear  more  reafonable,  if  it  be  confidered  that  very  many  of  the  Pro- 
prietors of  India  Stock,  who  have  held  that  flock  long,  receive  no  more  on  the  coft 
of  it  than  the  common  interefl  of  money,  namely  live  per  cent,  whilil:  their  property 
is  expofed  to  the  influence  of  ail  the  adverfe  contingencies  to  which  the  Company's 
affairs  are  liable;  and  whilft  the  Company,  that  is  to  fay,  thofe  Proprietors  in  theif 
coUedtive  capacity,  ferve  as  the  channel,  or  medium  by  which  immenle  advantages 
are  diifufed  through  the  natioii,  in  its  commerce,  its  revenues,  and  the  wealth  of  all 
the  fucccffive  races  of  Britifli  fubjeftr-,  employed  in  or  connected  with  their  teiri- 
toj-ics  and  affairs.  Thefe  juil  obfervations  acquire  now  a  peculiar  force,  when,  in 
duties  and  cuftoms  alone,  the  Eallern  commerce  pays  to  the  State  ;^3,226,opo  per 
annum,  and  when  the  receipts  of  the  Company,  for  the  lalt  twelve  months,  are  di- 
miniihed  near  a  million  flerling,  in  confequence  of  the  nev.'  and  czcelfive  duties  im- 
pofcd  on  their  trade. 

We  are  unwilling  to  urge  the  liberality  vvhich  the  Company  has  on  all  occafions 
manifefted,  to  aid,  according  to  its  means,  the  exertions  of  the  State  >  but  the  duly 
impofed  on  us  by  our  Conilituents  requires  that  liberality  fliould  be  noticed  on  the 
prefent  occafion.  By  fubfcribing  for  two  millions  of  the  Loyalty  Loan  in  1797,  the 
Company  loft  the  fum  of  ;^ 206,000.  The  three  compleat  and  effe£tive  regiments 
of  volunteers,  which  they  have  maintained  for  a  number  of  yeais  pail,  have  cofl 
them  very  large  fums ;  and  the  lafl  aid  given  by  them  in  {hipping,  on  the  particular 
fuggefllon  of  Government,  is  a  new  inftance  of  the  promptitude  and  alacrity,  with 
which  they  devote  their  funds  to  the  fupport  of  the  public  interell. 

After  all  thefe  contributions,  it  has  appeared  ungracious  to  the  Proprietors,  that, 
y/hillt  other  public  bodies,  which  had  not  given  fo  largely  to  the  wants  of  the  State, 

were 


(     4t      ) 

were  allowed  to  defray  ttie  Property-tax  out  of  their  general  funds,  the  Proprietor j  No.  XXII. 

of  EalUIndia  Stock  were  required  to  charge  the  modicum  they  received  for  the  ufc  of  

their  own  money,  and  for  being  the  agents  in  fuch  vaft  couGerns,  with  a  tax  hard  Cluirmin  tnJ 

upon  them  though  unimportant  in  its  amount,  to  the  Public,  and  from  which  they  ^■'P"7''  -Lctwr. 
conceive  the  Act  of  1793  ought  to  protect  the  dividend  then  accorded  to  them. 

When  our  predeceflors  in  office  mentioned  a  reference  to  Parliament,  they  pro- 
bably had  no  mora  in  view  than  fome  fuppofed  neceflity  of  a  modification  of  the  Pro- 
perty-tax ;  but  we  humbly  apprehend  that,  in  order  to  exonerate  the  Proprietors, 
individually  from  the  payment  of  the  tax,  no  fuch  reference  is  neceffary,  fince  for 
engaging  in  the  Loyalty  Loan,  for  forming  the  three  regiments  of  volunteers,  and 
for  the  late  aid  of  fhipping,  it  was  thought  fufficient  that  His  Majefty's  Minillers 
fliould  content  to  the  defraying  of  the  charges  arifmg  from  thefe  meafui'cs,  out  of 
the  general  funds  of  the  Company. 

_  Wifhing.  to  flate  nothing  upon  this  fubjeft,  but  what  appears  to  us  naturally  to 
grow  out  of  it,  we  fliall  only  add,  that  the  effect  of  the  impofed  tax  upon  the  value 
of  the  Company's  Itock  muft  be  very  obvious,  fmce  the  dividend  receivable  upon 
any  public  fund  is,  in  fa£t,  the  meafure  of  its  value  in  the  market,  and  every  de-- 
duction,  by  whatever  means,  effefted  in  the  produce  of  any  ftock,  is  in  reality  a  re- 
duction in  the  worth  of  the  capital ;  and,  accordingly,  we  find  that  the  flock  of  the 

,  India  Company,,  compared  with  that  of  the  Bank,  fells  at  a  price  difproportionably  low. 

Upon  all  thefe  grounds,  with  thofe  which  have  been  before  urged,  we  cannot 
but  reqtieft  and  hope,  that  as  the  determination  of  the  point  which  our  ConltituentSjr 
not  from  intereft  only,  but  from  various  other  motives,  have  fo  much  at  heart, 
feems  not  to  depend  upon  any  revifionary  proceeding  of  Parliament  (which  however, 
if  neceflary,  we  firould  ilill  urgently  defire)  but  upon  the  scquiefcence  of  His  Ma- 
jerty's  Miuiilers.  we  cannot  but  f:arneftly  requefl  and  hope,  that  it  will  feem  ex- 
pedient to  your  LordOiip  to  add  your  own  recommendation  to  this  reprefentation, 
and  that  you  will  have  the  goodnefs  to  fubmit  both  to  the  Chancellor  of  His  Ma- 
jcllj's  Exchequer. 

We  have  the  honor  to  be,  My  Lord, 

Your  moft  obedient  humble  fervants, 

(Signed)         W.  F.  ELPHINSTONE. 
CHARLES  GRANT. 
The  Right  Honorable  Lord  Vifcount  Caftleveagh, 
&c.     &c.     &c. 


Letter   from  the   Right  Honorable   Lord  Vifcount    Caftkreagh   to   the  j^^^^ 

Chairman  and  Deputy  Chairman.  Caftlereaa-h'« 


Gentlemen,  India  Board,  lath  September  1804. 

IN  compliance  with  the  defire  of  the  Court  of  Proprietors,  as  exprcflk-d  In  your 
letter  of  the  7lh  July  laft,  I  have  reconfidered,  with  the  moft  earneft  difpofition  at 
all  times  to  promote  their  wifhes,  the  opinion  which  I  before  prefiuned  to  exprefs, 
on  the  propriety  of  their  dividends  being  difcharged  from  any  deduction  on  account 
of  the  late  tax  upon  property,  by  caufing  the  fame  to  be  paid  out  of  the  general 
funds  of  the  Company,  and  1  have  alfo  communicated  with  Mr.  Pitt  on  this  fubjeft. 

Notv^ithftanding  the  very  ingenious  reafoning  contained  in  your  Letter,  we  are 
clearly  of  opinion,  that  a  payment  of  this  nature,  diredled  to  the  individual  emolu- 
ment of  the  Proprietors  of  India  Stock,  and  not  in  any  refpect  to  the  public  fervice 
of  the  Company,  cannot  be  ifl'ued,  under  the  exifting  appropriations  affcding  then- 
funds,  without  the  exprefs  fanclion  of  Parliament. 

Had  the  tax  been  directly  Impofed  on  income,  as  under  the  former  law,  we  appre- 
hend it  never  would  have  fuggefted  itfelfto  the  Court  of  Proprietors,  that  income  de- 
rived from  the  dividends  of  the  Company  ftiould  enjoy  any  partial  exemption.  The 
policy  of  the  Legiflature  has  recently  been,  to  apply  the  tax  to  the  fources  of  income, 
rather  than  to  levy  it,  as  formerly,  upon  the  llatement  of  the  poifelTor.  It  does 
not  appear  to  us,  that  this  change  in  the  mode  of  alfelTment  can  juflify  a  claim  to 
(59.)  L  perfonal 


Letter. 


No.  XXII. 


(     42     ) 

Perfonal  relief  from  the  tax  itfelf.     If  not,  the  propofuion  refolves  itfelf  either  into 

— Sn  encreafed  dividend,  or  into  a  new  appropriaiion  of  the  net  proceeds,  enabling 

Lord  Caftlercagh's  ^j,g  Company  to  charge  the  tax  on  their  funds  generally,  as  fome  other  Corporations 
^'■""'  have  done,  who  are  fnle  proprietors  in  fuch  funds.     This  opens  fo  large  a  queftion 

in  principle,  and  for  fo  fmatl  an  object,  either  as  it  affefts  the  intereft  of  the  Public 
or  .the  individual  Proprietors,  that  I  fhould  conceive,  under  all  the  circuniftances, 
tlie  Court  will  not  feci  difpofed  to  prefs  it  at  fuch  a  moment  upon  the  attention  of 
Parliament. 

1  have  the  honor  to  be.  Gentlemen, 

Your  mofl:  obedient  humble  fervant, 

(Signed)         CASTLEREAQH.,, 

The  Chairman  and  Deputy  Chairman  of  the  Ealt-India  Company. 


No.  XXIII, 


Secret  Court, 
iSMarch  j8i2. 


No.  XXIII. 
At  a  Secret  Court  of  Direftors,  held  on  Wednefday,  the  i8th  March  1812; 

n^HE  Chairman  from  the  Committee  of  Correfpondence  laying  before  the 
■  -*■  Court  draft  of  a  letter  to  Lord  Melville,  to  be  figned  by  the  Deputation,  re- 
quefting  that  a  longer  term  than  that  which  was  fixed  in  1793  may  be  granted  fdr 
the  renewal  of  the  Company's  exclufive  privileges,  the  fame  was  read  and  approved.; 
as  was  alfo, 

Draft  of  a  letter  to  his  Lordfnip,  to  be  figned  by  the  Deputation,  fubmitting  to 
his  confideration  the  expediency  of  providing,  that  the  additional  dividend  of  ten 
{hillings  per  cent,  paid  on  the  Company's  ftock,  under  the  aft  of  the  33d  of  His 
prefent  Majefty,  cap.  52.  fee.  124,  may  be  paid  out  of  the  general  profits  of  the 
Company  ;  and  alfo,  that  authority  may  be  given  to  make  the  Property-duty  on  the 
dividends  a  charge  on  thofe  profits. 


No.  XXIV. 


Depuration  hetuu 


No.  XXIV. 

Letter  from  the  Deputation  to  the  Right  Honorable  Lord  Vifcount  Mel- 
ville, noticed  in  the  preceding  Minute. 

My  Lord,  Eafl-India  Houfe,   18th  March  181 2. 

A  LTHOUGH  we  are  aware  that  this  may  not  be  confidered  the  proper  time  to 

difcufs  the  term  of  years  for  which  the  exclufive  privileges  of  the  Company  Ihould 

be  renewed,  yet,  under   the  profpefl;   of  your  Lorufhip's  fcon    leaving   the  India 

Boaidj  we  are  anxious  to  avoid  any  delay,  in  requefling  your  Lordlhip's  attention  to 

that  point. 

On  reference  to  the  negociations  in  1793,  we  obferve  that  the  principal  ground 
on  which  the  company  founded  their  application  for  a  renewal  of  their  pnvileges 
for  a  long  term,  was  that  fufficient  time  might  be  allowed  for  the  liquidation  of 
their  debts  at  intereft  in  India,  the  amount  of  which,  at  that  period,  was  feven 
millions  fterling.  The  term  then  granted  was  twenty  years,  from  the  1  ft  of  March 
J  794,  including  the  ufual  notice  of  three  years,  this  term  being  confidered  adequate 
to  the  objeft:  in  view. 

The  Company's  debts  at  intereft  in  India  are  now  fuppofed  to  amount  to  twenty- 
five  millions  fterling,  exclufive  of  the  debt  in  Europe  ;  we  truft,  therefore,  it  will  be 
evident,  that  a  longer  terni  than  that  which  was  granted  in  1793  ^^  indifpenfable,  to 
admit  of  the  gradual  reduction  of  the  prefent  debt,  and  the  effedtual  operation  of  any 
xneafures  which  may  be  determined  on  for  thatpurpofe. 


"Without  mentioning  any  particular  term,  we  take  the  liberty  of  referring  your  Lord- 
fliip  to  the  Ad  of  the  3d  cf  George  li.  cap.  i4,  to  fhew  that  a  longer  perioJ  than 

that 


(     43     )' 

tfiat  'gfalntedin  179^  has  been  conceded  ;  and  as,  under  every  view  of  the  fubjed.      No.  XXIV, 

confideiinp;  the  contingencies  of  war,  or  other  interruption,  we  are  convinced  of  the  — 

■ncceflity  of  a  more  extended  teim,  for  the  purpofes  of  hquidating  dtbls  of  fuch  I^-'P"'-*"""  i-^ti*""- 
niaf^nitii  le,  and  of  reftoring  the  Company's  afi'airs  to  that  Hate  of  profpenty,  which 
is  efTenticil  both  to   them  and   the  Public.     We  rely  with  confidence    on  your 
Lordlhip's  concurrence  in  the  opinion  we  have  fubmitted. 

We  have  the  honor  to  be,  with  the  greatefl:  refpeft, 

Your  Lordfliip's  mod  obedient,  humble  Servants, 

,       .           (Signed)  JACOB  BOSANQUET, 

,  ,  ■    HUGH  ING1.IS, 

Thc-'kigh'tHon.  Lord  Vifcount  Melville,.  W.  F.  ELPHTNSTONE, 

&C.&C.  &c.                         •  EDWARD  PARR y. 


No.  XXV. 

Letter  from  the  Deputation  to  the  Right  Honorable  Lord  Vifcount  Melville^       No.  XXT.- 
alfo  noticed  in  the  preceding  Minute. 


I 


My  Lord,  Eafl:  India  Houfe,  19th  March  1812. 

N  addition  to  the  fubjedt  on  which  we  had  the  honor  to  addrefs  your  Lordfhip 
yefterday,  there  are  two  points  to  which  we  are  very  defirous  of  calling  youratten- 
tion  before  your  Lord Ihip  leaves  the  India  Board. 

The  firft  point,  which  is  mentioned  in  the  hints  fubmitted  to  your  Lordfh'p 
on  the  4th  inltant,  is  the  diviile)iil  of  ten  fhiliings  per  cent,  paid  to  the  Proprietors, 
under  the  Ad  of  the  33d  of  His  prefent  Majeily,  cap.  52,  fee.  1 24,  iVom  the  feparate 
fund  of  the  Company.  .i. 

When  it  was  in  contemplation  to  increafe  the  capital  flock  of  the  Company  iri 
1797,  it  was  found  that  the  payment  of  this  dividend  to  the  Proprietors  of  the 
new  {lock  would  have  exhaniied  the  feparate  fund,  previous  to  the  expiration  of  the 
prefent  term  of  the  Company's  exclufive  trade.  To  guard  againfl  this,  a  claal'e  was 
inferted  in  the  Aft  of  37th  of  His  Majefty,  cap.  31,  authorizing  the  payment  of  a 
dividend  of  ten  fhiliings  per  cent,  to  the  proprietors  of  the  increafed  flock,  from  the 
annual  profits  of  the  Company's  trade. 

The  additional  flock  has  not  been  raifed,  and  the  feparate  fund  has  been  found 
adequate  to  the  payment  of  the  dividend  of  ten  fliiUings  per  cent,  upon  the  ex- 
illing  capital  hitherto,  and  will  continue  to  be  fo  until  the  year  1819,  when  it  will  be 
nearly  exhaufted. 

As  the  Proprietors  have  derived  from  the  dividends  little  more  than  five  per 
cent,  on  the  capital,  it  appears  to  us,  that,  on  the  renewal  of  the  Company's  pri-- 
vileges,  they  may  entertain  a  reafuiiable  expeftation  of  conrinuing  to  receive  this 
addition  of  ten  fliillings  to  the  ufual  dividend  of  ^"'lo  per  cent.  ;  and  as  the  feparate 
fund  will  not,  as  flated  above,  be  fuflicient  for  the  purpofe,  during  any  probable  term, 
for  which  the  renewal  m.ay  be  granted,  v.'e  take  the  liberty  of  fubmitting  to  your 
Lordfliip's  confideration  the  expediency  of  providing  for  the  additional  dividend,  out 
of  the  general  profits  of  the  Company. 

The  other  point  to  which  we  requeft  your  Lordfhip's  attention  is,  the  payment 
of  the  Property  Duty  on  the  dividends.  The  Court  of  Direclors  and  Proprietors 
have  always  confidered  it  a  hardfhip,  that  this  duty  was  not  allowed  co  be  paid  from 
the  profits  of  the  Company ;  we  have  the  honor  to  enclofe  copies  of  letters  on  this, 
fubjeft,  which  were  addrelfed  to  Lord  Caftlereagh  in  1003  and  1804.  and  we  flatter 
ourfelves  that  the  arguments  they  contain  will  induce  your  Lordlhip,  when  the 
queftion  of  renewing  the  privileges  of  the  Company  is  under  difcufhoii,  to  recom- 
mend that  authority  may  be  given  to  make  the  Property  Duty  on  the  dividends  a 
charge  on  the  general  profits  of  the  Company. 

As  the  profits  of  the  Company  were  fpecifically  appropriated  by  the  Act  of  1793, 
fome  difficulty  may  pofTibly,  from  that  circumitance,  have  occurred  in  conceding 

this 


Dcputa:ion  Letter. 


No.  XXV- . 


Oepaiatioa  Letter. 


(     44     ) 

this  point ;  but,3s,  in  any  tjew  arnnojement,  the  fubjpfl:  of  appropriation  will  necef- 
farily  undergo  confiderable  modification,  we  fhouli  hope  that  the  objedion  formerly 
lu-ged  may  eiifily  be  obviated. 

If  it  fhould  be  finally  deterinined,  that  the  funender  of  any  confiderable  propor- 
tion of  the  exci\ifive  privileges  of  theCompany  is  to  be  made,  it  appears  to  be  the  more 
neceflai-y,  that  fonie  boon  fhould  be  held  out  to  the  Proprietors,  in  alleviation  of  tb'i 
facrifices  to  which  theirconfent  may  be  required ;  we  hope,  ihereforcj  we  may  be 
permitted  to  indulge  a  confident  expe£tation  of  your  Lordfhip's  favourable  confidera- 
tion  of  the  points  now  fubraitted. 

We  have  the  honour  to  be.  My  Lord, 

Your  Lordfliip's  moft  obedient  humble  fervants, 
'       ^  (Signed)        JACOB  BOSAN^UET, 

The  Righ t  Hon .        "  HUGH  ING LIS , 

Lord  Vifcount  Melville,  W.  H.  KLPKINSTONE, 

"&c".  Sic.  8cc.  EDWARD  PARRY, 

CHARLES  MILLS. 


Ko.  xxvr. 


Secret  Coiiitj 

24  March  18  la^ 


No.  XXVL 

At  a  Secret  Court  of  Direftors,  held  on  Tuefdi?y]the  24th  of  March  1S12.- 

'T^HE  Chairman   from  the  Committee  of  Correfpondencc  laid  before  the  Court  a 
■*■     letter  Irom  Lord  Melville  to  the  Chairman  and  Deputy,  dated  the  2i{l  inftant, 
ftating  his  fentiments  in  reply  to  their  letter  of  the  4th  inftant,  and  enclofing 

A  paper  containing  "  Obfei^ations  on  the  Hints  fuggefled  by  the  Deputation  of  the 
«  Court  of  Direftors,  3d  March  1812." 

'  The  Chairman  alfo  laid  before  the  Court  a  letter  from  Lord  Melville  to  the  Chair- 
man and  Deputy,  dated  the  23d  inftant,  in  reply  to  the  two  letters  which  the  Depu- 
tation from  the  Court  of  Directors  addrelfed  to  his  Lordfiiip  on  the  il>th  and  jgth 
inftant. 

The  fame  were  read. 

The  Chairman  then  moving  the  Court, 

Ordered,  That  the  feveral  papers  now  read,  together  with  the  other  correfpond- 
encc, which  has  paffed,  refpefting  the  negociation  for  the  renewal  of  the  Company's 
exclufive  privileges,  be  laid  before  the  General  Court  to  be  held  to-morrow,  and 
printed,  as  fpeedily  as  poffible,  for  the  information  of  the  Proprietors. 


No.  XXVII. 


Ld.  Mclvilk's 
Leuer. 


No.  xxvir. 

Letter  from  the  Right  Honorable  Lord  Vifcount  Melville  to  the  Chairman 
and  Deputy  Chairman,  noticed  in  the  preceding  Minute. 

Gentlemen,  India  Board,  21ft  March  1812. 

I  HAVE  delayed  anfwering  your  letter  of  the  4th  inftant  (received  the  6th)  until  I 
could   tranfmit   to   you,  at  the   fame   time,  replies  to    the   feveral   propofitions 
brought  forvirard  by  the  Deputation  of  the  Court  of  Diredors,  at  our   conference 
on  the  4th  Inftant. 

In  fubniitting  to  you  thefe  obfervations,  however,  I  beg  to  be  diftin5:ly  underftood, 
as  conveying  to  you  only  the  prefent  fentiments  of  His  Majefty's  Government  on  the 
feveral  points  to  which  the  propofitions  relate.  Public  diCcuffion  on  fuch  an  import- 
ant queftion,  may  poffibly  produce  an  aiieration  of  opinion  on  fome  of  the  details  j 
and  though  the  fubjeft  has  been  fully  confidered,  it  may  be  deemed  necefiary,  in 
the  further  progrefs  of  the  meafure,  topropofe,  on  fome  points,  legulations  of  a  dif- 
ferent defcription  from  thofe  which  are  luggefted  in  the  cnclofed  obfervations. 

The 


(     45     ) 

The  Court  of  Directors  are  pcrfeftly  correifl  in  fiippoflng  thiit  it  Is  no\v,  as  It  h:'3      ^■o•  XXVI!. 
been  for  a  confiderable  time  palL  the  iixed  intention  of  His  Maieftv's  Governnienr,  to  ■" 

withhold  their  concurrence  from  any  propofition  which  might  be  fubmitied  to  Par-       La-.Mfiviue» 
liament  for  continuing  to  the  F'afl:  India  Company  their  privileges  of  exclufive  trade 
on  their  prefent  footing.     It  is  unneceflaiy  now  to  liifcufs,  whether  the  provifions  of 
the  Aft  of  1793  (by  which  the  Company's  monopoly  was  fo  far  relaxed,  as  to  adnxft 
the  goods  of  private  merchants  to  be  conveyed  in  the  Company's  (hips)  have  in  anv 
degree  fulfilled  the  expccLations  or  intentions  of  the  Legillature.    It  will  not  be  denied 
that  the  facilities  granted  by  that  aft  have  not  been  fatisfaftory,  at  lealt  to  the  mer- 
chants, either  of  this  coiintry  or  of  India.     They   have  been  the  iouice  of  conllant 
difpute,  and  they  have  even  entailed  a  htavv  expence  upon  the  Company,  without 
afibrding  to  the  Public  any  adequate  benefit  from  fiich  a  facrifice.     You  will  do  me 
the  juliicc  to  recolleft,  that  in  all  our  difcufllons  on  this  fubjeft,  both  recently  and 
on  former  occafions,  the  admiirion  of  the  (hips  of  merchants   in  this  countrv  into 
the  trade  of  India,  In  concurrence  with  thofe  of  the  C<impanv,  has  never  been  urged 
as  a  meafure,  from  which  much  Immediate  benefit  would,  in  my  opinion,  be  derived, 
either  to  the  country  or  to  the  individuals  who  might  embark  in  thefpcculatlon  ;  and 
I  certainly  am  not  without  confiderableapprehenfion,  that,  at  leall  on  the  firit  opening 
of  the  trade,  the  public  expeftation,  as  to  the  BritKh  territories  in  India  affording  any 
confiderable  outlet  for  Britilh  manufaftures,  beyond  the  amount  of  our  prefent  ex- 
ports, may   be  difappolnted.     On  that  admiflion,  however,  and  on  the  neceffity  of 
guarding  againlt  the  unreltrained  Intercourfe  of  Europeans  with  the  territories  of  the 
Company,  or  of  the  native  Stares  in  India  (In  which  alfo  I  fully  concur),  nearly  the 
whole  of  the  arguments  adduced  by  the  Court   of  Direftors  againfl  any  opening  of 
the  trade  are  founded.     But  it  mud  be  recollefted,  that  in  determining  the  quedion,  -^'f 

as  to  continuing  the  whole  or  a  part  of  the  Company's  monopoly,  It  will  be  the  duty 
of  i^arllament  to  confider,  not  merely  whether  It  may  be  fafe  to  prolong  It,  but 
whether  It  may  be  unfafe  to  abridge  or  abolifh  it.  As  far  as  relates  to  the  trade  with 
India,  and  feveral  other  countries  Included  within  the  limits  of  the  Company's  Charter,, 
the  Court  do  not  appear  to  have  fucceeded  In  eftablilhing  the  propofition,  that  any 
detriment  will  arife  to  the  public  intereft,  either  In  this  country  or  in  India,  or  ulti- 
mately even  to  the  Intereft  of  the  Company  themfelves,  from  the  Introduftion  of 
private  adventurers.  II  the  Company  carry  on  their  trade  more  expenfively  and  with 
lefs  activity  and  induft ry  than  private  individuals,  it  is  unjufl  to  the  country,  as  well 
as  to  the  Inhabitants  of  Britilh  India,  that  the  exclufive  monopoly  fliould  be  continued; 
and  In  fuch  a  ftate  of  things,  the  trade  Is  more  likely  to  be  advantageous  to  the 
country,  and  beneficial  to  the  individuals  In  their  hands,  than  in  thofe  of  the  Com- 
pany :  but  If  the  latter  fhall  conduft  it  with  fkill  and  enterprize,  and  with  due  and 
unremitting  attention  to  economy,  the  extent  of  their  capital,  and  the  i'uperior  faci- 
lities which  they  mufl  continue  to  poffefs,  of  providing  their  Inveftment  in  India  at 
the  cheapefl:  rate,  will  undoubtedly  affoi-d  them  the  means  of  fuccefiful  rivalfhip  whh 
all  other  competitors. 

In  adverting,  in  your  letter  of  the  4th  inftant,  to  the  ftatement  contained  in 
mine  of  the  i  nh  December,  on  thepropofed  transfer  of  the  Company's  army  to  the 
Crown,  you  do  not  appear  to  have  underflood  accurately  the  purport  of  my  fug- 
geftion.  I  entertained  no  doubt,  as  to  the  expediency  of  continuing  to  the  Company's 
Governments  in  India  the  fupremacy  of  their  military,  as  well  as  civil  authority  : 
but  though  various  regulations  may  pofiibly  be  neceffary,  with  a  view  to  promote 
the  difcipline  and  efficiency  ot  the  army  in  India,  1  am  not  aware,  that  any  Icgiflative 
enaftments  are  requlfite,  except  as  to  the  amount  of  force  which  His  Majclly  may 
be  empowered  to  maintain  in  India,  at  the  expence  of  the  Company,  and  perhaps  alio 
lome  provifions.  In  regard  to  the  relative  powers  of  the  Board  of  Commillioners  and 
the  Court  of  Direftors. 

In  your  letter  of  the  4th  inllant,  you  advert  to  the  queftlon  as  to  how  far  it 
may  be  expedient  to  adniil  Into  the  trade  with  this  country,  fhips  built  in  India  and 
manned  with  Indian  feamen.  This  is  undoubtedly  an  important  conhderation, 
as  It  Involves  in  It,  to  a  certain  extent,  a  departure  from  the  principles  on  which  the 
navigation  fyftem  of  this  country  has  hitherto  been  condufted.  As  far  as  the  haft 
India  Company  is  concerned,  it  will  probably  be  neceilary  to  leave  the  matter  on  its 
prefent  looting,  during  the  continuance  of  the  war  ;  but  ii  the  trade  with  India  is  to 
(S9-)  M  be- 


(     46     > 

No.  XXVII.  be  opened  to  all  Britiih  flilps,  jn  tlie  manner  already  pointed  out,  there  feems  tobe 
no  fufficient  veafon  for  breaking  in  upon  the  fyflem  of  our  navigation  laws,  by  per- 

Ld.Melvrk's  nutting  any  other  than  Biitilli  (liips,  with  a  due   proportion  of  Britiih  feamen,  to 

^^*^'''  import  colonial  produce  into  the  United  Kingdom. 

I  have  not  thought  it  requifite,  in  this  letter,  to  trouble  you  with  any  obferva- 
tions  on  fevera!  points  adverted  to  in  your's  of  the  4th  inftant,  which  are  alfo  no- 
ticed in  the  enclofed  paper  of  hints  and  of  replies  to  the  feveral  propofitions.  I 
ihall  abflain,  aifo,  from  any  lemaik.s  on  the  cdculations  detailed  in  your  letter,  and 
which  are  introduced  more  with  the  view,  as  I  conceive,  to  vindicate  the  Company 
in  their  pafl  nianagement  of  the  exclufive  trade  to  India  and  the  government  of 
their  territorial  poflefTions,  than  to  any  praftical  rjfults  to  be  derived  from  your 
flatement,  in  relation  to  the  matters  at  prefent  in  difcui!ion  between  His  Majedy's 
Government  and  the  Court  of  Directors.  The  Committee  of  the  Houfe  of  Com- 
mons on  Eall  India  Affairs  have  already  fubmiited  to  the  Houfe  detailed  ftatements 
on  that  piirt  of  the  fubjecl,  and  in  any  further  reports  which  they  may  prefent  they 
will  probably  complete  the  inveftigation.  '■  .-  ' 

I  am.  Gentlemen, 

Your  moll  obedient  humble  fervant. 
To  the  Chairman  and  Deputy  Chairman  (Signed)         MELVILLE, 

of  the  Eaft-lndia  Company. 


No.  XXVIII. 

Obfervations  on  the  Hints  fuggefled  by  the  Deputation  of  the  Court  of 
Directors,  3d  March   1812,  adverted  to  in  the  foregoing  Letter. 

N    XXVIII  *^5  2d,  and  3d.  IT  is  deemed  advifeabie,  with  a  view    to  the   fecurity   of  the 

"  '  revenue  and  to  other  objeds  connefted  with  the  trade  to  China,  to  leave  it  on  its 

Obfervations  prefent  footing,  and  toguard  by  proper  regulations,  againfl  any  encroachment  on  that 

on  Hiiiu.  brar.ch  of  the  Company's  exclufive  privilege. 

^  4th.  This    propofition   ought  to  be  acceded  to  ;  with  the  refervation,  however, 

that  the  Governments  in  India  ought  to  be  reftrifted  from  impofing  new  duties,  with- 
out the  previous  fandion  of  the  authorities  in  England. 

5th.  The  Company  are  underftood  to  have,  in  fome  degree,  the  power  of  re- 
gulating the  inteiT.al  trade  of  faltpetre  in  India  ;  it  appears,  therefore,  to  be  fcarcely 
nectflarv  to  mpofe  any  other  reftric'tions  on  the  exportation  of  faltpetre  from  India, 
than  fuch  as  may  be  deemed  expedient  for  political  objedls,  efpecially  in  time 
of  war. 

6th,  The  adoption  of  the  regulation  fuggeded  in  this  propofition,  will  probably 
tend  to  the  fecurity  and  advantage  of  the  public  revenue,  in  collefting  the  duties  on 
all  articles  imported  from  the  Eaft  Indies  and  China,  as  well  as  other  countries  to 
the  eaftward  of  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope. 

7th.  The  Company  ought  at  leafl  to  be  indemnified  from  the  cha-ges  incurred  by 
this  management. 

Sth.  There  does  not  appear  to  exiil  any  fufficient  reafon  for  preventing  fhips- 
from  clearing  out  for  the  Lad  Indies  from  oilier  pons  of  the  United  Kingdom  bo- 
fides  the  port  of  London. 

9th.  It  will  be  neceffarv,  either  by  the  regulations  fuggefled  in  this  propofi- 
tion, or  by  others  of  a  fimiiar  defcription,  to  guard  againll  the  evil  therein  de- 
fcribed. 

loth.  It  will  probably  be  necelTary  to  regulate  the  exportation  of  military  (lores 
to  the  Eail-lndies,  and  alfo  of  naval  (lores  in  time  of  war. 

1  ith.  It  is  underftood  that  the  objeft  of  this  propofition  is  to  fecure  to  the  manu- 
fafturers  of  piece  goods  in  India  the  continuance  ot  regular  and  conllant  employment, 
under  the  fame  fyflem  of  local  management,  for  their  benefit,  which  prevails  at  pre- 
fent.    If  that  objeft  is  likely  to  be  attained,  without  continuing  the  reflridions  men- 
tioned 


(     47     ) 


Obfervatioiii 
on  lIJQtt 


tioncd  in  this  propofition,  it  certainly  would  be  defirable  that  they   fiinuiii  ccHfe,      No.  XXVIII 
except  in  fo  far  as  it  may  be  neceiTary  to  regulate  the  importation  of  Indian  piece 
goods,  with  a  view  to  the  protedion  of  Britiih  manufadures. 

12th.  As  no  fuch  reftriftlon  exifts  at  prefent  in  the  importation  of  filk  by  private 
merchants,  and  as  the  reafons  which  have  hitherto  been  adduced,  on   the  part  of 
the  Court  of  Direftors,  for  eftablifliing  fuch  a  regulation,  though  entitled   to  much  -i 
confideration,  do  not  appear  to  be  conclufive,  it  will  fcarcely  be  deemed  expedient ' 
to  agree  to  this  propofal. 

13th.  This  fuggeftion  appears  to  be  perfectly  reafonable. 

14th.  It  is  underflood,  that  this  propolition  is  founded  on  a  principle  of  guard- 
ing againfl:  the  dangers  to  which  veffels  of  lefs  burthen  than  four  hundred  tons  would 
be  expufed  on  a  voyage  to  the  Eafl-lndies,  and  alio  of  providing  for  the  fecuritv  of 
the  revenue,  which  nught  be  affefted  by  permitting  importations  in  inialler  vellcls, 
Thefe  reafons,  though  entitled  to  due  confideration,  do  not  appear  to  be  fufHcientlv  ' 
ftrong  to  jullify  the  propofed  reftridion,  or  the  making  a  ciiftincUon,  in  that  refpect', 
between  fhips  trading  to  the  Eaft-Indies  and  to  other  countries. 

1 5th.   This  feems  to  be  reafonable. 

t6th.  It  will  be  neceflary  to  provide,  by  proper  regulations,  for  the  care  and 
maintenance  of  thefe  perfons,  and  for  their  return  to  the  Eaft-Indies. 

17th.  This  propofal  would  be  wholly  inadmiffible,  unlefs  it  were  limited  to  fuch 
unexpired  engagements  as  do  not  extend  beyond  March  1 8  1 4,  when  the  Company's 
prefent  term  of  exclufive  privileges  will  expire ;  but  the  Public  may  fairly  look  to 
the  Company  to  bear  this  burthen,  as  a  compenfation,  to  a  certain  extent,  for  the 
continuance  of  the  exclufive  trade  to  China. 

1 8th.  It  will  be  indifpenfably  neceffary,  for  the  purpofe  of  guarding  againft  the 
inconvenience  herein  alluded  to,  that  the  exiding  reftrictions  fhall  be  continued, 
with  fuch  alterations  as  may  be  requifite,  in  the  new  fyflem  of  trade. 

19th.  The   number  of  His  Majefty's  forces  to  be  maintained  by  the  Eafl-India'^ 
Company  may,  without  inconvenience,  be  limited,  as  herein  fuggefted.     It  will  be 
neceffary,  however,  in  confequence  of  the  increafed  extent  of  the  Britifli  territories 
in  India,  fince  the  pafling  oi  the  A&  by  which  the  number  is  at  prefent  regulated, 
that  a  confiderable  addition  fhould  be  made  to  it.      ,  '  fi 

2cth.  It  will  be  neceffary,  that  the  prefent  fyftem  of  accounting  between  the 
Eaft-India  Company  and  the  Paymafter  General  (liould  be  abolifhed,  and  new  regu- 
biions  enaifted. 

2 1  ft.  Thefe  demands  mufl  neceffarily  be  arranged  on  the  principles  fuggeR^d 
by  the  Cuinniittees  ot  the  Houfc  of  Commons,  who  have  reported  upon  the  fubject  0^ 
the  accounts  herein  referred  to.  ]f  it  were  neceffary  or  proper,  in  difcuffmg  the  futur^ 
regulations  which  it  may  be  deemed  advifable  to  eftablilh,  refpefting  the  atlairs  of  the 
Eaft  India  Company,  there  would  be  no  difEculty  in  demonflrating.  that  the  amount  of 
force  maintained  in  India  has  not  gone  beyond  what  was  requifite  for  the  defence  and 
fecurity  of  the  Company's  poffeffions,  and  for  other  operations,  intimately  and  in- 
feparably  connected  with  thofe  objects. 

2 2d.  The  Proprietors  ought  to  be  fecured,  as  at  prefent,  in  their  dividend  of 
ten  and  a  half  per  cent. 

23d.  The  whole  of  the  furplus  funds  of  the  Eaft  India  Company,  at  home  an"d 
abroad,  ought  to  be  applied,  in  the  firfi:  inftance,  to  the  reduction  of  debt,  till 
it  is  reduced  in  India  to  the  fum  of  ten  millions,  and  the  bond  debt  at  home  to  the 
fum  of  three  millions,  after  providing  for  a  proportionate  encreafe  of  the  capital 
ftock  of  the  company,  if  they  Ihall  think  fit  to  avail  themfelves  of  the  power  now 
vefted  in  them  by  law  to  that  effeft. 

24th.  It  is  intended  to  i'"ubmit  to  Parliament  a  propofition  to  that  effed,  or  fimilar 
in  fubftance. 

25th.  If  the  objed  adverted  to  in  this  propofiiion  can  be  obtained  by  exclufion 
from  the  dominions  of  the  Emperor  of  China,  and  a  prohibition  to  import  the  pro- 
duce of  that  country  without  licence  from  the  Company,  it  will  be  preferable  to  the 
mode  herein  fuggefted.  Ihere  feems  to  be  no  reafonfor  excluding  the  private  trade 
from  the  Spice  Iflands. 

No.  XXIX, 


Lelter, 


C    43-    >  " 

No.  XXIX. 

Letter  from  the  Right  Honorable  Lord  Vifcount  Melville  to  the  Chair- 
man and  Deputy  Chairman,  alio  noticed  in  the  Minute  above- 
mentioned. 

Gentlemen,  India  Board,  23d  March  1812. 

No.  XXIX.        T  Have  had  the  honor  to  receive  the  two  letters  which  the  Deputation  from  the 
^  Court  of  Direftors  addreffed  to  me,  on  the  18th  and  19th  inflant. 

Ld.  Mtlville'*  ]f  jg  undoubtedly  reafonable,  that  the  further  term  now  propofed  to  be  granted 

to  the  Eaft  India  Company  of  their  privileges  of  exclufive  trade  and  the  jj;ovfcrnment 
of  the  Britilh  territorial  poffeffions  in  India,  fhould  be  for  fuch  a  period,  as  may  be 
fufficient,  if  unforefeen  contingencies  do  not  arife,  to  produce  a  confiderable  reduction 
of  the  debt,  both  in  India  and  at  home.  The  experience,  however,  of  the  laft 
twenty  years,  has  fufficier.tly  demonlfrated,  that  it  is  impoffible  to  calculate,  with 
any  degree  of  accuracy,  on  what  may  be  the  ftate  of  the  Company's  affairs  in  India 
at  the  expiry  of  another  period  of  the  fame  duration.  If  they  are  profperous,  the 
iame  term  as  was  granted  in  1793  will  be  fufficient  for  the  purpofes  defcribed  in 
your  letter  of  the  iSth;  but  if  untoward  events  fhall  occur,  and  the  Company  fhall 
be  again  engaged  in  expenfive  wars,  it  will  be  defirable  that  Parliament  fhould 
have  the  opportunity  of  reconfidering  the  fubjeft,  and  of  making  fuch  new  provifions 
as  the  cafe  may  appear  to  require.  Under  thofe  circumdances,  I  do  not  think  it 
will  be  advifable  to  propofe  a  longer  term  than  what  was  granted  by  the  Act  of  1793, 
viz.  twenty  years  from  the  expiry  of  the  exiifing  period,  with  three  yeras  previous 
notice. 

I  have  no  hefitation  in  admitting  that  the  fuggcftion  in  your  Letter  of  the  !9th 
inflant,  relative  to  the  continuance  of  the  dividend  of  ten  fliillings  per  cent,  on  the 
cxi.^.in"-  capital  of  the  Eafl-India  Company,  after  the  feparaie  fund  fhall  be  exhaufled, 
is  reafonable,  and  that  it  will  be  proper  to  comply  with  it. 

Your  propofition,  in  regard  to  the  payment  of  the  Property  Tax,  requires  much 
more  confideration,  and  I  cannot,  at  prefent,  bring  myfelf  to  concur  in  the  expediency 
t)f  agreeing  to  fuhmit  it  to  Parliament.  A  confident  expeftation  may  be  entertained, 
from  the  ffate  of  the  Company's  revenues  in  India,  and  from  the  reduftion 
of  expenfe  vshich  has  already  taken  place,  or  v.hich  may  flill  be  efieded, 
both  at  home  and  abroad,  by  means  completely  within  your  power,  that  a  large  annual 
furplus  will  be  available  towards  the  reduction  of  debt ;  but  when  it  i«  recolleded, 
that  though  the  amount  of  the  debt  in  India  has  recently  been  confiderably  di- 
rainifhed,  it  has  been  proportionably  encreafed  at  home,  and  cnfidering,  alio,  that 
proviiion  muff  be  made,  for  the  poffible  contingency  of  the  Company  having  to 
pay,  in  this  country,  the  intered,  not  only  of  their  large  debt  at  home  but  alio  of 
the  whole  debt  of  India,  I  do  not  think  that  it  would  be  wife  or  prudent,  at  leafl  till 
after  the  exprrience  of  a  few  years,  to  make  an  addition  to  the  perman  nt  charges  of 
the  Company -at  home,  to  the- amount  of  the  Property  Tax  upon  their  dividends. 

lam,  Gentlemen, 

Your  mofl  obedient  humble  fervant, 

The  Chairman  and  Deputy  Chairman  (Signed)  MELVILLE- 

of  tlie  Eaft  India  Company. 


•^^^g'^^^ 


COPIES  of  the  CORRESPONDENCE  that  has  taken 
place  between  The  Prefident  of  the  Commlflioners  for 
the  Affairs  of  India,  and  the  Chairman  and  Deputy 
Chairman  of  the  Court  of  Diredtors  of  The  Eafl  India 
Company; — together  with  the  Minutes  of  the  Court 
of  Dire6lors    of   the    faid    Company ; — refpedling    the 

Renewal  of  their  exclufive  Privileges  : As  laid  before 

the  Proprietors  of  E all  India  Stock,  at  their  feveral 
General  CouitSj  fubfequent  to  the  25th  of  March 
1812. 


R 


At  a  Secret  Committee  of  Correfpondence,  the  31ft  March  18 12. 


E  A  D    again,    and    confidered.     Letter   from    Lord   Melville,    dated   the 
2 1  ft  March  ;  and  his  Lordfiiip's  Obfervations  on  the  Hints. 

AT  a  General  Court  of  the  United  Company  of  Merchants  of 
England  trading  to  the  Eaft  Indies,  held  on  Thurfday  the  2d 
April  1812  ; — 

MINUTES  of  the  laft  Court,  of  25th  ultimo,  were  read.  The  Chairman 
acquainted  the  Court,  that  it  was  aflembled  for  the  purpofe  of  taking  into  con- 
fideration  the  Papers  which  were  laid  by  the  Court  of  Directors  before  the  General 
Court  on  the  2  i;th  ultimo. 

It  was  then  moved  ;  and,  after  a  mature  deliberation, 

Refolved  unanimoufly,  Th^at  this  Court,  having  perufed  the  Papers  laid  before 
them  at  the  laft  General  Court,  defire  to  exprefs  the  high  fenfe  which  they  enter- 
tain of  the  great  ability,  zeal,  and  fidelity,  with  which  the  Diredtors  have  main- 
tained the  intereft  of  the  Eaft  India  Company.  They  return  them  thanks  for  the 
powerful  and  convincing  arguments  by  which  they  have  fliown  the  danger  which 
would  await  the  Briiifh  Empire  from  opening  the  Trade  of  India,  and  the  immenfe 
advantages  which  the  nation  has  derived,  in  ftrength,  revenue,  territory,  and 
charafter,  from  the  capital  and  the  exertions  of  this  corporation. 

That  although  this  Court  will  feel  it  their  duty,  on  all  occafions,  to  bow  to  the 
determination  of  the  Legiflature,  they  cannot  but  obfcrve  with  extreme  concern,, 
that  no  propofiticn  is  fuggefted  of  an  increafed  or  further  dividend,  either  now  or 
hereafter,  or  advantage  of  any  kind  whatever,  to  the  proprietors  of  Eaft  India 
ftock  ;  notwithftanding  the  negotiation  for  the  renewal  of  the  Charter  in  1 793 
begun  with  a  propofal  for  an  increafe  of  dividend  of  two  per  cent,  which  Charter 
opened  the  trade  but  in  a  limited  and  partial  degree ;  and  notwithftanding  that 
while  fuch  great  and  progrelFive  advantages  have  been  obtained  for  the  public  at 
large,  the  proprietors  themfelves  have  made  little  more  than  common  intereft  of 
their  money.  That  now  to  be  called  upon  to  part  with  an  undefined  proportion  of 
a  trade  thus  eftabliftied,  and  maintained  hitherto  at  their  fole  expenfe,  without 
any  confideration  for  the  fame,  feems  to  them  to  be  wholly  inequitable.  Under 
thefe  impreffions,  this  Court  confides  to  the  Honourable  Court  of  Dire£lors  the 
care  of  its  interefts  in  the  further  negotiation  for  a  new  Charter,  trufting  to  the 
(3  2.  J  A  juftice 


2       CORRESPONDENCE  between  PRESIDENT  of  INDIA  BOARD 

juftlce  of  their  fellow  citizens,  as  well  as  to  His  Majefty's  Government  and  to 
Parliament,  that  they  Ihall  receive  that  liberal  treatment  which  they  regard  them- 
felves  as  fo  eminently  entitled  to  at  the  hands  of  their  Country. 

And  that  the  Direftors  be  requefted  to  report  their  proceedings  from  time  to 
time  to  this  Court. 

That  this  Court  cannot  contemplate  the  effential  change  propofed  in  the  con- 
futation of  the  Company,  by  an  unreftrained  trade  to  and  from  India,  without 
great  concern  and  apprehenfion ;  not  fo  much  on  account  of  the  injury  to  which 
it  will  fubjeft  the  Company  in  their  commercial  privileges  and  profits,  as  on 
account  of  the  tendency  which  fuch  a  change  muft  have  to  affeO:  the  fyftem 
eftablifhed  by  the  Legiflature,  for  the  civil  and  political  government  of  the  Com- 
pany's territorial  poffelTions,  whilfl  it  is  not  at  all  likely  to  afford  to  the  commercial 
interefts  of  this  country  the  advantages  expefted  from  it. 

Should,  therefore,  the  opening  of  the  trade  to  India,  be  the  ultimate  deter- 
mination of  Parliament,  this  Court  cannot  but  exprefs  its  hope  that  all  due  care 
will  be  taken  to  accompany  the  enlargements  which  fhall  be  given  to  individuals 
in  thsTndian  trade  with  fuch  regulations  as  Ihall  moft  effectually  guard  againfl  the 
dangers  to  which  thofe  enlargements  might  expofe  the  exifting  fyflem  of  Indian 
adminiftration. 

Draught  of  a  Petition  to  the  Honourable  Houfe  of  Commons  was  then  read, 
being  as  follows  : 

To  the  Honourable  the  Commons  of  the  United  Kingdom  of  Great 
Britain  and  Ireland  in  Parliament  affembled  ; 

The  humble  Petition  of  the  United  Company  of  Merchants  of  England 
trading  to  the  Eaft  Indies  ; 

Sheweth, 
THAT,  by  an  Aft  of  Parliament  made  and  paffed  in  the  33d  year  of  the  reign 
of  His  prefent  Majefty,  intituled  '•'  An  Aft  for  continuing  in  the  Eaft  India  Com- 
pany for  a  further  terra  the  poffeffion  of  the  Britilh  Territories  in  India,  together 
with  their  exclufive  trade,  under  certain  limitations  ;  for  eftablifhing  further  re- 
gulations for  the  government  of  the  faid  territories,  and  the  better  adminiftration 
of  juftice  within  the  fame  ;  for  appropriating  to  certain  ufes  the  revenues  and 
profits  of  the  faid  Company,  and  for  making  provifion  for  the  good  order  and 
government  of  the  towns  of  Calcutta,  Madras,  and  Bombay  ;"  reciting,  that  it 
was  expedient  that  the  exclufive  trade  of  Your  Petitioners,  within  the  limits  of 
their  Charter,  which,  by  an  Aft  made  in  the  21ft  year  of  His  Majefty's  reign, 
for  eftablifhing  an  agreement  with  Your  Petitioners,  and  other  Purpofes,  was 
continued  to  them  for  a  terra  thereby  limited,  fhould  be  further  continued  to 
them  and  their  fucceffors,  under  certain  limitations  and  reftriftions,  for  a  term  of 
twenty  years,  to  be  computed  from  the  ift  day  of  March  1794,  liable  to  be  dif- 
continued  at  or  after  the  end  of  fuch  period,  upon  three  years  notice  previoufly 
given  by  Parliament  for  that  purpofe  ;  and  that  during  the  faid  further  term  all 
the  territorial  acquifitions  obtained  in  the  Eaft  Indies,  which,  by  an  AA  made  in 
the  7th  year  of  His  Majefty's  reign,  for  eftablifliing  an  agreement  for  the  payment 
of  a  certain  annual  fum,  for  a  limited  time,  by  Your  Petitioners,  in  refpeft  of 
the  faid  acquifitions  and  the  revenues  thereof,  and  by  fubfequent  Afts,  were 
continued  in  the  poffeffion  of  the  faid  Company,  together  with  the  territorial 
acquifitions  then  lately  obtained  there,  with  the  revenues  of  the  fame  refpeftively, 
Ihould  remain  in  the  poffeffion  of  Your  Petitioners,  without  prejudice  to  the 
claims  of  the  public  or  of  Your  Petitioners,  fubjeft  to  fuch  powers  and  authorities 
for  the  fuperintendance,  direftion,  and  controul  over  all  afts,  operations,  and  con- 
cerns which  related  to  the  civil  or  military  government  or  revenues  of  the  faid 
territories,  as  had  been  then  already  made  or  provided  by  any  Aft  or  Afts  of 
Parliament  in  that  behalf,  and  to  fuch  further  powers,  and  under  and  fubjeft  to 
fuch  other  rules,  regulations,  and  reftriftions  relating  to  or  concerning  the  faid 
civil  government,  and  the  appropriation  of  the  faid  revenues,  as  fhould  be  then 
made  and  provided  by  the  authority  of  Parliament ;  it  was  thereby  enafted,  that 
the  faid  territorial  acquifitions  in  the  faid  former  Afts  mentioned,  together  with  the 

territorial 


J 


and  CHAIRMAN,  kc.  of  The  EAST  INDIA  COMPANY.  3 

territorial  acquifitions  then  lately  obtained  in  the  Eall  Indies,  with  the  revenues 
thereof  refpedively,  fhould  remain  and  continue  in  the  pofTeflion  of  Your  Peti- 
tioners for  and  during  the  further  term  by  that  Ati  granted  to  them  in  the  faid 
exclufive  trade  ;  fubjeft  neverthelefs  to  the  feveral  regulations  and  provifions  in 
that  Act  contained  ;  and  by  tlie  faid  A£t  His  Majefty  was  empowered  to  nominate, 
conftitute,  and  appoint,  during  His  pleafure,  fuch  Members  of  the  Privy  Council, 
of  whom  the  two  Principal  Secretaries  of  State  and  the  Chancellor  of  the  Ex- 
chequer for  the  time  being  fhould  always  be  three,  and  fuch  otiier  two  perfons 
as  His  Majefty  ihould  think   fit  to  be,  and  who   Ihould  accordingly  be  and  be 
lliled  Commiffioners  for  the  Affairs  of  India  ;  and  the  faid  Board  of  Commif- 
fioners  were  by  the  faid  A6t  invefled  with  fuch  full  power  and  authority  to  fuper- 
intend,  dire£t,  and  controul  all  a£ts,  operations,  and  concerns  which  in  any  ways 
fhould  relate  to  or  concern  the  civil  or  military  government  or  revenues  of  the  faid 
territories  and  acquifitions  in  the  Eaft  Indies,  fubjed  neverthelefs  to  fuch  direc- 
tions, rules,  regulations,  and  reltrictions,  and  to  fuch  appropriations  of  the  faid 
revenues  as  were  by  that  Act  made,  provided,  and  eftablifhed  ;  and  it  was  further 
enafted,  that  Your  Petitioners  and  their  fucceffors  ihould   have,  ufe,  and  enjoy, 
and  fliould  continue  to  have,  ufe,  and  enjoy  the  whole,  fole,  and  exclufive  trade 
and  traffick,  and  the  only  liberty,  ufe,  and  privilege  of  trading,  trafficldng,  and 
exercifing  the  trade  or  bufinefs  of  merchandize  in,  to,  and  from  the  Eaft  Indies, 
and  in,   to,  and  from  all  the  iflands,   ports,   havens,    coafts,  cities,   towns,    and 
places  between  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope  and  the  Straights  of  Magellan,  and  limits 
in  an  Adt  made  in  the  9th  year  of  the  reign  of  King  William  the  Third,  or  in  a 
certain  Charter  of  the  5th  Day  of  September,  in  the  i  oth  year  of  the  fame  King, 
menrioned,  in  as  ample  and  beneficial  manner  as  Your  Petitioners  could  thereby 
or  otherwife  lawfully  trade  thereto,    fubjeft  neverthelefs  to  the  feveral  Umita- 
tions,  conditions,  and  regulations  in  that  Aft  contained,  and  alfo  fubjeft  to  the 
provifo  therein-after  contained  for  determining  the  fame,  any  former  Aft  or  Afts, 
matter  or  thing  to  the  contrary  notwithftanding ;  and  it  was  funher  enafted, 
that  Your  Petitioners  fhould  at  all  dmes  thereafter  (fubjeft  as  aforefaid)  have,  hold, 
and  enjoy,  and  be  endtled  unto  all  and  lingular  the  profits,  benefits,  and  advan- 
tages, privileges,  franchifes,  abilities,  capacides,  powers,  authorities,  rights,  remedies, 
methods  of  fuit,  penalties,  forfeitures,  difabilides,  provifions,  matters,  and  things 
whatever,  which  by  any  former  Aft  or  Afts  of  ParUament,  or  by  any  Charter  or 
Charters  founded  thereupon,  or  by  any  claufe  or  claufes  in  thefjiid  Afts  or  Char- 
ters contained,  were  enafted,  given,  granted,  provided,   limited,  eftablifhed,  or 
declared,  to,  for,  touching,  or  concerning  Your  Petitioners,  either  by  the  name 
of  "  The  General  Society  endtled  to  the  Advantages  given  by  an  Aft  of  Parlia- 
"  ment  for  advancing  a  Sum  not  exceeding  Two  Millions  for  the  Service  of  the 
"  Crown  of  England,"  or  the  Body  Politic  and  Corporate  called  by  the  name 
of  "  The  Englifh  Company  trading  to  the  Eaft  Indies,"  or  the  Body  Politic  and 
Corporate  called   by  the  name  of  "  The  United  Company  of  Merchants  of  Eng- 
"  land  trading  to  the  Eaft  Indies ;"  and  not  by  that  Aft,  or  any  other  Aft  then 
in  force,  repealed  or  altered,  according  to  the  tenor  and  true  meaning  of  the  faid 
Afts  and  Charters,  and  of  that  Aft,  freed   and  difcharged  from  all  provifoes  and 
conditions  of  redemption  and  determination  in  any  former  Aft  or  Afts  contained, 
and  the  fame  and  every  of  them  were  and  was  thereby  ratified  and  confirmed,  and 
to  continue  to   be  held  and  enjoyed,  and  be  praftifed  and  put  in  execudon  by 
Your  Petitioners  and  their  fucceifors,  for  the  better  or  more  eifeftually  fettling  and 
fecuring  to  them  and  their  fucceffors  the  whole,  fole,  and  exclufive  trade   to  the 
Eaft  Indies  and   parts  aforefaid,  and  for  the  preventing  trade  thereto  contrary  10 
the  true  intent  and  meaning  of  that  Aft,  and  for  fecuring  alfo  their  poffeflions, 
eftates,  and  effefts,  and  governing  their  affairs  and  bufinefs  in  all  refpefts  as  fully 
and  effeftually  as  if  the  fame  profits,  benefits,  advantages,  trade,  privileges,  fran- 
chifes, abilities,  capacities,  powers,  authorities,  rights,  remedies,  methods  of  fuit, 
penalties,  forfeitures,  difabilities,   provifions,  matters,  and   things  were  feverally 
repeated  and  at  large  re-enafted  in  the  body  of  that  Aft,  fubjeft  neverthelefs  to 
fuch  reflriftions,  covenants,  and  agreements  as  were  contained  in  the  faid  Acts  or 
Charters  then  in  force,  and  not  therein  or  thereby  repealed,  varied,   or  altered, 
and  lubjed  alfo  to  the  feveral  enaftments,  conditions,  Umitations,  and  provifoes  in 

that 


4        CORRESPONDENCE  between  PRESIDENT  «/ INDIA  BOARD 

that  A&  contained  ;  and  it  was  thereby  further  enacted,  that  at  any  time,  upon 
three  years  notice  to  be  given  by  Parliament  after  the  ifl:  day  of  March,  which 
would  be  in  the  year  of  our  Lord  i8ii,  upon  the  expLration  of  the  faid  three 
years,  and  upon  payment  made   to  Your  Petitioners  of  any  fum  or  fums  which, 
under  the  provifions  of  any  Act  of  that  prefent  Seffion  of  Parliament,  fliould  or 
might,  upon  the  expiration  of  the  faid  three  years,  become  payable  to  Your  Peti- 
tioners by  the  public,  according  to  the  true  intent  and  meaning  of  fuch  Aft,  then 
and  from  thenceforth,  and  not  before  or  fooner,  the  faid  right,  title,  and  intereft 
of  Your  Petitioners  to  the  whole,  fole,  and  exclufive  trade  to  the  faid  Eaft  Indies 
and  parts  aforefaid  fhould  ceafe  and  determine  ;  and  it  was  thereby  farther  enafted, 
that  nothing  in  the  faid  provifo  lafl  therein-before  contained,  or  in  any  provifo  in 
the  faid  Aft  of  the  9th  year  of  King  William  the  Third,  or  in  the  faid  Charter  of 
the  5th  day  of  September   in  the  loth  year  of  his  reign,  or  in  any  other  Aft  or 
Charter   contained,  fhould  extend,  or  be  conftrued  to   extend  to  determine  the 
Corporation  of  Your  Petitioners,  or  to  hinder,  prevent,  or  preclude  Your  Peti- 
tioners or  their  fucceffors  from  carrying  on,  at  all  times  after  fuch  determination 
of  the  right  to  the  fole,  whole,  and  exclufive  trade  as  aforefaid,  a  free  trade  in,  to, 
and  from  .the  Eaft  Indies  and  parts  aforefaid,  with  all  or  any  part  of  their  joint 
flock  in  trade,  goods,   merchandizes,   eftate,  and  elFefts,  in  common  with  other 
the  fubjefts  of  His  Majefty,  His  heirs  and  fucceffors,  trading  to,  in,  and  from  the 
faid  parts  or  limits  ;  and  by  the  faid  Aft  it  is  enafted,  that  for  and  during  fo  long 
time  as  Your  Petitioners  fhould  be  entitled  to  the  whole,  fole,  and  exclufive  trade 
and  traffick  in,  to,  and  from  the  Eaft  Indies  and  other  places  within  the  limits  of  their 
Charter,  fubjeft  to  the  provifions,  regulations,  and  limitations  in  that  Aft  con,, 
tained,  the  clear  profits  arifing  from  the  faid  territorial  acquifitions  and  revenues  in 
India,  after  defraying  the  charges  and  expences  of  collcfting  the  fame,  fhould  be 
applied  and  difpofed  of  to  the  ufes  and  purpofes  therein  mentioned  and  expreffed  ;, 
and  alfo  that,  during  the  continuance  of  the  exclufive  trade  to  Your  Petidoners,. 
the  net  proceeds  of  their  fales  of  goods  at  home,  with  the  duties  and  allowances 
arifing  by  private  trade  and  all  other  profits  of  Your  Petitioners  in  Great  Britain, 
after  providing  for  the  payment  of  bills  of  exchange  then  already  accepted  by 
Your  Petitioners,  as  the  fame  fhould  become  due,  and  for  the  current  payment  of 
other  debts,  intereft,  and  other  outgoings,  charges,  and  expences  of  Your  Peti- 
tioners, their  bond  debt  always  excepted,  fliould  be  applied  and  difpofed  of  in  the 
manner  therein  mentioned  as  by  the  faid  Aft,  reladon  being  thereunto  had,  may 
more  at  large  appear ;  that  the  notice  required  by  the  faid  Aft  of  Parliament  hath 
been  given  by  the  Speaker  of  Your  Honourable  Houfe,  for  determining  the  exclu- 
five trade  of  Your  Petitioners  on  the  loth  day  of  April  1814  ;  and  that,  fince  the 
faid  Aft  was  palTed,  further  territorial  acquifitions,  yielding  a  large  revenue,  have 
been  obtained  by  Your  Petitioners,  and  fuch  acquifitions  have  been  annexed  to 
the  feveral  governments  of  Your  Petitioners  in  the  Eaft  Indies,  and  fundry  debts, 
to  a  large  extent,  beyond  what  are  mentioned  in  or  referred  to  by  tlie  faid  Aft, 
have  been  incurred  by  Your  Petitioners,  in  the  defence  and  proteftion  of  the  Bri- 
tifh  poffeiTions  in  India,  and  by  reafon  of  wars  in  which  the  Bridfli  Nation  has  been 
engaged  with  European  powers  ;  that  fuch  debts  bear  intereft,  and  fome  of  them 
are  due  in  the  Eaft  Indies,  and  others  of  them  have  been  difcharged  by  Your 
Petitioners,  by  means  of  money  raifed  on  their  credit  in  this  country,  under  the 
authority  of  Parliament ;  and  that,  by  virtue  of  the  terms  of  the  obligations  for 
other  part  of  fuch  India  debt,  further  fums,  to  a  large  amount,  will  be  payable 
fhortly  in  this  country,  for  which  purpofe  it  will  be  necelTary  for  Your  Petidoners 
to  raife  a  further  fum  of  money  here ;  that  the  fyftem  eftabli/hed  by  the  faid  Aft, 
for  the  government  of  the  territorial  acquifitions  in  the  Eaft  Indies,  for  the  ma- 
nagement of  the  revenues  thereof,  and  for  the  general  conduft  of  the  affairs  of 
Your  Petitioners,  hath  been  approved   by  experience ;  but  by  the  appropriations 
made  by  the  faid  AQi  of  the  profits  arifing  from  the  territorial  revenues  in  India, 
and  of  the  profits  of  Your  Petitioners  at  home,  appear  to  Your  Petitioners  to  be 
inapplicable   to  the  prefent  ftate  of  the  Indian  debts  and  refources,  and  of  the 
concerns  of  Your  Petitioners  ;  that  Your  Petitioners   believe  that  it  is  undeniable 
that  the  exclufive  trade  carried  on  by  Your  Peduoners  has  been  a  great  pofidve 
advantage  to  the  nation  ;  and  although  they  do  not  prefume  to  ftate,  as  an  incon- 
trovertible 


and  CHAIRMAN,  &c.  of  The  EAST  INDIA  COMPANY.  5. 

trovertible  fa£t:,  that  greater  public  benefit  would  accrue  from  its  being  continued 
in  its  prefent  ftate  tlian  from  its  being  any  further  opened,  yet  Your  Petitioners 
do  venture  humbly,  but  confidently,  to  aifure  this  Honourable  Houfe,  that  the 
trade  with  China  could  not  be  opened  in  any  degree  without  extreme  danger  ; 
that  if  it  fliould  not  be  feen  lit  to  enlarge  the  term  now  held  by  Your  Petitioners 
in  the  whole  of  the  trade  whicli  they  now  enjoy  without  qualification,  Your  Peti- 
tioners are  ready  to  fubmit  to  fuch  regulations  as  fhall  be  juit,  a!ul  as  Parliament  in 
its  wifdom  fhall  enact,  for  the  condud  of  the  commercial  intercourfc  of  His  3T:'.iefl:y's 
fubjeds  with  thofe  places  which  are  within  the  exclufive  limits  granted  to  Your 
Petitioners  ;  that  on  account  of  the  length  and  variety  of  the  matters  neceflarv  to 
be  confidered  and  prepared  in  relation  to  the  fubjevil  of  this  Petition,  Your  Peti- 
tioners were  unable  to  prepare  a  Petition,  praying  leave  to  bring  in  a  Bill  or  Bills 
relative  to  the  Indian  territories  and  trade,  until  the  time  limited  for  p:  eientino' 
petitions  for  private  bills  was  expired ;  Your  Petitioners  th-jrefore  muil  humbly 
pray,  that  leave  may  be  given  to  Your  Petitioners  now  to  prefent  a  petition  to  this 
Honourab!  ?  Houfe,  praying  that  leave  may  be  given  to  bring  in  a  Bill  or  Bills  for 
continuing  the  pofl'eifion,  government,  and  management  of  the  territorial  acquifii 
tions  in  the  Eaft  Indies  in  Your  Petitioners,  fubjed  to  regulation,  and  for  altering 
the  appropriations  of  the  profits  arifing  from  the  Indian  revenues ;  and  for 
enabling  Your  Petitioners  to  raife  fuch  fums  of  money,  or  to  contract  fuch  pecu- 
niai-y  obligations  as  their  affairs  may  require,  in  refpe£t  of  the  payment  in  this 
country  of  debts  originally  contrafted  in  India  ;  and  for  fettling  the  trade  to  the 
Eaft  Indies  and  China,  and  other  places,  from  the  Cape  of  Bona  Efperanza  to 
the  Straights  of  Magellan ;  or  that  Your  Petitioners  may  have  fuch  other  relief  as 
their  cafes  may  require. 

And  Your  Petitioners,  as  in  duty  bound,  fhall  ever  pray. 

It  was  then  moved  ;  and  on  the  queftion, 
Refolved,  That  this  Court  do  approve  the  above  Petition. 

The  Court  then,  on  the  queftion,  adjourned. 

AT  a  Meeting  of  the  Deputation,  the  4th  of  April  1812. 

THE  Chairman  ftated,  that  himfelf  and  the  deputy  had  a  conference  yeflerday 
with  the  Prefident  of  the  Board  of  CommifTioners. 

Read  again,  and  confidered  the  hints  and  obfervations  on  them. 

AT  a  Secret  Committee  of  Correfpondence,  the  6th  April  1812. 

THE  Chairman  ftated  to  the  Committee,  that  the  Chairs  had  a  conference 
yederday  with  the  Prefident  of  the  Board  of  CommilFioners. 

Letter  from  Lord  Melville,  dated  the  2ifl  March,  was  read  and  further 
confidered. 

AT  a  Court  of  Diredors,  held  on  Monday  the  6th  April  181 2. 

On  a  motion, 
Ordered,  That  the  Company's  feal  be  affixed  to  their  Petition  to  the  Honourable 
Houfe  of  Commons,  which  was  approved  in  Court,  and  in  the  General  Court  on 
the  2d  inftant ;  alfo,  to  a  Petition  for  leave  to  prefent  the  fame ;  and  that  fuch 
members  of  this  Court  as  are  members  of  the  Houfe  of  Commons,  be  req^aeiled  to 
prefent  the  fiiid  Petitions. 

AT  a  Court  of  Diredors,  held  onThurfday  the  9th  April  18 12, 

On  a  motion, 
Refolved,  That  agreeably  to  the  Court's  refolution  of  the  2d  ultimo,  appointing 
a  deputation  of  Directors  to  confer  with  His  Majedy's  minifters  on  the  fubjcct  of 
a  renewal  of  the  Company's  exclufive  privileges,  the  under-mentioned  gentlemen 
be  appointed  for  that  purpofe  ;   viz. 

The  Chairman,  the  Deputy  Chairman,  the  Honourable  William  Fullarton 
Elphinflone,  Jacob  Bofanquet,  Efquire,  Charles  Grant,  Efquire,  George  Smitii, 
Efquire,  Edward  Parrv,  Efquire,  William  Aflell,  Efquire. 

(32-)  '  B  AT 


&        CORRESPONDENCE  bttit'een  PRESIDENT  of  INDIA  BOARD 

AT  a  Meeting  of  the  Deputation,  the  i  ith  of  April  i8ia. 

THE  Chairman  dated,  that  the  deputy  and  himfelf  had  a  conference  with  the 
Earl  of  Buckinghamfliire,  on  Tuefday  laft. 

Read  again  the  hints  and  obfervations,  and  deliberated  thereon  as  far  as  article 
twelve. 

And  adjourned  to  Monday  next  at  two  o'clock. 

AT  a  Meeting  of  the  Deputation,  the  13th  April  18 12. 

Proceeded  in  deliberating  further  on  the  hints  and  obfervations, 

And  adjourned  to  Wednefday  next. 

AT  a  Meeting  of  the  Deputation. 

Draught  of  a  letter  to  the  Prefident  of  the  Board  of  Commiffioners  was  read  and 
approved. 

And  the  Chairman  was  requefted  to  fubmit  the  fame  to  the  Court  of  Directors 
this  day. 

AT  a  Secret   Court   of  Directors,  held  on  Wednefday  the   15th 
April  18 12. 

THE  Chairman  from  the  Committee  of  Correfpondence,  fubmitting  to  the 
Court  draught  of  a  letter  to  the  Prefident  of  the  Board  of  Commiffioners  for  the 
affairs  of  India. 

The  fame  was  read,  and  unanimoufly  approved. 

My  Lord,  Eaftlndia  Houfe,   15th  April  1812. 

THE  correfpondence  between  the  Prefident  of  the  Board  of  Conimiflioners  on 
the  part  of  His  Majefty's  government,  and  the  Court  of  Direftors  of  the  Eaft 
India  Company,  on  the  fubje<5l  of  the  renewal  of  the  Company's  charter,  having 
been  laid  before  the  General  Court  of  Proprietors,  we  now,  in  confequence  of  the 
refolutions  of  that  body,  propofe  to  ourfelves  the  honour  of  continuing  the 
correfpondence  with  your  Lordfhip,  and  efpeciaily  to  reply  to  the  letters  of  the 
late  Prefident,  dated  the  2 ill:  and  23d  of  March,  and  to  his  obfervations  accom- 
panying the  former  of  thefe  letters. 

In  the  firfi:  place,  however,  permit  us  to  offer  fome  remarks  on  the  outlines  of 
the  negotiation,  as  far  ss  it  has  hitherto  advanced,  and  on  the  oppofition  which  has 
begun  to  fhow  itfelf  to  certain  propofitions  refpefting  the  neceflity  and  importance 
of  which  His  Majefly's  Government  and  the  Eaft  India  Company  appear  to  have 
entertained  fimilar  fentiments. 

It  is  manifeft  from  the  letters  written  on  the  part  of  the  Court  of  Directors, 
that  they  have  contemplated,  with  the  utmoft  reluctance,  fuch  an  enlargement 
of  the  trade  to  India  as  feemed  to  be  defired  by  His  Majefty's  Minifters, 
becaufe  they  believed  that  the  commercial  advantages  expected  from  it  to  this 
country  would  not  be  realized  ;  and  feared  that  it  might  eventually  endanger 
the  fecurity  of  the  Bvitifti  poflc-ffions  in  the  Eaft.  We  muft  defire  on  the  part 
of  the  Court  of  Diredtors,  diftinctly,  and  in  the  face  of  the  country,  to  ftate 
this  opinion,  not  as  advanced  without  convitStion,  to  ferve  a  caufe,  but  as  the 
genuiiie  refult  of  fuch  knov/ledge  and  e?:perience  as  the  Court  pollefs,  upon  a 
fubjefl:  refpefting  which  they  have  better  means  of  information  than  any  of 
thofe  affociations  who  are  nov/  eager  to  take  full  pofi'effion  of  the  Eaftern 
trade,  and  upon  which  alfo  it  is  certainly  material  that  the  public  ftiould  form 
juft  ideas.  We  have,  indeed,  yet  feen  no  arguments  advanced  in  anfwer  to  thofe 
reafons  which  the  Court  have  offered  againft  the  opening  of  the  trade,  and 
particularly  againft  the  expectiaion  of  the  great  increafe  to  be  produced  by  fuch 
a  meafure  in  the  exports  from  this  country  to  India,  and  the  imports  thence. 
Lord  Melville  has  fignificd  his  concurrence  with  the  Court  iu  thinkmg  that  the 

public 


and  CHAIRMxVN,  Sec.  of  The  EAST  INDIA  COMPANY.  7 

public  will  be  difappointed,  at  leafl  at  firfl,  in  this  expeiflatlon  ;  and  though  his 
Lordlhip  has  laid  that  "  the  Court  do  not  appear  to  have  liicceeded  in  ellablUh- 
"  ing  the  propofition,  that  any  detriment  will  arifc  to  the  public  intorcll:,  either 
"  here  or  in  India,  or  ultimately  even  to  the  intcrefl:  of  the  Company  tlicmfelves, 
"  from  the  introduction  of  jirivate  adventurers,"  we  mull  beg  leave  to  obferve, 
firft,  that  we  cannot  doubt  "  the  introduftion  of  private  adventurers,"  which 
his  Lordfliip  had  in  view,  was  iefs  extenfivr  than  is  now  likely  to  be  contended 
for  by  fome  portions  of  the  public,  and  was  connected  in  Iiis  mind  with  limita- 
tions and  reftridions  in  the  conduft  of  the  trade,  which  thofe  who  claim  the 
largeft  opening  of  it  exclude  ;  and  fecondly,  that  feveral  reafons  which  the 
Court  have  urged,  to  fhow  that  much  detriment  woultl  arife  from  a  general 
opening  of  the  trade,  remain  unanfwered,  either  in  his  Lordfiiip's  letters,  or  in 
any  of  the  public  refolutions  we  have  yet  feen.  Until  of  late  the  general 
language  held  on  the  fubjett  of  the  Indian  trade  was  rather  that  the  merchants 
of  Great  Britain  fhould  be  allowed  to  apply  their  induftry  to  I'uch  branches  of 
it,  and  to  fuch  ports  of  the  Indian  feas,  as  the  commerce  of  the  Company  did 
not  embrace,  than  that  they  fhould  invade  the  portion  of  the  rrade  which  the 
Company  carried  on.  But  now  little  is  faid  about  the  advantages  to  be  derived 
from  adventures  to  the  unexplored  parts  of  India ;  and  the  objefts  likely  to  be 
moft  warmly  contended  for,  are  not  new  acceflions  of  commerce  to  the  nation, 
but  a  transfer  of  much  of  thofe  branches  of  trade  already  carried  on  by  the  Com- 
pany in  London  to  individuals  in  the  out-ports.  The  large  conceilions  at  fu'ft 
required  from  the  Company  by  His  Majefty's  Government  appear  only  to  have 
encouraged  the  merchants  of  the  out-ports  to  make  Itill  further  demands,  regard- 
lefs,  as  it  would  feem,  of  the  political  confequences  that  might  enfue  from  a 
compliance  with  them,  and  apparently  unaware  too  that  the  corporate  capacity  of 
theEafl  India  company  is  perpetual,  and  cannot  be  annulled,  even  if  the  qualified 
monopoly  they  have  enjoyed,  were  to  ceafe. 

We  are  confident,  my  Lord,  it  was  not  the  intention  of  His  Majefty's  Minifters 
that  the  Eaft  India  Company  fhould  be  broken  down  and  dil'poiled  of  thofe 
faculties  neceffary  to  enable  it  to  perform  the  important  part  afligncd  to  it  by 
the  Legiflature,  in  the  government  of  the  Britifli  Empire  in  the  Eaft  ;  a  part 
which,  probably,  it  will  be  allowed  to  have  performed  well,  and  with  more  fafety 
and  advantage  to  the  mother  country  than  any  other  fyftein  hitherto  thought  of 
could  have  done.  The  benefits  accruing  to  that  government  by  the  reciprocal 
aids  of  revenue  and  commerce,  the  powers  of  which  are  united  in  the  conftitu- 
tion  of  the  Company  in  a  way  peculiar  to  it,  have  been  often  feen  and  fully 
acknowledged,  and  were  it  neceffary,  it  would  be  eaiy  to  enlarge  upon  them.  Thefe 
powers  have  now  become  fo  incorporated  that  it  is  impoflible  to  feparate  them 
without  effentially  endangering  the  whole  of  a  fyftem  that  has  proved  in  praftice 
eminently  ufeful  ;  if,  therefore,  the  commercial  part  of  that  fyftem  were  now  to 
be  deftroyed,  the  political  fundtions  exercifed  by  the  Company  would  be  fo 
weakened  as  necefl'arily  to  bring  into  view  qucftions  of  the  laft  importance  to 
the  fafety  of  the  Britifli  Empire  in  India,  and  of  the  Britiih  Conftitution  at 
home. 

We  hence  affuredly  rely,  that  the  wifdom  of  parliament  and  the  good  fenfe 
of  the  nation  in  general,  will  refift  thofe  rafli  and  violent  innovations  upon  the 
fyftem  of  the  Company  which  the  merchants  of  different  towns,  proceeding  upon 
theoretical  ideas,  and  overlooking  mofl:  material  fates,  nov.-  appear  to  intend, 
without  any  certainty,  even  of  extending  the  commerce  of  this  country,  but  to 
the  unavoidable  detriment  of  its  political  interefts  abroad,  aiid  its  financial 
interefts  at  home. 

It  was  ill  contemplation  of  dangers,  Iefs  immctiiate  and  alarming  than  the 
defigns  nov/  avowed  threaten,  that  the  Court  lb  earneftly  propoled  that  the 
renewal  of  the  Charter  fhould  proceed,  with  certain  modifications,  upon  the  bafis 
of  the  Aft  of  1793,  which  made  the  Company  the  medium  of  the  enlargements 
of  private  trade  ;  but  having  been  forced  to  depart  from  this  preliminary  principle, 
which,  they  ftill  maintain,  confults  the  true  policy  of  this  country,  and  the 
facrifice  of  which,  they  may  obferve  by  the  way,  inflicts  great  injury  upon  all 

the 


Obfer- 


8        CORRKSPONDENCE  between  PRESIDENT  of  INDIA  BOARD 

the  private  interells  and  parties  cn<iap;ed  in  the  Indian  trade  as  eflabHfhed  by  tliat 
adt,  particularly  on  the  commanders  and  officers  of  the  Company's  fliips,  whofe 
profellional  merits  arc  univcrfally  acknowledged.  The  Court  arc  however  per- 
feftly  Jatisfied,  from  the  aflurances  already  given  by  His  JNIajefly's  minillers  from  the 
beginning-,  that  any  enlargements  which  may  be  given  in  the  Indian  trade  fliall  be 
accompanied  with  luch  provifions  as  will  guard  againlt  the  dangers  to  which  fuch 
enlargement?  might  otherwife  cxpofe  the  exilling  fyllem. 

Several    of    the   precautions    neceffary  in    this   view  were   fuggefled    in   the 
^'""-    vM?onV.  "  Hints  "    fubmitted  by  the  deputation  of  the  Court  to  Lord  Melville  on  the 

—  ■ 4th  March,  and  upon  thcfe,  and  the  "  Objirvations  "  made  on  them  by  him, 

•3-    ■'■2-3-  yjQ  iiQ^v  feel  ourfelves  called  upon  further  to  offer  fome  elucidations  to  your 
Lordfliip. 

ON  the  very  important  head  of  the  China  trade,  permit  us,  my  Lord,  to  re- 
mark, that  although  the  fecurity  of  the  revenue  is  doubtlefs  a  very  fit  confidera- 
tion  for  His  Majefty's  government  and  for  parliament,  yet  the  Company  do  not 
underfiand  that  the  continuance  of  their  exclufive  privilege  in  this  trade  is  refted 
on  confiderations  of  revenue  alone  ;  nor  that  it  ought  to  be  affected  by  any  vary- 
ing circumftances  in  that  branch  of  the  public  affairs.     The  Company  have  the 
adtual  poffeffion  of  the  monopoly  of  that  trade,  which  was  given  them  for  na- 
tional purpofes ;    and  by  the  perpetuity  of  their  corporate  capacity  mult  be  more 
capable  of  maintaining  it  againlt  the  competition  of  private  merchants  than  thofe 
merchar.ts  would  be  to  drive  them  out  of  it.     But  fuch  competition  would  be 
ruinous  to  the  public  interelts ;    for  the  Company  already  fupply  the  nation  with 
as  much  as  it  wants  of  China  commodities,  which  are  almoll  entirely  ufed  for 
home  confumption,   and   exports  woollens   and  metals  of   this   country   to  the 
amount  of  a  million   fterling  annually,   at  a  lofs  to  themfelves  during  war.     By 
comoetition  the  cofl  of  teas  and  other  China  articles  would  be  enhanced,  the 
prices  of  our  ftaples  lowered  there ;  and  if  individuals  could  poffefs  themfelves  of 
the  trade  the  exports  in  thofe  articles  which  they  could  not  fell  to  profit  would 
be    loft   to   the  country,       A   flruggle,   therefore,   between  the  Company   and 
individuals    could    only    produce    ruinous    confequences    to    both.      The    jea- 
loufy  of  the  Chinefe  government,  which  now  allows  only  one  port  of  that  vail 
empire  for  all  its  foreign  commerce,  and  fubjefts  the  European  refidents  at  Can- 
ton to  a  confinement  to  their  factories  for  fix  months  of  the  year,  and  to  baniflr- 
ment  to  Macao  for  the  other  fix  months,  would  undoubtedly  take  alarm  at  the 
ingrefs  of  indefinite  numbers  of  unconnected  Engliflimen  from  Europe  ;  and  if  it 
did  not  at  once  exclude  them,   would  foon  be  induced  to  do  fo  by  the  diforders 
which  would  not  fail  to  follow,   and  which  are  on  the  prefent  limited  fcale  of  in- 
tercourfe    prevented  or   palliated  only  by  the   extreme  caution  and   eftablifhed 
ufages  of  the  Company's  fupra-cargocs.     Thus  the  trade  would  be  entirely  loft 
to  the  country,  and  with  it  not  only  the  export  of  a  million  of  its  manufactures 
annually,  but  a  revenue  of  four  millions,  with  the  fleet  of  excellent  fhips  now 
employed  in  that  commerce,  to  the  great  inconvenience  of  the  people  at  large, 
the  ruin  of  particular  claffes,  and  the  complicated  injury  of  the  ftate.     The  refort 
of  American   ftiips  to  Canton,  without  either   hindrance  from  the  Chinefe,  or 
confequent  diforder,  affords  no  parallel  to  the  cafe  of  an  open  trade  from  Great 
Britain  and  Ireland  to  China.     Tliofe  Americans,  few  in  number,  carrying  thither 
only  filver,  and  carrying  away  fiik  cloths  as  well  as  tea,  derived  their  reception 
and  protection  very  much  frc.a  the  orderly  Englilh  fa£tory  long  eftablifhed  there, 
who  have  endured  treatment  from  the  Chinefe  government  to  which  no  repre- 
fentative  of  His  Majefty  could  fiibmit.     We  are  fatisfied,  therefore,  my  Lord, 
that  fuch   provifions  will  be  introduced  into  the  new  Charter  as  will  effectually 
iecure  this  great  branch  of  trade  to  the  Company  and  the  nation  in  the  manner 
it  has  hitherto  been  enjoyed. 
A'     A-  ^^  fubmit  that  this  obfervation  ought  to  run  thus  : — "  This  propofition  ought 

'*  to  be  acceded  to ;  with  the  refcrvation,  however,  that  tl.e  governments  in  India 
"  ought  to  be  reftriCted  from"  making  any  alteration  in  the  rates  of  the  duties 
fanclioned  by  the  authorities  in  England,  or  that  they  may  hereafter  fanCtion. 

To 


and  CHAIRMAN,  &:c.  of  The  EAST  INDIA  COMPANY. 


ntioni. 


I 


To  the  conceflion  on  this  head  we  wifli  it  to  be  added,  that  the  Company  "!"«• 
fliall  have  a  fair  price  for  all  the  faltpetre  they  fhall  fupply  to  the  government.       — 

As  the  confinement  of  the  private  trade  to  and  from  India  to  the  port  of  Z- 
London  is  an  article  of  eflential  importance  on  the  whole  of  tlio  prefent  queftion, 
involving  the  fafety  of  the  Company,  it  may  be  expedient  that  we  ftate  fome- 
what  fully  the  various  and  powerful  confiderations  on  which  the  propriety  and 
necefTity  of  the  meafure  refts.  Thefe  confiderations  relate  to  the  ufages  reffjiting 
unavoidably  from  the  nature  of  the  Company,  which,  for  political  as  well  as 
commercial  purpofes,  it  is  fo  material  to  preferve ;  from  the  law  of  the  land  ;  the 
exifting  rights  of  individuals  ;  the  convtnieiiry  of  the  re-exportation  of  Indian 
commodities,  and  the  fecurity  of  the  public  revenue. 

From  the  firfl;  inftitution  of  the  EafI:  India  Company  they  have  ufed  the  port 
of  London  only  ;  and  the  pradlice  of  felling  their  imports  by  public  audion  only 
is  alfo  almoft  coeval  with  the  company. 

The  utility  which  di£tated  the  firfl:  of  thefe  praftices  is  obvious :  a  little  c:>n- 
fideration  will  (hev/  the  other  to  be  yet  more  neccffary.  — If  private  bargaining 
and  trafficking  with  individuals,  and  from  day  to  clay,  were  allowed  in  the  fales 
of  the  great  imports  of  the  Company,  how  many  doors  would  be  open  for  collu- 
fion,  impofiiion  andabufe!  It  would  be  impoffible  the  bufmefs  could  go  on  in 
that  way ;  and  the  very  liability  of  it  to  fufpicion  would  be  enough  to  deliroy  the 
confidence  of  the  proprietors  and  the  public— --Befides,  the  im.portations  of  the 
Company  coming  in  fleets  at  ftated  feafons,  it  fuited  the  convenience  of  all  parties 
that  the  fales  ihould  alfo  be  only  at  ftated  feafons,  and  pubhc,  which  would  afford 
the  opportunity  to  buyers  to  reibrt  from  all  parts,  foreign  as  well  as  domeftic,  to 
thofe  fales. 

In  the  ninth  and  tenth  years  of  King  William  the  Third,  the  legiflature  inter- 
pofed  to  prohibit  fale  of  Eafl  India  goods  othcrwirc'than  by  public  auftion,  and 
in  the  next  year  of  that  Prince  it  was  enafted,  that  E:lft  India  goods  fhould  be 
fold  only  in  London,     Thus  the  law  at  prefent  ftands. 

The  immediate  objeft  of  the  legiflature  in  thefe  enaftments  appears  to  have 
been  the  fecurity  of  the  revenue,  then  appointed  to  be  derived  from  the  cuftoms 
laid  on  Indian  goods  imported.  r    . 

And  nothing  fo  effeftual  could  be  devifed  for  that  fecurity' tb  bring  the  imports 
to  one  place ;  to  have  them  lodged  under  the  keys  of  government  officers ;  to 
have  them  fold  publicly  in  the  prefence  of  thofe  officers  ;  and,  finally,  to  have  the 
duties,  thus  carefully  afcertained,  coUefted  through  the  medium  of  the  company, 
with  hardly  any  charge :  the  whole  of  this  pradice  is  the  moft  complete  provifion 
that  can  be  imagined,  againft  defecl,  fraud,  or  expenfe,  in  realizing  this  branch 
of  revenue  to  the  public.  •  .  •  ■    -. 

But  if  this  was  material  in  the  time  of  King  William,  when  perhaps  the  revenue 
from  Eafl  India  goods,  including  china,  did  not  exceed  .5^^100,000,  how  efTential 
mufl  it  be  at  prefent  to  the  ftate,  when  that  revenue  exceeds  four  millions. 

With  all  the  care  now  taken,  and  when  London  is  the  only  lawful  place  of 
Importation,  it  is  well  known  that  teas,  fliav/ls,  filks  (prohibited  for  the  encou- 
ragement of  our  own  manufactures),  and  other  articles,  are  at  the  prefent  time, 
to  fome  extent,  fmuggled  on  fliore  from  the  Eafl  India  fliips,  notwithltanding  the 
penalties  of  the  law  ;  and  when,  in  addition  to  the  legal  penalties,  the  oflending 
parties,  if  the  Company's  fervants,  are  liable  to  farther  fines  and  ntultls  on  all 
illicit  trade.  But  the  hope  of  evading  the  heavy  duties  will  ever  continue  to 
operate  on  perfons  who  look  no  farther  than  their  own  immediate  profit  or 
convenience. 

Every  deviation  from  the  eflablifhed  ufage  would  fo  far  deflroy  its  fimplicity 
and  efliciency,  and  open  the  way  to  abufes.  Suppofe  the  importations  to  be 
allowed  to  go  only  to  one  out-port,  a  new  ellablilhment,  new  expenfe,  new 
trouble,  would  be  created,  and  a  channel  opened  for  finuggiing,  fraud,  and  abufe. 
What  would  it  be,  then,  if  feveral  out-ports  were  opened  for  the  landing  and  fale 
of  Indian  and  Chinefe  goods  ? 

(32.)  C  But 


to       CORRESPONDENCE  between    PRESIDENT  0/ INDIA  BOARD 

But  this  ftili  fuppofes  the  Company,  either  for  itfelf,  or  for  private  traders,  to 
be .  the  only  medium  of  importation.  If,  however,  all  individuals  were  to  be 
allowed  to  import,  and  into  all  the  ports  of  the  United  Kingdom,  elpecially  if  it 
were  allowed  to  employ  fhips  of  fmall  burthen,  which  drawing  little  water  could 
run  into  obfcurc  parts  in  the  remote  parts  of  England,  Scotland,  and  Ireland, 
where  would  be  the  prafticability  of  any  fafe  control  ?  Legions  of  Cuftom-houfe 
and  Excife  officers  muft  be  appointed,  at  a  very  great  expence ;  and  after  all, 
where  the  duties  are  fo  high  as  they  are,  efpecially  on  the  articles  of  tea,  filk,  and 
fine  mullins,  fmuggling  without  end  muft  be  expected.  If  private  fliips  were 
allowed  to  go  to  the  Eaftem  iflands  they  could  find  means  to  procure  tea  ;  and  if 
alfo  allowed  to  return  to  the  out-ports,  fmuggling  in  that  article  would  be  by  faf 
the  moft  gaining  trade. 

At  prefent,  the  duties  upon  Eaft  India  goods  are  colle£ted  and  paid  in  London, 
at  a  very  fmall  expenfe  to  Government,  and  to  the  full  extent  to  which  they 
ought  to  be  paid.  This  follows  becaufe  the  value  of  the  goods  is  afcertained  by 
competition  at  the  Company's  fales.  Were  every  port  to  have  its  India  Houle, 
where  would  be  this  general  competition  ?  The  fame  goods  which  pay  the  duty 
ad  i-alorem,  would  be  liable  to  one  amount  of  duty  at  Fowey,  to  another  at  Dub- 
lin, to  a  third  at  Port  Glafgow  ;  all  differing  from  each  other,  and  from  that  paid 
at  London.  There  would  be  no  remedy  for  this  inconvenience,  whatever  may  be 
faid  by  interefted  perfons  to  the  contrary.  The  endtefs  variety  of  Indian  commo- 
dities renders  it  impoffible  that  they  Ihould  generally  pay  what  are  called  rated 
duties,  of  fo  much  per  piece  or  fo  much  per  yard.  Pepper  may  pay  a  fixed 
fum  by  the  pound,  and  fugar  by  the  hundred  weight ;  but  the  ftaple  article  of 
piece-goods,  and  many  others,  muft  ever  be  rated  by  the  value,  quantity  being  no 
juft  criterion. 

It  therefore  follows  from  what  has  been  above  obferved,  that  were  the  trade 
to  be  carried  to  the  out-ports  of  the  United  Kingdom,  the  revenue  drawn  from 
Indian  goods  muft  be  greatly  diminiftied,  and  the  charges  of  collecting  it  greatly 
increafed. 

Let  it  be  next  inquired.  What  would  be  the  efteft  of  fuch  a  charge  on  different 
interefts  ;  the  perfons  already  poffeffed  of  valuable  property  employed  for  the 
Indian  trade  ;  the  exporters  of  Indian  commodities  from  this  country  ;  and  on  the 
Eaft  India  Company  iti'elf? 

The  City  of  London,  in  their  corporate  capacity,  as  confervators  of  the 
Thames,  and  all  claffes  of  perfons  in  the  metropolis,  who  are  engaged  in  the 
building  and  out-fit  of  fliips,  in  the  carriage,  warehouling,  forting,  buying,  and 
felling  of  the  Company's  goods,  have  alfo  a  dired  intereft  in  the  prefent  dif- 
cuffion. 

The  Eail  India  Dock  Company  have  hkewife  a  very  great  and  obvious  intereft 
in  keeping  the  Indian  trade  in  the  Port  of  London. 

"vVlth  refpedl  to  the  re-export  trade  in  Indian  commodities,  at  leaft  three-fourths 
of  the  imports  from  India  have  hitherto  been  for  the  fupply  of  the  continental 
markets.  The  foreign  buyers  repofe  confidence  in  the  regularity  and  publicity 
with  which  the  Company's  fales  are  conduced.  When  the  trade  was  folely  in 
the  hands  of  the  Company  the  particulars  of  their  cargoes  were  publiflied  imme- 
diately  on  the  arrival  of  the  Ihips,  and  diftributed  all  over  the  continent ;  notices 
of  the  quantities  to  be  fold,  and  periods  of  fale,  were  alfo  publiftied  for  the  like 
(liftribution.  1  he  fales  of  each  defcription  of  goods  were  made  at  ftated  periods, 
twice  in  the  year  ;  the  buyers  of  courfe  knew  the  ftate  of  the  market  at  the  time 
of  coming  to  theflile,  and  the  purchafes  were  made  under  an  affurance  that  no 
more  goods  of  fuch  defcription  would  be  difpofed  of  before  the  next  fale;  hence 
they  had  a  certainty  of  the  market  for  fix  months.  This  eftabliflied  a  folid  con- 
fidence, which  very  much  benefited  the  fales  ;  fuch  confidence  has,  no  doubt, 
been  much  weakened  fince  1793,  when  private  perfons  were  partially  admitted 
into  the  trade ;  the  chief  objedt  of  the  private  trader  being,  as  it  always  muft 
be,  to  obtain  prompt  fales  to  meet  the  payment  of  bills  ;  Eaft  India  goods  are 
frequently  re-fold  while  they  remain  in  the  Company's  warehoufe,  merely  by  a 
transfer  of  vouchers.     The  goods  when  fo  fold  will  produce  from  five  to  ten  per 

cent. 


.f 


^nd  CHAIRMAN,  &c.  of  The  EAST  INDIA  COMPANY.  i : 

cent,  more  than  when  in  the  hands  of  individuals ;  this  is  particularly  (he  cafe  as 
to  drugs,  which  are  fubject  to  great  adukcration. 

The  confidence  that  has  been  entertained  of  the  Company's  regularity  and  fair 
dealing  has  been  fuch,  that  the  foreign  buyers  have  given  their  orders  to  their 
correfpondents  in  London,  on  the  faith  merely  of  the  defcriptivc  marks  ;  anJ 
goods,  on  their  arrival  on  the  continent,  frequently  pafs  ihrough  various  hands 
before  they  are  finally  unpacked. 

By  the  mode  propofed  it  is  to  be  feared  the  foreign  buyer  will  ceafe  to  be  at 
any  certainty  as  to  his  purchafes,  and  the  quality  of  the  commodities  ;  and  th's  may 
eventually  lead  foreigners  to  look  direftly  to  India  for  the  fupply  that  has  hitherto 
been  furnifhed  through  the  medium  of  this  country. 

To  fpeak  now  of  the  eflFedts  of  the  propofed  change  upon  the  interefts  of  the 
Company  :  and  firft,  with  refpe£l  to  the  Eaft  India  trade,  properly  fo  called,  as 
contra-diftinguifhed  from  the  imports  from  China  ;  — If  the  mode  of  private  (lile 
of  Indian  goods  in  every  town  in  the  kingdom  were  introduced,  would  not  the 
ftated  and  the  public  fales,  to  which  the  Company  are  reftrided,  be  continually 
anticipated,  and  confequently  the  fupply  of  the  foreign  markets  befo  alfo ;  though 
on  the  whole  thefe  markets  could  not  take  off"  more  ?  Could  thefe  fales,  then, 
fecure  a  general  affemblage  of  buyers  ?  Could  it  be  reckoned  upon,  that  the 
Company's  goods  would  go  off  as  they  ufually  have  hitherto  done  at  the  fales  ? 
Could  the  prices  be  expefted  to  indemnify  the  Company,  when  the  market  fliould 
be  lowered  by  the  neceffity  or  impatience  of  private  importers  ?  Could  the  reali- 
zation in  money  of  the  Company's  Indian  imports  be  depended  on — that  realiza- 
tion fo  neceflary  to  the  finances  of  the  Company  ?  and  if  not,  how  could  the  cur- 
rency of  their  affairs  be  preferved  ?  How  could  they  pay  for  exports  to  India  ? 
How  could  they  maintain  the  fleet  of  fliips  they  now  employ  in  their  Indian  Com- 
merce, a  fleet  fo  neceffary  for  the  tranfportation  of  troops  and  ftores  and  warlike 
fervices  in  India  ?  And  if  the  Company's  Indian  commerce  failed,  and  fo  much 
of  the  Indian  imports  were  transferred  to  out-ports,  what  niuft  become  of  many 
of  the  Company's  wharfs,  warehoufes,  and  other  articles  of  dead  fl:ock,  formed 
at  a  vaft  expenfe  in  confequence  of  this  Indian  trade  ?  And  where  would  be  the 
benefit  to  the  nauon  by  the  change?  Would  it  be  any  thing  elfe  but  transfer- 
ring to  Briftol,  Liverpool,  Glafgow,  and  Dublin,  that  which  London  now  has  ? 
Would  it  be  really  any  acceffion  of  benefit  to  the  empire  at  large  ?  And  what,  to 
look  towards  India,  would  be  the  effed  of  an  unlimited  trade  from  the  out-ports 
of  Great  Britain  and  Ireland  to  all  thofe  regions?  Would  it  be  poflible  to  en- 
force the  regulations  which  His  Majefty's  minifters  think  abfolutely  neceffary  for 
perventing  an  uncontrolled  intercourfe  with  the  Eaft,  and  for  averting  the  evils 
that  would  enfue  from  it. 

Thefe  queftions,  to  add  no  more,  ouglit  to  be  very  clearly  and  fatisfaclorily 
anfwered,  before  fo  great  a  change  is  attempted  5  before  an  order  of  things  that 
has  fubfiftedTo  long,  and  done  fowell,  is  fubverted  and  deftroyed.  If  great  and 
fudden  mnovations  ought  at  all  times  to  be  regarded  with  caution  and  diftruft, 
furely  ought  thofe  in  pardcular  which  are  propofed  by  men  for  their  own  imme- 
diate advantage. 

But  what  are  the  arguments  with  which  the  merchants  of  the  om-ports  may  be 
fuppofed  to  enforce  their  claim  ?  Natural  right ;  the  freedom  of  trade  ;  allowing 
every  man  to  carry  on  his  own  bufinefs  in  his  own  way  ;  the  odium  of  the  prin- 
ciple of  monopoly  ;  the  advantage  with  which  ihey  would  carry  on  the  trade  if 
they  were  obliged  to  bring  back  their  Ibips  to  London,  inftead  of  their  own  ports  j 
the  difadvantage  to  the  country  confumers. 

To  all  this  it  may  be  replied,  that  fuppofing  the  whole  true,  are  thefe  arguments 
of  weight  and  value  fufficientto  overturn  the  prefcnt  long-eftabliflied  fyftemof  the 
Company,  and  to  endanger  fo  large  a  portion  of  the  public  revenue  ?  As  to  the 
arguments  for  natural  right,  &c.  fuch  arguments  muft  always  be  limited  by  con- 
fiderations  of  practical  good.  The  only  praft'cal  argument  that  occurs  in  favour 
of  the  out-ports  is  the  advantage  to  the  merchants  themfelves  and  to  the  country 

confumers. 


12      CORRESPONDENCE  beiween  PRESIDENT  of  INDIA  feOARD 

confumers.  Now  what  is  the  amount  of  this  advantage  ?  Let  it  not  be  forgotten 
that  at  prefent  it  is  problematical,  at  lead,  whether  any  great  Indian  trade  can  be 
eflabliflied  bv  the  private  mercliants  ;  that  at  any  rate  the  chief  part  of  Indian  goods 
imported  into  England  is  intended  for  re-exportation  ;  that  London  is  the  fitted 
port  and  mart  for  the  foreign  trade,  efpecially  (ince  the  warehouling  ad  ;  that 
there  is  realiy  little  confumption  of  Indian  goods  in  the  interior  of  this  country  ; 
and  that  if  no  great  acceffion  of  trade  fliould  be  brought  to  the  country  by  the 
private  merchants,  then  they  will  have  facrificed  the  exifting  fyftem  without  even 
attaining  the  objed  for  which  the  facrlfice  was  made. 

It  may,  perhaps,  be  faid,  that  the  Hudfon's  Bay  Company  has  public  fales, 
and  that  yet  there  are  liiles  on  account  of  individuals  of  the  fame  articles  the  Com- 
pany import.  But  this  will  form  no  parallel  cafe  as  to  companies  ;  nor  is  there 
any  great  queftion  of  revenue  concerned.  The  only  article  imported  b\  the 
Hudfon's  Bay  Company  is  Furs.  The  fales  of  this  article  on  private  account  are 
alfo  by  auftion  ;  and,  it  is  believed,  confined  to  London.  I'he  wiiole  is  compara- 
tively a  fmall  affair,  and  can  be  of  no  weight  in  the  prefent  queftion. 

Upon  the  whole,  therefore,  it  feems  moft  certain,  that  on  fuch  (lender  grounds 
with  refpeft  to  advantage  (an  advantage  as  before  mentioned,  only  to  be  taken 
from  London  for  the  out-ports)  with  fo  little  certainty  of  eflabllfhing  any  great 
trade  to  or  from  India,  with  fuch  imminent  hazard  to  the  Eaft  India  Company 
and  to  the  Revenue,  it  would  be  contrary  to  the  prudent  poHcy  which  this 
Nation  has  generally  obferved,  and  moft  unwife  in  itfelf  to  venture  upon  fo  great 
an  innovation,  fome  of  the  efFeds  of  which  were  pointed  out  to  the  Prefident  of 
the  Board  of  CommifTioners  three  years  ago  (Printed  Papers,  page  30,)  efFefts 
which  by  his  fdence  he  feems  to  have  admitted  ;  and  in  a  word,  it  may  be  appre- 
hended that  they  would  amount  to  the  deftruftion  of  the  Company's  Indian  trade, 
their  Indian  commercial  eftablifnments,  their  Indian  {hipping,  and  finally  leave 
the  China  monopoly  fo  infulated  and  unfupported  as  to  bring  that  alfo  at  length 
to  its  fall,  and  with  it  the  whole  fabric  of  the  Company,  and  the  great  revenue 
now  fo  eafily  realized  through  its  medium  ;  nor  can  it  be  at  all  doubtful  that  in 
fuch  cafe  the  China  trade  would  alfo  be  loft  to  the  Nation. 

It  is  not  irrelevant  to  this  fubjefl:  to  advert  to  a  paflage  in  the  hiftory  of  the 
Dutch  Eaft  India  Company,  under  the  year  1602.  "  The  plurality  of  Eaft  India 
partnerftiip  or  focieties  at  this  time  formed  in  Holland  creating  much  diforder  and 
clafiiing  in  that  commerce,  the  States  General  fummoned  before  them  the  diredors 
of  all  thofe  companies,  and  obliged  them  to  unite  for  the  future  into  one,  to 
which  united  company  the  States  granted  the  fole  commerce  to  Eaft  India,  for 
iwenty-one  years,  from  the  20th  March  1602."  They  had  in  coni'equence,  feve- 
ral  chambere  of  Eaft  India  commerce  in  Holland,  as  Amfterdam,  Middleburgh, 
*^""-    vations   &c.  but  thev  wefe  all  under  one  united  Diredion  *. 

7.  7.         In  the  time  of  King  William  the  Company  were  allowed  five  per  cent,  on  the 

private  trade.  ,^ 

8.  8.         Many  remarks  made  upon  the  fixth  article  will  alfo  apply  to  this  which  might 

have  properly  formed  a  part  of  it.  We  need  thereiore  only  obferve  here,  that 
the  permitting  of  fliips  to  fail  from  the  out-ports  will  go  very  materially  to  injure 
the  intereft  of  thofe  who  w'ere  let  into  the  Indian  trade  by  the  Ad  ot  1793  ;  to 
increafe  the  danger  of  colonization  abroad,  and  of  injury  to  the  revenues  by 
fmuggling  at  home,  as  well  as  another  danger  to  be  noticed  in  the  next 
article. 

so.  lo.  It  is  not  only  to  all  our  Indian  pofleftlons  that  the  exportation  of  military  ftores 
ought  always  to  be  prohibited,  but  alfo  to  the  numerous  iflands  in  the  Eaftern 
feas,  inhabited  by  a  vindidive  race  of  people  who  may  be  ready  not  only  to  buy 
v.-arlike  ftores,  but  to  engage  Europeans  in  their  quarrels  \  and  the  failing  of  (hips 
v/ill  certainly  increafe  the  danger  of  thefe  evils. 

II.  SI.  The  exifting  laws  as  to  piece-goods  enables  the  Company  to  confine  the  im- 
portation of  that  article  to  themfelves  ;  they  have  never  availed  thonfelves  of 


Obfer- 


•  See  Anderfon'i  Comraerct,  and  Macpherlon's  Annals  of  Commerce,  under  idzz. 

this 


14-      14- 


nnd  CHAIRMAN,  &c.  of  The  EAST  INDIA  COMPANY.  13 

his  privilege;  but  yet  it  may  be  proper  to  continue  it,  becaufe  "  the  reji^ular 
and  conftant  employment  of  mnnufr.ftun  r-;  und^r  the  exifting  fyflcm  of  local 
management,"  is  a  matter  of  conl'tquence  not  likely  to  be  otherwife  fo  well 
guarded  ;  and  that  great  importations  of  piece-goods  would  operate  againft  the  q,,c^_ 

home  manufaftures,  whilll  a  fuudler  feleft  importation  would  be  ufeful.  "'"""  v^tion.v 

There  is  a  new  reafou  for  the  fame  rcflric^ion  in  favour  of  the  Company  in  the  12.  12. 
article  of  raw  filk,  becaufe  fuch  a  general  competition  is  now  to  be  opened  againlt 
them,  and  becaufe  they  have  at  great  expenfe  in  a  long  courfe  of  years,  by  means 
of  their  own  eflabliflimcnts,  brought  the  raw  filk  of  Bengal,  wliich  they  export,  to  a 
hi'^h  fhue  of  pprfeclion  ;  and  ii  .Iiat  article  is  left  to  the  compotition  or  individuals, 
who  will  o'ten  have  to  refort  to  the  agency  of  indolent  natives,  the  quality  of  the 
article  n)av  be  expefted  materially  to  fall,  and  the  filk  manufactures  of  this 
country  to  be  much  worfe  fupjjlied  than  they  are  at  prefent. 

It  is  proper  to  add  on  this  fubjeft,  that  the  reftriction  in  favour  of  the  Company 
in  the  article  of  piece-goods  is  by  no  means  of  the  value  it  was  at  firft,  the  demand 
for  that  Indian  ftaple  being  now  greatly  diminifhed  in  this  country. 

Lord  Melville  has  obferved,  on  the  reafons  which  he  apprehends  had  influenced 
the  Court  in  propofing  that  fhips  of  lefs  than  four  hundred  tons  (hould  not  be 
allowed  to  fail  to  India,  that  "  though  entitled  to  due  confideratiou,  they  do  not 
"  appear  to  be  fufficieutly  flrong  to  juftify  the  propofed  reftriction,  or  the  making 
"  a  diftin<^ion,  in  that  refpefc,  between  fliips  trading  to  the  Eafl  Indies  and  to 
"  other  countries  ;"  it  is  therefore  deemed  necelTary  to  difcufs  die  propofuieu 
more  at  length. 

In  examining  the  fubjecl  of  the  fixth  propofition,  the  facility  which  fmall  fliips 
would  afford  to  fmuggling  were  the  out-ports  opened  for  the  difpofal  of  the 
homeward  cargoes,  has  already  been  confidered.  In  further  fupport  ot  the 
fourteenth  propofition,  refpedling  the  lead  fize  of  fliips  that  fliould  be  permitted 
to  go  to  India  on  account  of  individual?,  the  practice  of  the  India  Company  in 
the  early  part  of  their  intercourfe  with  the  Eaft  might  be  adduced,  for  they  foon 
dropped  the  fmaller  clafs  of  ihips  for  one  of  five  hundred  tons ;  but  as  this 
country  in  its  improved  ftate  of  navigation  and  commerce  has  few  fliips  of  that 
burthen,  except  thofe  employed  by  the  Eall  India  Company,  the  limiting  of 
fhips  to  be  now  employed  in  the  private  trade  to  India  to  four  hundred  tons  was 
fuppofed  to  afford  facility  to  the  mofl:  refpectable  houfes  to  benefit  by  the  pro*- 
pofcd  enlargement  ot  the  trade. 

Every  one  will  admit  that  there  is  more  of  refpeftabllity  in  the  larger  clafs  of 
fliips,  and  this  circumllance  fiiould  not  altogether  be  loft  fight  of  with  the  in- 
habitants of  India.  The  impreihons  of  the  fuperiorlty  of  our  maritime  ftrength 
to  that  of  other  nations,  and  particularly  to  the  Americans,  who  fpeak  the  fame 
language,  and  who  navigate  very  fmall  velfels  to  and  from  the  ports  of  the  Eaft 
fliould  be  kept  alive,  and,  as  a  rcafon  of  ftate,  fliould  have  its  due  weight  in  the 
confideranon  of  this  fubjeft. 

It  is  not  only  the  refpeclabillty  of  thefiip  that  fliould  be  attended  to,  but  there 
is  alfo  a  degree  of  refpectability  and  refponfibility  attached  to  the  charafter  of  the 
commander  and  of  the  officers  (of  whom  there  is  a  greater  eftablifhment  in  the 
larger  fliips).  Their  information  is  pre-eminent,  particularly  in  thofe  eifential 
articles  of  nautical  fcience,  the  variation  and  the  lunar  obfervadons  in  the  navi- 
gation of  the  Indian  feas,  and  to  and  from  thence,  by  fuch  men.  A  better  dif- 
ciphne  is  eftabHlhed  in  thofe  larger  fliips  which  fuit  them ;  the  fliips  are  alll> 
better  armed,  and  lefs  liable  to  capture  than  veffels  of  the  fmaller  clafs.  The 
length  of  voyage  requires  not  only  fuperior  equipment  and  a  ftouter  velfel, 
but  in  order  to  guard  againft  contingencies  of  every  kind,  fubordinate  officers 
and  their  afliftants  are  indifpenfable^  becaufe  in  the  event  of  the  death  of  the 
principal  officers  the  knowledge  and  fkill  requifite  to  fupply  their  places,  ef- 
pecially  in  cafes  of  emergency,  could  be  derived  from  no  other  quarter.  Small 
veflTels  cannot  have  thefe  neceflfary  advantages  j  an  obfervation  which   applies- 

(32.)  D  more 


14        CORRESPONDENCE  beiv:een  PRESIDENT  of  INDIA  BOARD 

more  particularly  to  fuch  petty  oflicers,  as  carpenters  and  caulkers,  in  refpeft  to 
matters  that  concern  the  hull  of  the  lliip,  and  to  medical  men  in  refped:  to  the 
crew. 

It  has  been  fdimd  bv  experience  that  larger  fhips  can  be  navigated  at  a  Icfs 
rate  per  ton  than  fmall  ones ;  hence,  one  of  four  hundred  tons  will  require  lefs 
rate  of  freight  than  two  of  two  hundred  tons ;  a  point  of  economy  in  the  con- 
veyance of  goods,  which  is  not  to  be  difregarded  even  in  a  national  view.  As 
India  is  concerned,  the  fmaller  veflels  v.ili  multiply  a  defcription  of  perfons  in 
the  ports,  and  tliroughout  the  country,  whofe  coadad  may  have  ferious  effects 
on  the  peace  and  quiet  of  the  Afiatic  govermnents,  from  the  caufes  before 
mentioned.  The  minor  ports  throughout  the  country  will  admit  of  an  inter- 
courfe  and  conne>^tiou  bct\\ccn  Europeans  and  the  Natives,  which  the  vigilance 
and  power  of  our  governments  cannot  dil'cover  nor  controul. 

The  fnips  employed  in  private  trade  lliould  be  conilrained  to  navigate  with 
a  certain  number  of  Europeans  outward,  fo  as  to  prevent  as  much  as  poffible 
the  introduction  of  native  feamen  to  this  country  j  and  hence,  for  the  fake  of 
humanity,  a  furgeon  becomes  a  neceifary  perlbn,  the  employment  of  whom 
may  well  comport  with  the  fize  of  Ihiprf  of  iour  hundred  tons  or  upwards, 
but  not  with  thofe  of  two  hundred  and  fiftv,  or  lefs.  If  the  health  and  lives  of 
feamen  be  thought  of  confequence  to  the  Itate,  the  larger  clafs  of  fhips  fhould 
certainly  be  preferred.  If  the  prefent  fuperior  clafs  of  Weft  India  fliipping 
are  of  four  or  five  hundred  tons,  where  the  paflage  is  not  more  than  fix  weeks, 
it  appears  at  leail  as  reafonable  that  thofe  employed  in  an  Eaft  Indian  voyage, 
which  may  lafl  many  months,  fliould  be  equally  competent  and  formidable  as 
the  running  fhips,  and  not  ftand  on  a  fcale  beneath  thofe  of  the  firft  clafs 
upon  Lloyd's  books,  fo  that  the  premium  of  infurance  upon  the  goods  fliipped 
may  be  kept  at  the  loweft  poilible  rate. 

Whenever  fuch  enlargements  as  may  induce  the  fubjeiSts  of  this  country  to 
embark  very  large  property  in  the  Indian  trade  fhall  be  opened  to  them,  it  muit 
be  highly  expedient  that,  for  fuch  time  at  leaft  as  may  be  fufEcient  for  the  return 
of  one  voyage,  the  utmofl  pofTible  fecurity  which  the  Legiflature  can  devife  fliould 
be  provided,  in  order  to  check  fuch  hazardous  adventures  as  might  otherwife  be 
carried  on  in  any  defcription  of  velTel,  or  under  the  conduft  of  characters  not 
fufficiently  refponfible,  and  at  the  riflv  or  coft  of  the  underwriter. 
■  If  an  honourable  commercial  intercourfe  wfth  India  be  the  object,  fuch  whole- 
fome  regulations  will  promote  it  ;  but  if  fpeculations  of  mere  chance  outward, 
and  fmuggling  homeward,  fliould  be  in  the  contemplation  of  any  adventurers, 
proteftion  to  the  fair  trader,  to  the  Eaft  India  Company,  and  to  the  revenue,  can 
only  be  fecured  by  fome  efficient  law  relpefting  the  fize  of  the  fnips,  and  their 
confequent  equipment  in  ftqres  and  force,  under  the  conduct  of  able  and  refpon- 
'^'""-  vations  fible  commanders  and  crews. 

J 6.      1 6.         The  regulations  propofed  with  refpeft  to  Lafcars-  are  only  intended  for  a  time  of 
war.     No  Lafcars  fhould  be  brought  to  this  country  in  a  time  of  peace. 

i8,      i8.  The  exifting  regulations  as  to  ingrefs  and  fettlcment  of  unlicenfed  Europeans 

into  the  Company's  eltablifhmehts  and  territories  to  be  continued.  No  Britifh 
fubjefts  to  be  allowed  to  fettle  in  any  country  within  the  Company's  limits,  and 
not  under  the  government  of  the  Company. 

19.  19.  The  King's  forces  maintainable  by  the  Company  in  India  not  to  exceed  fifteen 

thoufand  men  in  all,  and  this  number  to  be  reduced  as  may  be  found  pradicable» 

20.  20,  If  the  propofition  made  by  the  Company,  to  be  henceforth  charged  fo  much  per 

regiment  of  a  given  force,  or  fo  much  per  man,  be  not  adopted,  we  fhall  be  glad 
to  receive  any  fpecific  propofition  for  putting  upon  a  clear  and  equitable  footing 
the  adjuftment  of  accounts  between  the  Pa)-ofIice  aud  the  Company.  By  any 
fuch  arrangement  we  gannot  doubt  that  at  leait  the  intricacies  of  the  prefent  mode 
of  fettlement,  utterly  unfatisfactory  as  it  is  to  the  Company,  will  be  got  rid  of, 
even  if  the  expenfe  fliould  not  be  diminilhed  ;  but  will  it,  for  example,  admit  of 
any  queflion,  whether,  when  the  Company  have  been  charged,  as  they  really 

have 


end  CHAIRMAN,  &c.  of  The  EAST  INDIA  COMPANY.  15 

have  been,  with  the  expence  of  an  entire  recruiting  company  at  home  as  con- 

ftantlv  raifing  recruits  ;  and  whilft,  in  many  inltances,  the  recruits  fo  raifed  have 

been  fent,  not  to  India  but  to  other  quarters,  the  recruiting  company  having  alfo 

been  at  all  times  available  for  internal  fervice,  it  can  come  within  the  equity  of  the 

127th  claufc  of  the  Aft  ot   1793,  or  ever  could  have  been  intended  to  charge 

the  expenfe  of  fuch  company  to  the  Indian  territories  ;  or  is  it  juil,  that  the  ex- 

penfe  of  the  colonel  of  a  regiment  employed  either  at  home  or  on  the  Continent, 

or  perhaps  on  a  furlough  ftaft'  appointment,  fiiould  be  partly  charged  to  the  Eaft 

India  Company,  and  his  pay  be  drawn  from  them  ?  As  all  parties  therefore  agree  oiftr- 

in  the  propriety  of  an  alteration,  the  fooner  it  is  made  the  better.  '" ''  *"'«"»• 

The  Court  of  Directors  have  already  objefted,  and  mufl  ever  objeft,  to  the  21  •  21. 
arbitrary  mode  adopted  by  a  Committee  of  the  Houfe  of  Commons  in  1805,  for 
the  feltlement  of  the  demands  of  the  Company  on  Government.  We  think  it  a 
clear  and  equitable  principle  that  the  expenfe  of  captures  made  and  not  retained 
by  the  Company,  but  transferred  to  His  Majefly,  or  by  His  Majefly  reftored  to  the 
enemy,  fhould  be  charged  to  the  public. 

The  ordinary  pay  of  the  Company's  troops  employed  on  fuch  fervices,  and 
efpecially  in  places  out  of  the  fphere  of  India,  as  in  Egypt,  fliould  alfo  be  placed 
on  account  of  the  public. 

On  thefe  grounds  we  beg  leave  to  propofe,  that  the  balance  of  demands  now 
made  by  the  Pay  Office  on  the  Company  be  fet  off  by  the  funis  which  they  are 
yet  unpaid  for,  the  capture  of  Cieylon,  and  the  Moluccas,  and  for  the  expeditioii 
to  Egypt.  Even  then  the  fettlement  will  be  greatly  to  the  advantage  of  the  public, 
as  the  Company  have  made  good  to  the  Pay  Office  a  fum  exceeding  two  millions  ; 
in  addition  to  which  they  have  fnice  the  year  1797  been  charged  for  King's  troops 
beyond  the  number  for  which  the  law  obliged  them  to  pay,  at  the  average  annual 
rate  of  about  three  thoufand  firelocks,  befides  the  officers  and  ferjeants  requifiLp.for 
that  number  of  men. 

As  afupplement  to  this  article,  the  Court  cannot  help  again  fubmitting  to  con-  22.  22. 
fideration  the  earneft  defire  and  hope  of  the  Proprietors  to  be  exonerated  out  of 
the  general  funds  of  the  Company  from  the  payment  of  the  property  tax.  The 
dividends  of  other  pubhc  companies  are  thus  exempted  ;  and  it  is  but  a  fmall  con- 
fideration  in  the  immenfe  concerns  of  the  Company,  from  which  the  proprietors 
have,  on  the  whole,  yet  derived  only  the  ordinary  mterell  of  money  in  return  for 
all  the  hazards  their  property  has  run. 

The  debt  of  which  the  Court  of  Diredors  meant  to  fpeak  in  the  twenty-third  2^.  2', 
propofition  was  the  whole  of  the  Indian  debt,  part  of  which,  to  the  amount  of 
about  feven  millions,  has  been  transferred  to  England.  The  obfervation  of  Lord 
Melville  will  coincide  with  this  propofition  ;  and  the  Court  of  Direttors  can  have 
no  material  objedion  to  his  Lordfliips  provifo  refpefting  the  I'eduQion  of  the  bond 
debt  at  home  to  three  millions ;  but  experience  has  fhcwn  the  inconvenience  of 
contining  within  narrow  limits,  by  parliamentary  regulation,  the  amount  of 
this  debt. 

Confidering  how  probable  it  is  that  private  adventurers  will  defire  to  obtain  a  ^r.  25. 
fupply  of  the  article  of  tea,  m  order  to  be  fmuggled  into  this  country,  and  to 
foreign  parts,  and  confidering  alfo  the  importance  of  not  endangering  the  com- 
mercial intercourie  now  permitted  by  the  Chinefe  to  the  Britiih  nation  through  itS 
long-eftabliffied  organ  the  Eaft  India  Company,  it  is  obvious  that  effectual  provilion 
ought  to  be  made  in  fome  mode  or  other  for  preventing  both  thefe  evils  ;  and  we 
fhall  be  glad  to  hear  any  propofitions  which  wer^i  in  Lord  Melville's  contemplation, 
or  may  be  in  your  Lordlhip's,  as  more  likely  to  fuit  that  end  than  the  fuggeftion 
we  have  offered.  In  the  mean  time,  we  feel  it  incumbent  upon  us  to  requeft 
your  Lordfhip's  attention  to  fome  remarks  on  the  queftion  of  admitting  private 
fliips  to  the  Spice  Iflands.  The  demand  of  all  Europe  for  the  fpices  of  the 
Moluccas  is  fo  limited,  that  one  or  two  of  the  Company's  fhips  may  import  a  fuf- 
ficient  quantity  for  the  fupply  of  it ;  the  divifion,  therefore,  of  this  fupply  among 
the  Ccnipany  and  the  merchants  in  general  of  this  country,  will  leave  fo  little  to 

the 


i6     CORRESPONDENCE  betioccn  PRESIDENT  of  INDIA  BOARD 

*he  individuals  of  the  latter  clafs,  as  to  form  no  object  worthy  of  long  and  diilant 
enterprizc.  not  to  mention  that  fpiccs  are  now  rifing  up  in  other  parts  of  the  eaft, 
which  renders  thefe iflands  lefs  important  limn  they  have  been.  The  maintenance 
of  the  Molucca  Iflands,  which  produce  no  valuable  co.  .modify  but  fpices,  occafions 
to  the  Company  a  heavy  cxpciife,  and  can  only  be  compejifated  by  a  monopoly  of 
their  trade ;  and  if  private  merchants  are  to  participate  in  that  trade,  they  ought 
alfo  to  hear  a  proportionable  fhare  of  the  charge  of  eftablifliment  in  thofe  iflands. 
But  the  fpice  trade  is  not  the  moft  infercfting  confideration  belonging  to  this 
queftion.  If  m  any  of  the  ifiands  of  the  Ivaltern  Seas  not  belonging  to  the  Com- 
pany, Britifii  fubjefts  were  to  fettle,  (a  thing  which  the  Company,  even  if  armed 
with  legal  powers,  would  find  it  dllTicult  to  prevent  after  th')fe  leas  fliould  be  open 
to  all  the  ihips  of  this  country),  it  would  fecm  impoffible  to  hinder  them  from 
obtaining,  by  one  means  or  other,  a  fupply  of  the  teas  of  China,  for  the  purpole 
of  being  fmuggled  into  Europe.  That  objcft  alone  might  be  tempting  enough  to 
induce  a  fettlement,  where  no  other  circumltancc  was  fufiiciently  inviting  ;  and  if 
from  this  motive,  or  a  concurrence  of  others,  which  might  be  fuppofed,  a  num- 
ber of  Engliflrmen  were  once  to  unite  themfeives  in  that  quarter,  whither  nev/ 
individuals  might  continually  refort,  and  whence  again  they  might  repair  to  all 
the  ports  of  the  Indian  continent,  it  would  fecm  fcarcely  prafticable  to  preferve  the 
efiiciency  of  regulations  formed  either  here  or  by  the  Indian  governments,  for  the 
exclufion  of  unlicenfed  perfons  from  their  territories.  Such  would  be  the  danger 
efpecially  of  any  Britifn  fettlement  in  the  Eaftern  Archipelago  not  fubjefted  to  the 
governinent  of  the  Company,  a  danger  very  ferioufly  to  be  deprecated  ;  and  even 
in  thofe  held  by  them,  as  the  Moluccas,  if  they  were  open  to  all  Britiih  fhips,  it 
may  well  dePerve  confideration,  whether  there  might  not  be  fwine  liability  to  danger 
of  I'he  fame  kind.  On  all  thefe  grounds  it  really  feems  advifable  that  Britifti 
fhips  from  Europe  fhould  not  have  accefs  to  the  Spice  Ifiands. 

HAVING  concluded  our  remarks  upon  the  "  Propofitions"  and  "  Obfervations'' 
hitherto  brought  under  difcuffion,  we  next  beg  leave  to  fuggeft  fome  other  regu- 
lations growing  out  of  the  general  fubjed  now  under  confideration,  and  of  our 
pafl  correfpondence.  Thefe,  we  truft,  will  be  found  fo  obvioufly  proper  and 
neceflary  as  to  require  no  enforcing  argument. 

26th  Propofition  : — That  no  fhip  fliall  go  from  any  Britiih  colony  to  the  Eafl 
Indies  or  China  without  the  fpecial  licence  of  the  Company. 

27th  Propofition  : — Private  fliips  going  from  the  United  Kingdom  to  India,  to 
fail  direft  from  that  kingdom  thither,  and  from  India  to  that  kingdom,  without 
purfuing  any  circuitous  route. 

a 8th  Propofition  : — Ships  going  from  this  kingdom  to  India  not  to  engage  in 
the  coaiting-trade  of  India,  but  to  be  permitted  to  go  from  one  port  of  delivery 
of  the  original  cargo  to  another,  for  the  full  difcharge  of  it. 

We  have  the  honour  to  be,  my  Lord, 

Your  Lordfhip's  moft  obedient  humble  Servants, 

(Signed)         Hugh  Ingus,  Charles  Grant, 

RouERT  Thornton,  Edward  Parry, 

The  Right  Honourable  Jacob  Bosanqukt,  William  Astell, 

the  Earl  of  Buckinghamfhire,  W.F.  ELrniNSTONE,  George  Smith. 

&c.  &c.  &c. 


AT 


aiid  CHAIRMAN,  &c.  of  The  EAST  INDIA  COMPANY.  17 

AT  a  Secret  Committee  of  Correfpondence,  the  17th  April  1812. 

THE  Committee  took  into  confideration  the  flate  of  the  negotiation  for  the 
renewal  of  the  Company's  exclufive  privileges,  and  deliberated  maturely  upon 
the  feveral  points  connected  therewith. 

At  a  Secret  Committee  of  Correfpondence,  the  acth  April  1812. 

The  Chairman  .laid  before  the  Committee  minutes  of  a  converfation  held 
yefterday  evening,  between  the  Prefident  of  tiie  Board  of  Commiflioners  and 
himfelf. 

k  was  unanimoufly  agreed,  that  the  fame  be  fubmitted  to  the  Court  of  Direc- 
tors to-day,  together  with  a  minute  thereon,  now  read  and  unanimoufly  approved, 
being  as  follows  ;  viz. 

Lord  BuckinghamOiire  dated,  that  it  had  been  determined  to  preferve  the  mo- 
nopoly of  the  tea  trade  to  the  Company,  but  to  permit  the  private  traders  to  fill 
up  and  aifort  their  cargoes  with  nankeens  and  other  articles,  the  produce  of  China,, 
which  they  would  procure  in  India. 

His  Lordfliip  then  ftated,  that  it  was  the  determination  of  His  Majefhy's  Mi- 
nifters  to  recommend  to  Parliament,  to  permit  private  fhips  to  clear  out  from  any 
port  of  the  United  Kingdom,  but  that  they  fliould  only  be  permitted  to  import 
into  thofe  places  where  the  warehoufing  fyftem  exifted.  Sir  Hugh  IngHs  ftated 
it  as  his  opinion,  that  the  Court  of  Directors  in  the  firfl:  inllance,  and  the  Court 
of  Proprietors,  when  laid  before  them,  would  refill  by  every  means  in  their 
power  a  meafure  fo  fatal  to  the  vital  interefts  of  the  Company  and  to  the  public 
revenue,  as  would  be  the  meafure  of  allowing  the  (hips  of  individuals  to  import 
into  any  place  but  the  Port  of  London  ;  and  that  fituated  as  he  was,  he  ihould 
confider  it  his  duty  to  refill:,  and  recommend  to  the  Court  of  Direftors,  and  ulti- 
mately the  Proprietors,  to  refill  the  propofition. 

AT  a  Secret  Court  of  Dire£lors,  held  on  Monday  the  20th  of  April 
1812: 

TFIE  Chah-man  from  the  Committee  of  Correfpondence,  laying  before  the 
Court  minutes  of  a  converfation  between  the  Prefident  of  the  Board  of  Commif- 
lioners and  himfelf,  held  yeflerday  evening  ; — 

The  Court  after  deliberating  thereupon,  agreed  unanimoufly  to  the  following 
minute ;  viz. 

The  Chairman  having  in  a  fecret  Court  of  Directors,  communicated  the 
minute  of  a  converfation  which  he  held  laft  night  with  the  Prefident  of  the 
Board  of  Commiliioners,  the  Court  learn  from  thence  with  very  great  concern, 
that  it  feems  to  be  the  prefent  difpofition  of  His  Majefly's  Minifters  to  extend 
to  the  merchants  of  this  country  the  privilege  of  importing  goods  from  India 
into  all  the  out-ports  of  the  United  Kingdom  to  which  the  warehoufing  aft 
extends,  which  ports  are  in  number  : — The  Court  have  from  the 

beginning  of  the  negotiation  declared  their  firm  conviftion,  that  if  the  import 
trade  from  India  were  not  confined  to  the  port  of  London,  the  fyftem  of  the 
Company's  public  fales,  their  trade  to  and  from  China,  the  dividend,  depending 
chiefly  on  that  trade,  and  the  political  funflions  which,  aided  by  thofe  privi- 
leges, they  exercife  for  the  benefit  of  the  nation  in  the  government  of  the  Indian 
empire,  would  be  deflroyed,  as  well  as  the  revenue  of  this  country  (by  the  ex- 
tenfive  practice  of  Imuggling,  which  would  inevitably  follow  the  propofed  altera- 
tion) be  effentially  injured.  The  Court  having  never  before  received  from  His 
Majelly's  Minifters  any  intimation  that  they  differed  with  the  Court  upon  this 
point — having  Rated  their  opinion,  with  the  realbns  for  it,  to  their  conftituents 
and  the  public, — having  feen  no  argument  advanced  in  oppofition  to  it, — >and 
remaining  flill  perfuadcd  of  its  truth,  they  feel  it  impofhble,  as  men  of  integrity, 
invefted  with  public  trull  and  refponfibility,  to  recommend  to  their  conftituents 
to  abandon  the  propofition  for  reftrifting  the  import  trade  to  London;,  and 
would  moft  earneltly  requeft  His  Majeity's  Minillers  to  re-confider  the  com- 
(32.)  t  municatioiv. 


i8      CORRESPONDENCE  ^^/w^^«- PRESIDENT  0/ INDIA  BOARD 

inunication  made  to  the  Chairman  by  the  Earl  of  Buckinghamfliirc,  and  to  give 
the  Chairs,  or  a  deputation  of  the  Court,  an  opportunity  of  waiting  on  them, 
before  any  final  refolution.  adverfe  to  the  Company  is  adopted  on  this  very  im- 
portant head. 

AT  a  Secret  Committee  of  Correfpondence,  the  24th  April  1812. 

THE  Committee  deliberated  on  the  feveral  points  at  iffue  in  the  prefent  nego- 
tiation with  His  Majefty's  Miniflers. 

AT  a  Meeting  of  the  Deputation,  the  28th  April  1812. 

READ  and  confidered,  a  Letter  from  the  Right  Honourable  the  Prefident  of 
the  Board  of  CommilTioners  for  the  Affairs  of  India,  dated  the  27th  inftant. 

AT  a  Secret  Committee  of  Correfpondence,  the  28th  April  181 2. 

THE  Chairman  laid  before  the  Committee  a  Minute  of  a  Conference  held  on 
Saturday  laft,  which  was  read  and  approved ;  and  the  Chairman  was  defired  to 
lay  the  fame  before  the  Court. 

Mem. — This    Minute    is    contained    in    the    fucceeding   Minutes    of   the 
Court,  No.  54. 

AT  a  Secret  Court  of  Diredlors  held  on  Tuefday,  the  28th  April  1812. 

THE  Chairman  froin  the  Committee  of  Correfpondence  reports  to  the  Courtj 
that  in  confequence  of  the  requefl  contained  in  the  Minute  of  the  20th  April, 
which  was  communicated  to  Lord  Buckinghamlhire,  the  Chancellor  of  the 
Exchequer  and  his  Lordfliip  favoured  the  deputation  with  an  interview  on  Satur- 
day the  25th  inftant,  at  which  Mr.  A^allace  was  alfo  prefent. 

At  that  meeting  various  points  belonging  to  the  prefent  negotiation  were 
touched  upon,  but  the  difcuffion  majnly  turned  on  the  important  queftion  of  per- 
mitting the  Clips  of  private  merchants  generally  to  import  goods  from  India  at 
the  out-ports  of  the  United  Kingdom.  The  deputation  urged  every  thing  which 
occurred  to  them  in  fupport  of  the  propofition  of  the  Court  upon  this  fubjecl:,  as 
involving  the  eflential  interefts  of  the  Company  ;  but  they  found  with  regret,  that 
the  impreflions  which  His  Majefty's  Government  had  received  refpeding  it,  fmce 
the  date  of  Lord  Melville's  letter  of  the  2ift  March,  were  not  in  confonance  with 
the  fentiments  of  the  Court  of  Directors.  The  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer, 
however,  and  Lord  Buckinghamlhire,  esprelled  their  intention  of  communicating 
in  writing  the  judgment  they  had  formed  on  the  fubjefl;  in  queftion,  and  Lord 
Buckinghamftiire  having  accordingly  addrell'ed  a  letter  to  the  Chairman,  and 
Deputy  Chairman,  dated  the  27th  inftant,  that  letter  is  now  laid  before  the 
Court. 

Gentlemen,  India  Board,  April  27th  1812. 

IN  communicating  to  you  the  fentiments  of  His  Majefty's  Government,  after 
a  full  confideration  of  the  feveral  points  which  have  been  brought  under  their 
view,  in  confequence  of  the  conferences  and  explanations  I  have  had  with  you 
and  the  deputation,  fmce  I  had  the  honour  of  receiving  your  note  of  the  3d 
inftant,  it  is  unneceflary  for  ine  to  enter  upon  the  difcuffion  of  the  hints  and  ob- 
fervations  which  Iiave  been  the  fubjedl  of  the  correfpondence  between  the  late 
Prefident  of  the  Board  of  Control  and  yourfelves,  as  far  as  thofe  hints  and 
obfervatlons  have  been  fanftioued  by  the  general  Court. 

It  was  to  have  been  expeded  that  upon  a  queftion  involving  the  various  inte- 
refts of  fo  large  a  body  as  the  merchants  and  manufaclurers  of  the  United  King- 
dom, as  v.-ell  as  of  the  Eaft  India  Company,  that  confiderable  differences  of 
opinion  fliould  arife,  and  that  reafons  fliould  be  alleged  of  fufficient  weight  to 
fuggeft  the  propriety  of  revifmg  any  plan  which  might  originally  have  been  coii- 
certedi 

Under 


mid  CHAIRMAN,  &c.  p/ The  EAST  INDIA  COMPANY.  19 

Under  fuch  an  impreffion,  Lord  Melville,  in  his  letter  of  the  2  ifl:  ultimo,  defireJ 
it  to  be  diftinftly  underftood,  that  public  difcuflion  in  the  further  progrefs  of  the 
meafure  might  poffibly  produce  an  alti'ration  in  fume  of  tlic  details,  as  well  as 
regulations,  of  a  diflerent  defcription  ironi  thofe  which  were  then  fuggeded. 

You  would  therefore  not  have  been  wholly  unprepared  for  the  communication 
made  by  me  to  the  Chairman  at  a  perfonal  interview,  where  he  was  informed  that 
the  reprcfentations  which  had  been  brought  before  His  Majefty's  Government, 
fince  the  publication  of  the  Correfpondence  already  referred  to,  had  led  them  to 
entertain  an  opinion,  that  they  would  belt  confult  the  public  intereft  by  not  con- 
fining the  import  trade  from  the  Eaft  Indies  to  the  port  of  London. 

The  arguments  adduced  by  you  and  the  other  members  of  the  Deputation, 
and  which  had  been  urged  with  much  ability,  and  at  confiderable  length,  in  your 
letter  of  the  1 5th  inflant,  have  received  the  moft  ferious  attention  of  His  Majefly's 
Government ;  but  I  have  to  acquaint  you,  that  although  they  think  that  the  great 
intereft  of  policy  and  of  revenue,  as  well  as  of  tlie  Eaft  India  Company,  will  ren- 
der it  their  duty  to  propofe  to  Parliament  that  the  exifting  reftraints  refpefting  the 
commercial  intercourfe  with  China  fliould  continue,  and  that  the  exclufive  trade 
in  tea  fhould  be  preferved  to  the  Company  for  whatever  term  the  charter  may 
be  renewed,  yet  that  they  remain  of  opinion,  that  the  import  trade  from  the  Eaft 
Indies  fhould  not  be  confined  to  the  port  of  London. 

They  are  not,  however,  infenfible  to  the  danger  and  mifchief  which  the  revenue, 
as  well  as  the  Eaft  India  Company,  might  fuffer,  if  under  the  cover  of  that  trade 
an  illicit  commerce  of  tea  were  to  be  fuccefsfully  carried  on  ;  but  they  conceive, 
that  regulations  both  in  India  and  at  home  may  be  fo  framed  as  to  guard 
againft  that  danger,  and  to  protect  the  Company  and  the  revenue,  whofe  interefts 
in  this  refpeO:  equally  require  fuch  protection  from  the  eftefts  of  it. 

In  fubmitting  therefore  the  propofitions  to  Parliament  in  this  fhape,  the 
Government  are  perfuaded,  that  whilft  they  would  be  fupporting  interefts 
juftly  entitled  to  public  confideration,  they  would  at  the  fame  time  be  purfuing 
a  courfe  eflential  to  the  colleftion  of  a  revenue  of  nearly  four  millions  fterling, 
without  breaking  in  upon  that  fyftem  under  which  the  falutary  provifions  of  the 
Commutation  Act  fecui-e  the  people  of  the  United  Kingdom  againft  any  failure 
in  the  regular  ajid  conftaut  fupply  of  an  article  which  has  become  a  neceflary  of 
life. 

In  confidering  the  terms  propofed  for  the  renewal  of  the  charter,  as  they  would 
ftand,  ftould  the  fuggeftions  I  have  conveyed  to  you  in  this  letter  be  adopted,  you 
will  be  fenfible  of  the  high  importance  of  bringing  to  a  conclufion  an  arrange- 
ment, in  which  the  interefts  of  the  Company  and  the  nation  at  large  are  fo  deeply 
implicated,  with  as  httle  delay  as  may  be  deemed  compatible  with  a  mature  con- 
fideration and  fatisfaftorv  adjuftment  of  the  feveral  claims  and  pretenfions  of  the 
parties  concerned. 

I  have  the  honour  to  be. 

Gentlemen, 
Your  moft  obedient  humble  Servant, 
To  the  Chairman  and  Deputy  Chairman  (Signed )  Buckinghamjhire. 

of  the  Court  of  Diredors. 

AT  a  Secret  Committee  of  Correfpondence,  the  29th  April  18 12. 

READ  a  letter  from  the  Right  honourable  the  Prefident  of  the  Board  of  Com- 
miffioners,  dated  the  27  th  inftant. 

Read  alfo,  and  approved,  draught  of  letter  to  the  Prefident  of  the  Board  of  Com- 
mifTioners,  in  reply. 

AT  a  Secret  Court  of  Diredors,  held  on  Wednefday  the  29th  April 
1812. 

THE  letter  from  the  Right  honourable  the  Prefident  of  the  Board  of  Commif- 
fioners,  dated  the  27th,  and  read  in  Court  the  28th  inftant,  was  again  read. 

10  The 


20     CORRESPONDENCE  bcttoecn  PRESIDENT  of  INDIA  BOARD 

The  Chairman  from  the  Committee  of  Correfpondence  laid  before  the  Court, 
draught  of  a  propofed  letter  in  reply  thereto  , — 

And  the  fame  was  read,  and  unanlniouily  approved. 

My  Lord,  Eaft  India  Houfe,  29th  April  1812. 

THE  letter  which  the  Chairman  and  Deputy  Chairman  had  tlie  honour  of 
receiving  from  your  Lordfhip  on  the  27th  inflant,  was  the  day  following  laid  before 
the  Court  of  Direfiors,  and  engaged  their  moil  fcrious  attention ;  it  has  again 
been  confidered  by  them  this  day  ;  and  we  have  now  to  fubmit  to  your  Lordlhip 
the  anfwer  which  they  have  inftrufted  us  to  make  to  it ;  an  anfwer,  which,  from 
having  before  v/ell  reflected  on  the  principal  fubject  of  your  Lordfhip's  letter, 
delivers  their  mature  opinion  ;  and,  as  they  prefume  to  hope,  in  the  leafl  time 
poflible,  being  fenfible,  with  your  Lordfhip,  that  in  the  prefent  critical  period  of 
the  negotiation  all  unneceflary  delay  is  to  be  avoided. 

It  IS  with  extreme  concern  the  Court  find,  that  fmce  the  publication  of  the 
correfpondence  between  the  Prefident  of  the  Board  of  Commiflioners  and  the 
Court  of  Direftors,  on  the  momentous  queftion  of  the  renewal  of  the  Company's 
charter,  His  Majefty's  Minifters  have  been  led  by  the  reprefentations  which  have 
been  made  to  them,  "  to  entertain  an  opinion  that  they  would  befl  confult  the 
"  public  intereft  by  not  confining  the  import  trade  from  the  Eafl  Indies  to  the 
"  port  of  London,"  and  that  they  ftill  hold  this  opinion. 

Not  having  been  made  acquainted  with  the  particulars  of  thofe  reprefentations,. 
and  having  urged  various  arguments  which  remain  unanfwered,  againft  the 
meafure  of"  opening  the  out-ports  to  the  trade  from  India,  the  Court  under  the 
difadvantages  of  fuch  a  fituation  are  imperioufly  called  to  the  confideration  of 
the  circumllances  in  which  the  Company  are  now  placed,  and  in  which,  according 
to  the  beft  judgment  they  can  form,  the  Company  would  be  placed,  if  the  new 
charter  fhould  open  the  out-ports  of  the  United  Kingdom  to  the  returns  of  the 
Indian  trade. 

Whatever  may  be  thought,  my  Lord,  by  the  merchants  of  this  country,  of  their 
right  to  enter  into  the  poifefTion  of  a  trade  acquired  and  maintained  through 
long  ftruggles  and  viciffitudes,  at  immenfe  expenfe,  by  the  Eaft  India  Company  ;• 
a  trade  ftill  intimately  connefted  with  the  f'ecurity  of  the  vafl  empire  which  the 
fame  Company  have  gained,  and  adminifter  for  the  benefit  of  the  nation  at  large  j. 
the  Court  of  Directors  are  of  opinion,  that  the  facrifices  they  agreed  to  make  of 
that  trade  to  the  public  feeling,  or,  if  they  may  be  permitted  to  exprefs  their 
ideas  more  accurately,  the  public  prejudice,  were  very  large ;  and  they  yielded 
to  them,  undoubtedly,  under  a  firm  belief,  not  at  that  time  difcouraged  by  Hi^ 
Majefty's  Minifters,  that  the  importations  from  India  would  be  confined  to  London, 
as  well  as  that  the  exclufive  privilege  of  the  China  trade  would  be  carefully  fecured 
to  the  Company.  But  the  conceflions  frankly  made  by  the  Court  of  Directors 
and  Proprietors,  who  regard  themfelves  aKvays  as  a  part  of  the  public,  and  wiih 
as  much  as  poffible  to  be  lin  unifon  with  it,  have,  it  appears,  only  encouraged 
further  demands ;  and  if  the  tide  of  prejudice,  of  popular  clamour,  of  moft 
extravagant  expectation,  and  unbounded  pretenflon,  which  have  been  more  induf- 
trioufly  than  fairly  excited,  were  now  to  determine  the  public  Councils,  not  a 
veftige  would  remain  of  that  great  fabric  which  has  been  reared  in  the  courfe  of 
two  centuries,  uniting  v.ith  commerce  an  imperial  dominion,  which  would  be 
fhaken  to  its  foundation  by  the  deftruftion  of  that  fyitem  which  ha.->  acquired  and 
prefer ved  it. 

It  is  no  furprife,  my  Lord,  to  the  Court,  though  it  is  undoubtedly  a  great 
confolation,  that  His  Majefty's  Minifters  unite  with  the  "  great  interefts  of  policy, 
"  and  of  revenue,"  thofe  of  the  Eaft  India  Company  ;  and  that  it  muft  hence 
be  their  objeft  to  continue  the  political  functions  of  tlie  Company,  and  the  means^ 
which  are  necefiarv  for  the  maintenance  of  thofe  fundions.  On  this  bafis  the 
Court  are  happy  to  have  the  honour  of  meeting  His  Majefty's  Minifters,  and  to 
continue  the  prefent  difcufTion. 

It  is  perfe6l:iy  known,  that  for  a  feries  of  years  paft,  fmce  the  Indian  territory 
has  been  loaded  with  an  immenfe  political  debt,  the  Company  have  derived  no- 

furplus 


end  CHAIRMAN,  &c.  of  The  EAST  INDIA  COMPANY. 


2  1 


furplus  from  the  revenues  ;  they  have  carried  on  the  currency  of  tlieir  home 
affairs,  they  have  even  aided  the  political  concerns  of  India  ;  and  above  all, 
they  have  made  good  the  dividends  to  the  proprietors  from  the  profits  on  their 
commerce  ;  and  of  late  years  thefe  profits  have  been  derived  chielly  from  the 
China  trade.  From  the  flill  exillina;  territorial  debts  of  tlie  Company,  and  the  fcale 
of  their  Indian  expenditure,  after  all  endeavours  to  reduce  it,  the  Court  of  Direc- 
tors have  no  profpeft  of  pecuniary  acquiiitions,  except  through  the  fame  medium 
of  commerce,  for  many  years  to  come  ;  and,  as  already  intimated,  it  is  the  com- 
mercial profits  of  the  Company  which  enable  them  to  difcharge  the  political 
fundions  afligned  to  them  in  the  management  of  the  Indian  empire.  Without 
this  refource,  or  fome  equivalent  one  not  within  their  power,  the  dividends  could 
not  be  continued,  the  value  of  the  llock  would  diminilh,  and  the  Company  be 
brought  to  a  Hate  of  diffolution. 


■^Cl 


It  is  the  extinftion  or  material  diminution  of  the  commercial  profits,  arifing 
chiefly,  as  we  have  faid,  from  the  China  trade,  that  we  apprehend  from  the 
opening  of  the  out-ports  to  the  returns  of  the  Indian  commerce.  If  this  extinc- 
tion or  diminution  were  to  take  place,  your  Lordfliip  will  doubtlefs  agree  with  the 
Court  in  admitting,  that  the  fatal  confequences  they  contemplate  would  follow  ; 
and  that  after  going  on  a  few  years  on  the  new  plan,  the  Company  would  be  fo 
impaired  in  its  refources,  as  to  be  inadequate  to  the  important  part  allotted  to  it 
in  the  fyftem  of  Indian  adminiftration. 

When  the  Court  of  Directors  thus  view  the  confequences  of  opening  the  out- 
ports,  His  Majelty's  Minillers  will  not  blame  the  anxiety  with  which  they  re- 
fpecttully  contend  againft  that  meafure.  The  duty  they  owe  to  their  conftituents, 
to  their  own  charafters,  and  to  the  public,  requires  them  in  fuch  a  cafe  to  aft 
with  the  greateft  circumfpeclion,  in  order  to  obtain  a  reafonable  affurance  that 
the  terms  of  the  new  Charter  will  be  fuel)  as  will  enable  the  Comp:my  to  go 
on  efficiently  in  the  performance  of  the  political  fundions  it  has  hitherto  dif- 
charged. 

We  do  not  apprehend,  my  Lord,  that  there  is  any  difference  in  principle  oa 
thefe  points  between  His  Majefty's  Minifters  and  the  Court  of  Diredors  j  the 
main  difference  in  refpecl  to  the  queflion  of  opening  the  out-ports  is,  as  to  the 
practical  effects  of  that  meafure.  It  appeared  in  the  conference  we  had  the 
honour  of  holding  with  the  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer  and  your  Lordfliip,  to 
be  his  opinion  that  checks  could  be  devifed  to  prevent  an  indefinite  extent  of 
fmuggling  Tea,  ruinous  to  the  Company,  which  we  fear  from  opening  the  out- 
ports  to  the  Indian  trade  ;  we  have  already  given  many  reafons  for  thinking 
that  the  practice  of  fmuggling  would,  in  fuch  cafe,  be  uncontrollable.  Thofe- 
reafons,  which  need  not  to  be  repeated  here,  we  believe  it  will  be  difficult  for 
the  parties  molt  adverfe  to  the  Company  to  refute  ;  but  the  fubjecl  being  fo  im- 
portant in  the  prefent  dilcuffion,  we  beg  leave  to  add  a  few  more  obfervations 
on  it. 

It  is  a  fact  notorious,  tliat  tea  has  been  fmuggled  by  the  way  of  India  into 
this  country,  even  when  the  duty  was  comparatively  finall,  when  the  Indian 
import  trade  was  confined  to  eight  or  ten  Company's  fhips,  and  to  the  river- 
Thames.  How  much  more,  then,  is  fmuggling  beyond  all  bounds  to  be  ex- 
pefted  when  the  fhips  fhall  be  unlimited  in  number  and  fize,  and  may  refort 
to  the  out-ports  of  England,  Scotland,  and  Ireland  ?  This  pracHce  would  be 
much  facilitated,  becaufe  in  the  numerous  Eaftern  iflands  not  fubject  to  any 
European  powers,  where  we  have  faid  tea  might  be  brought  for  Englifh  fhips 
rom  China,  there  is  no  uiage  of  clearing  out  veffels,  or  giving  them  papers  or 
manifefts.  It  would  thence  be  eafy  for  them  to  break  bulk  in  the  paffage 
home,  and  as  they  approached  the  coaits  of  Britain  and  Ireland,  to  put  tea,  as 
well  as  other  articles  chargeable  with  duty,  on  board  of  Ihips  and  cutters 
deftined  either  for  the  ports  of  the  continent,  or  the  remote  coafts  of  Scotland 
and  Ireland,  on  which  for  an  hundred  miles  together,  every  where  acceflible 
from  the  fea,  there  is  fcarcely  a  cuftom-houfe,  and  where  cuftom-houfes  could 
not  be  fufficiently  multiplied.  Veffels  of  very  fmall  fize  being  allowed  in  the 
Indian  trade,  they  could  enter  into  ports  and  bays  little  frequented,  and  run 
(32.)  E  goods. 


22      CORRESPONDENCE  hcttueen  PRESIDENT  of  INDIA  BOARD 

goods  to  be  carried  inland,  and  there  difperfed.  In  feme  of  theNorthern  and 
Weflern  ports  of  the  United  Kingdom  we  have  heard  that  collufive  praftices 
between  the  revenue  officers  and  the  fmugglers  are  not  unufual ;  if  this  is  the 
cafe  in  refpeil  to  articles  which  pay  a  comparatively  fmall  duty,  what  would  it 
be  where  the  articles  of  tea  and  Indian  goods  were  in  quellion  ?  Ships  might 
flop  at  intermediate  ports  for  orders,  and  there  fmuggle,  as  thofe  bound  to  the 
Weftern  coail,  at  Cork  and  Falmouth  ;  thofe  to  the  Eaftern  coaft,  at  Falmouth 
and  the  Downs  ;  thofe  goinjr  North-about  on  the  Irifh  and  Scotch  coails. 
Ships  having  feveral  ports  of  difcharge  would  thereby  obtain  facilities  in  fmug- 
gling,  and  the  Itate  of  rehtions  between  this  country  and  parts  of  Northern 
Europe  may  be  fuch  as  to  afford  the  means  of  running  goods  into  thofe  parts 
which  from  their  proximity  may  again  be  able  to  fmuggle  the  goods  into  our 
remote  ports.  In  a  word,  we  are  led  to  appreheiul  that  the  means  and  tempta- 
tion of  fmuggling  tea,  when  an  unlimited  trade  is  permitted  to  India  and  the 
Eaftern  iflands,  mull  be  in  a  very  great  degree  uncontrollable  by  any  checks 
which  His  Majefty'^s  Government  can  in  fuch  circumltances  interpofe  ;  nor  is  it 
to  be  overlooked,  that  a  cluls  of  Indian  goods,  flyled  in  the  revenue  language, 
fro}ytbited,  becaufe  excluded  altogether  as  interfering  with  the  manufadures  of 
this  country,  will  by  all  the  openings  which  the  new  trade  will  produce,  be 
every  where  unavoiclably  brought  into  ufe.  It  is  true,  that  even  if  the  return 
of  India  were  confined  to  the  channel,  as  we  propofe,  fmuggling  might  be 
expeded,  but  certainly  not  in  our  opinion  at  all  to  the  fame  extent  ;  and  had 
we  conceived  otherwife,  the  fame  objeftion  we  now  advance  againft  opening 
the  out-ports,  would  have  been  urged  againft  that  enlargement  of  trade  in  which, 
the  Court  have  acqtnefced,  and  for  the  fame  reafon,  to  prevent  the  ruin  of  the 
Company,  which,  did  His  Majefty's  Minifters  apprehend,  they  would  doubtlefs 
in  either  cafe  have  a  defire  to  prevent,  even  by  retufmg  the  required  conceflions 
to  the  Britifli  merchants. 

With  thefe  views,  my  Lord,  deeply  impreffed  on  the  minds  of  the  Direftors, 
acting  as  they  are  in  a  molt  refponfible  iituation,  is  it  too  much  for  them  to  ex- 
peft  and  to  requeit,  that  they  may  be  honoured  with  the  knowledge  of  thofe 
means  which  His  IMajelty's  Government  may  think  would  be  effectual  to  prevent 
the  practice  of  fmuggling,  under  the  new  circumftances,  to  any  ruinous  or  great 
extent  ?  Could  they  have  a  rcafonable  perfuafion  of  the  pradicability  of  fuch 
prevention,  that  would  undoubtedly  fo  far  leifen  their  fears,  and  the  arguments  on 
which  they  now  feel  it  their  duty  to  infift.  They  hope  not  to  be  mifunderftood 
in  this  propolition,  Alfured  both  of  the  defire  of  His  Majefly's  Minifters,  as  well 
on  account  of  the  Company  as  of  the  revenue,  to  prevent  fmuggling,  and  of  their 
belief  of  the  prafticability  of  doing  fo  ;  feeling  alfo,  as  the  Court  do,  the  delicacy 
of  fceming  to  interfere  in  any  of  the  revenue  regulations  of  Government,  they 
are  yet  fo  circumftanced  in  the  prefent  critical  conjuncture  as  to  find  this  inquiry 
mofl  interefting  to  the  caufe  of  the  Company. 

It  is^  indeed  true  that  the  Public  appear  to  have  a  greater  concern  at  flake  here 
than  the  Companv.  The  Public  may  lofe  the  greater  part  of  a  revenue  of  four 
millions  per  annum,  whilfl  the  Company  can  have  only  to  the  extent  of  one 
million  at  hazard.  But  then  this  one  million  is  all  the  Company's  certain  income; 
if  they  lofe  that,  they  lofe  the  foundation  on  which  their  efficiency  reffs,  unleis  in 
the  new  arrangements  fome  other  rcfource  fliould  be  provided  which  fliould  fecure 
the  dividend  to  the  proprietors,  a  provifion  which  undoubtedly  would  alio  ma- 
terially affect  the  views  the  Court  of  Diredors  now  entertain  from  contemplating 
the  dangers  of  the  Company's  China  trade.  And  fuller  us,  my  Lord,  lince  the 
atfailants  of  the  Company's  privileges  are  fo  loud  in  reprefenting  their  intereib 
as  thofe  of  the  nation  at  large,  to  add  this  remark  concerning  the  nadonal  in- 
tereft  in  the  prefent  quefHou,  that  if  the  revenue  of  nearly  four  millions,  now  fo 
eafily  collected  from  tea,  fliould  fail,  or  fail  to  the  extent  of  only  two  millions, 
other  taxes  muft  he  laid  upon  the  public  to  compeniate  for  that  lofs  ;  and  whether 
the  nation  will  gain  fo  much  crtherwife  by  the  propofed  enlargements  of  trade, 
may  be  a  ferious  queflion  with  thofe  who  have  to  decide  on  this  momentous 
concern  J  with  us  it  is  none.     It  may  deferve  alfo  to  be  recoUetted,  that  with 

the 


and  CHAIRMAN,  &c.  of  The  EAST  INDIA  COMPANY.  23 

the  fall  of  the  Company's  China  trade  will  fall  the  exports  of  woollens  and  metals 
to  the  extent  of  a  million  annually,  by  which  the  profperity  of  the  counties  of 
Cornwall,  Devon,  Somerfet,  Dorfet,  and  Gloucefler,  and  Norfolk  in  fi)nie  mea- 
fure,  have  been  upheld  during  the  arduous  flruggle  of  eighteen  years  in  which 
the  country  has  been  engaged  ;  the  excellent  fleet  of  fliips  employed  by  the 
Company,  with  all  the  long  details  of  interefl  conncfted  with  them,  mufl 
decay,  whillt  the  nation  will  lofe  that  certain  and  regular  fupply  furniflicd  by  the 
Company  of  the  article  of  tea,  an  article,  as  your  Lordfliip  juftly  obferves,  now- 
become  a  neccflary  of  life. 

Before  we  difmifsthis  topic,  may  we  be  allowed  to  bring  under  your  Lordfhip's 
infpeftion  a  fuccind  view  of  the  capital  and  interefts  concerned  in  the  Indian  and 
China  trade  from  the  port  of  London. 

There  are  about  fourteen  hundred  commanders  and  officers  belonging  to  the 
fhips  of  the  Ea(l  India  Company,  befides  the  feamen,  who  may  be  about  eight 
thoufand  ;  the  tradefmen  engaged  in  the  fupply  of  the  Company's  (hipping  In  the 
river  Thames  are  about  twelve  thoufand,  and  the  labourers  employed  in  their 
warehoufes  are  about  three  thoufand  ;  all  thefe,  with  their  families  and  depend- 
ants, making  an  aggregate  of  upwards;  of  thirty  thoufand  perfons,  would,  by  the 
removal  of  the  Indian  trade  from  the  port  of  London,  be  generally  reduced  to 
great  diftrefs,  and  many  of  them  become  burthenfome  to  their  parifhes. 

The  capital  now  employed  in  the  Indian  trade  may  be  moderately  computed  as 
follows : 

The  Company's  Capital  Stock  of  ^6,000,000.  at  the  price  at  which 

many  Proprietors  purchafed,  will  amount  to  -               •  af  10,800,000 

Capital  in  Warehoufes         -               -                 .  _            .  1,000,000 

Capital  in  Ships         -             .              .             _  .             ^  3,800,000 

Capital  in  Docks             .              _                 .  .                 .  400,000 

Capital   of  individuals   in    the   Metropolis   may   be  moderately 

eftimated  at         -              -             .               _  .             .  5,000,000 

.5^21,000,000 

The  trade  in  which  this  large  capital  is  employed  produces,  as  we  have  had 
occafion  repeatedly  to  obferve,  an  annual  revenue  to  Government  of  more  than 
four  millions  fterling  ;  and  the  net  faving  to  Government  from  the  prefcnt  mode 
of  colleding  the  duties  may,  we  conceive,  be  fairly  eftimated  at  .^i  50,009.  per 
annum.  By  means  of  direft  and  indireft  taxation,  the  capital  itfelf  and  the  profits 
upon  it,  yield  a  further  lum  of  large  amount  to  Government ;  but  the  produ<5tive- 
nefs  of  the  capital  in  this  refpect  depends  wholly  upon  the  folidity  of  the  bafis  on 
which  it  refts. 

Thefe,  my  Lord,  are  the  fentlments  and  obfervations  which  we  are  directed  to 
communicate  to  your  Lordfhip.  The  refleiflion  upon  them  has,  we  truft,  been 
mature,  though  the  expreffion  of  them,  In  the  fliort  time  allowed  for  the  prepa- 
ration of  this  letter,  may  require  indulgence.  But  we  are  further  fpeciaily  direfted 
to  add,  that  this  is  a  concern  of  too  great  moment  for  the  Court  to  truft  to  its 
own  judgment,  or  to  aft  on  Its  own  refponfibllity  ;  the  Directors  have  therefore 
fummoncd  a  general  Court  of  Proprietors  to  meet  on  Friday  next,  when  the  cor- 
refpondence  with  your  Lordftiip,  Including  this  letter,  will  be  laid  before  them  for 
their  confidcration. 

We  have  the  honour  to  be, 
My  Lord, 
•v"  Your  Lordfhip's  moft  obedient  humble  fervants, 

(Signed)         Hugh  Inglis,  Edward  Parry, 

Robert  Thorntox,  Charles  Grant, 
The  Right  Honourable  Jacob  Bosaxuuet,      George  Smith, 

the  Earl  of  Buckinghamfliire,  W.  F.  Eli'Hinstone,  Wm,  Astell. 


&c.  ^*^c.  &c. 


AT 


34        CORRESPONDENCE  between  PRESIDENT  c/ INDIA  BOARD 

AT  a  General  Court  of  the  United  Company  of  Merchants  of 
England,  trading  to  the  Eafl  Indies,  held  on  Tuefday  the  5th  May 
1812: 

MINUTES  of  the  laft  Court  of  the  ift  inflant  were  read.  The  Chairman 
acquainted  the  Court,  that  it  is  met  by  adjournment  for  the  purpofe  of  taking  into 
further  confideration  the  papers  which  were  laid  by  the  Court  of  Directors  before 
the  General  Court  on  the  ift  inftant : 

And  the  Court  having  confidered  the  fame  accordingly, 

It  was,  on  a  motion, 
Refolved  unanimouily.  That  this  C.ourt  has  learnt  with  deep  concern  and  fur- 
prize,that  His  Majeily's  Minifters  have  been  induced  to  change  the  view  they  firft 
entertained  of  the  propriety  of  contining  to  the  Port  of  London  the  returns  of  the 
trade  to  India  now  to  be  permitted  to  all  Britifli  fubjecls.  That  the  meafure  of 
opening  the  out-ports  to  veiTels  of  all  defcriptions  from  India,  comprehending  in 
that  term  the  Eailern  lilands,  appears  to  this  Court  to  be  fraught  with  conl'e- 
quences  ruinous  to  the  Company,  and  all  the  long  train  of  interedis  connected 
with  it,  by  removing  from  the  Port  of  London  the  greater  part  of  the  Indian 
trade  which  it  has  hitherto  enjoyed — by  rendering  ufelefs  many  of  the  expenfive 
eftabliihments  formed  there  for  the  merchandize  and  fliipping  of  that  trade,  and 
throwing  out  of  bread  many  thoufands  of  perfons  who  now  derive  conftant  em- 
ployment from  it — by  deranging  the  practice,  and  frulf rating  the  end  of  Ifated 
public  fales,  which  are  ufeful  and  Important,  both  to  the  country  and  the  Com- 
pany, who  arc  neceilarily  reftrifced  to  this  practice ;  but  above  ail,  by  affording 
facilities  for  the  fmuggiing  of  teas  into  the  ports  and  harbours  of  England,  Scot- 
land, and  Ireland,  to  an  extent  unlimited,  and,  as  this  Court  apprehend,  uncon- 
trollable. That  the  coufequence  of  this  muft  be  the.deftruftion  of  the  Company's 
China  trade,  their  beil  fource  of  commercial  p.roht — the  faihu-e  of  their  dividend 
— the  depreciation  of  theii"  flock  ;  and,  unlefs  a  fund  is  provided  from  fome  other 
fource  for  the  payment  of  the  dividend,  inability  on  their  part  to  condnue  to  per- 
form the  funftions  alTigned  to  them  in  the  government  of  Britifli  India  :  That  if 
the  conftitution  by  which  the  Indian  Empire  is  now  adminiflered  Ihould  thus  be 
fubverted,  the  excellent  i'yftem  of  civil  and  military  fervice  formed  under  the 
Company,  and  maintainable  only  by  fuch  a  body,  will  be  broken  down  j  the 
tranquillity  and  happinefs  of  the  vaft  population  which  that  empire  contains ;  the 
interells  of  this  country  in  Afia,  ?jid  its  conftitution  at  home,  will  be  imminently 
endangered. 

That  the  profeiTed  objeft  for  which  thepropofed  changes  are  to  be  made,  and 
fuch  innnenfe  flicrifices  hazarded,  namely,  the  increafe  of  the  commerce  of  this 
kingdom,  cannot  be  in  any  great  degree  attained,  there  being  no  prafticability  of 
extending,  materially,  the  uie  of  our  manufaftures  among  the  Indian  people;  the 
tonnage  allotted  by  the  Company,  or  afforded  by  Indian  fliips  in  the  management 
of  intlividuals,  for  fuch  exports,  not  having  been  fully  occupied.  Neither  does  it 
appear  prafticable  largely  to  augment  the  importation  of  profitable  commodities 
from  thence,  of  all  which  the  example  of  the  American  trade  to  the  Eaft  is  a 
proof.  Britifh  maimfactures  which  they  could  eafily  have  procured,  making  no 
part  of  it,  nor  their  returns  exhibiting  any  new  articles  ol  importance.  That 
therefore  the  trade  novv'  enjoyed  by  the  Company,  and  individuals,  will  be  the 
only  certain  trade  to  which  new  adventurers  can  have  recourfe.  And  this  will  be 
no  addition  to  tlie  commerce  of  the  country,  but  only  a  transfer  from  one  fet  of 
hands  to  another  ;  lb  that  old  eltablifhments  will  be  fubverted  without  fubftituting 
any  thing  equally  good  in  their  place,  and  to  all  appearance  with  great  detriment 
to  the  Nation,  particularly  in  the  defalcation  of  a  large  part  of  the  duties  now 
coUedted  on  tea  to  the  amount  of  four  millions  fterling  per  annum  ;  for  all  which 
defalcation,  whether  one,  or  two,  or  three  millions,  new  taxes  mult  be  laid  on 
the  people. 

That  the  caufe  of  the  Company  has  been  deeply  injured  by  prejudice,  ignorance, 
erroneous  affumptions,  and  of  late   by   extenfive  combinations,  and  by  unfair 

roprefentation,. 


and  CHAIRMAN,  &c.   of  The  EAST  INDIA  COMPANY.  25 

reprefentation,  canvafs,  and  intimidation,  in  all  which  the  merits  and  rit^hts  of 
the  Company,  the  political  intcrefts  of  Britifla  India,  and  of  this  country  as  con- 
nected with  them,  have  been  left  out  of  fight ;  and  the  fingle  object  of  the  exten- 
fion  of  commerce,  an  objed  too  only  of  fpeculation  in  oppofition  to  pad  expe- 
rience, is  the  governuig  principle. 

This  Court,  however,  confidently  hope  that  Parliament  will  not  decide  the  fate 
of  the  Company  on  the  reprefentations  and  demands  of  private  intereds,  but  on 
juft  and  comprehenfive  views  of  national  policy  ;  and  the  Court  muil  alfu  believe 
that  His  Majefty's  Miniflers  are  too  enlightened  and  equitable  finally  to  adopt  any 
meafnre  calculated  to  deftroy  the  commercial  profits  of  the  Company,  and  thereby 
to  difable  them  from  performing  their  political  fundions ;  this  Court,  therefore, 
entirely  approving  both  of  the  firmnefs  which  their  Directors  have  {hewn  in  main- 
taining the  interefts  of  the  Company,  and  of  the  manner  in  which  they  have  in 
t!ie  papers  now  produced  by  them  defended  thofe  interefts,  doth  recommend  it  to 
ihem  to  perfevere  in  the  negotiation  with  His  Majeity's  Miniftcrs  upon  the  fame 
principles,  affured  of  the  determination  of  this  Court  to  fupport  them  to  the 
utmoft  in  maintaining  the  permanence  of  the  Company,  and  the  national  interefts 
which  are  involved  in  their  ftability. 

Refolved  unanimoufly.  That  the  thanks  of  this  Court  be  given  to  Randic  Jack- 
fon,  Efq.  for  his  very  luminous  and  excellent  fpeech  this  day  ;  for  the  great  zeal, 
ability,  and  induftry,  he  has  on  various  occafions,  and  particularly  on  this,  dif- 
played  for  the  honour  and  advantage  of  this  Company. 

Refolved  unanimoufly,  That  the  warmeft  thanks  of  this  General  Court  be 
offered  to  the  Chairman,  Deputy  Chairman,  and  Court  of  Directors  of  this  Com- 
pany, for  their  very  able  conduit  in  the  negotiation  with  Government  for  the 
renewal  of  the  Charter,  ahke  evincing  the  molt  luminous  ideas  of  the  bed  interefts 
of  this  Company,  and  their  mod  honourable  condud  in  the  management  of  fo 
important  a  concern. 

The  Court  then  on  the  Ouedion  adjourned. 

AT  a  Secret  Committee  of  Correfpondence  the  27th  November  1812. 

THE  Chairman  reponed  to  the  Committee,  that  he  and  the  Deputy  Chairmart 
had  this  morning  a  conference  with  the  Prefident  of  the  Board  of  Commiflioners, 
on  the  fubjed  of  the  renewal  of  the  Company's  Charter  ;  at  which  his  Lordfliip; 
declared  it  to  be  the  intention  of  His  Majedy's  Miniders  not  to  abandon  the  pro. 
pofition  they  had  made  for  allowing  adired  trade  between  India  and  the  out-ports 
of  the  United  Kingdom  ;  but  that  the  propofition  might  be  modified,  by  confining 
the  ports  to  which  fhips  fiiall  be  allowed  to  import  goods  from  India,  to  a  number 
lefs  than  that  to  which  the  Warehoufing  Ad  now  extends.  Lord  Buckingham- 
fhire,  however,  was  defirous,  before  refuming  the  correfpondence  relating  to  it, 
that  the  Comnnttee  of  Correfpondence  Ihould  hold  a  conference  with  Lord  Liver- 
pool and  himfelf  upon  the  fubjed. 

The  Chairman  further  dated,  that  in  reply  to  Lord  Buckinghamdiire  the 
Deputy  Chairmain  and  himfelf  declined  making  any  obfervation  at  prefent,  but 
dated  their  intention  to  communicate  the  fubdance  of  his  Lorddiip's  remarks  to  the 
Committee  of  Correfpondence  ;  and  alfo  exprefled  their  wi(h,  that  the  Committee 
might  have  the  honour  of  waiting  upon  his  Lordfliip,  previouHy  to  the  propofed 
conference  with  Lord  Liverpool,  to  which  Lord  Buckinghamdiire  confented. 

The  Committee  in  confequence  refolved  to  ademble  at  eleven  o'clock  on 
Tuefday  next,  for  the  purpofe  of  deliberating  upon  the  fubjed  of  the  above 
communication,  previoufly  to  waiting  upon  Lord  Buckinghamlhire  at  the  hour 
of  two  on  that  day. 

My  Lord,  Ead  India  Houfe,  28th  November  1812. 

WE  have  the  honour  to  acquaint  your  Lordlhip  that  we  have  communicated 
to  a  Secret  Committee  of  Correfpomience  the  fubdance  of  the  converfation  which 
we  had  yederday  the  honour  of  holding  with  your  Lordfliip,  INIr.  Wallace  and 

(32.)  G  Mr. 


ib      CORRESPONDENCE  I'efween  PRESIDENT  ef  INDIA  BOARD- 

Mr.  Sullivan,  and  in  which  it  was  notified  to  us,  that  the  opinion  of  Hi&  Majefty's 
Government  remains  unaltered  regarding  the  expediency  of  not  confining  the 
import  trade  from  the  Eaft  Indies  to  the  port  of  London. 

The  Committee  received  this  communication  with  the  deepefl:  concern  and 
regret  ;  its  members  unanimoufly  concurring  with  us  in  opinion,  that  fliould  the 
propofed  extenfion  of  the  trade,  even  to  a  fmall  number  of  the  out-porta  of  the 
kingdom,  be  fanftioned  by  the  Legiflature,  the  meafure  will  be  highly  preju- 
dicial to  the  public  revenue,  injurious  to  the  Eail  India  Company,  and;  detri- 
mental to  the  profperity  of  the  merchants,  manufafturers,  traders,  and  other 
numerous  bodies  intereited  in  the  commerce  with  India,  as  now  carried  on 
through  the  channel  of  the  river  Thames.  The  Committee  being  flill  defirous-of 
an  opportunity  of  renewing  their  reprefentations  to  your  Lordfliip  upon  this 
important  queftion,  before  any  communication  is  made  to  the  Court  on  the  fub- 
jeft,  have  direcled.  us  to  requefl  the  honour  of  a  conference  with  your  Lordfhip 
for  that  purpofe.  Should  it  be  perfeftly  convenient  to  your  Lordfliip  to  receive 
the  Deputation  on  Tuefday  next  at  two  o'clock,  we  Ihall  be  able  to  lay  the  refult 
of  the  conference  before  the  Court  on  the  following  day. 

We  have  the  honour  to  be, 
my  Lord, 
The  Right  honourable  Your  Lordfliip's  moft  obedient 

the  Earl  of  Buckinghamfhire,  humble  fervants,. 

&c.  &c.  &c.  (Signed)  Hugh  Inglis. 

Robert  Thornton. 

Sir,  India  Board,  28th  November  18 12. 

I  HAD  the  honour  of  receiving  your  letter  of  this  day,  propofing  that  the 
Secret  Committee  of  Correfpondence  fliould  wait  upon  me  at  this  Board  on  Tuef- 
day next. 

I  fliall  be  happy  to  have  the  honour  of  feeing  them  ;  but  as  I  am  defirous  that 
Lord  Liverpool,  and  other  members  of  the  Board,  fhould  be  prefent  at  the  in- 
terview, and  as  I  find  that  twelve  o'clock  will  be  more  convenient  to  them  than 
two,  you  will,  I  hope,  have  no  objedion  to  make  the  appointment  for  the  former 
hour. 

I  have  the  honour  to  be. 
Your  mofl  obedient  and  faithful  humble  fervant, 
Sir  Hugh  Ing'lis,  Bart.  (Signed)  Buckinghamjhire. 

kc.  Sec.  &c. 


AT  a  Secret  Court  of  DIreftors  held  on  Wednefday  the  2d  December 

l8l2. 

THE  Chairman  acquainted  the  Court,  that  a  meeting  took  place  yellerday  at 
the  Board,  between  feveral  of  His  Majefty's  Minifters  and  the  Committee  of 
Correfpondence,  upon  the  fubjecl  of  the  renewal  of  the  Company's  exclufive 
privileges,  when  it  was  agreed  that  no  minutes  fhould  be  then  taken,  in  order 
to  afibrd  the  moft  unreferved  mode  of  carrying  on  the  difcuilion,  at  the  conclu- 
fion  of  which  it  was  underftood,  that  His  Majefty's  Minifters  would  communi- 
cate in  writing  their  fentiments  upon  the  whole  of  the  fubjeft. 

AT  a  Secret  Court  of  Diredors  held  on  Tuefday  the    15th  Decem- 
ber 181 2. 

MINUTES  of  the  2d  inftant  were  read  and  approved. 

The  Chairman  ftated,  that  two  conferences  between  His  Majefty's  Minifters 
and  the  Committee  of  Correfpondence  had  taken  place  fince  the  2d  inftant,  viz. 
on  the  5th  and  12th  inftant,  but  that  he  had  nothing  further  to  communicate,  to 
the  Court  in  confequence. 

AT 


end-  CHAIRMAN,  &c.  of  The  EAST  INDIA  COMPANY.  27 

AT  a  Secret  Court  of  Diredors  held  on  Wcdnefday  the  16th  Decem- 
ber I  Si  2. 

THE  Court  adverting  to  the  ftatcment  which  the  Chairman  had,  with  their 
approbation,  made  to  the  General  C'ourt  to-day  as  to  the  late  conferences  with 
His  Majefty's  Minifters,  upon  the  fubjeft  of  renewing  the  Company's  exclufive 
privileges ;  and  this  Court  deeming  it  a  proper  mark  of  refpeft  to  His  Majeily's 
Minifters  that  they  ihould  bo  apprifed  of  the  fome  as  early  as  poflible : 

The  Chairman  and  Deputy  Chairman  were  requefted  to  wait  on  the  Prefident 
of  the  Board  of  Commiflioners  for  the  Aifairs  of  India  to-morrow,  to  communi- 
cate to  his  Lordfhip  what  had  paffed  in  the  General  Court  this  day,  and  to  ftate 
to  his  Lordfliip,  that  the  Court  of  Direftors  continue  decidedly  to  entertain  the 
opinion  which  they  have  formerly  exprefled  to  His  Majefty's  Minifters  as  to  the 
ruinous  confequences  of  admitting  the  imports  from  India  to  the  out-ports  of  this 


kingdom 


'  o 


AT  a  Secret  Court  of  Direftors  held  on  Friday  the  i8th  December 

l8l2. 

THE  Court  having  refolved  itfelf  into  a  Committee  of  the  whole  Court, 
And  being  refumed,  the  following  report  from  the  Committee  of  the  whole 
Court  was  read : 

"  The  Committee  taking  into  confideration  the  prefent  ftate  of  the  negotia- 
"  tion  with  His  Majefty's  Minifters  for  the  renewal  of  the  Company's  exclufive 
"  privileges,  deem  it  to  be  highly  important  that  the  fentiments  of  the  Court  of 
**  Diredors,  upon  the  propofition  brought  forward  for  admitting  the  imports 
**  from  India  to  the  out-ports  of  this  kingdom,  fliould  be  unequivocally  known 

"  The  Committee  therefore  recommend  to  the  Court  to  pafs  a  refolution' 
"  ftating,  that  the  propofition  in  queftion  is,  for  various  reafons  already  fet  forth 
"  in  the  Court's  writings,  pregnant  with  ruin  to  the  affairs  of  the  Company, 
"  inafmuch  as  it  would  render  them  incapable  of  performing  the  functions  allotted 
*'  to  them,  as  well  in  their  commercial  as  in  their  political  capacity ;  and  that  the 
*'  Court  cannot,  therefore,  confiftently  with  their  duty  to  their  conftituents,  re- 
"  commend  to  them  the  adoption  of  fuch  a  propofition." 

And  it  was,  on  the  queftion, 
Refolved  unaniinouily,  That  this  Court  approve  the  faid  report. 

And  the  Chairman  and  Deputy  Chairman  were  requefted  to  wait  on  the  Ri"-ht 
Honourable  the  Prefident  of  the  Board  of  Commiftioners  for  the  Affairs  of  India, 
and  to  communicate  to  his  Lordftiip  the  above  proceedings  of  this  day. 

AT  a  Secret  Court  of  Direftors  held  on  Tuefday  the  22d  December 
1812. 

THE  Chairman  acquainted  the  Court,  that  in  obedience  to  their  refolution  of 
the  18th  inftant  the  Deputy  and  himfelf,  on  Saturday  laft,  waited  on  the  Right 
Honourable  the  Prefident  of  the  Board  of  Commiffioners  for  the  Affairs  of  .India, 
with  a  copy  of  the  minutes  of  the  Secret  Court  of  the  18th  inftant. 

AT  a  Secret  Committee  of  Correfpondence  the   aSth  December 
1812. 

Read  a  letter  from  the  Right  Honourable  the  Prefident  of  the  Board  of 
Commiffioners  for  the  Affairs  of  India  to  the  Chairman  and  Deputy  Chairman, 
dated  the  34th  inftant ;   and 

Paragraphs  propofed  to  form  part  of  the  draught  of  a  Letter  to  his  Lordfhip, 
in  reply. 


AT 


^8      CORRESPONDENCE  bet%ueen  PRESIDENT  of  INDIA  BOARD 

AT  a  Secret  Court  of  Directors  held  on  Monday  the  28th  Decerabei 
1812. 

MINUTES  of  the  15th,  i6th,  18th,  and  2 2d  inflant,  were  read  and  approved. 

Read  a  letter  from  the  Ri^ht  Honourable  the  Prefident  of  the  Board  of 
ConimiiTioners  for  the  Affairs  of  India  to  the  Chairman  and  Deputy  Chairman, 
dated  the  24th  inflant ;  alfo. 

Paragraphs  propofcd  to  form  part  of  the  draught  of  a  Letter  to  his  Lordfliip, 
in  reply : 

Gentlemen,  India  Board,  24th  December  1812. 

THE  conferences  held  at  this  Board  with  the  Committee  of  Correfpondence, 
having  had  for  their  objecl  the  mod  vmreferved  and  candid  difcuflions  upon 
points  of  the  greatefl  importance,  with  refped  to  the  renewal  of  the  Eafl 
India  Company's  Charter,  and  it  having  been  underftood  that  no  further  fteps 
fhould  be  taken  upon  the  fubjeft  until  a  communication  was  made  by  me, 
in  an  official  fhape,  to  the  Court  of  Direftors,  it  was  not  without  fome  furprife 
that  the  copy  of  their  refolution  of  the  18  th  inflant  was  received  by  His  Ma- 
jefty's  Government,  becaufe  that  refolution,  adopted  under  fuch  circumftances, 
appeared  to  them  to  have  for  its  objeft  an  abrupt  termination  to  all  difcuffion. 

They  cannot,  however,  confider  it  the  lefs  incumbent  upon  them,  through  you, 
as  the  proper  official  channel,  to  bring  before  the  Court  of  Directors  the  princi- 
ples upon  which  the  opinions  I  have  to  apprize  you  have  been  formed,  in  order 
to  prefent  to  the  Proprietors  and  the  Public  a  corred  view  of  a  fubjed  to  which 
fo  much  importance  is  attached. 

I  {hall,  therefore,  convey  to  you  the  fentiments  of  His  Majefty's  Government 
precifely  in  the  terms  I  fhould  have  done  if  no  intimation  had  been  made  of 
the  refolution  of  the  Court  of  Direftors  of  the  i8th  inflant ;  and  with  that  objeft 
I  proceed  to  inform  you,  that  with  regard  to  thofe  points  to  which  the  attention 
of  the  Committee  of  Correfpondence  has  been  chiefly  direfted  at  the  conferences 
held  at  this  Board,  the  principle  uniformly  maintained  as  the  bafis  of  any  arrange- 
ment for  the  renewal  of  the  Eafl  India  Company's  Charter,  viz.  that  the  mer- 
chants of  this  country  have  a  fubflantial  claim  to  as  much  liberty  of  trade 
as  they  can  enjoy  without  injury  to  other  important  national  interefts,  cannot 
be  departed  from. 

It  was  in  the  hope  that  the  opening  T)f  the  export  trade  with  India  to  the  mer- 
chants of  the  City  of  London  and  of  the  out-ports,  whilfl  the  import  was  con- 
fined to  the  Port  of  London,  might  not  be  found  inconfiftent  with  this  principle, 
that  a  difpofition  was  felt  by  the  Government  to  propofe  an  arrangement  to  that 
cff"ea. 

In  confequence,  however,  of  the  promulgation  of  fuch  an  intention,  feveral 
perfons  interefled  in  the  commerce  of  the  out-ports  reprefented  hi  the  flrongeft 
terms,  that  the  propofcd  limitation  of  the  import  trade  from  India,  rendered  the 
extenfion  of  the  export  of  no  value  to  them  ;  and  they  declared  themfelves 
prepared  to  maintain  that  this  limitation  was  not  called  for  by  any  adequate 
motive  of  public  interefl. 

They  urged  their  claim  to  an  equal  participation  in  the  general  trade  to  India, 
and  their  conviftion,  that  the  ground  upon  which  the  exclufion  in  favour  of  the 
Port  of  London  was  defended,  viz.  the  additional  danger  of  fmuggling,  could  not 
be  fupported  ;  and  they  were  fatisfied  that  the  alleged  danger  might  be  obviated 
by  revenue  regulations.  They  alfo  entered  largely  into  the  fubject  of  the  China 
trade,  contending  ftrenuoufly  againfl  the  renewal  of  the  Company's  exclufive 
Charter,  and  ftated  their  reaibns  for  believing,  that  meafures  might  be  adopted 
by  which  that  trade  could  be  open,  without  injury  to  the  revenue,  and  without 
liazarding  the  continuance  of  the  intercourfe  with  the  Emperor  of  China's  do- 
minions. 

The  importance  attached  to  thefe  reprefentations  induced  His  Majefty's  Go- 
vernment  to  revife  the  arrangement  which  had  been  in  contemplation  ;  and 
although  they  did  not  fee  caufe,  under  all  the  circumftances  bearing  upon  this 

queftion, 


-oKt/  CHAIRMAN,  &c.  of  The  EAST  INDIA  COMPANY.  39 

queftion,  to  alter  the  opinion  they  had  entertained  of  the  propriety  of  continuing 
the  cxifting  rcftrictiong  upon  the  commercial  intorcourfe  with  China,  and  of  pre- 
ferving  to  the  Company  the  monopoly  of  the  tea  tra.de,  they  neverthelefs  felt  that 
the  merchants  belonging  to  the  out-poits  had  eftablillied  a  claim  againfl  an  ab- 
folute  reftriction-of  the  import  trade  to  the  Port  of  London. 

Under  this  impreflion  I  addreflfed  my  letter  to  you  on  the  27th  of  April  ultimo. 

The  obfervations  made  by  the  Committee  of  Correfpondence,  in  their  reoly  of 
the  29th  of  the  fame  month,  did  not  fail  to  engage  the  ferious  attention  of  His 
Majelty's  Government ;  but  after  the  beft  examination  of  thole  obl'ervations, 
aided  by  all  the  information  they  have  obtained  from  the  Boards  of  Culloms  and 
Excife,  they  are  not  enabled  to  concur  in  the  opinion,  that  the  propofed  exten- 
fion  of  the  import  trade  from  India  would  be  produclive  of  any  great  increafe  of 
fmuggling,  and  certainly  not  to  the  extent  flated  by  the  Court  of  Dircdors. 

It  is  conceived,  that  the  apprehenfions  entertained  on  this  account  might  be 
obviated  by  various  regulations,  fach  as  confining  the  trade  to  thofe  ports  which 
are,  or  may  be,  fo  circumftanced  as  to  afford  fecurity  to  the  due  colledion  of  the 
revenue,  by  the  limiiation  of  it  to  veffels  of  four  hundred  tons  burthen  ;  by  at- 
taching the  forfeiture  of  the  ihip  and  cargo  to  the  difcovery  of  any  illicit  articles 
on  board  ;  by  an  extenfion  of  the  Manifeft  Aft ;  by  regulations  for  checking  the 
praflice  of  fmuggling  in  the  Ihips  of  the  Company ;  as  well  as  by  other  provi- 
fions  too  minute  to  be  entered  into  at  prefent,  but  which  will  of  courfe  be  at- 
tended to  in  difcuffing  the  details  of  the  fubjefl:. 

I  am  perfuaded  it  will  not  efcape  your  obfervation,  that  from  obvious  confider- 
ations  the  Englifli  Channel  mull  at  all  times,  efpecially  in  time  of  peace,  afford 
facihties  and  inducements  for  fmuggling,  which  do  not  occur  elfewhere  to  the 
fame  extent,  on  account  of  the  clandefline  traffic  already  eilablifhed,  and  the 
ready  communication  with  the  oppofite  fhore. 

But  with  refpefl:  to  the  whole  of  this  part  of  the  queftion,  it  is  impoffible  to  lofe 
fight  of  the  deep  interefl  which  the  Government  mull  feel  in  the  prevention  of  fmug- 
gling. The  interefts  of  the  Company  are  no  doubt  involved  in  it,  but  thofe  of 
the  Government  are  ftill  more  concerned ;  and  it  cannot  be  fuppofed  ihat  they 
would  bring  forward  any  propofition  which  appeared  to  them  likely  to  endanger 
a  revenue  of  from  three  to  four  millions,  or  that,  if  a  defalcation  fhould  unex- 
pectedly arife,  they  would  not  immediately  take  meafures  for  applying  a  remedy. 
1  Jip  Company  have  therefore  an  ample  ground  of  confidence,  not  only  in  the 
difpofition  of  Government,  but  in  their  effeftual  co-operation  on  thofe  points  on 
which  the  Court  of  Directors  appear  to  feel  the  greatell  anxiety,  and  on  which 
they  urged  their  ftrongeft  objedions  to  the  propofed  arrangement. 

The  fcveral  articles  which  may  be  imported  from  the  countries  within  the  limits 
of  the  Company's  Charter,  and  which  are  charged  with  an  ad  valorem  duty,  al- 
though, with  the  exception  of  tea,  they  bear  a  very  fmall  proportion  to  the  whole 
of  the  revenue  collecled  from  the  trade  from  India  and  China,  are  neverthelefs 
of  fufficient  importance  to  demand  the  attention  of  Government,  as  the  quellion 
may  affed  the  interefts  of  the  Eafl  India  Company,  as  well  as  thofe  of  the  public 
revenue. 

With  this  view,  it  will  be  neceffary  to  confider,  whether,  with  refped  to  fome 
of  them,  a  rated  duty  might  not  be  fubftituted  ;  and  whetlier  regulations  may 
not  be  made  for  the  fecurity  of  the  duty,  ad  valorem,  on  thofe  articles  which 
Ihall  continue  to  be  fo  charged,  and  which  at  the  fame  time  fliall  prevent  their 
being  purchafed  at  a  price  likely  to  operate  injurioully  to  the  manufadurers  of 
tliis  country. 

The  juftice  of  the  obfervations  refpeding  the  additional  number  of  Europeans 
that  vv'ould  find  their  way  to  India  in  confequence  of  the  extenfion  of  the  trade, 
luuil  be  admitted  to  a  certain  extent ;  but  it  is  obvious  that  this  danger  would  arill- 
from  the  extenfion  of  the  export  trade  to  India,  and  would  fcarcely  be  leffened 
by  confining  the  import  trade  to  the  port  of  London.  Every  individual  during 
his  refidence  in  India  would  of  courfe  be  fubjed  to  the  exifting  regulations  of  the 
local  governments. 

(32.)  H        •  The 


3©      CORRESPONDENCE  bei-ioem  PRESIDENT  cf  INDIA  BOARD 

The  fituatlon  of  Lafcars,  who  arc  occafionally  employed  in  the  navigation  of 
fliips  from  India  to  this  country,  would  demand  the  humane  interpofition  of  the 
Legiflature  ;  and  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  effectual  provifion  for  their  mainte- 
nance while  in  England,  and  for  their  return  to  India,  will  be  made. 

Having  gone  through  the  principal  points  to  which  our  recent  conferences 
have  related,  it  may  be  proper  for  me  to  apprize  you,  that  His  Majefly's  Govern- 
ment are  of  opinion,  that  the  eflabliniment  of  King's  troops,  which  may  be 
requifite  for  the  prefervation  of  the  peace  and  fecurity  of  the  Britifli  pofleffions 
in  India,  muft  depend  upon  circumftances  that  it  would  be  difficult  to  anticipate ; 
but  as  thefinanrial  fituation  of  the  Company  may  render  it  neceflary  that  the 
numbers  to  be  maintained  at  their  charge  fhnuld  be  limited,  there  can  be  no 
obje£lion  to  propofe  to  Parliament  to  fpecify  that  number  by  legiflative  enaft. 
ment. 

I  have  thus  endeavoured  to  bring  the  fentiments  of  His  Majefty's  Government 
before  you,  with  the  fame  candour  that  has  been  evinced  in  our  recent  difcuflions  ; 
and  I  can  venture  confidently  to  aflure  you,  that  my  colleagues,  as  well  as  myfelf, 
are  moll  anxious  to  promote  fuch  an  adjuftment  between  the  Public  and  the  Court 
of  Proprietors  as  may  be  fatisfadory  to  all  parties. 

The  expediency  of  adhering  to  that  fyftem  by  which  the  government  of  India 
has  been  adminiftered  through  the  intervention  of  the  Company  is  ftrongly  felt 
by  His  Majefly's  Government ;  but  it  mufl  not  be  fuppofed  that  there  are  no  limits 
to  that  expediency,  or  that  there  are  no  advantages  which  might  refult  from  a 
different  courfe. 

It  is  for  the  Court  of  Proprietors  to  decide,  whether  their  own  interefls,  as  well 
as  thofe  of  the  numerous  perfons  depending  upon  them,  both  at  home  and  abroad, 
can  befl  be  preferved  by  their  rejeftion  of,  or  acquiefcence  in,  thofe  conditions, 
upon  which  alone,  confiftent  with  their  public  duty,  His  Majefly's  Government 
can  fubrait  a  propofition  to  Parliament  for  the  renewal  of  the  charter. 

You,  gentlemen,  muft  be  aware,  that  from  its  approaching  expiration,  provifion 
muft  be  made,  without  delay,  for  the  future  government  of  India,  and  that  His 
Royal  Highnefs  the  Prince  Regent,  in  his  fpeech  at  the  opening  of  the  prefent 
feffion,  has  called  upon  Parliament  to  make  fuch  provifion. 

I  have  the  honour  to  be. 
Gentlemen, 
Your  moft  obedient  and  faithful  humble  Servant, 

(Signed)         Buckinghawjhire. 
The  Chairman  and  Deputy  Chairman 
of  the  Court  of  Directors. 


AT  a  Secret  Committee  of  Correfpondence,  the  30th  Dec.  18 12. 

DRAUGHT  of  a  letter  to  the  Prefidcnt  of  the  Board  of  Commiffioners,  in 
reply  to  his  Lordfhip's  letter  of  the  241!!  infiant,  was  read  and  unanimoufly 
approved. 

AT  a  Secret    Court   of  Direftors,  held  on  Wednefday  t!ie  30th 
December  1812. 

DRAUGHT  of  a  letter  to  the  Prefidcnt  of  the  Board  of  Commiffioners,  in 
reply  to  his  Lordfhip's  letter  of  the  24th  inftant,  was  read  and  unanimoully 
approved. 

My  Lord,  Eaft  India  Houfe,  30th  December  181 2. 

WE  were  honoured  on  the  25th  inftant  with  the  letter  wliich  your  Lordihip  was 
pleafed  to  addreis  to  us  on  the  preceding  day,  and  have  laid  it  before  the  Court  ot 
Direftors. 

We  are  inftrufted  by  the  Court  to  acquaint  your  Lordfliip,  that  a  General  Court 
of  Proprietors  of  Eaft  India  Stock  has  been  fummoned,  for  the  fpecial  purpofe 
of  taking  into  confideration  the  important  fubjefts  treated  of  in  your  Lordfliip *s 

letter 


««i  CHAIRMAN,  &c.  0/ The  EAST  INDIA  COMPANY.  31 

letter  ;  and  we  fhall  lofe  no  time  in  fubmitting  to  your  Lordfliip  the  refult  of  the 
deliberations  at  that  meeting. 

In  reference  to  the  firfl:  paragraph  of  your  Lordfliip's  letter,  in  which  the  refo- 
lution  paffed  by  the  Court  on  the  i8th  inftant  is  ftated  to  have  caufed  fome  fur- 
prife  to  His  Majefly's  Government,  as  appearing  to  Iiavc  for  its  objeft  an  abrupt 
termination  to  all  difcuffion,  we  are  defircd  by  the  Court  of  Direftors  refpedlfuliy 
to  offer  the  following  explanation  : 

Your  Lordiliip  is  aware,  that  at  the  commencement  of  the  recent  conferences 
on  the  fubje*;;!:  of  the  renewal  of  the  Company's  Charter,  it  was  agreed  between 
your  Lordfhip  and  the  Deputation  from  the  Court,  that  no  minutes  fliould  be 
taken  of  what  pafled  in  converfation  ;  accordingly  no  particular  communication 
was  made  prior  to  the  receipt  of  your  Lordfhip's  letter  of  the  24tii  inftant,  of 
the  refult  of  thefe  conferences ;  but  an  earneft  defire  having  been  exprefled  by 
thofe  gentlemen  in  the  Direction,  who  are  not  membeis  of  the  Committee  of 
Correfpondence,  to  be  informed  whether  the  diilerences  of  opinion  formerly 
known  to  exift  on  fome  important  points  between  His  Majefty's  Governnient 
and  the  Court  were  in  a  train  of  reconciliadon,  and  the  general  anfwer  which 
we  thought  ourfelves  bound  in  duty  to  give  not  having  tended  to  afi'ord  them  the 
fatisfadlion  they  expefted,  they  deemed  it  proper  that  the  fenfe  of  the  Court 
refpefting  the  queftiou  of  the  Out-ports  fliould  be  formally  notified  to  your 
Lordfhip,  and  in  confequencc-  the  unanimous  refolution  of  the  i8th  was  tranf- 
mitted. 

Had  the  Court  perceived  that  that  proceeding  admitted  of  the  interpretation 
which  has  been  put  upon  it  by  His  Majefty's  Government,  they  would  alfuredly 
have  taken  pains  more  effectually  to  guard  againll  fo  great  a  mifconception  of 
the  real  intention,  which  was  no  other  than  to  mark  their  adherence  to  the 
opinions  they  have  uniformly  entertained  on  the  difputed  queftion,  of  extending 
the  import  trade  from  India  to  the  out-ports  of  this  kingdom,  which  had  formed 
the  principal  fubjed  of  difcufliou  between  the  members  of  His  Majefty's  Go- 
vernment and  the  Committee  of  Correfpondence.  It  was  certainly  defirable  for 
the  members  of  that  deputed  Committee,  and  it  was  thought  that  it  might  not 
be  unacceptable  to  your  Lordfliip  to  know  that  the  fentiments  which  they  had 
expreffed  in  the  courfe  of  difculfion  were  fanftioned  by  the  unanimous  con- 
currence of  the  body  by  whom  they  were  delegated.  The  mode  in  which  the- 
refolution  was  adopted  was  conformable  to  the  ufage  of  the  Court  of  Directors  on 
iblemn  occafions,  namely,  after  a  report  from  a  Committee  of  the  whole  Court, 
which  always  requires  fignatures,  and  which  in  the  prefent  inftance  was  fubfcribed 
by  every  Direftor. 

We  truft,  my  Lord,  that  this  explanation  of  the  meafure  alluded  to  will  prove 
fatisfaftory  to  your  Lordfhip  and  the  other  members  of  His  Majefty's  Govern- 
ment;  and  while  we  return  our  fincere  acknwlcdgemenis  for  the  attention  v/ith 
which. our  reprefeiitations  have  been  liftened  to,  in  the  various  interviews  with 
which  we  have  been  honoured  by  your  Lordfhip  and  His  Majefty's  Minifters  who 
attended,  we  hope,  at  the  fame  time,  to  ftand  perfe6lly  acquitted  of  any  defign, 
eit'ier  to  prevent  or  embarrafs  a  full  and  deliberate  difcuftion  of  the  great  interefts 
at  ftake. 

It  is  matter  of  deep  concern  to  us  to  find  that  His  Majefty's  Minifters  feeni' 
ilill  to  adhere  to  the  principle  of  opening  the  out-ports  of  the  United  Kingdom 
to  the  importation  of  commodities  from  India.  We  have  already,  in  our  letters 
of  the  15th  and  29th  April  laft,  fully  ftated  the  dangers  that  muft  refult  to  the 
Company  from  fo  great  an  enlargement  of  the  privilege  in  Eaftcrn  commerce 
to  Britifh  merchants.  We  prefume  to  think  our  objections  to  that  enlarge- 
ment have  not  been  adequately  anfwered ;  and  we  have  to  exprefs  the  concern 
felt  by  the  Court,  that  no  communication  has  yet  been  made  to  them,  of  thofe 
reprefentations  which  firft  led  His  Majefty's  Minifters  to  entertain,  and  which 
induce  them  ftill  to  adhere  to  the  opinion,  that  the  public  intcrefl  will  be  beft 
confulted  by  not  confining  the  import  trade  from  the  Eafl  Indies  to  the  port  of 

London. 


32       CORRESPONDENCE  beiwccit  PRESIDENl"  of  INDIA  BOARD 

London.  It  would  occafion  much  flitlsfaflion  to  the  Court  fliould  fuch  a  com- 
munication have  the  clFect  of  obviating  their  objections,  even  in  part,  to  a  mea- 
fure,  which  the  mofl  imperative  confiderations  alone  could  have  influenced  them 
to  oppofe ;  and  were  it  unfortunately  to  fail  in  producing  this  effeft,  it  is  never- 
thelels  defirable  that  the  Court  of  Diredors  fiiall  have  an  opportunity  of  renew- 
ing the  queftion  with  all  the  intelligence  that  can  be  brought  to  bear  upon  it. 
Your  Lordlliip  has,  indeed,  been  pleafed  to  favour  us  with  a  brief  fummary  of 
fome  of  the  arguments  ufed  by  the  merchants  on  this  fubjeft.  Arguments,  we 
muft  own,  not  in  the  leaft  convincing  to  us  ;  and  we  affure  ourfelves,  that  in 
adverting  to  them  your  Lordfhip  does  not  mean  that  the  Company  fhould 
be  concluded,  or  their  fate  determined,  by  what  thofe  who  oppofe  their  interefts 
choofe  to  advance,  although  their  reprefentations  appear  to  have  fo  far  influenced 
His  Majefty's  Minifters  as  to  lead  them  to  think  that  the  merchants  "  have  a 
*'  claim  to  as  much  liberty  of  trade  as  they  can  enjoy  without  injury  to  other 
*'  important  national  interefts."  In  thofe  interefts,  we  may  prefume,  are  com- 
prehended both  the  confideration  of  the  public  revenue,  and  the  maintenance  of 
the  Eaft  India  Company.  But  what  that  extent  of  trade  is,  "  which  can  be 
"  granted  with  fafety  to  thofe  interefts,"  is  ftill  a  queftion  undetermined.  We 
confefs,  that  the  regulations  contemplated  by  His  Majefty's  Minifters,  ib  far  as 
your  Lordftiip  has  been  pleafed  to  explain  them  to  us,  appear  by  no  means  calcu- 
lated to  remove  our  fears. 

The  comparative  intereft  which  the  Public  and  the  Company  have  in  pre- 
venting the  fmuggling  of  tea  was  defcribed  in  our  Letter  of  the  29th  April ; 
and  though  it  be  true,  as  your  Lordihip  obferves,  that  the  ftake  of  the  Public 
in  this  concern  is  numerically  greater  than  that  of  the  Company,  yet  the  im- 
portance of  the  Company's  inferior  ilake  is  to  them  infinitely  greater  than 
would  be  to  the  Public  the  importance  of  the  lofs  the  revenue  might  fuftain  : 
becaufe,  as  matters  now  ftand,  the  Company  have  no  certain  dependence  but 
the  China  trade  for  refources  eflential  to  their  fubfiftence.  We  do  not  the 
leaft  queftion  that  His  Majefty's  Minifters  would  be  thoroughly  difpofed  to 
frame  additional  regulations  to  prevent  fmuggling  tea,  ftiould  thofe  now  in 
contemplation  be  tried  and  be  found  infufficient.  But,  befides  that  we  ex- 
tremely diftruft  the  prafticability  of  preventing  fmuggling  to  a  large  extent, 
where  the  temptations  would  be  fo  great,  we  muft  entreat  your  Lordfhip  and 
His  Majefty's  Minifters  ferioufly  to  confider,  what  would  be  the  fituation  of 
the  Company  if  they  obtained  a  charter  upon  no  better  terms  than  thofe  now 
propofed,  and  upon  trial  it  fhould  be  found  that  their  commercial  income 
failed,  and  that  their  dividend  ftiould  be  unprovided  for  or  lowered  :  their  ftock 
would  im.mediately  fall  j  their  credit  would  be  diminifhed  ;  the  currency  of 
their  aflfairs,  in  their  paynients  particularly,  v.'ould  be  impeded  ;  general  alarm 
and  diflatisfadtion  in  all  parties  connefted  v.-ith  this  great  eftablifhment  would 
be  felt ;  and  there  would  be  a  neceffity  for  going  to  Parliament  again,  when  evils 
great,  perhaps  irretrievable,  would  have  been  experienced.  It  is  the  duty  of 
the  executive  body  of  the  Company  to  carry  their  views  forward  to  fuch  contin- 
gencies, and  to  feek  provifion  againft  them  ;  and  we  muft  beg  leave  to  add,  that 
whatever  rights  the  merchants  may  claim,  or  the  nation  be  pleafed  to  beftow 
on  them,  it  cannot  be  equitable  to  make  conceftions  to  them  which  fhould  deftroy 
the  Company  who  acquired  the  Indian  empire,  and  who  are  as  much  the  ov\Tiers 
of  the  chief  feats  of  European  trade  in  that  empire,  as  they  are  of  their  freeholds 
in  London. 

With  refpedl  to  the  refort  of  Europeans  to  India,  if  we  do  not  mifunderftand 
the  fcope  of  your  Lordfliip's  obfervation,  it  feems  to  imply  that  their  numbers 
might  be  in  propordon  to  the  export  trade  from  this  country.  If  indeed  they 
were  to  be  regulated  by  this  fcalc,  our  apprehenfions  would  be  the  lefs ;  but 
we  have  no  difficulty  in  acknowledging,  that  in  addition  to  all  our  other  arguments 
againft  admitting  importations  to  the  out-ports,  we  think  that  the  granting  of 
this  privilege  would  increafe  the  fpirit  of  rafli  fpeculation  from  Great  Britain 
and  Ireland,  and  thereby  the  number  of  adventurers  in  fearch  of  fortune  in  India  ; 

for 


md  CHAIRMAN,  &c.  cf  The  EAST  INDIA  COMPANY.  33 

for  It  is  to  be  remembered,  that  thofe  adventurers  would  naturally  feek  for  new 
eflablifliments,  even  out  of  the  Company's  territories,  and  there  endeavour  to 
acquire  real  property. 

But,  my  Lord,  this  is  only  one  of  many  points  which  require  particular  regu- 
lations ;  and  at  the  ftage  at  which  we  are  now  arrived  in  the  negotiation  we 
cannot  but  (late  to  your  Lordihip  the  anxious  \vMi  of  the  Court  to  be  made  ac- 
quainted with  the  whole  plan  which  His  Majeliy's  Government  mny  have  it  in 
contemplation  to  recommend  to  Parliament  for  a  renewal  of  the  E-afl  India  Com- 
pany's Charter,  including  fuch  amendments  in  the  fyftem  of  the  Company's  ter- 
ritorial government,  and  adniiniftration  as  pad  experience  may  have  indicated  ; 
the  regulations  deemed  necefiary  for  promoting  the  dil'cipline  and  efficiency  of 
the  Indian  army ;  the  amount  of  force  which  His  Majefty  may  be  empowered  to 
maintain  in  India  at  the  expenfe  of  the  Company,  and  the  proviiions  that  may 
be  thought  requifite  for  fettling  the  relative  powers  of  the  Board  of  Commiflioners 
and  the  Court  of  Directors.  Though  thefe  topics  were  fpecifically  mentioned 
in  the  letters  from  Lord  Melville  to  the  Chairs  of  the  30th  September  1808, 
and  the  aifl  March  1812,  the  Court  arc  fiill,  in  great  mealure,  uninformed  ot 
the  arrangements  in  regard  to  them,  which  His  Majefty's  Government  may  have 
in  view  to  propofe  ;  and  we  entreat  alfo,  that  your  Lordfliip  will  enable  us  to 
lay  before  the  Court  of  Diredors,  and  ultimately  the  Proprietors,  in  any  fliape 
that  you  may  judge  fit,  the  information,  additional  to  that  of  tlie  .  merchants 
already  folicited,  on  which  the  determination  of  His  Majefty's  Minifters  refts,  as 
to  the  extenfion  of  the  trade  to  the  out-ports,  and  their  intentions  upon  the  other 
parts  of  the  arrangement  to  which  we  have  now  adverted. 

The  requefts  we  now  make  appear  to  us  the  more  reafonable,  from  the 
weighty  intimation  conveyed  in  the  concluding  part  of  your  Lordfhip's  letter. 
It  brings  into  view,  (to  repeat  an  expreflion  ufed  in  our  letter  of  the  15th  April,) 
"  quejiions  of  the  lajt  importance  to  the  fnfety  of  the  Britif}  Empire  in  India,  and 
^•'  of  the  Brit'rfh  Confiitution  at  home."  This  is  a  folemn  fubjeft  for  the  Country, 
as  well  as  the  Company,  if  indeed  it  fliould  ever  come  under  actual  difculhon. 
,  We  have  that  confidence  in  the  equity  and  wifdom  of  the  nation,  that,  notwith- 
ftanding  all  prefent  clamours,  they  will  wi(h  to  do  the  Company  jufticc,  and  to 
guard  all  the  other  great  interefts  which  muft  come  into  queftion  ;  but  prepared 
as  we  fhall  be,  if  forced  into  this  fituation,  to  maintain  the  rights  and  claims  of 
our  conftituents,  we  muft  yet  exprefs  our  hope,  that  the  Company  will  not  be 
reduced  to  the  hard  alternative  of  thus  having  to  contend  for  all  that  is  dt^ar  to 
them,  or  to  accept  a  Charter  on  terms  which  will  not  enabk  them  to  execute 
the  part  hitherto  affigned  to  them  in  the  Indian  fyftem. 

We  have  the  honour  to  be. 

My  Lord, 
The  Right  honourable  Your  Lordfhip's  molt  obedient 

the  Earl  of  Buckinghamftiire,  humble  Servants, 

&c.  &c.  &c.  (Signed)  Hugh  Inglis, 

Robert  Thornton, 


AT  a  Secret  Court  of  Dircftors,  held  on  Tuefday  the  5th  January 
1813. 

THE  Chairman  laid  before  the  Court,  a  letter  from  the  Right  honourable  the 
Prefident  of  the  Board  of  Commiffioners  for  the  Affairs  of  India,  dated  the  4th 
inftant,  which  was  read. 

Gentlemen,  India  Board,  4th  January  1813. 

I  HAD  the  honour  to  receive  your  letter  of  the  30th  ultimo,  and  proceed  to 
convey  to  you  the  fentiments  of  His  Majefty's  Government,  as  far  as  it  would 
feem  advlfable  under  prefent  circumltances,  to  continue  the  difcuflion. 

•.^(32.)  I  With 


34      CORRESPONDENCE  heiwem  PRESIDENT  of  INDIA  BOARD 

With  refpeft  to  your  obfervation,  that  the  reprefentations  which  induced 
His  Majefty's  Government  to  form  their  opinions  upon  the  fubjeft  of  the 
<extenfion  of  the  import  trade,  have  been  withheld  from  the  Court  of  Direc- 
tors, and  that  your  objedions  to  that  extenfion  have  not  been  "  adequately 
anfwered,"  you  mufl:  allow  me  to  avail  myfelf  of  this  occafion  to  apprize  you, 
that  although  His  Majefty's  Government  have  fhown  a  ftrcng  difpofiiion  to  enter 
into  the  mofl  frank  and  unrefervcd  explanations  with  the  Court  of  Direftors, 
they  have  not  felt  that  it  was  within  the  range  of  their  duty  to  engage  in  a  con- 
troverfy  upon  the  points  at  iffue  ;  that  duty  has  been  fufficiently  difcharged,  in 
ftating,  for  the  information  of  the  Court  ot  Proprietors,  the  conditions  upon 
which  they  were  prepared  to  fubmit  a  propofition  to  Parliament  for  the  renewal 
of  the  Charter,  accompanied  by  fuch  reafons  as  are  conveyed  in  the  communica- 
tions they  have  authorized  me  to  malce. 

I  can,  however,  have  no  difficulty  in  acquainting  you,  that  the  claims  of  the 
merchants  connected  with  the  out-ports  have  not  been  brought  before  Govern- 
ment by  written  documents ;  that  they  have  been  urged  and  difcuffed  at  perfonal 
conferences  with  individuals  interefted  in  their  fuccefs  ;  and  that  you  have  already 
been  informed  of  the  grounds  upon  which  they  were  fupported  ;  but  that  it  doe;; 
not  appear  to  His  Majelty's  Government  that  you  can  be  warranted  in  expedling 
that  they  fliould  give  a  more  particular  account  of  the  arguments  adduced  at  thofe 
conferences. 

I  may  add,  however,  that  as  the  merchants  and  manufaSurers  connected  with 
the  out-ports,  confidering  themfelves  entitled  at  the  expiration  of  the  Charter  of 
the  Eaft  India  Company  to  carry  on  that  trade  from  which  they  had  been  excluded 
for  a  limited  time,  had  entered  into  a  ftatement  of  their  cafe  by  petitions  prefented 
to  Parliament  in  the  courfe  of  the  laft  feilion,  you  may  obtain  from  thofe  records 
that  further  information  which  you  appear  defirous  to  poffefs. 

With  regard  to  thofe  points  to  which  you  have  alluded,  as  requiring  particular 
regulation,  the  Minifters  of  His  Royal  Highnefs  the  Prmce  Re  ;ent  having  fig- 
nified  to  you,  that  confiftently  with  their  fenfe  of  public  duty  they  can  fubmit  no 
arrangement  to  Parliament  that  does  not  include  an  extenfion  of  the  import  trade  ; 
and  the  Court  of  Direftors  having,  with  a  knowledge  of  their  opinions  upon  that 
point,  by  their  Relblution  ot  the  i8th  ultimo,  declined  to  recommend  to  the. 
Court  of  Proprietors  to  agree  to  luch  an  extenfion,  it  would  feem  premature  ta. 
enter  into  details  until  that  queftion  (hall  have  been  finally  determined. 

You  are  apprized  of  the  difpofition  of  His  Majefty's  Government  to  adhere 
to  the  prefent  fyftem  of  adminiftration  in  hidla ;  and  I  am  not  aware  that  if 
circumftances  fhould  admit  of  its  continuance,  it  would  be  neccflary  to  propofe 
any  material  alteration  in  the  exifthig  provifions  for  carrying  it  into  execution, 
except  fuch  as  may  arife  from  the  opening  of  the  trade. 

The  confidence  you  exprefs  in  the  wifdom  and  juftice  of  Parliament  will,  I  am 
perfuaded,  not  be  difappointed  ;  nor  is  it  to  be  fuppofed,  that  in  the  confidera- 
tion  of  this  great  queftion  (to  ufe  your  own  wordsj  "  the  fafety  of  the  Britifh 
"  Enjpire  in  India,  and  the  Britilh  Conftitution  at  home"  will  be  overlooked  either 
by  the  Legiflature  or  the  Minifters  of  the  Crown. 

If  the  government  of  India  cannot  be  carried  on  with  fafety  to  the  Conftitution 
except  through  the  intervention  of  the  Company,  the  propofitions  of  the  Court 
of  Direftors,  whatever  they  may  be,  muft  unconditionally  be  admitted. 

It  will  be  for  Parliament  to  determine  whether  the  nation  is  in  this  refpeft 
without  an  alternative,  or  whether,  if  a  change  of  iyftem  fliould  be  rendered 
neceflary  by  the  decifions  of  the  Eaft  India  Company,  meafures  might  not  be 
taken  for  opening  the  trade,  and  at  the  fame  time  providing  fuch  an  adminiftra- 
tion of  the  government  of  India  as  might  be  found  compatible  with  the  interefts 
and  fecurity  of  the  Britifli  Conftitution.    I  have  the  honour  to  be, 

Gentlemen, 
Your  obedient  and  faithful  humble  Servant, 

(Signed)  Bu<kinghanijhire» 

The  Chairman  and  Deputy  Chairman 
of  the  Eaft  India  Company. 

AT 


and  CHAIRMAN,  8rc.  of  The  EAST  INDIA  COMPANY.  35 

AT  a  General  Court  of  the  United  Company  of  Merchants  of  England  tradin? 
to  the  Eaft  Indies,  held  on  Tuefday  the  jth  of  January,  1813. 

THE  Chairman  acquainted  the  Court  that  it  is  efpecially  fummoned  for  the 
purpofe  of  there  being  laid  before  them  further  papers  refpcding  the  negotiation 
for  a  renewal  of  the  Company's  exclufive  privileges. 

Thefaid  papers  were  then  read,  being  as  follows  ;  viz. 

Minutes  of  a  Secret  Committee  of  Coirefpondence,  the  27th  November  1812  : 
No.  60. 

Letter  from  the  Chairman  and  Deputy  Chairman  to  the  Right  honourable  the 
Earl  of  Buckinghamfhire,  dated  the  28th  November  1812:  No.  61. 

Letter  from  the  Right  honourable  the  Earl  of  Buckinghamfhire  to  the  Chair 
man,  dated  the  28th  November  1812  :  No.  62. 

Minute  of  a  Secret  Court  of  Directors  held  on  Wednefday  the  2d  December 
i8i2  :  No.  63. 

Minutes  of  a  Secret  Court  of  Directors,  held  on  Tuefday  the  15th  December 
1S12  :  No.  64. 

Minutes  of  a  Secret  Court  of  Directors,  held  on  Wednefday  the  i6th  Decem- 
ber 1812:  No.  65. 

Minute  of  Secret  Court  of  Directors,  held  on  Friday  the  i8th  December 
1812:  No.  66. 

Minutes  of  a  Secret  Court  of  Diredors,  held  on  Tuefday  the  3 2d  December 
i8i2  :  No.  6"/. 

Minutes  of  a  Secret  Committee  of  Correfpondence  the  zSth  December  1812  : 
No.  68. 

Minutes  of  a  Secret  Court  of  Directors,  held  on  Monday  the  28ih  December 
1812 :  No.  69. 

Letter  from  the  Right  honourable  the  Earl  of  Buckinghamfhire,  to  the  Chair- 
man and  Deputy  Chairman,  dated  the  24th  December  1812,  noticed  in  the 
preceding  Minutes ;  No.  70. 

Minute  of  a  Secret  Committee  of  Correfpondence  the  30th  December  18 12: 
No.  71. 

Minute  of  a  S<=cret  Court  of  Diredors,  held  on  Wednefday  the  36th  Decem- 
ber 1812  :  No.  72. 

Letter  from  the  Chairman  and  Deputy  Chairman  to  the  Right  honourable  the 
Earl  of  Buckinghamfhire,  dated  the  30th  December  1812,  noticed  in  the  pre- 
ceding Minute  :  No.  73. 

Letter  from  the  Right  honourable  the  Earl  of  Buckinghamfhire  to  the  Chair- 
man and  Deputy  Chairman,  dated  the  4th  January  18 13. 

The  Chairman  acquainted  the  Court,  that  the  above  papers  are  printing,  and 
will  be  ready  to  be  delivered  to  the  Proprietors  to-morrow. 

ITie  Court  then  proceeded  to  take  the  fame  into  confideration,  when  the  refo- 
lutions  of  the  General  Court  of  the  5th  May  laft  were  called  for  and  read. 

Refolved  unanimoufly.  That  this  Court  has  learnt  with  deep  concern  and  fur- 
prife,  that  His  Majefty's  Minifters  have  been  induced  to  change  the  view  they 
firft  entertained  of  the  propriety  of  confining  to  the  Port  of  London  the  returns 
of  the  Trade  to  India,  now  to  be  permitted  to  all  Britifh  fubjefts.  That  the  mea- 
fure  of  opening  the  out-ports  to  vefTels  of  all  defcriptions  from  India,  compre- 
hending in  that  term  the  Eaflern  Iflands,  appears  to  this  Court  to  be  fraught 
with  confequences  ruinous  to  the  Company,  and  all  the  long  train  of  interefts 
connedled  with  it,  by  removing  from  the  Port  of  London  the  greater  part  of  the 
Indian  Trade  which  it  has  hitherto  enjoyed,  by  rendering  iifclefs  many  of  the 
expenfive  eflablifhments  formed  there  for  the  merchandile  and  fhipping  of  that 
trade,  and  throwing  out  of  bread  many  thoufands  of  perfons  who  now  derive 
cenftant  employment  from  it ;  by  deranging  the  practice,  and  fruftrating  the  end 
of  flated  public  fales,  which  are  uieful  and  important,  both  to  the  Country  and 
the  Company,  who  are  neceiTarily  rtftriitcd  to  the  pradice  j  but  above  all  by 

affording 


36        CORRESPONDENCE  between  PRESIDENT  0/ INDIA  BOARD 

aflbrding  facilities  for  the  fmuggling  of  teas  into  the  Ports  and  Harbours  of  Eng- 
land, Scotland,  and  Ireland,  to  an  extent  unlimited,  and,  as  this  Court  apprehend, 
uncontrollable.  That  the  confequences  of  this  muft  be  the  deftrudion  of  the 
Company's  China  Trade,  their  bell  fource  of  commercial  profi»  ;  the  failure  of 
their  dividend  ;  the  depreciation  of  their  ftock  ;  and,  unlefs  a  fund  is  provided 
from  fome  other  fource  for  the  payment  of  the  dividend,  inability  on  their  part 
to  continue  to  perform  the  funftions  affigned  to  them  in  the  government  of  Bri- 
tifli  India.  That  if  the  conditution  by  which  the  Indian  Empire  is  now  admi- 
niftered  fliould  thus  be  fubverted,  the  excellent  fyftem  of  civil  and  military  fervice 
formed  under  the  Company,  and  maintainable  only  by  fuch  a  body,  will  be  broken 
down ;  the  tranquillity  and  happinefs  of  the  vad  population  which  that  Empire 
contains,  the  interefts  of  this  Country  in  Afia,  and  its  Conflitution  at  home,  will 
be  imminently  endangered. 

That  the  propofed  obiecEt  for  which  the  profeffed  changes  are  to  be  made,  and 
fuch  immenfe  iacrifices  hazarded  ;  namely,  the  increafe  of  the  commerce  of  this 
Kingdom,  cannot  be  in  any  degree  attained,  there  being  no  practicability  of  ex- 
tending materially  the  ufe  of  our  manufattures  among  the  Indian  People  ;  the 
tonnage  allotted  by  the  Company,  or  afforded  by  Indian  Ships  in  the  management 
of  individuals,  for  fuch  exports,  not  having  been  fully  occupied  ;  neither  does  it 
appear  prafticable  largely  to  augment  the  importation  of  profitable  commodities 
from  thence  ;  of  all  which  the  example  of  the  American  Trade  to  the  EaR  is  a 
proof.  Britiih  manufaftures,  v?hich  they  could  eafily  have  procured,  making  no 
part  of  it,  nor  their  returns  exhibiting  any  new  articles  of  importance.  That 
therefore  the  trade  now  enjoyed  by  the  Company  and  individuals  will  be  the 
only  certain  trade  to  which  new  adventurers  can  have  recourfe.  And  this  will 
be  no  addition  to  the  commerce  of  the  country,  but  only  a  transfer  from  one  fet 
of  hands  to  another ;  fo  that  old  eftablilhments  will  be  fubverted,  without  fub- 
flituting  any  thing  equally  good  in  their  place  ;  and  to  all  appeai-ance,  with  great 
detriment  to  the  nation,  particularly  in  the  defalcation  of  a  large  part  of  the  duties 
now  colleded  on  tea,  to  the  amount  of  Four  millions  fterling  per  annum  ;  for 
all  which  defalcation,  whether  one,  or  two,  or  three  millions,  new  taxes  mud  be 
laid  on  the  people. 

That  the  caufe  of  the  Company  has  been  deeply  injured  by  prejudice,  igno- 
rance, erroneous  affumptions,  and  of  late  by  extenfive  combinations,  and  by  unfair 
reprefentation,  canvafs  and  intimidadon  ;  in  all  which  die  merits  and  rights  of  the 
Company,  the  political  interefl:  of  Britifli  India,  and  of  this  country  as  connedled 
with  them,  have  been  left  out  of  fight,  and  the  fmgle  objetls  of  the  extenfiou  of 
commerce,  an  objeft  too  only  of  fpeculation,  in  oppolition  to  pad  experience,  is 
the  governing  principle. 

This  Court,  however,  confidently  hope  tliat  Parliament  will  not  decide  the  fate 
of  the  Company  on  the  reprefentations  and  demands  of  private  interefl,  but  on 
jull  and  comprehenfive  views  of  national  policy  ;  and  the  Court  mufl  alio  believe 
that  His  Majefty's  Miniflers  are  too  enlightened  and  equitable  finally  to  adopt 
any  meafure  calculated  to  deftroy  the  commercial  profits  o\  the  Company,  and 
thereby  to  difable  them  from  performing  their  political  lun£tions.  This  Court, 
therefore,  entirely  approving  both  of  the  firmnefs  which  their  Diredors  have 
fhown  in  maintaining  the  interells  of  the  Company,  and  of  the  manner  in  which 
they  have,  in  the  papers  now  produced  by  them,  defended  ihofe  interefts,  doth 
recommend  it  to  them  to  perfevere  in  the  negotiation  with  His  Majefty's  Minifters 
upon  the  fame  principles,  allured  of  the  determination  of  this  Court  to  fupport 
them  to  the  utnioft  in  maintaining  the  permanence  of  the  Company,  and  the  na- 
tional interefts  which  are  involved  in  their  ftability. 

Refolved  unanimoufly.  That  the  thanks  of  this  Court  be  given  to  Randle 
Jackfon,  efq.  for  his  very  luminous  and  excellent  fpec:ch  this  day,  to:  the  great 
zeal,  abihiy  and  induftiy,  he  has  on  various  occafions,  and  particulaily  on  this, 
difplayed  for  the  honour  and  advantage  of  this  Company. 

Refolved 


and  CHAIRMAN,  &c.  o/The  EAST  INDIA  COMPANY.  ^7 

Refolved  unanimoufly,  That  the  warmefl;  thanks  of  this  General  Court  be 
offeied  to  the  Chairmain,  Deputy  Chairman,  and  Court  of  Diredtors  of  this  Com- 
pany, for  their  very  able  condud  in  the  negotiation  with  Government  for  the 
renewal  of  the  charter,  ahke  evincing  the  moft  luminous  ideas  of  the  heft  interert: 
of  this  Company,  and  their  moft  honourable  condud  in  the  management  of  fo 
important  a  concern. 

It  was  then  moved,  and  on  the  queftion, 
Refolved,  That  this  Court  do  highly  approve  the  vigilance,  attention,  and  able 
condud  of  the  Court  of  Diredors,  in  their  negotiation  with  His  Majefty's 
Minifters  for  the  i  enewal  of  the  Charter;  and  that  for  the  purpofe  of  taking  the 
important  fubjed  now  fubmitted  to  them  into  their  moft  ferious  deliberation,  the 
Court  do  adjourn  unto  Tuefday  the  19th  inftant. 

And  the  Court  adjourned  accordingly. 


AT  a  General  Court  of  the  United  Company  of  Merchants  of  Eng- 
land  trading  to  the  Eaft  Indies,  held  on  Tuefday  the  1 9th  January 
1813. 

MINUTES  of  laft  Court  of  the  5  th  Inftant,  were  read. 

The  Chairman  acquainted  the  Comrt,  that  it  is  met  by  adjournment  for  the 
purpoTe  of  taking  into  further  confideration  the  papers  laid  before  them  at  their 
laft  meeting. 

The  following  motion  was  then  made,  and  feconded,  viz. 

"  That  this  Court  perceives  with  deep  regret,  that  after  a  long  correfpondencc 
"  and  difcuffion,  conduded  with  exemplary  firmnefs,  temper,  and  ability,  on  the 
"  part  of  the  Court  of  Diredors,  and  with  much  difference  of  opinion  among 
"  the  feveral  Minifters  who  have  reprefented  His  Majefty's  Government  in  the 
"  difcuffion,  and  clofed  on  the  part  of  His  Majefty's  prefent  Minifters,  with 
"  a  reference  to  the  petitions  lately  prefented  to  Parliament  as  a  ground  of  their 
"  new  determination,  the  parties  have  at  length  arrived  at  a  point  when  decifion 
"  is  abfolutely  required  between  the  ruin  of  the  Company  and  the  difappoint- 
"  ment  of  the  Petitioners  againft  the  Charter." 

And  after  a  debate  of  confiderable  length,  the  queftion  of  adjournment  of  the 
faid  debate  was  moved  and  feconded  ; 

But  it  having  been  fignified  by  a  Proprietor  that  an  amendment  to  the  firft 
motion  was  prepared,  and  intended  to  be  made. 

The  queftion  of  adjournment  was  by  confent  of  the  Court  withdrawn. 

It  was  then  moved,  and  feconded,  purfuant  to  the  intimation  already  given,  to 
amend  the  firft  motion,  by  leaving  out  all  the  words  after  the  word  "  that,"  in 
order  to  fubftitute  the  following  words,  viz. 

"  That  this  Court  deeming  it  prudent  and  proper  to  acquiefce  in  the  prin- 
*♦  ciples  and  preliminaries  ftated  by  His  Majefty's  Minifters,  through  the  Prefi-  • 
"  dent  of  the  Board  of  Controul,  in  the  papers  laid  before  the  Court  refpeding 
"  the  renewal  of  the  Company's  Charter,  with  certain  provifions  in  favour  of  the 
"  merchants  and  manufadurers  of  Great  Britain,  and  the  Out-ports  of  thefe 
"  realms." 

Refolved,  "  That  it  be  referred  back  to  the  Court  of  Diredors  to  continue 
*'  their  negociation  for  the  carrying  thele  principles  into  effed,  this  Court  rely- 
"  ing  on  due  attention  being  paid  to  fecure  to  the  Company  as  great  advantages 
"  in  their  commerce  as  are  confiftent  with  their  claims  upon  the  public,  and  the 
**  profperity  and  interefts  of  the  country  at  large  ;  and  for  that  purpofe,  by  pro- 
(32.)  K  ••  per 


-8       CORRESPONDENCE  beitveen  PRESIDENT  c/INDIA  BOARD 


o 


*'  per  regulations,  to  guard  againft  the  mifchiefs  that  might  arife  from  difputes  in 
"  India  or  in  England  between  thofe  engaged  in  the  commerce,  to  proteft  the 
.-*'  trade  from  fmuggling,  and  thofe  confequences  which  are  now  dreaded  by  a  de- 
*'  parture  from  the  prefent  eftabhfhed  fyftem ;  and  particularly  to  prevent  the 
*'  refidence  or  interference  of  Europeans  in  any  part  of  India,  ib  as  to  endanger 
"  the  Company's  governments  there  in  their  exclufive  adminiftration  of  the  ter- 
"  ritorial  pofTefTions  which  they  now  have  or  may  hereafter  obtain,  as  well  in 
"  their  revenue  as  in  their  judicial  and  military  departments.  That  the  Direc- 
"  tors  be  inftrufted  to  endeavour  to  obtain  from  His  Majefty's  Miniflers  a 
"  guarantee  to  the  proprietors  of  India  ftock,  for  their  capital  ftock  and  divi- 
"  dends,  in  cafe  the  trade  and  territories  fhould  at  any  future  period  be  taken 
■"  under  the  immediate  management  of  His  Majefty's  Government,  or  not  afiford 
"  the  neceflary  fupply  for  the  difcharge  of  the  fame :  That,  as  the  Company 
*'  confider  themfelves  guardians  of  the  profperity  of  the  Empire  in  India,  and 
"^  protedors  of  the  liberty  and  happinefs  of  the  millions  of  people  who  live  under 
*'  their  government,  they  repofe  confidence  in  the  abilities  of  their  Direftors,  and 
"  the  wifdom  of  the  Legiflature,  that  every  poflible  fafeguard  will  be  provided  to 
"  prevent  danger  to  the  Empire  and  injury  to  its  people." 

And  a  debate  having  arifen  on  the  propofed  amendment. 

It  was  moved,  and,  on  the  queftion, 
Refolved,  That  the  further  debate  on  the  faid  queftions  be  adjourned  till  Friday 
next  the  22d  inftant. 

And  it  was  then  moved,  and,  en  the  queftion, 
Refolved,  That  this  Court  do  now  adjourn  till  Friday  next  the  2 2d  inftant. 

And  the  Court  adjourned  accordingly. 


AT  a  General  Court  of  the  United  Company  of  Merchants  of  Eng. 
land  trading  to  the  Eaft  Indies,  held  on  Friday  the  22d  January 
1813. 

MINUTES  of  laft  Court  of  the  19th  were  read. 

•  The  Chairman  acquainted  the  Court,  that  it  met  by  adjournment,  for  the  pur- 
pofe  of  taking  into  further  confideration  the  Papers  which  were  laid  before  them 
on  the  5  th  inftant. 

The  Court  then  proceeded  to  take  into  confideration  the  motion  made  at  the  laft 
General  Court,  and  the  amendment  propofed  thereto. 

And,  after  a  debate  of  very  confiderable  length. 
It  was  moved,  and,  on  the  queftion, 

Refolved,  That  the  further  debate  on  the  faid  motions  be  adjourned  till  Tuefday 
next  the  26th  inftant,  and  that  a  General  Court  be  fummoned  to  meet  on  that 
day,  at  eleven  o'clock  in  the  forenoon  precilely. 

And  then  the  Court,  on  the  queftion,  adjourned  till  Tuefday  next  accordingly. 


AT  a  General  Court  of  the  United  Company  of  Merchants  of  Eng- 
land trading  to  the  Eaft  Indies,  held  on  Tuefday  the  26th  January 
1813. 

MINUTES  of  laft  Court  of  the  2 2d  inftant  were  read. 

The  Chairman  acquainted  the  Court,  that  it  met  by  adjournment,  for  the  pur- 
pofe  of  taking  into  further  confideration  the  papers  which  were  laid  before  them 
on  the  jth  inftant. 

■  .        The 


and  CHAIRMAN,  &c.  o/The  EAST  INDIA  COMPANY,  39 

The  motion  made  on  the  19th  inftant,  and  the  amendment  propofcd  (0  be 
made  thereto,  were  read. 

It  was  then,  after  a  debate  of  confiderable  length,  moved,  that  the  words  b 
the  original  motion,  propofcd  to  be  omitted,  ftand  part  of  the  queftion. 
And,  the  queftion  thereon  being  put, 
The  fame  was  carried  in  the  affirmative. 

The  main  queftion  being  then  put, — It  was 
Refolved,  That  this  Court  perceives  with  deep  regret,  that,  after  a  long  cor- 
refpondence  and  difcuffion,  conduced  with  exemplary  firmnefs,  temper,  atid 
ability  on  the  part  of  the  Court  of  Direftoi-s,  and  with  much  difference  of  opinion 
among  the  feveral  Minifters  who  have  reprefented  His  Majefty's  Government 
in  the  difcufHon,  and  clofed  on  the  part  of  His  Majefty's  prefent  Mmifters  with  a 
reference  to  the  Petition  lately  prefentcd  to  Parliament  as  a  ground  of  their  new 
determination,  the  parties  have  at  length  arrived  at  a  point  when  decifion  is  abfo. 
lutely  required  between  the  ruin  of  the  Company  and  the  difappomtment  of  the 
petitioners  againft  their  Charter. 

Refolved,  That  on  former  difcuflions  relative  to  the  renewal  of  the  Company's 
Charter,  and  particularly  in  1793,  His  Majefty's  Government  were  prepared  at 
the  outfet,  to  ftate  the  precife  extent  cf  conceflion  which  could  fafely  be  allowed 
to  the  petitioners  againft  the  Company's  Charter ;  and  their  mature  conviftion 
appeared  then  to  be,  that  the  regulated  monopoly  of  the  Company  was  eflential 
to  the  interefts  of  the  Country,  and  that  this  confideratioa  alone  was  a  fufHcient 
anfwer  to  all  pretences  for  interference  wdth  that  monopoly. 

That  the  territorial  pc^ffeffions  of  the  Company  in  India  are  their  certain  right  ; 
and  that  the  fyftem  provided  for  the  Indian  government  by  the  wifdom  of  Parlia- 
ment, together  with  the  difinterefted  fpirit  in  which  it  has  been  adminiftered  by 
the  Company,  have  extended  and  confolidated  the  Britifh  Empire  in  the  Eaft,  and 
added  to  the  ftrength  and  glory  of  the  Britifh  Empire  at  home. 

That  the  trade  of  the  Company  has  long  ceafed  to  bear  the  charafter  of  a  ftrift 
monopoly ;  and  that,  by  fome  further  modifications,  if  thought  indifpenfable,  in 
addition  to  the  arrangements  of  1793  and  of  1802,  it  may  be  rendered  as  much  an 
open  trade,  as  will  be  confiftent  with  the  fecurity  of  revenue,  and  the  profperity 
and  fafety  of  the  Indian  Empire. 

•■■'That  it  is  the  opinion  of  the  ableft  Indian  ftatefmen,  as  well  as  the  generality 
of  perfons  acquainted  with  India,  that  no  large  or  fudden  addition  can  be  made 
to  the  amount  of  Britiflr  exports  to  that  Country  or  China  ;  that  this  opinion  is 
confirmed  by  the  praftice  of  the  Americans,  who  export  chiefly  bullion,  and  by 
the  overloaded  ftate  of  the  Indian  markets ;  that  the  habits  and  religion  of  the 
natives  are  hoftile  to  any  fuch  extenfion  ;  and  that  the  Company  adually  fufFer  a 
lofs  in  this  department  of  their  concerns,  with  the  view  of  employing  the  capital, 
and  encouraging  the  induftry  of  their  countrymen  at  home. 

That  fo  far  as  relates  to  the  ordinary  produce  of  India,  the  import  trade  is 
now  carried  to  the  full  extent  of  the  demand,  as  appears  by  the  value  of  three 
millions  and  a  half  fter ling  of  private  property  at  this  moment  remaining  in  the 
Company's  warehoufes ;  and  that  to  open  the  out-ports  to  that  trade,  would  be  no 
other  than  a  ruinous  transfer  of  it  into  new  channels,  to  the  deftruAion  of  immenfe 
and  coftly  eftabliftiments,  and  the  beggary  of  many  thoufands  of  induftrious 
individuals. 

That  an  extenfion  of  the  trade  in  other  produfts,  ihe/uppo/ed  effed  of  opening 
the  out-ports,  could  be  realized  only  by  a  large  transfer  of  capital  to  India,  and 
its  confequent  colonization  ;  that  if  realized,  it  might  fatally  interfere  with  the 
manufadures  of  England,  or  with  her  commerce  to  countries  where  fimilar  pio- 
dufts  are  already  raifed  by  Britifli  capital,  imported  in  Britilh  fliipping,  and  paid 
for  by  Britifti  manufadurers,  and  that  thus,  fuch  extenfion  would  deeply  injure 
thofe  very  perfons  who  are  moft  impatiently  petitioning  for  it. 

That 


40      CORRESPONDENCE  between  PRESIDENT  of  INDIA  BOARD 

-  That  any  unreflrai'ned  intercourfe  of  Europeans  with  our  Indian  Empire,  is 
highly  to  be  deprecated  ;  that  the  unlimited  competition  of  commercial  agents 
would,  from  the  peculiar  circuraftances  of  the  country,  produce  "  a  boundlefs 
' "  fcene  of  confufion  and  fraud,  and  ultimately  the  ruin  of  the  manufadurers 
"  themfelves  ;"  and  that  tempting  opportunities  would  be  held  out  to  the  agents 
to  maintain  illicit  intercourfe  with  the  Native  Powers,  and  to  conduft  a  dangerous 
fyfliem  of  communication  with  China  from  the  Eaftern  Iflands. 

That  this  Court  do  mofl:  highly  approve  the  conduct  of  the  Direftors  upon 
the  vital  queftion  of  admitting  the  out-ports  to  the  import  trade  from  India  ;  and 
that  the  confufion  and  hazard  from  irregular  fales  at  the  out-ports,  the  lofs  to 
the  revenue  from  fniuggling,  and  the  confequent  ruin  of  the  Company's  China 
Trade,  are  decifive  obftacles  to  the  policy  of  fuch  a  meafure ;  they  are  therefore 
firmly  of  opinion  that  the  Court  of  Dii-edors  fhould,  on  no  confidcration  what- 
ever, cede  this  point  in  the  difcuflion. 

That  it  alfo  appears,  from  niunerous  Petitions  prefented  to  the  lafl;  Parliament, 
that  on  the  faith  of  approved  and  long  eftablifned  prafticc,  an  immenfe  capital  has 
been  inveiled  in  eftabhfliments  peculiarly  adapted  to  the  export  trade  between 
India  and  China ;  and  that  many  heavy  engagements  have  been  entered  into  by 
perfons  in  the  City  of  London  and  on  both  banks  of  the  Thames,  from  London 
Bridge  to  Gravefend,  the  very  fubfiftence  of  many  of  whom  depends  upon  the 
continuance  to  the  port  of  London  of  the  export  trade  to  India  and  China  ;  and 
that  nearly  10,000  induftrious  artificers,  together  with  their  families,  would  be 
in  danger  of  beggary  in  proportion  as  they  would  be  thrown  out  of  employment 
by  the  removal  of  the  export  trade  from  its  accuftomed  channel.  This  Court 
therefore  conceives,  that  it  is  of  vital  importance  to  the  city  and  port  of  London, 
that  the  export  trade  to  India  and  China  fhould  continue  to  be  carried  on  as 
heretofore. 

That  fince  the  high  duties  on  articles  imported  would  ftill  remain,  the  abate- 
ment in  the  price  of  freight  expeded  by  the  petitioners  to  enfue  from  the  fubver- 
fion  of  the  prefent  fyflem,  would  be  productive  of  trifling  relief  to  the  confumer  ; 
and  that  this  relief  would  be  purchafed  at  the  extreme  hazard  of  the  revenue 
of  cuftoms  and  excife  now  collected  eafily  by  the  Company,  as  well  as  imminent 
danger  to  all  the  fources  of  their  wealth  in  India. 

That  there  is  no  foundation,  in  fact,  for  the  ftatement  which  afcribes  to  the 
Company's  Charter  the  advantages  enjoyed  by  neutral  foreigners  over  Briti(h 
merchants,  in  the  admiflion  of  the  former  to  a  trade  from  which  the  latter,  are 
excluded  ;  for  that  the  profit  with  which  that  trade  has  been  carried  on  by  thofe 
foreigners,  has  been  entirely  owing  to  the  facilities  necefl'arily  belonging  to  their 
neutral  character,  and  which  of  courfe  cannot  belong  to  the  merchants  of  a  bel- 
ligerent Itate. 

That  the  difcharge  of  the  political  functions  of  the  Company  depends  on  the 
continuance  of  its  commercial  privileges.  That  the  propofitions  of  His  Majefty's 
Government,  by  giving  a  fatal  blow  to  the  commercial  interefts  of  the  Company, 
will,  if  infilled  on,  eventually  terminate  in  its  political  diflblution  ;  and  that  po- 
litical advantages,  of  the  highefl  importance,  will  thus  be  loll  to  the  country, 
amon<T  which  the  following  deferve  to  be  difl:in£tly  noticed,  as  much  too  valuable 
to  be  facrificedfor  a  trifling  redudion  in  the  freight  of  Indian  goods  to  Europe. 

I, — A  marine  of  100  large  fliips,  containing  a  tonnage  of  103,333  tons,  employ- 
ing i,4Co  officers  and  10,000  ieamen,  of  acknowledged  fkill  a!id  bravery,  and 
which  has  been  feund  ready  and  able  at  all  times  to  rainilter  to  the  national  coii- 
venience,  and  to  augment  the  national  glory. 

2. — An  extenfive  eftablifliment  of  yards,  which  has  often  rendered  large  and 
feafonable  ailiftance  to  the  Royal  Navy,  and  might  in  cafes  of  neceflity  be  made 
available  to  the  national  defence. 

n — The  remittance  of  the  fortunes  accumulated  by  above  3.000  officers  of  the 
Company's  military  fervice,  and  fome  hundreds  of  civil  fervaiws,  which  are  trans- 
ferred to  the  capital,  and  fliinulate  the  induflry  of  Britain, 

That 


and  CHAIRMAN,  &c.  o/The  EAST  INDIA  COMPANY.  41 

That  in  addition  to  thcfe  confidcrations,  the  liberal  dilburrements  of  the  Com- 
pany for  national  enterprizes,  and  the  meritorious  contributions  of  their  fervice 
to  the  national  fund  of  fcrtngth  and  glory,  are  entitled  to  ajufl  and  honourable 
remembrance  in  the  preparation  of  any  mcafure  which  may  vitally  afTcft  their 
interefts. 

That  connefled  with  this  department  on  the  fubjecl,  is  the  extreme  danger 
to  which,  in  cafe  of  the  Company's  diffolutlon,  the  balance  of  the  conflitution 
would  be  expofei)  by  the  transfer  of  the  Indian  patronage  to  the  Crown,  and 
the  enormous  burden  which  would  be  entailed  on  the  public,  in  fatisfying  the 
claims  of  compenfation  on  behalf  of  the  Company,  and  of  all  the  complicated 
interefts  which  would  be  involved  in  its  fate. 

That  by  the  deftruftion  of  the  Company,  a  vaft  number  of  thofe  proprietors, 
amongit  whom  its  capital  of  twelve  millions  flerling  is  divided,  would  be  reduced 
to  extreme  diltrefs  ;  and  nearly  40,000  perfons,  direftly  employed  by  the  Com- 
pany, with  many  others  indirectly  concerned  in  its  profpericy,  would  be  brought 
to  a  llate  of  abfolute  beggary. 

That  from  the  tenor  of  the  preceding  confiderations,  it  appears  to  this  Court, 
that  no  cafe  of  political  or  commercial  delinquency  has  been  ellablilhcd  againil 
the  Company,  to  juftify  the  ruin  with  which  they  are  threatened,  or  to  tovfeit 
their  claim  to  a  continuance  of  their  Charter ;  that,  on  the  contrary,  their  com- 
mercial management  has  been  frequently  deranged  and  interrupted  by  codiy  enter- 
prizes, to  Vv'hich  they  were  compelled,  on  grounds  of  imperial  policy,  and  which 
no  temporary  poflellion  could  have  induced  them  to  execute ;  that  their  remon- 
ftrances  againil  thefe  undertakings  were  fdenccd  by  reference  to  future  and  diftant 
recompence,  in  the  improved  profpeft  of  permanent  peace,  revenue,  and  com- 
merce, and  that,  by  arguments  which  implied  little  lefs  than  a  pledge  that  their 
privileges  (hould  be  continued,  at  leaft  until  their  indemnity  fliould  be  complete  ;. 
and  that  it  is  manifeftly  unjuft  to  allege  againft  them,  as  a  proof  of  commercial 
mifmanagcmenr,  pecuniary  difficulties  arifing  out  of  this  forcible  diverfion  of  their 
commercial  funds  to  national  purpofes. 

That,  with  a  view  to  their  financial  difficulties,  thus  incurred  on  the  public 
account,  the  Direftors,  in  the  year  1803,  apprehending  the  confequcnc.s  of  the 
transfer  of  the  Indian  territorial  debt  to  England,  propofed  methods  to  meet  and 
provide  for  thofe  confequences  ;  but  that  His  Majeity's  Miniilers  refufed  to  for- 
ward thofe  propofitions  to  India,  and  have  not  lubllituted  any  other  proceeding 
for  the  fame  end. 

That  the  Court  appeal  confidently  to  the  following  particulars  from  the  clofe 
of  the  Fourth  Report  of  the  Committee  of  the  Houle  of  Commons  appointed  in 
the  late  Parliament,  for  a  proof,  not  only  that  the  Company  have  carried  on 
their  affair's  without  any  expence  10  the  finances  of  this  country,  but  that  the 
operations  of  their  fyftem  have  been  in  manifold  uays  beneficial  to  its  interefts. 

ift. — That  fince  1791  Britiih  induftry  has  been  encouraged  by  the  employment 
of  ^£'46, 000, 000. 

2d. — That  the  pi'oduce  and  manufadlures  of  India,  purchafed  with  this  fum, 
together  with  thole  in  China  fold  in  England,  realized  in  fale,  amount  nearly  to 
^140,000,000. 

^d. — That  the  purchafe  of  the  produce  and  manufadlures  of  England  amounted 

to  .l€'29,2CO,000. 

4lh. — That  the  employment  of  Britifti  fhipping,  amounted  to  ^25,000,000. 

5th. — That  the  duties  on  imports  collected  through  the  Company,  at  a  trifling 
expenfe  to  Government,  aniounted  to  ^39,300,000.  and  on  exports  to  ^660,000. 
together  ^£"39, 960,000. 

6th. — That  the  combination  of  thefe  and  other  fums,  producing  ^185,960,000. 
fliows  that  on  an  average  of  the  laft  fcventeen  years  =£'10,900,000.  has  been 
diffufed  in  various  channels  through  the  whole  circulation  of  the  Britifh 
empire,  &c. 

(32.)  L  That 


42      CORRESPONDENCE  between  PRESIDENT  of  INDIA  BOARD 

That  for  proof  of  the  moral  and  political  benefits  derived  to  the  population  of 
India  from  the  government  of  the  Company,  this  Court  appeals  to  the  Fifth- 
Report  of  the  Committee  of  the  Houfe  of  Commons,  which  exhibits  the  gratify- 
ing piclure  of  a  people  raifed  from  the  loweft  diforder  and  degradation,  to  a  ffate 
of  induftry,  fecurity,  and  freedom  ;  and  that  this  Court  confidently  hopes  the 
improvement  in  the  condition  of  fifty  millions  of  natives  will  not  be  interrupted 
by  the  pernicious  experiments  to  which  the  fanftion  of  Parliament  is  now  fo  loudly 
foiicited. 

That  the  interefts  of  the  Company  are  now  become  fo  interwoven  with  the 
political  and  commercial  fyftem  of  Britain,  that  by  their  fudden  diffolution  the 
credit  and  grandeur  of  this  country  would  receive  a  fhock  which  muji  be  perilous, 
and  might  be  fatal ;  and  that  the  meafures  propofed  by  Government  are  therefore 
anxioufly  to  be  deprecated,  inafmuch  as  they  mail  have  the  effect  of  bringing  the 
Company  to  fpeedy  deftruftion. 

That  with  fuch  a  cafe  in  favour  of  the  Company,  the  Court  is  affured  they  may 
approach  Parliament  with  confidence,  and  without  the  fmalleft  alarm  from  the 
mifreprefentations  with  which  they  have  been  affailed  ;  and  they  are  perfuaded  that 
the  wifdora  of  that  enlightened  body  will  never  countenance  the  facrifice  of  the 
clear  and  pofitive  interefl  of  one  clafs  of  men,  to  the  contingent  and  uncertaia 
advantage  of  another ;  nor  demolifh  a  mighty  pradical  fyftem,  which  has  been 
raifed  by  fuch  immenfe  exertions,  in  order  to  place  its  materials  at  the  difpofal  of 
interefted  fpeculation. 

That  this  Court  approves  moft  highly  the  firm  exertions  by  which  the  Direftors 
have  now  enabled  the  Company,  if  necefTary,  to  bring  their  cafe  in  its  integrity 
before  the  tribunal  of  Parliament  ^  they  tender  their  warmeft  thanks  to  the  Chair- 
man, the  Deputy  Chairman,  and  the  Court  of  Directors,  for  their  zeal  and  abi* 
L'ty  in  fupport  of  this  important  caufe  ;  and  they  truft  that  if  any  opening  fhould 
prefent  itfelf  for  a  renewal  of  the  difcufTion  between  tlie  Company  and  His  Ma- 
jefty's  Government,  upon  the  principles  detailed  in  this  Refolution,  it  will  be 
conduced  by  them  with  the  energy  and  moderation  which  they  have  hitherto 
difplayed. 

And  the  Court,^  on  the  queflion,  adjourned. 


AT  a  Secret  Committee  of  Correfpondence,  the  27th  January  1813. 

THE  Committee,  adverting  to  the  following  pafTage  in  Lord  Buckinghamfliire*& 
Letter  of  the  4th  inftant  ;  viz. 

"  I  may  add,  however,  that  as  the  Merchants  and  Manufacturers  connected 
"  with  the  Out-ports,  confidering  themfelves  entided,  at  the  expiration  of  the 
•'  Charter  of  the  Eaft  India  Company,  to  carry  on  that  trade  from  which  they 
*'  had  been  excluded  for  a  limited  time,  had  entered  into  a  flatement  of  their 
"  cafe,  by  Petitions  prefented  to  Parliament  in  the  courfe  of  the  lad  Seffion,  you. 
*'  may  obtain  from  thofe  records  that  further  information  which  you  appear 
*'  defirous  to  poffefs  :— 

And  the  Committee  deeming  it  prop>er,  in  confequence,  to  enter  into  the  confi- 
deration  of  the  Petitions  above  referred  to  ; 

Ordered,  That  the  faid  Petitions  be  laid  before  the  Committee, 


AT 


and  CHAIRMAN,  &c.  of  The  EAST  INDIA  COMPANT.  43 

AT  a  Court  of  Dire£lors,  held  on  Wednefday  the  loth  February  1813. 

A  REPORT  from  the  Committee  of  Correrpondenee,  dated  the  9th  inflant, 
being  read,  detailing  at  confiderable  length  their  obfervations  and  opinions  on  the 
arguments  urged  in  the  Petitions  from  the  Outports,— that  the  Ea(l  India  Trade 
may  be  thrown  open  ; — and  the  Committee  alfo  fubmitting  draft  of  a  Letter  to 
the  Earl  of  Buckinghamlhire,  tranfmitting  a  copy  of  the  faid  Report  for  his 
Lordfliip's  information : 

Refolved  unanimoufly.  That  this  Court  approve,  the  faid  Report  and  Draft  of 
the  Letter  therewith  fubmitted,  and  that  the  faid  Letter  and  Report  be  tranfmitted 
to  the  Earl  of  Buckinghamfliire,  for  his  Lordfhip's  information  ;  accordingly,  draft 
of  a  Petition  to  the  honourable  Houfe  of  Commons,  praying  a  renewal  of  the 
Company's  exclufive  privileges  of  trade,  was  read,  and  unanimoufly  approved ; 
whereupon. 

The  draft  of  an  Advertifement,  giving  notice  that  a  General  Court  will  be  held 
at  this  Houfe  on  Wednefday  next,  the  17th  inftant,  for  the  purpofe  of  taking 
into  confideration  the  faid  Petition,  was  read  and  approved. 


REPORT  of  the  Committee  of  Corrcfpondence,  dated  the  9th  Febru- 
ary 1813  ;  noticed  in  the  preceding  Minute. 

THE  Prefident  of  the  India  Board  having,  in  his  recent  Letter  of  the  4th 
January,  referred  the  Court  to  the  petitions  prefented  to  Parliament,  in  the  courfe 
of  laft  Seffion,  from  the  Merchants  and  Manufacturers  conneded  with  the  Out- 
ports, for  fuller  infoiTnation  than  had  been  then  imparted  to  the  Court,  concern- 
ing the  reprefentations  which  had  induced  His  Majefty's  Miniflers  to  be  of  opinion 
that  the  Import  Trade  from  the  Eaft  Indies  fliould  not  be  confined  to  the  Port  of 
London,  Ypur  Committee  determined  on  examining  thofe  Petitions  as  they  fiand 
recorded  in  the  Votes  of  the  Houfe  of  Commons.  But  in  going  into  this  talk, 
your  Committee  found  that  it  involved  a  review  of  all  the  Petitions  lately  preferred 
againft  a  renewal  of  the  Company's  Charter,  becaufe  the  arguments  in  favour  of 
the  Outports  were  interfperfed  through  them.  The  whole  of  thofe  Petitions  have 
therefore  been  perufed  ;  and  one  remark  which  immediately  prefents  itfelf  on  that 
perufal,  a  remark  entitled,  in  the  opinion  of  your  Committee,  to  particular  atten- 
tion— is,  that  thofe  arguments  in  behalf  of  the  Outports  are,  in  a  very  material 
degree,  the  arguments  which  are  direftly  urged  for  the  abolition  of  the  whole  of 
the  Company's  exclufive  commercial  privileges ;  and  the  claims  of  the  Outports 
are  contended  for,  as  a  part  of  the  entire  freedom  in  the  Eaftern  trade,  which  is 
demanded  for  ail  the  fubjefts  of  the  empire.  The  places  efpecially  which  are 
ftridly  Outports,  proceed,  in  their  Petitions,  upon  principles  which  arraign  every 
fpecies  and  degree  of  monopoly ;  and  it  is  chiefly  from  thofe  principles  that  they 
deduce  as  a  confequence,  the  right  of  the  Outports  to  a  free  participation  in  Indian 
imports.  But  as,  in  the  deliberate  and  jufl:  opinion  of  His  Majefty's  Minifters, 
thofe  principles  and  arguments  are  not  valid  for  the  main  claim  of  the  Petitioners, 
it  is  to  be  prefumed,  that  neither  can  they  in  the  fame  opinion  be  valid  for  the 
fubordinate  claim  of  the  Outports,  fo  far  as  it  is  refted  on  the  fame  foundations  ; 
which,  however,  are  the  foundations  built  on  by  the  generality  of  the  Petitions. 
The  few  remaining  arguments  on  this  queftion,  relate  principally  to  the  facility 
and  certainty  with  which  the  revenue  may  be  collefted  at  the  Outports ;  and  to  the 
fafety  with  which  the  honourable  men  compofing  the  commercial  clafs  of  this 
Country,  may  be  admitted  to  all  the  fettlements  and  countries  of  the  Eaft.  But 
thefe  are  mere  aflertions  of  opinion,  to  be  clafled  with  the  "  untried  theories"  of 
the  time,  and,  as  far  as  the  light  of  experience  goes,  oppofed  by  it.  If  they  were 
even  proved,  which  they  are  in  no  degree,  they  would  not  by  any  means  fatisfy  all 
the  great  interefts  abroad  and  at  home,  which  are  involved  in  the  queftion  of  the 

Outports  i 


44       CORRESPONDENCE  between  PRESIDENT  of  INDIA  BOARD 

Outports ;  and  therefore  your  Committee  are  entirely  at  a  ]ofs  to  difcover  how 
the  arguments  in  favour  of  thofe  ports,  ns  they  Ihiud  in  the  Petitions  to  Parliament, 
refting  chiefly  on  principles  which  His  MajeRy's  Government  do  nut  admit,  have 
fo  prefented  theiul'clves  to  the  Minifters,  as  in  their  view  "  to  edablilh  a  claim 
"  againft  an  abfolute  reftri£tionof  the  Import  Trade  to  the  port  of  London;"  or 
how,  from  the  ^;if/>(7r/i?  reprefentations  of  thofe  Petitions,  which  proceed  on  the 
demand  of  an  entire  liberty  of  trade  to  India  and  China,  a  demand  refifted  by 
His  Majelly's  Government,  any  clear  definitive  idea  is  to  be  obtained  of  that 
degree  of  "  liberty  of  trade,  which  the  merchants  may  enjoy  without  injury  to 
"  other  important  national  interells."  And  hence  your  Committee  humbly  con- 
ceive, that  this  problem,  fo  important  in  its  nature,  namely,  the  meafure  of  fur- 
ther liberty  which  may  be  fafcly  granted,  ftill  remains  to  be  folved,  and  requires 
deliberate  and  accurate  inveRigation. 

Thefe  remarks  may  perhaps  receive  fome  confirmation  from  the  fuccinct  view 
which  your  Committee,  enlarging  fomcwhat  their  firfl  defign,  are  now  about  to 
fubmir,  of  the  principal  matters  contained  in  the  Petitions  for  the  abolition  ol  the 
Company's  commercial  privileges,  and  of  the  anfwcrs  to  which  they  are  obvioufly 
liable  :  Although  the  fame  allegations  which  are  thus  urged  have  often  been  com- 
bated, it  may  be  proper,  en  account  of  the  channel  in  which  they  now  come  for- 
ward, and  of  the  publicity  of  the  prcfent  difcuffion,  to  give  fome  diHinft  reply 
to  them,  which  will  at  leaft  further  evince  the  difpofition  of  the  Court  to  fhrink 
from  no  charge,  and  to  fhun  no  inquiry. 

All  the  material  objecllons  which  appear  in  thofe  Petitions  to  the  renewal  of  the 
Company's  Charter,  may  be  comprifed  under  the  following  heads  : 

ift.  That  Commercial  Monopolies,  efpecially  if  extenfive  and  long  continued, 
are  in  their  nature  and  according  to  the  experience  of  paft  ages,  inexpedient,  im- 
politic, and  unjuft  ;  and  that  the  monopoly  of  a  joint  flock  Company  muft  be 
managed  with  negligence,  wafte  and  prodigality,  unlikely  to  be  pradifed  by  pri- 
vate Merchants  ;  (fome  of  the  Petitions  admit  that  monopolies  may  be  tolerated 
in  the  beginnings  of  trade,) 

2d.  That  the  monopoly  of  the  Eaft  India  Company  has  been  injiirlous  to  the 
nation,  great  evils  having  refulted  from  it :  that  it  is  inadequate  to  an  extended 
trade  ;  has  locked  up  national  capital ;  has  retarded  improvement ;  has  not  ad- 
vanced trade,  nor  carried  it  to  many  countries  within  the  Company's  limits  ;  that 
it  cools  the  ardour  of  generous  and  liberal  compeution  ';  has  deprived  the  Woollen 
manufafturers  of  Gloucefter,  Wiltfhire,  Exeter,  Shrewfbury,  and  the  manufac- 
turers of  other  places;  fome,  of  fupplying  an  immenfe  population  ;  others,  of 
preparing  articles  for  China,  on  lower  terms  than  the  Company  allow  ;  others,  of 
carrying  on  trade  with  India  and  the  countries  north  of  it ;  others,  of  receiving 
orders,  infinitely  beyond  what  they  now  obtain  from  the  Eaft  India  Company  : 
that  it  is  (particularly  in  the  opinion  of  the  Staffordfhire  potters)  unfavourable  to 
the  introdudfion  of  new  articles  :  that  its  exports  to  the  Eaft  do  not  amount  to  a 
fifth  of  the  exports  of  this  country  to  America:  that  all  ideas  of  participationin 
the  profits  of  a  monopoly  trade,  by  payment  into  the  Exchequer,  ever  will  be 
vain  and  illufory  ;  of  which  the  difappointmtnt  of  the  nation,  in  regard  to  the 
Company,  is  a  complete  illuflration:  that  the  intention  of  opening  the  trade  will 
be  fruftrated,  by  leaving  the  Company  any  controul  over  Private  Trade  :  that  it 
is  proved,  by  undeniable  documents,  that  if  the  trade  be  allowed  to  remain  under 
its  prefent  reftridions,  it  will  languifh,  decay,  and  pafs  into  the  hands  of  other 
ftates  ;  that  it  muft,  if  continued,  diminiih  the  fources  of  private  wealth  and  na- 
tional revenue:  that  the  real'onings  in  favour  of  the  monopoly  proceed  from  narrow 
partial  views,  have  been  demonftrated  fallacious,  and  will  apply  equally  to  every 
other  branch  of  Britifli  Commerce  :  that  it  is  humiliating  to  individuals,  degrading 
to  the  national  chara£ler,  and  a  national  grievance. 

3d.  That  notwithftanding  the  incrcafc  of  the  Company's  territories,  their  trade 
has  decreafed,  though  proteded  from  enemies  and  hoftile  rivalry  ;  that  fmce  the 
renewal  of  the  Charter  in  1793,  they  have  added  greatly  to  their  debt ;  that  the 

pecuniary 


and  CHAIRMAN,  &c.  e/TPIE  EAST  INDIA  COMPANY.  45 

pecuniary  participation  held  out  to  the  country  In  1793  has  not  been  realized,  but 
has  been  converted  by  the  Eaft  India  Company  into  repeated  claims  on  the  public 
purfe  and  credit  for  enormous  funis  to  fupport  their  eftabliflnnents ;  and  that  fur- 
ther and  ftill  greater  pecuniary  afliftance  is  now  required,  to  avert  cmbarraffments 
in  which  they  may  be  foon  involved. 

4th.  That  a  full  and  free  right  to  trade  to  and  with  all  countries  and  people  in 
amity  with  His  Majefty,  and  more  particularly  thofe  countrits  acquired  and  main- 
tained by  the  efforts  and  valour  of  the  forces  of  His  Majejly^  is  naturally  the  un- 
doubted birth-right  and  inheritance  ot  the  people  of  this  empire,  of  every  fubjeft 
of  it,  and  every  port  in  it,  and  that  the  unreftraincd  exercife  of  that  right  is  cflcn- 
tiaily  neceflary  to  the  maintenance  of  the  manufacturer?,  and  profperity  of  the 
commerce  of  this  country  ;  that  the  confinement  of  the  Eaftern  trade  to  the  port 
of  London  would  be  a  violation  of  that  right,  at  once  unneceffary,  unjufl,  and 
impolitic — unneceffary,  becaufe  the  duties  may  be  collected  with  greater  eafe  and 
lefs  lofs  by  pilferage  in  the  Outports,  the  taxes  on  Weft  Indian  and  American 
produce  being  now  colleded  with  known  fafety — unjuft,  becaufe  every  mercantile 
place  in  the  United  Kingdom  is  entitled  to  the  fame  privileges — and  impolitic,  be- 
caufe the  fuperior  economy  and  difpatch  that  prevail  in  the  Outports,  are  requifite 
to  fecure  an  equality  with  foreign  nations.  In  thcfe  claims  for  the  Outports,  there 
is  a  general  concurrence  in  the  Petitions  from  Plymouth,  Glalgow,  Paifley,  Dundee, 
Arbroath,  Leith,  Edinburgh,  Belfaft,  Briftol,  Liverpool,  and  Hull ;  of  v/hich 
three  laft-mentioned  places,  Briftol  and  Liverpool  ftate,  that  they  have,  in  con- 
templation of  the  opening  of  the  trade  to  India,  enlarged  their  docks  ;  and  Hull, 
that  there  fhould  be  no  reftraint  as  to  the  fize  of  veffels  to  be  admitted  into  the 
Indian  trade. 

5th.  That  no  fatisfaSory  reafon  can  be  affigned,  why  the  tirade  to  China  fliould 
not  be  opened  ;  that  the  difficulty  apprehended  in  coliedting  the  Tea  duties  is  ideal  j 
that  the  Britifli  charafter  forbids  injurious  fiafpicions  as  to  inconveniences  in 
India  and  China  from  opening  the  trade  : — that,  in  the  avowed  opinion  of  one  fet  of 
Petitioners,  the  merchants  of  this  country  fhould  be  allowed  to  trade  direftly  from 
the  Eaft  to  the  Britilh  Weft  Indies  ;  and  another  fet  claim,  that  the  products  of  the 
Eaft  fiiall,  without  being  firft  landed  in  this  kingdom,  be  tranfported  to  the  Britilh 
Weft  Indies,  the  American  Colonies,  and  all  other  Countries  fouth  of  Cape  Finif- 
terre,  and  within  the  Mediterranean. 

6th.  That  the  exifting  monopoly  has,  contrary  to  reafon  and  juftice,  led  to  a 
fingular  peculiarity,  the  conceffion  of  privileges  to  foreign  nations  in  amity  with 
His  Majefty,  which  are  rigorouily  denied  to  merchants  of  the  Britifh  Empire  ;  or 
according  to  others,  that  the  trade  is  open  to  all  tbt  u'cr/if  except  Britifti  merchants  : 
that  the  American  States  have  long  enjoyed  this  trade  at  the  expence  of  our  own 
people,  employing  Britilli  capital  and  compelling  the  Company  to  fhrink  from 
competition  ;  that  they  have  engroffed  a  great  part  of  this  trade  and  alfo  of  that  to 
China,  which  the  Company  formerly  poffeffed  ;  that  the  American  merchants  being 
unfettered,  have  underfold  the  Company  in  the  markets  of  Europe,  have  deprived 
them  of  thofe  markets,  and  alfo  the  markets  of  South  America,  the  Weft  Indies, 
the  Mediterranean  and  Malta,  whilft  the  Englifti  trade  has  become  lefs  extenfive 
and  profitable  ;  that  the  example  of  the  citizens  of  the  United  States,  who  have 
evinced  the  fuperiority  of  individual  induftry,  when  oppofed  to  the  negligence  and 
prodigahty  of  a  joint  ftock  Company,  and  the  delays  and  abufes  of  their  concerns, 
proves  the  competency  of  Britifh  individuals  to  cany  on  an  extenfive  commerce  to 
the  Eaft  Indies,  China,  and  other  countries  within  the  Charter  of  the  Company  : 
that  the  monopoly  is  favourable  to  foreigners,  injurious  to  Britifli  Subjefts,  and 
its  abolition  neceffary,  to  enable  Britlfti  merchants  to  meet  neutrals  and  other 
foreigners,  in  fair  competition,  with  the  prod  ads  of  the  Eaft,  in  their  own  mar- 
kets :  or  at  leaft,  according  to  others,  that  Bi-itifh  fubjecls  fhould  be  put  on  a  foot* 
ing  with  foreigners  in  this  trade. 

7th.  That  the  diftreffes  and  privations  of  the  manufacling  and  trading  claffes 

(diftreffes  aggravated,  fay  fome,  by  the  monopoly  of  the  Eaft  India  Company) 

under  the  Continental  fyitem  of  Buonaparte,  the  difputes  with  America,  the  ex- 

(3a.)  M  cluficn 


45        CORRESPONDENCE  belweeti  PRESIDENT  of  INDIA  BOARD 

clufion  from  ufual  markets,  the  ftagnation  or  decline  of  trade,  are  grievous ;  that 
the  mercantile,  man ufa during,  and  (hipping  interefts  all  fufFer  ;  that  the  country- 
is  burthened  with  great  naval  and  military  eftablifliments;  and  that  under  fuch 
hardfhips,  prefTures,  and  exclufions,  every  poflible  relief  is  wanted,  and  new 
fources  of  trade  ouc;ht  to  be  looked  for  ;  and  that  on  account  of  the  exifting  war, 
.and  for  the  maintenance  of  our  naval  fuperiority,  and  the  prefervation  of  our  com- 
mercial, maritime,  and  financial  interefts,  an  open  trade  is  neceffary. 

8  th.  That  it  is  a  well-afcertained  faft,  that  during  the  time  of  the  Proteftorate, 
there  were  men  who  boldly  violated  the  Company's  Charter,  and  carried  on  the 
trade  with  fuch  fuccefs,  that  they  were  able  to  fell  the  commodities  of  the  Eaft,  ia 
the  different  markets  of  Europe,  on  lower  terms  than  had  ever  been  known  ;  and 
at  this  day  individual  merchants  have  traded  to  India  with  profit,  even  under  all 
the  difficulties,  delays,  and  taxes  impofcd  upon  them  by  the  Company  ;  that  the 
Private  Trade  has  continued  to  increafe,  although  fettered  with  many  reilriftions, 
but  that  thefe  reftrictions  deter  people  unacquainted  with  India,  and  refiding  at 
home,  from  engaging  in  the  trade  ;  that  a  free  Trade  to  the  Eaft  would  be  a  mea- 
fure  admirably  calculated  for  removing  prefent  evils,  would  be  a  fubftitute  for  the 
lofs  of  European  commerce,  an  equivalent  for  all  other  markets,  and  would  necef- 
farily  open  new  and  extenfive  markets,  a  field  greater  than  any  other  country  offers, 
and  beyond  the  grafp  of  the  enemy  ;  a  field  to  Britilh  fldll,  induftry,  and  enter- 
prize,  and  to  capital  otherwife  ufelefs,  whiift  the  national  refources  are  ftunted  ; — 
that  ihouf'.nds  who  are  now  reduced  to  idlenefs  and  poverty,  might  be  actively 
engaged  ;  that  the  capital,  fpirit  and  knoivkclge  of  Bvitifh  merchants  are  unbounded  ; 
—that  a  free  Trade  to  India  would  turn  the  wealth  acquired  by  the  foreign 
merchant,  into  the  pockets  of  the  fubjedts  of  this  Country  ;  would  excite  a  fair 
emulation  to  bring  all  the  produce  of  the  Eaft  to  its  proper  level  in  the  home 
market,  to  the  g»eat  benefit  of  this  country  ;  would  enable  our  manufafturers  with 
more  advantage'  to  exert  their  Ikill  and  induftry  to  produce  new  articles  of  trade, 
and  to  give  full  employment  to  the  operative  claffes  of  the  community  ;  would  cir- 
culate the  trade,  now  confined  to  London,  through  every  part  of  the  United  King- 
dom ;  would  be  the  means  of  increafing  our  maritime  ftrength,  our  financial 
refources,  and  the  wealth  and  glory  of  the  Britifli  empire.  Such  is  the  general 
tenor  of  the  Petitions  on  this  head  ;  but  the  language  of  the  one  from  Sheffield  is 
fo  animated  and  fanguihe,  that  it  may  not  be  improper  to  tranfcribe  a  part  of  it :— ■ 
*'  The  Petitioners  are  fully  perfuaded  if  the  trade  to  the  Eaft  Indies  were  thrown 
"open  to  all  His  Majefty's  fubjefts,  fuch  new  and.^abundant  markets  would  be 
■*'  difcovered  and  eftabldhed,  as  would  enable  them  to  fet  at  defiance  every  eftbrt 
'"  to  injure  them,  by  that  fworntcnemy  to  the  profperity  and  the  peace  of  Europe, 
"  the  prefent  unprincipled  P..ii4er  of  France ;  and  that  the  Petitioners  doubt  not, 
*'  if  the  trade  of  this  United  Kingdom  were  permitted  to  flow  unimpeded  over 
*'  thofc  extenfive,  luxuriant  and  opulent  regions,  though  it  might  in.  the  outfet, 
"  like  a  torrent  repreft  arid  fwoUen  by  obftruftion,  when  its  fluices  were  firft 
"  opened,  break  forth  with  uncontrollable  impetuofity,  deluging,  inftead  of  fup- 
"  plving  the  diftricl  bel'ore  it ;  yet  that  very  violence  which  at  the  beginning  might 
"  be  partially  injurious,  would  in  the  ifl"ue  prove  highly  and  permanently  benefi- 
"  cial ;  no  part  being  unvifited,  the  waters  of  commerce  that  fpread  over  the  face 
"  of  the  land,  as  they  fubfided  would  wear  themfelves  channels  through  which 
"  they  might  continue  to  flow  ever  afterwards,  in  regular  and  fertilizing  flreams; 
*'  and  that  to  the  wealthy,  enterprizing,  honourable,  and  indefatigable  Britifh 
"  merchant,  conducing  in  perfon  his  own  concerns,  no  obftacle  would  prove  in« 
"  furniouniable,  no  prejudice  invincible,  no  difficulty  ditheartening  ;  wants  where 
*'  he  found  them  he  would  fupply ;  where  they  did  not  exift  he  would  create  them, 
*'  by  affording  the  means  of  gratification." 

9th,  That  the  imagined  hardlhip  of  depriving  the  Company  of  the  only  lucra- 
tive branch  of  their  trade,  that  to  China,  will  be  alleviated  by  the  wealth,  influ- 
ence, knowledge,  and  experience,  which  in  their  united  capacity  they  will  ftill  be 
enabled  to  oppofe  to  the  unaffifted  efforts  of  private  merchants  : — that  if,  indeed, 
the  Company  can  carry  on  trade  to  greater  advantage  than  the  private  merchant, 
■they  have  nothmg  to  fear,  they  v/ill  reap  their  merited  reward  by  the  benefit  of 

competition  j 


end  CHAIRMAN,  kc.  r/ The  EAST  INDIA  COMPANY.     ^      4^ 

cempetition ;  and  without  competition  neither  would  commerce  have  rifen  to  its 
prefent  ftandard,  nor  will  it  increafe  to  bear  the  incceafing  expenccs  of  the  nation, 
^nd  with  refpeft  to  the  danger  of  exccfiive  fpcculation,  it  is  faiil  by  Glafgow  to 
be  imaginary,  becaufe  the  enteiprize  of  individuals  is  uniformly  limited  by  their 
means  and  fuccefs  ;  becaufe  any  evil  of  this  nature  is  temporary,  and  checks  itfelf ; 
and  that  the  -very  uorjl  ihat  can  cccur  in  the  event  nf  the  abandonment  of  the  trade 
by  the  Public,  would  be,  that  7iuiitcrs  luould  again  return  to  their  prefent  Jiate.  On 
all  the  grounds,  therefore,  flated  in  the  Petitions,  they  in  general  require  a  full 
and  entire  freedom  of  trade  tj  the  Eaftviird  of  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  including 
China,  and  all  the  countries  within  the  Charter  of  the  Eall  India  Company  ;  and 
for  the  means  of  indemnifying  or  remunerating,  the  claims  of  the  Company,  one  peti- 
tion propofes,  "  a  fair  and  equal  impofi  on  the  trade  in  quefiion.'" 

Your  Committee  having  thus  fubmitted  an  abftracl:,  under  different  heads,  of 
the  contents  of  the  petitions,  in  which  abftrad  they  are  perfuaded  nothhig  mate- 
rial is  omitted,  will  now  proceed  to  offer  fome  obfervations  on  each  of  thofe  heads. 

And  firft.  With  regard  to  the  doftrine  of  monopolies  in  general,  yoiu'  Com- 
mittee do  not  conceive  that  they  are  much  called  upon  to  enter  jnto  any  difcuffion 
of  it ;  becaufe  what  is  termed  the  monopoly  of  the  Eafl  India  Company  is,  as  it 
now  exifts  and  has  long  exiited,  an  inftitution  of  a  fmgular  nature,  formed  upon 
principles  peculiar  to  itfelf,  not  merely  or  chiefly  for  the  purpofes  of  trade,  and 
muff  be  examined  with  reference  to  the  ends  of  its  inftitution,  and  the  importance 
of  thofe  ends,    which  will    be   the  fubjeft   of  the   next  article.     In  the  mean 
time,  it  may   be   obferved    upon  this    firft    head,  that  the  ablefl  writers  upon 
political  economy,  and   the  moft  ftrenuous  againft  monopolies,  have  not  con- 
demned them  fimply  and  univerfally,  as  moft  of  the  Petitions  now  in  queftion  do. 
Even  Dr.  Adam  Smith  acquiefces  in  the  eftablilhment  of  the  Chartered  Banks 
:of  England  and  Scotland,  which  are  a  fpecies  of  monopoly;  and  he  praifes  the 
AQ.  of  Navigation,  which  is  founded  on  the  principle  of  exclufive  privilege.     He 
admits  alfo  the  propriety  of  a  temporary  monopoly  of  new  machines  and  new 
books  ;  and  what   is  more   immediately  to   the  prefent  purpofe,  he   grants,  in 
agreement  with  Montefquieu  and  others,  as  fome  of  the  petitioners  feem  alfo  can- 
didly to  allow,  that  "  when  a  Company  of  Merchants  (to  ufe  his  own  words) 
"  undertake,  at  their  own  rilk  and  expenfe,  to  eftablifli  a  new  trade  with  fome 
*'  remote  and  barbarous  nation,  it  may  not  be  unreafonable  to  incorporate  them 
*'  into  a  joint  ftocls.  Company,  and  to  grant  them  a  monopoly,  in  cafe  of  their 
*'  fuccefs,  for  a  certain  number  of  years.     It  is  the  eafieft  and  moft  natural  way 
"  in  which  a  State  can  recompencc  them  for  hazarding  a  dangerous  and  expen- 
"  five  experiment,  of  which  the  Public  is  afterwards  to  reap  thfe  benefit."     But, 
even  in  this  propofition,  it  may  be  obferved,  that  the  interefts  of  the  two  parties, 
the  Company  of  Merchants  and  the  Public,  feem  fcarcely  to  be  equally  cared  for. 
The  privilege  given  by  the  State,  is  a  privilege  for  its  own  benefit,  which  is  to  coft 
it  nothing,  fhould  the  experiment  fail ;  and  of  which  it  is  to  enjoy  the  permanent 
advantage,  if  the  experiment  fucceed.     It  is  fafe  from  lofs  ;  and,  befides  its  fiiarc 
of  what  prefent  advantage  there  may  be,  is  to  have  ultimately  the  fee  fimple  of 
all  the  gain  that  may  refult.     Undoubtedly,  in  this  cafe,  tiie  term  cf  enjoyment 
.by  the  merchants,  after  .all  the  feafon  of  hazard  and  viciffitude  is  paft,  fliould  be 
ample  ;  and  it  were  to  be  wilhed,  that  thofe  who  are  now  fo  eager  to  take  gra- 
■  tuitous  poffeffion  of  all  the  commercial  eftabliihments  formed  at  fuch   immenfe 
rifks  and  expenfe  by   the  Eaft  India  Company,  would  confider  more  equitably 
than  the  language  of  their  petitions  docs,  the  fair  claims  of  a  body,   even  if  re- 
:garded  merely  in  a  commercial  light,  who  have  hitherto  been  working,  through 
.a  long  feries  of  time,  of  difficulties  and  dangers,  to  the  vaft  benefit  of  the  nation, 
.^hilft  their  own  fair  compenfation  yet  remains  to  be  obtained. 

Secondly,  With  refpeft  to  that  fpecies  of  exclufive  privilege,  called  the  Eaft 
India  Company's  monopoly,  your  Committee  cannot  begin  their  remarks  upon, 
the  accufations  brought  againft  it,  without  lamenting  the  furpriCng  want  of  infor- 
mation which  the  generality  of  the  petitioners  difcover  reladve  to  the  Company's 
fyftem,  conduft  and  affairs  ;  and  your  Committee  are  compelled  to  add,  a  morti- 

7  fy'ng 


48      CORRESPONDENCE  between  PRESIDENT  of  INDIA  BOARD 

fying  defedt  of  nttention  alfo  regarding  things  that  could  not  poflibly  be  unknown 
to  the  petitioners ;  they  trei  t  the  whole  queftion  of  the  monopoly,  as  if  it  were 
purely  a  commercial  queftion  ;  as  if  it  involved  no  high  queftion  of  policy  ;  as 
if  it  flood  unconneded  with  the  acquifition,  the  government  and  the  prefervatioii 
of  a  great  Indian  Empire  ;  and  as  if,  from  its  political  relations,  the  queftion 
concerning  it  had  no  bearing  on  the  Britifti  conftitution.  Thus,  fay  fome  of  the 
petitioners,  "  the  reafonings  in  favour  of  the  monopoly  proceed  from  narrow 
*'  partial  views,  demonftrated  to  be  fallacious,  and  which  will  apply  equally  to 
"  every  other  branch  of  Britifh  commerce ;"  whereas  it  is  abundantly  obvious, 
that  the  exclufive  commercial  privileges  enjoyed  by  the  Company  in  the  Indian 
trade  (liowever  well  entitled  they  are  to  them  on  other  accounts)  are  contended 
for  by  them,  and  have  been  continued  by  the  Legiflature,  mainly  becaufe  deemed 
to  be  neccffary  for  the  political  government  of  India,  and  not  at  all  on  account  of 
any  pecuniary  participation,  which  one  of  the  petitions  erroneoufly  affumes  to  be 
now  in  queftion.  The  fame  caufe  alfo  was  underftood  to  require  the  continuance 
of  the  China  monopoly,  though  that  privilege  ftaiids  upon  other  irrefragable 
grounds,  as  the  unlimited  admillion  of  Britifti  ftiips  into  any  quarter  of  the  Eaftern 
Seas  could  not  be  thought  compatible  with  the  fyftem  adopted  for  the  fecurity 
of  our  Eaftern  territorital  poffelfions.  The  commercial  monopoly  therefore  is, 
in  a  word,  an  inftrument  in  the  hands  of  the  Company,  for  the  political  govern- 
ment of  India.  Such  it  has  been  maintained  by  them,  and  admitted  by  Minifters 
in  the  difcuflions  refpedting  the  Charter  to  be ;  but  this  great  truth,  either  as  a 
fadt  or  as  a  principle,  is  unnoticed  in  the  petitions.  Some  of  the  petitioners  are 
indeed  fo  juft  as  to  recolledt  that  the  India  Company  have  territorial  rights,  and 
to  fay  that  it  is  not  their  wifh  to  trench  upon  them  ;  but  they  do  not  feem  to  be 
aware,  that  thofe  rights  can  be  enjoyed  only  through  the  medium  of  commercial 
privileges,  or  that  any  provifion  can  be  made  for  fecuring  them  compatibly  with 
their  own  claims  for  an  univerfal  opening  of  the  Eaftern  trade.  The  petitioners 
proceed,  not  only  as  if  the  renewal  of  the  privileges  in  the  Indian  trade  were 
merely  a  queftion  of  commerce,  but  as  if  it  were  a  queftion  of  ftridl  monopoly, 
fuch  as  was  agitated  in  King  William's  time.  To  the  admillion  given  to  Private 
Merchants  into  the  Indian  trade,  by  the  Aft  of  1793,  enlarged  by  the  arrange- 
ment of  1802,  and  in  pradice  occafionally  ftill  further  extended  (not  to  fpeak 
of  the  confiderable  privileges  enjoyed  by  the  commanders  and  officers  of  the 
Company's  ftiips)  the  petitioners  do  not  advert,  except  to  blame  the  Company 
for  ihe  alleged  inefficiency  of  all  thofe  conceflions,  which  in  reality  greatly  relaxed 
the  monopoly,  and  made  it  what  the  late  Lord  Melville  called  a  regulated  or 
qualified  monopoly.  In  thus  cenfuring  the  Company,  the  petitioners  refort  to 
fome  reprefentations  formerly  brought  againft  them,  and  fufficiently  anfwered  on 
their  part ;  except  in  refpeft  to  the  irregular  difpatch  of  the  extra  ftiips  from 
India,  a  matter  originating  with  the  governments  there  from  the  political  circum- 
ftances  of  the  times ;  but  that  controverfy  is  now  paft,  and  quite  irrelevant  to 
the  prefent  ftate  of  things  :  for  another  point  to  be  held  up  to  particular  atten- 
tion is,  that  the  Company  have  lately  acquiefced  in  vaftly  larger  conceflions,  that 
is,  in  a  general  trade  between  the  United  Kingdom  and  India,  through  the  port 
of  London.  Yet  this  new  and  great  change  in  the  Indian  fyftem,  the  petitioners 
too  generally  overlook.  That  it  has  ever  attracted  their  notice,  is  only  to  be  in- 
ferred from  their  contending  that  the  trade  fliall  be  general  to  all  the  ports  of  the 
Kingdom  ;  but,  in  their  attacks  upon  the  Company,  they  aft  as  if  the  whole  ori- 
ginal ftrufture  of  the  monopoly  were  ftill  ftanding  and  obftinately  defended ; 
and  when  the  Company  acquiefce  in  large  relaxations,  the  petitioners  neverthe- 
lefs  perfift  in  charging  them  with  all  the  evils  of  the  moft  rigid  monopoly,  for 
the  purpofe  as  it  would  feem  of  aggravating  the  cafe  againft  the  Company 
in  the  eyes  of  Parliament  and  of  the  Public,  and  ftrengthening  the  prejudices 
•which  fo  much  pains  have  been  taken  to  diffufe.  Thus  the  political  pai't  of  the 
Company's  fyftem  and  its  intimate  connexion  with  commerce,  is  left  entirely  out 
of  fight ;  and  the  prefent  ftate  of  the  Company's  commercial  privileges  is  not 
accurately  1  eprefented,  nor  the  aftual  ftate  of  the  queftion  concerning  the  future 
meafure  of  thofe  privileges  fairly  brought  into  view. 

But 


and  CHAIRMAN,  &c.  of  The  EAST  INDIA  COMPANY.  49 

But  it  ought  to  be  again  and  again  prefTed  upon  the  public  attention,  thai  th  e 
firft  and  great  objed  in  any  new  arrangement  for  India,  is  not  commercial,  but 
political  ;  and  that  the  fafe  and  beneficial  adminillration  of  that  empire,  is  a  con- 
fideration  paramount  to  all  others.  No  one  has  denied,  cither  that  the  Company 
have  conducted  and  do  coiulud  the  adminillration  to  the  great  improvement  of 
the  fecurity  and  happincfs  of  the  vaft  population  that  empire  contains,  or  that  the 
government  of  it  fhould  remain  with  them,  and  confcqucntly  that  the  means  requi- 
fite  to  enable  them  to  continue  to  execute  fo  great  a  truft,  fliould  alfo  be  afforded. 
The  nature  and  extent  of  thofe  means  form,  therefore,  the  precife  quedion  now 
at  illue  ;  but  on  this  important  point,  as  has  been  already  intimated,  the  petitions 
in  general  are  quite  filent,  and  the  propofitions  contained  in  them  go  to  deprive 
the  Company  wholly  of  thofe  m3ans,  particularly  the  monopoly  of  the  China 
trade,  the  reafons  for  continuing  which  will  be  explained  in  a  fubfequent  head. 

With  regard  to  the  effects  of  the  monopoly  on  the  manufaitures,  trade,  and 
other  interefts  of  this  country,  if  any  thing  faid  in  thefe  days  to  the  difcrcdit  of 
the  Company,  could  occafion  furprile,  it  would  be  the  reprefentatiojis  given  in  the 
petitions  on  that  head.  The  Company  are  accufed  of  obftructing  the  export  of 
the  manufaftures  of  this  country,  even  by  fome  (v/ith  an  honourable  exception 
of  the  reft)  of  thofe  Woollen  manufadurers  who  have  owed  their  chief  employ- 
ment to  the  Company's  commiffions,  continued  for  the  benefit  of  the  nation, 
under  a  certainty  of  deriving  no  profit  from  the  exported  article. 

Of  thofe  "  undeniable  documents,"  by  wiiiehone  of  the  petitions  in  an  autho- 
ritative ftyle  affirms,  '•'  it  is  proved,  that  if  the-  trade  be  allowed  to  remain  under 
"  its  prefent  reftrittions,  it  will  languifh,  decay,  and  pafs  into  the  hands  of  other 
"  States  ;  that  the  monopoly  mud,  if  continued,  diminifli  the  refources  of  pri- 
"  vate  wealth  and  of  national  revenue  j"  your  Committee  have  never  heard, 
and  they  cannot  conceive  that  any  fuch  documents  exift.  It  is  more  probable 
that  the  petitioners  have  put  their  own  fenfe  upon  the  ftafements  of  the  Company, 
which  furnifli  the  moft  authentic  materials  in  this  cafe,  and  if  fairly  examined, 
with  a  reference  to  other  relative  circumftances,  will  lead  to  conclufions  diredly 
oppofite.  The  fubjefl:  of  the  American  trade  to  India,  which  feems  chiefly  al- 
luded to,  will  be  difcuffed  in  the  fequel.  That  trade,  as  will  hereafter  more  fully 
appear,  has  owed  its  incrcafe  effentially  to  the  ftate  of  war  in  which  this  nation 
has  been  placed  for  a  long  feries  of  years  part.  If  the  American  trade  with  India 
were  ftill  going  on,  a  much  eafier  and  jufter  remedy  for  the  alleged  evils  of  it 
could  be  found,  than  the  extindion  of  the  Company's  remaining  commercial 
privileges.  But  thefe  heavy  forebodings  are  pronounced,  when  America  and 
every  European  nation  (the  diftrcffed  one  of  Portugal  excepted)  are  actually 
wholly  excluded  from  the  Indian  feas. 

There  feems  to  be  a  general  and  deplorable  delu-Hon  refpeding  the  pradica- 
bility  of  a  vaft  extenfion  of  the  lale  of  the  m.anufadures  of  this  country,  in  India 
and  China,  and  of-jhe  produtlions  of  thofe  countries  here.  This  queftion  will  be 
the  immediate  fubjeft  of  a  following  article  ;  but  your  Committee  may,  in  the 
mean  time,  confidently  fav  that  the  Company  have,  in  a  long  courfe  of  years, 
made  more  numerous,  perfevering,  coftly  experiments,  in  attempting  to  pufh  the 
vent  of  Britifh  commodities,  particularly  woollens  and  metals,  in  the  Eafl,  than 
the  means,  the  refources,  the  fafety  of  private  merchants,  are  likely  to  enable 
them  to  make.  The  correfpondence  of  the  Company  with  their  fervants  abroad 
at  different  periods,  on  this  interelling  concern,  would  fdl  many  volumes.  That 
the  Eafl  India  Company,  far  from  impeding  the  profperity  of  the  country,  as  the 
petitions,  in  oppofition  to  hiftory  and  experience,  allege,  have  by  means  of  their 
monopoly  effentially  contributed  to  its  wealth  and  its  greatnefs,  it  will  be  much 
more  eafy  to  fliew,  than  to  difcover  accurately,  where  the  limit  of  the  advantages 
refulting  from  their  inftitution  is  to  be  fixed.  They  gave  a  very  early  impulfe 
to  the  manufactures  and  trade  of  this  country  ;  they  opened  a  new  commerce, 
not  with  the  Eaft  only,  but,  by  means  of  their  returns  from  thence,  with  foreign 
Europe  ;  they  foon  increafed  the  fhip-building  and  improved  the  navigation  of 
the  kingdom,  both  which  they  have,  in  latter  times,  carried  to  a  degree  of  ad- 
(32,)  N  vancement 


so      CORRESPONDENCE  between  PRESIDENT  of  INDIA  BOARD 

vancement  that  has  made  their  fleets  fcrviceable  in  the  wars  of  the  nation,  and 
the  commanders  fuccefsful  in  adding  to  the  naval  glory  of  their  country.  Againft 
the  jealous  rivalfliip  of  the  Portuguefe  and  Dutch,  they,  through  a  long  courfe 
of  hoftilities  from  a  fuperior  force,  raaintained  for  this  nation  a  fliare  in  the  India 
trade ;  they  preferved  it  from  being  totally  loft,  amidft  all  the  convulfions  of  the 
civil  wars ;  they  outlived  even  the  more  dangerous  innovations  of  fubfequent 
periods  ;  they  upheld  in  India  the  national  intcrefts  againft  the  ambitious  defigns 
of  European  enemies,  and  the  defpotic  violence  of  Native  powers  ;  and  in  a  long 
and  arduous  ftruggle,  maintained,  with  little  exception,  at  their  own  expenfe,  they 
acquired  a  territorial  empire  for  the  Mother  Country,  which  exalted  its  rank  in 
the  fcale  cf  nations.  They  have,  fmce,  expelled  every  European  nation,  except 
our  ally  of  Portugal,  from  the  Indian  continent  and  ocean,  and  they  have  given 
a  better  government  to  an  immenfely  extended  empire,  than  the  EaO:  ever  faw 
before. 

In  all  this  progrefs,  not  the  ability  and  wifdom  of  their  civil  fervants  only  have 
been  confpicuous,  but  the  talents  and  valour  of  their  military  officers  have  figiially 
added  to  the  glory  and  renown  of  the  Britifli  nation.  By  thofe  officers,  a  grand 
army  has  been  formed  of  native  troops,  in  difcipline,  attachment  and  efficiency, 
a  juft  fubjeft  of  admiration ;  and  from  the  time  of  the  firft  Clive  downward,  the 
exploits  performed  by  the  Company's  military  fervants  in  India,  equal  in  bril- 
liancy thofe  recorded  in  any  period  of  modern  hiftory. 

To  all  thefe  public  benefits  is  to  be  added,  the  dired  wealth  with  which  the 
Company  have  been  the  means  of  enriching  the  nation.  The  amount  of  thefe 
contributions,  confifling  in  the  profits  of  manufacturers,  fiiip-builders  and  tradef- 
men,  fhip-ovvners  and  officers,  fervants  and  labourers,  miners,  re-exporters  of 
Eaftern  productions  to  foreign  parts,  and  other  defcriptions  of  perfons  gaining 
by  the  Company's  trade,  in  dividends  to  proprietors,  payments  to  Government, 
and  the  influx  of  private  fortunes  acquired  in  India,  efpecially  in  the  lafl  fifty-five 
years,  may  perhaps  be  moderately  eftimated  at  one  hundred  millions  fteriing. 
Such  are  the  injuries,  the  grievances,  the  evils,  fiich  the  degradation,  which  the 
Eafl  India  Company  have  brought  on  the  country. 

Thirdly,  The  charges  under  the  third  head  are  nothing  more  than  groundlefs 
accufations,  calculated  to  render  the  Company  unpopular,  and,  except  the  firft 
article,  which  is  new,  have  been  often  anfwered  ;  as  to  this  article,  it  is  not  true 
that,  on  the  whole,  the  Company's  imports  have  decreafed,  although  the  fales 
have  in  fome  years,  fallen  off,  by  the  exciufion  of  Britifli  commodities  from  the 
European  continent ;  an  evil  common  to  all  the  merchants  ot  this  country,  but 
now  the  occafion  of  a  charge  againit  the  Company.  And  what  virtue  can  the 
expulfion  of  enemies  and  rivals  from  the  Indian  Seas  have  to  increafe  trade,  if, 
when  merchandize  is  brought  to  Europe,  there  is  only  a  tardy  and  diminiihed 
lale  for  it  ?  Again,  is  it  a  thing  of  courfe,  that  recently  acquired  provinces,  im- 
poveriflied,  unfetiled,  containing  a  people  every  way  diffimilar  to  us,  Ihould  pur- 
chafe  our  commodities,  when  the  inhabitants  of  other  parts  of  Kindoitan,  where 
U'e  have  been  fettled  for  ages,  have  flill  fo  little  relifh  for  them  ?  The  ftipulation 
in  the  ACl  of  1793,  for  a  pecuniary  participation  by  the  Public,  was  a  conditional 
fiipulation,  depending  on  a  contingency,  which  has  rever  become  a  reality  but 
in  one  year,  that  immediately  following  the  laft  renewal  of  the  Charter.  The 
long  war  in  which,  with  hardly  any  iutenniffion,  this  country  has  been  engaged 
ever  fmce  1793.,  has,  by  increafing  the  Company's  expenfes  beyond  the  moit  ex- 
travagant  fuppofition  that  could  have  been  previoufly  formed  on  that  head,  al>- 
forbed  all  the  expected  fources  of  accumulation.  Of  this,  every  Adminifiration, 
fince  1794  has  been  fenfible  ;  but  the  fame  utterly  groundlefs  charge  continues 
to  be  repeated.  "  This  promifed  participation,"  fay  fome  of  the  petitions,  "  has 
"  been  converted  by  the  Company  into  repeated  claims  on  the  public  purfe,  and 
"  credit  for  enormous  fums,  to  fupport  their  eftablilhoients  :"  a  moft  unfounded 
ftat^ment.  The  Company  have  never  had  occafion  to  apply  for  aid  to  fupport 
their  eftablilhments  ;  their  applications  to  Parliament  have  either  been  in  confe- 
q^uenge  of  levies  -by  Goverivnent  qo  the  fcore  of  participation  in  the  territorial 

ierenues^ 


and  CHAIRMAN,  &c.  of  The  EAST  INDIA  COMPANY.  5 1 

revenues,  or  for  reimburfement  of  immenfe  fiims  expended  for  the  State  in  mili- 
tary expeditions — funis  very  tardily  acknowledged,  and  not  yet  fully  paid ;  or  to 
enable  the  Company  to  meet  the  transfer  of  Indian  territorial  debt  to  this  country, 
a  debt  not  increafcd  by  their  order,  or  according  to  their  wiih,  though  the  pe- 
titions charge  the  increafe  to  them,  but  fanftioned  by  His  Majcfty's  GovcrnuiL-nt 
and  by  Parliament ;  a  debt  which,  every  intelligent  perfon  knows,  it  never  was  or 
can  be  pofTible,  in  the  nature  of  things,  to  difcharge  out  of  the  Company's 
commercial  funds,  and  therefore  nioft  unjuftly  made  a  ground  of  accufation  againft 
them. 

Fourthly,  The  claim  to  a  full  and  free  Trade,  as  the  right  by  birth  and  inhe- 
ritance of  every  fubjeft  in  the  realm,  and  the  arguments  in  favour  of  extending 
it  to  the  Outports,  are  contained  under  the  fourth  head. 

With  regard  to  the  general  pofition  on  which  the  arguments  are  founded,  little 
need  be  faid.     It  is  an  obvious  principle,  that   men,  living  in  fociety,  mul^  fub- 
mit  to  the  laws  of  the  fociety  and  to  reftraints  upon  their  natural  liberty,  when  the 
public  intereft,  in  the  opinion  of  the  legiflative  authority,  requires  it.    The  Indian 
monopoly  was  at   firft  e'labUfhed,  becaufe  it  was  thought  beneficial   to   the  com- 
mercial interefts  of  the  country.     It  was  long  continued  on   the  fame  principle  ; 
now  it  is  more  a  political  than  a  commercial  queilion.     It  may  be  (hated  thus  : — 
whether  it  be  more  for  the  intereft  of  the  nation  to  maintain  the  Indian  empire, 
under  the  fyftem  which  has  hitherto  preferved  and  improved  it, — a  fyftem  greatly 
relaxed  as  to  the  trade  with   India,  and  which   has   alfo  preferved  a   lucrative 
commercial  intercourfa  with  China, — or  to  adopt  a  fyftem  of  entirely  free  com- 
mercial communication  with  both  countries  at  the  hazard  of  lofmg   that  empire 
and  the  China  trade,  or  of  rendering  the  tranquillity  and  retention  of  the  one, 
and  the  enjoyment  of  the  other,  lefs  fecurc.     Until  this  qneftion,  or  one  reduced 
to   ftill  lower  terms,  namely,  whether  it  would  be  prudent,  for  the  fake  of  the 
obj.e6t:  in  yiew,  to  run  any  hazard  where  the  ftake  is  fo  great,  is  folvcd  in  favour 
of  an  open  trade,  the  plea  of  natural  inherent  right  has  no  title  to  be   heard. 
No  fuch  folution  has  yet  been  produced.     It  has,  on  the  contrary,  been  fliewn, 
that  dangers  and  difadvantages,  both  in  the  Eaft  and  at  home,  would  attend  the 
opening  of  the  Trade  ;  but  it  has  not  been  fliewn,  that  any  meafures  which  have 
been  fuggefted  as  preventives,  would  be  at  all  eflectual.     No  adequate  provifion, 
therefore,  againft  thofe  dangers  and  difadvantages  is  yet  propofed  ;  hence  it  may 
fairly  be  prefumed,  none  has  been   found.     But,  until   fuch  a  remedy  is  difco- 
vered,  the  prefent  fyftem  ought  not  to  be  overturned.     The  opening  ol  the  Out- 
ports would,  according  to  the  unanfwered  reafonings  of  the  Court,  have  this 
effect.     The  opening  of  a  part  of  the  Outports   would    lead  to  the  fame  effeft, 
though,  perhaps,  by  a  fomewhat  flower  progrefs  ;  for  it  would  immediately  re- 
duce  and    derange    the  periodical  public    fales   of  the  Company,  which  is  the 
mafter  wheel  in  the  mechanifm  of  their  Import  Trade.     His  Majefty's  Minifters, 
in  not  propofing  to  open  all  the  Outports,  botli  admit  the  contingency  of  danger 
from  fuch  a  meafure,  and   fet  afide  the  argument  of  univerfal  uiherent  right ; 
but  it  remains  utterly  unproved,  that  danger  would  not  refult  from  opening  even 
a  few  Outports,  efpecially  if  the  Export  Trade  is  allowed  to  all  J  and  that  after 
any  had  been  fo  privileged,  which  would  be  in  effecl  a  monopoly  againft  the  reft, 
thofe   others  would  never  be  quiet,  until  they  alfo  were  admitted ;  fo  that  the 
whole  of  the  danger  will  follow  from  the  firft  flep,  and  ought  to  be  contemplated 
accordingly.     It  may  juft  be  obferved,  that  the  quality  afcribed  to  certain  coun- 
tries, as  giving  the  petitioners  more  particularly  a  right  to  a  free  Trade  with  them; 
the  quality  of  having  been  "  acquired  and  maintained  by  the  efforts  and  valour 
"  of  the  forces  of  His  Majefty,"  properly  appertains  neither  to  Hindoftan  nor  to 
China,  and  that  the  ta-ritories  held  by  the  Company  were  acquired  by  undue 
^xclufive  powers  and  privileges  received  from  the  legiflature. 

Upon  the  fame  ground  of  natural  inherent  right,  and  of  the  necefTity  of  the 
€xercife  of  that  right,  as  effential   to  the  maintenance  of  the  manufactures  and 
commercial  profperity  of  the  country,  is  placed  the  clainr  of  the  Outports  to  a 
iiree  importation  of  goods  from  India  and  China.     Under  the  fourth  bead,  there- 
fore, 


5 a      CORRESPONDENCE  ktic-een  PRESIDENT  of  INDIA  BOARD 

fore,  your  Committee  have  colleiSVed  the  ftrength  of  the  arguments  contained  in 
the  petirions  in.  fupport  of  this  claim  ;  arguments  to  which  the  Prefident  of  the 
India  Board  was  pleafed  to  refer  the  Court.  The  argument  of  inherent  right  has 
been  ah-eady  confidered  :  the  other  arguments,  which  maybe  given  in  the  words 
of  the  Giafgow  petition,  are,  "  That  the  confinement  of  the  Indian  imports  to 
*'  the  port  of  London  would  be  unnecefl'ary,  impolitic,  and  unjult :  unneceffary 
"  becaufe,  firft,  the  ideal  difficulty  of  collefting  the  taxes  is  fully  obviated,  by  the 
."  known  fafety  with  which  the  duties  are  levied  on  articles  of  Wefl;  Indian  and 
"  American  produce  :  and  fecondly,  becaufe  the  duties  may  be  collefted  with 
"  greater  eafe  and  lefs  lofs  from  pilferage  in  the  Outports  ;  unjuft,  becaufe  every 
'•  mercantile  place  in  the  kingdom  is  entitled  to  the  fame  privileges ;  and  im- 
''  politic,  becaufe  the  fuperior  economy  and  difpatch  that  prevail  at  the  Outports 
"  are  requifite  lo  fecure  an  equality  with  foreign  nationSi" 

On  the  fecond  of  thefe  three  arguments  it  may  be  obferved,  that  the  claim  of  all  the 
Outpoi-ts  to  a  participation  in  the  Indian  trade,  as  matter  of  equal  right,  (lands  upon 
the  fame  principle  as  the  claim  6f  all  individuals,  which  has  jufc  been  confidered, 
and  muft  be  determined  in  the  fame  way  and  order;  it  therefore  demands  no 
farther  notice  here.  If  it  fliall  be  judged,  that  no  larger  inrereft  than  that  of  the 
Outports  oppofes  their  claim,  then,  and  then  only,  will  it  be  entitled  to  attention. 

The  firft  argument  is  ;  the  known  fafety,  and  greater  facility,  with  which  duties 
are  collected  at  the  Outports  Whether  that  facility  be,  in  fact,  greater  or  not, 
it  is  needlefs  to  examine.  If  it  were  indeed  fo,  it  would  ftill  leave  undecided  a 
much  more  important  queltion  ;  the  danger  of  fmuggling.  On  that  danger  the 
Court  have  enlarged  in  their  Letters  to  the  Prefident  of  the  India  Board,  of  the 
13th  January  1809,  and  15th  and  29th  of  April  181 2.  Your  Committee  can- 
not but  hope,  that  thefe  Letters  will  be  perufed  by  Members  of  Parliament,  as 
their  contents  are  material  to  a  juft  confideration  of  the  fubjeft.  The  Court  have 
refpeftfully  ftated  to  Lord  Buckinghamihire,  that  no  adequate  anfwer  has  been 
given  to  thefe  letters  :  his  Lordfhip,  in  addition  to  what  he  has  himfelf  faid,  has 
referred  the  Court  to  the  petitions.  The  argument  jufl:  quoted,  is  the  mofl  dired 
and  indeed  the  only  one  to  the  point  v.'hich  your  Committee  have  difcovered  in 
all  the  petitions.  But  it  does  not  meet  the  main  objections  of  the  Court,  taken 
frorri  the  danger  of  finuggling  ;  they  remain  untouched  and  unnoticed. 

Thofe  dangers  were  contemplated,  upon  the  fuppofition,  that  only  the  opening 
of  the  Indian  trade  v/as  in  queftion  ;  and  in  this  way  your  Committee  will  now 
eonfider  them,  referving  to  a  future  article  fome  remarks  on  the  ftill  greater 
danger  of  fmuggling,  which  would  follow,  if  the  China  monopoly  were  abo- 
Hfhed  ;  and  which  would  be  experienced,  whilft  our  merchants  were  permitted  to 
Vifit  China  at  all.  It  is  from  the  facilities  of  fmuggling  tea,  that  fliips  cleared 
out  for  or  from  India,  would  find  in  the  Eaftern  Iflands,  in  the  voyage  home,  and 
on  the  coafts  of  Scotland  and  Ireland,  that  the  Court  have  apprehended  the  chief 
dangers  would  arife.  In  the  Eaftern  lilands  there  are  no  Cuftom-houfes,  clear- 
ances, or  manifefts.  There  are  great  ranges  of  coafts  in  the  remoter  parts  of  the 
United  Kingdom,  where  there  is  no  Cuftom-houfe  :  bulk  might  be  broken,  and 
no  detedion  follow  where  the  fiiip  fliould  afterwards  be  regularly  entered.  It 
does  not  in  the  leaft  follow,  that  thefe  evils  might  not  happen,  though  it  fliould 
be  true,  that  rhe  taxes  on  Weft  Indian  and  American  commodities  are  fafely  col- 
lefted  ;  for  thefe  comm.odities  come  generally  in  very  large  unwieldy  cafks  or 
packages,  are,  in  proportion  to  their  bulk,  of  much  lefs  value  than  Tea,  which 
is  alfo  packed  in  fmall  portable  cafes,  and  they  come  from  countries  abounding 
with  regular  Cuftom-houfes,  whence  they  cannot  fail  without  manifefts  and  clear- 
ances ;  yet  with  all  thefe  fafeguards,  your  Committee  are  credibly  informed,  that 
th?  Am.erlcans  find  means  to  fmiiggle  Tea  into  this  country.  But,  even  fuppofing 
fhips  came  direft  to  an  Outport,  without  having  broken  bulk,  what  comparifor^ 
is  there  between  the  collection  of  duties  at  any  port,  provincial  or  metropolitan, 
and  the  collection  of  tea  duties  with  perfedl  certainty,  facility,  and  a  very  trifling 
expenfe,  at  the  India  Houfe  ?  The  objeQions  ftated  at  large  in  the  Court's  letters, 
your  Committee  b.eg  leave  to  repeat,,  remain  without  any  found  anfwer  j  and  it 

is 


and  CHAIRMAN,  Sec.  of  The  EAST  INDIA  COMPANY.  ^i, 

Is  extremely  material  to  obfervc,  tliat  file  opinions  maintaiiirtl  in  them,  on  this 
fubjeft,  are  corroborated  by  the  reports  which  the  Boards  of  Cullonis  and  Excife 
have  made  to  His  Majelly's  Minilters,  refpcding  the  danger  that  would  arife  to 
the  revenue  from  the  adoption  of  the  new  fyltem  j  a  danger  v.hich,  in  their 
judgment,  would  be  inevitable. 

The  third  argument  urged  in  the  petitions,  is  taken  from  the  necefiity  of  fe- 
curing  an  equality  with  foreigJi  nations,  which,  it  is  faid,  the  fuperior  economy 
and  difpatch  at  the  Outports  will  do.  If  this  alleged  advantage  of  the  Outport.s 
were  admitted,  it  would,  in  the  opinion  of  your  Committee,  weigh  but  little  in 
the  general  queflion.  The  diiterence  cannot  be  mat  .-rial  in  itfclf,  and  its  effed 
Uttle,  in  a  trade  fo  unlikely  to  become  of  any  magnitude. 

There  are,  however,  other  confiderations  of  great  weight  belonging  to  the  quef- 
tlon  of  opening  the  Outports,  to  which  the  petitions  do  not  advert.  One  of 
thefe  is,  the  immcnfe  interelts  which  the  port  of  London,  with  all  its  defcriptions 
of  merchants,  tradefmen,  tea'  dealers,  factors,  brokers,  dyers,  packers,  callen- 
derers,  infpeclors,  labourers,  fliip  builders,  fliip  chandlers,  rope  makers,  fliip 
owners,  manners,  and  all  their  train  of  eltabliHuncuts,  warehoufes,  wharfs,  docks, 
yards,  premifes,  fliipping,  formed  in  the  courfe  of  two  centuries,  in  which  the 
Company's  privilege,  and  the  law  of  the  land,  have  made  the  metropolis  the  fole 
feat  of  the  Ealfern  commerce  ;  all  thefe  interells,  v>'iih  the  Corporation  of  London, 
have  reprefented  to  Parliament,  the  ruin  in  which  they  would  be  involved  by  the 
opening  of  the  trade  to  the  Outports.  The  Cornnany's  periodical  public  fales, 
on  which  fo  much  of  the  order  and  fuccefs  of  thtir  bufmefs  depend,  would  b^ 
interfered  v/ith,  and  their  very  large  property  in  warehoufes  ami  other  buildings 
deteriorated ;  in  fhort,  all  the  inftitutions,  public  and  private,  of  the  capital,  for 
carrying  on  the  EaRern  trade,  would  be  fhattercd  or  broken  down.  The  removal 
of  the  trade  would  effeft  this,  although  the  new  Ipeculations  and  enterprizes 
would  eftablifh  nothing  equivalent  in  other  places,  far  lefs  compenfate  t!  i:  lofles 
of  the  fupplanted  parties.  Your  Committee  cannot  go  into  this  fubjed  fufficieutly 
to  give  a  jufl  fenfe  of  the  magnitude  and  importance  of  it:  but  they  may  fe-- 
rioufly  afk — Is  the  cafe  equal  between  the  people  of  London  and  thofe  of  the 
Out-ports  ?  Would  it  be  right  to  expofe  to  privation  and  ruin  one  fet,  by  with- 
drawing from  them  what  thev  have  long  enjoyed,  in  order  to  add  to  the  com- 
fortable provifion  the  other  fet  already  poflefs ;  and  this  only  to  lave  them  the 
flight  inconvenience  of  bringing  their  Indian  imports  to  the  port  of  London. 

Let  it  never  be  forgotten  too,  that  the  Indian  people  are  concerned  in  this 
queftion  ;  the  Court  have  already  in  their  letters  to  Lord  Melville  and  Lord  Buck- 
inghamfhire  flated  their  apprehenfions,  that  the  opening  of  the  Outports  to  im- 
ports from  India,  might  increafe  the  refort  of  European  adventurers  to  India. 
It  has  been  advanced  in  return  from  fome  quarters,  that  the  police  of  India  is 
fo  excellent,  as  to  obviate  every  danger  of  this  kind :  your  Committee  are  forry 
to  obferve,  that  they  find  in  the  records  of  the  Bengal  government,  informations 
concerning  the  police,  which  do  not  warrant  them  to  conclude  quite  fo  favour- 
ably of  it ;  for  in  fact,  with  all  the  progrelTive  improvements  in  the  fyflem  of  the 
government  there,  they  have  not  yet  been  able  to  bring  the  pohce  into  a  flate  of 
perfect  efficiency.  The  Fifth  Report  of  the  Committee  of  the  Houfe  of  Com- 
mons has  entered  much  into  this  lubjcft,  and  one  quotation  from  the  conclufion 
of  it,  may  fuffice  to  juftify  this  obfcrvation  : — "  It  does  not,  therefore,  appear  to 
"  have  been  from  any  want  of  information  in  regard  to  the  imperfect  ftates  of 
"  the  police,  that  the  Government  was  unable  to  prevent  its  becoming  worfe ; 
*'  but  rather,  as  your  Committee  fliould  fuppofe,  from  the  difficulties  which  pre- 
"  fenteu  themfelves  to  the  application  of  an  efficacious  remedy." 

Fifthly,  On  the  China  monopoly.  Befides  the  connexion  already  noticed  of 
the  China  monopoly  with  the  policy  of  our  Indian  fyltem,  the  uniting  of  this 
trade  under  one  head  is  neceflary,  both  on  account  of  the  extreme  caution  re- 
quired in  the  conduct  of  our  intercourfe  with  fo  jealous  and  inflexible  a  govern- 
jnent  as  the  Chinefe,  and  of  the  fecuritv  of  the  large  revenue  derived  by  the 
(32.)  O   '  Britifli 


54      COR  RESPONDENCE  hekoean  PRESIDENT  of  INDIA  BOARD 

Brlrifh  public  from  the  branch  of  commerce.     The  habits  of  the  Chinefe  nation 
ar3  known  to  be  as  fixed  as  tiicy  are  peculiar  ;  their  government  is  a  pure  defpot- 
ifm,-  jealous  of  the  fmalleft  tendency  to  infubordination  or  innovation  ;  the  people 
are  i^uided  by  a  principle   of  implicit  fubmiflion  to   their  faperiors ;  and  both 
government   and  people  hold  all  diforderly  conduct   in  the  utmofc  abhorrence. 
FojTfign  trade  is  held  in    low  eflimation,  and   the  commerce  which  Europeans 
have  been  permitted  to  carry  on  is  fubjefted  to  manifold  and  rigorous  reflriftions, 
intendea  to  prevent  the  intermixture  of  ftrangers  with  the  natives,  and  to  guard 
.  againft  their  entrance  into  the  interior   ef  the  country,  and  hazard  of  their  be- 
coming, in  any  way,  troublefome  to  the  government.     The  fiiips  of  European 
nations  are  allov.'ed  to  refort  to  only  one  port  in  an   empire  of  fo  vaft   extent ; 
and  there  even,  no  ftranger  is  permitted  a  conftant  refidence  without  credentials 
from  the  fovereign  of  the  ftate  to  v/hich   he  belongs.     When  a  faftory  is  efta- 
biifhed,  for  which   one  fpot   is  fixed,  the  factors  are  confined    to  very  narrow 
precinfts  around  it ;  they  dare  not  make  an  excurfion  beyond  thofe  precinfts  into 
the  open  fields,  nor  enter  into  the  clofely  adjoining   city  of  Canton.     The  go- 
vernment of  China  does  not  allow  to  its  own  fubjects  freedom  of  trade,  or  unre- 
flrained   intercourfe  with  foreigners  :  both  are   interdifted  ;  and  the  relfriftions 
impofed,  together  with  the  fumptuary  laws  in  force,  oppofe  the  ftrongefl:  obftacles 
to  any  great  extenfion    of   the   fale  of  our  manufactures   among  the   Chineie. 
The  trade  with  Europeans  is  given  in  monopoly  to  a  company  of  ten  or  twelve 
•  Chinefe  merchants,  ftyled  the  Hong  ;  and  thefe  merchants  become  refponfibie 
to  the  government  for  the  conduft  of  the  foreigners  with  whom  they  deal.  After 
the  fhips  are  difpatched  lor  the  feafon,  the  factors  are  obliged  to  witlidraw  to  the 
Ifland  of  Macao,  a  low  Portuguefe  fettlement,  till  the  fliips  of  next  year  arrive. 
And  with  refpeA  to  the  fliips,  they  are,  whilil  in  harbour,  under  the  controul  of 
the  Chinefe  officers,  who  are  empowered   by  law  to   take  the  cuflody  of  their 
guns.     And  if,  in  the  intercourfes,  and  consequent  frays,  between  the  natives  and 
our  Englifli  failors,  one  of  the  former  happens  to  meet  his  death,  by  accident,  from 
an  unknown  hand,  it  may  produce,  the  mod  ferious  confequences  ;,  for  the  Chi- 
nefe government  has  been  known,  in  fuch  a  cafe,  to  claim   the  life  of  an  Euro- 
pean in  expiation ;  and  for  an  occurrence  like  this  the  Company's  eftabhfhment 
is  held  refponfibie,  and  their  trade  liable  to  be  flopped.     With  a  government  fo 
abfolute  in  requiring  implicit  conformity  to   its  peculiar  law  and  ufages,  and  fo 
marlced  with  pride,  fufpicion,  and  defpotilm,  Britifli  fubjects  have  the  utmoft  dif- 
ficulty to  act ;  and  the  Company's  agents  frequently  fubmit  to  caprices  and  hu- 
miliations, to  which  the  honour  of  a  Sovereign  would  not  allow  any  reprefentative 
of  his  to  yield.     Is  it  therefore  in  the  leaft  probable,  that   the  Chinefe  would 
tolerate  the  indifcriminate  ingrefs  of  numberlefs   unconnefted,  unaccredited  Eu- 
ropeans ?  or,  if  they  did  give  them  admiffion,  that  their  multiplied,    irregular, 
deiultory  vifits  and  intercourfes  with  the  natives,  would  not   be  attended  with 
diforders  ;  with  violations  of  Chinefe  ufages  (with  fmuggling  for  inftance.  a  high 
offence  in  China),  which  would  foon  end  in  the  utter  expulfion  and  exclufion  of 
thefe  ftrangers,  or  in  fuch  injuflice  and  humiliating  punifliments,  on  the  part  of 
the  Chinefe  government,  as  might  call  on  the  honour  of  this  country  to  demand 
redrefs  ?     The  fplendid  embaify  which  His  Majefty  fent  by  Lord   Macartney  to 
the  Emperor  of  China,  had,  with  all  its  impofing  attendant  circumftances,  and 
all   the  fkilful  addrefs  of  that  nobleman,  no  influence   to  induce  the  Chinefe  go- 
vernment to  relax  from  their  rigid  reftridtions  on  tile  commerce  and  intercourfe 
of  Britifli  fubje£ts  with   its  territories ;  and  it  may  be  fafely  concluded,  that  all 
which  that  government  mufl  have  lince  heard  refpefting  the  revolutions  in  Eu- 
rope, will  make  it  adhere  fiill  more  obllinately  to  its  jealous  precautionary  fylteni. 
To  all  thefe  probable  dangers,  the  petitioners  oppofe  nothing  but  the  honourable 
charadter  of  Britons,  and  the  example  of  the  American  adventurers   to  China. 
Frail  dependence ! — Britiih  failors  carry  to  every  fhore  their  habits  of  excefs,  as 
is  too  often  found  in  the  Company's  fliips,  notvv^ith Handing   the  flrifl:  difcipline 
eflabliftied  in  them.     The  American   feamen  are  a  much  more  fober  and  quiet 
clafs  of  people,  and  the  adventurers  of  that  nation  have  derived  in  China  a  fanc- 

tion 


I 


0nd  CHAIRMAN,  &c.  oflht  EAST  INDIA  COMPANY.         S5 

tlon  from  the  pre-crtablifliment  and  credit  of  the  Englifli  faflory,  to  which,  from 
their  language  and  manners,  they  appeared  to  be  related.  It  is,  hideed,  by  the 
prudent  refpeflable  conduft  of  the  Company's  reprefentatives  there,  in  the  ma- 
nagement of  their  own  truft,  and  the  controul  cxercifed  by  them  over  other 
Britifli  fubjects ;  it  is  by  this  means,  and  by  the  extent  and  regularity  of  the 
Company's  dealings ;  by  their  probity  now  fo  famed,  as  to  pafs  the  bales  which 
have  their  mark,  without  infpcftion,  through  the  Chinefe  empire,  that  this  jea- 
lous and  fuperciiious  people  have  been  at  length  greatly  coik, :liated  :  but  the 
Company's  eftablifliment  could  not,  on  the  principles  new  propofed,  retain  either 
its  credit  or  pofition.  To  expofe  a  trade  of  fuch  value  and  importance  to  the 
nation  and  the  revenue,  to  hazards  fo  great ;  to  break  down  the  prefent  fyftem, 
with  the  immenfe  eftablillimenls  and  property  connedted  with  it,  particularly  the 
China  fleet  of  the  Company,  a  thing  unparalleled  in  the  commercial  annals  of 
the  world,  would  therefore,  in  every  view,  commercial,  financial,  and  political, 
be  utterly  unwifc  ;  and  if  this  defperate  rifk  were  run,  further  evils  would  av.ait 
the  new  fyltem  at  home.  Upon  the  fuppolition  of  a  general  refort  of  Britiili 
iTiips  to  Ciiina,  how  would  it  be  pofiible  to  prevent  the  fmuggling  of  Tea  on 
the  coalls  of  England,  Scotland,  and  Ireland,  with  the  facihty  which  exifts  of 
receiving  that  article  on  board  in  many  of  the  Eaftern  Iflands,  where  there  are 
no  Cullom-houfes,  and  with  the  temptation  of  evading  a  duty  of  ninety-five 
per  cent,  at  home  ?  The  petitions  offer  not  the  leafl  fatisfattion  on  this 
point ;  a  point  highly  interefting,  as  has  already  appeared,  if  the  queftiou 
were  only  about  opening  the  Indian  trade  to  the  Outports ;  but  yet  more  inte- 
refHng  in  refpeft  to  the  propofal  for  laying  open  the  China  trade,  which  is,  at 
the  beft,  a  propofal  to  incur  the  moft  imminent  rifk  of  lofing  that  trade,  and 
the  great  revenue  arifmg  from  it,  merely  in  order  to  change  the  hands  through 
which  it  fhall  pafs  ;  for  fupiwfing  it  to  be  prcfcrved  to  the  nation,  there  is  no 
reafonabie  ground  to  think  that  it  could  be  increafed,  becaufe  the  Chinefe  now 
take  our  Woollens  onlj  in  barter  for  Tea,  and-  the  prefent  importations  of  Tea 
are  as  large  as  the  ccuntry  reqtiircs. 

Sixthly,  On  the  complaints  of  the  fuperior  advantages  enjoyed  by  neutrals, 
particularly  the  Americans,  in  the  Indian  trade.  The  veffels  of  the  American 
States  fir  it  appeared  in  the  Indian  feas  about  the  year  1785.  At  that  time  feveral 
European  nations  poiifefTed  fettlements  on  the  continent  of  India,  in  vn-tiie  of 
grants  from  the  native  fovereigns,  recognifed  by  this  country,  after  the  Company 
obtained  territorial  dominion.  It  had  not  then  been  difputed,  that  thofe  fettle- 
ments might  receive  other  European  flags  as  well  as  their  own  (though  the  Com- 
pany have  within  thefe  few  years  properly  held,  that  the  original  grant  gave  a 
right  ot  trade  only  for  the  fhips  of  the  nation  to  whom  the  grant  was  made)  ; 
therefore  the  Bengal  government  thought  it  politic  to  admit  the  American  fliips 
into  the  Britifli  ports,  rather  than  oblige  them-,  by  refiifal,  to  carry  their  cuftom 
to  the  French,  Dutch,  and  Danes.  This  was,  however,  merely  a  gratuitous  li- 
cence, revokable  at  pleafure.  But  in  1794,  the  government  of  this  country, 
induced  by  the  polincal  circumflances  of  the  time,  gave  to  the  United  States, 
by  treaty,  a  right  to  a  direft  trade  between  their  own  ports  and  thofe  of  Bridfli 
India,  on  the  terms  of  the  mofl:  favoured  nation;  and  in  1797  the  privilege  of 
free  ingrefs  to  the  Britifli  ports  in  India  was  conferred  on  all  friendly  nadons. 
By  the  long  condnuance  of  the:  war  which  followed  the  French  revolution,  thefe 
conceflions  proved  of  unforcfeen  high  advantage  to  the  fubjetis  of  the  American 
Stat-es,  The  fettlements  on  the  Indian  continent,  of  the  French,  and  of  the  Dutch 
and  Danes,  who  had  fallen  under  French  influence,  were  fucceflively  captured 
by  the  Englifli.  The  Portuguefe  and  Americans  were  then  the  only  neutrals 
who  frequented  the  Indian  feas ;  and  the  troubles  of  Portugal  at  length  left  the 
neutral  trade  very  much  in  the  hands  of  the  Americans,  who  fucceeded  in  elTeft 
to  the  excluded  traders  of  foreign  Europe,  and  fupplied  their  wants,  as  well  as 
thofe  of  the  increafing  population  of  the  United  States,  and  the  demands  of 
Spanifii  America.  The  fubjefts  of  thofe  States,  undoubtedly,  abufed  the  privi- 
leges conceded  to  them  by  His  Majefly's  Government,  in  the  Indian  trade  ;  they 

8  were 


56     CORRESrONDENCE  bctv}cen  PRESIDENT  of  INDLi  BO;\RD 

Tvere  by  treaty  reflncted  to  a  direct  trade  between  America  and  India  ;  but  they 
"vifited  the  ports  of  foreign  Europe  going  and  returning,  and  became  the  general 
carriers.  They  even  fupplied  our  own  Weft  Indian  and  North  American  co- 
lonies witli  Enilern  commodities,  and  they  entered  aftlvely  into  the  China 
trade,  deriving  a  facihty  of  admiftion  there,  from  being  viewed  as  a  caft  of 
Er.ghflmien ;  perhaps  alio,  a  fanftion  from  the  countenance  of  the  Britifli  cfta- 
bhfliment  there. 

For  feveral  years  after  the  appearance  of  the  Americans  in  the  Indian  Seas, 
they  were,  no  doubt,  affifted  by  Britifn  capital  ;  partly  by  that  which  wanted  a 
remittance  to  Europe,  but  to  no  very  great  amount.  They  exported  from  Bengal 
in  ten  years,  through  which  their  trade  on  the  whole  was  confiderably  progrtf- 
five,  and  which  ended  with  1804-5,  goods  to  the  amount  of  ficca  rupees 
3,71,50,029  (^4,643,575),  or  ^464,357  per  annum  ;  and  they  imported,  to  the 
amount  of  ficca  rupees  3,12,48,544  (^''3,906,068),  or  ^390,606  per  aimum. 
The  excefs  of  exports  above  the  imports,  being  in  ten  years  ^737,507,  or 
^£^73,750  per  annum,  may  be  fuppofed  to  be  the  property  ot  Britifli  relidents  in 
Bengal,  remitted  by  the  way  of  America.  Whether  they  were  furniflied  with 
Britifh  capital  from  London,  and  to  what  amount,  it  is  difficult  to  afcertain  ;  but 
it  appears  evident,  that  as  they  proceeded  in  the  trade,  their  imports  to  Bengal 
more  nearly  equalled  their  exports,  which  fliews  they  were  better  able  to  do  with- 
out Indo-Britifh  afliftance,  and  probably  it  was  the  fame  as  to  European*  afhflancc. 
Upon  this  trade,  however  ofTenfive  to  our  private  merchants,  and  in  fome  vievi'S 
alfo  to  the  Company,  it  may  be  juftly  obferved,  that  it  was  favourable  to  Britifli 
India.  It  carried  feafonable  and  large  fupplies  of  bullion  to  that  country,  from 
year  to  year  ;  not  above  a  feventh  of  its  imports  being  in  goods,  and  thefc  chiefly 
wines  and  other  articles  for  the  confumption  of  Europeans  ;  it  alfo  carried  the 
commodities  of  India  to  foreign  Europe,  to  Spanilh  America,  and  other  places  to 
vvhich  Britilh  (hips,  on  account  of  the  war,  could  have  no  accefs  ;  and  when,  by 
the  policy  and  hicreafing  power  of  Buonaparte,  the  produce  of  this  country  and 
its  colonies  were  nearly  Ihut  out  from  the  Continent,  the  Americans  ftill  conti- 
nued to  introduce  the  commodities  of  India  there,  and  with  the  returns  of  their 
adventures  they  probably  purchafed  Englifli  manufactures  to  carry  to  the  Ame- 
rican continent ;  io  that  this  country  alfo  eventually  benefited  by  their  Indian 
trade  ;  and,  however  much  their  large  participation  of  that  trade  became  a  matter 
<if  complaint  among  Englifli  merchants  conneded  with  India,  it  is  certain,  that 
whilft  we  were  engaged  in  war  with  almoft  all  Europe,  thofe  merchants  could 
not,  even  by  circuitous  means,  have  occupied  the  place  which  the  Americans 
filled  in  the  Indian  commerce  ;  of  which  pofition  no  other  proof  is  neceflary, 
than  the  frequent  want  of  fales  for  the  goods,  public  and  private,  a6iually  brought 
into  the  India  Houfe  during  the  period  in  queftion.  The  great  progrefs  and 
profit  made  by  the  Americans  in  the  Indian  trade,  therefore,  proceed  elTentially, 
not  from  their  adlivity,  or  the  advantage  of  individual  enterprife,  but  from  their 
neutral  charadler ;  which,  befides  giving  them  accefs  to   countries  from  which 


*  Other  Averages  of  tlie  American  trade  with  India,  fr^m  Statements  before  your  Committee, 
paay  alfo  be  here  noted  : 


In  fix  Years  from  i3oJ-3 

to  1807-S. 

In  tliree  Yeai 

•sfrom  1S08- 

ptoi8ic-ri. 

Goods. 

Bullion. 

Total. 

Goods. 

Bullion. 

Total 

Jl 

£ 

£ 

£ 

£ 

£ 

£ 

Imports  into  all  India 

9S7."4 

6,528,250 

7.4«7.534 

351,602 

4.53i>a33 

4,882,836 

Exports  -  ditto  - 

6,901,269 

35,696 

6,916,965 

5>i07'3'8 

9.625 

5.ii7>443 

belligerents 


aiid  CHAIRMAN,  &c.  cf  The  EAST  INDIA  COMPANY.  sj 

belligerents  are  fliut  out,  enables  them  to  navigate  more  cheaply,  eafily  and  expe- 
ditioufly  ;  and  it  may  be  taken  as  a  certainty,  that  whenever  war  ceafcs,  all  their 
advantages  will  ceafe  with  it,  and  their  power  of  entering  into  competition  with 
us  in  the  trade  of  our  own  fettlemcnts,  be  very  greatly  reduced.  The  cry  that 
has  been  raifed  and  continued  againft  the  Company  on  this  account,  confelFedly 
with  the  view  of  obtaining  a  general  admiflion  of  Indian  fhips  into  England,  is 
therefore  altogether  unfair.  If  a  circuitous  trade  in  Indian  commodities,  from 
Biitainto  foreign  parts,  has  been  prevented  by  the  rivalfhip  of  the  Americans, 
the  Company  have  fuffered  as  well  as  individuals.  They  have  fuffcrcd  alfo  by 
the  fmuggling  of  Eaflern  articles  from  America,  into  our  Well  Indian  and  North 
American  colonies.  They  were  anxious  to  check,  the  abufes  of  the  treaty  of 
179^.,  and  when  it  expired,  they  obtained  the  confent  of  His  Majcfly's  miniflers 
to  impofe  a  double  duty  on  the  neutral  trade  with  India,  which  then  applied 
almofi;  folely  to  the  Americans  ;  but  if  the  complaints  againft  the  rivalfnip  cf  the 
Americans  in  the  Indian  trade  had  been  well  founded,  what  was  the  natural  and 
proper  remedy  ?  Was  it,  that  the  Company,  part  of  whofe  own  trade  had,  during 
the  war,  paffed  into  American  hands,  fliould  facrifice  the  rcfl  of  their  exclufive 
privileges,  and,  by  the  extinc?lion  of  them,  endanger  the  territorial  pofredions  ? 
Or  was  it  not  obvioufly,  that  the  Americans  fhould  be  excluded  from  a  trade 
fuppofed  to  be  carried  on  ac  the  expenfe  of  Great  Britain  ?  Yet  this  cry  is  flill 
unaccountably  kept  up,  even  v^'hen  v.e  are  at  war  with  America,  and  the  flag  of 
the  United  States  dares  not  be  feen  in  the  Indian  feas.  Nay,  it  is  kept  up  to 
injure  the  caufe  of  the  Company,  after  they  have  atlually  agreed  on  enlargements 
of  the  trade  to  England,  greater  than  ever  were  contemplated,  even  by  the  pri- 
vate merchants  of  India,  before  the  prefent  negotiation  ;  and,  if  enlargements 
could  effeft  the  objeft,  more  than  fufficient  to  bring  the  whole  Indian  trade  of 
the  Americans  to  the  port  of  London. 

It  is  fmgular  that  the  party  who  complains  of  the  large  fliare  that  has  been  en- 
groffed  by  the  Americans  of  the  Indian  trade,  Ihould  be  the  fame  party  who  com- 
plain alfo  of  the  large  fhare  which  the  Americans,  in  a  ftate  of  neutrality,  enjoyed 
of  the  Britifh  trade  between  Great  Britain  and  foreign  nations.  It  is  well  known 
that  previoufly  to  the  rupture  between  England  and  the  United  States,  it  was 
urged  as  a  grievance,  that  though  America  exported  from  this  country  to  the 
amount  of  twelve  millions  flerling  annually,  the  country  was  not  benefited  to  the 
utmoft  poffible  extent  from  this  export  trade,  becaufe  the  Britifh  merchants  and 
manufafturers  were,  by  the  intervention  of  America,  deprived  of  the  carrying  and 
of  the  fecond  felling  profit  upon  the  manufaclures.  America,  it  was  alleged, 
bought  from  us  to  a  great  extent,  and  Great  Britain  was  to  a  certain  degree,  a 
gainer  to  the  extent  of  the  American  purchafes  ;  but  becaufe  America  fold  our 
goods  at  fecond  hand  (to  the  Spanifh  Americans  for  example)  it  has  been  alleged, 
that  had  it  not  been  for  the  intervention  of  the  North  American  States,  we  (hould 
have  fupplied  Spanilh  America,  and  in  addition  to  the  profits  we  have  received, 
would  have  engroffed  all  the  advantage  which  has  accrued  to  the  merchants  of 
the  United  States  from  the  carrying  and  circuitous  trade.  But  may  it  not,  on  the 
other  hand,  be  argued,  that  if  the  Britifli  manufacturers,  in  an  open  trade  and 
during  a  flare  of  war,  have  found  the  alTiftance  of  Americi  necefl'ary  to  the  cir- 
culation of  their  own  manufaflures,  the  fame  affiftance  was  wanted  by  the  manu- 
facturers of  India  to  the  circulation  of  their  produdions  ;  that  the  large  exports 
from  India,  as  well  as  the  large  exports  from  Great  Britain,  by  the  Americans, 
were  owing  to  their  neutral  character ;  that  if  the  trade  between  India  and  Eng- 
land had  been  as  open  as  is  now  contended  for,  the  quantity  of  Indian  goods, 
circulated  through  the  world,  could  not  have  been  greater  than  it  has  been, 
under  the  competition  that  h?.^  aftually  exifled  between  the  merchants  of  the 
United  States,  and  the  Eafl  India  Company  ;  and  that  a  greater  fhare  in  the 
export  trade  from  India  could  only  have  been  obtained  for  the  free  Britifh  traders 
in  one  of  thele  ways,  either  by  America  abandoning,  or  Great  Britain  returning 
to  her  pacific  relations  with  other  countries.  If  a  free  trade  has  the  virtue  that 
is  imputed  to  it,  why,  under  complete  freedom  of  trade,  has  this  country  been 
rendered  tributary  to  America  for  a  rent  to  the  produce  of  Britifh  induflry  .?  and 
C32O  P  if 


58        CORRESPONDENCE  bet^.mn  PRESIDENT  of  INDIA  BOARD 

if  the  pacific  relations  of  flate=;  pafs  for  no  account;  in  fuch  a  queftioii,  whence 
the  conj^a-atulations  we  fo  ofien  hear  upon  what  we  have  gained,  and  may  yet 
gain,  by  the  rupture  with  America  ?* 

Seventhly,  That  the  diflrefles  of  the  manufafturers,  the  exclufion  of  our  trade 
from  the  continent  of  Europe  and  from  North  America,  its  confequent  great  de- 
cline and  the  fupport  of  the  war,  require  new  chaimels  of  enterprife,  and  there- 
fore an  open  trade. 


*  The  followine  Ktatcment,  which  has  been  receivetl  from  an  intcllitrent  merchant  who  refidcd  a 
number  of  years  in  America,  (hews  the  advantages  under  which  the  trade  of  that  country  was  car- 
ried on,  in  a  Itate  of  peace. 

The  advantages  which  Americans,  as  fhip-owner?,  enjoyed  in  a  ftate  of  neutrality,  are  obyious  ; 
uot  only  from  their  free  communication  with  belligerents,  but  from  oilier  caufes. 

Their  firlt  rate  vefTols  do  not  coft  one  half  what  thofe  of  the  fame  tonnage  built  in  Britain  gene- 
rally cofl;  ;  hence  the  capital  employed  is  one  half  leis,  and  one  half  the  infurance  is  fulficient  to 
cover  the  property  at  flake. 

The  premium  of  infurance  of  an  American  neutral  from  Britain  to  America,  was  lefs  than  half 
what  was  given  ou  an  Englilh  veiTel  for  the  fame  voyage  ;  on  Americans,  the  premium  was  from 
two  to  two  and  a  half  per  cent.,  on  Englilh  velFels  from  five  to  fix  per  cent. 

The  countervailing  duties  in  America,  induced  fhippers  always  to  give  a  preference  to  American 
veffels.  Goods  arriving  in  America,  paid  twelve  and  a  half  to  fif'.een  per  cent,  duties,  whilft  the 
fame  goods,  by  a  Britifh  veflel,  not  only  paid  the  fame  rate  of  duty,  but  an  additional  ten  per  cent, 
on  the  amount  of  thofe  duties,  which  is  one  and  a  quarter  to  one  and  a  half  per  cent,  increased  duty. 

The  freight  of  goods  from  America  to  England,  in  American  bottoms,  was  never,  in  the  bed 
times,  higher  than  one  fhilling  and  fixpence  per  foot ;  and  many  times  the  whole  freight  of  an  home- 
ward-bound American  of  three  hundred  tons  (that  is  to  fay,  an  American  fgoing  from  this  country) 
couid  have  been  had  for  jCjoo.  or  £400.  The  cargoes  of  three  fourths  ot  Americans  homeward, 
confifted  either  of  crates  of  ware,  fait,  or  coals  ;  which  are  well  known  to  yield  but  a  very  finall 
freight  indeed,  taking  the  whole  difference  betwixt  th;  purchafe  and  fale,  as  freight. 

The  provifioning  a  fhip  in  America,  did  not  certainly  cofl  more  than  one  half  thai  provifioning 
the  fame  fhip  in  Britain  would  have  colt  ;  bread  at  16s.;  beef  at  304.  to  36  j.  ;  pork  at  45  s.  to 
50 i. ;  rum  at  2  s.;  I  believe  will  not  be  more  than  half  the  Britifh  prices  for  tlie  fame  articles;  and 
thefe  were  the  current  rates  in  1800  to  1805. 

Upon  a  calculation  of  all  thefe  advantages,  it  will  be  found  that  an  American,  in  war  time,  could 
make  a  faving  voyage  from  any  of  thefe  ports  to  this  country  and  home,  when  an  Englifh  vefTel 
■would  inevitably  have  brought  her  owner  into  debt  ;  and  that  an  American  could  actually  import 
'roods  into  the  United  States  from  this  country,  and  fell  them,  at  their  average  wholefale  import?,. 
tion  profit,  to  others  as  low  as  a  Briiilli  merchant  could  fend  them  to  America  in  a  Britilli  (hip, 
and  deliver  them  over  to   be  Iranfliipped  without  any  profit  at  all. 

The  American  (hips  being  of  a  lighter  conflrudlion  than  ours,  they  fail  with  at  lead  one  third 
fewer  hands. 

The  following  Statement  will  better  ehicidate  thefe  remarks.  An  American  of  250  tons  is  em- 
ployed in  a  voyage  to  Britain  and  back  ;  her  value,  as  a  firll-rate  vcffel  for  that  trade,  is  .i'a.ooo.  ; 
and  the  voyage  occupies  five  months.  A  (liip  of  230  tons  woidd  carry  3,000  barrels  of  flour,  at 
gs.  which  was  the  ordinary  freight  -  _  .  .  £1,350 

The  average  freight  home  of  fuch  vefTels  could  not  exceed  -  -  Ooo 


.€1,950 


AMERICAN  CHARGES 

Infurance  out  and  home  i/ajOOO 

at  4I  per  cent. 
8  men  5  months,  at  £^. 
Captain  and  mate,  £\o.  each 
2,400  lbs.  bread,  at  16  y. 
Beef,  10  barrels,  at  32^. 
Pork,  10     di).     at  50  i. 
150  gallons  rum 
Interetl  of  .t2,ooo.  5  months 


s. 

£ 

s.    d. 

9S 



- 

200 



- 

100 



- 

19 

4  — 

- 

16 

—  — 

- 

25 



- 

16 

17  — 

- 

4' 

13  4 

J? 

5'3 

-4  4 

BRITISH  CHARGES. 

Infurance  out  and  home,  vefTel 
v  due  J  at  ^'4,000.  at  9  percent. 

11  men  five  months,  at  .t'5. 

Captain  and  mate 

360  lbs.  of  bread  for  14  people 
5  months,  at  52  s. 

13  barrels  of  beef,  at  .£''4. 

15     do.     pork,  at  90J. 

220  gallons  rum,  at  5^. 

Intercll  of  ^'4,000.  5  months   - 


£    s. 

d. 

360  — 

— 

300  — 

— 

100  

— • 

57  12 
60  — 

— 

67  10 

— 

55  — 
«3  6 

8 

1,083  8 

8 

Thefe  are  not  to  be  underflood  as  the  total  charges  on  the  voyage,  but  are   thofe  which  flicw  the 
adrantajjes  which  Americans  have  enjoyed. 

Every 


and  CHAIRMAN,  &c.  of  The  EAST  INDIA  COMPANY.  59 

Every  Britifli  heart  niuft  I:iment  tlie  obflruclions  to  whicli  our  ctiminerce  lias 
been  fubjedled,  muft  willi  fur  the  removal  of  all  continental  excUifions  as  well 
as  of  our  diil'erences  with  America,  and  that  commercial  freedom  and  aftivity 
may  be  reftored.  It  is  alfo  extremely  defirable  that  new  fourccs  of  trade  fliould 
be  difcovered,  and  natural  for  thofe  who  arc  now  fuflcrin;^  under  privations  and 
hardOiips,  to  catch  eagerly  at  the  flattering  profpects  and  promifes  fo  confidently 
held  out  to  them  from  opening  the  trade  with  the  Eait.  But  can  the  Court  of 
Dirciflors,  thoroughly  convinced  as  they  are,  that  all  fuch  expedations  are 
groundlefs  and  dclufive, — that  thofe  who  (hould  art  upon  them,  if  the  trade  were 
opened,  would  be  fure  to  experience  ruinous  Icifs  and  difappointment,  and  that 
the  abolition  of  the  Company's  commercial  privileges  would  be  in  eilett  the  ex- 
tinftion  of  the  whole  of -the  prefent  Indian  fvdem  ; — can  the  Court,  with  thefe 
conviclicns,  lend  themfelves  to  promote  a  dangerous  deception,  already  too  pre- 
valent, at  the  facrifice  of  fo  much  individual  intereft,  and  of  that  public  interclt, 
the' care  of  which  is  intruded  to  them  ?  If  it  were,  indeed,  probable,  that  by  a 
flow  procefs  the  commercial  intercourfe  between  this  country  and  the  Eall  could 
be  enlarged,  the  efiect  would  be  far  too  diftant  to  relieve  prefent  prellures,  and 
the  firfl:  adventurers  be  more  likely  to  plunge  the  trading  world  into  frefh  diffi- 
culties  ;  as  proved  lo  be  the  refult  of  the  general  rufli  into  the  trade  of  Buenos 
Ayres,  where  it  was  eafy  to  fend  exports,  but  difficult  to  find  fale  or  return.  It 
vvill,  perhaps,  now  be  faid,  that  the  trade  with  Buenos  Ayres  has  become  a  re- 
gular one  ;  but  it  can  be  a  regular  one  only  to  a  very  limiteJ  extent,  being, 
indeed,  partly  what  fubfifted  with  Lilbon,  before  it  was  turned  into  a  different 
channel ;  it  may  not,  in  a  long  time,  replace  the  vafl;  fums  at  firfl  lofl  there ;  anil 
at  any  rate,  it  diiplaced  no  important  fyflem  exifling  before.  From  the  late  very 
favourabie  change  in  the  affairs  of  Europe,  a  better  profpeft  of  relief  now  appears  ; 
from  the  Eafl,  it  will  be  found,  that  no  hope  of  any  can  be  rationally  entertained. 

Eighthly,  That  a  free  Trade  to  the  Eaft  would  be  a  fubflitute  and  cure  for 
all  prefent  connnercial  evils  :  would  open  an  unbounded  field  to  Britilh  manu- 
fadures,  Britifli  capital,  fkill,  enterprife  and  knowlege,  which  would  not  fupply 
the  wants  of  the  vafl  population  of  the  Eafl,  but  create  wants  where  they  did 
not  exiil. 

The  praclicabllity  of  extending,  in  any  great  degree,  the  commerce  of  this 
country  with  the  natives  of  the  Eafl,  in  Exports  and  Imports,  is  undoubtedly  a 
viial  queilion  on  the  Vv'hole  of  the  difcuftlon  refpeding  the  renewal  of  the  Charter  ; 
for  if  no  iuch  exlenlion  be  indeed  pradicable,  to  what  end  fliould  the  prefent  fyftem, 
with  all  the  eflablifliments  which  have  grown  out  of  it,  be  deftroyed  ?  The  ISritiih 
merchants  appear  to  entertain  the  moft  extravagant  ideas  of  a  new  world  for  com- 
mercial enterprife  ;  ideas  upon  which  they  are  ready  to  rifle  their  own  property, 
and  to  facrifice  all  the  interefls  of  the  exifling  Indian  fyflem.  The  Company, 
backed  by  the  great  niafs  of  Britifh  fubjecls  now  in  Europe,  who  are  acquainted 
with  the  countries  of  the  Eafl,  maintain,  in  direct  oppofition  to  all  fuch  imagina- 
tions, that  it  is  not  now  poflible  greatly  to  extend  among  the  inhabitants  of  the 
Eafl,  the  confumption  of  Britifli  productions,  or  in  this  country,  the  fale  of  Afiatic 
commodities.  On  the  fide  of  the  merchants,  there  is  in  truth  nothing  but  a  fan- 
guine  theory ;  on  the  fide  of  the  Company,  there  is  the  experience  of  all  the 
nations  of  Europe  for  three  centuries ;  there  is  the  ten:imony  of  ancient  hifcory  ; 
there  are  the  climate,  the  nature,  the  ufages,  tafles,  prejudices,  religious  and 
political  infliitutions  of  the  Eaftern  people.  If  the  difcovery  of  the  paffage  by  the 
Cape  of  Good  Hope,  and  the  account  of  the  firfl  Europeans  feni  by  that  route  to 
the  fliores  of  India,  were  only  jufl;  announced  to  us,  fome  explanation  might  be 
given  of  the  enthufiafm  with  which  the  hope  of  unbounded  commerce  thither  is 
entertained  ;  but  that,  after  all  the  knowledge'  which  fucceflive  ages  have  afforded 
upon  this  fubjed,  men  of  general  intelligence  and  cultivation  ihauld,  ia  oppofition 
to  the  ufual  courfe  of  human  affairs,  adopt  the  fond  idea  of  entering  at  once  into 
the  enjoyment  of  a  nev/  world  of  commerce,  is  a  mofl:  rt;riking  inllancc  of  cre- 
dulity, and  of  tlie  power  which  interclt  and  imagination  united,  have  to  impofe 

upon 


6o        CORRESPONDENCE  between  PRESIDENT  of  INDIA  BOARD 

upon  the  underftanding.  The  theory  of  Dr.  Adam  Smith  did  not  anticipate  any 
fuch  fudden  burft  of  new  commerce  when  he  pronounced  that  the  "  Eafl  Indies 
"  offered  a  market  for  the  nianufadures  of  Europe,  greater  and  more  extenfive 
"  than  both  Europe  and  America  put  together."  Eminent  as  Dr.  Smith  certainly 
■was  in  the  fcience  of  poHtical  economy,  he  was  not  infallible  ;  his  information  re- 
fpeding  India  was  very  defeftive  and  erroneous  ;  his  prejudices  againfc  the  Eaif 
India  Company  extreme,  and  his  prognoftics  concerning  their  Indian  Government 
■wholly  miltaken.  In  the  period  wiiich  has  elapfed,  of  nearly  forty  years,  fmce 
he  firlt  publifhed  his  work  on  the  IVealtb  of  Nations,  the  endeavours  ol  all  Europe 
and  America  have  made  no  difcovery  of  that  immenfe  market  for  European  ma- 
nufadures  which,  he  faid,  was  offered  by  the  Eaft  Indies  ;  yet  the  fame  doftrine 
feems  to  be  flill  in  the  minds  of  fome  of  tlie  Petitioners,  who  made  it  a  ferious 
charge  againfl  the  Company,  that  its  exports  to  the  immenfe  regions  of  the  Eaft 
do  not  amount  to  a  fifth  of  the  exports  of  this  country  to  North  America.  But 
as  well  might  it  be  a  matter  of  charge  againfl  the  merchants  of  England,  that 
their  exports  to  the  great  continent  of  Africa,  which  contains  fo  many  millions  of 
inhabitants,  lefs  influenced  by  religious  prejudices,  and  more  inclined  by  tafte  and 
manners  than  the  people  of  the  Eafl  to  ufe  our  productions,  do  not  equal  their 
exports  to  our  remaining  American  colonies.  The  reafon  is  obvious  in  both  cafes ; 
all  the  North  American  colonics  are  the  fiime  people  as  ourfelves  ;  live  under  a 
climate  nearly  fimilar,  and  have  a  variety  of  commodities  valuable  to  us,  to  ex- 
change :  the  Africans  live  under  a  tropical  fun,  are  poor,  and  have  little  means 
of  purchafing  even  fuch  of  our  manufactures  as  they  would  like  to  ufe.  It  has 
been  already  noticed  that  the  Americans  have  been  in  the  habit  of  carrying  our 
commodities  into  other  countries. 

A  profound  obferver  of  human  affairs,  thePrefident  Montefquieu,  had,  before 
the  time  of  Dr.  Smith,  who,  however,  overlooks  his  opinion,  realoneJ  more  agree- 
ably to  nature  and  experience  on  this  fubjeil.     '-Although,"  fays  he,  "  commerce 
*'  be  liable  to  great  revolutions,  it  may  happen  that  certain  phyfical  caufes,  fucii 
"  as  the  quahty  of  foil  and  climate,  fhall  for  ever  fix  its  charafter.     In  the  cora- 
*'  merce  which  we  carry  on  with  India,  in  modern  times,  the  export  of  money 
"  thither  is  indifpenfable.     The  Romans  carried  to  India,  every  year,  about  fifty 
"  miWions  oi  frfferces.     That  money,  as  ours  now  is,  was  exchanged  for  goods, 
*'  which  they  brought  back  to  the  Weil.     Every  nation  which  has  traded  to  India 
■•'  has  uniformly  carried  the  precious  metals  thither,  and  brought  back  goods  in 
*'  return.    Nature  herfelf  produces  this  effeft.    The  Indians  have  their  aits,  which 
*'  are  adapted  to  their  manner  of  life.     Our  wants  iu-e  elfentially  different  from 
*'  theirs  ;  and  what  is  luxury  to  us,  never  can  be  fo  to  thetn.    Their  cdmate  neither 
"  requires  nor  permits  the  ufe  of  almoft  any  of  our  commodities.     Accuflomed 
'"  to  go  almoft  naked,  the  country  furniflics  them  with  the  fcauty  raiments  they 
"  wear;  and  their  religion,  to  which  thty  are  in  abfolute  lubjedion,  infills  into 
"  them  an  averfion  to  that  fort  of  food  which  we  confume  ;  they,  therefore,  need 
*'  nothing  from  us  but  our  metals,  which  are  the  iigns  of  value,  and  for  which 
"  they  give  in  return,  the  merchandize  that  their  frugality,  and  the  nature  of  the 
"  country,  fupply  in  abundance.     Ancient  authors,  who  have  writren  upon  India, 
"  reprel'ent  the  country  precifely  fuch  as  we  now  find  it,  as  to  police,  to  m-anners, 
"  and   to   morals.     India  always  has  been,    and  India  always  will  be,  what  it 
"  now  is ;  and  ihofe  who  trade  to  India,  will  carry  money  thither,  and  bring 
'*  none  back." 

As  the  Court  have,  in  their  Letter  of  the  13th  January  1809,  to  the  Prefident 
jof  the  India  Buard,  given  the  fame  views  and  in  fome  detail,  on  this  fubjedf,  not 
deriving  their  opinion  from  any  fingle  authority,  but  from  the  broad  page  of  hif- 
tory  and  practice,  it  is  unneceffary  for  your  Committee  again  to  enlarge  upon  it : 
but  may  not  the  attention  of  the  manufafturers  of  woollens,  metals,  cctton  fabrics, 
and  potteries,  be  ftill  called  to  the  habits  of  the  Indian  people,  the  bulk  of  whom 
live  all  their  days  upon  rice,  and  go  only  half  covered  with  a  flight  cotton  cloth  ; 
the  rice  and  cotton  both  produced  by  their  own  foil  ?  The  earnings  of  the  common 
labouring  claffes.,   and  confequently  their  expenceS;,  may  be  eftimated,   on  an 

average. 


avd  CHAIRMAN,  .\c.  -/  The  EAST  INDIA  CC^IMPANY.  (n 

average,  not  to  exceed*  j^4.  los.  per  man,  per  annum.  They  arc  indolent  by 
nature,  frugal  by  habit,  under  in;mi(old  religious  rcllridions :  What  demand  oi" 
the  inanufaChires  from  Europe  is  to  be  expefted  from  thefe  ?  Of  the  better  claffcs 
few  are  rich,  unlefs  thofe  conneded  with  Europeans;  and  even  t/jrfc,  during  a 
courfe  of  nearly  three  centuries,  in  which  they  have  lived  in  European  fetllements, 
have  adopted  none  of  our  tafles  or  falhions  ;  unkfs,  perhaps,  in  a  few  articles  of 
jewellery  and  hardware,  looking-glafles,  and  carriages,  with  the  ufe  of  a  mantle 
of  broad-cloth  in  the  cold  feafon.  As  to  the  North  of  India,  though  the  climatt- 
there  be  lefs  diflimilar  to  ours,  the  people  are  extremely  fo  ;  and  in  poor  ill- 
governed  countries,  where  property  is  infecure  and  concealed,  what  hope  can 
there  be  of  a  vent  for  fireign  luxuries  ?  The  perfons  who  now  imagine  that  region 
to  prefent  a  great  field  for  commerce,  have  no  conception  of  the  ditliculty  of  carry- 
ing goods  there  from  the  fea ;  the  delays,  expence,  and  infecurity  that  muft  be 
experienced,  when  the  boundaries  of  the  Company's  Government  are  paflfcd  ;  and 
in  finding  and  bringing  back  returns,  if  the  European  commodities  could  be  dif- 
pofed  of.  With  refpect  to  China,  it  is  not  denied  tiiat  it  might,  in  all  probability, 
take  off  many  of  our  manufaclures,  if  the  Chinefe  Government  would  allow  the 
free  dilfemination  of  them.  I'he  jealous  reftridions  of  that  Government,  how- 
ever, which,  though  they  have  been  already  ftated,  it  may  be  proper  to  notice 
again  here,  prevent  their  own  fubjeds  in  general  from  any  de^dings  with  Euro- 
peans ;  and  it  has  been  feen,  that  the  magnificent  ftyle  of  Lord  Macartney's 
emhaffy,  which  befpoke  the  grandeur  of  the  Britifli  Sovereign,  with  the  refined 
diplomatic  talents  of  that  nobleman,  which  even  ifruck  the  Chinefe  Courtiers, 
were  incapable  of  moving  the  Government  to  depart  in  the  fmalleft  degree  from 
its  ellablilhed  policy.  If  inftead  of  the  regulated,  long  experienced  organ  for 
European  trade,  the  Company's  Canton  eftabhlhment,  under  whole  refpedability, 
in  fad,  the  Americans  were  admitted,  a  fwarm  of  unconneded  private  traders 
weie  to  be  let  loofe  upon  that  country,  it  is  altogether  probable,  that  the  Chinefe 
would  either  iliut  their  doors  entirely  upon  them,  or  contrad  even  the  prelcat 
narrow  entrance. 

If  fo  many  proofs  of  want  of  knowledge  on  Indian  fubjeds  did  not  crowd  on 
your  Committee,  they  might  cxprefs  furprife  at  finding  any  perfons  flill  fo  unin- 
formed, as  to  hold  up  the  trade  carried  on  by  individuals  in  the  time  of  Cromwell 
as  gahiful  to  the  parties,  and  ufeful  to  the  nation.  The  fad  is  now  afcertained  to 
have  been  notorioufly  otherwife.  The  competition  of  the  traders  led  them  to 
underfell  their  exports  in  India  and  their  imports  in  England  :  The  Public,  indeed, 
for  a  little  time,  got  Indian  goods  remarkably  cheap,  but  the  adventurer  could  not 
go  on  ;  and  Cromwell,  induced  by  the  reprefentations  made  to  him,  in  which 
leveral  of  thofe  very  adventurers  joined,  reftored  the  Company,  in  order  tofave 
the  Indian  trade  to  the  nation. 

Parliament  is  now  told  by  the  Petitioners,  that  the  Private  Trade,  to  which  in- 
dividuals were  admitted  by  the  Ad  of  1793,  enlarged  by  the  arrangement  of  1802, 
has  fucceeded,  and  produced  a  profit,  even  whilll  the  Company  have  been  trading 
to  a  lofs.  The  Court  have  very  fubftantial  reafons  to  believe,  that  although  fomc 
arncles  of  Private  Trade  may  at  certain  times  have  fold  to  a  profit,  yet  that  large 
importations  of  other  articles,  both  into  India  and  into  England,  have  repeatedly 
fold  to  a  lofs,  or  have  remained  long  on  hand  for  want  of  lale. 

The  nature  of  this  trade  fhould  be  confidered  ;  the  numerous  commanders  and 
officers  of  the  Company's  fliips  (a  very  fuperior  clafs  of  nautical  men)  have  no 
adequate  provifion  from  dired  pecuniary  allowances ;  their  compenfation  has 
been  in  the  privilege  of  trade,  and  a  certain  allowance  of  tonnage,  freight  free. 
This  has  generally  made  them  traders ;  and  as  they  are  to  look  to  trade  for  their 
emolument,  (for  but  tew,  comparatively,  make  money  by  pailengers,)  they  con- 

*  In  a  late  ftatidical  account  of  Dinagepore,  a  province  of  Bengal,  there  are  ftatementj  of  tlie 
nrnual  expenfcs  of  different  clafTes  of  fociety  ;  and  among  them,  one  of  the  expcnfes  of  a  labouring 
man  with  a  wife  and  two  children.  The  amount  is  only  Ritjiees  2;.  10.  1 1.  or  near  .t3  per  annum  ; 
being  at  the  rate  ot  fifteen  (hillings  per  head.  The  article  of  clothing,  for  this  family  of  four  perfons, 
ie  only  fix  {hillings  per  anuum. 

(3?.)  Q  tinued 


62       CORRESPONDENCE  between  PRESIDENT  c/ INDIA  BOARD 

tinued  to  adventure,  though  often  with  little  fuccefs  ;  and  your  Committee  are 
affured,  that  though  they  pay  no  freight  nor  commiffion,  being  tl.elr  own  agenrs, 
they  ftill  find  it,  on  the  whole,  a  precarious  unproductive  bufinel's.  Now,  if  thefe 
men  do  not  fucceed,  it  can  hardly  be  expefted  that  thof<;  who  have  freight  and 
commiflion  to  pay  can  fare  better. 

But  it  -will  be  faid  that  other  individuals  do,  neverthelefs,  embark  in  this  trade. 
To  this  it  is  to  be  ahfwered,  that  the  manufacturers  of  Indigo  iu  Bengal,  (an  ar- 
ticle originally  promoted  and  always  foflered  by  the  Company,)  generally  fcnt  their 
produce  to  England  ;  and  this  is  a  matter  of  necefiity  ;  becaufe  the  great  bulk  of 
the  article  cannot  otherwife  be  difpofed  of.  Again,  there  is  a  certain  annual 
amount  of  acquifition  by  Europeans  in  India  ;  and  as  this,  (doubtlefs  a  large 
amount  in  all,)  is  in  one  way  or  another  to  be  remitted  to  England,  merchants  in 
India  may  find  their  account  tolerably  well  in  taking  up  fuch  money  in  India  ;  in- 
verting it  in  goods,  and  granting  bills,  at  a  rate  favour  ble  to  the  drawer,  payable 
from  the  fales  in  this  country.  A  fort  of  new  tranfit  capital  ariles  in  this  way 
■every  year,  and  men  may  be  tempted,  occafionally,  to  feek  to  make  an  advantage 
of  it,  who  would  not  regularly  fix  a  capital  of  their  own  in  the  trade.  There  is 
alfo  a  third  fort  of  trade  Irom  India,  which  men  of  large  capital  fpeculate  in  when 
favourable  occafions  feem  to  offer ;  and  in  this  way  fometiraes  cotton  piece  goods, 
fometimes  cotton  wool,  fometimes  indigo  and  raw  filk  have  been  adventured  in- 
But  your  Committee  fuppofe  it  to  be  an  undilputed  faft,  that  thefe  larger  adven- 
tures have  repeatedly  been  attended  with  heavy  loffes  to  individuals,  particularly 
the  very  great  importations  of  piece  goods,  exceeding  in  value  two  millions  fler- 
ling  in  1802  ;  the  large  importations  of  Cotton,  and  even  of  Indigo,  fince  that 
time  ;  and  what  may  be  fufficiently  decifive  on  this  head  is,  that  very  large  quanti- 
ties of  thofe  have  remained  long  in  the  Company's  warehoufes  without  a  faie,  or 
uncleared  after  fale.  The  following  abflract  account  will  fufficiently  exhibit 
thefe  fads: 

Value  of  PRIVATE  GOODS  fom  India,  remaining  in  the  Company's  Warehoufes, 


On  I  ft  January  1809 
1810 
1811 
181 2 
1813 

Of  the  Sold  Goods  remaining  in  Warehoufes  ift  January  1813. 

246  Bales  Cotton  Wool  have  been  in  Warehoufe  ten  years  -             .t'2,460 

112          -         Do.         ...         five     -  -                 1,120 

6, Coo        -         Do.                 -                -                four  .             .           6,600 

30,000         -         Do.             -                 -                      three  .                300,000 

6,000        -         Do.                 -                -                 two  -            -          58,930 


Sold. 

Unfold. 

Tot.il. 

£ 
1.576,185 
1,370,958 
2.513. 761 
2,547,668 
2,411,259 

£ 
81 5,000 
1,057,760 

IjOOJ,000 

1,002,932 
1,008,000 

£ 
2,391,185 
2,428,718 
3,518,761 
3,550,600 
3.4 '9.259 

42,958  Bales  Cotton  Wool, 

value 

- 

71  Chefts 
722        - 
424       - 
23a       - 

.-5,12  1 

of  I. 

Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 

digo  remaining  feven  ye 
fix 
five 
four 
three     - 

1.593     - 

9,080 

Do. 
Do. 

- 

- 

two 
one 

4,82  s 

49,096 

28,83* 

15,640 

358,228 

io8,,3i4 
613,838 


£  428,519 


17,241  Chefts  Indigo,  value  .  -  .  .  .€1,178,786 


1,607,296 


Piece  Goods,  imported  in  iSiOj,  1804,  and  1S05. 

Remained  i.T  Warehoufes  in  1809  -  -  A^  276,784 

Do.  -  iSio  -  .  153,891 

Do.  -  i8u  -  -  132,094 

But  it  will  ftill  be  faid,  the  Private  Trade  between  Europe  and  India  has  greatly 
increafed  fince  the  enlargement  of  1793  was  granted. 

To 


ami  CHAIRINUN,  c^c.  c/The  LAS  I  INDIA  COMPANY.  c;, 

To  explain  this  it  is  to  be  reintmbcreil,  firfi,  that  as  aheady  ilarcd,  the  com- 
manders and  ofiicers  of  the  Compan)  's  iliips,  are  in  a  manner  obh'ged  to  be  tra- 
ders, and  that  they  have  greatly  increafed  in  number  fince  1793:  they  are  forced 
to  carry  out  goods,  and  therefore  to  bring  goods  bac!;  ;  becaiife  in  gohral  fpecie 
would  be  a  lofing  remittance.  Secondly,  that  the  number  of  Kuropcans  in  India 
has  been  very  greatly  increafed  in  India  fince  1793.  Kvery  clafs  has  increafed  : 
the  civil,  miliravy,  and  medical  lervants  of  the  Company  ;  the  King's  Troops, 
from  a  few  regiments  to  twenty  thonfand  men  ;  the  naval  lervanis  of  the  Crown  ; 
ladies,  lawyers,  free  merchants,  free  mariners,  and  the  mixed  race  of  European 
dei'cent,  now  become  a  great  multitude,  who  imitate,  as  far  as  they  can,  the 
talliions  of  their  fathers.  For  all  thefe  delci  iptions  of  pirfons,  every  thing  required 
for  ufe  or  luxury  is  fent  from  this  country-:  thus  the  exports  are  ncceflarily  en- 
hanced ;  and  exports  being  made,  returns  for  them,  in  the  commodities  of  the 
country,  become  necelTary,  v/hcther  they  are  fure  to  anfwer  or  not. 

A  brief  view  of  the  ftate  cf  the  Private  Trade  between  England  and  India  may 
here  be  given  from  the  Indian  regifters  of  external  commerce,  commencing  with 
1795-6,  when  the  A£b  of  1793  began  to  operate  in  India,  to  the  year  i3io-i  i. 
But  it  is  to  be  remarked,  that  only  the  Bengal  regilters  commence  in  1795-6  : 
thofe  for  Madras  and  Bombay  not  till  1802-3. 

Statement  of   the  PRIVATF.  TRADE  beuvreii   LONDON   and  BENGAL, 
from  the  year  i79j-6  to  1801-2,  both  years  inclufive. 


EXPORTS 

IMPORTS  INTO  BENGAL. 

from 

BENGAL. 

MerciianiJize.        j            Bullion. 

'I'otal. 

Merchandize. 

S»  R'. 

S^  R«. 

S''  R''. 

S'  R\ 

1795-6 

17,91,623 

4.81.538 

22,73,161 

84,08,800 

1796-7 

15^49,906 

2,33^°9'' 

17,83,002 

50,79,310 

1797-8 

11,^8,04.3 

3.+fJ.  176 

15.J4.2-9 

69,71,529 

I79S-9 

10,13,105 

7,30,209 

17.43.314 

41.07,834 

1799-1800 

31,50,696 

16,36,405 

47. 87. lot 

67,66,649 

1800-1801 

40,98,360 

3,74.112 

44.72.472 

^4,87,336 

1801-1802 

36,51,650 

3,24,019 

39,75,669 

1,31,97,430 

1,64,43,383             41.25.555 

2,05,68,938 

5,3.>i8,878 

Statenu-nt  of  the  PRIVATE  TRADE  between  LONDON  and  BRITISH  INDIA, 
from  the  year  1802-3  ^"  1810-11,  both  years  inclufive. 


IMPORTS. 

EXPORTS 

Stores  aiiJ 
Murchaiidize. 

Bullion. 

Total. 

A'lerchandize. 

Bullion. 

Total. 

Bengal,  ill  nine  years,  "j 
from  1802-3  r 
to  1810-1 1   J 

Madras 

Bombay- 

8=  R^ 
3.35.33.4-13 

1,14,96,21s 
1.48,03,575 

S-'  R'. 
52,19,768 

5=,t  7.839 
29,65,079 

8'  R'. 
3.87.53.2" 

1,65,14,057 
1,77,68,65:, 

S»  R». 
7.62,87,574 

93.72,303 
93. '8,775 

S '  R^ 
2,540 

5.867 

53.644 

S->  R«. 
7,62,90,1  li) 

93.78.170 
93,72-<'9 

Total 

5.98.33,236 

1,32,02,686 

7,30,35,922 

9,49,78,653 

62,051 

9,50,40,70,7 

This  is  the  comparative  ftatc  of  the  Private  Trade  with  Bengal  and  India,  in 
former  periods,  beginning  with  1795-6,  and  at  the  prefent  time  ;  but  the  increafe 
is  by  no  means  to  be  conceived  as  merely  the  refult  of  the  enlargement  given  by 
the  Aft  of  1793,  or  afterwards.  It  is  (let  it  be  again  ob  erved;  niuit  materially  to 
be  afcribed  to  the  increafe  in  the  number  of  the  Company's  comm-mdei-s  and  offi- 
cers, to  the  necefiity  of  making  returns  in  goods  from  India  for  their  exports,  to 
the  great  increafe  of  Europeans  and  their  defcendants  in  India,  to  the  vaft  increafe 
In  the  culture  of  indigo,  cherifhed  by  the  Company,  and  permitted  to  come  in 
their  fhips  before  the  Act  of  179J  ;  and  wliat  the  enlargements  of  that  Ad,  and 

fublequeat 


54        CORRESPONDENCE  between  PRESIDENT  of  INDIA  BOARD 


fubfequent  meafures  have  opened  the  way  for,  has  been  occafional  large  fpecula- 
tion  in  cotton,  piece  goods,  raw  cotton,  and  indij^o  ;  which  fpeculations  have  more 
often  failed  than  fucceeded.  Bat  the  great  co}aclufion  to  be  derived  from  the  ac- 
count of  the  trade  fince  1793,  is  this  ;  in  all  the  period  of  nearly  twenty  years, 
from  that  tinie  to  the  prefent,  in  which,  undoubtedly,  facilities  and  enlargements 
never  enjoyed  before,  have  been  given  for  private  enterprize  and  adventure,  in 
which  the  Private  Trade  has  confiderably  increafed,  and  on  the  whole  a  very 
ample  experiment  has  been  made,  not  one  new  article  for  the  confumption  of  the 
natives  of  India  has  been  exported;  and  little  perceivable  ditTerence  in  the  few  arti- 
cles of  metals  and  woollens,  of  which  they  participated  before.  This  is  a  very 
remarkable  faft,  and  ought  to  make  a  deep  imprellion  on  all  perfons  who  in  any 
way  interefl:  themfelves  in  this  fubject.  Let  us  not  hear  of  that  unfair  charge  fu 
often  repeated,  that  the  Company's  refliridions  have  prevented  perfons  from  avail- 
ing themfelves  of  the  privilege  held  out  by  public  regulations.  Would  the  com- 
manders and  officers  not  reflrained  by  high  freight,  or  any  uncertainty  of  getting 
tonnage,  not  have  carried  out  articles  for  the  ufe  of  the  natives,  if  they  had  found 
that  any  fuch  were  faleable  ?  Would  not  European  refidents  in  India,  keen 
merchants,  and  acquainted  with  the  difpofitions  and  taftes  of  the  natives,  have 
commiffioned  for  fuch  articles,  if  they  had  feen  any  vent  for  them  ?  Would  not 
native  merchants,  who  buy  and  fell  European  commodities,  have  recommended 
the  importation  of  things  for  the  natives,  if  they  had  feen  any  chance  of  a  fale  ? 
Yet  of  54,000  tons  allotted  for  the  Private  Trade  fince  1793,  only  21,806  tons 
have  been  aclually  ufed  by  private  merchants,  and  thcfe  filled  wholly  with  com- 
modities for  the  ufe  of  Europeans.  On  the  whole  then,  this  may  be  pronounced 
a  decifive  experiment,  a  decifive  proof  that  there  is  no  opening,  nor  any  material 
opening  to  be  expefted,  for  the  fale  of  European  articles  for  the  ufe  of  the  natives 
of  India. 

Of  the  Import  Trade  from  India  on  private  account,  fince  1 793,  after  what  has 
already  been  faid,  it  may  be  fufficient  to  prefent  the  following  Abltracl : — 

IMPORTS  FTIOM  INDIA  IN  PRIVILEGE  TRADE. 


1793-4  - 

Piece 
Guods. 

Raw  Silk. 

Cotton 
Wool. 

Indigj. 

Sv.gar. 

Saltpetre. 

Pepper. 

Drugs. 

A!l  other 
Articles. 

Tcial. 

£ 
83,439 

34,938 

£ 

X 
'    47,038 

12,465 

X 

X 

3,830 

£ 

X 
181,710 

■794-5     - 

296,098 

17,069 

li,C54 

1 '-''5,346 

6,286 

32,706 

. 

1,320 

- 

469,879 

1-95-6     - 

134,046 

3,058 

5,693 

235,013 

8,610 

13,084 

- 

10,283 

- 

409,787 

1796-7     - 

319,053 

3,315 

30,148 

273,654 

15,525 

17,169 

- 

19,885 

- 

678,749 

1797-S     - 

167,210 

3,684 

67,674 

283,893 

77,594 

33,527 

- 

13,200 

- 

642,782 

1798-9     - 

214,616 

- 

38,109 

440,275 

105,200 

13,168 

- 

61,484 

8,810 

881,66: 

1799-800 

295,65s 

- 

445,413 

782,449 

94,959 

- 

18,077 

102,804 

7,779 

1,747,139 

iSco-i     - 

I9",7J2 

53,009 

395,37:: 

491,472 

222,118 

12,483 

40,041 

130,009 

24,736 

1,566,972 

i8c!i-i    - 

394,890 

36,660 

i4;,4Sn 

636,046 

36,171 

62,326 

70,400 

151,-354 

193,889 

1,724,217 

i8oj-3    - 

861,87: 

37,588 

180,915 

789,314 

41,424 

ioi,87x 

1:0,673 

206,054 

246,870 

2,586,581 

1803-4    - 

884,467 

44,963 

67,006 

602,582 

44,643 

18,495 

37.488 

142,858 

18,232 

1,860,734 

1804-5    - 

673.787 

65,218 

93,242 

811,214 

65,391 

11,220 

33,718 

92,479 

6,781 

1,853,050 

1805-6    - 

63.!  ,9  n 

12,184 

lS,20I 

939,861 

- 

- 

1,376 

111,875 

5,564 

1,722,972 

1806-7    - 

164,111 

165,839 

122,072 

549,871 

- 

- 

572 

24,230 

2,067 

1,028,762 

1807-S    - 

69,314 

178,128 

125.636 

1,434,238 

9,171 

- 

19,918 

90,506 

4.774 

X.93 1.685 

i8o8-9    - 

18,199 

89,085 

158,032 

510,406 

- 

- 

- 

19,372 

2,:  35 

797,229 

1S09-10  - 

64,918 

11,780 

208,190 

764,2^3 

- 

_  — 

62,491 

16,826 

1,129,408 

i8io-ii  - 

48.043 

85,498 

550,078 

1,382,767 

•  10,827 

1,982 

38,533 

58,791 

21,813 

2,199,332 

1811-JI  - 
Total     - 

149,0:9 

90,335 

257,545 

425,074 

20,924 

89 

19,921 

178,366 

27,690 

1,169,013 

5,670,445 

993.351 

»,9i6,86o 

11,504,716 

77I:,^09 

318,120 

400,717 

1,481,191 

588,966 

=4085,673 

IMPORTS 


and  CHAIRMAN,  &c.  of  The  EAST  INDIA  COMPANY. 

IMPORTS  FROM  INDIA   IN  PRIVATE  TRADE  OF  COMMANDERS 

AND  OFFICERS. 


65 


> 793-4    - 

Piece 

Goods. 

Raw  Silk. 

Cotton 

Wool. 

Indigo. 

Sugar. 

Saltpetre. 

Pepper. 

Drugs. 

.\ll  other 

-Articles. 

ToeiL 

98,190 

£ 

£ 
37,921 

218,841 

£ 
5.054 

£ 

£ 
5.280 

£ 

76,640 

3 

£ 
441.9*9 

•794-5    - 

162,967 

- 

-      - 

140,974 

9.834 

-      ■ 

-     - 

60,093 

-      - 

J73.868 

I79J-6    - 

117,146 

.      . 

J02,2l8 

3.807 

29 

2,593 

«ti,823 

915 

458j4« 

1796-7    - 

55.303 

- 

-      - 

148,659 

•.324 

-     - 

11,163 

57.453 

910 

274,811 

1797-8    - 

25i»54 

- 

21,740 

141,506 

499 

-     - 

-     - 

96.389 

7.772 

193.^6'> 

1798-9    - 

29.499 

• 

",334 

266,176 

6,197 

-      - 

i,76S 

ii«U37t 

3.7 '5 

448,061 

1 799-800 

40,077 

',034 

IC.538 

226,708 

4,140 

3.060 

8,041 

64,990 

12,220 

jT'^SoS 

iJoo-i    • 

91.3S7 

46,615 

8,889 

280,886 

17.332 

-     - 

4,378 

50,222 

36,710 

546.419 

i8oi-a    - 

34.965 

274 

-      - 

168,588 

7,211 

97 

12,501 

41.326 

J»*65 

268.427 

iSoa-3    - 

207.799 

- 

8,151 

89,261 

827 

-     - 

18,367 

102,530 

29,117 

456.05* 

1803-4    - 

174,848 

11,164 

-      - 

100,052 

924 

-     - 

8,388 

»8,4Il 

i>5'6 

315.303 

1804-5    - 

180,034 

6o,*33 

593 

269,926 

-     - 

1,058 

7.471 

5.819 

45,85* 

570.986 

igoj-6    - 

138,089 

3^.044 

7,636 

452.997 

-     - 

144 

7.395 

84.445 

5.360 

7*8,110 

1806-7    - 

:   36.401 

86,231 

19,485 

224,515 

135 

•4 

980 

47,529 

9.558 

424.846 

1807-8    - 

42,229 

74,901 

18,104 

419.5*0 

-     - 

377 

-     - 

45.960 

16,724 

617.87^ 

180S-9    - 

47,334 

12,696 

35.420 

300,152 

'-     - 

48 

27« 

83,503 

41.379 

5*0,603 

1809-10  - 

11,646 

90.433 

22,021 

231,735 

-     - 

•156 

4,762 

66,414 

5,108 

433,»75 

1810-11  - 

76.335 

121,6,15 

7,626 

360,180 

1,602 

•94 

I7,t64 

91,678 

13,422 

690,396 

1811-12  - 

Total   - 

51. 'I* 

148.867 

-      - 

47.637 

-     - 

28 

1.398 

60,494 

•9 

309.555 

1,631,615 

686,188 

209,258 

4,290,59' 

58,886 

5,205 

112,420 

1.315.09I 

233.773 

8,543.027 

SHORT  ABSTRACT; 


Total  Privilege 

Private  Trade 


Which  contained  Indigo 


Cotton 


All  other  Articles 


^11,504,716 
4,390,591 

2,916,860 

209,258 


^  i5.795>307 


3,126,118 


.€14,585,673 
S.543.027 

X33, 128,700 


13,931.423 

14,207,275 


It  may  be  proper  to  point  out  to  attention  the  great  proportion  which  the  articles 
of  indigo  and  cotton  bear  to  the  whole  ot  thefe  import.'; ;  and,  likewiie,  to  refer 
to  the  great  quantities  of  thefe  two  articles,  which,  it  has  already  appeared,  re- 
main flill  in  the  Company's  warehoufes,  either  unfold  or  uncleared.  Of  the  prac- 
ticability of  enlarging  the  imports  into  this  country,  of  Indian  produdion,  fit  for 
the  European  market,  it  was  formerly  ftated  by  the  Court,  that  the  diligence,  not 
only  of  the  different  EaR  India  Companies  of  Europe,  but  of  individual  Europeans 
trading  through  the  whole  extent  of  the  Indian  Seas,  has  been  excited  during  three 
centuries,  to  difcover  articles  which  might  be  profitably  exported  to  Europe  ;  and 
after  all  the  experience  thus  acquired,  particularly  in  the  prefent  day,  when  the 
foafting  and  internal  trade  of  India  has  been  greatly  enlarged,  it  is  not  reafonable 
v-.-!-j(32.)  R  to 


^66      CORRESPONDENCE  betitxen  PRESIDENT  of  INDIA  BOARD 

to  be  affumed,  upon  merely  theoretical  ideas,  that  there  is  any  fource  of  materials 
raw  or  manufadured,  in  India,  yet  undifcovcred,  by  which  the  imports  from 
India  into  this  country  can  be  profitably  augmented  ;  and  with  refpeft  to  thofe 
articles  which  may  now  be  confidered  as  the  flaples  of  India  ;  namely,  curton 
piece  goods,  raw  filk,  indigo,  raw  cotton,  and  fugar  ;  the  demand  for  the  fi<  u  Js 
reduced  and  limited,  by  the  vaft  growth  and  excellence  of  the  cotton  manufaSures 
of  Britain  and  Europe  ;  the  fiecond,  to  whatever  extent  demanded,  can  be  bTougi;t 
home  in  the  fliips  of  the  Company ;  the  third,  already  imported  to  an  extent 
that  nearly  fupplies  the  confumption  of  Europe,  may  alio  eafdy  be  carried  home 
in  the  fame  channel ;  and  the  anicle  of  raw  cotton,  brought  from  a  great  diftance, 
at  an  unavoidably  high  freight,  which  renders  It  incapable,  when  this  country 
is  engaged  in  war,  and  North  America  and  Portugal  at  peace  with  us,  of 
entering  into  competition  with  the  cottons  of  Georgia  and  Brazil,  both  fuperlor 
in  quality,  and  brought  to  this  market  moreexpeditioully,  to  meet  the  fluftuations 
of  price  and  demand,  and  at  a  far  cheaper  rate  of  freight.  As  to  fugar,  if  It 
could  be  imported  to  this  market,  fo  as  to  rival  the  produce  of  our  Well  India 
colonies,  which  it  cannot  be  in  time  of  war,  furely  this  is  not  a  trade  which 
could  be,  on  the  whole,  profitable  to  the  nation ;  and  no  other  great  article  of 
Indian  produce  has  ever  been  thought  of,  except  hemp,  of  which  the  culture  is 
ftiil  In  an  early  ftage  in  India,  not  capable  of  ftanding  a  competition  with  RutTia, 
•whenever  our  intercourfe  with  that  country  is  open.  It  is  in  this  flate  of  things, 
when  the  Company  cannot  find  vent  for  more  exports  in  the  Eaft  ;  when  their 
warehoufes  are  filled  with  goods  from  the  Eaft,  for  which  there  is  no  demand  ; 
and  when  they  fuffer  from  the  continental  reftriftions  In  common  with  all  His 
•  Majefty's  fubjefts,  that  the  Petitioners,  whofe  chief  complaint  Is  of  general  flag- 
nation  of  trade,  cenfure  the  Company  for  not  enlarging  theirs. 

Ninthly-  The  demand  of  a  full  and  entire  freedom  of  trade  to  the  Eaft  ward  of 
the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  including  China  and  all  the  countries  within  the  Charter 
of  the  Eaft  India  Company. 

Such  are  the  views  of  the  Petitioners,  profeffedly  no  lefs  than  a  complete  fub- 
verfion  of  the  fabric  of  the  Eaft  India  Company,  and  all  the  great  commercial 
eftablifliments  connefted  with  It ;  involving  alfo  the  hazard  of  the  political  interefts 
of  the  Britlfli  empire,  Indian  and  European.  Certainly,  it  muft  beprefumed,  the 
Petitioners  exped  fuch  advantages  to  follow  from  all  thefe  changes,  as  (hall  com- 
penfate  for  the  immenfe  facrifices  which  they  require  ;  but  your  Committee  hope 
it  has  fufEciently  appeared,  from  the  preceding  difcuflion,  that  all  fuch  expefta- 
tlons  are  illufory  and  vain.  If,  however,  they  are  not  Indeed  the  offspring  of  fan- 
guine  theories,  but  the  refult  of  fober  rational  confideration,  might  not  the  fame 
fobriety  of  thought  be  expecled  to  pay  an  equitable  regard  to  the  ruin  which  would 
be  inflifted  on  exifting  interefts,  and  to  look  to  fome  fuitable  provlfion  againft  the 
poflible  contingency  of  final  difappointment.  Yet  thefe  Important  objects  feem  to 
iiave  received  no  adequate  attention.  Againft  the  alledged  danger  of  exceffive 
fpeculation,  (a  danger  which  Is  in  fad,  a  public  concern),  It  is  argued,  "  that  the 
"  enterprife  of  individuals  is  uniformly  limited  by  their  means  and  fuccefs."  But 
if  they  involve  all  their  friends,  and  fink  in  their  attempts,  and  this  fliould  be  the 
cafe  of  many,  would  not  the  refult  be  a  general  calamity  ?  The  argument  of  the 
Petitioners  aflumes,  that  the  new  trade  will  be  finally  fuccefsful ;  but  the  foregoing 
review  deprives  them  of  all  right  to  go  upon  this  fuppofition. 

For  the  deep  injuries  which  all  the  London  eftablifliments  connefted  with  the 
Eaftern  trade  would  receive,  there  is  abfolutely  no  relief  or  reparation  of  any 
kind  adverted  to.  And  for  the  Company,  they  are  told  firft  of  their  wealth, 
knowledge,  and  experience  (all  of  which  have  been  before  difparaged),  as  enabling 
them  to  oppofe,  unaflifted,  private  efforts ;  that  if  they  can  carry  on  trade  to 
greater  advantage  than  individuals  they  have  nothing  to  fear,  and  that  they  will 
reap  their  reward  in  competition.  All  this  is  particularly  applied  to  the  China 
trade,  which  is  not  a  new  trade,  nor,  as  has  been  (hewn,  either  fufceptlble  of 
increafe,  or  likely  to  be  preferved  at  all  as  a  general  trade.  The  transfer  of  it  to 
other  hands  would  add  nothing  to  the  nation,  whilft  the  entire  benefit  of  It  i» 

Bfice&ry 


and  CHAIRMAN,  &c.  o/Thit  EAST  INDIA  COMPANY.  67 

neceflaiy  for  the  fupport  of  the  political  interefts  of  the  Company.  Secondly  • 
it  is  propofed,  that  for  indemnifying  and  remunerating  the  claims  of  the  Com- 
pany, they  "  (hall  have  a  fair  and  equal  impqll  on  the  trade  in  queflion."  If  the 
trade  and  rate  of  impoft  were  both  likely  to  be  confiderable,  which  your  Commit- 
tee  fee  no  reafon  to  fuppofe,  the  idea  of  an  indemnification  for  the  whole  br 
giving  afterwards  a  part  (and  probably  a  fmall  part),  can  hardly  be  treated  as  a 
ferious  idea. 

But  for  the  detriment  which  the  Company  in  their  political  capacity  might  fuf- 
tain,  for  all  the  ill  confequences  that  might  enfue  to  the  government  and  immenfc 
population  of  India,  no  provifion  whatever  is  propofed.  And  againft  an  entire 
failure  of  the  vail  profpeds  now  fo  fanguinely  entertained,  this  confolation  is  at 
laft  adminiftered,  that  *' the  very  woril  that  can  occur,  in  the  event  of"  the 
abandonment  of  the  trade  by  the  Public,  would  be,  that  matters  might  "■  return 
"  again  to  their  prcfent  Jlate" 

But  can  it  be  ferioufly  fuppofed,  that  after  the  fabric  of  the  Company  and  its 
immenfe  dependent  and  connefted  ellablifliments  in  England,  in  India  and  China 
fhould  have  been  fet  afide  and  left  to  decay  and  ruin ;  when  India  (hould  have 
been  laid  open,  and  the  China  eftablilhment  fuperfeded,  and  fo  much  capital 
funk,  that  things  could  be  brought  back  to  their  former  ftate.  The  poffibility 
of  fuch  a  mighty  convulfion,  and  the  eafe  with  which  it  is  contemplated  by  the 
Petitioners,  may  be  fufficient  to  excite  a  falutary  fear  of  the  rage  of  theory,  fpecu- 
lation  and  innovation,  may  fuggefl  the  prudence  of  (topping  Ihort  of  the  precipice 
to  which  they  would  conduct  us ;  of  at  leaft  refting  at  fome  point,  fo  far  fafe,  as 
not  to  expofe  the  whole  of  the  empire,  Indian  and  European,  to  the  terrible  alter- 
native here  brought  into  view.  A  great  extenfion  of  the  trade  to  or  from  the 
Eaft,  the  objed  for  which  fuch  dangers  are  to  be  run,  is  fhewn  in  the  preceding 
pages  to  be  impradicable  ;  and  it  has  been  alfo  fliewn,  that  in  the  profecution  of 
the  attempt  to  obtain  it,  the  interefts  of  Britifti  India,  and  of  the  finances  of  this 
country,  would  be  endangered.  But  if  an  experiment  is  ftill  required  to  be  made 
in  the  vaft  continent  of  Hindoftan,  and  its  adjacent  iflands,  (for  to  pu(h  the  Expe- 
riment into  China,  would  be  to  rifle  the  trade  of  that  country  and  all  its  advantages, 
without  the  chance  of  any  benefit),  the  means  of  making  a  large  ample  experi- 
ment, in  which  the  whole  nation  may  participate,  through  the  port  of  London, 
are  now  offered ;  means  which  fliall  give  the  faireft  opportunity  to  afcertain  the 
prafticability  of  extending  the  trade,  without  breaking  down  prefent  eftabliih- 
ments,  or  cxpofing  the  Empire,  in  cafe  of  failure,  to  the  moft  difaftrous  confe- 
quences. At  the  fame  point,  therefore  here  defcribed,  your  Committee  humbly 
hope  the  wifdom  of  His  Majelly's  Minifters  and  Parliament,  will  ftill  fee  fit 
10  reft. 

(Signed)  Hugh.  Inglis. 

RoBT.  Thornton. 

Jacob  Bosanquht. 

Wm.  F.  Elphinstone, 

Theophilus  Metcalfe. 

Joseph  Cotton. 

Charles  Grant. 

Georgi  Smith. 

Edward  Parry. 

sweney  toone. 

William  Astell. 


LETTER. 


-68      CORRESPONDENCE  between  PRESIDENT  of  INDIA  BOARD 


LETTER,  from  the  Chairman  and  Deputy  Chairann,  to  the  Right 
honourable  the  Earl  of  BuckinghamfliirCj  alfo  noticed  in  the  precedmg 
Minute. 

My  Lord,  Eaft  India  Houfe,  loth  February  i8 13. 

BY  the  defire  of  the  Court  of  Directors  of  the  Eafl  India  Company,  we  have 
the  honeur  to  fubmit  to  your  Lordfliip  a  Report  of  the  Committee  of  Correfpon- 
dence,  and  refpeflfully  to  entreat  your  ferious  attention  to  it. 

It  contains  an  anfwer  to  the  matter  of  the  Petitions  which  were  laft  feflion 
prefented  to  the  Houfe  of  Commons  againft  the  renewal  of  the  Company's  Char- 
ter, and  particularly  to  thofe  arguments  to  which  your  Lordfhip  was  pleafed  to 
refer  us  in  fupport  of  the  claims  of  the  out-ports  to  be  opened  to  the  import 
trade  from  India  and  China;  it  alfo  enters  into  a  re\'iew  of  all  the  principal 
queftions  of  a  commer<:ial  nature  which  have  been  agitated  by  thofe  perfons  who 
demand  the  abolition  of  the  Company's  exclufive  privileges  ;  and  in  this  Minute, 
my  Lord,  the  Court  hope  you  will  find  the  following  pofitions,  among  many 
ethers,  well  edablifhed. 

Firfl,  That  the  Petitioners  have  not  correQly  defcribtd  the  prefent  flate  and 
effects  of  the  Company's  exclufive  privileges  and  trade,  nor  at  all  appreciated  the 
evils,  political  and  commercial,  which  would  refult  from  withdrawing  thofe  pri- 
vileges, but  have  arraigned  the  monopoly,  as  if  it  retained  all  the  flridnefs  given 
to  it  a  century  ago,  as  if  no  confiderable  relaxations  had  been  made  in  it  within 
the  la  ft  twenty  years,  and  as  if  ftill  larger  relaxations  were  not  now  acquiefced  in 
by  the  Company. 

Secondly,  That  the  clamours  which  have  been  raifed  againft  the  Company,  on 
account  of  the  trade  of  neutrals,  particularly  the  Americans  with  India,  are 
wholly  unjuft ;  that  no  fuch  trade,  unlefs  with  the  Port uguefe,  now  exifts,  and 
that  the  .prevention  of  injury  from  it  is  eafy. 

Thirdly,  That  the  Petitioners  have  by  no  means  obviated  the  objeftions  ad- 
vanced by  the  Court  againft  the  opening  of  the  out-ports,  nor  in  the  leaft  proved 
the  expediency  or  fafety  of  that  meafure  ;  and  that  the  adoption  of  it  would 
be  attended  with  thofe  dangers  which  the  Court  have  in  their  former  letter* 
defcribed  :  And, 

Fourthly,  That  all  the  former  reafonings  of  tlie  Court  againft  the  pradlicabi- 
-lity  of  enlarging  the  confuniption  of  Britifh  manufaQures  in  India  or  China,  or 
of  extending  profitably  the  imports  of  thofe  Countries  into  Britain,  are  confirmed 
•by  the  refult  of  the  large  experiment  which  has  aftually  been  made  by  private 
Merchants  and  Traders  in  the  courfe  of  near  twenty  years  paft,  from  which  ex- 
periment accurately  recorded,  it  appears  that  not  one  new  article  for  the  confumpiion 
.of  the  natives  of  the  Eajt,  has  in  all  that  time  been  fent  from  Great  Britain. 

And  from  this  very  important  faft,  new  perhaps  to  your  Lordfhip  and  the 
public,  though  long  exifting  in  the  records  of  the  Company,  the  Court  of  Di- 
reftors  join  with  their  Committee  of  Correfpondence,  in  hoping  that  as  the  views 
of  the  Petitioners  are  unlimited,  going  in  the  fiift  place  to  the  fubverfion  of  all  the 
exifting  ellablifliments  in  the  India  and  China  trade  ;  as  this  ruin  would  be  im- 
menfe,  and  the  compenfation  which  would  be  due  for  it,  would  be  immenfc  alfo  ; 
as  the  political  evils  which  would  thence  follow,  as  detailed  in  the  former  letters 
of  the  Court  (evils  ftill  to  be  pre-eminently  regarded)  would  fatally  afteft  the 
interefts  of  the  whole  Empire  ;  and  as  the  means  are  now  offered  of  making  the 
fullelt  and  faireft  further  experiment  of  the  pradicability  of  enlarging  the  trade 
to  and  trom  India,  upon  fo  great  a  fcale  as  fhall  admit  the  whole  nation  to  par- 
ticipate in  it ;  as  this  is  an  experiment  which  may  be  made  without  breaking 
.down  the  prefent  fyftem  and  all  its  cftablifhments,  as  it  affords  a  method  of  afcer- 
taining  all  the  good  that  is  attainable,  without  hazarding  the  dreadful  evils  that 
are  othcrwife  to  be  apprehended  ;  we  fay,  my  Lord,  the  Court  of  Direftors  do, 
under  thefe  jnomentous  circumllances,  earneftly  hope  that  His  Majefty's  Minifters 

will 


and  CHAIRMAN,  Sec.  o/The  EAST  INDIA  COMPANY.  69 

will  flill  fee  fit  to  flop  at  a  fafe  point,  which  will  give  the  utmoft  reafonahle  con- 
ceffions  to  one  fet  ol'  men,  whilil  it  will  prelerve  the  intercfts  of  Britifh  India,  of 
all  piirties  now  connected  with  it,  and  of  the  Empire  at  large,  from  ihe  difallrous 
confequences  ot  unbounded  innovation. 

We  have  tlv^  honour  to  be,  my  Lord, 

Your  Lordlhip's  moft  obedient  humble  fervants, 
f Signed)  Hu^h  Jnglis. 

Robert  Thornton. 
The  Right  Hon.  the  Earl  of  Buckinghamfhire, 
&c.  &c.  &c. 


AT  a  General  Court  of  the  United  Company  of  Merchants  of  Eng- 
land trading  to  theEall  Indies,  hdd  on  Wednefday  the  17th  Fe- 
bruary 1813. 

MINUTES  of  laft  Court  of  the  26th  ultimo,  were  read. 

The  Chairman  acquainted  the  Court,  that  it  is  aflembled  for  the  purpofe  of 
taking  into  confideration  the  draft  of  a  Petition  to  the  honourable  Houfe  of  Com- 
iTions,  refpecHng  the  renewal  of- the  Company's  exclufive  privileges. 

The  faid  Petition  was  then  read- 

The  Chairman  alfo  acquainted  the  Court,  that  the  Court  of  Direftors  had  pre- 
■  pared  the  Draft  of  another  Petition  to  the  honourable  Houfe  of  Commons,  for 
■payment  of  a  debt  due  by  the  public,  and  for  relief  by  way  of  loan. 

The  fame  was  alfo  read  ;  and. 

The  Court  proceeding  to  take  the  above-mentioned  Petitions  into  confideration. 

It  was  moved,  and,  on  the  queftion, 
Refolved,  That  the  further  confideration  of  tlie  faid  Petitions  be  adjourned  till 

'Tuefday  next. 

The  Chairman  then  acquainted  the  Court,  that  the  Petitions  will  lie  at  this 
houfe  for  the  perufal  of  the  proprietors. 

The  Chairman  further  acquainted  the  Court,  that  the  Committee  ofCorref- 
pondence  had  prepared  a  Report  on  the  Subjed:  of  the  Petitions  prefented  to  Par- 
liament  during  the  laft  Seffion  againft  the  renewal  of  the  Company's  Charter, 
which  Report  was  laid  before  the  Court  of  Directors,  and  unanimoufly  approved 
by  them  on  the  i  oth  inftant,  and  that  the  faid  Report  is  now  printing  for  the 
information  of  the  proprietors. 

The  Title  of  the  Report  was  then  read,  as  was  alfo 

'Draft  of  a  Letter  to  Lord  Buckinghamfhire,  tranfmltting  Copy  of  the  above 
mentioned  Report,  and 

Leuer  from  Lord  Buckinghamfhire  in  reply. 

The  Court  then,  en  the  queftion,  adjourned. 

Gentlemen,  India  Board,  15th  Februaiy  1S13. 

I  HAD  the   honour  of  receiving  your  Letter  of  the  10th  inftant,  enclofing  a 
Report  of  the  Committee  of  Correfpondence,  to  which  you  defire  my  ferious  at- 
tention ;  and  you  may  be  afTured  that  the  Report  will  receive  that  ferious  and 
-'deliberate  attention  which  has  been  given  to  every  part  of  the  important  fubject 
to  which  it  relates. 

I  have  the  honour  to  be. 

Gentlemen, 

Your  obedient  and  fmthful  humble  fer\'ant, 
(Signed)  Buckinghamjhire. 

The  Chairman  and  Deputy 
•Chairman  of  the  Eaft  India  Company. 
;.-        (32.)  S  ■  AT 


70       CORRESPONDENCE  between  PRESIDENT  of  INDJA  BOARD 

AT  a  General  Court  of  the  United  Company  of  Merchants  of  Eng- 
land trading  to  the  Eaft  Indies,  held  on  Tuefday  the  23d  Februaiy 
1813. 

■MINUTES  of  lafl:  Court  of  the  17th  inftant,  were  read. 

The  Chairman  acquainted  t!:e  Court,  that  it  is  met  by  adjournment,  for  the 
;.purpofe  of  taking  into  further  confideration  the  drafts  of  the  Petitions  to  the  ho- 
nourable Houfe  of  Commons,  which  were  laid  by  the  Court  of  Diredors  before 
the  General  Court  on  the  17th  inftant. 

The  draft  of  the  Petition,  praying  a  renewal  of  the  Company's  exclufive 
:privileges,  in  which  fome  amendments  have  been  inferted,  as  propofed  by  the 
Court  of  Diredors  fince  the  laft  General  Court,  and  now  fubmitted  to  this  Court, 
■was  read. 

To  the  Honourable  the  Commons  of  the  United  Kingdom  of  Great 
Britain  and  Ireland,  in  Parliament  aflembled  ; 

The  humble  Petition  of  the  United  Company  of  Merchants  of  England 
trading  to  the  Eall  Indies  j 

Sheweth, 
That  youT  Petiuoners,  in  approaching  this  Honourable  Houfe  with  an  appli- 
cation for  a  continuance  of  the  fyftem  by  which  the  relation  between  Great 
iBritain  and  the  Eaft  Indies  is  now  regulated,  hope  they  may  be  permitted  to  fhate 
the  outlines  of  the  Hiitory  of  the  Eftablilhment  of  your  Petitioners,  as  well  as 
their  prefent  fituatiou  as  to  their  property  and  rights,  their  fundions  and  obli- 
gations. 

That  the  firft  Adventurers  in  a  Trade  from  England  to  the  Eaft  Indies,  by  the 
•way  of  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  were  incorporated  by  Her  Majefty  Queen  Eli- 
zabeth, by  her  Royal  Letters  Patent,  bearing  date  the  31ft  day  of  December 
1601,'  by  the  ftile  of  "  The  Governor  and  Company  of  Merchants  of  London 
*'  trading  into  the  Eaft  Indies,"  to  whom,  by  the  fame  inftrument,  the  excluftve 
right  of  trading  to  that  Country  was  granted  by  her  faid  Majefty  for  a  term  of 
fifteen  years  from  Chriftmas  then  laft  paft. 

That  the  Corporate  capacity  of  the  faid  Governor  and  Company  of  Merchants 
of  London  trading  into  the  Eaft  Indies,  with  the  privilege  of  the  exclufive  Trade, 
was  renewed,  revived  and  confirmed  to  them  in  perpetuity  by  feveral  Charters  or 
Letters  Patent,  granted  refpedtively  by  their  Majefties  King  James  the  Firft,  King 
Charles  the  Second,  King  James  the  Second,  and  King  William  and  Queen  ^  Mary, 
fubjeft  neverthelefs  to  a  provifion,  that,  if  the  continuance  of  any  of  their  Char- 
ters, in  the  whole  or  in  pan,  ftiould  not  be  profitable  to  the  Realm,  that,  upon 
three  years  warning  to  be  given  to  the  faid  Company,  all  the  faid  Charters  lliould 
ceafe,  determine,  and  be  void. ' 

That  the  faid  Governor  and  Company  were  empowered  by  their  Charters  to 
eftablifli  Fadories  and  Settlements  in  the  Eaft  Indies,  •*  to  have  the  Government 
of  fuch  Fa6lories  and  Settlements,  and  to  appoint  Governors  with  a  judicial  Power 
to  equip  and  maintain  military  forces  by  lea  and  land  for  the  defence  of  their 
Settlements,  with  the  power  of  making  peace  and  war  with  any  Princes  or  people 
who  were  not  Chriftians,  within  any  places  of  their  trade,  to  make  reprifals  from 
thofe  perfons,  in  thofe  parts,  from  whom  they  lliould  fuftain  any  lofs  or 
injury,  to  ered  caftles,  fortifications,  forts,  and  ganifons,  and  alfo  to  coin  Indian 
money.  ^ 

'   Printed  Charters,  jj.to  Edition,  page  3. 

»  Ibid.  3ill  May  1609  page  ay  ;  3d  April  i66f,  page  54  ;  5th  Oftober  1677,  page  108  ;  9th 
Aiiguft  1683,  page  116  ;  12th  April  1686,  page  125  ;  /th  Oftober  1693,  page  141  ;  inh  Nov. 
i6(jz-  page  J52.  '  Ibid.  aSth  September  1694,  page  181. 

1  Ibid,  jd  April,  13th  Charles  II.  i66l,  page  54. 

5  Ibid,  ctli  Oaober,  28th    Charles  II.  1677,  page  in. 

That, 


and  CHAIRMAN,  &c.  o/The  EAST  INDIA  COMPANY.  71 

That,  by  virtue  of  thcfe  Powers,  the  faid  Governor  and  Company  made  Settle- 
ments, and  built  Forts  and  Factories,  at  different  places  in  the  Eall  Indies,  at  a 
very  great  expenfe,  which  Settlements,  Forts,  and  F..^1:ories,  with  ibme  territory 
annexed  to  them,  were  purchafed  from  the  native  Piir.ces  of  the  Countries  within 
their  limits  ;  the  fovereignty  remained  with  their  refpective  Chiefs,  but  the  imme- 
diate Governmenr  yf  thofe  acquifitions  was  exerciftd  by  the  Company  under  the 
powers  which  are  before  mentioned  to  have  been  granted  to  them  by  Charier ; 
and  the  laid  Company  alfo  made  a  Settlement  in  the  Ifland  of  St.  Helena,  on  its 
being  abandoned  by  the  Dutch,  about  the  year  1651. 

That  the  property  and  fovereignty  in  and  over  the  Port  and  Ifland  of  Bombay 
having  been  ceded  by  the  King  of  Portugal  to  His  Majefty  King  Charles  the  Se- 
cond, as  part  of  the  dowry  of  the  Infanta  of  Portugal,  on  her  marriage  with  King 
Charles,  His  faiJ  Majefty,  by  his  Royal  Letters  Patent,  bearing  date  the  ^j\.\\  day 
of  March  1669,'  granted  and  conveyed  unto  the  faid  Governor  and  Company, 
their  fucceflbrs  and  afligiis,  t!ie  property  thereof,  with  all  the  rights,  profits,  terri- 
tories and  appurtenances,  and  conftituted  them  the  true  and  abfoluto  lords  and 
proprietors  of  the  Port  and  Ifiand,  in  the  moft  unlimited  manner,  faving  to  His 
Majefty,  his  Heirs  and  Succeffors,  his  Royal  Sovereignty  of  and  over  the  in- 
habitants there ;  but  His  Majefty  granted  the  authority  of  immediate  Civil  and 
Military  Government  of  the  place  to  the  Company  ;  and  Saint  Helena  having 
been  taken  from  the  faid  Company  by  the  Dutch  in  the  War  of  1674,  was 
re-taken  by  a  force  belonging  to  King  Charles  the  Second,  who,  by  his  Royal 
Letters  Patent,  bearing  date  the  16th  day  of  December  1674,'  re-granted  that 
Ifland,  with  all  the  rights,  piofits,  territories,  and  appurtenances  whatfoever,  unto 
the  faid  Governor  and  Company,  their  Succeifors  and  Afllgns,  and  His  Majefty 
conftituted  them  the  true  and  abfolute  lords  and  proprietors  thereof,  faving  the 
allegiance  due  to  His  Majefty,  His  Heirs  and  Succeifors ;  and  the  faid  Charter 
contained  powers  and  authorities  for  the  government  and  defence  of  the  faid 
Ifland. 

That  by  an  A6t  of  Parliament  pafled  in  the  9th  Year  of  the  Reign  of  His 
late  Majefty  King  William  the  Third,"*  for  raifmg  a  fum  of  two  millions  by 
loan  for  the  Public  Service,  it  was  enacted,  that  all  the  fubi'cribers  to  the  faid  loan 
fhould  be  intitled  to  traffick  and  ufe  the  trade  of  merchandize  in  fuch  places,  and 
by  fuch  ways  and  palfages  as  were  then  already  frequented,  found  out,  or  difco- 
\'ered,  or  which  thereafter  fliould  be  found  out  or  difcovered,  and  as  they 
feverally  fhould  efteem  to  be  fitteft  or  beft  for  them,  into  and  from  the  Eaft  Indies, 
in  the  Countries  and  Parts  of  Afia  and  Africa,  and  into  and  from  the  iflands, 
ports,  havens,  cities,  creeks,  towns,  and  places  of  Afia,  Africa,  and  America, 
or  any  of  them,  beyond  the  Cape  of  Bona  Efperanza  to  the  Streights  of  Magellan, 
where  any  trade  or  traffick  of  merchandize  was  or  might  be  ufed  or  had,  and  to 
and  from  every  of  them  ;  and,  by  the  faid  Aft, '  His  Majefty  was  empowered  to 
incorporate  any  of  -the  Subfcribers  who  fhould  defire  it,  to  trade  with  a  joint 
ftock ;  and  it  was  enacted, '"  that  at  any  time,  upon  three  years  notice,  after  the 
29th  day  of  September  171 1,  upon  repayment  by  Parliament  of  the  faid  fum  of 
two  millions,  or  fuch  part  thereof  as  (hould  be  advanced,  all  the  corporations  to 
be  created  in  purfuance  of  that  A£t,  and  the  benefit  of  trade  thereby  given,  fliould 
abfolutely  ceai'e  and  determine  ;  and  it  was  enafted  "  that  all  fuch  perfons  as 
fliould  have  a  right  of  trading  by  virtue  of  that  A£t,  fhould  have  the  fole  and 
exclufive  Trade  within  the  limits  before  mentioned. 

That  the  faid  Sum  of  two  millions  was  fubfcribed  within  the  time  limited  by 
the  faid  Aft  ;  and  thereupon,  by  a  Charter  bearing  date  the  5th  day  of  Septem- 
ber 1698,"  His  faid  Majefty  was  pleafed  to  incorporate  the  larger  part  of  the 
Subfcribers  to  the  faid  loan,  by  the  ftile  of  "  The  Englilh  Company  trading  to 
"  the  Eaft  Indies  ;"  and,  by  the  faid  Charters,  powers  of  makiiig  Settlements, 

'  Printed  Charters,  page  80.  <  Ibid,  page  96. 

*  9  &  10  William  III.  cap.  44.  fcft.  Ci.  "  Sect.  Gi.  "  Se^.  70 

"  Sea.  ax.  '^  Printed  Charters,  page  1S8. 

aad 


yt       CORRESPONDENCE  bei'-Mcn  PRESIDENT  of  INDIA  BOARD 

asui  governing  them,  and  maintaining  military  forces  for  their  defence,  were 
j?;ranied  to  the  Englifh  Company,  fmiilar  to  thole  which  are  before  ftated  lO  have 
been  granted  to  the  old  Company,  fmce  diftinguilhed  by  the  appellation  of  The 
London  Company  ;  the  fovereign  right,  power,  and  dominion,  over  all  the  Set- 
lliiaenis  to  be  made,  being  referved  to  His  fp.id  Majefty. 

lliat  the  above  Adi  of  Parliament  and  Charter  would  have  operated  to  have 
extingnifhed  and  determined  the  corporate  capacity  and  privileges  of  the  London 
Company,  but  the  Aft  contained  a  provifion  that  they  fhould  have  liberty  to 
trade  till  the  29th  of  September  170 1,  and  the  London  Company  having  fub- 
fcribedthe  fum  of  ^315,000.  towards  the  fum  of  ^2,000,000.  to  be  raifed, 
became  entitled  to  trade  in  refpect  of  it ;  and  therefore,  by  an  Ad  of  Parliament 
palied  in  the  i  2  th  year  of  the  Reign  ot  His  faid  Majefty  King  William  the  "^  Third, 
their  corporate  capacity  was  continued  to  them,  fubjeft,  neverthelefs,  to  be  deter- 
mined upon  the  redemption  of  the  fund  eftabliihed  by  the  faid  Ad  of  the  9th 
of  His  faid  JVkjefty's  reign. 

That  the  faid  Englifh  Company  acquired  and  fettled  feveral  Fadories  m  the 
Eaft  Indies, -at  a  very  large  expenfe."'' 

Thaf  previous  to  the  Eredion  of  the  Englifli  Company,  the  London  Company 
had  carried  on  their  I'rade  with  the  Eaft  Indies  in  competition  with  the  Portu- 
guefe  and  Dqtch  and  French  Companies,  and  alfo  in  competition  with  unlicenfed 
adventurers  from  Great  Britain  who  traded  there,  notwithftanding  the  exclufive 
grants  which  the  London  Company  was  in  poffeffion  of,  and  which  unlicenfed 
adventurers,  at  times,  acquired  confiderable  afcendancy  amongft  the  Native 
Powers,  '^  and,  -after  the  incorporation  of  the  Englifti  Company,  they  became  alfo 
competitors  in  the  faid  Trade.;  and  no  European  nation  having  then  acquired  any 
confiderable  territorial  dominion,  the  whole  of  the  trade  by  Europeans  was  car- 
ried on. entirely  at  the  defpotic  will  and  fuflerance  of  the  Native  Princes  of  the 
Mogul  Empire  ;  the  Government  and  Officers  of  which  almoft  conftantly  Ihevved 
their  favour  and  protedion  to  fuch  of  the  competitors  from  whom  they  could 
obtain  the  largeft  prefents ;  and  in  proportion  as  they  proteded  one  of  them, 
they  opprefled  tiie  others ;  as  an  inftance  of  which,  your  Petitioners  {how,  that 
the  fervants  of  the  Englifti  Company  in  India,  by  means  of  corrupt  influence  with 
the  minifters  and  fervants  of  the  Mogul,  procured  all  the  principal  Officers  and 
Members  of  the  Prefidency  of  the  London  Company  at  Surat,  then  the  chief  feat 
of  their  trade  in  India,  to  be  imprifoned  for  feveral  feafons,  and  wholly  to  inter- 
-rupt  their  commercial  tranfadions.'* 

That  .the  London  Company  .and  the  Englifh  Company,  finding,  that  if  their 
competition  had  continued,  ruin  muft  have  enfued  to  both,  agreed,  about  the 
.year  1702,  to  unite  together:  the  union  was  effeded  by  force  of  two  feveral  In- 
dentures, dated  refpedively  the  22d  day  of  July  1702,  one  being  an  indenture 
tripartite,  made  between  her  late  Majefty  Queen  Anne  of  the  firft  part,  and  the 
faid  London  Company  of  the  2d  part,  and  the  faid  Englifli  Company  of  the  third 
•part.;  ''  and  the  other  being  an  indenture  quinquepartite,  made  between  the  faid 
London  Company  of  the  firft  part,  the  faid  Englifh  Company  of  the  fecond 
part,  and  certiiin  perfons,  Truftees  of  Property  belonging  to  the  London  Com- 
pany, of  the  third,  fourth,  and  fifth  parts,  '*  and  by  force  of  an  Ad  of  Parlia- 
ment, pafTed  in  the  6th  year  of  the  reign  of  Queen  Anne, '"  and  of  an  Award  of 
the  Earl  of  Godolphin,  the  Lord  High  Treafurer  of  Great  Britain,  dated  the 
.29th  day  of  September  1708. 

By  the  terms  of  the  Union,  all  the  property  and  rights  belonging  to  both 
Companies,  at  home  and  abroad,  including  the  fettlements,  forts,  fadories,  and 


■3  Private  Afts,  12  William  III.  cap.  28. 

'"'  Indenture  quinquepartite,   page   316,     They  were  made  over  to    the   United  Company   for 
^£70,000.  'i  See  Annals  of  the  Ealt  India  Company. 


'^  Annali,  vol.  iil.  pages  519.  54.3,  563.  '?  Printed  Charters,  page  243. 

'*  J'rinted  Charters,  page  316.  "»  6th  Anne,  cap.  17. 


territories.. 


and  CHAIRMAN,  8:c.  of  The  EAST  INDIA  COMl'ANY.  y^ 

territories,  vvliich  thcv  had  acquired  as  is  above  ftated,  were  vahie  1,  and  in  confide- 
ration  of  the  value  of  the  property  of  the  Loudon  Company  being  paid  or  al- 
lowed in  account  to  them,  they,  by  proper  legal  inflrumcnts,  transferred  and 
made  ov2r  all  their  property  to  the  Englifli  Company,  and  the  KngiilTj  Company 
we-c  allowed,  in  account,  the  value  of  their  property  ;  and  the  property  and 
rights  of  both  Companies  were  thenceforth  veiled  in  them,  for  the  beneiic  of  the 
united  conce.n  ;  and  the  London  Company  having-  completed  the  transfer  of  its 
property,  furrendered  its  corporate  capacity  ;  and  from  thenceforth  the  Englifi-» 
Company  took  the  ftyle  of  "  The  United  Company  of  Merchaiiis  of  England 
*'  trading  to  the  Eaft  Indies  ;"  which  is  now  the  llyle  of  your  Peiiiioners. 

Your  Petitioners  crave  leave  to  draw  the  attention  of  the  Houfe  to  fome  part 
of  the  fubjeds  of  which  the  property  of  your  Petitioners  conllfted  at  the  time  of 
the  union  of  the  two  Companies  in  1702,  and  which  they  derived  by  transfer 
from  them,  with  the  ccgnifance  and  fanftion  of  Her  Majelty  Queen  Anne,  and 
of  the  Parliament ;  amongfl:  other  things  your  Petitioners  were  then  entitled  to 
and  poiTefled  of  the  iflands  of  Bombay  and  Saint  Helena,  the  fovercignty  of 
which  was  vefted  iii  the  Crown  of  Great  Britain  ;  they  were  entitled  to  and  pof- 
fefled  of  the  Fadories  of  Surat,  Swally,  Broach,  Amadavad,  Agra,  and  Lucknow  ; 
on  the  Coaft  of  Malabar,  they  were  entitled  to  and  poffeffod  of  the  Forts  of 
Carwar,  Telllcherry,  and  Ongengo,  and  the  Faiftory  of  Callicut ;  on  the  Coaft 
of  Coromandel  they  were  enlilled  and  poffeffed  of  the  Fort  Saint  George,  with 
the  Caftle,  Fortifications,  and  Territory  thereto  belonging,  on  which  a  large  City 
called  Madras  was  built,  the  houfes  of  which  belonging  to  and  paid  rent  to  your 
Petitioners  ;  Fort  Saint  David,  being  a  ftrong  fort  and  fadory,  and  about  three 
miles  compafs  of  the  circumjacent  country,  on  which  feveral  fmall  towns  and 
villages  were  erefled  ;  the  Factories  of  Codolore,  Porto  Novo,  Pettipoiee,  Mado- 
pollam,  and  the  Fort  and  F.iftory  of  Vizagapatam  ;  in  Bengal,  your  Petitioners 
were  entitled  to  and  poflefled  of  Fort  William  and  the  Town  of  Calcutta,  with  a 
large  territory  thereto  belonging  ;  the  Fadories  of  Balhrore,  Coiliutbuzar,  Dacca, 
Hughly,  Maulda,  Rajamaul,  and  Patna,  all  thefe  poflefTions  were  fubjed  to  the 
fovereignty  of  the  Great  Mogid  ;  on  the  Illand  of  Sumatra.,  your  Petitioners 
were  entitled  to  and  poffefled  of  York  Fort  at  Bencooien,  and  a  Faftory  with  a 
territory  of  about  five  miles  thereto  belonging,  and  a  Fadory  at  Indrapore. 

That  after  the  union  of  the  two  Companies,  your  Petitioners  conduded  them- 
felves  fo  as  to  conciliate  and  acquire  the  confidence  of  the  natives  of  India,  and 
for  a  confiderable  period  ol  time  they  had  no  occafion  to  ufe  the  right  which  they 
enjoyed  of  maintaining  a  military  force,  except  for  purpofes  little  beyond  thofe 
of  police,  and  as  guards  of  their  fortifications  agaiuft  furprife  ;  but  near  the  middle 
of  the  lafl  century  it  became  necelTary  for  your  Petitioners  to  enlarge  their  military 
force,  and  to  exercife  the  power  of  war,  and  of  making  political  engagements 
wuh  fome  of  the  Native  Powers,  to  fupport  the  Britifli  interefts  in  India,  and  in 
order  tu  counterad  the  intrigues  of  the  French,  who  had  become  auxiliaries  to 
other  Native  Powers,  with  the  defign  of  driving  your  Petitioners  out  of  the  Eaft 
Indies,  and  of  excluding  tiie  Britifh  nation  wholly  from  Afiatic  commerce;  but 
by  means  of  the  forces  raifed  and  maintained  by  your  Petitioners, 'and  at  their 
fole  expenfe,  your  Petitioners  completely  defeated  thofe  objeds ;  fo  that,  at  the 
conclufion  of  the  war  which  ended  in  the  year  1763,  the  French  were  left  without 
cne  fmgle  fettlement,  and  almoft  whiiout  i.-.fluence,  in  any  part  of  Afia. 

In  the  year  1797,  the  Nabob  of  Bengal  permitted  your  Petitioners  to  eftablifli 
a  Mint  at  Calcutta  ;  "  and  in  the  fame  year  the  faid  Nabob  made  over  to  your 
Petitioners  the  property  in  certain  lands  in  Bengal,  generally  called  the  Twent)'- 
fom'  Purgunhas, "  and  the  Saltpetre  Lands  of  the  whole  provinv-e  of  Bahar ; "" 
and  in  the  year  1758,  your  Petitioners  obtained  a  grant  from  the  fiiid  Nabob  for 
the  free  tenure  of  the  Town  of  Calcutta,  difcharged  from  the  rent  to  which, 


^  Printed  Treaties,  page  9,  ;"  Ibid,  page  to.  "  Ibid,  page  12. 

(32.)  T  to 


74       CORRESPONDENCE  beh::'cn  PRESIDENT  o/INDIA  BOARD 

to  that  time,  it  h:ui  been  fubjetl: ;  '-'  in  the  year  1759,  the  Souhah  of  the  Decan 
made  over  to  your  Petitioners  thf^  vhole  of  the  Circar  of  Mafuhpatam,  with  eight 
diflricfls,  as  well  as  the  Circar  of  Nizampatam  and  the  diftrifts  of  Condavar  and 
Wacahnanner  ;  "'•*  in  the  year  1763,  the  Nabob  of  A'cot  made  over  to  your  Peti- 
tioners feveral  diftrids  of  land  furrounding  Madras,  ""^  which  lands  have  been  fince 
called  the  Jaghire  of  your  Petitioneis ;  and  fuch  transfer  was  confirmed  in  the 
year  1765  by  the  faid  Nabob,  and  alfo  by  the  Great  Mogul  ;  ^''  in  the  year  1764, 
the  Mogul  made  over  to  your  Petitioners  the  Country  of  Gauze-poor  and  the  reft 
of  the  Zemindary  of  Rajah  Bui  want  Sing  ; '''  in  the  year  1765,  the  Great  Mogul 
granted  to  your  Petitioners  the  country  called  the  Northern  Circars;  "'  and  in  the 
loUowing  year  fuch  grant  was  acceded  to  by  the  Soubah  ;  ^^  and  in  the  ye:ir  176^, 
the  Great  Mogul  appointed  your  Petitioners,  in  perpetuity,  to  the  office  of  Dewan 
of  the  Provinces  of  Bengal,  Bahar,  and  Oriffa,  fuch  appointment  being  made  as 
a  free  gift ;  '°  and  by  virtue  ot  fuch  grant  your  Petitioners,  in  the  execution  of 
the  office,  acquired  the  tight  of  colleftion  ot  all  the  revenues  of  the  faid  provinces, 
for  their  owii  ufe,  free  from  any  account  thereof  to  be  rendered. 

Your  Petiiioners  crave  leave  to  remark,  that  no  part  of  tlie  property  in  any  of 
the  forts,  faftories,  or  territories,  which  became  veiled  in  your  Petitioners  at  the 
time  of  the  union  of  the  two  companies,  nor  any  of  the  territories  nor  rights 
lailly  herein  before  mentioned  to  have  bef.n  granted  to  your  Petitioners,  were 
acquired  by  coriqueft,  but  by  purrhafe,  by  means  of  pecuniary  payments,  or  by 
fervices  rendered  to,  or  other  confidcrations  moving  the  Grantors. 

That  about  the  year  1767,  a  claim  was  made  on  the  part  of  the  Public  to  the 
beneficial  intercft  in  the  territorial  acquifitions  and  revenues  then  lately  obtained 
there,  and  thereupon  agreements  have  been  made  from  time  to  time  that  the 
poifeffion  of  fuch  acquifitions  and  revenues  ftiould  remain  with  your  Petitioners 
upon  a  participation  of  the  profit  of  the  revenue  between  the  Public  and  your 
Petitioners,  as  mentioned  in  feveral  Afts  of  Parliament  made  and  pafled  at  diffe- 
rent times  fince  1767,^'  without  prejudice  to  the  claims  of  the  Public  or  of  your 
Petitioners. 

That,  previous  to  the  year  1773,  the  Government  of  the  fettlements  and  acqui- 
fitions in  India  was  conduced  under  the  uncontrouled  diredion  of  your  Peti- 
tioners, by  virtue  of  the  powers  of  Government  which  they  derived  from  their 
Charters  ;  but,  ever  fince  the  year  1773,  the  mode  of  the  immediate  Government 
of  India  has  been  regulated  by  Parliament,  ^^  and  from  that  time,  to  the  year 
1784;  in  purfuance  of  diredlions  of  Afts  of  Parliament,  the  Lords  Commiffioners 
of  His  Majefty's  Treafury,  and  one  of  His  Majefiy's  Principal  Secretaries  of  State, 
in  their  feveral  departments,  were  made  acquainted  with  the  Correfpondence  and 
Orders  fent  to  and  received  from  India  by  your  Petitioners,  in  any  way  relating 
to  the  management  of  the  revenue,  or  civil  or  military  affairs  and  government  of 
your  Petitioners  in  that  country;  and  from  the  year  1784  to  the  prefcnt  time, 
all  ads,  operations  and  concerns,  which  in  any  ways  have  related  to  or  concerned 
the  Civil  or  Military  Government  or  Revenues  of  the  territories  and  acquifitions 
in  the  baft  Indies,  have  been  placed  under  the  fuperintendence  and  controul  of 
certain  Commiffioners  appointed  by  His  Majefty,  in  purfuance  of  Ads  of  Parlia- 
ment palfed  for  that  purpofe ;  "  and  your  Petitioners  have  been  reftrained  from 
giving  any  orders  or  dire£tions  relative  thereto,  without  the  concurrence  of  the 
faid  Commiffioners ;  and  in  cafes  in  which  the  ftud  Commiffioners  have  been  of 
opinion  that  the  fubjeft  matter  of  any  of  their  deliberations,  concerning  the  levying 
war  or  making  peace,  or  treating  or  negotiating  with  any  of  the  native  Princes  or 
States  in  India,  communicated  in  Orders  to  any  of  the  Governments  in  India, 


'i   Printed  Treaties,  page  23.  ^^  Ibid,  page  347.  '^  Ibid,  page  348. 

="  Ibid,  page  362.  ^7  Ibid.  p:ige  37.  ^*  Ibid,  page  361. 

'9  Ibid,  page  ^67.  ^o  Ibid,  page  43. 

3"  8  Geo.  3d.  cap.  17  ;    9  Geo.  3d.    cap.  24  ;     13  Geo.  3d.   cap.  64  ;    19  Geo.  3d.  cap.  61  ; 
20  Geo  3d.  cap  56  ;  21  Geo.  3d.  cap.  65  ;  33  Geo.  3d.  cap.  52.  3^  13  Geo.  3d.  cap.  63. 

33  24  Geo.  3d.  cap.  25  ;  28  Geo.  3d.  cap.  8  ;  ji  Geo. 3d.  cap.  10  ;  33  Geo.  3d.  cap.  52. 

have 


and  CHAIRM.VN,  &c.  0/ The  EAST  INDIA  COMPANY.  75 

Iiave  been  of  ?.  nature  to  require  fccrecy,  fuch  Oi^krs  have  been  Pent  ihrou'^h  the 
inedium  of  a  8ecr,it  Committee  of  three  of  the  Court  of  DiroilDrs  of  your  Peti- 
tioners, accordiniT  to  the  provifions  in  that  cafe  maJc  by  Parliament,  without  any 
privity  of  your  Petitioners,  or  of  their  Court  of  Directors,  and  without  any  dif- 
cretionary  authority  on  the  part  of  the  members  of  fuch  Secret  Committee. 

That  between  the  period  when  fuch  claim  as  herein-before  mentioned  was  firft 
made,  on  the  part  of  the  Public,  to  the  territorial  acquifitions  in  the  Kail  Indies,, 
and  the  Year  1793,  a  further  acquifition  of  territory  was  made  in  India. 

■  That  the  Term  heretofore  granted  to  your  Petitioners  in  the  eyclufive  trade  to 
the  Eafl:  Indies,  being  about  to  be  redeemed  in  the  year  1794,  an  Ail  of  Parlia- 
ment was  made  and  pafi'ed  in  the  33d  year  of  the  reign  of  His  preiViut  '■'  M.,j::l}y ; 
wherebv  it  was  enafted,  among  other  things,  that  the  territorial  acquifuious  iit 
certain  former  Afts  mentioned,  together  with  the  territorial  acquifitiuns  then  lately 
obtained  in  the  Eaft  Indies,  with  the  Revenues  thereof  refpedively,  fhould  con- 
tinue in  the  pofleiTion  of  your  Petitioners  during  the  further  term  by  that  Act 
granted  in  the  faid  e.xclufive  Trade  ;  and  that  '^  your  Petitioners  fhould  have  the 
exclufive  Trade  within  the  limits  mentioned  in  t'.e  faid  A61:  of  Parliament  pafle;! 
in  the  9th  year  of  the  Reign  of  King  William  the  Third,  fubjecf  neverthelcfs  to 
fuch  right  of  trading  as  is  thereby  given  to  individuals,  to  be  carried  on  ia  the 
manner  therein  mentioned,  and  fubjedl  to  a  provifo  to  determine  fuch  right  at  any 
rime,  upon  three  years  notice  to  be  given  by  Parliament,  after  the  n't;  day  of 
March  181 1,  upon  the  expiration  of  the  faid  three  years,  and  upon  payment 
made  to  your  Petitioners  of  any  fum  or  funis  which,  under  the  provifions  of  any 
Aft  of  that  Seffion  of  Parliament,  fhould  or  might,  upon  the  expiration  of  the 
faid  three  years,  become  payable  to  your  Petitioners  by  the  Public,  according  to 
the  true  intent  and  meaning  of  fuch  Aft  ;  but  it  was  enafted,^'  that  nothing  in 
that  provifo,  or  in  any  provifo  in  the  faid  Aft  in  the  9th  year  of  King  William 
the  Third,  in  the  faid  Charter  of  the  5th  of  September,  in  the  loth  year  of  his 
reign,  or  in  any  other  Aft  or  Charter,  fhould  extend  to  determine  the  Corpora- 
tion of  your  Petitioners;  and,  by  the  faid  Aft,"  certain  appropriations  were  made 
of  all  the  profits  arifmg  from  the  Territorial  Acquifitions  and  Revenues  in  India, 
and  alfo  from  the  fale  of  goods,  and  all  other  profits  of  your  Petitioners  in  Great 
Britain,  during  the  time  of  the  exclufive  Trade  thereby  granted  to  your  Petitioners. 

That  the  notice  required  by  the  lafl  mentioned  Aft  hath  been  given  by  the 
Speaker  of  your  honourable  Houfe,  for  determining  the  exclufive  Trade  of  your 
Petitioners  on  the  loth  day  of  April  1814. 

That  fince  the  pafTmg  the  faid  lail  mentioned  Aft,  a  further  acquifition  of  Ter- 
ritory and  Revenue  in  India  has  been  made,  and  is  now  in  the  pofTefTion  of  your 
Petitioners ;  and  your  Petitioners  alfo  fhow  that  they  have  taken  all  the  Forts 
and  Faftories  which  belonged  to  the  French,  Dutch,  and  Danes  in  Hindoflan  ; 
and  your  Pedtioners  are  now  in  pofiefTion  as  well  of  the  Territories  mentioned 
in  the  faid  laft-mentioned  Aft  of  Parliament  as  of  thofe  which  have  been  fince 
acquired,  and  the  Britifh  Dominions  in  India,  without  a  rival,  or  any  enemy,  now 
confifl  of  a  very  large  proportion  of  the  Peninfula,  befides  very  extenfive  Pro- 
vinces in  the  Noith  of  Hindoftan,  and  contain,  as  it  is  fuppofed,  above  fifty  mil- 
lions of  inhabitants,  and  have  been  acqtiired  wholly  at  the  expenfe  and  rifk  of  your 
Petitioners,  without  any  charge  whatever  to  the  Britifh  Exchequer,  for,  though 
land  forces  belonging  to  His  Majeftv  have  been  emploved,  in  conjunftion  with 
the  forces  raifed  by  your  Petitioners,  yet  the  whole  of  tl  ■  expenfe  of  fuch  forces 
of  His  Majefty,  whilft  they  have  been  employed  in  fuc'i  fervice,  as  well  as  for 
their  paffage  out  and  home,  and  in  recruiting,  has  bee-  defrayed  by  your  Peti- 
tioners ;  befides  which,  for  a  confiJerable  length  of  tine,  your  Petitioners  fur- 
nifhed  or  paid  for  viftualling  and  ftores  for  the  ufe  of  His  Majefl;y's  fhips  of  war 
in  the  Eaft  Indies. 


3«  33  Geo.  3<1.  cap.  51,  feift.  i.  "  Seift.  71. 

J*  Sea.  74.  "  See  Sea.  107.  to  II  J. 

Your 


7«6        CORRESPONDENCE  between  PRESIDENT  0/ INDIA  BOARD 

Your  Petitioners  beg  leave  humbly  to  reprefent,  that  the  welfare  and  happinefs 
of  the  inhabitants  of  the  Countiies  which  have  come  under  the  care  of  your  Pe- 
titioners have  been  their  chief  object,  and  they  have  reafon  to  hope  and  believe 
that  the  amelioration  of  the  condition  of  the  people  is  nioft  eminently  confpicuous, 
when  Hindofl?.n  was  firft  vifited  by  Brilifh  Traders,  and  long  i.fter  the  union  of 
the  two  Companies  before-mentioned,  when  the  oppofition,  not  only  ot  Britilh 
Subjed  againft  Britidi  Subjei^,  but  of  European  againft  European,  and  the  corrupt 
and  impolitic  attempts  which  were  conftantly  made  by  one  party  to  raife  the 
defpoilc  power  of  the  Indian  States  againft  other  parties,  had  in  fome  meafure 
ceafed,  the  chara61er  of  the  Native  governments,  as  well  as  of  the  Native  indivi- 
duals, remained  unchanged,  the  ill  uHige  which  they  had  received  from  individual 
and  aflbciated  Europeans  roaming  about  without  refoonfibility  or  controul,  raifed 
a  jealoufy  and  animofity  againft  every  ftranger  W'ithout  Gil!.in61:ion,  and  the  in- 
ternal ftate  of  the  Country,  where  juflice  and  injuftice  were  equally  articles  of 
traffic  to  be  bought  and  lold,  left  the  rights  of  perfons  and  property  entirely  at 
hazard. 

Your  Petitioners  found  the  Country  divided  into  many  different  States,  all 
feudatory  to  the  Mogul,  who  v*as  confidered  the  fole  proprietor  of  the  whole  ; 
thefe  States  were  again  divided  among  Zemindars  and  Chiefs,  with  other  defigna- 
tions,  under  whom  there  were  fub-infeudations,  down  to  the  Ryots,  who  were 
the  adual  cultivators  of  the  foil,  and  no  man  held  any  land,  and  fcarcely  a  crop, 
but  at  the  will  of  another  of  fuperior  power  ;  there  were  no  efleclual  means  of 
refort  for  the  fupport  of  any  right,  or  the  avenging  any  wrong,  and  the  will  of 
the  ftrongeft  was  the  only  praftical  rule  of  condud  which  was  eftabliflied  ;  under 
the  management  of  your  Petitioners,  the  fcene  has  been  entirely  changed  ;  by 
fixing  certain  permanent  and  invariable  rents,  a  new  and  valuable  property  has 
been,  as  it  were,  created  to  the  Natires  j-by  the  eftablilhment  of  Courts  of  Juf- 
tice,  and  the  appointment  of  liberal  emoluments  to  thofe  who  devote  their  lives 
to  the  ftudy  and  adminiftration  of  Laws  adapted  to  the  ufages,  cuftoms,  and  reli- 
gions of  the  inhabitants,  they  have  removed  temptations  to  corruption,  and  have 
provided  the  means  for  the  inhabitants  to  be  infured  in  the  enjoyment  of  property 
thus  created  for  them  ;  Courts  of  Criminal  Judicature  have  alio  been  univerfally 
eredled,  which  have  effeftually  provided  for  perfonal  liberty  and  I'ecurity  ;  by  the 
alterations  which  have  taken  place,  the  praftical  means  ot  foreign  Commerce,  of 
Traffic  from  port  to  port  and  internally,  have  been  facilitated,  very  greatly  to  its 
increafe. 

That  it  may  not  be  fuppofed  that  your  Petitioners  have  affumed  merits  which 
they  are  not  endtled  to,  they  beg  leave  to  refer  to  the  Fifth  Report  of  the  Sclecl 
Committee  of  this  Honourable  Houfe  on  the  Affairs  of  the  Eaft  India  Company, 
which  was  prei'ented  to  this  Honourable  Houfe  on  the  28th  day  of  July  lafl. 

Notwithftanding  ihe  ameliorated  condition  of  the  Natives  of  India  under  the 
Government  of  your  Petitioners,  to  which  they  have  been  accuflomed,  yet  the 
tranquillity  of  the  Country  is  not  maintained  by  a  phyfical  force,  but  chiefly  by 
moral  influence,  and  in  a  great  degree  even  by  prejudice ;  any  change  would 
alarm  them,  and  their  fubmiflion  to  Britifh  authority  would  be  greatly  endangered 
by  an  unreftrained  refort  of  Europeans  in  fearch  of  wealth,  either  by  Commerce 
or  other  means,  at  diffances  from  the  principal  feats  of  Governnient.  or  in  fuch 
numbers  at  thofe  feats  as  to  be  beyond  the  controul  of  the  Governors,  and  by 
the  relort  of  perfons  who  may  not  have  fuch  connexion  with  (and  intereft  to 
uphold)  the  authority  of  the  Ruling  Power,  as  will  infure  the  utmolt  care  in  their 
condudt,  not  only  not  to  irritate,  but  pofitively  to  concihate  the  Natives  with  whom 
they  may  have  dealings. 

Your  Petitioners  beg  leave  to  reprefent,  that  their  Military  EftabliQmients,  Ar- 
tillery, and  Marine,  have  been  of  other  moil  important  advantages  to  this  nation, 
in  as  much  as,  in  the  feveral  European  Wars  in  which  this  Society  has  been  en- 
gaged fince  the  Peace  of  Aix  la  Chapelle,  the  Forces  of  your  Petitioners  alone, 
or  in  conjundion  with  the  Forces  of  Ilis  Majefly  at  th&  expenfe  of  your  Peti- 
tioners, have  taken  all  the  Settlements  belonging  to  the  Europeans  on  the  Continent 

of 


and  CHAIRMAN,  kc.  ^fTHE  EAST  INDIA  COMPANY.  jj 

of  India  with  whom  this  Nation  has  been  at  war,  and  fuch  captures  have  formed 
part  of  the  price  of  National  Peace,  without  any  compenfation  to  your  Petitioners; 
and  that,  upon  the  fuojgeftion  of  His  Majefty's  Minilters,  your  Petitioners  fent  a 
large  Force  fro'nv  India  into  Egypt,  by  the  Red  Sea,  to  co-operate  with  His  Ma- 
jelty's  Forces  againll  the  French,  in  the  year  i3oi  ;  and,  in  the  prefent  War,  by 
expeditions  equipped  from  India,  aH  the  Poffeirions  of  the  French,  Dutch,  and 
Danes,  in  the  Fall,  have  been  conquered  ;  and  though,  as  to  fuch  of  thofe  expe- 
ditions the  accounts  of  which  have  been  fettled,  your  Petitioners  have  been 
•allowed  confiderable  fums  on  the  part  of  the  Public,  yet  fuch  allowances  were 
calculated  to  reiinburfe  only  a  part  of  the  vafl:  expenditure  aftually  advanced  by 
your  Petitioners  for  thofe  great  national  objefts. 

Your  Petitioners  humbly  hope  they  will  be  found  to  have  been  as  attentive  to, 
and  as  fucctfsful  in,  the  cultivation  of  the  Trade  with  China  as  they  have  been 
w  ith  refpe£t  to  the  concerns  in  India  ;  the  peculiarities  of  the  Chinefe,  and  the 
delicacy  attendant  upon  any  intercourfe  with  them,  mufl  be  too  well  known  as 
matter  of  hiftory  to  every  Member  of  this  Honourable  Houfe,  to  require  any 
flatemcnt  of  it  in  this  Petition  ;  it  will  be  fufficient  to  inform  this  Honourable 
Houfe,  that  it  is  but  little  more  than  one  hundred  years  fince  any  trade  whatever 
has  been  carried  on  between  this  Country  and  China  ;  and  that  at  this  time  about 
46,000  tons  of  fhipping  are  employed  by  your  Petitioners  therein,  and  that  your 
Petitioners  entertain  in  China,  for  the  purpofes  of  that  trade,  a  regular  eftablifh- 
ment  of  fervants  called  Supra  Cargoes,  and  others  of  inferior  ranks,  whofe  bufi- 
nefs  it  is  to  keep  up  a  connedion  with  the  few  merchants,  or  more  properly  mer- 
cantile officers  of  the  Chinefe  Government,  who  are  deputed  to  manage  on  the 
part  of  the  Chinefe  all  the  commercial  tranfaftions  between  Great  Britain  and 
China ;  by  this  means  the  trade  has  been  cheriflied  and  preferved  through,  and 
notwithftanding  many  perils  arifing  from  circumftances  apparently  trivial,  and  the 
fatal  confequences  of  which  could  only  have  been  averted  by  the  moft  delicate 
condu(^l:,  and  by  the  whole  commercial  concerns  of  the  Britifli  Nation  being  con- 
fided to  one  united  authority. 

Your  Petitioners  feel  it  incumbent  upon  them  to  fubmit  to  this  Honourable 
Houfe,  an  abftraft  of  their  financial  operations  fince  the  arrangement  contained  in 
the  above  mentioned  AQ;  of  the  33d  year  of  the  reign  of  His  prefent  Majefty  was 
made  ;  at  that  time  the  capital  ftock  of  your  Petitioners  amounted  to  the  fum  of 
^€"5,000,000 ;  fince  that  period,  in  purfuance  of  an  Aft  paffed  for  that  purpofe, 
the  capital  ftock  has  been  encreafed  by  the  fum  of  .i^i, 000,000  contributed  by  the 
fubfcribers  at  the  rate  of  ^200  per  cent. 

At  the  time  when  the  Aft  of  the  33d  of  His  Majefty  ^^  was  paffed,  fundry  debts 
incurred  in  the  defence  and  proteftion  of  the  Britifh  pofleffions  in  India,  bearing 
intereft,  were  then  due  and  owing  by  your  Petitioners,  amounting  to  j^7,ooOjOoo 
fterling,  or  thereabouts  ;  fmce  that  period  the  faid  debt  has  been  very  much  iu- 
creafedfor  the  fame  piurpofe,  and  great  part  of  fuch  increafed  debt  was  raifed  upon 
loans,  by  the  terms  of  which  the  creditors  were  intitled  to  the  option  of  being 
paid  off  in  India  or  by  Bills  of  Exchange  to  be  drawn  upon  London,  and  upon 
fuch  obligations  becoming  due,  your  Petitioners  have  been  obliged  to  provide  out 
of  their  funds  and  credit  at  home  the  means  of  paying  Bills  of  Exchange  drawn 
upon  them  fince  the  year  1807,  to  the  amount  of  j^i 0,902,924  fterling,  ih  dif- 
charge  of  Indian  debt,  and  the  debt  contrafted  for  political  purpofes,  now  remain- 
ing due  in  India,  according  to  the  lateft  advices  from  thence,  amounts  to  the  fum  of 
^"26,000,000  or  thereabouts,  over  and  befides  the  fum  of  ^3,000,000  reduced 
three  per  cent,  annuities,  and  the  fum  of  ^1,400,000  confolidated  three  per  cent., 
annuities,  on  which  the  fum  of  .^^2, 500,000  fterling  was  raifed,  in  purfuance  of  an 
Aft  paffed  in  the  laft  Seffion  of  Parliament,  to  enable  your  Petitioners  to  pay  Bills 
of  Exchange,  which  had  been  drawn  upon  them  from  India,  in  part  difcharge  of 
the  Indian  debt,  as  hercin-before  mentioned,  and  alfo  over  and  befides  the  fum 


i'  33d  Geo.  3d.  cap,  52.  fed.  108. 
(32.)  U  of 


78        CORRESPONDENCE  between  PRESIDENT  of  INDIA  BOARD 

of  jf«, 202,000,  or  thereabouts,  now  owing  by  your  Petitioners  upon  Bills  of  Ex- 
change not  yet  due,  but  payable  in  London,  which  have  been  drawn  in  India,  hi 
further  part  difcharge  of  the  faid  Indian  debt. 

That  the  revenues  of  the  territorial  acquifitions  in  India,  in  the  pofleflion  of 
your  Petitioners,  in  the  year  1793  amounted  to  the  annual  fum  of  ^8,000,000 
or  thereabouts,  and  by  the  latelt  account  and  eftimates  received  from  the  Ead 
.  Indies,  the  revenues  of  the  territorial  acquifitions  now  in  the  pofleffion  of  your 
Petitioners,  amount  to  the  annual  fum  of  ^16,000,000  or  thereabouts,  but  the 
civil  and  military  expences  of  the  Government  have  proportionably  increafed. 

That  the  profits  of  the  trade  carried  on  by  your  Petitioners  fines  the  year  1793, 
to  the  lateft  period  to  which  the  accounts  can  be  corredly  eftimated,  have  amounted 
to  the  fum  of  ^'6,289,405,  over  and  above  the  commercial  charges  of  your  Peti- 
tioners, and  beyond  the  payment  of  intereft  on  their  Bond  Debt  in  England,  and 
befides  the  dividends  from  time  to  time  paid  on  the  Capital  Stock  of  your  Peti- 
tioners, according  to  the  direclions  of  the  faid  Aft,  paffed  in  the  33d  year  of  the 
^  reign  of  His  prefent  Majefty. 

That  in  1793  a  Bond  Debt  in  England  of  your  Petitioners  amounted  to  the 
fum  of  ££"3,200,000,  or  thereabouts,  fmce  which,  by  an  Aft  paffed  in  the  year 
1797,3'  they  have  been  empowered  to  raife  money  by  increafmg  their  Capital  Stock, 
by  the  amount  of  jf  2,000,000  ;  but  your  Petitioners  have  not  availed  themfelves 
of  that  refource,  but,  under  the  authority  of  feveral  Afts  of  Parliament,""  they 
have  raifed  money  upon  bond,  and  their  Bond  Debt  in  England  now  amounts  to 
the  fum  of  ^5,409,325,  but  your  Petitioners  are  entitled  by  law  to  iffiie  bonds  to 
the  amount  of  jf 7,000,000  in  the  whplf. 

That  the  annual  intereft  upon  ^he  prefent  amount  of  the  Indian  Debt  now 
amounts  to  the  fum  of  ,^1,600,000,  or  thereabouts,  and  as  by  the  terms  of  the 
loans  on  which  fuch  money  was  raifed,  the  creditors  are  entitled  to  receive  their 
intereft  by  payment  of  money  in  India,  or  by  bills  of  exchange  to  be  drawn  and 
made  payable  in  London,  at  rates  favourable  to  the  holders,  and  judging  from  the 
amount  drawn  within  the  laft  half  year,'  your  Petitioners  eftimate  that  the  annual 
fum  of  .^1,500,000,  or  thereabouts,  wilt  be  neceflary  to  be  provided  annually 
in  London  for  the  payment  of  fuch  intereft,  befides  which,  although  the  feveral 
fums  of  money  payable  in  refpeft  of  the  Reduced  and  Conlblidated  Annuities, 
(on  which  the  faid  fum  of  ^£'2, 500,000  was  raifed  by  virtue  of  the  fiiid  Aft  of  the 
laft  SefTion  of  Pai-liament)  for  Intereft  and  Sinking  Fund  attendant  thereon, 
amounting  altogether  to  the  annual  fum  of  ^242,820,  are  cxprefsly  charged 
upon  the  revenues  of  the  territorial  acquifitions  in  the  Eaft  Indies,  yet  your  Peti- 
tioners are  bound  by  the  faid  Aft,  at  all  events,  to  pay  fuch  fums  of  money  into 
the  Bank  of  England,  in  manner  in  the  faid  Aft  mentioned  ;  and  your  Petition- 
ers will  alfo  be  obliged  to  provide,  in  London,  the  intereft  and  other  charges 
which  may  be  attendant  upon  any  further  Loan  which  may  be  neceiTary,  in  con- 
fequence  of  the  faid  further  fum  of  .^^2,202,000,  part  of  the  Indian  debt,  for 
which  Bills  of  Exchange,  drawn  upon  your  Petitioners,  are  now  outftanding  j 
and  it  is  eftimated  that  political  charges  (including  payments  to  be  made  to  the 
Creditors  of  the  late  Nabobs  of  the  Carnatic)  coniequential  upon  the  Indian  ter- 
ritory, to  the  annual  amount  of  ,^910,000,  or  thereabouts,  will  be  to  be  defrayed 
in  England ;  and  as,  from  the  beft  eftimates  which  can  be  made,  there  appears 
but  little  reafon  to  expeft  (without  a  coiifiderable  reduftion  of  the  military 
expences  of  your  Petitioners  in  India)  that  there  (hould  be  any  fufficient  furplus 
revenue  to  be  remitted  for  thofe  Purpofes,  your  Petitioners  apprehend  that  the 
punftual  difcharge  of  the  pecuniary  obligations  of  your  Petitioners  in  relation 
thereto,  as  well  as  the  payment  of  the  intereft  upon  their  Bond  Debt  in  England, 
and  the  Divicifnds  on  their  Capital  StocL,  will  depend  moft  eiTentially  upon  the 
trade  to  be  carried  on  by  your  Petitioners. 


39  27  Geo,  3.  cap.  31.  "t"  340^0.  3.  cap.  4;  ;     47  Geo. 3.  cap.  41.  feft.  2.  51. 

That, 


and  CHAIRMAN,  &c.-  of  The  EAST  INDIA  COMPANY.  79 

I'hat,  in  purfuance  of  feveral  Afts  of  Parliament  fince  1807/'  your  Petitioners 
have  increafed  their  Bond  Debt  in  England  by  the  funi  of  i^2. 409,-^25  ;  and  in 
purfuance  of  an  Aft  of  Parliament  pafled  in  the  50th  year  of  the  Reign  of  His 
prefent  Majefty,  your  Petitioners  have  borrowed  Exchequer  Bills  of  the  Public  to 
the  amount  of  ^^i, 500, 000  ;  and  by  virtue  of  an  Aft  pafled  in  the  laft  Seflion, 
as  herein-before  mentioned,  your  Petitioners  raifed  on  Loan,  by  way  of  Reduced 
and  Confolidated  Annuities,  the  fiim  of  ^^3, 500,000  ;  and  all  fuch  fums  of 
money,  together  wiih  the  faid  fum  of  ^6,289,405,  which  has  arifen  from  the  fur- 
plus  profits  of  the  trade  carried  on  by  your  Petitioners,  as  herein-before  mentioned, 
have  been  abforbed  by  payment  of  debts  and  expences  incurred  in  refpeft  of  the 
territorial  acquifitions  in  India. 

That  in  the  expeditions  on  the  part  of  the  Britifli  Nation  againft  the  European 
Enemies  of  His  Majefly,  and  by  advances  tor  His  Majefty's  Navy  and  other  pub- 
lic fervices,  your  Petitioners  have  incurred  very  large  expences,  which  they  fub- 
mit  they  are  entitled  to  be  reimburfed  by  the  public  ;  and  your  Petitioners  com- 
pute, that  after  allowing  fuch  fum  as  your  Petitioners  are  indebted  to  the  public 
for  the  loan  of  Exchequer  Bills,  to  the  amount  of  j€'i, 500,000,  as  herein-before 
mentioned,  purfuant  to  an  Aft  for  that  purpofe,  paflTed  in  the  lafl  Seflion  of  Par- 

.  liament,""  and  after  allowing  fuch  fums  as  your  Petitioners  are  indebted  to  Hfs 
Majefliy  for  troops  in  India  and  for  recruiting,  the  fum  of  ££"25294,426,  at  the 

.leaft,  will  be  found  due  to  your  Petitioners. 

Your  Petitioners  have  now  exhibited,  they  hope,  with  candour,  the  real  fitua- 
tion  of  their  affairs,  and  of  the  Britifli  trade  and  relations  with  the  Eafl;  Indies  and 
China ;  your  Petitioners  do  not  prefume  to  offer  an  opinion  whether  any  other 
arrangements  than  thofe  which  have  taken  place  would  have  led  to  refults  equally 
or  more  advantageous  than  have  arifen  to  their  Country,  but  they  apprehend  it 
to  be  quite  undeniable  that  the  privileges  entrufted  to  your  Petitioners  have  pro- 
'duced  a  large  quantity  of  pofitive  benefit  to  the  Britifli  Empire,  and  they  fubmit 
that  any  material  change  in  the  Indian  fyfliera  would  be.  matter  of  experiment,  for 
•which  there  can  be  no  fufiicient  data  from  which  its  fuccefs  can  be  calculated  j 
your  Petitioners  feel  it  to  be  their  duty  to  exprefs  to  this  Honourable  Houfe  their 
Tincere  opinion  that  the  public  interefl:  cannot  be  better  confulted  than  by  continuing 
your  Petitioners,  as  the  fole  organs  and  channel  both  for  the  trade  with  and  the 
'Government  of  India,  upon  the  principles' efl:abliflied  by  the  Aft  of  the  33d  year 
of  His  Maiefl:y's  reign,  with  fuch  variations  as  to  the  financial  appropriations,  and 
;n  fonie  other  points  of  detail,  as  prefent  circumftances  require,  and  experience 
has  pointed  out ;  your  Petitioners  aik  not  for  an  exciufive  Trade  upon  the  narrow 
principles  of  monopoly,  for  the  mere  purpiife  of  commercial  gain  ;  they  have 
under  their  care  interefts  of  a  much  more  extended  and  liberal  nature,  which  it  is 
xheir  duty  to  attend  to;  your  Petitioners  are  ready  to  become  parties  to  any  ar- 
rangement which  fliall  be  confiflent  with  the  rights  of  your  Petitioners,  and  the 
fecurity  of  Britifli  India,  and  which  will  not  deprive  your  Petitioners  of  the  means 
of  fulfilling  their  pecuniary  engagements  with  the  public  and  individuals,  or  the 
performance  of  the  fuiiftions  which  may  be  continued  or  allutted  to  them  ;  they 
nope  they  will  not  be  deemed  prefumptuous  in  humbly  fubmitting  their  opmion, 
ccnfidered  and  re-confidered,  that  the  opening  the  Trade  with  China  in  any  degree 
would  endanger  its  exiftence  akcgether  ;  and  your  Petitioners  iiave  at  no  time  con- 
templated any  alteration  even  in  the  Export  Trade  to  the  Eaft  Indies  without  con- 
fideralle  doubt  and  hefitation  ;  but  your  Petitioners  are  firmly  of  opinio;',  that  the 
unreflirr.ined  liberty  of  importation  from  that  Country,  otherwife  than  through  the 
medium  of  the  Efl;abliflmients  of  your  Petitioners  in  London,  would  produce 
effefts  which  every  well-wiflier  to  his  Country  mufl:  deprecate,  and  which  would 
put  to  extreme  hazaid  any  pledge  on  the  part  of  your  Petitioners  for  the  good 
government  of  India,  or  the  performance  of  their  obligations ;  your  petitioners 


■*•  47  Oeo.3.  cap.  41.  feft.  2  ;  51  Geo.  3  ;  52  Geo,  3.  cap.  135. 
♦^  ^o  Geo.  3.  cap.  135  ;  ^1  Geo.  3, 

fubmit 


8o      CORRESPONDENCE  between  PRESIDENT  cf  INDIA  BOARD 

f'lbniit  that  they  would  not  be  juflified  in  becoming  parties  to  any  fyflem  which, 
on  confideration,  (hould  appear  to  them  likely  to  prove  an  illufion. 

As  your  Petitioners  do  not  venture  to  anticipate  what  may  be  the  determination 
of  this  Honourable  lioufe  upon  the  queftion  hereby  fubmitted  to  its  decifion,  your 
Petitioners  hope  that  they  will  be  excufed  for  humbly  Itating  what,  in  the  event  of 
the  diffolution  of  the  prefent  fyflem,  they  conceive  would  be  found  to  be  the 
Tights  of  your  Petitioners,  as  well  aa  their  fair  pretenfions  upon  the  jufiice  and 
liberality  of  Parliament ;  the  abfolute  right  of  your  Petitioners,  for  their  own 
ufe,  to  a  confiderable  part  of  the  Forts,  Towns,  Iflands,  Territories,  and  Rights 
■which  they  have  acquired  abroad,  never  has  been  queftioned,  and  your  Petitioners 
believe  it  to  be  unquedionable ;  and,  notwithftanding  the  claim  made  for  the 
Public  to  other  parts  of  the  territorial  acquifitions  and  revenues  of  your  Petition- 
ers, they  entertain  a  ftrong  hope  that  the  property,  as  well  in  thofe  parts  which 
were  acquired  by  conqueft  under  the  powers  of  Peace  and  War  lawfully  exercifed 
by  your  Petitioners,  as  in  thofe  parts  which  were  otherwife  acquired,  would  be 
found  to  belong  to  your  Petitioners,  in  the  fame  way  as  any  other  property  within 
His  Majeily's  Dominions  belongs  to  the  owners  thereof,  fubjed  to  the  fovereignty 
and  allegiance  due  to  His  iVIajefty ;  but  even  fuppofmg  it  ihould  be  determined 
contrary  to  the  fenfe  and  expeftations  of  your  Petitioners,  touching  their  rights, 
that  thofe  places  were  not  the  property  of  your  Petitioners,  your  Petitioners 
fubmit,  that  in  that  cafe,  if  the  poifeflion  were  to  be  affumed  on  the  part  of  the 
Public,  your  Petitioners  would  have  a  juft  right  to  reimburfement  of  the  Expences 
•which  they  have  incurred  in  acquiring  and  maintaining  them,  and  in  making  the 
Fortifications,  and  Civil  and  IMilitary  Buildings  and  Works,  vi^hich  your  Petition- 
ers have  ere6led  and  improved  upon  them,  with  a  compenfation  for  the  fervices 
and  rilk  of  your  Petitioners  during  the  long  time  which  they  have  had  the  poflef- 
fion  and  government  of  fuch  Territories,  under  the  confirmation  of  Parliament, 
and  all  other  charges  incurred  by  your  Petitioners  relative  to  fuch  Territories ; 
thefe  expences  and  charges  amount  to  many  millions  of  money  ;  your  Petitioners 
alfo  fubmit,  that  they  have  a  juft  claim  to  be  reimburfed  all  the  fums  they  have 
paid  in  difcharge  of  debts  contrafted  on  account  of  the  Territories,  and  to  be  in- 
demnified againft  all  other  debts  in  refpe£t  of  them,  and  which  now  remain  un- 
dilcharged. 

Your  Petitioners  do  not  queftion,  as  an  abftradl  principle,  the  right  of  any  of 
His  Majefty's  fubjeft s  to  trade  with  any  part  of  His  Majefty's  dominions  ;  but  they 
humbly  fubmit,  that  it  cannot  be  contended  that  any  perfons  can  have  a  right, 
except  with  the  confent  of  your  Petitioners,  to  ufe  the  Settlements,  Fadories,  and 
Seats  of  Trade,  or  to  avail  themfelves  of  the  means  and  facilities,  moral  and 
phyfical,  which  your  Petitioners,  at  a  great  expence  and  rifk,  have  created  or 
acquired,  and  now  at  great  current  charge  maintain,  for  the  purpofes  of  coni- 
merce  and  civil  intercourfe. 

Your  Petitioners  therefore  moft  humbly  pray  that  this  Honourable  Houfe  will 
take  the  premifes  into  its  confideration,  and  make  fuch  provifion,  as  in  its  wifdom 
it  {hall  fee  fit,  for  continuing  the  Government  of  the  territorial  acquifitions  in  the 
Eaft  Indies  in  your  Petitioners,  and  for  fettling  the  Trade  to  the  Eaft  Indies  and 
China,  and  other  places,  from  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope  to  the  Streights  of 
Magellan,  according  to  the  prefent  fyftem ;  or  that  your  Petitioners  may  have 
fuch  relief  in  the  premifes,  as  their  cafe  may  require. 

And  your  Petitioners,  as  in  duty  bound,  will  ever  pray,  &c. 

It  was  then  moved  to  amend  the  faid  Petition,  by  leaving  out  the  following 
words,  viz.  "  Your  Petitioners  fubmit  that  they  would  not  be  juftified  in  becoming 
"  parties  to  any  fyflem,  which,  on  confideration,  fhould  appear  to  them  likely  ta 
"  prove  an  illufion." 

And  the  queflion  being  put,  that  the  words  propofed  to  be  left  out,  ftand  part 
of  the  Petition,  the  fame  was  carried  in  the  afSrmative.^ 

It 


and  CHAIRMAN,  &c.  o/The  EAST  INDIA  COMPANY.  8 1 

It  was  then  moved,  and,  on  the  queflion, 
Refolved,  That  this  Court  approve  the  above  Petition. 

The  Draft  of  the  Petition  to  the  Honourable  Houi'e  of  Commons,  for  payment 
of  the  debt  due  from  the  Pubhc  to  the  Company,  and  for  other  pecuniary  relief, 
in  which  Petition  fundry  amendments,  as  alfo  propofed  by  the  Court  of  Directors 
fince  the  laft  General  Court,  and  now  fubmitted  to  the  General  Court,  was 
read. 

To  the  Honourable  the  Commons  of  the  United  Kingdom  of  Great 
Britain  and  Ireland,  in  Parliament  aflembled  ; 

The  humble  Petition  of  the  United  Company  of  Merchants  of  England 
trading  to  the  Eaft  Indies  j 

Sheweth, 
That  loans  of  very  large  fums  of  money  have  heretofore  been  raifed  in  India 
on  the  credit  of  your  Petitioners,  for  the  defence  and  protection  of  the  Britifli  pof- 
feflions  there,  by  the  terms  of  which  loans  the  creditors  were  entitled  to  the  option 
of  being  paid  off  in  India,  or  by  Bills  of  Exchange  to  be  drawn  upon  London, 
and  upon  and  in  confequence  of  fuch  obligations  becoming  due,  bills  to  the 
amount  of  i€'i3, 104,924.  have  been  drawn,  fince  the  year  1807,  upon  your  Peti- 
tioners, payable  in  London;  and  the  fum  of  ^£10,902,924.  part  of  the  fum  of 
if  13,104,924.  has  been  diicharged  by  your  Petitioners  ;  and  ^2,202,000  refidue 
thereof,  now  remains  outftanding  ;  and  the  larger  part  of  the  bills  drawn  for  the 
fame  will  become  due  previous  to  the  month  of  March  1814  j  that,  for  the  pur- 
pofe  of  enabling  your  Petitioners  to  pay  the  faid  Bills  of  Exchange  which  they 
have  fo  difcharged,  to  the  amount  of  iPi 0,902,924.  they  borrowed  Exchequer. 
Bills  of  the  Public  to  the  amount  of  .^1.500,000.  in  purfuance  of  an  Aft  of 
50  Geo.  HI.  fbr  granting  to  His  Majefty  a  (um  of  money  to  be  raifed  by  Exche-  * 
quer  Bills,  and  to  be  advanced  and  applied  in  the  manner  and  upon  the  terms 
therein  mentioned,  for  the  relief  of  the  United  Company  of  Merchants  of  Eng- 
land trading  to  the  Lilt  Indies ;  and  your  Petitioners  alfo  raifed  a  fum  of 
i^2, 500,000.  upon  Reduced  ^'j.  per  centum  Annuities  and  Confolidated  £t^.  per 
centum  Annuities,  refpedively  transferrable  at  the  Bank  of  England,  in  purfuance 
of  an  Aft  of  52  Geo.  III.  for  advancing  ^2,500,000.  to  the  Eaft  India  Company, 
to  enable  them  to  difcharge  part  of  the  Indian  Debt. 

That,  by  another  Aft  of  52  Geo.  III.  to  amend  an  Aft  of  50  Geo.  TIL  for 
granting  a  fum  of  money  to  be  raifed  by  Exchequer  Bills  to  be  advanced  and 
applied  in  the  manner  and  upon  the  terms  therein  mentioned,  for  the  relief  of  the 
United  Company  of  Merchants  of  England  trading  to  the  Eaft  Indies,  it  is  enafted, 
that  it  Ihall  be  lawful  for  the  Commiffioners  of  His  Majefly's  Treafury,  or  any 
three  or  more  of  them,  to  carry  to  the  credit  of  your  Petitioners,  in  re-payment  of 
the  lums  advanced  under  the  provifions  of  the  faid  Aft  of  51  Geo.  Ill,  any  fum  or 
fums  ot  money  which  fhould  have  been  advanced  or  difburfed  by  your  Petitioners 
in  the  Eaft  Indies,  for  His  Majefty's  Navy,  or  any  public  fervices. 

That  your  Petitioners  compute,  that  after  allowing,  in  account,  fuch  fum  as 
your  Petitioners  are  indebted  to  His  Majefty  for  the  loan  of  the  faid  Exchequer 
Bills,  that  the  fum  of  ^2,294.426.  at  the  leaft  is  now  due  to  your  Petitioners,  in 
refpeft  of  money  which  has  been  advanced  or  difburfed  by  your  Petitioners,  in  the 
Eaft  Indies,  for  His  Majefty's  Navy  and  other  public  fervices. 

That  by  virtue  of  an  Aft  of  37  Geo.  III.  to  enable  the  Eaft  India  Company  to 
raife  money  by  further  increafing  their  Capital  Stock,  and  to  extend  the  Provifions 
now  exifting  refpefting  the  prefent  ftock  of  the  Company  to  the  faid  increafed 
Ifork,  your  Petitioners  are  now  authorized  to  raife  money  by  increafing  their 
capital  ftock  by  the  fum  of  .^2,000,000  ;  but  your  Petitioners  have  not  raifed  any 
money  in  exercife  of  the  powers  contained  in  the  faid  Aft. 

That  your  Petitioners  are  now  authorized  by  law  to  raife  money  in  England, 

upoa  Bonds,  to  the  amount  of  .^7,000,000  j  and  they  have  iflued  Bonds  to  the 

C33-)  X  amount 


82       CORRESPONDENCE  between  PRESIDENT  of  INDIA  BOARD,  ^c. 

amount  of  ^5,409,325.  and  are  at  liberty  to  iffue  further  Bonds  to  the  further 
amount  of  ,^1,590,675.  and  by  an  Ad  of  51  Geo.  III.  to  enable  the  Eafl;  India 
Company  to  raife  a  further  fum  of  money  upon  Bond,  inftead  of  increafing  their 
capital  ftock,  and  to  alter  and  amend  an  A£l  of  47  Geo.  III.  rekitive  thereto,  it  is 
provided,  that  when  your  Petitioners  fhall  have  railed,  under  and  by  virtue  of  the 
faid  Att  of  T^y  Geo.  III.  and  of  the  faid  Aft  of  47  Geo.  III.  and  of  that  Adt,  fuch 
fums  of  money  as  together  Ihould  amount  to  the  fum  of  ^4,000,000.  fterling  ; 
from  thenceforth  it  Ihould  not  be  lawful  for  your  Petitioners  to  raife  any  further 
fum  of  money  upon  Bond ;  and  all  money,  which  from  thenceforth  Ihould  be 
raifed  by  increafe  of  Capital  Stock,  under  and  by  virtue  of  the  faid  firft-mentioned 
Ad,  fhould  be  applied  in  difchargc  of  the  faid  Bond  Debt,  until  the  faid  Bond 
Debt  created  by  virtue  of  the  faid  AS.  of  47  Geo.  III.  or  of  that  Ad,  together  with 
the  money  to  be  raifed  by  increafe  of  Capital  as  aforefaid,  fhould  be  reduced  to 
the  fum  of  ^4,000,000.  flerling. 

That,  upon  an  eflimate  of  the  probable  receipts  and  payments  of  your  Petitioners 
in  England,  including,  amongfl  the  receipts  the  faid  fum  of  ^€"2, 294, 426,  fo  due 
from  the  Public  to  your  Petitioners,  as  herein-before  mentioned,  it  appears  that  it 
will  be  advantageous  and  neceflary  to  the  concerns  of  your  Petitioners,  that  they 
fhould  be  authorized  to  raife  the  fum  of  ^2,500,000  on  Loan,  in  a  ditFerent 
manner  from  that  in  which  they  may  now  raife  money,  for  the  purpofe  of  enabling 
them  to  difcharge  the  faid  Bills  of  Exchange,  to  the  amount  of  ^2,202,000, 
drawn  in  liquidation  of  the  Indian  Debt,  to  provide  for  their  other  current  pay- 
ments, and  to  enable  your  Petitioners,  as  circumftances  may  render  it  advifeable, 
to  reduce  the  amount  of  their  Bond  Debt,  without  increafing  their  Capital  Stock. 

Your  Petitioners  therefore  moft  humbly  pray,  that  this  Honourable  Houfe  will 
be  pleafed  to  dired  the  payment  of  the  faid  fum  of  ^2,294,426.  fo  due  by  the 
Public  to  your  Petitioners,  as  herein-before  is  mentioned,  and  to  grant  to  your 
Petitioners  fuch  relief,  in  the  premifes,  as  to  this  Honourable  Houfe  fhall  feera 
meet. 

And  your  Petitioners,  as  in  duty  bound,  will  ever  pray,  &c. 

It  was  then  moved,  and,  on  the  queflion, 
Refolved,  That  this  Court  approve  the  above  Petition. 

Drafts  of  Petitions  to  the  Honourable  Houfe  of  Commons,  for  leave  to  prefent 
the  above  Petitions,  were  alfo  read  and  approved. 

And  it  was,  on  a  motion, 
Refolved,  That  the  Company's  Seal  be  affixed  to  fair  tranfcrlpts  of  all  the  faid 
Petitions,  and  that  they  be  prefented  to  the  Honourable  Houfe  of  Commons 
accordingly. 

The  Court  then,  on  the  queflion^  adjourned. 


UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA   AT   LOS   ANGELES 

THE  UNIVERSITY  LIBRARY 
This  book  is  DUE  on  the  last  date  stamped  below 


®^^  3  1  1952 


KECE 


!  V  E  D 


m^       MAIN  1.0AI4  DESK 

A.**.  P.M. 

■  yifllQ[l<^|nil^|'t2lSl4l5l6 


to- It; 


r 


.<. 


iBBtW** 


Form  L-9-15m-2,'36 


UNIYERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA 

AT 

LOS  ANGELES 


in 


D    000  724  861 


f 


PLEA-t  DO   NOT    REMOVE 
THIS   BOOK  CARD    i 


1 

University  Research  Library 


8 
8 
* 

t 

a 

K 

a 
« 

e 
ft 
a 


;:mm^m'imm^^^m 


