the short-fall of war-related demand. The 1816-1817 after-war depression was accompa-
nied and magnified by the large postwar demobilization, implying a more than threefold
increase in the unemployment rate from 5 to 17 percent (Acworth 1925, Feinstein 1998).
Although numerous, public manifestations of economic and social discontent were ren-
dered illegal by a number of legislative actions that restrained civil rights heavily.


Moreover, the electoral system entailed an under-representation of the citizens most
affected–registered voters amounted to 1.5 percent of affluent in the total population.
This granted a large intersection between public creditors on the one hand, and members
of parliament and registered voters on the other hand (Johnston, 2013). Since deflation
increased the real value of debt to the advantage of creditors, political support for reim-
bursement of public debt at the pre-war gold content of the pound was strong.


The mistakenly perceived ease with which the resumption was undertaken in 1821, how-
ever, shaped British monetary orthodoxy and the global financial system for the century
to follow (Fetter, 1965). It also ushered in the gold standard’s second resumption after
WWI, an event that prolonged and aggravated the Great Depression (Kindleberger 1984,
Bernanke 1995, Eichengreen and Temin 2000).


The remainder of this article is organized as follows. The next section briefly describes
British war finance before the French Wars and lays out the logic of changes in the mone-
tary and fiscal policy framework as events unfolded. Section three presents the sequence
of regimes during the war and suspension years: here we draw on new hand-collected
data regarding the public short-term debt market and the Bank’s balance sheet. Section
four details the political and economic circumstances that shaped the exit strategy from
inflationary war-finance. A last section puts our findings into analytical and historical
perspective and concludes briefly.




2    Public Finance before the French Wars

By the beginning of the French Wars, Britain was equipped with formidable tools of fis-
cal and financial policy. These had been developed and honed under the pressure of the


                                             5
