2.3   The French Wars: Unprecedented Funding Needs

From 1793 to 1815, England mobilized in the French Wars all its resources, in collabo-
ration with allies on the continent, to thwart the French attempt at the domination of
Europe. At the onset, it was not clear that Britain would prevail and become the main
world power for the century to follow. As Knight (2013, pp. xxi-xxii) writes:


“Most people (excepting very few scholars) [..] do not realize how vulnerable Britain was
at this time. It was a world war in all but name [..], with ferocious fighting right to the
finish between two systems of government, each using every possible resource to overcome
the other. A British victory was finally achieved but only through radical efficiencies in
the nation’s economic and political life.”


Policy makers made decisions under uncertainty about future events. Expectations re-
garding possible future events defined the mix of monetary and fiscal policies used to
finance expenditures, i.e. a policy regime. Within a policy regime, decisions were af-
fected by the realizations of random events but a given regime also implied a consistency
constraint such that the regime itself did not change. Whenever the unfolding of events
made a regime inappropriate for policy response, the regime had to be replaced by a new
one (Daunton 2001, pp. 12-22). During the French Wars, two changes of regime took
place, in 1797 and in 1811. The transition after 1815 was a phase in itself that had been
anticipated before, with some uncertainty.


In the first phase, 1793-1797, fiscal and monetary policies were conducted as in the
previous three wars of the 18th century: tax smoothing through debt financing and con-
vertibility of the pound into gold at the Bank of England. The unprecedented level of
interest rates on public debt led to the second phase (1797-1811) with the suspension of
convertibility, the Bank’s real bills policy and, despite the war, a primary budget surplus.
For the final surge in expenditures (1812-1815), fiscal policy went back to deficit financ-
ing and the Bank purchased large amounts of government liabilities. During the last
phase after Waterloo, a large primary surplus and shifts in the Bank’s balance sheet led
to the resumption of the gold standard at the pre-war parity in 1821. In the following,
we track the sequence of these regimes.



                                             9
