                   Monetary and Fiscal Policy in England
                     during the French Wars (1793-1821) ∗

                          Pamfili Antipa †1 and Christophe Chamley ‡2

                     1
                         Banque de France and Paris School of Economics
                                        2
                                            Boston University


                                             October 2017



                                                Abstract

         The French Wars (1793-1815) exerted unprecedented pressures on Britain’s fiscal
         and monetary policy settings. Policy makers had to constantly adjust the policy
         mix as events unfolded. This meant implementing monetary and fiscal policy innova-
         tions, such as the suspension of the gold standard and the instauration of Britain’s
         first income tax. These adjustments signalled the government’s commitment to
         undertake the necessary to win the war, without jeopardizing fiscal sustainability.
         Drawing on new hand-collected data, we also show that the Bank of England played
         an essential role in two successive phases of the war. The Bank granted ample liq-
         uidity to the domestic payment system, by discounting large amounts of private
         bills. It also financed the decisive phase of the wars by purchasing large amounts of
   ∗
       The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect those of the
Banque de France. All remaining errors are ours. We are particularly thankful for comments by Vincent
Bignon, Forrest Capie, Rui Esteves, Pierre-Cyrille Hautcoeur, Sumner La Croix, Larry Neal, Galo
Nuno, Patrick O’Brien, Xavier Ragot, Albrecht Ritschl, Stefano Ugolini, and François Velde. We also
thank seminar and conference participants at Banco d’Espana, Banque de France, Economic History
Society, European Historical Economics Society, London School of Economics and Political Science,
Oesterreichische Nationalbank, University of Cambridge, University of Oxford, and Western Economic
Association International. Christophe Chamley thankfully acknowledges funding by Fondation Banque
de France.
   †
     pamfili.antipa@banque-france.fr
   ‡
     chamley@bu.edu


                                                   1
