Drawing on new hand-collected data, we also show that the Bank of England played an
essential role in the last and decisive phase of the wars by purchasing large amounts of
public debt. The variations in the Bank’s balance sheet affected asset prices and the
aggregate price level because they interacted with fiscal policy choices. In line with what
the proponents of the Real Bills doctrine claimed, prices evolved with the fiscal backing
of the Bank’s notes (Sargent 1982).


The Bank’s policy was set with the expectation of an exit strategy. After the war, the
government would redeem some of the short-term bills held by the Bank of England by
converting them into long-term bonds, backed by future tax revenues. The expansion
in the Bank’s balance sheet was backed by real assets. According to a Modigliani-Miller
argument (Wallace 1981), the expansion of balance sheets in this context should not have
a large impact on the price level. And yet, at its peak in 1813, the price level exceeded
its pre-suspension level by roughly 40 percent.


The Bank’s intervention took place in an environment where the convertibility of the
pound into gold had been suspended. The suspension of the gold standard was accom-
panied by debt accumulation and inflation. Not only was the return to the pound’s
pre-war gold content contingent on the outcome of the war, it would come at high de-
flationary costs. Resuming the gold standard was an uncertain prospect, as was the
reversion of the fiscal and monetary expansion that had financed the French Wars (Ac-
worth 1925, Kindleberger 1982). This uncertainty affected the behavior of prices (Antipa
2016).


The government’s exit strategy was helped by the fact that military expenditures–
accounting for 2/3 of Britain’s budget–collapsed from 20 to 5 percent of GDP, bringing
about important primary surpluses. Sizable funding operations converting short-term
bills into long-term bonds were undertaken in 1815, 1818, and 1820. Interest rate reduc-
tions for long-term debt, i.e. the widespread use of contingent debt, further rendered
public finances more sustainable.


No measures were taken to alleviate the economic and social difficulties that came with


                                            4
