2.2       The Lull before the French Wars in 1783-1793

After the Treaty of Paris (1783), the public debt had reached 150 percent of GDP. A
Sinking Fund of about £1 million per year was reinstated by Prime Minister Pitt to repay
the debt. When that Sinking Fund was preserved during the war years of fiscal deficit,
it was not an accounting gimmick. It provided an additional signal of the government’s
commitment to long-run fiscal sustainability.3 Such a commitment would be especially
important during the suspension of the convertibility of the pound when market expecta-
tions about the resumption of convertibility would depend on the prospects for long-run
fiscal balance (Antipa 2016, Sargent 1982). Even in contemporary economies, separate
accounts have been used to reinforce future commitments, such as the separate tax for
social security in the US.


The Sinking Fund redeemed every year on average the equivalent of 42 percent of long-
term debt created (Figure 13 in the appendix). By the end of the French Wars, the
Sinking Fund had redeemed the equivalent of 26% of debt created. The Fund’s interven-
tions in the long-term debt market may also have contributed to stabilize prices.


During the decade after the Treaty of Paris in 1783, the rate of interest decreased grad-
ually, as one would expect in peace time. What may be more interesting was the fall of
the premium of the 4 percent annuity over the 3 percent. Recall that this premium is
the present value of the payments of the additional coupon of the 4 percent over the 3
percent, namely one pound, as long as the 4 percent is not redeemed. Following previous
experience in the 18th century, this redemption would take place either slowly through
budget surpluses (the Sinking Fund), or in one swoop as in 1749, for the entire stock of
the 4 perncet annuities (Chamley 2011). In either case, a reduction of the premium is a
strong indication that the market expects interest rates to decline in the future and to
the peace time level of 3 percent.


At the beginning of 1784, the price of the 4 percent was nearly 4/3 of the 3 percent. A
lowering of the long-term interest rate back to 3 percent was too far to be seen. In the
   3
       Gladstone criticized, in 1854, the practice of “continually buying up stock at 3, 4, or 5 per cent
below the rate at which you were simultaneously creating stock in order to find the money to make the
purchase” (Silberling 1924).


                                                     7
