There is no neat way to distinguish monetary policy from debt management, the province
of the Federal Reserve from that of the Treasury. Both agencies are engaged in debt
management in the broadest sense, and both have powers to influence the whole spectrum
of debt.” (James Tobin)




1    Introduction

The French Wars (1793-1815) exerted unprecedented pressures on Britain’s fiscal and
monetary policy regime. As such, the wars offer a unique case study regarding the inter-
actions between fiscal and monetary policies. Their outcome also shaped the political,
monetary, and financial landscape for the century to come. We therefore ask how Britain
financed and won a world war against all odds, emphasizing duly the role played by the
Bank of England. As the 22 years of almost uninterrupted warfare induced public debt
accumulation and inflation, we also examine the exit strategy from inflationary war fi-
nance.


Our findings are relevant for the euro area where the euro plays a role that is analogous
to the specie of former times and where the European Central Bank is the principal actor
of crisis management, in the absence of a supranational fiscal authority (Reis 2014). We
also inform the policy choice between maintaining a fixed exchange rate and restructur-
ing an outstanding debt overhang, as under discussion in certain member countries of
the euro area. Finally, we contribute to the analytical debate that is concerned with
the conditions under which the variations of a central bank’s balance sheet affect prices
(Chamley and Polemarchakis 1984).


Policy makers were able to effectively adjust the monetary and fiscal policy mix as events
unfolded. During the French Wars, two regime changes took place in 1797 and 1811 and
consisted in implementing monetary and fiscal policy innovations. After war finance had
taken its usual form–tax smoothing through debt financing–the second phase of the war
(1797-1810) meant the suspension of the gold standard, a Real Bills policy of the Bank
of England, and the instauration of Britain’s first and successful income tax. For the
final push (1811-1815), fiscal policy went back to deficit financing.


                                             3
