As soon as Britain went to war in 1793, the already usual practice of advancing funds
for Exchequer bills without specific Parliamentary authorization or funding was officially
legalized (a practice not in compliance with the Bank’s Foundation Act). The possibility
of applying directly to the Bank for funding was amply used by successive Chancellors
of the Exchequer, whenever unforeseen expenditures arose and it was not possible to sell
bills in the market at a premium.


In the winter of 1797, the tension between the Bank and the Government increased. In
February, a run started on some country banks amid rumors of French invasion. On
Saturday, February 25, the 3 percent was down to 50 1/4. The next day a crisis meeting
took place with the Governors and Pitt. The Bank claimed that it had lost nearly a
million in specie during the past week, leaving it with £1.3 million in cash and bullion,
for a circulation of approximately £10 million.10


The suspension of convertibility was decided and announced the next day as a tempo-
rary measure. The policy had immediate effects. The 3 percent jumped from 50 1/2 to
52 1/2 (Figure 4). More importantly, according to Clapham (1944, Vol.1, p.272), the
Bank’s metallic reserve began to improve almost at once. All over Britain, bankers and
merchants declared that they would support public credit by accepting the Bank’s notes
in their transactions. Britain’s business community made sure that the transition from
convertible to inconvertible paper money was relatively smooth (Coppieters 1955, p.37,
Shin 2015).


The events in February 1797 can be characterized as a standard bank run that was
stopped by the suspension of convertibility. “About the beginning of May the fear of is-
suing specie, which the stoppage of the Bank had occasioned, began to subside” (Grellier
1810, p.413). The Bank following its own interest, wanted to resume convertibility, but
Pitt opposed resumption of the gold standard. The tensions of the previous year had
shown that, in the credit conditions of the time, convertibility had created additional
difficulties for the financing of the war. Another crisis would have entailed another sus-
  10
       At that time, the Bank did not target a particular coverage ratio. Governors of the Bank declared
that depending on economic and political circumstances the same amount of bullion granted the Bank
more or less security in its interactions with the public (Clapham 1944).



                                                    17
