The price of a 4 percent redeemable bond, is the sum of a 3 percent bond and a bond
that pays one pound per year until a maturity that is random and related to the end of
the war. A longer war lowers the price of the 3 percent bond and increased the number
of years during which the additional coupon of one would be paid. If the impact of the
higher interest rate on discounting is not too large, the longer maturity had a positive
effect on component with a random maturity. One should expect that the variance of
the 4 percent bond price is lower than that of the 3 percent bond. The next table shows
that the variance of the 4 percent price was indeed lower, but the effect is not very large.



              Table 1: Descriptive Statistics of Annuity Prices, 1793-1821

                                              Consols (3%)     4% annuities

               Mean                                64.3            80.7
               Standard Deviation /Mean            0.11            0.10
               Maximum                             83.8            101.8
               Minimum                             47.4            58.1
               Observations                        7606            6420



The arguments on the variances of the prices and the shift of interest payments to the
future must have been discussed at the time since Grellier (1812) mentions them.


The gains from the end of the war (assuming victory) are distributed differently when
the loans are in consols at 3 percent or redeemable annuities at 4 percent or 5 percent.
In the first case, the end of the war brings a capital gain and the beneficiaries are the
bond holders. For the second case, we have to consider only the difference between
holding redeemable annuities and consols. The end of the war eventually terminates the
difference in coupons. The beneficiary is the tax payer.


There are other arguments that would be in favor of high coupons bonds and these may
not appear in the literature of the time. The first is that a high coupon bond generates
an incentive for “good behavior”, both in terms of taxation and expenditures. Such a
behavior generates a faster return to lower interest rates. By redeeming the high coupon

                                            14
