bonds with a long-term maturity in 1758-63, redeemable bonds at 3, 4 and 5 percent and
short-term debt in for the American War. At the beginning of the French wars, the type
of new bonds was heatedly discussed. Pitt preferred the bonds with the high coupons
but could not get his way. For the bonds issued in 1793, Grellier (1810, p. 371) reports:


“It was originally intended to have raised the loan on 4 or 5 percent stock; but, the
embarrassed state of commercial credit having caused a scarcity of cash, the minister
received offers from one set of subscribers only; and, as they preferred 3 percent, it was
judged expedient to conclude the bargain in that stock, on the above terms, which were
between 4 percent and 5 percent under the market-price. The minister [Pitt] admitted
that the terms of the loan were much more disadvantageous than might have been ex-
pected; but that, having done every thing in his power to excite a competition among
the moneyed men without effect, they were the best he could procure."


Discussions on the types of financial instruments went on. Regarding the 1796 loan,
Grellier (1810, p. 388) reports: “The terms of this loan excited considerable discussion;
and it appears evident from them, that Mr. Pitt, who had formerly strongly reprobated
borrowing in the 3 percent had now changed his opinion.”


The choices of financial instruments for war financing face at least four issues, some of
which already discussed at the time. First, in deciding the coupon rate of redeemable
bonds, it has to be recalled that the peace time interest rate, since the 1730s, had been
around 3 percent. A wholesale reduction of the interest rate on these bonds was very
unlikely. The attempt at reducing the interest of 4 percent bonds in 1736 had been a
failure. The same type of operation had been a success in 1749-50 because of particular
circumstances: a very high debt, both old and new, at 4 percent and the availability
of a market for the 3 percent bonds (Chamley 2011). For the Seven Years war, the
government did not see the conditions for another success and issued non redeemable
bonds of a long maturity. The 3 percent would eventually be reduced to 2.5 percent in
1888,5 after almost a century of low interest rates. For practicality, one can assume that
the 3 percent was non redeemable.6
  5
      Harley 1976.
  6
      Bonds can be recalled through budget surpluses, but recalls affect first bonds with higher coupons



                                                   12
