3.2   The Second Regime (1797-1811): Suspension of Convertibility and
      Tax Push

Fiscal Policy
For about two years after the suspension of the convertibility of the pound, war finances
continued to rely mainly on borrowing with tax smoothing (Figure 3). However, after
six years of warfare against Revolutionary France, the national debt had more than dou-
bled causing doubts regarding the stability of public finances. With a consol price of 50,
the long-term interest reached at 6 percent its highest level since the early 18th century
(Figure 5).


In these circumstances, Pitt was able to introduce Britain’s first income tax (Daunton
2001, O’Brien 1988). The new tax was met with opposition but it proved very produc-
tive. In the peak years of the war (1808-1815), the tax raised about the same amount as
customs, 18 percent of total revenues. For the rest of the French Wars, Britain abandoned
the tax smoothing policy that it had followed for the previous century. The introduction
of the income tax was complemented by rate hikes on a number of already existing taxes.


Britain had a primary surplus of 2.9 percent of GDP on average during the years 1803-
1813. Only during two years of the final surge (1814-1815) the surplus became a deficit
(Figure 3). Of course, over the whole period the primary surplus was not sufficient to
service the debt that had been accumulated over the previous century, including the first
part of the French Wars. Hence, the government was forced to continue to borrow in
each year of the war.


The efforts in terms of taxation helped the credibility of public finances. The streamlining
of the kingdom’s administration further enhanced the public sentiment that everybody
in the Nation was contributing to the war effort (Knight, 2013). Despite a substantial
increase in the government’s tasks, charges for the civil government remained broadly
stable over the war years. As can be seen in Figure 5, after the suspension of convert-
ibility and for the rest of the war, the interest rate on consols never reached the level of
the first regime again. This was due to both the fiscal restraint and to the policy of the
Bank of England to which we now turn.



                                            19
