and 1810.26 In 1819, long-term debt creation originated solely in the conversion of short
into long-term debt. For the “surge” years, funding operations accounted for 24 percent
of long-term debt creation.27


While ex ante parliamentary authorization and ear-marked taxes were necessary for issu-
ing standard long-term debt, parliament only intervened to ex post sanction the creation
of long-term debt through funding operations. If bills were converted into four or five
percent denominations of bonds during war-time, they also became convertible into three
percent consols when peace was concluded. Since these conversions potentially reduced
the Government’s interest costs, they were never opposed in Parliament.


Operations were engineered to cancel short-term debt whenever prices depreciated be-
cause of over-abundant issues. Hand-collected daily prices for Exchequer bills display
clearly that beginning in 1808/1810 Exchequer bills are quasi-systematically priced at
a premium (Figure 9). This jump in prices coincides with an increase in the frequency
and size of funding operations and the Bank’s rising holdings of Exchequer bills.


Funding operations were similar to interest reductions of long-term bonds at 4 or 5%.
Holders of convertible bills decided freely whether or not to to accept the conversion of
the bills into long-term bonds. The Bank stood ready to cash the bills of those holders
not willing to convert. Depending on proposed conditions and current market prices,
funding operations were more or less successful along two dimensions. For example, in
1815, out of the total of £18 m of fundable Exchequer bills only £10 were funded and
created an outstanding debt of £12 m.


For the success of such operations, it was important to keep bill prices up. High market
prices made sure that the market value of debt came close to the amount of outstanding
debt the tax payer would eventually have to cover. In particular, for £1 of long-term
debt created through a conversion, the public could dispose of £0.9. This ratio was of 0.7
  26
       We only consider funding operations in Exchequer bills. A total of £19 m Navy, Transport, and
Victualing bills were funded in 1794, 1795, and 1796. Afterwards, funding operations only concerned
Exchequer bills.
  27
     Report by the Secretary and Comptroller General of the Proceedings of the Commissioners for the
Reduction of the National Debt, 1891.


                                                  28
