in Figure 6. The demand for the Bank’s own discounting declined, whenever companies
were able to easily discount with private banks.22 23


Finally, the functional importance of the Bank’s funding can hardly be overstated. Bills
financed by the Bank covered charges not foreseen by the budget. They were also used to
pay the dividends on long term debt and to sustain the British and Irish Sinking funds.24
The former was instrumental in accomplishing the decisive war effort, the latter were
essential for the credibility of Britain’s public finances. The Bank’s funding can therefore
be understood as the ultimate backstop that kept British public finances sustainable.25


       Refinancing Long-term
In the context of war emergencies, short-term debt accumulated. Short-term debt was
used as an instrument for temporary financing. When outstanding bills accumulated,
they could not be repaid by a budget surplus and had to be refinanced by long-term
bonds, perpetuals in the case of Britain. Short-term debt was not necessarily backed
by specific taxes and carried a higher interest charge than perpetuals–coupons were of
5.3 percent for the former against 3 percent for the latter. Perpetuals were serviced
by specific ear-marked taxes, voted by the Parliament. Refinancing through perpetuals
therefore meant that the short-term was also, implicitly, backed by the future taxes.


The anticipation of refinancing was essential for the perception that the Bank’s govern-
ment debt holdings were not seignorage and should therefore not be inflationary. At the
time, long-term refinancing was called funding and, because of the exceptional accumu-
lation of short-term debt, funding operations had to take place well before the end of the
war. They became the rule when the war intensified after 1808. Operations accounted
sometimes for as much as 40 percent of yearly long-term debt creation, as in 1796, 1809,
  22
       Effectively, the Bank did not compete with London banks for the business of discounting private
assets–Bank rate stayed at the legal maximum of 5 percent between 1797 and 1822 (Clapham, 1944).
  23
     Report from the Secret Committee on the Expediency of the Bank Resuming Cash Payments, 1819;
testimony of George Dorrien.
  24
     The Report from the Secret Committee on the Expediency of the Bank Resuming Cash Payments
in 1819 contains transcripts of the request for funding that also stated the purpose of funding.
  25
     For this system to perform efficiently, the value of the Bank’s notes had to safeguarded. Legal
restrictions imposed their acceptance for any sort of debt at face value (Lord Stanhope’s Act or 51 Geo.
III, c. 127.)


                                                   27
