of their real counterpart. Inflation was first contained by price controls enforced by the
Terror. It jumped to a high level after the fall of Robespierre.


The experience of the assignats remained on the mind of policy makers and economists
in England. However, the policy context was very different. Taxes had not collapsed but
they were increased to generate a primary surplus and the Bank’s notes in this phase of
the wars were not the result of direct lending to the government.


Prices only increased towards the end of the real-bills phase when fiscal prospects de-
teriorated (see discussion below). The evolutions in inflation led to many discussions
by policy makers and economists, and triggered the Bullion Committee and Report in
1810/11. According to David Ricardo (1817) and advocates of the bullionist position, it
was the issue of Bank notes that primarily affected prices, although the Bullion Report
itself did acknowledge that other than monetary factors might have influenced prices
(Fetter 1942).



3.3       The Third Regime (1812-1815): The “Surge”

The years 1809/10 proved disastrous for the British in military terms.13 While these
events took their toll on public finances, there was little scope for more tax revenues.
Although the exact limits of taxable capacity were difficult to establish, the feeling was
widespread that those limits had already been over-passed (Acworth 1925).14 However,
Napoleon’s defeat in Russia and Prussia’s and the coalition’s re-involvement in the war
changed Britain’s situation completely and prompted a “surge” 15 for this last and deci-
sive phase of the French Wars.


On the fiscal side, the primary budget surplus was reduced to zero. On the monetary
side, the Bank which had made a substitution from private to public securities in the
years 1810-1812, contributed to the surge from 1813 to June 1815 by expanding its notes
  13
       In July, the Fifth Coalition–the Austrian- and British-led alliance against France–was defeated at
the battle of Wagram. By the end of the year, the French imposed control in most of the Iberian
Peninsula.
  14
     See also Lord Grey’s speech on the state of the Nation, 13 June 1810.
  15
     The expression is taken from a more recent war.


                                                    23
