mobilize resources on an unprecedented scale. The system’s backbone consisted in the
country’s effective fiscal capacity: overall, 60 percent of the extra cost incurred by the
wars would be covered by tax revenues (Brewer 1988, O’Brien 1988).


As events unfolded during the 22 years of warfare, policy makers were able to effec-
tively adjust the monetary and fiscal policy mix. Major monetary and fiscal policy
innovations–the suspension of the gold standard and the instauration of Britain’s first
income tax–were implemented, whenever necessary in the costly pursuit of warfare. Pol-
icy regimes changed to grant their consistency given the realizations of random events.
This signaled the government’s commitment to undertake to necessary to win the war,
without jeopardizing fiscal sustainability.


In particular, after war-finance had taken its usual form–tax smoothing through debt
financing–the first regime change in 1797 meant the suspension of the gold standard, a
Real Bills policy of the Bank of England, and primary surpluses thanks to the income
tax. For the final and decisive surge in expenditures (1812-1815), fiscal policy went back
to deficit financing and the Bank purchased government liabilities on a large scale.


During this second war-time regime, the Bank’s balance sheet increased substantially,
but its composition may have mattered more than its growth. To resume the gold stan-
dard, the Bank needed to restore a balance sheet that was similar to the one before the
suspension. As the counterpart to note circulation were the Bank’s holdings of public
securities, the success of resuming the gold standard hinged on the Treasury’s will to
reimburse the Bank.


The successful return to convertibility and the pre-war price level came in 1821. The
Bank did not bring down its circulation to the 1797 level to resume the gold standard.
It had, however, been reimbursed the larger part of government short-term debt held on
its balance sheet. In line with what proponents of the Real Bills doctrine pointed out,
prices evolved with the fiscal backing of the Bank’s notes.


The exit from inflationary war finance and debt accumulation also consisted in convert-
ing short-term bills into long-term bonds and then in reducing the interest rate on the


                                              37
