tional merchants accumulated with each other (Neal 1990, p. 5f).


These important commercial and financial networks and instruments were essential for
British war finance. The Exchequer purchased bills of exchange from London merchants,
drawn on their foreign correspondents. British military officials used these bills abroad
to hire troops and purchase supplies. Continental merchant readily accepted the bills,
as they could in turn be used to pay for British imports. Napoleon sought to undermine
British war finance and the acceptance of bills of exchange by making it difficult to im-
port British goods (Neal 1990, pp. 201ff).


The price of bills of exchange therefore reflected political and military events that, among
other things, affected British export markets on the Continent. The price of bills also
incorporated contemporaries’ expectations, as we consider the 2.5 months usance rate on
Hamburg–the only series available for the entire period of the French Wars. As shown in
Figure 11, the exchange rate fluctuated around 34 schillings (Flemish banco) per pound
until the end of 1808. The poor harvests in 1800/01 did, for example, not affect the
exchange rate durably. Afterwards, the pound devalued progressively in line with im-
portant expenditures in the Peninsular War and the continued war-related expenditures
and subsidies to Britain’s allies elsewhere on the Continent (Silberling 1924).


The agio in Figure 11, was computed as the difference between the pound’s official ex-
change rate into gold–the mint price–and its market exchange or spot rate. The mint
price carried the promise that pounds would be exchanged against gold at the pre-war
parity at some unknown moment in the future, conditional on the conclusion of a definite
peace treaty. Differences between the two reflected a discount factor that differentiated
the value of a paper pound at time t from its expected gold content in the future. The
discount factor captured how risky and, by extension, how credible the promise of re-
suming the gold standard at its pre-war parity was in the eyes of contemporaries (Antipa
2016).


For the years when the pound was discounted in London while not sustained by the
convertibility in the Bank of England, there was a remarkable concordance between the
two prices. As for the exchange rate, the agio increased substantially beginning in 1809,


                                             35
