p.351).


The intense debates prefigured those after World War I, in which Keynes took a famous
position. On one side, the Birmingham School of currency reformers, including Thomas
Atwood, considered that the deflation caused by the return to the old parity was the
cause of England’s economic difficulties and of the successive crises, which shook its so-
cial and political structure at that time (Atwood 1816). Thus, they advocated paper
money–or at least a reduction in the metallic content of the pound–and an important
increase in the Bank’s note circulation (Checkland 1948, Fetter 1965). Contemporaries
indeed considered the possibility of never resuming cash payments, as uttered by Bank
proprietors when the suspension of convertibility was reiterated for the first time after
hostilities had ceased in the spring of 1816 (London Times 13 April 1816).


David Ricardo and many contemporaries, on the other hand, posited that a reduction
of the note circulation was necessary to return to the pre-war parity. Figure 10 presents
the evolution of the Bank’s note circulation and prices. Between 1797 and 1810, prices
did not increase nearly as much as notes in circulation and some of this growth may have
been caused by real shocks. In particular, prices in the agricultural sector, which was in
this early stage of the industrial revolution the main part of production, were subject to
sudden spikes after poor crops, as for example in 1800-1801.32 These variations had an
impact on the prices in other sectors of the economy, as manifest in the high correlation
between agricultural, services and aggregate price indices, shown in Table 6. Prices in-
creases could also have been triggered by war shortages.


The low level of prices compared to the amount of Bank notes outstanding reflects the
Real Bills effect well. The Bank’s notes were the counterpart to real assets, the goods and
services produced in the private sector or the taxes collected by the government. Prices
only increased permanently when fiscal prospects and therefore the notes’ backing de-
teriorated as war-related spending increased after 1808.33 In addition, the decrease in
prices gained momentum with the end of war-related expenditures and well before note
  32
       Henry Thornton, member of the Bullion Committee and driving force behind the report’s theoretical
analysis, argued that the 1801-02 price spike was caused by real disturbances (Thornton 1802, pp.214ff.)
  33
     Hansard HC Deb 7 May 1811 vol. 19 cc927.



                                                    32
