       Table 6: Correlations between Agricultural and Other Price Indices, 1790-1830
                                  Agriculture     Industry     Services    GDP deflator

                Agriculture             1            0.58        0.87           0.94
                Industry                -             1          0.47           0.77
                Services                -                -         1            0.90
                GDP deflator            -                -         -              1



bances by introducing the so-called Six Acts. The acts were aimed at censoring radical
newspapers, preventing large meetings, and reducing what the government saw as the
possibility of armed insurrection. Crafts (1998), characterizes the period between the
French Revolution and the late 1820 as one of severe repression.


The franchise had not yet been extended and the electoral system provided no repre-
sentation of the citizens of low income who were most affected. The right to vote in
Parliamentary elections or to become a member of parliament was linked to property
rights. Only the affluent qualified and registered voters over the period under consider-
ation amounted to 1.5 percent of the total population.


Denominations of public debt certificates were large enough to guarantee a large inter-
section between creditors of public debt on the one hand, and members of parliament
and registered voters on the other hand (Johnston 2013).35 Since deflation increased
the real value of debt to the advantage of creditors, support for reimbursement of public
debt at the old par was strong amongst registered voters and members of parliament.


There were, however, doubts in the market regarding the resumption of the convertibil-
ity. These expectations can be measured by two prices, the external exchange rate of
the pound and its internal exchange rate into gold, the agio. The external exchange rate
was based on the price for bills of exchange. The latter were payment instruments that
circumvented bullion shipments by taking advantage of offsetting balances that interna-
  35
       Consols and Exchequer bills were not issued for sums under £100. In 1819, yearly average salaries
ranged from £39 for farm laborers to £219 for highly paid government officials (Lindert and Williamson
1983)


                                                    34
