Sergei Antonov, Bankrupts and Usurers (2016), Introduction pp.28ff, selected excerpt from downloads/pages/05a0209a543e.md.
URL https://ebin.pub/bankrupts-and-usurers-of-imperial-russia-debt-property-and-the-law-in-the-age-of-dostoevsky-and-tolstoy-9780674972599.html

The second major set of policies designed to shape imperial Russia’s credit relations established a succession of government-owned banks
offering much cheaper loans than the private market. The first such bank appeared in 1754 as a way to assist and in effect bribe the
serfowning nobility. It was of limited effectiveness because most of its sums were issued to a small group of courtiers close to Peter
Shuvalov, Elizabeth’s favorite. The volume of the bank’s business remained small into the early nineteenth century.90 Under Catherine II,
financial support for the gentry was placed on a firmer basis when several institutions were established that provided cash loans secured by
serf “souls” at the low legally sanctioned five or six percent annual rate. The most important ones were the Moscow and St. Petersburg
Orphan­ ages; by the mid-nineteenth century, they accounted for about ninety percent of all government loans to the nobility. Each of them
ran a “Safekeeping Treasury” (Sokhrannaya kazna) through its Board of Trustees (Opekunskii Sovet).91 Board loans issued from 1775 onward
were originally limited to 5,000 rubles (admittedly, a hefty sum for all but the wealthiest nobles) and payable within five years, which
ensured the Boards’ solvency and prevented the highest aristocracy from leaching their funds. In the first half of the nineteenth century,
the loan terms were gradually liberalized: the repayment term was extended to twelve years in 1819, to twenty-four years in 1824, and
finally to twenty-six and thirty-seven years in 1830.92 Unpopulated lands and houses could also be mortgaged for smaller sums. State-run
credit institutions reached their apogee during the reign of Nicholas I (1825–1855), when they started to accept unlimited deposits, which
paid a generous four percent interest rate that could be compounded. Max­ imum loan amounts were greatly increased from the original 10
rubles per serf “soul” to 150–200 rubles, depending on the value of the estate. Table 0.3 lists the total amounts of serf-secured mortgages
issued by the Moscow Board of Trustees in the 1850s, before such loans were discontinued in 1859. In terms of overall loan portfolios, in
1855 the Moscow Board held loans worth 192.2 million rubles, accounting for nearly half of the government’s credit operations. St.
Petersburg Board loans were worth 133.4 million, and the Loan Bank in St. Petersburg that serviced the highest court aristocracy held
another 30.1 million. All the provincial Offices of Public Welfare held loans worth 42.4 million. By 1859, when a banking crisis induced the
Introduction 29 Table 0.3 Moscow Board of Trustees Loans to Serfowners, in Silver Rubles Year 1852 1854 1856 1858 Amount 14,566,216.64
9,716,892 8,597,904 16,719,290 Data sources: TsIAM 424.1.2081 (1852), 2083 (1854), 2085 (1856), and 2087 (1858). government to stop making
these loans, the accumulated gentry debt amounted to 425.5 million rubles, secured by sixty-six percent of all privately owned serfs. (The
total amount for 1855 was 398.2 million.)93 The average loan amounts issued annually are difficult to estimate, but the average annual
increase of gentry debt to the state in 1823–1859 was 9.3 million rubles.94 This average increase was smaller than the new loan numbers for
the 1850s for the Moscow Board alone, suggesting that gentry borrowing did not taper off once most of the eligible serfs had been mortgaged
but rather that it continued until the 1859 closure of government banks, with serfowners paying off some of their loans and then
remortgaging their estates. The financial success of the government banks was enhanced by their ­privileged legal status. Their loans had
priority over all other debts and obligations. Even when a loan was not in delinquency, the Board retained considerable control over the
mortgaged property. Borrowers were required to mortgage entire estates with resale value as opposed to a few serfs at a time. Police and the
courts could not enforce any acts with respect to mortgaged property without the Board’s approval, including moving peasants to another
estate. If a delinquent estate was sold, and there were fewer serfs or less land than originally declared, the Board collected the
difference from the borrower, and if he was insolvent, from the officials and government institutions that had permitted the situation to
occur. It was virtually impossible to take the Board to court or dispute its proceedings.95 Success was also ensured by efficient
administration. Nineteenth-century government banks were very strict about requiring regular payments, even if they could allow a
“remortgage”—that is, issue a new loan secured by that portion of an estate that was “cleared” through repayment. Moreover, instead of
selling delinquent properties, state banks preferred to inventory the estates, appoint a trustee, and collect the income until the debt was
paid.96 For example, in Simbirsk province, in 1856, out of 800 mortgaged estates, 33 were inventoried, 14 actually seized from their owners,
and only 1 sold; in 1860, out of 897 mortgaged estates, 119 were inventoried, 109 taken over, and 2 sold.97 30 Introduction In Riazan
province in 1857, out of 2,554 mortgaged estates, 194 were inventoried, taken over, or sold.98 These statistics do not indicate how many of
the mortgaged estates were actually delinquent. No doubt landowners with appropriate connections could influence the Board to fudge the
rules, but for typical landowners, all evidence points otherwise. Moreover, it appears that the small numbers of auction sales were due not
to any difficulty of collection but to the difficulty of finding buyers for bankrupt properties. As discussed below, at least the Moscow
Board of Trustees turned a healthy profit on its mortgage loans. A public sale was a last-resort measure, which explains its rare
occurrence. Court cases illustrate the circumstances that resulted in a sale by the Board. The estate of Collegiate Secretary Petr
Zubov—approximately 3,000 serfs in Arzamas and Makariev Counties of Nizhnii Novgorod province— had been in extreme financial disarray for
several generations, yet the Board was content for many years with appointing a trustee but keeping Zubov as the legal owner.99 Andrei
Chikhachev, a middling landowner from Vladimir province, wrote an article for the Agricultural Gazette lamenting the indebtedness of
provincial serfowners, noting that estates were being taken under trusteeship, but did not mention any actual sales at auction. Aleksei
Galakhov in his memoirs recalled the panic experienced by indebted provincial landowners when reading their weekly mail, although he also
noted that most of them managed to negotiate with the government or find private loans to keep their estates.100 Thus, by the middle of the
nineteenth century, the government banks— the four largest ones being the Loan Bank, the Commercial Bank, and the St. Petersburg and Moscow
Boards—accumulated nearly 1 billion rubles in deposits—an astronomical amount at the time, enough to fill the empire’s budget for several
years.101 As Soviet historian Iosif Gindin has suggested, these funds could have been used more productively to finance the development of
Russia’s economy. Instead, the larger portion of the amount was used to cover budget deficits, and a relatively small proportion was
invested in additional loans to serfowning nobles. But Gindin did not want to exaggerate the claim of Russia’s lagging behind: whereas large
joint stock depository banks appeared in the United States and Britain in the 1830s, in France, Austria, Germany, and Italy such banks began
to appear only in the late 1840s and early 1850s—that is, approximately ten years before they appeared in Russia.102 Ivan Pushechnikov, a
conservative landowner and memoirist from Oryol province, thought the Board of Trustees had been “a most beneficent Introduction 31 mediator
between depositors and borrowers,” in addition to carrying out its philanthropic work.103 This is in contrast to the late-imperial and
Soviet Marxist view that the government’s policies in effect enserfed capital and that the banks were essentially “feudal” institutions.104
It is true that the mortgage banks mostly assisted the nobility, but it is not at all clear why we should consider as deviant or backward
the fact that elites enjoyed financial and other economic benefits. For the majority of Russia’s property-owning classes, who owned
relatively few serfs or none at all, the state banks could not be of much help.105 However, the benefits that they provided extended much
further than other historians have acknowledged: indeed, the very distinction between government and private lending was not completely
clear-cut. The funds loaned to serfowners were often then transferred into the network of private credit by being reissued to other
individuals at higher interest rates. Even more interestingly, some serfowners deposited their loans back in the same government banks at
four percent interest and then used their deposit receipts— which circulated like cash—to issue private loans and collect additional
interest.106 Moreover, the Commercial Bank, despite its reluctance to make risky loans to entrepreneurs, did support economic development by
purchasing ­commercial debt documents and thereby supporting the system of commercial credit. In 1859, the state banking system was shut
down. Technically, this happened because after the Crimean War there was too much cash in circulation without enough potential borrowers;
servicing the swelling volume of deposits became expensive, inducing the state to reduce the interest rate. This led to a run on the banks
and to their financial collapse, as recounted by Stephen Hoch.107 Memoirists remembered the event with bitterness. Pushechnikov thought it
was “not only a reckless affair, but a blasphemous one, and even the most ardent enemy of Russia would not dare to commit such barbarity.”
In his view, the government held such valuable collateral that it could easily borrow money in Europe to deal with the crisis.108 It was
also hinted that the bank fiasco was a subtle way to wrestle serfowners into acquiescing to the impending emancipation.109 As Seymour Becker
has noted, government-issued mortgage banks for the nobility were successfully revived toward the end of the nineteenth century, even though
they made far riskier investments.110 Government banks were established to make private credit cheaper for privileged property owners,
especially serfowners but also merchants. The 32 Introduction banks were also unique sites where public and private credit and finances
intersected—although this aspect of their activity is still poorly understood. Despite all of their unprecedented authority to collect their
debt and discipline their debtors, largely in circumvention of the court system, the banks and government policy in general left a
surprising amount of decision-making to private individuals. For instance, there were no restrictions on what the borrower could do with the
money borrowed from a government bank. Compared to the state-run credit system, private lending was even less restrictive; most importantly,
there were no requirements, such as licensing or registration, on who could act as a lender, making the world of “usurers” a financial free-
for-all. Part I T h e C u lt u r e of Deb t Figure 1.1. V. G. Astrakhov, At the Market. Playing Checkers (1857) Source: State Historical
Museum (Moscow) chapt e r 1 Usurers’ Tales She was a tiny shriveled old thing, around sixty, with sharp and mean little eyes, with a small
