n such a system of moderation and forbearance as should make it difficult for the enemy to find a suitable occasion for the rupture. And I really believe, that, if we had abstained from that insulting and imperious conduct, and from those outrages and disgraceful acts which were. the forerunners of the declaration of war, if we had conducted ourselves with the moderation due to a brave and honourable, but unfortunate nation, the war might at least have been deferred:—The French and the Spanish governments might then have doubted, whether the Spanish nation, afflicted as it had been, and still was, by the hand of Providence, labouring as it still was under the dreadful calamities of that pestilential disease which has committed such ravages in that unfortunate country, and of scarcity amounting almost to famine, I say, sir, the government of France and of Spain might have doubted, whether under these circumstances the Spanish nation would have submitted to having the additional calamity of war wantonly forced upon them, without any aggression from us, or any possibility for their government to justify the measure as necessary for the preservation either of their interests or their honour. Thus, by pursuing a judicious and moderate conduct, we should have had good reason to hope that the period of a rupture with Spain would at least have been deferred; and his majesty's ministers, who contend (whether justly or not is immaterial to this view of the subject) that both our navy and army are in a state of progressive encrease, must surely admit, that, situated as we were, delay was advantageous. But even supposing 655 the war could not have been either avoided or postponed; even supposing that nothing could have prevented France from making use of the ports, the arsenals, and the ships of Spain; yet there is one most powerful element of war, which, without the aid of his majesty's ministers, France could not have obtained, I mean the hearts of the people. Force might have added another nation lo the list of cur enemies, but it would have been an unwilling enemy, breathing more hostility against France who had driven them into the war, than against us who had done them no injury and offered them no insult: whereas now, if there remains a single spark of Castilian honour and pride in their breasts, they must burn with the desire of revenging the insults and outrages which on our part preceded the declaration of war. And, sir, I think it will scarcely be urged that this difference in the feelings of the Spanish nation, respecting the cause which has involved them in hostilities with us, I think, I say, that this difference of feeling will not be considered as a trifling or unimportant feature in the war, by those at least from whom on the occasion of our last rupture with France, we heard so much of the great advantage resulting from the experimental peace of Amiens, the advantage, namely, that from the proved impossibility of peace without dishonour, government now had the hearts of the people with them in this new war. That advantage the Spanish government now has, and for that advantage they may thank the right hon. gentleman. But is this all? no sir; not only have we roused the active hostility-of a high-minded nation, but we have forfeited the good opinion of those who were our friends. Such are the effects of that narrow and disgraceful policy which dictated the order for the attack of the Spanish frigates. Bur, sir, although in speaking of the Spanish war it was impossible for me not to notice the circumstances which preceded it, and the manner in which it was commenced; yet, with the view in which 1 have introduced this subject, the main- question undoubtedly is, whether our situation is better or worse than it was before that war was undertaken. In order to shew the house that the right hon. gent. opposite to me (Mr. Pitt) is bound in consistency to assent to my present proposal, I am endeavouring to prove that, since the time when he so strenuously recommended a similar enquiry, the necessity for it has greatly encreased. This position I am desirous of supporting in the most plain, simple, and indisputable manner, namely, by 656 proving that, during that period, the enemy's forces have been augmented in a far greater proportion than our own; that the latter are consequently more inadequate to the services likely to be required of them than they were when he thought the interference of parliament necessary to enquire into the state of our military establishments; and that the Spanish war in which he so precipitately engaged is one great cause of this en-crease of our difficulties and dangers. The question, therefore, on which we are at issue in this part of the discussion, is, are we in a better or worse situation than we were before we went to war with Spain? His majesty's ministers say the former. They contend that the actual and effective powers of our enemy has been rather crippled and diminished than encreased by the Spanish war: because, say they, Spain was supplying France with immense sums of money; we consider this pecuniary supply as the most efficient aid which she could give her ally in the present contest; and therefore, rather than suffer this to go on, we had better be at open war with Spain, and endeavour to intercept the supplies which enable her to pay these subsidies to France. This is their opinion, recorded in their official correspondence with our minister at Madrid. Now, sir, to decide whether the aggregate sum of the efficient powers of our enemy has been encreased or diminished by the declaration of open war between this country and Spain, we must examine two questions on the solution of which or either of them will depend that of the principal question, namely, 1st, Is there any certainty of our preventing these arrivals of treasure from America; or any so great probability of it as to amount, in point of expediency, to a justifiable cause of war. idly, Are these supplies so necessary to our enemies in the present war, that without them Spain can do nothing, and the exertions of France will be very materially lessened?Why, sir, as to the question whether we can prevent, during war, the remittances of bullion from America to Spain, I shall not enter into a train of vague conjecture; but if were to judge from what is passing every day, I must think that, whilst the enemy's fleets or squadrons, whether of twenty ships of the line or of two, appear to go in and out of port, to and from the West Indies, in short, very nearly where they please, there seems to be no such very great probability that the squadrons bringing home treasure should be so frequently intercepted; at least I am at a loss to know how we can calculate upon it with such a degree of confidence as to justify 657 our grounding the policy of a war with Spain upon that probability. And as to the second question, namely, whether the intercepting this treasure, if we are fortunate enough to do so, will materially cripple the exertions of France and anninilate these of Spain, I should also say, that what has happened since our disgraceful seizure of the treasure ships by surprise does not justify any such opinion. As yet I think we have no proof that the powers of the French government to put its navy into a state of activity have been paralyzed by this pecuniary disappointment; and with respect to Spain, there certainly appears to have been a considerable degree of activity on her part, in equipping her squadrons for sea. Indeed the supposition on which his majesty's ministers have acted, that the emperor of the French, though possessing the whole resources of France, Flanders, Holland, part of Germany, and, we may almost say, the whole of Italy, should be prevented by the occasional capture of the Spanish galleons, from prosecuting the war with vigour, appears to me, I confess, to be a most egregious absurdity, and I do not think that any rational man would be convinced of its being otherwise, by any of the pamphlets or writings of those ingenious gentlemen who have amused their readers with similar predictions ever since the commencement of the war that followed the French revolution. But, unless their present predictions should prove to be better founded than the former, they must admit, that whatever exertions Spin shall make must be considered as an actual and positive encrease of the aggregate sum of the real efficient powers of the enemy against whom we have to contend. The French government, indeed, which is perhaps as well able to judge of the sufficiency and probable duration of its own pecuniary resources as even our present ministers themselves, does not appear to be regulated in its conduct by any such estimate of its means, as that which forms the only ground of policy on which his majesty 's ministers have plunged us into the war with Spain. For the very circumstance, that the Spaniards are actually fitting out their navy, does, in my opinion, amount to a proof that the government of France foresees no impediment (arising from want of money) to continuing its own exertions in the naval department on as large a scale as was before intended. For they well know that, the number of ships being equal, a naval force, composed entirely of French, must be far more efficient for their purposes than a combined one of 658 French and Spanish: and, therefore, if they had not the pecuniary means sufficient for their own marine, they would prefer receiving from Spain the money she is now expending in her arsenals, instead of the ships for the equipment of which it is expended. Spain must acquiesce in the wishes of France, and France prefers the ships to the money; which is a proof that the former are truly an augmentation of her mass of the means and elements of war.—It is therefore, I think, sufficiently, manifest, that France, whilst she has acquired the accession of the whole navy of Spain, has not been deprived of any thing that was indispensably necessary to her own naval exertions on the greatest scale that she ever had in view; and I shall now shortly compare the augmentation of force which has thus taken place on the side of the enemy with that which, during the same period, has been effected in our own. It has been said, by an hon. gent. (Mr. Grey) in a former debate, that, cut of about sixty sail of the line which Spain possesses, we may reckon about twenty-five of them to he in a state tit to go to sea. This statement appears to me to be moderate, and. it was not by any means treated as an exaggerated one by gentlemen who took a part in that debate. I may therefore, without fear of contradiction, adopt this as the measure of the addition made to the navies of our enemies, and shall have no great difficulty in shewing that no proportionate augmentation has been effected in our own. But before I enter into these details I beg leave to state one general principle,which, if just, will further illustrate the truth of my assertion that our situation is more critical, and the necessity of a parliamentary enquiry into the present state and probable means of augmenting our military forces, greater now than it was at the time when the right hon. gent. (Mr. Pitt) so strenuously supported it.—general principle which I allude to, and which undoubtedly ought to have had considerable weight with his majesty's ministers, is this, namely, that if, in a war like the present, any considerable increase takes place in the enemy's navy, even although accompanied by a proportionate increase of our own, the war becomes more dangerous to us than it was before. For in the general plan of operations of such a war as this is, our navy most be considered as a purely defensive weapon, whilst his is an offensive one: the object of his navy is to bring his armies into action, whilst the chief employment of ours is to attempt to intercept them in their passage from their own ports to the points of attack and