---
source_url: "https://api.parliament.uk/historic-hansard/commons/1805/jun/28/state-of-the-army"
final_url: "https://api.parliament.uk/historic-hansard/commons/1805/jun/28/state-of-the-army"
provider: "exa"
text_sha256: "272a1f806a9822bbf21d3f0c36ab92f8a8c05ac36c1af1cb61192db7ab8dcaf8"
title: "State of the Army (Hansard, 28 June 1805)"
content_kind: "page_text"
---

State of the Army (Hansard, 28 June 1805)

# State of the Army

HC Deb 28 June 1805 vol 5 cc649-701 649

rose to make his promised motion, and spoke as follows:—Sir, 650 Before I enter upon the discussion of the topics connected with the motion of which I have given notice, it is perhaps natural for me to say a few words respecting the time at which it is introduced: and certainly, sir, I do feel that I should have great reason to apologize to the house, if I was conscious that any neglect or remissness on my part had been the cause of postponing to so late a period of the session, the discussion of subject, which, in my opinion, is, beyond all others, the most important that it is possible for parliament to deliberate upon. But, sir, I am not conscious, and I hope the house will acquit me of any such culpable neglect. My absence from parliament in the earlier part of the session was occasioned by a circumstance which, if I was to explain it, the house I trust would have the good nature to admit as a sufficient excuse. After my return, I lost no time in giving notice of this motion, and in calling for the papers that appeared necessary to the investigation of the subject. The production of these papers has been attended with delays far beyond what I had any reason to expect. Some of them, which were not printed till Monday, were then found to be incorrect; and other necessary documents were not laid on the table till the day before yesterday. Without, therefore, imputing blame to others, I have a right to assert that none can be attributed to me. But although I am conscious that the very long delays and frequent postponements of this motion have not been occasioned by any fault or neglect of mine, I do not the less sincerely lament them: for even if my first object, namely, a committee of the whole house to examine into the state of our military establishments, should now be attained, it could hardly be expected that, without protracting the session far beyond its expected duration, it should immediately produce the whole of those beneficial consequences which might have been expected from it at an earlier period of the year. Many important reforms and improvements might, however, be introduced into our military system even during the present year, without any materially inconvenient protraction of the session; although to remove all the defects which I think I see in it, and to introduce all the improvements which appear to me to be necessary, would certainly be a work of considerable time, and one that would require all the collective wisdom of the house. The house indeed has lately been told, though I own it was rather in a sneering manner, by a right hon. gent. on the opposite side, that from me they might expect this 651 day to have detailed to them a military system so complete, and so perfect in all its parts, that this great question, which has so long engaged their most anxious attention and solicitude, would now he set at rest for ever, and that from henceforward it would never again become necessary for them to take it into consideration. But the house, I imagine, does not expect quite so much; and I certainly am not, and never have been actuated by any such presump[...]uous, self-sufficient estimate of my own abilities; never less than on the present occasion. Whatever diffidence I may have felt when a sense of duty has induced me to take a part in former debates, I to-day feel a more than ordinary distrust of my ability to acquit myself, with any degree of credit, of the task which I have undertaken. I wish, however, not to be misunderstood as to the causes of this diffidence; and I beg to assure the gentlemen opposite to me, that no part of it arises from any idea of its being difficult to point out the defects of our present military system, and the glaring absurdities of that part of it in particular, of which his majesty's present chancellor of the exchequer is the author. The latter would indeed be a degree of modesty far beyond any to which; in repelling the charge of presumption, I shall pretend to lay claim. But I do feel the greatest possible diffidence, when I consider that the subject which I am about to discuss, has at no very great distance of time been twice brought forward, nearly in a similar manner, by two of the most distinguished members of this house;—at the close of the last session by an hon. gentleman (Mr. Fox) whose talents and abilities may he considered as the brightest ornament of his country, and in the present session by my right hon. friend (Mr. Windham) whose great and cultivated genius, amidst the multifarious objects which it embraces, has in a very peculiar degree, been directed to the investigation of our military system, and of whom I can say with sincerity, that of all those who have spoken, written, or with whom I have conversed upon the subject, he is the man whose ideas are, in my opinion, the most just, the most accurate, and the most profound. To follow such men as these, even at this distance of time, I feel indeed, a great disadvantage to myself personally; but there is another of a more serious nature under which I now labour, and which I sincerely deplore, being a disadvantage not affecting me only, but the cause in which I am engaged. What I mean is, that the war having now gone on so long without our having yet experienced any of 652 those disasters which have been foretold as the probable and natural consequence of out defective military system, mens' minds have become tired of contemplating the nature and tendency of a contest hitherto so barren of events, and the public is less alive than I could wish to see it, to the real situation of the country, and to the dangers with which we are menaced;—dangers, which have rapidly encreased under the right hon. gent. and his colleagues, and the reality of which, will, I fear, he too fully proved by experience, if we do not speedily adopt some more effectual means of averting them.—But, sir, if on the one hand I come to this discussion under considerable disadvantages, on the other hand I have reason to congratulate myself on the singular good fortune, that in proving that which I am most deeply impressed with, namely, the defectiveness and inefficacy of the right hon. gent. (Mr. Pitt's) military administration, I shall at the same time prove to the house that my motion is entitled to his support: and I confess, sir, that what I am mainly anxious to establish is, that the right hon. gent. consistently with the principles on which he acted 12 months ago, is absolutely bound to assent to this motion; for if I can establish that point, the reasonableness of my proposition will then stand upon grounds far stronger than any arguments that I can adduce, namely, upon the united authorities of those two distinguished members on this side, who formerly made similar motions, and of the right hon. gent. who has so great an influence on the other side of the house. My anxious desire to succeed in my present motion, will therefore induce me to go into some details (I hope not very tedious ones) in order to shew that the present state of the army, as compared with the situation of the country, and the circumstances of the war, renders the interference of the wisdom of parliament, for the purpose of improving our military system, far more necessary now, than it was at the time when that rt. hon. gent. (Mr. Pitt) so strenuously supported the motion of the hon. gent. below me (Mr. Fox.) In order to shew that the rt. hon. gent. is bound to give me at least an equal degree of support on the present occasion, it is necessary that I should enter into an examination of the changes that have in the mean time taken place in the general relative situation of the contending powers: And in pursuing this enquiry, it will be natural for me to make some remarks upon those parts of the right hon. gent.'s administration which are connected with, or have tended to produce these changes; beginning 653 with that class of his measures which has had the effect of adding to the physical force and active hostility of the enemy, and then proceeding to those, if any, by which he has encreased our own means of effective or defensive war. The object and the result of this investigation will be to prove that the situation of the country is more dangerous and critical now, than it was at that time when the right hon. gent. voted and spoke in support of a motion for a committee of the whole house to enquire into the state and adequacy of our military force. In making out this case, I shall as much as possible abstain from all disputable assertions and vague conjectures of what may be the precise nature of the enemy's designs, chiefly confining myself to incontrovertible statements of his augmented means of giving effect to a system of general and active hostility: and from this statement it will appear that cur situation is infinitely worse than it was twelve months ago, both in consequence of the very disproportionate encrease which has taken place in the forces of the contending powers, and also in consequence of the distribution and use which has been made of these forces on either side. The house will probably anticipate me in stating that the first great object to be adverted to in this comparison, is, the war with Spain. Respecting the justice of it, I shall say nothing, as that would be, in a great measure, foreign to my argument; but it is perfectly relevant, and closely connected with my present purpose, to say a few words respecting its policy or expediency, and the consequences which it has produced. For if the consequence of it has been that the enemy's strength has, within the last year, been augmented in a far greater proportion than ours, then it must naturally follow that our military force is, in a greater degree, inadequate to the general purposes of -the contest in which we are engaged than it was last year; and consequently that a parliamentary enquiry into the causes of that inadequacy and the means of correcting it is more necessary now than it was then. This must be equally admitted to he the fact, even if it should be contended that the Spanish war was inevitable, though the obligation on the right hon. gent. will of course he still stronger, if it should appear that, by a different line of conduct, he might have avoided it. I am desirous of touching upon this part of the subject as cursorily as possible; yet, in talking of the effects and consequences of the Spanish war, one cannot help saying a few words respecting the extraordinary and disgraceful circumstances which immediately 654 preceded it: the former have indeed, in no inconsiderable degree, arisen out of the latter; and, on the whole, they so naturally connect themselves in one's mind, that it is extremely difficult to argue from the one without slightly noticing the other. I will admit that the Spanish government has given us sufficient grounds for declaring war, if we thought it our interest to do so: I will admit, too, that there appeared to be a great probability that they would he forced into a rupture with us, whenever France should deem it to be, on the whole, materially advantageous to her, and should not find herself restrained by any important considerations from insisting upon it: under these circumstances it was necessary for us to prepare ourselves for the event; but, situated as we were, it was at the same time in the highest degree incumbent upon his majesty's ministers to endeavour, as long as it should he possible, without dishonour, to persevere i