s appears by-the returns;—quite sufficient to receive a larger number of men than has been raised under this act, in addition to what they before contained. But they were not sufficient to display in all its force the beautiful theory of the right hon. gentleman's new tangled military system; since a prominent feature of that system is, that every regiment of the line shall have its fellow batallion in this new home army; and for this 682 sole purpose 40 new batallions were created, the expence of which in the pay of officers, agency, allowance for cloathing, &c. amounts to about 350,000l. per annum over and above what would have been required for the pay and cloathing of all the men raised under this act, if they had been put into the 19 batallions that previously existed for limited service. And as the total number of effective men raised under this act, as stated in the returns, does not exceed 4,500, they have cost about 801. per man in one year, exclusive of their pay and cloathing, and of the enormous bounties.&#x2014;Considering this measure, therefore, in every point of view, its expence to the public, its inefficacy as a measure for raising men, its oppressive and unjust operation as a tax, and the injurious competition raised by it against the regular recruiting, I should feel that I had done the country and the army an essential service if, in the committee which I propose, it should be resolved to repeal that act.—After I had got rid of the right hon. gentleman's parish bill, and before I proceeded to the investigation of the means of improving the constitution of the regular army itself, I should be desirous of pruning some other branches of our military system, by which it is overshadowed; and with this view I should direct the attention of the committee to the Volunteer establishment, of which the right hon. gent. is so zealous an admirer, but which I have always thought the most absurd system that was ever imagined by any government for the defence and security of a great empire. I do not mean to say that we ought to trust to our regular army only; I am very far indeed from estimating lightly the advantages to be derived from the exertions of a great proportion of the people properly and judiciously prepared to co-operate with the army for the defence of their country; I have always carried my ideas of the value of such co-operation as far as any man of some experience and observation in military affairs can reasonably do; but my opinion is, that all establishments of this sort should be made entirely subordinate to the regular army, that they should be so modelled and aranged that they could at no time and in no way interfere or come in competition with it, that their whole tendency should be to support and strengthen it. This is not the occasion to enter into any detailed explanation of the manner in which I should wish to constitute these subsidiary branches of the public force: nor am I so sanguine as to suppose that we could in the short remainder of the present session, completely digest and establish such a system as I allude 683 to; but some of the defects of the Volunteer system are so glaring as to deserve our immediate consideration. And first, I must mention that abominable prostitution of military honours, titles, and distinctions, which have been so indiscriminately and profusely lavished upon men of all ranks and descriptions. The absurdity and mischievous tendency of it has at different times been most forcibly illustrated by my right hon. friend (Mr. Windham), and I have never missed an opportunity of expressing my disgust at it; but I cannot let it pass without again reprobating it, as it deserves to be. What indeed can be so disgusting, what so likely to lessen the respect for the military profession, and what therefore more impolitic in the present times in particular, than this mockery? Military titles were valued once as an honourable distinction in society. Old and meritorious officers, after long and hard services, were gratified and rewarded by obtaining the title of colonel. What must the disgust and mortification be now, at seeing persons who never quitted the safe and peaceful walks of civil life, assuming those titles which formerly pointed them out as men who had devoted themselves to the honourable profession of arms, and which were almost the only reward for the services they had rendered to their country? But are the titles all? No, sir, the real rank and command annexed to those titles has also been wantonly bestowed upon the officers of the volunteers;. and if the country was to be invaded to-morrow, every lieutenant-colonel of his majesty's regular army would be exposed to find himself and his regiment too, placed in a situation equally humiliating to the army and dangerous to the service; that is to say, in tie situation of being absolutely tinder the command of a colonel of volunteers. Whatever the civil occupation of the latter, and however respectable their station in civil life, and the professions in the exercise of which they employ themselves may be, they can have no right to the titles and powers of military rank; and perhaps therefore, with respect to the general principle of their unfitness for military command, this can make but little difference: yet I cannot help particularising one instance of the manner in which this rank has been bestowed, because it is so ludicrous, as to afford a happy illustration of the absurdity of the system that is acted upon. It is only with this view that I am induced to mention it; and in doing so I trust that I shall not speak of the individual in question in any way that can be considered as taking an unfair 684 advantage of my situation as a member of parliament. Nothing can be further from my intentions: it is the thing and not the man I wish to hold up to ridicule. From all that I have heard, I believe him to be a worthy good sort of a man, and of an education superior to what people in his situation generally possess: and I cannot conceive that he or any decent tradesman can have so little sense as to be ashamed of the appellation that belongs to the trade which he industriously, honestly, and openly exercises in one of the most public streets of the metropolis. But would it be believed, sir, in any country in the world, or can it be heard without indignation in this, that his majesty's ministers, abusing the well-known devotion of the army to the will of its sovereign, should require of it to hear without a murmur, that an officer, w ho, after 20 or 30 years of military service in all parts of the world, has at length obtained the rank of a lieut. colonel, should, if called our upon actual service in Great Britain, be exposed to the degradation of being commanded by a pastry-cook—a retailer of tarts and cheesecakes? He may he a roost worthy man; every body knows that he is an excellent pastry-cook; and his puffs and patties are as good as it is possible to make; but is it not too absurd for credibility, that the vender of them should be a colonel? It is impossible, not to laugh when one thinks of it; but it is also impossible not to feel indignant at this degradation of the military profession. The pastry-cook may be perfectly justified in accepting the rank; but what must we think of the government that bestows it? and how is it possible that the military profession should long he respected, that military honors should be valued, or that the true military spirit should be cherished in a country, where, by the acts of the government itself, the arms' is thus degraded? Consider too the immediate and practical consequences that may result from it, if the country was invaded. It is no exaggeration to say that his majesty's officers, aye, his majesty's regiments too, may be commanded by this man in the day of battle, or by others, who, however superior to him in rank in civil life, must be equally unfit to exercise this military command over the officers of the army. If the Volunteers are mixed with the king's troops, as seems to be the intention of government (and as indeed in some way or other they must he) and the general officers commanding a brigade or detachment are killed or wounded, the command would in most cases devolve on a volunteer colonel; for almost all the regiments of the line are 685 commanded by lieutenant-colonels, whilst many of the volunteer corps have full colonels at their head, who by an act of parliament are entitled to rank above all lieutenant-colonels of the army. I did, in the committee upon that bill, oppose as much as lay in my power, the adoption of the clause containing so monstrous an absurdity; but my voice did not prevail. The right hon. gentleman (Mr. Pitt) who attended so minutely to every clause and every stage of that bill, saw no objection to conferring this rank on volunteer officers; and I presume that in his, opinion, the hardships which entitle them to that rank (for which we must toil so long) are undergone,—the experience which fits them to command us, is acquired by that species of volunteer service called permanent duty. The importance which the right hon. gent. seems to attach to this permanent duty, appears to me quite curious, One must suppose that in his opinion, the volunteers, by passing a fortnight in making merry and carousing in some village a few miles distant from their homes, (to the great inconvenience of the country, and neglect of their own business and useful occupations) do really acquire a very great portion of the military character and habits, and fitness for war. Nay, I remember that at the close of the last session, when the right hon. gent. was reproached for not having performed any of his mighty promises of improvement in our military force, he actually did very gravely and seriously state to the house, that the strength and security of the country had, since he came into office, been greatly encreased by the circumstance of I don't know how many thousands of the volunteers having been a whole fortnight upon this said permanent duty. For my own part I confess that I am disgusted when I see the soldiers dress, and the pomp and splendour of military parade, which formerly excited animating feelings, to which ideas of military glory associated themselves, and the exclusive possession of which was of no inconsiderable importance to raise in the country a certain feeling of respect for the army, and to facilitate its recruiting,—I say, sir, I cannot help feeling some degree of disgust when I see all this displayed in every street in the town, with a magnificence that quite eclipses the regular army, by men, whose only experience of the military life consists in having passed a fortnight on what is ridiculously called permanent duty.—There are many other parts of this volunteer system, which, as well as the rank of the officers, call aloud for remedy; and the house should 686 consider, that whatever difficulty may exist in applying it now, will be encreased by delay. The longer the evils are allowed to exist, the deeper root will they take in the country, and the more difficult will it be to eradicate them. I shall not, however, dwell any longer upon this part of the subject, but shall pass to that which more immediately relates to the regular army itself: and I feel confident, that if the army was reinstated in the exclusive possession of all those advantages, honours, and distinctions that peculiarly belong to the military profession, if the defects of its own internal constitution were remedied, if the conditions which may he supposed to render men averse from entering into in were changed, and if the competition now raised against it by other branches of the public force were completely abolished and done away,—I feel confident, I say, that under these circumstances, we should not find it difficult to procure an army adequate to the exigencies of the state.—In the changes and improvements which I have