, as 659 this species of defence is admitted to he precarious, every multiplication of the chances of such a war, that is to say, every extension of the scale on which it is carried on, is to our disadvantage. Therefore, although, if the increase of the navies of the contending powers had been proportionate, it might perhaps have been said that we were as superior to the enemy at sea, and as capable of frustrating his designs, as we were before; yet this would be true only on the supposition of its being a part of the enemy's plans, or a necessary prelude to his ulterior operations, that the fleets should come into contact with each other. If we bear in mind the nature of the war, we shall come to no such conclusion. If we consider the extreme uncertainty of naval blockades in general, we must admit, as a demonstrable truth, that, the number of ports containing squadrons ready to convey the enemy's armies on offensive expeditions being increased; the probability of the escape of some of these squadrons (even although a suitable squadron of ours be allotted to the blockade of each) must he proportionably greater; or, on the other hand, that, the. number of ships in any one or more of the blockaded ports being increased, the mischief to be apprehended from it, although watched by a proportionately reinforced squadron, will also be greater, because, whilst the uncertainty of the blockade remains the same in either case, the consequence of the escape of the larger squadron, if it does get out,. will of course be much more serious. And therefore I say, that whilst the general aspect of the war continues to be on our part purely defensive, it is demonstrated that every increase of the enemy's navy, although accompanied by a proportionate increase of ours, is nevertheless disadvantageous to us, because it affords him more numerous chances and increased means of bringing his land forces into action, and lays us open to more frequent and more powerful attacks than we were before exposed to.—But if upon general principles it be true, that every extension of the scale of the present war, although mutual and proportionate, must multiply our dangers, render our navy less adequate to our defence, and require a very great increase of our land forces also, how much more strongly must this be the case in the present instance, when the augmentation of our naval means has borne no sort of proportion to that of the enemy? I have already noticed that in a former debate it appeared to be admitted on all sides of the house to be a moderate statement, that in consequence of the Spanish war France had gained not less than 25 sail of the 660 line: what the increase of ours has been in the same time I am enabled to state with indisputable accuracy, because my information is derived from the official returns lately presented to the house. In stating the result of these returns, I shall confine myself to large ships only; for without discussing the advantage of employing a greater number than we formerly had, of small vessels to. act against the French flotilla in the narrow seas, it will of course be admitted that, as a counterpoise to the Spanish navy, nothing but a proportionate increase of large ships can be of any avail. With respect to the latter then it appears, from the above-mentioned official documents, that in the last twelve months there has been an addition of 6 to the number of line of battle ships in commission, and a decrease of five 50-gun ships; so that the actual increase in ships above the rate of frigates has been only one, whilst the enemy has received an accession of 25 sail of Spanish line of battle ships, exclusive of the augmentation which we may suppose to have taken place in the same period in the French and Dutch marines.—I shall now proceed to examine whether, during the right hon. gent.'s administration, our land forces have been augmented in such a degree, as to compensate for the advantage which the enemy has gained in the naval branch, and to place us in a state of security greater or even equal to that which we were in when he thought them so inadequate as to call for a parliamentary enquiry. But before T proceed. to state the result of the official reunites from which I shall endeavour to draw this comparison, I must observe that I am obliged to make it in a manner more favourable to the right hon. gent. than he in truth is entitled to. What I mean is, that, there being no return before us of the state of the land forces at the rime of his coming into office, I am obliged to take its amount as it stood on the returns of the 1st. January, 1804, whereas the commencement of the right hon. gent.'s administration (immediately previous to which he had voted for an enquiry similar to that which I now propose) did not take place till about five months subsequent to that date; and if in the whole of the 17 months intervening between the 1st. Jan. 1804, and the 1st. June, 1805, there appears to have been an increase of force, it is to be presumed that a part of it was effected during the five months preceding his return to office. But not having it in my power to ascertain with precision the real difference between the amount of the various descriptions of land force as they stand now and as they did stand 661 when he thought them so inadequate, I shall deal handsomely by him, and give him credit for more than he is entitled to, namely, for the whole of the difference that appears between the oldest and the most recent of the returns upon the table, between that of the 1st of Jan. 1804, and that of 1st of June, I805.—In drawing the comparison of the actual state and relative adequacy of our land forces at these two periods, I shall review the subject under the two great divisions of forces at home and abroad; and the result of this inquiry will I think amount to an absolute demonstation, that in every respect, and in every quarter of the globe, we are weaker and more exposed to danger now, than we were when the present chancellor of the exchequer came into office. In the first place, let us consider our situation abroad. From the returns that have been presented to us it appears, that the number of troops on foreign stations on the 1st of Jan. 1804 amounted to 46,698, and on the 1st of June, 1805, to 65,358. I must however beg the house to recollect that yesterday evening I discovered upon enquiry, that in the latter number are included 2,000 recruits, belonging to regiments on foreign stations, who are now in the army depot, in the Isle of Wight, and that this description of men was not included in the return of the 1st of Jan. 1804; so that the real amount of forces now abroad is 63,358, and the increase since Jan. 1804, is 16,660.—It must however be remarked that in this number of 16,660, is included an increase of 1,792 Ceylon native troops. How, far these people may be useful for the internal police of the island I know not, but it would be perfectly absurd and ridiculous to consider them as a really efficient military reinforcement; and therefore, if we wish to investigate the truth and to draw a fair comparison of our situation at the above mentioned periods, it is necessary to deduct these miserable Ceylonese from the difference of gross numbers that appears on the returns of the army, which would reduce the increase of force abroad to 14,868.—I shall hereafter make some further remarks on the composition and distribution of this reinforcement, but will first examine what is the amount of troops that the enemy has sent abroad during the same period, as far as we are enabled to estimate it with any degree of probable accuracy.—In the first place, we know that the first squadron which sailed from Rochefort to the West-Indies, consisted of 6 sail of the line, and some frigates, and we may, without any exaggeration, compute the land forces embarked in this squadron at 3000 men. At 662 the same rate we may reckon that the combined Toulon and Cadiz fleet, of 18 sail of the line, and 5 frigates, carried out 8 or 9000 men; and that the second Rochefort squadron, of 3 sail of the line, besides frigates, had 1500 men on board. Thus it appears, that, exclusive of what may have gone out in single ships, and small detachments that may have escaped without notice, the enemy has within the last six months probably detached about 13,000 men to foreign stations; whilst the increase of our forces abroad since the 1st of Jan. 1804, after deducting the trash of Ceylonese native troops, amounts to 14,868. But, will any man pretend to say, that our foreign settlements are as secure as they were last year? Is there any man in this house or in the country who thinks so? I believe not; but if there was one, who, considering merely the apparent numerical addition to ours and the enemy's troops serving abroad generally, should be inclined to infer from thence that the danger to our foreign possessions has not increased, I should think that a very little inquiry into the details, a very little attention to the nature and distribution of the respective reinforcements would suffice to prevent his coming to so erroneous a conclusion. Of the nature and distribution of cars I can speak. with certainty: what has become of the greater part of those which the enemy has detached, God only knows; his majesty's ministers I believe are as ignorant upon that subject as myself; but I am sure that I am not singular in presuming that, when they do turn up, they will he found to have been disposed of in a manner which affords them a chance of acting with effect against possessions of great importance; whilst a very considerable proportion of ours (of our reinforcements I mean) are of such a sort or so distributed as to afford no hope of their being found within reach of counteracting the designs of the enemy. One part of them consists of troops locked up for mere defensive purposes, in places which, but for the Spanish war, would not have been exposed to attack, and which, therefore, are certainly not more secure now than they were before; so that the troops sent to them cannot be said to have added any thing to that degree of strength (whatever it was) that we enjoyed last year. Another part consists of an augmentation of local troops in remote settlements, which certainly are not at present in the contemplation of the enemy; and a third part, of troops sent on an expedition, by which they are placed in a situation where there appears little chance of their effecting any important of- 663 fensive operation, and where they are certainly lost as to any purpose of preventing the blow which the enemy may he supposed to have in contemplation; for, although we know not where that blow willbe aimed, yet we are very sure it will not be in the Mediterranean.—Of the first description, is an addition of the 1,639 men to the garrison of Gibraltar; for, will any man pretend to say, that, with this addition, that fortress is more secure, or as much so now, as it was before the Spanish war? certainly not. Gibraltar, with a garrison of 3,500, whilst we were at peace with Spain, was as secure as it is with 5000, now that we are at war with that poster; that is to say, it was as secure last year as it is at present; and the 1,639 men lately sent thither must therefore he put out of the account, in comparing the different degrees of danger or security of our foreign possession at those two periods.—The second description of troops which should be deducted from the gross amount of the encrease of forces abroad, consists of an addition of about 1,300 men to the fencible and local corps in Nova Scotia, the Bermudas, New Brunswick, and other settlements which are not at all in the view of the enemy: and these two numbers, of 1,639 and 1,300, being deducted from 14,868, reduces to 11,900 the amount of those reinforcements, which can be considered as influencing the real strength and security of our foreign possessions, or as being 