little longer on the patience of the house.—If, then, we do go into a committee, the first thing that I would propose to it to do, would be, to undo 'all that tie right hon. gent. (Mr. Pitt) has done; namely, to repeal at once the whole of his Parish Bill; and if I obtained from the committee no more than this, I should congratulate myself on having rendered an essential service to the country, and on having removed one of the numerous obstacles which stand in the way of our getting such an army wove might, and ought to possess. What," will it be said, would you at once destroy that beautiful system, from which, in the eloquent description that was given of it by its author, we were taught to expect such happy results? Have you no consideration for those sixty battalions, who so tenderly sympathize, with your favourite regular army?"— None at all, sir.—Nothing less than the immediate destruction of the whole fabric would satisfy me. At the time of the introduction of that bill, I urged my objections to its being passed into a law; and the sooner it is expunged from the statutes the better. For really, sir, the general principles of it are so absurd, that I cannot imagine how a man of that right hon. gentleman's abilities could ever have conceived such a scheme. He says, that before he came into office, his objection was, not so much that the gross amount of our force was insufficient, as that too small a proportion of it was disposeable. Now, what are the means by which he sets about to remedy this defect? Why by an attempt to double the amount of in,-disposable force; for, if his plan succeeded, if the sixty battalions which he has set on foot at an enormous and altogether useless expence had been filled, we should, including militia, have 440,000 men engaged for home service only. Is it possible to conceive a more preposterous mode of setting about to 678 obtain a disposeable army? Is it not evident to every man of common sense that this enormous home army must absorb the greater part of the men who would otherwise go into the regiments of the line? for this home army holds out to them not only all the general inducements to enlist which the regular army can offer, but also many very important and weighty advantages which are peculiar to it, and which the latter does not possess. For, if we consider for a moment what are the circumstances or dispositions, which induce men to enlist as private soldiers, we shall he convinced that either temporary distress, or an inclination to an idle and vagrant life mixed with a desire of figuring in a gay and splendid military dress, are. amongst the most frequent and powerful; and all these operate as much in favour of the home army as of the regiments of the line; in addition to which, the former can offer as good pay and a much higher bounty to a man for five years service at home, than the latter can give to induce him to bind himself for life to serve in all parts of the world. It is therefore evident, that great numbers of men, who would go into the regular army if they had no other opportunity of gratifying those propensities which induce them to make trial of a military life; especially if they could engage in it for a limited term of years, will now prefer those branches of the service in which all those propensities are equally gratified, in which they will at the end of live years have the option of remaining or changing their situation if they do not like it, and in which they are not exposed to he sent to those climates, the fatal effects of which are so universally known and dreaded: and thus it must he evident to every man of common sense, that the more you extend this receptacle, the home army, the more you obstruct the recruiting of the regular army, which, if it was differently constituted as to the duration of service, and had not to combat such a competition as you now raise against it, would probably he filled without difficulty.—From these considerations I am justified, first, in assuming that all the men whom you draw into the home army, are, in fact, diverted from the regulars; and secondly, in deriving that any men are obtained, either by this or other such schemes, who might not, by a more judicious management, have been obtained for general service for a limited time. This is the main objection to all establishments of this sort generally: and as to this particular scheme of the right hon. gent. it is, from beginning to end, fraught with absurdities and defects peculiarly its 679 own. What can be more absurd, or if not altogether nugatory, what more mischievous, than the idea of employing the parish officers as recruiting serjeants? and yet this is the grand merit of the bill; it is, to use an expression of my right hon. friend (Mr. Windham) the sole invention for which this patent was taken our. I have heard the right hon. gent. the author of this bill, describe, in general terms, the manifold advantages of this invention; but I confess I am still quite ignorant how it is to operate; and I entreat of him to condescend, for once, to lay aside that eloquence which he can so readily apply to every occasion, but which may sometimes tend rather to dazzle than instruct an ordinary understanding, in the investigation of a subject so plain as this; I would entreat of him, I say, to condescend for once to tell me, in plain language, how it is that these parish officers are to perform the task which he has assigned to them. Would he have them do what all other recruiters, in all countries, are obliged to do—would he have them pass whole days and nights in the ale houses drinking with the lads whom they wish to cajole into the service? Is this the way in which he would wish the parish officers to pass their time? and yet all this is in:et:sorry to recruiting. And if they did spend their time in this way, could they succeed as well as common recruiting serjeants? A glowing description, given over the bowl, of all the pleasures, the adventures, the glories of campaign, coming from the mouth of a man who is supposed to have experienced them, raises the wonder of many a country lad, and excites in him an admiration of this serjeant, whom he believes to have performed his share of these heroic deeds: but, how would all this sound in the mouth of a peaceful church-warden? In short, if parish officers are to set about recruiting in the ordinary way, they must begin by leading as idle and as dissipated a life as recruiting serjeants do; and after all, they will but awkwardly attempt that which the other can perform with much more effect and address. And what extraordinary means have the former, which the latter do net possess?—As to influence, and the power of persuading men to go into the army, it is impassible they can have any. But it will perhaps be said, "no matter whether you can conceive the mean by which they are to raise men, the fact is they do raise them." If this was really the case, still I should repeat, for the same reasons which I before assigned, that these very men might, by a more judicious management, have been procured for the regular regiments of the 680 line: but the true state of the case is, that the parish officers have not raised any men; and those which are returned as such, have in fact been procured by enormous high bounties paid by the parishes to crimps, and other professional recruiters. In the abstract of all the men raised under that act, which, in consequence of a motion of mine, has been presented to this house, it is stated that 3,999 had been raised by the parishes: and what particularly struck me, is, that of 2,498 men stated to have been obtained in Ireland, 2,292 are said to have been procured in that manner. My curiosity being excited by this apparent activity and success of the Irish parish officers, I mentioned it to a member for one of the Irish counties, who assured me that, during the recess, he had taken a very active part in carrying the act into effect in his country, but that not a single man had been raised by the parishes in any other way than that which I have mentioned, namely, by contracting with professional recruiters; and that this was the case in all the other counties. It is therefore clear that this bill, as was predicted, has operated merely as a very partial and unjust method of raising money, and has been wholly ineffectual as a measure for obtaining any men who could not otherwise have been procured; whilst the manner in which this call upon the parishes is made, has at the same time been the cause of continuing, those enormous bounties which the Army of Reserve Act had given rise to, and the abolition of which the right hon. gent. when he came into office, professed to be one of the great objects he had in view. For every man raised by the parishes under this act, they receive 141 from government: for every man of their quota that they fail to raise, they are fined 201.: it is therefore clearly their interest to give any bounty short of 341. rather than suffer the fine: for if they give 331. bounty, 141. of which is repaid to them by government, the man costs them only 191. whereas, if they had not procured him, they would have been fined 201. A further bounty of ten guineas is allowed to such men as shall volunteer from the limited service to the regiments of the line; and therefore every man who comes into the latter through the medium of this parish army, may be computed to have cost the country 431. in bounty only. Under these circumstances, it is to be presumed that men, who have determined on going into the army, will, instead of taking the direct road, have sense and patience enough just to look in upon the parish army in their way, and take its bounty along with them; 681 and then we are told wonders of the effects of this system of drawing men on by degrees to that, which if it had been proposed to them all at close they would have been afraid of venturing upon.—Another very serious consequence of this bill, to which I wish to draw the attention of the house, is the enormous and worse than useless expence which, exclusive of these high bounties, has been occasioned by the measures which government have adopted for the purpose of carrying this system into effect. There are at present no lest than 59 batallions, all complete in officers, allotted for the reception of these men. Nineteen of these batallions it appears were originally formed for. the purpose of receiving the men raised under the army of reserve act of 1803, and were afterwards allotted for the reception of the men to he raised under this permanent additional force act, as it is called. Not content with this number, which might have been deemed at least sufficient untill the experiment had been tried, the right hon. gent. in his eagerness to provide room for the hosts that were to be poured in by his recruiting parish officers, did at one stroke create 40 new batallions, at an enormous and totally useless expence to the public, and to the great detriment of the army, which could not fail to be considerably deteriorated by such an unnatural promotion of officers, and by the call that was also made on it to furnish non commissioned officers for these new batallions. The expence of 59 batallions in ply of officers, agency, allowance made to the colonels for cloathing men who do not exist, and other regimental allowances,totally independant of the pay and cloathing of the effective men, amounts to upwards of 400,0001. per annum, every farthing of which would have been saved to the public if since the commencement of the war, government had gone upon 'the plan of not raising new regiments till the old ones were pretty nearly completed. But even admitting, which I do not, the policy of having some batallions of this sort, were not the 19 which the right hon. gent. found when he came into office sufficient?—sufficient for every useful purpose, even in this point of view, they certainly were, a