ry upon all occasions. But if this is the case with respect to, armies in general, it is still more strongly so with respect to ours in particular, on account of the great number of our foreign possessions, in which infantry alone is employed. It is therefore interesting to consider this branch of our military force separately; and with that view I have drawn up time following resolutions, namely, 'That on the 1st of January, 1804, the whole infantry of the regular army, amounted to 119,523 men (including the recruits at the army depot who were omitted in the said return) and that of this number 12,900 or thereabouts consisted of foreign corps; so that the British infantry at that time amounted to 106,623 men.'—'That on the 1st of June, 1805, the whole infantry of the regular army amounted to 137,213, including about 673 20,178 belonging to foreign corns (of whom 5,401 consisted of Ceylon Native troops.) That the whole amount of British infantry at that time was therefore 117,035, being 10,402 more than on the 1st of January, 1804 But, as in this increase are included 8,963 men enlisted from the militia, it appears that the whole increase of British infantry arising from any means that can be considered as permanent, has not exceeded 1,439 man in 17 months; which is at the rate of 1015 men, or about one 36th part of the present deficiency, in 12 months."— This, sir, is an accurate statement of the present situation of our army. A right hon. gent. (the secretary at war) may shake his head, as I perceive he does; but I defy him to prove the smallest inaccuracy in any part of my statement, unless indeed he shall again acknowledge that the returns which he has presented are not correct. If the returns are correct, my statements are so likewise; this can be examined into in the committee, and there I defy that hon. gent. to point out the most trifling circumstance, or a single figure in which my resolutions are not supported by the documents on the table:—at all events what I now propose are mere resolutions, which as we know from recent experience, it would he easy to rescind.—In the mean time, I will pledge myself to prove from the papers on the table, that in that part of the public force which it is most essential to keep on a high footing, the infantry I mean, the increase in 12 months has nor exceeded one 36th part of the deficiency; and that even the increase consists chiefly, it nor entirely, of an augmentation of the number of officers, occasioned by the formation of new battalions, of which I shall speak hereafter. So that as far as relates to the operations of any permanent source of supply, it has absolutely stood still; I say permanent, for the recruiting from the militia, though I greatly approve, and have frequently urged the having recourse to it, is one which his majesty's ministers, unless they abandon the principles on which they carried that measure into effect, cannot consider as a permanent resource; and it is in itself no real augmentation of our military force. The number of men actually raised by all the other various modes of recruiting the regular infantry, whether for general cr limited service, has barely kept pace with the casualties; and that too, let it be observed, during a period which, excepting in the East Indies, has been a period rather of a preparation for war, than of actual war. The army has enjoyed all the general advantages of a state 674 of war for recruiting; all the benefit too, if there be any, of all the measures which the right hon. gent. (Mr. Pitt) and his colleagues have been able to devise; and, excepting the East Indies, it has suffered none of thole losses which we must look to in the continuation of the contest; and yet, taking the cavalry and infantry jointly, the excess of the recruits over the casualties, even including the great encrease of officers, has been only one-11th part of the deficiency; and. the infantry, which wants near 40,000 men of its compliment, has absolutely stood still. But if this has been the case in the last 17 months, a period so barren of military events, is it not probable, nay, is it not certain, that in the progress of the war (which cannot continue to be quite so quiet) the army will progressively decline, in proportion as the exigencies of the war encrease? Must not this be the natural consequence of our continuing to place our reliance on measures, so futile as those which his majesty's ministers have hitherto had recourse to? Upon these grounds it is, sir, that after exhibiting as I have done in the former resolutions, the discouraging results of the returns upon tire table, I shall proceed to propose the following resolutions, namely. "That, considering the small progress made towards compleating the army during a period, excepting in the East Indies, very link loss has been sustained in consequence of military operations; and, considering the nature of the contest in which we are engaged, this house is of opinion, that it is necessary to have recourse to some more efficacious system, for the supply. of the army, than that which has been hitherto pursued." And "That, as it does not appear that his majesty's ministers have any intention of proposing any new measure with a view to the furthering of the recruiting service, or to the improvement of our military system, this house do therefore resolve itself into a committee of the whole house, in order to deliberate upon those highly important subjects."—Now, sir, I am really at a loss to know upon what grounds it is that the right hon. gent. and his friends who voted with him for a similar enquiry last year, can resist it now. The plea then was, that our military force, particularly the army, was inadequate to the exigencies of the war, and that the system of the late administration afforded no prospect of augmenting it. The exigencies of the war have, since that tine, increased in a very alarming degree, whilst all the right hen, gentleman's beasted plans and projects 675 for the augmentation of the army have utterly and entirely failed.—Both the amount and distribution of the enemy's forces are much more menacing now than they were last year. Abroad, our most valuable possessions, which last year were in a state of security, are now confessedly exposed to imminent danger: at home, the enemy's means of offence have powerfully increased, whilst our means of defence, so far from keeping pace with him, have positively diminished. Last year the enemy's naval force, in the number of ships of the line, was to ours only as two to three; the numbers now are nearly, if not quite equal. Our military force at home, which last year was thought barely sufficient for defence against the lesser danger, is now not only proportionably; smaller, (with reference, I mean, to the great increase of the enemy's means), but it is actually and positively diminished: it is threatened, too, with a still further reduction, by the large detachments which are now and long have been embarked at Cork, and are apparently kept in readiness to sail for the support or recovery of our colonies, where there is every appearance of the commencement of operations, which, if they should continue, would (as we know from experience) prove a dreadful drain to the flower of our army, whatever, in other respects, their ultimate issue might be. Looking, therefore, at the present state of our affairs as compared with the past, it is manifest that the public force is now infinitely more inadequate to the services required of it than it was when the. right hon. gent. voted for the enquiry which I now propose: and as to the future, what possible ground is there for hoping that the state of our army will improve, or that, when the war becomes active, it will not rapidly fall off? The right hon. gent. in answer to a question which I put to him before I gave notice of my present motion, declared that he had no new measures to propose; and,judging of the probable future results of his present system by the ample trial it has already had, what can we expect from it? what, I say, has hitherto been the result of all his boasted plans for the supply of the army? Is it not proved in the manner of all others the most indisputable, namely, by a comparison of the official returns of the effective strength of the army at different dates? is it not proved, I say, that, during a period in which we have had no loss of men by military operations, excepting in the East Indies only, the infantry, which wants nearly 40,000 men of its compliment, has absolutely gained nothing?that the casualties 676 have at least equalled the number of men raised by all the multifarious modes of recruiting,—parish officers and all? And let it be remarked, too, that a great proportion of the men that have been raised consists of new levies, which, before he came into office, had been set on foot by his predecessors.—And has he not, as his last resource, been obliged to have recourse to recruiting the army from the militia;—from that militia which we have so often heard him declare ought to be held sacred, and which, before his ardent hopes of the wonderful effects of his famous parish bill, were disappointed, he would not upon any account consent to touch? What reason, then, resulting from a comparison of our present state with that in which he last year voted for an enquiry—what reason resulting from any hope of the future that can reasonably be grounded upon the experience of the past, will any man, who did vote for that enquiry then, assign for resisting it now? I really can conceive none, excepting, indeed, one, which the right hon. gent. himself will hardly avow, and which some of his colleagues would scarcely carry their complaisance to him so far as to concur in if he did, namely, that he is prime minister now, and that he was not in that situation then. But whatever a few of his friends may feel, the majority of the house, I trust, will not carry so far their blind confidence in a minister under whose management the country has been brought into a situation, beyond all comparison worse than it was at that time, when he himself declared it to be the duty of parliament to enquire into the state of the public force, and investigate the means of improving it.—But, sir, it may perhaps be asked of me, what, if the house adopted my motion, I should have to propose to the committee to do, with a view to remedy the evils of which I complain? Sir, I do not know that it is incumbent on me to propose any thing. I have attempted to prove, that our present system is defective, inefficacious, and requires revision. If I have established that, as I think I have, then I have done enough to justify my motion, and I might, without impropriety perhaps, leave the rest to the wisdom of the house. I believe, indeed, that it is almost impossible to put a stop all at once to the various had consequences that have resulted from the system which has for some time past been pursued; and certainly I do not pretend to effect so much. But a change is absolutely necessary; immediate benefits, of great magnitude and importance, would result from such improvements in our military system as I should propose to the 677 committee to adopt at once; and the rest would follow.—I shall therefore briefly state the outlines of what I would now propose; but must previously apprise the house, that these suggestions, although in my opinion of infinite importance, are no longer new. The subject has been so often discussed; I have myself so frequently delivered my opinions upon it in the house; my tight hon. friend (Mr. Windham) above all, has treated it in so masterly a manner, that little more is left for me now, than either to repeat myself, or imperfectly to recapitulate what he at various times has so forcibly urged. But the subject is one of such transcendant importance to the glory, the welfare, and the safety of the state, that I shall venture to trespass a 