

observed, that the hon. col. in the outset of his speech, seemed very sanguine that he should he able to convince the house of the expediency of appointing a committee on the subject of his resolutions; and then stated, as the first remedy which he should propose in the committee, for the evils of which he complained, the undoing of that which parliament had been doing for the last two years, having himself but little to offer in substitution, and being willing to defer the introduction of that little till next session! He rather thought that on these grounds the hon. col. would be disappointed in his expectations. Did he imagine that his right. hon. friend (the chancellor of the exchequer) was ready to go into a committee at all times because there was one period in which he deemed it expedient to do so? the hon. col. should recollect, that the same. proposition had been agitated in an early part of the present session, end that neither his right hon. friend, nor the house, at that time, deemed it expedient to go into such a committee, and he did not believe that what the hon. col. had this evening urged, would 693 hold out a sufficient inducement to them to acceed to that, which on the occasion he alluded to, they had most decidedly rejected. Putting out of his view the early part of the hon. colonel's speech, in which he had travelled so far out of his way to censure the conduct of government in the rupture with Spain, and to state the injurious consequences of that rupture to Great Britain, he would confine himself to the subject immediately before the house, namely, the present military state of the country. There was one fact, which the hon. col. himself could not dispute, and on which he could not help congratulating the house. Parliament had certainly adopted a system in the additional force bill, which, although it might not have been productive to the full extent that was expected by his right hon. friend who introduced it, yet as far as it went, was not only compatable with the recruiting service, but since the existence of which the recruiting for the regular army had been constantly and progressively improving. Though the hon. colonel might impeach the details (which had already been discussed so largely) he could not contend that a system which produced under every disadvantage, nine or ten thousand men in the year, was an unimportant one. He had asserted that the increase had not exceeded 4,000 men in the year; but the papers on the table confuted his statements. In the four first months of this year the army had experienced an increase of 7,500 men; calculating in that proportion for the remaining eight months, the number would be 15,000, making in the whole between 22 and 23,000 men, instead of 4,000 and this without including the transfers from the militia. But the hon. colonel seemed to think that the measure which he suggested, of enlisting men for a term of years instead of for life, might without delay be adopted, and by improving the character augment the numbers of our army; and he insinuated blame against ministers for not having attended to this subject. Now, the fact was, that they had given it the most anxious and painful attention, and the great difference of opinion that prevailed not only among them, but among men of the highest military authority, justified them in not coming to parliament to propose such an alteration. In his own mind, he thought few more men would be obtained by this new inducement, and he was confirmed in this opinion by the fact, that when it was proposed to the Irish militia to inlist into the regulars, a bounty of ten guineas being offered for limited service, and 12 guineas for unlimited service, out of 9,000, only 250 694 took the to guineas, for limited service, and the remainder were induced, by the trifling addition of two guineas, to inlist for unlimited service. The hon. col. complained of the heavy expence of the second battalions; but these were of infinite service. From them the first battalions were most easily supplied, as was clearly evinced in the regiments lately sent out to the East Indies, which were immediately compleated to their full compliment of 1000 men from the numbers of volunteers who crowded from the second battalions. Another benefit attending these second battalions was, that in case of invasion (the danger of which he had never asserted to be at an end) the number of experienced officers in the midst of the country, ready to take charge of the volunteers or armed peasantry would be a circumstance of incalculable advantage. With regard to the difficiencies at present existing in the regular army, it was evident that all armies raised as those of Great Britain were by voluntary enlistment and not by conscription, must he occasionally short; but owing to the supernumeraries not having been accounted for in the papers on the table, he rather thought that they staved the deficiencies as greater than they really were. The regular army was at present greater than it ever was in this country of that army the disposeable force was larger; of that disposeable force the infantry, and particularly the British infantry, were more numerous, independant of a volunteer force exceeding 400,000 men, which, whatever the hon. colonel might think of them, were in a state of spirit and determination which would render them formidable to any enemy that should dare to attack them. Compare our gross force with the highest point to which it reacted in 1802, and it would be found to exceed that number by 5,100 men. Compare our present regular army with that existing on the 1st of January, 1804: at that period it consisted of 150,500 men, it now amounted to 179,100, making an increase in the last 18 months of 28,600 men. Of that number the disposable force was on the 1st of January, 1804, 122,700; it was now 161,300. being an increase of 38,600; of the disposable force, the infantry (which had been contended, and, fairly contended, to be of the most moment) was on the 1st of January 1804, 90,500, it was now 121,700, being an increase of 31,200 in the regular disposeable infantry, during the last 18 months. The number of foreign troops was pretty much the same at each period, the increase being nearly exclusively in British infantry. The hon. colonel 695 did not seem to attach so much consequence to the foreign troops in our pay as they deserved. Even the native troops in Ceylon were by no means contemptible; the Sepoy's had frequently shown themselves formidable. But what could the hon. colonel say against the Hanoverian troops, or those other continental regiments,who fighting undergen. Stuart in Egypt, had abundantly proved their bravery and discipline? It was impossible for him, consistantly with his duty, to say any thing on the expedition that had been sent up the Mediterranean, except to express his surprise that the hon. colonel, in total ignorance of all the facts which had induced government to fit out that expedition, should take upon him unequivocally to condemn it. The hon. colonel's statements of the general distribution and amount of our force in our foreign possessions was erroneous. In the accounts of June 1805 the artillery were nor included, but he compared them with those of January 1804, in which they were included. The actual return of the troops now serving abroad was 69,300 men; in Jan. 1804. they consisted only of 49,000 men, so that the actual increase of the number of troops serving abroad was not 16,000 as stated by the hon. colonel, but 20300.—With respect to the general deficiences at home, the hon. col. had truly stated them at 4,000; but was this surprising, when we had detached such numbers abroad? Besides, examine the comparitive quality of the force in Great Britain now, and that in January 1804. Whether we looked to the regular army, the militia, or the volunteers, no man of a candid mind but must admit, that so far from the means of defence which the country possessed being weaker at the present moment than they were at that period, they were much more powerful, and afforded much greater security; and although he would not say that the danger of invasion was entirely gone by, he would certainly say, adverting to our naval and military force, that the danger was not near so considerable as it was at the period alluded to. The hon. colonel was of opinion that such were our military deficiencies, that we could not avail ourselves of any opening that might offer itself for operations on the continent; but should any opportunity really occur, arising from the efforts of those great powers who alone were able to combat the gigantic strength of France, a great part of our disposeable force might be detached to act in co-operation with them, leaving the country under the protection of the militia, the volunteers, and the remainder of the' regular army, who would be 696 amply sufficient for its defence, secured as it would he from any danger of invasion, by the necessity which the enemy would feel to direct his exclusive attention to those parts of his own empire in which he was attacked. Admitting that our force, high as it now stands, does not stand so high as it could be wished, what could be more expedient than to permit the continuation of those measures, by which it had been so rapidly and material! increased? The bill introduced by his right hon. friend, had, under the most disadvantageous circumstances, produced above 10,000 men in the year. If the general and regular recruiting should go no higher than it had hitherto done, it would cover the casualties, and the operation of the additional force bill would be a net addition to our strength; but there was every reason to expect, that the ordinary recruiting would rise much above the standard of last year. What it exceeded that standard so much would still be added to our force. It was impossible there-sore, with justice, to contend that this system was had or inadequate to the wants of the country. The hon. colonel talked of new schemes; of these we had no practical experience, but we had practical experience of his right hon. friend's system, and he earnestly dissuaded the house from tampering with that system or setting the question once more afloat. On a revision of the whole of the circumstances of the case, in comparing our present strength with our former, he saw no ground of charge against government; but, on the contrary, it appeared to him, that they had done their duty, and acted on a system, which, without being injurious to other parts of the service, had very considerably extended the military strength of the country. Feeling, therefore, that there was nothing to warrant the going into a committee for the purpose of undoing that which in his opinion had been so well done, he should move the order of the day.