 detain the house with noticing at present;—one only excepted, upon which I cannot help taking this opportunity of expressing my opinion, it being one in which I also feel a lively interest, and respecting which I refrained from troubling the house upon a late occasion, when it was introduced with so much force and feeling by an hon. gent. (Mr. Fox,) when he made a motion for taking a more general view of the situation of that description of persons to whom I allude, I mean the Roman Catholics. The policy of admitting them fully into the military service, is a question which I think might very well be entertained by the house, independantly of their other claims, for the whole of which, however, to the fullest extent that they have ever urged them, I am glad of every opportunity of professing my- self a warm advocate. What I now mention may, however, in the mean time, be made a subject of separate consideration; and I am convinced that the granting it would be attended with the best consequences to the state. By laying open the military career to them in the service of their own sovereign and country, you would bring into the army a set of men who have furnished many of the most distinguished officers to the armies of other powers, to which they are driven, by being excluded from our's. It may be said, indeed, that they are now allowed to serve in his majesty's army;—but how, and on what conditions, are they admitted into the service? Why, on the condition that they are never to exercise the command annexed to the rank which every officer, who is of the stuff of which good officers are made, looks forward to as the means of acquiring that reputation, the love of which is the predominant motive to treat actions. A catholic may indeed attain the rank of a general officer; but, as the law now stands, he never can be employed as such. How, then, can you expect that they should prefer the service of a country who treats them in this manner, to that of other countries where the highest military rank and the actual command of armies is open to them. A very large proportion of the best officers of the Austrian army have long been furnished from Ireland; and so far were they from being deprived of their due share of those high distinguished stations to which every good officer looks forward, and, without looking forward to which he will never rise above mediocrity of merit, I say, so far were they from being deprived in that service of their due share of those honours which are denied to them in their own country, that, on the contrary, Maria The- 692 resa's armies were, on more than one occasion, commanded by men born, or immediately descended, from natives of his majesty's dominions. If they had the same encouragement here, they would undoubtedly prefer the service of their own sovereign; and it is natural to suppose, that, by the introduction of a proper proportion of Catholic officers into the army, the lower orders of the people of Ireland, of that persuasion, would be more favourably disposed towards the service, and that the recruiting would be greatly facilitated.—There arc some other points, sir, to which, in a committee, I should think it my duty to endeavour to draw their attention; though I shall not now trespass any further on the indulgence and patience of the house. But, before I make my motion, I must again observe, that if the accuracy of any of the detailed statements of numbers contained in the resolutions he disputed, I hope that this difference will he considered rather as a motive for the further investigation, than for the immediate rejection of my propositions: and I pledge myself to prove that they are accurately made out from the documents on the table.—After again expressing his regret at the very late period of the session to which his motion had been postponed, in consequence of the long delays that he had not foreseen, and could not prevent, in the production of the documents on which it was founded, the honourable officer concluded by moving his first resolution.