

 Work I and II appeared some years before Studs Terkel’s Working in the United States. 5 It is a reasonable surmise that Terkel’s book, which sold a million copies, was prompted by Ronnie’s enterprise, as he was asked to write it
by André Schiffrin, who knew Ronnie and would be his American publisher at Pantheon. The contrast between the two is instructive. Terkel, an irrepressible raconteur who started out life as a concierge in his father’s hotel before
becoming a talk-show host on radio, taped interviews with some 130 individuals, grouped by type of activity – Cleaning Up, Watching, Driving, Counting, etc. – and edited to allow their voices an average of a little over four
pages each. The result is a lively and diverse mosaic, with many a graphic expression of discontent at particular jobs and the system around them, as well as of satisfaction at tasks of meaning and worth. Terkel himself was a
very honourable American progressive in a Midwestern tradition – his family were admirers of Debs. 6 But by reason of its formal composition, analytic reflection could not be a strength of his book, in which the word ‘capitalism’
is not to be found. Ronnie proceeded very differently. He did not tape interviews, but solicited written contributions, in the belief that if these could be located, they would allow deeper and acuter capture of the lived
realities of work, and more time for reflection on them. The result is reports that are longer – an average of fifteen to sixteen pages, significantly less anecdotal and more substantial; some, tours de force of literary
intensity. Two that remain indelibly etched in the mind are Ronnie’s own grim description of work in the hub of Reuters – its opening paragraphs have a touch of Zola – and Tom Nairn’s unforgettable memento of existence as a
nightwatchman. 7 The framing of both collections is unambiguously socialist.

 *

 In 1969, a few months after the publication of the second volume of Work , in one of those serendipitous moments that historians sometimes know in the archives, Ronnie saw in The Times an item reporting that the republican mayor
of a Spanish village had emerged from thirty years of hiding, on news that Franco had finally issued an amnesty for suspects and opponents of the Civil War period. The village was Mijas, where Ronnie had gone to write in 1957
after quitting Reuters, and later made a home. Rumours that the mayor was concealed and still alive had surfaced now and then among the villagers, and Ronnie had in fact based a character in one of his unpublished novels on such
a figure. 8 He decided there and then to see if a book, of fact not of fiction, could be made from the ordeal of this sequestration. Once the initial press hubbub around the mayor had died down, he returned to Mijas in the summer
of 1969 and taped the life-history of Manuel Cortés, an Andalusian barber born in 1905, who became a Socialist under Primo de Rivera, was elected mayor on the eve of the Civil War, joined the carabineros at the front in defence
of the Republic, and was proscribed when it fell, to endure thirty years immured in a hole in the wall of one house, and confinement to an attic; and of the wife who protected him.