

 In Hiding , the reconstruction of this arresting story published in 1972, made Ronnie’s name, winning admiration across the board in the Anglosphere – Arthur Miller singling it out for praise – and opening a new cycle in his
career. A Spanish edition remained impossible. But when Schiffrin told him he doubted whether a Spanish case study in a ‘village series’ that a group of publishers was planning would be possible either, Ronnie took up the
challenge. On the heels of In Hiding , he produced within another year a compelling history and ethnography of Mijas, composed of a tessellation of interviews with fifty villagers of all ages, social positions and political
outlooks, set within a narrative tracing the evolution of the community from the last years of the nineteenth century to the invention of the Costa del Sol and tourist invasion of the region in the sixties – resident foreigners
are not neglected, providing a further half-dozen witnesses. 9 ‘Written with a certain novelist’s vision’, as he put it, and published with the transparently altered title Tajos , the book’s precision and scholarship form a sober
contrast with Gerald Brenan’s lyrical portrait of the village of Yegen in South from Granada , the work that had once attracted Ronnie to the area.

 No sooner was Tajos out than at the suggestion of Alastair Reid, the Scots poet and translator of Borges and Neruda who lived in the yet smaller village of Galilea in Majorca, 10 Ronnie conceived the project of an oral history
of the Spanish Civil War, and had no difficulty getting an advance from Schiffrin to finance it. This was in a sense a logical jump, by now. But it was a huge one: from recovering the experience of a couple, to a village, to a
country; from a lifetime, to several generations, to just three convulsive years of war and revolution. With characteristically clear-eyed planning, he determined from the outset not to attempt to cover every part of Spain, but
to select two Republican- and two Nationalist-controlled zones – centred respectively in Barcelona and Madrid, Andalusia and Castile-León – and one that knew control by both, Vizcaya-Asturias; and to concentrate principally on
what the Civil War meant for the population behind the lines of fighting, rather than at the fronts themselves. Criss-crossing the country for two years from 1973–75, finding what interlocutors he could, he eventually interviewed
over three hundred witnesses, recording upwards of 3 million words, the tapes dispatched at every stage to Gorz in Paris for fear of discovery and confiscation by Franco’s police. Out of these, after another two and a half years,
he composed Blood of Spain , a book of 200,000 words. 11

 Nothing like this had ever been done before. Oral history as such was not new. But hitherto it had essentially been confined to two genres. Either – this was its first incarnation, under the aegis of Allen Nevins at Columbia,
patriotic hagiographer of Lincoln – it set down the spoken reminiscences of Prominenten , politicos and bureaucrats thought to have played an important role in affairs of state, from above. Or – in a subsequent and opposite
version, inspired in good part by Paul Thompson at Essex – it was typically concerned to retrieve the daily lives of those below the radar of any public drama, the lower orders of the unremarked and forgotten, in an extension of
social history. Blood of Spain differed from both. What it set out to do, and achieved, was to recapture popular experience, not apart from, but in the very quick of a vast socio-political and military conflict, through an
astonishing spectrum of individual lives. In finding and drawing out the testimony of participants from both sides in an ideological and civil war that still could not be freely spoken of in Spain, Ronnie had the advantages of an
outsider, as an Englishman, and the instincts of a first-class reporter. But without his natural gifts of quiet courtesy and tact, he could never have got so many different people to open up to him, often for the first time since
the thirties, about the repressed national trauma. What he discovered was that those with the clearest and most striking memories were typically middle-level witnesses, active but not leading participants in the conflict – those
he would term ‘militants’, and whose accounts of their past form distinct sections in his reconstruction of it.