

 On its appearance in 1979, Blood of Spain was rightly hailed as a masterpiece of oral history. Yet Ronnie himself always had reservations about the term, observing that it generally rested on a confusion between source and
genre, taking oral as if it denoted a subdiscipline comparable to economic, social or cultural history and the like, whereas in fact it simply indicated another kind of evidence which could inform any of these – in so far, of
course, as witnesses were still alive, hence perforce contemporary fields within each. In the case of his work, though based on interviews, Blood of Spain is not a collation of them, of the kind that can be found in what at first
sight might look like enterprises akin to it – Terkel’s Hard Times or ‘The Good War’ , on the Depression and America’s World War Two, are representative examples – but a meticulously constructed composition. The successive phases
of the Spanish Civil War form a historical narrative whose grandeur and intensity comes from its continuous inset of voices from survivors, most fairly and some very succinct, intercalated at regular intervals by notably longer
recollections – ‘Militancies’, or particularly vivid scenes or incidents – ‘Episodes’, and concluding with a retrospect on flash-points of the Republic – land, religion, nationalisms, libertarians, rising of 1934, army – that
preceded and precipitated the Civil War.

 The epigraph at the head of the foreword to Blood of Spain is from Pierre Vilar, and reads: ‘The subjective aspect of events, the “atmosphere” in which they took place, is also a condition of history . . . Indeed, can history be
made real if [this aspect] is not resuscitated? Shall we leave the task solely to the novelist?’ Such was, exactly, the ambition of the book – ‘an attempt’, Ronnie wrote, ‘to reveal the intangible “atmosphere” of events: to
discover the outlook and motivations of the participants, willing or unwilling; to describe what civil war, revolution and counterrevolution felt like from inside both camps’, to which he brought the formal ingenuity and
sophistication of a historian who described himself as a novelist manqué . But, he added, ‘the atmosphere does not hang above events like the ether; it is a social emanation, the result of very terrestrial struggles’. 12 If
recovery of the lived experience of the agents and patients of the Civil War was a project reflecting the existentialist imprint on his outlook, already visible in his enquiry into the meanings of work for himself and others, he
was also a Marxist who knew that objective structures, and their explanations, were not the same as subjective passions or intentions. Engels’s warning to Bloch stood at the entrance to his book as a whole.

 Among the universal acclaim for Blood of Spain , one response was pitched at a level above any other, Victor Kiernan’s essay on it in NLR : a magnificent if sombre meditation on the contradictions and paradoxes of Spain from the
time of Ferdinand VII to that of Franco – it might, after Edward Thompson and in its comparisons of the Spanish and English civil wars, have virtually been entitled ‘The Peculiarities of the Spaniards’. As a work of history,
Kiernan wrote, its ‘chorus of discordant voices echoing out of the past’ was ‘so life-like as to be almost eerie’, bringing together ‘the fragmentary, disconnected experiences and sensations of a multitude of individuals’ that
‘lived through a cataclysmic time whose collective orbit transcended and eluded them all’. But, he went on,