

 The first, and most lasting, change Ronnie brought to New Left Review was to ensure its survival. Like most small magazines of the time and since, when he arrived it was still losing money, with dwindling reserves of credit or
cash to keep it going. Taking the precarious finances of the journal in hand, he devised a seven-year plan to put it on a sound material footing, which worked to a tee. By the turn of the seventies, NLR had achieved a take-off in
circulation that was self-sustaining. The fact that some sixty years after his architecture the journal supports a considerably larger staff with a positive balance sheet – a rarity in the world of the left, or indeed of any
journals with intellectual pretensions – is originally due to him. So too would be the creation in 1970 of New Left Books, which became the Verso of today, in London and New York. Setting up a publishing house is a much harder
and more complicated task than running a magazine, and the fortunes of the one have always been more accidented than of the other. But there as well, the survival of any house of the left for over fifty years, not to speak of the
growth in its reach and reputation, is a feat for which the founding credit goes in large measure to him. To the end, he took a lively interest in its performance.

 The second big difference he made to NLR was intellectual. From an early age, he wanted to be a writer, publishing a novel at the turn of the sixties, 2 and his primary orientation remained literary. Translations of texts from
two Spanish writers of the ‘generation of the fifties’, Antonio Ferres and Luis Martín-Santos, and reflections on a novel by Michel Butor, were among his contributions to the journal. 3 But in him writerly ambition – frustrated –
was wedded to reportorial curiosity in a single enterprise that came to unify everything he wrote: a life-long commitment to lived experience as an intellectual and political value. In NLR , that produced the finest integrated
series of texts in the history of the journal: the twenty-five accounts of different kinds of work published without a break, save for a special issue on May 1968 in France, over four years between 1965 and 1969. 4

 The subject was given editorial priority under the influence of Marx’s economic-philosophical manuscripts of 1844, then very strong on us, and introduced with a quotation from it. But Ronnie alone was capable of converting what
could otherwise have remained a theoretical concern into so concrete and vivid a sequence of experiential reports, covering industrial, clerical, professional and speculative employment – car-worker, printer, steel-maker,
signalwoman, miner, bricklayer, bus-driver, teacher, trawler, housewife, actor, croupière, accountant, stockbroker and more – not to speak of unemployment. They were collected in two volumes by Penguin in association with NLR in
1968–69, with introductions by Ronnie and afterwords by Raymond Williams and Alvin Gouldner respectively. They read as freshly today as when they were written.