

 Napoleon’s Cursed War suggests otherwise. While distinguishing between ‘partisans’, ‘privateers’ and ‘religious crusaders’ among the guerrillas, it points to the scale of the forces they came to muster – 55,000 by the end – and
of the losses they inflicted on the occupiers, here for the first time regionally computed in some detail. 25 Esdaile, while respectful of the book, has questioned these findings, contending that much of the damage was done by
regular rather than truly irregular forces. 26 But since partisan warfare has so often involved connexions between these – one has only to think of Soviet resistance to the Nazi invasion of Russia – this is a qualification,
rather than a decisive objection. Where both historians agree is that by failing to create any unified command of the French armies in Spain, Napoleon reduced any possibility of stamping out armed opposition to the occupation,
and that by requiring they live off the land, inflicted such levels of ruthless exploitation and suffering on the population that even those indifferent to all politics, and unwilling to be conscripted in any fight against the
French, ended by longing for their expulsion.

 That was brought about, not by popular resistance to the French but, as the best-known guerrilla leader, Espoz y Mina, acknowledged, ‘in the snows of Russia’, although their local defeat was inflicted by Wellington at the head
of an Anglo-Portuguese army. In this struggle, Britain played the role of Germany and Italy in the Civil War in assuring the victory of the old order: in Goya’s portrait of him in the National Gallery, the vacant, frozen gaze of
the Duke of Ciudad Rodrigo is that of the Ritter von Thoma or Roatta of his time. His contempt for the country he secured for absolutism was famous: ‘I have never known the Spaniards do anything, much less do anything well.’ 27
If the war in Spain proved a curse for Napoleon, contributing to the defeats in Russia and Germany that felled him by pinning down 260,000 French troops south of the Pyrenees, it was a catastrophe for Spain, which after massive
destruction and loss of life was returned to the retrograde tyranny of the Bourbons. Objectively, had the Spaniards made no resistance to Napoleon, they would have suffered far less, and ended with the same outcome: the
restoration of the monarchy to which they were so attached, in the baggage-train of the Allied armies that triumphed at Leipzig. But Napoleon’s deposition of Ferdinand VII, unnecessary as it was for him, and disastrous for Spain,
was still an emancipation elsewhere: without it, Hispanic America would not have gained its freedom.

 Ronnie was seventy-eight when Napoleon’s Cursed War appeared. Few historians have left so original and variegated a body of writing – two great histories, each pioneering sources never previously mined, a transformative
autobiography, stethoscopes of work in an advanced industrial society, records of a political sequestration in a rural society, and of the community surrounding it; fewer still who neither learned nor taught in a university. In
the past half-century, English scholarship has been set apart from any other in the continent by the leading contributions it has made to the history of virtually every country in Europe – Italy, Germany, France, the Netherlands,
Portugal, Sweden, Poland, Hungary, Greece and beyond. But perhaps none has attracted such a cohort of distinguished historians – Elliott, Lynch, Kamen, Carr, Brenan, Thomas, Esdaile, Preston – as Spain. It would be interesting to
speculate on the reasons for that concentration. But in the general pattern of such curiosity about foreign lands and their pasts, it has been a rarity for such historians to live in the country of their study. In Italy, Paul
Ginsborg comes to mind. In Spain, there have been two, Brenan and Fraser. Without literary equal among Hispanists as a writer, Brenan’s vision of the country came from a village, and from books; travelling rather little in Spain,
his direct knowledge of it confined to a corner of Andalusia, he scarcely knew its major cities. 28 For a romantic ironist, that was enough. Politically, he sympathized with the Republic during the Civil War, but for a time
supported non-intervention, and after the war came to see many good points in Franco. The Catholic Church was an abiding value in Spanish life, and monarchy without democracy would, after the ordeal of the thirties, be the best
solution for the country. 29