

 Ronnie was a realist, less deeply versed in Spanish letters, more aware of the north and centre of the country, and its urban life. But Spanish society had, of course, changed fundamentally, and with it Spanish culture, by the
time he settled there in the nineties. The passions that fascinated Brenan, their embers still glowing in Blood of Spain , had burnt themselves out. Napoleon’s Cursed War , not a book his predecessor could have written, was
composed in the banalized, self-satisfied landscape of Felipe González and Julio Iglesias, José María Aznar and Pedro Almodóvar. In Valencia, Spain’s third-largest city, he could see the provincialism of its new European
conformities, and suffered from it. But the Jacobin streak, and his perseverance, remained. He was correcting the proofs of his last collection of essays, Las dos guerras de España , containing his comparison of the Peninsular
and Civil Wars, when he died in February 2012. In England, the class he detested was back in the saddle, amid riot and recession; in Spain, a bloated monarch astride big game, corruption oozing from the palace, demonstrations of
the young in the streets, the illusions of counterfeit wealth vanishing, a Third Republic overdue. It was the kind of scenery that had made him the iconoclast he was.

 Perry Anderson

===== FILE: OEBPS/06_Ack.xhtml =====
Napoleon’s Cursed War

 Acknowledgements

 I wish to thank the Leverhulme Trust and the Cañada Blanch Foundation for grants which enabled me to carry out a considerable part of the documentary research on which this book is based. Without their generous aid, the work’s
scope would have been much diminished, especially at the local level where the grants enabled me to engage a score of individuals to scour provincial and other archives for relevant material. I gratefully recognize the
contribution to this book made by the following though none, of course, is responsible for the use I made of their research:

 Juan Ballesta; Gonzalo Butrón; Julia Cifuentes; Monica Ferrer; Ines Gómez; Leonor Hernández; Germán López; Isabel Martínez; José Manuel Pelaez; Marcel Poblet; Elena Quirós; Gonzalo Rodríguez; Pilar Rovira; Pilar Salomón; Ma.
José Sánchez Pravia; Julio Sierra; Sonia Turón; and Miguel Vázquez.

 I am especially endebted to Professor Josep Fontana, an outstanding Catalan historian of the period, for his continuing encouragement and knowledge on which I could always call; Professor David Sven-Reher led me gently by the
hand through some elementary demographic procedures and his invaluable suggestions have added considerably to the book’s range; Antonio Moliner and Richard Hocquellet kindly made available their doctoral theses and the marquesa
de Marañón allowed me to consult the private papers of her Bertrán de Lis forebears; William Christian’s deep anthropological understanding of popular Spanish religious practices was always instructive and María Tausiet’s
permission to use her work allowed me to probe a case of village religious ‘possession’ during the war; in researching the period, Isabel Aguirre, head archivist of the Simancas archives, was exceptionally helpful, as were
Fernanda del Rincón, archivist of the Valencian Cortes and Chris Woolgar of the Hartley Library, Southampton University. I wish also sincerely to thank Perry Anderson and Tariq Ali for their constant friendship and counsels
during some difficult moments in this book’s production; and Fred Halliday for his unremitting efforts on my behalf from his new Barcelona base.