

 A considerable number of historian-demographers provided me with much valuable information. As their names will be found among the sources at the end of Appendix 5 I shall not repeat them here. But I wish to take the opportunity
of thanking them collectively.

 Many historians whose names do not figure helped me at various times and in ways too varied to enumerate; I am particularly grateful to the following: Celso Almuiña, Rafael Aracil, Manuel Ardit, Marc Baldó, Xosé Barreiro,
Antonio Bernal, Robert Brenner, Esteban Canales, Raymond Carr, Julián Casanova, Francisco Díaz Torrejón, Fernando Díez Rodríguez, Juan Francisco Fuentes, Mario García Bonafé, Salvador García Jiménez, Antonio García López, Carmen
García Monerris, Ana Ma. García Rovira, Ramón Garrabou, Carlo Ginzburg, Nigel Glendenning, Manuel González Portilla, Richard Herr, Eric Hobsbawm, Herminio Lafoz, Emilio La Parra, Alicia Laspra, Francisco Javier Maestrojuán, José
Martínez Carrión, Tom Mertes, Jesús Millán, Encarna Nicolás, Madalena de Pazzis, Ma. Antonia Peña, Manuel Pérez Ledesma, Vicente Pérez Moreda, José Manuel Pérez García, José Antonio Piqueras, Paul Preston, Joaquín Recaño, Ricardo
Robles, Isabel Rodríguez Zurro, Ma. Cruz Romeo, Pedro Ruíz Torres, Jorge Sánchez Fernández, Antoni Simón Tarrès, Ignaci Terradas and Ramón Villares. (I apologize in advance to any I may have inadvertently overlooked; a
last-minute computer crash lost for ever the original list which I have had to recompile from memory).

 I owe great thanks to Paloma Botella for her outstanding statistical work and to Carla and Blanca Marín’s mathematical skills in elaborating demographic figures. Without Amparo Hinarejos, who classified and kept track of
thousands of documents, the research effort would have ended in chaos.

 Far exceeding an agent’s normal duties, Rachel Calder saw this book through to publication for which I am truly grateful.

 It has become almost an authorial platitude to thank wife and family for their support during the long years of researching and writing. In this case it is far from platitudinous. My wife, Aurora Bosch, patiently and lovingly
supported long absences physical and mental over the past ten years and as a professional historian gave me invaluable advice. My son, Mark, in the antipodes, deprived himself of much needed sleep from his demanding work to read
and criticize successive drafts; and my daughter, Jessica, provided me with some invaluable suggestions. To all I owe immense gratitude and love.

===== FILE: OEBPS/07_Fore.xhtml =====
Napoleon’s Cursed War

 Foreword

 Amid the vast compendium of histories of the Peninsular War, the appearance of yet another book requires some explanation. It would, of course, be vain to hope to add anything new to the overall map of this well-charted
conflict; but within it one area has remained virtually unexplored: the unremitting popular Spanish resistance to Napoleon’s attempted seizure of the Spanish homeland.

 Over six long years in a nation still proud of its tradition as an age-old Catholic monarchy and defender of the true faith, the bloody struggle was unique in French-occupied countries. (Anti-Napoleonic revolts at different
times in other largely Catholic areas – Naples, Sicily, the Tyrol – were by comparison minor, surmountable regional affairs. Even Napoleon’s Russian disaster in 1812 owed more to snow and disease than to pitched battles and
guerrilla resistance.) Elsewhere in Europe, however, local elites and populations accepted the French imperial system; but not in Spain, France’s ally which Napoleon had treacherously invaded and where he had proceeded to depose
its new young Bourbon king in favour of his own brother. Reaction to the emperor’s attempt to take over the nation, unlike his policy in other defeated countries, aroused a popular Spanish resistance which continued unabated even
during the two and a half years when Wellington did not once venture from Portugal into the Spanish interior.