

 There he worked for some fifteen years on his final achievement, a history of the Peninsular War to match that of the Civil War. He conceived it as a history from below comparable to Blood of Spain . But after some six years in
the archives of Madrid, Barcelona, Simancas and London, he realized that in any close sense this was impossible. 21 No letters, diaries, memoirs of ordinary people had survived in more than vestigial quantity: their voices could
not be directly recovered. So he shifted instead to a prosopography of those who fought, hungered, rioted and died in the convulsion that followed Napoleon’s abolition of the Bourbon monarchy in 1808, as the ground-bass of a
vast, tragic composition in which rulers, nobles, priests, officers, landowners, merchants, as well as villagers and urban labourers all play their parts. Napoleon’s Cursed War begins with a magisterial class map of Spain under
the ancien régime on the eve of the catastrophe, and ends with five statistical appendices, the last – ‘The Human Costs of War (and Peace)’ – on the demographic tally of deaths incurred and lives foregone, in what the Spanish
like to call their War of Independence. Between these differing objective inventories unfolds a dramatic narrative, tying together military battles, political conspiracies, ideological rallying cries, social conflicts and
economic ordeals into a complex skein composed of the colliding interests, aims, impulses, designs and blunders of all the forces in play, from top to bottom of Spanish society and of the French occupation. The written
expressions – pamphlets, songs, reports, polemics, proclamations – of all these interlocking struggles, between loyalists, liberals, afrancesados , the foreign enemy, rich and poor and those in the middle, punctuate the text as
once the oral testimonies of survivors of the Civil War. As in Blood of Spain , here too ‘Episodes’ and ‘Militancies’ highlight collective moments and individual destinies of particular colour or intensity. 22

 The title of the book avoids the claim of any war of independence, as if the country had not been a sovereign state for centuries. What of Napoleon, the author of an invasion he would ultimately himself not merely regret, as he
did his attack on Russia, but condemn? 23 His first political error, as this history shows, was to abolish the Bourbon dynasty outright, installing his brother as ruler, rather than preserve it as the façade of a satellite state,
a stipulation the contemptible Ferdinand VII would have accepted as a condition of keeping his throne. Napoleon could impose his siblings or subordinates as rulers in the Netherlands, West Germany or Italy, but made no such
attempt in Prussia or Austria, when they were at his mercy – these were powers that could not be so played with, even in defeat. In treating Spain as if it were no more than a principality of the kind dotted across the former
regions, he committed a double mistake. The country was far more backward than the prosperous zone stretching from the Rhine to the Po, where there was a social basis among local elites for modern post-feudal administration, and
French rule was not unwelcome. In the archaic ancien régime of Spain, where ‘vassals’ was still a current term – this was how a court official could still address crowds waiting outside the royal palace in Madrid on May 2, 1808,
to rouse them to arms against the French, of which there is a wonderful account here – and the Inquisition in place, there was only the thinnest potential support for the enlightened side of Napoleonic rule, its reforms becoming
a dead letter in the inferno of fighting that followed their proclamation.