

 But it was not only the negative lack of a sufficient social basis for modernization along French post-revolutionary lines that undid Napoleon’s takeover of Spain. It was the positive attachment of such wide strata of the
population to their monarchy, and fury at the indignity of foreign rule. The tragic paradox at the centre of Napoleon’s Cursed War is the heroism of so many of the common people in defence of a political and ideological order – a
stagnant absolutism and benighted church – which had always given them so little, and then paid them back with vicious post-war reaction. The reasons for that lay deep in the history of the country. Spain had been the dominant
power in Europe for 150 years, till defeat by France at the Battle of Rocroi in 1643. A century and half of decline had followed; but memory of this past was inseparable from Spanish ‘pride’. Even amid the decadence of the old
order, Spain still possessed the largest colonial empire in the world. But culturally, this was a society untouched by Protestantism or even any variant of Gallicanism, in the grip of a brand of Catholicism forged by expulsion of
Jews and Muslims: historically closed, xenophobic, intolerant and fused with national identity. In geographical isolation behind the barrier of the Pyrenees, there was less import of Enlightenment ideas than elsewhere, and little
urban civil society to receive them. It was these asphyxiating conditions that explain the apparently perverse attachment of the people to everything most of Europe by then despised – intensified by the immediate background of
the disrepute into which Godoy’s regime had fallen, investing Ferdinand VII with his ludicrous aura by way of compensation.

 In the overall construction of Napoleon’s Cursed War , the foreword explains, central attention goes to ‘the common people’s initiatives and responses’ to the conflagration, for ‘a social history from below of the resistance’.
Not a few patriotic myths are dismantled in the process. Popular attitudes were far from uniform, popular initiatives rarely dissociated altogether from action by superiors, themselves divided and frequently compromised. There
was no spontaneous or universal uprising against the foreigners. But stripped of any romanticism, the record of resistance from below to French imperial power still remains unique. No other part of Europe came near such
protracted and effective fighting by commoners, in urban sieges and rural engagements alike. This was, famously, the experience that gave the word ‘guerrilla’ to the world. What weight did such guerrilla forces have in the
balance of the war? The fine military historian Charles Esdaile, whose Peninsular War of 2002, comparable in scale, is the necessary foil to Napoleon’s Cursed War , has argued that in any strict sense it was nugatory, many
guerrillas actually fighting as units of Spanish armies that were more effective than hitherto believed, while many others were predatory opportunists and random looters of no political complexion at all, preying on whomever they
could. 24 Had Napoleon not depleted his troops in Spain for the Russian campaign, The Peninsular War concludes, he could easily have crushed such resistance to him.