

 These first two years, moreover, were, until the starvation year of 1812, the most tormented of the war. They witnessed the multiform anti-Napoleonic risings and the popular resistance’s early victories, followed by crushing
military defeats at the hands of the Grande Armée , led by Napoleon himself; the worst hardships and the greatest population losses; the creation of a new patriot central power, and almost the largest territorial extent of French
military occupation; the beginning of the South American colonial revolt; the decline of the Spanish armies’ effective fighting strength; and the rise of the guerrilla. These events in themselves explain the need to devote a
large part of the book to these two years.

 For want of a better word, I have called patriots those who resisted Napoleon; it was the term they used of themselves. But their monopoly of the word is not historically justifiable: those Spaniards who supported Napoleon and
the regime he installed in occupied Spain considered themselves equally, if not more, patriotic in their desire to avoid a fratricidal conflict which could only thwart the pursuit of much needed reform – a pursuit that the more
progressive of the anti-Napoleonic resistance was also bent on. The clash of ‘patriotisms’ was but one of the many ironies of the Spanish war.

 On a different terminological level, I use the word villager in place of – but also in a wider sense than – peasantry, while recognizing that the former is neither an accepted historical nor sociological category. There are two
reasons for this: the foremost is the fact that Spanish landworkers never referred then (or now) to themselves or others as ‘peasants’, but always by the category of their relationship to the land (day labourer, sharecropper,
tenant, and so on.) This is not to deny that Rodney Hilton’s definition of the peasantry applied to them: ‘those who possess but do not necessarily own their subsistence’s means of production, and whose basic unit of work is the
family. Day labourers and rural artisans are included in this definition. All are obliged by the dominant classes to produce a surplus over and beyond their subsistence and reproduction needs in order to sustain these classes’. *
However, in using the alternative villager I wish to indicate a broader sense of the population of a village or rural township: an (inter-classist) community that includes, but goes beyond, the definition of peasantry, and which,
despite its inner conflictivity, adopted certain common cultural attitudes which to no little extent shaped all those who lived in it, including the better off. In this extended meaning villagers can be read as the rural
population.

 Two other words will not be found in the book: ‘bourgeoisie’ and ‘class’. The former did not enter the Spanish language until a great many years after the war and then only in a translation of a French work; and during the
period under consideration here, the most that can be said is that a proto-bourgeoisie was in the process of forming. I preferred therefore not to use the word. As to ‘class’ in the modern sense, the word was unknown. Classes, on
the other hand, meaning groups or kinds of people whose occupations (or lack of them) were broadly similar, was frequently used and I have followed this precedent.