

 It is sometimes forgotten today that the Peninsular War began in Spain over the nation’s immediate destiny as France’s ally. In 1808, both sides stumbled – Napoleon aggressively, the Spanish Old Regime’s rulers more than
reluctantly – into war. Neither expected an armed conflict and both shared a similar view of the necessary outcome should one occur: Spain would inevitably go down to defeat in the face of Napoleon’s superior might. And so it
would and should have been, had not the Spanish people risen in their country’s defence and new patriotic governing bodies seized power from the old rulers; and had not Britain, eager to exploit an anti-Napoleonic struggle on
France’s southern flank, come to their aid.

 From the resistance sprang a political revolution which deeply fissured, without destroying, Spain’s Old Order, enunciating the principle of popular sovereignty and heralding the (male) population’s entry into the political
arena. It was Spain’s first step into the modern era.

 The causes and experience of the Spanish civilian resistance and revolution form the theme of this book. Its major concern is to elucidate the common people’s initiatives and responses to the war while simultaneously taking
account of their commoner superiors who initiated the anti-Napoleonic risings in 1808 and used them to seize regional power in the people’s name; and among them those who carried the political revolution forward. In short, the
book embarks on a social history from below of the resistance and an account of individuals’ lived experience during the war.

 This dual aim is the cause of some of the book’s idiosyncrasies. In the first place, widespread illiteracy among the lower orders made for a scarcity of written sources, and even when these were discovered, they were of a
fragmentary nature, difficult to generalize unless repeated in distinct places or regions. And their shard-like character also made it virtually impossible to follow the same individual through distinct experiences. Often I would
have given an arm and a leg to have been able to interview a sample of the survivors; instead I was obliged to create new sources – frequently as databases, built out of the fragments – to explore important areas of the
resistance and the social changes (or lack of them) that the war induced (or maintained alive).

 In those aspects where the fragments were too few to create a new source, I preferred to array them in a mosaic of narrative detail rather than generalize on the basis of insufficient evidence. Some may object that I haven’t
seen the wood for the trees. I would reply that the trees are the wood (or more usually a copse) seen in close-up. If any readers get lost, they’ll soon see on which side of the trunk the moss grows. At other times, however,
where the specific conditions of a particular form of resistance – the guerrilla, for example – demanded it, the focus was widened beyond the trees to explain the geo-social and historical context in which they could grow. To
those discomforted by the narrative break, I can say that these explanatory interludes may be passed over lightly without losing the general thread.