

 At the regional or provincial level, this imbrication of powers was reproduced in the functions of the captain general who was as much a civilian as a military power. Supreme army commander of his region – though he did not
necessarily lead his troops in time of war – he also presided over the audiencia in the supreme regional organ of civil power, the Real Acuerdo. Simultaneously a court of justice and a political administrative council, the
audiencia’s duties ranged from maintaining public order and food supplies to providing army recruits and soldiers’ billeting, while the intendente, a civil servant appointed by the king, held a power parallel to the captain
general’s: this official controlled all treasury matters and local finances, but was also responsible for a wide spectrum of judicial, fiscal, political and economic matters, the latter especially in relation to military affairs.

 This overlapping of powers, a legacy of medieval feudalism, served to maintain the social order. The role of the judiciary in the affairs of government, for example, created ‘a formidable instrument at the service of political
power,’ 1 in other words, of the dominant social order: Church, nobility and state. In the eighteenth, as in earlier centuries, this unity of powers seemed quite natural, and it was their division, brought about by the American
and French revolutions, which appeared ‘an enormously artificial construction’. 2

 But it also blocked the state’s centralizing aspirations. It was one thing for the crown to decree laws and another to see that these laws were put into effect. When they ran counter to the local oligarchy’s interests they were
quietly sabotaged. Despite the intendentes and state-appointed local corregidores, the monarchy lacked an adequate administrative machinery in the regions to back them up, and relied on local powers to carry out its orders. The
result was a ‘dispersion of power in a multiplicity of … hierarchies, each relatively autonomous in relation to the crown, although subordinated to it as the supreme power’. 3

 Alongside the overlapping, there lay the clear legal demarcation of the social order. The organization of society by estates, each with its own laws, was hierarchical and distinctly defined. With the exception of the clergy,
where there was choice, everyone else was born into a pre-existing estate. In real life things were more complex: by the eighteenth century belonging to an estate was often more a juridical than a functional matter, as the
untitled nobility’s situation demonstrated (see below).

 Within the social structure there was also some movement. By the late eighteenth century a service nobility existed, created by the monarchs to reward special services to their persons or the state. Lower down the social scale,
economic expansion in mid-century had created a stratum of the new wealthy: colonial shippers, señorial dues-farmers, government contractors, grain merchants, large land-leasing farmers, among whom some had become members of
local oligarchies. Even more important for the political revolution that broke out in 1808, the basic tenets of a laissez-faire ideology had evolved in some important sectors of the enlightened classes.