

 Since social status counted for more than professionalism and personal valour, and promotion was by seniority and normally slow, the officer corps’ average age was high: sixty-one for colonels, fifty-nine for captains and
fifty-eight for lieutenants. 27 These were hardly likely to be innovative officers; and with a few outstanding exceptions, they were not well trained in the art of war.

 The second Bourbon innovation was to turn officers into all-powerful political functionaries as the supreme military and civil authority of regions and provinces. Almost inevitably the higher echelons of the officer corps became
‘politicized’ as they were called upon by different court factions to support their power struggles. Promotion was the usual form of reward for support. The army became top-heavy with officers: one for every twenty men, twice the
number of the Prussian army. (Only the pre-revolutionary French army exceeded the Spanish figure: one officer to every sixteen men. 28 ) In the four years from the start of Spain’s war against the French Revolution (1793–1795),
the royal favourite, Manuel Godoy, increased the number of generals by nearly sixty percent, one for every 290 other ranks – or two generals per infantry battalion. 29

 The late eighteenth-century reformers, more concerned about the state of the treasury than the military, whose political power they had, moreover, come to fear, compounded the problems. They had not planned on an army to fight
in peninsular Spain. The main enemy, Britain, was a naval , not land, power; neighbouring France, with a large army, was an ally; Portugal represented no military threat. The role of Spain’s regular army was conceived of as
defending the colonies, in situ or as an ancillary of the navy which was the first priority. The 30,000-strong militias were thought sufficient to defend metropolitan Spain. 30

 Manning a standing army at least cost to the treasury was another problem. Volunteers and the levies of vagrants, vagabonds, beggars and the like, who were periodically cleared from the major towns and condemned to serve, proved
insufficient. Obligatory military service for one in five of the able male population, decreed in 1770, was highly unpopular and generally ineffective in raising the standard of recruit, since those in danger of being selected by
lot ‘absented’ themselves from their villages or, if chosen, could pay another to serve in their place; in either case it was the poorest, least able villagers who were conscripted. There was a constant shortage of men. *
Unsurprisingly, the proportion of Spanish military to the civilian population was below the European average and significantly lower than Prussia, Austria and even Russia. †

 A soldier’s life was harsh in the extreme: subject to very severe discipline, poorly paid (when paid at all), always hungry on meagre rations, wearing tattered uniforms that had worn out before their allotted time; it was little
wonder that, as the Inspector of Infantry wrote at the beginning of 1802, many rankers deserted, ‡ or committed crimes and acts of indiscipline ‘with the premeditated idea of improving their lot in penal servitude’. 31