

 In attempting to maintain a larger standing army than Spain’s economic resources could adequately equip and maintain, the army declined seriously in quality in the last quarter of the eighteenth century. 32 Over and above
officers’ low level of technical instruction and recruitment problems lay the profound contradiction of a professional army organized in its chain of command on feudal social lines which bore no relation to the functions to be
carried out. 33

 A secondary, but highly important effect of enlightened military policy with its colonial–naval and cost-cutting emphases, was the reduction of the cavalry’s role: only dragoons, still considered mounted infantry in Spain, and
thus able to fight on foot, were valued. * The Spanish patriots went into the Napoleonic war desperately short of cavalry, especially of the light cavalry which Napoleon used to such effect as the advance screen of his armies,
while the lack of well-trained heavy cavalry more than once turned their disadvantage into staggering defeats by Napoleon’s generals.

 In time of war, there was no general staff to plan campaigns – though such had existed in France since 1763; 34 and the army had no baggage train of its own but had to hire (or commandeer) mules, carts and their drivers (if any
of these scarce items were to be had) from villagers or contractors. In short, before a field army could move considerable time was taken in resolving administrative and logistic problems.

 The War of the Convention against revolutionary France revealed these failures. † The army’s humiliation brought on an identity crisis among officers who, on the one hand, had admired the French army with which some had trained
and alongside which others had fought as allies while, on the other hand, intensely hating the revolutionary ideals that had come to inform it. Their accepted view of the world had been overturned: yesterday’s allies, the French,
were today’s enemy, and the former enemy (Britain) now an ally. 35 In 1808, they had again to confront such fundamental and disorientating changes. Given their state, the Spanish officer corps in general went through the
Napoleonic war ‘without being able to understand or support either the new strategy of mass warfare or the tactics of guerrilla warfare. They had been trained for very different suppositions than those it was their lot to live
through.’ 36

 With an officer corps like this, it was hardly to be wondered at that so many of the new recruits who had enthusiastically enlisted to fight Napoleon deserted or took up the struggle on their own as guerrillas.

 SPANISH ENLIGHTENMENT AND LIBERALIZATION

 The Bourbons’ determination to reform and return Spain to a position of power in the world, necessary to strengthen the state and defend its colonial empire, led them to appoint enlightened men to their bureaucracy who tried to
put into governmental practice the lessons of ‘reason’ learnt from France and elsewhere. Thus, many of the major figures of the Spanish Enlightenment from mid-century on were high state functionaries. * The questions they raised
on how best to develop the country, and on the individual’s rights, continued to reverberate throughout the Napoleonic era.