

 The Church was a state within the state, the monarchy’s single wealthiest institution, with its own judicial and tax-raising system, the latter generally more efficient than the state’s. Its total annual income, in
mid-eighteenth century, has been calculated at just over 450 million reales per annum or one-fifth of gross domestic income. Its lands in the kingdom of Castilla * produced one-quarter of all produce, it received nearly
three-quarters of all mortgage interest and almost half the dues from feudal rights, tithes and rent on land and urban property; it was an urban Church living off the land, in which it had invested heavily in the eighteenth
century at prices it could easily afford but which were too expensive for the ordinary villager: clerics were well aware of the land’s profitability at a time of inflationary agricultural prices. † The Church’s economic weight in
the kingdom of Castilla, ‘bore down on the population with relentless uniformity’. 8 But as a territorial organization it was no more uniform than the monarchy itself, a palimpsest of historical accretion: Madrid, capital of a
world empire and with a population of nearly 200,000, did not have episcopal status or a cathedral, while a township like Sigüenza, with 4,000 inhabitants, was one of Spain’s richest dioceses. 9 Unequal diocesan divisions
resulted in an institutional multiformity and an uneven distribution of ecclesiastical wealth: prelates took seventy percent of tithes and parish priests, who were the Church’s loyal tax-collector, eleven percent on which they
had to live and keep up their church. Many rural priests were often so poor that they had to have recourse to their parishioners.

 Unlike eighteenth-century France, the Church was not the preserve of the upper nobility. High ecclesiastical office tended to be filled by university-educated commoners or untitled nobles – many of them reform-minded prelates –
in the same way as the royal administration; while at its lower levels it was an avenue of social ascent for the labouring classes’ sons. Although the clergy numbered in 1787 just under 134,000 or about 1.3% of the total
population, of the 60,000 ordained priests only approximately one-quarter served as parish rectors or curates. This left over 2,000 of the country’s 19,000 parishes without spiritual assistance.

 The intellectual and spiritual level of parish priests varied from the virtually uneducated to the enlightened. The vicar of Ciudad Real reported that in his district ‘many priests were to be found who were so stupified and
ignorant that it was a triumph for them to understand the canon of the Mass’. In the isolated Andalucian vicarates of Huéscar and Cazorla priests were found living with their mistresses, gambling and hunting, engaged in
smuggling, and some who refused to wear clerical dress when they performed their sacerdotal duties. 10

 On the other hand, there were those who ‘identified with the interests of their flocks … [and] defended the poor against the powerful and the señores’. This was certainly the case of some Andalucian parish priests who were among
the leaders of their municipal councils’ legal battle over their señorial lords’ usurpation of village lands. 11