

 Until the first decade of the nineteenth century, these internal social movements were of no immediate threat to the Old Order, for in this hierarchically organized society, nobility and Church played a dominant role. The Church
was the more important of the two. Spaniards inhabited one of the oldest political units in Europe which had spanned almost identical borders since the early sixteenth century; if they had a collective identity it was that they
shared the same religion. ‘The whole of the ancien régime’s legitimising discourse and the vigilant eyes of institutions such as the Inquisition had left a seemingly indelible Catholic legacy.’ 4 Alongside allegiance to the
crown, this religious identity, the sense of being defenders of the true faith, ‘God’s chosen people among gentiles’, and the ‘spiritual reserve of the West’, 5 was without doubt the most important national foundation of a
society which tended in general to look back on its heritage rather than forward to an innovatory future. Beyond these two national loyalties, at the popular level, there was little or no sense of belonging to more than a local
community, or at most a region, which was hardly surprising given the poor communications and the lack of literacy.

 The absolute monarchy rested then not only on the interlocking foundations of nobility and Church, but more widely on acceptance of their leading role in society. Status (of the individual as member of a recognized grouping) and
stasis (of the social formation) were two essential characteristics of this patrimonial society. The weakness of absolutism, its insufficient centralization and bureaucracy to bypass provincial powers and popular local loyalties
would, paradoxically, turn out to provide much of the country’s strength in fighting Napoleon.

 THE CHURCH

 As the sole effective national institution, the Church did its utmost to ensure that everyone accepted his or her place in the hierarchical order of things: in educating the young and in sermons and private admonitions, it
stressed the obligation of submission and obedience to authority and each individual was instructed to observe ‘the obligations which correspond to his estate and occupation.’ At the ideological level it controlled the expression
of ideas and personal and social behaviour – a role in which the Inquisition, as guardian of orthodoxy and morality, and as ecclesiastical censor, was widely involved: here the Holy Tribunal’s secrecy and its capacity to destroy
a person’s life – if not literally, then morally and financially – created ‘a pervasive psychology of fear’ which gave the Inquisition its special power; 6 and lastly, in the Church’s function of administering public charity
through its management of beneficial foundations. The clergy was well-placed for these tasks because its leading role in society was uncontested, and at times of calamity unfailingly predominated. ‘Drought, hail, frosts,
infestations, the saving of life itself in times of scarcity or illness – the Church was always called upon.’ 7