

 The Inquisition was a state within the ecclesiastical state, but also a power within the temporal state. Under Carlos III it was, however, a power in decline. After exiling one inquisitor general for obeying Rome rather than the
monarchy, Carlos III appointed an enlightened bishop to the post. In 1782, the latter admitted that fear of the Inquisition’s censorship, now regulated by the state, was ‘nearly extinct’. But this did not prevent the Inquisition
from banning virtually the entire range of foreign enlightened thought, from Montesquieu to Rousseau, Voltaire to Diderot, Adam Smith ( The Wealth of Nations ) to Defoe’s Robinson Crusoe . The Inquisition’s proscription, however,
did not thwart the enlightened securing and reading clandestinely these authors’ works in the original. What it did, rather, was to prevent their translation and publication in Spanish. 17

 But the Holy Office’s structure – permanent tribunals in the different regions, inquisitors, prisons, familiares (lay informers and inquisitorial police force) – remained in place. The Inquisition, with its long history, was
arguably a more centralized and effective power for repression than the state itself. And, as always in the past, it could be called upon in defence of the state.

 The central role allotted to the Holy Office by the government during the panic of the French Revolution reinforced the threat that hung over Spaniards’ heads, and many at all levels of society – from government ministers to
obscure parish priests – would suffer the attentions already recently known to others. On being charged in 1797 by the Valladolid tribunal for possessing proscribed works, Juan Antonio Posse, a young rural curate in a remote
mountain village of León, believed himself ‘doomed’. Before setting off, he hid with great difficulty under rocks on the roadside the works of Pedro Tamburini – ‘the Inquisition’s most formidable opponent’ – taking with him only
a relatively harmless dissertation by the Italian professor, whose enlightened Catholicism was the pole star of Spanish Catholic reformers.

 I knew only too well the conduct of this Holy Tribunal and of its satellites who, excited by the most frenzied superstition, persecuted without moderation, examination or formality [those who had spoken] indiscrete words or
other trifles …

 The tribunal commissioner, who appeared not to know of Tamburini, demanded the forbidden works. Posse gave him the dissertation. The commissioner looked at its cover, read his orders, and told the curate that he must hand it
over. ‘Happy to make the sacrifice and to be freed of this henchman’s claws, I left.’ *

 Posse, a Galician smallholder’s son, was fortunate; though other prisons awaited him later in life, he would not see the inside of an Inquisitorial prison.

 *

 There were two important consequences of the Church reform movement. The most significant was that the reformers believed that the forces opposed to change were too strong to overcome without state intervention. This discouraged
reforming self-reliance within the Church, and encouraged a too-ready dependence on state legislation. The imbrication of the state in the Church’s internal affairs led opponents of eccelesiastical reform to lay the blame on the
state – or rather the state’s political structure – at crucial moments of shaping a new constitutional monarchy during the war. Opposition to Church reform – especially, but not solely, the Inquisition’s abolition – reinforced
clerical resistance to political change.