

 The second consequence was that many university students who, as adults, took part in the war were exposed to – and espoused – the reform movement, particularly at Salamanca university where the curriculum had, after long
resistance, been finally modernized. The trajectories of many of these reformers during the war would criss-cross one another’s as some stayed loyal to the patriot cause and others served the Bonaparte regime. The conflict
tragically split the enlightened, young and old, as it split the governance of Spain in what, effectively, became a civil war within the larger Napoleonic war.

 THE NOBILITY AND THE FEUDAL LAND SYSTEM

 With one important exception, that of the army officer corps (see below), the Spanish Bourbons excluded the aristocracy from any dominant role in the affairs of state. Unlike in France, by the end of the eighteenth century the
old Spanish titled nobility had lost most of its political influence, which had fallen into the hands of commoners and minor untitled nobles. 18 Nonetheless, the nobility was the essential vertebra of the social order and its
apex. By its status alone, the aristocracy enjoyed honour, dignity, esteem. ‘To be a noble was the secret ambition of every Spaniard.’ 19

 In 1797, according to the not always very reliable Godoy census, the ‘nobility’ numbered just over 400,000; but of these only 1,323 were titled nobles. The remainder were hidalgos – the children or descendants of those who
claimed nobility. As the entire Basque-born male population of Vizcaya and Guipúzcoa claimed hidalguía , just over 100,000 hidalgos were to be found in those two provinces alone; * and, for historical reasons, a very large
proportion of the remainder also lived in the other northern regions where their way of life was often virtually indistinguishable from the lower orders. South of Madrid, however, their numbers fell sharply, they tended to own
land and their social status was higher.

 The fact that hidalgos could be found in every walk of life did not mean that they were an insignificant social grouping. On the contrary, in their educated middle and upper echelons, they represented an important – arguably
indeed one of the most important – strata of Spanish society. They were a working nobility and their very numbers, especially in the north, made them a large pool of potential recruits to a series of positions and professions.
From their ranks came high government officials and prelates, merchants and bankers, lawyers and writers, and virtually all army and naval officers, since hidalguía was a condition of entrance to the military colleges. In the
regions their wealthier members, who were usually medium-sized landowners, often with an entailed estate, were almost always to be found among the local elite. In Galicia, for example, though relatively few in number, they were
the elite.

 It was, however, the titled nobility, especially the thirty or so grandees, who were the large landowners and principal señores . * Thanks to strategic marriages and fortuitous inheritances, the magnates had become a national,
inter-related nobility with domains in different parts of the country. Even so, this tight-knit aristocratic grouping had no real political coherence, some of its members’ only desire being to enjoy once again a determining role
in the country’s government.