

 Agriculture progress in the kingdom of Castilla was further blocked by the nobility’s use – the Church had its own variant (mortmain) – of the legal artifice of entailment to protect their holdings from being squandered by
indebted heirs. The entailed secular estate ( mayorazgo ) was indivisible, inalienable and not liable for debt, and inheritable exclusively by the oldest son. * More importantly from the agricultural point of view, the entail
could not legally be let on long leases, thus making the improvement of the land of no interest to tenants. And since it could also not be sold, the mayorazgo was especially galling at a time of land hunger at the turn of the
century, and was generally criticized as leaving the estates poorly farmed. To Floridablanca, the reforming first minister, entail was ‘a seminary of idleness’. † 23

 Each municipality also had large tracts of commons which could not in principle be sold. Estimates of the total amount of inalienable land varied from half of the entire territory of Spain (of which only forty percent was
arable) to sixty percent of the country’s productive land. 24

 Finally, one further point about landownership needs to be made. The question of who owned the land was not always as relevant as that of who controlled and benefited from it. One reason for this was again an overlapping of
rights: title to the land and its hereditary use could be vested in distinct individuals (or corporative bodies, in the case of title-holders). In a wide swathe of northern Spain stretching from Galicia and parts of Castilla la
Vieja through the Basque country, Navarra and Aragón to Cataluña, different forms of hereditary leases were common, with the result that tenants felt themselves to be ‘owners’ of the land they worked. During the war, the sense of
protecting their own ‘property’ became an important factor in fomenting popular resistance, especially the guerrillas.

 THE ARMY – PRESERVE OF THE NOBLES

 [The standing army had] a corps of generals sufficient to command all the armies of the world and who, if they had the soldiers, could conquer all the regions of the Universe; a multitude of regiments short of men though
hardened veterans in the fatigues of curling their hair, whitening their uniforms with flour, marching like dancers in a quadrille; wasting powder in salvos in the meadows, and serving to oppress their fellow citizens. (León de
Arroyal, ‘Pan y Toros’, 1793) 25

 The most acerbic critic of Spain’s Old Order in the eighteenth century’s last decade, Arroyal’s irony undershot the mark: the army’s situation was more critical than he perceived. Many of its failings were the outcome of social
and political decisions which, uncorrected, still affected it at the beginning of the Napoleonic war. Absorbing (with the navy) seventy percent of the royal budget, 26 one of the fateful practices originated by the early
Bourbons, who needed the nobility’s support, was to turn the officer corps into the latter’s preserve, restoring the nobility to their original feudal status as the ‘sword’ of the realm. This process grew so intense during the
latter part of the eighteenth century that the corps became exclusively noble in character, ‘turned in on itself’, a typical feudal social pyramid: at the base, the soldiery made up of the lowest of commoners, a middle stratum of
hidalgo officers, and an apex of titled nobility who dominated the top commands. *