

 In addition to the secular clergy, the religious orders had just under 40,000 monks, friars and novices in 2,000 houses; and just over 24,000 nuns and novices in 1,000 convents. The majority of the male orders were mendicants
(monks represented only one-tenth of the orders’ numbers); and because urban centres provided the easiest pickings for alms the friars, alongside the ordinary clergy, were concentrated in towns and cities. * In Sevilla the
religious orders outnumbered the secular priesthood, alone providing 1,600 members for the great religious processions. 12

 Like the secular, the regular clergy presented a gamut running from ‘ignorance and superstition’ to spirituality and erudition. A well-educated elite held high office, presiding over a large body of friars whose ‘intellectual
quality and religious commitment left much to be desired’. 13 Some friaries and convents were in a state that left more than something to be desired, as the diocesan visitor sent to inspect the Dominicans in Villanueva de los
Infantes, a small township in the Mancha, reported.

 The nuns and friars mingle daily together for indecent purposes, from which vile coitus two children have resulted … I saw with my own eyes the nuns leaving their convent at night and making for the friary. And in the daytime,
the friars scandalously entering into the enclosed convent. 14

 However unruly the behaviour of a minority, most friars and parish priests enjoyed the lower orders’ respect. Great numbers of them were recruited from the same social strata; and if their religious observances did not meet the
Church’s highest demands, the same could be said of the majority of their flock who evinced a common trait, ‘ignorance, and an evident superficiality of theological knowledge, a defect which made it easy to fall into
superstitious practices far removed from religious rectitude’. 15

 In its determination to control all aspects of society, including the ecclesiastical estate, Bourbon absolutism had wrested from an ineffectual papacy the right to appoint Spain’s bishops, and it ensured that a number of
enlightened clerics were put in place. These were generally in favour of expanding royal intervention in Church affairs in order to secure the reforms they believed necessary because the state alone had the authority to confront
Rome and deeply entrenched religious customs in Spain. These enlightened reformers and their lay supporters were, by the late 1780s, opposed to the religious orders, the Inquisition, and papal temporal authority over the Spanish
Church. They believed in a personal, more interior religion, in ‘knowledge of the religious truth, and in the practice of a simple liturgy’. 16 They were as hostile to superstitious ‘popular’ devotions as they were to the
extravagances of the official cult. One of their earliest and greatest achievements, no doubt, was to secure the Inquisition’s agreement to the Bible being read in the vernacular, though this met strong opposition from
ultramontane members of the clergy.