

 How much land the titled nobility owned has never been satisfactorily calculated, † and for a reason: their predominance rested not solely on their own landholdings but as much on a feudal structure for extracting the surplus of
those who tilled land which the señores did not own. It was yet another case of overlapping rights; the system was known as señorial and the lands and rural municipalities over which it was exercised a señorío .

 In the main, the system’s widespread usage arose from bankrupt Hapsburg monarchs, the Bourbon’s predecessors who, to raise money, sold their jurisdictional rights to crown property; these covered the exercise of justice –
including on occasion capital punishment – and local administration under the royal prerogative of appointing magistrates and town councils in crown domains. Apart from these, the monarchy also sold its feudal dues and rents,
which could include a part of the crown’s taxes (and not infrequently a portion of tithes), its rights to levy tributes and tolls and to exercise monopolistic feudal privileges over mills, bakeries, smithies, even brothels and,
of course, hunting rights. But the monarchs did not sell the land itself.

 Though for historically distinct reasons señoríos, notably in Andalucía and Cataluña, included landownership, the vast majority were jurisdictional only. While the titled nobility occupied the largest single number of these
lordships, the Church, monasteries and military orders also exercised and profited from them. In Spain as a whole these different types of señoríos outnumbered royal domains. ‡

 By the end of the eighteenth century it was estimated that more than one-quarter of the Spanish population and over sixty-five percent of cultivated land was under secular and ecclesiastical señorial rule. 20 Another estimate
had it that nine-tenths of all wheat on the market, which in normal times kept the urban population in bread, came from noble and ecclesiastical señorial rights, rents and tithes extracted in kind from those who worked the land.
21

 Throughout the second half of the eighteenth century, the increasing belligerence of municipalities which challenged the lord’s legal rights led to court cases that could and did drag on for generations, to the señores’
considerable cost. Though townships and villages usually lost in the end, unchallengeable ownership became a matter of importance to the nobility. During the Napoleonic war, it was to no small extent this material interest which
kept most of the latter – and other would-be landowners – aligned with the patriot reformers, who wanted to introduce a free market in land. The more aware nobles were prepared to exchange their constantly contested señorial
rights for a more profitable and less troublesome ownership; and this, as will be seen in the book, they achieved when, under certain conditions, the Cortes of Cádiz turned señores into outright landowners.

 With very rare exceptions, the grandees did not invest in new agrarian methods to increase agricultural productivity on their estates. The money went on sumptuary spending, especially in maintaining vast numbers of retainers, or
at best – if the Dukes of Medinaceli and Infantado were representative – into reorganizing and centralizing estate administrations to make them more efficient to ensure that they benefited from rising agrarian prices. 22