

 This period also saw the rise of a new type of large farmer, sometimes a nouveau riche villager but more often a wealthy outsider, with the means to rent big estates en bloc from noble landowners or the Church. By subletting the
worst lands to small village tenants they were often able to exploit nearly rent-free the estate’s best arable. But these new tenant farmers – grain merchants, government contractors, lawyers and nobles’ own bailifs among them –
did not make an agricultural revolution; instead they tried to turn a profit within the existing system. When it suited their ends, they might make common cause with the villagers against a noble or ecclesiastical señor, whose
‘ancient’ rights and prerogatives oppressed the villagers and skimmed off a portion of the large tenants’ profits. But in general the new farmers’ and villagers’ interests were opposed. The former wanted to buy land to exploit;
they stood therefore on the side of liberalization which would release land onto the market from the ‘dead hand’ of Church mortmain or noble entails. While sometimes expressing anger that Church and nobility did not put their
lands to better use, the villagers saw only too well they would not benefit from liberalizing measures: higher bread prices, higher lease contracts, lower day wages had been the result of government measures abolishing price
controls with the aim of stimulating agrarian development. * Though villagers did not particularly question the existing system of landownership, they might regret, even resent that they did not own the land they worked but they
did not claim that they should own it. It was not necessarily this that would guarantee them a living. A villager lived better or worse depending on the extent of the land he could work with security of tenure.

 ‘Apathetic’, ‘ignorant’, ‘conservative’, ‘superstitious’ … These were the customary stereotypes imposed on the villagers by the hegemonic culture; and yet they were in practice belied in many ways. They could not, for example,
account for the vast number of villagers’ legal complaints and petitions to one or other authority about rent increases; abrogation of tenants’ contracts; nobles’ and large tenants’ claims over village commons; corn merchants
‘who have increased prices three and four times due to the free commerce of grains’; criticisms of the Church as a large landowner – two small villages in Burgos and León refused to pay any money or rent that recalled the
villagers’ ‘miserable condition of slaves of the Church’. 64 Many others refused to pay ‘medieval’ dues to the nobility, even though the amounts were derisory; and more seriously began to renege on paying tithes. †

 In the face of the new conditions they confronted, it was not ‘apathy’ but an excess of patience that characterized the villagers. Their belief that they would get justice in the end was almost always disappointed; a few crumbs
might be thrown their way, but little else, especially when a noble landowner was their adversary. As a Granada scrivener put it, ‘the powerful always win the cases brought by a tenant who has been thrown off the land’. 65