

 Artisans saw their multiplicity of guilds as a protection against social denigration. Through them the masters regulated production, quality and direct sales to the public; the fact that there were shoemakers but no shoe shops
illustrates their control of consumption. One of the guilds’ less obvious advantages was their success in guaranteeing that their members’ income differentials were kept at tolerable levels. Their takings might be low, rarely
sufficient to create substantial savings, but guilds ensured that while none individually could become particularly rich, ‘few could sink into a poverty beyond social remission’. 50 Nor did the Spanish artisan forget that not
only the French Revolution but many other countries had abolished the guilds. *

 Egalitarian impoverishment – the guild-imposed standard – impeded capital accumulation and investment in technological advance even had masters been prepared to contemplate it, which in general they were not. Moreover, the
Church was resolutely opposed to the seeking of economic success which it saw as ‘pride’ and contrary to Christian charity, distancing the soul from God to put it at the service of transitory worldy goods.

 Despite their defensive measures great numbers of masters in the more dynamic sectors like silk or cotton manufacture were already proletarianized, working for other masters or merchants as wage labour. And a majority of the
others were unable to rise above an elementary level of production, working alone without journeymen or apprentices. †

 Over the country as a whole, textiles, footwear and tailoring occupied about half of all artisans. Their productive weakness, already apparent before the war, became doubly evident from the start of the conflict when their large
number of volunteers deprived the remainder of the means to provide the Spanish armies in the field with uniforms and shoes in sufficient quantities. Patriot soldiers were constantly reported by their commanders to be barefoot
and in rags.

 The site of production and reproduction, the family was the master’s lynchpin. As a Barcelona artisan’s son, José Coroleu, recalled many years later:

 We lived in a simple, hard-working, frugal society, deeply and fanatically attached to our traditions and accustomed to considering the family as a tribe whose patriarch was venerated. No one observed his faults and all obeyed
his orders without second thought … I cannot recall that my father ever sharply reprimanded me and yet I trembled before him. 51

 If Madrid masters were anything to go by (and there was no reason to suspose they were not), urban craftsmen were far more likely to be literate than the rural population. At the very lowest guild level, half the individual
Madrid members could sign their names, and in most of the capital’s guilds the percentage ran from sixty to ninety percent. But their literacy – if indeed they could do more than sign – derived from their occupational needs
rather than from a desire for edification. 52 They owned few books and the majority of those that have been identified were religious works. Displaying the same veneration for saints as villagers, they usually had one or more
pictures, cheap prints or statues of saints in their shop and home. To be buried in a religious order’s habits was as common among them as among villagers. 53