

 The progressives believed that ‘the people’s freedom, the good of the fatherland, is the first law’. 39 And that the people themselves must be those who put into effect and carried out this law as the only guarantee that the
‘general will’ would prevail. They believed Spain needed a constitution to secure individual liberties (not least freedom from the Inquisition’s censorship), and to end the arbitrary use of absolutist state power. The ‘general
will’, as will be seen in the book, found its ultimate conclusion during the war in the adoption of national sovereignty by the first liberals of the modern political era.

 MONIED COMMONERS

 The wholesale merchant classes, who numbered little more than 6,000, a miniscule total in comparison to Britain or France at the time, were among the richest commoners; and, alongside those of Madrid, the large colonial
merchants in the Atlantic and Mediterranean ports were the wealthiest of these. Before the Napoleonic wars, the Spanish trade monopoly with its colonies had been highly profitable; and these merchants did not seriously question
the Old Order. Their single greatest number was to be found in Cádiz, the top ten percent of whom had fortunes of more than fifteen million reales each. † Madrid merchants were probably the second wealthiest, although only the
top five percent owned assets of more than ten million reales. 40 However, even many of the lesser merchants, as in Valencia, had accumulated 700,000 reales – to earn which a journeyman in the building trade would have had to
work 350 years uninterruptedly without spending a real – in little more than a single generation, and in some cases from barely any starting capital. 41

 The richest Cádiz and Sevilla merchants were not inclined to invest in manufacturing ventures. The ‘lethargic’ uses to which their capital was put pointed to ‘an unambitious mentality, a low level of cultural concern and social
dynamism. We do not find here the revolutionary bourgeois of other latitudes.’ 42 Whether they were aware of it or not – and the indications are that they were not – their refusal to invest in industrial enterprises was a defence
of the Old Regime for it obviated the risk of creating new social productive forces which would enter into contradiction with the existing order. 43 And so, once their fortunes were made, they tended to petition the king to be
ennobled: self-made wealth was insufficient. They shared the assumptions of the rest of society: ennoblement meant social status. *

 The dominance of colonial trade favoured the maritime regions, producing an uneven development in relation to the interior, with the exception of Madrid. This imbalance, however, became of strategic importance during the war:
until the French slowly reduced most of the ports, their merchants’ capital helped to keep the armed resistance afloat and, though often protesting at the sums of money the patriot authorities demanded of them, they supported the
war effort in the hope that the conflict would end soon in order for them to renew colonial commerce. They realized, moreover, that a Bonapartist victory would end their monopolistic control of the trade, opening it to rival
French houses. Their objective then was for political stability, peace and good trading conditions, in a reformed Spain independent of alliances which inevitably led to war. In Cádiz, besieged but never conquered, the merchants
not only ran patriot government finances for a period but they cashed in their wealth as political leverage during the government’s long residence there.