

 One of the main questions posed by these reformers was a question still familiar today. To what extent should the state regulate the lives and activities of its subjects in the interests of their ‘felicity’ (i.e. well-being) and
the country’s economic progress? To the early reformers of Carlos III in the 1760s and 1770s, exemplified by Campomanes, the Consejo de Castilla’s attorney, there was no doubt: they believed they could – indeed, had to – use the
absolute monarchy to reform the absolutist state without undermining its bases. A series of gradualist reforms were put in hand to free Spain of the ‘obstacles’ to progress. † The thinking behind them, however, was state
‘productivism’ rather than a generalized opening up to ‘free enterprise’. It was a case of using certain market mechanisms for the benefit of the state, and, not least, that of the treasury. But the reforms did not have the
desired effect.

 Within twenty years, the earlier strategy was radically challenged by some of the second ‘generation’ of enlightened thinkers, most notably by Gaspar Melchor Jovellanos. Under the influence of Locke and Adam Smith, among others,
Jovellanos came to believe that ‘the first objective of social laws’ must always be ‘to protect the individual’s interests’, which were the stimulus to progress and the source of a nation’s wealth. By denying self-interest and
relying on government laws and regulations, the earlier reformers had put the cart before the horse. Each citizen must be ‘independent and free in his actions, as long as these do not contradict the law’, and each citizen must be
‘equal in the eyes of the law and have the same right to enjoy its protection’. 37 Taking these views to their logical conclusion became one of the progressives’ ideological aims during the war. But Jovellanos, an admirer of
England’s constitutional monarchy, blended reform with monarchic traditionalism; ‡ and in this mix, it could be said, he more closely represented popular wartime sentiment than that of the third generation whose progressives
believed in a political rupture with the past since in their view the major obstacle to Spain’s advance was absolutism itself.

 This last generation came of political age with the French Revolution and the enthronement of Carlos IV in Spain; ‘unquiet spirits’ like the poet Manuel Quintana and the clerical free-thinker, José Marchena – later to confront
each other as the early ‘ideologues’ on either side of the Napoleonic war – owed much to their immediate forebears. As the son of the Enlightenment Quintana was perfectly aware of what he owed to its great French thinkers. But he
refused, like many others, to embrace France because of it: Spain had her own great past which would, in political and civilian matters, reassert ‘the place nature has assigned to our character and circumstances’.

 Quintana, and others of his generation, took the social commitment of their elders’ literary output and radicalized their thinking: they saw their country as presently subjugated to a ‘despotic’, absolutist royal favourite,
Godoy, and as a result their fatherland reduced to a ‘deathly counterfeit’; 38 they translated their elders’ economic liberalization into national as well as individual liberty from ‘tyrannical’ oppression; and they set
themselves the literary task of awakening educated people. *