

 Fernando crosses into French-occupied Cataluña, disobeys Cortes decree (March 22)

 Provisional government formed

 Allied coalition forces enter Paris (March 31)

 Enters Valencia to scenes of popular rejoicing (April 16)

 Fernando abolishes Constitution, restores absolutism (May 4)

 Persecution of liberal deputies begins in Madrid (May 11)

 Fernando VII enters Madrid to popular acclaim

 French garrison of Barcelona surrenders longest-occupied Spanish city (May 28)

 Goya completes his iconic Second of May and Third of May paintings on the 1808 Madrid rising and its repression

 Napoleon abdicates, end of war (April 6)

===== FILE: OEBPS/12_Chapter01.xhtml =====
Napoleon’s Cursed War

 1

 Spain and the French Connection

 NAPOLEON’S INVASION OF FRANCE’S ALLY:
OCTOBER 1807–MARCH 1808

 The heavens had foretold imminent disaster. A comet, visible to the naked eye from Valladolid in the north to Sevilla in the south, had trailed its fiery tail through the western sky in the months of August and September.

 It signalled the death of a king or some powerful person. And cities would be desolated, some said, because of the white and saffron colour of its tail …

 noted the Sevillan friar, Manuel Giles y Carpio, in his diary. 1

 In the manner of such things, only tortuous human intervention turned the augury into reality. It began with Napoleon’s firm resolve to wage total economic war on Britain by blockading her trade with the continent. Portugal
alone refused to obey and close her ports to her traditional British ally; this lonely exception, the Emperor decided, must be brought to heel.

 On October 18, 1807, nine days before the enabling treaty with Spain was signed, Napoleon pushed a twenty-five-thousand-strong expeditionary force across the Spanish border. Its military objective was to cross Spain and conquer
Portugal. The Spanish court raised no objections to the anticipatory troop movement; under the Fontainebleau treaty, Manuel Godoy, Spain’s chief minister, royal favourite and head of state in all but name, and the Bourbon
monarchy were to share the spoils of conquest in which twenty-five thousand Spanish troops were to participate.

 The imperial forces, commanded by General Junot, were the first foreign military the majority of Spaniards west of the Ebro had seen on their soil in living memory. In townships and villages on the long muddy road across the
Castilian plain, people gathered to watch the unending march of the ‘conquerors of Europe’. Provincial diarists, 2 heirs of an enlightened century, assiduously counted the troops, and noted their regiments’ numbers, while the
majority gawped at the bright uniforms, the cuirassier’s shining breast- and back-plates, the extravagantly attired staff officers. It did not much matter that many of the foot soldiers were Germans, Italians and Swiss, 3 or raw
French recruits. This for the spectators was the Grande Armée .

 The military spectacle temporarily relieved a grim reality. For the past eighteen months, townfolk and villagers had been attempting to rebuild their lives. A catastrophic famine, accompanied by malaria, * had struck central and
southern Spain between 1803 and 1805. The dearth had been worsened by the difficulties of moving grain rapidly to where it was most urgently needed because of a deficient road system. 4 Castilla la Vieja was among the worst hit:
by 1805 the region had lost seven percent of its mid-1800 population. † Not even in the six bloody years of war that were about to begin would Castilla suffer such a loss.