

 The Old Order’s escalating erosion had coincided with Carlos IV’s accesssion to the throne on the death of his father, Carlos III, and the outbreak of the French Revolution only six months later. Foreign and domestic problems,
separate and combined, had begun in his reign to challenge the structures on which Bourbon absolutism had rested for the past three-quarters of a century. Though ‘well-intentioned and zealous like his father’, the new king was
‘weak, vapid, and less wise than becomes a sovereign … and his pusillanimous spirit came to be dominated by the queen, Maria Luisa’, in the words of an enlightened contemporary cleric. 22 A formidable statesman was needed; and if
Carlos IV lacked that quality, then he lacked another equally grave: that needed to find and appoint the statesman required. *

 SEQUELS OF THE FRENCH REVOLUTION

 For several nights the early summer sky over France beyond the Pyrenees was as clear as day, or ablaze in vermilions, gold and blues … and always of such variety and clarity that those who witnessed it were amazed. The celestial
lights were a manifestation from heaven of the calamities and misfortunes which were to come, and of the martyrs who were to die, in the revolutions

 wrote a Catalan posting-house master many years later. 23

 The extraordinary changes brought about by the revolution in Spain’s ally, France, resulted in a number of exceptional changes in Spain itself. First, the revolution frightened the enlightened government reformists who, for the
past twenty years under Carlos III, had attempted to eliminate inherited ‘obstacles’ to economic and social advance, without undermining the Old Regime’s structures. ‘Everything for the people, but without the people’, summed up
their creed. They believed, for example, that the Church needed reform – the Inquisition, because it concerned itself not only with religious but with state affairs; the religious orders because of the great number of
‘unproductive’ friars and monks, some of whom displayed a scandalous moral laxity – though, unlike the French philosophes , they did not (at least openly) question their Catholic faith. The reformists criticized the nobility for
its ‘idleness’ but believed it had an essential place in society. They thought that the nobility’s and Church’s entailment of a great part of their landholdings was both a serious obstacle to increased agricultural production,
and kept large extents of poorly farmed land from the market – but they did not attack entailment head on. They criticized the artisans’ guilds for their monopolistic practices in price-setting and control of production but did
not abolish them. Their determination not to bring the edifice crashing around their heads outweighed their reforming zeal. Not suprisingly then, the French Revolution turned them from the path of reform (if they had not already
run out of intellectual stamina) because reform in France had set a dangerous precedent.

 This change of heart was exemplified by conde Floridablanca, who had led the reformist government for twenty years before the revolution. A scrivener’s son, now aged sixty, he was representative of the enlightened commoners or
untitled lower nobles who had formed the leading members of the old king’s administration, and whom Carlos III had rewarded with titles. His attempt to impose a cordon sanitaire to stop the revolutionary ‘plague’ from entering
Spain was more an outcome of panic than a response to any real possibility of the contagion becoming an active epidemic. The country itself was not prepared for revolution, either socially, politically or culturally. *