

 In the capital itself, theatre takings dropped abruptly by nearly one-third in the first two weeks of March; 17 the only good news, it seemed, was that Godoy looked sadder than usual on his weekly stay in the capital; the hated
favourite’s downfall now appeared certain, and the value of the treasury bonds, the vales reales , rose accordingly. 18

 THE OLD ORDER IN CRISIS

 If not at its nadir, Spain was politically and economically closer to it in early 1808 than at any time in the past three-quarters of a century. The metropolis of the world’s greatest empire was to all intents bankrupt. For more
than twelve of the last sixteen years, Godoy’s Spain had been progressively indebted by war. The economic and demographic progress of the long eighteenth century – the phrase is justified by the fact that agrarian and demographic
progress had begun in the last quarter of the seventeenth century – which had seen the population rise from six to eleven million, accompanied by a sizeable increase in agriculture, manufacturing and trade, had come close to
ending. Restraints inherent in the Old Regime’s landowning structure, dominated by Church and nobility, set serious limits to further agricultural advance. The beginnings of an industrial revolution based on textile manufacturing
in Cataluña suffered the loss of its major market, the Spanish New World. Large merchants in the major Spanish ports experienced a massive decline in colonial trade. An inflationary spiral of agrarian prices reduced the labouring
classes’ meagre purchasing power (even noble and clerical landowners’ rents and señorial dues could no longer keep pace with rising wheat prices), and unemployment, especially in the textile industries, rose. Drought and
pestilence added to the general distress. In a poor agrarian country, with primitive agricultural techniques as backward as Russia’s, and without a developed domestic market, a local crop failure could result in catastrophe: for
want of an adequate road system and cheap transport, foreign wheat could not be moved from the ports to inland areas in trouble; nor, in good years, could surplus wheat be transported – except at prohibitive cost compared to
imported foreign wheat – from the cereal-growing Castilian plains to the coastal regions, where the eighteenth-century population growth had mainly taken place. Spain thus found itself in a paradoxical situation: Castilla
produced surplus wheat and bought mainly smuggled foreign textiles, while Cataluña produced textiles and imported great quantities of wheat. This resulted in a large balance of payments deficit for Spain as a whole. The system
could only function as long as colonial trade sustained the deficit. 19

 Although there were temporary respites to the economic setbacks during moments of peace, the colonial trade was the first to suffer in war. War, first on the French Revolution then, in alliance with France, war against Britain,
had increased public expenditure over the past decade by between five- and eight-fold. 20 By 1808, annual indebtedness was running at nearly double domestic taxation revenues and the total debt stood at the equivalent of ten
years’ revenue. 21