

 The Church thus bore the brunt of the state’s fiscal crisis. 52 As state bonds were now backed by the sale of church property, they seemed to many churchmen similar to the assignats of the French Revolution; 53 and the Church’s
opposition to these measures was in no small part responsible for the downfall of Godoy and his royal master in 1808. 54

 None of the measures solved the treasury’s crisis. Even government ministers did not get paid; by 1808 their salaries were the second highest item on the list of outstanding debt. 55 Fiscal pressure forced many municipalities to
sell communal lands; as a result townships and villages dominated by noble-appointed oligarchs became ‘inveterate enemies of the government’. 56 More accurately, it could be said that all the monied classes had ‘lost confidence
in the solvency of the crown’. 57 Godoy paid the political price. Hatred of the royal favourite grew in all sectors of the population which suffered, to a greater or lesser degree, the cost of an unpopular war.

===== FILE: OEBPS/13_Chapter02.xhtml =====
Napoleon’s Cursed War

 2

 Preliminaries of War

 BOURBON FAMILY SQUALOR: THE ESCORIAL AFFAIR

 Napoleon’s designs on Spain, and his army’s slow but ceaseless advance on Madrid in March 1808, precipitated a crisis at the very heart of the absolutist monarchy. The Emperor continued to keep his plans a tightly held secret.
No one, not even Marshal Murat, his brother-in-law and lieutenant general in Spain, knew for certain what Napoleon planned. Although late in the day, only one Spaniard appreciated the full scale of the danger: Godoy. And the
awareness brought him his downfall.

 To popular jubilation, the royal couple’s favourite had been worsted the previous autumn by the heir to the throne, Fernando, whose popularity had soared as a result. An anonymous letter to the king, probably written by Godoy or
one of his henchmen, led Carlos IV to search his son’s rooms and to the discovery of compromising documents. On October 30 1807, the king proclaimed officially to the nation that Fernando had conspired to usurp the throne, that
he was under house arrest, and a number of conspirators had been imprisoned. 1 The twenty-five-year-old heir’s conspiracy was in fact a plot to rid the country of Godoy. Fernando’s hatred of Godoy went back to his adolescence.
Not perhaps surprisingly, as he saw his mother’s alleged lover rising in power and noble rank to become a prince, a Spanish title usually reserved only to the throne’s heir; and had he remained unaware of the situation, his
former clerical preceptor, Juan Escoiquiz, ‘an astute, servile, unscrupulous intriguer’, would have insinuated the dangers that faced him. But this was probably unnecessary: Fernando had a sufficiently suspicious, cowardly,
spiteful and unforgiving nature to need few lessons in revenge. His own mother found him ‘sly and cowardly’; and for his first mother-in-law, Queen Carolina of Naples, he was ‘stupid, indolent, lying, debased, underhand …’ 2
Between 1804 and 1806, he had financed a series of scurrilous popular engravings figuring Godoy and his mother, accompanied by salacious rhyming couplets, which he distributed among the aristocracy and its hangers-on. Churchmen
and nobles had also contributed satirical, often coarse, verses (occasionally in Latin) to his anti-Godoy campaign. 3