

 Every faithful Catholic is obliged to maintain the truth of his religion and faith against his enemies, to the point of sacrificing his life in their defence if necessary … The sanctity of our Catholic religion demands of its
professional soldiers … that they sanctify their hands with the profaners’ blood … The soldier of Christ kills with assurance … In death he gains glory, and if he kills it is to the glory of Christ. 37

 The slogan had, however, a deeper significance: it expressed a change in the definition of warfare from a conflict between states for territorial or dynastic objectives to a national, ideological war in which the enemy became
personalized and anathematized.

 The lessons of the French Revolution’s summons to the entire French population to rally to the ‘défence de la patrie’ against a ‘malign’ enemy were most readily turned on their head by Spanish religious counter-revolutionaries.
In their Janus-faced view, la patrie , with its revolutionary connotations for the French, became, as la patria , a call to defend a counter-revolutionary homeland, its laws, customs and traditions, Spain’s Old Order, its
monarchy and religion. The Spanish Church was well prepared for this sort of ideological twist, for waging a crusade against foreign heretics. It was hardly surprising then that the slogan should re-emerge with even greater
strength at the beginning of the Napoleonic war, just as Diego de Cádiz’s booklet again became the catechism of many volunteer soldiers after the rising against Napoleon in 1808.

 The similarities between the two wars did not end there: other more material elements were shared by both. Spanish army commanders, with few exceptions, revealed themselves inept; the army itself was undermanned, ill-organized,
badly trained, fed and equipped, and unable to confront sustained and rapid revolutionary assaults; desertion and sickness became serious problems …

 During the Convention War, the Church kept up its tireless campaign to inflame hatred of the ‘barbarous’ and ‘impious’ enemy … But the conflict could not be financed by the royal treasury other than by obligatory contributions
from the Church and the wealthy and the massive issuing of state bonds, the vales reales , which in consequence depreciated in value, as inflation spiralled upwards. The sons of township oligarchs managed, thanks to their
fathers’ influence, to avoid enlistment which caused resentment among ordinary villagers who were sent to the front; and popular enthusiasm for the ‘crusade’ waned notably after the first few months of war fever …

 Equally, however, the war was the testing ground of self-organization, local resistance and irregular warfare. These were to be among the most striking elements of Spanish popular resistance to Napoleon.

 A small Spanish military force rapidly marched over the Catalan border and, taking the exiguous and unprepared Convention troops by surprise, captured the province of Roussillon (whose inhabitants were more Catalan than French
and were generally hostile to the French Revolution), and stood before the gates of Perpignan. For the remainder of 1793, the Convention was busy holding back the Spanish; armed French civilians took up guerrilla war as part of
the struggle. Angered by this breach in conventional warfare, General Antonio Ricardos, the Spanish commander, issued a proclamation threatening to shoot them out of hand if captured. *