

 Furthermore, the Basque provinces of Vizcaya and Guipúzcoa and also Navarra claimed that the sole duty of their locally-raised and financed forces was to defend their own provinces, outside of which they could not be stationed,
or be incorporated into the Spanish army or come under the army commander’s orders. Although the Consejo de Castilla rejected this interpretation of their fueros , 39 in Vizcaya most villagers agreed that the war beyond their
provincial limits did not concern them. In Gauteguiz de Arteaga the youth refused to undergo military training, making ‘mocking gestures at the officers whom the authorities had imposed on them, and indicating that they would
appoint their own officers to train them’. Although the Church backed the religious crusade against the French revolutionaries, the ‘enemies of God’, Vizcayans, believing themselves protected by the Spanish army on the frontier
and by Guipúzcoa, faced the beginning of the war with relative tranquility. 40

 Nevertheless, after the French breakthrough, when the Spanish army commander, conde de Colomera, sent an urgent request for men to join his force, the Vizcayan authorities prepared to dispatch eight thousand men to Tolosa
outside of their borders to reinforce him. This resulted in further village protests. Some said that all were agreed that the war did not affect them, others that they would go to the borders of Vizcaya but not to join Colomera’s
forces since other villages felt the same. In Sopuerta, the locals, armed with sticks and knives, insulted and threatened the authorities when they were about to hold a ballot to decide who should go to Tolosa, shouting that they
would not serve outside Vizcaya. 41 They would be ‘better off and freer if the French came to this country and they followed the maxims of its Assembly rather than continue under the (Basque) Constitution’. They shouted insults
at the Catholic religion and the state of the kingdom … The authorities fled for their lives. In Guecho, villagers armed with hoes and agrarian implements forced the authorities to give them the lists of those who were to go,
tore them up and buried them. Women, mothers and wives of those who had been selected, were prominent in the riots. But everywhere the rioters made clear that their protest was not at serving within Vizcaya but at having to serve
beyond its borders. Finally, as Colomera could not hold Tolosa, the order was countermanded, and the ringleaders of the protests were arrested and as punishment sent to the front.

 San Sebastián’s surrender and the formation of a junta or committee, of a small group of enlightened individuals prepared to support the French – their aim being as much to protect the population from reprisals as at outright
collaboration – shocked other Basques. A Bilbaino, probably a merchant, considered it ‘ignominious’, a ‘villanous affair’ for which he claimed the French had paid twenty million reales. But, as the same writer recorded, it was
not until two weeks after the surrender that the first Vizcayan regiment set out for the provincial front, the village recruits shouting that to ‘avoid betrayal the traitors must die’. 42