

 In the progressives’ view – and this was what was innovative – the Spanish people would have to make the needed reforms in their own way. † Not the uneducated and lowest orders of the people, for sure: democracy was a dangerous
illusion that led only to disorder and bloodshed. But when the (respectable) people achieved freedom, the ‘fatherland’s good became the first law’. The people must effect and carry out this law, as the only guarantee that the
‘general will’ would prevail. 31 In this sense, then, they could be said to have inverted the earlier enlightened reformers’ ‘everything for the people, but without the people’. They counted on ‘the people’ to make the reforms in
which they put their faith.

 *

 What then did the Spanish labouring classes make of the French Revolution? Direct evidence is scanty, but occasional glimpses are afforded through the authorities’ eyes. In 1791, for example, the governor of Lérida advised the
first minister of the innumerable French workers crossing the Pyrenees as usual to seek work in the olive mills of lower Cataluña, parts of Aragón and Valencia. Their conversation could not, in these days, be ‘beneficial to the
unwary local inhabitants’, he reported, because inevitably they talked of

 their new Constitution, their liberty, equality, the lowering by half of the tributes and dues they had paid before, the exemption from taxes, tithes and parochial payments for baptisms, marriages, funerals and other advantages
of their new laws. These can leave an impression on the lower people who, without reflecting, compare what they pay here with the apparent benefits they hear of in conversation. I do not presume that the French talk of these
things with malicious intent, for they are simple and ignorant people, or that the people of these parts form advantageous ideas of the French revolution; indeed to the contrary the former are generally looked on with scorn
because of it. 32

 The governor’s report appeared ambiguous: the ‘unwary local inhabitants’, for whom he feared, almost immediately turned into wary individuals who responded to the revolution with scorn. Scorn for liberty and equality? Or for the
fact, as the governor went on to report, that these French countrymen were much favoured by local Spanish mill-owners because they laboured at tasks ‘that few of the local inhabitants are prepared to do’ and at lower daily wages
than a Spaniard? A possible explanation of this ambivalence came in another communication to the minister, this time from the captain general of Cataluña, conde de Lacy, in February, 1792:

 Catalans look with bad feeling on migrant French artisans and journeymen who are willing to work for two cuartos less a day … and I am taking care to see that this does not lead to blows which would end in no quarter being
given. 33

 Throughout the 1780s, there had been large-scale French immigration to Cataluña, attracted by the high wages paid in textile manufacture. But a downturn in manufacturing in 1789 had left many of these without work. 34 What real
benefit had the revolution brought them if they could not find jobs in their own country and offered to work for less than a Catalan artisan who, like the Aragonese and Valencian mill-workers and journeymen, was suffering a
serious decline in real wages? What meaning had liberty and equality in such circumstances? The scorn for the French Revolution had a perfectly comprehensible basis in the ‘bad feeling’ which these migrant workers aroused by
their labour practices, especially when it is recalled that xenophobia, anti-French sentiment at this time in particular, was easily aroused among the Spanish lower orders – as the serious anti-French riots of 1793 in Valencia
demonstrated.