

 No sooner had the San Sebastián junta been formed than other local committees were created to resist the invaders, and they began guerrilla actions. General Moncey, the French commander, complained that the Basques ‘do not fight
ordered battles, [but attack] and escape without leaving a trace, and end up by killing many of our men without suffering great losses themselves’. 43 However, the French continued their advance south; after a harsh winter, they
took Vitoria, and, striking into Castilla, Miranda del Ebro. From here, the road to Madrid was virtually open to them. The time had come to end a war which had turned out disastrously for the Spanish army and the Old Regime.

 Though other, better European armies had also gone down to defeat at the hands of the French Revolution, the Spanish army had proven itself of poor fighting worth. Irregular warfare had sprung up on both the Catalan and Basque
fronts and had given the French army a hard time of it; but the guerrillas could not and would not be victorious on their own. The events of the last days of the war, however, on both the western and eastern fronts, gave cause
for reflection. Stiffened by large numbers of local recruits and guerrilla reinforcements, the Spanish armies went on the offensive in Navarra and Cataluña. The conjunction of regular and irregular warfare took its toll on the
enemy, and resulted in last-minute Catalan victories. A twenty-five-year-old general – the youngest of his rank in the French revolutionary army – noted the Spanish popular resistance. A land war in Spain was unwinnable, he
warned, because of the national uprising it would precipitate. 44 A decade and a half later, and to his cost, Napoleon had forgotten his youthful perspicacity.

 In seeking peace, Godoy was fortunate: the post-Robespierrean Convention did not want to get bogged down in a war to overthrow a Bourbon in Spain when its principal enemy was the far more threatening anti-French monarchical
coalition led by Austria and England. Peace with Spain, moreover, could once more ensure France of her naval assistance in the struggle against England. By the treaty of Basel, Spain conceded her half of Santo Domingo to France
while all the Spanish territory, fortresses, armaments, etc, which she had lost in the war were returned. 45

 There was general rejoicing: the treaty’s terms were better than those accorded to the other enemies of the revolution. 46 His royal masters rewarded Godoy by naming him Prince of the Peace.

 THE OLD ORDER’S ALLIANCE
WITH REVOLUTIONARY FRANCE

 Only a year later, in 1796, shortly after the advent of the French Directorate, Spain tied her fortunes once more to France in an unholy alliance of Bourbon absolutism and the new Republicanism. It was a return to Spain’s
pre-revolution foreign policy in which the French and Spanish Bourbons had been allies against Britain, in the so-called ‘Family Compact’. In negotiating an offensive-defensive alliance against Britain with the Directorate, Godoy
was less concerned, however, with a return to the past than with playing the foreign affairs card to try to reinforce his domestic position. During the war, several plots against him had been discovered, and though Godoy had
foiled them with relative ease, all of them significantly implicated members of the political elite. Without domestic political support, other than from sycophants and the royal couple, Godoy believed that an alliance with France
would strengthen his cause. It resulted in the destruction not only of the Spanish fleet, * but of trade with the colonies. At the same time it increased the latter’s desire for independence, deepened Spain’s internal economic
crisis, and accelerated the Old Order’s erosion. Although Britain wanted to avoid a conflict with Spain, the latter declared war on England in October 1796.