

 As a Spanish historian, Andrés Muriel, wrote in his history of Carlos IV:

 It would have mattered little in the people’s eyes that don Manuel Godoy, at twenty-five, had been raised to the dukedom of Alcudia and named chief minister by the king’s free appointment, if they had seen in the favourite
superior talents, or knew at least of previous glorious achievements which, in the critical circumstances faced by Spain, could herald important services to the kingdom … What hurt Spaniards was the origin of his power, due
solely to the queen’s passion. 26

 The only earlier ‘glorious achievement’ known of Godoy was that, as a guardsman, he had fallen from his horse in escorting the then princess María Luisa, and remounted rapidly, which brought him to her attention. His relative
good looks could not be ascribed to any previous achievement known to him. In the course of ruling Spain, with one brief intermission, for the next sixteen years, he became – often quite unfairly – the most maligned and hated
absolutist chief minister.

 Louis XVI’s execution shook Spain to its core. Despite last-minute concessions to France, Godoy’s endeavours to save Louis were unsuccessful. Regicide was the ultimate crime in Spain, * where Crown and Altar were consubstantial
with the perceived essence of the country’s past and continuing existence.

 Alas for you, mad nation who

 With your horrendous outrage have

 Afflicted heaven, staining the anointed

 With blood . 27

 wrote Gaspar Melchor Jovellanos, the personification of Spain’s Enlightenment. The sympathy with the French Revolution’s early attempt to establish a constitutional monarchy – envisaged by the more progressively enlightened as
the solution to Spain’s absolutism – turned to antipathy; the Terror completed the revulsion.

 Finally, as could be expected, the revolution brought forth violent attacks from unreformed clerics and laymen on the Enlightenment which was considered responsible for the ‘anarchy’ in France. For the more extreme clerics, the
revolution was the very incarnation of evil, the work of the ‘sinister philosophes ’, and it was monarchy’s divine right and fundamental mission to repress such Luciferian work which disturbed the immutable, hierarchical order of
society. The Church’s help and guidance – and, in Spain, that of the Inquisition – was necessary to this end. 28

 Conservative opposition to enlightened reform had long existed, but the French Revolution gave it a new strength and coherence, joined as it was by the older generation of reformers themselves; albeit temporarily, support for
Spain’s ancien regime was reinforced.

 *

 A small number of young writers and poets, however, kept their faith in the need for reform – ‘unquiet spirits’ like Manuel José Quintana and the clergyman José Marchena, later to confront each other as the early ‘ideologues’ on
either side of the Spanish political and ideological strife that was part of the Napoleonic war. What marked these progressives * was a belief in liberty and the inherent virtues of the patria or fatherland which they saw as
having been desecrated by absolutism and the reign of a despot, Godoy. They welcomed the French Revolution’s overthrow of the Old Regime and its early attempt to create a constitutional monarchy; supported the Declaration of the
Rights of Man; believed in the liberty from oppression, and the freedom of expression, that the revolution had introduced; shared the view that la patrie belonged to, and expressed the needs of, the people, and not merely those
of an elite. Thus far the French Revolution’s political achievements could serve them. But they saw also, in Quintana’s words, that the revolution had resulted in ‘drowning the Enlightenment; swallowing up the talented;
corrupting customs and from the streams of blood and mountains of dead bodies has raised up an insolent and ambitious man to the height of power … How could I wish for my country anything of this nature?’ 29 In brief, regicide
and Jacobin terror in the name of the people had terrorized his generation, while the revolution’s ultimate denouement in Napoleon’s ‘dictatorship’ horrified them as a new tyranny – ‘a betrayal’ of the revolution at its best. The
French Revolution was no model they proposed to follow. Even one of the few outright Spanish supporters of the revolution – José Marchena, who took refuge in France and became a Girondin – penned a proclamation to the Spanish in
which his most radical proposal was to summon the Old Order’s Cortes. He showed himself well aware of the importance of Spain’s past institutions and its ardent Catholicism. 30