

 Fernando feared that Godoy and the queen were planning to deny him the throne on his father’s death, which had recently appeared imminent; rumours were rife at court that this was their plan and that Godoy might even be
appointed regent. 4 Godoy feared, justly, that when Fernando came to the throne he would be deprived of his supreme power.

 Had the affair remained at this personal level nothing much might have come of it. But it assumed wider dimensions because an anti-Godoy court faction found in Fernando the ideal figurehead as future king to plot the favourite’s
downfall. This faction, the Fernandista ‘party’, was bent on restoring the nobility’s importance in the country’s governance from which the Bourbons had excluded it. In foreign affairs, it was purely opportunistic, swinging from
support for England to France to oppose Godoy’s current predilections. Thus, during the favourite’s momentary flirtation with the anti-Napoleonic alliance in 1806, the Fernandistas opted for Napoleon, and subsequently for the
marriage of the widowed Fernando to a Bonaparte princess. In pursuit of this aim, Fernando wrote a grovelling letter to Napoleon in October 1807, which also quite explicitly criticized the Spanish government’s attitude towards
the Emperor. By this date, both Godoy and the Fernandistas were wooing the Emperor. *

 Among the papers seized in Fernando’s rooms was a decree, the date left blank, appointing his supporter, the duque del Infantado, grandee of Spain, to the post of captain general of Castilla and commander of the forces to
overthrow Godoy should the king die; and a long letter, addressed by Fernando to his father, describing the ‘perverse’ Godoy’s aspirations to ‘take the Throne and finish with all of us’. It also attacked the favourite’s morals,
accusing him of bigamy, and worked on the king’s fears of the French Revolution. The letter, written by his ex-preceptor and faithfully copied out by Fernando, said one thing that was true: Spaniards had grown cold in their
respect for the royal couple, not in themselves but because of ‘the pain that the elevation of a monster like Godoy has caused them’. 5

 Opposition to Godoy was by this time practically universal. Apart from the Fernandistas, the court nobility, which had always viewed the royal favourite as an upstart, was joined by regional oligarchs who resented his attempts
to increase central control at their expense; the clergy who opposed his sale of Church property; merchants and manufacturers who faced ruin because of his foreign policy; sectors of the liberal professions who experienced the
arbitrary appointments of family members, sycophants and flatterers to cherished posts, sometimes accompanied by their own removal to outlying districts; sectors of the enlightened literati who fulminated privately about
‘despotism’; and the lower orders in general who suffered from declining wages and increasing prices, and were scandalized by Godoy’s moral laxity.

 A week after his arrest, Fernando made a full confession, naming all his confederates and admitting to direct correspondence with Napoleon and the French ambassador. Once confessed, he wrote an abject letter to his father
begging forgiveness which his father granted. His repentance, Fernando wrote, had been proven by his denunciation of the other plotters who had been arrested. Someone somewhere noted this and wrote: