

 *

 Abased and abused, Godoy had been brought down for pursuing the correct policy; even some of his bitterest enemies came to recognize this. The move to Andalucía, where the Spanish armies could be assembled without difficulty,
and the king could address his people openly on Napoleon’s intentions, was

 the only prudent measure in the circumstances, as events have shown; but because it was proposed by the Prince of the Peace, it found not a single supporter.

 An expedient and wise [measure] … In proposing the move, Godoy acted correctly and in this aspect posterity cannot censure his conduct. 36

 These were both the immediate and the mature reflections of two anti-Godoyista participants in the coming war: a high-placed government official at the time, José de Arango, and conde Toreno, who years later wrote the classic
Spanish history of the war. Although Godoy’s foreign policy had been driven as much by personal ambition as reasons of state, his domestic policy had followed the enlightened reformers’ line and, completing some of their
uncompleted tasks, had also initiated others. His reign saw the founding of the Royal College of Medicine, the Astronomical Observatory, the Veterinary School, the extension of primary education in the countryside, and a
nationwide campaign to vaccinate children against smallpox. 37 Many of these reforms had little time to become operative. In questions of censorship, he was fairly broad-minded, permitting the first Spanish translation of Adam
Smith’s Wealth of Nations , which had previously been banned by the Inquisition. 38

 But he alienated all reformists, old and young, by incarcerating (or at the very best, accepting the incarceration of) Gaspar de Jovellanos, the embodiment of Spanish enlightenment, for seven years in the Palma de Mallorca
fortress. Although an absolute ruler, it was his weaknesses, his hesitancies, which most characterized him. In the era of Napoleon and Talleyrand, Metternich and Pitt, he was little more than a dwarf amongst giants.

 POPULAR HOPES IN THE NEW MONARCH

 From the start of the new king’s reign his noble ‘Fernandista’ councillors proved themselves singularly inept, trusting unduly in Napoleon’s support of their protégé. The tactical advantage to be gained by Fernando’s entry into
Madrid before Marshal Murat and his troops escaped them. The new king would wait until the capital was calm, an official announcement said, revealing the Old Regime’s terror of popular mobilizations. 39 To reach the capital from
nearby Aranjuez, Fernando had barely to bestir himself, while Murat had to force march his men from Castilla la Vieja. At the head of a cortège of brilliantly attired officers and a detachment of the Imperial Guard, he beat the
new king to it by nearly twenty-four hours. For sure, there was little popular acclaim for him: apart from the Imperial Guard and the cavalry, the French troops did not impress the local population. ‘There are hardly any old
enough to have beards, they are all youths of sixteen or so.’ 40 Few Madrileños, moreover, answered the local authorities’ call for bedding for the troops, despite the promise to pay for it and return it later. 41