

 Let us speak clearly: Bonaparte is coming and not with good intentions. Fernando will be able better to benefit the nation than I in the circumstances: this is the real reason for my renunciation. 28

 This statesman-like rationalization, for which there were few objective grounds, elevated a primitive fear of the rabble to the high ground of European politics. And so, when a Napoleonic envoy worked on the old king’s sudden
access of pique at having abdicated ‘under duress’, he secured a statement from Carlos reclaiming the throne which Murat kept secret to use as imperial policy dictated. But in fact Carlos soon had second thoughts, and his wife
and daughter constantly assured Murat that the former king did not wish to resume the throne, but only to be allowed to live peacefully with the queen and Godoy in a climate more suited to his poor health than that of Madrid. †

 *

 And what of the people who, for the first time in modern Spanish history, had participated in dethroning a reigning monarch? To consider them as no more than the nobility’s (suborned) pawns is to suppose that bribery alone moved
them to act when it was rather that money provided them with the means – their daily subsistence – to be free to act. They had their own reasons for participating, as the witnesses’ accounts make clear. ‘Alarmed and worried, like
young children who fear their father’s absence’ they would, if the king fled, be left ‘foresaken and defenceless’. Men and women, even the old, were prepared to fight and die to prevent this. Paternalistic and patronizing like
all the elite in their attitude to the ‘simple’ villagers and lower urban orders, the witnesses nonetheless were not wrong: the villagers’ world remained structured around two constants: Monarch and Church. ‘A world without a
King, like a world without religion, was a world turned on its head, at the prey of chaos and arbitrary conduct in which the weak and the poor were the principal victims.’ 29 The monarch was the paternal father of his vassals,
the earthly shepherd of his flock. Without a monarch in place, the people felt ‘orphaned’, deprived of their terrestial protector, abandoned to their individual fate. The king was the natural source of all justice in this world,
as God was in the next; and if the monarchy’s injustices starkly contradicted the monarch’s justice then it was the king’s ministers, advisers or administrators who were to blame. They were acting arbitrarily, being unfaithful to
the king’s orders. This mystification lay deep in the collective mentality of the Old Regime, part of a long process of cultural conditioning actively pursued by all the instances of power to legitimate the monarchical regime.

 Apart from Godoy’s plan to deprive them of their king, they also had many more immediate grievances to lay at his door – the costliness of living; the burden of taxes (especially the increased tax on wine); the forced sale of
the rural and urban poor’s last safety net: the Church’s charitable institutions; conscription; the effects of war … But above all, his ‘shameless, immoral’ conduct. However immoral their own conduct, they expected their rulers
to be impeccably moral. Moreover, Godoy did little to hide his desire for lasciviousness and lucre; on the latter score, the royal couple more than satisfied him; on the former he seemed well able to look after himself. Apart
from the queen, there was his royal wife (the king’s niece whom the royal couple had given him in marriage), his attractive Andalucian mistress, and great numbers of female supplicants. * Constantly whipped into a moral fervour
by a hostile nobility, the people at large came to blame even natural catastrophes on him: crop failures, hunger, epidemics, earthquakes … Village and town poor were only too happy to participate in his downfall.