

 The dismissal, nonetheless, appeared to have had its effect for on the 18th Aranjuez was calm. The royal couple appeared on a palace balcony and were cheered. But, as another acute observer noted, despite the cheers for the king

 nobody thought of obeying his orders concerning the fate of the fallen favourite, when the royal will had solemnly declared [in the dismissal decree] that he should be allowed to retire in peace. Officers, soldiers and villagers
continued to look for him to take him prisoner. 24

 Early on Saturday morning, March 19, the first act of the drama ended and the second began when Godoy was found by soldiers in an attic of his own house. *

 The people took him, clubbing him like a Jew, wounding him, shouting that he should be killed, everyone crying out at the same time viva el Rey, muera el Traidor!, and proclaiming the Prince of Asturias [Fernando]. 25

 It was an object worthy of compassion to see a man who on Wednesday, March 16, was in command of the entire Monarchy, now defenceless, a prisoner, humiliated. Despite his despondent mien, the people wanted to drink his blood. 26

 As both these anonymous observers related, the mob would no doubt have killed Godoy had the Household cavalry not guarded him and had not Fernando been sent by the king to contain the people. Even so he was lucky to reach the
guards’ barracks alive. There Fernando saw him again, spared his life and ordered his wounds to be dressed, but told him that he would be judged by the laws of the land. The heir to the throne succeeded in quietening the mob
around the barracks which was demanding Godoy’s head by assuring them that the prisoner would be tried.

 Almost immediately afterwards there occurred one of those fatal mistakes that brought an end to the drama.

 At this very moment [after Fernando’s visit] the king ordered a coach, guarded by two hundred royal carabineros , to take him [Godoy] to the Granada’s Alhambra castle. The people learned of this, and when the coach arrived, they
smashed it to pieces, and demanded the prisoner’s life. Such was the uproar that, seeing it could not be controlled, the king abdicated the throne in favour of his son … King Fernando immediately left the palace on horseback for
the guards’ barracks to calm the people, and all of them cheered him. *

 Not a drop of blood had been spilled in the rising – other than the few of Godoy’s wounds; not once had the people or soldiers, who throughout had shouted Viva el Rey! , threatened the king – other than by disobeying his wishes
concerning Godoy. Not once throughout three difficult days had his councillors or ministers suggested he take any definitive step – other than opposing his flight. A resolute king, determined to keep his crown, would have had
little problem in staying in power. But Carlos IV was old, ill, irresolute – and he had seen disgraced the man on whom he had depended for nearly two decades; had seen the army join sides with the people; had seen (and used) his
son’s popularity and influence with the crowd; and above all he had seen his ally, Napoleon, advancing ever faster on Madrid. He signed his abdication decree with pleasure, it was said; 27 and a few hours later told his
confessor, Archbishop Amat: