

 Despite their various efforts, Godoy’s plan remained in effect and was given more urgency by the news that two of Murat’s divisions were forced marching on Madrid. The date for departure was finally set: the night of March 17.
Teba, now in Aranjuez, was as aware of the date as everyone at the palace. He also knew well how to create one of the conditions by which the grandees’ aims could be met.

 Again in Manchego peasant disguise Teba went to all the neighbouring villages, pretending now to be from one place, now from another, to incite loyal Manchegans to join him in preventing the king’s flight which, if it took
place, would leave them foresaken and defenceless. With these words, he attracted even the old men who came to Aranjuez determined to die rather than permit His Majesty to leave. 12

 Meanwhile, as the guardsman explained, ‘the grandees had taken all the places to prevent anyone escaping’. The two to three thousand palace servants and minor functionaries, and their dependents, had a vested interest in the
king’s remaining. Their pay, in many cases, was several months in arrears and it would be a long time before they saw it if the royal family left. But as another eyewitness, José de Arango, wrote, they were also

 alarmed and worried, like young children who fear their father’s absence. They went the rounds of the palace grounds that night [March 16–17], without firearms and without other aim than to obstruct the roads and paths with
their bodies, to weaken with their tears and laments the king’s resolve to leave. 13

 To prevent any disturbances, Godoy had taken the precaution of ordering the Household cavalry and foot guards from Madrid to Aranjuez. Back in Aranjuez from his village mission, Teba and another grandee, the marqués de Castelar,
demanded that the guards officers swear formally not to obey Godoy, and to arrest him. 14 As these officers, all nobles, had no love of Godoy for having allowed the northern fortresses to be taken by the French, and were hostile
to the royal family’s flight, 15 and since both the grandees were ranking army officers, their task was not difficult. From the night of March 15, guardsmen began to watch for the slightest signs of escape. Inside the palace, the
Fernandista faction had a highly powerful ally, the minister of Grace and Justice, the marqués de Caballero, ‘perhaps one of the worst among the many bad people at the court of Spain at that time’. 16 He argued forcibly against
Godoy’s plan and awoke in the king his fears of the riot and revolution that could occur if the royal family attempted to leave. On the 16th the king published a proclamation to his ‘beloved vassals’ in which, as ‘the tender
father who loves you’, he assured the people of Aranjuez and Madrid that he had no intention of leaving them, as ‘some evil intention has made you suppose was necessary’. 17 He again reassured them that the French came as allies
and friends.

 All the same, the king had lost the people’s confidence; despite his promise they believed he would flee. This was the impression of an anonymous Madrid witness – a merchant possibly – writing during the early hours of March 17.
18 Popular suspicion of royal intentions no doubt made it easier for the nobility with estates around the capital to recruit more villagers – women accompanying the men – to reinforce those already in Aranjuez. To this end ‘the
gold flowed from Teba’s hands, those of one or more other grandees, and a confidential agent of Don Antonio’, the king’s brother, who sided with his nephew, Fernando. 19