

 MADRID: THE PEOPLE’S STREET WAR
AGAINST THE FRENCH MILITARY

 As a foretaste of things to come, three French soldiers were admitted to hospital with wounds received in the streets during Fernando’s triumphal entry into Madrid; and a few days later there was a near battle between the people
and French troops in the Plazuela de la Cebada. 46

 The French troops had barely entered Madrid when

 they began to put on imperial and señorial airs as if they were already the sovereign power in the capital. The people, who are all eyes and ears and see and hear everything, started to look without confidence on the (military)
movements which had all the appearances of being hostile, and doubted the friendship and alliance of their guests,

 noted an enlightened friar, Vicente Martínez Colomer. 47

 The authorities’ repeated demands for supplies for the French troops, to be paid for at – and even above – market prices, found few takers. Madrid theatre admissions, that thermometer of the feelings of the capital’s
inhabitants, fell to only thirty percent of their previous quarter’s takings. 48

 The nervousness was grounded in reality. From the first Murat refused to recognize Fernando VII. The French ambassador, François de Beauharnais, who had been an ardent Fernandista during the Aranjuez rising, now turned his back
on the new king. Aranjuez had definitively determined Napoleon to be rid of the Bourbons. Although in the first days of his reign Fernando had written to the Emperor to assure him that he would pursue ‘all possible means to draw
tighter the bonds of friendship and close alliance which happily exist between Spain and the French empire’, 49 Napoleon did not want on the Spanish throne a new, young and popular Bourbon, who owed nothing to him for his
accession to the monarchy. He immediately ordered the French press to launch a campaign claiming that Fernando VII had come by the crown through unworthy intrigues and that the throne was in consequence vacant. 50 The Aranjuez
rising might well be called an ‘unworthy intrigue’. But Napoleon’s subsequent plotting to put his brother on the Spanish throne can be called – in his own words – little less than ‘cynical, immoral trickery’. * Keeping even Murat
– who himself had ambitions to the throne of Spain – in the ‘mysterious obscurity’ of his intentions, the Emperor dispatched to Madrid his henchman, General Savary, an army ‘policeman’ of unsavoury reputation, to entice Fernando
with false promises to meet him in Burgos on his much-bruited visit to Spain which he had no intention of making. In an audience Savary swore to the king that Napoleon would recognize him as soon as they met, and that the Emperor
would be pleased and flattered if Fernando VII set out to receive him. Savary, in fact, was under orders to bring Fernando to Napoleon in Bayonne, the last main town in France on the Paris-Madrid road, where the Emperor had
expressly established his headquarters, and to hold him there until he had renounced his rights to the throne in return for compensation in Italy – for example, the kingdom of Etruria. † If the king refused to make the trip,
Carlos IV’s protest at his ‘forced’ abdication and the declaration that he was resuming the throne – the statement he had made in his pique to a French envoy and which Murat had kept secret ‡ – was to be made public, and his son
declared a rebel. The Emperor’s need was to ‘regenerate’ Spain and establish closer relations with France by changing the dynasty. 51