

 Scenes of jubilation, the public burning of Godoy’s portrait and the tearing down or smashing of busts and plaques took place all over the country. The destruction of these symbols of power – to which most townsfolk had, but the
day before, paid reverence as the source of public posts and honours – was often, however, directly or indirectly aimed at unpopular Godoy-appointed authorities. A particularly striking case was Sanlúcar de Barrameda where the
rioters demanded the dismissal and imprisonment of the local tax representative and provincial intendente. While the people were smashing busts and portraits of the royal favourite and devastating the botanical garden – one of
Godoy’s most prized endeavours, where American, African and Asian plants and trees, among them cinnamon, cocoa, and bananas, were being acclimatized for planting on the Mediterranean coast – a representation was submitted to the
town hall demonstrating ‘the many favours’ Godoy had done for the town and giving thanks for them. 32 *

 In Valladolid, the municipal council showed some reluctance in delivering up to the people the full-length official portrait of Godoy hanging in the town hall, until the threat of a tumult made them change their minds. 33 The
people then dragged the portrait to the centre of the main square, and breaking it, built a bonfire and burned the pieces, cursing Godoy as a traitor. Others went to the royal palace, to pull out the triumphal carriage on which
the portrait had originally been paraded through the streets. They were watched by many, including an attorney of the Chancillería, Francisco Gallard.

 Pulled by the people, it was taken to the Plaza Mayor, amidst taunts and ignominy, pelted by stones, stalks and lumps of mud. They put a large chamberpot full of filth in it, and two wretched, dirty, black urchins, with brushes,
on either side, and in front a man on horseback who shouted, viva el Rey y muera el traidor. They reached the place in the square where the gallows are raised, and there they burned the carriage, taking the ashes to the river,
saying that of so infamous a man not the least relic should be allowed to remain. 34

 This reversed, carnivalesque repetition of the portrait’s inaugural procession was repeated to some extent in Salamanca. After stoning the medallion of Godoy, which the military governor, the marqués de Zayas, had had errected
with ‘great pomp and majesty’ only eighteen months earlier, Salamanca university students obliged him to send for a stonecutter to efface it. They then made the governor, who it would seem was their main target of attack, repeat
the festivities he had organized when he inaugurated the medallion.

 This was the biggest affront a man could receive, to make him efface what he had had errected and accompany it with the same festivities. It is true that the general rejoicing at the obliteration of the medallion was greater
than for its erection … But oh! The inconstancy of things human! 35

 So wrote Joaquín Zaonero, an hidalgo rentista who lived in the town.