

 On my fellows I did peach

 Honour and fame I lost ,

 The vile traitor did I beseech ,

 And sold my Friends at cost ,

 Father, for my sins, forgive me . *

 But this perspicacious voice, which understood that Fernando would sell anyone to save his own skin, struck a discordant note among the vast majority of Spaniards who believed that the heir to the throne’s tribulations were the
result of a plot devised by Godoy and the queen. And when the Consejo de Castilla, constituted as a Supreme Court, found insufficient proof of guilt against the accused, there was further jubilation. Godoy’s plot had redounded
against him. Although Napoleon was angered by the revelations of Fernando’s intrigues with him, the country at large believed that the heir to the throne now enjoyed the Emperor’s protection and the latter’s popularity rose
perceptibly. Carlos IV, meanwhile, also tried to curry favour with Napoleon who became the arbiter of the family squabble and, beyond that, of Spain’s destiny. Subsequently, many Spaniards came to see in the Escorial affair, so
called after the palace where the royal family was then residing, the detonator of the Napoleonic war. 6

 THE ROYAL FAVOURITE’S OVERTHROW:
THE GRANDEES’ REVOLT

 In Aranjuez, some thirty kilometres south of Madrid, where the court was residing in March 1808, many people believed that Murat’s slow advance on the capital ‘was intended to bring pressure to bear on the Spanish royal family
to flee the country, following the Portuguese example’, as Archbishop Félix Amat, the king’s confessor and member of His Majesty’s Council wrote at the time. 7

 But the Spanish courtiers’ assumptions were incorrect. This option was evidently no longer in Napoleon’s mind, for as early as February 21 he had sent urgent orders to his admiral of the fleet bottled up in Cádiz by the British
navy since Trafalgar three years earlier, that no Spanish ships should be allowed to leave the port. This was the day after he had appointed Murat as his lieutenant general and head of all French forces in Spain. In chosing his
hot-headed and vain brother-in-law, Napoleon probably had in mind a marshal with sufficient ambition to ensure that the royal family did not escape at all.

 One of Napoleon’s private envoys, conte de Tournon, warned his master twice during March of Spanish ‘irritation’ against the French, and advised him that he should make no ‘final decision’ on the country’s fate until he had
judged the situation for himself.

 Spaniards have a noble and generous character, but one which tends towards ferocity and they would not stand being treated as a conquered nation. Once they are reduced to despair they would be capable of the greatest and most
valiant revolutions and of the most violent excesses … Only [the Emperor’s] presence can calm everything … The marriage of the Prince of the Asturias [Fernando] with a princess of the Imperial family is still longed for. 8

 Even Murat, who had sent optimistic dispatches on his enthusiastic reception along his march, was forced to recognize that the seizure of Pamplona fortress had caused ‘general consternation’ and that a possible rising in Navarra
might result. 9 But he deceived himself and deceived Napoleon in turn when he informed him that ‘Everywhere the people are awaiting Your Majesty and the felicity Your Majesty will bring …’, unless by this both understood that
this felicity depended on the Emperor overthrowing Godoy and granting imperial support and a Bonaparte wife to Fernando. 10 This the latter’s supporters firmly believed was Napoleon’s aim and they rejoiced openly at the prospect;
they, too, deceived themselves and the public. Almost totally isolated, Godoy bent every last effort to persuade the king to move with his family out of the French army’s immediate reach to the safety of Sevilla. The arrival in
Aranjuez of Izquierdo, the favourite’s private agent in Paris, with an imperial memorandum for the king – containing a series of half-truths concerning the reasons for Napoleon’s military intervention in Spain and demands on the
region north of the Ebro – finally seemed to have concentrated the king’s mind. * On March 13, he agreed to Godoy’s decision to leave. Meanwhile, a score of grandees of Spain had been hurriedly assembled in Madrid by the conde de
Teba (subsequently Montijo) who, in peasant disguise, had ridden posthaste to the capital from Andalucía following the duque del Infantado’s instructions to take all possible measures to prevent the royal family’s flight. As a
Household guardsman who witnessed these and the subsequent events later wrote, the grandees ‘agreed to commit their fortunes and their own persons to prevent the flight of the king and queen, and also to annihilate Godoy’. 11