

 By the time the decrees reached Madrid they had been superseded by the official news of Fernando’s abdication. These decrees were never presented to the amplified governing junta, according to Bernardo Iriarte, a member for the
Consejo de las Indias, who maintained that Miguel Azanza, Fernando’s treasury minister at the time and shortly to be a minister of King Josef Bonaparte, had kept them secret.† In the immediate, this mattered little. But in the
medium term of the war, fought by the patriots in the name of Fernando, the decrees, had they been widely known, could have conditioned several political choices: the creation of a regency, the summoning of the Cortes, albeit in
a limited role, indeed the very declaration of hostilities against Napoleon, which could have cut the ground from under the feet of those, especially his former ministers, who collaborated with the Bonaparte regime.

 In Bayonne, the day after the old royal couple’s arrival on April 30, Napoleon manoeuvred Carlos into stating that Fernando should return the crown to him, and informed the latter’s councillors accordingly. Although previously
they had refused Napoleon’s dogma that Carlos had abdicated ‘under duress’, they now accepted with alacrity on three conditions which Fernando set out in a letter to his father: he was prepared to renounce the throne, but only in
Madrid, and before the Cortes or an assembly of notables, and that if Carlos did not want to rule, Fernando would do so as his designated lieutenant. The conditions were obviously dictated by the desire to release Fernando from
Napoleon’s immediate grasp and by the certain knowledge that any representative Spanish body would refuse his handing the throne back.

 Within fifteen minutes of Fernando’s dispatching the letter, it had been delivered by the French police to Napoleon’s hands, and he was reading it to Carlos. The Emperor offered to draft a reply which, with a Cartesian logic
that Carlos could never have mastered, surveyed events since the Escorial affair, and indignantly rejected Fernando’s offer. By now Carlos IV was dominated exclusively by hatred of his son who had ‘usurped’ his throne. 89

 Three days later, on May 4, Fernando repeated his offer. That evening he received the verbal questions sent by the governing junta in Madrid; the following morning, May 5, he wrote out his two decrees – the last of his first
reign. That afternoon, Napoleon received word of a popular anti-French rising in Madrid three days earlier. Infuriated, the Emperor went to the appartments of the ex-king and queen. Fernando and his brother, Carlos, were summoned
to their presence, and their father told his oldest son that he was responsible for the bloodshed and that if he did not give up his rights to the throne he and his retinue would be considered traitors. Napoleon is supposed to
have added: ‘Prince, you must choose between cession and death’, and to have told him that he had until midnight to renounce the throne in favour of his father, and to inform Madrid of the fact. ‘With an almost imperceptible nod
of his head, Fernando withdrew.’ Alone with the old royal couple, Napoleon had little difficulty in persuading Carlos, who had indicated his wish to renounce the throne, to abdicate in his favour ‘as the only person who in the
state of things prevailing can reestablish order’. 90 But Fernando and his councillors were unaware of this.