

 But the compact also implied the existence of a ‘fundamental law’ which bound rulers and ruled ‘so that nothing is judged to be done justly if anything is done contrary to that primary law’. 82 Any violation of the fundamental
law was null and void. This opened the door to a conclusion diametrically opposed to that of absolutism: in the case of such violations, society had the right to establish a new compact to determine the form of monarchy it wished
to live under. In this interpretation, then, the mythical notion of the compact would during the war strike at the heart of absolutism, opening the way to ‘national sovereignty’ and a constitutional monarchy, as the Cádiz
constituent assembly of 1810 to 1812 demonstrated.

 If Fernando’s ineffable former preceptor and cleric, Juan Escoiquiz, was to be believed, he was the first of the Spanish royal party to be informed directly by Napoleon of his reasons for demanding that the Bourbons abdicate the
throne.

 My empire’s interests demand that the House of Bourbon, which is my implacable enemy, does not henceforth reign in Madrid. It is also in your nation’s interests because the last kings of this dynasty have done Spain nothing but
harm. 83

 Napoleon returned many times to his conviction that Carlos IV’s abdication during the Aranjuez tumult, when his guards had mutinied, could not be anything but a renunciation under force and therefore illegitimate. To Escoiquiz’s
long-winded denial of the allegation, the Emperor replied: ‘Say what you will, Canon, I stick to my maxim…. Moreover, my House and Empire require that the Bourbons no longer reign in Madrid.’

 Whereupon his Imperial Majesty good humouredly took hold of my ear and jokingly tweaked it, adding, ‘even if you were right, Canon, I repeat: Ma la política’. 84

 The ear tweaking, one of Napoleon’s notorious personal proclivities, was shortly thereafter repeated with somewhat greater force when Escoiquiz still refused to agree with the Emperor’s propositions.

 In a more serious vein, Napoleon justified his political reasoning in a report to the Spanish purportedly by his foreign minister, Champagny (but to all intents and purposes the Emperor’s own work), which maintained that the
Empire’s security depended on good relations with Spain, whose forces and resources must be increased, in order to oblige England to sue for peace. Napoleon considered it impossible to return Carlos IV to the throne against
national opinion or Fernando VII who, supported by England, had risen against his father; but nor could he leave Spain submerged in anarchy and in England’s hands. Spain had descended into decadence and it was necessary to
regenerate her. Policy advised it, justice authorized it, the recent Bourbon troubles proved the necessity of putting a prince of the imperial family on the throne. 85

 The Spanish played for time, asking for everything in writing. But time was not on their side. The arrival of the old king and queen on April 30 changed the scenario totally.