

 the people running through the streets for sheer joy and the greengrocers in the Plaza Mayor throwing their fruit and vegetables into the air out of delight; in this way the people went from the extreme of despondency to the
extreme of rejoicing, pleasure and happiness … 73

 On all points the report was pure illusion. Designed to calm spirits, the fact that it was so readily believed demonstrated Spaniards’ precise hopes at that moment. But when the government junta did not publish a much-awaited
communiqué confirming the news, Madrileños were again thrust into despair and anguish.

 To a rationalist attempting to steer a course between rumour and fact, like the earlier anonymous diarist cited, rumour reached such heights that over the coming days he withdrew from several gatherings of distinguished
individuals

 because all were like savage animals facing extinction. The least they predict is that the stars are about to fall from the heavens, and the sun split open like a pomegranate … Others are making their wills and disposing of
their possessions, from which, unluckily, I shall receive nothing. 74

 The propaganda war took a new turn with Murat’s attempt to take control of a printing press. Napoleon was very well aware that the war of the pen was an important weapon of combat. ‘Pay especial heed to everything concerning the
printing presses’, he ordered Murat in mid-April. 75

 In order to achieve his aims, the Emperor had meanwhile determined that he needed a ‘legitimate’ reigning monarch to abdicate the throne, and was adamant that Carlos IV resume his former crown. Carlos’ renunciation of his
abdication was to be made public. The Madrid printer whom Murat’s officers had ordered on April 20 to print it refused unless specifically ordered by the Consejo de Castilla to do so. There was a near riot when the people learned
what was – or what was rumoured to be – up: for one rumour had it that the officers had ordered the printer to set in type a proclamation including the phrase: Viva Carlos IV! Viva Godoy! Muera Murat! (Long live Carlos IV, Long
live Godoy, Death to Murat) – an incendiary provocation; while another claimed that the French were to sack all churches and impose a forced financial levy on the people. But the actual fact – the possibility of Carlos’ return to
the throne – was sufficient to bring out the mob the following day in the streets of Toledo when a French officer, who had arrived to seek billets, proffered ‘with a lack of prudence and good sense’ certain comments on the
current situation which enraged the people. They responded by sacking and burning the houses of some of the former king’s supporters and authorities who had collaborated with the officer. 76 Murat was obliged by the incident to
set up a press in his residence, from which issued the first pro-Bonapartist pamphlets in Spanish. José Marchena, who had returned as Murat’s secretary from France where he had fled in 1792 under threat from the Inquisition for
his anti-clerical opinions, published what was probably the first of these in the guise of a retired Spanish army officer’s letter to a friend. In France, Marchena, an exceptionally intelligent and well-read cleric, had become a
Girondist supporter, been imprisoned by Robespierre, and finally welcomed Napoleon’s reign as the culmination of the French Revolution. Adopting the pose of a patriotic Spanish officer who had fought against the French in the War
of the Convention, and who was deeply concerned for the fate of the Spanish monarchy after the Escorial and Aranjuez affairs, his pamphlet displayed notable political realism in its attempt to convince educated Spaniards to
accept that the feuding Bourbons had discredited the crown, becoming ‘mere instruments’ of ‘criminal intrigues’ which had led at Aranjuez to the ‘beginnings of a revolution’ (understood here as the people’s irruption in political
life). Only a ‘great arbiter’ – Napoleon – could re-establish a monarchy capable of restoring Spain to its past grandeur and dispelling the threat of revolution. 77 The pamphlet was cleverly aimed at both the middle levels of
polite society and the political elite.