

 Another prior event may also have caused Perez’s fury, for it enraged the majority of Madrileños – and the rest of the country. On April 21, Murat’s troops released Godoy from prison:

 Today 22
The saddest and most fateful day that Madrid has known since it became Madrid … The people here are in a tyrannical mood beyond belief. To see their faces so pale one would believe they had just risen from their sick-bed. A
stream of ranting against all and sundry issues from their fiendish mouths … 69

 Such emotive language in the habitually restrained, personally inexpressive writing of the times is as clear an indication of the feelings which overwhelmed this unknown letter-writer as those he was describing.

 No sooner had Fernando crossed into France than Murat had felt safe in ordering Godoy’s release – ‘une affaire extremement délicate qui blesse l’orgueil national’ (‘an extremely delicate affair which offends national pride’) as
he wrote to Napoleon on April 15, 70 and the official announcement of which was delayed for a further two days in case a mob attacked the palace in Chamartín where Godoy was being held. The former royal favourite’s freedom from
incarceration was the turning-point for Madrileños. Godoy, whom they so roundly hated, on whom they had cast the blame for all of Spain’s and of all their own woes, whose culpable consent had, in their view, allowed the French to
invade the country and take over its fortresses – this scapegoat on whom their vengeful passions were concentrated, was to go untried and in peace due to French military might. More than any other so far, this intervention in
Spain’s affairs was felt as a betrayal of the people and of Fernando. It was hardly to be wondered that ‘a sense of anger and panic overtook the people’. 71 They turned their hatred of Godoy on to his saviour, Napoleon.

 The situation was coming too close to boiling over. On the same day, in fact – but of course unknown to Madrid – the first minister, Cevallos, wrote to the governing junta from Bayonne to ‘redouble its precautions to ensure
public tranquility because the least attempt at insurrection would endanger the king’s safety and that of the people themselves.’ 72 Good news was needed, and good news came just as required the following day. To the crowd
milling in the Plaza del Sol in front of the post office waiting for correspondence from Bayonne, an official Spanish report from France (censored, of course, by Napoleon’s functionaries) brought ‘joy and relief.’ Napoleon and
Fernando had reached agreement, the anonymous correspondent reported. Fernando VII had been recognized as king – and had also been appointed regent of Portugal – and would make peace with England. The king would be given the hand
of a princess of France. French troops would be gradually withdrawn, beginning in May, and Spanish fortresses returned to Spain. Napoleon would excuse Spain’s three-year debt to France and end the monthly subsidy payments. Godoy
was to be expelled from Spain and handed over to France where he would be tried. The following noon at his daily military parade, the writer added, Murat was to proclaim Fernando King of Spain. Popular jubilation at such news was
exemplified by: