

 The sad and melancholic say that as soon as Napoleon has all the royal family and Godoy in his power, he will unmask himself, and embroil us in a civil war. The opposing Party continues joyfully to expect the satisfactory
outcome that has been announced. There are reasons for reflection and reconciliation between these extremes. 68

 Rumour, always a powerful influence in times of crisis and doubly so in a society where few were literate, kept the lower orders on a knife edge of optimism and angry desperation during most of the second half of April. Rumour
could be invented on the spot or fed by those in positions of power through their retainers who moved with ease among the people, or by royal guardsmen in or out of uniform, mingling with the crowd in their off-duty hours. Given
their awareness of the decisive role they had played in the Aranjuez rising and Fernando’s accession to the throne, the guards were not prepared to sacrifice their achievement to Napoleon’s or to the French military’s plans.
Murat was under no doubt that they were spreading anti-French sentiment among Madrid’s labouring poor, for he constantly instructed the governing junta to post the guards out of Madrid for that very reason. Rumour was fuelled
also in clerics’ sermons and by friars, who feared that they had everything to lose under a Bonapartist regime.

 But rumour was not the only manipulated news. The royal bulletins from Bayonne were almost invariably ‘optimistic’, raising new hopes of a satisfactory outcome to the talks. Napoleon ensured this: all Spanish dispatches from
France were ‘censored’, and much fabulation went into their writing to tranquilize domestic opinion. Caught up in this web of disinformation, to use an anachronistic phrase, it was little wonder that the population’s spirits rose
and fell almost by the hour.

 Another weapon used in this propaganda war, the pasquinade or satirical lampoon, revealed that despite their customary respect for authority, Madrileños had condemned to indifference the governing junta. At noon on April 23, the
city police affixed an edict in the Puerta del Sol forbidding the posting in public places of pasquinades. With the police barely out of sight, a man of some apparent standing stuck a poster across the edict:

 By pragmatic sanction

 It is hereby proclaimed

 In the public’s criterion

 The bollock to name

 ‘Napoleon’

 And for the same reason

 A law shall decree

 And in the Gaceta be placed

 In a section apart

 That the latrine be called

 ‘Bonaparte’ *

 This scatological lampoon, obviously written to appeal to the unlettered to hear, memorize and repeat, was presumably the work of a Fernandista stirring up the crowd. There were frondeurs aplenty always ready to keep the
inhabitants on an emotional edge with posters and fresh rumour. The strength of the latter was brought home by an incident which caused a considerable popular impact.

 On the morning of April 25, Antonio Pérez, a 47-year-old cacao-seed grinder went out to buy a clasp knife. Like many other Madrid tradesmen, he was not a Madrileño by birth, but a Galician from the village of Coba de Ornia. On
the scant evidence available, he had been in the capital for about nine years. With his newly acquired weapon, Pérez went to the Plazuela de Antón Martín, and stabbed in the lower abdomen the first French soldier he came across,
Captain Josef Luci. Then spying three more French soldiers in the patisserie in the square, he entered and stabbed two of them, a soldier in the stomach and a drummer in the hand. The captain and the soldier died two days later
of their wounds. Rapidly arrested and admitting to being the author of the stabbings, Pérez confessed that he had bought the knife with the express aim of killing all the Frenchmen who crossed his path, convinced as he was that
‘they had come with bad ideas against the Spanish’. On being asked by the court if the French soldiers had done him any personal harm, he replied ‘No’. His motives, he said, were that the ‘French rogues had come to sack the
temples of the one and only true God, and to rob him of the fruit of his labours’. * He had done what he believed any right-thinking man should do, but had been mistaken, finding himself alone in the streets. In self-defence, he
pleaded that he had acted in an access of ‘frenzy or fury’. † A rumour had claimed two more lives.