

 In Madrid, meanwhile, the governing junta, composed of a number of ministers, failed to resist Murat’s orders and set an example of leadership. Effectively the only sovereign power in Spain once the king was in France, it acted
as though hamstrung by the limited remit Fernando had given it before his departure and its respect for superior French military strength. Although informed on the night of April 28 that Fernando’s councillors were resisting
Napoleon’s abdication ultimatum, arguing that if Napoleon considered that Carlos IV had abdicated ‘under duress’, Fernando’s abdication would be even more ‘forced’, since it would take place in a state of un-freedom and removal
from his vassals ‘by means that everyone is aware of and that will horrify and outrage all Europe’, 86 the Junta took no action in the capital to reinforce this resistance. No doubt its legalistically minded members were more
concerned than Murat by the possibility of a popular rising which would jeopardize the king’s (and their own) future. Given that they acted almost only on orders from the king – had they received his instructions to declare war
they would have surely, though unenthusiastically, executed them – their task was made more difficult because open communication with the king’s party in Bayonne had been cut off by the Emperor’s police who seized all
correspondence between them.

 Nonetheless, by the night of May 1–2, the junta – now amplified to include the governors, deans and two ministers of each of the realm’s supreme councils – had been driven by the critical situation in the capital to initiate a
discussion on the question of declaring war. At that moment an emissary arrived from Bayonne with a message that the junta should do everything in its power to ‘conserve peace and harmony with the French’. This put an end to the
dicussion. Instead, the junta decided to send Fernando a verbal message placing four questions before him; the message’s bearers reached Bayonne on May 4. 87

 The questions were these: 1. Would the king authorize the creation of a substitute junta, whose members he should name, and which would be free to move out of French reach if the need arose? 2. Was it the king’s wish for
hostilities to be opened against the French, and if so how and when should they begin? 3. Should the frontier posts be immediately ordered closed to prevent more French troops entering the country? 4. Did the king consider it
opportune to convoke the Cortes? 88

 The day after receiving the questions, Fernando wrote out in his own hand two decrees. In the first, he stated that as he was ‘without liberty and in consequence disabled from taking any measure to save his Person or the
Monarchy’, he authorized the junta to remove itself to an appropriate place and to exercise all the functions of sovereignty in his name. In other words to act as a regency. Hostilities should begin as soon as, by ‘an act of
violence’, he was interned in France, whereupon the junta should take whatever measures it considered appropriate to prevent the entry of further French troops. In the second decree he expressed his wish that the Cortes be
summoned to whatever place seemed the most expeditious, and that for the moment the Cortes should confine itself exclusively to raising the money necessary for the kingdom’s defence. *