

 Irrespective of social status, women played a notable role in the fighting. They ranged from adolescents to sixty-year-olds – the mean age of those killed was thirty-four. Thus half of their numbers were, in terms of
contemporary life expectancy, already middle-aged or elderly. Their high casualty rate – eleven percent of the total inflicted although their proportion of the combatants was only just over seven percent 22 – can only be
explained by their bravery. For example, a twenty-year-old, Ramona Esquilino, and her mother rushed out unarmed into the street on hearing the French advance on the artillery park. Ramona seized a French officer’s sword from his
hand and laid about her, wounding the officer. Within minutes, French soldiers had felled mother and daughter and left them, apparently lifeless, in the street. Amazingly both survived. 23

 Considerable numbers of civilians who had escaped the cannonade at the royal palace and the fighting in the Puerta del Sol made their way by back streets to the artillery park where they hoped to find arms. It was there that
some of the final and most desperate fighting of the day took place.

 The park, then on the capital’s perimeter in the original chispero quarter of Maravillas, was indefensible; neither its emplacement in the grounds of an old ducal palace nor the wall which enclosed it had been planned for
defence. It lay between two major access streets to the capital’s centre, la calle Ancha de San Bernardo and Fuencarral, and its perimeter was bounded on two sides by smaller streets. The stores contained a considerable quantity
of arms and munitions – but the storeman who held the key failed to report for duty. At the start of the rising, only sixteen Spanish artillerymen were on duty, outnumbered five to one by a French contingent which Murat had
posted there. A junior officer, Lieutenant Rafael Arango, had been ordered to the artillery park that morning with the official order confining all Spanish troops to barracks; and it was not until the situation became critical
that Captain Luís Daoíz, a forty-one-year-old Sevillano, and the park’s commandant, was dispatched to take command, bringing with him a repetition of the official order. A reflective officer, Daoíz appeared to be weighing up,
Arango recalled, his duty to obey orders or to come out in support of the rising. 24 While outside the closed main gate increasing numbers of people were clamouring for arms, and inside a few artillery and infantry officers
waited, Daoíz paced the parade ground in reflection …

 Like many others that day, it was the sound of combat in the streets that brought Captain Pedro Velarde, aged twenty-eight, from Muriedas, Santander, rushing from his desk job to the park. Realizing that French artillerymen
outnumbered the Spanish, he made first for an infantry barracks close by and, together with Captain Andrés Rovira y Valldocera, a Catalan infantry officer on leave from Cuba who led a civilian group, persuaded the commanding
officer to let him have one company of 40 officers and men, commanded by a captain, to contain the civilians trying to break down the park gates in their demand for arms. It was his first ruse; his second, once inside the park,
was to secure the French artillery contingent’s acceptance of protective imprisonment rather than face slaughter at the hands of the mob clamouring at the gate. Meanwhile, Daoíz suddenly drew his sword and ordered the gates
opened.