

 The people poured in, were armed with the weapons laid down by the French contingent and from the park’s armoury, and poured out again to fight in the streets. Many preferred edged weapons to muskets which they did not know how
to use. Even as they went to their almost certain death, the people’s instinct was right; the enemy had to be harried in familiar streets and alleys unknown to him. The strategy of static defence of an indefensible place could
only attract the concentrated fire-power of superior French arms. Even though disciplined military presence strengthened the people’s fighting capacity in the park, unless the defenders could hold out until the following day at
the very least, the park’s defence would do nothing to support existing foci of insurrectionist combatants or to inspire continuing popular resistance throughout the city.

 At first, cannon fire and disciplined military action in combination with unskilled civilian daring – Velarde had managed to retain some of the armed people for the park’s defence – repulsed two French attacks; but the cannon,
which had had to be brought out into the park’s flanking streets, were exposed to enemy fire, and for want of grapeshot were less effective in close-quarter fighting than they might have been. It remained one of the mysteries of
the day why the artillerymen did not break down the storeroom door to secure at least the grapeshot which they knew was kept there and which they desperately needed to sweep the streets of their attackers. Instead, they fired
only ball.

 Civilians acted as the park’s advance guard. After the war, the captain who commanded the small infantry detachment in the park during its defence testified that he had seen a young girl carrying musket cartridges under fire to
her aged father and his companions who were firing on the French from beyond the park’s wall. Suddenly struck by a musket ball in the breast, she dropped to the ground dead. Her father saw her die, but continued at his post.
Feeling for the old man’s grief, the captain ordered him three times to leave his post before he agreed to do so, having run out of powder. He came and knelt by his daughter’s body, kissed her face, and lifted her up tenderly to
carry her home in a nearby street. Subsequently the dead girl was identified as fifteen-year-old Manuela Malasaña.

 But in 1816, Manuela’s only surviving relative, her aunt, gave a far more horrifying account of her death. She was returning home from her job as an embroiderer, carrying as was customary her scissors attached to her waist when
she was stopped by French soldiers who searched her. On finding the scissors, an aggressive weapon, she was shot out of hand by the soldiers close to the artillery park gates. 25 * The young girl who was killed under fire
bringing her father munitions remained an anonymous heroine.

 In the midst of the fighting, a forty-two-year-old mother of five, Clara del Rey, another long-unacknowledged heroine of the park, was killed serving the cannons as she had throughout; living close by the park, at the first
sounds of the rising, she had roused her three sons and her husband to ‘help the heroic Spanish artillerymen’. Like so many of the Madrid labouring poor, she and her husband were originally villagers – from Villalón de Campos,
Valladolid in their case – who had abandoned their smallholding to migrate to the capital, probably during the great dearth of 1804. Her oldest son, Juan, the only one of the family whose trade is known, was a nineteen-year-old
bricklayer who, to avenge his mother, joined the patriot army and fought throughout the war. 26