

 The undeclared war which, for the past month, had been fought against the French in the capital’s streets might have exploded into open warfare earlier or later or perhaps never at all. Why then did it happen on this particular
day? An event, already familiar from the Aranjuez rising, and shortly to be seen again in the wider anti-Napoleonic risings, occurred on that Monday in Madrid: the threat to the people of losing their last remaining link to their
monarch. Running like a mobilizing thread through all of these risings was the fear, solidly embedded in popular consciousness, of living in a world without their king. In Aranjuez, it had been the planned departure of their then
king, Carlos lV, which had aroused the villagers’ fear – cleverly exploited by the anti-Godoy nobility. In Madrid on May 2, it was the forced departure to France of the last direct heir to Fernando’s throne remaining in Spain;
and within the month it was the definitive news of the loss of the Spanish throne to Napoleon which aroused popular urban anger and support for a handful of anti-Napoleonic patriots to launch risings and effectively to begin the
war against the French. Moreover, if the king’s departure from Aranjuez had been an outrage of Godoy’s, these last two outrages were the French Emperor’s work in order to conquer and subdue Spain, leaving the people ‘orphaned’
and abandoned to their fate. The people’s passionate hatred for Godoy was now transferred to Napoleon or more immediately to his lieutenant general in Spain, Murat.

 This thread of abandonment by their king was woven into a fabric of other fears, passions, anxieties, resentments and hopes, as was seen during the Aranjuez rising. But within this fabric a new warp had also recently been woven:
the knowledge, since Aranjuez, that the people, by their joint action, could definitively affect the affairs of state.

 On May 1, a large crowd in the Puerta del Sol had waited since early morning in front of the post office for the latest official Spanish communiqué from Bayonne – which did not arrive, stirring up new conjectures and
exacerbating old fears. The crowd booed and hissed Murat on his way through the square, and wildly cheered don Antonio, Fernando’s uncle and president of the governing junta, as his old and unstylish carriage drove past. Only at
10 p.m., under a shower of rain, had the waiting crowd dispersed, still without news from Bayonne.

 For the past four days, Murat had been pressuring the junta to dispatch to Bayonne Fernando’s two siblings still remaining in Madrid: Luisa, the ex-queen of Etruria, whose husband had been enthroned and she, his widow, dethroned
by Napoleon, and the fourteen-year-old infante (prince) Francisco de Paula, the youngest of the royal children. On May 1, the junta had finally agreed to the young prince leaving the following day: as a gesture to the junta’s
fear that the royal departure would lead to rioting, Murat agreed that it should take place after dark on May 2. The news of the impending departures, spread by court officials and palace servants, became known. On the same day,
moreover, the first of the French-inspired Spanish pamphlets of the propaganda war appeared from Murat’s press, which attempted to persuade Spaniards to abandon the decrepit Bourbon monarchy and accept a new Napoleonic crowned
head. It was clear from this that Napoleon was intent on taking over the throne. Fearing the worst, the junta ordered the three-thousand-odd Spanish troops in the capital to be confined to barracks and deprived of munitions.