

 Another person at court had no doubt as to the rising’s origin: ‘There is a great rising’, a lady of the court cried to the naval engineer and poet, José Mor de Fuentes, as he was making his way to the palace at about 10 a.m. ‘A
rising, why?’ ‘Because the French want to take the prince.’ 4

 Rapidly informed of a crowd gathering outside the palace, Murat dispatched a general and another officer to discover the cause; seeing them riding in and believing that the officers had come to take off the prince, the crowd
turned on them and they unsheathed their swords. The situation was momentarily defused by a Spanish guards officer who protected the French general, and by the arrival of a small party of French soldiers who escorted the two
officers back to Murat’s residence. Almost immediately, French cannon were wheeled to the edge of the palace square and fired into the crowd which, leaving the dead and wounded behind, fled through the city, crying out the news.

 Hearing the cannon fire, a Galician hidalgo, Joaquin Terreiro Montenegro, made for the Plaza de Santo Domingo near the palace. ‘Seeing the people sadly defenceless in the face of the enemy’, he ‘exhorted them to take arms’. To a
judge of the Madrid court, Francisco Cano Manuel, who was there at the head of a police patrol, and to the commander of the palace guard picket, he made the same proposal. ‘The latter replied that he was without a single
cartridge, the judge that he lacked all support, and the people that they had been refused arms at the depot.’ Terreiro, jurisdictional lord of ‘a number of places in the Kingdom of Galicia’, told them that if they were
determined ‘they should demand arms again and again. But it was all in vain ….’ *

 However, elsewhere in the city armed French troops were attacked wherever they were met – the unarmed usually being left to go free – by Madrileños using any weapons they could lay their hands on at first: clasp knives, clubs,
cutting tools, and a few blunderbusses, shotguns and pistols. Barely an hour had passed since the French cannonade had precipitated the insurrection.

 ‘To arms! To arms!’, a Sevillian priest, living not far from the palace, heard rushing people shout from the street. The Rev. José María Blanco went out to see what was happening:

 I had just arrived at an opening named Plazuela de Santo Domingo, the meeting point of four large streets, one of which leads to the palace, when, hearing the sound of a French drum in that direction I stopped with a
considerable number of decent and quiet people whom curiosity kept rivetted to the spot. Though a strong piquet of infantry was fast advancing upon us, we could not imagine that we stood in any kind of danger. Under this mistaken
notion we awaited their approach; but, seeing the soldiers halt and prepare their arms, we began instantly to disperse. A discharge of musketry followed in a few moments, and a man fell at the entrance of the street, through
which I was, with a great throng, retreating from the fire. The fear of an indiscriminate massacre arose so naturally from this unprovoked assault, that every one tried to look for safety … I hastened on towards my house, and
having shut the front door, could think of no better expedient, in the confused state of my mind, than to make ball cartridges for a fowling piece which I kept. 5