

 Having conceded ground since the arrival of his parents, Fernando now collapsed. He was not made of the stuff of patriotic martyrdom. Moreover, he had just dispatched a decree effectively declaring war on Napoleon, which the
French police might easily seize. Whether Napoleon actually threatened him with death or not is immaterial: Fernando knew that the Bourbon duc d’Enghien had been abducted and shot on the Emperor’s orders. The following day, May
6, Fernando renounced the throne in his father’s favour; and the latter, after confirming Murat as his lieutenant general in Spain (Murat had packed don Antonio, Fernando’s uncle and president of the governing junta, off to
France on May 3 and taken over his presidency), handed his throne over to Napoleon.

 But Fernando went even further. Abandoned by his councillors, he subsequently renounced his rights as heir to the throne. And on May 12, he, his brother Carlos and his uncle Antonio issued a proclamation in Bordeaux absolving
Spaniards of ‘all obligations’ to them. The three then continued on to their internment at Talleyrand’s country estate at Valençay where the young ex-king spent the war years grovelling before Napoleon, going so far as to
congratulate him on placing his brother on the throne of Spain. Fernando thus became the first afrancesado – the name given to collaborators with the Bonaparte regime by the anti-Napoleonic patriots who had risen in his name and
in defence of his throne.

 Courage and dignity in the morning; cowardice and vileness in the afternoon. Fernando was dominated by events. His shifty character, lacking in all decorum, allowed him to humble himself before events in the hope of better times
without any sense of humiliation to outrage his feelings. He had a plebeian soul which accounted for his popularity. 91

 Thanks to Bourbon turpitude, Napoleon won the Spanish throne easily. But he would live to regret it. On St Helena, he confessed that the resulting ‘accursed Spanish war was the primary cause of my misfortunes’ 92 – ‘I started
this affair very badly, I confess; the immorality of it was only too patent, the injustice too cynical, and it was a very vile trick because I have fallen victim to it myself.’ 93

===== FILE: OEBPS/14_Chapter03.xhtml =====
Napoleon’s Cursed War

 3

 The First Shots of War

 THE MADRID RISING, MAY 2–3

 On Monday, May 2, for a matter of hours, the people of Madrid rose against the French. After heavy fighting they were defeated by a combination of their own authorities and greatly superior French forces; and finally they were
repressed with brutal savagery by Murat. The outcome, common sense assured, was foretold: the balance of opposing forces was too heavily weighted against the insurrection’s success. But common sense is not the stuff of which such
risings are made.

 In the event which precipitated it, and the social groupings which participated in it, the insurrection was typical of the national rising which still lay in an uncertain future. But in other aspects it was totally atypical: it
took place under direct French military occupation and had immediately to confront French military might, something which occurred in none of the major insurrectionary cities subsequently. As the culmination of a month-long
agitation against the French army in the capital, the labouring poor rose, and though rapidly joined by a sizeable number of members of other social groupings, the former remained (along with Spanish military) the principal
protagonists. Without evidence of prior planning or leadership and without money flowing, theirs was in this sense closer to a spontaneous rising than many of the later provincial insurrections which were planned by Fernandista
supporters who used, and frequently ‘remunerated’, the lower orders, as in the earlier Aranjuez rising, as an intimidatory street force. Finally, while the Madrid rising could justly be called the first shots of the Napoleonic
war, it was not the ‘spark’ which immediately set off the conflagration in the rest of Spain.