

 From an early hour on May 2, the street sellers were chanting their wares as usual, reassuring a visitor to the capital that everything was normal; 1 it was ‘St Monday’ – the day of the week when, as in other west European
countries, those manual workers who could afford to do so (and many who couldn’t), took the day off. More artisans and the like were able, therefore, to gather in public places than on a normal work day. The Puerta del Sol was
again crowded with people waiting for the long-delayed bulletin from Bayonne. Only a handful had gathered outside the palace gates. By 8.30 a.m., Luisa was on her way. She was not popular, being considered almost a foreigner, and
had remained close to her discredited parents, Carlos IV and María Luisa, on whose behalf she had corresponded frequently with Murat. No one attempted to prevent her departure. A second carriage still waited, its driver and
postilion already in place.

 The immediate events following on Luisa’s departure were confused. Different accounts and participants’ reports almost inevitably varied; but the significant aspect was that all led to the same conclusion, expressed in an old
woman’s cry, ‘They are taking them away from us!’

 ‘Treachery!’ cried a man who had suddenly appeared, ‘they have taken our king and now they are taking the whole royal family to France! Treachery! … Death to the French!’

 A former royal locksmith and Fernandista confidential agent, José Blas Molina Soriano, had seen Luisa’s coach driving through the streets, and had run to the palace where he found another royal coach waiting; immediately he had
enquired of the coachmen who they were waiting for. On his worst fears being confirmed he launched the cry to the sixty or seventy people gathered outside. He then ran into the palace, followed by the people, shouting, ‘the
prince must not leave ….’ By chance, they encountered the tearful prince who, to their acclaim, promised to appear on a palace balcony if they returned outside. This they did and the prince duly appeared, bowing his head several
times in acknowledgement to the crowd which had now increased to about two hundred. 2 An Asturian-born inn porter, José Muñiz Cueto, who was outside the palace early in the morning, independently confirmed Soriano’s story, but
added, as other witnesses also claimed, that a court official had appeared on a palace balcony and shouted to the crowd: ‘Vassals! To arms! They are taking the prince!’ 3

 The confidential agent, Soriano, a man of humble origin who understood the popular mentality, played the role of ‘agitator’ to perfection, an essential role as would be seen in the later provincial risings. He claimed
subsequently to have been acting independently, yet his vigilance of the movement of the royal carriages and his easy access to the royal palace suggested that he was well known there and was informed of the junta’s fear that
Murat might try forcibly to smuggle the prince out of Madrid. If he was in reality acting on the junta’s behalf, it was, however, as a spy, not as a popular agitator, since the junta was trying at all costs to maintain public
calm.