

 The number of fathers and sons, mothers and daughters who fought alongside each other was remarkable. Almost inevitably, one or other of the family was killed: in one instance, a father and son faced a French firing squad
together. The death of a parent often led to a surviving son swearing vengeance and joining the army. Three bereaved sons wreaked a different form of revenge: they began guerrilla actions, and one of them, from the village of
Miraflores de la Sierra, whose father had died fighting alongside him in the Madrid streets, became a guerrilla leader. 27

 In the few hours that the park’s defence lasted, seven women were known to have been killed or to have suffered fatal wounds, and at least another two were wounded. 28 Like many of the women who died fighting, Clara del Rey was
given a pauper’s burial. The Maravillas quarter, where the park was located, was the scene of the rising’s greatest number of casualties. 29

 A considerable number of non-combatant women also died when they went out onto their balconies to watch the fighting, or from musket balls fired through their windows. But women suffered, too, the effects of their husband’s near
or actual deaths, as was seen in the master embroiderer’s case. Another wife, soon to give birth, went mad and jumped to her death from the second floor of her house. Four women whose husbands were killed died of the shock almost
immediately, while the sister of another man shot out of hand was literally struck dumb and remained so. (These cases were not gender exclusive: the brother of a non-combatant lawyer who was also shot out of hand ended his days
in a lunatic asylum; while the father of one of those executed died of shock. 30 )

 Angered at his troops having been twice repulsed, Murat gathered a force strong enough to attack the park on all sides and placed its command under a trusted general. The end was not long in coming. Ammunition and powder were
running low. The defending artillerymen were killed at their cannons exposed in the streets, a musket ball struck Captain Velarde in the heart, and Captain Daoíz was wounded in the foot. The defence crumbled. As he approached the
silent cannon on which Daoíz was holding himself erect, the French general had bitter words for the captain, who took his sword to him, only to be bayonetted in the back by a vigilant French guardsman, a wound from which he died
a few hours later. Both Velarde and Daoíz, the commanders of the defence, found subsequent fame as Spanish national heroes.

 A short time later, all fighting, if not the bloodshed, was brought to an end. O’Farril and Azanza, War and Treasury ministers respectively, and members of the governing junta, persuaded Murat that the rising was not a
conspiration and that they could bring it to an end if his troops stopped firing and a French ranking officer accompanied Spanish civilian and military authorities into the streets in a call to end resistance and declare an
amnesty. This they did. But as the fighting ended, the French repression began. Most of those captured with arms in hand were summarily tried by a drumhead military commision, and those caught with concealed ‘weapons’ (among them
shearing clippers, scissors, sack sewing needles and other ‘offensive’ tools of their trade) were shot out of hand.