

 The middling to upper commoners – liberal professions, gentlemen, administratives and clergy – were not spared either, though their percentage of executed was only slightly higher than their proportion of combatants. However,
within this group, the liberal professionals paid a heavier price than the others: their percentage of the executed was one and a half points higher. Whether by design or chance (and the figures would suggest the former) the
French military struck – and struck hard – at their major enemies, sparing only the Spanish military. They evidently had no desire to alienate a national organization with the means to extend armed risings to other parts of the
country; * and Murat in consequence accepted the junta’s pleas not to extend the repression to the artillery park’s surviving military defenders, now prisoners.

 A number of civilians, like Francisco Matas, the Valencian hatter’s journeyman who, on hearing the sound of fighting in the streets, had run to the park, and had subsequently been wounded and taken prisoner there, owed their
lives to the junta’s intervention and Murat’s concession. As Matas relates:

 At ten at night the few prisoners, including myself who had a slight wound in the thigh, were marched with the utmost brutality from the park under guard to the village of Chamartin where we were held until the following day,
May 3. Then we were brought back to Madrid and taken to the Montaña de Monte Pío where I thought we would be shot as so many other victims had already been; but then they took us to the Puerta de Recoletos, and finally locked us
up in the basement of the Geronimos friary.

 The following day they were taken out and marched under guard through Madrid’s major streets,

 an act they believed was ignominious, as though we were to be ashamed of having taken up arms against the French. Then they made us sign a deceptive and fanatical statement before freeing us … During those two and a half days we
were beaten and insulted constantly and given no food … Divine Providence spared us in the end. 37

 But many of the dominant elite no longer had much faith in Divine Providence and they fled the capital, Antonio Galiano’s uncle, a judge of the Madrid court, among them. The many regional dignitaries who had come to Madrid to
kiss the hand of their new monarch and had remained, returned home. There was no lack of authoritative personages to spread the news of the May 2 insurrection through the provinces, although private correspondence sent by the
efficient and rapid crown mail services, and the latter’s carriers, were often the first to relate it.

 In an Order of the Day to his soldiers on May 2 and in a proclamation to Spaniards on the same day, 38 Murat attempted to drive a wedge between the ‘good Spaniards’ who must deplore the rising and the capital’s ‘rabble’ who had
been aroused by ‘villainous agitators’ and ‘our common enemy’, the English. His tactic was to no effect; the repression, if not the rising, had seen to that. As usual the Madrileños’ real mood could be gauged with some precision
by theatre attendance. In an attempt to placate the capital’s population, Murat ordered the theatre company ‘forthwith’ to put on plays every day of the week. ‘For several months the theatre-going public declined to such an
incredible degree’ that, ‘with no financial help forthcoming from the government, the players ran up a debt of more than one hundred thousand reales with the Treasury’. 39