

 As part of the country’s ‘regeneration’ process, the Emperor hastily drew up a draft constitution, and summoned an assembly of 150 Spanish notables of the three estates to approve it in Bayonne. Although the majority of these
were nobles and prelates, some were to be elected by the town councils of major cities of the realm. The elections were about to be held or were in the process of taking place when the nationwide risings occurred. The widespread
knowledge of the elections was a factor in precipitating the insurrections.

 The Bishop of Orense, Galicia, was one of those summoned to attend the Bayonne meeting. Pedro Quevedo y Quintano was an Extremaduran by birth, and seventy-three years old. An absolutist, his letter to the Madrid governing junta
refusing the summons became a well-known statement of an ideological posture which, while adopting predictable hostility to the Emperor’s procedures, expressed views that were widely held by many patriot commoners at the time.
Diplomatic and formal in style, he confronted head-on Napoleon’s ‘regenerationist’ rhetoric of curing Spain’s ills and ‘substitutionist’ policy of ‘improving the nation’s and monarchy’s destiny’:

 Has the Nation approved, has it given its firm authority for this? Is it prepared to submit to awaiting its cure by these means? … The renouncements [of the throne], on which all authority depends, have made the entire Nation
suspicious … and require, for the Spanish Kingdom’s satisfaction at least, that they be ratified … so that, exercising its independence and sovereign responsibility, the Nation may recognize as its legitimate King whomever
nationality, rights and circumstances may call to the throne. 54

 The bishop was no doubt well aware that Fernando VII had proposed in Bayonne that Napoleon allow him to return to Spain to offer his abdication before the kingdom’s Cortes; and that the latter would almost certainly reject the
offer. In this sense, his letter was no more than a veiled attempt to secure Fernando’s return to the throne – and if that proved impossible, a Bourbon successor at the least. But at the same time he enunciated the nation’s
independent and sovereign right to recognize as monarch the person it considered best suited for the position. A convinced absolutist was therefore among the first to express publicly to Napoleon the doctrine of the Spanish
nation’s right to choose its sovereign.

 That said, it is necessary to enter two caveats. In the first place, when the bishop spoke of the ‘nation’ he did not distinguish between it and the ‘kingdom of Spain’; in other words, he was not speaking of popular national
sovereignty, but of a sovereignty restricted to those who had the right of representation in the kingdom’s Cortes – historically certain towns which had been granted the privilege in the past. Secondly, implicit in his absolutist
posture, was the argument that once the ‘nation’ had chosen its ruler, it had no right to reject him (or her). If the Spanish people rose to defend Fernando as the country’s sovereign, no one might question his right to absolute
monarchy. On the one hand then, the absolutists could not deny that the nation was independent and sovereign in its right to select its monarch, but on the other they denied that this choice was revocable or that the monarch
could in any manner be restricted in the exercise of his divine rights. It was on these arguments that the great patriotic debate – and the bitter gulf between absolutists and progressives – opened up during the war: ‘national
sovereignty’ versus ‘popular sovereignty’.