

 Popular agitation may to some extent be attributed to a generalized malaise due to the bad economic conditions, especially for artisans, or specific conditions like that of Cartagena, where the Spanish Mediterranean fleet’s
major arsenal had been at a virtual standstill since the Trafalgar defeat. † But the crowd’s motivations were multi-layered and complex. One general aspect of these must be taken into account. In a traditional society, where
everything was apparently regulated from above by laws, decrees and custom, nothing was a greater destabilizing factor than political uncertainty. To be ‘unsure of the future’, ‘not to know what to expect’, represented a rupture
with the Old Order’s ‘monolithic mental and operative system’. 4

 At a more prosaic level, the popular classes were deeply affected by a persistent rumour that swept the country from the moment of the French army’s invasion: it had brought in its baggage train thousands of manacles to seize
the young and force them into Napoleon’s army in the north of Europe. While the rumour was unfounded, the dread of conscription into the Emperor’s army was one of the most powerful fears that mobilized the lower orders. Aware of
the rumour’s potency, and before setting a foot in Spain, the new French king issued a proclamation denying that Spaniards would be conscripted into the Napoleonic army; but it made no difference.

 A fundamental distinction between the different risings lay in the balance of military to civilians. In almost all the insurrectionary cities, a few junior military officers were among the conspirators; but in garrison towns
like Cartagena, La Coruña and Badajoz, the military (or naval) forces assumed a particular importance, as their relative weight on the post-rising juntas showed. In the others, civilians, though usually able to count on the
support of at least part of the local military, were pre-eminent. No military forces rallied to repress the main risings.

 Of the major risings, three – Oviedo, Valencia and Zaragoza, none of them with important garrisons – were civilian led and organized; four, where the presence of garrisons was marked – Sevilla, La Coruña, Badajoz and Valladolid
– were civilian–military affairs; and one – Cartagena, the great Mediterranean naval base – was a garrison-organized insurrection.

 THE CIVILIAN RISINGS: OVIEDO, VALENCIA, ZARAGOZA

 Prior planning, hostility to the authorities who temporized with the French, the Fernandista need to prevent the risings from getting out of hand, popular agitators, and the people’s seizure of arms, were in differing degrees
essential to almost all the civilian-led risings. Oviedo, the capital of Asturias, was a prime example of planning. A group of Fernandista commoner elite who ‘formed a real revolutionary committee’ organized the coup on the night
of Tuesday, May 24, and the formation of a supreme junta early the following day, 5 after nearly two weeks of popular commotion. Among this group of Fernandistas were the senior Oviedo judge, two government officials, the Oviedo
arms factory purveyor, the local postal service head, an artillery commissioner, a military officer, two cathedral canons and a number of private individuals; only one titled noble joined the group. * The decision to stage the
coup on the night of May 24–25 was quite deliberate; the group’s determination to control events equally evident in that the conspirators had earlier joined with the old authorities to pacify the crowd for fear of a popular
rising. In Valencia, which rose a day earlier but only formed its junta two days later, the same preoccupation was patent. Two agitators, armed with plentiful money, raised the crowd and ensured that it remained orderly.