

 The bishop had still another point to make:

 At the same time as it is offered its happiness, the nation believes itself enchained, enslaved. More than artifice, this is a work of violence: a numerous army which was admitted to Spain as a friendly ally, or as the result of
indiscretion and timidity, or perhaps of vile treachery, serves as an authority which it is difficult to envisage as legitimate.

 There could be no doubt that every patriot shared this view. Imperial military force had become the basis of an illegitimate authority. Napoleon’s nomination of his brother to the throne might attempt to create a new, civilian
legitimacy, but in the last resort the new monarchy was always dependent on the imperial army to sustain itself.

 In conclusion, wrote the bishop, an assembly called outside Spain could not be free to decide on a new constitution. Tumults could be feared in the kingdom and if these led to foreign troops being offered or asked for to fight
the French on Spanish soil, ‘what desolation, what more lamentable scene can be imagined? The Emperor’s compassion, love and solicitude [for Spain] may cause her the worst of disasters rather than cure her of her ills.’

 The bishop’s prescience was considerable. Not only did he foresee that Napoleon’s policy would drag Spain into Britain’s war with France, but that this would result in a war of Spaniard against Spaniard, anti-Napoleonic resister
against Bonaparte supporter.

 The bishop alleged that his age prevented him from attending the Bayonne assembly, a thin excuse, for it did not exclude his subsequent – and highly controversial – participation on the patriot side. Many other members of the
elite also refused to attend, on the then common excuse of their ‘ailments’, or on receiving threatening anonymous letters 55 – or even turning back once on the road to Bayonne. The Galician hidalgo, Joaquín Terreiro Montenegro,
who had witnessed the May 2 events in Madrid, was one of the latter. Apprised while still in Madrid at the beginning of June that he had been appointed to attend the assembly, he tried to evade the commission, but was threatened
by the French if he did not attend. He set out on the road, having shortly before learned that his native region had risen against the French. On reaching Valladolid, which had also risen, he encountered people fleeing the city;
General Cuesta had just led an army of civilian volunteers and patriot regulars to a crushing defeat by the French military at Cabezón. Retracing his route, Terreiro retreated to the township of Olmedo where he encountered six
other deputies to the assembly, among them the conde de Altamira, a convinced Fernandista and one of the richest nobles in Spain. As Terreiro later wrote:

 With great art, the conde sounded out the deputies’ opinions. The present writer was the only one to respond openly with the words: ‘My decision is taken. Galicia has raised her head, my homeland’s fate is mine.’ *

 Altamira and he were the only two to elude local surveillance, and Terreiro set off for Benavente, the township to which General Cuesta had retreated. In the latter’s presence he tore up the deputy’s papers to the Bayonne
assembly and the French passport with which he had been issued; and in their place was given a Spanish passport with which he reported to the junta of La Coruña, and subsequently to that of Santiago, where he handed over the
fifteen thousand reales he had withdrawn for the journey to Bayonne.