

 In all of these risings, the existing authorities – as a rule represented by captains general and audiencia magistrates – tried to quell the revolt and were the insurrectionists’ first enemy. In Oviedo, for example, where a
fortnight separated the start of popular commotions, which even the Fernandistas wanted controlled, and the actual ‘controlled’ insurrection, the news on May 9 of the Madrid May 2 rising and subsequent repression, saw an
indignant crowd shouting ‘To arms! Death to the French! Revenge for our people vilely assassinated!’, and setting off for the audiencia to demand the orders the authorities had received from Madrid. The magistrates stalled, and
the people, who included a large number of vociferous women, threatened to break down the doors. Amidst utter confusion, the principality’s procurator general, a known Fernandista, demanded the orders in the name of the people
who were to be praised for their understanding that ‘the monarchy and the nation’s freedom and independence are endangered’. Still the magistrates havered. Seeing the orders in one of the chief secretary’s coat pockets, the
procurator took them and showed them to the crowd, saying that he would read them aloud in the Campo de San Francisco; and there having done so, † he tore them up. He then told the people to remain orderly, respect the
constituted authorities and not to insult, directly or indirectly, anyone. He formed the armed into street patrols and ordered their leaders to inform him immediately of any incidents. 6

 The commotion was as ‘spontaneous’ as they come – and therein lay its danger for Fernandistas and local authorities, who equally feared popular mobilization and the ‘inevitable descent into anarchy’ that this entailed in their
eyes. This was shown a few hours after the disturbances when a special session of the Junta General of Asturias, * which had begun its triennial sessions in Oviedo on May 1, unanimously recognized that the people’s ‘noble
enthusiasm’ to preserve the monarchy and ensure the country’s defence was not ill-judged,

 as long as the people maintained and acted without resort to commotions but at the orders of the legitimate authorities and the people’s natural representatives … 7

 But the Oviedo audiencia did not admit defeat. It ordered that further Junta meetings be postponed until July, that the university be closed, and all arms seized during the commotion by the armourers from the arms factory be
handed in. Incensed by these measures, the crowd was pacified only by respected Fernandistas’ assurances that another opportunity to achieve their aims would soon arise.

 *

 In Zaragoza and Valencia, the other two civilian-led risings, where prior commotions had been less marked, more threatening procedures had eventually to be taken against the old authorities during the insurrection itself.
Moreover, in neither of these two cities was the rising as meticulously planned as in Oviedo. In both, it was not until the arrival of the Gazeta de Madrid officially announcing the Bourbon abdications, that the people rose.