

 Of the 150 deputies from the three estates due to attend the Assembly only sixty-five, mainly from areas controlled by the French military, initially attended. Even this number was reached only by nominating a score of new
deputies, a process that Murat, the governing junta in Madrid and Napoleon himself continued until by the assembly’s end the total reached ninety-one. † The rest of the country was already in the throes of a general
anti-Napoleonic insurrection.

 Napoleon’s draft constitution envisaged a number of profound reforms: religious reform, including the Inquisition’s abolition; the creation of a unified national tax system; the ending of all noble and corporative privileges and
the introduction of the Napoleonic code. All of these vanished in the face of stubborn Spanish resistance, usually in the form of legal-historical objections. (‘Vous êtes des bêtes’, Napoleon wrote on the Consejo de Castilla’s
representative’s submission. 56 ) Nonetheless, on July 7, Spain received its first written ‘Constitution’ – a debatable status within constitutional theory which maintains that a Constitution can only be drawn up by a sovereign
assembly on national soil, and that Bayonne was rather a charter graciously granted by a foreign monarch. 57 Whatever its formal status, it was mild medicine for the country’s regeneration. As finally approved, there was no
religious reform – indeed, Catholicism was granted the status of the only religion to be permitted in Spain and her colonies – and even the Inquisition survived unscathed. * But at the same time it virtually sealed the fate of
the Old Regime.

 An amalgam of the Bonapartist constitutions created for France, the Bayonne statute represented the culmination of Spain’s eighteenth-century reform movement. It put a king, whose powers were not specificially limited other than
by his swearing to observe the Constitution, at the head of state and government. But, if not explicitly then implicitly, he was no longer a king by divine right: the new monarchy’s ‘fundamental law’, as the statute’s preamble
stated, was a pact between the people and their king, the king and his people, in which the sovereign swore to preserve Spain’s territorial integrity and independence, individual liberty and property. And men of property were
given a measure of representation in a Cortes which, although without legislative power, allowed them to debate and approve ministerial bills, especially the triennial state budget, and to consider ministerial misdeeds. These
arrangements were a considerable advance on the previous absolutism.

 Most significantly, the statute made a number of important judicial, commercial and financial reforms. The judiciary became independent of the administration, thereby losing its former overlapping feudal role of government
administration and justice; † habeas corpus was introduced, torture banned, arbitrary arrest and imprisonment made punishable by law. An individual’s house was inviolable and could be entered only by day and with adequate legal
authority. A single civil and criminal code would apply to all of Spain and its colonies; the previous privileged laws for nobility and clergy were abolished as were señorial-appointed justices. Similarly a single commercial code
would apply. Freedom of trade, industry and commerce was guaranteed; all internal customs were abolished, as were commercial privileges, and the colonies were granted equal trade rights with the metropolis. All special tax
privileges were abolished, and taxation would apply equally to all those liable to pay. Entail, which had caused so much anguish to the Spanish reformers, was effectively restricted. ‡ While the existing nobility was preserved, a
noble condition could no longer be demanded for civilian posts or for the army and navy. ‘Service and talent will be the only criterion for promotion.’ Freedom of the press would be introduced two years after the new Constitution
came fully into effect which, to give time for enabling legislation (and probably as a Spanish delaying tactic) would be only after five years. 58