

 Amongst the crowd that Monday morning, May 23, in the Plaza de la Compañía, where Valencians normally gathered to read the latest Madrid news – the newspapers could be bought or hired and read aloud for the benefit of the
illiterate – was a smallholder and his companion from the huerta , the rich, irrigated land around the city. As the full import of the news was silently taken in, a sudden, solitary cry was heard: Viva Fernando VII!

 The smallholder, Francisco Lluesma, and his companion, Vicente Rausell (whose profession is unknown but who as likely as not was also a smallholder) had come well prepared for such a moment; money in their pockets and a
Fernandista standard ready to be unfurled. Inspired by their ‘patriotic zeal’ and ‘without thought for the dangers and risks involved’ they had thereupon immediately

 inflamed the good vassals’ spirits to ensure that they proclaimed Fernando VII as their legitimate king … Both distributed largesse from their own pockets to the needy and poor who had gathered in order to prevent pillage and
disorders, a purpose they indeed achieved at that critical moment. 8

 Three merchant brothers and purveyors to the town hall, of a certain standing and wealth in Valencia, were known to be the major conspirators behind the rising. Vicente, Manuel and Mariano Bertrán de Lis had, from shortly after
the Aranjuez insurrection, raised their own private ‘army’ of five hundred paid men, mostly huerta smallholders, to support Fernando VII’s cause and to begin a popular anti-Napoleonic rising in late April. That rising had not
taken place, but their private militia was still in existence. Moreover, they had a couple of city councillors, a lawyer, a doctor and an army captain from the small garrison of six hundred-odd soldiers, in their group of
progressive Fernandistas.

 There could be little doubt that the smallholder and his friend, who went unnoticed for nearly two centuries by local historians and chroniclers, were trusted members of the Bertrán private army who had been posted among the
crowd that morning to ensure both a popular rising and to control it. The crowd, thus inspired (or paid) to stage an ‘orderly rising’, tore up the Gazeta de Madrid and the official paper in the duque de Berg’s (Murat’s) name, and
set off for the captain general’s palace on the far side of the Turia river. There, this dignitary, the conde de la Conquista, appeared on a balcony and told them to trust to the constituted authorities to take the necessary
action, and called on them to disperse quietly to their homes. The crowd turned back without protest; but it did not obey orders to return home. Very shortly, it discovered carts laden with tax-revenue money about to leave for
Madrid, seized them and dragged them to a trusted noble’s mansion. Amidst the crowd’s clamours and shouts that more money had been sent the previous day and on the need to secure its return, a Franciscan friar, Juan Rico, who
happened to be visiting the noble, the conde de Cervelló, asked to be heard: