

 The conspirators left few accounts of their activities during these three weeks in the eight cities and towns which were the foci of the risings. It suited all persuasions of Fernandistas after the risings to maintain that the
‘people’ had spontaneously risen against the hated Godoyistas and Napoleon in order to validate the power they seized ‘in the people’s name’ during the insurrections. In rising, they proclaimed, the ‘people’ had reasserted their
right to the sovereignty with which the enforced absence of their monarch in France endowed them and had graciously bestowed this sovereignty on the local juntas of notables which sprang up everywhere. These myths, most
especially of the risings’ spontaneity which the Fernandistas ardently fostered, have remained alive for the last two hundred years in the Spanish imagination of these historical events.

 With the exception of Cataluña, the main risings were an exclusively urban-originated affair, the majority on the mainland’s periphery. The eight cities in which the principal risings took place – in the sense that these were
the major foci from which the insurrections spread outwards: Oviedo, Valencia, Zaragoza, Sevilla, La Coruña, Badajoz, Valladolid and Cartagena – varied in size from about twelve to twenty-three thousand inhabitants (Badajoz,
Oviedo, Cartagena, Valladolid) to forty thousand (Zaragoza) and eighty thousand (Sevilla, Valencia). The risings were not thus dependent on the size of the towns – indeed, cities like Granada, Málaga and Cádiz, with populations
of fifty thousand or more, and regional or provincial capitals like Murcia (fourteen thousand) and Santiago de Compostela (twenty thousand), did not rise until other towns in their provinces or region had led the way, although
only a day or two separated them. The significant factor was that, almost without exception, the major risings took place in the most important regional towns that were the seats of captain generals and audiencias. *

 None of the insurrectionary towns was occupied by French forces which, with the exception of Valladolid, were several days’ march distant. (French columns were – or were feared to be – marching on Sevilla and Zaragoza, however.)
None, therefore, had immediately to confront the Napoleonic occupation forces, as had the people of Madrid on May 2. Had they had to do so, the results might have been similar to those in the Spanish capital.

 In Cataluña, on the other hand, the risings were widely disseminated in townships throughout the region. Under French military occupation, the capital, Barcelona, did not rise, leaving pride of place to Lérida. But it cannot be
said that the latter’s insurrection conditioned to anything like the same degree the subsequent risings in the region, as was the case with the major cities in the rest of Spain. *

 The insurrections in some towns but not others can only be explained by the determined planning of local Fernandistas to raise their inhabitants and the degree of prior popular agitation. These factors were not independent one
of the other; and the attitude of the army, active in support or studiously passive, was vital to both. Moreover, gratifications, or subornations, were not uncommon, in the Old Order’s manner of organizing commotions.