

 Senñores: The people is a monster unless it permits itself to be governed by one person whom all the remainder obey. Without that everything will be disorder and confusion … Remember, with clamours and shouts we shall not defeat
the French, but only with arms and armies and a good government to lead us. And all of these we are presently lacking … If we know how to lead ourselves, we shall triumph. 9

 The demand for a leader was immediately accepted by the crowd which, evidently convinced of its own ‘monstrosity’, elevated Rico to the leadership. At the head of the crowd, the new people’s tribune set off for the audiencia
where the local authorities were meeting. He and another Franciscan entered the council chamber. After informing the authorities that the Valencian people accepted no other king than their ‘beloved Fernando VII’, Rico launched
into a long tirade on Godoy which ended finally with the people’s demands: declaration of war on Napoleon, a general enlistment and arming of the people, and their favoured noble’s appointment to train and lead the recruits. When
his harangue was countered by the captain general, Rico retaliated: ‘There are forty thousand people outside waiting for your reply. It is my duty to inform them of your way of thinking and your replies to my glorious demands.’
Whereupon, according to the friar, the gathered dignitaries panicked, fearful of being slaughtered by the crowd, and granted the demands, including that of issuing the enlistment edict in the name of Fernando VII. 10

 *

 The Zaragoza rising on the morning of Tuesday, May 24 – precipitated, as in Valencia, by the arrival of the Gazeta de Madrid following on earlier information that a column of French troops was marching on the city 11 – was
exceptional in originating amongst an urban-based group of medium-sized vineyard owners and agrarian foremen. 12 As elsewhere, the news of Madrid’s May 2 rising and the French repression had resulted in popular anger. The
vineyard owners, who worked their own land, and the agricultural foremen, included two men, Mariano Cerezo and Jorge Ibor, * who were said to have ‘a great ascendancy’ over their fellow parishioners, and collaborated closely
together. They began in one of the traditional ways of articulating public discontent: the lampoon or satire posted overnight in prominent places. But having taken their agitation so far, they felt inadequate to the task of
leading a rising, and went in search of a reputable and respected local leader. † In each case they were turned down on the pretext that ‘the authorities’ intervention was indispensable’, and things must be done ‘in an orderly
manner’. 13 As they subsequently wrote, their

 spirits flagged at discovering that no leader, amongst the many who existed, could be found to take on this arduous task … Those who should have been prepared to shoulder this great work were seduced by their base interests,
promising themselves greater prizes at the cost of enslaving their fatherland … 14