

 The war saw to it that the Bayonne statute was never fully put into effect, and during the conflict it was only partially applied in some Bonapartist-controlled regions. In the patriots’ eyes it was a constitution imposed by the
Emperor and validated by an unrepresentative assembly on foreign soil. They did not need ‘regenerating’ by a foreign power, even by the most powerful of Emperors. They knew the reforms the country needed, and they, as Spaniards,
were more than capable of instituting them.

 And yet in more propitious circumstances, the statute would have constituted a good transitional programme for modernizing Spain. Gradualist, moderate, careful not to offend religious or regional sensibilities, * leaving in
place a powerful sovereign, offering improved conditions for industry and commerce, making a cautious start to freeing land for the market, reforming an antiquated judicial system, attacking noble privileges but leaving the
nobility in control of their most valuable asset, their land – such a constitution, if originated in and adopted by a Spanish constitutional assembly, would have won acceptance from the majority of the enlightened elite. It would
no doubt have been attacked by absolutists as undermining the divine right of kings, or for failing to give the nobility a special role in the affairs of state, and by the more extreme progressives as being an authoritarian
rather than a fully constitutional monarchy; but both would have found it difficult to mobilize large sectors of society in their support. One of the most lucid and enlightened contemporary Spanish observers of the moment, the
Rev. José María Blanco (better known later as Blanco White), who admitted that from an early age he had ‘ceased to admire Spain as a political entity, miserably oppressed by government and Church, as it was’, put it many years
later like this:

 I was convinced that if the people remained tranquil under the form of government to which they were accustomed while the country rid itself of a dynasty from which it was no longer possible to expect any improvements, the
political humiliation of accepting a new king from Napoleon’s hands would be amply compensated for by future rewards … Many of the most enlightened and honest Spaniards had placed themselves on José Bonaparte’s side. [The] new
Constitutional framework, despite the arbitrary manner of its imposition, contained an explicit declaration of the nation’s right to be governed by its own consent, and not by the king’s absolute will … 59

 This retrospective view overlooked some timely contemporary issues, however. What national state, however decrepit, could willingly submit to foreign invasion and domination? And let alone by an enemy but by an ally? To the
imposition of a new king from abroad? To the infliction of foreign ‘regeneration’ and ‘felicity’? To manipulation by subterfuge and chicanery?

 To pretend friendship the better to plunge a dagger in the breast; to remove her troops, the better to sacrifice and reduce Spain to the last extremity and, as she lay dying, to suffocate her between his [Napoleon’s] nails; to
take over without effort her forts, war materiel and munitions prepared for her defence and to use them to sow death and desolation; to come with promises and the intention of carrying out none; to take our sovereign from us with
violence, treachery and felony. Who before has ever done this? No one except the French. 60