

 The labouring classes, the majority of the country’s working population, could expect nothing from the Napoleonic Constitution. Indeed, they did not wait to discover their ‘constitutional’ fate. Under the leadership of
Fernando’s supporters, the urban poor rose in passionate anti-Napoleonic fury a month or more before the statute was formally approved. Existing authorities who favoured, or fell under suspicion of favouring, the Bonaparte regime
were replaced and sometimes killed. New governing bodies came to power. In Sevilla this body put it simply: ‘It is an act of rebellion for an independent Nation to obey a foreign Prince.’ 61 Or, as another anonymous writer stated
in an essay entitled Spain’s Happiness :

 Spaniards are recovering their strength: they have almost miraculously revived, and are determined to finish off all their enemies … The nation has resuscitated itself, and will without doubt achieve its complete regeneration
and happiness. Unexpectedly Napoleon is going to realize what he promised; but he shall not carry it out. 62

===== FILE: OEBPS/15_Chapter04.xhtml =====
Napoleon’s Cursed War

 4

 Declaration of War: The National Rising

 What blessings Napoleon would have reaped if Fernando had remained to rule, even though the French had governed! The country would have accepted any new government, forgetting Godoy, and celebrated the old King’s exile. (Cádiz
French Consul’s informant) 1

 More than three weeks passed between the Madrid insurrection and the first provincial risings. * During this time, a majority of local notables hesitated doubtfully on the course (if any) to take, while many existing
authorities, who knew of the abdications well before they were officially announced, considered a rising a folly to be prevented at all costs and worked actively to that end. Intendente Xavier Aspiroz of Valencia, for example,
told a meeting of elected huerta leaders to remain calm. What did it matter whether Josef, Peter or Francis were king? What was important was that the taxes on commoners be removed so that the farmers might live easier. 2 The
Bourbons were ‘ridiculous dimwits who had ruined themselves with their family rivalries and we should not ruin ourselves because of them’, he told another meeting, urging those in attendance to convince ‘the people to accept as
king whomever the Emperor Napoleon decided should rule over Spain’. 3 †

 The fact that officials like Aspiroz almost invariably owed their positions to Godoy only brought them into further disrepute with the Fernandistas ‡ who, equating Godoy with Napoleonic treachery and despotic French domination,
envisaged the need to supplant them in an eventual rising. In this sense, the risings were dual-headed: on the one hand a continuation of the confrontations between the Fernandistas and Godoy which had culminated, but not
ideologically ended, in the Aranjuez tumult in March, only two months earlier; on the other, against the Napoleonic occupation of the country. The Fernandistas also required time to ensure that they could precipitate and control
the desired insurrection to prevent it from turning into a dangerously uncontrollable popular outburst. Finally, the main condition for which the lower orders would rise had not yet been met: the definitive and absolute certainty
that they had lost their new king. They retained to the last their illusions of Fernando’s return to the crown.