

 When the revolt broke out without an apparent leader, a surgeon’s assistant was the first to afix the red Bourbon cockade to his hat and was rapidly imitated by others. As the city’s chronicler put it, ‘the people who had been
observing the movement saw that this was a moment favourable to a rupture’. 15 The crowd, presumably incited by these observers, made for the palace of Captain General Guillelmi, as it had in Valencia. But here, unlike Valencia,
there were obviously some – the surgeon’s assistant, Carlos González, among them – willing to take the lead, and immediately demand arms. The captain general tried to pacify them, to no effect. Fearing for his life, two brothers,
both commanders of paramilitary forces, proposed that the crowd follow them to the Aljaferia castle, outside the city walls, where a good number of arms and artillery pieces were stored. Surrounded by a multitude, shouting ‘Arms!
Arms!’, the brothers and Guillelmi reached the castle, and members of the crowd followed them in. Again the captain general tried to calm them, saying it was useless to hand over arms to people who did not know how to handle
them, and he would assent only to arming military men, 16 whereupon the two brothers accepted responsibility for the arms. 17 Shortly afterwards, Guillelmi resigned his post in favour of his second-in-command.

 The people found twenty-five thousand muskets and eighty pieces of cannon in the castle. After arming themselves, they loaded muskets onto carts and dispatched them to the elected heads of each neighbourhood for distribution.

 In the afternoon, armed civilians issued an edict to the town crier which called on all Spaniards to arm themselves at the castle or face the threat of death. 18 By evening, five thousand muskets had been distributed; the night
passed without serious incident.

 *

 Meanwhile in Oviedo, shortly before midnight of Tuesday, May 24, the rising began. Undaunted by the earlier news that Murat, now president of the Madrid governing junta, had ordered Spanish troops to march forthwith on Oviedo
and had appointed two new and ‘reliable’ Spaniards to the head of the principality’s military and civil government, or that the Asturian envoys dispatched by the Junta General to León and Santander, an action taken after the May
9 commotion, to inform these neighbouring provincial capitals of the Oviedo events, had reported negatively on their reception, the Fernandistas had continued their plotting. Although reinforced by the newly elected procurator
general, Antonio Florez Estrada, a leading political economist who had twice been exiled under the Old Regime for his advanced ideas on a constitutional monarchy, the Asturian insurrectionists seemed to be standing alone. On May
20 they sent three members into the countryside to rally support amongst the villagers. The rural world was easier to control than the urban. Each villager prepared to take part in the rising was offered four reales a day.
Serious commotions nonetheless broke out in Oviedo on the nights of May 22 and 23 which the Fernandistas managed to prevent from exploding into insurrections. 19