

 their [social] sphere and birth is far distant from those classes which believe themselves honourable. In those dangerous circumstances, however, they manifested an honour of greater merit for having so few examples to imitate
in their own families. 29

 These two smallholders thus revindicated the honour which plebeians were denied by the nobility, and at the same time cast doubt on the nobility’s inherent right to honour – not without reason, for no titled noble, other than
the reluctant conde de Cervelló, whom the insurrectionists named their military leader, had taken any part in the rising.

 The Valencia rising was significant not only for taking place in a large city but because its impact spread into southern Cataluña, the Balearics and southwards to Alicante, thus creating a lynchpin for the insurrectionary
powers which would shortly control the Spanish Mediterranean coast from north of Tarragona to south of Cartagena, as well as the strategic Balearic islands. Only a few days later the Sevillan rising extended this southern thrust
to the limits of Gibraltar and by the end of May to the great trading port of Cádiz and along the Atlantic coast to the confines of Portugal; while the Oviedo rising would spread outwards along the Cantabrian coast from Santander
to Galicia and into Castilla la Vieja; and the Zaragoza insurrection – one of the two (Valladolid was the other) which did not take place on the country’s periphery – exercised a decisive influence on the rising in the adjoining
Catalan province of Lérida.

 THE CIVIL–MILITARY RISINGS:
SEVILLA, LA CORUÑA, BADAJOZ, VALLADOLID

 Apart from the fact that the civilian conspirators succeeded in mobilizing considerable numbers of the local garrison, these insurrections differed little from the civilian-led risings. However, the Sevilla revolt on the evening
of May 26, which continued throughout the night, was a seismic event, for its shock waves produced secondary quakes throughout Andalucía and were felt as far away as Extremadura. In the following days, insurrections broke out in
Cádiz, Córdoba, Granada, Jaén, Málaga and the Extremaduran frontier city fortress of Badajoz, controlling access to and from the southern reaches of Portugal. No other insurrection to date had affected such a wide territory –
effectively the whole of southwestern Spain – or such a large population. Of even greater importance, the only Spanish army still left intact – nearly seven thousand men under General Castaños stationed in front of Gibraltar –
placed itself at the Sevilla junta’s orders. * This gave the latter a military strength which, with the exception of La Coruña, no other junta enjoyed. Moreover, the Sevilla insurrection could count on an immediate and important
strategic success: the remains of the French fleet, immobilized in Cádiz since Trafalgar, was bombarded into submission on June 14. †

 As in the civilian-led risings, various plotters were at work, all of them virulent anti-Godoyistas: among them a merchant of contraband goods, Nicolás Tap y Nuñez Redón; 30 a friar, Father Manuel Gil; and a noble, conde de
Tilly. A recently arrived cavalry captain also claimed to have agitated among the military. As in Oviedo they knew that the inhabitants were well-disposed to a rising. On receiving the news of the May 2 Madrid insurrection four
days after the events, the popular ferment had been so great that the Sevilla authorities had been obliged to stage in due form a public oath-taking to Fernando VII as their sovereign. To the beat of a drum, a portait of Napoleon
was carried through the streets upside down on a pole covered in black cloth; and a voluntary enlistment called. 31 Though pushed to the extreme, the authorities managed to restore and maintain a tenuous public order until the
evening of Thursday, May 26.