

 *

 The rising in Badajoz, the Extremaduran fortress city astride the Portuguese border, commanding the southwestern approaches to Spain’s neighbour, appeared to be the only leaderless civilian–military insurrection – at least as
far as the inadequate records go – and one of the most violent. On May 23, there had been a riot; no source stated the reason, but it can be surmised that the cause, as elsewhere on that date, was the arrival of the Gazeta de
Madrid with the news of the Bourbon abdications. The authorities had not been able to contain the rioters without calling on the clergy. The archbishop, at the head of the cathedral chapter, had sallied forth at the authorities’
request and, passing from street to street, had calmed the people, exhorting them to maintain ‘peace and tranquility’. 46 (The clergy’s Godly authority was the Old Order’s ‘shock absorber’ at times of social crisis – the secular
powers lacking any natural authority over the people and unable to turn to a reliable repressive force since the army, though summonable, was generally unwilling to be used as a domestic police force.) The Fernandista
conspirators, who included the governor’s second-in-command, the intendente, Martín de Garay, and the treasurer of the Spanish army in Portugal, Félix Ovalle, were planning a provincial rising on June 3 or 4; but as it turned out
events overtook them. 47

 On the morning of Fernando’s feast day, the royal standard was not flying; nor had there been a cannon salute. * Informed by the governor’s second-in-command that the people were demanding that the feast day be celebrated
according to custom, the captain general, Conde Torre del Fresno, appeared on his balcony and informed the crowd that he was giving orders for its demands to be met. 48 He then told an assembly of the town’s leading authorities
of the Sevilla rising; barely had he the time to state his support for the Fernandista cause and call on others to state their views when the sound of cannon fire broke out, accompanied by much shouting. 49 Enraged by the failure
to fly the royal standard, a crowd had gathered on the city walls and reprehended the artillerymen for not firing a salute. A woman, María Cambrero, is credited with having seized a linstock from one of the soldiers and set fire
to a cannon, whereupon the artillerymen followed suit. 50

 The crowd, meanwhile, made for the captain general’s quarters. Voices spoke up angrily against Torre del Fresno for not making public the news of the Sevilla rising and declaring his support for it. Crying, ‘Death to the
traitors!’ ‘Long live our king, Fernando VII!’, they stopped at the gates of a cavalry barracks, and called on officers and men to join them. When the officers replied that they could move only on their superiors’ orders, the
crowd brushed aside the sentries and rode roughshod over the officers; thereupon the other ranks joined them. 51 As in Sevilla, the garrison cavalrymen identified with the mutinous people whose cause they perceived as their own.
They were soon joined by individual artillerymen and sappers.