

 Learning of Palafox’s presence, the insurrectionists set out to find him. Did they know that the brigadier they were about to charge with the supreme command of Aragón’s defence had never, in his seventeen years in the army,
been involved in a hostile military skirmish, let alone a battle? 21 Probably not. But it was not this that mattered. They knew that he was an impassioned Fernandista – so impassioned, indeed, that he was (and for long remained)
totally blind to Fernando VII’s defects – and the son of a leading local noble. Loyalty to the cause, fear of turncoats and betrayal, rather than military expertise, was uppermost in the their minds. Evidently unaware of the
previous day’s rising, Palafox was fearful, on seeing a band of armed men approaching, of being arrested. Instead, the vine-growers offered this ‘magnanimous hero’ the leadership of Aragón’s defence, and

 led him in triumph to his palace [where] the people received him with the greatest of joy, and repeated acclamations. They appointed him their Governor, their Leader, their Father and Protector. 22

 Palafox wanted no revolutionary rupture, no uncontrolled plebeian outburst. In no other city had the lower ranks on their own come to seize such power, even if this was not their original intent. He was well aware, as he later
wrote, that

 the insurrection had not sprung from a single talent who could lead it, arouse, temper or stop it at will: it was a volcano which could have devoured and destroyed by its strength the finer elements of its honorable objectives.
23

 Like the conspirators before him, Palafox wanted his actions legitimated by a higher authority, and asked that the Real Acuerdo * meet the following morning. Appearing before the assembled dignitaries, Palafox energetically
defended the people’s ‘spontaneous determination to seek revenge for the outrages committed in Bayonne against their king’, but refused their offer of leadership which only the highest royal authority could confer on him. †

 The magistrates began to debate the situation. The large crowd gathered in the Plaza de la Seo outside the building grew impatient. Soon there were sharp knocks on the chamber door. The porter informed the assembly that the
people wanted to enter, and the magistrates panicked, ‘convinced that they were about to perish’; by his own account Palafox had to calm them with the words that they had ‘nothing to fear from a people loyal to their king and
meek when they know they are being led on the path of reason’. And it was he who suggested that two or three of its representatives be permitted to address the meeting. Momentarily recovering their composure, the magistrates
returned to their seats and did as he bade.

 Within moments three ‘determined and respectably attired young men’ entered the chamber. They were University of Zaragoza doctoral graduates, and thus most likely university teachers. 24 After seeking the president’s permission
to speak, they said, as Palafox later recalled, that the people of Zaragoza had sworn to be faithful to Fernando VII: