

 To control his supporters Tap had to regale them with wine.

 But then he heard the owner of a drinking place complain that an insolent man had fled without paying for what he had drunk, saying: ‘The Revolution will pay …’ After settling the small amount owed, Tap selected a number of men
and ordered them to find the man and execute him on the spot and to arrest any others who committed the same fault. ‘From one single grain grows an ear of wheat,’ he commented. 36

 Tap’s accomplice, Esquibel, with less money than Tap but much willingness to spend it on the cause, ‘gathered together, thanks to gifts and money, a multitude of troops and civilians to stage the rising’, wrote his wife later.
37 Popular insurrections did not come cheap.

 At 7 a.m. the audiencia magistrates called a meeting for a hour later, at the town hall, of all the authorities and influential individuals with sway over the people: outside the hall were gathered a mass of Tap’s
insurrectionists. A new governing junta which Tap claimed a leading role in forming emerged from the meeting, though he did not ask for, or receive, a place on it. But his pretentions to influence and power, as the leader of a
strong armed force, soon came to nought after agreeing with the junta to remove his forces from the city. The junta did not acknowledge his first dispatch announcing that he was encamped with his men beyond the city walls; his
troops were quickly reclaimed by their commanders, and the civilians either enlisted or melted away, leaving him without his ‘popular army’, as he had earlier titled it. He was faithful, however, to the new junta he claimed to
have helped create, and informed it of popular demands – a more rapid way of enlisting men, for example – which the junta acted on. But when he warned the junta of having received an approach to lead a plot to force out three of
its members, conde de Tilly among them, his fate was sealed. Ten days after the insurrection he and his comrade-in-arms, Esquibel, were thrown into solitary confinement in Cádiz castle dungeons by a Sevillan junta which feared,
or was angered by, his intrusion – on the people’s behalf – into their august affairs carried on in the name of the newly-asserted people’s sovereignty. 38

 In Zaragoza, the insurrection’s leaders had surrendered armed power voluntarily. In Sevilla it was taken from them by their leader’s ingenuous illusions of power.

 *

 Like May 26, San Fernando’s feast day on May 30, a Monday, was also a public holiday – an opportune time, as Sevilla had shown, to gather the people in the streets. In La Coruña, a popularly respected master-saddler, Sinforiano
López y Aliá, had been given ‘all the money thought necessary to be distributed as and when he wanted to ensure that San Fernando’s day did not pass without the mine exploding’,

 subsequently wrote Cristóbal Conde García, confessor to Archbishop Múzquiz of Santiago de Compostela. 39

 The saddler, who, since the news of the May 2 events in his home city of Madrid, had been ‘working to achieve a rising against the old [Godoy] government and Napoleon’s tyranny’ 40 would live up to the expectations placed in
him. ‘He was an ardent man, endowed with popular verbosity, loved by the crowd and who led the people at will.’ 41 At 10 a.m. on the feast day, López headed a crowd, including many women and children, to the captain general’s
residence with shouts of Viva Fernando VII! and Death to Murat! The military guard did nothing to stop the children, many with banderoles fixed to sticks, from running amongst them. Encouraged by the troops’ inaction, the adults
began to crowd round the door, to stone the windows and demand the captain general’s head. The military governor of Coruña, Major General Antonio de Alcedo, and other high-ranking officers, were within paying their respects to
Captain General Filangieri, who had been newly appointed to his post. Seeing that the tumult was increasing, Alcedo proposed that someone should go out to address the crowd, but of the many officers and nobles there none
responded. He decided to go himself. With no little difficulty and at some risk he moved into the crowd and shouted that three or four persons should step forward to treat with him. This they did, demanding, according to Alcedo,
that