

 The date of the Asturian rising was conditioned by two factors. On May 21 orders from Murat were received to execute fifty-eight named individuals who had attended the May 9 Junta General meeting which had unanimously approved
the ‘people’s noble enthusiasm’. (The order was addressed to the newly appointed military commandant, La Llave, who had not yet arrived. The existing commandant did not dare open the sealed document, whereupon Florez Estrada took
it from his desk and broke the seal. Both men were shocked to read the order. 20 ) Two days later another order arrived, which summoned the local authorities to elect deputies to the Bayonne constitutional assembly. It was to
pre-empt this and the newly arrived military commandant carrying out Murat’s execution orders that the insurrection was planned for the following midnight.

 By this time the conspirators had assembled four thousand villagers on the city’s outskirts. The arms factory was seized with the artillery commissioner’s complicity and the help of some artillery officers and workers; and the
villagers were armed. A column of these made for the new military commandant’s quarters: its Fernandista leader, disguised as a villager, handed the commandant a letter from Oviedo’s senior judge which, ‘in the people’s name’,
called on him to summon within the hour a junta of the individuals listed in the letter. The lower orders found no place among them. Seeing the square outside full of armed men discretion overcame valour, and the commandant
agreed. Thus the junta of Asturias came into being. At about the same time two men, their faces covered by cloaks, knocked on the cathedral sacristan’s door and demanded the keys. At midnight exactly, to the flare of fireworks,
the cathedral bells began to ring, accompanied by those of all the city’s churches, summoning the inhabitants to join the rising. They gathered in the main square and ‘broke out in shouts of Viva el Rey! and in favour of national
independence’, wrote an eyewitness, Ramón Álvarez Valdés, many years later. *

 The Oviedo rising’s repercussions were considerable. Two of the new junta’s representatives were hastily sent aboard a privateer to England, Spain’s traditional enemy, to call for aid in the Asturians’ apparently solitary
struggle against Napoleon. Thus it was that Britain’s direct military intervention in the Peninsula began. †

 *

 In Zaragoza, the people’s insurrection finally found the leader it had been looking for. Royal guards officer José de Palafox, aged thirty-three, member of a prestigious local noble family, was a well-known Fernandista who had
been involved in both the Escorial and Aranjuez affairs; after the latter he had been charged by Fernando VII with Godoy’s custody. Once the royal favourite had been released to the French, Palafox had been ordered by his
military superior to the French frontier at Irún, with three other young guards officers, to attempt to communicate with Fernando VII, and possibly organize the king’s escape. Napoleon’s police discovered them, and they fled in
disguise at night, hotly pursued by French gendarmes. Still disguised, Palafox reached a relative’s home a couple of hours’ ride from the city where he remained in hiding.