

 We shall fulfil our oath … The people are armed … They only have confidence in those they have chosen. Do not waste more time, señores. Either Sr. Palafox will be our leader and captain general or all these heads (the three
pointing with their hands at the magistrates) will roll in a moment.

 Once again, the threat of armed force won the day. Terrified, the magistrates prostrated themselves at Palafox’s feet and implored him as their ‘liberator’ to take command, to save king and country at this hour of danger.
Stressing that he was not usurping power, Palafox accepted in the name of Fernando VII and the Aragonese people. Then turning to the people’s representatives, he added:

 Let this be the last popular commotion … I shall march hand-in-hand with the law on the path of duty, religion and honour. Whoever does not follow this path will find an enemy in me … But I need public tranquility until I have
determined the course the kingdom of Aragón must take … 25

 The following day, Palafox decided that course. Aragón was to be governed under military law, private property was to be respected, and armed centurias formed to maintain order. With these measures he ‘cut off at its roots, or
at least suspended, the troublesome effects and complications of differing opinions’, he subsequently wrote. In short, Palafox had doused the ‘volcano’ and taken personal power, thanks to the insurrectionist people who had
voluntarily surrendered it to him.

 *

 The matter of arming the people was vital to the Fernandistas’ enterprise. On the first night of the Valencia rising, while the captain general sent a clandestine letter to Murat in Madrid asking for troops to restore order, 26
the Bertrán de Lis faction determined to storm the following morning the Ciudadela, a Bourbon fortress designed not for the city’s defence but for its inhabitants’ submission and which contained arms, and to set up a junta to
govern Valencia during the enforced absence of Fernando VII. 27 Friar Rico suggested that an attempt be made to take the fortress peaceably, and supported by Bertrán’s private army and scores of smallholders, he finally succeeded
in getting the captain general to allow a small number of people into the Ciudadela to determine the arms it contained. Behind the designated persons the crowd poured through the fortress gates; the armoury door was smashed open,
with the complicity of a captain on guard duty, and the people seized arms.

 The Bertrán faction was now in near total control of the city. Writing several years later Friar Rico described the rising as initiated by

 a short number of the most impoverished and wretched plebeians … [who] dared to oppose [Napoleon’s] colossal power and declared him to be the most execrable monster of the human species … There was not a decent person to be seen
amongst them … What more ignomonious and humiliating affront to the European tyrant’s pride than this beginning to his destruction in Spain. 28

 The smallholder and his companion, who had ensured the initial rising’s orderliness and had entered the Ciudadela with the permitted few, put their own gloss on the matter, writing that they ‘confessed without shame’ that