

 Gathered again at 9 a.m., the junta was about to consider the urgent measures to be taken when the postal administrator hurried in. A great crowd had gathered in front of the post office and was refusing to allow the ordinary
mail to leave, even threatening to burn the mailbag. The junta sent two of its members to try to calm the crowd, in vain. The people believed that dispatches to inform Murat of the rising were being sent to Madrid. Suddenly the
two junta members were surrounded by a furious mob brandishing the mailbag and shouting that all mail must be checked, and letters for Madrid removed. The crowd acted with the same instinct that moved the people in all the
risings: traitors to their cause among the old authorities or educated people would use the mails to betray them. Proven correct in more than one case, the precautionary instinct was justifiable; and yet it was hard not to
believe that the unlettereds’ fear of the educated’s command of an idiom alien to them – ‘a mess of fishhooks’ on paper which they did not understand – was also at work in these instances.

 The demand to censor the mail was just the beginning; immediately shouts were heard demanding that the captain general (a known Godoyista), the governor and the engineers’ commander be removed from their posts because they were
French sympathizers. The tumult now rose to a new height; the two junta members could not make themselves heard. When finally they secured the crowd’s attention, they told them to elect a person to speak in their name. This the
people rapidly did, their choice falling on the magistrate’s senior bailiff. The latter informed the full junta of their demands: the dismissal of the three senior officers, and the appointment of the infantry colonel, marqués de
Camarena la Real, as governor and General Hidalgo Cisneros as captain general. While the three ‘deposed’ officials left the meeting in high dudgeon at the accusations against them, the two new appointees were sworn into office.
This was a totally irregular procedure; but both officers accepted their appointments without a qualm, revealing thereby their readiness to overthrow the former authorities. And here again the crowd acted as it did in many of the
risings, choosing a new military leader in whose loyalty to the cause it believed it could trust. A new junta was also formed which brought in new members, among them two who were to represent the people. Significantly, the armed
plebeians did not elect their representatives from among their own ranks but from those of their ‘betters’: an artillery colonel, the military governor’s second-in-command, and the bailiff already mentioned. As in Zaragoza, the
commonality lacked the confidence to command, let alone take advantage of, the new situation. It was trained to accept that it was not part of the ‘political nation’ – those whose right it was to govern.

 The touchstone of loyalty and patriotism was anti-Godoyism; and replacing or eliminating known Godoyistas was considered the insurrection’s first task. One further event graphically illustrated this and the army’s position.
Fearing for his life, de Borja, the former captain general, requested, and received from the junta, an armed guard on his residence. Aroused by news of both French army slayings and patriot assassinations of suspected ‘traitors’
in other insurrectionary cities, an armed mob, including many arsenal workers, made for de Borja’s residence on June 10. The guard abandoned its post, de Borja was seized and taken to the arsenal where a gallows had been erected.
The military officer on guard duty at the entrance ordered his men to shut the gates to prevent the mob entering, but made no attempt to rescue his former superior who was stabbed to death on the spot. 69 He was but one of the
four captain generals assassinated as a result of the risings: in each case, the military made little or no real attempt to save them, never calling out the troops to protect their superior officer.