

 The people have demanded and forced us into providing them with the means of defence. The town council has no arms to distribute, but it is said that in Villafranca there are more than sufficient to lend us for this purpose. 78

 All the while, for three days and nights, the town’s main church bell tolled unceasingly in the traditional summons to the sometent. A cobbler, his youngest son and a neighbour, a fuller by trade, had shut themselves in the
tower with sufficient food to keep the bell ringing for as long as was needed to awaken the authorities to the people’s demands. 79

 On the same day that Franch and another man set out for Villafranca del Penedès, the district’s main town, to seek arms, even more startling events occurred. On June 4, two columns of French troops marched, on Napoleon’s orders,
from Barcelona, the first such expeditionary forces to venture out of the occupied capital to western Cataluña. One column, under General Chabran, made for Tarragona and was to continue southwards to Valencia to join a force
under Marshal Moncey which was advancing from Madrid on the Levant capital; the second, under the Austrian General Schwartz, and composed of four thousand Neapolitan conscripts and Swiss troops and two cannon, was to march to
Lérida up the Barcelona to Madrid royal highway, on which Igualada lay, and then on to Zaragoza to unite with a French force assembling before the Aragonese capital. Napoleon’s strategic plan, brilliantly conceived on paper from
a Parisian distance, but abstract as was often the case when its results were translated into actions in Spain, was now thrown out of joint by the Catalan risings – and decisively defeated in the first sometent resistance at the
battle of the Bruch pass on the royal road.

 Barcelona patriots sent news of the French forces’ departure and destinations, which was received in both townships on June 5. Once across the Bruch pass, the imperial troops would be only a short distance from Igualada; and if
they made a thirty-kilometre detour from the top of the pass, they could march on Manresa. * In both townships there was an immediate and instinctive reaction: to defend the pass which had seen other decisive battles in the past.
Heavy rain which held up the imperial column on June 5 in Martorell came as a stroke of luck to the Manresa and Igualada sometent, giving them more time to take up positions on the six hundred metre high pass. As a backdrop
reared the columnar grey rock of the Montserrat mountains amidst which stood the famous monastery of the same name. On the last part of the climb, the road curved in a wide arc forming, as it were, the perimeter of a vast
amphitheatre. On the left the land dropped precipitously; on the right, there was a pine wood and great boulders to shelter the sometent in their traditional village white wide-kneed breeches and red bonnets. The defenders felled
a large number of the trees to lay across the highway and dug a wide trench in it to obstruct the enemy’s advance.