

 Underlying the lower orders’ trust in new authorities was the notion that only a change at the top could bring the reforms they had hoped for from their new king’s reign. The Old Regime mentality of reform from above remained
deeply embedded. ‡ In a deferential distrust of their own capabilities, the urban – and subsequently village – poor insisted on finding and entrusting politico-military leadership to new ‘leaders’ among the educated classes.
Their trust was generally betrayed; the new leaders were no more interested in their fate – other than as servile cannon fodder – than the old.

 THE CATALAN INSURRECTION

 From today’s perspective of Cataluña as an historically distinct and different country from the rest of Spain, the question of why the Catalans were prepared to defend the Spanish Bourbon monarchy, which had deprived them a
century earlier of their cherished self-governing rights, was paradoxical. And yet not only did they rise and fight, their resistance was longer, more bitter and more costly in lives and property than in almost any other part of
Spain. No sooner had they risen, indeed, than their civilian ‘home guard’, the sometent , with some military help, battled and defeated a Napoleonic force.

 Lérida, the Catalan provincial capital closest to Aragón, was the first to rise on May 28, four days after Zaragoza. News of the latter’s insurrection was highly influential: popular pressure, demanding that the authorities
declare openly that they ‘followed the Spanish party, as the people demanded’, 72 resulted in the creation of a profoundly conservative junta, which included members of the three estates under the bishop’s presidency; the junta
immediately declared its preparedness to join the Aragonese in their struggle, and dispatched emissaries to Tarragona, Tortosa, Vich and Manresa to foment risings.

 On June 1, General Duhesme, the French military commander, issued a proclamation threatening to shoot out of hand any Catalan found carrying arms and munitions, and to deprive any township, small or large, of its rights if ‘it
dared to rise’. Should French blood be shed in any of them, the township would be burned to the ground and its authorities tried as criminals. 73

 Two local insurrections illustrated the similarities and differences between Cataluña and what had occurred in the rest of Spain. Manresa and Igualada were textile-working towns of between six and eight thousand inhabitants
about one hundred kilometres north west of Barcelona. Unemployment in both was extraordinarily high. In Manresa until recently four hundred master artisans had employed over two thousand journeymen in the production of silk and
other textiles. But by early 1808, most of the manufacturing had ground to a halt because of the decline in colonial trade, reducing the journeymen to public beggars. Despite the creation of a ‘Charity Junta’ with the aim of
finding work and food for the unemployed, 74 the mass of out-of-work small masters and journeymen resented being reduced to road workers, clearing tracks from the town and improving the Manresa to Barcelona highway. Impotent rage
at their work situation sharpened their will to rise against a threatened and feared French military domination.