

 The Manresa sometent was led by a local retail merchant’s son, Francisco Riera, a great number of the volunteers being almost certainly young artisans and journeymen, for the two religious banners under which they fought were
those of their Brotherhoods, the town’s most numerous and flourishing at the time. 80 The junta had managed to acquire several stand of muskets; powder, manufactured in Manresa, was plentiful; but there was a shortage of ball,
and the lead with which to make it. The town’s blacksmiths were set to work to produce horseshoe nails until it was discovered that these damaged the muskets after four or five shots. Instead, they turned to producing cylindrical
iron ball, which was rapidly proven to be more effective than lead against the French cuirassiers’ breast and back plates. 81 The wealthy – for the poor had none – contributed their iron curtain rails to the cause.

 The Igualada contingent, which was initially organized by clerics and guild leaders, included a number of foreign mercenary soldiers and officers * – the Spanish army included several regiments of Swiss and Walloon troops – and
almost certainly a handful of women: four pairs of women’s espadrilles figure among those which the town council bought to shoe its combatants. It also purchased ninety shotguns from a local armourer: Igualada was known for its
gunsmiths. 82 Despite the arms which both towns obtained, many of the some-tent set off with no more than the rudimentary sharp-edged weapons they had fashioned.

 Divided into squads and marshalled by a conch bugle, these men, as they later showed when they went to the relief of Zaragoza, liked best to fight hand-to-hand with long knives. † Not all the local volunteers, however, were raw
recruits; a number had fought in the War of the Convention. One of these subsequently confided:

 I had been with my battalion in almost all the battles of the 1793 campaign, but I was never as frightened as I was at the Bruch pass. The disorder of the men – one with a musket, another with a carbine, pistol or sword – men
with mattocks and sickles and even long poles with bayonets tied to the end. What sort of a force was this to hold off the French division we were facing! But the enemy fled, I don’t know why. 83

 Despite this former soldier’s dismay, military men played a far more important part in the battle than subsequent myth allowed. A lieutenant of the Swiss mercenary Wimpffen regiment which sided from the start with the rising; a
retired lieutenant colonel living in Igualada; and a major and a captain who had escaped from Barcelona were among those who in fact led the battle. The officers and mercenary troops gave the sometent the organization and
discipline they needed; the sometent the popular enthusiasm which ensured that the soldiers continued to fight. 84 Nonetheless, each sometent fought under its own leader, and under its own religious flag – appropriately enough,
the purple Igualada banner bore the words, Holy Lord, Help Us . Equally striking was that no source provided even a rudimentary estimate of the defenders’ total numbers or of their casualties.