

 However, a considerable number of sometent from the two towns and surrounding villages – including one group under its parish priest, and a group of students, the ‘Company of St Thomas Aquinas’, from as far off as Vich 85 – were
occupying the pass and its approaches when General Schwartz began his ascent. Expecting no resistance – since he had encountered none so far – the general advanced up the highway without particular precaution, sending out no
light infantry to reconnoitre the terrain. When his vanguard, which included a detachment of cuirassiers, came under withering fire from behind trees and rocks, and recoiled, he was surprised; but though only a minor Napoleonic
general, he was not long in counter-attacking. Reorganizing his forces, infantry companies, supported by cavalry, charged up the highway and threw back the defenders to the top of the pass. Here, the sometent held out in an
abandoned hospice, Can Masana, at the junction of the road to Manresa; but the imperial forces dislodged them and they were beginning to retreat along the two roads towards Manresa and Igualada when, incomprehensibly, General
Schwartz failed to press home his advantage; 86 perhaps he was unsure which of the two groups to pursue. At this moment, providentially, new sometent forces arrived. Fresh to battle, they threw themselves into attack, carrying
with them the original defenders: so impetuous was their charge that they drove the imperial troops from the hospice, and, pursuing them hotly, sent them retreating to the top of the highway. At this point, they were met by the
concentrated fire of the sometent led by Antonio Franch, who had hastened to the pass with fresh volunteers on returning from his unsuccessful mission to Villafranca del Penadès. The imperials fled down the highway to rejoin the
column’s main body whom they infected with their panic, while the sometent, shouting Victoria! Victoria! , closed in on it. It was mid-evening and the fighting had lasted several hours.

 Harassed on all sides, Schwartz formed his men into squares and they defended themselves ably. With night approaching, however, the general could no longer hope to cross the pass in safety; or even to remain in his present
position, exposed to the swarm of sometent fire. Withdrawal along the road he had come on was the only option. Yet even as his buglers sounded the retreat, he tried one more tactic: his troops staged a last and desperate attack
which the sometent threw back. Thereafter Schwartz began his retreat in earnest, a nightmarish march harried by the sometent on his heels and flanks throughout the long night. He lost one of his two cannon and carts bearing
equipment – after the parish priest and others of the small village of Abrera had set a slow fire to the wood pylons of their bridge which collapsed under the imperal forces’ weight – and finally reached Martorell at seven the
following morning. The local sometent there might have dealt the weary and hungry column a serious blow; but forewarned of Schwartz’s retreat the villagers, who had the previous afternoon killed some imperial soldiers guarding
carts with additional supplies for the column, feared revenge and sought refuge outside the village. The imperial column passed through and continued to San Feliu de Llobregat, in the shadow of the French occupation forces in
Barcelona. The sometent harried them as far as Molins del Rey, and remained in the latter’s vicinity to prevent more French troops from advancing on their towns and villages. 87 Three hundred and eighty five imperial soldiers –
ten percent of the column – were killed or wounded, it was claimed. 88