

 While in much of Cataluña the general features of the Spanish insurrections remained true, the exceptions to the rule demonstrated in part the Catalan region’s particular social character. The prior existence of an armed local
self-defence organization, through which villagers and townships’ inhabitants could forcibly express their social needs and demands, was a case in point. Resuscitated during the war against the Convention, the sometent now
frequently became the vehicle for anti-feudal agitation, which had been rife prior to the rising, and which became part and parcel of a number of local insurrections. Although the popular hatred of those in authority who were
thought to be pro-French was as profound as elsewhere, the hatred did not stop at these people but included señorial tax-farmers, tithe collectors, usurers, scriveners and others who directly extorted the population. The risings
in such places were not so much due then to local Fernandistas as to the labouring classes who took the initiative of carrying them through.

 Cataluña, furthermore, demonstrated a sense of unified command which it would take the rest of Spain several months still to realize. Only a week after its formation, the Manresa junta proposed the creation of a superior Catalan
junta to take charge of the regional resistance. The Lérida junta had come to a similar conclusion, and issued, a day after Manresa, a circular to all those townships which it believed free of French military occupation, to form
a general Catalan junta. Stressing the need for the greatest unity, it called on all districts not subjected to French force to send ‘the most enlightened delegate possible’ to ensure ‘the fatherland’s glorious defence’. 90 The
call met with an immediate response. On June 18, the supreme Catalan junta was created in Lérida, although only twelve deputies had arrived with their respective juntas’ credentials.

 However conservative it turned out to be, the regional junta’s creation was highly necessary in terms of Cataluña’s defence. In the most difficult conditions of a constant French military presence – the junta changed its place
of residence twenty-two times in the first four and a half years of the war 91 – it remained in existence throughout, even in the darkest days when it seemed that Catalan resistance must come to an end.

 *

 The Catalan paradox was less paradoxical than at first sight appeared. There can be no doubt that in 1808 and throughout the war the principality’s inhabitants felt themselves Catalans above all – as will be seen on more than
one occasion in the course of the struggle – but simultaneously this did not prevent them from feeling part of the Spanish monarchy: a large part of their prosperity had derived (as part of the monarchy) from the colonial trade
in textiles and spirits, and there were few who were not aware of this, since the decline in colonial commerce after the Trafalgar disaster, which left Spanish exports without naval protection, had reduced their profits or even,
more dramatically, left them without work. Moreover, the Spanish interior was itself part of the Catalan domestic market for textiles, particularly woollen goods. Like most people in the rest of Spain, Catalans had hoped that
Fernando VII’s reign would bring in its train renewed prosperity, especially to their burgeoning textile-based industrial revolution, the first in Spain. This view, however, was insufficient to explain their resistance to
Napoleon’s designs.