

 Another, though more harmless myth, was that the first battle of El Bruch was the patriots’ first armed civilian resistance to a French army column – when on the very same day, June 6, the inhabitants of Valdepeñas in La Mancha,
and the villagers of Santa Cruz de Mudela, sixty kilometres to the south, were successfully fighting the tail of General Dupont’s column marching on Andalucía. And this without the sometent tradition or the advantages of terrain
which the Catalan volunteers enjoyed. In Valdepeñas, with a population of about twelve thousand, the inhabitants rose to prevent six hundred fresh cavalry en route to join Dupont’s column from entering their town, strewing the
main street with nails, sharp irons and ropes hidden under sand to bring down the horses. As the vanguard cavalrymen fell, they were shot, and hit with stones, bricks and boiling water, suffering considerable casualties. The
commanding French general attacked the town from the side streets, setting fire to eighty or more houses as he went and massacring many of their inhabitants. Finally, the local authorities and the general agreed a truce; but,
having learned their lesson, the French retreated northwards in the direction opposite to which they were marching. 94 In Santa Cruz, where Dupont had left a detachment of four hundred soldiers to guard food supplies he had
stored there, the parish priest subsequently claimed that one hundred French had been killed and the same number of prisoners taken, along with one hundred and fifty supply carts. 95

 THE VILLAGERS’ RISING

 The Catalan township and village risings put in sharp relief an important element of the rest of the Spanish risings. These, as has been seen, were initially and exclusively confined to major towns and cities. The urban
population’s anger, defiance and desire for vengeance would, however, have remained a minority affair – and would almost certainly have been put down by the French – had the villagers not joined it, transforming it into a
majority nationwide insurrection. As in Cataluña, this made it physically impossible for the French military to occupy the entire country: they could control the principal towns, but not simultaneously all of the 6,500 townships,
villages and hamlets disseminated over the face of Spain. 96 The Napoleonic army marched fast, and was usually on the move, but it did not have the technological means to engage in distant surprise attacks. Patriot spies, whether
through loose tavern talk or direct observation, were usually able to discover where a column was marching to. Even at the height of Napoleon’s military intervention from October 1808 to October 1812, when three hundred thousand
imperial troops or more were stationed in Spain, they could not totally control even the northern part of the country. 97

 Villagers’ participation in the resistance to Napoleon was therefore a crucial element of the patriotic struggle. In effect, as the majority of the population, it was they who had to bear the brunt of the fighting, the brunt of
exactions, intimidations and terror to extract the one element essential to both sides which only they could provide: food supplies. The control of the latter became one of the strategic elements in the war: much of the ensuing
patriot guerrilla struggle revolved around them. With the exception of places on the imperial army’s direct line of march, as was the case of Valdepénas in the Mancha (see above), or close to urban insurrectionary centres,
villages and rural townships did not generally rise until they were incited by envoys from the capital and ordered to form juntas or had news of the capital’s rising. This in itself was hardly surprising: a single village rising
made little but dangerous sense to even the most ardent Fernandista. All the same, it may be wondered whether villagers would have risen at all had it not been for the example they were set by the urban centres. Indeed at least
one village found the latter’s example sufficient reason not to rise: the local authorities of Pedroches de Córdoba wrote to the Consejo de Castilla that they refused to comply with the the Sevilla junta’s appeal to revolt and
call a general enlistment, collect arms and munitions, gather funds from persons of law and order; they would only obey the previous orders received from Murat via the Consejo: