

 On hearing that the sometent were gathered outside of the town, the governor called on the commander of the Spanish Guards battalion stationed in the town to bring out his troops to maintain order. He categorically refused as
did other officers. Dr Lluís Freixas, a local town councillor, whose reassuring letters three months before to his student stepson about the French invasion, was reproduced earlier was with the governor at the time. Freixas
insisted that the latter go into hiding in the friary where the guards were quartered. He replied that he must first pass by his house, but would return to follow Freixas’s advice.

 No sooner had I turned the corner by the confectioner Gras’ house than I found myself surrounded by a disorderly mob shouting savagely, firing their arms continually, and uttering horrible death threats. All the inhabitants, the
strong and the weak alike, were terrified. I asked to speak to the sometents’ leader to see if I could come to some agreement, but none of them paid attention to anything but exciting horror in all and sundry … They pointed their
shotguns at me, forcing me to leave. 111

 One group made for the governor’s house. They broke down the doors and, finding his wife in the garden, shot her dead where she sat with her two lapdogs. Then they sacked the house, lit a great fire in the street outside and
burned everything: clothes, jewels, furniture and all the governor’s papers. ‘And what they didn’t burn they stole.’

 Then they made for the house of [his secretary] Garrigó. They maltreated him and then killed him. They burnt all his belongings, even the clothes from his corpse on which they inflicted a thousand sword cuts. Then they threw his
naked corpse into the flames.

 They found the governor in a lady’s house and the leaders seized him and shot him immediately in the street. After that they went to the magistrate’s home but he had hidden under vine prunings or wheat sheaves in the next door
granary. They burnt all his possessions. That same night, he escaped, disguised as a Trinitarian friar, but after various mishaps they found him close to Monistrol de Noya (a village about fifteen kilometres distant) still
dressed as a friar, and shot him, too.

 The sometent went after eleven other men. Three of them were tax farmers of the special impost, imposed by Godoy in 1805, * one of them a merchant, another a saddler and harness maker. A fourth man was the attorney in charge of
this impost who was at the heart of ‘all those disreputable troubles’. 112 Two other attorneys and the town hall scrivener were also hunted down. (The others’ occupations were not noted.) All of them managed to escape with their
lives if not their possessions which were burnt, with the exception of a couple of the pursued who saw to it that the sometent were paid large sums of money. The massacre might thus have been very much greater but for these
eleven men’s escape. Even so, the violence had one final touch that confirmed its underlying motives. Many local men joined the sometent, wrote Freixas, and they forced their way into the town hall and broke open the room where
the land registry papers were stored and destroyed them all.