

 THE MILITARY, CLERGY AND TITLED NOBILITY
IN THE SEAT OF POWER

 With apparently surprising unanimity, all the major insurrections resulted in the immediate creation of juntas. Yet it was only superficially surprising that this should be so, for in the new situation created by the risings, a
new form of government independent of French-controlled Madrid had to be found; and the junta was an historically accepted institutional response to resolve matters of urgency, whether at local or state level. The insurrection’s
organizers and leaders were filling a local power vacuum which their rising had created; and local township juntas sprang up throughout the insurrectional zone.

 The similarity of the juntas’ early proclamations was perhaps more surprising. The events of the last four months, however, had been so dramatic that reminders of Godoy’s despotism, Napoleon’s perfidious betrayal, the forced and
illegal abdication of their new young king, and the threatened French despotism inevitably filled many pages. As a proclamation of the Orihuela junta had it:

 Valiant Spaniards, the Fatherland’s independence, its institutions, the sacred religion we profess and the preservation of our king, lives and property call us imperiously to arms … A traitor to the country [Godoy] has placed us
before the harsh choice of being subjugated by a perfidious ally or of taking up arms in defence of our independence and rights. What Spaniard can doubt the side he should take? None surely. 1

 Exhortations to take up arms, the war’s justification – which now included the preservation of lives and property – the need for union, the defence of the fatherland, the call to God and the appeal to the rich to demonstrate
their patriotism were further themes pursued by many juntas’ proclamations:

 To Arms! To Arms! … Victory or death! … Is it not better to die arms in hand on the field of honour defending our unhappy Monarch, our homes, our sons and wives than to die a vile and ignominious slave’s death? … Do you want
fetters on your feet and manacles on your hands? To be taken off forcibly to remote climes beyond the Pyrenees? … Let us invoke the God of the Armies … For our cause is just and God will lead and support us … We fight in defence
of Religion, the Fatherland, our Laws and King … A people resolute and united, is never defeated … Landowners, merchants, the wealthy, show your generosity by contributing liberally to the homeland’s common needs … War is a
lesser evil than peace, only this terrible means can save us … 2

 Two new words, had begun to enter patriot language: Independence and Revolution . Alongside the earlier ‘freedom’ or ‘liberty’ and sometimes replacing them, the first word signified independence from any foreign domination,
Napoleon’s in particular, and Spain’s secondary role in the long prior French connection, though it would also apply to Spain’s new ally, Britain. But depending on context it also meant independence from the ‘despotism’ of a
royal favourite, first minister or government. As a result, it took on an additional meaning: independence … not just from , but to put in place the necessary reforms to prevent any such recurrence and, in the progressives’
minds, to create a new constitutional monarchy.