

 However, the attack also had its patriotic side. Under threat of death, the sometent obliged all inhabitants immediately to put on red cockades; and ordered all mule owners to bring their animals to the Rambla where, it could be
be assumed, many of the mules were expropriated for the sometents’ war aims. Throughout the whole of the day the church bells never stopped sounding the alarm. Finally late in the evening, Freixas succeeded in getting the
sometent captains to meet him and come to an agreement whereby peace was restored for the night. The sometent were given – or took – all the meat, wine, rice, dried cod and other provisions held in the shops or private houses to
satisfy their stomachs. Meanwhile Freixas spent the night giving orders and arranging for two cannon to be sent from Sitges to defend the town against Chabran’s return which the town councillor judged, correctly, was inevitable
after General Schwartz’s defeat at the Bruch.

 Scenes of such violence, it must be said, were quite exceptional. * The explanation may perhaps lie in the diary of a well-to-do farmer living close by. Isidre Mata del Racó i Mir recorded that the sometent were led by a
theology student, a ‘slightly hunchbacked learned little lad from Barcelona’, Joseph Marimon by name. Ordained only in the first four minor orders of the priesthood, † he was the son of an elementary schoolteacher. ‘When this
land was quiet again and there was a government, the said Marimon was tried for having seized the governor … but because he was of the minor priesthood he was sentenced only to banishment in Tarragona for eight years.’ 113

 In some regions, most notably Asturias, the rising was bloodless – though only by a hair’s breadth. Three ranking military officers, who had been ordered by Murat to put down the Oviedo insurrection, and two notable civilian
emissaries dispatched for the same purpose, were seized by a crowd of raw recruits, tied to trees in the Campo de San Francisco outside the city walls and were about to be shot when a cathedral canon, with the host in his hands,
managed in extremis to save their lives. 114 The total number of French victims outside of Valencia was far lower than those of Spaniards: only eighteen were recorded killed, twelve of whom were hospitalized French soldiers
massacred in a particularly brutal incident in Manzanares. 115 The local juntas’ rapid incarceration of French residents to protect them, and the intervention of priests carrying ‘that powerful charm’, 116 the consecrated host,
saved a great number of their lives. In Jerez de la Frontera, for example, the local priest bearing the host brought to a temporary halt the threatened massacre of French merchants and their families which was finally ended by
the expedient of letting loose a number of fighting bulls to run through the streets to distract the mob from their murderous intent. 117

===== FILE: OEBPS/16_Chapter05.xhtml =====
Napoleon’s Cursed War

 5

 New Self-Government: The Juntas