

 I saw now that I was in real difficulties, and I determined to kill them rather than return to land, from where my action had been observed and I was doomed. The sailors realized I was determined to sell my life dearly. A
fortunate sword thrust knocked the musket from the sailor’s hands. I do not know how, but I made them row towards the English ships, a white handkerchief fixed to the mast … 24

 The British sent out a boat to take the sub-lieutenant aboard, and he was soon transferred to the naval commander’s ship. To his surprise and joy he was shown letters and dispatches for Romana which the British had no way of
conveying to the general. He was asked if he would take them ashore. Though a known deserter, he volunteered and was landed by night from an English cutter on the coast of Langeland. He made his way to his commandant and from
there, in disguise, to General Romana. As he later wrote:

 Everyone was amazed by the news. I myself did not know what was happening to me. The dispatches were all directed towards the objective that Romana save the division and return with it to Spain, because the present circumstances
demanded it. Orders were issued to assemble the troops, and to the English to gather their ships.

 Romana entered into secret negotiations with Rear Admiral Keats, the British second-in-command, on the means of taking his troops off and returning them to Spain. Meanwhile his forces on Langeland took over the island and, on
August 9, the Spanish commander seized Nyborg which became the main concentration point. Four days later, nine thousand troops were evacuated by sea to Gothenburg where they awaited the British transports that would return them
to Spain. Some five thousand Spanish troops were left stranded, captured by French forces to whom Romana’s second-in-command, Juan de Kindelan, had betrayed his superior’s plans. Surrounded by a large enemy force, one Spanish
cavalry captain shot himself rather than surrender. 25

 THE JUNTA ARMIES’ SOCIAL COMPOSITION:
VOLUNTEERS AND ENLISTED MEN

 The regional juntas immediately summoned all men between the ages of sixteen and forty-five to enlist. It was a measure initially taken as much to get the insurrectionary crowd off the streets and under military discipline as to
increase the existing army’s strength; yet, when it came to the latter, popular enthusiasm for the cause was such that more than sufficient recruits enlisted to make good the heavily depleted strengths of most regiments, and
enough men still remained to create new volunteer regiments.

 One of those who volunteered was Francisco Guervos, a young Granada cathedral violinist. Little over eighteen months earlier, when he was conscripted to serve ten years in the pre-war army, he had paid a substitute to take his
place; but as soon as war was declared, Guervos had not doubted a moment about joining the colours.

 I desired only to sacrifice my peace and quiet, my interests, and what is more my life, as any man must who loves his country and freedom. And the principles of religion which have been engraved on my heart similarly induced me
to volunteer. 26 *