

 All this took but a few days, testimony to postal and priestly efficiency. Robertson, however, had still to ascertain where Romana’s forces were stationed. On presenting a letter of credit to a highly respectable Hamburg
merchant, the monk asked him outright. The merchant guessed why he asked. ‘“What, do you suppose you can outwit Bonaparte? Let me tell you he is too many for you.” “We can never know unless we try,” I answered. “Try! That has
been sufficiently tried already. I know of three or four who have attempted to reach the army: they and their papers were seized, and I need not allude to their fate.”’

 Nevertheless, the merchant let drop that Romana was at Nyborg, on the Danish island of Fünen, ‘a long way from here’. Electing a circuitous route to confound the Napoleonic police, the monk reached Nyborg by a combination of
post-chaises and hired boats without serious incident. He took lodgings at the hotel where Romana and his staff resided; and on the morning after his arrival he sent the Spanish commander a note in French to the effect that ‘a
foreign merchant desired to have the honour of a private interview with his Excellency … in order to present to him samples of some articles he dealt in’. Before leaving Lübeck, Robertson had bought a small quantity of the best
Havana cigars and a few pounds of chocolate to represent himself as a merchant. Almost immediately, he received a favourable reply, and found himself in Romana’s presence, where he set about verbally establishing his credentials
for, as he assured the general, he brought no papers of any kind that could compromise the Spanish commander or himself.

 Señor, you see before you a stranger who comes to put his life in your hands. I am a Catholic priest, chosen, perhaps partly on that account for the mission I am about to explain, as it was imagined that a Spaniard might be
disposed to put confidence in the word of a Catholic clergyman. I am directed to your Excellency by the English Government … 21

 Romana, dwarf-like in stature but with a certain dignity, listened silently to Robertson’s further credentials, and the message he brought. Romana remained silent. The monk trembled for his own safety. ‘Is he, thought I, so weak
that he shrinks from any show of difficulty? – then he may be wicked enough to sell my life to Bonaparte, merely to give him a proof of his fidelity.’ Romana finally reassured him that he had nothing to fear; but continued to
question him so closely that Robertson was little relieved. Nonetheless, taking courage in his hands, he said: ‘“Well then, General, may I beg the favour of an answer to my principal?”’ ‘“An answer – what now? Surely you will not
depart immediately!” “Certainly not, my Lord; though I came at the peril of my life, and remain at the same risk, I shall not take my departure today.” “Then we shall meet again?” “Whenever your Excellency pleases.”’ 22

 The monk had not long to wait. After sauntering through the town as if on a business mission, he returned to the hotel to receive a message bidding the ‘man with cigars’ to attend on the Spanish commander. On re-entering
Romana’s cabinet, the monk said: ‘“I presume, General, I shall now have the honour of your reply?” “Sir,” said he, “before I decide on your proposition, let me observe that we are utterly ignorant of what is going on in Spain.
For a whole year, not one letter has been suffered to reach us.”’