

 The early birds caught the worm. All the envoys asked for at least five million Spanish dollars * (about £1m) for each of their regions. Foreign Secretary Canning told them Britain would send ‘as much specie and arms as she
could spare’. Before the end of summer Britain had provided £1,100,000 (about sixty-six million reales) † in what, formally, were loans to be repaid after the war, to five major juntas; and by November, 1808, had sent one hundred
and sixty thousand muskets with another thirty to forty thousand to follow within a month. 14 Although this was considerably less monetary aid than the juntas had asked for, in their precarious financial state it helped to
resolve the most immediately pressing problem of raising and paying armies for those fortunate enough to have secured it.

 But the windfall did not seem to persuade the recipient juntas to help out other less fortunate regions. The Galician junta, for example, which received about forty percent – twenty-six million reales 15 – of the British total,
rejected pleas for financial help from its Castilian and Leonese companions on the united junta they had formed, and from Ciudad Rodrigo and Cataluña. 16 As the Galician army advanced eastwards into León, it thought nothing of
ordering the justice of the township of La Robla to provide the united junta with one and a half million reales. It received a tart reply:

 Neither in a single year nor in one hundred years does this township in my charge produce one and a half million reales. At most it produces two to three thousand reales a month. Your request leaves me astonished. 17

 Despite the aid received, the Galician junta maintained in November 1808 that it was broke, and the archbishop of Santiago provided one million reales to keep its army in the field. 18 A lot of money appeared in the meantime to
have disappeared; it was not perhaps surprising that four respected members of the junta’s treasury committee, including one of the representatives the junta had sent to Britain in search of aid, resigned in October. 19

 Other juntas, Sevilla in particular, were no less blameless in their financial conduct. But whatever they did with the money, and even if they had received none, the juntas had established one important principle: British
finance, arms, uniforms and supplies had been secured without the threat of British soldiers on their soil. They had no wish to see another foreign army in Spain: they had sufficient men (theoretically) to fight the war. All they
needed was money and equipment to keep them in the field. The juntas had one other immediate request of the British: that they secure the return to Spain of the nearly fifteen-thousand-strong Spanish force, under the command of
marqués de la Romana, which Napoleon had demanded of Godoy and had stationed first in north Germany and subsequently in Denmark. The force included some of Spain’s best troops who would be invaluable to the patriot cause. This
resulted in one of the most bizarre – and ultimately successful – events of the early days of the war.