

 Robertson informed him of the Asturian and Galician risings. * ‘“Asturias already has a deputation arrived in London to solicit aid and protection of our Government. The names of the Deputies are …” “How!” interrupted the
Marquis, “these are men I know well; men of the highest influence in the country … But what can I do, situated as I am at present? My troops are dispersed through all the provinces and islands of Denmark …” “Well, Señor, if you
cannot rescue all, rescue at least what portion of your force you can.” “Alas! To what purpose?” answered Romana; “what can we – what can Spain do against France?” 23

 Romana refused to help the monk effect his escape; and his mission unsatisfactorily ended, Robertson took his leave and set out for the shore where, under the pretence of collecting shells and pebbles, he occasionally waved a
white handkerchief to attract a British man-of-war cruising in the Belt. But it was a Danish guard’s attention that he first attracted, and Robertson found himself under arrest. It took him no little ingenuity to secure his
freedom.

 The misadventure was a stroke of fortune, however, for on his return to the hotel he encountered Romana ascending the stairs with some of his officers. ‘“Come to me – tomorrow morning – eight o’clock”, the marqués half whispered
over the banister in broken English …’ At the agreed time the monk again entered his cabinet to be informed that the Spanish commander, having consulted with those of his officers in whom he placed unreserved confidence, ‘had
finally determined to accept the proposal of the English Government, and would immediately proceed to take his measures.’ Thanking Robertson for his valuable service, he advised him to depart rapidly so as not to excite suspicion
and regretted that it was not in his power to place him out of danger. Little did either man know that the monk would find no means of escape from the continent until long after Romana and his force had been returned to Spain,
and even then only hotly pursued by French hussars. †

 Romana’s sudden decisiveness sprang from a Catalan sub-lieutenant’s actions rather than from the monk’s persuasiveness. Lieutenant Juan Antonio Fabregue, * of the first battalion of Catalan volunteers, which formed part of
Romana’s force, was returning with official dispatches from Copenhagen to his post on the island of Langeland when, on close examination of the shore, he discovered a small fishermen’s boat, and impetuously offered its owners a
fair sum to be taken direct by sea to his station. About four leagues out in the Belt he had observed three English warships anchored; and once underway, ‘in an access of patriotism, and without a second thought’, he drew his
sword and ordered the two fishermen to take him to the ships. A Spanish soldier accompanying him was so surprised and terrified by the order that he tried to jump into the water. One of the fishermen caught hold of the soldier’s
musket, while the other also prepared to resist.