

 A war against Napoleon was a different matter to a war against the French people. The former implied a war of state against state (in as far as a junta could claim now to represent the state), an eighteenth-century-style war in
which high dynastic, territorial and diplomatic interests were at stake and which did not involve the people other than as conscripts. The second option, of nation against nation, the Spanish against the French people, meant the
type of people’s war which the French Revolution had introduced. The juntas had little or no desire to engage in the latter: its outcome might result in an ‘uncontrollable’ revolution of the sort they most feared. While the hope
persisted that the French people would reject the Emperor’s ‘perfidious’ policies, it could only be counterproductive to antagonize the former by declaring war on them. ‘It is not a war of nation against nation. Our concern is
only to protect ourselves from a tyrant’s oppression’, declared the Catalan junta of Vich on June 11. 5 The Galician junta went further. Only a few days after requiring that all French persons in Galicia swear fealty to Fernando
VII and confiscating all property belonging to those who remained ‘Napoleon’s vassals’ – common enough junta measures – the junta quite uniquely rescinded all confiscations. ‘The war is against Napoleon, not against the French
people’, the proclamation stated. 6 ‘The enlightened and generous French’ had not participated in the ‘abominable and deceitful breach of faith committed by their tyrant’. 7

 Barely a week after Sevilla’s original proclamation stating that there was ‘no revolution’, and that it was declaring war on no one, the junta changed tack and, in the name of Fernando VII and the Spanish nation, which it
claimed to represent, declared war by land and sea. On whom?

 The Emperor Napoleon I, and on France while the latter remains under his domination and tyrannical yoke. We order all Spaniards to act in consequence and to do them all possible damage, according to the rules of War … We shall,
moreover, not lay down our arms until the Emperor Napoleon I restores our King Fernando VII and all the remaining Royal Family to Spain, respects the Nation’s sacred rights which he has violated, its freedom, territorial
integrity and independence. 8

 What had caused the junta’s change? In the intervening week, Sevilla had received news of other juntas arming and preparing for war. * Furthermore, General Dupont’s expeditionary column, marching from Madrid to Cádiz, was
threatening Córdoba; and the junta had learned that another, smaller French-led column due to join him from Portugal had been ordered to fall on Sevilla. 9 In these circumstances the earlier strategy was of dubious value, and a
more vigorous junta statement was evidently called for.

 The Sevilla declaration coincided to the day with the first civilian victories over the imperial military at the Bruch pass in Catalonia and in La Mancha. In the Puerto del Rey pass in the Sierra Morena, the access route from
Castilla la Nueva to Andalucía, five thousand Andalucians had gathered under the leadership of a local township justice, who had raised the force at his own expense, to cut off Dupont’s supplies travelling down the main road from
Madrid. The number of men was no doubt exaggerated. But on June 7 there were sufficient to capture a supply train, killing a general, his aide-de-camp, and a colonel, and taking thirty-four prisoners. The rest of the escort was
put to flight. 10 A people’s war, outside of direct military command, was already a fact; but it would always remain for the new authorities a disputable fact as they tried, and generally succeeded, to bring it under control.