

 In either case, Spain was again split into its constitutent kingdoms and regions, each of them autonomous and sovereign. It was not now the state, but the individual juntas which declared war on Napoleon, negotiated treaties
with Britain, raised armies, took over state and municipal funds and communal property to attempt to finance their war effort, and expropriated French-owned property. Always short of money, the juntas tried to make good the
remainder with new taxes, forced loans, donations – and some of them with British subsidies. But this is not to say that the juntas lived in splendid regional isolation. On the contrary, once the insurrection’s nationwide nature
became known, they corresponded with enthusiastic frequency, passing on proclamations, reports, letters, and edicts from other juntas as well as their own. All the maritime regions from the Cantabrian coast (Asturias and Galicia
in the van) to Andalucía, Levante and Cataluña immediately understood the need of communicating the news of their rising to Britain through any means that came to hand: sending deputations to London, contacting patrolling British
naval vessels, approaching privateers to take their messages to British commanders, dispatching emissaries to the British military authorities in Gibraltar. They sought, and signed, armistices and peace treaties, and asked for
money and arms to support their war effort. The Spanish adage, ‘War with every land – but peace with England’ was being put into effect. *

 THE JUNTAS’ WAR EFFORT: A STATE OR NATIONAL WAR?

 Against whom and for what aims were the juntas preparing to wage war? A question, surely, which admitted of only one answer. In fact, however, the answer to the question was not as obvious as it appeared. Only two days after the
rising, the Sevilla junta published a long proclamation in which it rehearsed all the usual arguments against Napoleon’s ‘perfidious’ actions. It then continued:

 There is no revolution in Spain. Nor do we declare war on anyone. Our sole objective is to defend what we hold most sacred and of which [Napoleon], under the pretext of an alliance and friendship, has attempted to deprive us. It
is to be feared that unless we fight, he will strip us totally of our laws, monarchs and religion. 4

 The strategy behind the statement’s somewhat diffuse logic was actually fairly simple. By not declaring war, by claiming that no revolution had taken place, it furnished Napoleon with no new grounds for further intervention in
Spanish affairs. At the same time the proclamation, and the juntas’ mass enlistment, showed the Emperor that the Spanish were prepared to fight to defend their ‘sacred rights’ if he continued to pursue his present policies. It
was the threat of war and the dangers of such a course that was aimed at deterring Napoleon. All of Europe, moreover, would come to Spain’s aid, especially those nations suffering under Napoleon’s ‘harsh Empire’ and who saw the
possibility of recovering their freedom, the proclamation insisted. Finally, the French people themselves would reject the ‘infamy’ of becoming the instrument ‘of such horrible perfidy’, or of shedding blood ‘for so vile a
cause’. To those who might reasonably doubt the possibility of defeating French military power in the field – the majority of junta members most probably – such a policy made sense. The statement’s purpose was an attempt to
achieve the insurrection’s aims without having to go to war, but it was also an illusory strategy, based on the idealistic conviction that Spain’s cause was as ‘just’ in the eyes of all nations as it was in God’s sight. *