

 It was the only time in the war when volunteers flooded into the army in great numbers. Where did they come from? Young educated men like Guervos were obviously a minority in a country where seventy percent of the people were
engaged on the land. It stood to reason that the majority of recruits must be villagers. And since day labourers and smallholders together formed the predominant rural population, they could be expected to have provided the
greater part of those who enlisted. But the extremely rare enlistment rolls which record trades, occupations and professions, albeit only partially, reveal that this was not so. Two such rolls from Morón de la Frontera in western
Andalucía and Igualada in Cataluña reveal that artisans who made up little more than four percent of Spain’s active population, enrolled in equal numbers to agrarian workers. A third such roll from the city port of Alicante shows
artisans providing the same number of men as service workers, the two largest groups to enlist. In all, over 2,000 recruits were recorded in the three rolls which were the only examples of their kind brought to light in the
research for this book. †

 Morón de la Frontera was an important town of some ten thousand inhabitants, the administrative centre of a large agrarian district sixty-five kilometres south-east of Sevilla. Here, between May 30 and June 13, 1808, 772 men
were enrolled, of whom just under half were volunteers. 27

 The enlistment itself took a dramatic form. On Monday, May 30, Morón found itself invaded by nearly ninety men who had walked from the small, isolated village of Puerto Serrano, thirty-five kilometres to the south, and who
clamoured to volunteer. The Morón authorities had taken no steps at that point to begin an enrolment, but their hand was forced by the new arrivals, nearly half of whom were aged between sixteen and twenty. That day, only one man
from Morón – job and age unstated – volunteered. On the Tuesday, an even larger group arrived from Puerto Serrano. By the end of the day 194 men had volunteered and twenty-five had enlisted, all but eighteen of them from Puerto
Serrano. The proportion of sixteen to twenty-year-olds had risen to little short of sixty percent.

 On Wednesday, June 1, the last large contingent from Puerto Serrano arrived: seventy men, all but half a dozen of them volunteers. On this day the Morón inhabitants began to stir: twenty men volunteered and six enlisted.
However, this was small beer compared to the effort made by Puerto Serrano: in three days this village of about one thousand inhabitants – one tenth of Morón’s size – had enrolled 311 men, only one less than those eventually
enlisted by Morón township. Moreover, the overwhelming majority of the Puerto Serrano men were volunteers, almost all of them between sixteen and twenty-five years old.

 Who were these men? Regrettably, the Morón scribes, as was official custom at the time in regard to the lower orders, did not generally think fit to note their trades, recording those of only thirty-nine of the Puerto Serrano
volunteers and ten of their enlisted. Taking both categories together, there were twenty-six day labourers and four smallholders, who outnumbered the remainder by thirty to nineteen. On this very small sample, the supposition
that day labourers and smallholders formed the majority of volunteers and enlisted men appeared to be borne out. And in the Morón district as whole (as opposed to the township alone) land workers slightly outnumbered artisans.