

 As the only urban roll, it reflected a far wider occupational spectrum than the others. Royal and municipal employees, domestic servants, a rather large land transport sector, and for the first time in the three rolls, members
of the privileged classes, including five nobles, an estate-owner, and a priest. In the service sector, which matched that of the artisans in size, there were merchants, agents, brokers, dealers, retailers and salesmen, as well
as shopkeepers and their assistants. And following them, tavern-keepers, bakers and breadsellers, water carriers and cacao grinders, a wig dresser, a butcher, three blood-letters and a couple of surgeons.

 For a port, however, there was an absence as striking as that of the Morón day labourers: the lack of maritime volunteers. A fisherman, a couple of sailors and five galley owners were the only seafaring men enrolled, just about
the least numerous group of all. Presumably, pressures similar to those of the Andalucian township were exercised by the large wholesale merchants to ensure that, in the new and seemingly profitable situation where the British
navy would no longer hinder their exports to the colonies, lack of crews to man the ships would not prevent their goods reaching their destination.

 None of the three enrolment centres – Igualada, with its relatively advanced farming and the beginning of a cotton-based industrialization; Morón, a large Andalucian township dependent on a relatively backward señorial and
latifundista agriculture; or Alicante, a small town but nonetheless a major Levant port – could be considered typical of Spain at large. Nonetheless, it was striking that, for varying reasons, the apprentice, the journeyman under
twenty or the artisan in his thirties made up in one or other of them almost half of the original volunteers and enlisted of three of the new junta armies. This was not what might initially have been expected from the majority
social composition of Spain at the time. But it was not atypical of the age: apprentices, journeymen and artisans had played important roles in the American and French revolutionary armies; and now they were to do so again in a
nationwide struggle against what they saw as the threat of domination by a foreign power. Less surprisingly, they were joined by agrarian workers – who overall matched the artisanal sector’s numbers more or less exactly. In
Alicante, predictably, the agrarian workers were replaced by service workers who made up the other half. According to these three enrolments, the new armies’ composition was an almost equal mix of the artisanal and agrarian in
the township recruits, and of artisans and service workers enrolled in the towns.

 The almost exact coincidence of the proportions of the predominant volunteers’ age groups * from two widely separated areas – Andalucía and Cataluña – left little reason for doubt: whatever their trades or employment, the
majority of the volunteers were between sixteen and twenty-five, with the bulk of them not yet turned twenty. Spanish labouring youth had turned out en masse to fight Napoleon.