

 Voices began to be heard accusing the junta of betraying the people’s trust. On July 3, thirteen men armed with swords assaulted the gaol, killing three prisoners, one a Frenchman, and another a man being held on suspicion of
spying for the French. They then went to the governor’s house, forced open the doors and assassinated him in cold blood. ‘Preparing to take the lives of more inhabitants, they were intimidated by a large funeral procession, with
a great cross at its head, which the priests had wisely and opportunely decided to hold’. 42 So intimidated, indeed, that it was said they joined the procession with their assassin’s arms.

 On the following day, at a special meeting of the guilds’ leaders called by the rebels, one of the latter read out a paper containing a number of demands, among them that the previous day’s assassins be pardoned, that the people
seize all tithes and the junta be reformed. At the end of his peroration, the speaker said, ‘Mana lo Poble baix’: ‘the plebeians must be in charge’, and gave the names of those, including himself, who must become junta members. 43

 Meanwhile, the tumult continued, apparently raised by one of those shortly to be arrested for the assassinations, causing one more death and two seriously wounded. Public order was restored, albeit temporarily, by Francisco
Riera, a local retail merchant’s son, who had led a Manresa sometent at the victory of the Bruch pass. He arrested three of the main suspects, and at the same time reformed the junta, on which eighteen laymen and eight clerics
were now to sit. By ensuring the exclusion of two former members, both of them town councillors, the populace had won a minor victory at the expense of considerable bloodshed. 44

 But as late as September 1808 there were serious fears of another popular revolt. Commenting on the earlier events, the Manresa magistrates wrote that they had been the work of a ‘few persons who, with artful guile, spread the
fire of sedition amongst the lowest of the plebs, and deluded and inflamed them to execute the greatest of assassinations’. Anonymous letters, which in the past had been the precursors of disaster, were again being received by
the magistrates … 45

 The implication was clear. Behind the rebellious plebs stood others of higher social status – ‘enterprising revolutionary people’ – who manipulated, or paid, the lowest of the low to achieve their aim of replacing the junta by a
popular town government. 46 Was this anything but the elite’s manner of understanding (or misunderstanding) the lower ranks, who in their eyes were incapable of acting autonomously, and could only be led or manipulated by people
of higher social status? The question was impossible to answer conclusively in this instance, though it was suspected, on the evidence of the earlier risings, that agitators – though not necessarily men of higher rank – had been
at work.

 To many other townsmen and villagers liberty and popular ‘sovereignty’ evidently meant something other than government by the juntas: ‘ Carajo ! Now there is no king, we’re all one and the same …’, ‘There’s no justice of the
peace to order us about any longer …’, were the sort of comments heard in Aragón. 47 In Cataluña, the protest took a more direct form: ‘We have no king, therefore we won’t pay’, the inhabitants of Falset told the tax collectors.
‘The poor … who have been skinned all our lives … say that the rich who have money should pay’, added the villagers of Cunit. ‘Now there’s no justice of the peace, or king or God, we’re all equal’, some Martorell inhabitants told
the local justice who reported these comments to the commander of the Catalan army on July 19, 1808, in shocked disapproval. 48 Not unexpectedly. The disregard for king and fatherland might perhaps be excused – but the denial of
God? What had become of fighting for religion, king and country if some individuals thought like this? For these people, social equality had become the insurrections’ and war’s rationale. Certainly only a minority dared openly
express such views, but their attitude to the sacrifices demanded by the war became widespread.