

 The Morón township enrolment of 312 recruits was less inexplicably dramatic, but more socially instructive, since 182 had their trades or professions listed, seventy percent of all those in this category. 28

 Here, artisans, who formed just over ten percent of the inhabitants, provided half the recruits. Day labourers, who formed nearly half the population, provided just over ten percent of the enlisted. Only one Morón man in just
under seven volunteered – compared to Puerto Serrano’s five volunteers for each enlisted man. Not a single Morón landowner’s name appeared among those whose professions were recorded; and only seven master craftsmen. It was their
journeymen or occasional apprentice who answered the call. Again, as in Madrid during the May 2 events, journeymen shoemakers, cobblers and bricklayers formed the majority, followed by barbers and carpenters.

 Why were craftsmen the largest group to enlist? The answer in part depended on another question: why were day labourers so remiss in joining up? For had they enlisted in anything like their proportion of the population, they
would have largely outnumbered the craftsmen. The answer to the latter lay without doubt in the excellent harvest standing in the fields. The landowners pressed them not to answer the call, fearing that the first good wheat crop
of the century would remain unreaped in the fields. And probably the labourers themselves saw the opportunity of finally securing a better day wage – or at least more day wages – by staying to reap, gather and thresh the good
crop.

 No other social group outdid the craftsmen in producing five times the number of recruits compared to their population percentage. Journeymen were evidently anxious about the future. While masters would always be needed, the
journeymen had no certainty of becoming a master within the restrictive guild system which the latter manipulated to their own ends; and if the guilds were abolished, as seemed likely under the new Bonaparte king, the journeymen
would be left to sink or swim, and most likely the former, in a world that no longer offered them any protection. In other words, they were fighting against sinking to the lowest depths of proletarianization.

 However, one sector of the agrarian world enlisted in almost the same proportions to their numbers in the population as the craftsmen: tenant farmers – the labradores . * These were local men with the knowledge and means to farm
considerable areas of land, which they rented from the nobility or large landowners. The inflationary spiral of agrarian prices, however, was bringing in new labradores – often not men of the land at all – who were prepared to
pay higher rents in order to make a quick return on their investment, relegating the old labrador class to unemployment and a decline in social status. Like the journeymen, though at another level, the old type of labrador
confronted the same dilemma, and saw their future as fighting to preserve the past; the new labrador as fighting to become the owner of the land.