

 Only two days after the junta’s creation, one of the nobles appointed as a member was assassinated. Here again the people demonstrated their long memory. At the start of the rising, barón de Albalat, who had commanded the
militia during the 1801 anti-militia revolt, when he had ordered his troops to fire on the crowd, killing three men, had fled for his life. But on hearing that he had been appointed to the junta, he returned to the city believing
himself safe. He was seized by the crowd and brutally murdered, his head cut off and stuck on a pike which was paraded round the city. 51

 Meanwhile, in the Ciudadela, the city’s fortress seized by the insurrectionaries on the second day of the rising, infantry captain González Moreno, one of the rising’s original plotters, commanded a sizeable force of armed
smallholders, and had titled himself Comandante del pueblo soberano (the sovereign people’s commander) 52 or, in another version, Comandante del pueblo armado en defensa de sus altares, Patria y Rei (the armed people’s commandant
in defence of their religion, fatherland and king). 53 The comandante was almost certainly dubious about the loyalty of many members of the new Valencia junta and was prepared, it was said, to hold out in the Ciudadela against
the junta if need be. 54 And his smallholders’ force would have followed him. (If the allegation was true, the captain became one of the first of a number of army officers prepared to intervene, as non-junta members, directly in
the new political situation.)

 Despite this putative display of strength, the weakness of the Bertrán de Lis’ political stance became rapidly evident. The old authorities on the junta effortlessly removed three of the original insurrectionists from the city
by promoting the comandante to colonel (to command its freshly raised division at its outpost along the Ebro) and the two younger Bertrán de Lis brothers to captains in the same force. Almost simultaneously, the junta decided to
imprison all French residents for their own safety in the Ciudadela which, with the comandante ’s and his men’s departure, was now ungarrisoned.

 Apart from their distrust of the junta, fear of a French attack on the city kept the remaining smallholders in a state of high tension, as did the threat of the ‘internal’ enemy – the imprisoned French residents. To find
themselves the major armed force in the city added to their frenzied determination to act. But, it should be noted, their determination did not run to demanding seats on a reformed junta, but rather to expelling the ‘traitors’
from it or to abolishing the new government body altogether.

 Into this conflictive situation, an ultramontane cleric suddenly catapulted himself. Baltasar Calvo, a forty-five-year-old Valencian-born canon, well-known for his ‘violent character’ and anti-reformist ideas 55 which had
resulted in his explusion from the Spanish capital, reached Valencia. After failing in his aim to be nominated to the newly-formed junta – friar Rico turned him down flat – he looked for, and found in the smallholders, the means
of overthrowing the junta and establishing a new one under his leadership. But equally – indeed perhaps more so – the smallholders found in his violent anti-French demagogy and determination to ‘clean out the junta’s traitors’
and deal it a deathblow the perfect means of achieving their aims. On the afternoon of June 5, the smallholders surrounded the Ciudadela shouting: