

 Not surprisingly, the labouring classes were frequently dissatisfied with their lack of representation on the juntas, and the manner in which the latter, ‘to avoid the convulsions of a nascent liberty’, as the Gazeta de Valencia
put it, were exercising their power.

 In Alicante, for example, where after co-opting a few local notables, the entire municipal council had turned itself into the junta, the populace protested at its lack of representation and obliged the junta to accept two
clergymen to speak and vote on its behalf. This was not an uncommon choice: the clergy enjoyed status and was literate, and among them there were always a few priests well-known and trusted for their generosity to the urban poor.
In this case, however, it was insufficient. The following day, June 13, a crowd gathered in the junta’s anteroom and ‘imperiously’ demanded, on their behalf, that one of the junta members be relieved of his post immediately.
Fuera! Fuera! (Out! Out!) the crowd shouted. The junta agreed to his suspension while it investigated the member’s case. The people showed that they had a long memory. In 1802, this junta member, Ignacio Spering, had been accused
of favouring merchants, at the inhabitants’ cost, in supplying the town with foodstuffs. 39

 The crowd then demanded that the young single enlisted men who still remained in Alicante be ordered to march immediately to Almansa where the southern Valencia and Murcia conscripts and volunteers were gathering. The junta
issued the necessary edict. Evidently encouraged by its success, the crowd gave two junta members a hard time when they went the next day to collect the mail just received from Madrid and France. Believing that they were
deliberately being kept in ignorance of important and adverse news, the people began to riot in front of the post office, demanding that the mail be opened and read aloud. The junta members’ indecision only increased the tension.
‘Let real Spaniards collect the mail!’ the cry was raised. Finally, one of the members took the packet of letters from Madrid and France, which numbered very few, and read them out. 40 Such scenes were still continuing as late as
July 4 when a crowd, ‘creating the greatest of disorder and threatening the lives of junta members’, demanded that official mail received by the junta be made publicly known. 41

 These protests were a minor affair compared to the events in Manresa, which had been among the first Catalan towns to rise, and where the junta’s unpopularity extended to more than the lower orders. Additional taxes to pay for
the war effort had led many of the wealthy to leave the town for neighbouring places where they were out of harm’s way. ‘The rich leave the hardships to the poor’, the people responded, and rioted. The junta managed to restore
order by assuring the rioters that it would expropriate many of the wealthy’s valuables to meet its war needs; but, as the days passed and the junta did not fulfil its promise, tension again rose. An earlier edict had ordered all
arms to be handed in, and offered a reward to informers who gave the names of those who did not comply. The disarming had angered the inhabitants; if nothing else they found themselves defenceless against a surprise French attack.