

 More booty was being brought in from beyond the walls as men and women set out to make a grisly profit from the enemy dead, stripping corpses of shoes, uniforms, watches and sundry valuables. And as though these were
insufficient, two days later armed Spanish civilians were arrested sacking the monastical Charterhouse outside the gates. 16

 *

 Although Palafox had refused to return to Zaragoza from his headquarters at Belchite, just over fifty kilometres to the south-east, he had gathered a small force of volunteers and a few regulars, and was determined to cut off
the French besiegers’ rear. At Épila, a part of Lefebvre’s column, under a Polish colonel’s command, smashed the Aragonese leader early on June 24. Palafox had now gone down to defeat twice in open battle.

 In Zaragoza, meanwhile, the authorities who had played little part in the first day’s combats, attempted to reinforce the city’s defences and their own control over the inhabitants. In accord with Palafox’s post-rising
declaration that he was imposing a military command, they appointed army officers to the gates’ defence, ordered Zaragozan defenders to join the military units created by Palafox after the insurrection, and to obey only their
military officers. Women, children and the elderly were ordered to remain at home when the French again attacked. Exceeding their established status, women’s participation in the struggle was presumably believed to be an
incitement to a frenzied popular defence and lack of respect for established authority. Out of this might arise some quite unforeseen and – the authorities feared – undesired consequences.

 The population took little notice of the orders. They elected their own leaders at each gate. June 16 was Corpus Cristi, one of the major liturgical celebrations of the year. But there was no procession and from eight in the
morning no church opened its doors to any but women. 17 The people spent the time instead carrying out church benches, shop cupboards and shelving to build barricades in the streets; others tore down the awnings from their
windows to make sacks, which were filled with earth and wool to protect the guns at the gates while some, armed with swords, patrolled the streets; yet others with spyglasses climbed towers to warn of an enemy advance … Those who
ventured out beyond the walls cut down the olive trees to reinforce the gates’ defences and clear the field for the artillery. 18 Although much of this activity was militarily useless, it showed a popular initiative which no
orders from above either brought about or could countermand.

 Palafox had earlier ordered his older brother, marqués de Lazán, to return to Zaragoza, giving him full authority to act in his name. As so many of the officially constituted junta members had vanished during the first day’s
fighting, Lazán called a meeting of the major military, civil and religious leaders, which decided to set up a military defence junta and sent an appeal to the Lérida junta for the heavy artillery and gunners which had assembled
there; and on June 28, several large cannon and munitions reached Zaragoza from the Catalan city. * At more or less the same time, a few detachments of troops who had fled Barcelona and Madrid, a reduced battalion of infantry and
eighty Portuguese troops who had escaped the French also arrived. Meanwhile, the intendente, Calbo de Rozas, organized supplies of food, set up an armoury and arms factory, and put friars and others to making cartridges, and
farriers to turning scrap iron into musket and cannon ball. Further French surrender demands were indignantly rejected; and two men who, on reaching the city from outside, were discovered to be carrying Bonapartist propaganda
were rapidly tried and hanged.