

 From La Coruña to Cádiz the newly formed juntas made determined efforts to recuperate the arms the people had seized during the insurrection. Although no one could be sure of their exact number, the pre-rising musket inventories
in four of the major insurrectionary towns’ arsenals alone stood at 143,500, more than sufficient to arm a large army, 67 though of course the arms stocks were in widely separated parts of the country. Many of those who had
seized arms would have joined the colours with them as each junta immediately began to form its own army; and most of the population was unfamiliar with the use of muskets and would have seized small arms instead. Nonetheless,
there were evidently sufficient arms in the rearguard during the weeks after the rising seriously to concern the juntas. 68

 Not all the juntas’ initial measures were directly repressive: they also took some steps to appease the labouring poor. They abolished Godoy’s hated war taxes, especially on wine, and rescinded further disentailment of religious
property introduced by the former royal favourite which, affecting the Church’s charitable institutions, had left the poor without one of their last resources for staying alive in times of extreme poverty. Moreover, in Sevilla’s
case, the junta instituted a special tax on large landowners’ income to help finance the war. This, as the junta stated, demonstrated its determination

 to distribute the cost of maintaining an army in the most equitable manner possible. Taking into account the advantage to Andalucian grandees and other landowners of preserving their property, the junta has decreed that, over
and above their ordinary taxes, they shall pay ten percent of the cash incomes which their estates produce. 69

 The measure, taken by a junta which had co-opted the second highest number of titled nobles after Valencia, suggested that the great Andalucian landowners were prepared to make a gesture to the villagers to try to avoid trouble
on their vast estates. In the last resort the special tax was easier to evade – if in fact it was ever imposed – than the fate which awaited the poor: conscription and death in their country’s defence.

 The popular ferment continued for several months, and when it subsided it was only temporarily. But it would be mistaken to conclude that, in present-day terms, it had a revolutionary content or that it was necessarily as
threatening to the authorities as they usually painted it. The latter’s tolerance level of any popular protest was exceedingly low, almost to the point of paranoia. Any ‘gatherings, meetings or secret conventicles’ they saw
immediately as ‘suspicious’, aimed at disobeying their orders. The lower classes, it was true, were often disposed to take justice into their own hands if they felt the authorities were untrustworthy. But rarely were they seeking
to overthrow the new authorities. They wanted to be sure that junta members were truly loyal to the cause, and sometimes demanded a minimal junta representation, though not by individuals of their own lowly standing. They wanted
to be informed of all events, favourable or unfavourable; and they wanted a social equality of sacrifice in the war effort. This could not be termed ‘suspicious’ except by those who rejected totally the idea of the popular
classes’ right to have any say in the conduct of affairs.