

 The Aragonese capital, with its forty thousand inhabitants, had no garrison, indeed Godoy had virtually depleted Aragón of regular troops. Zaragoza was not a fortress town. Its adobe walls were little more than a modest
circumscription to ensure that goods entered and paid the appropriate taxes at the official gates. After a brief reconnaissance, the French commander came to the same conclusion as Palafox: the city was indefensible. Although the
northern walls were protected by the Ebro, and a suburb, the Arrabal, on the river’s far bank which was connected by a stone bridge to the city, provided the inhabitants with a road out to the rest of Aragón, the southern walls
were highly vulnerable to attack. Lefebvre decided to storm these. Although the walls were flimsy, here and there friaries, churches, a monastery, an almshouse and a cavalry barracks protruded their solid backs through or beyond
the walls. The city’s castle and a few other friaries stood singly half a kilometre or so in the countryside beyond.

 Before the French advance, Palafox had ordered a general enlistment throughout the region, summoning all recruits to Zaragoza. This led to popular tumults in a number of Aragonese townships where the people feared being left
unprotected. 5 His call for all arms in the capital to be handed in within two days also met popular opposition, the municipal council informing him that ‘the people have been surprised and take badly the order to hand over their
arms which they hold for the defence of their persons and houses’. 6 The people were well aware, as they had been during the rising, that arms were their power and sole defence.

 At the same time, Palafox took a further step to legitimize his command. He called a meeting of the ancient Cortes of Aragón to ratify his position and to appoint a junta to advise him. This, on June 9, the Cortes duly did.

 Persuaded that Palafox and his levies would hold off the French column at Alagón, only twenty kilometres from the city, Zaragoza’s population had done little to fortify the capital before the first battle survivors began to
straggle in on the night of June 14–15. Many people, and not only the wealthy, asked for passports to leave. 7 Most of the junta members newly appointed by the Aragonese Cortes absconded. 8 But the greater part of the people
rallied to make good their earlier deficiency, hurriedly dragging cannon to the southern walls’ three major gates, and opening musket loopholes in the walls. Meanwhile, the fifty army gunners remaining in Zaragoza were assigned
to the pieces, none of heavy calibre, ‘given a gratification to do their duty’ and provided with a small amount of ammunition. 9 Formally leaderless now that Palafox had gone, and without any concerted plan of defence, shouting
inhabitants crowded in the streets leading to the gates as the French began their attack. Some bore arms, others munitions and provisions; yet others knelt and prayed. Amidst the general confusion and excitement as the first
shots were heard, the people flung themselves forward to face the enemy. They lined up two deep along the promenade outside the wall from the Carmen to the Portillo gates, and fired at the advancing enemy troop. French cannon
rapidly dispersed them, and they rushed for the shelter of the gates where the Spanish army gunners were opening fire. From inside the city, more people ran forward to defend the gates. As Alcaide Ibieca, an eyewitness, recalled: