

 The Cartagena junta had also to repeat its orders for public tranquility. It had immediately ordered all beggars out of town, but strictly forbade anyone else of whatever class or age, other than women with young children, to
leave without its express permission. It set up a police junta, and warned parents, master craftsmen and householders that they would be held responsible for the obedience to its orders of their children, apprentices and
servants. † It assured the inhabitants that the junta had ‘sworn on its honour to defend your just desires’ and in consequence ‘your contribution must be a real and effective subordination’ to the new authorities. 63 Evidently,
these counsels were insufficient, for the junta rapidly issued an edict which, incidentally, provided a new image of the popular protest. The junta had

 observed with surprise and sorrow that women who, by reason of their sex, should withdraw from popular street agitations into their houses, have gathered in great numbers, either out of a spirit of curiosity or for other less
obvious reasons, increasing street disorders with their agitated and even perhaps irritating voices … They are warned in future to abstain from such disorders, leaving it to the true and good patricians to settle in calm their
real interests and needs. If the contrary occurs, these same men who, by the dignity of their sex, must sustain this task, will be the first to give notice of the women in question who shall be punished as they deserve. The same
holds for young lads who … have been acting similarly. 64

 Like the Sevilla edict, Cartagena displayed the clear notion that the people existed to obey their social betters. But in one aspect, the Cartagena edict exceeded the norm: its concept of the true and good patricians whose
natural right to govern was reinforced by their maleness , was no doubt what many felt but would not in the circumstances have cared to commit to an official paper. *

 Nor, of course, was the defence of property forgotten in the juntas’ strictures:

 Respect property; observe the greatest discipline; obey exactly your appointed leaders; bury resentments which ignorance or mistaken understanding have aroused in you; united as one body, and raising our prayers to the God of
the Armies … you can be assured that shortly you will see your liberty restored.

 stated the Vich junta in Cataluña on June 11, 1808. 65

 To keep the people under control, a number of juntas (for example, León, Segovia and Tarragona) had no hesitation in declaring their inhabitants subject to military justice. The Catalan junta went a step further. On June 22,
only days after its creation, the junta set up criminal tribunals functioning under military law in all the French unoccupied zone. These courts could pass sentence without reference to higher authority. At the same time the
junta ordered a cavalry squadron, under an army officer, to be formed in each district to patrol those villages which had undergone – or were thought likely to undergo – disturbances and troubles. 66 It was not long before most
of the major juntas throughout Spain had appointed police commissioners or juntas – an unpopular innovation, even to some of the municipal councils whose traditional policing duties were thereby ignored – and had formed volunteer
militia companies under the command of nobles and honorable burgesses to maintain law and order. The urban lower classes saw these as a standing force to police them on behalf of the new authorities; resentment at this measure
was one of the causes of the riots which swept a number of towns at the beginning of 1809. †