

 Before they did so, however, they learned two sharp lessons. The first was that hastily raised and untrained civilian levies were easily defeated in open battle by French cavalry and infantry charges. General Cuesta’s defeat by
imperial forces at Cabezón in the first days of the Valladolid rising had amply demonstrated this; three routs in Aragón and another at the Alcolea bridge where Cordoban patriot forces were rapidly dispersed by Dupont’s column
advancing into Andalucía, confirmed it.

 The second lesson was that patriot regional field commanders’ disputes and rivalries – let alone their tactical follies – bedevilled their armies’ success in open battle, a fact which Marshal Bessières exploited to the full in
his crushing defeat of the Galician and Castilian forces, under Blake and Cuesta, at Medina del Rio Seco on July 14. * Though the patriot defeat was shortly redeemed by victory in Andalucía, the Medina defeat relieved the threat
in Castilla la Vieja of attack on the imperial lines of communication to France. The Emperor’s choice of Spain’s new king, his brother Josef, could now proceed with relative tranquility towards his unknown capital, Madrid.

 The obverse of these lessons was that the inhabitants fought with a tenacity and courage unpredecented in the previous century to defend their own cities and repulse French attacks on Zaragoza and Valencia; and a unified
Andalucian army command of mainly regular troops won a startling victory in open battle over Dupont’s column at Bailén on July 19. These three Spanish victories, especially the Bailén triumph, changed the course of events in the
early part of the war.

 THE PEOPLE’S DEFENCE OF ZARAGOZA

 On Wednesday, June 15, General Lefebvre Desnouettes appeared before the Aragonese capital at the head of a small column of 3,500 infantry, 1,000 cavalry and a single artillery battery. 3 At the same time, the popular hero,
Brigadier José Palafox, whom the insurrectionists had elected as their supreme civilian and military leader, quietly slipped out of Zaragoza. In open battle, Lefebvre had just twice devastatingly defeated the Aragonese levies in
their attempt to halt his advance on the city, the French cavalry riding down and slaughtering village and urban conscripts. Convinced that the capital could not be defended, Palafox left, he said, because of the French
government’s ‘lively desire to sate [its vengeance] on my head’, and to find reinforcements to continue the struggle. 4

 Zaragoza dominated one of Napoleon’s two lines of communication, which the Emperor always chose with care and zealously protected. Having established his operational base in southwestern France, his major line ran along the main
Spanish road from the border diagonally south and westwards to Burgos and Valladolid, each of which provided a direct route southwards to Madrid, and continued from Valladolid through Salamanca and Ciudad Rodrigo to the
Portuguese border. * Traversing this major line just to the south of the Basque country another diagonal cut across Spain from northwest to southeast: the Ebro valley. Though Napoleon judged this of lesser importance than the
first, the river linked the Basque country, Navarra and Aragón to southern Cataluña. Zaragoza dominated the Ebro diagonal, and thus could not be left in the insurrectionaries’ hands. He detached Lefebvre’s column from Pamplona to
take the city in what he imagined was no more than a minor police operation.