

 The women were exemplary: they ran between the files of soldiers and bayonets, without concern for the musket fire or the bloodshed of both sexes, bringing water and bread, cheese, almonds, wine and spirits to their brave
fellow-countrymen, sacrificing thereon the little money of their day’s subsistence … The serenity with which these heroines ran through the musket fire … inspired the most ardent defender, whose energy was thereby redoubled. 12

 The women’s participation in the defence impressed all male eyewitnesses. They evidently had expected nothing of the sort. But women’s contribution was not the exclusive privilege of the lower orders: condesa de Bureta,
Palafox’s cousin, fought with equal valour. She and the plebeian women might in the long term be fighting for different objectives; but in the immediate both were defending their city against French ‘colonial’ subjection. As
another witness of the struggle put it: for the men

 the idea that they were defending their wives, their children, and their homes gave them the strength to fight; they remembered that their religion was endangered; that they were about to lose their freedom: and that on this
depended the return of their sovereign, and they called down the fires of Etna to overwhelm their vile oppressors. 13

 As the sun set, and many of all classes gave up hope and were leaving the city, the French made one more determined charge. At both the Engracia and Carmen gates, they pushed the defenders back, but their advance was halted by
withering fire from roofs and windows of nearby houses and narrow street openings. At this crucial moment, reinforcements arrived, one thousand Catalan volunteers and local recruits under Colonel Francisco Marcó del Pont, who
entered the city on its northern side: the French had not been able to cross to the Ebro’s left bank to cut off this road. The reinforcements were rapidly distributed to the endangered gates. At Santa Engracia, Major Renovales
organized a counter-attack which drove out the Polish cavalry; the French infantry who had momentarily seized the Carmen gate were also forced to retreat. It was now the people’s turn to attack and they pushed out beyond the
gates and skirmished among the olive groves. The French commander decided to call it a day and withdrew out of Spanish artillery range to the Santa Barbara heights. In nearly nine hours of fighting he had lost seven hundred dead,
thirty prisoners and six guns which could not be pulled away under the defenders’ heavy fire. The defenders’ losses were put at about three hundred. 14

 The people broke out in wild jubilation on the news of the French withdrawal. They had stood fast against Napoleon’s army, indeed severely mauled it. The trophies of war were there for all to see, six French flags among them.
Women were

 running in groups through the streets displaying the Eagles, the shakos, the backpacks, the fine shirts and epaulettes taken from the French, so that all should see that the enemy soldiers, and even their officers, had been
conquered by Zaragozan arms … 15