

 There are traitors in the junta: we have been sold out! Their treachery has left the Ciudadela unguarded and in the Frenchmen’s power! Death to all of them, and an end to the junta! 56

 Within a few hours, under cover of darkness, the mob began to massacre the French. As the victims’ screams were heard, all the city’s religious orders hastened to the fortress; but even two consecrated hosts, a venerated
crucifix and the friars’ reasoned pleas could not end the slaughter. 57 Friar Rico was twice turned away at the Ciudadela’s gates by sympathetic smallholders who were concerned to save his life which would have been endangered
had he entered the fortress. The assassins were encouraged and protected by another religious authority – canon Calvo.

 They murdered two hundred French that night. Some 140 survived until morning. Friars came early to take the living to safety in the Torres de Quart, one of the tower gates that protected the city. The assassins were waiting for
them by the newly-built bullring. There they put all of them to death and then went in search of French hiding in the city. Only a dozen or so were said to have survived. *

 That same morning, June 6, Calvo entrenched himself in the Ciudadela. He ordered its cannons to be loaded and aimed towards the city. Then he sent an order to the captain general to resign his post, and to the intendente and
postal administrator to send him money and current correspondence. The latter two complied, but the captain general refused. Calvo ordered him to report to the Ciudadela with the junta. This, with some junta members, he did.
Calvo publicly dismissed him and abolished the junta. He told two members (one of them the Bertrán de Lis group’s junta secretary) that the junta had made many ‘errors’. The way to correct them was to rid it of ‘the traitors’ in
its midst; but as the junta itself was ‘incapable of saving the kingdom [of Valencia] it was necessary to create a new one with far fewer, but recognized patriots, as members’. 58 The existing junta was powerless; at that moment
Calvo enjoyed wide popular support and the armed smallholders and assassins of the French dominated the city streets. The junta had no armed force it could immediately call on to put down the revolt.

 Had Calvo been anything but a fanatical cleric who believed that his writ was God’s, he could have organized his forces to achieve his aims. Instead, he allowed Bertrán de Lis and friar Rico time to gather their forces.
Ingenuously, the following day, Calvo attended on its own terrain a meeting of the junta he had abolished. By this time, the bloodlust of the massacres had been sated; Calvo’s supporters believed they had done what was necessary
and that he had abolished the junta they abhorred. Bertrán de Lis had the junta chamber surrounded by men in his pay. Once the junta had gathered, Bertrán de Lis or Rico – both claimed the credit – launched their accusations to
the canon’s face. Thus encouraged, other junta members joined in. Isolated, Calvo was easily picked off. Bertrán de Lis called in his two trusty smallholders, Francisco Lluesma and Vicente Rausell, to arrest him and put him
aboard a frigate which that evening sailed for Mallorca. 59