

 Zaragoza’s defence had by now become of military–political concern for the French in Madrid. The new French ambassador, La Forest, reported on June 20 that rapid Aragonese submission was needed adversely to affect Catalan and
Valencian resistance, as well as in the two Castillas where ‘the Aragonese are considered Spanish heroes’. 19

 There is a great difference between the Spanish nation today and what it was towards the middle of May. An ignorant people, who cannot abide uncertainty, have thrown themselves en masse into the opposition. 20

 VALENCIA: POPULAR RESISTANCE

 On June 28, two days before the Zaragoza offensive reached new heights, Marshal Moncey appeared at the gates of Valencia. Like his companion in arms before the Aragonese capital, the veteran French commander had been ordered to
subdue the Valencian insurrection with a force of about eight thousand men. Believing it little more than a rapid military exercise, he chose the shortest, but by far the more difficult road from Madrid, through the mountains of
Cuenca. Believing he would march on the easier route across La Mancha, the inept Spanish army commanders paid little or no heed to his actual whereabouts.

 The Cuenca road to Valencia passed through two steep defiles, one across the Cabriel river, the other the Cabrillas pass where the Castilian meseta dropped down sharply to the Valencian coastal plain. When the Valencia junta
learned to its surprise that Moncey was in Cuenca it sent a force of about eight thousand mainly new recruits to cut his passage across the Cabriel defile. Inexplicably, the military commander stationed most of the force at the
furthest and least likely bridge and only a small force at the obvious passage. Shortly thereafter he vanished. * The French forced the bridge over the defile with relative ease: the dryness of the summer allowed their troops to
find several places to ford the river and turn the levies’ flanks.

 Defended by armed villagers and a small, heterogeneous force of military who had retreated from the Cabriel river disaster, the second great obstacle, the Cabrillas pass, was similarly outflanked by Moncey with great loss of
life to the defenders. † A hurriedly formed line of defence in the plain outside Valencia was also forced to retreat on the city. Of the eight thousand civilians gathered the day before to defend the line, only 150 remained the
following morning. The rest had deserted during the night in resentment at the martial discipline and their fear of betrayal by the military leaders. ‡

 After these easy victories, it was unsurprising that Moncey who had already twice summoned Valencia to surrender, repeated his demand on reaching the city’s gates on Tuesday, June 28. By this time the city was full of people who
had fled their villages. The Valencia junta rejected the first two summons. Outraged by the military’s ‘treason’ in not organizing the two defiles’ defence, the inhabitants, encouraged and advised by artillerymen and military
engineers, hurriedly began as in Zaragoza to strengthen the city’s defences, dragging cannon to the main gates, digging trenches to impede the enemy advance, filling bags with earth to provide parapets for the artillery, and
securing the gates with massive wood beams torn from the recently constructed bullring.