

 ZARAGOZA: THE HEIGHTENING SIEGE

 On June 27, twelve days after the first battle, General Verdier, a French army veteran, reached the Aragonese capital with reinforcements. * As senior officer he took command of a force of nearly fourteen thousand infantry, over
one thousand cavalry, and twenty cannon, mortar and howitzers. The defence now numbered some eight thousand men, who included seven hundred regulars, 170 cavalry and 250 army gunners. 32

 Only a few hours after Verdier’s arrival, a tremendous explosion shook the city with a roar which could be heard forty kilometres away. Some barrels of gunpowder, which were being carted from the stores, had exploded; people ran
panic-striken into the streets, barely able to breathe in a cloud of black smoke and dust. Cries of treachery were raised as men and women began to dig out survivors from the smoking rubble of houses which had collapsed. But it
seemed that a spark from a negligent carter’s cigar was the real culprit. 33 French patrols advanced towards the gates hoping that the defence had abandoned their posts; they were met by musket and cannon fire.

 In a style and tone not uncommon to the patriot leaders, Lazán issued an exhortation to the people for tranquility, ‘submission and deference to the law’ and ‘docility to the constituted authorities’ paternal voice’ to maintain
the city’s defence. But his unusual and revealing words that followed made apparent the authorities’ dependence on the people in the city’s extreme situation. ‘Order, subordination, fraternity and the intimate union of general
opinion will procure and secure incalculable advantages’ (stress added). 34 The inclusion of the lower orders in ‘general opinion’ and the call for an ‘intimate union’ of all orders of society, let alone ‘fraternity’ between
them, was quite novel. The populace had made its effect felt. But then these were desperate times.

 *

 Shortly after midnight of Thursday, June 30, Verdier began his first bombardment. It was to last uninterrupted for nearly twenty-seven hours. The initial panic, which – despite orders – saw inhabitants running wildly in the
streets, and crowding into the Virgen del Pilar’s shrine, soon gave way to a resigned calm: the French cannon was not doing great damage to the solidly built brick houses. Moreover, look-outs posted in the Torre Nueva rang the
bell when they saw the French batteries firing; and civilians took cover.

 There were, unsurprisingly, miracles of survival.

 Everywhere people were saying: A shell fell on my house. There were several of us there and it exploded in front of us, yet no one was hurt. An incredible thing: a miracle worked by the Virgin Mary. 35

 Others felt themselves under the protection of their patron saint, the Virgen del Pilar, who would shield God’s ‘elected people’. 36

 But the unremitting barrage, which intensified at dawn, did great damage to the Portillo gate, leaving the cannon there virtually unprotected, and some of the gunners wanted to spike their guns. Major Renovales ordered them back
to their battery and threatened to shoot any deserter. At the Santa Engracia gate most of the gunners were killed at their posts, and their places were taken by new defenders. But the French attack on the gates was repulsed.