

 Villagers on the other hand were not content solely with denying the Church its dues; land seizures, strikes for higher wages, smallholders’ revolts, farmers’ and juntas’ counter-offensives affected various regions of the
patriot zone.

 Only two weeks after the Sevilla rising, day labourers in the nearby township of Carmona refused to reap the harvest on the great estates. ‡ They stayed at home, alleging that their absence was due to the ‘new developments’.
Effectively on strike, the withdrawal of their labour increased – as they must have known it would – the shortage of field hands resulting from the recent large army enlistment. Taking advantage of the excellent grain crop
standing in the fields, the day labourers were attempting to secure a raise in their pitifully low wages. On June 9 the Carmona junta reacted with draconian measures: for each day that a labourer refused to work he was to be
punished by ten days in gaol and two hours in chains. 16

 Presumably this got some men back, because ten days later the junta received a farmers’ memoir setting wage levels for different labouring jobs. The day before, after complaints from a number of townships about the labourers’
strike, the Sevilla junta issued an edict which said it had been made aware of landworkers’ ‘scandalous abuse’ of the shortage of hands caused by

 the indispensable necessity to defend the fatherland, religion and our beloved sovereign … Ignoring the level of day wages already agreed, they have tried to raise them exorbitantly, to the very notable prejudice of agriculture.
The junta cannot remain indifferent to … or fail to restrain the avarice of these inconsiderate vassals who use to their own benefit the afflictions of their fellow workers … 17

 In order to contain wages ‘within the limits of reason and distributive justice’, the Sevilla junta ordered that all wages agreed prior to the ‘present events’ must be respected and local justices must enforce these, punishing
if necessary those who failed to respect the agreed rates. Significantly the junta did not threaten recalcitrant labourers with the fate that Carmona had decreed; indeed it even threw them a few crumbs by recognizing that as a
result of ‘the actual circumstances’ wages might rise somewhat: no junta at that moment could afford to create an enemy of its future rural recruits or run the risk of serious agrarian conflict.

 However, even this edict did not immediately have the desired effect, because a few days later the Carmona junta admitted that ‘many labourers are still in the town and will not go to the fields to work’. And those who had
returned were being paid ‘excessive’ wages by some estate bailiffs without heed of the Sevilla proscriptions or its own. The Carmona junta issued another decree raising the punishment for each day’s refusal to work to twenty days
in gaol – although reference to chains was now omitted – and a fine of about five days’ wages. *

 The repetition of a broadly similar situation in Calatayud, Aragón, suggested that labourers’ determination to raise their low wages thanks to the outbreak of war was a fairly widespread phenomenon. † 18