

 Dirty and dishevelled, they were fierce of aspect and violent in their ways, lacking all discipline and of repugnant appearance … The Madrid educated classes were filled with terror to see these threatening people abound in the
streets …

 They sang to small four-stringed guitars, and entered convents to ask the nuns for yet another religious picture to stick in their already overloaded hats, keeping their daggers always visible in contrast to the devout images on
their heads. ‘On the other hand, the Madrid plebs … looked on them as friends on whom they count in case of need,’ * continued the same witness. 2

 The capital’s elite looked forward therefore to the Andalucian army’s arrival. This, since it had defeated the French, must be a professional army. Although some members of the Sevilla junta saw the necessity for their
victorious troops to move immediately northwards in pursuit of the enemy, the victory celebrations in Sevilla and the fêting of Castaños, as the hero of Bailén, took up over a month’s vital time before the army reached Madrid.
Its effect on the educated classes was not a great deal better than that of the Valencian–Murcian army. Apart from the mounted Jerez bull-herders who, in their native attire, attracted particular attention, the rest of the army
was of ‘middling aspect – not as bad as the Valencians but not as good as the best of the French’, recalled Alcalá Galiano. 3

 When the people remembered the martial appearance of the Imperial Guard whom the defeated Dupont had taken with him, they were amazed to think that they had surrendered to these inferior looking soldiers. †

 The elite’s doubts as to whether these troops could again defeat a French army were shortly to be confirmed. The populace, on the other hand, was ecstatic. In front of the church where Castaños and his staff attended mass, a
manola suddenly leapt out of the enormous crowd and embraced Colonel Whittingham with such force that both she and the British observer to the Andalucian army fell to the ground while the woman exclaimed: ¡bendito sea el
inglesito de mi alma!’ (‘blessed be my darling little Englishman!’) … 4

 To the people’s even greater delight, the Andalucian army’s ‘valiant soldiers’ arrived ‘adorned with captured spoils’: hats decorated with enemy plumage, officers’ swords and even proudly mounted on the crop-tailed horses of the
highly regarded French cuirassiers, reported the Gazeta de Madrid .

 Some were attired in complete French uniforms to show that they had looted the enemy whose life they had taken. Others bore the muskets, swords and sabres which had, on the day, been loaded and sharpened to use against them …
The overjoyed Madrid populace mingled with the soldiers and followed them … 5

 The possibility that these rough and ready patriot troops might unite with the Madrid populace to cause a commotion – even to fill the capital’s power vacuum – was never more than an elitist chimera, as the events of the
following day proved. On August 24, with all the city’s councillors dressed in the traditional black doublets and hose of Spain’s golden age, a rejection of all that was French, indeed foreign, Madrid proclaimed Fernando VII king
and the authorities swore the traditional oath of fealty. It was the people who had insisted on the dress, asserted Quintana’s Semanario Patriótico , and it was the people who gave the day its particular significance.