

 Ignoring these state affairs, the Madrid proletarian youth who had burlesqued the last French cavalry to abandon Madrid took to the streets as though they were theirs. To the horror of the burgess and the authorities they
cavorted naked in the Prado’s public fountains, ‘without heed of the presence of both sexes’, and sang lewd songs which ‘offended the public’s sense of decorum and virtue’. The Consejo de Castilla demanded that the Madrid
justices re-establish patrols of law-abiding subjects. 13

 RURAL CONFLICT IN THE REARGUARD

 We must pause for a moment in the march of events to survey the rearguard, the rural world which formed the majority of the population. The still widely-held Spanish idealization that all social classes were united as one in the
struggle was rapidly shown to be no more than a myth.

 From the start of the war, frequent complaints from the Church and señorial lords that their vassals were not paying dues and tithes reached the regional juntas. As the lords were not receiving their dues, post-hoc logic assumed
that the villagers were not paying them. In many cases this was true. But another more imperative logic was also at work: local oligarchs were retaining these impositions, especially tithes, in order to pay the war contributions
demanded by the juntas, and to have sufficient food stocks in hand to meet the requisitions of the Spanish and French armies, both of which had to live off the land. In this way, these classes spared themselves the burden of
being the major contributors to the exactions levied on their villages. * But the ability to provide supplies to the armies was also a way to save ordinary villagers from military – especially French army – reprisals for failure
to deliver up their meagre crops.

 Bishops and cathedral chapters were particularly vocal in their protests about losing tithes. Village resistance had begun before the war, but with the conflict the refusal became more radical and widespread. The Church’s right
to exact such tribute was now questioned in even the smallest of places, like Herrera del Duque, far from the beaten track in Badajoz, where villagers staged a catechismal parody during their local fiesta in May, 1808. A man on a
donkey, acting the part of towncrier, addressed the villagers:

 Do you believe that tithes are to maintain those who go about Toledo † in carriages with their whores and to keep priests who are no more than drones? – Yes, that is what we believe, responded the villagers in chorus. 14

 Although patriot bishops and cathedral chapters were initially often a source of considerable funds for the local juntas, popular feeling was aroused by the Church’s determined refusal of any wartime sacrifice of its right to
tithes. As a letter to the Junta Suprema by one who called himself Juan de Miedez put it: ‘Why should the poor soldier suffer and die in the war, and the canonry with its excesses bring down the wrath of our great God on the
whole Spanish Nation?’ 15 Both the Suprema and the Catalan regional junta agreed with the Church and señorial lords, denying to all and sundry the right to seize dues and tithes: in their view, no change in the feudal system
could be envisaged. The social status quo, it might be argued, was necessary to maintain a broad patriotic alliance against the French; but it could equally be argued that this strategy suited both juntas’ conservative instincts.