

 Although in their month’s training, using a French revolutionary army manual, 70 the volunteers were relatively well trained, Castaños was wary of the poor results shown by volunteers in open battle, and included only ten
percent of these in the force he used directly against Dupont. The remainder were posted to reserve battalions. 71

 In keeping with accepted eighteenth-century military tactics, the Spanish army commander formed a flying column under a colonel to harass the French communication and supply lines and to keep the French forces under constant
observation, without however engaging in battle. This irregular corps was the first formally created by the patriot military during the war.

 Dupont, meanwhile, made an uncharacteristic mistake: convinced that the Spanish would attack him in Andújar – and the appearance of a Spanish army on the other side of the river fuelled his misconception – he failed to send out
a cavalry screen to inform him of the patriot army’s movements. Instead, he ordered his reinforcements under General Vedel, which were holding the rear along the road, to march urgently to support him against the feared Spanish
attack. In a forced march of nineteen hours along the tracks beside the Guadalquivir – instead of the royal road which would have taken less than half the time – Vedel reached Andújar. No sooner had he done so, than Dupont
received news that a Spanish force – the patriot’s flying column – was threatening the Sierra Morena defiles and thus the French rear and communications with Madrid. He ordered Vedel to march back immediately to defend the
mountain passes. Like a good Napoleonic general, Vedel set out the following day.

 Castaños had deceived Dupont: the patriot force in front of the French at Andújar was the Andalucian reserve army, aimed precisely at making the French general believe that this was to be the main point of attack. Castaños had
meanwhile sent two crack divisions of veteran soldiers to ford the Guadalquivir above Andújar with the aim of taking the French from the rear. Splitting his forces was risky: had the French commander informed himself better, he
could have attacked the relatively weak Andalucian reserve; instead, with the news of Spanish military activity in his rear, he decided to withdraw to the safety of the Sierra Morena which was guarded by his reinforcements. At
nightfall on July 18 he began his retreat from Andújar. As Colonel Pedro Girón, of Castaños’ general staff, recorded:

 It says little for the patriotism or resolve of Andújar’s inhabitants that not a single person ventured to inform us of [the enemy’s retreat] until 2 a.m. the following morning; at that hour two men appeared in the
commander-in-chief’s bivouac, where I was also, and gave us the first news. 72

 The two elite patriot divisions had meanwhile forded the river and stationed themselves, as planned, before Bailén. Their objective was to advance on Dupont’s rear; they did not know that the French general was instead advancing
on them, and Dupont was unaware that a considerable Spanish force was about to advance on him. Before dawn on July 19, Spanish outposts encountered the French vanguard. The patriot forces took up defensive positions. They were
commanded by two foreign-born major generals: a Swiss, Teodor Reding, and a Belgian, marqués de Coupigny. To complicate matters, both sides now also had enemy divisions in their rear: Castaños, who had crossed the river at
Andújar that morning, was purportedly pursuing Dupont; and the Spanish defending Bailén were potentially threatened by Vedel’s division which Dupont had ordered back to the Sierra Morena, some fifty kilometres away. But
inexplicably the commanders of both these reserve forces dawdled, arriving at the battlefield too late to have any effect on the fighting. *