

 All are going together … Castilians, Asturians ,

 Galicians, Santanderinos and Extremadurans

 all yearn to free themselves. The triumph

 of their union achieved

 the Pyrennees

 will see them linked with Navarra

 the Basque Country and Cataluña … 82

 THE ILLUSIONS OF VICTORY

 These early Spanish victories, however, had more baneful than beneficial results for the patriot cause. They brought the illusion – very soon to be brutally shattered – that after Bailén the Spanish army could fight and defeat
the French in open battle; with two not very significant exceptions, the patriot army on its own would, in this type of combat, go down to crushing defeat time and again. The other illusion, precipitated by Zaragoza’s and, to a
lesser extent, Valencia’s defence, was that, thanks to the inhabitants’ determination, towns could withstand imperial sieges. This, at an enormous cost of lives and untold suffering, was similarly proven false. With only one
important exception – Cádiz, which by its geographical situation was almost impregnable to land attack – no town would again repeat Zaragoza’s first triumph; and after Gerona’s seven-month long resistance in 1809, the length of
time besieged towns were able to hold out diminished to little over one month and sometimes much less. This was not so much because popular resistance declined, but because the size and firepower of the army Napoleon committed to
Spain increased. For sure, the dozen or so sieges tied down large numbers of imperial troops for about eighteen months. The defence of the weaker side, as the American War of Independence had shown in its first year, lay in
increasing the length of the conflict and in wearing down the enemy. But the cost in prisoners, usually regular troops, of these defeated sieges, let alone civilian lives, was immense; and in the end this static defence was not
going to win the war.

===== FILE: OEBPS/18_Chapter07.xhtml =====
Napoleon’s Cursed War

 7

 Soldiers at the Front and
Rural Conflict in the Rear

 THE PATRIOT ARMY’S SLOW ADVANCE

 The last of King Josef’s troops to abandon Madrid after Dupont’s capitulation at Bailén was a squadron of cuirassiers. This ‘sad relic of a proud corps’ was preceded by

 A boisterous and playful crowd of children, wearing the same breast and back plates which that bloody army had abandoned in its flight, and who mimicked exactly the unruly officers’ gestures, the brutal cavalrymen’s yells and
their barbarous prancing and cavorting … Acquaintances and strangers embraced in the streets … the hymns of victory resounded everywhere,

 wrote Semanario Patriótico . 1

 During the two weeks between the French army’s rapid retreat and the first patriot army’s entrance, the Madrid burgess lived in fear of ‘anarchy’ without government or authorities to control the populace. In fact, nothing of the
sort happened. But the Valencian–Murcian army’s arrival on August 14 did little to enthuse the law-abiding. The soldiers were poorly dressed in countryman’s flared knee breeches and woollen cloaks, recalled Antonio Alcalá
Galiano, and their round hats were covered in bad religious miniatures.