

 They were not the purely passive spectators accustomed like mercenaries to attend the ceremonial occasions organized by the authorities or, as often as not, by a tyrant’s will … it was the people who were this august function’s
glorious spirit, motif and composer. Not content with cheering their king, the populace’s … greatest huzzas and vivas were reserved, as was only right and just, for the noble English guests, Lord Doile and Colonel Vitingham, in a
display of the people’s gratitude for the singular favour that their generous nation is demonstrating to Spain; and frequently cheers were heard in which ‘England!’ ‘Spain!’ and ‘Fernando!’ were mixed. 6 *

 The following day, the city’s inhabitants and troops were treated to a celebratory firework display, music in the Prado, the ascent of three hot-air balloons and two specially authorized bullfights, one in the morning and one in
the afternoon, to which the soldiers who had ‘so gloriously defended their country’ were allowed in free and, as ‘a gift to the capital’s public’, civilian spectators were charged only half price. 7 The Prado itself was shut to
carriages so that ordinary people could ‘enjoy the spectacle more comfortably’. Significant of the general feeling of new-found freedom, 8,300 tickets were sold by the two Madrid theatres for their performances on August 25. 8
There was no particular thought of the morrow; the inhabitants, assiduously assuaged by the local authorities, believed that the war had come to an end; they had declared for Fernando VII and forgotten that Napoleon did not take
defeat lightly.

 Meanwhile, the armies tarried in Madrid when they should have been marching north to chase the French army out of Spain. There was more than one reason for Castaños’ delay. The Sevilla junta refused to authorize him to move
north of Madrid or to continue to supply him. 9 The juntas’ determination to keep their armies under their own control – for without an army they lacked their most important recourse to power – here demonstrated one of the true,
and limited, faces of the ‘national’ rising. And though Sevilla subsequently denied its refusal to supply its army, there can be little doubt that it was true. † In a letter from Madrid, Castaños wrote that he was ‘saddened to
know that nearly three thousand of my troops cannot leave their barracks because they have nothing to wear, and I don’t count in this number those men who are in rags …’. 10 Both Madrid theatres gave three special performances in
late August to raise money to provide troops with uniforms; they brought in 28,301 reales, a paltry sum in relation to the troops’ needs. 11 The lack of uniforms and shoes would constantly beset the Spanish army whose troops
often went barefoot and in rags.

 Greater affairs, however, detained Castaños in Madrid. The regional juntas, led by Galicia, Valencia and Murcia, had reached agreement on the need to set up a Junta Suprema, in effect a national government, to conduct the war
effort. * General Cuesta, who had so reluctantly been pressed into joining the Valladolid rising, quickly attempted to pre-empt the new ruling body. As the regional juntas’ deputies were making their way to the Junta Suprema’s
founding meeting, he proposed to Castaños that the two generals and the duque del Infantado (who like many another authority after Bailén had abandoned the French cause and turned ‘patriot’) should take over supreme military
command. The provincial juntas would be abolished and the authority of the captain generals and audiencias re-established. Generals with military command would pressure the Junta Suprema to appoint a regency in its place. To his
credit, Castaños turned down the plot which would have been the first real pronunciamiento – the military’s intervention in politics at a national level which so plagued the rest of the Spanish nineteenth century. 12