

 A. A fine, upstanding man .

 Q. As such, what and how many are your obligations?

 A. Three. To be a Christian, an Apostolic Roman Catholic, defender of the true faith, of King and Fatherland, and to die before being conquered

 Q. Who is your king?

 A. Fernando VII .

 […]

 Q. Who is the enemy of our felicity?

 A. The Emperor of the French

 Q. Who is he?

 A. A new and infinitely evil señor. The covetous origin of all wrong, exterminator of all good, the sum of all vice.

 Q. How many natures has he? [Does he belong to the race of humans?]

 A. Two. One diabolical, the other human. [It can be doubted, given his diabolical operations].

 […]

 Q. Who can free us from such a monster?

 A. The union of Spaniards under arms .

 Q. Is it a sin to kill French people?

 A. No, sir, it merits praise if by this the What homeland is freed of their insults

 […]

 Q. What is Spain? [ Who forms the fatherland?]

 A. The entirety of many peoples [our peoples] ruled by a King and governed by the same [just] laws

 Q. Are ours and all these peoples’ interests the same?

 A. Yes, sir, by the natural and reciprocal obligation of all to support and defend each other

 […]

 Q. What felicity should we be seeking?

 A. That which the French cannot give us .

 Q. And what is this?

 A. The security of our rights and persons, the free practice of our sacred religion, and the establishment of our monarchical government, adapted to Spain’s present customs and those of European religion

 […]

 Q. To whom shall we look to achieve this?

 A. To Spain, which alone has this right, to the exclusion of all foreigners. 10

 Apart from the obligatory anti-Napoleonic virulence, and the determination that the country’s political salvation depended exclusively on itself, the Catechism attempted briefly to articulate two war-related problems. The need
for union among the Spanish peoples whose continuing mass mobilization was necessary to man the armies needed to repel the foreign aggressor, and the question of how this could be achieved and on what basis it could be
maintained. In short, the nature of the Spanish ‘Nation’ or ‘Fatherland’. The Catechism went no further than proposing that Spain consisted of the entire conglomeration of its peoples (or communities) who had a mutual obligation
to defend each other. Once they had released their venom on Napoleon, both of the earlier cited authors, the Catalan-born Antonio Capmany, the most intelligent of Spanish conservatives, and Isidoro Antillón, a determined
Aragonese progressive, addressed this problem in more detail. In Antillón’s words:

 We are all Spaniards … All members of a great family, [who] are fighting for our King Fernando, for our religion, our laws and our honour. The cause is one: one is our spirit, one is our plan, one our defence, common to all are
the dangers and the victories … But we need a centre of this union. 11

 The notion of the ‘great family’ came from the Old Order monarchy. The king was the ‘father’ and his vassals his ‘sons’. As such, all those under his rule were ‘brothers’ who faced common dangers together. The initial appeal to
defend religion, king and country sought an overarching bond to unite Spain’s peoples in terms they could easily understand and feel. Hatred of Napoleon, the perfidious aggressor, pursued the same aim. The Emperor’s previous
military triumphs had been achieved because he had ‘fought against kings, not the people. Our situation is different ….’ The Spanish would do well to recall what Napoleon had only the previous year told the Poles: ‘A nation of
eight million inhabitants, who want to be free, runs no risk of ever being subjugated.’ Antillón continues: