

 Spain has a population of more than twelve million souls. * Let us for this once profit from his [Napoleon’s] doctrine. Let us show the world that the forces of tyranny are nothing against a million men, armed en masse to defend
their liberty and honour. 12

 While the progressives shared the absolutists’ view of the people’s prime importance as the originator of the risings and in volunteering to fight, they saw the urgent need of going beyond religion, king and fatherland in order
to maintain popular enthusiasm for the struggle. A country-wide, but provincial popular resistance had to be – but had not yet been – turned into a united, ‘national’ struggle which would enable Spain’s peoples to release and
coordinate all their human energies and material resources to free the country of the foreign invader.

 In this sense, it was fortunate that Spain had been a ‘state-nation’, covering the same geographical territory, and occupied by mostly the same peoples, as it had been since its foundation in the fifteenth century by Fernando
and Isabel (more aptly known in Spanish as ‘The Catholic Kings’). Its inhabitants shared a collective identity, centred on the monarchy and Church, that had largely been forged by Spain’s 150-year-long dominance in Europe. Funded
by the silver and gold from the newly conquered South American empire, Spain’s supremacy had involved the country in constant wars in defence of its fortuitously inherited European possessions † and of Roman Catholicism against
the Reformation. While the fighting did not immediately affect the bulk of the Spanish population, the conflicts inevitably ended up doing so: the popular recognition of Spain’s common enemies and of their abhorent betrayal of
the true religious faith served to foster this identity which, by the eighteenth century, was comparable – though incomparably distinct – to that of the English and French. 13 In this identity’s formation, moreover, the Spanish
Church’s bitter struggle against the Reformation had played a singular part: as the irreducible defender of Catholicism, the Church and Inquisition raised intransigence and intolerance to the rank of sanctity. It was unsurprising
therefore that these two characteristics entered into the popular collective identity.

 Largely isolated by the Counter-Reformation from scientific and philosophical advance in much of western Europe, the lower orders’ reliance on tradition, the way things had ‘always been’, became inbred: Catholic monarchy and
entrenched defence of the holy faith; a (supposedly) ethnic and Catholic Spanish purity (stemming from the Jews’ and Muslims’ expulsion from the late fifteenth to the early seventeenth centuries), and an endemic suspicion of all
that was foreign; lack of innovation and defence of the routines of daily life – these became the common people’s inheritance.

 The cost of Spain’s golden age had its share of blame in this. The colonies’ precious metals flowed in – and flowed directly out to finance the country’s wars. European ascendancy and intransigent defence of Catholicism was
bought at the price of a domestic socio-economic leap forward, the creation of a vital urban life and the emergence of new capitalist classes.