

 Although a hard and fast line could not be drawn between them, the pamphlets fell into two broad categories: vituperative diatribes against Napoleon, the French Revolution, French influence in and domination of Spain, *
sometimes in verse but more often in prose; and those primarily concerned with the type of patriot government needed to meet the country’s imperative needs. Leaving the second category for later consideration, the first consisted
largely of invective, insults, satire, irony, sarcasm, parody and hyperbole, in which Godoy was not spared either; but as there was a limit to the amount of virulence that most of the home-spun writers could summon up to describe
Napoleon’s ‘despotic tyranny’, they tended to repetition: the Emperor was unfavourably compared to the tyrants of antiquity (Nero, Caligula, Tamburlaine, Attila); to a tiger, a fox, a wolf. He was a cross between ‘a wild beast
and man’, a ‘tyrant sated with crimes’, the ‘Anti-Christ’. † He was a man of ‘frenetic ambition’, ‘impious’, ‘treacherous’, ‘perfidious’, ‘barbarous’; ‘Europe’s greatest robber’, the ‘dragon of France’, ‘the Corsican upstart’; ‘a
small island’s abortion’, ‘a monster spewed from Hell’ … In short, ‘assassinations, false oaths, treachery, impudent lies, corruption: all these are noble and approved means in the Napoleonic Code which illustrate his
sacriligious morality’. What Spaniard could believe that the Emperor desired Spain’s ‘felicity’, ‘regeneration’ and ‘defence of her religion’ when he had founded his claim to the Spanish throne on Fernando’s forced abdication;
when his troops had sacked Spanish churches, murdered priests and defiled nuns; and when, at this moment, he was preparing handcuffs and chains to take Spain’s youth to fight Austria ‘on the shores of the Danube’.

 The enlightened’s passionate hatred of Napoleon – the epithets and quotations above come from the pens of two such erudite and respected authors * – was reminiscent of lovers scorned. And though one of them, Capmany,
specifically rejected the notion, many of the Spanish educated elite had in the recent past admired Napoleon as France’s redeemer who had brought order out of revolutionary chaos without denying the best of the revolutionary
conquests. But the Emperor’s treatment of his long-suffering ally had turned admiration into abhorrence.

 These authors’ excessive language, however, was also intended as an instrument of patriotic propaganda to whip up and maintain anti-Napoleonic sentiment in the country. Another form of this propaganda, in question-and-answer
form which made it more easily assimilable by the public at large, was the Catechism. The first of these, El Catecismo civil , ‘a brief compendium of the Spaniards’ obligations, awareness and explanation of their freedom’s
nature, to be useful in the present circumstances for both sexes’ education’, was published just days after the rising in Cartagena. †

 Q. Tell me, boy, what are you called?

 A. A Spaniard, by the grace of God. does Spaniard mean?