

 The junta meanwhile had made two powerful enemies, the audiencia and an important sector of the Church. It had curtailed some of the audiencia’s rights – no doubt in revenge for its role in trying to prevent the rising; and had
taken over the cathedral chapter’s wealth – on the pretext that the chapter refused to pay canons and employees who were ‘serving the country’.

 These enemies combined forces and, cleverly, in the light of popular discontent, succeeded in introducing a ‘people’s representative’ on the junta – which shortly afterwards abolished the post, and approved the pro-noble decrees.

 Its opponents launched a counter-attack, accusing the junta of arbitrary and tyrannical conduct, misappropriation of funds and finally of proposing to abolish the villagers’ right not to be dispossessed of rented land.

 More than a little alarmed, the junta issued a proclamation the following day strongly denying these ‘false rumours’ which had caused ‘popular anxiety and displeasure’ against the ‘legitimate authorities’. 21

 Still determined to win, the opposition planned an anti-junta coup for the following night, using the same tactics as those who had risen four months earlier. Villagers were to assemble in Oviedo and seize various strategic
sites by surprise. But this time the new authorities were on the alert. Major General Francisco Ballesteros, later one of patriot Spain’s more successful generals, occupied the town with his troops and artillery. Villagers who
had been summoned by church bells ringing the alarm set out with their arms; but on discovering that the capital had been taken over militarily, they returned to their homes without confronting the troops. 22

 The junta arrested the people’s representative and a number of audiencia employees, and set up an investigatory commission, announcing at the same time that henceforth a military force would be stationed in Oviedo to prevent any
repetition of such disorder. 23

 Subsequently a different gloss was put on the events by the leading progressive Flórez Estrada and another junta deputy who, addressing themselves to the ‘pacific townsfolk, landworkers and simple artisans’, called on them not
to be seduced in future by ‘French agents’ in combination with such impostors as a ‘small number of this capital’s inhabitants’ who wanted to ‘raise the entire province’ against the junta. These people had sent out orders in the
junta’s name to the villagers ‘to come armed to the capital on September 29’. 24

 As a young witness to the events, and a fervent junta supporter, later admitted, the junta had been wrong in attacking the villagers who

 had taken to arms to defend the country’s Independence, but also to improve the lot of the Spanish, and to make them equal before the law. It was politically inadvisable, therefore, to create enemies of a very important class of
society, and even less to create divisions and rivalry among it. 25

 EPISODES: THE VICISSITUDES
OF AN ANDALUCIAN LANDOWNER

 At the beginning of the conflict, Estevan Meinadier, of French origin but a Spanish subject, was a large landowner in Puerto Real, Cádiz. Unlike most such owners, he ran the estate himself, and had turned it into a model farm.
Shortly before the outbreak of war, he had brought in ten French landworkers to put into practice the latest cultivation techniques on the estate with particular attention to clearing uncultivated land to create arable. His
French employees were the start of his downfall. The Cádiz junta ordered them held in a friary until they took an oath of loyalty to the new regime; when they had done so, they were returned to their work on the estate.