

 who not only had shown a criminal audacity in singing songs in favour of the intruder king and against our nation, but one of them is maintaining herself on the money left her by two Frenchmen with whom she lived; and another
has a relationship with an unknown person, which is suspicious enough. They should be investigated immediately. 4

 In another letter to the Junta which said more about the writer’s self-perception than about the perception of the traitors named, a woman wrote: ‘If a woman’s advice is worth anything, and begging your forgiveness for my
audacity, I write to say that ….’ 5

 The Junta soon stepped in with a warning to the Madrid police and court authorities to prevent the large numbers of people in cafes, taverns and other public places who were holding ‘conversations subversive of law and order, no
doubt promoted by our enemies to foment partisanship and anarchy’. They had forgotten the laws which severely prohibited such ‘suspicious and prejudical’ gatherings.

 To tolerate these in the present circumstances is to contribute directly to the corruption of the public spirit which is all that can save us in the terrible crisis in which we find ourselves. 6

 The Madrid justices expressed their ‘unanimous surprise’ at the order for, as they reported to the Junta Suprema, they had not the slightest indication of gatherings of this nature, although they would increase their vigilance
henceforth. 7

 As a newly established government, the Junta Suprema, still unsure of its public legitimacy, might be excused its paranoia about public talk. But it did not understand that the new ‘spirit’ on which it so patently admitted that
the war effort depended, equally depended on a new sense of popular intervention in public affairs. Old Regime reflexes which demanded an unquestioning obedience to authority and the trinitarian slogan of religion, king and
fatherland still ruled the minds of the new authorities.

 MILITANCIES: AN INFORMANT’S ARREST

 Little did sixty-one-year-old Josef Guinart think he was venturing his freedom when he set off from Madrid to Aranjuez on foot with a letter for Floridablanca, the Suprema’s president. A Catalan who had come to the capital in
vain to find work in the mid-eighteenth century, he had joined the army and served four and a half years in the Regiment of Africa. Subsequently, he had become a wigdresser and guild member; but more recently he had lost work due
to the new male fashion of dispensing with wigs and cutting hair short. He and his wife made a modest living from their Madrid home on the main floor of No. 4, Calle Júcar, where they rented out two rooms for a total of twelve
reales a day. Guinart, lodgers testified, spent most of the day in bed. But he had not forgotten that he had been brought up in the household of the engineer general who had remodelled the Barcelona fortresses of the Ciudadela
and Montjuich and the Figueras fortifications. He believed that he knew their weak points and how they could be re-taken by the patriot forces. He also understood, so he thought, French military tactics, which were ‘quite
different to all those of the nations they had overcome’. And so on Sunday, November 13, he set out with the letter for Floridablanca, describing these matters.