

 There was one last irony to this story. When the French occupied Andalucía at the beginning of 1810, Meinadier returned from nearby Puerto Santa María, where he had taken refuge, to Puerto Real. The port and the surrounding
countryside had been sacked by the French military of all its remaining grain, straw, charcoal, firewood, olive oil, household valuables and farm equipment. On his arrival, he was acclaimed by the clergy and inhabitants who chose
him as local magistrate, a post in which he was confirmed by King Josef. His French heritage now stood him and the inhabitants in good stead; and in his new post he did all in his power to alleviate the population’s distress. 27

===== FILE: OEBPS/19_Chapter08.xhtml =====
Napoleon’s Cursed War

 8

 Fatherland and Nation:
A National Patriotic Government

 REVOLUTIONARY BABEL

 Revolutionary circumstances usually release a babel of voices from those who were silenced under the previous regime. Patriot Spain was no exception. As the Vigo junta in Galicia put it:

 From the first moments, the inhabitants of this place began to open their mouths and to speak of the real feelings which moved their oppressed hearts, their voices expressing nothing but fervour and just hopes for their king and
lord. 1

 As long as a predictable, univocal loyalty to their dispossessed king was the actual or supposed outcome of the inhabitants speaking their ‘real’ minds, the juntas could boast of their patriotic credentials. Neither absolutist
nor progressive dared to doubt for a moment that they owed the country’s anti-Napoleonic resistance and the revolution to the people’s initiative. The conflation of the ‘instruments’ with the ‘originators’ of this state of
affairs had been initially fostered by the Fernandistas’ need of popular legitimation for seizing power locally and creating the juntas. But the lower orders’ participation in the risings and their mass of volunteers for the new
junta armies was taken by the absolutists as proof of the plebeians’ ‘uncontaminated’ Spanish virtues which – in contrast to the French-influenced upper social strata – stood by their duty to religion, king and fatherland.

 Most junta members, acting like the Old Regime officials many of them were, considered free speech subversive. But nothing could stop people talking. In the Madrid flea-market, for example, the rumour was rife in the autumn of
1808 that the British army in Portugal was coming to join the Spanish army. The people’s comment that ‘they are no better than disgraceful Frenchmen disguised as English’ reflected popular distrust of Spain’s traditional enemy as
of all foreign troops on Spanish soil; nonetheless, the remark was considered worthy of a letter to Floridablanca, president of the recently constituted Junta Suprema, the national government, by the person who overheard it. 2
Similarly, Galician popular suspicion of British designs on El Ferrol, the navy arsenal in Galicia, which were obviously rife, were passed on to the Junta. 3 Informing on ‘traitors’, rumour-mongers and French sympathizers in
Madrid became rampant. There were certain women