

 He got no further than Villaverde, one of the first villages on his route, when he was detained. Had he a passport to go to Aranjuez, the local justice asked. No, he replied, but his matter was urgent. He had to deliver this
letter to the Junta Suprema’s president. The letter was unsealed and unstamped, noted the justice, taking him into custody. Guinart resisted arrest, which did his case little good. Obliging him to put a stamp on his missive, the
justice sent it to the Madrid corregidor, informing him at the same time of Guinart’s arrest. The corregidor immediately reported the detention to the Junta Suprema.

 So far, there was not much to hold against Guinart. But presumably frightened by his arrest, he disowned his letter and pretended that it had been given to him by a Catalan in Madrid whose name and address were unknown to him.
Even this was insufficient to cause him grave trouble. This came from another source. When Martín de Garay, the Junta’s secretary general, received the information from the Madrid corregidor, he asked the royal architect in the
capital to investigate Guinart. The architect talked to the Catalan’s neighbours, including the actor Vicente Baca, and discovered that Guinart had had commissions and contracts from the Godoy government to transport artillery
and other war materiel during the recent Franco-Spanish invasion of Portugal, while still continuing to work as a wigdresser. This was enough for Garay to order, three days later, that Guinart be taken under arrest to Aranjuez,
seat at that moment of the Junta. Guinart’s fate thereafter remained undocumented, but if he was still imprisoned, as was likely, he was probably released when the Junta fled shortly before Napoleon’s capture of the capital a
fortnight later. 8

 Guinart – perhaps no more than a self-deluded ‘expert’ – was illustrative of the lower orders who tried to make their voices heard to those in command of the patriot war effort. His efforts were no more successful than others
before and after him.

 PAMPHLETEERING: A UNITED NATIONAL STRUGGLE?

 Guinart would have done better to have written a pamphlet than to try to approach the new government directly. Before – and indeed immediately after – the Junta Suprema’s formation, the educated commoner elite’s main form of
intervention in public affairs was pamphleteering. Scores, if not hundreds, of pamphlets and tracts were written and printed at their authors’ expense. This sudden explosion of opinion was a clear sign of the Old Regime’s
institutional collapse: its censorship had vanished in the debris, and the literate, whose voices had been stifled for so long, breathed a new air of freedom. To read all that was published ‘you would have to rise at seven in the
morning, when the blind pour into the streets, and not finish until eleven at night’, wrote a correspondent in the Diario de Málaga . 9 In the majority of cases the writers used the freedom to relieve themselves of their pent-up
feelings but expressed not much original thought.