

 Shortly thereafter a lad armed with a shotgun, and a fictitious order from the junta’s president, came to arrest them. Aware that it was a trick, they fobbed him off and informed the junta. The latter now ordered them to report
to Puerto Real where they were put aboard a Spanish man of war anchored in the port and held for forty-six days. Meinadier provided food and drink for them and their guards to prevent the latter again mistreating the workmen as
they had on the first day ‘because of the general ferment that reigned in Andalucía at the time’.

 It was harvest time. Meinadier was one landowner who did not benefit from the Sevilla junta’s prohibition on labourers raising their wages. To get the harvest in he had to pay large increases. And once the wheat was on the
threshing floor, most of it was stolen. His foremen and overseers, ‘hallucinated by revolutionary fanaticism, fear or wilfulness’, did not dare to oppose the thieves, who were ‘encouraged by the local magistrate, and others of
his faction who wanted to benefit from the fruits of his (Meinadier’s) labours’.

 The same fate met his olive crop. Only now the people came armed and with beasts of burden to carry the olives away, and threatened anyone who attempted to stop them. Finally, the 350 fanegas (about 550 acres) he had sown to
wheat were invaded by villagers with their livestock ‘to graze on as though it were waste land’.

 Subsequently, Meinadier’s estate was expropriated and he and his fourteen-year-old Spanish-born son were condemned to the hulks as ‘suspicious and harmful’ French subjects. Although his Spanish wife secured orders for his
release from the Junta Suprema representative in Cádiz, the judge refused to release him, and she had to take his case to Sevilla. There, despite the judge’s continued resistance, the Junta gave him an honourable discharge and
fined the judge 300 ducats (3,300 reales). On his return to his estate after six months in the hulks, Meinadier found that all his valuables, farm animals and equipment had been stolen; he had lost some 750,000 reales, he
calculated. To pay his debts he was forced to sell part of his land. But what finally drove him to leave the estate and Puerto Real were the threatening masses of people who gathered outside his house; on the last occasion four
thousand assembled townspeople and villagers remained from two in the afternoon to eight at night. 26

 *

 Meinadier was obviously hated by the locals. Why? Because of his French origins, or because he was a large landowner? There is no conclusive evidence; but it could be supposed that it was a combination of both. Here was a
latifundista who, unlike the pure Spanish estate owner, was vulnerable to attack. Backed by the local magistrate, whatever his motives, the surrounding villagers could take out on him both their xenophobia and their hatred of the
large estate owners who deprived them of land, reducing the majority of them to the status of landless day labourers. Perhaps even his model farm was the cause of envy and resentment. Certainly, bringing in French landworkers to
instruct his locally employed labour in the latest agrarian methods would have been experienced as an insult. For a villager, maintaining the old ways was a point of pride. New-fangled ‘foreign’ methods, wherever they originated,
were initially resisted. In any event, the field hands and others took out on him a hatred that prejudiced even their own interest, sending in their livestock to feed on his wheat fields when they could better have waited to
harvest the crop and kept themselves comfortably in bread.