

 The fatherland and patriots were no new concepts either. The second half of the eighteenth century saw a proliferation of the educated elite’s ‘patriotic societies’ whose leitmotif was ‘love of the fatherland’. * The War of the
Convention, during which the reactionary elements of the Church had redefined, in a counter-revolutionary sense, the patria in opposition to the French Revolution’s ‘La Patrie’; and more profoundly the anti-Napoleonic struggle,
extended the meaning of patria and patriotic in several new directions. In the first instance, love of the fatherland descended from the educated elite’s heights to the patria’s plebeian defenders; and as the conflict spread to
all the regions of Spain, so the patria extended in popular credence from local or regional allegiance to the whole of the country. Finally, the new patriots were expected to experience so burning a personal devotion to the
fatherland that they would willingly sacrifice their lives in its defence. (Whether this latter asumption on the part of the patriot rulers coincided with the plebeians’ real sentiments will be explored in later chapters.)

 It was the patria, rather than the abstract notion of the nation, which Antoni Capmany, a curious blend of conservative and reformist, traditionalist and man of the Enlightenment, proposed as the unifying national principle of
the Spanish peoples’ anti-Napoleonic resistance. This was not, of course, ‘La Patrie’ of the French Revolution, but neither was it the diametrically opposed ‘patria’ of Spanish absolutist churchmen during the Convention War. His
was a ‘patria’ full of affective appeal. Returning to the Old Regime concept of the monarchy as a family, the ‘patria’ became the motherland and ‘the mother’ its guiding symbol. * Patriots of all strata of society owed it to her
to love and shed their blood in defence of the mother who had borne them. 19

 Capmany praised the villagers for not having been corrupted like the upper orders by French thought and fashions, for having remained true to

 your forefathers in character, dress and language, and the love of the land which saw your birth and which will witness your death. Now you have shown this in your bravery and disdain for your lives by throwing out the [French]
robbers who threatened your possessions, honour and families. 20

 The concept of motherland could then in the first instance appeal to the villagers’ basic sense of loyalty to their own community and traditions which, though far from extending to Capmany’s global vision of the patria, could
certainly encourage the villagers’ continuing patriotism.

 The idea of a motherland, never clearly defined as a concept, was a portmanteau into which progressives and absolutists alike could put some of their treasured beliefs in order to remain united in the struggle. More clearly than
most, Capmany saw that the Spanish had still ‘to save their skins’, as he put it, warning constantly of the French military threat that awaited them in Napoleon’s certain counter-offensive to reverse his early defeats. The need
for unity of all strata of patriot society was essential to this endeavour. His strongly held anti-Napoleonic sentiments, so widely shared, were insufficient; but he indicated the way: conservative ideas mixed with promises of
reforms held together – momentarily at least – by an emotional, and sometimes irrational, appeal to love of the patria as the mother of patriotism, the mother of all Spain’s patriot peoples.