

 Although on the face of it seemingly of little importance, one of the most drastic of the new regulations was to abolish all township and village juntas excepting those in district administrative centres. At their best, these
juntas had allowed new men to take over municipal affairs in place of señorial placemen or councillors with hereditary title to the post. These junta members were often the newly wealthy – large farmers, renters, tax-farmers and
the like who had their own agenda: a hostility (in those areas still dominated by señorial dues) to a feudal system which affected them adversely, to tithes which rich and poor alike – though unequally in their effect – had to
pay and to all constraints on a free market in land. Although occasionally they might make common cause for their own purposes with their locality’s smallholders and tenants, they were prepared to see the latter go to the wall.
But on the juntas they represented a rupture with the local social status quo, as was plainly indicated by the fact that they were often at loggerheads with the still existing town councils. Moreover, they were likely to be more
dynamic in aid of the war effort than the routinized councillors. To see these small-town juntas disappear was a loss of support that the provincial juntas’ reformist and progressive elements could ill afford. In fact, many of
the small local juntas refused to disband. * The Sevilla provincial junta supported them. ‘Their members are individuals who generally are the most outstanding residents of their localities, and that not simply by status of birth
and [royal] awards’, it declared. 33

 To retain its singular sovereignty in the name of the king, the whole Junta had to discuss and approve suggestions from its committee members. This made decision-taking a cumbersome and slow affair. ‘I lament to say that matters
are going on very slowly, and the measures of the Junta are far from keeping pace with the energy and enthusiasm of the people’, Charles Stuart, the British diplomatic representative, informed Canning from Aranjuez a month after
the Junta’s creation. 34

 As a self-declared sovereign power, the Junta had overlooked one essential: the sovereign power of money. Its founding provincial juntas had not provided it with any immediate funds to finance its own existence, let alone the
war effort. The sixty-five million reales (£1,100,000) of British aid which had gone at the start of the war principally to Galicia, Asturias and Sevilla were now sorely missed by the Junta. It dispatched requests for the
respective provincial juntas to remit the British monies remaining because, as it wrote, its situation was ‘of the greatest need and distress imaginable’. 35

 In these early days the Junta Suprema was still unsure that its sovereignty would be respected by its provincial constituents whose role it had just downgraded. It proposed to raise a loan at four percent, which it hoped would
produce sixty million reales, and which would be guaranteed by future tax receipts and silver and specie received from the colonies. One-third of this money, it supposed, would come from Madrid, and the remainder from the
regional juntas. 36