

 Lorenzo Calbo Rozas, the only known commoner on the Junta, was dispatched to Madrid in the early days of November to raise the capital’s contribution. Five million reales of the hoped for twenty millions were urgently needed to
finance the newly-denominated Army of the Centre. As a former Madrid merchant, Calbo Rozas had no difficulty in securing promises of twelve million reales from his professional colleagues. But they would provide the money only on
condition that the grandees and wealthy put up their proportionate share.

 It is shameful that men with an income of three hundred thousand reales a year have the nerve to offer three hundred, when a merchant whose capital is well below this sum willingly offers twenty thousand, and a poor servant who
can barely save one hundred reales a year generously gives the price of two or three shirts. The titled nobility and the wealthy should raise thirty millions in Madrid alone, and while the war lasts, contribute two-thirds of
their income … If they and other wealthy persons are short of cash, they should hand over to the mint their unused silver plate. 37

 Calbo Rozas, however, was highly enterprising. In one day, he increased the Madrid contribution from little over one and three-quarter millions to six. Again he fulminated at these ‘highest persons of estate, in class, income
and salaries, who proportionately offer the least’, while ‘those who – at the cost of the sweat of their brow – and barely have enough to live on decently freely donate the savings it has cost them many years to earn’. 38
Meanwhile, the Junta’s merchant deputy did not ignore the Church’s wealth. He sent a message to the Carmelite prior in Madrid to ascertain the sum of money deposited in a religious foundation in the latter’s charge. ‘According to
my information, the foundation has eight million reales which would come in most handsomely at the moment. It could be a refundable loan.’ He was cautious enough, however, to ask the Junta’s opinion on the matter. Receiving no
immediate reply, he added:

 The Prior, murmuring over the very mild but quite clear message I sent him, will be taking some powders at this moment. But if those musty funds vanish into thin air, it will do us no good. 39

 Calbo Rozas did not report on the outcome of this particular attempt to secure funds. But the six millions he had collected, and the Galician junta’s opportune discovery of three millions more from its British aid, pulled the
Junta out of its immediate financial abyss and provided the means for the main Andalucian and Extremaduran armies to advance north to meet the threatened French offensive. At the same time, Calbo Rozas also ensured the removal to
safety of the gold stored in the Madrid mint; and, as a good merchant, was presently securing the most favourable price for a large consignment of salt pork for the army. 40

 Notwithstanding his success, even this entrepreneurial deputy had succeeded in securing less than one-third of the Junta’s hoped for twenty millions from Madrid. Quite evidently, the Junta was not out of the financial woods. As
a body, the Junta Suprema did not compare with Calbo Rozas’ exemplary enterprise. Its ‘mindset’, to use an anachronistic expression, was that of the Old Regime: rapid decisiveness was not of the essence. More concerned with
insuring themselves against the ‘despotic’ control by the few, its deputies preferred to delay fundamental decisions, such as appointing a commander-in-chief, which could lead to any such threat. Much concerned by the delays,
Stuart again commented to Canning that he was ‘disgusted’ by the ‘slowness of this unwieldly machine which is common to every person who has business to transact, whatever be the branch of service’.