

 If the colonies do not depend directly on any [metropolitan] central authority, each will establish its own independent government, as has happened in Spain. Their distance, situation, wealth and the natural inclination towards
independence will lead them to it if the ties which unite them to the fatherland are broken. Our enemies will then achieve, thanks to our carelessness, what they have not been able to engineer despite their most powerful efforts.
23

 Coming hard on the patriots’ stunning victory, the Valencia proposal was generally accepted, especially by the powerful Sevilla junta. Very shortly thereafter, the Consejo de Castilla, in an attempt to make good its seriously
impared patriotic credentials, threw a spoke in the juntas’ wheel by proposing that it should take a leading role in a Junta Suprema’s formation and composition. The uproar from the regional juntas, Sevilla especially, was so
thunderous that the Consejo backed down.

 During the three-month interregnum in major combats after the French evacuated Madrid at the beginning of August, and Napoleon unhurriedly assembled the Grande Armée on the French border to deal a decisive blow to the Spanish
‘insurgents’, the pamphleteers had a field day with their ideas and proposals on the sort of government needed. The majority seemed to have little idea of what was awaiting them. Many, those of absolutist persuasion in
particular, proposed a regency. The reformists’ rejection of this was straightforward:

 The stairs to the throne, which formerly no one dared tread without some more or less legitimate right of succession, are now commonly trodden by men who climb them without any such right. Their example, joined to human
ambition, will excite even more the passion to dominate. 24

 On one point there was widespread agreement among the pamphleteers: whether a regency or some other form of government be created, it should be formed of a small body of men able to act decisively and rapidly. Its task would be
to appoint a supreme military commander to coordinate the provincial armies in benefit of patriot military operations. Once this and other war-related matters were dealt with, the new government should settle down to resolving
the country’s much needed reforms. The judiciary, treasury, military, navy and diplomatic corps were still packed with Godoy’s placemen who must be dismissed. Within a few months, wrote a reformist, ‘the Nation will find itself
renewed … After this peaceful and consoling revolution, the task of planning the new order of things can begin with the creation of a new constitution.’ 25

 The pamphleteers, especially the newly liberated Madrid educated classes, apparently considered that there was all the time in the world to reform Spain peacefully. They were living a time of illusion, granted by Napoleon’s
careful preparations to crush them.

 THE JUNTA SUPREMA SEIZES POWER

 The Junta Suprema was finally founded with due pomp and circumstance in the palace of Aranjuez on September 25, 1808, little more than three months after the original idea had been mooted. After a solemn mass in the royal
chapel, the deputies were sworn in. The provincial juntas had previously reached agreement that each should send two deputies to the founding meeting. In the preceding two days, preliminary discussions among the score of deputies
who had already reached Aranjuez had led to some significant decisions, of which there remained very few documentary traces. Even deputies who arrived after the event found no account of them. 26