

 There was nothing the Recoder family could do to salvage their former home. Without food, they set off across country to escape further danger. For four days they walked northwards into the interior, crossing mountains and
valleys until, ‘worn out and discomposed’, they reached the small village of Castellterçol, some fifty kilometres from Molins del Rey. By this stage, Recoder was

 so given over to dire sentiments and in a state of such despondency as is difficult to conceive. In this crisis, this moment of such significant things, I resolved to take up arms again to defend Religion, my King and Country. I
made my way to Granollers where the local junta gave me the lieutenantship of the third company of miquelets …

 After taking part in a successful attack on the castle of Mongat, on the coast just north of Barcelona, Recoder was charged by his commanders with overseeing all the captured French supplies and conducting the garrison prisoners
of war to an English frigate stationed offshore. The captain invited him to dine and showed him ‘every benevolent consideration’.

 His family, wandering from place to place, was without any means of subsistence, and he no longer had his monthly Administrator’s salary to provide for them. Two months almost to the day after he had watched his belongings burn,
he petitioned the Catalan junta for a position in the patriot postal service ‘or any other compatible with his status’ in order, as ‘an act of mercy’, to be able to support his family.

 The petition, in which he related his and his family’s recent experiences, ended with an invocation of the Catalan junta as ‘this loving and compassionate Mother’, who demonstrated her desire to do justice, and also as ‘the
Father of mercy’ under whose ‘beneficent cloak’ a destitute supplicant trusted to receive a post as ‘a gift from heaven’.

 Did these blandishments secure Recoder his desire? The documents, as is so often the case, leave us uninformed. But Recoder’s prior words, despite their invocation of the tripartite slogan, leave little doubt as to why he again
came to take up arms. ‘Religion’ and ‘King’ – they are not again mentioned – fade before the patria’s importance: the local homeland, moreover – the patria chica – and the loss of his home and possessions at the hands of
marauding imperial troops.

 PREPARING FOR A NEW GOVERNMENT

 The great number of pamphlets and tracts opining on the appropriate government for patriot Spain had one thing in common: none doubted the need of a nationally representative body to lead the country through its greatest trial
of recent times. The evidence of this need had become greater with the Bailén victory and the French retreat north: provincial juntas, devoted to their regions’ defence, could not organize the supreme offensive necessary to throw
the enemy back over the Pyrenees.

 Already a month before Bailén the necessity had become obvious to some regional juntas. Again with surprising unanimity, three juntas – Asturias, Galicia and Murcia – proposed within ten days of each other in mid-June some form
of central government or gathering of the Cortes. On July 16 – the day after Bailén, but in ignorance of the event – the Valencia junta weighed in with its proposal for a Junta Suprema. It urged speed in forming a central
governing body. The war effort required it. So, too, did relations with the colonies.