

 The problem was to get the people to stop firing on the enemy. This was not easy, as Domingo Traveso, a Galician in the Seminario de Nobles, reported:

 In the morning of December 3, an officer of the Segovia Grenadiers appeared and ordered everyone in the Seminario to stop firing. He said this was necessary because our armies were approaching from the rear to cut off the enemy
and we could be mistaken and shoot at them. But the people took no notice and did not stop firing until two o’clock in the afternoon of the same day. 10

 When it became public knowledge that the junta was about to surrender many, like Traveso – a batchelor from Cedofeita, Galicia, who had been staying with his uncle, an employee in the general accomptancy of the state – fled the
capital on foot; on reaching Mondoñedo on December 26, Traveso suffered the fate of many eyewitnesses of Madrid’s fall: he was detained in the militia barracks on possible charges of aiding and abetting the enemy by spreading
false rumours. He was fortunate that two young Galician bakehouse porters from Vivero arrived shortly afterwards on foot from Madrid. They not only confirmed that Madrid had fallen but added that they had fled on hearing it said
– or reading it in a French edict, one of them claimed – that all youth were to be rounded up and forced to join the imperial army. 11

 On the morning of December 4, Madrid’s gates were opened, and the French marched in. Remembering Murat’s ferocious repression after the May 2 rising, the inhabitants had handed in their arms; they watched the troops in sullen
silence. Napoleon kept the garrison to a minimum and its soldiers on a short leash. Even so there were ‘excesses’ and Napoleon reprimanded his army publicly: any imperial soldier caught mistreating an inhabitant, pillaging or
impeding the re-establishment of order would be condemned to death by a military tribunal, he announced. 12 As a further step to avoid provocation, the Emperor only entered the city once – and then early in the morning and
without fanfare – to visit the royal palace, otherwise remaining in the duque del Infantado’s country house at Chamartín.

 Those who had tried to leave Madrid before and during the French offensive had run the more likely risk of death at the hands of the capital’s inhabitants or the villagers arriving to help in the capital’s defence than from the
French. José Pizarro was one of those who turned back on his attempted first flight, convinced that his life was in greater danger outside than within the capital.

 Even the mass exodus on the capital’s fall was not without serious risk. Marauding soldiers and parties of villagers still making for the capital to defend it were a threat to those who had a privileged look to them and were
evidently fleeing. Even grandees were obliged to leave the capital on foot. And the very few privileged who fled in comfort had to contend with the people’s ire. Their carriages were fired on, recalled the wife of a highly placed
public servant. 13 For those on foot, the lack of food was one of the worst hazards.