

 Although it is unbelievable, there are officers so cowardly that some pretend they are here on commission, while others go into hiding. On December 24, General Galluzo called for reinforcements – if no more than armed villagers;
the officers listened to the appeal without the least feeling. Some vanished. Others publicly ignored the most ignominious reprimands, turned their back on the enemy and made for Badajoz. None returned to the army. I shall use
the same procedures against them as against the troops. 28

 Unruly behaviour had, ‘like a contagion’, finally infected all classes and estates of the population, the commissioner wrote. A friar preacher of the order of the Descalzos de San Pedro de Alcántara, Gregorio de Villamiel, had
been heard publicly declaiming in front of a gathering of inhabitants that the treachery of a number of generals was the principal cause of the patriots’ disasters. The Extremaduran army had been well provisioned but its soldiers
had died of hunger. But worst of all, the friar committed a sacrilege that offended every patriotic sentiment. He wrote to the Junta Suprema to suggest that if Spanish generals were inadequate, English generals should be
appointed to lead Spanish troops. 29 No patriot could countenance the idea that foreign generals were better than their own, even when the latter proved themselves inadequate for the task. The patriot leaders continued recklessly
to count on finding capable commanders, inevitably of noble origin, from the army’s top echelons.

 Shortly before, the Junta Suprema had itself found it necessary to draft an exhortation to the bishops of the realm to help combat the enemy’s ‘vile and suggestive’ means of ‘disorganizing our armies and filling with fear and
terror our soldiers … who, at the beginning of our revolution, fought like heroes’. The ‘brave and honourable’ Spanish people had never failed to follow the clergy’s leadership, it asserted.

 In no time has this been as important as now … With its exhortations and prayers, the priesthood must help to ensure that the government’s orders are not in vain. The Junta Suprema trusts therefore that Your Holiness will
contribute to this sacred aim, charging all your priests and other subjects to portray with intensity and energy from the pulpit and in private conversations our present situation, the fate that awaits us if we are defeated, the
obligation that religion imposes upon us to fight for it, our king and country. 30

 Amidst its armies’ disintegration and the soldiers’ wild cries of ‘betrayal’, the Junta’s need to call on religious aid was expressive of its own uncertain authority in defeat. Nonetheless, its feeling that it could not take
this aid for granted was striking: was not the Church the backbone of patriotic Spain and one of the principle causes that the people were defending? Not necessarily: the Junta was well aware that some enlightened bishops in the
French occupied zone had declared for the Bonapartist cause. *

