

 As the defence junta’s reply did no more than stall for time, Napoleon ordered his troops to attack. As the first shells fell on José Pizarro’s home his servants fled and the house was converted into a munitions depot. Pizarro
himself received an order from the man commanding the Fuencarral gate to fetch munitions for the patriots who were fighting in open country beyond the gate.

 I did as I was told. The people’s docility and zeal was incredible in those glorious days: someone had only to call out and from all the balconies people threw down their iron and copper utensils to make grapeshot, woollen or
cotton articles for cannon wads. The balconies were covered with mattresses ready for street attacks; the entrances to the streets themselves were blockaded with tables, rich chests of drawers, and furniture of all sorts. There
was no mistrust, all the houses were left open … Oh my countrymen, you were always worthy of better government! 6

 Instead of pressing the attack, at 11 a.m. Napoleon sent another surrender summons, offering the city a pardon, security for its peaceful inhabitants, respect for churches and clergy and ‘oblivion of the past’. 7

 To the military on the defence junta it was obvious that the city could be heavily bombarded from the Retiro height which Napoleon’s forces had taken; to the civilians that, if resistance continued, their homes and property
would be sacked. A majority decided to send two negotiators, General Morla and Bernardo Iriarte, a member of the Council of the Indies, to treat with the Emperor. After two hours of negotiations with Marshal Berthier, Napoleon’s
chief of staff, the two Spaniards were taken before the Emperor who was waiting in the next tent. As Iriarte later recalled, Morla, almost prostrating himself at Napoleon’s feet, appealed for mercy, humbly repeating, ‘Aiyes pitié
du peuple de Madrid’ (Have pity on the people of Madrid).

 The Emperor turned his back on him and repeated, ten or a dozen times, ‘FF’ [‘Fuck’] … Embarrassed by this scene, I intervened and addressed the Emperor in a tone quite distinct from that of Morla’s humble and lamentable voice.
‘Sire, I am the brother of him who had the pleasure to sign the Peace of Bêle (which ended the War of the Convention) and to renew the links between our two nations which should never be separated one from the other. What
happiness would be mine if I could obtain from a Hero such as Your Majesty the kind treatment of this people as befits your character.’ 8

 Without moving, the Emperor continued the discussion with Iriarte. He threatened that if Madrid did not sign the capitulation articles by six the following morning, December 4, all those caught with arms would be executed. With
these terms before it the junta spoke no more of resistance; but the news of the coming capitulation was kept secret for fear of the inhabitants’ reaction. As Pizarro recorded: 9

 Everything was done behind the people’s back, gulling them deceitfully; the people were still full of spirit and fight … I saw troops and their officers mysteriously retreating from their posts, the junta inexplicably and
uncertainly leaving, and finally everything breaking up … Determined not to remain in the conqueror’s power, I decided to leave the capital and follow the fatherland’s noble but desperate resistance. *