

 But only two days after Jovellanos’ visit, on November 28, the Junta issued the first of its many ‘popular war’ declarations, calling on all Spaniards to ‘turn themselves into soldiers, to make every house an impregnable
fortress’. Even numerous armies were insufficient to defeat a battle-hardened enemy.

 It is necessary to resist the enemy at every step, so that each small advance costs him a victory, diminishes his forces, his soldiers’ spirit and hopes. The inhabitants not only of provincial capitals but of all important
townships and large villages must resist, using whatever means are at hand, even sticks and stones if there are no other arms, because everything serves when it comes to defending one’s own home … This defensive war … will give
the enemy an idea of what patriotism means when the people are determined to conquer or die. 3

 Yet, in truth, very little was done to prepare Madrid’s defences until Napoleon, having swept aside the patriot defence at the Somosierra pass, was closing on the capital’s gates. Then its inhabitants began feverishly to attempt
to fortify the city, as witnessed by one high official, José García de León y Pizarro. The capital was a ‘grandiose sight’.

 Men and women working with their hands to lift the paving stones from the streets, to dig, fill sandbags, carry stones, to help with the defence work. In the [defence] junta, I found nothing but disorder, suspicion, and …
dissimulated terror. So I, and many other honourable men and even women, went to work like day labourers on the defence of the Puerta de Fuencarral, and on a battery at the top of the calle de Alcalá. 4

 Though the popular spirit was willing to emulate Zaragoza’s defence, Madrid was not the Aragonese capital: in the latter it was the old part of the city, with its winding, narrow streets, that had helped to hold off the
besiegers. Madrid’s northeastern sector which was under threat of assault had a number of avenues leading into the city’s heart. Napoleon came at the head of a far greater veteran army than the heterogeneous Zaragoza besiegers
had assembled. The decisive difference resided in neither of these factors, however, but in the pusillanimity of those in authority in Madrid.

 The Junta Suprema had placed the city’s defence in the hands of the marqués de Castelar, captain general of Castilla la Nueva, and General Tomás Morla, a member of the Junta’s military committee. But by the eve of Napoleon’s
attack, the popular effervescence had risen to such a pitch that the authorities, alongside Castelar and Morla, created a defence junta to organize and keep it under control. The junta included officials of Madrid institutions
and four Consejo members. 5

 On December 2, Napoleon reached the capital’s gates. Before launching his assault, he summoned the city to surrender, and received a defiant response: the inhabitants would die buried in the ruins of their houses rather than
permit French troops to enter the city. The Emperor would have to assault the capital. But again before ordering the attack, he demanded the capital’s surrender. The Emperor had no wish to reduce Madrid by force and so to create
patriotic heroes of its defenders; he wanted a quiescent and undamaged capital which would peacefully swear allegiance to its Bonaparte king, his brother, and show up the patriots as a doomed, fanatic, priest-ridden horde
manipulated by the English for their own anti-French ends.