

 Despite its best efforts, the Junta’s attempts to organize the war could do little more than to take discrete measures. The task of organizing the military effort on the large scale required would have meant setting the country
on an all-out war footing: requisitioning the wealthy’s grain stocks – instead of ‘asking’ for them; forcing the rich, including the Church, to contribute to its loan; taking over tithes and ecclesiastical benefices; in short,
commandeering all the wealthy’s resources to fund the war and supply its armies. This would have meant the beginnings of a social revolution. Apart from the fact that its social composition countered any such radicalization, the
Junta was still highly dependent on the provincial juntas’ collaboration; and the demands on the wealthy might well have threatened their continuing participation in the broad patriotic alliance that ran from noble landowners to
villagers and urban proletariat. Thus it remained that the poor were called to the colours to sacrifice their lives and the rich were called on to donate some part of their wealth in a cause which, as all came to recognize,
served first and foremost to defend their property.

===== FILE: OEBPS/20_Chapter09.xhtml =====
Napoleon’s Cursed War

 9

 Napoleon’s 1808 Offensive

 PATRIOT DEFEATS

 Early in November, Napoleon crossed into Spain to take personal command of the Grande Armée of 250,000 men and most of his veteran field commanders whom he had assembled along the Ebro. The Emperor came with his strategy
planned: an Austerlitz on a massive scale – to smash through the enemy’s centre and to sweep up his flanks from the rear. The patriot armies were to be annihilated and all further resistence crushed – the supreme revenge for the
Bailén humiliation.

 Although his lightning campaign did not go exactly to plan, Napoleon’s victory was total. He shattered the patriot armies or sent them reeling in retreat, great numbers of the raw troops deserting in panic. On November 24, the
day after the Army of the Centre and the Aragonese armies were defeated at Tudela, and with Napoleon already at Aranda del Duero, the Junta Suprema ordered the fortification of Madrid. The capital must not again be allowed ‘to
submit in cowardice to the tyrant’s insulting yoke’. Recalling the heroic example of the May 2 rising, it called on the population to turn the capital into the ‘tomb of the enemy army’, and ordered supplies and provisions to be
hurried to the city. 1 Letters from King Josef’s ministers appealing to Floridablanca, the Suprema’s president, and other notables to avoid the country further disasters and to end their resistance were ordered by the Junta to be
burned by the public hangman. 2

 On November 26, Jovellanos, now an Asturian deputy on the Suprema, on commission in Madrid to prepare the Council of the Indies for its escape, reported that the capital’s inhabitants were ‘living without a care in the world’.
They expected the enemy to be held off in the Guadarrama mountain passes to the city’s north.