

 Under constant rain throughout Christmas night, Galluzo continued his retreat southwards; on the following day the Extremadura army virtually ceased to exist. Infantry and cavalry alike ‘dispersed’. * With their commander’s
example before them, it was hardly surprising. † The earlier scenes of routed and mutinous troops grew even worse. A farmer reflected on the desolation:

 I shall not leave the house because the great number of deserters make it dangerous to be outside. Today I did not send the mules out to plough lest they be stolen … Nothing is safe from the deserters, neither donkeys, livestock
nor anything they can lay their hands on; they try to sell here what they have stolen elsewhere. God help us, as he may, because we have seen the evilness of those who give orders and those who obey them. (Tio Pepe, December 10,
1808) 24

 Later, the Semanario Patriótico gave a graphic description of the disbanded troops’ exactions of their own countrymen.

 Throwing down their muskets in the fields, the dispersed left a trail of horror and abominable excesses in the villages through which they passed. They covered the shame of their precipitous flight by crying out that their
officers had betrayed them, that they had fled the colours because they doubted their patriotism and loyalty … As they approached villages they shouted that the French were coming; frightened, the inhabitants fled their homes,
and the troops then sacked them … there was even an individual who was seen with a church chalice which he was trying to sell. Those who passed through the village of Mengabril pillaged all the clothes and lengths of cloth, and
stole the monstrance’s precious jewel which was kept in the parish priest’s house … How sad an outcome of indiscipline and the state’s general disruption! 25

 It seemed inexplicable that the fleeing troops should subject their own country-folk to so severe a sacking. It was as though their fellow-commoners were the enemy on whom they were entitled to take their revenge for resisting
defensively in the rearguard while they had suffered the vicissitudes of battle, hardship and severe defeat at the front; as though the patriotic fervour with which they had begun the war had turned sour on them.

 The junta commissioners had to redouble their earlier efforts. Antonio Fernández del Castillo, a Badajoz junta member, had been assigned to Cáceres. On December 27 and 28 only thirty-four inhabitants, including himself, remained
in one of the most populous Extremaduran towns.

 I have never seen a sadder sight … Like a devastating and irresistible storm … [the town] was innundated by the pestilence [of the dispersed]. They had spread such terror among the inhabitants and those of nearby villages, that
the hills and woods around were full of terrified people while their houses stood empty. The faces of the few who had not fled were marked by fear. 26

 Had regimental officers stood firm, the work of the special commissioners would have been made easier. During its brief stay in Trujillo, the Junta had issued orders that all deserters were to be arrested and, without more
formalities than an ‘assessor’s’ findings, to be sentenced to death ‘without the slightest delay’. 27 But who was to arrest them? As Fernández del Castillo, reported: