

 Determined to put the greatest distance between himself and Madrid, Pizarro set out again on foot and reached Navalcarnero with some companions he had encountered en route. There was no food to be had. Recalling an attractive
young woman whom he had known years before in an amateur theatrical production, and whose father was a shoemaker in the now almost deserted township, he made enquiries of the only young man he could find. The directions he
received were correct. He rang on the doorbell. Recognizing Pizarro, an aged, poor old man opened the door and embraced him, crying: ‘my dear sir, what a state you are in!’ Locking the door behind him, he began to cook a chicken
with rice, a dozen eggs, and put bread and wine on the table. Once Pizarro and his companions had satisfied their stomachs, the old man told them of a fellow shoemaker who lived in the Toledo hills who would help them the
following day. By leaving the main road, Pizarro and his fugitive companions might escape the worst of the marauding bands; and the shoemaker sent his son to show them the right track.

 I can do no more than praise this shoemaker’s truly noble conduct and generous hospitality … The natural moral character of this poor sort of person should put in the shade those arrogant enlightened individuals, whose knowledge
is most of the time directed at no more than a contemptible, small-minded egoism. 14

 Coming from an enlightened top level civil bureaucrat – especially one as drily observant of his fellowmen as Pizarro – this was a fine testimony to the virtues of the Spanish artisan.

 NAPOLEON’S ‘REGENERATION’ OF SPAIN

 In under four weeks, Napoleon had achieved his military objectives. With the patriot armies’ rout and the capital’s surrender, Spanish resistance had, he believed, met its end.

 Amidst scenes of mutinous soldiery fleeing for their lives, the Junta Suprema’s hasty retreat, and the capital’s quiescent populace, Napoleon’s judgement appeared justified. In a war between states, one resounding victory, the
capital’s capitulation, ended the conflict. But Madrid was not Vienna or Berlin; the Spanish war was not between states – there was nothing yet that could reasonably be called a patriot ‘state’ – but between a national uprising
and the Napoleonic order. The war had started in the regions; in part deliberately, the provincial risings had set out to fragment a Madrid-based ‘despotic’ state. While the capital’s fall deeply affected the provincial patriot
inhabitants who blamed it on the Junta Suprema’s ineffectual leadership, Madrid was not the resistance’s centre, and its surrender did not signify the end of the patriot cause. Resistance returned to where it had begun, in the
regions.

 The Emperor’s view was thus ill-judged. The war was not at an end, but rather about to begin: the real, gritty, grinding and seemingly endless war. Until then Napoleon had fought and defeated, in a decisive battle or two, the
potentates of Europe, not their peoples – the objects, perhaps, but not the subjects of imperial destiny. He depreciated the lower classes. Despite his military genius, which had revolutionized warfare, he could find no strategy
to deal adequately with popular war. And though the imperial armies in Spain were still to win many resounding victories in the field, the end of the tunnel, the ultimate victory which concluded the war, never came. As resistance
was crushed in one region, it began again in another …