

 Moore had a high regard for the Spanish people. As he had demonstrated during an earlier command in Sicily, he was hostile to absolutism and to governments that brought no benefit to the people. But in Salamanca he was surprised
to find a lack of enthusiasm for the anti-Napoleonic war which he had been led to believe fired the hearts of all true Spaniards.

 Nor was he alone. A local wrote to Floridablanca, the Suprema’s president, on December 6, 1808, to complain that ‘everything here has gone cold’.

 All the young men are in their houses and the horses with their owners. If some were in the army they have been sent home. The people are frightened, and say to each other, ‘what is going on? … Treachery! Treachery! …’ Seeing
our leaders’ inactivity and weakness, our allies, the English, are most dispirited. I’ve heard them say that the people are well-disposed, the Spanish soldier is strong and spirited, but the leaders are impaired, and the generals
a bunch of ignoramuses. 53

 Moore had to wait three weeks in Salamanca before his artillery, which he had sent on a circuitous route from Portugal because of the poor state of the roads, caught up with him. Meanwhile reinforcements sent from Britain under
General Baird had disembarked at La Coruña. Despite the Galician junta’s initial reluctance to allow foreign troops in their land, the locals turned a pretty penny from them. They sold horses to the British at ‘excessive prices’,
the junta reported, while

 in the city’s squares, cafes and public stalls, the troops are being charged scandalous sums for products and food. It is necessary to correct this procedure in respect of allies who have so generously come to sacrifice their
lives in order to consolidate our independence … 54

 The Galician junta ordered its Coruña counterpart to take the necessary measures to prevent this scandal continuing and to punish those who contravened them.

 *

 On December 10, five days after his artillery had reached him, and in the knowledge that Madrid had capitulated, Moore marched from Salamanca to strike a blow at Napoleon’s lines of communication to the north of the capital. ‘We
had no business being here as things are, but, being here, it would never do to abandon the Spaniards without a struggle’, he had written on November 26. 55 * Meanwhile, the Emperor’s armies were poised to continue their advance
southwestwards from Madrid into Portugal, seizing en route Extremadura and possibly Sevilla, before converging on Lisbon. The immediate course of the war would thereby swing dramatically in Napoleon’s favour. But on Monday,
December 19, the day before the Zaragoza siege began, the Emperor finally received various reliable but much delayed reports on the British movements. Immediately ordering Ney to march north against Moore on the following dawn
and diverting his army from the assault on Extremadura and Portugal, he assembled every available soldier into an eighty-thousand strong force to crush the British who totalled less than half that number.