

 Shortly before his own death at the battle of Essling a few months later, Marshal Lannes reflected on the siege, wondering if in truth it had been necessary to put an end to such heroism. ‘To conquer a throne [in Spain] a nation
has first to be destroyed’, he commented, not without a sense of historical irony. 49

 *

 On Napoleon’s express orders that he be considered a rebel, Palafox, who had received the last rites, was transported to the Vincennes fortress in France where, imprisoned, he spent the rest of the war.

 At the end of the siege, six thousand corpses were said to be lying in the streets awaiting burial. A modern study of parish records shows that just under 3,600 parishioners perished, just over eight percent of the inhabitants.
Many more – especially villagers whose deaths were probably not recorded – almost certainly increased the numbers. But the recorded parishioners’ deaths, and the lowest number of births so far in the new century, effectively
wiped out the previous five years of the population’s growth. More surprisingly, within the next five years under French control, the inhabitants recuperated all the siege’s losses. Marriages after the end of the siege rose in
the rest of 1809 to an all-time high for the new century, nearly doubling their 1800–1817 average, and deaths in 1810 fell to a new century low; births in the latter year were ten percent above average. Despite its two sieges,
Zaragoza was one of the few places where at the end of the war the population had grown by nearly two percent since the conflict’s start, and eighteen percent above its 1800 figure. 50 Though the majority undoubtedly continued to
hate their French occupiers, the relative peace the inhabitants enjoyed was, as the growth figures showed, an unexpected boon.

 EPISODES: BRITISH RETREAT 51

 While Zaragoza’s inhabitants were engaged in their bitter struggle to stave off the enemy, ill-starred events were taking place far to the west where a British army, under the most renowned British field commander at the time,
General Sir John Moore, was fleeing for its life in front of Napoleon and one of his best-known marshals, Soult.

 A few days after Moore had taken command of the British forces in Portugal, he had ordered them to advance into Spain. On November 13, he reached Salamanca. Three days earlier Napoleon’s offensive had shattered the centre of the
patriot armies and the imperial army had taken Burgos. The British troops’ arrival impressed Joaquin Zaonero, a Salamanca diarist who, nearly a year earlier, had witnessed Junot’s army’s march through the town on Portugal: the
British infantry, he wrote, seemed ‘insuperable’.

 This is the best army that can be found, as much in its men, as in their discipline, submission, uniforms and arms; they receive a good daily ration of food and pay. Their punishments, though, are cruel. For the least offence
they receive one hundred or one thousand lashes from which many die. And their religion is no more than a chicken’s cackle. They hold their masses of a Sunday … without more ado than a chaplain in an ankle-length cassock and a
drum on the floor … 52