

 The French also had learned from the first siege. They needed from the start to invest Zaragoza from both banks of the Ebro, so as to cut off the roads which previously had allowed reinforcements and supplies to enter through El
Arrabal on the river’s far side. Equally important, they needed an immensely strong siege train which for three undisturbed weeks Marshal Moncey assembled in Alagón, only twenty kilometres to the north of Zaragoza. All the
materiel had to come overland from Pamplona. Palafox’s failure to use his numerous troops to destroy the train before it could be brought to Zaragoza was typical of the Aragonese hero’s grasp of military affairs: throughout the
second siege, he was never willing to risk but the smallest sortie even when the odds of turning the tables on the besiegers’ limited forces were highly favourable. ‘He wavered, was indecisive’, Alcaide Ibieca, eyewitness and
chronicler of both sieges, wrote. His lack of resolution aroused the wrath of the polymath and university professor Ignacio Jordán de Asso, who had edited the Gazeta de Zaragoza during the first siege. Three days before Moncey
began the second siege on December 20, Asso protested to the Junta Suprema that thirty thousand troops were confined in Zaragoza while ‘three to four thousand enemy soldiers’ were allowed to gather supplies, artillery, munitions
and pontoons to cross the Ebro. *

 The army and ranking officers all clamour to sally forth against the enemy. I must inform Your Majesty [the Suprema] most determinedly that unless corrective measures are rapidly taken, Aragón will be lost … I repeat that things
are going very badly. 38

 The troops under Moncey’s command numbered more than Asso’s few thousands, but they were mainly the raw recruits who had invaded Spain earlier in the year and were not in good fighting shape, which made them vulnerable to a
surprise attack; but they were shortly reinforced by Mortier’s veteran army corps bringing the total which initially besieged Zaragoza to forty thousand infantry, 130 cannon of different calibres, and over one thousand engineers
and sappers. 39 But hardly had the siege begun than ten thousand veterans were ordered to leave to keep open the road from Madrid.

 The besiegers rapidly repeated their conquest of Monte Torrero, the only height from which their batteries could bombard the city at will, and began to dig siege trenches in the bitter winter cold. Their sights were again set on
the Santa Engracia gate, but this time they planned – or rather, after studying city plans, Napoleon had given the order – to attack the walls to the east of Santa Engracia – the Quemada gate and the Plaza de San Agustín – from
which the besiegers would more rapidly reach the Coso which it was essential to dominate. At dawn on January 26, with Marshal Lannes now in command, fifty heavy cannon blasted three breaches between Santa Engracia and the Santa
Mónica convent to the east. The following day the full-scale assault began; and though the Santa Mónica breach could not be stormed, after seven hours of fighting the other two were taken and the French were again within the
city. The inhabitants once more rushed to its defence. For the next three weeks the battle raged house to house and street to street south of the Coso.