

 On learning the news of Napoleon’s pursuit – thanks to General Romana’s intelligence – Moore decided to ‘make a run for it’ as he had always supposed he would be obliged to do. The order for a general retreat on the evening of
December 23 disconcerted the Spanish officers attached to Moore’s army. The engineer commandant of El Ferrol, whom the Galician junta had ordered to assist General Baird, wrote that

 it was not very decorous for the undefeated British Army, which had solely been in the rearguard without engaging the enemy, to retreat and leave a defeated Spanish army [the Galician] in the vanguard. The British were turning
their back on the field of honour … 56

 The order to retreat was also highly unpopular among the British troops. Many of them were veterans of the previous year’s British victories over Junot’s forces in Portugal. The idea of running away, without firing a shot, from
the enemy whom they had defeated a year earlier, wrote a Highland Light Infantryman,

 was too galling to their feelings … rage flashed out on the most trifling occasion of disagreement. The poor Spaniards had little to expect from such men as these, who blamed them for their inactivity. ‘Why is not every Spaniard
under arms and fighting? The cause is not ours: are we to be the only sufferers?’ Such was the common language, and from these feelings pillage and outrage naturally arose. 57

 Looting of villagers’ houses for food, and any object that would fuel the troops’ bivouac fires, began almost immediately on the retreat, a precursor of the much worse that was to come. Doors were torn down, the villagers’
sparse furniture burned. Drunkenness, which had been a problem on the advance, increased in retreat. In Benavente, the troops brought up barrels of wine discovered in vaults beneath the main square and shot holes in them,
drinking from the wine running down the gutters. Moore issued a strongly worded order in which he blamed officers for not controlling their men. Protected by a rearguard of cavalry and light infantry which held off the enemy, the
heavy infantry and artillery continued the retreat, in constant rain along roads that turned into a quagmire of thick mud, but without being troubled by the French.

 In Astorga, a walled town in which later Spanish forces held off French besiegers for a month, the British troops and the Spanish liaison officers hoped Moore would make a stand. If not in the town itself, then on the
1,200-metre high Manzanal pass beyond it on the main road to La Coruña. But, unable to find a defensive position that could not be flanked, and running short of provisions, Moore pushed the retreat over the pass.

 Although Soult’s vanguard cavalry and the British rearguard cavalry were involved in constant skirmishing, the French had not caught up with the main British army. In Astorga, Napoleon realized that Moore could only be
retreating on Galicia, not Portugal, and on the pretext that urgent business summoned him to Paris, he dropped out of the pursuit, leaving Soult and Ney to finish off the work. From Valladolid on January 17 he departed from Spain
in great haste, never again to return.