

 It was in this situation that the Villanueva lawyer and member of the local junta, Antonio Josef Cabañero, declared the township’s independence from the provincial junta and the Suprema. He issued a call to all the neighbouring
villages to send delegates to a meeting to agree on a common defence policy. His refusal to accept the provincial junta which, like the majority of its kind, had not thought to include members from its principal townships, led
him to reject its emissary sent to resolve the local dispute unless two of Villanueva’s junta members were given seats on the provincial junta. But his defiance was reported to have gone much further: he had ‘captivated the
people’s simple minds and especially that of the junta’s president’, had taken over all public funds and used ‘armed force to seize all the king’s possessions’, that’s to say, all those to which the Suprema had entitled itself.
31 A strong personality in a situation like this could become an indisputable leader. But what was equally evident was that, in the absence of a strong patriot national government, local autonomy again inevitably came to the
fore. And this autonomy, just as inevitably, denied the inhabitants’ duty blindly to obey the patriot authorities. The strength of wartime resistance depended as much on this local disobedience – or rather, local initiative –
than in obedience to the central authorities. In the last instance, the latter could do very little to protect individual villages or their surrounding rural areas.

 When, in the summer of 1809, the French occupied villages in Villanueva’s neighbourhood and the patriots fled to the hills, the township’s junta president and magistrate, who was earlier said to have been in Cabañero’s thrawl,
swore allegiance to King Josef. This the local junta members in hiding, including Cabañero, would have forgiven him, believing he had acted out of ‘fear or stupidity’; but what they could not forgive was that he had travelled to
Madrid, taking with him a commoner under a noble pseudonym, to swear personal fealty to Josef on behalf of Villanueva’s nobility and commoners. 32 Duplicity, it appeared, was but another form of personal defence.

 *

 The Carrión coup, in the heartland of the Calatrava military–religious order’s domains, momentarily deposed a local magistrate appointed by the provincial junta in place of the previous señorial administration. Members of the
order had come under attack at the beginning of the war from one of the first patriot guerrilla leaders for having failed in 1808 to help villagers fight Dupont’s army as it crossed La Mancha to Andalucía.

 Carrión de Calatrava, not far distant from Ciudad Real, was a village of some two thousand inhabitants, one in five of whom was a day labourer. It was one of the many, centred on Almagro, over which the military–religious order
had held sway since the seven-century-long reconquest of Spain from Islam’s domination. In Carrión, early on the morning of Friday, March 18, 1809, a noble, Antonio Portocarrero, accompanied by his brother, a friar of the order,
and several other persons, affixed a public edict proclaiming that he was asuming the judgeship in order to control ‘the revolutionaries and discontented’ who had ‘disturbed public tranquility’ since the new magistrate’s
appointment. Henceforth, his edict proclaimed, gatherings of three or more people were prohibited under pain of a fine and imprisonment, and ‘revolutionaries and tumultuous people’ would be punished under the full rigour of the
law. Portocarrero’s acolytes assaulted the existing magistrate who quickly resorted to a cavalry colonel for help; after ascertaining from the local priest who was the village’s rightful magistrate, the colonel arrested
Portocarrero. He was found to have a pistol on him, and his dagger was discovered thrown into a corner of his place of confinement. 33