

 Under cover of dark, and the ruse of bivouac fires kept blazing through the night by a few men, the British retreated from the battleground and began to embark on the transports. Shortly thereafter La Coruña surrendered to the
French; it had no forces with which to defend the city.

 How many men did Moore lose on his expeditionary campaign? Figures ranging from just over three thousand to just under six thousand have been advanced, roughly between ten and twenty percent of his force. Of these under one
thousand were lost in the only major battle Moore fought at La Coruña. 67 The retreat had been a high price to pay to save the only British army that then could be fielded against Napoleon on the continent.

 However, the sacrifice had its positive aspect. It kept Napoleon from advancing south to capture Sevilla and Lisbon; gave the Junta Suprema a breathing space to reorganize its defeated armies, and tied up two French army corps –
Soult’s and Ney’s – in the northwestern extremity of Spain. After submitting initially to the capture of their country, Galician villagers rose en masse and led the French to withdraw, never to return: the only instance during
the war when a popular rising precipitated the enemy’s withdrawal from an entire region.

===== FILE: OEBPS/21_Chapter10.xhtml =====
Napoleon’s Cursed War

 10

 The Contagion of Defeat: Popular
Revolts and Local Resistance

 The patriot armies’ defeats and the fall of Madrid infected the rearguard’s lower classes with a desire for revenge which they wreaked principally in assassinations and tumults against their own juntas, two of which they
overthrew. Though confined to only a few places, the assassinations nonetheless took a toll of at least fifteen lives – the majority of them suspected French sympathizers – in those regions which felt most immediately threatened
by the enemy’s advance: Lérida in western Cataluña, Extremadura and La Mancha. 1 These killings usually contained an element of defiance of local juntas or the authorities. On December 16, in Badajoz, for example, the entire
junta turned out to try to prevent the slaying of two French prisoners of war who had just been brought under escort to the city gates:

 No sooner did we arrive on the scene than the shouting and clamour redoubled, and the mob roundly insulted us, calling us no better than sycophants [of the French]. In the midst of this confusion, and defying all respect for
authority, the two prisoners were beaten to death. 2

 Three more people – two Spaniards and a Portuguese, an alleged French spy – were later dragged from imprisonment and assassinated. At the same time, probably aided by the mob, eleven common prisoners escaped from gaol. The Junta
Suprema expressed its revulsion at these assassinations, and ordered the guilty to be expeditiously punished. The Catalan junta had not waited on the Suprema’s orders: in Lérida, seven of the chief culprits were punished within
forty-eight hours, and four more detained within the next four days. 3 But in Badajoz, the investigation was hindered by the refusal of ‘honourable’ witnesses of the events – which took place in broad daylight – ‘to testify
against the principal authors of this horrifying catastrophe, whether out of compassion or fear’. 4 Unruly behaviour had, ‘like a contagion’, infected all classes and estates, as the Badajoz special commissioner in Cáceres had
earlier remarked in another context.