

 The paradoxical aspect was that, on Villel’s initiative, the Suprema had seriously concerned itself about Tap y Nuñez’s release from prison since the Sevilla junta refused to give any valid reason for his incarceration. But on
learning of his participation in the revolt, the Suprema ordered his continued imprisonment and new charges to be brought against him. The riot was brought to an end by religion and armed force: clergy and military deployed in
the streets to pacify or deter the rioters. Though a month later, an army captain reported from Cádiz that the city’s ‘lowest classes’ still remained ready to ‘disturb public tranquility’. 24

 From the available evidence it is impossible to deduce exactly the extent to which the rioters’ hostility arose from resentment at having placed in power a new set of rulers who were little or no better than those of the Old
Regime (being usually of much the same social strata), or whether their protest was principally aimed at their new rulers’ ineffectiveness at organizing the war effort to protect them from the enemy. Most probably both these
reasons were inextricably intertwined.

 DISTURBANCES IN THE COUNTRYSIDE: LA MANCHA

 If the Junta Suprema was to be believed, La Mancha’s villages were rife with ‘assassinations, disobedience of magistrates and serious disturbances against the authorities’. It appointed a Granada High Court judge to travel
through the region to investigate the situation because of the ‘critical and extraordinary circumstances’. 25

 Just over a fortnight before the judge, Francisco León Bendicho, set out on his commission, Toledo had been taken by the French without resistance; this opened the way to the enemy light cavalry which set out on exploratory
patrols southwards towards La Mancha. But the mass of the French army had been diverted to Castilla la Vieja and León in pursuit of the British forces under General Moore and was not about to attack. Nonetheless, fear of the
enemy’s advance reigned in villages and townships deep into La Mancha.

 The judge began with an escort of four hundred light cavalry. Given the chronic shortage of patriot troopers, this was a huge force. Almost immediately his escort was ordered north to reinforce the patriot vanguard. After ‘very
disagreeable’ talks with the cavalry’s major, Bendicho persuaded him of the importance of keeping his escort to ensure ‘public order’ in the rear. The real reason emerged a few days later when a new general ordered the escort to
the west, and the judge accompanied it ‘because my person was not safe without it, due to the influence which the previous scenes of ferocity still retained in the people’s minds’. 26

 While fearing for his personal safety, Bendicho was, for a high court judge, curiously reticent about providing concrete evidence of this ‘ferocity’, or of the ‘considerable number of assassins and the evil-intentioned’ he had
arrested who were ‘fomenting this province’s insurrections’. He reported only one arrest of a man who had seriously wounded a magistrate in the countryside near Almagro. 27 But when it came to a confrontation with the provincial
junta of Ciudad Real over the extent of his remit, he acted with insufferable arrogance – filling endless pages to the junta and Suprema on a trivial matter of precedence and status. 28 Obviously imbued with a sense of his
self-importance as a judge and a Suprema commissioner, his positive patriotic influence on villagers and town inhabitants, in which the Suprema had trusted, could only have been of small value.