

 For long thereafter, Murcian politics remained polarized between ‘old’ and ‘new’ juntas. Obliged to send two ranking officials to restore a minimal unity, the Suprema became the target of popular anger by also reinstating the
‘old guard’ alongside the new. As one friar, Alejandro Valentín Castillo Zapata, recorded:

 The people are very disdainful. They say: on our own authority we overthrew the former junta and we had just and powerful reasons for doing so … What reasonable motive has the Suprema to derogate what only a short time earlier
it approved … [and to press for the arrest of those] who took part in the events – persons who deserve to be applauded rather than punished? 22

 But this, the friar continued, was an ‘everyday occurrence in Spain at the present time …’. Murcia was experiencing what had happened in Valencia, Granada and other ‘notorious places’: their juntas, assuming a ‘feigned patriotic
air and a burning zeal’ to the prejudice of the public cause, had punished many hundreds of ‘good, true and innocent patriots’ to prevent an outcry against their corrupt obstination and conduct. Unless the Suprema took the most
serious measures to remedy these ills, the lower orders would, without any doubt, take over the whole government. ‘They will cure these problems easily ….’ Preaching to the wind: the Suprema was the supreme example of what the
writer complained of.

 CÁDIZ: THE JUNTA DEPOSED

 There were few critical junta members, especially progressives, who did not suffer imprisonment at the hands of their fellows. The above writer’s reference to Valencia concerned the anti-progressive junta coup staged by the
region’s former captain general, La Conquista, on December 29, 1808, when he arrested Vicente Bertrán de Lis and father Rico, leaders of the original anti-Napoleonic rising, along with most of the Bertrán group, on trumped-up
charges of ‘disturbing public order and clashing with the authorities’ during the latter rising. The accused were shipped off to Mallorca, though eventually most were found innocent. 23

 During the Cádiz riots in late February, 1809, the plebeians, to the insistent cries of ‘we want no more juntas like this’, deposed the Cádiz junta, demanding its members hand over their badge of office; forced the criminal
judge out of office; and assassinated the commandant of the excise forces. At the same time they released Tap y Nuñez, one of the leaders of the rising in Sevilla, from the infamous Santa Catalina castle in which he had been
incarcerated by the newly formed Sevilla junta shortly after the rising. *

 Ostensibly a popular revolt against the announced arrival of a patriot ‘Foreign Legion’, made up principally of deserters from the imperial army, it was almost certainly manipulated initially by some members of the honourable
volunteers regiment, who feared that they would be forced, by the Foreign Legion’s replacement, to leave Cádiz to join the regular army. * But the rioters, who were armed by sympathetic soldiers and sailors, went far beyond this
limited aim: they started by demanding the keys to all the official correspondence of the Catalan Suprema deputy and representative in Cádiz, the highly unpopular marqués de Villel, in order to examine his communications with the
Suprema; demanded that the Foreign Legion be banned from the city, a measure immediately agreed to by the authorities, and that the city’s artillery defences be improved; they ended by confining Villel under guard in the Capuchin
friary with the intent no doubt of forcing him from the city. True to his ‘populist’ principles, Tap y Nuñez twice harangued the rioters in the friary which had become their headquarters, presumably congratulating them on their
overthrow of the junta and inciting them to take over the city’s government themselves.