

 This complaint by the newly enlisted Murcia plebeians showed that they were not prepared to be oppressed by the better-off who were dishonourably escaping the call to the colours by joining the honourable volunteers regiment. To
make matters worse the latter’s duty officer – a ‘chubby young blond fellow’ – had the previous night arrested a wigdresser when he went to ask for the volunteers’ drums. 17

 Two carpenters and a baker made for the guardhouse. Juan Meléndez, a master carpenter in the silk-spinning factory, one of the intendente’s ‘wicked men’, demanded to see the officer in charge. The latter, a lawyer, admitted the
carpenter to his presence. He did not know Meléndez who at first had his cloak wrapped round his face. * But later the duty officer saw that he was tall, brownish-skinned with a mark on his lip. The newcomer told him to come out
onto the staircase.

 There he opened his cloak. He had bulges in it which appeared to be firearms. On his left side there protruded a dagger or knife hilt. Taking off his hat, he said: ‘The people order you to close down the guardhouse and to come
with me to the marqué s de Villafranca’s …’ 18

 Recognizing that the man before him was one of the leaders of the previous day’s tumult, and that he came determined to achieve his ends, the duty officer consented: the few volunteer soldiers under his command had no
ammunition, and there was still much popular disorder.

 In the presence of the Suprema’s deputy, the master carpenter handed over the volunteer guardroom’s keys to Villafranca. ‘The people considered it right to shut the guardhouse. This gentleman was the officer on duty ….’
‘Meléndez, you have done a very bad thing’, Villafranca replied. ‘If the people wanted this, they should have asked me first since they have placed the government in my hands’, the lawyer–officer recalled him as saying.

 ‘Well, the thing is done now’, responded Meléndez, ‘and there is no remedying it’, letting Villafranca understand that he had no regrets. 19 Without more ado, the honourable volunteer regiment was disbanded. 20

 The two carpenters and the baker were arrested, with many others, at the beginning of April 1809, nearly three months after the events. Of the first dozen or so men who were gaoled by the investigating magistrate for their
alleged participation in the tumult’s various events over half were master craftsmen – those usually called upon by the pre-war authorities to put down the revolts of their journeymen and apprentices, none of whom figured among
the recorded number of Murcian accused. The working elite’s dissatisfaction with their social superiors in the old junta’s organization of the local war effort – and it was not much better under the new – had reached critical
proportions. As an anonymous correspondent wrote to the Suprema:

 If the provincial juntas had been created correctly, and the artisan and farmer had had a vote on them like all the others who should not have it, things would have been different … In Murcia only the unhappy artisans are
enlisted, for the rest nobody has to serve … 21