

 It seemed right that the wheat which was about to be handed out should go to the army, because here everyone can work and improve their lot. The accused did not intend to insult anyone; had he thought he might do so, he would
have preferred to bury himself underground, being, as he was, no more than a very poor man who could eat only when he worked … 12

 Marín’s action attracted a large crowd to the bishop’s residence. And what comments had he heard them make?, the investigating magistrate asked the forty-six-year-old apothecary, Manuel Gómez, identified by the intendente as one
of the city’s ‘most wicked’ subjects and who was detained in gaol on suspicion of participating in the events. The people were saying that the bishop ‘should be confined to a friary and receive only twenty reales a day, and all
the rest of his income should be devoted to the war effort’. 13

 Villafranca condemned the insults against the prelate’s decorum and respect, and ordered the arrest of those responsible. While the bishop gave way to the popular demand no longer to distribute alms to the poor and send the
proceeds to the army, he also gave vent to his ire. He informed the Junta Suprema that he had suffered

 the most sacrilegious and degrading insults that could be made to a vagrant or criminal. The people wanted to confine me to a friary and seize my mitre … [while] others have distorted my actions to give them a criminal
appearance, to make them appear as though I do not use my tithes to support the public cause. 14

 But the bishop was careful not to say as much to the Murcian public. Two days after the worst of the tumult, he issued a printed statement in which he listed all the money the bishopric had contributed to the war effort and on
alms since the beginning of the war. Privately, he begged Villafranca to have the case against his denigrators dismissed or, if that were impossible, that none of the accused be punished. Christian charity was informed by the
experience that it was impolitic to antagonize the Murcian lower orders. 15

 The revolt, however, was not yet over. Wednesday, December 28, its third day, began with the people’s altercation with a former junta member who had torn down an anti-junta pasquinade at Cuatro Esquinas, the city’s centre, and
ended with the closing down of the honourable volunteer militia. The latter was highly unpopular. Its colonel, conde de Campo Hermoso, was known for his incompetence and arbitrary conduct, which affected all the city’s
inhabitants, and particularly the subordinate classes.

 But there was another reason, not confined to Murcia, for the regiments’ unpopularity. It was supposed to be made up of those who, for whatever reasons, were not eligible for military service. But in fact it was the refuge of
many young men, especially from the privileged classes, to escape enrolment in the army.

 There is no reason why youth who are fully capable of serving in the army or those who have got married to avoid military service, or hidalgos looking for ways out of joining the army by interpreting His Majesty’s orders in
their own interests, should be allowed to enlist in the honourable militia in order to escape their responsibilities. 16