

 He nearly met his downfall at the hands of the patriot tribunal of public security in Sevilla. His failure to explain the ‘grave excesses’ of the deposed French-born corregidor in Almagro were sufficient for the tribunal to
consider the judge’s conduct highly suspicious and to demand his recall for investigation. The Suprema softened the punishment to a reprimand, and Bendicho continued in his post – almost certainly as much hated as the French –
until he fled before the enemy in April 1809. The actions of one Old Regime judge were of no special social significance other than as an indication of the human material on which the Junta Suprema counted to assure itself of
popular support. Blind obedience to patriot authority – like obedience to the eighteenth-century absolutist reformers – was, in this view, the villagers’ essential duty. Popular mobilization had therefore to take place outside of
the authorities’ ambit. The contrasting events in two townships, which Bendicho reported but did not investigate, were significant of the social divisions taking place in La Mancha. In the face of the French threat, a local
lawyer in Villanueva de los Infantes revolted against the provincial junta and the Suprema because neither could do much to defend his locality; in Carrión de Calatrava, a noble of a famous house staged a coup to reinstate
señorial domination.

 Villanueva was an important agricultural township, the head of the Montiel administrative district, lying about thirty kilometres due east of Valdepeñas in the southern half of La Mancha. Nearly sixty percent of its population
was engaged in the dry-land grain farming typical of the area. Artisans formed one in twelve of the working inhabitants. Although the population of 5,700 had declined since the end of the seventeenth century, Villanueva remained
one of the more densely populated municipalities of La Mancha, including a high proportion of day labourers; and for that reason no doubt, like other places in the region, the township had earned a reputation for rebelliousness.
29

 The increasing numbers of smallholders and tenants who had lost their lands to large farmers and had been reduced to day labouring had heightened social tension in La Mancha for a number of years before the war. Labourers, who
still remained proportionately far below the numbers in Andalucía and Extremadura, resorted to acts of violence against the large farmers’ lands, ripping up their crops and putting axes to their olive trees. 30

 The call to patriotism was insufficient to reduce the social tension: all those without property to defend knew only too well – indeed it had been stated by none other than the Junta Suprema – that the landowners and wealthy had
the most to lose from a French victory. Nevertheless, by resisting the French, the proletarians stood to lose a great deal more: theirs and their families’ lives, their women’s honour and the desecration of their cherished
religion – a threat more than enough, in the absence of an army to defend them, to put doubts in the mind of all but the bravest. Even the Suprema recognized the problem of convincing villagers to engage in their self-defence.