

 MURCIA: THE PEOPLE OVERTHROW THE JUNTA

 When it came down to serious popular opposition, most juntas were – at least momentarily – powerless. Murcia, a small provincial capital, was a good example. Beginning on December 26, artisans, shopkeepers and liberal
professionals were prominent among a crowd which forced the junta president – the city’s corregidor and intendente – and the junta’s military councillor, a lieutenant general, to surrender their commands; abolished the honourable
volunteers militia, raised and commanded by a local noble; and attacked the bishop. Having to all intents seized power, they characteristically handed it over to another local noble, the marqués de Villafranca y los Vélez and, by
marriage, duque de Medina Sidonia.

 Popular fears that Murcia was to be left undefended before an enemy which, after taking Madrid and Toledo, was thought to be advancing across La Mancha on the regional capital, lay at the tumult’s root. The removal of field
artillery from the city, the requisitioning of privately held arms and – in the midst of the tumult – infantry deserters, wrongly identified as artillerymen, being conducted, roped together and under armed escort, from the
capital gave substance to the lower classes’ fears. The junta, moreover, had made itself unpopular by imposing a war tax of one and a quarter reales daily on each head of family in the city and villages, and had applied much
‘pressure and humiliating distraints’ to ensure the tax’s collection. 5 But the people’s fears and distrust of the junta were manipulated in typical Old Regime fashion if not by Villafranca, then almost certainly by the Junta
Suprema’s deputy and local representative, marqués de Villar. 6

 On the day after Christmas, two popular and peaceful demonstrations demanded that Villafranca take over the junta’s political and military command. In the evening, a mass of people marched up to his house in the pouring rain,
bringing with them the postal courier who had just arrived. They insisted that any suspicious letters be opened and read aloud. 7 At that moment a thin man, with sunken cheeks in a brownish-skinned face, wearing a cape and top
hat, * came through the crowd and said that the courier had brought documents for the intendente, Clemente Campos. ‘To his house!’ the people began to shout. A regimental adjutant, Gerónimo Valle, was ordered by his colonel, who
was present, to accompany the crowd to ensure that no harm befell the intendente’s guard drawn from the regiment. When the adjutant reached the intendente’s house, people were shouting: ‘attack the guard!’, ‘force them inside!’
Valle pushed his way to the front. ‘Gentlemen, contain yourselves. What is it you want?’ ‘The ceremonial mace’, came the shout. A corporal touched Valle’s shoulder: ‘here it is’ and handed him the intendente’s symbol of office.

 Almost immediately thereafter, according to Valle, who was latter arraigned for his part in the events, the intendente appeared before the crowd.