

 I have no desire to command. I am a true Spaniard and a respectable man. I have no need of more guards than the people of Murcia. Take my mace. I beg of you only one consideration: please leave us in peace because my wife has
just given birth … 8

 Subsequently the intendente saw matters less equanimously. His staff of office had been forcibly seized as the result of an ‘iniquitous plot’ to deprive him of the junta’s presidency, to which Villar, the Suprema’s
representative, had given his approval the following day. ‘The consequences of this bad example are evident from its similarity to a democracy’, he wrote to the Suprema, going on to finger the ten men who, he claimed, were the
real troublemakers: an apothecary, two carpenters, a tavern-keeper, a surgeon, a noted doctor, a weaver, a master woodcarver, a scrivener’s assistant, and one other man whose trade or profession he did not state. 9

 The crowd, whose leaders were armed with staves, blunderbusses, shotguns, swords and carbines, next made for the military councillor’s house and shouted that he surrender his mace. Lieutenant General Julián Retamosa appeared
with his staff of office which, with the crowd’s approval, Valle took. No sooner had the general retired inside his house, than a voice shouted: ‘and the general’s sash!’ The crowd took up the cry. The general sent a servant down
with it and handed it over to Valle who wrapped it around the two maces.

 When Valle handed them over to the Suprema’s deputy, the latter passed them on to Villafranca: ‘As the people have elected your excellency as their political and military leader, as these insignia demonstrate, I, in the name of
Fernando VII, bestow them on you.’ A one-eyed man in the crowd called out: ‘And if you don’t govern well we shall take them from you.’ 10

 Although up to this point there could be little doubt that the crowd – and possibly Valle – were working in concert with Villar, the comment indicated that the people had their wits about them. The events of the following day
reinforced this idea.

 At 10 o’clock the next morning, more grave incidents occurred outside the episcopal palace. * As the bishop’s employees were preparing to distribute tithe grain and alms to the poor, a small, red-faced man in a green cape strode
up. A mason, commonly known as the ‘Governor’, he shouted to the men to stop giving out wheat and insulted them roundly. To the two or three poor who had already received their portion, he ordered them to return it to the stack,
and the granary’s doors to be shut.

 This is what the people want. All the grain must be sent to the army, he cried. Then, turning on the episcopal porter, he said: why are you not wearing a cockade? You’re man enough for that, do the same as the rest of your class
… Then the apothecary who was standing close by told the porter to get back to his room lest worse happen … 11

 Under arrest, the mason in question, by the name of Marin, testified to the investigating magistrate that he had just come out of the episcopal palace lavatory as the alms distribution was beginning.