

 The following day, December 21, two hundred enemy cavalry appeared shortly before noon to take the township. The enemy opened fire with such ferocity that ‘it sounded like cannon shots’. The fire was returned from behind the
walls which enclosed underground rooms on Villacaña’s outskirts and hastily dug trenches. The battle lasted over three hours; the defenders nearly ran out of cartridges, but the ‘God of battles’ came to their aid by the discovery
of some musket balls, powder and cartridges held by the inhabitants. Unable to advance, the French finally sounded the retreat. This victory over ‘the victors of Austerlitz, Jena and Marengo’ enthused the population. Their
patriotism

 made them determined to resist whatever number of French attacked the township. They were perfectly united in their aim – the only essential in such circumstances. In order to triumph, the whole peninsula should have pursued
this aim from the start, and should at the present still pursue it … The people said, We shall triumph or die before surrendering …

 On the following two days, French cavalry detachments approached the township to observe if it was still defended. Seeing that the defences had been improved – new trenches had been dug, more embrasures opened in the walls,
every sort of cart and carriage used to form ramparts in the streets should the French suceed in penetrating the outer defences – the French cavalry withdrew without offering to fight.

 Even so, the French cavalry general ordered the township to surrender and swear allegiance to Josef Bonaparte. ‘Some people argued that, in order to avoid worse consequences Villacañas should submit; but others, more sensible,
rejected their arguments.’ By this time the inhabitants had armed themselves with every conceivable weapon: muskets, shotguns, blunderbusses and pistols; swords, halberds, lances, pikes, sharpened iron staves and billhooks
attached to long wooden poles … ‘a selection of quite extraordinary weapons’. The military men divided them into groups to defend the township. On Christmas day, the French cavalry again appeared in force. By now totally
confident, the defenders shouted at them to attack; when the French held back, the infuriated inhabitants suddenly rose from their defensive positions and attacked them, putting the enemy to flight and pursuing him into the
countryside. ‘Since then we have seen no more of him.’

 *

 Villacañas became an heroic patriotic episode, cited as an example of local defence in the Suprema’s call for all-out popular war. Without denying the bravery and determination of the township’s inhabitants, it must be said that
French light cavalry was not the adequate military force to subdue a township’s resistance. It was not intended as such, as its lack of cannon demonstrated. It was the Napoleonic army’s exploratory ‘screen’, ranging far ahead of
the infantry to gather information of the enemy’s positions and the possibilities of exacting food supplies. At a moment of the Spanish armies’s dispersion, it was a force sufficient to occupy undefended townships; but not to
overcome those which stubbornly resisted.