

 It was in Cataluña, however, that the death toll reached shocking heights. More under-sevens died proportionately than at any other time between 1800 and 1817. Adults suffered even worse. Judged by villages in the Tarragona
area, deaths began to rise in November 1808, and thereafter climbed relentlessly month after month until May 1809, when they reached over five and a half times their average for that month. Even though the rate began to decline
slowly thereafter, it was not until November that something approaching normality returned. In the year from November 1808 to October 1809, three times as many villagers in the area died as on average.

 In Extremadura, bordering on Portugal, the first full year of the war exacerbated a population crisis which since the turn of the century had plagued the region, one of Spain’s poorest. In 1809 deaths rose to their second
highest point of the war and births fell.

 Advancing, retreating or merely stationary, and without firing a shot, the armies brought death and disease to civilians. The township of Chinchilla, southeast of Albacete, explained to the Suprema that

 since the Army of the Centre has been here, this town and its neighbouring villages have been devastated. Food and supplies have been paid only by receipts and bits of paper. The costs have risen by having to care for six
hundred ill soldiers. Due to this, sickness has spread so rapidly among the small number of the town’s inhabitants that within less than a week two hundred people have been laid low, and the contagions continue to spread. 2

 Contagious diseases and lack of hospitals decimated civilians, and reduced the fighting strength of the armies. In April 1809, five thousand soldiers were in Catalan hospitals with ‘putrid fevers’ resulting from lack of proper
clothing and the miserable conditions of the previous winter’s campaign. The army’s commander-in-chief ordered a ration of brandy for his troops to increase their nutrition ‘in order to prevent in part the spread of disease’. 3

 Naturally, nothing was more feared. In March 1809, the Sevilla junta commissioned a doctor to report on how contagious diseases in La Mancha could be prevented from spreading to the Andalucian capital. 4

 By October 1808, Napoleon had pushed nearly three hundred thousand troops into Spain in an attempt to put down the insurrection. (The number rose by another fifty thousand to its maximum in the summer of 1810.) 5 Depending on
circumstances, the Spanish army had around one hundred thousand men. Without counting the British army’s sporadic incursions, some four hundred thousand ‘useless hands’ had to live off a countryside which, before the war – when
most of the available labour was working the land – struggled to support its own population. It was fortunate for Napoleon – and the patriots – that the conflict began in a bountiful agrarian year: the highest grain crops of the
new century. A famine year in 1808, or even a year of below average crops, and it is doubtful that the war could have continued for long, unless Napoleon renounced his dictum that imperial troops had to live off the land, as he
was forced to do in Cataluña, a region traditionally deficient in grain.