

 Although in principle the Spanish military paid for its supplies, the patriot treasury was usually in such dire straits that the payments, as in Chinchilla, were not in cash but receipts. (Some of the wealthier made a good
living from this: they discounted heavily the villagers’ paper and collected the full amount – or as near as they could get for it – from the treasury when the Mexican silver ships arrived.) Short of hands, the villagers had to
support, virtually free of charge, two, and sometimes three, destructive armies as well as Spanish guerrilla forces and try to keep themselves alive. In consequence, a vital – indeed the vital – issue of the war turned on the
control of limited food resources.

 In 1809, the villagers’ inevitable inexperience in this matter no doubt increased their number of deaths; lack of food exposed them to dying cruelly of disease. Some, of course, died at the hands of imperial troops in their
raids to exact supplies but they were the minority. The sort of thing that happened in these French forays – the following example is from the village of Pueblanueva, southeast of Talavera de la Reina – was described by a member
of the Toledo junta in hiding, Martín de la Cerda. On November 24, 1809, French infantry, accompanied by cavalry, entered the place and seized eight to nine thousand head of all type of livestock, as well as over seven hundred
fanegas of barley. * They also looted some houses. Three days later, as he was writing his account, they were seizing a further ninety-two fanegas of barley and looting three more houses.

 There is not a saint they have not burned, a woman they have not abused and they have killed some men who refused to give them what they wanted … This has to be seen to be believed. 6

 Despite these barbarities, the loss to the villagers of their whole herd of livestock and no doubt a large part of their barley reserves was an even greater blow. In just a few days the village economy was shattered. How the
villagers were to live thereafter could be barely imagined. But they and township inhabitants learned to become more resourceful. They hid their crops and livestock from any and every army that crossed their lands. Toledan
villagers sowed their grain by night to prevent soldiers of one side or another seizing their seed corn. 7

 Though in 1809 several regions suffered heavy population losses they were exceeded in the two Castillas, southwestern Andalucía and Extremadura by those of the pre-war famine and malaria epidemic. From mid-1803 to mid-1804,
Extremadura lost five percent of its population, each of the two Castillas just over four percent and southwestern Andalucía, struck also by yellow fever, slightly more than three percent. The first full year of war in these
regions was less deadly than a peacetime famine accompanied by disease. †

 During the war (as in the pre-war) there were wide regional differences. For example, Valencia, in the patriot rearguard, lived (in comparative population terms) as if the war barely existed in 1809. Though a small rise in
mortality – among young children especially in early spring and mid-summer – brought a population decrease, the mere 0.2% was the lowest of all the regions. Marriages were buoyant, reaching their highest point since the turn of
the century. Month after month throughout the year, with the single exception of November, when the patriot army went down to its heaviest defeat of the war at Ocaña, they exceeded their average. Conceptions followed the same
pattern, though at a lesser rate.