

 *

 By the winter of 1808–1809, not a single patriot army still stood unbeaten and intact. The advice proffered at the start of the war by the Sevilla junta on the only strategy to combat Napoleon – to avoid pitched battles and to
wear the enemy down by every other means – had not been heeded by the Suprema or its army commanders.

 Increasingly, however, the people were taking the struggle into their own hands. Bands of rural guerrillas were forming in different parts of the country to wage their own irregular war on the enemy. As a symbol of this new type
of struggle, an unidentified Spaniard sacrificed his life in a suicidal explosion in the port of Santander where he blew up a number of gunpowder barrels and 130 boxes of ammunition to prevent them from falling into French hands.
Spanish and British sailors then landed from a cruiser and sacked all the port’s warehouses, leaving nothing of worth, the Bonapartist authorities reported. 37 The rapidity of the Anglo-Spanish incursion after the explosion
suggested that the suicide bomber’s action had been planned in agreement with the cruiser. *

===== FILE: OEBPS/22_Chapter11.xhtml =====
Napoleon’s Cursed War

 11

 1809

 THE RAVAGES OF WAR

 In many regions 1809 was, until the famine of 1811–1812, the harshest year of the war. Almost without exception, civilian deaths rose and births declined, dramatically reversing the population growth of the two previous postwar
years. In what could, at that moment, be called the frontline regions, deaths between 1808 and 1809 increased by over two and a half times in Cataluña, more than doubled in Castilla la Nueva, rose by over one-half in Extremadura
and more than one-quarter in Castilla la Vieja. Annual population losses ranged from seven percent in Cataluña – a tremendous drop in one year – three and a half percent in Extremadura and two percent in Castilla la Nueva. With
the exception of the latter region where the loss came almost exclusively from a sharp increase in deaths, the combination of lower births and higher mortality largely explained the decline. * In Cataluña, births in 1809 fell to
their lowest point of the war – indeed, of the whole period from 1800–1817. In terms of annual population loss, 1809 was not only the worst year of the war in Cataluña, but the worst in the eighteen-year period from the beginning
of the century.

 Everywhere, the deaths were generally caused less by enemy fire than by the ravages of war. Despite the Suprema’s call for all-out local defence, the constant French incursions of villages and townships to requisition food
struck panic into most inhabitants and sent them fleeing for safety to remote hills, barren lands, outlying refuges. Here they had to live rough, exposed to the elements, with insufficient food or polluted water. The toll on
young and old was enormous. In the cold winter months of 1809, fifty-five percent more people died in Castilla la Nueva than on average. † High death rates continued through the summer: disease struck down both the aged and the
under-sevens. More young children died than in any other year of the war. 1