

 In terms of village defence, nevertheless, there was one factor which negated this argument: the organic solidarity of village life when confronted by external threat. Even the most impoverished villager felt that his or her
home place – usually their village of birth – was as much theirs as that of the wealthiest farmer or landowner. Attachment to locality was perhaps even stronger among the poor who barely ever ventured beyond its purlieus. Without
expressing it as such, this was what the Suprema was in fact counting on in its appeal to local defence, at the same time as it defined the external threat in the shape of the ‘barbarous imperial soldiery’s looting and rapine’ –
a theme unremittingly harped on in all the patriots’ declamations (though it could equally have been used about the British on their retreat to La Coruña or about the conduct of the Extremaduran army’s ‘dispersos’).

 Like its first call in late November 1808, for all-out civilian resistance at the French threat to Madrid, its second, in February 1809, come when the Suprema was in panic at the possibility of a French invasion of Andalucía.
After Moore’s army had evacuated La Coruña in January, Galicia had unresistingly fallen to the imperial forces. The French armies were now free again to pursue Napoleon’s original plan to advance southwards on Extremadura and
Andalucía, and into Portugal, while the Suprema was still desperately trying to form new armies to resist them. In fact, Napoleon, with characteristic strategic sense, ordered Soult to use his new Galician base to invade Portugal
and wrest it from British control. However, the Junta’s call for ‘popular’ war corresponded once again to a moment when it feared that its own existence was threatened; and contained more of a desperate demagogic appeal than the
determination to support and carry out such a war, the popular consequences of which would be unpredictable.

 The Suprema’s dictum to villages and townships on their self-defence ran to forty-nine articles on the practical details of the means of resistance, some of which were taken from Zaragoza’s and others from Cataluña’s example.
The most striking perhaps was that they enjoined local magistrates to prepare the necessary defence measures though these were to be assisted by ‘persons of accredited knowledge’ in such matters who were to be appointed by the
provincial captain generals. In other words, popular defence was to be kept well under control of the existing authorities: it was not to be a popular uprising against the French. This overlooked one important aspect of local
life: on the threat of a French attack many local authorities were the first to flee. In one aspect, however, the Catalan example was cited with admiration: villages should form sometents, on the Catalan model, for their
self-defence. This sort of homeguard should be paid out of village funds, and if these were insufficient, local landowners should advance the necessary money which would be repaid out of the first tax monies received by the
municipality. In this scheme of things, the propertied would lose none of their income, while the day labourers and rural artisans risked their lives to defend their villages.