

 To cite Villacañas as exemplary in terms of local resistance was consequently somewhat of a Suprema deceit. Should the French infantry, supported by cannon, attack a township or village, the consequences were almost certainly to
be much graver for its inhabitants. But as long as the patriots defended the interests of noble landowners and large farmers, their concept of popular resistance could go no further than to envisage that the plebeian inhabitants
of villages and townships should – as in Villacañas – patriotically sacrifice their lives in an all-out resistance to the French. Real popular war would have made very different demands on the dominant social structure: greater
representation in provincial juntas, or even in the Suprema; the end of noble domination of the army’s officer corps, the abolition of señoríos and their feudal domination; the conviction that defence of the fatherland was the
defence of a more just and equitable future instead of the defence of an existing hierarchical society … If the patriots, exemplified in the Suprema, did not envisage this sort of popular war, it must be said that the villagers
did not generally demand it either. Under the Church’s influence, when they were willing to fight it was to defend the past, not the future.

 LOCAL DEFENCE AND THE AUTHORITIES

 The Suprema’s injunction that local magistrates take charge of their place’s defence – part of the Old Regime’s hierarchical order – was shown up in the village of Torrejoncillo, in northern Extremadura, which a troop of
forty-two French cavalry reached on December 31, 1808. Instead of calling on the three thousand inhabitants to defend their village, the two local magistrates ordered them to open their doors to the French and not to demonstrate
the least sign of resistance, threatening any who disobeyed with sentence of death. They themselves went out with a white handkerchief attached to a stave to meet the French troop.

 Scandalized by this ‘reprehensible and intolerable’ surrender of the village to ‘the atrocities this canaille habitually commit’, and aware that the French troop was too small to subjugate the place, two villagers began to
shout: ‘Go for them!’ Thereupon the people attacked the cavalry with knives, stones and any sharp instrument that came to hand, driving them out of the village and pursuing them for some distance while the magistrates still tried
to calm them. Once matters were again safely under their control, the magistrates ordered the arrest and imprisonment of the two men who had raised the cry to attack the French; and sent word to the latter that they were holding
prisoner those who had been responsible for the assault. ‘That was the punishment that these innocent men, who were only trying to defend their country, religion and August Sovereign received’; and they were still under close
guard in gaol when the witness to these events, one Clemente Terrón, left the village four days later. However, the magistrates would shortly change place with the two patriots: on receiving Terrón’s report, the Suprema sent
immediate orders to General Cuesta, commander of the Extremaduran army, to have them arrested and ensure they were tried. 36