

 The coup’s importance was more symbolic than real. But it demonstrated the determination of an important sector of the landed classes not to lose their señorial domination over ‘revolutionary’ day labourers and the like.

 *

 As a result of these multiple disturbances in the patriot zone, the Junta Suprema issued, on February 3, 1809, new orders on the suppression of riots. No society or government could exist unless its members were to ‘submit to
the law and respectfully obey the authorities whose duty it is to enforce it’. Henceforth, riot leaders and those who offended magistrates would be shot out of hand; and their followers sentenced to two hundred lashes and ten
years in a penal colony. The lightest sentence was forcible enlistment in the army to fight in the positions most exposed to danger. It became an offence to pass on ‘seditious’ comments about magistrates or the authorities, to
detain or open the mails, to call anyone a ‘traitor’ in public. The armed forces were to assemble immediately on the scene of a riot; parents and guild masters were responsible for keeping their children or journeymen and
apprentices out of the streets; and guild officials were to put themselves at the authority’s orders to restore public order. With the exception of enlistment riots, which continued unabated, the number of other riots certainly
declined – though whether this was due to the new ordinance or to the increasing demands of the war was open to question.

 FROM RIOTS TO LOCAL RESISTANCE

 Barely ten days after its riot ordinance, the Suprema issued its second call for total ‘popular’ war on the enemy. The entire population was summoned to become soldiers, fighting with stones, bricks and boiling water if no other
means were at hand. The new order implicitly revealed the problems of convincing villagers to engage in their self-defence. Noting with ‘great sorrow’ that provincial juntas had failed to observe, or even communicate, its earlier
call to the villagers, and that none had fully carried it out, the Suprema, in its new appeal to the provincial juntas, commented:

 The result has been disastrous. The enemy has invaded many provinces without the slightest risk to himself … It is essential that villagers stop deluding themselves: sterile willpower is insufficient to gain their freedom. What
is needed is to fight – and to fight valiantly … The villagers must be convinced of the fact that only their resistance can save the Country … 34

 Even allowing for the hyperbole common to Suprema proclamations, the Junta’s doubt about villagers’ determination to resist was patent. Yet how should they be convinced that they must defend themselves and their villages in
order to prevent sackings and robberies by the enemy? If they fought and lost, they were certain to be the objects of reprisals. Why should the landless day labourers and rural artisans expose themselves to the threat of dying to
defend the property of the privileged? Needing to maintain the patriotic alliance of the wealthy and the impoverished classes, the Suprema – made up as it was of the privileged orders – did not address this problem, other than to
offer an annual reward of 320 reales (approximately half of a labourer’s yearly wage) to those who, in their village’s defence, killed or took prisoner an imperial soldier. Welcome as such a sum might be – though there was no
record that it was ever paid – the Suprema’s constant and consistent refusal to permit any change to the established socio-economic order militated against the proletarians’ general determination to defend the patriotic cause.