

 EPISODES: VILLAGE DEFENCE

 Under certain limited conditions, townships could and did defend themselves in the early days of the war. Villacañas, a place of 4,500 inhabitants, in southeastern Toledo close to La Mancha, held off French light cavalry for
five days at the end of 1808. Lying between the main roads to Andalucía and Valencia, Villacañas was one of fourteen villages belonging to an ecclesiastical señorío, the priory of San Juan. An agrarian township, where nearly one
thousand men worked on the land, two-thirds of them day labourers, Villacañas was of no particular strategic importance to the French who already had their cavalry in Madridejos to the south. The inhabitants of the latter and
other places along the Andalucian road had fled on the imperial troops’ approach. Not having seen a French soldier, those in Villacañas stayed put, ‘in great tranquility or rather criminal inactivity’, as a subsequent account of
the events termed it. 35

 The inactivity ended on the evening of December 20, 1808. Guided by a local man, sixty French cavalry silently entered the township and formed up in the main square. Their captain demanded that the magistrate provide them with
two men to lead them to Alcazar de San Juan, the district’s chief town, thirty kilometres or so to the south, for which they were leaving immediately. Distrusting their intentions, the inhabitants suddenly fell on them with any
and every weapon that came to hand, killing two troopers and their horses and putting the rest to flight. The people, who suffered no losses, pursued them into the countryside, but in the snow and darkness lost sight of them.
This access of popular fury was typicially attributed, in the subsequent report (by a participant in the events), to the inhabitants’ renowned patriotism, their hatred of and anger at these ‘bandits whose only precepts are
sackings, violations, desecration and devastation’. If this were the case, why had the inhabitants quietly basked in their ‘criminal inactivity’ only the day before?

 The writer gave a small, but better clue to another important aspect of this sudden attack. Among the inhabitants were a number of men who had served in the army, to whose orders the inhabitants – especially the ‘rustics’ as the
correspondent put it – willingly deferred. Had these been retired army officers, it would have been customary to specify their rank. But there was no mention of rank, not even of the military man who was popularly elected as
‘General’ to lead the defence. It was conceivable therefore that some of these men were dispersed soldiers of the Army of the Centre, and by now virtual deserters – whom the writer did not want to refer to directly in order to
save them from reprisals. These soldiers’ well-documented desire to avenge their humiliating retreat after the battle of Tudela may well have precipitated the attack.

 Whatever the case, Villacañas was now committed to defend itself against the inevitable French reprisal. That night the inhabitants seized the arms stored in the town hall, and posted sentries to alert them to a surprise French
attack. As was their habit in these situations, some of the local authorities decamped, leaving the township to its fate. Nonetheless, a few ‘more or less distinguished persons’, among whom were the report’s author, and a number
of priests and friars remained to participate in the defence.