

 produce heavy damage [to the enemy] because he cannot push forward small forces and will encounter frequent and fearful obstacles to devastating the countryside, collecting supplies and exacting forced contributions from the
villagers … The French are used to fighting against disciplined troops and to engaging in battle with armies. Above all they fear the villagers, who attack and then scatter before them without presenting a force on whom to employ
their terrible tactics. 20

 Cuesta rejected this policy, pointing to the military difficulties of the people’s mass arming. Indeed, he had a shock in store for the Suprema. Only a month after Medellín, this new supreme commander proposed abolishing the
existing Extramaduran junta and establishing a new one for the defence of Badajoz ‘in which neither the people nor the the old junta members have any influence’. Surprisingly, the Suprema’s military junta agreed. Informed of the
matter, the Suprema immediately reacted with shocked indignation, countermanding both its own military junta and Cuesta. Though it had seriously curtailed the provincial juntas’ powers, the Suprema was always aware that its
original authority emanated from them: and it was not prepared to see any of them sacrificed to the whims of a general who, despite Jovellanos’ plea to place their full confidence in him as the new commander-in-chief, many
Suprema deputies continued to fear as a potential dictator. 21

 MILITANCIES: A SECRET MISSION TO MADRID

 When Salustiano Andrés de Embite, an infantry captain of the Tiradores de Murcia, set off on the Suprema’s orders from Sevilla for French-occupied Madrid on January 29, 1809, he knew he was on a perilous mission which, as a
military officer in villager’s disguise, might end before a firing squad shot as a spy. The Suprema’s instructions were wide-ranging: from ascertaining French military forces and fortifications in the capital to making contact
with high officials of the Old Regime to persuade them to leave Madrid for Sevilla. But the crucial issue was to discover the Bonapartist government’s policy towards the colonies. 22 Embite had had no hesitation in accepting the
mission. He was brave, as he had shown in the defence of Madrid, where he succeeded in breaking through Napoleon’s troops and rallying his men to fight again at Aranjuez. 23 Captains were two a penny and any who wanted quick
promotion had to prove themselves ingenious, efficient and daring.

 With a trustworthy companion, Vicente del Campo, whom the Suprema had allowed him to choose, the captain’s troubles began at Manzanares, about half way through the Mancha. * There he was warned that the French were thick on the
ground not far to the north, the road was untravelled in consequence, and he was advised to take a safer but more circuitous route. He ignored the advice because it would take too long but, as a precaution, donned his villager’s
guise, and hid on his person all the documents and gold he carried. The people’s terror at the enemy’s advance was so great, he later reported, that nobody would help them venture north, until the captain learned that a calèche
had just arrived from Madrid. Imagining that the driver must have a French pass, the captain approached him and found that he was willing to sell his authorization for the return trip to Madrid (the Suprema had provided Embite
with funds and documents to procure money from local justices). Though the pass was for the driver alone, Embite and his companion pressed on the following morning: the captain gambled, correctly, that a single pass would be
sufficient.