

 arbitrarily mixed individuals of whatever trade or position, the unvirtuous and the indecent with the more decent who have responsibilities which distinguish them in the social order, a distinction created by nature, the soul,
craft or skill … The respectable, honourable man … will then not find himself put on the same level as a lowly tradesman, a dolt or a despicable inferior. *

 The protest’s dominant tone was unmistakably that of the master craftsman, concerned about his social status and honour, though it cannot be supposed that all fifteen signatories came from this social stratum. Their statement
can be read in two, not necessarily antagonistic, ways. In the first, as the craftsmen’s continuing defence of their status against the enlightened reformers’ attack on their corporative guilds’ control of production and their
fear that a Bonapartist regime would carry this to its extreme – the Revolution had abolished the guilds in France. In this respect, it was significant that in many parts of the country artisans and journeymen had formed an
important proportion of the first volunteers to fight Napoleon.

 A second reading demonstrated that their claim to a new social status reflected on their right to a particular vision of patriotism. Their substitution of ‘liberty’ for ‘king’ in the hallowed patriot tripartite slogan was the
most significant of these. The fatherland without liberty did not exist. While social distinctions might be ‘natural’, they were also created by the ‘soul, craft or skill’. As spiritual liberty, the soul could be patriotic, even
if actual liberty was unknown; by ‘craft or skill’ they were as distinguished in the social order as those who occupied this position by ‘nature’ and thus they had a right to tell their apparent social superiors their patriotic
duty. To reinforce their argument, they claimed that in ‘another country’ – presumably France – they would enjoy ‘noble status’, a hyperbole in Spanish society where the distinction between the noble-born and the ignoble
labouring poor remained marked not only before the law but in society as a whole, especially in Galicia where the lower nobility, the hidalgo, formed the dominant class.

 Isolated by land, Vivero was a port where many foreign ships put in; and so it was often better connected to the exterior world than, for example, the closed rural world of the Galician interior. Despite their Old Regime defence
of social inequality this contact with the outer world appeared to have allowed the protesters to imbibe something of the French Enlightenment and the first phases of the French Revolution. Moreover, Vivero was one of the largest
areas of royal – rather than minor noble or ecclesiastical – lordships in Galicia, which gave it and its hinterland a certain independence; and also added a further significance to the substitution of liberty for king.

 However exceptional, the Vivero protest illuminated an Old Regime cast of mind overlaid by – or rather already imbued with – a number of progressive ideas. It would be foolhardy to suppose that this was equally true of the
labouring poor everywhere. But what was certainly true was that the Vivero men’s dominant demand for equality of sacrifice was widely shared. This was the real meaning of the labourers’ refusal to work unpaid on their towns’ and
cities’ defences. The popular complaints about the injustices of military conscription reinforced this view.