

 Desertion from the army did not necessarily mean abandoning the struggle; the men might join a guerrilla group where the possibility of booty and plunder, licitly or illicitly got, made good the lack of army pay and offered
relief from military discipline. Others turned to outright banditry; the deserter become guerrilla turned bandit was a not infrequent phenomenon during the war. 51

 The losses of the Spanish army in Cataluña through desertion, it might be imagined, would have been off-set by the constancy of the volunteer miquelets, the militia which the Catalans raised in place of the Spanish-led army; but
it was not so. As elsewhere, volunteers felt free voluntarily to return home. The cleric Francesc Rovira, one of the most prestigious Catalan guerrilla chiefs, wrote of his surprise at the ‘continuous and scandalous’ desertion in
all his divisions, adding that within a short while ‘I expect to be left without any men other than those of my own corps. And even there, the example is bound to have a deleterious effect.’ 52

 The volunteers deserted, Rovira wrote, because they complained that frequently they went without pay and often lacked food. ‘If that were true, my lads would have deserted a long time ago’, he scornfully added. Nonetheless,
Tomás Veri, Suprema deputy for Mallorca and its sometime representative in Cataluña, informed the Junta that fewer miquelets would abandon the colours if there were sufficient money to pay them. 53 He was proven right by Joaquín
Sagrera, a Terrassa cloth manufacturer, who in a very short time raised a force of deserters and dispersed by offering to pay them a peseta a day out of his own pocket and to provide them with a ration of bread to defend the
town. 54 * Veri’s report was an admission of the impossibility of maintaining a large volunteer force on a regular footing without funds.

 But there was no stopping desertion. By the spring of 1810 the rate had increased to such an extent that it was reported to be one of the major problems of Cataluña’s defence. 55 Dr Bosch i Cardellach, of the village of Bràfim,
noted in his diary on May 18:

 Our troops’ desertion is scandalous. I have counted three thousand men who have passed through Bràfim in the past three days going back to their homes. 56

 The Suprema’s insistent orders to local magistrates to round up deserters and return them to their regiments usually fell on deaf ears. Everywhere desertion was heaviest at harvest time.

 Colonel Carlos Carbantes, an officer who had spent four pre-war years hunting down smugglers and delinquents in Andalucía, explained that labour shortage on the land was the principal reason that deserters were not turned in.
The latter’s parents and friends

 depend on or respect their patrons, the local authorities, who need these deserters to work their land because there is a lack of young hands. They protect them, therefore, and their parents give them shelter. These magistrates
have no other aim than to look after their own interests. 57