

 A near month-long struggle between Dátilo and the armourers ensued. The Suprema took a direct hand in the matter, threatening the armourers that if they did not sign within three days they would be deprived of their craftsmen’s
rights ‘within His Majesty’s dominions’ and returned to their home regions at their own expense.

 Unawed and unabashed, the master armourers reiterated to the Suprema many of their earlier objections and rejected the accusation that, because of the privileges they had enjoyed in Asturias, their refusal to sign was a result
of ‘our not wanting to concede anything in circumstances where all vassals have had to suffer’. 67 They ended by writing that they were willing to sacrifice their lives if the Suprema demanded it of them but rejected all
allegations that they were disloyal to the royal service.

 Incensed no doubt by these last lines – for no one was asking the armourers to sacrifice their lives, and their loyalty to the royal service could certainly be questioned – Dátilo replied to the craftsmen the following day: ‘Let
me tell you, exaggerated expressions of patriotism and the greatest will to serve the cause are very common, especially when the facts demonstrate the exact opposite …’. Though under extreme government pressure, the Basque
masters continued to hold out. They now said they wanted to live in their own houses with rooms to establish their shops. Dátilo agreed to find them housing once they had signed. Finally, the masters, among whom the barrel makers
were the most militant, appointed a Basque judge of the Sevilla audiencia to represent them. To assist him in his task, Dátilo drew up an extensive account of the prices, costs and profits of each trade in Oviedo and those
proposed in Sevilla.

 The judge, Domingo Letona, was helped by the Suprema which agreed to accept his claims on the armourers’ behalf, and to pay them for the days that the stand-off had lasted. At the same time it stated categorically that Dátilo’s
original price of 201 reales for a completed musket and bayonet must stand. As the Suprema had restricted its own freedom by announcing acceptance of the judge’s findings, it – and Dátilo, too – had to accept a four-real increase
in the barrel makers’ piece rate which brought a musket’s price to 205 reales, eighty-five percent higher than the Oviedo price.

 The armourers’ contract was finally signed on August 7. The masters’ agreed piece rates – from which they had to pay higher journeymen’s wages and material costs – rose on average by two-thirds. The master barrel makers more
than doubled their Oviedo piece rate. Dátilo calculated that the master who produced a monthly maximum of 120 barrels would make a net profit of 1,500 reales a month in Sevilla as compared to just under one thousand in Oviedo.
This was no small increase: it equalled the pay of a serving colonel without command of a regiment; three-quarters of an army auditor’s, and half of a newly appointed provincial intendente’s salaries. 68 And compared to the
thirty reales a day a master armourer received in Cádiz it was riches.