

 The Rev. Gómez, who had offered his services to the Suprema as a roving commissioner to the region’s villages to speed up enlistment, round up deserters and search for horses needed by – and under expropriation for – the patriot
cavalry, reported that up to ten thousand reales were being paid in Sevilla by local oligarchs to free a son. Faking infirmities and rapid marriages were other means:

 Juan de Bargas, a magistrate, has two sons. He freed one by claiming that his teeth were not good enough to bite the end from a musket cartridge; and the other he married off a month ago, although the couple is not yet living
together. The villagers are mutinous about such goings on … I told Bargas and another magistrate (who had paid a bribe to free his son) that they were no better than villains, and the villagers’ disgust was just and well-founded.
37

 Though nowhere was the refusal to serve in the army as passionate and determined as in Cataluña, conscripts there echoed their fellows’ words throughout the patriot zone in a petition to the Catalan junta: ‘Convinced though [we]
are of the necessity and obligation to serve the king and to reinforce the principality’s army’, a group of conscripts from Riudoms wrote that thirty-three local youth who should have been called up had been exempted. ‘Many if
not all of these have not the slightest legal right to exemption. Justice demands that the necessary measures be taken to examine their reasons and to declare these insufficient …’ 38

 Conscription was unpopular everywhere. Nonetheless, the majority of the labouring classes outside of Cataluña were prepared to accept it as an ineluctable wartime necessity, as long as it was carried out justly and demonstrated
social equality. Still, a large minority of deserters rejected it – large enough certainly for the Junta Suprema to state, with unconscious irony, that they made it appear as though people were being forced into the patriot army
against their will. 39 This was almost certainly close to the truth. Conscription was a coercion which in normal circumstances manual workers would have done their utmost to avoid: * none better than a Catalan military doctor,
Josef Antonio Viaàdér, who lived through the Gerona siege, to describe a wartime soldier’s living conditions:

 passing from extreme heat under the sun to rain, snow, wind and damp … day and night in wet uniforms, sleeping on the open ground, or on soggy straw; going months without enjoying a bed or having a change of clothes; drinking
bad water and worse wine, eating poor bread made from inferior flour poorly kneaded and baked; making do on rotten meat, and fish and fruit of low quality; ordered to march and engage in violent exercises … and living in constant
fear of his life: 40

 It was little wonder therefore, that many patriot conscripts, faced not only with such conditions but also with the prospect of being thrown untrained into battle and the likelihood of violent death, were highly reluctant to
serve, and that Spain’s largest conscript army up to that time suffered high rates of desertion. While desertion was common to all European armies, revolutionary or absolutist, what was new to Spain was the volume of the
phenomenon. Though fewer in number than conscripts, regular army officers also deserted. After having several times had to order officers back to their regiments the Suprema finally instructed that officer-deserters be shot.
(Those who turned themselves in were reduced to the ranks.) With such examples before them, it was scarcely surprising that ordinary soldiers abandoned the colours. The Junta’s attempts to prevent it – threatening first to shoot
all deserters, then offering rewards for their capture and finally punishing rank-and-file deserters with an additional eight years service – were of no real avail. 41