

 In the five months that remained before Sevilla was taken by the French, the Basque armourers could have produced at the most forty percent of their annual Oviedo output: 520 muskets.

 Understandable as it was, the Suprema’s decision to be independent of foreign musket supplies cost it dear. It underestimated the difficulties of setting up arms factories de novo in regions without any tradition of arms
manufacture, and the cost that such autarchic production entailed. Granada alone spent 600,000 reales to set up its arms factory, in tool-making, wages and the beginning of musket production. In the year to the end of 1809 it had
produced a total of 370 new muskets and five hundred barrels in varying stages of completion. (The Oviedo factory turned out thirteen hundred new muskets per annum which could have been raised to fifteen hundred.) Taking
Granada’s cost attributable to musket production alone, each firearm came out at a cost of over 900 reales, more than four times Dátilo’s contracted Sevilla price. 69 For the money spent on the Granada factory alone, which was
only a fraction of the Suprema’s subsidies, the latter could have bought nearly six thousand East India Company’s muskets. *

 Despite various setbacks, the factories were a serious attempt by local juntas to respond to the Suprema’s order to innovate a previously unknown manufacturing process to resolve a crucial military problem. The juntas accepted
the premise of independence from foreign supplies – even to the point of delaying their own musket production by spending invaluable time in making their own specialized tools. The Suprema’s war ‘commandism’ was extended most
significantly to the ‘conscription’ of all iron workers in Andalucía: there could be little doubt that, in some extreme circumstances, it was prepared to consider a sector of the civilian populace’s mobilization as part of a
total war.

 But its relatively lenient conduct of the Basque armourers in Sevilla demonstrated that the Suprema was not prepared for an outright confrontation with a determined and dissenting labouring group. This was evidently also true of
another trade working on war materiel: the gun-carriage makers in the Sevilla arsenal. The latter’s weekly production reports referred frequently to

 these workers’ continuing absence which seriously threatens production … in terms of not completing on time royal orders for gun carriages and other military materiel which, but for their absence, could be produced. 70

 As Dátilo pertinently observed, the Suprema’s armament policies were plagued with inconsistencies, like many of its other wartime actions. But then, the Suprema would always temporize to retain an apparent patriotic unity, and
especially to avoid disruptive conflicts in the rearguard, which would threaten to split an absolutist–reformist coalition whose only raison d’être was the anti-Napoleonic struggle. And, as under the Old Regime, there was nothing
it feared more than a popular revolt.