

 Many no longer wanted to continue. Their commander (an army colonel, who had been promoted on the spot in Santiago to brigadier) found himself in the dire necessity to send many of them home. The majority left with their
uniforms almost in tatters; others became beggars. Many of the latter came to me, pretending to be ordinary people. I gave them what I could. 12

 General Blake, the Galician army commander at the time, sent home a further 350 in September 1808, after the defeat at the battle of Rio Seco, ‘because of their lack of spirit and willingness to sacrifice their lives for the
cause’. 13 The battalion was reformed with a mixture of the remaining students and soldiers, and thereafter performed creditably.

 THE STRUGGLE’S START

 With its news limited to the surrender of the major Galician cities, the Suprema had good cause for its condemnation of the region’s lack of resistance, but it did not recognize the beginnings of a sporadic rural anti-French
struggle from the moment the imperial forces invaded the country. This started solely in places exposed – sometimes brutally – to the presence of French troops: * it was by the Pedrafita pass on the main road to La Coruña – the
scene of so many dramatic accounts of Moore’s retreat – that the first recorded resistance took place shortly after the British had struggled – and straggled – up it in sleet and snow. Formed by three local notables, a partisan
group killed over forty imperial soldiers in various actions at the end of January 1809, freeing in their course a number of British prisoners, and finally ambushing the brother of the French military commandant of Lugo. In
reprisal, imperial troops burned several neighbouring villages, which stiffened local resistance; but also resulted in the permanent stationing of three hundred French soldiers on the pass.

 Above all, this patriot defence of the Pedrafita was aimed at cutting French communications with Madrid in which it proved quite successful. As Antonio Eiras, one of the original organizers put it:

 The [enemy’s] loss of mail was a bad blow for them … The villagers in their redoubts on the pass, reinforced by others from the burned down villages, made fun of the enemy troops. Many times they forced them to flee in retreat.
At least one hundred of our men were killed, but this was not considerable in relation to the numbers the enemy lost. 14

 On the southern road to Orense and Vigo, along which a smaller part of Moore’s forces had marched, Romana’s raggle-taggle army had followed, seeking refuge close to the Portuguese border. The French army pursued, and mauled it
twice, but did not finish it off. En route, the imperial troops made their usual demands for supplies and committed abuses. Around Valdeorras the villagers’ fury rose to such a pitch that it was not difficult for local priests
and hidalgos to form them into a partisan group. Many villagers had escaped to the snowbound mountains to be freed of French oppression. As Eiras reported: