

 Once they felt themselves the masters of the township, the villagers went on the rampage. They demanded that all existing authorities be dismissed and threatened to kill the corregidor, firing at his house. They wanted no
corregidor, they clamoured, unless they appointed him themselves to ‘do and undo’ as they themselves desired. Nor any more scriveners. * Shouting that the local junta members were French sympathizers, they assaulted the houses of
two of them, both naval officials. They knew full well that the local junta had been set up, as in many other places in Galicia, by the dominant elite – in this case the municipal council – essentially to control any ‘popular
excesses’, but without the most minimal popular pressure or participation. 18 Thus even the Dominican friary did not escape their fury; they dragged out five casks of wine to drink, using the brothers’ glasses and serviettes,
before going on to loot the home of a rich merchant, the French and Danish vice-consul, which they stripped of every movable object. Several locally respected men, who tried to calm the mob, were manhandled, and one was wounded.
Even the hastily assembled junta’s offer of food and drink for all the villagers was insufficient to calm them. 19

 Many of these same villagers had, a decade earlier, burned down the recently created Sargadelos iron-ore foundry; at the instigators’ trial it was alleged that the incendiarists had cried ‘Long live freedom, long live France,
death to the factory and its owner!’ though the accused claimed that the cries were ‘Long live the king and death to Ibáñez!’ (the foundry’s merchant owner). † Finally, in view of the prospect of the French army’s certain
vengeance on the township, the villagers were pacified and prepared to defend themselves and Vivero. The vengeance was not long in coming, and this time in strength. Some two thousand imperial troops pushed through the
civilian-manned defences on the outskirts and seized Vivero on February 18, putting it to the sack for over three days. Two hundred people were slaughtered, but the majority of the population managed to flee to the hills.

 In Vivero and Ribadeo, it was villagers from parishes in the surrounding countryside who provided the townships’ main fighting force, though in neither case had the French troops carried out the customary seizure of their crops.
The villagers around Betanzos – Moore’s last halting place before La Coruña – were far less favourably placed since the French army was thick on the ground and forced them to feed it, adding insult to injury by frequently seizing
the best oxen or cows which had drawn their cartloads of supplies. Aggrieved, these villagers one night took their revenge in an action that remained part of the region’s collective memory: at an agreed hour they rose in the last
week of February and massacred all the French officers and men in their parishes, burying them in the pine woods with their accoutrements and effects, and immediately dispatching their horses to Romana’s army in Ribadavia in the
south. According to tradition, 199 French were killed, one wounded corporal escaping to report the massacre. 20