

 Napoleon’s plans for Galicia’s domination, a hasty outcome of Moore’s pursuit, were deficient in an area where he was usually strong: geography, the lay of the land. (He was certainly not alone: one of the Suprema’s early orders
had been to make an accurate map of Spain. 2 ) He was misinformed about the state of the roads and the speed at which his troops could move between major towns. To prevent further English landings, control of the Atlantic coast
and its ports was his major concern. Much of the Galician hinterland, especially in the south, was left unoccupied. Moreover, once he had secured the region’s submission, Soult was under orders to invade Portugal from Galicia and
Ney was left in command of an occupation force which was not large enough to control the whole countryside. 3

 Napoleon also allowed preconceptions to misinform him about the villagers’ religious loyalties. As usual, he believed that the upper clergy – in this case the bishops – controlled the ‘ignorant and fanatically religious’
villagers, and his commanders were given orders to cultivate and win over the prelates. But it was not they who exercised influence, but rather the parish priests and the permanent ecclesiastical institutions: monasteries,
friaries and cathedral chapters which incarnated Galician tradition. 4

 Equally – if not more – important for local Galician resistance was the fact that, though the countryside was still profoundly señorial, * villagers, who made up eighty percent of the population, had enjoyed for nearly half a
century virtual hereditary land leases. This meant that they and their heirs had the legally sanctioned use of their plots, even if they were not legally their owner and had to pay rents and dues to their lords. As long as they
complied with their feudal obligations, the land to all intents and purposes was ‘theirs’. 5 It was they, not their lords, who had introduced the two new crops – maize and potatoes – which had dramatically alleviated the food
shortages of the past. In this sense, legal ownership of the land was not the villagers’ sole criterion: legal ownership of the land’s use was what mattered. A villager ‘lived better or worse depending on the extent of the land
he could work; a renter with five hectares did not envy the smallholder with half a hectare, even though it were his own’. 6

 There was, for sure, a long anti-señorial tradition and constant legal battles between villagers collectively and their lords over feudal dues, from which the former tried to free themselves or at the worst convert them into
real rents related directly to the land; and many villagers involved in legal disputes used the war situation to refuse to pay these dues to their ecclesiastical lords. 7

 Throughout Spain, territorial resistance was almost always stronger where villagers enjoyed the virtual right of property over the use of the land than where they did not. This was not suprising: these villagers feared that
‘their property’ was at stake. One other condition of Galician local resistance was the custom of beating the parish bounds. Most parishes had a considerable extent of commons – generally hilly forest land – which were an
essential and invaluable part of the villagers’ difficult livelihoods. Unclearly delineated, these were often invaded at nightime by neighbouring parishioners. Gangs of youths from fifteen-years-old and upwards – and most
parishes had one – set out to guard their commons and fight the invaders with whatever primitive means they had to hand. The gangs, to which only batchelors were admitted, had their youth leaders, their own meeting places,
customs and rites. There was thus a gang tradition of defending their parishes against all intruders. 8