

 On coming within sight of Valdemoro, Lieutenant Colonel Joaquín Ovalle, at the head of a few [Spanish] soldiers, obliged all those on the road to return to Madrid … This misfortune could not be made good on the 2nd and 3rd of
December, because – as is well-known – the people forbade anyone to leave, and those who attempted to do so were treated as traitors. They even fired on carriages carrying wives and children to safety. 79

 After lying low in the capital for five days, Sotelo once more escaped on foot, accompanied by several companions, including Almagro. Before reaching Alcorcón, they and the large crowds in flight from the capital were warned by
retreating Spanish troopers that the French were ahead and killing all those they seized. Everyone left the main road and scrambled in a wearying escape over ploughed fields to bypass the township; once on the other side, Sotelo
and his companions believed it safe to rejoin the main road. They were mistaken. A party of French cavalry caught them and threatened them ‘with the ultimate horror of an untimely death’ if they did not return to Madrid. En route
back to the capital, and again in Madrid, French soldiers robbed Sotelo of twenty-three ounces of gold, his gold watch and the jewellery he carried on him. The bloodstained streets were still full of dead bodies from the
capital’s aborted defence. His wife, who had taken refuge with her father in Cádiz,

 spent many miserable days in the cruel uncertainty of his fate. Since her husband was in such an awkward situation in relation to the perfidious French, her misery received no comfort from the news that he was back amongst them
… He was a person who – even physically – was the least able to withstand the rigours of flight. 80

 In fact, as she subsequently discovered, Sotelo had gone into hiding in the capital. He refused absolutely, wrote his wife, to seek the new regime’s protection, even at a time when, as seen from Madrid, the war appeared
virtually over:

 French divisions were pouring out in December, 1808, towards Extremadura, Andalucía, Valencia; the patriot armies were thought to have scattered; the villages were believed to be in a state of anarchy, and the Suprema hunted
down. The English army’s (i.e. Moore’s) arrival in Castilla saved Spain, forcing Bonaparte to withdraw the forces that otherwise would have entered towns and cities before the news of their approach even reached them. 81

 Convinced by past experience of her husband’s patriotism, his wife had no hesitation in petitioning the Junta Suprema, in January 1809, for financial help. Sotelo, she explained, had for the past year received no salary for his
official post – a common enough occurrence at the time. The Suprema acceded to her request, given ‘the particular services’ her husband had done for the cause, and ordered her to be paid one month of Sotelo’s salary due. Thus
neither his wife, nor the Suprema, had any doubts about his ‘patriotism’ at the beginning of 1809. In clandestinity in occupied Madrid, meanwhile, Sotelo still maintained hopes of escape with his friend Almagro, though such an
attempt without a Suprema passport would have been highly perilous: a villager had only to remember the Gazeta’s original accusation that he had refused loyalty to the Suprema and which the paper had not had the time to correct
before Madrid’s capitulation. Many were assassinated for less. Believing it dangerous for Sotelo to flee in these conditions, Almagro escaped alone in February with the promise that, once in the patriot zone, he would organize
Sotelo’s escape. He was as good as his word, approaching Garay, the Suprema’s general secretary, and other deputies to secure a passport for Sotelo which he planned to leave for him in the first unoccupied village outside Madrid.
He also contacted a trustworthy postal courier to assist in his plan.