

 From Talavera, the first unoccupied town he reached on his escape, he wrote to the captain general of Extremadura in ‘proof of his fidelity and patriotism’, to say that he had left his employment, family, and all his belongings
to serve his king and country, and desired to return to his native Sevilla. This was an intellectual rather than a natal loyalty. Born in 1766 in Almeria, of a Madrileño father and an Andalucian mother, he was of the ‘third’ and
youngest generation of pre-war enlightened reformers. From the age of thirteen, he had enjoyed a brilliant career at the University of Granada, receiving outstanding degrees in jurisprudence and canonical law, and was appointed
professor in both subjects. But from 1786, he had become attracted to Sevilla – his mother came from the nearby township of Utrera – because of its literary and intellectual vibrancy. He moved there and was well-known and
personally respected among his peers as one of the small, but influential prewar group of enlightened literati, most of whom were in 1808 using their pens to support the patriot junta.

 As a result of his letter to the captain general, the Extremaduran junta gave him a passport to return to Sevilla. But popular rumours in the Andalucian capital about his loyalty to the patriot cause – so great at the time were
the suspicions of Madrid officialdom’s collaboration with the French, especially when their appointments to posts under the new regime had been published in the Bonapartist press – led Sotelo to petition the Extremaduran junta to
clear him officially of charges of ‘anti-patriotism’; this indeed it did, as subsequently did its Sevillan counterpart. 77

 The patriots’ victory at Bailén and the French evacuation of Madrid in early August 1808, occurred while Sotelo was still clearing his name. General Castaños ordered him to the capital, stating that he was needed ‘for matters of
importance to the country and the prompt restitution of our beloved king, Fernando VII, to the throne’. On his return to Madrid he was again cleared of ‘anti-patriotic’ charges by the war council itself.

 However, no sooner was the Junta Suprema formed than the patriot Gazeta de Madrid alleged that he had refused allegiance to the new government; to refute the allegation he petitioned the Suprema, describing himself as ‘a
faithful citizen whose acts have given many proofs of his patriotism’. 78 The Suprema cleared him and ordered that its finding be published in the Gazeta ; but in the general confusion of the patriot armies’ defeats and
Napoleon’s imminent capture of Madrid, it never appeared in the paper’s pages. Barely a week after writing his petition to the Suprema, he was again fleeing Madrid to escape the Emperor. This time he bundled his wife, María de
las Mercedes Porres, his three children, father-in-law and other relatives with no more belongings than the clothes they were wearing into his carriage, a dangerous form of escape at that moment. * Sotelo left on foot. By chance
he was overtaken by his friend, Juan Antonio Almagro, a lawyer, who was travelling in a coach. Shortly, his wife’s carriage caught up with them. Her father, the marqués de Castilleja, proposed that, before leaving, Sotelo and
Almagro should pay their respects to the Suprema in Aranjuez. They agreed and quickly found an empty calěche whose driver agreed to take them there.