

 All of us complained of their pillaging, sacrileges and violence … They treated iniquitously those who had remained in the village. After making them do the most degrading tasks, they forced them to carry haversacks on the march
with them for days on end. Burning for revenge, our anger was raised still more when two hundred dragoons put to the sword all the villagers of Salas, without sparing the priest, the elderly or the young … 15

 A district junta was created under the Casoyo parish priest’s supreme leadership, helped by his brother, Juan Bernardo Quiroga, and the district’s military commandant. The partisans were divided into five groups, each with a
captain at its head. Their greatest triumph came on January 31, when they attacked ninety-six French troopers, killing or capturing all of them. Displaying great heroism, women fought the cavalry alongside the men.

 Two small northern coastal townships and their surrounding countryside were the next to offer open resistance: Ribadeo, on the Asturian border, and Vivero, an isolated medieval port at the end of a long bay well to the west.
French troops deployed from Mondoñedo, the nearest town, reached Ribadeo on January 25, 1809, and demanded, as was their habit, rations of bread and wine; some ‘honourable and distinguished patriots’ incited its inhabitants to
resist their demands and to unite in their locality’s defence. Within twenty-four hours villagers from outlying parishes armed with shotguns, pikes, sickles, and other edged weapons had gathered in strategic places on the troops’
return route and set about the small French column which, it was reported, lost sixty of its 150 men in continuing skirmishes. 16

 The consequences of the neighbouring parishes’ participation in Vivero’s defence were sharper. A column of seventy French cavalry entered the township on January 28 to a chilly reception. The commander’s orders were to ensure
that the local civilian, military and ecclesiastical authorities swore allegiance to King Josef; his proclamation to that effect aroused the inhabitants’ anger. Nonetheless, despite prior defence preparations, Vivero’s 2,700
inhabitants and local authorities made no move to defend themselves for a week. However, after midnight of the morning on which the authorities had been summoned to swear allegiance, five thousand villagers from neighbouring
parishes and hamlets gathered on the heights outside Vivero and began a lively fire. The French cavalry force was already in a state of fear: ‘they read in the inhabitants’ faces their inner anger at their presence, and posted
sentries at night …’. 17 Heavy rain interrupted the villagers’ attack for four hours. At 5 a.m. they advanced on the walled township. At the same time, its inhabitants began to fight the French. Within an hour, the enemy had
suffered eight dead, forty-eight prisoners, including their commander and his officers, and a number wounded. Only eighteen of the original seventy-four troopers managed to escape, the majority of them being cut down in the
countryside beyond Vivero.