

 His wife, Joaquina Orozco, however, resisted his ‘bad conduct’ in going over to the Bonapartists, and defended herself against his and various French military officers’ ‘aggressions’, the latter attempting to force her to
accompany her husband in his decision. With ‘great constancy she freed herself, steadfastly rejecting the enemy’s offers of great opulence or their threats’, she later wrote. Effectively she repaid her husband’s desertion by
deserting him, and demanded of the Junta Suprema that it make over to her half of Rivas’s possessions which had been embargoed on his arrest.

 In both Sotelo’s and Rivas’ case, their wives showed greater loyalty to the patriot cause than did their husbands. Rivas faithfully served the Bonapartists, becoming again corregidor of French-occupied Trujillo where he
organized a petition to the Junta Suprema calling for an end to the war. But he gave up the offer of a criminal judgeship in Valladolid to return to his wife and family after Sevilla, where the latter were living, was captured by
the French early in 1810. His wife, he said, had ‘demanded his protection’, and he had complied. An accredited Bonapartist husband, in a French-occupied zone, had become an undeniable asset; even more so after his wife’s earlier
patriotic stance. In 1812 Rivas’ submission to become a supernumary judge, albeit unsalaried, in Madrid was rejected by the minister of Grace and Justice on the grounds that it was neither ‘just nor respectable’ that anyone serve
unpaid or that posts be created before their necessity was proven. However, he was assured that his case would be kept in mind. 86

===== FILE: OEBPS/23_Chapter12.xhtml =====
Napoleon’s Cursed War

 12

 Popular Territorial Liberation Struggles:
Galicia and Cataluña

 GALICIA AND FRENCH RETREAT

 The repeated defeats of patriot armies in open battle led to irregular civilian warfare of two distinct types. The most common were the initially small guerrilla bands which, though they usually had certain territorial
allegiances, ranged far and wide: mobility was essential to their capacity to strike at the enemy by surprise and evade capture. * Of a different order, although using the same type of irregular warfare, were the partisan groups
who defended their territorial interests against the French. Galicia and Cataluña were prime examples of this. The Galician–Asturian army, then under General Blake, and operating alone on the Vizcayan–Santander border, had been
heavily defeated in Napoleon’s November 1808 offensive. Blake’s battle losses of three thousand were nothing compared to those suffered in a harrowing retreat – far more arduous than Moore’s – over tracks in the Cantabrian
mountains. By the time he reached the relative safety of León, two-thirds of his remaining army had simply ‘dispersed’, as Spanish dispatches habitually put it. Blake was replaced by General Romana who took over the seven
thousand troops remaining. †

 After the British army’s evacuation early in 1809, La Coruña capitulated to Moore’s pursuer, Marshal Soult, without resistance. Thereafter all the major cities and towns fell like a pack of cards: within a fortnight the French
were masters of Galicia. Instead of taking refuge in the mountains to organize resistance, the Galician junta disintegrated and vanished. Scarcely able to believe the news of the region’s lack of resistance, the Junta Suprema
excoriated the Galicians, calling them ‘wretches who lacked the strength to fight or the courage to die … La Coruña’s surrender at so little cost will for all eternity recall to the world your nullity and infamy.’ 1 Appointing a
special mission to enquire into the causes of this collapse, the Suprema could little imagine that within a few months it would be hailing the Galician people as heroes, an example for all patriots to emulate, although continuing
to consider as traitors the former local juntas of large towns and cities.