

 At the same time, the parish priest of Valladares, Juan Rosendo Arias Enríquez, and two Franciscan friars, along with several local hidalgos, raised the countryside south of Vigo. They issued a proclamation, also signed by
Troncoso, ordering all men able to bear arms to report within twenty-four hours or face a firing squad. Their siege of Vigo began on March 8, the same day as Pontevedra’s investment, but it was a week before all the region’s
partisan bands had gathered to join it. Vigo and Tuy were the only two French-garrisoned places in the south. Though much larger than the latter, Vigo was more lightly held by a scant fifteen hundred imperial troops. After the
partisans, under two of their Franciscan friar leaders, brothers Villagelíu and Giráldez, had thrown back a French attempt from Pontevedra to raise the siege and attacked the city itself which they could not take, the situation
turned more unfavourable to the French: two British frigates arrived off Vigo to help the besiegers whom they supplied with a certain amount of munitions. Surrender talks began, but the French commandant, fearing that some of the
village partisans would run amok, refused to surrender to civilians. Cachamuiña, Lieutenant Pablo Morillo (raised from the ranks on the Bailén battlefield for his bravery, and one of the officers dispatched by the Junta Suprema
to assist the Galician patriots) and a retired captain, Francisco Colombo, who had raised the village of Cotobade, arrived from Pontevedra to take over the negotiations, and to advise the besiegers. But as the negotiations
dragged on, some partisan leaders believed that the garrison was playing for time. On the night of March 27, with Cachamuiña and the two Franciscan friars at their head, the partisans again attacked the city. Within an hour, the
French surrendered. The next day, more than eight hundred imperial troops, led by their commandant, Chalot, formally surrendered to Captain Coutts Crawford of the frigate Venus who took them prisoner. 25

 After their victory, the partisans hastened to the siege of Tuy where for nearly a month the Couto parish priest, Troncoso, had led his army. The immediate effect of this strengthened force was that Troncoso was relieved of his
command and replaced by Lieutenant Colonel Manuel García del Barrio, the senior officer sent by the Suprema to Galicia. This was taken very badly by the other partisan leaders, especially when del Barrio decided to lift the siege
in the face of a combined attack by Soult in Portugal and Ney from the north. With only two thousand men with firearms, the rest having only lances, axes and clubs, del Barrio’s decision made military sense. But the local
partisans refused to join him in his retreat. They elected friar Giráldez as their commander, who asked Cachamuiña, now the new military governor of Vigo, for munitions to continue the siege. Happily for the partisans, Soult’s
column commander realized that there was little possibility of holding the town for long, and the marshal needed its four thousand men. He evacuated the garrison and its artillery across the river Miño. On April 17 there was not
a French soldier left; southern Galicia was free of imperial domination.