

 The partisan bands, like those at the Piedrafita pass, had to all intents and purposes cut communications between the French garrisons, isolating them. The lack of news of how their fellows did in other towns served to lower the
troops’ morale, 24 as did the partisans’ harassment of their patrols and the small but steady additions to their death toll. Moreover, they had everything to fear from the village irregulars who did not respect the conventions of
war. They were, however, spared one additional fear: Romana, incredibly, did not bring his army – which by this time, thanks to new volunteers, numbered nine thousand men – to the partisans’ aid, even when they were beseiging a
major town like Vigo. He earned the Galicians’ scorn for constantly evading combat and the sobriquet of marqués de la Romería (a procession to a shrine) for his marches and countermarches to keep at a safe distance from the
French. In the early stages of the rising before his excessive caution became clear, a number of partisan chieftains consulted him and asked for help; and in the absence of any supreme Galician power, he took over this role,
confirming local leaders’ appointments, supporting the fusion of different groups, ordering punishment of those who refused to serve. Though not participating directly, he became the partisans’ organizational centre of reference.
His best service to the cause was to detach Captain Bernardo González, a native of Orense, from his army to lead the partisans of Ribadavia and O Carballiño. Under the nom de guerre of Cachamuiña, he became one of the rising’s
most important leaders, and one of the first to decide to attack the French-garrisoned cities. This bold move, with a force only of poorly armed villagers, was made possible by the small garrisons Soult had left behind when he
invaded Portugal; nonetheless, for untrained irregulars simultaneously to besiege three of the main towns in the southwest immediately on their formation was a novelty repeated nowhere else.

 Pontevedra was the first to fall after a two-week siege. Cachamuiña had organized partisan leaders in a number of neighbouring insurrectionary villages to join forces to take the town. No sooner had Pontevedra been taken than
the victorious forces left it to join the siege of Vigo, a larger and more important city port to the south; and – temporarily, as it turned out – the French reoccupied Pontevedra.

 Meanwhile, another leader also to become famous, the parish priest of Vilar y Couto, Mauricio Troncoso y Sotomayor, had rebelled against Soult’s requisitions of foodstuffs, wine, meat and mules for his army on its march to
invade Portugal. He told his parishioners not to provide the supplies and invited them and neighbouring hamlets and villages to join him in armed struggle against the French. Two small French detachments which came to collect the
provisions in Vilar y Couto were beaten off; the battle with a third, larger contingent lasted three days.

 Little more than an isolated hamlet of scattered houses around a parish church just north of the river Miño, Vilar y Couto became the nucleus of an army which grew to over 7,000 strong. By the end of February, Romana had
appointed Troncoso ‘general’ of his newly raised army. Shortly thereafter he laid siege to Tuy, downriver on the Miño, where the French garrison numbered four thousand.