

 FRENCH WITHDRAWAL

 Ney returned to Santiago which he took without a battle, the partisans having retreated south of Pontevedra to strong defensive positions at the Sampaio and Caldelas bridges across the Oitabén river on the main road to Tuy. The
former bridge had been cut on Morillo’s orders and the latter was heavily blockaded. On June 7–8 all Ney’s attempts to force a passage for his twelve hundred cavalry across the swollen river’s fords were beaten back by the Miño
Division’s ten thousand partisans and soldiers who held the far bank in well-prepared positions. A gunboat from an English frigate also participated in the defence. As great numbers of the insurgents were still without firearms,
they used, it was said, every artifice of war: cannon hollowed out of oak trunks, bound with iron rings; improvised bows and arrows made from umbrella spokes; clay pots painted bronze to appear like cannon mouths … 30

 Soon realizing the high cost to his eight-thousand-strong corps if he continued to press the issue, Ney called off the attack and returned with his troops to Santiago and La Coruña.

 Though little more than a minor victory – Vigo’s earlier siege and capture by village partisans without military help was more significant of the uprising’s strength – the Sampaio battle had consequences far beyond its military
importance. While Ney waited in La Coruña for Soult to join him, the latter, on hearing the news of the battle, decided to abandon Galicia and march to neighbouring León. Ney was left in an untenable position, with little other
choice than to evacuate the region also. By July 3, he had removed his force from Galicia; behind lay the popular insurrection which two of Napoleon’s most famous marshals had been unable to repress. Galicia was free of the
French army which, throughout the rest of the war, would never again set foot there. After achieving this reversal of Napoleonic fortunes, the majority of Galician villagers returned home to tend their land and look after their
livestock. The parish priest Troncoso, lately ‘general’ of the Miño forces besieging Tuy, also returned to his village to continue to care for his spiritual flock. The popular rising brought no social change in its train. The
dominant rural classes – hidalgos and clergy – retained their hegemony over the villagers. In part this was due to the fact some of these classes had participated in the struggle to expel the French, fighting as they were to
preserve their privileges. Troncoso, however, was highly critical of them. He had expected, he wrote in a summary of his activities to the Suprema’s defence minister, Pedro Cornel, that the ‘arduous enterprise’ of ousting the
French would have been supported by local magistrates at the head of their villagers, and dispersed army officers who would have led the ‘rough plebeians’ who made up the Miño army.

 The wealthy and enlightened should have contributed to maintaining order, always so difficult in such cases, and with their wealth could have helped to feed the many poor who made up the army’s largest number … But with great
sorrow the writer must say, that with a few exceptions, it was not so. The wealthy’s promises … were never kept … What damage they did to the cause! Keeping themselves and their wealth to themselves, they left the poor to fight
alone. 31