

 but with an extreme confidence in Providence – almost, one might say, a believer in miracles … but I must confess that his heroism always seemed to me that of a Christian martyr rather than of a professional soldier. 37

 The town he was so determined to defend, though a provincial capital, had a population of some eight thousand inhabitants in 1808, 38 and was smaller than many in Barcelona’s industrial orbit. It lived off the land – most of
those who laboured on the señorial estates were sharecroppers – and was known for the quality of its mutton and lamb. Day labourers formed the largest part of its active population, followed by textile workers; more than half of
the artisans were guildsmen. While this gave the guilds a certain social importance, their existence did not indicate a thriving economy: Gerona’s economic prostration had been worsened by the Convention War. 39 * The town was
notable for one other social aspect: its great number of clergy – one of every twelve inhabitants in 1797 which was more than four times the Spanish average; the cathedral chapter became one of the principal bases of resistance
during the siege. 40 It was, in short, a small rural town, civilly dominated by a self-perpetuating elite and religiously by a large clergy, which had missed out on Barcelona’s industrial revolution, and with a long history of
suffering sieges. Despite his military staff’s reservations, General Alvarez was certainly professional enough to organize the volunteer civilian defence on military lines from the start. Eight companies of one hundred men, each
under a captain, whom he collectively named La Cruzada (The Crusade): one was made up of students, another of friars, and another of secular clergy. Garrison officers trained them to load and fire a musket; nothing more was
expected of them, and they generally defended the less vulnerable town walls and bulwarks. Carpenters, masons and labourers were also organized into three companies whose tasks were to strengthen and repair the outer walls, and
in the first part of the siege especially, when the besiegers’ artillery fired mainly incendiaries, to put out fires. Other civilian volunteers took over guard duties and the like to relieve the garrison of minor tasks.

 One other novelty, taken on the initiative of two garrison officers’ wives and quickly accepted by Alvarez, was the organization of women volunteers into a company to fetch the defenders food, water, brandy and munitions and to
assist and accompany the walking wounded to hospital to relieve soldiers of these duties. The Santa Bárbara Company, as it was officially called, consisted of 120 ‘young, robust and male-spirited women, without distinction of
classes’, as Alvarez’s founding order put it, divided into four squadrons each under a woman commandant. His consideration of women’s abilities did not run to the belief that they could be left to organize themselves or to comply
with their military duties. He entrusted the company’s organization and its orders of the day to two male commissioners. In carrying out their duties under fire – and not infrequently bearing the wounded on stretchers on their
shoulders – five of the company’s women were killed and eleven wounded during the siege. 41