

 Local resistance in the south was precipitated by Soult’s march from the Atlantic coast to the city of Orense where he crossed the Miño river to invade Portugal. Once the example of local resistance was set, it developed rapidly
into a widespread uprising, taking advantage of the absence of Soult’s troops, and gathered great numbers of rural recruits with the aim of expelling the enemy from their territory.

 The mass of combatants were villagers; but they were raised and led by their social superiors, in many cases parish priests or local magistrates, and subsequently by a number of officers sent for the purpose by the Junta Suprema
or detached from Romana’s Galician army. After the initial moments of resistance, they were generally organized by parishes, in companies and battalions with sergeants and corporals, and commanders whom they elected. As could be
expected the latter were ‘individuals who, by their gifts, authority and bravery’, the villagers recognized as worthy of respect. The best shots among the youth were selected for the few firearms available. 21

 THE COUNTRYSIDE ATTACKS THE CITIES

 News of such events was spread far and wide to rouse villagers to the struggle. Parish priests played an important part: the pulpit became ‘a political tribunal, confessionals served to transmit slogans, orders and news of the
war. Altar cloths hid firearms. Altar boys made scapulars for those about to die and cartridges for those about to kill.’ Flysheets, the periodical press, songs served the same end:

 The worst of all, lads,

 Is that hangman France works,

 To prevent us being Christians

 And to turn us all into Turks.

 So my priest says

 Let our clenched fists make a rod

 For the Fatherland and King.

 And prepare ourselves willingly

 To die for God. 22

 This composition, with its many more stanzas, was sung all over unoccupied Galicia, especially in the taverns where the villagers gathered to talk and exchange news. The young and the not so young began to join their local
partisan groups. A participant in the struggle described the workshops set up in the friary of Santo Domingo to equip these new village recruits. ‘A group of shoemakers and tailors, under the direction of the prior and two
members of the local junta, were working to clothe and shoe them. Carpenters were busy in a workshop making musket stocks and artillery gun carriages. Everything was so well ordered that it looked like one of the king’s
arsenals.’ 23

 The uprising spread rapidly. The French use of cavalry detachments to control villagers – Ney had begun his renowned military career as an enlisted ranker hussar – did not prove effective in tight situations where they could not
easily manoeuvre, as in township streets or in the narrow valleys and mountainous Galician terrain. In more favourable cavalry circumstances, the partisans fled before them, reformed and attacked them from the rear. But the
stretched occupation forces’ need to cover a large region with the maximum speed gave Ney little other choice.