

 The advantages enjoyed by the partisans in the unoccupied enemy south were revealed in the north where the occupation force was a great deal more numerous. When the small port of Corcubión just to the east of Cape Finisterre
raised an army of villagers under its parish priest to resist further enemy exactions, a French infantry column from Santiago evaded the defenders and burned the village to the ground, slaughtering a great number of its
inhabitants. The British frigate Endymion , which the Corcubión junta had called upon for assistance, could do little to help. 26

 THE MIÑO DIVISION

 In the south, the third and last stage was potentially the most difficult: to confront the French in open battle. Here at last, though not on his direct orders, a portion of Romana’s army participated. * A detachment of two
thousand men, whom he had left under General Martín de la Carrera in Puebla de Sanabria, on the extreme south-eastern limits of Galicia, joined the partisans, bringing with them nine cannon and a few troopers. A group of
guerrillas under José María Vázquez, of Salamanca, who was known for daring attacks in Castilla la Vieja, also joined the Galicians. 27 By this time, the partisans alone numbered fourteen thousand, of which those formed by the
parish priest, Troncoso, comprised the largest nucleus; and together with the newly arrived troops, the whole force turned itself into the División del Miño , commanded by Carrera. Its immediate objective was to take Santiago de
Compostela, a symbolic town for all Galicians, indeed for most Spaniards, as the (supposed) burial place of St James, the Apostle, one of the two patron saints of Spain.

 With Morillo as its chief of staff, the new division, taking with it ten thousand men, advanced north along the coast road towards Santiago. The city was defended by General Macune of Ney’s army with nearly three thousand
troops, fourteen cannon and three hundred cavalry. He chose to engage the insurgent force on open terrain, supposing no doubt that there his disciplined and trained troops would have the better of the village partisans. On May
23, at the campo de la Estrella, he joined battle with the division which outnumbered him by over three to one. For once, weight of numbers told; he was defeated. Carrera’s report on the battle read:

 Santiago is ours … After an hour of firing we tired of this suffering, and I ordered Morillo to charge the enemy on the right flank while I led the other columns on his front … Morillo succeeded in entering the city and cut down
the enemy in the streets, pursuing them for more than a league. We have suffered few losses. 28

 The French were reported to have had six hundred dead and wounded, including among the latter Macune himself. However satisfying this conquest, it was premature to offer great thanks. The division could take a city but were
unable to hold it. Ney reconquered it barely a fortnight later in his last desperate attempt to put down the insurrection.

 Meanwhile Soult, who had suffered defeat by Wellesley at Oporto and made a harrowing escape – even worse than Moore’s – over the Portuguese mountains, reached Lugo, the easternmost provincial capital of central Galicia. At a
stormy meeting, Ney argued that their task was to suppress the Galician rising; at this moment, he held no more than La Coruña, El Ferrol, Mondoñedo and Lugo. Soult responded that the main objective was to force the British out
of Portugal. Each was doing no more than express Napoleon’s original orders. Finally, they agreed that while Ney would push the insurgent army back to Tuy, and send a column to Orense, Soult would pursue Romana and force him to
fight or retreat, and would also make contact with French forces in Zamora and Astorga. 29