

 It was notable that the thieves’ principal violence was reserved for the large sheep owners and their alleged sale of their flocks to the enemy-occupied capital. By comparison, the deceitful poor shepherd had been let off
lightly. The wealthy farmers were accused of anti-patriotic profiteering at the people’s expense: they were thought, no doubt correctly, to be turning a handsome profit from an illicit trade. The thieves could do the same or, in
a patriotic sense, prohibit it by keeping the flocks to feed their own men. Either way the well-to-do would lose out. Little better than brigands, these miquelets nonetheless demonstrated a certain social consciousness. *

 In fact, the village militiamen were fighting two wars. In the first, like all Spanish villagers, they took to arms to defend their homes, their families, their lives against the French invader who was trying to dominate their
homeland. Beyond their historical memories of hostility to France, they believed in Fernando VII’s cause – that in the new and young king the much-needed reforms which would alleviate their lives would finally be enacted. They
defended their ‘forefather’s religion’ and their local traditions. These were sufficient causes for believing in the struggle’s righteousness. But at the same time they were fighting to redress the social inequalities they had
suffered – as hired labour, sharecroppers or tenants of the privileged in the past.

 *

 Cataluña had a long history of armed groups roving the countryside: gangs of bandits and smugglers, miquelets and sometents, and it was to be expected that with the practice of irregular warfare banditry and smuggling would
resurface during the Napoleonic war. However, the supply of provisions to the enemy in Barcelona was a particularly flagrant affair with some sometents around the capital acting to protect and profit from it. The Mataró junta
informed the Catalan junta that

 In the village of Tiana, there is a farmer called Felio Rovira who raised a number of [sometent] companies which originally were useful to the struggle. Today they have become the primary smugglers of foodstuffs into Barcelona,
signing passes barefacedly in return for the money they demand. They have gone so far as to threaten the life of the village mayor, who is one of the most honourable of men … Another similar group has now appeared there … and the
competition between them has reached the point that they have shot at each other in order to keep this lucrative business … 53

 When they were well-led by Catalan commanders who had earned their respect – through their skill, fighting success and social status – the ‘volunteer’ miquelet companies fought alongside the army as well as any troops; and as
irregulars were formidable enemies. Often aided by village sometents rallied for the occasion, the militia contantly fought or harassed French foraging forces and columns attempting to control the countryside as had the Galician
villagers. St Cyr, the new French commander-in-chief, testified to the constant drain on his forces by their attacks. By the middle of February 1809, little more than three months after his army of twenty-five thousand had
crossed into Cataluña to reinforce the French occupation forces, which were then barely holding on to Barcelona and Figueras, he calculated that his troops had ‘used up two million cartridges in petty skirmishes and suffered a
very appreciable loss in operations that were practically worthless’. 54