

 SOCIAL CONFLICT

 The better-off villagers of the same Vallés region had not only to confront the French troops but their own forces. Though the Spanish army was odious to Catalan villagers, many of their own volunteer miquelets and sometents
were soon equally hated for their pillaging and aggression towards their own countrymen. In August 1809, the local justices of the Vallés district jointly ‘and with much grief’ complained to the Catalan junta about the miquelets’
conduct.

 The outrages, thefts, and humiliations they commit and inflict are as numerous as the farmers’ houses they pass, without the owners being able to oppose their execrable conduct … the miquelets point their muskets and threaten to
kill them if they try to prevent the pillaging. 50

 One farmer who had the temerity to seize a miquelet who was robbing him, took the militiaman to his commander, expecting to see him punished. Instead, the commander arrested the farmer and let the miquelet go free. 51

 Similar reports about the miquelets’ misconduct were received from a number of places. A trial of four militiamen in Granollers in August 1809, on charges of attempting to steal various flocks of sheep, implicitly showed that,
unlike the Galician uprising, a secondary conflict using the same irregular tactics was being waged in Cataluña under the cover of war. The well-off knew that they could count on the Catalan junta’s rigorous defence of property
rights, tithes and feudal dues – in short of the Old Regime’s status quo. But great numbers of the miquelets were impoverished village landworkers who had, in the past, been exploited by wealthy farmers and monasterial señoríos .
The war had put the dominant boot on the labourer’s foot. Armed but not subject to military discipline, these rural militiamen took the law into their own hands and to their own advantage, for want of money if nothing else, since
most of them received little or no pay for defending their homeland. The first witness at the miquelets’ trial, a butcher in Mollet, close to Granollers, testified that two months earlier they had attempted to force him to give
them his flock but had been prevented from their ‘criminal designs’ by the local purveyor and a cashier. They had, said the butcher, already tried to steal other flocks.

 The militiamen then went to a nearby pasture and tried to rob a shepherd of his flock. The latter informed the tribunal that he had mendaciously told them that the sheep belonged to the municipality and that if they stole them
he would have to pay to make good the loss. This was sufficient to deter the miquelets. They had then proceeded to a another pasture, declared a third witness, where they had told those minding the flocks that since the sheep
would shortly be taken by their owners to the relief of French-occupied Barcelona – a documented practice (see below) – the militiamen would do so themselves. An argument arose. The miquelets pointed their muskets at the
shepherds; the owner–witness’s brother offered them money – a peseta to begin with, a duro subsequently – to take themselves off, but the militiamen refused. The owner’s brother sent a message to the local justice. He appeared on
the scene with a number of locals, and the miquelets fired at them, not hitting any however. Overwhelmed by the number of villagers who had gathered, the militiamen made off. 52