

 Coming from what was generally assumed to be the most Roman Catholic of countries, this was bewildering. But it also was not new. Since the turn of the century all the disasters, epidemics and famines had proven God’s wrath with
the Spaniards for having turned from his path. The war was the latest – and greatest – of these punishments, inflicted by the very country whose example had been responsible for corrupting an age-long Spanish religious tradition:
France, ‘from [which] all evil, all pestilence, all ruin has come to us….’ 10 None other than the last Suprema president, Archbishop Laodicéa, addressing patriot Spaniards on his assumption of office, resumed the values of
theological history with copious references to Israel’s fate when its people strayed from the face of God, and to Spain’s past victories as his standard bearer. The people must ‘sanctify this war to oblige God to favour our
cause’.

 The [holy] faith shows us that war is one of divine justice’s greatest scourges wherein is seen the hand of God and his fury to make this nation amend its impious ways, to be appeased only by prayer and penitence … Let us weep
at the insensitivity which, in midst of outrages to our holy religion, of our villages’ desolation, of our provinces’ oppression and of the ruin which threatens the kingdom, does not recognize the need to set our customs aright,
of which God, through the fruit of our new and extraordinary tribulations, is attempting to make us aware … 11

 This was relatively restrained in comparison to some exhortations, the archbishop having proved himself a fairly moderate Suprema member; and it was published at an extreme moment of crisis in the war, with the enemy preparing
to invade Andalucía. Nonetheless, it illustrated the theological stance that Napoleon was little more than God’s scourge to return Spaniards to their old ways, for Catholic devotion was inherent in the nation’s customs and was
not a matter of choice: religious toleration – which many feared the Bonapartist regime would introduce in the occupied region – was anathema. God, not soldiers, won battles, though the archbishop did not totally ignore human
agency, exhorting the nation’s clergy to aid military enlistment and the formation of clerical guerrilla bands.

 The token of this theological position was almost always women’s ‘immodest’ dress.

 Like the proud women of Israel, some Spanish women, in their confident arrogance, expose themselves in their dress far in excess of Christian modesty and decorum. Provoking the wrath of Heaven with the whims of your lust, you
bring on yourselves dishonour, orphanhood, mourning and the final extermination. 12

 Shortly before, the bishop of Santander had tried to have the Suprema legally outlaw feminine ‘immodesty’. But he met his match in the former vicar general of Toledo, who had become the Suprema’s secretary-general. In his report
on the bishop’s proposal to ‘bury legally and forever in Spain women’s nakedness’, Pedro Rivero advised the Suprema that ‘every law which is at odds with a kingdom’s public and general opinion is not obeyed or is evaded in such a
manner as to make a fool of the law’, and ‘in turn reflects on the government’s power’. 13 The Suprema agreed with its secretary general who, as an enlightened cleric, granted society’s agency a power which the theological
interpretation of events tried to deny it.