

 By now the defenders’ guiding spirit, Alvarez, was himself suffering from fever and was delirious much of the time. Yet he rejected out of hand all offers of terms – as he had done throughout the siege. The town, its garrison
and inhabitants could perish of hunger or at the enemy’s sword: he would not surrender.

 Despite their great suffering, it was once again not the inhabitants who lost heart, but rather the officers, eight of whom, including three lieutenant colonels, deserted to the enemy on November 19. They informed Marshal
Augereau of the town’s state and that Alvarez was insane and dying. Heartened by the news and determined to hasten the end of the siege, Augereau offered to treat, but Alvarez again rejected surrender. The French commander began
to batter a new breach in the walls, and took the redoubts above the town, seriously threatening the garrison’s last forts on the heights and Gerona’s inner defences.

 But the immediately decisive factor was Alvarez. On December 8 his health worsened notably and he suffered a fit of delirium. Drs Viadér and Nieto Samaniego confirmed the seriousness of his condition, and the next day he was
given the last rites. The junta appointed his second-in-command, Julián de Bolíbar, in his place. At a meeting of military commanders and junta members early on December 10, amidst a bombardment which had begun at dawn from all
the enemy batteries and with constant requests arriving for reinforcements at the breaches as the imperial troops attacked, and members’ discouraging accounts of the state of the defences, the lack of wheat stocks, the
unlikelihood of receiving any external aid, the majority voted to seek negotiations to ensure that the population and garrison were not put to the sword after a successful new assault. Colonel Fornás, who had led the Montjuich
defence and commanded many of the garrison’s sorties, was called on to negotiate.

 Meanwhile, the bishop called a meeting of clerical dignitaries, professional men and guild representatives to inform them of the state of affairs. The guild members, who had been one of the mainstays of resistance, expressed
great opposition to negotiations. Guildsmen had been responsible originally for raising Gerona; their 730-odd members had defended the town – masons, carpenters and allied trades in the three special companies which repaired
breaches; 88 their officials had ensured that members reported for duty in their Cruzada companies; and the guilds had contributed money to the defence and to the officers’ food and pay. But they had not been consulted on the
army envoy’s dispatch to seek terms; with the exception of Alvarez, the officer corps had revealed itself as the defence’s weak link.

 Extended to a wider meeting, the military junta informed the assembly that, even with civilian help, the garrison was too weak to hold off an enemy attack on the breaches, and that negotiations had begun to avoid the
population’s slaughter. But if the inhabitants were determined to continue resistance, the garrison was prepared to die alongside them. While these discussions were still in progress, the French general appointed by Augereau to
draw up the capitulation terms arrived. He was amazed to find himself the object of questions from junta members in the midst of an increasingly chaotic meeting which had not reached agreement on whether to surrender. Minds were
finally focused by Colonel Fornás recalling that, under his agreement with Augereau, he was due in a short time to return to the marshal with the town’s answer. Finally, agreement was reached; Fornás returned, terms were reached:
the town would capitulate on the following morning, December 11. 89