

 Many of the lower clergy were less concerned in their sermons with theological arguments about God’s wrath on the Spanish than to incite them to fight.

 In our present straits, it is imperative that we unite all our strength. We must hasten to take up arms; all deserters and those who shelter them or prevent military enlistment are unfaithful to the fatherland and religion …
Friars and clerics will join the struggle … 14

 From early 1809, in the occupied regions of Castilla la Vieja, Navarra and Aragón, about half the bishops fled their dioceses for the safety of the patriot zone. Many of them went disguised as ordinary priests, some on foot. The
eighty-three year old bishop of Segovia, for example, hid in a friary in the Guadarrama mountains for five months until he was warned that a detachment of French troops from Madrid was on its way to arrest him. Fleeing at night,
he rode over the sierras, down into the Tajo river valley and up into the Toledan hills until he reached the patriot outpost of Horcajo de los Montes where he rested from ‘the ailments and disorders of this long and tiring
journey on horseback which … it seemed impossible for me to have endured. But I am comforted that I did so rather than tarnish my old age … by setting Spanish youth an example of weakness ….’ 15

 The Suprema was ‘horrified’ by the Bonapartist bishops’ ‘scandalous’ conduct. Who could have believed that among those few individuals, ‘whose perversity, ambition or weakness’ had led them to ‘embrace the party of Europe’s
oppressor’, there should be numbered prelates of the Church?

 Even more so does it seem impossible when the tyrant’s and his satellites’ outrages to our August Religion, to the faithful’s Venerable Father, to our most holy and sacred institutions, are taken into account. No, it is not
credible that the Lord’s anointed … should use their high and sacred ministry publicly to maintain that perfidy is justice, godlessness piety, inhumanity clemency, violence a legitimate right, pillage generosity, devastation
happiness. 16

 The Suprema ordered that all the Bonapartist clerics’ property, temporalities and rights were to be seized immediately and that they were to be tried for high treason if caught. As the Bonapartist regime also expropriated
prelates who did not return to their dioceses in the occupied zone, the Church’s institutional heads were generally in little position to lead the struggle.

 By default, this was left to rural parish priests who shared their village parishioners’ fate at the hands of the French forces. They were the only clerics who usually stayed at their posts at times of imperial incursions. This
clergy was materially affected by the enemy troops’ exactions since, against the Bonapartist government’s express orders, the portion of tithes on which they lived were usually seized by the military along with the villagers’
crops; and with the increased resistance to paying tithes – and local authorities’ retention of those that were paid to meet exactions from both French and Spanish armies – the parish priest was hard put to stay alive. * In this
he was no different to the majority of his parishioners.