

===== FILE: OEBPS/24_Chapter13.xhtml =====
Napoleon’s Cursed War

 13

 The Church at War

 ABSENCE OF A UNIFIED FRONT

 We are not now engaged in an ordinary war … No, this is a voluntary war of religion, in which all who are capable of taking arms must willingly enrol, and offer themselves in sacrifice to God if that is the Almighty’s wish. It
is a war in which the rich must offer all their wealth and jewels without a thought, as the Church is about to offer all its silver … Moreover, to ensure us of all Heaven’s fervour, we must preach the complete reform of [the
people’s] customs: if we do not do so, how shall we distinguish ourselves from our dissolute and disbelieving enemies? … This is a time of penitence … (A Prelate’s Proclamation to his Parish Priests, 1808) 1

 This was the language that could be expected of an absolutist bishop. There was nothing new in it; it had been used by predicant monks and friars during the previous war against the French Revolution, which they had similarly
declared a religious war. What was singular about the proclamation was that it did not represent a nationwide clerical response to the anti-Napoleonic struggle as might be supposed.

 From the start of the conflict, the Church failed to adopt a national collective stance – a general ecclesiastical call, for example, to rally clergy and people in a crusade against the ‘infidel’ invaders. The Church’s ‘silence,
inactivity and insensibility’ to the popular will to defend religion had ‘made the people lose heart, and not without reason …’ wrote an unnamed correspondent to the Suprema.

 Scandalized by the enemy’s insults and profanations of their temples, altars and ministers the people in their zeal would have faced any danger or sacrifice to avenge them. Had the ministers of the Church raised their standard
and exhorted the faithful in their defence this would have happened … The motif of religion profaned was more than sufficient for all Spaniards to adopt the motto, Victory or Death. 2

 Who better than the head of the Church to rally popular resistance? But the primate of Spain, Cardinal Luís Borbón, a close relative of the deposed royal family, was at that moment a member of a pro-French junta of public
tranquility in Toledo. An enlightened – though personally weak – cleric, there he would have stayed had it not been for the patriot Bailén victory; like many another highly placed personage, he then changed his mind about
Bonapartist prospects in Spain and turned coat to become a patriot supporter. Even so, it was only two months later, in September 1808, that he issued his first pastoral to his diocese calling on his parishioners to take to arms
like ‘the Israelites and Spanish provinces’ in defence of religion, king and fatherland.

 Cardinal Borbón’s attitude graphically illustrated the ecclesiastical split. Although the Church was a truly national institution, a state within the absolutist state, the question of whether it could have been the vector of
organized national resistance seemed dubious in the light of its lack of political and ideological homogeneity and of a coherent territorial organization. *