

 The Suprema’s request brought a reply from the prior of a religious order in another nearby township. The secular and regular clergy had denied their profession of faith, he wrote.

 I attribute precisely all the evils which have affected, and still affect us, to the sins of us who are ministers of the faith … We have still not returned to our duty as clergy, it being necessary to carry forward our reform in
order that such missions &c may bear their full fruit. 26

 When the final crisis loomed and Andalucía was about to be invaded, the Suprema again appealed to bishops to send priests, prebendaries and other church dignitaries to the army ‘with the purpose of exhorting the troops and
officers to fulfil their respective obligations and to improve their habits’. The fatherland’s defenders must learn military discipline ‘and become accustomed to the duties which religion imposes on them’. 27

 From the start of the war, some provincial juntas had been ready to intervene directly in ecclesiastical affairs. The Granada junta, for example, declared that Spanish bishops could make full use of their facultative powers to
confront the critical situation created by the impossibility of communicating with the Pope, then Napoleon’s prisoner in France, or the Roman curia. Cardinal Borbón protested at this lay ‘intervention’ in ecclesiastical matters:
the juntas’ sovereignty, in his view, was limited and temporary and did not extend to ‘regalist’ sway over the Church. Undaunted, the junta even intercepted some of the cardinal’s mail.

 The Suprema’s major grievance with the Church came, however, over the most material of matters: gold, jewels and silver plate – ecclesiastical treasure. Despite its great institutional wealth, the Church, which thanks to some of
its prelates had contributed handsomely after the uprising, now barely gave anything to the cause it was supposed to call its own. The prelates of Valencia and Cuenca, the former with prewar revenues of close on two million
reales a year and the latter with but one quarter of this amount, were exceptions. But the archbishop of Granada categorically refused to contribute more than the four hundred thousand reales he had already given when the Suprema
called on him to provide for the maintenance of troops from his diocese serving in Cataluña ‘in order to help them secure Barcelona’s surrender’. He said that his alms kept alive ‘the poor of all classes, many of them honourable
families, in a country whose poverty makes it the Galicia of Andalucía’. 28 Charity at home was evidently more important than a distant war.

 One reason, no doubt, for the decline in the prelates’ war contributions was that patriot bishops who had fled their dioceses no longer controlled their revenues or had seen them expropriated by the Bonapartist regime; another
that clerical revenues had in many cases dropped very considerably because of the widespread resistance to paying tithes or their expropriation by local authorities to pay for exactions levied on villages by the French military.
In order to identify the local landed wealthy, the French made a practice on entering an unknown village of immediately seizing the tithe books. To defend themselves and their villages, the wealthy could offer payment collected
from the community’s tithes instead of seeing their own resources plundered.