

 As long as the patriot resistance was principally rural-based, depending on villagers for recruits and crops, village priests were in fact as important to the cause as Church prelates, indeed perhaps more so for their direct
influence on the local population. (The Bonapartist regime also recognized this and tried, unsuccessfully, to win them to its cause.) What was at stake was to ensure the Church’s survival which required in turn the fatherland’s
survival. To an unlettered public, the parish priest was the divine and terrestrial conduit summoning villagers to continued resistance for God-given aims and the sheer need of physical survival. Sermons were their major form of
rallying the people. In the villages where imperial troops seized crops and livestock, damaged churches and committed other crimes, they provided parish priests with ready-made patriot propaganda. But even in those that had not
yet experienced the enemy, the news of their razzias elsewhere was sufficient; from a small, isolated Sevillan village, the local priest wrote in June 1809:

 Though my parish is poor and has few parishioners, the [Suprema’s] orders for special and solemn celebrations on H.M. Fernando’s saint’s day were observed with a solemn mass and Te Deum …; and the following day another service
in honour of our brothers killed in the present war. All this in order to ask mercy of God, to honour and glorify him for the outrages which the vile French heretics perpetrate. 17

 The Suprema was well aware of parish priests’ importance in maintaining the people’s spirit of resistance. In gratefully rejecting one such’s offer to serve in the army, the Junta told him that ‘in your substantial duties as a
parish priest you can do more good for the fatherland by inspiring your parishioners to fight and resist tyrants than you can by enlisting in the army’. 18

 *

 It was, without a doubt, the Bonapartist regime’s dissolution of the religious orders which provided the patriot lower clergy with a common bone to chew. Foreshadowed by Napoleon’s Chamartín decrees of December 1808, King
Josef’s minister of ecclesiastical affairs, the Spanish conde de Montarco, spent considerable time with his advisers carefully planning the matter in order to lessen opposition to the dissolution, though the need to reduce
Spain’s sixty thousand friars – the Bonapartist figure, which was fifty percent higher than the usually accepted number 19 – had been widely recognized by enlightened secular and religious clergy, as well as by the government,
from long before the war. (The patriots would subsequently also propose a reform restricting friars’ numbers.) * An early Bonapartist measure was to promise all those friars and monks who left their cloisters voluntarily a
pension of 2,200 reales. Only about seven hundred accepted the offer; 20 many more fled in the face of imperial army incursions and did not return because their religious houses had been burned or destroyed by the occupying
troops.

 The ‘near-run’ battle of Talavera in July 1809, † and the awareness that the majority of the Spanish regular clergy was implacably hostile to the new Madrid regime, brought a readiness to seize the moment for reform. ‘Neither
the consideration we have shown until now … nor the sincere promises we have made to grant [friars and monks] our protection and favour, have sufficed’, the preamble to the dissolution decree declared. 21