

 Most strikingly it was precisely in those regions which the French had not occupied – Galicia and Murcia – or occupied only for a relatively short time like Andalucía that headed the list of the highest number of propositions.
In Sevilla, for example, they rose six-fold. But those regions which had been occupied the longest or for nearly the whole war varied little from their pre-war levels. The exception was Cataluña where the number rose by nearly
two-thirds: the severity of the social conflict which was fought there under cover of the anti-Napoleonic struggle was no doubt responsible; and the postwar desire for revenge on the part of the well-to-do and ultra clergy was
sufficient cause for the increase of accusations.

 The disparities between unoccupied and occupied zones could be interpreted in a number of ways: on the one hand, those who had suffered the French occupation for a long period would be little inclined to denounce the religious
‘crimes’ of persons who had been known patriots, while notorious collaborators with the Bonapartist regime had either fled or been killed. Intimately aware of the difficulties of the times, the majority who had not actively
participated on one side or the other provided little scope for potential accusers who would fear that the tables could be easily turned on them. In the unoccupied or briefly occupied zones, there were fewer restraints. The great
number of accusations compared to pre-war – though the war and postwar years extended over a greater time span – could be explained by the fact that people had no excuse for their sacrilegious verbal behaviour. † Added to which
was an unknown factor: many of the denunciations, it could be imagined, corresponded to personal wartime vendettas which were pursued in the repressive post-war climate.

===== FILE: OEBPS/25_Chapter14.xhtml =====
Napoleon’s Cursed War

 14

 Origins of the Guerrilla

 One of the first recorded guerrilla leaders was a self-confessed illiterate, Diego López Membrilla, whom his companions elected to their command after the people had risen in several townships of La Mancha and fought against
Dupont’s rearguard in 1808 on its march to Andalucía. In a proclamation, he said that the ordinary people ‘maintained a good number of wealthy men’ with their dues and rents on the lands belonging to the locally dominant
Calatrava military–religious order.

 But on this occasion little good did it do you to protect your cause. These (rich) men did nothing to help you, did not place themselves on your side and raise an army of your courageous brothers … [In future] they shall
contribute with their wealth to protect you so that you may conclude the great enterprise that you have undertaken. (Itinerant headquarters on the Guadiana [river], June 27, 1808, by order of señor Diego Lopez Membrilla, who does
not know how to write.) 1

 Romantic myth had it that the guerrilla (or ‘small war’) – like the anti-Napoleonic rising – was the major popular response to Napoleon’s invasion of Spain. And in Membrilla’s case with the added spice of social criticism. There
can be no doubt that the lower orders played a significant part in the rising and guerrilla; but in neither case were they the exclusive protagonists. The educated elite played an important role in both. One of the earliest
partisan leaders, for example, was a Basque-born friar who formed his party in Castilla la Vieja very shortly after the outbreak of the war. Juan Mendieta (who fought under the nom de guerre of ‘El Capuchino’, in honour of his
religious order) staged a particularly spectacular coup in capturing General Franceschi, Napoleon’s brilliant light cavalry commander, in June 1809. Franceschi was travelling by coach with dispatches from Marshal Soult to King
Josef in Madrid. As he passed through Zamora, where Mendieta’s friary was situated, the friar’s band held up the coach and, after a struggle, seized the general. A couple of months later the friar took prisoner at no great
distance from Valladolid a French detachment commanded by an aide-de-camp of General Kellerman, military governor of the Castilian capital. Irregular warfare had an age-long history; the guerrilla was of a more recent vintage,
with its own particular historical causes. 2 From the mid-eighteenth century, the regular and increasingly professionalized armies on which absolutism based its power paid much greater attention than in the past to the principle
of mobility. Small military groups reconnoitred and probed the enemy’s lines, seizing prisoners to gain information on their opponents’ strength, movements, food supplies and battle plans. When fighting in their homelands, local
villagers acted as guides and informants. This type of war, named by the French ‘la petite guerre’, or ‘small war’, was adopted as a standard military strategy of the Old Regime’s armies and became ‘as common as pitched battles
or sieges’. 3 Translated into Spanish, a great number of treatises on the subject, especially French, used in their titles or translations the literal Spanish equivalent of ‘small war’ – ‘guerrilla’. This military connotation was
the Spanish word’s principal meaning at the outbreak of the Napoleonic war.