

 Only one further step was necessary: the expansion of the ‘little (military) war’ to a civilian strategy of armed resistance which recalled the age-long tradition of irregular warfare. Although it was often believed that,
because of its Spanish name, the guerrilla as a civilian phenomenon was a Spanish innovation arising out of the Napoleonic conflict, there were recent forerunners in French anti-revolutionary movements: the Vendée and Chouannerie
of 1793–1801; the Calabrian insurrection of 1799, and indeed the Spanish war against the French Convention (1793–1795). During the latter conflict, it was villagers in southwestern France who took to irregular combat when their
homes and lands were threatened by Spanish regular troops. In French revolutionary times, when their own armies failed them, or they had none, a population determined to resist had little other option than to fight with the only
means to hand: a ‘small war’. What distinguished the Spanish guerrilla in the Peninsular War was thus not its originality but its extent . It was the first time that the guerrilla became a nationwide form of resistance and a
sanctified right of self-defence.

 PRECONDITIONS OF SPAIN’S GUERRILLA WARFARE

 Sanctified or not, self-defence had for long been a self-assumed right under the Old Regime. In the difficult times of the late eighteenth century, villagers had to defend themselves, their homes, crops and livestock from a
proliferation of bandits, smugglers, highwaymen, robbers and thieves. Many locals were skilled in the use of firearms as a result. In coastal and border areas, armed smugglers, often in large bands, were prepared to fight it out
with excise men. Volunteer civilian forces raised by the government tried to put them down. The result of this strife was that a great number of township and village inhabitants had experience of fighting in small, self-organized
bands; or in officially approved militia-style ‘regiments’, and this practice they could put to good use in the anti-Napoleonic struggle.

 Self-defence was one precondition for armed popular resistance. Two others were the military’s state at the outset of war and the question of land ‘ownership’.

 The Spanish Military

 The army’s humiliation during the War of the Convention in which, after initial success, it was defeated by the French revolutionaries, brought on an identity crisis among officers who, on the one hand, admired the French army
with which some had trained and alongside which others had fought as allies, while, on the other hand, they intensely hated the revolutionary ideals that informed the French army. Their accepted view of the world had been
overturned: yesterday’s allies, the French, were today’s enemy, and the former enemy (Britain) now an ally. 4 The same happened in 1808. In their disoriented state it was hardly surprising that in general the Spanish officer
corps went through the Napoleonic war ‘without being able to understand or support either the new strategy of mass warfare or the tactics of guerrilla war. They had been trained for very different suppositions than those it was
their lot to live through.’ 5