

 Reinforcing this perception, another important event took place during these years. A reforming Spanish regime began to emerge in Cádiz where the patriots under French siege held a Constituent Assembly which culminated in the
proclamation of a new constitution late in Lent, 1812. * But the event had long been foreseen. Opposed to absolutism, the constitution appeared to many, especially the absolutist clergy, as a check on the Church’s former power.

 In 1812 and 1813, in one of Spain’s most devout regions, the Basque country, Lent conceptions soared while population growth dropped. † Until then, as in the pre-war, Basques had observed the proscription with a certain rigour.
What had changed? In the first instance the war itself. From early 1812, precisely at the height of their apparent control, the French occupation was shown to be vulnerable: known to all, Napoleon was withdrawing troops for his
Russian campaign; guerrilla activity rose to its maximum in neighbouring Navarra and the Basque country itself, and a fortnight before Lent Wellington captured the border fortress town of Ciudad Rodrigo, the first step of his
latest campaign in the Spanish interior. Perceptibly the war was taking a new turn. It was now possible even to imagine victory in which, under a new constitution, the Old Order and its dominant Church would have no place … By
the following year the war was plainly about to end in an allied victory: barely a fortnight into Lent, Josef Bonaparte evacuated Madrid never to return. A triumphant peace would ensure that the patriot constitution was put into
effect, undermining the clerical ultras and their Castilian centralism which the Basques deplored.

 In this view, popular wartime religiosity depended rather largely on the fortunes of the war at different moments and visions of what the future might hold. On external events, in other words, rather than on internalized
religious sentiment, in keeping with a past where, in much of Spain, a ceremonial Church pervaded the exterior world without undue concern for the inner spiritual being.

 *

 The postwar Inquisition’s tribunals added another dimension to the question of wartime religiosity since they explored religious ‘subversion’ during the conflict. One accusation in particular predominated both before, during and
after the war. Called ‘propositions’ it covered a multitude of sins: heretical, erroneous or scandalous utterances, for instance, that transgressed religious dogma by, to cite one example, declaring that ordinary fornication was
not a sin. In 1815, ten Inquisition tribunals throughout the country received denunciations of persons accused of propositions. These had more than doubled over the pre-war number. * This could well have been because ‘verbal
heresy’ was the easiest accusation to make and the hardest to disprove. But their regional distribution gave the lie to the Spanish clerical assertion that the French occupation had been solely responsible for the growth of
secularization.