

 Partisans formed eighty percent of the recorded guerrillas. † On this evidence, the authorities’ policy of encouraging and sanctioning the creation of new groups in order to retain control of the guerrilla movement was not
strikingly successful. But once the decrees were widely known, increasing numbers of would-be guerrilla leaders asked permission to form their groups. At the very minimum one in five guerrilleros came from the privileged classes:
the clergy, military, professionals (lawyers and doctors mainly) and civilian authorities – administratives and civil servants. Students were also well represented. Clerics made up forty percent of these classes, but only eight
percent of the guerrilleros total. The elite’s presence was more marked among the leadership than in the rank and file.

 Overall, the labouring poor outnumbered the educated classes. Smallholders and land-use owners formed nearly half of the latter’s members. But the most striking aspect of the labouring classes was the absence of the rural
proletariat – the agrarian day labourers – who at the turn of the century made up just under one half of Spain’s land-working population. This can be ascribed to two factors: their proportion of total land workers was lower in
the north – Galicia, Asturias and the Basque country had under twenty-five percent, and Castilla la Vieja between twenty-five and fifty percent – than in Andalucía where they reached eighty percent. 15 The fact that they had
nothing to lose and were the last to fear a Bonapartist takeover in terms of ownership – they would have to labour to earn their daily wage whichever regime was in power – was the second factor. As Gaspar Melchor Jovellanos, a
Junta Suprema member, speaking about the Andalucian rural proletariat, put it: ‘these provinces in which the people are mainly composed of day labourers, are miserable and indifferent and without any patriotic spirit …’ (stress
added). 16

 Among the partisans – those who became guerrilleros without either civilian or military authority – labouring men outnumbered proportionately the privileged classes, demonstrating the fact that the former had been first into the
field and had asked permission of no one to wage their own ‘little war’. At their head, as always, were smallholders and land-use owners; and these, as a percentage of their recorded participants, provided as many chiefs as did
clerics who headed the elite’s number of leaders. *

 Though overall the lower orders provided fewer chiefs than their social superiors, it was from among the former that many of the great guerrilla leaders emerged: their parties came to number several thousand each, and their
chieftains, whose military exploits in confounding the imperial forces became legendary, demonstrated an instinctive sense of irregular war and how to lead their men. They showed an agility of tactical thinking and flexibility of
action that should have put the Spanish noble military hierarchy to shame; and most of them were promoted by the patriot government to the military rank of brigadier at least. †