

 Small guerrilla bands began to form from late 1808 and early 1809. The latter year and the following two were economically even harsher than the preceding period. Grain prices rose and output fell. Criminality increased, and the
incipient guerrillas and bandits grew in numbers. To out-of-work and vagrant youth the former offered, if not a land of milk and honey, then one of food, drink and a weekly wage of twenty reales, as some adolescents testified to
the Bonapartist extraordinary criminal tribunal in Bilbao. By the autumn of 1809, guerrilla incursions into villages – especially those of difficult access to the French – were becoming frequent. Six guerrilleros took over the
village of Munguía on Epiphany, 1810, cutting off its entrances and mingling with the many inhabitants celebrating the feast day, saying they had come to kill the local magistrate who, along with the rest of the village
authorities, rapidly went into hiding. A village landowner and former cavalry officer who witnessed the street scene said that ‘never had he seen a more disorderly and unruly group of men, whose drunkeness, their running hither
and thither, their shooting of arms and shouted threats not surprisingly frightened many people’.

 As a rule, at this stage, between fifteen and thirty armed men, some mounted, others on foot, would seal off the village entrances and take over the main square. They had come, they quickly made it known, to ‘deal with’ a number
of local notables of dubious patriotism. The notables in question hid, fled or tried to temporize; it made little difference because their belongings, money, clothes, arms, private papers and archives, even their beds on
occasion, were seized. They could be happy to escape with their lives. Meanwhile, the guerrilleros recruited among the indigent young and could usually count on enlisting a good score of them.

 Alongside these chaotic, lawless small groups – ‘bold, daring and perverse men, who will do whatever comes into their heads’ said a landowner who had been threatened with death by a group – there emerged a number of guerrilla
leaders who commanded respect by their discipline, conscious commitment to the anti-Napoleonic struggle, tactical skill and personal bravery. They had no hesitation in shooting spies and traitors, in punishing rogue guerrillas,
in pursuing ‘an eye for an eye and a tooth for a tooth’ reprisals. But they took good care of the relationship with the villagers and issued receipts for the food and services received – though whether the villagers were ever
able to cash them in is highly doubtful. 14 A guerrilla tactic to deceive the enemy was to order village authorities to prepare rations for several thousand men on the following day. Learning of this from their spies, an
outnumbered French column would make off; the guerrilla then struck in an altogether different direction.

 THE GUERRILLAS’ SOCIAL PROFILE *

 At their most basic level, the guerrilleros could be separated into three general categories depending on the manner in which they were created. Those who took up arms without any authorization from either civilian or military
authorities could be called partisans ; those who asked for and received official authorization to create new groups under one of the two Junta Suprema’s decrees, especially the second, could be termed privateers ; and within
them was a sub-category of outlaws , mainly pardoned smugglers, whom the Junta Suprema also called on to participate in the guerrilla. Finally religious crusaders was the name given to officially authorized groups led or formed
in their majority by clerics. Guerrilla, when it entered the Spanish language in its new use, became the generic name for all of these.