

 The only other motive for joining the guerrilla which came close to that of desertion was the experience of collective violence at the hands of the imperial forces, often with personal consequences: the death of close relatives,
the abuse of female kin, forced labour in carrying or carting for the occupying army, the forcible seizure of food supplies and an infinity of individual indignities. Many of the outstanding parties’ leaders, however, shared an
experience which conditioned their choice of taking up arms: the Convention War. Three of the large party leaders – El Empecinado, Julián Sánchez, Miguel Sarasa – and Gerónimo Saornil, the leader of a medium-sized party in
Castilla la Vieja – were veterans of the war; and Espoz y Mina had felt its harsh effects when the French revolutionaries invaded his native Navarra.

 Guerrillas’ Age

 Although the average age ‡ was 25.9 years – the youngest guerrillero registered was ten and the oldest sixty – it was, as in the massive army volunteer enlistment at the beginning of the war, the sixteen to twenty-five-year-olds
who predominated, forming almost two-thirds of the total. (The sixteen to twenty-year-olds alone formed forty-seven percent). The overall average was raised by the much higher age (near thirty on average) of the educated classes.

 Generally speaking then the labouring poor’s guerrilleros were considerably younger than their privileged counterparts, which reinforced the latter’s leadership role. Given that life expectancy at birth for all Spanish males was
no more than 27.3 years, 17 and that half of the national population was aged twenty-five or under (but only twenty-eight percent lived to reach more than forty, and just over fifteen percent to reach more than fifty), it was
little wonder to find youth at the forefront of the labouring classes’ guerrilla contingent.

===== FILE: OEBPS/26_Chapter15.xhtml =====
Napoleon’s Cursed War

 15

 From the Battle of Talavera
to the Suprema’s Demise

 In July 1809, General Wellesley’s British army of Portugal, in conjunction with General Cuesta’s army of Extremadura, began an offensive along the Tajo river towards Madrid. On the 27th and 28th the allies won what both patriots
and the British government considered the ‘victory’ of Talavera. It was the largest and bitterest battle the British army had fought in sixteen years of war. 1 A Te Deum was sung in celebration in Sevilla cathedral, and Wellesley
was elevated to the peerage as Lord Wellington, viscount of Talavera, by a grateful Tory cabinet. The victory was not, however, as clear-cut as the Anglo-Spanish forces might have achieved. In a fierce and bloody battle, Marshal
Victor made three determined attacks on the allied lines and was beaten back, only narrowly more than once, with the loss of some seven thousand men. But the imperial troops inflicted heavy casualties also: Wellesley lost 5,400 –
one in four of his combatants on the field. At the end of the day, the allied forces made no attempt to pursue the enemy which had retreated only a short distance.