

 Instead, after a few days, it was the allies who retreated, under threat from Soult advancing on their rear, leaving free the neuralgic centre of Spain to the enemy who was at liberty to begin his attacks southwards again. The
situation was worsened at Almonacid on August 11 by the defeat of the patriot army of La Mancha, which was supposed to have supported the allied offensive but arrived too late. Within a few weeks, according to a patriot agent,
French officers were openly laughing in Talavera about the battle just outside the town’s walls. They had successfully attacked a force double their strength, they claimed. Although at one level this was sheer bravado, at another
it represented a strategic truth: the imperial forces remained in command of the Tajo river, Madrid’s natural defence against attack from the west or south. But the patriot agent in Talavera wrote:

 … such is the faith and enthusiasm of all us unhappy and ignorant people that together, as though with one voice, we say: Our forces will come like lions one day and all will be avenged . A few, who claim to be more sensible,
exclaim: What is the purpose of their coming just to retreat? 2

 The battle’s outstanding effect on the allies was to worsen their relationship, which began with Wellesley’s distrust of Cuesta; * a distrust which deterioriated into mutual recriminations, charges and counter-charges; and ended
with Wellesley – now Wellington – retreating at the end of the year from the Spanish–Portuguese border back into Portugal, not to reappear at the head of an army in the Spanish interior for two and a half years.

 Before his retreat, the Extremaduran junta attempted to prevent him from withdrawing his forces totally from their region. 3 The Suprema reacted violently to the junta’s ‘insubordination’ in treating with foreigners – violating
the Junta’s diplomatic privilege; its anger was increased by the fact there had been discussions in its military junta about giving Wellington command of the Extremaduran army. The Suprema deputy, Antonio Valdés, had approved the
idea ‘as long as Wellington is prepared to remain on the offensive’. But another deputy, Rodrigo Riquelme, of Granada, forcibly rejected the proposal.

 It is not part of the British system to make active war against the French … It should not be forgotten that after Talavera the English general [Wellington] withdrew his forces from those of Cuesta … The British government has
realized that the Spanish Nation’s struggle against the Tyrant [Napoleon] is altogether unequal, that all the sacrifices it makes are useless, and might as well be thrown into the sea … 4

 No more was heard thereafter about the proposal.

 *

 Much of the earlier recrimination revolved around Spanish food supplies for Wellington’s army. When in January 1809, shortly after its arrival in Sevilla, the Suprema appointed Clemente María Rodríguez director general of the
kingdom’s royal provisions, whose task was to supply the armies, he found the office like a ‘skeleton in its death throes’, without funds, staff, and any knowledge of the armies’ or their commissariats’ whereabouts.