

 using the lowest and vilest forms of guile … Napoleon took over our principal fortresses and imprisoned our king. Is it not evident that civilians must unite to combat these hosts? … Force must be repelled by force, and the arms
used must be the same … 7

 This decree ‘militarized’ the guerrillas only as a pretext to protect them. It did not suggest new measures for putting them more firmly under military or civilian political control. The Suprema sent a paper to French army
commanders to inform them of the ‘just and powerful causes’ for engaging in ‘land-privateering’. It was hard to imagine that a nation which only twenty years earlier had

 proclaimed with the greatest energy the Rights of Man and defended with no less enthusiasm the independence of nations, should have degenerated in so short a time to the extreme of attacking and attempting to destroy those
principles which are the basis of civil society and have been recognized and canonized by all cultivated nations and by the philosophers of all centuries. (Junta Suprema, Sevilla, May 1809)

 The regency, which in 1810 succeeded the Junta Suprema as patriot Spain’s government, adopted a series of regulations in 1812 to bring under even more direct military supervision the growing guerrilla strength, having already
incorporated most of the ‘great’ parties – in numbers and leadership – into the regular army. 8

 If there was any tradition of Spanish civilians taking up arms and fighting their own war in self-defence it could perhaps be said to have come from the Catalan sometent, the volunteer village ‘home guard’ who were called out to
defend their locality and had inevitably to resort to irregular warfare. But it is unlikely that their example was well known to the people outside of Cataluña. For example, the originator of the Suprema’s policy of legalizing
partisans as officially authorized combatants under the invention of ‘privateering by land’, Vicente Alcalá Galiano, the royal treasurer, did not appeal to some historic Spanish (or Catalan) tradition; he wrote that the idea had
come to him from the Cossacks on the Vistula and Napoleon’s maritime privateering to enforce the Continental blockade. 9 Nor did Alcalá Galiano, or his predecessor who drafted the Junta’s first regulations on the guerrillas in
late December, 1808, use the word guerrilla or guerrillero . Formations of civilian combatants were called parties or teams (‘partidas’ or ‘cuadrillas’) in the first document and exclusively ‘cuadrillas’ in the second. *

 Although guerrilla warfare had certain Spanish preconditions, it was another myth, put about by mainly foreign nineteenth-century writers, that its way of fighting suited an anarchic, individualist Spanish temperament. Rather,
the guerrilla corresponded to a number of pressing objective situations: the regular patriot armies’ continuing and crushing defeats in open battle, the state of the military, and the will of many conscripts and regulars who had
served in the army to continue the struggle in better conditions. This explained why it became a widespread popular response in the Napoleonic war.