

 The only ready money I found in the till was sixty-one thousand nine hundred reales. There was no accounts staff, no one to take charge of distributing supplies … How great was my surprise and bitterness, my worry and fear! …
Instead of the twelve million reales a month that in peacetime H.M. government assigned to this office, I received [from the Suprema] only two million six hundred and forty-six thousand from March 1 to June 30 … 5

 Before the battle at Talavera was even joined, Wellesley believed that the Spanish were wilfully withholding food supplies. ‘It is ridiculous to pretend that the country cannot supply our wants’, he wrote. His own lack of prior
intelligence about the villagers’ situation in northern Extremadura, which had suffered the ravages of two French armies, not to speak of the patriot army and General Moore’s artillery column, was patent. Not to have taken this
into account was a serious mistake for any general who planned to campaign in the poorest region of Spain. A British informant – perhaps an agent – who travelled through the area shortly after the battle, reported to his minister
of war that

 from Mérida to Trujillo there was no cattle … [the villagers] had not enough oxen or any animals to thresh out their crop … [I saw in Trujillo] the unpaid bills of some miserable wretches who were starving though in possession
of regular receipts to a great amount for provisions furnished to Gen. Hope [commander of Moore’s artillery in 1808] … 6

 However, there was no doubt in the mind of a patriot lawyer, Laureano Escamilla, from the small village of Erguijuela in Extremadura, who witnessed the scenes in the rearguard before and after the battle, that there had been
criminal incompetence in supplying the patriot armies. Lack of food, in particular, had been the cause of ‘thousands of soldiers deserting, falling ill or dying’, he wrote to the Suprema. The officers and authorities responsible
should be severely punished.

 Soldiers and villagers see these guilty men, endure them and can do nothing about them. They do not know how to complain or dare not do so, and their only sad consolation is to say that everything is lost because of the bad
Spanish government. 7

 The most excoriating military criticism came from the Suprema-appointed junta of La Carolina, responsible for the defence of Despeñaperros, the major pass in the Sierra Morena from La Mancha to Andalucía, and of the army
operating before it. After the latter’s rout at Almonacid, junta members saw patriot soldiers fleeing all over the countryside like ‘flocks of discomfited pigeons … who reached the sierra devastated and broken in spirit … There
has been no other military nation up to now which has conducted war in the manner we have been doing.’

 Our generals are absolutely ignorant of how to unite their forces, totally lacking intelligence and the art of coordinating a plan of campaign … This junta is convinced of the necessity of restraining and reducing to moderate
limits the whims of military despotism. Events have shown that we have no generals in whom such unlimited power can be safely confided. 8