

 That a public opinion was, nonetheless, beginning to take shape – but not necessarily the one Calbo would have desired – cannot be doubted. As a comment by an Andalucian Capuchin friar, brother Pablo de Vélez-Málaga, suggested,
this involved all sectors of society:

 In Jaén and neighbouring villages, people of all classes and condition, from the bishop’s secretary to the commonage, talk of the events of the day with the freedom of members of the House of Commons, and this not only in
private but openly in public places … 23

 Perhaps this was due to the Jaén junta’s laxity or its opposition to the Junta Suprema, shared with its superior, the Sevilla junta. But as brother Pablo, the son of a very poor family, learned to his cost, this freedom did not
extend to his native Andalucian village. The local junta of Vélez-Málaga detained him for speaking his mind publicly on political events, especially for singing the praises of the forthcoming Cortes, searched and placed his
parents’ house under armed guard, and submitted the friar to a six-day ‘trial’, having sworn to secrecy all junta members and others attending it as though the case concerned lese-majesty. The main witnesses for the prosecution
were fellow friars to whom brother Pablo had talked. The local junta was convinced of the latter’s guilt; but the Suprema’s special commissioner in Málaga, Antonio Cortavarria, sensibly called it a case of ‘little seriousness
since only some imprudent expressions, without further importance, are at stake’. Nonetheless, brother Pablo was confined to a special cell for friars in need of punishment in the Málaga Capuchin friary. 24 The restrictions on
public opinion which questioned a univocal patriotism remained very sharp.

 The progressives wished for a public opinion carefully moulded by literate patriots along progressive lines, not anarchic and critical discussions among the plebs which were likely to be destructive and demoralizing to the
patriot war effort. One of those who made a serious attempt to educate his fellow countrymen was Rev. José Blanco, the political editor of the Semanario Patriótico founded by Quintana in 1808. (As a leading member of the
Suprema’s staff, the latter gave up the editorship during its publication in Sevilla in 1809.) In a series of articles entitled Política , Blanco set out to recuperate words like ‘liberty’ and ‘equality’ tainted in the elite’s
notions by their association with the French Revolution.

 Men of bad faith, who try to keep the public in a state of passive despondency, and those who shudder fearfully at the thought of innovation, put it about that liberty means disorder, and equality anarchy … There is no madness
greater than to confuse freedom and lawlessness. Never do men enjoy less liberty than when there is no order … Political liberty consists of a nation being subject only to those laws which it has willingly recognized … There is
no monarch, however unlimited his power, who can oppose a people’s unanimous opinion. 25