

 Meanwhile, the Extremaduran junta in Badajoz excused its failure to supply the armies by claiming that, ‘like the most ordinary of people’, it did not know their whereabouts or their fate. 16 The previously cited British
informant found a month later that Badajoz had plentiful stocks: the junta’s president, a priest, informed him that – apart from the stores accumulated in the spring when, after the Medellín defeat, the French had threatened the
border fortress town – Sevilla had recently sent further supplies. None of these, except biscuit, had been forwarded to the armies. ‘Badajoz is determined to become a second Zaragoza’, he wrote, putting his finger accurately on
one of the main supply problems. 17

 Weary of his fruitless struggle, Calbo turned his energy to trying to improve the lot of hundreds of military sick and wounded who had been sent to a hospital in an abandoned Franciscan friary in Medellín. Though Calbo had given
two weeks’ warning to the military hospital service, neither the Inspector nor the employees had done anything to prepare the place or to care for the patients, who were without palliasses or sheets. Calbo procured these and then
had to attend personally to feeding the inmates. He busied himself ‘in this disagreeable but gratifying task, for anyone who appreciates the character of the Spanish soldier knows that he suffers more than sufficient causes of
discontent to disgust him and lead him to desert’. 18

 *

 Patriot military hospitals were one of the early disgraces of the war which the ordinary soldier experienced directly. During his brief tenure as the Central Army commander of the troops in La Mancha, General Cartaojal gave the
thirty thousand sick and wounded under his command only six hours in which to be evacuated southwards from field hospitals which were in a general state of disorder. As a result of the urgency, five thousand soldiers had died,
wrote Fr. Alonso de la Puebla in a scathing report after being ordered as a member of La Carolina junta to investigate military hospitals. 19 All such matters immediately becoming a question of competence and power, the army’s
intendente, making the most of his twenty-two years of service, criticized the report and the priest’s proposed reforms. Confronted by its own war minister’s opposition, the Suprema, with its customary back-pedalling before
established precedent, rescinded its recent order passing control of military hospitals to the junta and reverted to the intendentes’ command decreed nearly three quarters of a century before.

 But the problem, as usual, lay elsewhere: doctors and hospital workers were owed 630,000 reales in back wages; and the latter were living in such a state of poverty that they lacked even a change of clothes. Some went out at
night and, pretending to be beggars, tried to receive sufficient alms to buy a pound of bread; others went in gangs to steal the broad beans farmers had just planted to sate their hunger, wrote the Comptroller of Hospitals. 20 If
this was the state of hospital employees, the situation of the sick and wounded was not hard to imagine.