

 Though the proposal was marked ‘approved’, there was no documentary evidence that it was ever acted upon. In fact, it became a case of the hunter hunted. The Sevilla junta was discovered opening and reading the Suprema’s mail,
especially from Cádiz, and note being taken of the information it contained, as a junta member informed the Suprema. The latter immediately ordered Sevilla not to open any mail other than that addressed directly to it. 29

 In the circumstances, the letter to the Suprema came therefore to be one of the major access routes for the expression of individual comment and criticism. The Junta received (and filed) over four hundred of these, many of them
in the early months of its existence. * Three-quarters were anonymous. To the present-day mind this refusal to put one’s name to a letter has a contemptible, even sinister ring. But to individuals unused to the freedom of
expressing to authority critical opinions of its conduct and fearful of retaliation – the case of friar Pablo de Vélez-Málaga showed that this was no idle threat – it was a protective recourse. Another reason for anonymity was
expressed by a writer who, criticizing the Suprema for not informing the nation of serious reverses, wrote simply that he (or though unlikely, perhaps she) was ‘a person of no consequence’. It was precisely because most of the
writers could have said the same that the letters are significant; and because, as another correspondent put it, ‘it is still impossible to write the truth’.

 As could be expected, the greatest number concerned the Suprema’s conduct of the war, and especially its dilatory activity. Criticisms of the military, the socially privileged and provincial juntas followed. *

 The Nation fears and weeps because it does not see the government making the extraordinary efforts demanded by the extraordinary circumstances and great risks to the fatherland … How much more was done when the Provinces acted
separately. With what slowness [the government] acts when everything should be activity and burning fire … Why not arm the nation en masse?

 The situation was better, remarked another correspondent, before there was a Suprema.

 The labouring poor have courage and energy, and cannot look on with indifference at what is happening … Unless more active measures are taken, the nation will be obliged to shake off this oppressive yoke, as it did in May [the
Madrid uprising of 1808].

 The Suprema’s war leadership and its confidence in the old class of generals came in for frequent criticism:

 Get rid of these old, lazy, ignorant, timid and indolent generals: let those of courage, virtue and real merit command the armies instead of these grandees of pure and illustrious birth. I ask only one thing: that an ordinary
sergeant in gaiters be put in command of twenty thousand infantry, two thousand horse and one thousand artillerymen and be given the absolute right to pursue the enemy, on condition that no military commander is of higher rank
than a sergeant …