

 There was certain irony in this. The report was signed by, among others, the junta’s president, Juan Carlos Aréizaga, who was shortly to lead – through his incompetence – the patriot army to its gravest defeat.

 MILITANCIES: LORENZO CALBO DE ROZAS –
A MERCHANT PATRIOT

 The Suprema took very seriously the accusations that it had failed the allied armies in the matter of food supplies. Within two days of the Talavera battle, it ordered its ‘troubleshooter’, to use a contemporary phrase, Lorenzo
Calbo Rozas, to Extremadura to investigate. The former Madrid merchant, who had been Zaragoza’s intendente during the city’s first siege, and was subsequently appointed a deputy for Aragón to the Suprema, was one of the few Junta
members who was prepared to take an active role in attempting to resolve concrete problems. Like many another Madrid merchant, Calbo was a Basque by origin who, in 1798 at the age of twenty-five, migrated to the capital at the
start of what was to become a highly successful and prosperous business career. By the beginning of the war, a decade after reaching Madrid, his fortune was estimated at four and a half million reales, including six houses in
Madrid, which easily put him among the richest twenty-five percent of the capital’s merchants. 9 * His business interests extended from Málaga, Cádiz, La Mancha and Alicante to Lisbon. 10 †

 As an active progressive, Calbo was exceptional among merchants. At the very beginning of the Suprema’s existence, it was he who had raised in Madrid part of the loan which the Junta desperately required to continue the war
effort; and during Zaragoza’s second siege, he forcibly advised the Suprema that if it did not send reinforcements to relieve the city, he would resign his Suprema post and return to Aragón to fight with musket in hand. 11 In the
spring of 1809, the Junta asked him to report on the manufacture and distribution of army uniforms, including those sent from England, because many troops were still unclothed – the Suprema believed that many recruits sold their
uniforms. 12 He submitted proposals to the Suprema for the reform of the patriot administration, which he called ‘dim and abusive’, and most of its employees ‘negligent or inept’. 13 It was not surprising therefore, that the
attempt to resolve the armies’ supplies should fall on him. An ardent supporter of summoning the Cortes as rapidly as possible and of immediate press freedom, he had used his privileged position as a Junta deputy to bypass the
Suprema’s attempted control of the press and publish an attack on army officers’ neglect of their troops’ training and other military wrong-doings. The Suprema retaliated and ordered the paper closed. 14 The article earned Calbo
considerable unpopularity with the military, and his absolutist Suprema colleagues were, no doubt, only too pleased to commission him to take on the prickly task of dealing with the allied armies’ food supplies.

 Calbo’s mission began in much the manner in which it was to continue: his carriage broke down less than three leagues out of Sevilla, from where he had set off at two in the morning, and the postilion’s saddle collapsed soon
afterwards. ‘I fear that this trip will take longer than I had intended’, he wrote to the Junta’s general secretary. 15 After a month’s stay he returned mortified and frustrated. The new army commander, General Eguía – Cuesta had
resigned for health reasons shortly after Talavera – refused, as did his interim intendente, to provide him with such elementary information as the number of daily rations needed by his army. He believed they themselves did not
know. ‘Here everyone does whatever they desire’ – it is a ‘theatre of disorder and confusion’. No one obeyed orders. He had given the strictest instructions that villagers were to be properly paid for carting supplies to the
army, and were not to be distrained or subjected to other extortions which made them reluctant to undertake the work. In spite of his ‘solemn promise’, he had received nothing but complaints from villagers that the old practices
continued.