

 I can see no reason why the hospitals should be looked upon with such indifference, or why these wretched soldiers’ infinite clamour against those who are the cause of their great need should fall upon deaf ears … Are these
miserable men of a different hierarchy when their illnesses and wounds have been incurred in Our Defence? Why do they find themselves victims of the disputes and mad ambitions which should be far from our thoughts today? 21

 Lorenzo Pérez, a priest who had been appointed Administrator of military hospitals in Úbeda, Jaén, protested to the Suprema’s secretary general that funds were needed to help ‘these poor men who are worthy of every
consideration’. He reported that, without advance notice, as many as two thousand sick soldiers had reached his town on a single day from other nearby military hospitals, and they were still arriving as he wrote. The local junta
had done all it could in the early days to help fund the hospital; but the army’s intendente had subsequently insisted on taking over the task despite his lack of funds. Lorenzo Pérez had provided what money he could from his own
small benefice and, when this was insufficient, had pawned some of his family’s jewellery to succour the ‘destitute humanity’ in his hospital.

 Overwhelmed by these and other reports on the hospitals’ state, the Suprema ordered its finance minister to make funds available to remedy the situation. Whether or not these were actually paid – indeed, whether there were any
funds available to do so – is not recorded.

 Public concern about military hospitals was evident; battles took place in distant places but the wounded and maimed were there in the rearguard for all to see. Many soldiers complained that they were released from hospitals
before being full cured. When intendente José Canga Argüelles, a member of the Valencia junta, decided that a 150-bed convalescent home was needed for these men, and took over a country house and gardens outside the city walls
for the purpose, his appeal for its funding met a massive public response from the Valencia population. Eighty thousand reales were raised; significantly more poor people contributed than the wealthy, although the latter’s
contributions – especially the bishop’s fifteen thousand reales – provided the bulk of the funds. 22

 PUBLIC OPINION

 Calbo’s concern with press freedom and forming public opinion, shared by all progressives, meant public involvement in the affairs of state. Under the Old Order the general public had been passive spectators of the kingdom’s
political affairs, their views and participation in the country’s governance neither asked for nor desired. In propitiatory recognition of the ‘people’s’ role in the rising, the Suprema had, from its inception, appealed to all
‘citizens’ (i.e. respectable members of society) to make their views known. This had opened a small space for their involvement in governmental affairs which was simultaneously constricted by the Suprema’s refusal to decree the
freedom of the press.