

 Despite the more than a year that the patriots had been given to complete the defences of the Despeñaperros pass in the Sierra Morena on the main road from La Mancha to Andalucía they had not been finished. The French were clear
of the pass after a couple of hours of fighting. Sevilla fell much as it had risen in June 1808, with a popular insurrection, the seizure of arms and the invasion of the chamber in the Alcázar where the Suprema had sat. The crowd
agitatedly demanded that a regency be immediately set up. * Francisco Saavedra, former Suprema treasury minister who had remained in Sevilla as a member of the local junta, was among those who tried to calm the people.

 Their clamour was finally reduced to forming a military commission for Andalucía’s defence and for General Blake to take command of the Army of the Centre … Despite the fury which is always characteristic of these tremendous
popular upheavals, they can be calmed down and the people’s confidence restored to the point of even handing over with the greatest docility the arms they had seized to veteran soldiers who were unarmed … 36

 The following morning a mob again assembled at the Alcázar, once more demanding a regency. They were led, Saavedra informed the Suprema’s president, by an Aragonese priest.

 We told the people that for the moment such a demand was out of order. The people allowed themselves to be persuaded, and even turned their anger on the inflamed instigator of their demand … But what most infuriated the people
was the news that in Cádiz ships were waiting to embark the Suprema delegates, taking with them great quantities of money, silver and jewels. 37

 To satisfy the people, the Sevilla junta dispatched one of its members to Cádiz forthwith to order the governor not to permit any such manoeuvre. On the Suprema’s departure, the regional Sevilla junta proclaimed itself Supreme –
its final revenge for the months of dissension that had occupied the two since the Suprema had taken up residence in the Andalucian capital. It promised to organize the patriot defence. But as the enemy approached it too fled. A
few French cannon shots sufficed. On Thursday, February 1, 1810, Sevilla surrendered without a fight.

 *

 As in the first imperial invasion of Andalucía, the second also mistook the relative importance of Sevilla and Cádiz as their major objective. In the early days of the war, the French had marched from Madrid on Cádiz with the
aim of relieving their fleet bottled up there for three years since Trafalgar. The end result was their defeat at Bailén. In 1810, as Andalucía lay defenceless at their feet, the choice again lay before them and at the last
moment they selected Sevilla. The patriot capital was a more tempting prey than the great city port on its rocky Atlantic isthmus. By this decision they brought upon themselves an unsuccessful siege which lasted nearly two and a
half years. Although initially garrisoned by only eight thousand men, Cádiz was virtually impregnable by land: a river and marshes protected its approaches and it could not be starved into submission since supplies could be
brought in by sea. Furthermore, the small garrison was more than doubled in size from the very beginning by the duke of Alburquerque’s initiative in force-marching his twelve thousand troops from Extramadura into Cádiz the day
before the French appeared.