

 ‘Equality’, Blanco continued, was in material and social terms impossible, even undesirable, for the poor’s ambition to equal the rich in wealth and power had historically caused rivers of blood. ‘While the people can barely
achieve a miserable subsistence’, condemned to ‘work and poverty’, they believed that happiness belonged to the privileged. ‘It is necessary that the poor understand that society does not condemn them to this horrendous
inequality; and that the superiority in wealth, honours and might which indispensably must exist in society, is not directed at nullifying and rendering unhappy the inferior classes.’ For if material equality was impossible,
equality before the law was not only possible but necessary; and it was this that would change the workers’ and indigents’ condition. Under legal equality, they could, if they would, make their way in society by their own
capabilities and ingenuity on equal terms with the wealthy.

 The state in which … one class overflows with wealth and others are without the means to earn a livelihood is close to total ruin. This horrible inequality which brings low its victims, turns the most prosperous regions into
uninhabited deserts which only wild animals will devour. 26

 In the meantime, the labouring poor should ‘remain in the place that Providence has assigned to you: and when the time comes for your voice to be heard, do not clamour to strip others of their positions’. Poor comfort in
reality, but a fair index of what awaited the lower orders from the progressive elite.

 In the autumn of 1809, as political strife over setting up a regency in the Suprema became acute, two other newspapers began publication in Sevilla in support of the reformist cause. El Espectador sevillano , edited by the poet
Alberto Lista, was not long in producing a definition of public opinion:

 It seems to us then that public opinion, defined with the greatest possible exactness, is the general voice of a whole people convinced of a truth which they have examined through discussion . It must be general in order to
produce its great effect: since truth known only to the wise and unknown to the nation serves no purpose. 27

 This ‘general voice’ could not make itself heard without freedom of the press and an assembly in which ‘an examination through discussion’ could take place openly. Meanwhile, public opinion lacked a public avenue to those in
power.

 The Suprema recognized this. It proposed to set up an office, ostensibly to inspect mail intercepted from alleged or actual Bonapartist supporters, but also secretly to read all private mail to check on the ‘people’s public
spirit’.

 The pen expresses the soul’s feelings which are communicated to relatives and friends with the good faith these relationships inspire … [Letters] which give news of the people’s state, of individuals among them, or of any other
part of the realm, of the enemy’s behaviour towards the people and their’s towards him, in short everything which gives an idea of their morale, and the real physical and material state of the realm’s countryside and homes …
should be classified and graded according to category. 28