

 These events he related in a petition to Josef which indeed had another, quite different purpose: to beg the king to order that a wrong done him by the regal commissioner * in Córdoba be righted. The latter had embargoed all his
wealth, household goods and olive crop at the demand of doña Joaquina Dozta, whom his brother, don Diego Francisco, had married at the age of forty twenty years earlier. Joaquina was half her husband’s age, of ‘unknown
antecedents and very poor’, he added. His brother’s entailed estates brought in over thirty thousand reales a year.

 Despite the difference in age, my brother who is a meek man, allowed Joaquina to flatter him into making over his estates’ management to her which she carried out for seventeen years. She did not respond with the gratitude and
love which such a privilege merited but avariciously amassed wealth for her widowhood because they had no children. Not content to leave him without the money for those occasions that society offered his peers, she treated him
like her ward and even denied him her table and bed.

 Two years earlier, Diego Francisco clearly saw that he was losing his income and peace of mind, revoked her powers and made them over to his brother. A lawsuit followed immediately to legalize the change to which the justices
agreed. In accord with his social status, Diego Francisco also claimed his living costs from his wife.

 Realizing that she had to pay not only his past costs but the expenses of the lawsuit, and that she would no longer control her husband’s income, Joaquina took action. It was at the start of the war, and the Córdoba junta had
just been formed. ‘Thanks to the work of some of its delegates’, Torres y Coca alleged in his petition to Josef, ‘she succeeded in procuring an absolute decree to have her former rights restored, and that her husband should be
interned in the monastery of El Fardón, situated in a deserted, uninhabited place. She had no consideration for the fact that this would have killed my brother because of his great age and poor health.’

 Diego Francisco learned of her manoeuvre, fled Bujalance and after a few days appealed to his brother for help. The latter agreed and hid him in a number of different country farmhouses and hamlets, paying for his food and his
repeated and costly illnesses. Diego Francisco offered to reimburse his brother for the considerable costs involved as soon as he had again taken possession of his estates. Joaquina meanwhile continued in her former position,
until in 1810, learning that French troops were approaching Bujalance, she fled, leaving behind the money she had amassed. On the day of Josef’s visit to Bujalance, Diego Francisco appeared in the township to ask the corregidor
whom the king had appointed to return his estates to him. This the official did without more ado, and Diego Francisco took charge of the olive crop which was then being picked, and sold the oil to repay his brother for the two
years he had maintained him.