

 JOSEF IN ANDALUCÍA

 After Andalucía’s fall, King Josef made a triumphal entry into his newly conquered territory. Constantly derided by his ‘subjects’ with derogatory sobriquets – Pepe Botella was the most usual * – he was, surprisingly, received
with popularity by the Andalucian local elites who had been aggrieved and frustrated by the Junta Suprema’s incompetence in leading the war effort and the run of military defeats. The war had at last receded, the Andalucians had
not yet suffered the full rigours of French military occupation, and they believed for a time that peace at any price was an improvement on the immediate past. Josef, a legal man by training and a wealthy merchant by profession,
was Fernando VII’s antithesis: a moderate liberal who wished to reform his new kingdom and improve its people’s lot. Cultured, amiable and generous to a fault – Napoleon envied his older brother’s cultivation and success with
women – Josef’s well-intentioned desires were undermined by one serious defect, as Napoleon also saw. A civilized monarch – too civilized, too gentle a man, perhaps – he lacked the mettle, the strength of character to impose
himself as king in the difficult conditions of the Spanish struggle. ‘He is fond of pleasure but does not value military glory enough’, was a Napoleonic general’s succinct summation of his character. 17

 But now, with his – and not his brother’s – conquest of the largest and most populous patriot region, Josef allowed himself to believe that he had achieved military glory, had imposed his regal will. He deluded himself.
Important as the region’s addition to his rule might be, his conquest, brought about and maintained by French bayonets, precipitated a popular resistance – the formation of the highest number of guerrilla parties recorded in any
region, while his failure to take Cádiz allowed the patriots a stronghold from which to begin their own constitutional reforms. Very shortly, moreover, Napoleon showed him who was the real ruler of Spain.

 In the immediate, Josef, who was not without vanity, bathed in his clamorous Andalucian reception, the popular recognition of his sovereignty which was so strenuously denied him elsewhere. The reception Josef received in
Córdoba, he assured General Suchet, surpassed in allegiance anything he had ever received in his former kingdom of Naples. 18

 EPISODES: A COUNTRY MARRIAGE

 On his procession, Josef had passed through the rural township of Bujalance where the authorities had turned out in full to welcome him. Among them was Pedro de Torres y Coca, an hidalgo who, in representation of the nobility,
had received from Josef’s hand a ring which, as he subsequently wrote, was the ‘gem he would always most highly treasure’.

 Learning earlier that Josef was in Granada, he set out to lay himself, in the idiom of the day, at his sovereign’s feet and kiss hands. But his good intentions were frustrated only two leagues from his destination when he was
held up by sixteen ‘bandits’ who several times during the night threatened to execute him and his retainers. They accused him of having hidden in the farmhouse where they had discovered him a great quantity of money to hand over
to Josef. Finally, they robbed him of five thousand reales in money and clothes and all of his gold. In these straitened circumstances, he had felt it impossible to present himself to the king and had returned home with the hope
of being able to pay homage when Josef reached Jaén or Andújar which were closer to