

 The Suprema deputies gathered on the Isla de León – some, including the president, Archbishop Laodicéa, had to be summoned to go there 38 – had many months earlier collectively elected the Isla as their place of exile should
Sevilla be threatened. It was a semi-island joined to the Cádiz isthmus, protected by the swamps on the far side of the river Petri from where any land attack would have to come. In the circumstances, it was as safe a place as
could be.

 Here on January 27, 1810, the progressive merchant Calbo de Rozas, who had for so long stubbornly defended the Junta against the absolutists’ demand for a regency and had called for the immediate summoning of the Cortes, himself
called for a regency to be formed. The Sevilla riots, he admitted, had plainly shown that the Suprema had lost the people’s confidence. Calbo set about formulating the internal regulations by which a five-man regency, under
General Castaños, would be governed. 39 On January 31 the regency took office and the Suprema ceased to exist. *

 Few regretted its disappearance. And yet for the sixteen months of its existence, it had, despite its many drawbacks and failures, kept the military struggle alive against very great odds. It had managed to recreate large armies
after massive defeats, and though these were never likely to deal the French a decisive blow, their threat could not be ignored by the imperial forces. Its major defect in this field had been to leave its armies in the hands of
the old noble officer corps. The Junta had also encouraged civilian guerrilla war, even if its aim had essentially consisted in trying to control what was already becoming a large-scale phenomenon by 1809. In general, however, it
must be said that its concept of ‘revolutionary’ war was highly unrevolutionary, and it did little or nothing to mobilize the lower orders whom it feared as much as – if not more than – the French.

 None of the regents, with the exception of Francisco Saavedra, who was old and ill, was a leading politician. Without an elected Cortes to legislate, the regency seemed unlikely to be any more adept at running the war than the
Suprema and, new to power and fearing progressive reforms, it was even less likely than the latter to summon the Cortes.

 The former Junta delegates became the targets of a vicious campaign of denigration; many suffered the mortification of having their baggage searched for stolen funds before they embarked on a frigate for Galicia. But the worst
treatment was meted out to the more progressive among them, including accusations of corruption and embezzlement of funds. Calbo’s Talavera mission turned out more personally disastrous than he could have imagined. He was
arrested by the new government and confined under close detention on board a frigate in Cádiz and then in the San Sebastián castle in the same port. His wife and secretary, among others, were also imprisoned. Within a month of
proposing its creation, he found himself a prisoner of his creature. His high-placed absolutist enemies took their revenge on a progressive, using trumped-up allegations that on his Extremaduran mission, and earlier as intendente
in Zaragoza, he had embezzled public funds for his own speculative trading operations. Held incommunicado for nine months without charges, he was released in October 1810; but this was only the beginning of a three-year-long
battle to restore his reputation. ‘A man’s life is nothing if he cannot live with honour’, he wrote. 40 (He had the good fortune to survive: conde Tilly, a Sevillan-appointed Suprema delegate who was also incarcerated, died in
prison.)