

 As to the Cortes, which was due to convene on March 1, it did not finally assemble until September 24, 1810, and then only because serious pressures were brought to bear on the regency. The greatest of these came not from Spain
itself but from the South American colonies where the Suprema’s demise was taken to mean the end of Spanish resistance. To defend themselves from Napoleonic domination, the creoles of Buenos Aires, Caracas and elsewhere, created
supreme juntas on the Spanish model, which remained loyal to Fernando VII but not to any current Spanish government. 41 Their incipient revolt turned, in September 1810, into a full-scale rising against the Spanish in Mexico, led
by the priest Miguel Hidalgo y Costilla, who nonetheless initially recognized Fernando VII as king. As a number of more far-sighted patriots and Spanish Bonapartists had feared since the start of the war, the conflict’s
consequences had undermined Spain’s jewel in the crown, the greatest territorial empire of the time.

===== FILE: OEBPS/27_Chapter16.xhtml =====
Napoleon’s Cursed War

 16

 1810–1811

 Compared to the extreme and generalized civilian suffering of 1809, the following two years were less rigorous. With the exception of Galicia, Cádiz and the Levante, and parts of the northern Cantabrian coast and Extremadura,
the French in principle controlled Spain, though in reality they dominated only those areas they physically occupied. Most of the heavy fighting was now confined to the Spanish periphery: the southern Catalan Mediterranean coast,
where Marshal Suchet made slow but inexorable progress in reducing the last urban foci of resistance: Tortosa and Tarragona, and prepared to besiege Valencia; and on the Spanish–Portuguese border. The most significant military
action took place not in Spain at all but in Portugal. Napoleon’s victory over Austria at Wagram, in July 1809, left the Peninsula as his only field of military operations. The Emperor used the opportunity to reinforce his armies
in Spain to their highest strength of the whole conflict and to attempt to chase the British out of Portugal. By the beginning of 1810, the imperial forces in Spain numbered 360,000 men (with an effective strength of 287,650),
formed into eight army corps commanded by some of Napoleon’s most experienced commanders. 1

 In 1810, the population began to make good the losses of the previous year. A sharp drop in the death rate, a moderate rise in the birth rate, and a great upswing in marriages were the most striking elements of the recovery. In
Castilla la Nueva, for example, deaths fell by half between 1809 and 1811; births rose by twelve percent and marriages in 1810 increased by over fifty percent compared to the year before to reach their highest annual number of
the whole war. Castilla la Vieja’s progress was smaller but it had suffered less; even recently conquered Andalucía showed broadly similar tendencies though the birth rate remained very low.

 The most exceptional change, however, was in Cataluña, where deaths dropped by sixty percent in 1810 compared to the previous year, births rose by one quarter, and marriages by more than one half. At the opposite end of Spain,
Extremadura received a little relief: although deaths continued to outnumber births as they did for every year of the war except the first, mortality dropped by over one-fifth in 1811 compared to 1809, births rose more than ten
percent and marriages a considerable thirty-eight percent.