

 These positive population figures showed two things: a natural tendency to make good the disasters of 1809 and the population’s general belief that the ‘normality’ of the French occupation had become a fact of life. This
‘normality’ remained ‘abnormal’ in that arbitrary French exactions, requisitions and war taxes remained severe. But pitched battles and French victories had receded from the immediate experience of the greater part of the
country. Except for Navarra, bordering on France and flanking the main imperial communications route, where the guerrilla movement was taking a threating aspect for the Bonapartists, French military governors in Castilla la Vieja
were content to hold the large cities on the route: their inactivity against rural resistance was criticized by Josef’s Spanish officialdom, but as long as the countryside did not rise to threaten their hold on the cities, in
Castilla la Vieja at least, they made only the occasional razzia into the countryside without great conviction of definitively putting down the rural resistance.

 *

 These were the years when the imperial forces expected to win, and in all reason should have won the war in the Peninsula. However, in battle terms, their impressive number of troops was deceptive: not even a quarter of their
effective strength could ever be asssembled by the French command for a single battle: sixty thousand men was the maximum and that was for the decisive battle of Vitoria in 1813. The rest were tied down in occupying the country,
protecting lines of communications and escort duties. An entire army corps was needed to keep the high road between the French frontier and Madrid open from guerrillas. The journey from the Spanish capital to the French frontier
that had taken three days before the war, now took eleven, and for large military convoys, with an escort of three to four thousand men, cavalry and artillery, Madrid to Paris could take as many as thirty-seven days. In
Andalucía, Soult needed seventy thousand men to maintain his hold over a region where a guerrilla movement had begun almost immediately after its fall. The number of parties formed became the largest of any of the regions.

 Though many Spaniards in the occupied zones had no doubt come to the conclusion that the French were there to stay and that further resistance only imperilled their lives or worsened their living conditions, a large minority of
the population continued to fight. In the absence of sizeable patriot armies – after Ocaña, the patriots could never again raise forces totalling one hundred thousand – and with an ineffectual government confined to Cádiz, it was
during these two years that the guerrilla became not only a significant fighting force, ensuring that enemy troops who otherwise would have formed larger armies to throw at the Anglo-Portuguese forces had to be retained in the
rearguard, putting the smaller allied armies on a closer numerical parity with the French; 2 but equally, the guerrillas’ small though resonant victories served to raise the population’s morale and will to resist.