

 This slim pretext for the guerrilla’s increasing numbers appeared at first sight like a displacement theory which refused to recognize the truth that the imperial occupiers’ exactions were the cause of the Bonapartist
‘misfortune’; and it might have applied equally to French and British soldiers who made a fair picking from this sort of trade. * But perhaps it was precisely in implying the considerable difference between the soldiery’s and
guerrilla’s aims that the Bonapartist government theory signalled a fact worth taking into account. Since the guerrilla’s objective was to eliminate village authorities’ collaboration with the occupying force, their seizure of
the well-to-do’s property was a punishment or a warning to them of the vengeance they could expect if they sided with the enemy; and the sale of their property an acknowledgement of the impoverished social order under which most
of the lower classes of villagers lived. In a rudimentary manner, then, the guerrilla found itself waging a ‘social’ war with the objective of ensuring the majority of villagers’ support for the patriot cause by redistributing
wealth from rich to poor and – by the use of terror – restraining the rural wealthy from collaborationism. The ‘sale’ of the wealthy’s goods was a piece of social revenge that was a means to maintaining alive a popular spirit of
resistance. †

 Though the guerrilla, which had to fund itself, no doubt made its turn on these deals, it was not from these small village takings that much money was made. It was rather from the sale of large-scale expropriated crops, the
collection of fruits and tithes on wine, rents and feudal dues from Bonapartist landowning supporters that even some of the reputable leaders, including El Empecinado, amassed small fortunes during the war as was to be expected
by the criteria of the times. 6 But there was undoubtedly another reason, which the Bonapartists seemed unable to fathom, for the guerrilla’s attack on the village wealthy. Local oligarchs were buying up at low prices
expropriated lands, including those of the former religious houses – the National Property, as it was called by the Bonapartist regime which put them on the market in an attempt to reduce the national debt – and village commons
and grazing which councils were being forced to sell to pay the exorbitant French demands for money and food. The better-off class of villager or wealthy townsman was profiting from enemy measures at the expense of the poor
villager, the smallholder, the long-term tenant who could not afford to buy the land on offer and was losing his traditional rights to the village’s communal lands.

 MASSÉNA’S DEFEAT BEFORE WELLINGTON’S
PORTUGUESE DEFENCES

 After Andalucía’s conquest, Napoleon turned his attention to the British in Portugal. As long as Wellington remained there he was a threat to the Emperor’s Spanish flank. In April 1810, Napoleon created an army of Portugal,
under Marshal Masséna, to carry out his plan of expelling the British, and sent nearly 140,000 more men to Spain – though only twenty thousand of these were new troops; the remainder were replacements to bring the three army
corps under Masséna up to strength. 7 He thought at first to lead this army himself, but his divorce from Josephine in December 1809, and his marriage to the Archduchess Marie Louise of Austria, focused his mind on dynastical
matters rather than on military leadership. 8