

 Nonetheless, relief that the war was more or less at an end seemed the dominant note. Andalucía in general had put up no real resistance; it was a moment when much of Spain’s labouring classes gave signs of retreating into
apathetic acquiesence of a fait accompli: the Bonapartists observed this in the spring of 1810.

 For a short time, villagers recognized their real interests, threw off these enemies of the people [the guerrillas] or tried to persuade them to return to their homes to take advantage of the king’s pardon for their past
mistakes and to enjoy all the advantages which his government offers. 3

 In the time it took the smallholder Espoz y Mina to consolidate his hold on the Navarrese resistance in 1810 and prove that a great guerrilla was in the making, guerrilleros went home, villagers were demoralized and the
temperature of resistance fell notably. After Andalucía’s fall, a large part of the population seemed for a moment stunned into resignation; the armies’ virtual demise as a fighting force and the imperial troops’ impact on the
rural world were the decisive factors in maintaining the guerrilla alive. Until then, it could be said that the guerrilla had been an auxiliary to the army; even its greatest coup could not match a battle won. But the patriots
had now lost almost every battle but the first and by the beginning of 1810, the army was a discredited and spent force. All that remained were the guerrillas. They had rejected the army’s regular warfare for a style of their
own, and this had brought them military honours and officer’s rank. To renounce the struggle would have been to dishonour both the cause and their particular place in it.

 Without them, they knew, the rearguard’s resistance would crumble. The guerrilla was the crystallization of the villagers’ will to resist. It was the only form of combat available to the weak against the strong. The guerrilleros
were the villagers’ kith-and-kin. They were used to fighting in straitened circumstances. When the guerrilla failed, the rearguard’s spirit and determination dropped. Keeping resistance alive was one of the guerrilla’s main aims.

 Despite the philosophers and politicians, who weigh up the balance of forces, the advantages and disadvantages of their field positions, the armies’ greater or lesser skills – even whether their cause is good or bad – the
guerrillero will win because the philosophers do not take into account … the presence or lack of fighting spirit which is needed for victory … ( Semanario Politico, Historico y Literario de la Coruña ) 4

 The Bonapartists were shocked and angered at ‘our misfortune’ in witnessing the guerrilla’s strengthening re-emergence. They recognized it as a rural reaction; support stemmed from the villagers. But they pinpointed it
concretely on the guerrilla’s thefts of the well-to-do’s property, and sale of the stolen goods to the lower orders locally or in neighbouring villages.

 These evil men, aided by some of the inhabitants, enter the villages and sack the houses of the rich whom they call traitors, taking their owners with them to assassinate later or often in the village itself. They then carry off
in triumph everything of worth, in money, livestock and other effects, certain that they can sell them at low prices in neighbouring villages if not in the village where they have committed these horrors … There would be fewer
men of this ilk if they were sure they could not find buyers, and there would be no buyers if the local magistrates arrested them and handed them over to the courts … 5