

 One of Napoleon’s oldest and most able commanders, the one-eyed André Masséna was in no hurry to conquer Portugal – Napoleon had ordered him not to take Lisbon too swiftly ‘as I could not feed the city [before the harvest] with
its immense population accustomed to live on food brought from the sea’; 9 and Masséna had first to cover his Spanish flank, in particular Asturias: Oviedo, the capital, was taken and retaken four times and though imperial forces
occupied most of the principality they were never fully able to consolidate their hold. At the same time the French had to besiege and reduce Astorga in León which, due to its stout resistance, caused them heavy losses; and then
the fortress towns of Ciudad Rodrigo in Spain and Almeida in Portugal. Despite the urgent pleas of Ciudad Rodrigo’s governor, Andreas Herrasti, Wellington, whose vanguard was close by, refused to commit any troops to help raise
the siege which lasted two months. After the British commander’s refusal to come to the Suprema’s aid during the disastrous Ocaña offensive, or to the defence of Andalucía, the Spanish were incensed and in consequence refused to
provide Wellington with information on French movements. 10 As Wellington retreated deeper into Portugal, there were many Spaniards who recalled Moore’s ‘inglorious’ retreat in 1808 when he, too, had refused to engage the enemy.
Ciudad Rodrigo finally capitulated on July 9, the Spaniards losing 460 killed, nearly one thousand wounded and four thousand prisoners. *

 Masséna, whom Napoleon had also placed in command of all northern Spain in order to use its military resources for the offensive, had an effective fighting strength of sixty-five thousand before the invasion proper began. But he
could not use the thirty thousand imperial troops stationed in the north of Spain – indeed had to reinforce them – for fear of guerrillas in conjunction with the remaining small Spanish regular forces disrupting his
communications with France. 11

 After reducing Almeida, Masséna waited a month for reinforcements and supplies. The former did not arrive. Although the Emperor had ordered his generals to afford him all the help he required, General Reille, the military
governor of Navarra, diverted some of the reinforcements which crossed into Spain in August to his own flying columns which were fighting the three thousand guerrillas raised and led by Espoz y Mina in the region. The
reinforcements helped Reille to harry the guerrillas for over two months in a series of forced marches and counter-marches over mountainous terrain, until, with only half of his men left, Espoz y Mina was obliged temporarily to
leave Navarra, cross the Ebro and take refuge in Castilla la Vieja. 12 Mina had nonetheless delayed Masséna’s reinforcements which, when Reille finally despatched them, arrived too late to be of any effective use.

 Wellington made one stand against Masséna on September 27 at Buçao; more decisive than his victory, however, was the scorched-earth policy, a traditional Portuguese practice before an invading army, which Wellington enforced.
Unable to hold Coimbra, he obliged its forty thousand inhabitants to withdraw in front of the British troops, carrying with them everything that could serve the enemy.