

 Old people, lame and sick people, women just risen from childbed, children, and whole families with all their belongings packed either on bullock carts, mules, horses or donkeys, were to be seen mixed up with all kind of beasts,
among which pigs, owing to unruliness and horrible cries, were the most conspicuous. Now and again, the cry would arise that the French were coming, and then the young girls would implore all those who were riding to help them
upon the saddle with them. Ladies, who, according to the custom of the country, had never perhaps left their homes except to go to Mass, could be seen walking along, three in a row, wearing silk shoes and their heads and
shoulders covered only with thin scarves. 13

 Masséna’s army, now down to fifty-seven thousand men, 14 depended on supplies irregularly brought from the rear on roads which were in a terrible state, suffering severe deprivation as a result.

 In mid-October Masséna found himself facing an impenetrable challenge. The Anglo-Portuguese army and eight thousand Spanish troops whom General Romana had marched from Extremadura, were ensconced behind two parallel fortified
lines of earthworks, blockhouses and hundreds of cannon some twenty miles in front of Lisbon and guarding all access to the Portuguese capital. Wellington had been constructing these fortifications, the Torres Vedras lines, for
over a year: the first line was held by the Portuguese militia while the Anglo-Portuguese field army was held back to counter-attack if the French managed to break through at any point in order to decimate the enemy weakened by
the assault. 15

 Although the scorched-earth policy was not carried out close to Lisbon with the thoroughness Wellington had hoped for, and Masséna’s army was able to hold out for a month in front of the lines and three further months in
Santarem on the Tajo where food was more plentiful, only Masséna’s steely determination kept the French army in Portugal. Despite Napoleon’s order to all his field commanders to help him none did except Soult in Andalucía who
finally moved in February, scraping together as many men as he could without threat to the loss of his Andalucian fiefdom, and besieged Badajoz which after five weeks tamely surrendered to him on March 10, although the border
fortress town had men and supplies sufficient to hold out another month. Five days earlier, Masséna’s army, having received no further reinforcements, began its withdrawal, committing harrowing atrocities in the Portuguese
villages en route. The invasion cost the French some twenty-five thousand men, about sixty percent of whom fell victims to starvation, disease and the Portuguese irregulars. 16 Although Masséna had failed in his major objective,
the French had in the course of mid-1810 to the spring of 1811 succeeded in taking three of the major Spanish–Portuguese fortified border towns: Ciudad Rodrigo, Almeida and Badajoz. Until Wellington had subdued these, he could
not move into Spain. General Beresford’s failure to recapture Badajoz in May 1811 effectively confined British forces to Portugal for the rest of the year and they failed to present any threat to the French armies in Spain.