

 Thiébault retaliated in a decree placing all police matters and Spanish troops serving the king under French military command. He informed Amorós that General Kellerman, governor of all northern Spain, had ordered that no
general measures be taken without his permission. Amorós riposted by sending Thiébault the king’s orders on his appointment as regal commissioner.

 Amorós saw only too clearly that the new regime needed the imperial army to consolidate its rule, but at the same time that the army was in large part responsible for the regime’s failure to ensure the people’s loyalty. Although
armed force was necessary, the French army could not achieve the latter aim. More was needed.

 The great gap between the triumphant French conquerors and the Spaniard impoverished by the war and resentful of its ravages, but indomitable because of his concerns and tenacious temperament, must be reconciled by persons loyal
to and fervent in the royal service if the king is to become the sovereign of all Spaniards. 24

 However, six weeks later, with Thiébault’s decree round his neck, and further experience of the French army’s actions, Amarós was doubtful that even the previously well-disposed would support the Bonapartist regime.

 Some French military commanders are now so hated for their behaviour that the Spanish refuse even to accept any benefits they offer. Military governors refuse to allow … the Spanish authorities to carry out Your Majesty’s and
ministers’ civil and political orders … as the [Bayonne] constitution guaranteed. The people’s displeasure and irritation will become general as a result. 25

 The French military’s determination to control the civil administration, he continued, had in Burgos led them to line their pockets with a ‘considerable portion of the royal revenues’, a foolhardy practice which could only end
in trouble. It was not only embezzlement but French military exactions which concerned Amorós. A delegation from the township of Belorado had recently made the fifty-kilometre journey to Burgos to complain to him personally about
the exactions Thiébault had imposed. They had travelled this distance, he reported to the king, because they feared to put their complaint in writing. Thiébault had threatened to burn Belorado to the ground if they remonstrated
about what he had extorted from the inhabitants. 26

 When two Burgos hospital employees deserted their posts, Thiébault ordered all the hospitalized sick to be sent to prison. Even worse, it had come to Amorós’ attention that in the Basque town of Mondragón the local French
commandant ran his own court of justice.

 In his horrible tribunal a man’s life depends solely on whether or not he has one hundred reales to pay for his freedom … This officer has an obsession to be known as they military commandant who has condemned the greatest
number of people to death … 27

 Finally, Amorós, who had already asked to be relieved of his post which he had occupied for little more than two months, wrote to various government ministers saying he was leaving Burgos for Madrid to report personally on the
state of affairs with the French military in Castilla la Vieja. 28