

 Napoleon granted him five hundred thousand francs until July 1, and a further one million francs per month for the rest of the year. Half of this was to fund the Army of the Centre which henceforth was guaranteed to be under
Josef’s direct command, and more importantly, one-quarter of all the tax funds collected by the imperial armies in the regions which, under Napoleon’s division of Spain, depended on Paris, was to be handed over to Madrid. Justice
and the administration of these regions was in future to be carried out in the king’s name; and all French army commanders were now to report to Josef on their military and political initiatives. In other words, the king regained
some degree of authority over the land he was supposed to reign. 41

 Though there could no doubt about the regime’s willingness to bring in reforms, there was always something improvised about those which were enacted. Like the division of Spain into prefectures, which was intended to show
Napoleon that Madrid still controlled the whole country’s future, they tended often to be reactions to immediate situations, not part of a general and considered plan. In the circumstances, probably little more could be expected:
dependent on French bayonets to remain in being, subject to Napoleon’s diktats, to imperial marshals’ political caprices, to shortage of funds and the ebb and flow of the war itself, it was hardly surprising that the regime had
an air of provisionality about it.

 PATRIOT REFORMS:
THE CONSTITUENT CORTES OF CÁDIZ

 On Monday, September 24, 1810, the unicameral Cortes assembled – or rather those deputies who had managed to reach the Isla de León, usually by sea – in the church of San Pedro and took the oath to ‘carry out faithfully and
legally the task which the Nation has entrusted to you, preserving the laws of Spain, yet modifying if necessary those that must be changed for the good of the Nation’. 42

 The claim to sovereignty had been at the heart of the provincial juntas and the Junta Suprema. But none had claimed, as the Cortes immediately declared in its first decree, that it represented popular national sovereignty. As
the nation’s sole elected legislature it separated the executive and the legislative – the judiciary would follow shortly – and was the first real rupture with the Old Order, in which the monarch had incorporated all three
functions in his divinely appointed being. The nation’s will, expressed in the legislature, was thus set above the monarchy which became the executive to whom the former could delegate such powers as it saw fit. At the same time,
in its first measure, it recognized Fernando VII as Spain’s sole and legitimate king, while turning the regency into the executive branch of the government and titling itself ‘His Majesty’. The Old Regime’s adherents, like the
Bishop of Orense, one of the regents, were not surprisingly incensed at this usurpation of monarchical rights which heralded the creation of a parliamentary monarchy. He denounced the Cortes’ declaration of sovereignty, accusing
it of turning the king into ‘the nation’s vassal’ and asserting that its assumption of an omnipotent power would ‘consummate the Nation’s ruin and even offend Religion’. 43 The deputies responded by confining the bishop to a
monastery for six months; but the introduction of religion as a political issue from the Cortes’ inception did not bode well for the future.