

 In some cases, like the abolition of the religious (and military) orders, and of all noble titles with the exception of those recognized by Josef, * the new regime went further than Napoleon had himself proposed for Spain in his
Chamartín decrees. Señorial rights, as the Emperor had decreed, were also eliminated † and so, too, were special jurisdictions except for commercial transactions and ‘for the time being’ the military. All the old state Councils
were decreed out of existence, the Consejo de Castilla being replaced by a twenty-five member Council of State. Hanging was abolished; in future only the garrotte would be used, and the regime looked into ways of making this more
humane (though the Madrid corregidor refused to pay for the work). 31

 The government concerned itself with primary education, ‘the teaching of the Christian doctrine and the three “Rs” ‘, and in the larger towns created secondary schools in buildings which had been taken over from those who had
fled or in expropriated friaries or convents. In Madrid it set up a girls’ school also. The reform of prisons was another objective actively pursued, at least in Madrid and Sevilla, where overcrowding and unsanitary conditions
were rife. Old prisons, both for men and women, were shut down and expropriated friars’ houses often used to replace them. It was not the government’s policy to ‘keep offenders for a long time in prison’, the Justice Minister,
Manuel Romero, informed the king, recommending a royal pardon for a women prisoner. 32

 Urbanism was of particular interest to Josef and in this he was followed by many of Napoleon’s generals who were in command of cities. The king, for example, knocked down a warren of streets in front of the Royal Palace in
Madrid to make today’s Plaza de Oriente and, to clear access to the Plaza Mayor, built two new squares for vendors’ stalls.

 But in one important aspect the regime, which believed in ‘an owner’s sacred rights’, prejudiced Madrileños’ daily living conditions by freeing rents in expropriated property bought from the state, and in allowing landlords to
evict tenants in arrears with their rents. This brought a flood of protests, including those from women schoolteachers. Rosa Sánchez who taught poor children in the Buen Suceso and Baroneja quarters of the city, appealed to a
judge to seek a compromise with her landlord who was threatening to throw her out of her room, ‘given the importance to the public of the work I do’. 33

 Recognizing that the government lacked the money to pay teachers in charity schools and other educational establishments, and that their evictions did ‘grave harm to the public good’, the interior minister proposed that
evictions should be judicially prevented, but the justice minister disagreed. Although the law gave tenants forty days’ grace before eviction, unscrupulous landlords often did not respect this, and evicted them on a few days’
notice. The protests continued but there was no evidence that the government took action. 34