

 Within three weeks of the Cortes’ assembling, it began discussion on a proposal to free the press. The issue had been aired by Calbo Rozas in the Suprema without success; but the Cortes was a different matter. Three deputies
made particularly powerful speeches in favour: Agustín Argüelles, a thirty-four-year-old Asturian hidalgo lawyer; José Mexía, born in Quito and professor of medicine at Lima University; and Diego Muñoz Torrero, an Extremaduran
cleric and former rector of Salamanca University, who summed up the argument in favour with the words: ‘the right to examine a government’s actions is an imprescriptible right that no nation can renounce without renouncing its
nationhood’. The Cortes approved press freedom, but it was a conditioned approval which applied only to the expression of political ideas. All religious writings had still to receive the consent of prior censorship, although this
was removed from the Inquisition to the bishops. Moreover, a supreme censorship junta was created – along with provincial juntas of the same nature – to guard against abuses of press freedom, political or otherwise, and see to it
that the accused were prosecuted by the courts. 44

 Freedom of the political press turned out to be a double-edged weapon for the liberals. Amidst a plethora of newspapers which sprang up in Cádiz, the liberals’ opponents ensured that their own press took every opportunity to
attack the progressives, to proselytize and make adverse propaganda, while the liberals paid the price of their most radical wing running afoul of the censorship junta which sent a couple of them to gaol for several weeks.
Moreover, the liberals, with their visceral fear that the common people should inflect or infect their political agenda, made no attempt to find new graphic forms to attract their support, relying on the Old Order’s classic art
styles in their papers or pamphlets. Where a Goya was needed to bring alive the disasters of Absolutism, the old genre of classical print, even if intended as criticism, subtly reinforced a continuity rather a rupture with the
past. 45

 The question of the colonies had arisen on the day after the Cortes assembled. The American deputies had put forward the need of accompanying the Cortes’ decree establishing its national sovereignty with a statement that the
colonies’ inhabitants held equal rights to those of the metropolis and conceding an amnesty to those who had taken part in the recent events. In a secret session, the Cortes agreed. 46 But it came too late and was not enough.

 A previous problem re-emerged only a fortnight after the freedom of the press was approved. The Cortes appealed for volunteers to build fortifications and for the recruitment of ten thousand men for the army. The results were
nugatory. The liberals had no more learned the lessons of the past two years than the Suprema members had in their time. Meanwhile the Cortes set up a Constitutional Commission of nine lawyers and six clergy, of whom ten in all
were Spanish and five Spanish-Americans, presided over by the liberal cleric Muñoz Torrero. Liberals and their opponents * were about equally represented; the ultra absolutists had only two members.