

 Of the just over one hundred deputies who had assembled, nearly one half were substitutes for those who had not yet been able to reach Cádiz or whose election had been delayed because they were in the French zone. They had been
elected by their fellow countrymen who had sought refuge in Cádiz. * Twenty-six of these substitutes represented the South American colonies and two the Philippines. As little by little the elected deputies arrived their numbers
rose to 233. Of these approximately one-third were clergymen (although only five among them were bishops), a handful of titled nobility, another handful of merchants and property owners, and a majority of mainly professionals –
lawyers, professors, government officials, physicians and literati. One social stratum was entirely absent: the lower orders.

 The commoners and clerics who made up the greatest number of deputies were in general moderate reformers who knew what measures they wished to see enacted although they had no overall parliamentary plan for achieving them. It
was only as a small group among them proposed one reform after another, which was usually approved by the majority, that it became clear that a new political order was taking shape which was very different from that of the Old
Order’s absolutism. In this view, freedom – political and civil – was the only basis which would bring a lasting and just felicity to the nation and ensure that despotism could not again rule the country. The vassal of the past
must become the citizen of the future. Equality – not Jacobin social equality – but equality before the law and equality of opportunity went hand in hand with liberty. Equality before the law meant sweeping away the maze of legal
privileges enjoyed by the two upper estates, the nobility and Church, as well as that of distinct institutions, and opening up to all Spaniards the freedom to rise in society as the reward of their own abilities, merits and
virtues. In a word, the reformers were proposing a meritocracy . The citizen would be free when he – for women did not form part of the political theory – enjoyed the same legal rights as every other citizen, without the
exclusions which the privileged had imposed on him in the past.

 The outstanding reformers came soon to be known as ‘liberals’, the first time the word had been applied to a political grouping, and after a time their opponents were named ‘serviles’, that was to say servile to absolutism.
There was one other important aspect to this nascent liberalism which remained an essential tenet of its ideology thereafter: the rejection of state intervention – inherited then as a reaction to the enlightened reformers’
attempts to involve the state in resolving all the problems which held back Spain’s economic growth. Individual interest, not government laws and regulations, were the stimulus for progress, the liberals maintained: and
individual interest could only be assured by the hallowed right of property and by the free market in every aspect of economic life. All ‘monopolistic’ interests, such as the guilds, which set prices and determined the labour
market in their trades, were to be abolished.