

 The ideologically committed afrancesados were a different case. Most were usually enlightened men of the old generation – this was particularly true of those in government – who had believed in reforming Spain from above:
‘everything for the people without the people’, had been enlightened despotism’s policy. Reform without disorder, in other words. They considered themselves as ‘patriotic’ as the patriots, if not more so, inveighing against a
fratricidal war which they envisaged as destroying the country and preventing the reforms which the great majority of Spaniards knew were needed. The nation’s geographical indivisibility was as important to them as to the
patriots. Though they recognized the inevitability in the circumstances of the French army’s presence they in fact disliked it, seeing it clearly for what it was; but they could also not forget that for over a century France and
Spain had been allies, and that Britain, with her threatening designs on the South American colonies, had been the natural enemy. Only Napoleon was strong enough to keep the British at bay.

 Some ideological afrancesados – there were not many of them in all – had like a number of patriots begun the war on the other side. The rising, the mob in the streets, the fear of revolution had brought the former into the
Bonapartist camp; while the patriots’ victory at Bailén in the summer of 1808 had kindled the hope among others that resistance was not only possible but could triumph. Until the war hardened the lines, the divisions were often
very thin. It was more the means of how to achieve them than the reformist ends which separated them.

 MILITANCIES: FRANCISCO AMORÓS
AND THE FRENCH ARMY

 The friction between Spanish Bonapartist government officials and the French military was exemplified by Francisco Amorós, an ideologically convinced afrancesado (and ex-Godoy supporter), and General Thiébault, the French
military governor of Castilla la Vieja. Amorós, who was the king’s regal commissioner in Burgos, unceasingly complained to Josef’s government about Thiébault’s military inactivity against the guerrillas and his active attempts to
take over the region’s civil administration. On one occasion in the summer of 1809, a convoy of 110 carts of munitions heading from Burgos for Valladolid, with a small escort, was successfully intercepted by several guerrilla
parties which had united for the attack. ‘One thousand wretched men, poorly armed and led made a fool of five thousand excellent soldiers whom this general [Thiébault] has at his command, without knowing how to use them’, Amorós
informed the king, adding that the general had not had the courtesy to receive him as the monarch’s representative. 22

 By September 1809, the situation between the two had become even more critical. A petty incident gave a good idea of the tension. The Burgos police chief appointed by Amorós arrested a local tailor for ‘comments subversive to
honourable opinion’. Thiébault immediately ordered his release. The police chief handed in his resignation which Amorós refused, and the former re-arrested the tailor. Thiébault again sent an aide-de-camp to release him; but the
tailor now refused to leave prison because he feared the consequences and ‘respected, as he should, his natural [i.e. Spanish] judges’. Whereupon Amorós ordered his release because of his ‘honourable conduct’ and the police chief
again resigned and was replaced by another Amorós appointee. 23