

 BONAPARTIST REFORMS

 One of Josef’s demands of all those employed by his regime was that they swear allegiance to the throne. This might seem a fairly normal procedure, but in the circumstances it was bitterly resented by most Spanish officialdom
and kept not a few from serving him. * The patriots had made it abundantly clear that all those who swore allegiance would be considered traitors. Indeed, a change had come about in the language they used to describe those who
served the Bonaparte government. At the start of the war, these were ‘bad’ Spaniards; by 1810, they had lost their right to be called ‘Spaniards’ at all. By this change, the patriots demonstrated that, in their minds, the very
essence of ‘Spanishness’ was anti-Bonapartist. †

 A Galician supporter of the new regime, who titled himself a Spanish patriot, expressed many afrancesado concerns in a public appeal to his fellow Spaniards to end the useless bloodshed which was ‘devastating the country’ and
encouraging the ‘horrors of anarchy’ to defend the indefensible:

 The preservation of the privileged classes, whose unjust authority runs counter to the country’s well-being … and some clerics, who without conscience or virtue are vassals’ lords and look only to their own interests … these are
the two classes which today make their unhappy compatriots believe they have taken to arms in defence of religion and the former king, when in reality they are sending them to their deaths to continue their abuses down to the
very last victim. * 29

 Napoleon’s 1808 Chamartín reforms – the Inquisition’s abolition first and foremost – met with the Galician author’s full approval. The Inquisition had ‘excessively brutalized the nation … and contributed not a little to Spain’s
progressive ruin’ in the past. ‘Who cannot bless the Emperor for eliminating it?’ Similarly, the abrogation of feudal rights was a great step forward because the lords exercised a power in their domains greater even than a
sultan’s and certainly more extensive than the king’s. For Spaniard to fight Spaniard was one of the ‘worst outrages’ imaginable, in his view. ‘Let us leave this to those alone who have interests to defend … while the rest of us
return to our ordinary tasks … to live in peace, if ever we can achieve it one day.’

 Many on both sides had once admired Napoleon as much for his administrative talents, the domestic peace and reforms he had brought to France, as for his military genius; and during the war these committed Bonapartists wanted his
legal code introduced in Spain. But even they recognized that it could not be imported wholesale; a royal decree establishing a committee to prepare legislative proposals necessary for its introduction was created in 1809, but
the junta charged with the task of adapting it to Spanish conditions was still at work a year later. 30 Almost certainly, like Spanish objections to the Bayonne constitution which had resulted in Napoleon’s accepting changes,
vested interests were at work; most afrancesados believed that Spain must reform itself in its own manner, in which they differed little from the patriots. The end result was that, with or without reforms, the code was never
introduced by Josef, though certain changes contained in the Napoleonic Bayonne constitution – the start of an independent judicial system, for example – were instigated. Other reforms, like the division of the country into
prefectures, each with its prefect, were taken over from France. †