

 This new mobility, which was not exclusively a guerrilla affair – army service also provided it – reinforced an awareness that for all its diversity Spain was one country, one nation, and that only the union of its diverse parts
could achieve its present objectives.

 CRITICAL MASS

 In 1811, E1 Empecinado, a small farmer who became the best known of the guerrilla leaders, wrote that the day of the small party was more or less over. They could no longer do as much damage as they had at the beginning of the
struggle. The early guerrilla movement of surprise attack and rapid dispersion in search of a small victory had led to its own counter-insurgency tactics, and produced fewer benefits as a result. His comment was borne out by the
facts: the concentration of guerrilla parties continued strongly between 1811 and 1812. The total number of medium and small parties, as well as those of unknown category, declined by over half while the large parties held their
own, though also not without some loss of members. Overall, the number of guerrilleros dropped by nearly six percent in 1812. The French withdrawal from Andalucía in that year was certainly in part responsible for the decline
both in numbers and small parties.

 The sheer weight of men which the large parties had come to command was leading them to the formation of a critical mass which inevitably changed their aims and perspectives. They were beginning to seek a centred spatial
control, to hold down territory, to become more like a popular territorial liberation movement. Critical mass, however, was not a question of sheer numbers alone. Of equal, if not greater importance, was fighting experience.
After years of hand-to-hand combat, the guerrillas were battle-hardened veterans who were no longer frightened of the French troops, having killed, captured or put them to flight on so many occasions. As an experienced French
counter-insurgency general who led the ‘Infernals’ (so named by the French for their notorious anti-guerrilla tactics) wrote after suffering a heavy defeat at Espoz y Mina’s hands:

 I confess to your excellency in all honesty that the brigands of this kingdom [Navarra] merit the name of veteran soldiers. They can compete with the best of our armies, for the continuous battles and victories have made them
lose their fear of us. (General Soulier to Marshal Suchet, February, 1812) 12

 The decline of eighty thousand imperial troops in Spain during Napoleon’s Russian campaign * reduced French military pressure on the guerrillas and opened a space for a new sense of territorial conquest. This was best expressed
by Espoz y Mina’s blockade of Pamplona, the Navarrese capital. Decreed in December 1811, the blockade was put into serious effect in the early months of 1812. Its aim was to cut off the capital and its French garrison from the
rest of the region. Marker stones, guarded twenty-four hours a day, were set up on all the major roads into the city at a distance of about one and a half kilometres from the walls: no one was to be permitted to carry money, food
or merchandise beyond these markers towards the capital. Its inhabitants were allowed to leave the city to live in the guerrilla zone but not to return: those who remained in Pamplona were declared enemies for as long as the war
lasted. ‘The volunteer detachments guarding the line will shoot anyone they see approaching, without orders or communication; and whether wounded or not the offender will be hanged immediately from a tree’, said Article 10 of
Mina’s blockade decree. 13 This in a year when food was already growing short meant considerable hardship for the Pamplona population, and hardship also for the small farmers who marketed their produce in the capital, but it was
a clever territorial move. It visibly demonstrated to the population that total belligerency was demanded of them by a guerrilla that was in civilian as well as military command.