

 Coming from one of the guerrilla leaders who was said to be more feared in his native Navarra than the French themselves, this was strong language. As a Spanish colonel whom Mina rescued by a surprise attack from a prisoner of
war column on its march to France described him:

 Mina is a man of average, slightly blond looks, well-built, about five foot one inch in height, and of few but direct words. He is between twenty-eight and thirty years old, if not more. He does not like women, and would not
allow one to be a member of his division. He sleeps only two hours a night, and always with his pistols readied in his belt. He remains shut in his room on the few nights that he goes to a village. He attracts much attention but
is very reserved. 5

 After being shorn, Mina’s men were issued with new uniforms: brown jackets and trousers, tall black hats and hemp espadrilles which was to be the standard uniform of the Navarrese Division, as Mina called his force. In
uniforming his men, he was no different to the majority of guerrilla leaders, since one of the first things they tried to do was to replace with standard uniforms their men’s captured pieces of imperial military outfits and
shakos – a cylindrical or conical hat with a peak and a plume – which they wore on top of villagers’ clothes. The reason was simple: the leaders wanted to be recognized, both by the patriot authorities and the enemy, as official
military detachments. As such, they asked the patriot authorities to grant them and their subordinates military rank, and to receive money and aid. From the enemy, they wanted their men who were taken prisoner to be granted the
same rights as any regular soldier and not considered, as they only too often were, brigands and gallows-carrion.

 The major guerrilla leaders were not men who rejected authority or discipline per se, indeed they often tried to impose better discipline on their forces in the search for greater combat effectiveness, using dispersed soldiers
to train their men and officers to lead them when their numbers rose beyond a single leader’s control. They gave their guerrillas military-sounding titles – the Castilian Scouts, the Sharpshooters of Cantabria, the Hussars of
Iberia – and as far as they could organized their parties along military lines into companies, battalions, regiments, divisions. But one factor would always prevent them from becoming totally militarized: the guerrilleros’
loyalty to a charismatic leader. When wounded, as Espoz y Mina was, his men felt leaderless and relapsed into a generalized inactivity.

 Their leaders’ military inclinations were not reciprocated by the Spanish regular army officers in general. They claimed that the guerrilla was detrimental to the regular army because it recruited the young, protected deserters,
encouraged indiscipline and demoralized the enemy-occupied rearguard by its exactions and incursions into villages. Some of these arguments were no more than received ideas. Guerrillas operating around Valladolid gathered up
dispersed soldiers and deserters who had not returned to their regiments and as a punishment