

 *

 After another winter of renewed French counter-insurgency, when Mina was obliged to disperse his four battalions of one thousand men each to the safety of the mountainous northwest of Navarra and the eastern Pyrenees, with the
occasional exception to strike a blow, it was not until May 1811 that the French counter-insurgency again slackened off, and Mina could assemble his four battalions once more. The moment coincided with his receiving the news from
his fifth Alavese battalion commander * that a French convoy of over one hundred carriages of French sick and wounded, more than one thousand Spanish and British prisoners of war, and Marshal Masséna’s booty from his abortive
Portuguese offensive was leaving Vitoria on May 25 for France. The marshal himself was part of the convoy. The escort alone numbered 1,650 troops.

 Mina did not hesitate. There was little enough time. He knew the column would have to traverse the Arlabán pass on the borders of Álava and Guipúzcoa. In an eighty-five-kilometre forced march over rough terrain in two days and a
night, he led his four thousand men to Arlabán. Once the column was well into the pass, Mina employed his usual tactics: an initial volley of one musket round per man and then a bayonet charge.

 Two hundred and forty of the escort were killed and 160 taken prisoner. The rest fled back along the road they had come. Almost all the one thousand prisoners were released, † and seventy carts captured, the effects and money
they contained worth four million reales. Quantities of gunpowder and munitions of which the guerrillas were always short were also seized. Masséna, who had tarried in Vitoria, was warned by the fleeing escort of the attack. The
guerrilleros retired ‘laden with gold and portmanteaux full of rich apparel’, Mina wrote. 7 ‡ It was the biggest guerrilla victory to date.

 GUERRILLA NUMBERS

 At one or another time during the war over 330 parties were formed. Their number and the rudimentary state of membership figures made problematic the calculation of their exact numbers at their height in 1811–1812. In this
period, however, one fact stood out: the vast majority of guerrilleros were now enrolled in one or other of sixteen ‘great’ parties with a combined strength in 1811 of approximately 47,000 infantry and cavalry. * Averaging just
under three thousand guerrilleros each these large parties formed over eighty-five percent of the total. The overall number of active small and medium parties had declined: eleven medium-sized groups (of between 250 and 999
members) accounted for a further 5,400, and twenty-nine small bands (of up to 249 members) amounted to nearly 2,400. The total number of guerrilleros in the field in 1811 would thus have been about 55,500. †

 This was a high figure. At a time when the four remaining Spanish armies, excluding Cataluña for which no data existed, reached just over seventy thousand men present under arms in the summer of 1811, 8 the guerrilleros
represented a nearly matching strength. As the majority of the large parties were in the north, five of these, numbering over thirty-three thousand foot and cavalry, were officially enrolled by the patriot government as the
Seventh Army operating from the borders of Galicia eastwards to the French frontier. ‡