

 branded their foreheads with the letter ‘D’ and told them that if in three days they had not reported to the nearest army or party they would be shot and they and their parents and closest siblings would be declared traitors,
lose all their property and be branded with the letter T. 6

 The guerrillas’ military critics overlooked the fact that the enormous desertion from and dispersal of the regular patriotic armies had begun in late 1808 when the guerrilla had barely started to form and was the outcome of a
refusal, on the one hand, to serve in an army in which the privileged orders (including officers) frequently managed, in one form of another, to evade having to face the enemy; and where, once in the army, the ordinary recruit
had no other resource than to flee in defeat. It similarly ignored the social problems caused by conscription. It was an open question whether the dispersed soldiers would necessarily, or without considerable restraint, have
rejoined the army under commanders they did not trust and who did not trust them. The constant complaints to the authorities about ‘dispersed bandits’ was an indication that they would – as many indeed did anyway – have become
outlaws instead. Or landworkers whom local oligarchs were prepared to protect to secure the labour they needed.

 Many guerrilla leaders initially adopted an authoritarian attitude towards villagers, which was not especially surprising in a society where the enlightened, the state and the Church had, pre-war, all ordered the lower orders to
obey their instructions on almost every aspect of their public and private lives. But when carried too far this guerrilla ‘commandism’ was an unaccepted but actual admission of failure. Unable to win the population’s support by
victories over the French, their forced exactions from villagers, whom they refused to defend from imperial extortion, isolated and marginalized them, as it did the villagers, from the struggle. These parties tended not to last
long; their chieftains were betrayed, or captured and sometimes shot by those guerrilla leaders who, sharing the villagers’ social origins, fully understood their motives for taking to arms. It was this type of leader who
prevented the rearguard from accepting the occupation as an uncontestable inevitability. Two elements were necessary to achieve this. The constant threat to collaborators’ lives, or even to those who sought refuge in
‘neutrality’. The imperial forces were too thin on the ground to protect all those who were – or would have been – prepared to collaborate; the guerrillas were only sufficiently strong enough to pick off some of them but the
example was sufficient. Who could know where they would strike next? The second condition required victories, however small, over the occupation forces, especially on their foraging expeditions. News of these travelled fast.
Without these triumphs the villagers resented the guerrillas’ impositions, knowing full well that they had still to confront the enemy’s exactions.