

 While landownership was an important element of the anti-feudal struggle, the latter was marked by another factor: it was the large farmers who led the conflict and were the most vocal in their protests at señorial domination.
They resented having to pay dues and tributes to the lord, who profited at their expense and labour; members of the local oligarchies, they wanted to be free agrarian entrepreneurs, unsubjected to their lord’s restrictive rights
and justice.

 The Cortes’ August decree added fuel to the flames. It did not satisfy the villagers who wanted land, and it dissatisfied all those who had made their living from the señorial system. Moreover, it was rare in Valencia for there
to be a clear distinction between jurisdictional and territorial señoríos. Unlike in Castilla, where the señores’ income came almost exclusively from rents, in Valencia by the end of the eighteenth century, dues and tributes
accounted for half of their income. In consequence, the decree’s ambiguity as to whether this meant the abolition of both or only of the jurisdictional aspect, allowed villagers to accept the former interpretation. Though the
question of whether it was the señores or their vassals who had to present the documentary proof of their alleged rights was a complicating issue, for most villagers all señoríos had been abolished. † As a lawyer representing the
Valencian señorial landlords wrote:

 Since the August decree was published in Valencia, my plaintiffs’ villagers rejected with vulgar or insulting gestures not only the jurisdiction but also the prerogatives and prohibitions which the decree left to private owners.
They used violence to usurp the provisions which it granted to owners and which did not fall under jurisdictional abolition: our share of the crops, the payments due … from [land] contracts freely made … Many also had the
temerity to take over our buildings and property … In Alberique they went so far as to take over the owner’s and justice’s houses … and put to public auction the boat, inn, shops, baking ovens and mills, and also the owner’s own
rooms, and to smash the coat of arms in the portico and replace it with the title of plaza de la Constitución … 49

 Elsewhere, townships, especially in the Alicante señorío of the conde de Altamira (who, under his other title of marqués de Astorga, had for a time been the Suprema’s president) set up ‘popular juntas’ to run local affairs in
place of the count’s administration. There was no shortage of anti-feudal incidents throughout the patriot zone; what was lacking was their fusion into a mass movement to ensure that the Cortes abolished the señorial system in
its totality. Given that a large number of small and medium-sized farmers were armed and fighting in the guerrilla, their absence from the political scene was the more striking. *

 The Cortes, meanwhile, found itself confronted with another question of land ownership. What to do with land which was not owned individually but collectively, such as village commons? But also entailed estates and
ecclesiastically owned land. The Cortes only found time to debate the first. The ideological liberal argument was that the commons should be sold to the highest bidder without any type of restriction. † Those deputies who put
this view admitted that only the wealthy would benefit, but they believed that in the long run this would be to society’s advantage. However, they ran into criticism from their own fellow liberals. Returning to the enlightened
reformers’ argument that a state’s wealth and strength depended on the size of its population, García Herreros stressed that a population increase was meaningless if the additional people were poor and wretched. They must be part
of families with their roots in the land if the state’s wealth were to increase. Thus a motion was tabled in 1811 that one-third of the commons should be sold in small plots, and all that were not sold should be distributed among
the landless and small tenantry. The more radical liberals raised the limit to one half of the commons.