

 Pre-war, as land values rose, villagers engaged in lengthy legal disputes, lasting anything up to half a century, to reclaim these rights, which involved the nobility in considerable costs and conflicts with townships and
villages in their señoríos. The more acute among the nobility had come to realize that they would be better off as private landowners rather than as the señorial incumbents of disputed land. Rising rents would offset any loss of
dues and tribute. It was this awareness that led them not to fear the liberals depriving them of feudal lordships as long as the former confirmed them as property owners; and this was one of the reasons that had made their
wartime ‘popular front’ alliance with the liberal reformers possible.

 Heirs of the eighteenth-century enlightened reformers, the liberals had no time for the ‘idle’ nobility as it had been called by their intellectual forebears. But on the señorial issue the liberals were not prepared for a
showdown with the nobility. It could be argued that the necessities of the war forbade any such rupture among the patriots. But in fact the liberals, in agreeing to abolish only jurisdictional señoríos, were trapped in their own
ideology: their determination that there be one – and only one – law before which all Spaniards must be equal meant that special jurisdictions, such as those of the jurisdictional lordships, had to be abolished. And their
insistence on the sanctity of private property meant that they could not deprive any individual of his or her right to enjoy and use it for the felicity of the nation as a whole. The proposal that all señoríos be taken over by
the crown quickly dropped from the debate. Ideology dominated – as it was later to dominate the Cortes’ debates on the Constitution and the rupture between a reforming and a defensively reactionary Spain. And it was permitted to
dominate during the señorial debate by the absence of a large-scale villagers’ movement, like that of the French Revolution, demanding the distribution of the nobility’s domains which would have pressured the liberals into more
radical action. As it was, the decree of August 6, 1811, abolishing señorial jurisdiction did nothing to reform the landowning structure of Spain since the señores continued to hold their large domains, converted now into private
property. Moreover, the decree contained two fatal ambiguities. Whether those señoríos which were both territorial and jurisdictional were abolished because of their latter status; and whether it was the señor or his vassals who
had to produce the evidence of rightful ownership to disputed land.

 *

 With a history of anti-feudal struggle stretching back to the sixteenth century, the Valencian countryside was the focal point of renewed conflict between señorial domination and the villagers from the very beginning of the war.
Many villagers stopped paying dues and tributes, alleging in part that their contributions of food supplies and money to the ‘national’ cause made further impositions impossible to meet. A Suprema decree in 1809 expropriating the
rents of all those suspected of siding with the Bonapartist regime, whose whereabouts were unknown or who received rents in other parts of patriot Spain became a useful instrument in their hands, since many of the titled nobility
had señoríos in provinces outside Valencia * or lived elsewhere; interpreting the decree with considerable latitude, local corregidores instructed the villagers not to pay them rent. 48