

 When, in December 1810, well-founded rumour had it that Napoleon intended to give a Bonaparte princess in marriage to Fernando (in fact, the latter had beseeched the Emperor to do so and had been turned down), the Cortes acted
in united determination to prevent it by passing a motion that a Spanish monarch could not marry without the knowledge and approval of the Spanish nation.

 Although a number of liberals had put forward motions at the beginning of 1811 to abolish feudal land rights, it was nearly a year since its inception before the Cortes began to debate the question which directly concerned the
majority of the population. † At stake were the two forms of señorial domination of the rural world. The first, and by far the most extensive, was a lordship’s jurisdictional rights which did not necessarily bear any relationship
to actual ownership of the land but granted the right to appoint local justices and municipal councillors who could be expected to do their lord’s bidding in any dispute with his vassals. Such disputes inevitably arose over the
lord’s other feudal rights to dues and tributes from those working the land, rights which also included the monopoly of mills, smithies, baking ovens, brothels, ‡ grazing, of hunting and shooting … § The lord might be an
individual or an institution, a bishopric or monastery, for example. Most of the rights, which belonged originally to the monarchy, had been sold to them in the past by near-bankrupt kings to raise funds.

 The second type of señorial holding was that of the land itself which a grateful monarch had originally bestowed on a noble vassal who had distinguished himself in the monarchy’s service, usually in a military capacity. The land
ceded the crown’s rights over uncultivated land which belonged to neither a municipality nor an individual. At the beginning of the nineteenth century, these señoríos were not usually directly worked by the owner, heir of a long
distant forebear, but parcelled out into holdings or even smallholdings and rented out. Where the owner was also the jurisdictional lord he or she would collect dues and tributes, which had over time often become confused with
rents. To complicate matters still further, señorial domination could vary in detail in different parts of the country without losing its basic purpose of extracting the landworking population’s surplus. ‘Nothing contributes more
greatly to the unhappiness of villagers than to be subject to jurisdictions and particular señoríos’, said a Valencian deputy, Antonio Lloret, who came from a señorial township. 47

 The simplest political solution to these forms of rural domination was to abolish all types of señoríos and reincorporate them as crown property, repaying the owners who could show that their original title was legally
foolproof. This, indeed, was what the deputy for Soria, García Herreros, proposed in a motion at the beginning of a long and intense debate which led to the noble deputies collectively asking for the only time in the Cortes’
history that the terms of a motion be clarified. This they soon were by another proposal by García Herreros which demanded that only señorial jurisdictional rights be revoked and that land recognized legally to belong to the
señor become his or her private property. This took into account the fact that the señor’s forbears had often over the centuries expanded their señoríos by abuse of their power and the forceful recognition of rights over land
that had neither been ceded by the crown nor bought from individuals. Their legal ownership of señorial rights would have to be proven.