

 Among the guerrilleros nine women were recorded, including Francisca de la Puerta, who fought with two well-known male-led groups in La Mancha and Extremadura and petitioned the authorities in 1810 for permission to form her own
party which was not granted, though the Extremadura junta awarded her a medal of honour. Catalina Martín, the niece of Toribio Bustamente, a well-known guerrilla leader with whom she fought was promoted to a cavalry second
lieutenant by the Junta Suprema after distinguishing herself in several actions. Francisca de Ipiñazar and Dominica Ruíz accompanied their guerrilla husbands; the latter, the wife of another known leader, Alonso Ignacio
Cuevillas, was said to have killed three imperial soldiers with her own hands in Santo Domingo de la Calzada. 9

 Other women, without being in the guerrilla, played equally important roles in the resistance. Rosa Aguado, General Kellerman’s Spanish mistress while he was governor of Valladolid, was a patriot spy. On being arrested later,
she stated clearly that her imprisonment was due to the ‘singular services she had done for the good and true Spaniards, who loved the fatherland, against the French intruder government’. 10 Three Valladolid sisters, known
collectively as the Ubonas (from their family name of Ubón), looked after and helped poor Spanish military prisoners, and probably also acted as spies for the guerrilla. After the war, one of the sisters, María, was given a life
pension by the government for her services. 11 In fact, many other women in Madrid and elsewhere helped Spanish military prisoners to escape or sheltered them when they had done so.

 THE PARTIES’ REGIONAL DISTRIBUTION

 About one in six guerrilleros fought in regions outside of their own. And one in five of these fought in more than two other regions: the Cantabrians and the Navarrese were the most active on this front, mainly in Aragón,
Asturias, the two Castillas (especially la Vieja), the Basque Country, and Extremadura. The Cantabrians, under Brigadier Porlier, the rank to which the Suprema had promoted him and the best-known of the military guerrilla
leaders, defended three fronts: the Basque to his east, the Asturian to his west, and the Castilian to his south. In Navarra, the main danger came from Aragón, which Espoz y Mina was determined to control.

 These regional ‘transfers’ were not part of some larger tactical plan, but responded to the conflict’s exigencies or those of the individuals concerned. They reinforced the truth, stressed earlier, that it was not ‘home
territory’ that the guerrillas were defending in the first instance, not even their own plots of land, but the right of passage over the face of their own country.

 People who had moved little beyond the perimeters of their home villages, found themselves suddenly thrown into unknown territories which formed part of a country threatened by the same hostile forces as those which they faced
at home. They found themselves coexisting with others confronted by the familiar needs of earning a living from an ungrateful soil, saw crops unknown to them – potatoes and maize for the southerners in the north, rice and citrus
for the northerners in the south; heard unknown languages and dialects, and customary names for weights and measures different to those they were used to; but everywhere they confronted the same enemy, the heretic invader who
requisitioned villagers’ livestock and crops, pillaged their villages, sacked their houses and desecrated their churches. The more they moved the more they found everything was the same.