

 The state will gain a great amount if the number of owners is multiplied, if ownership is extended to those who presently do not own land, and if not a single plot is without its distinct owner. 50

 The motives underlying this motion were not only to increase private property and agricultural production (and thus the state’s revenues) but to reward those villagers who had fought in the war. But the decree, published at the
beginning of 1813, came too late to have any effect: Fernando’s return from his French exile the following year and the restoration of absolutism put an end to it.

===== FILE: OEBPS/28_Chapter17.xhtml =====
Napoleon’s Cursed War

 17

 The Invisible Army:
Guerrilla Successes and Failures

 Like a net through which no French soldier who for a moment left his column or garrison could escape, an invisible army spread out over almost all of Spain. (Miot de Mélito, superintendent of Josef’s royal household) 1

 One of the most spectacular guerrilla coups of the war was the result of endurance and speed of march. The French infantry had been trained under Napoleon to march fast; but as General Reille reported on taking up his command of
Navarra in July 1810, the guerrillas marched twice as fast. 2 Francisco Espoz y Mina, who had taken command of the party formed by Javier Mina, his student relative, after the latter was captured by the French in the spring of
1810, had in one year created a force of four thousand guerrilleros, despite a long period of harassment and pursuit by French forces which had not only driven him from Navarra but dealt him a severe defeat as he and his men
attempted to return from Castilla in the autumn of 1810. Dispirited, the guerrilleros had filtered back into their home region. Shortly afterwards a successful ambush in the Carascal pass, a favourite guerrilla position, of a
French munitions train guarded by thirty gendarmes provided the guerrilleros with the arms and munitions they desperately needed; and the withdrawal of some of the extra French troops – intended to reinforce Masséna in Portugal
and which Reille had drafted into the region as a counter-insurgency force – provided them with time to regroup, refit and rest.

 To reimpose discipline was another matter.

 Espoz y Mina ordered that all his men be shorn of their long hair, like army conscripts; long hair, braided or held behind the ears was a mark of independence allowed in the army only to officers. Despite his subalterns’ fear
that the men would mutiny at the humiliation of having their hair cut, he turned the event into a masterly display of egalitarian authority: when all his men were shorn, he sat down in front of them and had his own hair cut. 3

 The guerrillas, like the armies, contained their fair share of rogues, villains, troublemakers and the lawless, as Espoz y Mina confessed.

 You have no idea of the sort of people I have. I am in the sad situation of having to count my continued existence by the minute. I have to use several cartridges of a sudden to make myself feared, and when I am alone I see
before my eyes a raised hand and dagger about to pierce my heart. 4