

 Earlier, in another brilliant stroke, Mina had taken over Navarrese custom posts and chanelled their tolls – three million reales a year, he estimated, including a monthly ‘contribution’ of one hundred ounces of gold from the
French customs post at Irún to allow French goods to cross the border – into the guerrilla movement to pay his men’s wages, buy arms and munitions, uniforms and other equipment. Although he was quite capable of levying forced
contributions from townships which had proven themselves unwholeheartedly behind the cause, and of obliging the villagers to provide his men with food, he used the customs money to avoid having to impose monetary taxes on the
mass of the rural population. In order to rally the Aragonese to his guerrilla, Mina pledged that he would put an end to the excessive French taxation, requisitions and pillage. 14

 At the beginning of February 1812, the British navy provided Mina with two twelve-pound cannon and two four-pounders in a drop-off in the Bay of Biscay. For a week, the guerrilla humped, hauled and heaved the precious artillery
pieces over mountain paths and tracks in enemy occupied territory with the division spread out covering the flanks to a considerable depth to prevent a surprise French attack. When they reached their objective – Tafalla, one of
the Navarrese towns most heavily fortified by the French – the twelve-pounders were not long in opening a breach in the castle walls which, after an abortive guerrilla assault, was still sufficiently threatening to induce the
imperial garrison to surrender the following day. 15

 General Reille, who had chased Mina very hard and pursued a repressive policy in Navarra in the same year, saw the writing on the wall. The mobile column which Napoleon had ordered as the chief counter-insurgency weapon, was
losing its fighting efficiency, he observed. Until then, numerically inferior imperial columns had been able to engage and put to flight guerrilla bands. But the latter’s combat experience was beginning to tell and they were
defeating increasingly large French columns, many of which were manned by raw conscripts or troops unfamiliar with the terrain. Until more troops were available, Reille noted, the imperial inferiority could only be made good by
cavalry and artillery units – which were impossible to deploy in rugged terrain. 16

 THE BATTLE FOR FOOD

 The battle for provisions was vital to the guerrilla war – indeed to the conflict itself. Napoleon’s policy of ‘war feeding war’ – in other words that his troops be fed and paid by local requisition – was viable for an army on
the march but became a very different matter when, in a poor agrarian country, it turned into an army of occupation. Nothing was more likely to keep a rural guerrilla alive and fighting than French exactions of food and money in
an impoverished countryside. * Moreover, if the guerrilla could prevent the French requisitioning supplies, they did the enemy as much harm as by forcing a column to flee or killing a score of imperial soldiers. To deny the enemy
their daily subsistence brought the guerrilla – who also had to live off the land – the popular support it needed, added new recruits to their cause, and left the enemy hungry, unpaid and demoralized.