

 Quite probably Matías was chosen for the mission because he knew Huesca well, the town being only a few hours on foot from his native village, or because he and the men were not yet fitted out in the glamorous Navarrese cavalry
uniforms which the latter could now afford, while the Aragonese-based men were still dressed little differently to the villagers. With his four soldiers, Sgt Matías made his way in the dawn through Huesca’s streets, his and his
men’s arms hidden under their capes, while he thought of some student prank from his tavern days in Zaragoza to set matters alight.

 ‘We reached the market at last and there we shot dead a gabacho [the common Spanish name for a Frenchman] 32 who was just leaving a meat stall. The rest of the French troops in the market ran for their fort.’ Quite
cold-bloodedly, the guerrilleros celebrated the death with some glasses of spirits in the market liquor shop. Then they left at a canter.

 At about the time that Matías had set out on his mission, the guerrilla leader Joaquín de Pablo, ‘Chapalangara’, set out for Huesca with two companies of his Aragonese infantry guerrilla and forty horse. The infantry took up an
ambush position around the Huesca gates. From beyond the city walls Matías and his guerrilleros allowed themselves to be seen, and soon a French gendarme cavalry squadron sallied forth. Specially trained to maintain (French)
civilian order and put down bandits in rural zones, the gendarmes could see that they were outnumbered by the two hundred infantry. ‘When we reached our rendez-vous with our chief he asked me: “How many are there?” and I replied,
“quite a few”, without giving him any more details. I would have been taken as a coward to have said more; in that division you had to be cautious.’ As he was admiring the ‘gendarmes’ high-spirited looks’, Matías saw that there
were not thirty but nearly eighty horsemen. Chapalangara’s infantry advanced on the enemy, while the guerrilla cavalry was ordered to take up position behind the French to cut off their retreat into the town. On seeing the number
of infantry ahead of them the enemy wheeled about to retire on Huesca, only to encounter the guerrilla horse. The infantry continued forward …

 The minutes seemed like eternity until we got the order to charge. We had advanced some five hundred paces to find gaps in the stone boundary walls of the fields through which to set upon the enemy …

 The French cavalry fired two rounds at the Spanish as they charged – the first with their carbines, the second with pistols. ‘The first round broke our commandant’s leg and the second killed a brave cavalryman of our army whom I
did not know until he was dying, but his comrades told me was a courageous man.’ The rest of the fighting was hand to hand with sabres and infantry bayonets. Matías’ sabre had over one hundred parrying chips slashed into it, and
his commanders came to look at it … ‘I knew thereafter that my companions had no equals in all the armies.’ The French cavalry finally broke through the Spanish lines and retired into Huesca with thirty casualties against twenty
for the guerrillas. The latter’s wounded could take comfort from the fact that Espoz y Mina took great care of them, for he believed that a well-trained soldier was his most valuable asset.