

 As their power increased, so by 1811–1812 the guerrilla increased the French army’s illness rate by their stubborn defence in the war of provisions, preventing the enemy from providing full rations to his troops. This they
achieved more often by seizing imperial supply columns – flocks of sheep, beef on the hoof, convoys of wheat carts – than by preventing the French soldiers’ requisitions; as a result the French military’s sickness rate of twenty
percent in Spain was higher than on campaigns in central Europe. In January 1813, Suchet had to reduce the bread ration from twenty-four to sixteen ounces because the guerrillas had collected most of the available surplus from
the harvest and hindered the transportation of what little grain the French had managed to accumulate; and in the early summer of the same year one-quarter of his infantry reported sick. 17 The guerrilla sapped the enemy’s morale
– imperial troops had little faith that they would conquer the ‘invisible’ army in this constant, never-ending struggle which forced them into long, tiring and fruitless marches over rugged country only to find that the enemy had
vanished into thin air; or even worse, if they encountered the guerrilla face-to-face they feared a terrifying fate. Untrained for this sort of work, conscripts had little stomach for it: the guerrilla’s existence encouraged the
rate of desertion in the Napoleonic ranks. Even in major cities, regular French troops felt under constant threat. ‘Little by little we are going to be destroyed … We shall all die here’, wrote an infantry sergeant major to his
father in France shortly after Sevilla’s occupation.

 We shall never destroy these bandits … Without hesitation and in broad daylight, an inhabitant will kill a French soldier he finds on his own in the street … The other day a drunken soldier who was stabbed to death had more than
thirty dagger wounds from head to stomach … Like others, he died in the cruellest of torments. The armed villagers commit the most brutal barbarities. They cut their victims’ ears off and stick their genitals in their mouths … 18

 Shortly before, a lieutenant colonel of the Imperial Guard, who had been promoted to colonel to command a line regiment, had suffered this fate in a village not two leagues from Sevilla before he could take up his new posting.
After six in the evening no troops in the Andalucian capital dared to venture out of barracks. * The French occupation army was in a wretched state, the sergeant major confessed to his father. The soldiers had been three days
without bread. No uniforms, no shoes, no shirts were reaching them from France … ‘I have seen many soldiers die of vermin, I saw one with a hole in his armpit eaten by lice which had laid their eggs in it, others die of chagrin
and misery.’ It was quite probable that sickness – human louse-borne typhus in particular – decimated the imperial ranks more heavily than the guerrilla. Suchet’s third army corps alone, which was one of the best equipped and
supplied, lost an estimated thirty-six thousand men – or one sixth of its strength yearly – to illness between 1810 and 1814. 19 At an annualized rate, this was the equivalent of nearly twenty casualties a day.