

 At the university, he read philosophy, as had Javier Mina, the founder of the Navarrese guerrilla, who was three years older than he and whom Matías probably knew. But Javier seemed to have been no direct influence on Calvo; it
was his relative Espoz y Mina, who succeeded Javier on his capture in 1810, who made an impact. After the 1808 rising and general enlistment Calvo, as a university student, was immediately made a sergeant in Fernando VII’s Royal
Infantry Regiment. ‘At that time one can say that there were few men in Spain capable of commanding a company let alone a battalion, but when we saw the enemy we thought we would eat him alive simply because he was the enemy.
What ignorance!’

 Matías took part in both the defences of Zaragoza, in the first fighting at the Carmen gate which was one of the most vulnerable openings in the city walls. But halfway through the second siege he, along with several others,
deserted, jumping from the city wall at night and making off across the countryside towards his home village. ‘No words can describe the state of the city by then … everything was in ruins ….’ His return home was worse than the
besieged city he had fled. French forces were attacking and sacking the village where three thousand patriot civilian reinforcements had assembled to relieve Zaragoza. Thirty-seven inhabitants, men, women and children lay dead in
the streets and houses, and the sanctuary of Our Lady of Magallón was ablaze.

 Escaping with young villagers up the high wooded hill to the sanctuary, Calvo saw below him, stretching out over two kilometres or more, the French forces sweeping forward, leaving swathes of dead Aragonese volunteers behind
them. A few artillery pieces were still defending the sanctuary. In his hurry across the square in front of it he did not notice that one of the ‘artillerymen’ was a woman, Lorenza Marcén, helped by her fifteen-year-old son,
Nicolás Seral. Both were killed in the final French attack.

 Matías’ parents lived by the sanctuary but they had fled. After sleeping in the sierra, eleven of the bolder youth made a cautious reconnaissance of the village: the French had evacuated the place.

 Oh, heavens above! Words fail me. We looked at one another as we passed the first houses … there was a corpse lying in the street, two more further on. A man who had been ill in bed at home lay dead … There was not a house in
the village with an unbroken chair, a table, not even the smallest thing; everything was smashed, all the doors and windows as well. It was horrible to walk down the streets.

 That night the youth made a fire in the public square with the firewood prepared by the French troops to warm themselves. Matías lay down on a stone bench between the arcades. When he awoke he found himself alone in the midst of
a dark, cold, silent square. He recalled that his erstwhile companions had spoken of a house where they could spend the night and he set off to find it. But they were not there.

 I did not know where to go. I seemed to remember that the last place we had spoken of was by El Coso. I went down the calle Mayor to the corner of the Coso and the calle Baja, but I did not see or hear anyone. It was enough to
frighten even the most courageous … Passing a door all you heard was a dog howling … Through another door I had already seen a man with his throat slit, and others shot to death … When I reached the calle Gimeno, my courage
failed me entirely. A man who until that moment had known neither fear nor danger, my eyes were suddenly blind with terror. I believe that if I had not had the luck to see a light emerge into the street … I would not have come
out of the village alive. I was convinced that something even more frightening had happened and that my companions had fled.