

 In the ongoing battle for provisions, the French exacted more than 150 million reales in food, fodder and monetary taxes from the Navarrese population alone. The bulk of this fell on the villagers. This amount represented two
years of the region’s average pre-war annual agarian, commercial and industrial production; spread out over five enemy occupation years, the sum was the equivalent of forty percent yearly of the region’s principal income. Just
under half the total sum was requisitioned from villagers solely between February 1808 and July 1811, in rations of bread, wine and meat for the imperial troops and barley and straw for their horses. 20

 It was the area of small farmers’ predominance in La Montaña – the rugged northern part of Navarra – which most resented enemy exactions and sought to resist them; and it was this region, giving on to the foothills of the
Pyrenees in the east, that formed one of the major guerrilla recruiting bases and refuges throughout the war. With its gorges, hidden valleys and series of mountain ranges of up to two thousand metres high, it was ideal guerrilla
country; French superiority in arms and military organization was largely neutralized by the terrain. La Montaña was over-populated at the time for the subsistence farming on which it depended because the usual outlets of
migration or emigration had been cut off by the war, and there was no shortage of potential guerrilla recruits who shared a common cultural heritage: like Espoz y Mina, they spoke Basque. With the exception of Pamplona, the
region’s capital, there were no major towns: the people lived in small villages or hamlets scattered over the countryside, which made the imperial army’s task of tax-collecting and requisitioning all the harder and more
hazardous. *

 The only opposition in Navarra to imperial domination lay in Espoz y Mina’s guerrilla which grew exponentially year by year, until it became by far and away the largest in Spain. Though the Navarrese Division had also to be fed
by the villagers, their requisitions were much more modest than those of their enemy – thirty percent of the total compared to the imperial forces’ seventy percent; and only seven percent overall of the guerrillas’ were exacted
by armed force. At the same time, the guerrilla paid (in fact, issued receipts) for nearly three times as much food received as they seized by force. 21

 All French-occupied regions suffered heavy monetary imposts and seizures of foodstuffs to pay for the imperial war and to keep their troops victualled. Between 1810 and 1814, Suchet extracted from Aragón forty-one million francs
– just under 150 million reales – the same amount as in Navarra, though the Aragonese population was approximately three times the size of the former. 22 Santander, on the Cantabrian coast, was another province harshly pillaged
by the French where feeding, supplying and paying for their occupation took up seventy-five percent of the province’s costs. 23 It was one of the main battlegrounds of Juan Diáz Porlier, a young naval officer who had fought at
Trafalgar and subsequently transferred to the army. By 1811 he had a force of several thousand men. The Bonapartist provincial police chief had no doubts about it: