

 The situation is looking worse and worse throughout the province … the miserable inhabitants have nothing to eat because of the guerrilla’s requisitions of foodstuffs and enlistment of recruits. 24

 On top of the French exactions, which were the main cause of the misery, and the guerrilla supplying itself, foodstuffs that could be of use to the enemy were expropriated. In Castilla la Vieja, the different bands carted off
the grain as soon as it had been threshed. Writing to the Bonapartist police minister, Pablo Arribas, his Valladolid informant reported:

 The conde de Torreblanca’s bailiff has had his whole grain crop in Cubillos seized, leaving him in its place a Junta [Suprema] decree which ordered the parties to requisition all those whom they believed to be Bonapartist
supporters or who lived in the French-occupied zone. (Josef Timoteo del Monasterio, Valladolid, September 20, 1811)

 Though even the early small parties had been able seize a certain amount of food requisitioned by the imperial troops, or to ambush enemy detachments on their exaction raids, villagers could not be adequately protected until the
guerrilla became a large and veteran force that dominated the countryside and fought the French in open battle.

 POPULAR SUPPORT

 Mina’s three guerrilleros, who escorted the French prisoners to be exchanged, arrived in Pamplona with their arms and revolutionary insignia, and after being presented to the [French] Governor were allowed to walk through the
capital’s streets, squares and public gates … A numerous crowd gathered and followed the three bandits, crying Viva Mina! Viva Mina! … 25

 To say that the guerrilleros swam like fish in a sea of villagers would be exaggerated. To the guerrilla, the villager ‘owed’ the fighting man his foodstuff for risking his life daily to protect the run-of-the-mill non-combatant
villagers, whose principal resolve in the harsh war conditions was to retain as great a portion as possible of their agricultural reserves. If the guerrilla protected the villagers from enemy plunder, well and good, the former’s
demands could be seen as an insurance policy, and what the guerrillas took, the French were denied. But so, too, were the villagers. And if the guerrilla could not or would not protect them, leaving the villagers still to face
enemy impositions, then they were no more than another armed pestilence to feed.

 The large partisan bands appreciated only too well the need for villagers’ support – they had many men and horses to feed, required good local intelligence and guides in unknown territory, refuges and deposits for arms and
stores, and a rural population that did not betray their presence to the enemy. They understood very clearly that rogue guerrillas who were no better than bandits did them a great deal of harm by undermining village support and,
when they did not shoot them out of hand, they arrested them, going so far on occasion as to hand them over to enemy justice.

 Gerónimo Saornil, whose party came to number nine hundred by 1812, fought in Castilla la Vieja, mainly in the area around Valladolid. A youthful veteran of the Convention War, he had been released by the rising from a Valladolid
gaol at the beginning of the war, where he was being held on charges of robbery or smuggling, and took to the hills where he formed a group of partisans. In the spring of 1812, he caught nine men in the act of robbing some
passers-by in Medina del Campo and arrested them; he believed they were the same group which a few days earlier had robbed and killed four people. He penned a letter to the local Bonapartist corregidor, explaining that he held
these men prisoner.