

 They say that this king is so compassionate that, on prostrating oneself at his feet, his charitable heart may respond to an appeal for clemency. My friend … you should not neglect this task… because it is a matter of your
brother and you should put forward his extreme youth … And speak to Abril, who is a general, and to Amorós * to see if they are able to secure your brother’s pardon … Here my friend we have suffered considerably and I in
particular because my house was one of the seventy-five whose sad lot it was to be burned to the ground in this poor and now very unhappy village … Much patience is needed … 34

 This letter never reached its destination. It was intercepted by guerrilleros – quite possibly by Echevarría’s own men – and eventually was forwarded to Sevilla where it ended in the Junta Suprema’s files. In May 1809, little
more than a month after his capture, Echevarría was sentenced to be hanged: the Bilbao extraordinary criminal tribunal was set up especially to try him and his associates, the first of these courts which were to become a standard
instrument of Bonapartist anti-guerrilla ‘legal’ repression. Whether any representation was made on his behalf to Josef remained unknown.

 *

 The quantity of the guerrilla mail interceptions in 1810 – 963 – did not increase their quality: forty percent of the intercepts were private letters mailed from within Spain and to a small degree from France. However, the
Bonapartist regime suffered heavily, particularly in official correspondence with Andalucía. Ministers accompanying Josef on his official tour of the newly won region complained constantly that correspondence from the capital was
not being received. On July 27, 1810, for example, the entire Andalucian mail from Madrid was seized by a guerrilla party at Villarrubia de los Ojos. But it was by no means a problem confined to Andalucía: ‘Despite the proximity
of this town [Guadalajara] to the capital and court [Madrid], it is as though we were a hundred or more leagues away in relation to the mail …’ 35 wrote the Guadalajara prefect in 1811; while the king’s regal commissioner to
Andalucía, on his return to Sevilla on September 21 in the same year, after visiting the whole region with Marshal Soult, reported that he had received no correspondence from Madrid since June 26 and no orders since August 5. ‘I
very much fear that the mail will be lost because of its constant interception especially around Granada and Málaga.’ 36 Part of the problem, the Bonapartist government maintained and probably not without reason, was that the
majority of postal couriers in Spain were Spanish and out of fear handed over their dispatch bags to the first person to stop them. 37 They had plenty of incentive to do so, since their lives were usually at stake. Bonapartist
officials, when they could, used the French military’s postal system which was protected by the army – in November 1809, the entire Third Regiment of the Vistula was detached to safeguard correspondence. 38