

 Probably because most of his guerrilla companions were illiterate, Matías from his earliest time in the party had been made the receiver and distributor of the company’s rations. ‘As a result I never went short of wheaten bread
…’ This showed little solidarity with the rest of his troop whom he always contemptously called ‘those people’, though he was referring to the Navarrese whom he considered as far greater fighters than his fellow Aragonese, and to
Mina’s custom of mixing veteran and recent recruits in the division’s forces.

 At the beginning of June 1812, Mina sent the Aragón cavalry a commandant accompanied by twelve men and a sergeant whose task was to take over the small cavalry force and form a regiment to be called the Aragonese Hussars. Until
two months before, most of the Aragonese cavalrymen continued on provincial recruiting missions, remaining in Aragón, under the command of José Tris, an Aragonese guerrilla leader of somewhat dubious reputation. Indeed, Matías
did not record the incident by which Tris went down in guerrilla history. In April 1812, Espoz y Mina had passed into Aragón after a second handsome victory at Arlabán, * in the Basque country, when he was nearly captured during
the night in lodgings in the village of Robres. There was no doubt that he had been betrayed, and there were a number of different stories as to how he escaped. One of these had him surprised alone in his rooms by a French
cavalry detachment. While the French tried to break down the front door, Mina rushed out with a stave in his hands, and as he battered the nearest foes into submission shouted: ‘Lancers to the rear! Cavalry sergeant, take the
first squadron to the left!’ 30 Thinking that it was they, not Mina who had been trapped, the French withdrew just long enough to allow the guerrilla leader to escape on horseback. † 31

 Mina wreaked a terrible vengeance for his near escape. Believing that Tris and six town officials had betrayed him, he had them shot. Nothing in his actions or in the French correspondence suggested that the Aragonese guerrilla
leader had betrayed Mina, or that he was a traitor. A scapegoat, however, he certainly was. But Mina had not finished. With his usual speed and decisivenesss, he ordered all the magistrates of the villages who should have warned
him of the French attack to be hanged forthwith. On being informed that the Lecineña parish priest had told a patriot cavalry officer, whose handsome uniform he had mistaken as French, that, according to the local justice, there
were a great number of Navarrese dispersos in the region, Mina also ordered the priest and justice shot. Such was Espoz y Mina’s authority, nonetheless, that not only did his own men accept this rough and ready justice, but the
members of Tris’s band made no objection to being taken over by Mina and stayed under his command even after their former leader was shot.

 *

 One guerrilla battle Matías never forgot, for it was his first as a sergeant, was an affair that was typical enough of the sort of ‘battle’ that the guerrillas were frequently engaged in and which would in normal circumstances
have barely made a footnote in a history of the war. But Matías related it as though it were a major victory. One June day of 1812, he was ordered by his new commander to go to Huesca (the capital of the Aragonese province of the
same name which was in French hands) with four mounted men to see if they could provoke the French garrison – said erroneously to be made up of not more than thirty cavalry – into battle. His commandant believed that twenty of
Mina’s cavalry – Matías’ company strength – would be sufficient to deal with them because the Navarrese Division by now felt it could handle greater numbers with ease.