

 His young companions welcomed him back and shared out the little food they had found: two doves and a chicken inside a large feather-lined wicker basket which must have belonged to the general commanding the French troops. ‘The
experience made me realize that I was beginning to live, that it was impossible to continue to exist as I had until then …’

 In a literary memoir this new state of consciousness would almost surely have heralded a change in personal attitude and activity. A sixteen-year-old who had been gaoled (for his anti-Godoy student actions), experienced most of
the Zaragoza sieges, an attack and the sacking of his home village, a night of panic, and two winter months in the Sierra de Alcubierre where his family and the other villagers took refuge thereafter, would be prepared to throw
in his lot with the guerrillas. But this was not Matías’ case. After Zaragoza’s fall on March 29, 1809, and the patriot military defeats three months later in their attempt to encircle Zaragoza, there were virtually no guerrillas
to join. General Suchet succeeded in slowly but surely eliminating the small bands like that of Anselmo Alegre, an ex-smuggler whose ten-year sentence to the galleys had been pardoned by the patriots for fighting as a guerrilla
leader in the sierra de Alcubierre.

 Matías neither went to war immediately nor followed his father’s medical profession. * For the next two years he lived with his parents in Leciñena, helping his father attend to the local sick and those of the neighbouring
village of Perdiguera, all of whom were living rough. Matías’ village was permanently occupied by imperial forces, and their French commandant became a firm friend of his father, don Cosme, who had cured him of a painful illness.

 From the time of the cure the commandant came to our house every day after our meal, because his only pleasure was to talk to my father … They conversed in Latin. I must say that my father was famous for his command of the
ancient language. Whenever new imperial troops arrived, the commandant immediately posted guards outside our house to ensure that no one entered or bothered us in any way.

 Once General Suchet was fully occupied with besieging the towns of southern Cataluña the columns of his troops diminished,

 and the Spaniards began to raise guerrillas in all parts, waking at last from the lethargy in which they had been enveloped … Aragón’s liberation came from the west, from Mina’s side, from the borders of Navarra. Mina exercised
control over the Aragonese parties and appointed Joseé Tris, Malcarado , as their chief.

 Matías’ father’s death at the age of forty-eight in 1811 left the family with three sons, of whom Matías was the oldest, three daughters and a mother. ‘All señores without careers and little money.’ In his new circumstances,
Matías chose the profession of arms.

 Almost immediately one of Mina’s officers asked me to accompany him, in fact, offering me a horse and arms … That very afternoon I was part of his group of twenty horse and fifty soldiers in the sierra of Llanaja whose task was
solely to recruit people and send them to Navarra for training … Our orders were that if we saw a French force we thought we could defeat we should attack it and until 1812 all of us came out of these encounters unharmed, by
which time we could do to the French what they until then were used to doing to us. Then, sometimes, we would go into the villages at night – until then we always slept in the woods – but wheat was so dear in 1812 that … a kilo
of bread cost sixty centimos whereas a guerrilla’s daily pay – and this was good pay – was ten centimos a day.