

 But I have no safe prison for them, nor does my style of life permit me to take them with me to put them on trial. This is why I have decided to hand them over to Your Honour so that they may be formally tried and receive the
punishment befitting their crimes in accordance with the law. I trust therefore that you will tell me where you would wish me to turn them in … (A flying camp, May 1, 1812, Geronimo Saornil) 26

 This was a service, his letter added, which was as important to the patriots as to the Emperor’s troops; convinced of this, he had detached a number of parties to hunt down and arrest thieves and murderers to ‘re-establish in
this manner public order and tranquility’. He would continue to hand over to the Bonapartist authorities all those who committed such grave crimes, he concluded.

 Nonetheless, there were very many villagers’ complaints about guerrilla exactions and brutality. For example, the party of Julián Sánchez (‘El Charo’) from Salamanca, whose aid Wellington appreciated sufficiently to incorporate
him into his army, was accused of arbitrarily demanding rations and other exorbitant supplies, and when the local magistrates did not provide them of tying them to a tree in the square or on stands resembling scaffolds in the
village outskirts and giving them a severe beating until they accepted their demands, thus ‘satisfying their evil aim of doing harm for its own sake’. 27 The terrorizing of local authorities which was part of the guerrilla
strategy could also affect the ordinary villager whose food supplies the magistrates, in order to save their own lives, would commandeer to satisfy the guerrilleros’ demands. Nonetheless, popular sympathy with the guerrilla was
expressed in the traditional coplas (four-line songs) which were invented – often by women – to be sung to well-known tunes.

 Mina is my life,

 Longa is my love,

 Don Gaspar de Jáuregui

 Fills my heart

 or

 Since the priest Merino

 a general was made

 Spain’s urgent interests

 Are no longer delayed * 28

 A smallholder (Mina), a master artisan (Longa) and a poor Basque shepherd (Jáuregui – who significantly was given the title of don, perhaps only to fill the stanza adequately) were the guerrilla leaders the common people
celebrated. There were no similar songs saluting Spanish noble generals.

 The guerrilla leader, El Empecinado, was very rapidly turned into a national hero, epitomizing the anti-Bonapartist struggle. A number of plays about his exploits were written and performed in Cádiz theatres from 1810 on. The
guerrilla struggle was felt by common patriot folk – or at least those who did not live under its exactions and terror – to express the essence of popular resistance to the Bonapartist regime.

 MILITANCIES: THE FORGING OF A GUERRILLERO 29

 Matías Calvo was an Aragonese doctor’s son from Lecineña, a large village about thirty kilometres northeast of Zaragoza in the Monegros steppe lands. In 1801, aged nine, Matías was sent to grammar school in Zaragoza. ‘God
endowed me with an average talent but made of me a bad but quite intrepid student who, in my time off, got up to pranks and fights … [but] never of a nasty kind ….’