

 *

 Four years earlier, Palafox had ordered frightened and improvised Aragonese troops to defend Zaragoza. The tables had turned now, Matías reflected. Then, Palafox had been unnerved by the constant defeats and it was the Spanish
who took refuge in the cities; now it was the Spanish who were ready and prepared to take on the enemy in open battle. Severe discipline, austerity, courage and the sharp intelligence of those in command had made of the Navarrese
Division a formidable and frightening force, even for the most experienced imperial troops.

 Officers used to say to me that I was cut out for a military career. But they were mistaken. I was not really courageous, and I did not distinguish myself in any of the many other actions in which I took part. But nor, I must
say, did I ever leave my post or fail the mission assigned to me. I was never rash, but nor was I a coward … where others expected me to be they found me. That was my whole campaign, I had a great passion to pursue a military
career, but in a few moments all my plans were brought to nought.

 Matías remained a guerrilla sergeant for the rest of the war.

 MAIL INTERCEPTIONS

 One of their major tasks – indeed, as has been pointed out, the origins of the guerrilla movement itself – was the interception of enemy mail. Preserved in the Madrid National Historical Archive among the Junta Suprema’s
documents is a collection of 1,626 intercepted letters. * Only twenty-eight date from 1808; but in 1809 the figure rose tenfold and in 1810 trebled that of the previous year. The highest number, it must be said, were private
Spanish letters, followed by Bonapartist government mail. Amongst the intercepted French correspondence from within Spain were a number of letters from French generals and regional commanders to their counterparts or hierarchical
superiors reporting on and complaining about the state of their region usually because of the increase in guerrilla activities. There were even a few personal letters to her husband in Madrid from the king’s wife who remained in
France. But there were no concrete French military orders. †

 There could be no doubt that such orders were intercepted, since an increase in the French use of a cipher for many military communications was notable by the beginning of 1812. A collection of fifty-two such dispatches – not
all in cipher (which a British intelligence captain cracked) – was received and compiled by Wellington’s command between March 1812 and March 1813. 33 Since one of the guerrilla’s main objectives was to inform on the enemy’s war
plans and movements, the absence of a section devoted exclusively to intercepted military orders is striking.

 But one letter in particular was remarkable, less for what it said than the circumstances of its interception.

 EPISODES: A DEATHLY INTERCEPT

 One of the first guerrilleros in the north, Juan Fernando Echevarría, a young man of good family, was also one of the first to be captured by French troops in March 1809. A Basque, he had begun his guerrilla with a score of men
in the uplands of the neighbouring province, Santander, where he called his party La Compañía del Norte (the Northern Company). The conditions of his capture with two of his men were never made specifically clear. The three were
taken to the prison at Mercadillo until they could be sent to Bilbao. Between fifteen and twenty of his men tried to rescue them from the gaol, but the provincial vice-commissioner of police, the abbot of Siones, and villagers
and prison guards fought them off for three-quarters of an hour. The following day under the command of a French sergeant who, recognizing the quality of his person, let Echevarría ride his horse on his word of honour not to
escape, the captives set off, the two other guerrilleros on foot. Their route took them through the township of Balmaseda. After attending mass in the parish church, Echevarría asked his guard to be allowed a few minutes with a
family friend who lived there. The meeting was very brief, just long enough for Echevarría to beg the friend, Joaquín María de los Azuelas, to write to Juan Fernando’s brother to ask the latter to try to secure him a royal
pardon; Azuelas sat down to do so immediately.