

 News from the constitutent Cortes might take a month or more to reach Navarra which was about as far from Cádiz as it was possible to get by land in Spain. For many months at the start of his guerrilla leadership, Mina had had
virtually no contact with Cádiz at all, and though the government came to admire and reward his military exploits, it never seemed to overcome a certain suspicion, fuelled by the Navarrese refugee elite, of the ‘governmental’
measures he took to achieve his ends: his take-over of Navarrese customs posts, which yielded his guerrilla several million reales a year, was a case in point.

 But as Mina acerbically pointed out,

 no titled noble, no owner of an entailed estate or man of property, no renowned name came forward to raise the banner of resistance … around which all the youth who desired could rally … So what could be expected of men like us
who for the greater part knew only how to handle a spade, a mattock and pruning shears, and whose only commercial experience was of selling the harvests our small plots produced? 54

 For a long time Mina’s main contact with patriot Spain was through Valencia, arguably the most manifestly anti-señorial region of Spain. But Navarra was not señorial Valencia: except in the southern plains, some seventy percent
of Navarrese villagers owned the land they worked, and ‘use-owners’ made up most of the rest, even the relatively small proportion of señoríos being rented out on inheritable leases. 55 In Valencia, on the other hand, the señores
derived at least half their income from dues and tributes.

 This difference which, with the exception of Galicia, was true of most of the north and northeast, explained why the large guerrillas did not become directly involved in the agrarian questions being debated in Cádiz. Another
factor also held them back. The guerrillas appeared as the patriot army disappeared as a fighting force. But this did not mean that institutionally the Spanish army had disappeared for good as the large guerrillas’ insistence on
attempting to militarize their parties demonstrated. Thus, while their leaders and subalterns were being incorporated into the officers’ ranks, it was difficult, if not impossible, for them openly to sustain political positions
which their military superiors did not support, let alone to intervene militarily in the Cádiz proceedings.

 Finally, of course, the threat of disunion, the difficulties guerrilla leaders experienced (like the military) in cooperating effectively, the possibility of open civil war and the threat of complete surrender to the French
would all have weighed heavily on any thought of using guerrilla military power to shape the country’s future. This was not to say that at the local regional level there were not accusations of guerrilla leaders wishing to take
or exercise power. Apart from Mina, El Empecinado for example was virtually accused by the Guadalajara junta in 1811 of wanting to make himself the region’s supreme commander and of disobeying its authority. But these were fairly
exceptional situations.