

 On January 11, 1812, Espoz y Mina put his threat into execution. He had just decisively defeated Abbé and his two-thousand-strong column outside Sangüesa, inflicting six hundred casualties. That day he took no prisoners. And
thereafter, when the French executed a guerrilla officer, four French officers held in Mina’s prisoner-of-war camp were shot; for every rank-and-file guerrilla, twenty imperial soldiers were executed. As the French by now were
losing more men to the guerrillas than vice-versa, Abbé stopped treating Mina’s men as bandits; and Mina returned to his former system of giving quarter to captured enemy troops. The barbarous cycle was finally laid to rest for
the last years of the war.

 ARMS

 Always short of arms, munitions and money, the Spanish government bottled up in Cádiz could do little to aid the large and distant northern guerrillas. The first regency, which took over from the Junta Suprema, asked Britain to
supply arms and money direct to the ‘Corps of Troops and of Peasants’ in these regions because the distance from Cádiz made it impossible. 43 A large part of this aid was channelled from La Coruña eastwards along the coast,
either by land or sea. The assistant British Commissary, George White, to whom the guerrilla chiefs, Porlier, Longa and Espoz y Mina all addressed requests for arms, ammunition and shoes, stated unanimously that they could employ
‘to the greatest advantage any number of Arms that may be sent them’.

 White gathered together a shipment of materiel to be sent by sea, which included ten thousand pairs of shoes, two thousand muskets, pistols and swords, and wrote to his London superior:

 I am convinced that their distribution will have the effect of greatly encouraging those meritorious Parties who meet with so little consideration from their own Government that their only expectations of assistance and
encouragement are directed to England. 44

 Another less obvious source of munitions for Mina, as well as for El Empecinado and Brigadier José Durán, leader of a large party in southern Aragón, were sent by mule trains from Valencia, where the British agent, Pedro Tupper,
was in charge of the operation.

 It affords me great satisfaction to receive the thanks of all the Authorities of the interior acknowledging … that the brilliant advantages obtained [by these guerrillas] over the Enemy since November [1811] could never have
been achieved without my exertions …

 he wrote to Henry Wellesley, British minister to the regency, ten months later. 45 Tupper also appointed his old associate and one of the three brother conspirators of Valencia’s uprising in 1808, Manuel Bertrán de Lis, to
venture deep into the interior and bring back information, including the state of the guerrillas, from the enemy rearguard. These services, Bertrán later wrote, ‘involved danger to his life every day he was engaged on them’. *

 Along the Cantabrian coast and the Bay of Biscay, the transport of guerrilla and regular Spanish and British forces by a small Anglo-Spanish naval squadron stationed at La Coruña and El Ferrol, in unoccupied Galicia, kept the
French coastal defences under threat from the summer of 1809 till the end of the war. In July 1810, and again in August, British frigates appeared off the coast, and landed strong guerrilla raiding parties; 46 the failure of two
well-known partisan chiefs to join Porlier brought the first raid to an end after four days, but it gave the afrancesado intendente, Joaquin Aldamar, a serious fright.