

 COUNTER-INSURGENCY

 The insurgency’s success was everywhere in direct relation to the counterinsurgency’s insufficiencies. Many of these arose from Napoleon’s failure to confront the basic problems of guerrilla warfare. It was not a new military
problem; the Vendée and Calabrian insurrections had been forerunners from which lessons could and had been learned. One of Napoleon’s generals, Suchet, was capable of keeping the guerrillas in Aragón quiet for nearly two years;
another, Reille, though less successful in Navarra, kept Mina on the run for nine months and defeated him heavily on two occasions. Why then was French counter-insurgency in general apparently so ineffective?

 The first question was whether it was as ineffective as it appeared. Of the guerrillas, whose wartime death was recorded, † one-quarter were killed in action or upon being taken prisoner. This did not say much for the
counterinsurgency’s combat effectiveness. But when account was taken of the fact that two-thirds of the guerrillas known to have died were tried and sentenced to death, it would seem that at another level the anti-guerrilla
struggle was rather more successful than was usually believed: the level of French intelligence networks must have been high; informants among the population more plentiful, and anti-guerrilla sentiment and collaboration with
counter-insurgency measures greater than was generally imagined.

 But the nub of the problem lay in Napoleon’s politico-military strategy towards Spain. He envisaged it as a wealthy colony to be exploited for his larger ambitions and overlooked the country’s actual conditions. He never
provided a viable counter-insurgency policy. This error resulted in helping to keep the guerrilla alive. In the first place, his refusal to appoint a commander-in-chief to plan and coordinate on a national scale the
counterinsurgency (and the anti-British struggle) was a prime mistake. He believed that he could control the war from Paris through a series of provincial commanders, many of them principally concerned with their own parcel of
territorial power and frequently in dispute with one another. The result was the extreme difficulty of mounting a unified, consistent and simultaneous counter-insurgency campaign over several provinces or entire regions, a
difficulty increased by the Emperor’s observance of artificial provincial boundaries as the limits of territorial military commands. In consequence, the guerrillas could usually find secure refuges along provincial or regional
borders where none of the provinces’ French commanders, knowing that the effort was useless since the guerrillas would simply move into the neighbouring province, was prepared seriously to campaign. The mistake was compounded by
dividing power within the political regime Napoleon had created to replace the old Bourbon monarchy by his segregation of the Spanish provinces north of the Ebro from his brother’s kingdom to that of his own in Paris. Not only
did this arouse popular resistance in the affected regions at the possibility of their being formally incorporated into France, but added yet more generals in politico-military command of provinces.