

 GUERRILLA WAR AND REVOLUTION

 Though by no means exclusively plebeian, as has been seen, the guerrilla formed the only popular Spanish armed force during the war. Its major leaders (for contemporaries and historians alike) were of plebeian origin:
landworkers and small farmers like Juan Martín, ‘El Empecinado’ in Castilla la Nueva; Espoz y Mina in Navarra and Julián Sánchez, ‘El Charro’, from Salamanca; the 18-year-old shepherd Gaspar de Jáuregui, ‘El Pastor’, in the
Basque country and the rural parish priest Jerónimo Merino in Castilla la Vieja, alongside the Burgos master ironworker, Francisco Longa, in Cantabria. (Four army officers, Juan Díaz Porlier, in Asturias and Cantabria, Mariano
Renovales in the Basque country, José Joaquín Durán, in Castilla la Vieja, Navarra and Aragón and Ramón Gayán also in Aragón, were the outstanding exceptions.) By the end of 1811 Mina, apart from a few towns still physically held
by the French, virtually ruled his native Navarra, while other leaders – El Empecinado was a case in point – dominated the main military resistance in Guadalajara and neighbouring territories up to the gates of Madrid.

 This guerrilla military ascendancy raised an important but seldom addressed question. Why did this plebeian armed force not act on the political situation of the moment? Could, for example, the patriot Cádiz Cortes’ decision of
August 6, 1811, to abolish only the jurisdictional aspects of the señorial system on the land, satisfy these village guerrilleros? In effect, the Cortes had proposed no profound social change in the señorial agrarian world other
than to deprive the señores of the right to appoint magistrates and municipal councillors and to collect certain dues and tributes which pertained to their lordships’ rights. For the rest, the same señores would now own the land
over which they had exercised feudal privileges if their legal rights to ownership could be sustained.

 The Cortes debates had given a fair indication of the lack of any substantial reforms to be made to the basic structure of land ownership, and it was clear that the villager did not stand to gain much – indeed, as will be seen,
stood rather to lose a great deal – from other legislation which was to ‘liberalize’ the rural world by opening it to market forces. The August 6, 1811 legislation might alone have been thought sufficient to generate protest
among the village guerrilleros and ensure that they used their military strength to attempt to amend, reform or radically change it and to put in its place a land reform act.

 But the guerrilleros made no move to cash in their armed force for political power; indeed, there was little evidence from the 1810 elections to the Cortes in the occupied zones – when the guerrilla strength was, of course,
considerably less than two years later – that they made much effort to ensure that some of their own number were elected. * For all their leadership and organizational skills, most of them would have agreed, sincerely or
ironically, with El Empecinado: ‘I am an ignorant fellow; I am sorry that God did not give me more talent, or fortune more learning, but I am not to blame.’ 53 In other words, national heroes they might be, but the ability to
represent the nation in debating its future was not part of their self-conceived mental attributes. Apart from self-depreciatory jibes, there were objective conditions which explained, though not necessarily in order of priority,
the guerrilla absence from the political scene.