

 Admittedly, Mina’s division – even united with Catalan irregular forces – could not hope to hold a part of Pyrenean France for any length of time; but the anti-Napoleonic propaganda effect of a serious offensive across the
Pyrenees would have served notice on French public opinion that the Emperor was engaged on two fronts simultaneously and that his home rearguard was threatened. The fact that Wellington, who was concerned solely with defeating
Napoleon, was no more aware than the guerrilla of the advantage of advancing into France after his 1812 victory at the battle of Salamanca, certainly made it invidious to criticize the latter with their smaller forces and
different concerns. Nonetheless, Wellington’s failure did not excuse a strategic guerrilla omission. 48

 EPISODES: FORCED RECRUITMENT

 Forced recruitment to the guerrilla was by no means unknown and, after being captured by the French, many guerrilleros used this as their excuse for having joined a band. A striking case of resistance – indeed not only to
joining a guerrilla but to fighting for king, religion and country in any form – was provided by a man who later became notorious as El Empecinado’s jailer before the famous guerrilla leader was hanged by Fernando VII’s restored
absolutism.

 Gregorio González was a twenty-year-old at the outbreak of the war, and the only son of a well-to-do family in the village of Roa, in the province of Burgos. His father had died and the womenfolk depended on him to look after
the large family estate. He and his mother were determined to keep him from any form of armed service and they succeeded, paying bribes if need be to ensure that Gregorio was not conscripted into the patriot army. By 1811 the
situation had become so difficult, however, that his mother advised him to get married to avoid having to serve, and he faithfully obeyed. However, shortly afterwards a new threat appeared in the shape of El Empecinado’s brother
and cofounder of his guerrilla, Damaso Martín. By sheer threat of force, Damaso enlisted Gregorio in the guerrilla and took him off. His mother was having none of this.

 Her displeasure at my enforced absence, her fear of the danger I was being exposed to and her trepidation that I would leave my already pregnant wife a widow were so great that she packed her bags and, obliging my father-in-law
to accompany her, set off after me. She caught up with the guerrilla in the village of Riaza [not far distant], where she arrived at a most opportune moment, and her pleas and efforts on my behalf were so successful that she
succeeded in having me granted a total dispensation from armed service. 49

 What this may have cost the family coffers Gregorio González left carefully obscure.

 GUERRILLA-INFLICTED CASUALTIES

 The guerrillas have caused more losses to the French armies than all the regular troops during the war in Spain. It has been proved that they murdered one hundred of our men per day. Thus, during the period of five years, they
have killed more than 180,000 Frenchmen, without losing … more than 25,000. (General August Julien Bigarré, aide-de-camp to King Josef) 50