

 POLITICS

 As the above implied, regrettably little was known about the political attitudes of even the better known leaders during the war itself. The most that was likely to emerge was whether they proclaimed the new 1812 ‘liberal’
constitution to their men and had them swear allegiance to it – not an insignificant political fact, for sure, but one that had an obligatory element to it which detracted somewhat from the authenticity of the political
sentiments expressed by the act.

 It was after the war that the leaders expressed their politics by declaring themselves liberals, monarchists or absolutists, or in other cases trying to weave an uncommitted path between the political options which, with
Fernando VII’s abrogation of the 1812 Constitution and the return to absolutism, were now at the forefront of the political divide which the war had opened in Spanish society.

 More than twice as many ex-guerrilleros fought as royalists against the liberals’ restoration of the 1812 constitution during the revolution of 1820–1823 as fought in support of it. * The fact that two well-known guerrilla
leaders – El Empecinado and Espoz y Mina – came out for the liberals and a third, Porlier, had a year after the end of the war risen in their cause, may have obscured the historical vision that liberals were a minority in the
guerrilla movement at large. Although generalization on an exiguous sample is hazardous, it could be argued that, as the crystallization of popular resistance, the guerrilla represented widespread popular sentiment in which
defence of the monarchy without constitutional restrictions instead of the political innovation of national sovereignty, seen as a foreign import, was the keystone. This political option, which included defence of religion, did
not, however, exclude the serious reforms expected of Fernando’s restored reign. Undeniably, the rural population, from which a majority of guerrilleros stemmed, wanted an improvement of its lot; but the liberals offered them so
little – abolition of jurisdictional lordships without total relief from feudal dues and tithes; a free agrarian market in which the señores became outright landowners and villagers stood little chance of acquiring land – that
their political reforms held hardly any popular rural appeal. *

 *

 Had the Spanish ‘revolution’, so consistently invoked by most sectors of the fragile patriotic alliance of Old Regime supporters and reformists – had this revolution extended to the labouring poor, the military effectiveness of
the Spanish anti-Napoleonic war effort would have been deeply reinforced. But the revolution was not a social revolution. Its luck was that the poor were prepared to fight for reasons of their own: to defend their families and
lives, their plots and homelands, their customs and traditions, their forefathers’ religion, their monarchy. Their determination was best expressed in the struggles for popular territorial liberation and guerrilla warfare. To
this extent, the patriots were fortunate in having their support. But in the long run, as Mina himself said, the war was finally won ‘in the snows of Russia’.