

 One of the more outstanding cases was brought by the Bilbao tribunal against a group of five women and three men, all from Elorrio, in Vizcaya, who carried out armed robberies in houses around the township and were in contact
with the guerrilla in the hills of Urquiola. The youngest of the women was fourteen-year-old María Josefa de Iturbe who, dressed as a man, was known to have just returned from the hills where she had accompanied the guerrilla on
their missions immediately before the robberies took place. She was the only one of the women against whom certain proof existed that she had taken part in the crimes. Moreover, the group was alleged to be known to have stolen
six or seven cart-loads of cloth bales the previous January and to have kept them in their houses where they sheltered the guerrillas, gave them help and accepted jewels in payment. Judging by their family names, the group
included two brothers and their sisters. Two of the women, against whom no concrete proof was offered, were sentenced to ten years in gaol, two others to eight and María Josefa de Iturbe to six. Two of the men were given ten
years each in prison and the third was judged to have spent sufficient time in gaol prior to the hearing to have served his sentence.

===== FILE: OEBPS/29_Chapter18.xhtml =====
Napoleon’s Cursed War

 18

 1812–1814

 THE FAMINE YEAR: 1812

 The scourge of dearth returned to decimate the population in 1812. The 1811 grain crop was poor and bad weather in the Castillas delayed reaping and threshing the little grain that stood in the fields. In war-stricken Cataluña,
the death rate began to increase from the middle of 1811. The French, having taken Tarragona in June after a two-month siege which ended in a ferociously bloody sacking, now occupied all the major Catalan ports, preventing the
import of grain to a region normally deficient in wheat.

 In Madrid the old monarchy had always been frightened of bread riots. From the second half of the eighteenth century, they had created storage facilities of one million fanegas (just over 1.5 million bushels) of wheat in Madrid
to ensure that the capital’s inhabitants should have sufficient bread at a more or less constant price. But in the spring of 1811, prices began to rise as wheat supplies from the two Castillas, which until then had been adequate,
fell off. The increase was worsened by bakers short-weighting loaves. Popular opinion had it, a police report said, that the wheat shortage was caused by the government which had ordered all available supplies to be sent to the
French army in Burgos, or more significantly, that the guerrilla had captured the grain on its way to the capital. 1 The latter rumour was true; guerrilla bands which now showed themselves openly within a short distance of the
capital had seized several thousand fanegas of wheat being transported from La Mancha: the battle for food supplies was being remorselessly waged.

 Price increases began to affect other essentials, like olive oil, vegetables and pulses. As the population’s discontent grew, another more subversive rumour was heard: the increases were to pay for celebrating the king’s saint’s
day on March 19. 2 Aware of the danger, the interior minister informed the Madrid corregidor that the king would not permit celebrations that raised the price of any essential foodstuffs and ordered that those spreading the
rumour be punished. At the same time the government secured assurances from the bakers to maintain the standard price; but the assurances lasted only a few days and the cost of a 2lb loaf rose by over one quarter of a real, or
some sixteen percent. *