

 The courts’ magistrates, prosecutors and staff were exclusively Spanish – drawn from the legal profession and frequently from criminal courts, including, in Andalucía especially, those tribunals which the patriots had set up to
try people accused of supporting or materially aiding the Bonapartist regime. † The latter were established in most patriot-held provincial capitals, and although they did not publish figures of their executions and sentences it
was certain that they did not condemn to death anything like the number sentenced by the Bonapartist extraordinary tribunals.

 The guerrillas took their revenge on the tribunals’ justices by seizing them – often as they made their way to take up their posts. Thus the presidents and judges of both the Ciudad Real and Málaga tribunals were captured before
they could reach their destination to set up their court. Three hundred guerrilleros, most of them on horseback, attacked Valdepeñas in La Mancha in May 1810, and took the Ciudad Real justices prisoner, sending them under guard,
the Bonapartist local authorities supposed, to Valencia. Two years later El Empecinado captured the prosecutor and a judge of the Cuenca tribunal.

 Guerrillas also seized a Madrid tribunal judge who was taken to Cádiz where he was publicly hanged by the patriot government; and the secretary of the Bilbao court was sequestered. A good measure of the tribunals’ unpopularity
was the difficulty some had in finding executioners to carry out the death sentences. Ciudad Real and Guadalajara complained that they could find none and Jaén informed the justice ministry that the local executioner would accept
no less than three thousand three hundred reales a year with certain perquisites which he claimed went with the job.

 WOMEN SENTENCED

 Two hundred and sixty-eight women appeared before the tribunals to be tried for various offences, nearly sixty percent of them before the Madrid court. (Bilbao, with less than twenty percent, trailed well behind in second
place.) Just under one in three were found not guilty which was perhaps not exceptional since many were brought before the court on mere ‘suspicion’ of being involved in some illegal activity. However, the charges against one in
five of the accused were quite plainly connected to the guerrilla and patriot cause in one way or another. Manuela Salazar received eight months in prison in Madrid for marrying a man who was popularly accused of being an
ex-guerrillero, and Manuela Uriarte, also of Madrid, was tried on charges of ‘slovenly behaviour and of having been in the insurgent [patriot] army’. She was acquitted on all charges. Another seven women were given various
sentences of from one to two years for involvement in the killing of a French dragoon. Carrying mail to the guerrilla, providing intelligence, storing arms and ammunition in their houses, implication in the theft of a French
officer’s horse or the sale of two stolen mares figured alongside the more banal charges of receiving stolen goods and the like. Helping Spanish prisoners of war to escape from the columns being conducted to France and aiding and
abetting deserters from the imperial armies were also quite frequent charges. At least one woman, Francisca Artiago, was sentenced to death in 1810 by the Valladolid tribunal for having stolen, in the company of others, five
thousand reales’ worth of goods from a French mess. *