

 Suchet relied also on the mobile column, often made up of squadrons of gendarmerie, trained to patrol and control the French countryside, as the major link between his strongholds, which were often no more than fortified
convents or friaries. But he attempted to improve their performance on the ground which had often to replicate the guerrillas’.

 From Paris, Napoleon could not himself handle the small detail of an anti-insurgency war when matters of greater moment occupied most of his thinking. This was evident from the degree of insubordination which he tolerated –
unknowingly in many cases – from his generals in Spain. Quite possibly, had he taken personal command of the counter-insurgency campaign, ensuring sufficient troops and making provincial generals cooperate at regional levels he
might have succeeded in putting paid to the majority of the northern guerrillas. But this required a strategic decision which for reasons of international affairs (his marriage to Marie Thérèse of Austria, his plans for invading
Russia) he was unable or unwilling to take. Compared to these, Spain was a secondary affair.

 Many of the Emperor’s commanders were more concerned with holding to ransom rather than executing any patriot they believed could raise the money to pay. To make ready cash was more important to them than shooting patriots which
brought them no returns other than to create more martyrs and to reinforce the enemy cause. Napoleon was also faced with a military problem that put the counter-insurgency’s priority in question. Who was the main enemy? There
could be no doubt that the Anglo-Portuguese army was the greatest of the three threats which confronted his domination of Spain: however much of a nuisance, the guerrillas could not and would not win the war on their own. The
renewed Spanish army and the guerrillas together were a force to be taken into account, but one that was hardly likely to threaten the withdrawal of the imperial forces from the country. The Anglo-Portuguese army, on the other
hand, was capable of winning battles which could threaten imperial dominance. And if the latter were joined by the Spanish army and guerrillas the threat would be seriously increased. Despite the failure of Masséna’s campaign, in
1810–1811, to throw the British into the sea, the Anglo-Portuguese army was blocked in Portugual until early 1812 by the French capture of the major fortress towns along the Spanish border; as a result the French were left a
choice of isolating and defeating one or other of the Spanish forces as the first step in defence of the country. By 1812, some of Napoleon’s generals were advocating that the guerrilla was the major enemy to be destroyed. 60

 Indeed Napoleon agreed with them. He had no wish to see the guerrillas cross the Pyrenees while he was campaigning in Russia. The Army of the Ebro, which he created with the express purpose of ‘pursuing the guerrillas to
extinction’, was particularly aimed at eliminating the border raids from Cataluña which he had just annexed. This new army of thirty-six thousand men he placed under the command of General Reille, a veteran counter-insurgent
general. The armies of the North, Cataluña and Valencia were ordered to help – another sixty-four thousand troops on paper. One hundred thousand soldiers in all, the largest single army the French had tried to put together in
Spain. Apart from these men, Napoleon planned that an additional division of conscripts and national guardsmen protect the French frontier from the irregulars’ raids. The most significant change in Napoleon’s thinking was that
the new army should not be restricted by provincial boundaries and was to cover natural geographical areas of operation.