

 Yesterday the people had great entertainment in putting on masks and strolling along the Prado in groups in ingeniously splendid dress, despite the short notice they were given that the celebration was to take place. Last night,
a large crowd attended the theatre of the Caños del Peral for the public ball, and the people amused themselves in an orderly fashion … For a moment everyone forgot about the high cost of bread and the other burdens that are
tormenting them. 6

 Indeed, judging by the amounts taken by the Caños theatre on Feb 10th and 11th – nearly thirty-four thousand reales – there was still money available for pleasure. 7 But by the end of April so few people were going to the
theatre that the other main Madrid stage, the Coliseo del Principe, took in on April 29 only 381 reales. Possibly the program was not sufficiently attractive; but it was more likely that hunger and shortage of money – those who
still had cash were having to pay four or five times the pre-famine prices simply to stay alive – had reduced one of the Madrileños’ major attractions. 8

 Already in January, to the local authorities’ amazement, a young beggar woman found dying in the street could not be admitted to the women’s hospital because there was no room left for even a single patient. 9 In March two
corpses were discovered in a room in the Santiago neighbourhood; a man who had died of dysentry and a woman, who looked after him, who had got drunk and died. 10

 Meanwhile the king had donated half of his civil list to acquire wheat at any price, and ordered the government to bring in grain from its own warehouses. Madrid’s large stores had been progressively depleted by the treasury
even before Napoleon’s invasion. Special taxes on the country-wide network of grain storehouses – which had originated in the middle-ages and had been much expanded in the eighteenth century – in order to raise money to back the
depreciating value of government bonds (the vales reales ) had left many of them, including Madrid’s, without the funds to purchase grain. From the beginning of the war, what remained of the stocks had been mainly used to feed
troops. In the countryside, government exactions exacerbated the shortage. * In consequence, when the dearth began there were virtually no wheat reserves in the capital on which to call.

 Lacking a national market and an adequate road system to move wheat cheaply from areas of surplus to those with grave shortages, pre-war wheat prices had always fluctuated wildly depending on supply. In a bad harvest year they
could be four hundred percent higher in the Castilian interior than in good years, although on the coast, where wheat could be imported, the rise might be only fifty percent. 11 A sharp increase in the price was therefore to be
expected in Madrid where in mid-May 1811 a fanega of wheat was fetching between sixty-six and eighty-eight reales; a year later it was being sold at between 400 and 490. 12

 At the beginning of March 1812, the Bonapartist secret police reported that