

 As usual Napoleon expected Reille to break the guerrillas’ back in one swift campaign, following his own plan which tried always to crush the enemy with a single blow, and ordered Reille to coordinate closely with General Decaen
in Cataluña. But instead of helping Reille, Suchet, the Aragón army commander who had just scored an outstanding victory in taking Valencia, and Decaen began to dismember the Ebro army. Suchet, who had won his marshal’s baton
after his victorious siege of Tarragona, ordered Reille to send two regiments to replace the Polish regiments which he had had to send on the Russian campaign; while Decaen took two other regiments from lower Cataluña. Before he
even started, Reille lost one quarter of his army which was reduced to twenty-two thousand men.

 Napoleon always underestimated the guerrilla’s staying power. 1812 was a famine year and Reille’s troops could not secure sufficient supplies in any one zone for more than a few days; where they could not eat they could not
fight, and Reille’s sweeps grew ever more limited; his incessant movements to feed even his reduced army made it impossible to crush the guerrillas along the Ebro. Suchet again intervened, ordering Reille to protect only his own
territorial base, Aragón. By the beginning of May,

 Reille had only fourteen thousand men left. On May 6, 1812, the army was wound up after four months of operations, having lost two thousand five hundred men.

 REPRESSION: THE EXTRAORDINARY
CRIMINAL TRIBUNALS

 Article II
Assassins, thieves, the armed rebellious, the seditious, rumour-mongers, spies, recruiters for the insurgents [patriots] and those who are in communication with them, or those who are found with daggers and sharp-edged weapons
upon them, if convicted will be hanged irremissibly within twenty-four hours and without the right of appeal. (Bonapartist decree creating a new court, the Extraordinary Criminal Tribunal, Madrid, February 16, 1809). 61

 The courts which the Bonapartist regime considered essential to control the incipient guerrilla movement at the beginning of 1809 tried over two thousand accused during their three years of existence (one year less in Andalucía
which was taken in 1810). Of these close on four hundred received the death sentence. The unremitting nature of the repression was demonstrated by the fact that, with the exception of 1809 when the extraordinary tribunals were
created piecemeal in different provincial capitals and sixty-one prisoners were sentenced to death, in 1810 and 1811 the figures were over one hundred annually. A diarist in Valladolid carefully, if laconically in the style of
the times, recorded the executions for the latter year.

 Jan 1, 1811. ‘El Galleguillo’ was brought in a prisoner this morning. At four in the afternoon, more or less, he was shot …
Jan 9. Five men, one of them a surgeon’s son, were publicly garrotted in the Campo Grande …
May 23. A soldier, said to be an escaped English prisoner and a spy, was executed by a firing squad in the Campo Grande …
July 30. Three men, one of them the son of a local inhabitant, commonly known as Fantasías, were garrotted in the main square. Another was a lathe worker …
August 2. A priest, chaplain to Saornil’s party, and taken prisoner, was garrotted in the main square …
Sept 22. A German, said to have deserted and joined a guerrilla, was executed by a firing squad …
 Dec 8. Early in the morning ‘Chagarito’ and two accomplices who had been captured by the French the previous night were brought in. Chagarito revealed the names of this city’s inhabitants and those of other places who, through
force or out of fear, had supplied or helped him. The other two were honourable and gave no names. Chagarito thought his revelations would save his life. The extraordinary tribunal was fair and acquitted all those he had informed
against. Chagarito and the other two were sentenced to death and garrotted in the main square on Dec 24. Chagarito’s corpse was quartered and the pieces stuck up on the country paths into the city. 62