

 EPISODES: REVENGE

 Francesc Torné i Montserrat, a twelve-year-old Catalan veil-weaver, was returning one day to his home in Reus from a visit to a nearby mill where he had gone to see if his father’s flour was ready when he was stopped by a French
patrol. They asked him where he was coming from, but as he did not speak French he neither understood the question nor was able to answer. Believing that he was a ‘mountain brigand’, they immediately ordered him to kneel on the
ground and readied their arms to shoot him. Luckily for the lad, the French sergeant in command, seeing that he was only young, put an end to the matter and told Francesc to get up. ‘Allons’, he said, gesturing to him to get on
his way home.

 A few nights later he had his revenge for the great fear he had experienced. The two imperial soldiers billeted in his house were in a drunken stupour in bed, dead to the world. Francesc and some companions grabbed first one and
then the other, carried them outside and threw them down the well. Then they filled a great sack with earth and rocks and threw it in after them. Shortly, some of the soldiers’ companions arrived, asking for them. Francesc said
they had recently left, but he did not know where. The following evening the companions returned saying the two soldiers had not been seen all day, gathered up their arms and equipment and left.

 This, and the following incident, were stories told many years later to his son, who wrote them down. 56 Like most family stories they were almost certainly much embroidered in the telling, or even outright fabulations. But they
revealed, if not ‘the truth’ in this particular case, a more general truth by no means confined to Cataluña: an enemy aggressor created a popular resistance in its homelands ready to resort to individual acts of great violence
against a hated invader. Francesc was again returning home at nightfall from the countryside with some landworking friends when they heard a noise behind them. They turned and saw five French soldiers carrying vegetables and
fruit they had stolen. Allowing them to catch up by the aptly named Devil’s Reservoir, Francesc gave a signal, his friends dropped their own baskets, and attacked the soldiers with their mattocks, wounding three, two of whom fell
to the ground. The other, with his face badly injured, fled with the two unhurt soldiers towards Reus. Francesc and his friends threw the remaining two into the reservoir and then fled themselves, entering the town from another
direction as though nothing had happened. A French patrol was ordered out to catch them; but all it found was two corpses floating on the water …

 *

 To return to the broader theme of counter-insurgency, Suchet, arguably Napoleon’s most successful commander in Spain, observed that this sort of war required battle-trained soldiers used to fighting in small units, lightly
equipped and rapid, acting by surprise and led by experienced officers who were both audacious and prudent: ‘These are men who are almost always out on missions; and they have to be able to bear the most painful marches and the
harshest conditions …’ 57