

 These were but some of the thirty public executions in the Castilian capital in a single year – though only half of them were known guerrilleros; and the eleven who were executed by firing squad had certainly been sentenced by
French drumhead courts martial, since the extraordinary tribunal condemned its victims to the garrotte. In Jerez de la Frontera, where before 1810, eight years could pass without an execution and the average was one a year, the
extraordinary tribunal condemned forty-four men to death in thirty months. 63 Overall, Madrid was the bloodiest. It sentenced to capital punishment one hundred accused for various activities, including resistance, in its four
years of existence; 1809 was the harshest year. The Valladolid tribunal came next in severity with seventy-one, more than half of them in 1810.

 The extraordinary tribunals had two quite distinct origins, one Basque, one French. In 1799, the Basque elite had become so concerned by the increase in rural criminality in its country that it had approved a special law to
judge and execute bandits and thieves which gave the prosecution thirty days to prove guilt and thereafter no appeal, complaint or other recourse was admitted before the death sentence was applied to all those above the age of
sixteen. Soon after the beginning of the war this special law was resuscitated to try the first Basque guerrilla captured. * 64 The exceptional increase in highwaymen, brigands and the like which the war spawned was also used to
justify bringing back the 1799 law.

 The second source stemmed from French Republican and Royalist plots against Napoleon in 1803. The future Emperor had thereupon set up special summary criminal tribunals in France to try traitors and assassins, armed robbers,
arsonists, vagabonds and re-offenders. These tribunals’ sentences were carried out immediately and without the possibility of appeal.

 The majority of those judged and sentenced to death by the extraordinary criminal tribunals in Spain were not, however, guerrilleros. The Bonapartist regime – like the French army – did not distinquish between ‘bandits’ and
‘guerrillas’. For both they were one and the same. In consequence, it was often highly difficult to differentiate – in the brief descriptions of their crimes afforded by the summary of their cases – whether indeed these were
highwaymen or guerrillas. They were tried for armed hold-ups: but whether their ultimate purpose was to steal their victims’ money or to use it to further the patriot struggle was usually left in doubt (indeed, there were parties
for whom the difference was of little import). Considering therefore only those who were officially identified as such, approximately twenty-five percent of those condemned to death were indisputably guerrilleros. *

 Only in 1812, when the French were in obvious danger and had abandoned Andalucía did total death sentences drop back to fifty-nine, close to their starting point. Over and above the tribunals, the French military held their own
courts martial which sent to their deaths an unspecified number of real or suspected guerrilleros. Usually, Bonapartist and French military respected their rough codes of justice; but occasionally the latter resorted to the
barbarities of which they accused the ‘brigands’: the minor Aragonese guerrilla chieftain, ‘Pesoduro’ was tortured, and his hands – cut off while he was still alive – were publicly nailed up; on the scaffold the rope broke
several times before he was finally hanged. 65