

 In Suchet’s view, the mobile columns replicated the guerrillas’ own tactic of sweeping over the countryside when what was needed, he believed, was to occupy it; and he garrisoned as many strongpoints in his territory as his
military strength, which was rarely overwhelming, allowed, and kept the same troops in the same towns for as long as possible. This had a dual objective: his soldiers not only knew their combat terrain but could fraternize with
the local population, helping to reduce conflictive situations and extend the flow of intelligence on guerrilla movements. This tactic was not totally successful either, but on several occasions his garrisons held out long enough
to pin down guerrilla forces or expose them to counter-attack from relief columns.

 He realized early on that to win the guerrilla war he had to win over the population. Aware that looting, thieving and violence were inevitably brutal forms of alienating villagers, he kept his troops on a very short leash to
prevent them pillaging. Above all, he knew that he could not pacify Aragón, create a civil administration, pay and feed his troops while great numbers of dispersed soldiers from his two victories over the patriot armies near
Zaragoza in 1809 swarmed in the countryside. He made the guerrillas his main target of attack.

 Soldiers, he knew, spent their pay almost as soon as they received it. As a result, he effectively paid them every five days: the rapid turnover of money helped to keep the Aragonese economy afloat, while simultaneously
discouraging the troops – many of whom in other armies were not paid for months – from acts of violence against the population. The main question then was money. But he was also prepared to take drastic retributive measures: to
burn to the ground or deport the entire population of a village if it did not contribute its taxes or bring in the harvest or where his soldiers were shot. Suchet also believed that he had to attract the Aragonese with positive
policies, and he did so by leaving much of the local administration, especially tax collection, to the old authorities and rewarded them with a greater share of responsibility in disposing of the region’s resources.

 I was convinced that as I could not cover the whole country with my troops, it was in the army’s interest to concern the people in preserving the national product by giving them one quarter of the region’s income … the people
had no interest whatsoever in allowing themselves to be stripped of it by the brigands … 58

 He raised six companies of fusileros – the pre-war volunteer anti-brigand militia – paid for by an extra tax, praising the Aragonese as courageous fighters and, in one of his most popular measures, ordered that the army’s stores
be opened to those communities whose crops had been ruined.

 The people know at last the protective power that is being offered to them, they rise against the ‘brigands’ … the farmers have sown their fields everywhere, the land is being cultivated, even industry is showing some progress.
59