

 While at the turn of the century, a Madrid labourer spent nearly three-quarters of a day’s wage to secure two days’ food, of which bread was the main ingredient, † at the beginning of 1811, if a police commissioner’s report was
to be believed, the labouring classes had the wherewithal to buy food. ‘The populace is calm because they have money, and if they do not have more it is because people of distinction are lacking it.’ In other words, employment
was not as plentiful as it might have been but for the war; but it was sufficient for the labouring classes not to suffer unduly. 3 Though the report may have been nothing more than the commissioner’s attempt to ingratiate
himself with the regime, there had been no deep popular discontent with the new monarchy. The cheap bread – cheaper in Madrid than in the neighbouring provincial capitals – and bullfights by which Josef Bonaparte had attempted
not unsuccessfully to woo Madrid’s inhabitants were, as the spring price rises showed, coming to an end.

 Before they did, however, the lower classes continued to enjoy themselves. Theatre takings remained high; in the Maravillas quarter, site of the artillery depot where so much blood had been shed in the uprising on May 2, 1808,
the only public dance hall, La Estrella, was always full of soldiers ‘and the freest women of the surrounding neighbourhoods’. Public propriety was somewhat wanting, however, the police commissioner reported.

 Modesty and decorum which should be maintained at all public functions are not sufficiently in evidence, and this cannot be remedied because some of those present have drunk a surfeit of wine which results in an excess of
kissing and hugging … I have warned the female proprietor … 4

 Gambling was the other major popular distraction. The government tried to outlaw card games, especially ‘cané’ which was a particular favourite among the Madrid labouring poor. When an out-of-work master carpenter, Juan de
Bastiyeta, with five children to provide for was granted permission by the Madrid corregidor to organize a simple game of fortune with sweetmeats as prizes, the latter was immediately reprimanded by the police minister for acting
beyond his limits and against royal regulations. Despite their rigorous hostility to the lower classes’ uncontrollable gambling, the Bonapartist authorities nonetheless received a healthy income from the Madrid gaming-house
licences they approved. An ‘inveterate vice’, as the Ocaña police commissioner called it, gaming was widespread and one of the ‘greatest evils’ of La Mancha; and in Sevilla, where the regal commissioner, conde de Montarco, tried
to put an end to it, his efforts led nowhere because, as he informed the government, the French occupation forces derived too much money from it to allow its prohibition. 5

 To appease the Madrid lower classes for their increasing hunger, carnival celebrations, which the Bourbon monarchy had banned for over forty years, were permitted by the king in February 1812, and were held in traditional style
with three days of masked balls.