

 Yet another of Napoleon’s errors was to believe that if Spanish resistance to Bonapartist domination of Spain had been irreducible since 1808, only military force could subdue it. And while in general the assumption of Spanish
resistance was correct, Napoleon made no attempt to formulate alternative policies which would give the population good reasons not to support the guerrilla. Military pacification and taxation, repression and requisition, were
the only nostrums on offer.

 The counter-insurgency had to fight without better weapons or communications than the enemy. Artillery and cavalry were of little use, in fact were often counter-productive in the rough terrain where most of the operations took
place. Therefore the French had either to deploy highly superior numbers or highly-trained troops if they were to defeat the guerrillas. Every time they detached large numbers to the counter-insurgency campaign they obliged the
insurgents to disperse; but even with an occupying force of three hundred thousand men divided into distinct provincial commands, it was not often that they were able to assemble sufficient troops for a sufficiently long campaign
– a campaign which had indeed to be virtually constant – to maintain their enemy’s dispersal. And as they moved troops from one region to another the guerrilla filled the vacuum they had left.

 Napoleon believed that a single campaign would eliminate the guerrillas. He was projecting state war against popular war. Powerful but brief sweeps never suppressed the insurgents for long: they disappeared in small, dispersed
companies. He was convinced, on the basis of the Vendée, that mobile columns were the military answer, and in this instance his generals followed his orders. Napoleon was hostile to static garrison troops, and was constantly
ordering regiments to be moved from one command to another just when the troops had become familiar with the terrain in which they had to fight. The result was to slow down the counter-insurgency: commanders delayed in
dispatching their best troops to another, usually rival, general, and often did not fill their ordered quota of men, leaving the other command even more under strength than before the change was ordered.

 Though Napoleon took the ‘brigand’ threat seriously enough, especially when they raided French territory, he never came to believe in the guerrillas’ fighting capabilities, and his counter-insurgency was manned mainly by
inexperienced conscripts who were the most likely to be terrorized by the guerrilla tactics of surprise attack, ambushes and hand-to-hand fighting. Moreover, the conscripts heard enough stories of the guerrillas’ brutality to
live in mortal fear of their enemy, and were easily demoralized by the constant losses – small detachments of their regimental companies, including individual companion conscripts – who were suddenly missing after a minor
military operation to collect taxes or requisitions of food. The counter-insurgency required troops already hardened to living in a hostile environment and trained to accept that their own lives were under constant threat from
even the most innocent-looking villager.