

 so difficult would it be to overcome the prejudices and the pride of the officers at the head of the Spanish Armies as well as many of the leading persons in Spain, that I am firmly of the opinion, they would prefer subjection
to the French, to receiving assistance in this shape, however advantageous, from Great Britain. 39

 However, Wellesley was proven wrong and the regency set up a new depot in Cádiz under Doyle, where British officers and NCOs trained Spanish recruits. While this was a useful step, there was nothing to be done about the generals
who led these men; and it was under the command of Blake, * the Spanish general who had fought and lost more pitched battles than any other patriot general, that the Valencian army of some thirty thousand confronted Suchet’s
second – and this time serious – attempt to take the city with about the same number of men in the autumn of 1811. Blake attacked him north of Valencia on October 25 but was heavily beaten and driven back to the regional capital.
Suchet then had to wait two months for reinforcements from Cataluña, and Blake remained inactive, other than to order El Empecinado, the guerrilla leader, and Villacampos, a military officer commanding a flying column on the
Aragón–Valencia border, to join him in the city. Some of El Empecinado’s men did so; but their leader was far too experienced a guerrilla leader to allow himself to be shut up in a city about to be besieged. Blake’s order showed
how little he understood of the popular struggle: instead of deploying the guerrillas to attack the besiegers in the rear, he displayed a traditional defensive siege mentality.

 During the two months of military inactivity, Blake played his cards (if he had any) close to his chest. But it soon became evident to the inhabitants that he trusted only the military and did not count on the people in his
plans. The enthusiastic popular participation which had been so important in the city’s first defence in 1808 † was not to be repeated.

 Suchet began the offensive on the night of December 25, 1811. On the day after, the city was encircled by eight French divisions. Three days later, Blake tried to break out to save his army, but the attempt failed. The rumour
that he had fled led to the creation of a patriotic junta whose members were mainly clerics and artisans who voiced the people’s discontent to Blake’s face. By New Year’s Day, the situation inside Valencia was extraordinarily
tense. Food was short and prices rose sharply. On January 3, soldiers mutinied and sacked many of the friaries which had been turned into barracks and a number of private houses, while others sold their muskets and cartridge
pouches to get money for food. ‡ Three days later, Suchet summoned the city to surrender. When the summons was rejected, the French commander began a violent artillery barrage, which increased in intensity on the following two
days; many public buildings were damaged. Blake had not ordered any precautions against a bombardment. On January 8 the city capitulated. Sixteen thousand Spanish military, including Blake, were taken prisoner. 40