

 Pursued by French cavalry which cut off his return route to the city, the enigmatic British ‘consul’, Pedro Tupper, had escaped by the skin of his teeth during a tour of the western lines manned entirely by guerrillas on the
first day of the siege. He rode across country to Cullera and then to Denia, which was subsequently captured without resistance. Fulminating against his fellow junta members who had vanished, most of them to their homes, Tupper
made his way to Alicante, one of the few provincial capitals which the French never took, where he tried to set up a new junta to encourage resistance. Once occupied – Gandía was the most southern Levant coastal city occupied by
Suchet’s army – guerrilla parties emerged almost immediately in the Valencian region.

 Despite the Bonapartist abolition of the señorial system, or the Cortes’ measures against señorial jurisdictions, Suchet adopted the strategy that had served him well in Aragón: he left the Valencian feudal system intact to
provide the funds he needed. In order to maintain their rights, the Valencian señores paid handsomely on their vassals’ backs: two hundred million reales which Suchet demanded from the region as an ‘extraordinary war
contribution’, and which by the beginning of 1813, had been paid, half a million reales from the capital and an obligatory loan of a further two millions. He gathered sufficient funds to send money to the Madrid government, to
re-equip not only his own army but that of the centre and south, to send aid to the French army in Cataluña, and find two millions to help Josef during his time in Valencia (see below). 41

 The population as usual paid a high price for the French occupation. The province’s deaths in 1812 more than doubled compared to the previous year – the famine no doubt contributed to this figure – and population growth dropped
by over three percent. In 1813 mortality rose a further eighty percent over 1811, and natural growth declined by another 1.4 per cent. These were the heaviest consecutive Valencian losses of the period from 1800 to 1817. *

 EPISODES: SUCHET’S CLERICAL REPRESSION

 A week after capturing Valencia Suchet ordered all the city’s friars to be deported to France. He blamed them for having incited Valencia’s resistance, and thus having prolonged the siege.

 At three in the afternoon of January 15 all the regular orders were required to present themselves at San Francisco, where [we] remained until five o’clock. Then under an escort of grenadiers [we] were taken to the friary of
Santo Domingo where, in a conglomeration at the gates, [we] spent the night while the French made out lists and checked them. 42

 In the dry, objective language of the times, Brother Pelegrin Benavent, a Franciscan friar who was among the many hundred deported, related that at six in the morning of the following day, guarded by a grenadier company and a
group of fusileros, they were marched out of the city while the old and infirm were segregated; the remainder started on their long trudge to captivity in France.