

 almost every day [we] find poor people dying in the streets. Sickness is increasing daily. Three swollen corpses have been taken from the San Lorenzo prison … There are great numbers of prostitutes plying their trade on the
banks of the river [Manzanares]. 13

 Until April the inhabitants’ resignation and patience was remarkable. Bread, which only the wealthiest could afford, was openly carried and sold without protest among a starving people. 14 The previous month the government had
been forced to recognize that the measures taken so far, which included funding a special commission to provide soup and healthy, plentiful food for the most needy at accessible prices, were inadequate and it doubled its monthly
subsidy to one hundred thousand reales. Private donations were called for and received: but over and above the eleven thousand poor who were helped, three thousand of the subscribers also received the advantages of subsidized
foodstuffs. Indeed, by this time even some government judges, whose salaries were always in arrears, were reduced to begging. 15

 On April 7 and 8, the poor finally lost patience. Several bakeries were asaulted and the government had to call on armed force to subdue the assailants, some forty of whom were detained, before peace was restored. 16 The
government, whose free market economy principles forbade it to control prices, began to clamp down on the bakers with inspections to ensure that they were not hoarding wheat to raise bread prices. However, more energetic measures
were needed. At the beginning of the month, the secret police – all of eight individuals * – informed the government that

 sickness continues to devastate the population; the hospitals are overflowing with patients, and the populace is exasperated by hunger and misery. Despite this, the people’s spirit is running high and very seditious
conversations are heard, both among the lower orders and decent persons who talk of nothing but enemy victories and their certainty that soon all the countries dominated by the French will be liberated … There was very little
wheat in the grain market yesterday … 17

 Some way had to be found to prevent the capital starving to death and to return its inhabitants to their previous acceptance of the regime. The interior minister, rejecting the idea of mixing wheat with rice, maize, potato or
carobs – potatoes were already too dear and carobs in large quantities caused ‘acute colic’ – decided that only an inferior quality of bread, which included a large amount of bran, could be baked. Although there was a degree of
social equality of sacrifice to the measure, since this was the sort of bread used to feed ordinary campaigning soldiers and gaol prisoners, the people remained dissatisfied. Believing openly that bakers were making undue profits
from the new measure, they demanded that the government fix the price of a standard 2lb loaf. 18

 Even the new sort of bread did not end starvation. May 1812 was almost certainly the most deadly month. Among the few sources of relief were the long queues at the remaining convent doors for a cupful of watery soup which at
least warmed empty stomachs. Enterprising sorbet wafer-makers turned their talent to setting up street stands where they cooked ‘sandwiches’ from grass pea flour and onions which cost a quarter of a real. Although recognizing
that these stands were tolerated for the ‘good of the poor’, the secret police wanted them banned because neighbours were suffering from the smoke of the burned oil and fat and the stands could be the source of fire. ‘Public
order and salubrity demands that these so-called sandwich stands be prohibited.’ 19