

 Though the secret police report did not recall it, a most surprising scene had taken place at one of these stands a few weeks earlier when the people lost patience with their long suffering. A priest bearing the viaticum was on
his way to give the last rights to a dying person. In normal times people uncovered their heads in respect, or knelt in the street at the sight of the eucharist. But now indignation and exasperation had reached such a point that,
as the priest passed a stand on the corner of the Calle de la Fe, the owners began to throw spoonfuls of dough at passers-by. 20 Public order required no repetition of such disgraceful scenes.

 But the stands were allowed to remain. In the secret police view they were the cause of ‘thousands of disturbances because the Madrid youth, desperate with hunger, robbed them and prevented people passing by in the streets’. 21
Nonetheless, one of Goya’s horrifying prints of the capital’s starving inhabitants in his Disasters of War , in which a woman half-raising herself from the street to receive something to eat from a group which appears more
impoverished than she, is captioned: ‘Thanks to the grass pea flour’. * The secret police could no doubt still eat, but the stands provided the poor with a little basic sustenance.

 Meanwhile, the famine’s ‘terrible ravages’ continued unabated; the secret police reported that 1,996 adults had died in May. 22 † ‘Hunger is the principal enemy of this country’, the king wrote. If all available troops were not
called upon to protect the coming harvest, ‘the danger exists that the fields will be devastated and the harvest burned which will make inevitable the evacuation of Spain’. 23 His fear had been precipitated by reports that
Wellington was pursuing in Extremadura the burnt-earth policy he had used in Portugal during his defence against Masséna two years earlier. *

 The schoolboy Ramón Mesonero Romanos would never forget the desolate scenes of people dying openly in the streets in full daylight, wives and children crying beside their husbands’ and brothers’ corpses lying on the pavement
from where they were collected twice a day by parish carts.

 Even the air smelled of the noxious gases of the dead and seemed to extend a funereal shroud over the population. One simple memory will suffice: in the three hundred paces between my home and my primary school, I counted one
day as many as seven corpses and expiring bodies, and I ran home crying to throw myself into my anguished mother’s arms. For several months thereafter she did not allow me to return to school. 24

 Mesonero Romanos also recalled that French troops stationed in the capital were generous to the numerous starving beggars in the streets; Goya in his Disasters of War insinuated the same. But under the bitter title ‘They are of
another breed’ the artist depicted better-off Madrileños callously ignoring the starving, skeletal poor. Goya’s captions – nearly one in five of his stark black-and-white Disasters’ engravings are of the famine which, living in
Madrid, he witnessed – tell the story: ‘There was nothing to be done and he died’; ‘Vain laments’; ‘The worst is to beg’; ‘To the cemetery’; ‘It is no use crying out’; ‘The beds of death’; ‘Corpses piled up’.