

 Despite the uneven distribution of the spectacular mortality, the famine, which saw villagers along the Ebro in Aragón reduced to eating bread of acorns and millet mixed, 26 was responsible for fewer deaths and missing than
those which resulted from the French occupation in the first full year of the war. In 1809, all regional mortality, with the exception of unoccupied Andalucía and Valencia, was higher than in 1812.

 SEVILLA

 Confidential patriot agents in western Andalucía reported to the regency in August, 1811, that the harvest had been very unproductive and that ‘great distress is apprehended’. By the early autumn the agent in Puerto de Santa
María, a cleric, wrote that the first signs of famine were showing in the townships of Ronda, Morón de la Frontera and Utrera and neighbouring villages. ‘I give one month and a half for the great Famine to appear which is to be
the deliverer of Andalucía – a plague most fortunate, if it delivers Andalucía from one of the most insupportable scourges ever suffered by heaven’s vengeance.’ 27

 The agents’ reports were passed on by the regency to Henry Wellesley, British minister plenipotentiary to the Cádiz government and Wellington’s younger brother, who forwarded them in translation to another older brother, the
Marquess of Wellesley, who was the British minister for foreign affairs at the time. ‘The people here are very much out of spirits. They expect to perish this winter for want of bread, for it is already dear.’ A normal 2lb loaf
was fetching seven reales, the Sevilla patriot agent reported in October 1811. Three months later, it reached ten reales. Wheat was to be allowed to enter the city from any quarter available ‘to avoid fatal consequences’. After
visiting the Cartuja to inspect the stocks available, Marshal Soult, Napoleon’s supreme commander of Andalucía, ordered that only one sort of inferior bread should be baked. 28

 Sevilla enjoyed one advantage that Madrid lacked. It was a port connected to the Atlantic and to Córdoba in the interior by the river Guadalquivir; though upriver from Sevilla the river was not navigable to ocean-going ships, it
could be used by boats except in years of drought.

 The great famine duly appeared as predicted, but it could not be said that it delivered Andalucía to anything but fearful mortality and distress. The French army, as usual, looked after itself by requisitioning grain, and
importing flour from the Barbary coast in US ships to the great scandal of Wellesley and the regency which promised to ‘put an end to a traffic so advantageous to the enemy’. 29 Even so, many of their troops also went hungry. The
guerrilla battle for food was waged with the same intensity as elsewhere. The partisan leader Saldivar intercepted a convoy of one thousand fanegas of wheat, forty thousand reales and the jewellery of a French colonel’s wife in
December. Shortly before it was claimed he had nearly captured Soult himself on his evening ride from Sevilla to Buenavista; the marshal was saved by a shepherd’s warning. ‘The shepherd has had more curses heaped on his head than
he has hairs upon it …’ 30