

 The debate over the Inquisition was the most acrimonious of all. The Holy Office had been inactive during the war for lack of an inquisitor general (only the Pope, with whom it was impossible to communicate, could approve the
appointment; the previous inquisitor, Ramón José de Arce, Archbishop of Zaragoza, was an ardent afrancesado).

 While the liberal deputies in general were not anti-clerical, the Inquisition was the bane of their lives since the Holy Office – or fear of it – had for so long controlled their freedom to read and write. Freedom of the press –
more papers were published in Cádiz in the years of the Cortes than in the whole of Spain’s eighteenth century 60 – resulted in a polemical style of journalism, broadly divided into pro- and anti-liberal, which reflected the
growing antagonism between the two factions in the Cortes and the fundamental division that had surfaced in Spain during the French Revolution and festered just below the surface for a generation before.

 As the anti-liberal press and its frequent clerical contributors honed their attacks on liberal policies in the Cortes, many of the more progressive liberal newspapers responded in kind with a violent polemic on the Old Order’s
supporters and the Church. Their attacks went beyond anti-clericalism to the heart of religious belief. When Manuel Alzáibar, a close friend of Mexía, published an article that lambasted the notion of the soul’s immortality and
followed it up with an even more impious attack, many liberal deputies were so horrified that they wanted the matter referred to the Inquisition, despite the fact that in matters of religion the Cortes had agreed that clerical
censorship was to be exercised by bishops.

 Another pretext for the ultra monarchists to pursue the Inquisition’s continued existence was the scandal caused by the publication of Bartolomé Gallardo’s Critical and Satirical Dictionary in reply to an earlier dictionary
written by two ultra anti-liberal deputies. * Gallardo, a progressive liberal, was the Cortes’ librarian. A self-confessed secularist from an early age, he had a sharp mind and as sharply stylish a pen, and he satirized his
opponents to great effect. The work was considered scurrilous, subversive, anti-clerical, and insulting to certain members of the ecclesiastical hierarchy. Even a leading liberal deputy like the conde de Toreno thought it
‘inopportune,’ ‘indiscreet’ and ‘scandalous’. 61 Gallardo was sent to gaol by the Cádiz provincial censorship junta within a week of its publication on April 15 and remained there for three months, suffering the same fate as most
of those whose ideas were considered too extreme for orthodox patriotism. A year later the ten copies of his work which had been seized were burned. To take on the Church from an advanced liberal stance was bound to be a perilous
affair.

 MILITANCIES THE MAKING OF A LIBERAL PROGRESSIVE: BARTOLOMÉ J. GALLARDO 62

 Born in 1776 to a none-too-wealthy Badajoz farmer and his wife, and educated at home by priests, Gallardo was a prodigious student who was admitted to Salamanca University at the age of 15. Without consulting him, his parents
wanted the young Bartolomé to study for the priesthood so as to take up a chaplaincy that was in their gift; once aware of their designs, Gallardo steadfastly refused to comply, causing a serious rift with his parents, but
demonstrating a determined independence which was a trait of his life. When both his parents died, leaving him penniless, he was fortunate to be taken under the wing of a university librarian and fellow Extramaduran, who secured
his admission to a university college and no doubt encouraged his protegé‘s enthusiasm for books. Quite soon, in his study of philosophy and literature, Gallardo became fascinated by anatomy and began to study medicine, which was
less remarkable than it might seem. The Salamanca medical faculty was the most open of all to new forms of teaching and innovation of research; moreover, Gallardo spent many hours a day in his college library reading on
everything that took his attention, and a work on anatomy was among these; but it was past Spanish literature that most attracted him and from which he distilled a pure Castilian style and idiom for his own writing. At the same
time he read widely among the French philosophes’ works including, clandestinely, those banned by the Inquisition, among them Voltaire and Rousseau. In his last year of seven as a student, he demonstrated his acid pen and mastery
of Castilian by publishing a satire on the local Salamanca newspaper which brought him to the attention of the enlightened bishop of the city, Antonio Tavira, who, after going to some lengths to arrange a meeting, was
sufficiently impressed to become Gallardo’s friend and protector. * The twenty-two-year-old student responded with an epigram, as he called it, in French, dedicated to the bishop: