

 The ecclesiastical wrath of all but liberal clerical deputies and a small number of bishops, who had argued for the Inquisition’s abolition, was immense. Writing under the pseudonym of ‘El Filósofo Rancio’ (‘The age-old
philosopher’), the Dominican preacher, Francisco de Alvarado, added fuel to the fire with his critical letters to an absolutist deputy which attacked the heretical French philosophes and the Enlightenment and stated, among many
other anti-liberal indictments, that Spain would not be content until the Inquisition cleansed the country of ‘ philosophes in the same manner as it had cleansed it of Jews’. 66

 But it was not only clerics who attacked the Inquisition’s abolition. As a manufacturer, Antonio García Colado, wrote to a newspaper from Siguenza:

 If this country has ten million inhabitants, nine of them at the least want the Inquisition to continue in existence. I can assure you that despite the great devastation which, in a city like this we have suffered at the hands
of the French, and there is not one of us who has not been left five times or more with nothing else than the shirt he stands up in, there is not one inhabitant who does not feel the same suffering at the abolition of the Holy
Office. 67

 Despite these attacks and a much reduced majority of only thirty, when most moderate bills could count on double that number, the Cortes approved the Inquisition’s abolition in February 1813, * 68 four years after Napoleon had
extinguished it in the Bonapartist zone. Another decree expropriated its property. An order to read a Cortes proclamation explaining the Inquisition’s abolition to the nation on three consecutive Sundays in all churches met with
outright opposition, even the threat of excommunication, from many bishops. And when the Papal Nuncio protested to the regency, he was expelled from Spain. 69

 EPISODES: THE POSSESSED 70

 On Corpus Christi, one of the Church’s great holy days, the religious procession in the village of Tosos was unexpectedly disturbed by eight local women who demonstrated all the signs of being possessed by the devil. They made
‘extreme and wild gestures’ and ‘frenzied movements’ … A week later more than thirty village women were manifesting similar symptoms and accusing one woman, Joaquina Martínez, of being the witch who was responsible for their
state. Very quickly, most of the villagers and the so-called doctors among them firmly believed that Martínez was a witch; and one ‘possessed’ male made two attempts on her life. The unrestricted violence of the possessed women
soon drove Martínez, her husband and a mutual friend, out of the village.

 It was mid-1812. Tosos was little more than a hamlet of three hundred souls close to Goya’s birthplace of Fuendetodos south of Zaragoza. It lived mainly from its vineyards which produced grapes for the neighbouring and
well-known local wine-producing centre of Cariñena.

 As a result of this mass possession, the parish priest, Mateo de León, was overwhelmed by demands for exorcism which he and his friar assistant began to carry out. Before the outbreak had become widespread and Martínez had been
generally identified as being the cause of the problem, she had already offered to exorcize a number of the possessed who had gone to her house. There she had applied to them the usual ‘divine’ impedimenta of reliquaries and
religious medallions; but she had also used more mundane practices like touching and caressing their private parts. The priest who was subsequently commissioned by the Zaragoza archbishopric to investigate the case wrote of ‘the
ease with which Martínez had taken these women to her house, and even lain in the same bed with them’. 71