

 The virtual annexation did little to win over the Catalans to the Napoleonic cause. In an official report, the prefect of one of the new departments, that of the Ebro estuary (Bouches de l’Ebre), explained that the Catalans’
hatred of the French lay ‘in very old disputes’ which went as far back as the seventeenth century. These historical facts were still clearly remembered by the Catalan people, he wrote. Moreover, French emigré priests had informed
Catalans of the ‘barbarities’ committed by the French Revolution which had increased Catalan hatred of France. The prefect added that the Catalans detested the Castilians almost as much as the French, because of the War of the
Spanish Succession at the begining of the eighteenth century (as a result of which Cataluña had lost its self-governing rights), ‘their national jealousy, their spirit of liberty and independence, and their natural distance from
the [Madrid] court and its intrigues’. 44 The new French administration ran into many local difficulties in controlling the population: the mayors of five villages near Gerona were arrested for collaborating with the patriotic
Catalan junta; and where, as in Besalu, junta-appointed mayors had been dismissed, the French administration could find no one prepared to replace them. Even the fishermen of Barcelona were refusing to collaborate. 45

 The Cortes of Cádiz had refused to see the Spanish army withdraw from Cataluña, and had appointed General Lacy to its command. To reinforce the army, the latter had incorporated all irregular units into regular service. 46 The
British frigate captain, Edward Codrington, on the Catalan station, had no hesitation in writing him a letter reproaching him for his decision.

 The sentiments of the people upon the coast now appear to me to have undergone a decided change and that confidence which lately prevailed has given place to a very alarming dejection in consequence of a few thousand French
occupying their Towns with impunity and their being, as they alleged, deprived of the means of defending themselves by the determination your Excellency has lately adopted of abolishing altogether those Companies of Partidarios
[irregulars] who have harassed them so considerably in all their movements. 47

 Lacy replied that because one part of the coast was occupied it did not follow that the country in general would submit to its oppressors; and sent Codrington gazettes to prove his point. The frigate captain answered, thanking
him for the newspapers and said they confirmed his view that

 whenever the Catalans are well commanded they will always act with their characteristic Bravery, whether as Regular Soldiers, Somatenes, Partidarios or simple Peasantry. But instead of concluding that because they have fought so
well it is wise to make them Soldiers by Force, I cannot help thinking that attention to their wishes, and a kind consideration ever for their prejudices, is due to them, for their perserverance, and the sacrifices they have so
long continued to make … Considering the eventual happiness of the people as the only legitimate cause of all warfare, it appears to be more than ever necessary to consult their feelings by whom that Army is to be kept efficient,
and when personal Service is almost the only remaining sacrifice which they have to offer to their Country…. Nor can I forget that your Excellency then agreed with me on the necessity of attending to the sentiments of the people
and attributing the failure of your predecessors to a want of that particular consideration … 48