

 It was, without doubt, his Dictionary which first brought Gallardo notoriety. In it he substituted his own definitions for his opponents’ entries in their dictionary. Under ‘P’, where the anti-liberals, among other things, had
defined the ‘People’, as a ‘collection of figures or puppets to be used by their puppet-masters, according to the philosofes’ , he re-wrote the entry. After rehearsing the ancient view that some men were born with blue blood and
others with red, he continued that the study of man’s nature had proven that villeins and gentlemen were all made of the same matter: the definition of the people, ‘at its highest and most sublime’, was synonomous with the
nation, and was also used to mean ‘the people’s sovereignty’.

 In a more humble sense (though never contemptuously because there are no lower people in Spain), is meant the ordinary citizens who, without enjoying particular distinctions, incomes or posts, live by their trades; and although
they do not exercise official positions, they have the option to do so and access to the highest posts and decorations with which the fatherland rewards merit and virtue … These were the people who, on May 2, unarmed, cursed and
abandoned by the weak government of Madrid, threw themselves on the perfidious Murat’s hosts, raising the first cry for Spanish independence … The voice of liberty triumphed and triumphs. The proverb which says that the people’s
voice is the voice of heaven has become sacred. Eternal glory to the people of Madrid, and to all the peoples of Spain! 63

 Despite his progressive thinking, Gallardo adopted the orthodox liberal view of the people and the constitutional creation of a meritocracy. There was no question of the Rights of Man. The people collectively were praised for
their anti-Napoleonic resistance; thereafter, they were a mass of individuals who by their own merits and virtue could – like Gallardo himself – ascend to the political elite. The only equality offered them, and this was no small
matter, was equality before the law; the only liberty offered them was that of the free market.

 *

 THE INQUISITION ABOLISHED

 The Cortes referred the matter of the Inquisition’s reinstatement to its constitutional committee which, in 1812, reported that the Holy Office’s secret procedures were incompatible with the constitution and it should be
abolished.

 Bourbon absolutism had used its state power to control the Church, indeed had expropriated part of its wealth, and to no little degree had emasculated the Inquisition. 64 The anti-liberals saw that, like absolutism, the liberals
were reinforcing the power of the state and feared for the Church, which they identified with the institutions of the Old Order that they were determined to defend. They might not want a return to state absolutism, which had
attempted to oversee and reform the Church; but even less did they want a liberal state which was certain, in their view, to do even worse. As a result they fought to preserve the clergy’s corporate identity and its privileges
against both. They identified Catholicism exclusively with the counter-revolution, anti-liberalism and the legitimate dynasty. 65