

 BRITISH VICTORIES AND RETREATS

 Despite Suchet’s victories, the war was not to be won on the Mediterranean coast but in the heartland of Spain. The day Valencia fell, Wellington began his break-out from Portugal where he had been confined since 1810 by French
occupation of the major Spanish border fortresses during Masséna’s offensive. On the night of January 19, 1812, he took Ciudad Rodrigo, the northernmost fortress town, after a ten-day investment at a cost of five hundred
casualties; the Anglo-Portuguese troops lost all discipline, looting and pillaging the town remorselessly until the following day. The French commanders of the central and northern armies, Marmont and Dorsenne respectively, were
unaware of the town’s siege until January 15, and a rapid allied advance after its capture might have caught them unprepared. Napoleon had depleted the imperial army in Spain for his Russian campaign, but more importantly had not
replaced casualties or the sick: in consequence, the French army’s effective strength had fallen from just under 300,000 in July 1811, to 230,000 in May 1812. 49 Since the army was trying to hold down the country, its effective
fighting strength was further reduced.

 Always cautious Wellington next turned his attention to the southernmost fortress town of Badajoz, which the Anglo-Portuguese army had failed to capture the previous summer, though in fact its strategic position was unlikely to
play a part in an offensive in central Spain. Its capture on April 6 was rather a diversion – unless Wellington planned to attack Soult in Andalucía. 50 The British losses were tremendous; the assault’s carnage was followed by a
British carnage of the population, a sacking that went far beyond the rules of war. It made no difference to the drunken soldiery that they were murdering, pillaging and raping their Spanish allies; even worse was that Wellington
took no serious measures to prevent what, in effect, was the most horrifying night of the British Peninsular War. 51

 In June, from his northern Portuguese base, Wellington at last launched his offensive on central Spain, occupying Salamanca, where his fifty-thousand-strong army was held up for ten days – as long as the siege of Ciudad Rodrigo
– by the determined resistance of three convents which the French had fortified. Once the convents were reduced, Wellington moved on the river Duero where he was outmanoeuvred by Marmont, who forced the Anglo-Portuguese army
back. For several days, the two armies marched side by side less than half a mile apart. A month after leaving Salamanca, Wellington was back on the hills around the village of Arapiles south of Salamanca which he had previously
occupied, and was prepared to retreat on Portugal. *

 Over-confident that the Anglo-Portuguese would continue to withdraw, Marmont attempted to outflank Wellington’s positions and over-extended his lines. Wellington took full advantage of this error. The battle, on July 21,
resulted in a triumph for Anglo-Portuguese arms and heavy losses for the French. It was a decisive victory for it opened the road to Madrid. Josef fled to the safety of Suchet in Valencia. On August 12 – preceded by the guerrilla
forces of El Empecinado, Chaleco (Francisco Abad) and El Médico (Juan Palarea) who were received by cheering crowds and all the city’s church bells ringing (El Empecinado was the real hero of the day for his victories in the
capital’s environs) – Wellington entered the Spanish capital to the huzzas of the population which only a few months earlier had been dying of starvation and was still short of food. 52