

 On May 11 the Madrid captain general informed the Cortes president that the king had dissolved the assembly. As the president was one of the signatories to the Manifiesto de los Persas he readily acquiesced. That night the
persecution began with the arrest of all the leading liberals whom Eguía, supported by troops, could lay hands on. The arrests continued the following day in Madrid and the provinces. That day a few hundred of the mob, probably
organized by the conde de Montijo, whom Fernando had dispatched to the capital earlier to stir up anti-liberal sentiment, tore down the stone naming Madrid’s plaza Mayor the plaza de la Constitución, and dragged it to the Cortes
shouting ‘Viva Fernando VII!’, ‘Long Live Religion!’, ‘Down with the Cortes!’ ‘Viva la Inquisición!’ They then wrecked the Cortes chamber and obliterated the word constitution from the facade. 11

 When Fernando entered the capital through triumphal arches, with troops lining the streets, he received for the second time an enthusiastic reception. After six years of war and suffering, their ‘beloved’ king was back on his
throne. The fundamental liberal attempt to restructure the country had collapsed. The war which, with the exception of Suchet’s continuing occupation of Cataluña, 12 was finally over in Spain, had in the end, it could be thought,
changed nothing.

 And yet, in truth, the end of the Napoleonic war marked the beginning of the real intestinal conflict. The country’s educated classes were now divided into two warring camps. The reformers on the one hand, the ultra
conservatives, backed by the Church, on the other. Three nineteenth-century civil wars and the greatest of all in the twentieth, followed by forty years of Franco’s dictatorship – more than a century and a half in all – would be
needed before this division could be sufficiently healed in a modern constitution which permitted the free interplay of parliamentary politics under a constitutional monarchy.

 Fernando’s new reign, accompanied by six years of ferocious reactionary repression, was the beginning of this open conflict. The Inquisition was restored, freedom of the press abolished, the pre-war councils of state
reestablished and municipal government again left in the hands of the old oligarchies. The regular clergy recovered its monasteries, friaries and property. Though the landed señores did not recover their jurisdictional rights –
the only advance which the absolutist restoration took over from the Cádiz Cortes – they could continue to exact dues and tributes as in the past. Wellington, not exactly a liberal himself, visited Madrid after the final victory
over Napoleon to try to persuade Fernando to moderate his repression against the liberals. He was unsuccessful. What could be expected, he commented later, of a king who every day partook of his afternoon tea in the company of
nuns?

 MILITANCIES: GOYA AND THE DISASTERS OF WAR

 Goya’s eighty-two engravings of the Disasters of War – not the artist’s original title * – have been and frequently continue to be taken as literal documentary evidence of the conflict’s brutality, especially of French
repression. This was mistaken: it turned Goya into a ‘naturalist’ before his time; 13 he was rather a ‘visionary of the real’. 14 As in his two emblematic paintings of the May 2 Madrid rising and its repression on May 3, he did
not document events as much as imagine them and their horror. Goya was sixty-two at the outbreak of the war, deaf and for nearly a third of a century had been official court painter to Carlos IV. Of humble origins – his father
was a Zaragozan master gilder who died in poverty, and his mother was from an impoverished minor Aragonese noble family – until the age of forty Goya lacked any wide culture. Aged twenty-eight, he was called to Madrid to paint
cartoons for the royal tapestry factory; his later friendship with Jovellanos and other enlightened reformists like Bernardo Iriarte, both of whom he painted and each of whom took separate sides in the war, eased his entry into
the world of the Enlightenment. Like them, he was of a generation whose poets and playwrights attacked the social abuses of the absolutist regime, and like them, in his desire for reform, had initially supported Fernando VII. He
was more daring then most of his contemporaries, however, criticizing directly in his series of pre-war engravings, ‘Los caprichos’, the Church’s malign influence in fostering the people’s ignorance and credulity, among many
other social ills. While he vigorously depicted the lower classes’ festivities and labours, a part of him distrusted their susceptibility to superstition, religious customs and attachment to traditional ways of thought and habits.