

 Throughout the war he remained in Bonapartist Madrid, with the exception of a brief excursion to Zaragoza, at General Palafox’s request in the autumn of 1808, to depict the inhabitants’ heroic defence of the Aragonese capital at
the end of the first siege; this project he never carried out, other than to include in the Disasters of War an impressive etching in stark black-and-white of the siege’s heroine, Agustina Zaragoza, standing on dead artillerymen
to fire their silenced cannon at an invisible enemy. ‘What courage!’ he titled the engraving.

 On his return to Madrid, which meanwhile surrendered to Napoleon, he swore ‘love and allegiance’ to King Josef, along with thirty thousand other heads of family. He had little choice if he wanted to continue in the capital where
lay his main possibilities to earn a wartime living by his art. Considerable numbers of his enlightened pre-war friends served the new regime, and like them Goya was by no means unaware of the advantages that Bonapartist rule
could bring to Spain. Napoleon’s Chamartín reforms which abolished feudal rights, did away with the Inquisition, and reduced the number of religious communities by two-thirds confirmed this. But by 1810, when he began work on the
Disasters of War , the imperial army’s sacking, pillaging and outright oppression of the country had alerted many Bonapartist politicians to the fatal dangers this military policy contained for the new regime. Without the army it
could not consolidate its sway; with this army, its legitimacy was constantly undermined.

 Throughout, Goya remained deeply ambivalent about the war, its aims and means. His critical vision of reality was expressed in the palette and brush, in his engraving tools and copper plate. (Because of the war he was so short
of the latter that he cut up two beautiful landscape engravings to use the reverse sides for four of his Disasters .) On the one hand he heard numerous stories about the French army’s brutality – he must have had large gatherings
of friends in his house which, according to the inventory drawn up on his wife’s death in 1812, contained over fifty chairs; he had learned to lip-read and the subject of conversation was bound to be about the war, making it
easier for him to understand. On the other, the patriots’ defence of religion and reliance on the Church did not enamour him to their cause. Moreover, what all the enlightened of his generation most feared had come to pass: once
their fury was unleashed the lower orders proved as capable of abominable atrocities as their oppressors. The cruelty of the supposedly ‘civilized’ French enraged him. The savagery of the villagers and guerrillas confirmed his
worst dread. In the sense in which it would be understood today, he found it impossible ‘to take sides’.

 This was made easier by his isolation in Madrid. Had he lived in the patriot zone things might have been different. But in the capital he depended for news on his afrancesado friends and acquaintances. News and rumour went hand
in hand as they did in the patriot zone – exaggerated in both, depending on circumstance. Despite his marginal comment ‘This I have seen’ on a number of the Disasters’ plates, many modern historians suspect that he indulged in a
certain poetic licence. But whether he actually witnessed some of the events he depicted – and it is indisputable that he lived through the horrifying street scenes during the 1812 Madrid famine – is in fact irrelevant. His
artistic imagination, the expression of his intimate feelings, was what counted. This allowed him to add at the end of the series on massacres and mutilation a number of satirical prints – ‘the striking caprichos’ on his old
anathema, the Church – which come as a surprise to the horror-hardened twenty-first century viewer. Goya certainly intended them as a criticism of the Church’s return to power – and its popular acceptance – and of the restoration
of absolutism.