

 Soon the commissioner discovered from the local parish priest’s evidence that on one occasion a French military patrol had arrested him and Antonia Ramo and taken them to a nearby village. 77 But the commissioner neither asked,
nor did the priest offer, any reason for the arrest which occured on an unspecified date after Joaquina had been driven from the village. What might have explained such an action? It was unlikely that the junior commander of what
would have been a small imperial force sent to the village would act on his own initiative unless it were a question of taking the authorities hostage for nonpayment of taxes, tributes or requisitions. While the priest was
obviously a local authority, the same could not be said of Ramo. Moreover, the priest did not suggest that the arrests lasted long. Did the Zaragoza ecclesiastical authorities propose to the French military the expediency of
removing these two troublemakers from the hamlet – or at least of frightening them by the possibility of expulsion from Tosos? A mystery certainly hung over both these events.

 It was only after the war that a priest who was investigating the matter – which continued unabated, war or no war, under the Cortes de Cádiz’s liberalism or Fernando’s absolutism – came closest to providing an intelligible
reason:

 During the French domination, dissensions between the said villagers arose, one of the best-known being between A. Ramo and Joaquina Martínez. † Because of the one’s envy of the other’s shop, Ramo began to put it about that
Martínez was selling a bedevilled cheese and that all who partook of it would be possessed. At the time it happened, either because of the fear of French outrages or for other reasons that belong to the medical realm, many women
and some men suffered disorders which were notable for [the afflicteds’] extraordinary movements, so that Martínez was pursued to death. 78

 Fear of French outrages, which were current in the first years of the war, were by 1812 not as likely to occur in Aragón unless villagers supported the patriot movement. The postwar investigating priest’s association of village
dissension under French occupation with that of Ramo and Martínez appeared to point to their interconnection (unless his report were no more than one of those common Spanish early nineteenth-century stylistic elisions of
disparate events). Though it was imaginable that in little more than a hamlet the two women’s rivalry arose from the one’s envy of the other’s success with her bedevilled cheese, different loyalties in the war were more profound;
and Tosos was obviously split in its political allegiances between French and patriot supporters. These divisions crystallized around the two women’s dissension in which the villagers’ ‘general will’ stood by the possessed.

 While the participants’ motives, and the village’s inner workings in which these motives were played out, remained obscure, it was clear that in one small village the daily stress, fears and divisions caused by the war resulted
in an outbreak of mass psychosis which conceivably was a defence mechanism, a projection of the ‘enemy devil’ onto the ‘other’, the ‘outsider witch’ who must be driven from the community or face the threat of losing her life when
all would again be well.