

 One woman in particular was Martínez’ main accuser: Antonia Ramo. The two women had been close friends; both were in the business of selling foodstuffs to the villagers. Ramo was a woman well-considered in the village. Many
witnesses confirmed that she always attended all religious devotional acts, was well-educated and polite, and that her conduct was morally and politically irreproachable. She, too, was a God-fearing woman who went to communion
regularly. Some witnesses, however, recalled earlier symptoms that she was ‘not quite right in the head’. Why should these two women have quarrelled to the extent that Ramo would fall into a possessed fit every time she saw
Joaquina?

 The ‘witch’ was said to have a ‘warlike’, ‘proud’ and ‘masculine’ temperament. She came from a neighbouring village which, in Spanish terms, always implied rivalry, and had arrived in Tosos poor and burdened with children. For a
time the village authorities had given her the task of looking after its horses. In the village she was nicknamed ‘The Charge-Beater’ which had overtones of the heroine of Zaragoza’s first siege, Agustina Zaragoza, who, when an
artilleryman had fallen at the breach, took his place and fired the cannon to beat back the enemy as they charged through the gap in the walls. Nicknames were an important part of villagers’ perceptions of others.

 Paradoxically, the archbishopric recommended both women for their religiosity while condemning Ramo’s persistent and unflagging charge that Joaquina was a witch, an accusation that nothing would make her retract. Joaquina, on
the other hand, always maintained that the ‘possessions’ were fraudulent and caused ‘by the defence of highly concrete interests’, though she did not specify what these were.

 No coherent explanation of these events was put forward by the initial ecclesiastical investigation which provided only random clues – and probably with good reason. Zaragoza was under French control and there was a close
understanding between the ecclesiastical and military authorities. * A part of the problem between the two women seemed to revolve around the war and there was little reward to be gained for the clerical hierarchy by digging too
deeply into the causes of events that had occurred in a hamlet of no particular consequence.

 The original investigating commissioner, Rev. Manuel Pasqual Bernard, the Cariñena parish priest who was appointed by the Zaragoza ecclesiastical authorities, pointed out two war-related incidents without, however, expounding on
them. ‘It has come to my attention that in those years of revolution some violent deaths took place here’, he wrote in order to explain that the threats to kill Joaquina must be taken seriously, ‘as this is a village where such
scandalous conduct can occur’. 76 Evidently then at the start of the war some villagers had been suspected of lack of loyalty to the patriot cause or personal vengeance had been vented on the assassinated. This had not been
forgotten. But the tables had turned in the past two years when the French indisputably controlled Aragón; Marshal Suchet had even extinguished the guerrilla threat. In 1812, at the time of these events, however, the Aragonese
guerrillas were re-emerging with gathering strength. Arguably, this renewed resistance and the fear of French military reprisals was splitting the inhabitants into two opposed camps, each represented in their different ways by
Joaquina and Antonia. *