

 From well before Fernando’s arrival in Valencia, his uncle Antonio who had gone directly to the city from Cataluña, had been plotting on his behalf. A number of ultra monarchist deputies were involved also. But the real
conspiratorial power was General Francisco Javier Elío, the monarchist captain general of the region, a post he had exercised from Alicante before Suchet withdrew from Valencia. He had travelled to Aragón to meet Fernando where
he had incited the latter to recover ‘absolute power’. On the day after Fernando’s arrival in Valencia, as he made his way to a Te Deum in the cathedral along the streets lined with troops, General Elío stopped in front of the
crown’s regimental flag and held it aloft.

 Your majesty, I beg you to stop to show you a sight worthy of yourself. These stains which you see on the flag are those of the severely wounded officer who saved it from the enemy at the battle of Castalla. This crown covered
in blood is that which the loyal army has shed in order for you to recuperate the crown; the blood remaining of all Spanish soldiers will be spilt to secure you on your throne in the fullness of your natural rights. 5

 Elío’s pronouncement could hardly have been clearer. It was followed by what came to be known as the Manifiesto de los Persas , a letter to Fernando from a score of ultra deputies which called on him not to swear the
constitutional oath. ‘Absolute monarchy … is a work of reason and intelligence’, the manifesto declared. ‘It is subordinate to divine law, to justice and to the fundamental law of the state. It was established by right of
conquest or by the voluntary submission of the first men who elected their kings.’ 6

 On May 2, the Valencia populace, incited no doubt by the ultras, smashed the tablet naming one of the main squares the plaza de la Constitución, substituting for it the Real plaza de Fernando VII, while conversely in Madrid the
atmosphere was joyous during ceremonies for the completion of the new hall where the Cortes was to assemble. The inhabitants of all classes had worked or paid to complete the hall on time to celebrate the popular May 2
anti-French rising of 1808. On the facade of the former monastery, between statues representing Religion, Fatherland and Liberty, was a marble tablet inscribed with the words from the constitution: ‘The power to enact the laws
resides in the Cortes together with the King.’ 7

 Two days later, Fernando staged his coup. His decree, though not published until May 11 in Madrid, abolished the 1812 constitution and all the Cortes’ decrees, and he reassumed absolute power. Anyone who advocated obedience to
the constitution or the Cortes’ decrees would be guilty of lese-majesty and punishable by death.

 Fernando was making a serious mistake, Henry Wellesley, British ambassador to the regency, believed. Shortly after Fernando crossed into Spain, Wellesley sent ‘A Most Secret and Confidential’ despatch to Lord Castlereagh, the
British Foreign secretary.

