

 Napoleon, who on August 27–28, had defeated the Russian and Prussian armies at Dresden, meanwhile sent Marshal Soult to command the remnants of the French army on the Spanish frontier. Taking advantage of Wellington’s
preoccupation with the two sieges, he surprised the supreme commander by attacking him, not as he expected across the Bidasoa river which formed the Franco-Spanish frontier, but through the Pyrenean passes. Soult had an effective
army of eighty-five thousand men in whom he had inspired new confidence. For nine days of very hard fighting, known as the battle of the Pyrenees, Soult’s offensive was only finally stopped in two bloody battles (Sorauren, July
28 and 30) within sight of Pamplona’s walls. The battles cost Soult thirteen thousand men and Wellington just over half that number. Spanish guerrillas incorporated into the army, and battle-hardened regulars fought with great
bravery to hold Soult off. Though his troops were dispirited by their defeats, Soult made one last attempt by attacking San Sebastián on the day the allies stormed the city: he was thoroughly defeated at the battle of San
Marcial, losing four thousand men. The majority of the allies’ 2,500 casualties were Spanish.

 Even so, Wellington did not take advantage of his victory, allowing Soult a month to regroup his army and throw up defence works along the Bidasoa. The five weeks it had taken to achieve the great Vitoria victory had turned into
five months (July to November) of fighting in and around the Spanish frontier. Although there was no question, as after past victories, of retreating to Portugal, like most of Wellington’s peninsular campaigns this one also ended
in a strong anti-climax. 3 *

 END OF THE WAR: FERNANDO VII’S RETURN
AND THE RESTORATION OF ABSOLUTISM

 While the allies continued to fight in the northwest, important political events were taking place in the rest of the country. In September, the constituent Cortes adjourned and elections to an ordinary Cortes were held in a
greater number of unoccupied provinces than had been possible in 1810. In many provinces the vote was clearly manipulated by local oligarchs. At the same time the liberals of the Constituent assembly boycotted their opponents’
attempts to move the new Cortes to Madrid, fearing that they lacked a popular base in the capital. When the Cortes finally gathered in the capital in January, 1814, the liberal majority had been sizeably reduced but the liberals
had no intention of relinquishing power. (None of the deputies who had sat in the Constituent Cortes was permitted to stand for election.)

 A profound unpredictability hung over the new assembly. A month earlier, Napoleon had freed Fernando to return to Spain. Popular premonition, fear – or desire, whipped up by absolutist clerics – of a confrontation between
parliament and king and of absolutism’s restoration had a startling effect. Religious observance suddenly increased: in five regions, all experiencing population growth, Lent conceptions dropped sharply in terms of the usual
small changes, indicating that the Church’s proscription of carnal relations during Lent were now again being more widely observed. * The change was borne out by historical evidence. In Valladolid, Castilla la Vieja’s capital, a
special religious fervour reigned in May, 1814, and a far greater number of inhabitants than usual attended cathedral services and other religious events. 4