

 The Disasters of War , as they eventually came to be called, had to wait until 1863 – thirty-five years after Goya’s death – to be published. When the artist went into exile in France in 1824 – after the Spanish liberal
revolution of 1820–1823, which restored the 1812 constitution, was put down by a new French invasion, ordered by Louis XVIII to restore Fernando VII to his throne – he left the plates behind in his house. The series as published
ended with plates 78 and 79 which showed the death of Truth and suggested that should she try to rise again she would be struck down once more by Spain’s forces of evil and reaction. But the final print which Goya designed for
the series (82) during the last brief liberal period which ended again with reaction on the throne, was a vision of peace and plenty, a reaffirmation of his hope for mankind. 17

 THE COSTS OF THE WAR *

 The conflict cost Spain some 215,000 to 375,000 missing population between those who died and those who were not born because of the war. † Added to this were material destruction, social disruption and the state’s virtual
bankruptcy. Beginning in 1808, just as some population growth was under way to recuperate the losses of the disastrous pre-war famine, yellow fever and malaria epidemics, the war put paid to the respite and worsened the crisis
which had already cost the country between 350,000 and half a million missing population – a greater loss than during the war itself. The anti-French struggle, however, had one particularly negative outcome. At the start of the
war youth of marriageable age, the sixteen to twenty-five-year-olds, had enlisted massively – and been massively slaughtered in the heavy defeats of 1808–1809; their loss seriously affected population growth long after the last
of the war’s survivors had died.

 The wartime losses added to the even heavier pre-war losses resulted in a demographic haemorrhage of some 560,000 to 885,000 missing population – between six and ten percent of the late eighteenth-century total. ‡ This was due
as much to declines in the expected number of births as to adult deaths. The effects were especially notable throughout much of the rest of the century in the missing births of the potential children who were not born between
1800 and 1814.

 The war had very diverse effects in different parts of the country. The worst hit were the two border regions at opposite ends of Spain: Cataluña and Extremadura. The former experienced a net loss of over seventy-five thousand
of its pre-war population; the latter, which had already suffered sharply prewar, close on sixty thousand (representing declines of 8.6 percent and 14.1 percent of their respective regional populations). Andalucía was the next
largest with a loss of just under five percent. Castilla la Vieja, on the other hand, was outstanding in its wartime recuperation of the region’s heavy population losses during the 1803–1805 famine; Castilla la Nueva was not as
fortunate: its minimal war increase was insufficient to offset the pre-war famine loss. Conversely, Valencia’s pre-war gain was more than enough to absorb limited wartime losses; while in Galicia, the Basque country and Navarra
the conflict led to considerable – though not negative – declines in growth. (In the latter two regions, where the major losses occurred during Wellington’s last campaign of the war, population growth declined by over
two-and-a-half times in the Basque country and two times in Navarra. Galicia was less affected: the decline was held to just 13.5 percent.) The disparities between the two war-torn border regions were equally marked. Unlike
Extremadura, Cataluña had not suffered from the 1803–1805 famine and had enjoyed reasonable demographic growth of nearly four percent from 1800 to the war’s start. The conflict led to an increase in mortality of some sixty
percent; a small rise in the birth rate could not compensate for such a massive loss. The high number of deaths was particularly pronounced in the war’s first full year (1809) and again during the famine of 1811–1812. In addition
the French sieges of four major towns (Gerona, Lérida, Tortosa and Tarragona) took their toll. Lasting longer in Cataluña than any other region, the war thus not only truncated earlier population growth but turned it into a
significant loss. It was not until three years after the war ended that the population reached one percent higher than in 1800.