

 *

 Internationally the Spanish people’s sacrifices in the war counted for little. The great powers – Austria, Prussia and Russia – considered themselves solely entitled, with Britain which had to no little extent financed their war
effort, to determine the continent’s post-Napoleonic fate. To the continental allies, it was their decisive military victories in central Europe and later France itself which had led to victory; in comparison Spain’s
participation – indeed the Peninsular War itself – was a sideshow, important no doubt in keeping the struggle alive but never capable alone of defeating Napoleon. In general, their view was hard to fault: Germany was the
strategic military theatre, for it was there, and there alone, that Russia, Austria and Prussia could assemble their armies in force and threaten France. But their argument overlooked one significant fact. Had Napoleon been able
to marshal the two hundred thousand troops still tied down in Spain, the continental allies might have found victory more difficult. A pacified Spain would also have provided Wellington with less propitious terrain from which to
fight his way, finally, into southern France. As was observed earlier, the patriots were less concerned with Napoleon’s overthrow than with throwing his brother off the Spanish throne and freeing their country from French
military occupation. This awareness, as also that of the duplicitous role played by the ‘desired’ Fernando VII in captivity, and his signature to an anti-British pact to secure his return to Spain, doubtless influenced the
allies’ marginalization of the country from their political negotiations on a post-Napoleonic settlement. But even more important was the certainty that Spain had been bankrupted by the struggle and that the colonial independence
movement would further ruin the country. For over two centuries Spain had declined to a second-rate European power; in the past century, under the Bourbons, its international standing had depended almost exclusively on its ally
France.

 Although Spain had interests in Italy – the kingdoms of the Two Sicilies (Naples and Sicily) and Etruria (created by Napoleon and originally ceded to the son-in-law of the Spanish queen) – the allies and Britain paid no heed to
these in their negotiations on the future of Europe. While Spain was officially represented at the Congress of Vienna, the Spanish delegate was excluded from the allies’ inner councils.

 After six continuous years of resisting the French occupation – longer than any of the allies experienced and often alone despite the alliance with Britain – Spain’s international treatment was shameful. Reasons of state
outweighed all recognition of the sacrifices the Spanish people had made in holding down great numbers of imperial troops which otherwise could have been unleashed to advance Napoleon’s hegemonic designs.

 *

 Spain was ruined. Villages, land and livestock devastated. In Móstoles, scene of the proclamation on the May 2 rising in Madrid, of the sixty well-to-do farmers who had worked their lands pre-war, not a single one remained in
1815. The medium-sized farmers had been reduced to one-sixth of those in 1808. There had been no beggars on the outbreak of war; now there were 141. 19 There were scores of such townships and villages which suffered as greatly.