

 A third renowned guerrilla chief, Francisco Espoz y Mina, was somewhat more fortunate: he escaped death but not failure in the struggle against absolutism. Immediately at war’s end he rose against the reinstalled Old Order but,
significantly, the majority of his Navarrese guerrilla officers refused to follow him, and Mina fled to his former enemy’s nation, France. It was one thing to fight the French occupation; another for Mina’s men (as it was for the
military sergeants who betrayed Porlier) to disavow the divinely ordained throne for which they had fought.

 Matías Calvo, the Aragonese cavalry sergeant in Mina’s division, exemplified some of the guerrilleros’ political and (this being Spain) regional problematic. At the end of the war, he and the bulk of the Aragonese rejected
Mina’s liberalism, and the wartime depreciation they felt they had suffered at the hands of the Navarrese; they deserted the division and put themselves at the command of the royalist, José Palafox, ‘hero’ of the Zaragoza
defence, whom Fernando VII had appointed captain general of Aragón.

 Lorenzo Calbo Rozas, the Suprema’s enterprising merchant deputy, remained true to his political ideals; in the 1820–1823 revolution, which reinstated the 1812 constitution, he became a liberal deputy in the Cortes; Manuel
Quintana, poet-founder of the Semanario Patriótico and author of most of the Suprema’s proclamations, was released by the liberal revolution after six years of absolutist imprisonment and presided over the new government’s Board
of Public Education; while Bartolomé J. Gallardo, polemicist, Cortes librarian and bibliophile, who was condemned to death by Fernando’s regime, managed to escape to England. (Over one thousand Spanish exile families were said to
be living in London alone.) He returned to Spain to participate in the liberal revolution, was imprisoned after it and later condemned to internal exile; but his subsequent renown rested more on his uncompromising devotion to
literary studies than on his politics. The (posthumous) publication of his bibliographical work on rare and curious Spanish books was a landmark in Spanish literary and cultural historiography.

 After the allied victory at the battle of Vitoria (1813) some twelve thousand afrancesado families sought exile in France. Among them was Francisco Amorós, the former Bonapartist royal commissioner (whose set-to with the French
General Thiébault was described in an earlier chapter). Unlike most of those who had formed part of the Bonapartist administration, he remained unrepentant. He, too, became well-known; his work in France on developing physical
education as part of the state school’s curriculum, a labour he had begun in pre-war Spain under Godoy, was widely adopted in his country of exile.

 Under French pressure – Louis XVIII was politically wary of their presence in France – the afrancesados were amnestied by the liberal Spanish revolution. Those who returned had shortly to resume their exile when, at the Holy
Alliance’s behest, Louis invaded Spain to restore Fernando to his ‘rightful’ throne in place of the constitutional monarchy which, as a result of the revolution, he had been forced to accept.