

 Goya did not engrave the Disasters in the order which he finally chose for the series. In the course of the decade he worked on them his style became more powerfully precise and dramatic. Significantly, French atrocities were
the new style’s theme: hanging and quartering, severing corpses in half, impaling, mutilating and executing figures bound to a tree (31–39). Usually an imperial officer or soldier is watching, a satisfied look on his face. One
execution scene (35) over the title ‘One cannot tell why’ is striking. In fact, the reason hung round the majority of the eight men’s garrotted necks: not in the illegible placards each of them bore denouncing their crimes but in
the weapons they used to carry them out: daggers, knives, swords, pistols … Goya’s imagination did not illustrate the fact that these were certainly victims of the Bonapartist extraordinary criminal tribunals which garrotted its
victims while the French military generally shot them. In the artist’s mind, as French military fortunes in Spain grew more desperate, their barbarity increased.

 In 1809, Goya received a commission from the capital’s authorities to paint an allegory of the city of Madrid, which included a medallion of King Josef. Goya completed this early the following year. Two and a half years later
when Wellington entered Madrid after his victory at Salamanca and Josef fled to Valencia, the king was painted out and replaced by the word ‘Constitution’ to celebrate the 1812 liberal constitution which had been proclaimed in
Cádiz. But Wellington’s victory was short-lived and Josef reoccupied the capital. His portrait was again painted in, once more to vanish the following year after he definitively evacuated Madrid, and ‘Constitution’ reappeared.
Its life was little longer than the first; in 1814 Fernando VII’s portrait was painted in the medallion. Rather than an allegory, the painting became one more of the war’s many ironies. *

 Although never officially a court painter to Josef, Goya was decorated by the king with his highest honour in 1811. He also painted a number of afrancesados, among them Antonio Llorente, one of Josef’s Spanish councillors, a
canon and former secretary of the Inquisition in Madrid, whom the king commissioned to write a history of the Holy Office from tribunal documents taken over after its abolition by Napoleon. This, and the portrait of a handsome
young French general Nicolas Guye (who fought under General Hugo in unsuccessfully hunting down El Empecinado, the outstanding guerrilla leader) are among Goya’s most vibrant. His several portraits of Wellington are less so.

 Encouraged no doubt by the new patriot constitution and the likelihood of French military defeat, Goya hoped to publish his ‘Fatal Consequences of the bloody War …’ as he had wished for his ‘Caprichos’ twelve years earlier: the
latter’s sale had been stopped and the plates handed over to the king to prevent his persecution at the Inquisition’s hands. 15 He needed to make good his delapidated finances due to the war. But on absolutism’s reimpostion – the
most ‘fatal’ of all the war’s consequences – he feared for his freedom. Having pulled one set of numbered proofs, which he gave to his friend Ceán Bermúdez, and which bear their titles in pencil, most probably by Goya himself, he
set the Disasters and their accompanying ‘striking caprichos’ aside and turned to a safer subject: a series on the art of bullfighting. At the same time he proposed to the patriot regency ‘to perpetuate the most notable and
heroic actions and scenes of our glorious insurrection against the tyrant of Europe’. The regency gave him a monthly allowance of fifteen hundred reales and his expenses to carry out the project ‘in consideration of the great
importance of so worthy an enterprise’. 16 Six years after the events, which he had not directly witnessed, he produced the two magisterial and best-known paintings of the war, El Dos de Mayo and El Tres de Mayo , two paintings
on the capital’s May 2 rising and the French executions which followed it. * His artistic genius was such that, unlike any other Spanish painter of the time, he captured the indelible essence of both events, as well as much of
the detail: for example, in The Second of May , the number of women around the combatants in the Puerta del Sol, one of whom appears to be helping to unseat a mameluke. † Amidst the blood and gore of the execution scene of the
third of May, two aspects of the central figure can be observed: his wild face and characteristically outflung arms in the presence of death and that there is nothing classically ‘heroic’ about this hero. Goya was among the first
– if not the first – artists to depict the anonymous people as heroes and makers of history.