

 To Goya and his contemporaries ‘caprichos’ meant the free expression of the artist’s imagination and interior sensibility – usually expressed in small prints, drawings or paintings – in contrast to the commissioned paintings and
portraits which provided their living. In this sense – and this strict sense alone – the Disasters were of the ‘capricho’ genre. The artist’s harsh black-and-white depictions of death, brutality, rape and starvation which
appeared a realistic rendering of the horrors of the war often expressed rather his own anguished and contradictory feelings about the conflict’s ‘fatal consequences’. This did not make them less impressive; but it did not make
them a documentary record of Spain’s Napoleonic war. (While not denying the conflict’s barbarities, it must be recalled that these were not the exclusive preserve of French troops and Spanish guerrillas. British soldiers on
Moore’s retreat, at Ciudad Rodrigo, Badajoz and San Sebastián were also equally barbarous, though they did not figure in the Disasters .)

 ‘This is what you were born for’ Goya wrote in the Disasters (12) * under a pile of partially stripped corpses, possibly French soldiers by their remaining long trousers, shoes and a fallen flat hat which some imperial infantry
wore. Above the dead an unarmed villager staggers forward, blood spewing from his open mouth, arms outstretched in a typical Goya gesture and about to fall on – and join – the corpses. There is no question mark to his caption, as
some commentators have supposed; it is a bald statement of fact.

 ‘Charity’ says another below naked corpses being thrown into an open ditch or grave (27); ‘Rightly or Wrongly’ – suggesting the artist’s ambivalence – depicts two villagers, armed only with a pike and a dagger attacking imperial
soldiers about to fire their muskets at them at point blank range. One of the villagers is already bleeding at the mouth (2). The following plate has a villager with an axe about to split open a French soldier’s head. A later
engraving shows a villager about to rape anally with a pike a naked dead or wounded imperial soldier and a woman lifting a club to beat the body, while spectators impassively look on. Significantly, it is entitled simply ‘The
Populace’ (28).

 Women figure in the dualistic role of vengeful furies and victims: first one is seen stabbing an imperial cavalryman she has unhorsed: ‘The women inspire courage’ (4). But immediately the following caption expressed Goya’s
intimate sense of the people’s threat: ‘And they are like wild beasts’ appears under a woman holding a baby against her back and spearing a French soldier with a pike while behind her other women, one preparing to hurl a rock,
attack a small party of troops (5). Another engraving (9) shows women in both roles: an aged mother is about to stab an imperial soldier in the back as he attempts to violate her daughter: ‘They do not want to’ reads the caption:
– ‘Nor they’ – ‘And nor do these’ – as women become solely the victims of outrage and rape (10, 11). The imperial troops’ ‘Bitter presence’ (13) represents yet another woman being dragged to her fate. ‘There is no longer time’
has French soldiers, swords drawn, seizing the women of men they have killed (19). The preceding scene (18) is one of the series’ most poignant. A village couple, handkerchiefs to their faces, stand on a slight rise overlooking a
group of naked corpses – their fellow villagers perhaps. Again the central body is depicted with outstretched arms. ‘Bury them and keep quiet’ reads the title … This ‘quietism’ does not last long. Despite Goya’s dislike of the
clergy, a scene of a friar being stabbed in the chest, bears the caption: ‘This is bad’ (46). The artist’s imagination encompassed the event but not its justification.