

 Non-wounded 3.5 × 120:
 420

 Total:
 1,355

 This hypothetical aggregate represented 0.8% of Madrid’s 176,374 inhabitants, according to the Godoy census, which without doubt underestimated the population. (Most historians put the figure at or around 200,000.) It also lends
credibility to Colonel Aniceto Ramos Charco-Villaseñor’s estimate that 1,000 people must have taken part in the defence of the artillery park, if not in the park itself (where Guzman’s figure of 100 defenders is patently wrong
since nearly 250 men, defending the rear of the park, were at their posts when the French took the place), then in the surrounding streets in order to have held off the French attacks for even three hours. 16

 The number of total combatants identified represents about 45% of the estimated total.

 VILLAGERS

 The general assertion that great numbers of villagers had stayed over in Madrid from the day before, a Sunday, and participated in the rising or came in specifically to fight remains an open question. The identified number is
small, 18 in all. (Only one group of villagers – from Fuencarral, just to the north of the capital – and led by a local priest, is known to have come specifically to Madrid to fight: the priest’s enthusiasm was such that he
brought his group to the capital on Sunday; but their numbers are not recorded and only the priest figures in table 1 under ‘clergy’.)

 In determining the status of villager, it is highly important to distinguish in the casualty listings between the word ‘householder in …’ or ‘resident of …’ (‘vecino de’ in Spanish) from the word ‘place of origin’ or ‘native of’
(‘natural de’). A large proportion of the Madrid population had migrated from their places of origin to live and work in the capital: though ‘natives’ of other places, they had become Madrileños and were included in population
figures as such. Equally, those ‘natives’ of villages near to the capital cannot be taken as non-Madrileño villagers who participated in the rising (as some over-eager researchers have done) simply because of the proximity to
Madrid of their places of origin when, as far as is known, these ‘villagers’ lived in the capital.

 A further source of confusion has lain in following Guzmán in not distinguishing between combatants and non-combatants: a number of muleteers who arrived at the city gates from nearby villages during the fighting have been
identified as participants in the rising, especially as many of them met a tragic fate: seized by the French troops and searched, they were executed if carrying even a sack-sewing needle. But these victims of the rising (who are
included in Table 1 as Non-Combatants Executed) did not have time to participate in the insurrection, even had they intended to.

 In light of the small number of identified village combatants, two assumptions are possible. That – like the Madrid prisoners – villagers suffered a very low casualty rate and they therefore returned home unrecorded in casualty
rolls; or that they rest unidentified among the 91 combatants of unspecified occupations and places of origin. On the unlikely assumption that the latter were all villagers, their participation – taken together with identified
villagers – would reach some 18% of all recorded combatants, the highest single proportion of any group.