

 RELIGIOUS OBSERVANCE

 INQUISITION TRIBUNALS

 To ascertain whether any other significant religious or social changes occurred between the pre- and post-war which might be attributed to the conflict itself, the Inquisition’s tribunals appear a good starting point. This
repressive organization with its close vigilance of the population’s religious and moral state could hardly fail to record such changes. Examination of ten tribunals’ records over the whole country revealed, however, few
surprising differences. Of the tribunals’ score of accusations seven were selected for inclusion in the following table on the basis of covering both religious and social offenses.

 Some of the accusations require explanation. As was noted in Chapter 12 , ‘propositions’ were verbal expressions of a heretical, erroneous or scandalous nature. ‘Soliciting’ referred to secular and regular clergy who
propositioned women either in the confessional or outside in the course of their religious duty. ‘Irreverence/irreligiousness’ were distinct categories which the author has subsumed under one for their relative similarity.
(Irreverence was the accusation of an individual’s lack of respect for the Catholic Church’s dogma; irreligiousness was obviously the same though carried to a further degree.) The remaining categories are self-evident.

 It must be stressed that the tribunals’ figures refer to charges laid against individuals by Inquisition officials and anonymous informants. The accused had not necessarily been officially charged or brought before the
Inquisition’s courts. The post-war accusations refer as much to individuals’ wartime as to their immediate post-war conduct.

 As can be seen, ‘Propositions’, which formed the highest pre-war proportion, more than doubled during the war and immediate post-war for reasons outlined in Chapter 13 . Though the national level of ‘Irreverence/irreligiousness’
sextupled, suggesting that ‘verbal heresy’ was accompanied by a rejection of Church dogma and the Catholic faith per se, this was deceptive. Two regions, Murcia, where ‘Propositions’ rose by five times in the war and post-war
compared to pre-war, and Andalucía where they quadrupled in the same period, alone accounted for 9 of the 12 national accusations of ‘Irreverence/irreligiousness’. As was observed in Chapter 10 , Murcia experienced a particularly
conflictive start to the war and Andalucía (Sevilla especially where propositions rose more than six-fold) did not lag far behind. It should not be overlooked that ‘verbal heresy’ was the easiest accusation to make and the
hardest to disprove, and provided therefore a simple means in the post-war of attempting to settle wartime vendettas.

 TABLE 3.3 INQUISITION TRIBUNALS * PRE- AND
POSTWAR NATIONAL FIGURES & % OF TOTAL

 Categories
 1803–1807
 1815–1817

 Propositions
 115 (54.8)
 243 (60.6)

 Irreverence/irreligiousness
     2 (0.9)
   12 (3.0)

 Blasphemy
   11 (5.2)
   11 (2.7)

 Soliciting
   34 (16.2)
   34 (8.5)

 Bigamy
   21 (10.0)
   25 (6.2)