

     * After 1784, there was an annual shortfall of 17,500 men for a standing army of 59,000, which meant that only six of the forty-one line regiments could muster the two battalions laid down as the military norm; and a number
of foreign mercenary regiments had to be disbanded for lack of volunteers. (Esdaile, 1998, p. 14.) The army’s numbers on paper, moreover, hardly ever corresponded to its fighting strength.

     † The Spanish proportion was 1:160; Prussia, 1:29; Austria, 1:96, and Russia, 1:120. (Roura i Aulinas, 1993, p. 157.)

     ‡ Between 1797 and 1801, the desertion rate in Spanish infantry regiments increased from five percent of the total infantry strength to over nine percent. Deserters outnumbered fatal casualties in the same period by thirteen
percent. (Andújar Castillo, 1991, pp. 93 and Table 1, p. 94.)

     * Horse-breeding had been neglected from mid-eighteenth century in Spain by the adoption of the mule as the main source of animal traction and transport, used even by the nobility and wealthy to draw their carriages.

     † See Chapter 1 , pp. 19–24 .

     * This was not to say that Spain’s Enlightenment did not have its own trajectory and ‘generational’ differences. Those born around 1720 – most notably Floridablanca and Campomanes – formed the generation of Carlos III’s
reforming politicians. Those born in mid-century, men like Gaspar Melchor Jovellanos, usually considered the Spanish Enlightenment’s supreme representative. And finally those born around 1770 – Manuel Quintana, Rev. José María
Blanco, and the free-thinking cleric José Marchena to name but these – who participated in the Napoleonic war on one side or the other and represented the change not only from the eighteenth to the nineteenth centuries but from
‘one Spain to another’. (Domínguez Ortiz, 1984, p. 477.)

     † These included abolishing state or municipal intervention in fixing grain prices – thus ending the past three centuries’ custom of subsidizing bread – and in determining wages and tenancy contracts. Equally, if not more,
significant was the proposal to rent plots of municipal commons annually to the rural landless with a sufficient number of draught animals to till them, a proposal that local oligarchies in general managed to obviate.

     ‡ He was, for example, largely responsible for fostering the myth that the ‘fundamental laws’ of medieval Spain had stood guarantor of the country’s traditional liberties and ‘general will’ through the power shared in the
Cortes by the three estates with the king. What was needed to guarantee these liberties anew, he believed, was a return to those laws which absolutism had eviscerated.

     * A patriot avant la lettre , Quintana used his poetry and drama for ideological and political ends as no other Spanish poet of the period. His ode to Juan de Padilla, leader of the Castilian comuneros’ sixteenth-century
revolt against Carlos I, the first Hapsburg on the Spanish throne, was a paean to the fatherland’s virtues and an indignant denunciation of ‘the infamous yoke’ that was presently oppressing ‘a strong and generous people’; and his
subsequent play Pelayo , about the eighth-century Visigoth monarch who initiated the 700-year-long Catholic reconquest of Spain from its Muslim occupiers, reminded his reading public of a heroic and glorious fatherland that
rejected foreign domination, imposed monarchs and absolutism.