

     ‡ Madrid was an exception, with more books on the arts and sciences being produced. But in the provincial capitals there was no change. (French figures in Chartier, 1991, p. 71; Spanish proportions in Teófanes Egido, ‘La
religiosidad de los españoles (siglo XVIII)’, in VV.AA., 1990 (1), p. 769.)

     * Forty-seven percent of French men and 27% of French women were literate. (Chartier, 1991, p. 69.) At an estimate, 75% of Spanish men and 90% of women were illiterate. Male literacy solely among the labouring classes – as
measured by those who signed their names at the beginning the Napoleonic war to enlistment rolls – ran from 13.5% among agricultural workers in one Andalucian township to 20.6% among urban and rural males in a Catalan town. (See
Appendix 3 .)

     † Elorza, 1989, pp. 102 and 99. This view was confirmed by a French agent, Chantreau, after a secret mission to Cataluña in 1792, who wrote: ‘les apôtres de notre révolution seroient très mal reçus’ [our revolution’s
apostles would be very badly received’] (cited in Roura, 1993, p. 136).

     ‡ Initiated in the early sixteenth century by Carlos I, a grandee was the realm’s highest noble distinction after that of infante, which was reserved exclusively for the monarch’s children. Although the title was most
usually awarded by the sovereign to a duke, persons of lesser or even no title could be raised to grandee and as such were considered the monarch’s ‘cousin’.

     * In this respect, it is worth observing that, despite the turbulence of much of Spain’s political history since the beginning of the nineteenth through to the first third of the twentieth century, which saw two monarchs
exiled and another abdicate the throne in despair of being able to govern, the Spanish have never committed regicide.

     * Admittedly anachronistic, I use the word to differentiate those who believed in a constitutional monarchy from others who supported absolutism, albeit slightly reformed.

     † I have knowingly homogenized the views of the more progressive poets and writers, views which were influential during the war, in a way that does not do justice to the variety of intellectual argument expresssed in
Quintana’s tertulia (regular literary gatherings). By no means all of those who attended would have shared all of the views put forward here – but it was these that mobilized an articulate minority during the Napoleonic war.

     * The war was both temporally and spatially small-scale compared to the later Napoleonic war. Fighting was basically restricted to Cataluña, the Basque provinces and Navarra, and continued for only a little over two years,
whereas the Napoleonic war extended over the whole of Spain, lasted six years, and at its height involved over three hundred thousand imperial troops – seven times more than the maximum deployed during the Convention War. There
were many other major differences also: the Convention War did not begin with the French in occupation of Madrid and a large part of the north, there had been no previous dynastic crisis to exploit by the French to eject the
Bourbons from the Spanish throne, and it did not directly inspire colonial independence from Spain. (For a comparison of the two wars, see Jean-René Aymes, ‘La ‘‘Guerra Gran’’ (1793–1795) como prefiguración de la ‘‘Guerra del
Francés’’ (1808–1814)’ in Aymes (ed.), 1989, pp. 311–66.)