

     * Conceptions, as used here and subsequently, refer to baptized births backdated nine months. (Author database: Demography : Regional monthly births, 1799–1817.)

     * Two years later, almost to the day, Luis Freixas was assassinated by imperial soldiers who, on being besieged by Catalan troops, had retreated to the Villafranca barracks, taking with them as hostages a number of local
notables, among them Freixas, who had played an outstanding role in defending the local population against the worst imperial excesses. Before surrendering, the French ran Freixas through with their swords. (Benach i Torrents,
1968, pp. 17 and 59–61.)

     † On February 1, 1808, Napoleon issued a proclamation declaring that, as the house of Braganza had ceased to rule Portugal, he had taken the country under his protection and it would be governed in its totality and in his
name by his army commander, i.e. Junot. Thus Napoleon unilaterally abrogated the Fontainebleau Treaty’s provisions on carving up Portugal into distinct realms, of which the southern one was to have gone to Godoy and the northern
one to the Spanish Bourbons, and foreclosed one of his options mentioned above. (Junot’s proclamation in Toreno, 1838/1916, p. 43.)

     ‡ In Castilla la Nueva, in which the capital was situated, marriages dropped by 16% and in Castilla la Vieja by 5.5% below their 1800–1817 averages. (Author database: Demography : Regional monthly marriages: 1800–1817).
After two years of high marriage rates, these would almost certainly have declined sooner or later in 1808. It was the simultaneity of the drop throughout these two large regions that was striking. Even sharper falls of as high
as 50% of the average were recorded in Cataluña for six months after the French took Barcelona in February.

     * Carlos IV’s main task was to hunt from nine to twelve and from two to five every day, in all kinds of weather, following his father’s example. (Hunting had been proposed to the Spanish Bourbons as a means of avoiding
melancholia.) In the evenings he would ask Godoy, ‘And what have my vassals been doing today?’ As late as 1803 he constantly ‘forgot’ that the British colonies in America had gained independence, although Spain, as France’s ally
and enemy of England, had afforded aid to the American revolutionaries.

     * There was only one direct similarity with France: 1788–1789 saw bad grain harvests, and in February–March of the latter year Barcelona was the scene of serious bread riots; there were similar riots in a number of townships
in the interior. But these remained localized, did not spread outwards into a wider movement.

     † The nearest Spain came to anything like educative discussion societies illustrates the distance from the French example. The purpose of the Economic Societies, the first of which was started in the Basque country in 1765,
was to encourage agriculture, industry, commerce, the arts and sciences. Though fundamentally they represented agrarian interests, noble landowners were notable by their absence as were also merchants in the port cities –
Barcelona, Cádiz, La Coruña, Bilbao – where no societies were set up. It was the more enlightened clergy and highly enthusiastic commoners who gave them their active support. The Societies’ attachment to religion was one of their
strongest features. (Anes, 1972, ‘Las sociedades de Amigos del País’, pp.13–41 and Anes, 1976, pp. 398–400; Herr, 1958, pp. 154–163.)