

     † Napoleon’s invasion of the Vatican states in February 1808, appeared to most Spaniards as the culmination of the attacks on the Church which had begun with the Revolution, and had made a deep impact, as had subsequently
the Pope’s support for Spanish resistance. Napoleon’s recognition of French Judaism was another strong irritant. The 1808 title of a pamphlet by an Andalucian priest, The Seven-headed, Ten-horned Beast or Napoleon, Emperor of the
French. A literal exposition of Revelations, Chapter XIII – in which the mythical beast was taken by the Church as a symbol of the Anti-Christ – was indicative of the lower clergy’s feelings on these events.

     * Antonio de Capmany, a notable Catalan historian, in his Centinela contra franceses , and Isidoro Antillón, Spain’s most famous geographer in Qué es lo que mas importa a la España? , both of 1808.

     † A version of this Catechism, under a different title, was published in a four-page supplement of the Diario de Valencia in early August 1808. The most important changes, which show how thinking had changed in little over
two months, appear between square brackets. In the last three extracts, I have changed the original order to make a coherent reading. This Catechism was originally intended as a reply to Napoleon’s Imperial Catechism for the Use
of all Churches of the French Empire , which had been translated into Spanish in 1807 and again the following year. (Françoise Etienvre, Introduction to Antonio Capmany’s Centinela contra franceses , p. 31, fn. 66, London, 1988.)

     * This was the popularly accepted figure. In fact, it was closer to eleven million.

     † Brought about by the accession to the Spanish throne in 1516 of the Habsburg Carlos I, the Catholic Kings’ grandson, who inaugurated his house’s Spanish dynasty; shortly thereafter he was elected Holy Roman Emperor under
the title of Charles V.

     * Starting with Jovellanos, some enlightened eighteenth century thought also rejected the golden age because it had seen the consolidation of absolutism. Significantly, this vision focused on an even more distant (and
mythical) past prior to absolutism, in which Jovellanos, for one, believed that medieval Spain had enjoyed ‘fundamental laws’ which guaranteed the country’s traditional liberties and had stood guarantor of a ‘general will’
through the power shared in the Cortes by the three estates with the king. What was needed to guarantee these liberties anew, he argued, was a return to those laws which absolutism had eviscerated.

     † As a sign of the times, it has to be said that the word generally disappeared from the juntas’ and Suprema’s declarations, proclamations and edicts to be replaced by ‘citizens’ (‘ciudadanos’) or ‘residents’ (‘vecinos’). In
neither case, should the word be taken in its present sense but rather in its original meaning of persons of standing enjoying rights in the cities, towns or villages in which they lived. Absolutists, however, continued
frequently to use the word vassal.