

   38. ibidem, Legajo 5D/n.n. Suprema delegates’ summons to Laodicéa, Jan 27, 1810.

   39. ibidem, Legajo 17/1 19 , Dec 27, 1809.

   40. Calbo Rozas, 1813, pp. 76–94.

   41. Herr, 1996, p. 84.

 16. 1810–1811

     * For example, in the village of Azucayca, close to Toledo, French soldiers stole some mules, and the following day produced them in the village plaza to sell. ‘Their owner complained bitterly. As a result villagers seized
the mules, and punched the soldiers in the face. The military governor of the place ordered the soldiers arrested and offered to have them punished, which calmed down what otherwise would have been the start of a revolt.’ (AHN,
Estado , Legajo 40/255, report from Josef González de la Torre, the Suprema’s lookout on the Toledo front heights, to Junta Suprema, Aug 5, 1809.)

     † ‘This is a war of poor against rich’, recognized General Cafarelli, who spent a fruitless time hunting down the guerrilla leader Espoz y Mina in Navarra, in a letter to Marshal Berthier, in which he referred to the
guerrilla’s plundering of the wealthy. On the ground Cafarelli saw the situation far more clearly than the Spanish Bonapartist ministers immured in Madrid. (Cafarelli’s statement is from Dictionnaire Napoleon , ed. by J. Tulard,
Paris, 1997, in the entry under ‘guerrilla’, written by J.R. Aymes, pp. 849–852 and cited by Moliner i Prada, 2004, p. 95.)

     * Wellington, it must be said, was not prepared to risk Britain’s only field army on an enterprise which he was not certain of winning, since even a costly victory might give the British government the excuse to withdraw the
army, which he was convinced would be a military error. The peninsular bridgehead, he believed, was dividing the Emperor’s military strength which might otherwise be directed at more direct conquests abroad. And he had prepared
defensive plans to beat off Masséna’s threat which he had forseen for over a year. Napoleon was unaware of the extent of these – a major intelligence failure – and underestimated the number of Wellington’s troops, which by June
1810 numbered thirty-three thousand British and German rank-and-file and ten thousand more by November.

     * Pepe is the common version of Josef (or José), and Botella (‘bottle’) because he was said to drink heavily.

     * This was a new civilian post created by Josef to head each province’s administration.

     * ‘The unity of our Holy Religion, the Independence of the Monarchy, the integrity of its territory and the freedom of its citizens are the conditions of the oath I took upon receiving my Crown. It will not be debased on my
head’, he had announced on his second entry into Madrid, in January 1809 (AHN, Estado , Legajo 3004).

     * The San Sebastián corregidor wisely left it to the individual’s free choice whether to swear or not (AGS, Papeles del Gobierno intruso, Gracia y Justicia , Legajo 1130, n.n.) but he seems to have been alone in doing so.

     † The word ‘afrancesado’ had been used before the war, usually pejoratively, to label those who followed French fashions and customs. The first use of it to indicate a follower of the Bonapartist cause that I have found
dates from May 1809, in a letter from Cartagena which denounced a number of local people to the Suprema for being ‘afrancesados’.