

     * The anonymous author was writing in the midst of the 1809 Galician uprising which led to the French withdrawal from the region.

     † The existing town halls were to be replaced by municipalities elected by local men of property, industry or commerce chosen by lot. But there was one other important innovation: the corregidor, who was not elected but
appointed by the government, was no longer to play any judicial role, or the justices have any part in local administration. (AGS, Papeles del Gobierno intruso, Gracia y Justicia , Legajo 1109, n.n., decree recalling to justices
and corregidores the separation of their functions, Madrid, November 5, 1810. On the question of the separation of the judicial and administrative powers in general under the regime, see Muñoz de Bustillo Romero, 1991, pp. 73–80.)

     * In Sevilla in 1810, he recognized a slew of marqueses who had sworn allegiance to the throne, many of them concerned no doubt to retain their titles. (AGS, Papeles del Gobierno intruso, Gracia y Justicia , Legajo 1104.)

     † Although not all French military governors obeyed this reform, in particular Suchet. (See Chapter 17 .)

     * Except for those from unoccupied regions, the majority of mainland deputies were originally substitutes; in large part this was due to the fact that it was only in June that finally the regency, under pressure of the Cádiz
and other provincial juntas, and the serious news of the South American colonies’ increasing dissidence, summoned the Cortes to meet two months later, giving little time for elections to be held in those regions where the former
Suprema’s instructions to elect deputies could not be put into effect. Little by little, elections were held even in most French-controlled regions, demonstrating the imperial occupation’s porousness over large parts of the
country.

     * The anti-liberals, it should be noted, were not hostile to all reform and at this time there was a large floating vote which did not divide along pre-defined ‘party’ lines.

     † In the meanwhile it enacted some significant minor reforms: judicial torture was abolished; instead of remaining the exclusive preserve of the nobility, military colleges – and thus the right to become an officer – were
opened to commoners; the provincial juntas were each reduced to a body of nine elected members, apart from the intendente, and presided over by the local captain general; Cortes deputies were forbidden to hold other official
positions, and with a few exceptions a maximum wage of forty thousand reales a year was decreed for state officials.

     ‡ On the duque de Osuna’s Andalucian domain, the township and village brothels were among the most profitable concerns and, to increase their revenues, the dukes attempted to wrest them from the municipalities and
incorporate them into their señorial prerogatives, fixing the prices and wages of the employees. The brothels were clearly differentiated by their colour and other external signs from the ordinary village house. (See Atienza
Hernández, 1987, p. 126.)