

 4. Sworn witnesses to those making official applications in the immediate postwar period for the May 2 medal instituted for casualties of the rising.

 5. Servants, inn porters, waiters and cooks, hospital attendants and male nurses, water-carriers, street porters, muleteers, carters and coachmen, small traders, and shop attendants, etc.

 6. Madrid inhabitants engaged in agrarian, livestock or agrarian transformational occupations, such as charcoal burners.

 7. Since the documents barely ever referred to their jobs I have relied almost exclusively on the humble neighbourhoods where these women lived to include them among the plebeian ranks.

 8. The artillery park ‘heroine’ Manuela Malasaña and the non-combatant widow of an executed non-combatant who was herself subsequently executed in Alcalá de Henares.

 9. ‘Dons’ of no known profession.

 10. ‘Doñas’ of no known profession.

 11. Resguardo del Estado y Rentas Reales.

 12. Artillery and infantry officers and men known to have defended the artillery park.

 13. Based on a garrison of 3,000 men.

 14. Only those listed as householders (‘vecinos’) of villages outside Madrid are included. Excluded are individuals from Royal Palaces and estates outside of Madrid already accounted for under Royal Personnel, as well as one
priest (Fuencarral), one surgeon (Valdemoro), one Revenue man (Vallecas), and an Army doctor (Chinchón) who have similarly been accounted for under their respective occupational headings.

 15. In later set battles like those of Talavera (1809) and Vitoria (1813) the French killed to wounded ratio ran from 1: 6 to 1:8; but as many of those wounded in the streets of Madrid subsequently died, I have chosen a more
conservative proportion.

 16. Ramos Charco-Villaseñor, ‘El dos de mayo de 1808, Aclaraciones’ in Revista Historia Militar , No. 2, 1958, p. 81, fn. 40. Peréz de Guzmán’s categoric assertion that 4,000 forest guards in civilian clothes took part in the
insurrection has been authoritatively disproven by Alia y Plana who demonstrates that this force numbered under 100 men in all, and states that there is no documentary proof to show that even this small number participated in the
rising. Alia y Plana, Museo del Ejercito , Madrid, 1992, p. 122.

 17. See Relación de las Ciudades, Villas, Lugares, Aldeas, Granjas, Cotos redondos, Cortijos y Despoblados de España y sus Islas Adyacentes, 1801 , accompanying the Censo de la población de España de el año 1797 , facsimile
edition, Madrid, 1992.

 APPENDIX 3:
POPULAR SOCIAL CHANGE AND STASIS

 * Excluding Morón township.

 † This age group in Igualada included one 14 and three 15 year-olds.

 APPENDIX 4:
GUERRILLAS

 * The database does not include the Catalan and Galician irregulars for reasons explained in chapter 12 . Some of the data offered here varies from that published by the author in ‘Identidades sociales desconocidas. Las
guerrillas españolas en la Guerra de la Independencia, 1808–1814’, Historia Social , No. 46, Valencia, 2003, and a similarly titled essay in International Journal of Iberian Studies , Vol 16, No. 2, Bristol, 2003, pp. 81–99. This
is due to the database’s subsequent re-elaboration by statistician Paloma Botella for whose meticulous work on analysing and computing the figures the author wishes to express his gratitude. The major changes consisted of
eliminating 61 names, the majority Galicians, and adding 64 previously not included of the 81 who were condemned to death by the extraordinary criminal tribunals and could, without a shadow of doubt, be identified as guerrilleros.