

   71. Tausiet, 2002, p. 57.

   72. Alvar Monferrer. Els endimoniats de la Balma , Valencia, 1997, cited by Tausiet, fn. 54, p. 57.

   73. Cases cited by Tausiet, 2002, fn. 53, p. 58.

   74. ibidem, pp. 36–39.

   75. ibidem, p. 41.

   76. ibidem, p. 95, Commissioner Bernard’s report of Dec 4, 1813, Carineña.

   77. ibidem, p. 106, Commissioner Bernard’s report, n.d.

   78. ibidem, pp. 64–65, citing the priest Francisco Marcos’ report of 1817.

 19. MILITARY VICTORY AND POLITICAL DEFEAT

     * After the Russian disaster, Napoleon had withdrawn Marshal Soult and twenty thousand veteran soldiers to fight in Germany.

     * Wellington finally crossed the Bidasoa at the beginning of October 1813, and surprised Soult, turning his right flank, and putting his army to flight. Had Wellington continued his advance that day, he could have taken St
Jean de Luz ten kilometres to Soult’s rear and turned the line of the Nivelle, the next river. Instead he gave Soult /cont’d over cont’d/ another month’s breathing space to reorganize his army while he waited for Pamplona to
fall. Crossing the Nivelle cost the allies more than three thousand casualties. Once again, Wellington did not resolutely pursue Soult, but again waited a month before attempting to cross the next river, the Nive. This led to
hard fighting, with Soult attacking first one half of Wellington’s army which had crossed the river, and then the other half. Though the allies finally threw back the French, it was at the cost of five thousand casualties.
Wellington then went into winter quarters. Three battles in two months had barely advanced the allied army more than thirty kilometres into France. He did not resume operations until February 1814, investing Bayonne, Soult
withdrawing to give battle at Orthez. Wellington stormed his strong positions at the cost of another two thousand casualties. Soult fell back on Toulouse. On April 10, 1814, Wellington attacked the city’s outer defences,
suffering 4,500 casualties. Not wanting to be besieged, Soult slipped away during the night, and Wellington entered Toulouse to great royalist welcome. On April 12 news arrived of Napoleon’s abdication and the end of the war.
Wellington’s slow advance cost the allies nearly fifteen thousand casualties, large numbers of them Spanish. (Muir, 1996, pp. 299–305.)

     * Fernando’s release was common knowledge well before Lent. On Lent conceptions as a measure of religiosity, see chapter 13 , and Appendix 3 . It should be added that this access of religiosity did not last long. In the two
postwar years, accompanying population growth in all regions, Lent conceptions began marginally to return to above their pre-war levels in Andalucía, Castilla la Nueva, Cataluña and Extremadura. Only in the Basque country and
Valencia were they significantly higher. The sole exception was Castilla la Vieja which remained slightly lower, its religiosity finally untainted.

     * This was: ‘Fatal consequences of the bloody war in Spain with Bonaparte and other striking caprichos’.