                              Introduction


J     esate the whole of the period from 1793 to 1815 when Britain was
     at war almost continuously with the French republic and Napoleon’s
empire, she contrived to maintain one faithful ally—though one faithful
sometimes only in name, and usually more from need than sentiment—
Ferdinand, king of Naples and Sicily.
   Those two kingdoms, with their long coastlines and their harbors both on
the Adriatic and on the Tyrrhenian seas, required the help of a maritime
power to preserve their independence from France. But they also needed a
military power of the stature of Russia or Austria. Britain could provide them
with naval protection, but never with troops in sufficient numbers to with-
stand the might of the armies of France, and if Russia or Austria or both
failed to come to their assistance or made a separate peace with France, all
that Britain was able to do was to carry the court to the safety of Sicily and
thereafter safeguard that island by covering it with a naval squadron and
stationing a garrison there.
   The value of the Neapolitan-Sicilian alliance to the British fleet was consid-
erable—the kingdoms’ ports supplied the fleet with winter bases, fresh water
and food, and during the war of the first coalition, Naples contributed
battleships and small craft. Economically, the alliance was important in
weakening Napoleon’s stranglehold on British trade with the continent of
Europe, and militarily, it provided a base for the launching of offensive
operations in both eastern and western Mediterranean.
   What King Ferdinand wanted from his ally Britain was a guarantee that his
mainland kingdom (Naples), lost to France in 1806, would be recovered and
returned to his rule at the earliest possible opportunity, and at the latest in a
general peace settlement. This Britain was unable to give, although she was
willing to guarantee him Sicily. This failure on the part of Great Britain,
suspicions (fully justified) that Britain intended to ignore the claims of King
Ferdinand to the sovereignty of Malta, and suspicions (that were in fact not
justified, though the reason for them was understandable) that Britain in-
tended to take over Sicily and turn it into a permanent protectorate, all put a
strain on the alliance. The utter dependence of the court at Palermo on
British support from 1806 onward was humiliating for the king and queen,
who came to detest, if not Great Britain, at least most of its soldiers and
diplomats. Britain, for her part, as the war continued, became increasingly

                                        11
