                              Getting a Foothold                            19

was unwilling to take the risk. Nelson also took away to Palermo two
Neapolitan ships-of-the-line, but the rest of that navy having no crews were
burned in the bay, on Nelson’s orders, so that they should not fall into
French hands—three ships-of-the-line, a frigate, a corvette, together with
some smaller vessels.? The kingdom of Naples, though not of Sicily, thus
passed under the control of the French, and it was not long before they had
set up a so-called Parthenopean republic, constructed on the best revolution-
ary model and with the active cooperation of members of the Neapolitan
nobility.
   The welcome the king received in Palermo from his subjects in Sicily was
warm enough, though the latter detested the Neapolitans. “Down with the
cowardly and treacherous Neapolitans” was a cry that echoed in the streets,
and one that much offended the queen. But clearly concessions had to be
made to the real strength of popular feeling (one with which Nelson was
much in sympathy, writing that he thought a proud people had every right to
be consulted in matters concerning their own defense). In consequence the
king agreed to two Sicilian noblemen (Prince Trabia and Prince Cassaro)
being given ministerial posts, though neither proved to be capable. But if the
Sicilians loathed the Neapolitans, they detested the French as much, if not
more. French émigrés who had fled from Naples on board British ships were
refused admission and had to be sent away to Trieste; while a shipload of sick
and wounded French soldiers, brought away from the army of Egypt and put
ashore at the port of Augusta, were mostly murdered in cold blood by the
fanatical local inhabitants.!°
  Meanwhile the second coalition, financed by Britain, was taking shape, and
a month before the king left Naples his government signed a treaty with
Russia. The latter was much concerned to prevent any further expansion of
the power of France in the eastern Mediterranean—an expansion that threat-
ened the Turkish Empire—and also concerned to prevent the British from
dominating the Mediterranean. The Russians looked at the fate of Malta and
of the Ionian islands (both of which Napoleon had seized) and for this reason
they could not endure a French occupation of the kingdom of Naples or a
French threat to the kingdom of Sicily. Seen from the point of view of Naples
(or rather Palermo, for the time being), a Russian offer of military support,
which neither Austria nor Britain could make, seemed to have many advan-
tages; in fact the 155000 troops that the queen had fondly imagined landing
from Russian transports to liberate Naples were a figment of her imagination.
The only force the Russians provided was a small force of 600 marines from a
warship anchored off Manfredonia."?
   Nelson was personally very hostile to the presence of Russian ships in the
area, though the British government welcomed it and reproved him later for
taking this stance. Nelson thought the Russians had their eyes on Malta, and
when Admiral Ushakov, who had arrived with his fleet off Palermo on 1
