                              Getting a Foothold                              23

troops he could spare when he got to Messina, and on arriving there he made
it clear that the British must all remain in the citadel. In this he received the
full support of the officer commanding the troops in Minorca, General Sir
James St. Clair Erskine. Later attempts were made that year, this time by
Nelson, not the court, to get Graham to send his troops to help in the long
drawn-out siege of Valletta. Nelson visited Erskine personally to try to get
him to let the troops go, but again he met with no success. It was only when
Erskine was replaced by Fox that orders arrived to let Graham depart,
together with his Messina garrison.18
  Stuart, when writing to Henry Dundas, the secretary of state for war,
insisted that it had not simply been the urgent requests from Nelson and
others that had prompted him to take the action he had, but a realization that
possession of Sicily could help the cause of the allies in Italy by keeping
French forces pinned down in Naples, and help also in the capture of Malta.
It could also, he added, be a useful base for future offensive operations, either
in Egypt or Italy.!? Stuart was right, and once Britain took Malta, Sicily
became of great importance as a major source of supply for that island, which
needed its cattle, grain, timber and wine, although the cattle and grain were
not always forthcoming. And as the war with Napoleon continued into the
nineteenth century and Britain and France became involved in a struggle of
economic attrition, Sicily became like Malta an entrepdt for smuggling goods
into Napoleonic Europe. Because Neapolitan customs officials were corrupt,
almost without exception, communications between Sicily and the mainland
were never broken throughout the war. The ports of Sicily, moreover,
remained vital to the British fleet in its task of watching the French in
Toulon, as well as for keeping open the trade routes from west to east in the
Mediterranean.?°
   Apart from the naval and military protection afforded King Ferdinand by
the treaty with Britain, which was signed in December 1798, an ex gratia
payment of £100,000 was made by the British government in March to help
him recover Calabria and Naples.?! Thus financed, his patriot army under the
command of Cardinal Ruffo succeeded in overrunning Calabria and, by mid-
June, had retaken Naples. And when news of Russian victories against their
armies in the north arrived, the French had already withdrawn from the city.
  On the overthrow of the Parthenopian Republic, which had owed its
existence to French mhilitary power, Ferdinand, with the assistance of Nelson
whose services were rewarded with the duchy of Bronte and the very active
support of the queen, took a terrible revenge on his disloyal subjects—one
that was not forgotten in Naples and was to cast a lingering shadow over all
later attempts the court was to make, when it was once more in exile in Sicily,
to enlist the active support of those who had been its subjects on the
mainland of Italy.
   The British government was most anxious that the king himself should
