                               Getting a Foothold                              NW

French and agreed to revert to her neutral status, though she was still allowed
to admit to her ports, on the mainland and Sicily, British ships.
  By 1798, however, the court of Naples grew so alarmed at the renewed
threat of French aggression that it made appeals to Austria and Britain to
come to its help if it were attacked and begged the British government to
allow some warships to protect its coast. General Berthier in Rome, where
the French army was now established, was making demands on the king of
Naples that seemed a prelude to occupation, while naval preparations by the
French in Toulon, Genoa, and Civita Vecchia were seen to presage an attack
on Sicily.* The British government at this time was trying to rebuild the
allied front that had broken down in the past three years, and, as Grenville the
secretary of state wrote on 16 January 1798, Europe could be saved from
French domination only by the union of the four Great Powers.
  Austria expressed her willingness to assist in defending Naples from attack,
but she pressed Britain to dispatch, at once, a fleet to the Mediterranean.
Grenville, who had persuaded Pitt that this was the right course to adopt,
informed Naples that a squadron under Nelson was shortly to arrive in the
Mediterranean. But it was essential that all the king’s ports be free to admit
this naval force and allow it to buy what supplies it needed; and indeed if this
request was not met, the fleet would be ordered to leave at once.#
   When Nelson’s squadron arrived off Naples on 24 June 1798 the attitude
of the Naples government to granting these terms remained equivocal. It was
divided into two factions, that of the foreign minister de Gallo, which did not
wish to antagonize France, and that of Acton, who favored Britain. But in
any case it was most unwilling to commit itself to a course of action that
might give rise to a French attack until it was sure of Austrian support. The
treaty that Austria had signed with Naples on 20 May 1798 was purely
defensive in its terms, and not until 16 July was there added to it a clause that
provided for Austrian military help, should Naples find herself under attack
for opening her ports to the British fleet.*
   Nelson’s plea for the help of frigates was understandably turned down, and
his request for the opening of ports to the whole of his fleet was also refused,
albeit only officially—the terms of neutrality only allowing three to four
warships at any one time to be given entrance to a neutral port. Unofficially,
however, Nelson did obtain the agreement he sought, and Acton secretly
signed, for the king‘ a letter instructing the governors of ports to permit free
access to Nelson’s fleet, see that it was supplied with provisions, and allow its
sick and wounded ashore. Even so, this private letter was not dispatched to
the governors at once, and Nelson later complained that the governor of
Syracuse was ignorant of these terms. However, his fleet was fully provi-
sioned when he called at Syracuse on 20 July in pursuit of the French fleet
bound for Eygpt, and had it not been, he would have been forced to return to
Gibraltar for food and water. The government at Naples had of course been
