20                       SICILY: THE INSECURE       BASE


September 1799, agreed to assist in the bay of Naples, Nelson at once
dispatched Troubridge’s squadron to seize Ponza, Ischia, and Procida, en-
force a blockade of the port of Naples, and finally land a force of marines and
contingents of sailors from British warships to carry the war to the Roman
states. But by that time Admiral Ushakov’s fleet had been recalled to the
Black Sea ports.!2
   Whatever the reasons (and the major one was his notorious attachment to
Lady Hamilton), Nelson retained his ships off Sicily through 1799 to 1800,
telling Ball, besieging Valletta, that he considered Sicily to be under Britain’s
special protection. His attention had already been drawn to the vulnerability
of Messina, which he rightly saw as the key to Sicily. If the French were to
march into Lower Calabria, they had only to cross a strip of water measuring
at its narrowest point only a mile and a half across. Much depended on the
strength of the fortress and the loyalty of the Messina garrison, and the queen
had learnt that Danero, its commander,        was neither competent nor even
loyal, though this information was certainly false. What was true, and what
worried Danero, was the feebleness of the garrison, made up as it was of
deserters, criminals, vagabonds, and conscripted Calabresi. Nelson told
Troubridge to inspect the defenses and, if need be, land 300 marines, but he
changed his mind on the queen’s intervention. Instead he transported 500
picked troops from the royal army at Palermo and put them into Messina
citadel, but this he considered a temporary measure.!3 He had in the middle
of February written to General Sir Charles Stuart, commanding the British
troops in Minorca (a place whose surrender he had recently taken), making it
clear that a British force was badly needed in Sicily if the island was not to fall
to the French. “What a state we are in here,” Nelson had written, “with the
enemy at the door and no troops” [to depend on]. The 4,000 Neapolitan
troops were totally untrustworthy, while a force of 13,000 Sicilians was still
in the process of being raised. Although Messina was a strong fortress, able to
withstand a long siege, treachery would probably yield it without ever a shot
being fired. Only 1,000 British troops would suffice to make the island secure
and Stuart must surely see the need for them.14 Hamilton wrote in the same
vein to his old friend Colonel Graham, then commanding a regiment in
Minorca, and to Grenville, the foreign secretary in London. The Sicilians, he
thought, might hate the French, but there were enough causes for discontent
in towns like Catania, Milazzo, and Trapani (exploited no doubt by Jacobin
agents) to have already provoked disturbances; while the garrison at Messina
was so distrusted, it was being replaced by troops from Palermo. If action
was not soon forthcoming to draw the French off in some other direction,
the royal family would again be forced to take refuge on board HMS
Vanguard, Nelson’s flagship that had earlier borne them to safety in Sicily.15
Graham responded sympathetically. Were Sicily to fall, he told Hamilton, not
only Malta but also Egypt would remain firmly in enemy hands. Though
