24                      SICILY: THE INSECURE       BASE


return to Naples at the earliest possible opportunity, since it looked on the
state of disorder there with a sense of continuing and growing disquiet. But
the king was not eager to return, at any rate immediately, afraid of possible
threats to his life and the lives of the royal family. While he had been exacting
vengeance on his Neapolitan subjects, he had never set foot on the soil of
Naples, preferring to address his orders from the safety of the cabin of
Nelson’s flagship.
   Troubridge had written in a letter to Nelson of the appalling state of
corruption, oppression, and economic stagnation he had encountered in the
kingdom of Naples, and of the need for an act of oblivion in regard to the
thousands who were being held for trial. And Sir Arthur Paget, the young
British minister who succeeded Hamilton at Palermo but who had called in
at Naples en route, made the same kind of report to Grenville. In pressing the
court for the king’s swift return and pressing the need for reform of the
government, Paget made himself very unpopular. The queen called him “the
detested Paget” and complained in a letter she wrote to de Gallo of Paget’s
hard and abrupt manner—“1t 1s clear that Paget wants us to feel all the weight
of his country’s power.” Acton greeted Paget’s suggestion that the amnesty
granted by the king on 31 May 1800 would have much more effect if the
king in person were to supervise its enactment with what Paget described as a
“degree of ill-humour.” Acton told Paget the king had a right to be free of all
outside interference in running his kingdoms? internal affairs, and that he
must be free to choose how long he spent in either Naples or Sicily. Paget
thought that the queen’s opposition to the speedy return of the king arose
more   from pique than from principle, stemming,          he believed, from the
“effect of their own humiliating and dependent position.” “The queen has
been taught to believe that I was sent here to dictate, to use haughty language
upon the subject, at which idea . . . she was violently irritated.”22
   Paget was convinced, as he told Grenville, that nothing good or useful
could be done in Sicily without some sort of direct intervention, and “the
more I reflect upon it the more despondent I feel.” As Harold Acton
remarked, in his book on the subject of the Bourbons of Naples, this sounds
like the voice of Lord William Bentinck speaking fourteen years before his
cime:+3
   Napoleon’s victory at Marengo and Russia’s defection from the allied cause
meant that Naples was once again threatened by invasion from a French
army. The king begged Britain to send him troops, but Paget had to tell
Ferdinand that only Austria could help him. The British government was in
no position to send more than 15,000 men, and such numbers would be of
little avail against the armies France could command. Any assistance Britain
could give would have to be purely maritime.2# When four months later at
Lunéville Austria made a separate peace without any reference to her allies,
the British government advised Ferdinand to make the best terms he could
