 18                       SICILY: THE INSECURE BASE




The Straits of Messina with HMS Foudroyant, painted by Pocock, engraved by
Hall. (Courtesy of the National Maritime Museum, London.)

waiting for the ratification of the Austrian treaty, with its vital clause affecting
the ports, and Hamilton had to explain this to Nelson when he wrote to
assure him that all was now well.©
   In any event, Nelson’s crushing victory at Aboukir Bay a few weeks later
swung Naples firmly behind the British—her government already alarmed at
the French occupation of the island of Malta. The welcome Nelson received
from the court on returning to Naples was quite ecstatic and convinced, as he
wrote, he had saved Sicily “in spite of Neapolitan councils,” he urged the
king and queen to attack and drive the French out of Italy. Sir William
Hamilton, the British minister, also favored this rash course of action, while
the queen hoped to force Austria’s hand into making a full-scale offensive
alliance, afraid that the emperor might otherwise come to terms with Napo-
leon and abandon the cause of the smaller powers.” The decision that was
made proved disastrous for Naples. Her army, which had advanced to
capture Rome, was totally routed by the French, its incompetent Austrian
commander Mack escaping south as best he could, its officers deserting, and
its troops dispersing. Grenville, too late, had counselled caution, convinced
that Naples should not risk going to war until sure of Austrian military
support. Austria was extremely angry, having made clear five days before the
advance on Rome was actually begun that she very strongly disapproved of
Naples taking aggressive action. She also blamed the British government for
trying to involve her in a war for which she was insufficiently prepared.8
   Utterly dismayed at what had happened, the king, the queen, and the royal
family took refuge on board Nelson’s flagship Vanguard and, during the
fourth week in December, sailed into temporary exile in Sicily. The people of
Naples had begged the king to stay and fight it out with the French, but he
