                              Getting a Foothold                            29

wish, was to turn to Russia and also to Britain for help in getting the French
expelled, and to get the czar to dispatch to Corfu 10,000 troops for use in
Italy. The court of Naples in 1805 was playing a dangerous double game. On
the one hand, through its envoy in Paris, it had signed a treaty of neutrality
with France, which the king in Naples then ratified, and that got the French
army withdrawn from its territory. Yet at the moment of that ratification it
signed a military alliance with Russia and invited a Russian army to land,
supported by a very much smaller British one. This was to be an act of bad
faith that Napoleon was never to forgive, and it was to cause him to proclaim
the end of Bourbon rule in Naples.
   The ever-present threat by Napoleon, once he crowned himself king of
Italy, to take over the kingdom of Naples had been a source of continuing
anxiety not only to Britain but also to Russia, now firmly based in the Ionian
islands with 11,000 troops and a large naval force and ready to resist any
French threat to Turkey. Russia had throughout 1804 been urging Britain to
send troops to Calabria, while Britain in turn had been pressing Russia for a
force of 15,000 men to join with her in a joint expedition to free all of Italy
from the French.4? But the signing of any sort of agreement had been
inhibited by several factors: the British inability to provide a force of more
than 5,000 at a time when their own shores were faced with invasion, and
Pitt’s recent policy decision to commit no large force to the Mediterranean;
the Russians’ dislike of committing themselves until Austria had shown her
hand; and above all the Russians’ suspicions that the British were only
concerned with Sicily, where British troops would be little use in helping the
allied cause on the mainland. Back in the summer of 1803, the Russian
chargé d’affaires in Naples had warned Acton against British ambitions,*?
and eighteen months later the queen had shown Elliot letters received from
her envoy in Petersburg urging her to distrust the British. It seemed to the
czar they were interested only in embroiling Europe in a general war, from
which they would shortly seek to escape, retaining Sicily as a British posses-
sion. The czar, it was said, was most unwilling for the keys of Sicily to be
given to Britain.44 These Russian suspicions were not justified, but it does
seem from what Harrowby, the then-foreign secretary, wrote to Elliot on 5
November 1804 that the cabinet was very interested in developing Sicily’s
military potential as a source of manpower for future operations conducted in
the Mediterranean.! Harrowby envisaged that if the king was forced to take
refuge in Sicily, a considerable proportion of his army could then be enlisted
in British pay. This force, commanded by British officers, could become a
very efficient army, and though initially at the service of the king, it could
later be made available to serve elsewhere in the Mediterranean.*9
  By the spring of 1805, however, the difficulties with Russia had been
overcome, even if Russia’s suspicions remained in the minds of her diplomats
if not of her soldiers. On 11 April 1805 an Anglo-Russian treaty was signed
