26                      SICILY: THE INSECURE BASE

finally signed the Treaty of Amiens prevented the French from seizing Mes-
sina.?7
   By the Treaty of Amiens Britain agreed to leave Malta within three months
and to hand it back to the Knights of St. John. But before leaving she was
naturally anxious to ensure that the island remain friendly and capable of
defending itself. To this end she persuaded Ferdinand to dispatch 2,000 of
his troops to Malta, secretly agreeing to pay their cost to the tune of
£50,000. Naples claimed sovereignty over Malta—a claim dating back to the
sixteenth century—and King Ferdinand had been bitterly offended at the way
by which in August 1800, after the French in Valletta had surrendered to the
British, General Pigot had not allowed the hoisting of the Neapolitan flag
beside that of the Knights of St. John. Ferdinand had also taken it ill when in
January 1801 Malta had been declared a British protectorate without his
even being consulted.?8 Now that it was to be handed back under the Treaty
of Amiens, it was important to both Britain and Naples that it should not
again fall prey to the French. Paget tried to impress on Ferdinand that the
independence of Sicily could not be preserved if Malta was lost, and that as
long as Malta was friendly or neutral, the island of Sicily could be de-
fended.?? When it rapidly became apparent that, in view of Napoleons’
provocative actions, Britain intended to keep hold of Malta, whatever might
have been said in the treaty, Napoleon made approaches to Ferdinand for a
military alliance and the joint seizure of Malta. These approaches were
tactfully rejected on the grounds that his kingdoms were too exhausted to
take part in fresh hostilities, and that war with Britain (repugnant in any case,
since that country had been a faithful ally) would only result in Naples being
blockaded and her population reduced to starvation.2°
   When in May 1803 Britain renewed the war with Napoleon, the latter sent
an army once again to occupy the coasts of Apulia and Abruzzi within the
confines of the kingdom of Naples. Not unnaturally this resulted in renewed
tension between Naples and Napoleon, the former tacitly supporting Britain,
bitterly resenting the French occupation, yet desperately anxious to maintain
its neutrality. Sir John Acton, the British-born minister who still carried the
most weight with the king and who really directed royal policy, made secret
approaches to the British, very soon after war broke out. He urged them to
occupy Messina and other ports in Sicily, if the French army of occupation
showed signs of moving out of its bases. “We shall protest against the
measure to save appearances,” he told A’Court, the British chargé d’affaires in
Naples, and if the French then attacked Sicily, Neapolitan forces would help
to defend it.+! A°’Court thought the French were still so dispersed that no
immediate danger threatened, but he said he would inform Admiral Bicker-
ton and the British governor of Malta (Ball) if the French started to concen-
trate, so that appropriate action could be taken.32
   Nelson, who was bringing out the new minister, Hugh Elliot, to the court
