                               Getting a Foothold                              27

of Naples, had orders from Addington to act vigorously if the French tried to
attack Sicily and to take good care of the royal family whom George II
considered to be “the most faithful allies he ever had.” Colonel Villettes, the
officer who commanded the British garrison in Malta, had also received
orders from London to provide as many as 2,000 troops (if he could spare
them) to seize Messina, should Nelson decide it was necessary. Nelson, while
fully appreciating the reservations of the king and queen, who had no wish to
risk having to flee through premature action by the British in Sicily, urged
Acton to take no risks. “Though Naples be lost, Sicily is secure; but if Sicily is
lost so is Naples.”33 Nelson also impressed on Elliot the necessity for speedy
action, if it looked as if Sicily would be attacked: “In a small degree we risk it
every day, in hopes of preserving the kingdom of Naples.” The danger, as he
saw it, was that the enemy could ferry over some thousands of men in a very
short time, if they had the boats. And no navy in Europe could stop them,
with the current running at seven knots.34
   The trouble was, as Nelson realized, the very real fears of the king and
queen that they might provoke Napoleon, who, deeply suspicious of the
court of Naples, was shortly to demand and procure the dismissal of Acton
on account of that statesman’s notorious Anglophilism, the dismissal of the
émigré French Count Damas (in command of the Neapolitan army) and even
to demand, though unsuccessfully, the removal of Elliot from his post as
minister. The queen was genuinely frightened that Nelson and Elliot be-
tween them might involve Naples again in a war. She wrote in September
1803, “It will be a real miracle of St. Januarius if, caught between Nelson and
Elliot, we are not dragged into some adventure which will reduce us to the
situation of the king of Sardinia,” [now a puppet of the French republic].
And again in May of the following year she complained to her correspondent
de Gallo, “The English accuse us of being pro-French and the French pro-
English—all we want is to be neutral and get rid of French troops.”#°
   Yet Elliot had already become a spokesman for the queen’s more cautious
approach and he impressed the need for it on Nelson and Ball: “We are
steering between Scylla and Charybdis, it is as dangerous to do too much as
too little.”3° Ball, in Malta, when writing to Elliot, acknowledged the force
of the latter’s argument, that it was unwise to risk losing Naples by taking
overhasty action in Sicily. Yet he remained extremely suspicious of the pro-
French elements in the Naples cabinet, and he was worried that the Sicilians
themselves, discontented with rule from Naples, would if not assisted by
Britain turn to the French out of desperation.37 For this reason he had
ordered Villettes to have a force of 1,200 ready to move on Messina in an
emergency.?8                 :
   Certainly Ball had extreme views about the future of Sicily and its rela-
tionship to Great Britain—views he shared with his correspondents Wiliam
Miles, an agent of Pitt, Francis Leckie, the English consul at Syracuse and a
