                                2
           Sicily as the British Found It in 1806

S icily was different from mainland Italy. This difference arose partly be-
     cause the island lay so close to the coast of north Africa, and after its
conquest by the Arabs retained a very strong African connection that lasted
into the sixteenth century; and partly because it became and remained, for a
period of over four hundred years, a kingdom annexed to the throne of Spain
and was administered separately from other Spanish possessions in Italy.
When Ferdinand IV of Naples became King Ferdinand III of Sicily, succeed-
ing his father Charles III, there were few ties of affinity between the Neapoli-
tans and the Sicilians. The African and the Spanish connections had bred in
the people of Sicily a complacent sense of isolation from what went on in the
rest of Europe.
   The period of the African connection had been one of great prosperity and
vigor, intellectual as well as material, and the Arab influence on Sicily’s
culture persisted throughout the reign of the Normans and of the Suabian,
Frederick II. The exotic flavor of the court at Palermo, where Arab and
Byzantine influence intermingled, made it entirely different from any other
court to be found in Europe.?
  The Aragonese and then the Spanish connections (once the thrones of
Aragon and Castile were united), which began at the end of the thirteenth
century (when Peter of Aragon was called in to replace the detested An-
gevin), resulted in Sicily becoming still more distinct from neighboring Italy.
Sicily welcomed Spanish rule, and in spite of periodic revolts, was for long
considered a loyal province; most Sicilians looked on themselves as closer to
Spaniards than to Italians.* But this meant that Sicily was also cut off from
that flowering of Italian culture that began in the age of Giotto and Dante
and blossomed into the Italian Renaissance. Its isolation was further in-
creased by the introduction there of the Spanish Inquisition.® This last was
responsible, needless to say, for effectively strangling free enquiry, so that all
the rebirth of learning and science that illuminated so much of Europe in the
sixteenth and seventeenth centuries had little effect on the island of Sicily.
   There were other respects in which Sicily’s distinctness from Italian life was
made manifest. The island boasted of having a parliament that dated back to
the early Middle Ages and that at the end of the eighteenth century was still
possessed of its liberties. That this fossilized relic of past history, surrounded

                                        35
