                              Getting a Foothold                            33

do not need recounting once again. It would never have landed in the first
place had Napoleon not ordered General St. Cyr’s withdrawal to meet the
imminent Austrian threat, and he fully intended that St. Cyr should return
once Austria had been defeated. Napoleon’s victories at Ulm and Austerlitz
made the presence of the Anglo-Russian force in the kingdom of Naples
anachronistic. Even with the help of Neapolitan forces, most of whom were
completely untrained, it was quite inadequate to defend Naples against the
forces the French could muster. General de Lacy received an order to with-
draw his army at once to Corfu, while Craig had already made the decision
that to carry out his original instructions he must reembark and retire to
Sicily. Yet while there remained the slightest hope in the minds of the queen
and her advisers of negotiating with Napoleon, the court remained extremely
anxious to prevent the British from landing in Sicily. Serious differences
arose between Elliot and Craig over this question, Elliot supporting the court
in its efforts over forty days to treat with Napoleon. Offers were made on
behalf of the queen involving Ferdinand abdicating in favor of his eldest son
and (though this was not known to Elliot) closing the ports to British ships.
It was believed that Spain and Russia would lend the negotiations support,
and Tatischeff, the Russian envoy in Naples, who was certainly no friend of
the British, hinted to Neapolitan ministers that Britain intended to take over
Sicily.48 Initially the queen had desired the British force to remain near
Naples to back her diplomacy by a show of force, but when Craig made clear
he was leaving anyway, she had wanted the British to go to Malta. Writing to
Damas, she fulminated at what she regarded as British cowardice: “The smell
of gunpowder sickens the feeble organs of General Craig. . . . I am entirely
disanglomanised.”4?
   Craig in fact went to Messina not Malta, although he took care not to land
his force until invited by the king to do so. Elliot, who remained ingenuously
satisfied that the queen’s negotiations had some chance of success, told Craig
that an uninvited landing would be treated by the court as a hostile act. Craig
understandably showed irritation, sure that Elliot was being deceived. As
Nelson had noted two years earlier, the court at Naples had not found it
difficult to hoodwink this British minister.°°
   Writing to Castelreagh on 1] February, Craig told him his original inten-
tion had been to make for the port of Augusta, much more capacious than
that of Messina, but had decided the risk of leaving the latter open to the
 French was one it was too great to take. They might slip across 5,000 troops
 before the British were aware they had done so, and since Collingwood and
the British fleet had had to leave the Mediterranean, there was no squadron at
 hand to deter them. Now that the French were established in Venice and in
 Venice’s ports in the Adriatic, Sicily appeared to be all the more vital to
British interests in the Mediterranean. The court and Elliot had seemed to
