28                      SICILY: THE INSECURE BASE

gentleman farmer in that area, and Granville Penn, the under secretary at the
Colonial Office in London. He had, he wrote to Penn, told Nelson and Elliot
that if Sicily should fall to the French, they would draw more wealth and
resources from it than from the whole of Italy. Whereas, he went on, “a good
proclamation and fifteen hundred troops would lay all Sicily at our feet—we
must declare Messina an English port. We could then protect Sicilian trade
from the Barbary states and turn all the inhabitants in our favour.” Miles had
already told Ball that the Sicilian people as a whole would favor an annexa-
tion by Britain, that the men of property said so privately, even if they dared
not say so publicly, while “the lower and industrious class to a man would
fight for our cause.”3?
   In August 1804 Ball was suggesting that since the king derived few
advantages from the possession of Sicily, he might, rather than run the risk of
having it taken over by France, be ready to accept compensation in the form
of an annual pension from Britain, while the latter took over the island
herself.4° There is no reason to believe that these views were ever shared by
any British cabinet, but when four years later they were first aired in the
columns of the British press (although then Leckie, and not Ball, was
responsible for their publication), they caused not unnaturally some alarm
and also suspicion at the court of Palermo—suspicion that was to be deep-
ened further by subsequent British publications and finally by the disclosure
of the private views of Lord William Bentinck.
   The difference of opinion between Elliot and the heads of the British
armed services about taking action over Sicily was resolved in the end by a
compromise, which took the form of a secret agreement between Britain and
the court at Naples. Messina and Syracuse were to be garrisoned by the 2,000
Neapolitan troops sent to Malta in 1802 and returned to Sicily in July 1803;
Messina’s citadel was to be repaired; gunboats were to patrol the straits; the
people of Calabria were to be armed; and the king’s forces in Sicily were to be
put on a footing for war. To meet the expenses incurred by all this, the British
government promised Naples £170,000 and thereafter an annual subsidy of
£150,000, which if Naples was involved in hostilities could be increased to
£300,000. And to make sure it got value for its money, it sent an experienced
British officer, nominated by Ball and Villettes, to report on the progress of
the fortifications. This officer, Colonel Layard, stayed in Messina for nearly
two years, keeping in touch with Elliot and Ball, and was ready to give them
early warning of any hostile movements from Italy.4!
   Meanwhile it was agreed that Nelson should keep a warship in the Bay of
Naples ready to take off the royal family, if the French started to advance on
the capital; and a year later Villettes was instructed to send 2,000 of his
troops to Messina if Elliot should deem it necessary.
   The eventual enforced resignation of Acton meant in effect that the queen
was once more in control of foreign policy. It was she who, against the king’s
