30                       SICILY: THE INSECURE BASE

providing for the protection of Naples and for the expulsion of the French
from Italy. Meanwhile a force of 5,000 men under General Craig was sent
out from England, destined initially for Malta, but ultimately for Italy. Craig
had orders to place himself at the disposal of the Russian commander, and
British transports were to convey Russian troops from Corfu to Naples. But
the principal object of Craig’s expedition, as was made clear in his secret
instructions, was the safeguarding of the island of Sicily. On no account, his
orders ran, were the French to be allowed on the island, and if they did
succeed in landing, they must be expelled without delay. If French action
should compel the king once more to seek asylum in Sicily, or if under
extreme French pressure, he were to close his ports to the British, then Craig
must at once take hold of Sicily. Over this decision he was accorded complete
freedom to act on his own, although he was told that if circumstances
permitted, he should work with Nelson, Elliot, and Ball.4°
  At the same time a British officer, Lt. Colonel Smith, was dispatched to
Sicily to report to Malta and then to London on the current state of Sicilian
defenses; and to help him prepare his eventual report, he was sent copies of
the recommendations made by Charles Stuart six years earlier. The con-
clusions to which Smith finally arrived were not very different from those of
Stuart. The Sicilians, he found, were discontented and heartily disliked the
French, but even so they might not resist if a force of 10,000 Frenchmen
landed. The regular Neapolitan troops, dispersed throughout the island,
were unreliable, especially the officers, while the principal military comman-
ders were either useless or objects of ridicule. General Bourcard, a Swiss
officer, had been two years in command in Sicily, yet he had never once
stirred out of Palermo and knew nothing of the island’s resources.
Guillichini, in command at Messina, was an ex-naval captain from Tuscany,
ignorant of military matters and obviously a person quite unsuited to com-
mand the island’s principal fortress.
     All the fortresses, apart from Messina, were wholly lacking in artillery,
were generally of inferior construction, and were in a very poor state of
repair. Palermo itself was indefensible. Syracuse suffered from a lack of guns
and also lacked an adequate water supply. Messina alone was in good
condition and with a garrison of 3,000 British soldiers could hold out, Smith
thought, indefinitely. As for the island generally, he agreed with the verdict of
General Stuart that it could only be defended by the local inhabitants. All this
Smith reported to the court before returning home to England, and he
thought the king and queen welcomed the idea of Sicily having a British
garrison.*7
     The landing of an Anglo-Russian force consisting of 13,000 Russian and
7,000 British troops under the command of General Maurice de Lacy, an
aged but Anglophile Russian officer, in the bay of Naples in September 1805
and its hasty withdrawal a few months later, without ever having fired a shot,
