40                      SICILY:   THE   INSECURE   BASE


braccio of peers, a nobleman had as many votes as he had feudal estates, and
Prince Butera with his nine towns, over which he exercised jurisdiction, was
therefore entitled to no less than nine votes in the Sicilian parliament.
   The fiscal system was quite inequitable, with its burdens falling not on
luxuries but on articles of daily consumption. There was no register of land
and taxes on property were based on self-assessments, while the nobles
resisted strenuously any attempts to survey their lands.24 The king had been
forced by his need for money to sell annuities secured on the customs to
monopolistic corporations, yet his court, while in Sicily, made no attempt to
live in any way economically. Neapolitan and French émigrés either occupied
the posts at court or drew state pensions at Sicilian expense—they were a host
of parasites, some far from reputable, and a cause of much bitterness among
native Sicilians.*° The king foolishly, though perhaps understandably, in
order to uphold his independence tried to maintain an army and navy as well
as diplomatic representation at all the principal courts of Europe, something
that the slender royal revenues, even when bolstered by British subsidies,
found it extremely hard to finance.
   King Ferdinand, in whose person was united sovereignty over the two
kingdoms of Naples and of Sicily, spent very little of his time at court,
preferring the retired life of a country gentleman with sporting tastes. He had
a passion for shooting and fishing, and showed little interest in the business
of government, which he was glad to leave to the queen. Although lacking in
formal education, he was neither a dolt nor a simpleton, possessing a certain
native shrewdness that he used in his dealings with the British. He was
moody, extremely obstinate, and had fixed ideas about his royal prerogatives
that were similar to those of the queen. His common touch and earthy
bonhomie commended him to the Naples lazzaroni who had nicknamed him
“Nasone” for obvious reasons, but underneath he remained a despot, and a
vindictive one at that.2© One Frenchman has described him as being popu-
lacier plutot que populaire (common rather than popular), though when he
first arrived in Palermo the people welcomed him very warmly. Only when
they came to realize that he looked on Sicily merely as a place for furnishing
him with the means by which he could pay his court and recover Naples did
their attitude toward him change. For on one subject he was singleminded—
the recovery of his Neapolitan throne. As he was to write in 1814: “I will
never renounce what God has given me and my father left me and which in
justice belongs to me and also to my successors, nor ever agree to accept
compensation.”*7 Even then it was the queen and ministers rather than the
king himself who attracted unpopularity.
  The queen of Naples, Maria-Carolina, has been portrayed so often in print
that her character must be familiar to most people. A strange, contradictory,
and pathetic person, she was a compound of restless energy, passion, charm,
and utter ruthlessness, swayed by every momentary occurrence or the most
