                    Sicily as the British Found It in 1806                   4]

casual and idle rumor. Robert Fagan, British consul general in Palermo and a
man to whom she unburdened herself, described her as “either exhilarated to
excess or engulfed in a chaos of imaginary and gigantic evils.”28
  She had all the pride of her Hapsburg mother, the formidable Empress
Maria-Theresa, and the political amorality of her wretched sister, the French
Queen Marie-Antoinette. General Moore, first deputy and then commander
of the British force in Sicily in 1807, decided in the end that she was not
really wicked, but only badly guided by those about her. It was her misfor-
tune, in his opinion, to feel that she must meddle in public affairs for which
she had no capacity.2? Admiral Collingwood, who commanded the fleet in
the Mediterranean from 1805 to 1810 and had some dealings with the
queen, shared Moore’s views to a large extent. “She would be thought a deep
politician, yet all her schemes miscarry. She broods over what is impracticable
with her little means, and frets herself continually that others are not as dim-
sighted as herself.”3° She chose to be surrounded by a network of spies and
employed agents all over Italy, as well as maintaining in her pay chiefs of the
partisans or masse (often no more than brigand bands) in the mountains of
Calabria and the Abruzzi. It was estimated that she spent a million and a half
ducats in maintaining this system of spies and informers, many of whom
proved double agents in the pay of Saliceti, the chief of police in Naples. But
all her intrigues in Naples, Rome, Tuscany, and Genoa, London, St. Pe-
tersburg, and Vienna in the end had very little effect. She did exercise some
influence, though not as much as was once thought, in Sicily, over the king
and her sons. By 1806 she had really become in many ways a tragic figure,
worn out by personal misfortune, childbearing, and miscarriages, which had
driven her to take opium daily. She loathed Sicily and its inhabitants, talked
sometimes of selling the island, and longed only to return to Naples, the
recovery of which was her main preoccupation. In the winter of 1798 she had
described Palermo as being “poverty-striken, and peopled by rogues, where
the price of everything is exorbitant and the climate depressing,” and she
never altered this initial opinion. Of the Sicilians themselves she wrote, “the
priests are completely corrupted, the people savage, the nobles of doubtful
loyalty. . . . Iought not to govern Sicilians I hate them and, if they were as
honest as I am, the King and the Hereditary Prince would say the same, for
they think the same.” She in turn was detested in Sicily and was so unpopular
that, when her son the hereditary prince was seriously ill (possibly from food
poisoning), it was widely rumored that the queen had poisoned him in order
to recover her influence.3! She, who had been devoted to the British in the
days of Nelson and Emma Hamilton, was now convinced that they were only
concerned to keep Sicily for themselves and had no real interest in recovering
Naples. The only Englishmen she liked were those who were ready to flatter
her and forward her schemes for campaigns on the mainland for the recovery
of the kingdom of Naples—Admirals Nelson and Sidney Smith and, for a
