                                       3

       Problems of Defense in the Early Years of
                     Occupation


Glaser 1806 and 1807 the prospect of the invasion of Sicily by a
  French army was a very real one. Napoleon did not cease to impress on
his brother, now seated on the throne of Naples, the importance of taking
Sicily. He could not tolerate that on Italy’s doorstep there should remain
(and in English hands) a smugglers’ base, a refuge for deserters, a standing
threat to the stability of his empire in Naples and elsewhere in Italy, and what
he described as “an impassable barrier” to communications with the Levant.
Only after the Treaty of Tilsit, signed in July 1807, which secured him Corfu
and the Adriatic, did Napoleon lose interest in capturing the island. Sicily in
theory remained desirable, if only to safeguard his base in Corfu, but from
this point on he regarded it as of only secondary importance. Once he became
committed to his plan for absorbing Spain and Portugal, Sicily was seen by
him merely as a trap where British forces could be kept immobile that might
otherwise oppose him in the peninsula.
   But in 1806 he could not wait to have news of the capture of Sicily. “I
would rather,” he told Joseph, “a ten years war than leave your kingdom
incomplete and Sicily an unsettled question.”! Both he and Joseph had
counted on making a quick dash across the straits of Messina in the wake of
the routed army of Damas, and they had only been frustrated in this by
Craig, who had taken away all the boats available as well as the guns from the
coastal batteries. Joseph then insisted that he needed an army of no less than
25,000 men if ever a crossing was to succeed, a figure Napoleon considered
ridiculous. According to the latter, a force of 10,000 or at the most 15,000
was all that could reasonably be required. Joseph had, so Napoleon told him,
15,000 more troops than he needed, and if he still could not take Sicily, not
to mention the fortress of Gaeta whose garrison under the Prince of Hesse
still held out against the French, then he would never be able to do so, even if
given 100,000 men.?
   Bonapartist plans for Sicily suffered a setback in July, when General
Stuart’s army landed in Calabria and won an impressive victory at Maida. But
with Stuart’s withdrawal shortly after and the fall of Gaeta in the autumn,
preparations for the capture of the island were resumed. Nothing could be

                                       45
