42                      SICILY: THE INSECURE BASE


time, General John Stuart; she liked the British ministers at Palermo, Sir
William Hamilton, William Drummond and, for a few years, Hugh Elliot,
and the consul general, Robert Fagan. She hated Hamilton’s successor Paget,
the two generals, Fox and Moore, and particularly Lord William Bentinck,
who was to be responsible for her enforced exile from Sicily, so that she was
later led to declare that when she saw an Englishman she felt the guillotine on
her neck. Even though she intensely disliked the French, seeing them always
as the murderers of her sister and oppressors of all monarchies, she was quite
prepared to intrigue with them, if only to get rid of the British. She loathed
the ideas of the French Revolution and had no love for the Bonapartes,
though the personality of Napoleon had an awful fascination for her. She
told her confidant the Marquis de Gallo that she considered Napoleon “the
greatest man of the century” and that for him, as a person, she had “a really
deep respect.” She said she hoped his schemes would fail, but wished him
personal glory and good fortune, so long as they were not “at our expense.”3
She was quite unscrupulous in her methods, and Joseph Bonaparte believed
not only that had she placed a price on his head, but that she had tried to have
a plague-ridden ship driven onto the coast of Naples. In the end she became
the scapegoat for everything that went wrong in Sicily, although it is not
difficult to understand the desire of the British to see the last of her.
   Her remaining children (only six remained of the seventeen to whom she
had given birth) were married into Europe’s royal families—her daughters to
the Hapsburg Emperor Francis, the Spanish Prince of Asturias, the brother
of the king of Sardinia (in 1807), and the duke of Orleans (in 1809), while
her eldest son, the hereditary prince, found a second wife in the Spanish
Infanta. The hereditary prince and her youngest son Leopold (who was
completely dominated by his mother) and her two then-unmarried daughters
(Maria-Amelia and Maria-Christine) all accompanied the court to Sicily.
(Both the empress of Austria and the princess of Asturias were dead before
the end of 1807.)
   Francis, the hereditary prince, was at the age of thirty-five still largely
under parental influence. Interested like his father almost solely in country
pursuits, he found himself after 1810 compelled to play a political role.
Though he seemed to go along with the British when appointed by his father
as vicar general, he had little real sympathy with their views on Sicily and
remained a Neapolitan at heart.
  As to ministers and court officials, the man who wielded the greatest
influence when the British first became concerned with Sicily was the Anglo-
phile Sir John Acton, a former favorite of the queen, although he had lost her
favor completely. His eventual retirement was due, however, as much to old
age and growing incapacity as to the jealousy of the queen. For many years he
had been the real directing hand in Naples. He was not, in the opinion of
William Drummond who briefly succeeded Paget as envoy, a very profound
