                    Sicily as the British Found It in 1806                   Buh

be,” with a population so discontented it would welcome even the hated
French, if that meant any change for the better.!° He was merely echoing Sir
Arthur Paget, who had told Grenville in 1800 that the state of the island was
so wretched and corrupt that “nothing useful can be effective but by the
introduction and direct influence of foreigners.” There were several others
who shared this opinion. Colonel Bunbury, on General Craig’s staff, re-
marked on the welcome the British received when they first landed in 1806;
he noted that if a few of the merchants had appeared at first to favor the
French, this was out of no love for the latter but because “they longed for
better laws” and some “relief from capricious tyranny.” And the French they
reckoned were more likely to stay, while the British would only be “birds of
passage.”!1
   The Abbate Balsamo, who was Nelson’s contemporary and an expert
agronomist among other things, saw the difference between the Sicilian
laborer and his counterparts in Western Europe as similar to that between the
Sicilians and the savage tribes of Africa or America.!? The plight of the
peasant was hard indeed. He lived in a state of extreme poverty, seeing the
profits from agriculture passing into the hands of a tiny minority—the
income of the richest prince (Butera) equalled one-tenth of the national
revenue, or so it was reckoned in 1810. He was often forced to live in the
open, no matter how inclement the weather, or to return to his village late at
night, since his place of work was so far from his home. The peasant was ill-
clothed, ill-housed, very close to starvation, burdened by all sorts of dues and
taxes, ignorant of modern methods of farming, short of capital and clinging
desperately and obstinately to outdated customs. The Scots landowner Gould
Francis Leckie, who at the end of the eighteenth century had farmed land
round Syracuse, had endeavored to introduce new farming methods, but
according to the traveller John Galt, who visited Sicily in 1810, few had
followed his example.'%
   Though once the granary of the Roman Empire, Sicily by the start of the
nineteenth century could scarcely produce enough to feed itself. Only a third
of the land was cultivated and this so badly that it produced no more than a
third of what it might have. The main reasons for the shortage of corn lay in
the increased population, which by 1800 was half as much again what it had
been in 1700, and in a shift in the population from the country areas to the
towns.!4 But the inefficiency of the system by which the corn was marketed,
as well as the unwillingness of cultivators and landlords to undertake agri-
cultural improvements that would have ensured increased production and
have maintained an export trade, was also a major contributory factor. The
growing of greater quantities of cereal was not encouraged by government
taxes on the export of corn and the consumption of flour. And the strict
control of export licences benefited only the merchants of corn who “played
the market” and manipulated prices. Peter Brydone, in his tour through
