                    Sicily as the British Found It in 1806                  43

politician, and one who was happy to wait on events, but nevertheless the
only man who in Drummond’s words could hold the helm “of a crazy vessel,
in very stormy times.”33 Forced in May 1804 to withdraw to Palermo by
pressure from Napoleon, he continued to advise the king from Sicily and be
sent diplomatic correspondence. When the royal family were once again
forced to leave Naples and flee to Palermo, Acton regained for a short time
his former dominant position, since his rival at court, the Count Damas, was
blamed for the rout of the army of Naples. His sudden return to power,
however, lasted a matter of less than four months, and he finally retired in
June 1806, having become a sort of Polonius.##
   The man chosen to take his place, the Marquis Circello, was not a strong
character. The British first thought that he was on their side, but they soon
realized he was no match for the queen and was incapable of influencing royal
policy. The court adopted measures without his knowledge, and his sense of
loyalty toward the crown forced him to accept them without any protest.
William Drummond thought little of his abilities—“no minister of foreign
affairs was more foreign to those affairs than he”; while Lord William
Bentinck, a few years later, contrived to have him removed from office for
having “entirely despotic” principles.°
  The queen surrounded herself at Palermo with a group of advisers who
were wholly non-Sicilian: Tatischeff, the Russian minister until 1808, Ka-
unitz, the Austrian minister until 1810, Roger Count de Damas, the French
émigré (though he left Sicily in 1806), Corsicans who were anti- Bonapartist,
and Neapolitans like Circello, and Medici, the minister of finance, perhaps
her most able and loyal servant (despite his dubious prior career as a sus-
pected Jacobin), Prince Moliterno (of whom more later), and the young and
romantic Prince Canosa, the so-called “Don Quixote of reaction,” whom she
dispatched to the island of Ponza to try and raise a rebellion in Naples.
   She was also surrounded by humbler men, some of them near-criminals,
the most notorious among whom were Colonel Carbone and Marquis Cas-
trone.3 The only others who counted for something in a court dominated by
Neapolitans and French were the Duke of Ascoli, an agent of the king, and
the Marquis Saint Clair, the queen’s secretary and (so gossip had it) her secret
lover.
   Ascoli was the king’s private secretary and had considerable influence with
him, partly because he was a good sportsman and shared the king’s mania for
shooting and fishing. Ascoli did not like Sicilians any more than he liked the
British. He was in turn disliked by the queen, who was jealous of anyone
who challenged her influence. Ascoli had been head of the police in Naples,
where he gained an unsavory reputation for brutality and the abuse of power.
In Sicily he supported the king in his role as unchallenged sovereign and
urged him in 1811-12 to resist the demands being made on him by the
                                                                    even of
British for constitutional and administrative reform, to the extent
