 44                       SICILY: THE INSECURE BASE


abdicating and seeking refuge at some foreign court. He favored taking
extreme measures, even if this meant civil war or playing the game Napoleon
wanted, rather than yielding to British pressure, though the king did not
accept his advice. The British eventually forced him to leave and go into exile
in Sardinia, but for a time he was virtual viceroy.37
   Castrone was another undesirable character, the protégé and confidant of
the queen. He was the chief of police in Palermo and controlled the network
of spies and agents with whom the queen surrounded herself, maintaining
her contacts with mainland Italy and particularly with the kingdom of
Naples. Together with the queen he ran a lucrative business in privateering
and piracy, the profits from which went to maintain this whole system of
informers and agents.3® While Castrone operated from Palermo, Carbone
based himself on Messina, was instrumental in organizing flying columns of
the Calabrian masse from 1806 to 1809, and collaborated with the English
commanders. But he acted also as a spy on the English and reported all he
heard back to the court, even though his truthfulness was profoundly sus-
pect. He was appointed by the British to be head of their military secret
service and was so well regarded by senior officers that in 1815 he was
awarded a pension for life by the British government, on the recommenda-
tion of Lord William Bentinck.3?
  The Marquis Saint Clair, an ex-French guards officer, possessed good looks
but no real talent. Alquier, the French minister in Naples, had described him
as less than a mediocrity. Though he was hated by the British as the
representative of the pro-French faction, he hardly deserved the execration.
Appointed tutor to Prince Leopold, he was merely the lap dog of the queen,
and the senior posts he filled in the army gave him status but no effective
power. He was honest and loyal to his mistress, and accompanied her when
she went into exile.4°
   Another favorite of the queen was the colorful condottiere Prince Mo-
literno, a dashing type of professional soldier, adventurous, physically brave,
but lacking any political sense. The queen, who was herself a romantic, fell in
easily with his wild schemes for the reconquest of the kingdom of Naples,
and at one time of the whole of Italy. Even when the king was forced to
concede the overall command of all forces in Sicily to a British officer, Lord
William Bentinck, the court still attempted, unsuccessfully, to appoint Mo-
literno to a similar post. His military activities, as well as those he carried out
as a double agent in correspondence with the French, made him yet another
of those at court who aroused in the British the deepest suspicions of
treachery or at least bad faith.4!
   Relations between the British in Sicily and the court at Palermo grew
increasingly strained during the first five years of occupation, and eventually
ended in the British government agreeing to active interference—somethin
                                                                                  g
that most British cabinet ministers had studied studiously to avoid.
