                    Sicily as the British Found It in 1806                   39

was used to extract confessions, and orders could be obtained from the king
for proscriptions, confiscations, and arbitrary arrests (much in the manner of
lettres de cachet during the ancien régime in France) to satisfy some private
vendetta or enrich the magistrate involved.?°
   The vast majority of Sicilians in a population of a million and a half were
either peasants or poor townspeople; Palermo’s population numbered
200,000 and absorbed most of the wealth of the country. There was much
jealousy of the capital on the part of towns like Catania and Messina, and
Palermo’s claims to jurisdictions were challenged by its principal rival, Mes-
sina. There was practically no middle class, but numerous clergy and a few
thousand nobles. In what was still in many ways a feudal society, the Sicilian
nobility controlled the island, some of its members being extremely rich. In
fact, as a class, the nobility were far more wealthy than was the crown,
holding in towns and lands in the island three times as much as the king.
Even so, the greater part of the noble families was heavily in debt. It was said
that it was almost as difficult to find a nobleman out of debt as it was to find
one who was well-informed, and though the revenues of a few families were
nominally very great, these were the families that were most in debt. This
explains why the nobles as a class were eager, when a new constitution was
drafted, as it was in 1812, to be rid of their feudal obligations to the crown,
while insisting on being paid compensation for the extinction of their feudal
rights over the peasants. They possessed the means to oppress the poor
through the exaction of these feudal rights and enjoyed all sorts of privileges
and jurisdictions in both town and country. Under the reforming viceroy
Caracciolo, toward the end of the eighteenth century, enlightened reforms
had been set in train to restrict the nobles’ privileges, put an end to monopo-
lies, and help the peasants to get credit more easily. But the peasants were
unwilling to change their ways, and the abolition of villeinage merely created
landless laborers.2! In any case, the French Revolution brought all en-
lightened reforms to a halt. Drummond, the British minister at Palermo,
writing in the spring of 1807, compared the state of Sicily to that of England
under the Plantagenets, even if the nobles did not keep private armies.?? In
the view of the Scotsman Francis Leckie, the nobles as a class were “ignorant
beyond belief” and were very largely responsible for the “abject wretchedness
of the people.””4
   The Sicilian parliament, which was summoned to meet only once in four
years, consisted of three bracci or estates of the realm: militare or noble,
ecclesiastico or clerical, and demaniale or communes of the royal domain. Its
powers were limited to granting donativi (the name implying gifts not taxes)
to supplement the ordinary income of the crown, present petitions for redress
                                                                         collect
of grievances, and elect a body of royal nominees whose task was to
                               the laws between sessions of parliamen t. In  the
the taxes and administer
