36                        SICILY: THE INSECURE BASE

as it was by both myth and romance, was now merely a bastion of privilege
and had been largely responsible for keeping Sicily poor and backward does
not alter the fact that it was extraordinary and indeed very nearly unique. In
the whole of Europe—outside of Sicily, only England and Corsica could
boast of parliaments that had remained intact.© Also in contrast to other
countries, at the end of the eighteenth century when the European aristocra-
cies had lost much of their power (and were trying desperately to regain it)
and most if not all of their feudal privileges, the nobles in Sicily had hung on
to theirs. Henry Swinburne—an English traveller to the island—remarked in
1785 how the Sicilian baronage were more independent of royal authority
than were the barons in the kingdom of Naples, and exercised more control
of their vassals. In Sicily, the lord of the manor seemed to operate without
restraint:

     He appoints to every place of jurisdiction and trust; civil and criminal law
     are both distributed by his creatures ... in general the barons have
     disposal of everything within their manor.”

While a Frenchman visiting Sicily in 1778 could write:

     The Sicilians, remote from their king, whom        they know only by his
     representative, are accustomed to consider him as a pensioner whom they
     defraud of his due; while they pride themselves in granting free gifts, and
     from time to time make experiments of disobedience, with the sole view of
     performing an act that may assist their freedom.
       The Sicilians have had so many sovereigns that they are accustomed to
     like none of them, and to give the preference only to him, with whom they
     can make the best conditions.®

He also commented on what he described as their “insular and republican
character.” Even the Catholic Church in Sicily was remote and cut off from
the continent. Subjection to Rome was minimal in matters ecclesiastical and
all holders of senior church appointments were nominated to their posts by
the crown. The king of Sicily in his own person was apostolic delegate, and
the court of monarchia, which enjoyed supreme jurisdiction in church affairs,
was presided over by a judge who was a royal appointee.?
     Sicily in 1806 was, as it had remained for centuries, “a traditionalist and
static society” (to use the words of Professor Mack Smith), and all attempts
by its foreign rulers during the eighteenth century to change it to conform
with modern ideas in keeping with the Enlightenment had in every case
encountered failure. What the British found, when they came to the island,
was a country that for historical reasons was so backward it was a century
behind the most advanced of the western states. Nelson in the summer of
1803 described Sicily’s condition as “almost as bad as a civilised country’s can
