38                      SICILY: THE INSECURE BASE


Sicily made in 1770, remarked how the duties on the export of wheat that he
described as “exorbitant” had served to make corn a drug on the market and
had been responsible for the ruin of farmers.1° Of the sum total of Sicily’s
harvest, a third was bought by the government at a price it fixed for its own
convenience, and the rest was sold to monopolist corporations. The latter,
not the market, controlled the price, and price controls led inevitably to a
black market and to the bribery of officials.1©
   There were other reasons for the decline of the grain trade and for a falling
off in production. The kind of hard grain that was grown in Sicily could not
compete with the cheaper-priced soft grain that was able to be grown in
milder climates. The discontinuance of granting long leases led to the re-
moval of any incentive to improve the land or to use modern methods. Land
was overcropped and exhausted, while the profits accruing to the landlords
were not invested in agriculture but frittered away in conspicuous consump-
tion by absentee landlords who lived in Palermo. Lack of roads and the high
cost of transport also discouraged would-be improvers of the backward state
of Sicilian farming, while the onset of the French revolutionary wars had
dislocated all maritime trade.!7
   The plight of Sicilian agriculture had been made worse in recent times by a
drought that had lasted for the past six years, and at the time that the British
arrived, the appalling prospect of famine was looming. It seemed to the
English ironical that in neighboring and barren Malta the markets were well
supplied with corn, due to good management by the Governor Ball, while in
Sicily there was starvation: “a glaring proof (Hugh Elliot wrote) of the . . .
incapacity of this government,”!8 though the reasons were more complex
than Elliot realized.
   There was very little manufacturing, although linen was made at Cal-
tanisetta and silk was woven in Messina and Catania; and there was very little
internal trade, not only because of the mountainous country, but also because
roads and bridges were lacking and because there were so many local tolls.
Even in the middle of the nineteenth century it cost more to carry goods to
Palermo from the interior of the island than it did to transport them from
Sicily to places as far off as Paris or London. The external trade of Sicily was
closely linked to the mainland of Italy and to central and northern Europe.
The war therefore was initially to have a harmful effect on this trade, and the
loss of markets in France and Switzerland had serious results for silk produc-
tion in the provinces of Messina and Catania.19
   Another feature of Sicily’s backwardness was its wholly corrupt judicial
system, with a complexity of different laws seemingly designed to produce
the maximum confusion. Because of delays in the dispensing of justice,
people no longer looked to the courts but preferred the protection of a
powerful noble. Judges were ignorant or subject to court pressure, torture
