48                      SICILY: THE INSECURE BASE


arm. Initially Craig had had to strip Malta in order to raise the strength of his
force, but on his return soon after to England (giving up his command on
grounds of ill-health) he persuaded the British ministers to reinforce the
Sicily garrison. Guns and gun-carriages arrived, as well as two battalions of
infantry, and General John Stuart, who succeeded Craig, was able to recruit
500 Sicilians, paid and clothed by the British government and officered
largely not by Sicilians (to Colonel Bunbury’s relief) but by members of the
Corsican corps or by foreign regiments. By the early summer of 1806 Stuart
had a force of 7,500 holding a defense line in northeast Sicily, which
stretched from Milazzo in the north through Faro and Messina as far south as
Taormina. The king then allowed him to extend his command further south
to Cape Passaro to include the ports of Augusta and Syracuse, which, on the
insistence of Collingwood, were to be garrisoned by British troops.!° Even
so, the island enjoyed a security that was only relative. Moore, writing in
1807, took a typically pessimistic view of the prospects of defending it
successfully. He thought it required 12,000 more troops, to include cavalry
and artillery, in addition to the existing garrison, which then amounted to
14,000. More brigs, cutters, and small craft were needed, while the fortresses
that were far too numerous but because they existed had to be manned were
(save for ammunition) completely lacking in the means to resist an attack for
long.14
   The glaring defect in these Sicilian defenses did not however prevent the
island from being used for offensive purposes during the summer of 1806.
The driving force behind the offensive was the British Admiral Sidney Smith,
recently appointed commander of the fleet in the central Mediterranean.
Pushing, vain, and irresponsible, the admiral arrived with a great reputation.
Everyone had heard of his exploits, for he had a great gift for self-publiciza-
tion: his daring raids on the French coast, his dramatic escape from the
Temple prison, his triumphant relief of St. Jean d’Acre. A spoilt child of
fortune, brave, dashing, seductive, he was (in the words of Jacques Ram-
baud) “only too ready to lend an ear to the flattery of an Italian court and
become the champion of a distraught queen.”!? The latter, delighted to
discover what she fondly imagined was another Nelson, played on Smith’s
obvious vanity, and decided, as she said, “to work on his feelings.”!3 On
pleas from her, he took stores and ammunition to the garrison of besieged
Gaeta, though without consulting anyone else. This infuriated Elliot, who
prided himself that he alone could approach Acton and so the court.14
   Smith raided the Calabrian coast, capturing guns and inciting revolt. He
took Capri, got Stuart to garrison it, and then persuaded him to cooperate in
a scheme to conquer the whole of Calabria. In fact the object of the expedi-
tion, which Stuart led with 5,000 troops who were landed in the Gulf of St.
Euphemia, was to force the French from the toe of Italy, destroy their supply
dumps, guns, and magazines, and so pre-empt an invasion of Sicily. In this
