           Problems ofDefense in the Early Years of Occupation              51

Stuart was entirely successful, though his victory at Maida in July owed more
to the action of his subordinates than to brilliance of leadership on his part.
The French lost nearly 4,000 men and at Crotone, to which the British sent
two regiments round by sea, they lost all their guns and warlike stores,
accumulated for use against Sicily, as well as their army’s sick and wounded
that General Régnier had left behind.
   Wisely refusing to pursue the French army with the limited force at his
command and wisely refusing to commit a force of 1,000 men to reinforce
Gaeta (a fortress that was on the point of falling), Stuart contented himself
with capturing the strongpoints of Reggio and Scilla, the two places the
French must hold before embarking on an invasion of Sicily. It should be
remembered that in doing all this he had acted entirely without instructions,
his only orders from London being to safeguard Sicily against attack.!°
   During the course of these operations, Sidney Smith had obtained from
Ferdinand a commission to act as the viceroy of Calabria, with command of
all the king’s forces there, and this not unnaturally had annoyed Stuart. The
latter through Elliot and Acton made strong representations to the court and
as a result Smith had to step down and accept Stuart as commander-in-
chief.!° But he did succeed in involving Stuart in schemes, which were really
those of the queen, for raising the Calabrian masse. Stuart was unwisely
persuaded to issue an inflammatory proclamation inciting the Calabrians to
rise, an action that the ministry in London found a source of some embarrass-
ment. Stuart, though acclaimed for his victory and rewarded by being made a
Knight Commander of the Bath, was all the same rebuked (although mildly)
for the indiscretion of his proclamation. The government, he was told, could
not guarantee indefinite protection for the people of Calabria, and in taking
his action he should first have obtained the approval of the British Minister
Elliot.!7 Stuart shortly afterward resigned out of pique at being passed over
for command and was replaced by General Henry Fox, the younger brother
of the statesman, while General John Moore was sent out to act as Fox’s
deputy and second-in-command. Henry Fox was a sick man and known by
the ministers to be such, so his reliance on John Moore, where decisions or
actions were required, was something that was accepted in London.
  Meanwhile Sidney Smith, in the words of Bunbury, “always panting for
distinction . . . restlessly active”!8 and bursting with enthusiasm, spread his
ships and small craft along the coast as far north as the bay of Naples,
scattering his proclamations to revolt. Moore blamed him, perhaps unfairly,
for concentrating on these activities rather than trying to relieve Gaeta, and
for taking credit for capturing towns that had either already been abandoned
or must have fallen to the-British army as it fell back on Scilla and Reggio.
Smith kept pressing Elliot and Fox for more money and more men, urging
that these were all that were needed to drive the French out from the
kingdom of Naples. Moore, who was the real driving force behind the less
