46                      SICILY:   THE   INSECURE   BASE


done immediately, for the masse insurrection had to be crushed and the
country cleared of brigand bands, but this was achieved by the spring of
1807. Even then, there still remained the British-held fortresses of Scilla and
Reggio. These places the British had garrisoned at the time of their with-
drawal following Maida, and their capture remained a precondition for any
successful invasion of Sicily. Napoleon continued to pester Joseph
throughout the summer and autumn of 1807 for their immediate reduction,
finally issuing him a personal order to take them. By March 1808 they had
both fallen and Sicily was once again faced with the prospect of invasion.?
   When General Craig had arrived in Sicily in February 1806 he had found
the island largely defenseless. On its long coastline, with its multiplicity of
roadsteads, small bays, and open beaches, an enemy force could land very
easily; and its main harbors, save for Messina, were lacking in the necessary
means to defend them—artillery, stores, and also men. Colonel Smith had
made this apparent in his report of the previous October when he stated that
the island as a whole could only be defended by its inhabitants. The regular
forces at the king’s disposal were supposed to number 9,000 or thereabouts,
but their effective strength, it transpired, was not much more than a third of
this figure, and they were for the most part in very poor shape. As to the
militia, it proved nonexistent for all practical purposes, a force without either
clothes or pay or any sort of organization. Meanwhile Sicily remained depen-
dent on Malta for guns and ammunition.* Apart from the northeastern strip
of the island occupied by the forces of Craig, its safety, as Elliot impressed on
Collingwood, was wholly in the hands of the British navy, and the extent of
the latter’s protection would sway the loyalty of the Sicilians. Collingwood
did in fact provide a substantial squadron to guard Sicily and keep watch on
the enemy-held ports in the Tyrrenhian and Adriatic—four ships-of-the-line,
eight frigates, and three sloops—while a sizeable flotilla of gunboats and
galleys, including Neapolitan gunboats, was based on Messina to cover the
straits. The formation of the Sicilian flotilla was a most important contribu-
tion to the effective defense of Sicily, since it was small craft that were needed
in the narrow waters that separated Sicily from Calabria. It was manned by
Sicilian volunteers who were only too willing to serve in vessels that flew the
British flag, not the Neapolitan one.© What remained of the Neapolitan navy
was of very little immediate assistance, apart from the gunboats already
mentioned—one ship-of-the-line and some frigates and sloops, but so ne-
glected through lack of money they were little better than useless hulks.
Later, though not until 1809, these ships were repaired at British expense in
the naval dockyards at Gibraltar and Malta.
   Lack of money in the next few years, despite a large subsidy paid by the
British, continued to keep the king’s regular army in a wretched state of
inefficiency. It was badly trained and, in General Moore’s view, did not
possess a serviceable musket. Recruitment was a difficult problem because of
