            Problems ofDefense in the Early Years of Occupation              47

the inadequate rewards that were offered. The queen tried to enlist the masse
and form them into regular units, but these people resented discipline.
Criminals and Italian deserters from the French army were accepted as
recruits, and the king ordered all means short of force, though he dared not
use conscription, to encourage enlistment. General Fox found the Neapolitan
troops totally undependable and despised by the masse and the people of
Sicily. He regretted that the more reliable Sicilians were not kept apart from
the Neapolitans, but the court “by the fatality that attends almost all their
measures” made no attempt to separate them, and they lost all pride and
esprit de corps.”
  After the disaster at Mileto at the end of May 1807, when 6,000 men
under the Prince of Hesse met with humiliating defeat, a rather more serious
attempt was made to organize the royal army. The king and queen, with
some reluctance, allowed its inspection by British generals, who were not
impressed by what they found. Not only was the discipline poor—the officers
discontented, the soldiers unpaid, pawning or selling their arms or desert-
ing—but the higher command was unimpressive. Even Count Damas, favor-
ite of the queen and certainly no lover of the British, was more damning in
his verdict on the latter than any British general: “Hesse is a loyal and brave
man, but very far from intelligent. Bourcard does not want to leave his
beloved Sicily; baron Acton [brother of Sir John] is merely another edition of
Hesse, while Cattolica is a fool. That is all I can say. In fact we have
nobody.”8
   In 1806 attempts were made to raise a genuine force of militia, the court
issuing an edict in May to enroll a force of 24,000. Yet a year later Colonel
Bunbury, quartermaster general and chief of staff, reckoned that there was
not a single militiaman in the whole of the district the British occupied. In
1808 Cattolica brought forward a plan to enlist 40,000 Sicilians, raised and
commanded by local landowners, but this was opposed by the queen and the
Neapolitans. The British command had no faith in the scheme and disap-
proved of it anyway as discouraging regular enlistment. There was already
jealousy between the regulars and the volunteers over the question of rank
and command,        and there was no provision for unified control, let alone
overall command by the British. In June 1809 there were reckoned to be a
maximum of 1,500 militiamen in the whole of the island, outside Palermo,
who were trained dnd equipped for general service. And the corps at Palermo
the British considered to be fit for little save ceremonial occasions. The court
did agree to the British embodying two battalions of Sicilian militia, but
nothing ever came of this. At Augusta not a man turned up, and at Milazzo
the 380 who did appear were of such poor quality (having been crimped or
dragooned into joining) that they had to be instantly discharged.?
   All this meant that Sicily’s defenses continued to rest on the British alone,
apart from any help from the peasants whom the court out of fear refused to
