            Problems of Defense in the Early Years of Occupation             DS

decisive and ailing Fox, had to point out that it was not the intention of the
British command to tie up its forces in Calabria, more so since the French
had been reinforced. The Calabrians anyway were hopelessly divided, with
property owners siding with the French and the masse intent on rapine and
murder. The main object of the British forces must remain the defense of
Sicily, and the navy’s small craft ought to be used not in conducting futile
raids but in intercepting the coastal traffic.
   Moore was sent by Fox to investigate what Sidney Smith was really doing,
and, having landed at various points, he came to the conclusion Smith’s ideas
were absurd. Moore found the people frightened and disheartened, ready to
hoist, as danger dictated, either the Bourbon or republican flag and occupied
only in plundering or satisfying some private vengeance. He thought it not
only an act of cruelty but one unbecoming to the British name to encourage
this kind of hopeless insurrection unless the British intended to stay. On
behalf of Fox he therefore told Smith to abstain from any further promises of
British assistance to chiefs of the masse; Fox alone must now be responsible
for help afforded to the Calabrians.!? Smith however remained firm in his
conviction of the rightness of his strategy and that Sicily “could not be
defended militarily or maintained politically without Calabria as a téte du pont
and as a magazine and mart.”?°
   Elliot, who was sensitive on questions affecting protocol and his position
as minister, wrote home privately to complain of Sidney Smith’s irregular
behavior: his direct communications with the queen, his importunate re-
quests for funds, and his misapplication of those funds, granted for the
purpose of obtaining intelligence.?1 Smith eventually received from the
Admiralty a mild reproof (though he described it as “most mortifying”)     ,?7
but he nevertheless remained the queen’s ally in her plans for the reconquest
of Naples until his posting away the following January. There is no doubt
that Sidney Smith had found in Stuart a ready collaborator, and the latter’s
departure meant that the army was no longer prepared to indulge Smith’s
schemes. Henry Fox wrote home to his brother that Calabria had become for
Stuart “in a degree his hobby horse” and that he had “in the vagabond massi
[sic]” a confidence he thought no one else had. Stuart was, in Fox’s opinion,
not without his share of vanity and he had more confidence in the court than
Fox had, because Stuart had been misled by its flattery and failed to realize
how much it was despised.?%
  After defeating the Prussians at Jena in October        1806, Napoleon had
advanced into Poland but had then been checked and had retired onto
Warsaw. Russian ministers in foreign courts gave out that the French had
been defeated, and the court at Palermo, and the queen especially, were only
too ready to believe this story. In consequence the queen, through Circello,
pressed hard for another expedition to be dispatched to mainland Italy,
suggesting that this was desirable, if only for political reasons. If a general
