                 The Court, Drummond, and the Generals                     61

he called “so bad a corvée,” but “Fools, I believe, never learn—so that we
cannot hope that those who direct the Sicilian government will profit by this
check.” And Fox could not resist telling Drummond that the Neapolitan
cavalry had behaved even worse than their infantry. As for the masse, perhaps
even the queen would now acknowledge their uselessness—they had not fired
a shot in the whole campaign, and their vengeance had as usual been directed
against their defenseless countrymen.!°
   Two months later, Fox received from Castlereagh instructions drafted on
21 May ordering him to prepare to land in Calabria or some other part of
Italy. This might, in Castlereagh’s opinion, lead on to the conquest of Naples
and even its permanent occupation, but at worst it would furnish a useful
diversion and perhaps destroy a French corps as well.!! It was clear that
Castlereagh, who had been prompted by Drummond, did not realize the size
of Ferdinand’s army, fondly imagining that it and half the British force (the
proportion he instructed Fox to hold in readiness) amounted to 20,000 men.
Fox had to point out his error to him, at the same time emphasizing the poor
fighting quality of the Neapolitans, as revealed so recently at Mileto. If he
did, he wrote, take an army to Italy, he would have to leave behind 2,000
men to secure the fortresses of Messina and Syracuse, and that would give
him a strength of 8,000 (half the army being still in Egypt) to confront a
French army of 20,000. He remained without any cavalry and, even if joined
by the king’s forces, he would still be outnumbered by the French.1?
   Over plans for yet another expedition (Mileto took place at the end of
May) and over attitudes toward the court, the disagreement between Drum-
mond and the generals came to a head in July 1807 when Fox went home and
the outspoken Moore took over the post of British commander. Ever since he
had changed his mind over the attitude of the court, Drummond had tried to
persuade the generals that the French party no longer controlled it, and that
since the king’s power was limited by noble and corporate privileges, many
abuses existing in Sicily were outside the power of the king to remedy. He
was sure the queen’s influence was now minimal, and protested that he
(Drummond) had been unfairly stigmatized for “weakness, imbecility and
lack of steadiness.”!3 Fox in his turn had represented to Drummond that the
recent appointment of the king’s eldest son to be inspector general of the
royal army and of Saint Clair to be one of his aides certainly did not
correspond with any loss of power by the queen. As to the barons, Fox was
unsure whether giving them more power would not be preferable to what he
characteristically described as “the miserable weak government of the reign-
ing family.”!4
   Drummond continued to believe that the way to better Sicily’s lot was by a
reform of the constitution, initiated by the king, and that he (Drummond)
could use his influence to bring such a reform about. He certainly did not
want such a change effected by a military coup, a course the generals were
