                                         4

 The Court, William Drummond, and the British
                    Generals


    deep distrust obtaining between the court at Palermo and the British
A government, further exacerbated as it was to be by the strained relations
that soon developed between Drummond and the British generals, became
apparent in 1806. Negotiations for peace with Napoleon had been con-
ducted by Charles James Fox, foreign secretary in the Ministry of All the
Talents, during the months of June and July, and fears were expressed by
Acton and Circello that the British saw Sicily as expendable; they wanted to
force the king to exchange it for territory in, perhaps, the Balearics.! It was
true that the Russian plenipotentiary had agreed to accept such terms from
the French, but the czar had refused to ratify them, and Britain never agreed
to them. Drummond was instructed to refute vigorously allegations made in
Palermo that Britain had neglected Ferdinand’s interests, and to emphasize
instead that it was her perseverance in standing up for the king’s right to
choose that had been one of the principal reasons for the failure of peace
negotiations. Whitbread, while speaking in the House of Commons in
January 1807, made clear that Fox could only have proceeded on the basis of
uti posstdetis, and had made the retention of Sicily the sine qua non of any
peace settlement.   Howick,    speaking in the same      debate, referred to the
impossibility of Britain ever surrendering Sicily without first obtaining Ferdi-
nand’s consent, adding with a patriotic flourish that “it would have broken
the hearts of those brave men who fought for it in the plains of Maida, if it
could have been given up on any other conditions.” In any case the death of
Charles Fox, which occurred in September 1806, had ended the peace
negotiations; but as even he had allowed the garrison to be increased to
13,000 by the end of July 1806, there was really no question of Britain
deciding to leave Sicily in any hurry. Sicily (in the words of Professor
Holland Rose) “was the chief cause of the prolongation of the war, as Malta
had been of its inception.”
   Instead, the ministry decided to bind the court more closely to her British
ally by offering it a treaty of alliance. This treaty provided for Sicily’s ports to
be kept open to British ships, and for Sicily to supply provisions for British
crews and British troops as well as for the island of Malta. In return, Britain
agreed to protect the ports of Messina and Augusta, to maintain at least

                                        58
