                  The Court, Drummond, and the Generals                        65

them.?° It was difficult to argue rationally with her. She had in the winter of
1807/8 been involved in one of her many intrigues, this time with the
Russian ambassador, with the idea of a Russian garrison being sent to Sicily
to replace the British. Tatischeff, anxious to discredit Britain, had according
to Drummond been spreading rumors that he was able to mediate between
the court and Napoleon, to the end that the king should recover Naples,
provided the British got out of Sicily. At Drummond’s peremptory request,
which earned him a rebuke from Canning, Tatischeff was ordered to leave
Palermo, but the incident did little to better relations between the Sicilian
court and the British.?!
  Russia, of course, since the Treaty of Tilsit, when Czar Alexander joined
hands with Napoleon, had become an enemy of Britain. It was therefore, in
British eyes, disgraceful that the queen should be seeking the help of the
Russians. There had already been an incident in January, when Circello had
been under pressure from Drummond to order the seizure of a Russian
frigate that had earlier arrived in Palermo harbor, before war was declared
between Britain and Russia. Thornborough, acting on Admiralty instruc-
tions, had wanted to attack the frigate, but the Sicilian government had at
first demurred. It was finally induced by Drummond to declare a state of war
with Russia, and the frigate’s captain agreed to surrender to the Sicilians,
though not to the British, thus defusing an awkward situation that had
touched the quick of Sicilian pride.?2
   The Sicilian court was particularly sensitive about attacks on its loyalty to
Britain and on its general competence, including those made in the British
press. Castelcicala, the minister in London, was so incensed at an article
published in February 1808 in the pages of the Whig Morning Chronicle that
he persuaded the British government to start proceedings against Perry, the
proprietor. The matter was eventually settled, though not until after more
than a year, by Perry making an abject apology. The paper, he said, was
merely anxious to draw the British public’s attention to the danger to which
British troops were exposed in the current Sicilian situation, and he had no
wish to interfere in the way an independent state was governed, much less to
try to sow dissension between the Sicilian king and his subjects.*° But six
months later there was more trouble, when Leckie’s “Historical Survey” was
published and brought to Castelcicala’s attention. In it Leckie did not mince
his words. He described the Sicilian government as exhibiting “all the
weakness and degeneracy” associated with the Byzantine Empire “in its last
stages of degradation,” and he urged the ministers to undertake the much-
needed reforms in Sicily, since by propping up an unpopular regime the
British themselves incurred popular hatred. He attacked the attitude of the
queen who clearly had no love for the British, the duplicity of the Palermo
court, and the pro-French sympathies of at least one minister, and demanded
that Britain interfere in Sicily’s internal affairs for “pressing motives of self-
