60                      SICILY:   THE   INSECURE   BASE


Porte, who, it was thought, was about to yield to French pressure and side
with Napoleon. Though Britain now possessed in Sicily an army of 20,000
men, it was felt that because of the court’s dubious loyalty, no substantial
force could be spared from the island to lend support to the naval squadron—
a deprivation that had fatal consequences since it resulted in the total failure
of Duckworth’s expedition to the Dardanelles. Instead it was decided to send
from Messina a force to seize Alexandria, in order to forestall a possible move
by Napoleon to recover Egypt.®
   Accordingly 6,000 men, commanded by Brigadier General Fraser, were
dispatched to capture Alexandria from the Mamelukes, which they did on 20
March 1807. Fraser was not an experienced commander, and Fox would
have preferred to send Moore, but decided he could not spare him from
Sicily. Fraser, in trying to extend his position to include control of the Nile
delta, suffered two serious military reverses involving the loss of a third of his
force, and Fox had to send from. Sicily 2,000 reinforcements to make good
this loss. When the ministry in London was told by Fox that it would require
16,000 troops, including cavalry, to defend Egypt, it decided Sicily took
priority. The possession of Alexandria, wrote Windham, had always been
subordinate to the security of Sicily, and to “the more important object” of
acting against the French in Italy.” The British troops in Egypt were with-
drawn, though not until September 1807.
  Meanwhile General Fox had been under strong pressure both from Drum-
mond, now a spokesman for the court, and from the Russian ambassador
Tatischeff, to send another army to Italy to relieve the pressure on Britain’s
allies. Such an expedition would, it was argued, cause a diversion in favor of
the Russians, who felt threatened in Dalmatia by French forces in Friuli, and
would meet with little opposition in Naples, which kingdom the French had
denuded of troops. Now that the army of Napoleon had received a serious
setback in Poland, the time was ripe, so it was argued, for an assault on Italy.8
General Fox rejected these arguments. He had already made clear to Drum-
mond his objections to such an enterprise, drawing attention to the large
proportion of his army that was now committed to Egypt, to the possibility
of having to send another force to the Dardanelles, and to the lack of
dependability of the Neapolitan troops of the king. He doubted the accuracy
of the information about the strength of French troops in Naples, and the
French in any case could always draw on a large strategic reserve in the north.
Anyway of what use was a plan whose secret was bound to be betrayed by the
queen and her entourage, he asked?? Rebuffed, the court acted on its own,
and dispatched Hesse’s army to defeat at Mileto.
   The reactions of Fox and Moore to the latter were, predictably, “I told you
so.” Moore wrote privately to Fox: “Thus has ended Circello’s and the
Queen’s expedition in the only manner it could reasonably be expected to
end.” He was sorry that a brave man like Hesse had been employed on what
