                  The Court, Drummond, and the Generals                      63

known to favor. “I would desire for many reasons that the seat of legislature
should rather be a Sicilian parliament than a British camp.”!§ The generals
favored stopping the subsidies until British demands were met for radical
reform of Sicilian institutions, but such a recourse, in Drummond’s view,
would never produce the results desired. He thought the king and queen far
too proud to yield to menaces of that sort, and meanwhile the royal army
would fall to pieces through lack of pay.!°
   In March Drummond had visited Messina to try to present his case in
person, but the generals had given him a chilly reception. Moore had talked a
little wildly about dispatching the queen to Trieste, and Drummond had
come to the conclusion that he understood little of Sicilian affairs.!7 Moore
for his part despised Drummond, whom he thought “the weakest and silliest
of men,” a “false, unprincipled, mean fellow ... who at first bred all the
mischief with the queen and who still, as far as he is able, will endeavour to
foment it.” Moore was certainly not renowned for his tolerance of civilians
and politicians, and his strictures concerning Drummond          recall curious
echoes of his condemnation twelve years earlier of Sir Gilbert Elliot’s conduct
in Corsica. Sir Arthur Paget, the diplomat and former minister at Palermo,
who passed through Sicily in July and who listened to both sides in the
dispute, concluded that they were irreconcilable.18
   The navy also was drawn in to the quarrel. Captain Thornborough com-
manding the squadron, entrusted with the defense of Sicily, was approached
by the court to convoy to Italy a royal expeditionary force. In private talks he
had had with Drummond,         the latter had appeared to agree with him that
such an action would only divide his squadron and subject it to unacceptable
risk. Yet when Thornborough met the queen in the presence of Drummond,
the latter totally unexpectedly turned round and spoke in support of her case.
“This sudden change . . . has astonished me,” wrote Thornborough,            “at
present I know not how to act with such a man. . . . [I] am convinced he
would wish to throw all the blame on the Army and Navy.”!? Drummond
was certainly devious, and his lack of frankness in dealing with Canning over
the question of the Spanish regency and Ferdinand’s claim to it for one of his
sons was a year later to lead to his recall.
  The person, attitude, and influence of the queen remained at the center of
the dispute. She herself put her views to Paget during his stay in Sicily. She
complained that it;almost seemed that the British looked on Sicily as a
conquered country. The generals complained that the court did not recruit,
yet how, she asked, could it hope to do so, when the British offered higher
rates of pay. The court had 6,000 regular troops ready to embark at an
instant, yet the generals treated her plans with contempt and refused to
expend British blood in removing a tyrant from the throne of Naples. Those
who accused the court of betrayal were, she said, nothing but a crowd of
malcontents who had taken refuge at Messina and got the generals to listen to
