                  The Court, Drummond, and the Generals                       59

10,000 troops stationed on the island at her own expense, and to pay a
subsidy of £300,000 annually, backdated to September 1805. Further provi-
sions were suggested to the court, but these were most unfavorably received.
They involved the British guaranteeing to keep 5,000 troops in Sicily in
peacetime, giving Syracuse, Milazzo, and Augusta the same free-port status
Messina enjoyed, and granting to British merchants in Sicily the position of
most-favored nationals.* The court was understandably afraid that the British
had ideas about annexing Sicily, while Messina was bitterly opposed to
sharing her privileges with other ports. The hostile manner in which the draft
treaty embodying these last clauses was rejected by the court caused a
temporary rift with the British government. Drummond decided to suspend
the subsidy and wrote back to London for instructions. These instructions,
drafted in March 1807, were never in fact dispatched to him because of the
fall of the ministry and its replacement by one led by Portland. They would
have entailed Britain playing a significant role in governing Sicily, the sort of
role that she was eventually compelled to adopt in 1811. They would have
entailed the continued suspension of the subsidy Britain paid to the court and
ultimately the use of force, were the court not to accept measures designed to
render it less unpopular, and were aimed at removing what seemed a real
danger of a discontented people or a disloyal court betraying Sicily to the
enemy. Strangers obnoxious to Sicilians were to be removed from the royal
council, Sicilian noblemen were henceforth to be admitted to positions of
trust, there was to be a unified command under the senior British officer, and
no post of military importance was to be given to a non-Sicilian, or indeed to
anybody not approved by the British commander. It was also proposed that
the British minister should have the power to remove from their posts any
foreigners suspected of treachery.*
   When Canning took over the Foreign Office, he decided these instructions
should not be sent and that all that could reasonably be required of the king
was his confidence and cooperation. But by this time, Drummond, having
been persuaded that the court’s attitude had radically changed, had already
renewed the payment of the subsidy. The treaty, without the offending
clauses, was signed on 23 March 1807, though because of changes in the
international scene brought about by the Treaty of Tilsit in July, its ratifica-
tion by the British sovereign was postponed for another fourteen months.
Drummond had éonvinced himself that because the queen had agreed to
withdraw from the royal council and Saint Clair had been removed from his
post, the policy of the court had changed, and that he (Drummond), Cir-
cello, and the king would henceforth control the conduct of affairs. In
believing this he was certainly naive, and the generals made it clear that they
thought so.
   Meanwhile the British government had decided during the winter of 1806
to send a naval force to Constantinople to support Russia and to frighten the
