                     Threats of Invasion and Counterinvasion                15

invitation for him to invade.!9 Stuart’s arguments persuaded Castlereagh,
who received his dispatches in May 1809. By that time Austria had reentered
the war, and Castlereagh, in writing to Stuart to approve his not sending
forces to Spain, expressed the hope he would now begin to make himself
useful in Italy.2°
  The vague wording of Castlereagh’s dispatch exemplified the cabinet’s lack
of a plan for cooperation with the Austrian armies. The Austrians themselves
had since the spring been trying through the offices of Count Sallier de la
Tour to coordinate plans with the British command and with the courts at
Palermo and Cagliari for joint operations in northern Italy. La Tour, who
was a Piedmontese subject serving as an officer in the Austrian army, had
arrived in Palermo on 31 March. He had instructions from the Austrian
government to obtain the support of the king and the British—the latter
providing, it was hoped, if not troops, then transports and naval escort. The
Archduke John, who was to command the Austrian army in the north of
Italy, impressed on La Tour the need for speed—his own campaign against
the French was due to start on 9 April—and what he wanted was for forces
from Sicily, and if possible from Sardinia also, to join his own army in the
Lombard plain or in the valley of the Po.??
   The queen, as might have been expected, was a great enthusiast for the
plan, and she even got the king to agree to Stuart being given the supreme
command. Stuart agreed, in principle only, to taking some action in Italy, but
would not commit himself to details until he knew more of the Austrian
movements and until he had received instructions from London. The rele-
vant instructions (if such they can be called) did not reach him until July. In
any case he felt incapable of doing more than causing a diversion with the
limited number of troops he had, even if the French had withdrawn their
main army and the mass of Italians were “ripe for revolt.”?7 Collingwood, on
the other hand, was a firm supporter of the Austrian case. He sent three
frigates to reinforce Martin and urged Stuart to take advantage of the dearth
of French forces along the coasts. If Austria were to fail now, and the fate of
Italy depended on her, he would not wish Britain to be responsible, and he
could not see how the allied cause could be helped by the temporary posses-
sion of Naples or of some island in its bay.?°
   Stuart finally agreed with the court to make a double landing in the south
of Italy, 15,000 troops going to Calabria, and another 2,000 to Naples itself,
in the hope of achieving a coup de main there. But when he learned of the
Austrian defeats that had taken place in Bavaria, he suspended all prepara-
tions for sailing—this despite violent protests by the queen, who refused to
believe that Vienna had fallen. The troops had been embarked on 26 May,
                                                                         the
but Stuart told La Tour that they could not leave until the situation in
north was clarified. The queen meanwhil e bombarde d La Tour  with messages
                                                                         the
urging immediate action and with plans for 3,000 Sardinians to join with
