68                      SICILY: THE INSECURE BASE


the island, while Leopold’s presence at Gibraltar was scarcely required for
defense of that fortress. Nor had his reason for coming there been to look for
safety and British protection. It was all very well to take a “high tone” about
the right of the king of Sicily to the regency of Spain being “clear and
incontrovertible” and to assert that such a claim was the only way to avoid
civil war, but the evidence for this was not forthcoming, nor was there any
for the claim by the king to devolve the regency onto his son. If the united
voice of Spain had called for Ferdinand II or Leopold, that indeed would
alter the case, but the facts proclaimed that this was not so. The court at
Palermo, Canning went on, must have been aware that Drummond had
acted without any precise instructions, and had he not connived personally at
the action taken by the Sicilian court, the British government would be
entitled to take grave offense at what had been done. The arrival of a prince
of Sicily aboard a British vessel before a British fortress was liable to the
gravest misconstruction, and the king was advised to stand very clear of any
suspicion that he had condoned it.?%
   What Canning was saying in so many words was that it had all been the
fault of the queen. And this was underlined in a secret letter he sent the same
day to Castelcicala in which he protested in the strongest terms about the
inclusion of the Marquis Saint Clair in the party that had accompanied
Leopold. Saint Clair he described, without actually naming him, as someone
whom the British government had been trying over the past two or three
years to have removed from positions of trust and had only refrained from
pressing its case out of a sense of delicacy. Hence the government had been
amazed to discover that this man had been sent to visit a British fortress in
company with Prince Leopold—“a Frenchman and one whose near connec-
tions are notoriously established at the throne of Bonaparte.” He must, wrote
Canning, be sent home at once, and on no account would he be allowed to
pass through Gibraltar into Spain.34
   The upshot of the whole affair had been to further injure Sicilian pride, or
at least the pride of the royal family, and to make the British yet more
suspicious of the loyalty of the court at Palermo.
  Moore, once he had assumed command, obtained two interviews with the
queen, at one of which the king was present, in which Moore did his best to
persuade her that he had the court’s best interests at heart and wanted
sincerely to do all in his power to regain for it the kingdom of Naples. If it
had not been possible to agree on the feasibility of plans, this was for very
good military reasons. As he told Paget, the king and queen thought that
because the French had recently sent some troops to Corfu from Naples, the
whole of that kingdom now lay open, and that it only needed a force to land
for the country to fall like a ripe fruit. It would, he commented, be time
enough to land at Naples when the French had gone—“the kingdom will not
run away.” The largest force that could be raised in Sicily, 8,000 British and
