                 The Court, Drummond, and the Generals                     67

Britain had already been canvassed by Castelcicala.28 And when Canning
learnt of Drummond’s views and his assurance that he had not yet communi-
cated them to the court, he instructed Drummond       on no account to lend
support to any such claim. The question of choosing a regent for Spain must
be a matter for the Spanish Cortes, and any attempt by the court of Sicily to
claim the regency without being invited was bound to arouse a hostile
response. The last thing the British government wanted was to offend the
Spanish patriots.??
   But things had now gone too far for Drummond to see how he could
retract his support, and Circello had been given his written assurances that
what he was doing was backed by his government. The queen had agreed
that Leopold should leave for Spain as soon as possible in the company of her
favorite Saint Clair, the Duke of Orleans, Prince Cassaro, the Duke of Ascoli
and Tommasi, a legal adviser of the government. The whole party was to be
conveyed by the British warship Thunderer, which Ball in Malta had agreed
to supply, without having been shown the passenger list. The T/underer duly
sailed in September and arrived at Gibraltar, only to find that the party was
not permitted to land. Prince Leopold was kept three days on board until he
agreed to return to Palermo and abandon any attempt to make contact with
the Spanish Junta and the patriot party.°°
   Canning had naturally been outraged when he discovered what Drum-
mond had done, disregarding his clear instructions. The British government
had been placed in a quite invidious position. It must either approve Drum-
mond’s actions and so appear to be interfering in Spain’s strictly internal
concerns, or disown the whole Sicilian démarche and thus risk causing
offense at Palermo. It decided to take the latter course, and Drummond was
told that he was recalled.?
  Drummond      comes somewhat discreditably out of the whole wretched,
botched affair. He tried to excuse himself to Canning by making out, quite
untruthfully, that Circello had been the moving force in having Leopold sent
to Spain, and that he, Drummond, had merely connived, and then only in his
private capacity. His excuse for the failure to tell Captain Ball that the
Thunderer was to carry a royal prince was a thoroughly unconvincing one;
over the sending of the Marquis Saint Clair, he attempted to shift all the
blame on the queen—“another proof of her dirty cunning which fools have
mistaken for sense and acuteness”—though he certainly knew that Saint Clair
was going.
   The situation was not improved by a protest, lodged soon after by Cas-
telcicala at the action the British took at Gibraltar. When he tried to argue
that Leopold’s party should have received the same hospitality that British
forces had received in Sicily, Canning became extremely angry. “Tt can hardly
be necessary to you to point out the inaptitude of this illustration.” British
                                                                   safeguard
troops, he added, had been invited to Sicily, and then in order to
