66                     SICILY: THE INSECURE BASE

defence.” Castelcicala wrote to Canning, describing the survey as grossly
insulting—an appalling libel on the king, the queen, and the whole Sicilian
government, and again asked for the author to be prosecuted and punished
with the full vigor of the law.?4 And matters had been made no easier, in
trying to establish relations of trust between the British and Sicilian govern-
ments, by an episode concerning Spain, which involved the Sicilian royal
family.
   pee as the news had reached Palermo that Ferdinand VII of Spain,
nephew of Ferdinand II of Sicily, had been forced by Napoleon to abdicate,
that the Spanish royal family were now prisoners in France, and that a revolt
had broken out by the Spanish people against French occupation, great
excitement prevailed at Palermo. By the will of Charles III, the father of the
Sicilian king and of the unpopular Charles IV of Spain (who had recently
yielded his throne to his son), if the male line of Charles IV should fail,
Ferdinand the Sicilian king would become heir to the throne of Spain.
   Drummond took up the cause of the king (Ferdinand III of Sicily),
sponsored his claim to the Spanish regency, and managed to persuade the
queen that it had the support of the British government. (Needless to say,
King Ferdinand of Sicily was not himself greatly interested, and Drummond
felt he had cause to complain that the king did not go to Spain in person.)?°
Yet Drummond was acting on his own initiative, not only without authority
but directly against Canning’s stated wishes. This was to have unfortunate
consequences, not just for Anglo-Sicilian relations but also for Drummond
personally.
   Writing on 31 May 1808 and a week later on 7 June, Drummond told
Canning he was sure that if the Spanish monarch, as well as his sons, were
excluded from the throne of Spain, then Britain must wish to see on that
throne someone who was her friend and ally. He thought the prospects for
old Spain were gloomy, but that Prince Leopold could be sent to England
and helped to a throne in Spanish America. At this stage, he assured Can-
ning, he had breathed no word to the king or his court that he was thinking
along these lines, but wanted to learn what the ministry thought.?° Yet,
without waiting for a reply, Drummond committed himself at once (and by
implication the British government) to sponsoring a Sicilian regency in
Spain. Having toyed first with the idea of sending the hereditary prince to
Spain, while Leopold went via England to America to claim the regency on
behalf of his father, he got the court to agree that Leopold, in the company of
various advisers, would be sent to Gibraltar to sound out the Spanish. To this
end Drummond had already advanced £10,000 of British money toward the
expenses of the voyage and the cost of Leopold’s stay in Gibraltar.27
   Drummond’s letter of 31 May and his second one of 7 June crossed with a
dispatch to him from Canning. This warned him not to encourage the court
to make any claim to the Spanish regency—a claim for which the backing of
