                                       5

       Threats of Invasion and Counterinvasion


ties fear of a French invasion of Sicily continued to preoccupy Stuart
   throughout the course of 1808. During the winter of 1807/8 the threat
of a French assault was a real one, for Napoleon, seeing Sicily denuded, albeit
temporarily, by Moore’s departure together with 8,000 of the best British
troops, ordered the capture of Reggio and Scilla and preparations for full-
scale invasion.!
   French success in capturing these two strongpoints was due to the British
navy’s inability to keep station in the winter storms and intercept convoys of
small craft carrying munitions from Naples to Pizzo. British reverses were
also the result of the French success in capturing (perhaps through treachery)
in the straits of Messina four gunboats, armed with twenty-four-pounders—
guns that the French found extremely useful in reducing Scilla’s fortifications.
Sherbrooke, the general in temporary command of the British forces at
Messina, ordered the withdrawal of the Scilla garrison after a siege of seven
weeks, not having sufficient forces to make a diversion to relieve the fortress.
Scilla fell on 23 February 1808, but by then Napoleon had changed his plans.
Originally, he had ordered Ganteaume, commanding the Rochefort and
Toulon squadrons, to sail to Naples, embark 9,000 men there, and then land
them around Messina at the same time that Régnier was to put across a
further 9,000 from Reggio and Scilla. But he now felt that Russia’s threat to
the Turkish Empire in the Mediterranean had become of far-more-pressing
importance than the need to deprive the British of Sicily. He decided
therefore to reinforce Corfu with the object of staking out a claim to the
Turkish provinces in Albania and Greece. He instructed Joseph, who at that
moment was busy preparing to enter Sicily, to regard Corfu as of greater
importance: “Sicily’s fate is known and sealed, Corfu’s is quite unknown and
hangs in the balance . . . in the present state of Europe the greatest misfor-
tune that could befall me would be the loss of Corfu.”* And Ganteaume was
not to call at Naples, but instead to make directly for Corfu. When part of his
fleet under Admiral Cosmao became detached in the course of a storm and
put into the port of Taranto, Cosmao sent to Joseph for instructions, but
Joseph, though longing to invade Sicily, did not dare disobey his brother,
and Cosmao was therefore dispatched at once to rejoin Ganteaume’s fleet at
                                                                        in
Corfu. Napoleon, now having learnt that the British had been reinforced

                                       71
