                   The Court, Drummond, and the Generals                     69

7,000 Neapolitans—the latter ill-paid, ill-led and disaffected—would not be
under a unified command, could certainly never beat the French, and would
not impress the local people. As for it acting as a diversion, it would do
nothing to distract Napoleon, who “knows that the fate of Italy will be
decided on the Vistula.”35
   Moore, with good reason, was very doubtful if he had succeeded in
convincing the queen. He felt that she so detested the British, he seriously
wondered if her real aim was not to get the British out of Sicily and to see
their army destroyed on the mainland. The king, it is true, did eventually
permit him to inspect the royal armed forces, whose condition he found
indifferent—about equal to that of the London Volunteers but with “far less
discipline and without their zeal and personal bravery”; but he was not
granted a unified command, the king insisting that the time for this would be
when a joint force had landed in Italy.3°
   Moore was convinced there was no remedy for an unsatisfactory situation
until the role of British diplomat in Sicily was merged with that of military
commander, as it had once been very briefly when General Fox had filled
both parts; for, as things were, the British army had no influence whatever at
court. The queen, he was sure, was guilty of treachery, and surrounded
herself with foreign émigrés who were certainly no friends to Britain. The
only way to maintain Sicily was to take over its government, for if it were left
to the king and queen “they will lose themselves, the island and us.” If the
French were to land, the island would be gone, the royal troops probably
would desert and the local inhabitants, losing confidence, would offer the
enemy no resistance. All the British army could hope to do would be to shut
itself up in its fortresses and await relief from the British navy. It would
clearly therefore be prudent to retain enough transports to take away the
army.37 Moore had decided to make Castrogiovanni (today and in ancient
times called Enna), set on a well-nigh impregnable hill in the center of the
island, his pivot of resistance, leaving only enough men       to garrison the
principal ports.
  This very pessimistic analysis, and Moore’s call for 12,000 more troops,
decided the cabinet to recall him. The Treaty of Tilsit had left Britain on her
own again and had put paid to any hopes of using Sicily as a base for offense,
so Moore and 8,000 of his best troops were ordered back to protect the home
shores and to act as a mobile strategic reserve outside the Mediterranean. The
cabinet had been put in a position in which it must either accept Moore’s
views or recall him and replace him by someone else. It chose the latter, for
reasons that Castlereagh made clear in a letter he wrote to Hawkesbury:

  Unless we are Berea to act up to his principles of setting the govern-
  ment aside, which I certainly am not ... I should not despair of his
  obedience, if of his conversion, to any system we might lay down for him,
