HDD                     SICILY: THE INSECURE BASE

Sicily and that a powerful British fleet had arrived in the Mediterranean, and
having no wish for Ganteaume’s ships to become engaged with a superior
force, ordered them to return to Toulon. It is true that Joseph still had a force
ready amounting to nearly 8,000 men, though of these 3,000 made up the
garrison holding down Lower Calabria; but without the munitions and
transports promised that would have arrived with Ganteaume’s fleet, he felt
that he could take on the British with any reasonable chance of success. When
Napoleon’s interest soon after shifted to the theaters of Spain and Portugal,
Joseph was recalled in July to take over the Spanish throne.*
   During the summer of 1808 Stuart continued to act offensively against the
Neapolitan coast and kept up pressure on the enemy ports, although he
decided to terminate the raids by Calabrian refugees that were organized by
the Marquis Carbone. These raids, he had been assured by General Sher-
brooke, were merely pillaging expeditions that could only result in bringing
discredit on the British army in Sicily.
   In September he was able to report a most successful combined operation
against the small harbor of Diamante. A detachment of British troops had
been landed and with the help of two British sloops had captured thirty-eight
enemy vessels, including two large Neapolitan gunboats.° During the re-
mainder of that month he continued to make hostile demonstrations with
troop transports, as if planning a landing, but eventually he had to call these
off for lack of an adequate naval escort.”7 But in any case he was now
confronted with a far more resourceful and daring opponent than Joseph
Bonaparte had ever been, and he himself was forced onto the defensive.
  For Joseph’s successor in the kingdom of Naples, the daring, ambitious
Joachim Murat, was quite determined to undertake the conquest of Sicily as
soon as he could. As a preliminary, he captured Capri during October 1808,
describing this success to Napoleon as a good augury for the seizure of
Sicily. Although the British had not intended to surrender the island so
easily—in fact the relief force arrived too late (having been driven back by a
storm) and the many desertions from the Corsican regiment, once the deed of
surrender had been signed, had proved, to say the least, somewhat discon-
certing—they did not regard its loss as serious. The cost of defending it had
been excessive and it had served very little purpose except as a base for the
queen’s spies and agents.? The loss did however         alarm the court, who,
through Drummond, complained to Collingwood about the lack of naval
protection. Collingwood was impatient with such complaints. He told
Mulgrave that no important point on the coast of Sicily would be left
undefended and his ships were constantly on station to watch the approaches
to the island. The court, he thought, seemed to imagine that when those
ships were out of sight, the defense of Sicily had been abandoned, and yet
when they were seen in port, the enemy had been left to do as he pleased. “It
would,” he commented feelingly, “require a squadron in every port to
