74                      SICILY: THE INSECURE BASE

whole subject of Italian resistance. “I fear there are no leaders,” he wrote,
“nor any one common or durable bond, which could ensure to us the united
and continued aid of the Tuscans, Romans, Neapolitans and Piedmontese.”!5
Collingwood was also very skeptical about there existing a spirit of pa-
triotism on which to build a war of resistance. “There is no stuff to work on
there—the people are licentious, the nobles are unprincipled. It is a superior
army alone that can effect a change or maintain it.” The Italian people, in his
view, did not possess “the Spanish spirit.”!¢
   Stuart by now had become distrustful of Biancamano and his claims,
especially since he seemed to be linked with slippery characters like Prince
Moliterno, the condottiere who kept in with both sides. He told Castlereagh
that he did not doubt that many in Italy were discontented, but he had yet to
hear of a cohesive party, a concerted plan of operations, or any measures
generally agreed upon. Much depended on the future actions of the Span-
iards and the Austrians, for his force of 9,000 (all he could spare) would
never free Italy on its own. In the kingdom of Naples the upper classes would
be slow to desert their French masters by whom they had been courted and
rewarded, and the people as a whole still had bitter memories of the royal
vengeance in 1799. An amnesty guaranteed by Britain would be “an indis-
pensable prelude” to any attempt to recover Naples. And he tried to convince
the king and queen that he could not undertake any move to the continent
until he received unequivocal proof that the Italian peoples were organized
for war.17
  Murat, through his agents, was well aware of the British involvement with
potential rebels and he kept Napoleon informed accordingly, as also did
Eugene, the viceroy of Italy. He knew of the British correspondence with
patriot leaders in Bologna and Venice in regard to placing Italy under one
constitutional sovereign, and of 12,000 who had pledged themselves to take
up arms in the Roman states, but he sensibly and realistically attached little
importance to all this and assured Napoleon that a general uprising
throughout Italy was an impossibility.18
  Castlereagh, as soon as he realized that Italy was no duplicate of Spain,
decided that troops in Sicily could be better employed in Catalonia. In
October, therefore, he instructed Stuart to prepare to dispatch a force to
Spain, without realizing the damaging effect that this would have on morale
at the court. The latter was already sufficiently alarmed by the recent loss of
Capri to Murat, the movement of troops into Lower Calabria, and the
seeming absence of naval support, to which reference has already been made.
Stuart delayed acting on Castlereagh’s instructions, if only because it seemed
useless to send a force of less than 7,000 to Spain, and that would leave in
Sicily fewer than the minimum of 10,000 troops guaranteed by the treaty of
alliance. The king made it clear he would never agree to such a reduction in
British strength, since he thought it was bound to appear to Murat an open
