                  Threats of Invasion and Counterinvasion                     73

remove all their apprehensions.” However, to calm the fears of the court, and
particularly those of the queen, who still apprehended a British betrayal, he
detailed Admiral Martin with three ships-of-the-line to base himself on
Palermo harbor.!°
   Throughout October and November Murat continued to prepare for
invasion, assuring Napoleon that all he required was 6,000 troops and naval
support; and he argued that the time was now ripe, since the strength of the
British army in Sicily had been reduced to a mere 4,000 [sec]. Clearly, Murat
had swallowed whole the disinformation put out by Napoleon to alarm the
government in London and deflect its attention from Portugal to Sicily. He
had ordered false reports to be placed in various Dutch newspapers about the
strength of the British in Sicily, a landing by 30,000 French, and the exodus
of the king from the island. But by March it must have dawned even on
Murat that Sicily’s invasion had been postponed indefinitely, orders having
reached him to send troops northward to meet the threat presented by
Austria.!1
  Meanwhile there had been various pressures on the British to use their
forces in Sicily to support a national Italian uprising of the kind that had just
been witnessed in Spain. A Neapolitan called Biancamano had recently got in
touch with Drummond, making out that he was the spokesman for the chiefs
of all the parties in Naples. He alleged that these chiefs were in league with
others throughout the whole length of Italy, and that they looked to the
British in Sicily to give them material support.'? The government in
London, being apprised of this, instructed Stuart to use his discretion. But
any help that he might give must be used not for some attempt at the
temporary recovery of Naples but for a purpose “likely to lead to important
and extensive combinations,” or in other words to a major effort to liberate
Italy from the French.!? A month later he received instructions that were a
little more positive. He was urged to explore the possibilities of giving
assistance to the Italians, and for this purpose he was allowed to retain the
transports he had been told to send home. He was warned however that any
help given must be dependent on the success achieved by the patriot armies
of Spain.!4
  Through Lowe, when commanding the Capri garrison, Stuart had made
various inquiries as to how far the local inhabitants would support the arrival
of an army of 10,600. He contemplated the possibility of a landing at some
point along the coast between Terracina and the Gulf of Spezia, since any
landing in the kindgom of Naples would have little appeal to other Italians.
Colonel Bunbury, corresponding with Lowe, pressed for a landing where the
French were weak, and that meant the Roman states or Tuscany. They had
32,000 men, it was true, but scattered over so extensive an area, sickly, and
locked up in garrisons, they would not be able to concentrate them to meet a
threat posed far from Naples. But he did admit to serious doubts about the
