              Growing Impatience with the Court at Palermo                    83

being made by the French to invade Sicily, the inadequacy of Sicilian de-
fenses, the deplorable state of the royal army, and the fact there was no
unified command. He also drew attention to the civil unrest, the widespread
contempt for the court and its government, and the acceptance by most
Sicilians of the absolute need for foreign intervention, no matter from what
quarter it came. Britain, by supporting the court, was reproached for per-
petuating current abuses, and Sicilians queried the value of an alliance with a
country pledged to such nonintervention. Intervention now by Britain
would be welcomed by everyone on the island, save only the queen and her
entourage, a group whose hostile attitudes endangered the lives of the British
garrison.
   In practical terms what he was suggesting was the introduction of Sicilians
to the cabinet® (at present made up of four Neapolitans), the summoning of a
parliament, the exclusion of the queen from public affairs, and the granting to
Britain of a unified command; that, or at least the right to control all
expenditures on the royal forces, whose condition was such they might well
desert the moment the French set foot on the island. Force, he thought,
should be used if necessary to ensure these measures were carried through—
measures imperative in the face of invasion, but also to prevent the island
from remaining merely a “backward and lukewarm ally.”?
  The discontent of the British commanders (greater even than that of
Amherst) at the court’s lack of cooperation in making preparations against an
invasion is apparent in letters written by Campbell, the adjutant general, to
his fellow officers. “The court makes no effort, sends no succour, takes no
notice. Ferdinando the fourth goes a’tunny fishing, and his wife continues
her usual pranks . . . convicted in my mind of acting in concert with Murat
for our expulsion. . . . We must soon hear of some decision by the govern-
ment to abandon Sicily or strongly reinforce and effectively maintain [it].”
For as things were, the court presented nothing but “a tissue of folly and
inconsistency.”!°
   The invasion crisis of the summer came on the heels of a political one,
resulting from the court’s financial difficulties and the parliament's refusal to
grant it any money. The last time the king had asked for a donative had been
back in 1802, and since that date he and his court had had to seek refuge on
the island. The way in which they had used Sicily for their own, not Sicilian,
purposes, the gross extravagances of the queen, the awarding of senior posts
to foreigners, and the maintenance of a substantial army merely in order to
recover Naples, caused steadily mounting dissatisfaction. A body of discon-
tented nobles whose motivations were various and who were led by the vain
and ambitious Prince Belmonte together with his uncle, the idealistic Prince
of Castelnuovo, sponsored a plan for a more rational tax system, designed by
Balsamo, an enlightened economist. This plan envisaged abolishing do-
natives and substituting a tax on land and a moderate tax on general con-
