               Growing Impatience with the Court at Palermo                  85

not to resist an attack by the French and that the latter received from her
assurances that their own vessels would not be fired on.15
   Meanwhile attempts to persuade the court to agree to a unified command
continued to meet with a negative response.!© There was a suggestion that
the Duke of Orleans, the Anglophile son-in-law of the king, should visit
Messina to consult with Stuart, but the latter made it clear that he considered
this pointless until the question of command was resolved. Finally Stuart did
accept that Bourcard should be allowed to come and help coordinate the
movements and positioning of the British and the Sicilian forces; yet almost
on the eve of Murat’s invasion, the plans agreed upon were cancelled by the
court.'” Efforts had been made to get the king to issue a public proclamation,
denying that the interests of Sicily were in any way different from those of
Britain, and to encourage the Sicilian people to join in resisting the invader,
but no action had been forthcoming. Only in July could the king be induced
to order his troops and his general in Messina to cooperate with the British
forces, and to deny Murat’s claim that the people of Sicily looked to him
(Murat) as their deliverer and savior. Even then the order in question did not
carry the king’s signature nor those of any of his ministers, nor was it ever
officially proclaimed or given widespread circulation. Mellish, the chargé
daffaires in Palermo, had had to use the strongest language to get the order
issued at all and to persuade the king to send to Milazzo a regiment of royal
cavalry.18
   As the court had done nothing on its own to counter the stream of
propaganda put out by the government in Naples, Stuart had organized his
own   with the newspaper     Gazzetta Britannica,   written and published in
Messina and edited by a Sicilian priest. From March onward it described the
horrors the people might expect once the French landed, and it led its readers
to anticipate a Sicilian Vespers in reverse. Stuart relied on local support (as
things turned out, with justification), and issued his own proclamation to the
people, as the court had so signally failed to appeal to them.'?
   To resist the invasion, Admiral Martin disposed of a force of three sail-of-
the-line, five frigates, nine brigs and nearly 120 gunboats, which harassed
Murat’s invasion preparations and captured and destroyed a great many of his
vessels. In one action alone on 21 July this force successfully intercepted a
convoy carrying important stores, and out of a total of fifty boats captured
thirty-seven and sank the rest. Even so Martin remained very conscious of the
limitations within which he operated, and he emphasized to his superior,
Cotton, the impossibility of interdicting the enemy’s coastal communica-
tions.?°
  Stuart himself had under command a force of 16,000 troops, almost half of
whom were foreign, which included a disposable reserve of between 8,000
and 9,000 men. Since April he had resisted the orders that were sent to him
