                  Threats of Invasion and Counterinvasion                    77

lying in Toulon’s outer harbor as if awaiting orders to sail. Collingwood
warned that he was unable to guarantee the protection of Ischia, or indeed of
Palermo itself, for if the French fleet got out from Toulon, it might well be in
the Bay of Naples before he knew that it had sailed, were the weather to favor
the enemy. In view of all this, Stuart decided he must, if ignominiously, retire
forthwith to Sicily, abandoning the captured islands that Collingwood had
never considered worth taking.3°
   Back in Sicily, the Count La Tour continued to press for a joint expedition
to land on the northwest coast of Italy, and in this he received the support of
the court (disgusted at Stuart’s withdrawal from Ischia) and the British
ministers in Palermo and Cagliari. But, wisely, Stuart remained hesitant. It
may be, as La Tour suggested, that Stuart possessed only physical courage
and was frightened of making any decision for which he could be held
personally responsible; but given the decisive defeat of the Austrians, a
landing in the north would have courted disaster and exposed Sicily to
immediate invasion.?!
   La Tour then propounded a new plan. It involved 6,000 Austrian troops
being sent to Sicily to join the king, as a bait to tempt him back into Italy.
The idea had great appeal to the queen, since it seemed a way of ridding the
court of its utter dependence on the British, and with 4,000 troops the
Sardinians were offering, there could soon be a force of 10,000 in Sicily
completely under the control of the court. The whole thing was a fantasy,
based on Vienna’s erroneous conception that the allied forces in Sicily were
made up of 5,000 British auxiliaries under the direct command of the king,
and a royal army of 15,000. In any case the La Tour mission and schemes for
sending armies to Italy were brought to a very speedy conclusion when the
Austrians signed the Peace of Vienna.??
   What Stuart was persuaded to do, at the thrice-repeated request of Col-
lingwood, was to send a small force of 1,700 to capture the southern Ionian
islands. Now that the French looked on the point of moving into Illyria,
Collingwood was persuaded it was important to prevent them from getting a
hold on Greece and threatening the existence of the Turkish Empire. Posses-
sion of the islands, he hoped, would act as an effective check to the French
and would simultaneously afford Sicily correspondingly greater security.
During the first week in October British forces from Sicily captured the
islands of Zante, Ithaca, Cephalonia, and Cerigo, and shortly after, Santa
Maura. Stuart was then pressed by his subordinates to authorize an assault on
Corfu, but because of his instructions from London he had no choice but to
resist this pressure.33 Wellesley, the secretary of state, positively forbade an
attack on Corfu since far too many troops would be needed not only to
capture the fortress but to hold it. The policy of the British government was
to act defensively in the Mediterranean while the struggle being waged in
Spain and Portugal was employing so much of the British army. The gar-
