84                      SICILY: THE INSECURE BASE


sumption. The plan was approved by parliament but rejected out of hand by
the court, who, under the pretense of negotiating a scheme for amending the
Sicilian constitution, succeeded in dividing the barons and winning over a
part of them, headed by the loyal and upright Cassaro. The recalcitrant
barons led by Belmonte then decided to turn to the British and made an
appeal for help to Amherst, who, though sympathetic, had no instructions.!!
Amherst, knowing he was quite shortly retiring from his post in Palermo,
recommended that his successor be empowered to intervene in the govern-
ment (in ways he had already sketched out in his dispatch of a month before).
The barons, he wrote home, want a constitution modelled to some extent on
the British, and they believe that the king’s opposition to it can be overcome
only by Britain’s interference. Sicily, he stressed once again, was a country
that was ripe for resistance, and the prospect of becoming a province of
England was not unwelcome to most of its people. Tactful support by the
British government of the kind of constitution the barons envisaged could
have the effect of influencing the court. But in any case some change was
needed. There must not be a repetition of what had recently occurred when
the court, confronted by a French invasion, had clearly appeared to side with
the enemy.}2
   For several months there had been no doubt that the enemy was seriously
preparing an assault. Murat, who to the end of his career remained a victim of
self-deception, had persuaded himself from intelligence reports that the bulk
of the Sicilians were on his side. The British army and the court at Palermo
were both, he was told, detested heartily and in any case were at odds with
each other. He told Napoleon that he was sure he could count on the support
of Prince Moliterno, who, together with his fellow officers, was awaiting his
arrival with some impatience.!3 By the end of July Murat had concentrated
500 boats in the little ports immediately facing Sicily, dismantled his forts to
arm these boats, and erected batteries at points where transports could be
assembled and troops embarked. Finally he arrived in person in the neigh-
bourhood of Reggio, publicly pledging that in twenty-five days he would be
dating his letters from Palermo. Yet in the face of all this the court had
maintained an attitude of indifference, conduct that Amherst had stigmatized
as “tardy, temporising and even suspicious.” After much delay, it did finally
order the enrollment of 8,000 men, though not until the end of July. But in
any case there was no real prospect of the order being carried out, since
everyone knew the court had not the means to pay even the troops it already
had. The court also ordered sixteen gunboats in Palermo harbor to join the
British, but then reduced the pay of their crews, thus offering them, it
seemed, an incentive to desert; and the crews were only prevented from
doing so by the British agreeing to make good their pay.!* There is also
evidence that agents of the queen issued secret instructions to the gunboats
