                                       6

  Growing Impatience with the Court at Palermo

ie the root of the differences between the court and the British representa-
       tives in Sicily, either military or civil (for Amherst, who in March 1809
had replaced Drummond as minister, shared the views of the generals about
the court), lay three apparently unanswerable question: how to obtain
stricter control of the way in which Britain’s subsidy was spent, how to get a
unified command of all troops on the island, both royal and British, and how
to procure the court’s support in the effort to mobilize the island’s defenses.
On each of these three important matters, and of course the three were
interlinked, all attempts to secure agreement or to establish any measure of
confidence continued to meet with total failure, and in consequence bred
increasing frustration.
   The growing financial difficulties of the court led the British government
to offer it an increase of £100,000 in the amount of the annual subsidy, in
return for which it was suggested that certain important concessions be
made. The first of these was the introduction of a unified command on the
island. If this were done the problem of accounting could be solvied simply
and painlessly. British senior officers at Messina had long been pressing for
the right of supervising the way in which the subsidy was spent—ostensibly
on military objects, but in reality on pensions for émigrés and for financing
the queen’s network of spies."
   What Canning wished to make clear to the court was that his government
had no desire to interfere in Sicily’s internal affairs, though neither could it
commit itself to the restoration of the kingdom of Naples.” The court, while
welcoming the first assurance, remained completely adamant over the ques-
tion of a unified command. This was awkward for the ministry in London. It
had earlier secured from Castelcicala, Sicilian minister to the Court of St.
James, a pledge that if Sicily were invaded, all forces there would come under
British command. This pledge had been used by ministers to satisfy a
querulous House of Commons who were doubtful about the value obtained
from the annual subsidy paid to Sicily. Now the court made out that
Castelcicala had acted without authority, that the king had become the
commander-in-chief (an expedient to be rid of a difficult question, since his
health would prevent him from taking the field) and that to surrender
command of his forces would be a blow to his royal dignity. The queen saw it
                                       79
