82                      SICILY: THE INSECURE BASE

as an absolute necessity for the king and his sons to be seen to command if
they were not to lose “face” in Sicily and indeed throughout the whole of
Europe.* The queen got her way and the treaty was signed and duly ratified
in 1810 without the government in London mentioning the court’s con-
tinued intransigence. “We are still,’ Amherst wrote to Stuart, “in the same
uncertainty . . . left to ourselves to remedy as best we can the want of unity of
plan and employment of the military resources of Sicily.”4
   Stuart by now had become disillusioned with a court whose darling he had
once been. The operations he had undertaken in the Bay of Naples in June
and July had opened his eyes to the court’s duplicity. He complained to
Castlereagh of the way he had been deceived over the role of Prince Leopold,
who had accompanied him to Ischia in what was nominally a military role.
Yet once Ischia had been taken, the prince had revealed himself unexpectedly
as the king’s representative on the island, a step that Stuart considered to be
both “premature and injudicious,” in view of the suspicions of many Neapoli-
tans in regard to the king and his future intentions. Stuart also complained
bitterly of the actions of the Marquis di Schiara, appointed by the king as
civil governor in Reggio and the surrounding area. Despite the king’s solemn
amnesty, backed by assurances from the British commanders, Schiara had
behaved in such a way as to alienate all the local people, and although Circello
tried to make out that Schiara had acted without authority, Stuart was
convinced he had been the recipient of secret instructions from the queen.
While the latter was considered the source of authority by ministers and all
those in government, “Revenge, Passion and Asperity” would rule, and there
seemed to Stuart to be little advantage in any military agreement with the
court.®
   It was only the strongest opposition on his part and on that of Rear
Admiral Martin, now in command of the naval force that was protecting
Sicily, that prevented the court in February 1810 from once more trying to
raise the masse by sending a force under Prince Moliterno into Calabria with
3,000 muskets. The fact that this madcap scheme of the queen had been
planned without consulting the British, though it entailed the employment
and escort of British transports for 4,000 men, caused the British comman-
ders no small irritation, and it also caused Amherst to lodge a protest against
such “separate and secret undertakings.”© Stuart by now had become con-
vinced that only intervention by Britain could save Sicily from disaster,
ironically the same conclusion that Moore had reached three years before. He
informed Bunbury there were no alternatives but to take over Sicily or to
abandon it altogether, and he told Amherst that Britain must dictate to the
court “its measures as well as its policy.”7
   Amherst had come to agree with him. Writing to Wellesley, the foreign
secretary, he called on the ministry at home to intervene in Sicilian affairs.
Outlining his reasons for doing so, he drew attention to the preparations
