               Growing Impatience with the Court at Palermo                 87

the risk of sickness in an area known to be plagued by malaria during the
months of July and August. But to save face, he announced publicly that the
point of the exercise had been achieved. Napoleon told him he ought to have
kept his army concentrated, to deceive the British, and that he was imme-
diately to resume a threatening posture in regard to Sicily.24 When Stuart
reacted as Napoleon desired and for fear of weakening Sicily’s defenses
refused to send more troops to Spain, he was overruled by Liverpool and
resigned his appointment in disgust.25.The court meanwhile declined to
order any public celebration of the island’s deliverance.?°
   Sicily continued to remain vulnerable. The foreign troops under British
command were of a very mixed quality, and two regiments were singled out
as being especially unsatisfactory. The British forces covered only the area
from Milazzo    to Faro and then south to Cape Passaro and, apart from
Trapani where they had a small garrison, the rest of the island was very
exposed, guarded by an army of 9,000 virtually useless royal troops. As for
protection by the British navy, this was entirely dependent on the weather.
The ships could not operate off Calabria in the teeth of a strong northeasterly
wind and might always be inhibited by currents or periodic calms (as Nelson
had stressed earlier). On 18 September 1810 the fleet had not been able to
prevent the bulk of Cavaignac’s invading force from returning safely to
Reggio, nor to stop Murat’s fleet of 600 ships from making its retreat to the
north, unscathed, save by volleys from coastal batteries. It is true that a
fortnight afterward a flotilla of 110 of these boats was successfully inter-
cepted off the coast of Calabria and that thirty-six of them were destroyed,
but the bulk of Murat’s invasion armada contrived to return to Naples
intact:27
   Nevertheless the ministry in London was not inclined to be pessimistic, no
doubt influenced in their views by the conclusions of a military report
submitted early in 1811. This report considered that the British garrison,
amounting to 15,000 troops, could repel any attack from the east. And if the
French were to land in the west, conveyed by a strong naval force from
Toulon that might always evade the British fleet, it would still be months
before they could drag their heavy siege guns across the mountains to reduce
the fortresses of Messina and Milazzo. By which time, it was safely reckoned,
the navy would haye come to evacuate the army.?® In refusing to strengthen
Sicily further at the expense of Spain and Portugal, the ministers took a
calculated risk, but one that proved in the end to be justified.
