               Bentinck and British Intervention, Stage One                 95

  they regard the changes now making in their government is astonishing
  even to us, who have had for so long an acquaintance with their want of
  sense and good feeling in any matters savouring of patriotism.?5
In regard to the trials in Messina to investigate allegations of treachery, she
described how the mountain of the council of war, of which her husband had
been a member, had labored long to produce its mouse. (It had sat for seven
weeks and examined an enormous volume of written evidence.) The pris-
oners accused of selling the island had, the court found, merely offered to
trade some trifling details to the French in Calabria about British strengths
and dispositions, only in order to obtain facilities for promoting a trade in
contraband.7°
   Bentinck had returned from England armed with the power to withhold
the subsidy if the court refused to accept his demands. These were: the
immediate appointment of Sicilians to positions of influence, the conceding
of a unified command, the recall of the five exiled barons, and the removal of
anti-British advisers.2” He proceeded at once to use this power, though it did
not yield instantaneous results. His interviews with the king and queen and
Marquis Circello all proved fruitless, so he sent for a regiment from Malta
and ordered his troops at Milazzo and Trapani to embark on transports and
sail for Palermo. As he wrote to General Oakes, the civil commissioner in
Malta, “this uncertainty will never be determined until force, or the ap-
pearance of force, shall produce the necessity of a decision.” It was a policy
that Robert Fagan had urged on him the previous September (“every point
will be obtained in four hours . . . Good God, what ridiculous and ill-judged
delicacy has directed our conduct till the present”).?8 And indeed there were
many others, generals, admirals and diplomats, who had acquaintance with
Sicily and the political position there, who had written him letters of encour-
agement, urging him to take a very firm line.
   In a stormy interview with the queen, Bentinck found himself accused of
trying to dethrone the king, whose only course, so the queen declared, was to
lead his army into Italy and die in the breach, like Tippoo Sultan.?? She
ridiculed the whole idea of choosing Sicilians as ministers—people “who
could neither read nor write”—yet there was little she could do.?° She was
however almost certainly responsible for encouraging an officer called Melito
to try to stir up the mob in the capital, and Bentinck now decided to make
that city the future headquarters of the British garrison."
   The king offered to abdicate (a course that Bentinck himself favored) and
was only dissuaded by the queen. But in the face of the military threat, he did
agree to appoint his eldest son, the hereditary prince, as vicar general (a
course that the queen had also opposed), although he refused to delegate any
control over foreign affairs. He also agreed to a unified command, with
Bentinck henceforth as captain general, and to recalling the five barons
without any conditions attached.?
   Yet despite his apparent victory, Bentinck discovered that little was hap-
