                Bentinck and British Intervention, Stage One                   ot

of the British Empire” was published in November 1810 and ran through
four editions in two years. It was read and admired by many army officers,
including Generals Wellington and Beresford, and it was favorably com-
mented on in the Quarterly Review of May 1811.8
   Pasley’s thesis was that Sicily had not fulfilled the terms of the treaty under
which it received a substantial subsidy, and instead of providing an efficient
army, it absorbed 15,000 of the best British troops. “As long as we hold
Sicily . . . without applying its revenues and resources to our own purposes,
in return for the protection we afford it, it can only be compared to a
millstone round our necks.” He argued that Sicily was potentially an incom-
parable asset to Great Britain, and militarily of far more value than all the
West Indies put together, yet the British government seemed to regard it as
nothing more than an appendage of Malta. Britain should have conquered it
in 1805, instead of earning unpopularity by propping up an incompetent
monarchy. Pasley therefore proposed that a Britain general should be put in
command of all troops in Sicily, and that commissariat and postal services
should be placed forthwith under British direction.?
   This may have made uncomfortable reading for the Perceval ministry in
London, but in the end it was the resignations of both Amherst and Stuart
coming together, that forced the government to rethink its policy.'
   Bentinck was commissioned by Wellesley to produce a memorandum of
his views, based on a reading of the relevant dispatches, before being given
his instructions. His conclusions, which did not please all the cabinet, were
that if Britain were to keep Sicily, she could not delay her intervention.
Britain, he submitted, must control the subsidy, take command of all troops
in the island, appoint Sicilians to the government, and ensure the reform of
outstanding abuses. These measures would appeal to the people and might
have a great effect on Italy. If the Sicilian court refused to accept them, then
the minister should withdraw to Messina. The great and pressing evil in Sicily
demanded a “speedy and decisive remedy,” and unless he was given extraordi-
nary powers he felt he could not perform the task or cope with all the “deceit,
low cunning and intrigues of that miserable court.”?*
   The Prime Minister, Perceval, was not impressed by this reasoning. He
pointed out that for the past five years every military authority had said the
same thing, namely that the security of Sicily depended on effecting these
reforms. Yet Sicily was still defended. The revolution envisaged by Bentinck
would overthrow the royal prerogative and also noble and corporate priv-
ileges, and he was not convinced that the changes proposed would necessarily
result in the promised gains. He did not believe in the queen’s treachery and
thought her jealousy of Britain understandable, and he did not feel that the
use of violence was justified in the circumstances. Bentinck must be urged to
                                                                           British
accept the post, provided the views he submitted to the court were the
government’s and not his own.'?
