86                       SICILY:   THE   INSECURE   BASE


by Castlereagh to send away four battalions to Spain, exercising, understand-
ably, the ultimate discretion he had been given.*! He had much improved the
coastal defenses in the area most exposed to attack, built a military road from
Messina to Faro, and constructed batteries along the coast, suitably protected
by fascines and sandbags. The local peasants had given their labor voluntarily
to dig entrenchments, and the well-to-do had offered their horses, till forbid-
den to do so by the governor of Messina.?* Whether this would have been
sufficient to withstand an assault by 25,000 well-led, well-equipped and
experienced troops (15,000 of whom were French), it is impossible to guess.
Everything really hinged on the question of whether Murat would be able for
long enough to maintain his line of communications in face of the threat
from the British squadron, for his own tiny naval squadron had been largely
destroyed on 3 May by a British frigate. And of course his ability to do so
depended entirely on the weather.
   When the invasion eventually took place on the night of 17/18 September,
it very soon developed into a fiasco. Thirty-five hundred Neapolitan troops
under Brigadier General Cavaignac landed on the coast south of Messina,
but, when attacked by a British force, retired swiftly and took to their boats,
leaving behind 1,200 men (or according to French sources, just under 800),
together with their brigade commander. In this encounter the British suf-
fered the loss of only three or four men. The local peasants, most of whom
had firearms, had also joined in the defense and surprised Stuart agreeably by
their hostile attitude to the invaders. The major attack planned on the Faro
mainly by French troops never took place—Murat giving as his excuse a
sudden drop in the favorable wind. Whether           their commander,   General
Grenier, who was in communication with Paris and directly responsible to
the minister of war there, had been given an order not to embark cannot be
proved by the documents. What is certain is he had been told by Napoleon to
take no risks and to be sure of success.
     Jacques Rambaud, in an interesting article about this abortive enterprise,
has shown that it was not only Napoleon and Grenier who were hesitant, but
also the other French generals commanding the divisions of Murat’s assault
force, especially Partonneaux, who knew the area, and Lamarque, who had
earlier proved his enterprise in his bold assault on the cliffs of Anacapri. It
was Murat’s awareness of his generals’ reservations that had almost certainly
prompted him to launch Cavaignac across the straits, in order to convince the
others that the operation was feasible.23
   Napoleon, we know, was primarily interested in making the British believe
in the invasion in order to distract their attention from Portugal, Spain, and
the Ionian islands. He was therefore furious with Murat when the latter,
realizing his project had failed, withdrew most of his forces from Calabria,
including all his gunboats and transports, Murat was unable to afford the
expense of keeping his troops mobilized for invasion. He also feared running
