                                        7

  Lord William Bentinck and British Intervention,
                                Stage One


     s the constitutional crisis worsened in the early months of 1811, so did
A     relations between the court and British officials, civil and military. The
refusal of the Sicilian parliament to grant the king the money he had asked for
led him to try to raise taxes by decree—a patent violation of the constitution.
The royal edicts of 14 February imposed a tax of 1 percent on all sales,
including those made by British merchants, and confiscated properties be-
longing to the church and to various charitable communities, which were
then ordered to be sold by public lottery.
   When the British merchants protested strongly that the sales tax was
contrary to the treaty signed with Britain by Spain in 1667 and renewed by
the Palermo court as recently as 1809, they received the cursory reply they
should either comply or leave the island. The court was irritated not only by
this protest but by the appeal being made to London by Prince Belmonte and
other barons, calling for the repeal of the royal decrees and the summoning of
a parliament. Protests on behalf of British subjects arrested and detained in
Sicily and on behalf of the captain and owners of a ship flying the British flag,
captured by three of Castrone’s privateers, were all rejected out of hand, and
the British Consul General, Robert Fagan, when he tried to remonstrate with
Circello, was accorded a less than polite reception. He was then suspended
from all his functions on the grounds that he was interfering with the normal
judicial processes.! Meanwhile five leaders of the dissident barons, including
Belmonte and Castelnuovo, were arrested and deported to the smaller is-
lands.
   All the tension this generated was made worse by the growing suspicion
that the queen was involved in treachery. As early as March 1810, Amherst
had drawn London’s attention to the queen’s change of attitude toward
Napoleon, after she had learned of the latter’s intended marriage to her
granddaughter, Princess Marie-Louise. There was evidence that the queen
was corresponding with the government in Paris through Vienna, with the
French consulate in Tunis, and with Lucien Bonaparte, a prisoner in Malta.
In February 1811, reports reached Amherst that the queen had made a secret
agreement by which the king was to get back Naples, while an Austrian

                                      88
