 94                     SICILY: THE INSECURE BASE

of British and Sicilian officers and he himself must appoint its president. He
also asked for authority to arrest and punish summarily anyone found inside
the British defenses who either aided the enemy or was in correspondence
with him. To the latter request the king demurred on the grounds that the
matter was no longer urgent, but he did accede to other demands about the
appointment of a “council of war” and the way in which it was to be
composed. 19
   The most important figure in the plot, Captain Rossaroll, an infantry
officer and chief of the royal police in Messina, was tried by an Anglo-Sicilian
court, sentenced to death and subsequently hanged.?° Though Rossaroll did
not reveal at his trial he had been acting on behalf of the queen, Bentinck had
evidence enough to prove that her advisers were deeply involved. Another of
her agents, Captain Cassetti, had earlier been arrested in Palermo and the
letters he carried seemed to show on whose behalf he must have been acting
in the contacts he had established with Murat.?! The threat to publish the
relevant documents was one Bentinck used against the court, and the fact that
the king refused to examine them showed he knew that they were not
forgeries. But he told Orleans that although the queen had committed many
indiscretions, he could not believe she would go so far as to correspond with
the enemy.?7
   These plots were only the culmination of intrigues that had been detected a
year before, revealing the queen to be rather more of an inveterate schemer
than a serious danger. Castlereagh told Castelcicala that although he was
convinced of her treachery, which meant that she could not stay in Sicily, he
thought she had acted in a moment of passion and not with any premedita-
tion. Bentinck himself never believed that the queen really meant to give the
French Sicily, and he thought that only her love of intrigue, her love for
Naples, and her Anglophobia had led her to compromise herself.23
  It seems that the initial reactions in both London and Messina to events in
Sicily during 1811 had been overdone. One shrewd observer in Messina, the
wife of a senior British officer and clearly a woman of some intelligence,
wrote home of the alarmist reports then being circulated in England about
the state of unrest in Sicily and the spy scare that for several months had
caused a flurry in military circles:
   Each party speaks boastfully and threatens much—but in each there is so
   little spirit and real energy and so little genuine patriotism or power of
   pursuing consistently for any length of time one steady undeviating
   course—that small indeed is the reliance to be placed in anything said or
  projected by either party—a Sicilian talks loud and long, sometimes even
  well—but he has rarely the resolution or courage necessary for action.24
That was in August 1811. Five months later, she wrote on the same theme:

  So far from the people of the island being in a state of insurrection, as has
  been asserted in many of your newspapers—the total apathy with which
