                Bentinck and British Intervention, Stage One                  93

treachery. It entailed the suborning of German troops (part of the garrison of
Messina), the seizure of the Faro fort, and an invitation to the French in
Calabria to cross over without opposition. Sixteen people in all were arrested,
including the colonel of the Sicilian flotilla, the principal judge, and an army
captain. And a soldier of the Calabrian corps (who was arrested by a British
patrol) was tried summarily by court martial and executed without further
ado. The bishop of Oppido was also arrested, although by royal command
and at Maitland’s request.
  In regard to the earlier “conspiracies,” >) revealed in the letters sent from
Calabria that had been seized by the British authorities and had seemed to
implicate the queen, the king had been anxious to demonstrate his con-
tinuing loyalty to the alliance. The incriminating letters, so Circello pointed
out, were clearly intended by whomever sent them (the agents of Murat in
Calabria) to fall into the hands of the British, and so were designed to sow
suspicion between Britain and Sicily. In November therefore the king had
ordered the printing of a special dispatch to be given the widest distribution
in which he condemned all such attempts to stir up discord between the
allies. And in order to discourage future messengers, armed with such letters
and carrying false papers, he decreed that any such persons caught were to be
hanged within twenty-four hours of their having been found guilty of the
offence. The British commander, Sir Frederick Maitland, was asked to assist
in smuggling copies of this dispatch to Calabria, which Maitland of course
agreed to do.!7
   But then had come the revelations of a “real” conspiracy at Messina. The
king took violent offense at what seemed to be the high handed manner in
which Maitland had handled the business. He could not, so Circello pro-
tested, allow his subjects to be put on trial by the representative of another
power, and he therefore ordered a special court, to include two British
officers, to be set up to try the accused. He also took very great exception to a
proclamation that Maitland had issued appealing for the support of Sicilians
for the British forces protecting Sicily—a proclamation that had been made
without the permission of the king, and one in which no mention was made
of any alliance between Britain and Sicily. And the king took further grave
exception to the promise, publicly made by Maitland, to pardon all those
who might turn “king’s evidence.” Pardon was, it was pointed out, the
prerogative of the king alone.!8
   By this time Bentinck had returned to Sicily and he had to apologize to the
king for the tactlessness of his deputy. The need for speed in taking action in
what seemed desperate circumstances had led Maitland, he feared, to forget
due forms. But what Bentinck refused to accept was the kind of tribunal the
king envisaged for trying the men accused of treason. The persons arrested
had been detected in the very center of the British camp and at the headquar-
ters of the commander-in-chief, and he therefore insisted that the court to try
them must be appointed by him alone. It should be composed in equal parts
