               Bentinck and British Intervention, Stage One                   89

prince was to rule in Sicily with the support of German troops. Though
Circello, on behalf of the court, made a solemn denial of these rumors and
assured Amherst that the king still remained staunchly loyal to the British
alliance, Amherst professed himself dissatisfied, until the king conceded a
unified command.”
   Meanwhile the government in London had at last followed Moore’s ad-
vice, given to it by him four years earlier, namely to combine the offices in
Sicily of diplomat and military commander as they had once been under
General Fox. On 25 February 1811 Lord William Bentinck was appointed to
this post—envoy extraordinary, minister plenipotentiary, and commander-
in-chief of the British forces. Bentinck was a man of wide experience in both
the military and administrative fields, having seen active service in Spain,
Italy, and the Netherlands, and from 1803 to 1807 he had governed the
province of Madras. Described by his most recent biographer as possessing
something of the energy and forthrightness of a great Victorian public
servant, cool in action and very determined, a Whig idealist but not doc-
trinaire, he was to fill for the next four years the unenviable and exacting role
of a British proconsul in Sicily,* which 1s what the ministry had decided that
it wanted. His plain speaking as a straightforward soldier, as well as his
somewhat charmless manner disguising what was a strong natural reserve,
did not endear him to the court, and the queen who resented particularly his
dictatorial attitude and actions described him as being a wild beast, a boorish
sergeant, someone who having been sent to Sicily merely “in order to bow
and scrape” had the temerity to give laws to the country.° While the king,
completely unaccustomed to hear such blunt language used to a sovereign,
thought of Bentinck as an instrument of God, sent to punish him for all his
sins.©
   The British government had long been under pressure to intervene more
in Sicilian affairs—pressures exerted by members of Parliament, a section of
the popular press, the publications of Francis Leckie (the Scotsman who had
farmed near Syracuse), British merchants who did business in Sicily, and also
by a very influential book by the army captain Charles W. Pasley. Indeed the
ministers had had some difficulty in persuading the irate Castelcicala that they
were anxious to give such protection “to the honour and dignity of an ally” as
the law allowed against offensive publications. A letter published in the
Morning Post on 14 August 1810, which suggested that Sicily could only be
saved by Britain annexing it and pensioning the king, caused the institution
of legal proceedings, though a month later these were dropped. And a report
in the Morning Chronicle on 2 May 1811 reporting the speech of a member of
Parliament, in which he had said of Sicily that “a more profligate government
or a more oppressed people did not exist or had not existed,” called forth
further protests from Castelcicala and renewed demands that the editor of the
newspaper be prosecuted.” Captain Pasley’s “Military Policy and Institutions
