102                     SICILY: THE INSECURE BASE


Bentinck his prime minister or “Grand Chancellor.” Not unnaturally this
offer was refused, Bentinck replying that he could not see how any foreigner
could hold such a post.°8
   The king thus put firmly on one side, it only remained to deal with the
queen and those advisers of the court who were known to be unfriendly to
the constitution. The hereditary prince, at Bentinck’s request, relieved of
their posts the king’s recent supporters, the barons Cassaro, Cuto, and Aci,
agreed to deprive of all influence Tommasi, Hesse, and Circello, and ordered
out of Sicily foreigners like Frilli and Moliterno.5? To the queen, who was
still at Castelvetrano, Bentinck sent Macfarlane, a tactful general, with orders
to ensure she left Sicily and to make arrangements for her departure. To make
certain that the queen complied and did not attempt to raise the people,
Bentinck dispatched three battalions of infantry, together with a squadron of
cavalry. There was no physical resistance, but a great many protests and
delays (some of them caused by the queen’s ill-health) until she finally
departed from Mazzara on 14 June 1813. She sailed aboard a British warship,
escorted by two more, travelled to Vienna via Constantinople, and died there
in September 1814 shortly after her arrival. Financially she had been gener-
ously treated, the British government paying her debts, redeeming her per-
sonal jewels from pawn, and granting her a respectable allowance. Whether
she had really been worth so much trouble and all this expense is perhaps
debatable. What is certain is that her removal was not a solution to the
island’s problems or to those of the British in Sicily.6°
   Bentinck now appeared to have triumphed, though he regretted that the
relevant dispatches had arrived too late to make his coup needless. For what
the dispatches did was make clear what the queen had been trying to cast a
doubt on (thus bringing on a political crisis), namely that Bentinck had the
support of the British ministers in London. But now he felt certain that the
matter was resolved, the queen’s influence was finally extinguished (“the
cause of all our past embarrassments”), the king was neutralized, the prince
had full powers, and the ministry enjoyed his confidence. It was one in whose
work he now played a full part, attending the council regularly and meeting
ministers at his house or theirs to discuss tactics and policies, and the shaping
of the new constitution. So involved had Bentinck become in bestowing a
constitution on Sicily that he gave the matter priority over all other consid-
erations, including the question urged by the British ministers of his taking
over the command in Spain. It seemed to the egregious Sir Robert Wilson
(disliked by Bentinck for his interference in the politics of the court at
Palermo), who was staying in Sicily at this time, that the British were
“preparing for a crusade, with the British code of laws on the points of our
bayonets.”61
   Bentinck felt that he could now boast that the old system against which the
British had been contending for the past six years had at last been “com-
