96                      SICILY: THE INSECURE BASE

pening, and he began to regret his precipitancy in resuming the payment of
the British subsidy. The court was expert at procrastination, and the heredi-
tary prince was no exception, being far more under the influence of his
parents than Bentinck had either supposed or hoped. The prince tried to have
the former ministers, including Circello, retained as councillors, a course to
which Bentinck strongly objected, given their unprogressive views and gen-
eral unpopularity. And the prince also took the view that to summon
parliament at this time, when popular opinion was so inflamed, would merely
be courting revolution, despite Bentinck’s attempt to impress on him that
nothing less than a parliament could solve the country’s financial problems
and introduce much-needed reforms. The king, who together with the queen
really governed the hereditary prince, was convinced that Bentinck had
exceeded his powers, and he therefore counted on Bentinck’s recall before a
parliament could be summoned and a new constitution introduced. For that
reason he advised the prince to delay in effecting any change.#4
     A new ministry was eventually formed of four members of the Sicilian
nobility: Belmonte, Castelnuovo, Cassaro, and Aci, though not until March
1812, and even then it failed to gain the hereditary prince’s confidence.
Parliament did not meet until May and no progress whatsoever was made
toward adopting a new constitution. There were still too many anti-British
advisers who surrounded the king and queen, even if the worst had been
removed (Ascoli exiled to Sardinia,3+ Castrone shut up in Castellamare, and
Medici allowed to go to England in order to plead the cause of the queen
there). Bentinck was certain that the queen was the real cause of all the delay.
She was responsible, according to Belmonte, for spreading rumors that the
latter was trying to get rid of the hereditary prince and set up a regency under
Orleans. Orleans was the intimate of Belmonte and also the trusted friend of
Bentinck, whom, through his link with the royal family, he was able to keep
very well informed of what was being thought and done at court. Orleans
told the hereditary prince that he was wrong to suspect him of wanting his
place; that if he wanted that he would not try so hard to reconcile him to the
British command.    But the rumor, once started, was hard to scotch, and
Bentinck thought it was one of the reasons for the unpopularity of the
British.35
   Bentinck tried without any success to persuade the queen to leave Sicily,
letting her know he was well acquainted with her agents dealings with the
enemy. She grew by turns angry and tearful at the harshness of Bentinck’s
inflexibility, his attempt to get rid of her “as if she were nothing but a
common prostitute,” and his refusal to pay her debts, and she resolutely
declined to move.#° The court had been banking on Bentinck’s support for
an expedition to Italy and had therefore professed to approve of the idea of
Sicily having a new constitution, having been convinced by Moliterno of the
magical importance of that word as the key that would unlock the kingdom
