               Bentinck and British Intervention, Stage One                  99

ing from compromising himself in the hope of preserving the dynasty. When
he gave his approval to the constitution, he gave it in a qualified form, and he
excepted from his approval articles relating to the civil list, the right of
parliament to control expenditures, and compensation for the loss of civil
rights.*°
   Much (too much) of Bentinck’s time was given up to getting rid of the
queen, to whose     presence in Sicily, it can now    be seen, he attached an
exaggerated importance. The king liked to shelter behind the queen, making
out that it was she, not he, who was really the cause of any obstructions. The
king, in his attitude to the queen’s removal, was, according to Belmonte, a
cunning “old Fox,” pretending he could not get his wife to leave in order to
make the British use force and thereby enhance his own prestige.47 In
October 1812 Bentinck at last after considerable difficulty persuaded the king
to induce the queen to go away to Santa Margherita (a town in the southwest
of the island and far enough from the king and Prince), the king meanwhile
living at La Ficuzza, a shooting lodge thirty miles from Palermo. The queen
arranged that the following spring she would leave the island altogether,
having been promised by the Habsburg emperor that she would be welcome
to come to Vienna (although in fact the emperor did not want her there but
found it impossible to refuse her). Yet two months later she was pleading her
debts and her poverty as reasons for staying.*8 Castlereagh supported Ben-
tinck in his efforts to exclude the queen from government and engineer her
departure from Sicily, having been considerably impressed by the documents
that Bentinck had sent him. He made clear to Castelcicala that Britain could
no longer tolerate someone who stood in the way of change, misled foreign
powers like Austria and Russia about Britain’s future intentions for Sicily,
and engaged in treasonable correspondences. He did however in writing to
Bentinck stress his desire to save the queen’s face by avoiding the use of any
force, and to make her leaving Sicily appear to have been done by arrange-
ment only.4? But when in April 1813 this dispatch arrived in Sicily, events
had overtaken it and induced Bentinck to use forcible methods.
   Bentinck was angry when he found that the queen, in breach of the
previous agreement, had returned to Ficuzza to be once more with the king;
and still more angry when the king denied he had made any promise in regard
to the queen, asserting that the written undertaking, signed on his behalf by
Cassaro and Circellé, had merely been an expression of his wishes.°° Bentinck
was already most dissatisfied with the influence that the duke of Ascoli
(though in exile) continued to have on the king through his aide-de-camp
Colonel Frilli, who acted as the king’s secretary, and through Lonzelot,
comptroller of the royal household. And to compound matters, the king (he
found) was consulting Cassaro and other barons who, disliking the idea of
abolishing entail, had split the ministry and turned to the crown. Although
parliament had since November completed its work on the constitution, the
