                Bentinck and British Intervention, Stage One                     97

of Naples. Moliterno himself liked to pose as the leader of an Italian resist-
ance movement, obtaining the queen’s support by suggesting she herself
might eventually become the ruler of all Italy. But Bentinck made clear he
would not allow any Italian expedition until Sicily was given the free consti-
tution he wished her to have. And when British troops in Sicily were ordered
to Spain and not Italy, the court lost interest in the constitution.37
   Bentinck’s frustration reached breaking point when he found himself
obstructed in measures for reforming the royal army in Sicily, whose con-
dition he considered such that “no officer could lead it to the field with any
confidence of victory.” The hereditary prince refused to allow him to issue
orders except through the minister, on the grounds that he had no authority
from the king and that Bentinck had already agreed to Sicily being governed
by Sicilian ministers. The minister in question was Aci, a man who, Bentinck
came to think, had “more vanity than patriotism,” was certainly incompetent,
and deeply resented having to share the credit for army reform with anyone.
Bentinck therefore decided he had once again to step in and withhold the
subsidy.38 The Sicilian reaction was immediate. Parliament, though it had
been elected in the spring, had not been summoned till 8 July, and since then
it had done nothing at all. It now met on 20 July and passed all the
fundamental articles (or Bases) of the constitution in one all-night sitting.9?
   The constitution approved by the parliament provided for a bicameral
legislature with the exclusive power of making laws, and one to which
government ministers and public officials were now responsible. Parliament
was to meet at least once a year, though the king had the right to prorogue
and dissolve it, as well as the right to veto laws. The king was given a civil list,
while the Commons controlled all public expenditure. The judiciary were
independent; there was trial by jury and the right of habeas corpus, and
relative freedom of the press. But only the literate had the right to vote and
the right to sit in parliament (which meant about 15,000 men out of a
population of a million-and-a-half). The guilds and all religious bodies were
to lose all their privileges, while feudal rights and entail were abolished, with
certain provisions made for compensation. Sicily was declared independent,
the king was forbidden to leave the island without the consent of parliament,
and a provision was made, if he went back to Naples, for his eldest son to
remain as viceroy.*°
   The modelling of'the constitution on the English prototype was deliberate,
because in Sicily (outside Catania) there was more sympathy for English
ideas of the politically enlightened kind than for those of Rousseau and the
French Revolution, and Balsamo, who drafted the constitution, was well
versed in English common law as well as in the writings of Blackstone. It was
not originally Bentinck’s intention that the constitution should be so mod-
elled, although he had been given complete discretion by Castlereagh to
make recommendations. And he had at first opposed the idea of copying the
