               Bentinck and British Intervention, Stage Two                  105

matters of routine, its refusal to allow troops to land and even to permit the
landing of some cavalry horses dispatched from Egypt. The question of the
horses became so sensitive that it gave rise to a debate in parliament. The
horses were landed in defiance of the rules, on express orders from General
Macfarlane, but eventually they were sent off to Spain, after Lord
Montgomerie intervened. Marching the horses across the island would, he
realized, have meant using force.®
   Force did have to be used in Palermo when on 18 and 19 July 1813 riots
and disorders occurred in the capital. Provoked initially by the shortages of
food and the profiteering accompanying them, they were naturally exploited
by all those people who were eager to discredit the ministry. Indeed the food
crisis had been induced by the removal of price controls—a policy adopted by
Castelnuovo, minister of finance and a disciple of free trade—and Bentinck
was forced a few months later to reintroduce a “law of the maximum.” British
troops and artillery had to be used to restore order and the ringleaders of the
revolt were executed.°®
   But all this was merely the background to a major constitutional crisis. A
split had occurred in the ranks of the ministry and its supporters in parlia-
ment, brought about by differences over abolishing feudal rights and entail.
It was an ideological argument that divided Belmonte from his uncle Cas-
telnuovo, though strong personal and material considerations also entered
into it, causing Belmonte to turn his coat in order to side with the demo-
crats.” There had emerged in the parliament a radical democratic party led by
men influenced by France and the ideas of the French Revolution. Chief
among these was a lawyer Rossi (the so-called “Mirabeau of Sicily”) and an
ex-shopkeeper called Gaspare Vaccaro, president of the Board of Health (a
body the British found highly obstructive). The latter was so plausible that he
made quite an impression on Bentinck, who later described him favorably as
being both “able and educated.”§ Both Vaccaro and Rossi, had spent some
time living in revolutionary France, and Rossi had no love for the English,
having once been imprisoned by Nelson. These two and their followers (men
from the Sicily outside Palermo who were jealous of the capital and all that it
represented) stood for the destruction of noble privileges and for a fairer
distribution of wealth—cheaper food, agrarian reform, the breaking up of
great estates, more church property to be sold, and an equitable system of
taxation. They were certainly not the red revolutionaries of the extreme
Jacobin kind, though their radicalism so alarmed the British that Macfarlane
did not consider it safe to dispatch any reinforcements to Spain. Their tactic
in the parliament was the classic one of steadily refusing to vote any taxes, and
referring everything to committees on which they were always well repre-
sented, until their first demand was met—the amalgamation of the houses of
parliament.?
  At the end of July 1813 the ministry resigned, demoralized by Belmonte’s
