                Bentinck and British Intervention, Stage One                  101

shortly after by a solemn Te Deum being sung in the cathedral. But two days
later he had to endure a stormy interview with Bentinck during which the
latter told him plainly that he would not permit him to destroy the constitu-
tion. The king was furious at what he regarded as Bentinck’s arrogant and
threatening tone. He kept repeating the word “permit” with ever increasing
irritation, arguing that Britain had no right to meddle in Sicily’s internal
affairs.53
   For the next fortnight Bentinck endeavored to treat with the king through
intermediaries (as the king refused to see him personally)—the king’s con-
fessor, Prince Belmonte, the hereditary prince, and the duke of Orleans.
Relations became increasingly strained, with Belmonte and all the ministers
resigning, the king still adamant in his refusal to let Bentinck treat him (in his
own words) as if Bentinck was his schoolmaster, and Bentinck widely re-
ported as saying he would have the king and queen taken to London while he
set up a regency in the island.5* Both the king and queen still clung to the
hope that Bentinck was unsupported in London. Castelcicala had recently
assured them that the ministers in Britain left their officials overseas without
any definite instructions—if they succeeded, the ministers took the credit,
while if they failed, they broke their neck. Since the mail between England
and Sicily could take from two to three months to arrive, it was easy enough
to insinuate that Britain’s representative had exceeded his instructions. It was
a ploy that Paoli had used eighteen years earlier in Corsica when he had
successfully undermined the morale of the British viceroy. But Bentinck was
made of sterner stuff than the strangely self-doubting Gilbert Elliot, and
Castlereagh was more punctual in answering dispatches than the ever-dila-
tory Duke of Portland.
   After a week Bentinck’s patience was exhausted and he finally decided on
the use of force. When he heard that the king was about to attend another
thanksgiving service in the capital, and fearing a popular disturbance would
follow, he ordered his troops and guns onto the streets, and threatened the
king with the end of the alliance. At one stage he even contemplated forcing
the king to abdicate in favor of the hereditary prince and then making the
king his prisoner, but he realized his instructions did not allow for this.>°
There was of course no attempt at resistance. The king agreed to delegate all
his powers to the hereditary prince and accepted that the queen must be
ordered to leave. Ih return, his civil list was confirmed and the queen was
assured financial solvency. Even then, in order to get the king to put this
agreement in writing, Bentinck had to post fifty dragoons on the road out of
the palace at Colli in case the king should try to escape and raise a civil war in
the countryside. What the king now put his signature to was a promise not
only to restore the Vicariate but also not to resume his powers until permit-
ted by Bentinck to do so.57 Before finally signing the agreement, the king had
made yet one final effort to slip out of the political noose by offering to make
