                                       8

 Lord William Bentinck and British Intervention,
                                Stage Two

      uring the absence of Bentinck in Spain, things went badly wrong in
D Sicily, indeed so wrong that government, through lack of funds, was
brought completely to a standstill, and parliament refused to grant money
until its radical demands were met. Why things went wrong is a matter for
debate. The Abbate Balsamo took the view that the troubles were really
entirely due to the absence of Bentinck’s guiding hand in a political scene that
was highly volatile.! Bentinck’s biographer, Dr. Rosselli, does not go as far as
this, but he does consider that Bentinck’s presence would have prevented
much of the friction—friction between Sicilians and British and between the
various political factions.? Another historian, Dr. Lackland, thinks that much
of the trouble stemmed from the recent departure of the queen, fear and
dislike for whom had for so long bound together the parliamentarians. But
she does concede that with Bentinck there things would not have reached the
pitch they did, even though he could not have prevented a radical movement
from emerging.*
   There is one factor that stands out in the turbulent scene of the summer
months and that is the degree to which popular feeling was now directed
against the British, something that struck Bentinck forcibly when he even-
tually returned to the island.* It was they who had backed the constitution,
and its enemies were not slow to associate all current troubles with the British
presence. The British were really an obvious scapegoat for every fresh ill that
affected the island, whether it was the threat of plague, the high prices of
food in the towns, or the use of troops and martial law to restore order in the
capital. A very serious outbreak of plague that affected Malta in 1813 had
resulted in the Sicilian government imposing strict quarantine regulations
and interpreting them in such a way that trade with the outside world was
stopped. The British merchants were furious that licenses were being refused
them to allow the landing of goods and passengers even from plague-
free England and Spain, while attempts to get a relaxation of the total
prohibition against ships from Malta calling at any Sicilian port gave rise to
public accusations of officials’ disregarding public safety. The British army
too was incensed at the government’s lack of cooperation in even the simplest

                                      104
