98                      SICILY: THE INSECURE BASE

English constitution, since he rightly thought it unsuited to Sicily. He had
told Belmonte that because the English constitution was such that no one
understood it or was able even to define it, to adopt it as a model was inviting
ridicule. Later however he changed his mind, but only because no alternative
plan seemed to present fewer difficulties.41 The king believed that the English
constitution safeguarded the royal prerogative; the queen, who derived her
knowledge from Medici, concluded that it was largely nonexistent, while
what did exist was largely negative.4? But if Bentinck did not beget the
constitution, he was certainly an active midwife at its birth. The Italian
historian Capograssi thinks that without Bentinck’s enthusiasm it could
never have seen the light of day. But clearly this enthusiasm got the better of
his sober judgment and led him to imagine that Sicily, because it had for so
many centuries boasted of having a constitution, must have had the necessary
experience to assimilate a new one on the English model.#3
   The king was at first most unwilling to sanction the resolutions of the
parliament, and adopted his usual delaying tactics. When pressed by Ben-
tinck, he became very angry, exclaiming “Never, never, never” would he
assent to the constitution. An English constitution, yes, but this was neither
English nor Sicilian. But the threat of withholding the subsidy proved in the
end to be decisive, because it was obvious that without it the army would not
be paid or fed. The king therefore signified his agreement to the prince,
although he insisted that he approved only of those articles that conformed
with the English constitution.4+ He even talked of sending it to England, to
be scrutinized and reported on, but in his heart he could never bring himself
to approve of any new constitution. He later told Bentinck that he was afraid
that the changes it brought could only end in bloodshed, revolution, and
anarchy. “We are living with cannibals,” he said, and fearing for his life and
property and for those of his family, he wanted a warship standing by to carry
them off to some safe haven.45
  The hereditary prince was also, at heart, no enthusiast for the constitution,
and he filled the role allotted to him out of fear rather than genuine convic-
tion. He was fond of repeating the Latin tag Nescit regnare qui nescit simulare
(He knows not how to reign who knows not how to feign), and Bentinck
was amazed that such a “blockhead” should be so adept at dissimulation. In
his private correspondence with Castelcicala, the prince complained of being
bullied by Bentinck (of whom he was obviously afraid), as well as reviled by
his father and mother, the queen calling him a villain and the king accusing
him of ambition. Belmonte thought his character was “like that of a woman,
subject very much to change,” while Bentinck told the Duke of Orleans that
it was only fear or force that would ever induce the prince to act. Bentinck
thought he was terrified of being damned for disobliging his parents, “always
seeing Hell on one side and the reproach of posterity on the other.” Not
possessing a strong character, the prince tried merely to keep afloat, refrain-
