106                      SICILY: THE INSECURE BASE


opportunism and frightened of a probable vote of censure for having intro-
duced martial law. Montgomerie managed to get the prince to appoint a
phantom ministry in order to maintain the semblance of government, and he
toyed with the idea of a dissolution, which Orleans favored but the prince did
not.!° Bentinck had written to dissuade Montgomerie not only from dissoly-
ing parliament, but also from using violence against men like Rossi. Neither
the press nor parliament in Britain would tolerate arresting men merely on
account of their opinions, and in any event he did not think a revolution in
Sicily likely, the people in general being far too timid. If there was to be a
revolution, it was better that it should come from the actions of the parlia-
ment than from any unconstitutional acts of the crown.1!!
   Montgomerie accepted Bentinck’s advice. Nevertheless he persuaded the
prince to veto two resolutions of parliament that he regarded as dangerous:
an attempt to get control of the army by using it to enforce the quarantine,
and sending a deputation to London to complain of the conduct of British
generals. At one stage he went so far as to threaten the parliament with
instant dissolution if it still refused to vote supplies, it now having adopted
the ruse of voting enough for a few months only, with the aim (or so
Montgomerie thought) of perpetuating its existence and becoming a kind of
Sicilian Long Parliament. When in the face of Montgomerie’s threat it did
vote taxes for a year ahead, it still did not vote the ways and means by which
those taxes could be raised, so Montgomerie got the prince to prorogue it
until Bentinck returned at the start of October.+2
   Bentinck left Spain reluctantly and to Wellington’s extreme displeasure,
and only because of the urgent pleas of the hereditary prince, the duke of
Orleans, Generals Montgomerie and Macfarlane, and a number of Sicilian
constitutionalists.!2 He was, it was clear, the only man who could resolve the
crisis in Sicily. Montgomerie and his secretary Joseph Smith had been
suffering from the effects of ill-health (they both died before the year was
out), and neither had the experience to deal with the complex political
situation that had developed since Bentinck left, Montgomerie being no
diplomatist and Smith being new to Sicily.14
   Bentinck landed once more in Sicily on 3 October 1813. At once he set
about trying to find a solution through the parliament, addressing its mem-
bers personally and lobbying them in a final endeavor to get the financial
measures adopted. When this failed, he had to resort to getting the prince to
dissolve the parliament having appointed a new ministry whose members
Bentinck picked himself.!5 But this ministry, for all its compliance, did not have
the required courage to proclaim a state of emergency, which Bentinck now
reckoned to be essential, if only because attacks on property had brought in a
new and alarming element. So Bentinck himself proclaimed the emergency,
assuming full responsibility for maintaining order in the island. He ordered
his troops to march into the interior, where apparently they were
