114                     SICILY: THE INSECURE      BASE


from Sicily on 31 July and numbering 3,000 less than promised was not the
setback it might have been for the fortunes of Wellington’s campaign. Suchet,
the general commanding the French in Valencia and Catalonia, had been so
alarmed at the rumored arrival at any time in June or July of a great army
from Sicily that he did exactly what Wellington wanted and sent no help to
Soult or Joseph, with whose forces Wellington was engaged.?!
  The force from Sicily was never one that Wellington could depend on
unreservedly, so its usefulness to him was limited. Bathurst made plain that
the Sicilian situation must take priority over all others so far as Maitland’s
troops were concerned, and that Wellington must let them go if Sicily was
ever threatened.?? This is precisely the situation that occurred in the spring of
1813 when Sicily’s political situation forced Bentinck to act against the court.
The 44th Regiment, destined for Spain, had to be diverted to Sicily from
Malta, and General Murray, then the commander of the Sicilian forces in
Spain, was required to send back 2,000 troops.?? All this not unnaturally was
unwelcome news to the ministers in London, who had recently been pressing
Bentinck to send more of his men in the opposite direction. Spain in their
view was the only theater in which Britain could afford to exert herself?4 (a
point that had to be made clear to the Russians, who tried to involve
Bentinck and his government in financing a force of 40,000 men to be sent
from Moldavia to the Adriatic to cooperate in an Italian campaign).?5 If
Sicily was not a liability it was scarcely the asset the cabinet hoped for.
Nevertheless during 1813, as Bentinck was later at pains to point out in
trying to justify constitutional change as the means by which Sicily had been
made stable, there were dispatched from Sicily to Spain 13,500 troops, 2,500
of whom were Sicilian soldiers, the remainder British, Italian, and German.2¢
Bentinck himself had left Sicily for Spain on 27 May 1813, only to be forced
to return in October to restore the political situation. With the remainder of
his army he now planned to invade Italy.
   Already in January 1813 Bentinck was outlining to Bathurst his scheme to
use the Italian Levy as the cadre for constructing an Italian army. He wrote in
almost glowing terms of the military qualities of its two corps—something
perhaps difficult to understand, considering the poor record for desertion
one Italian regiment earned in Spain,27 though doubtless it would have
shown more spirit had it been fighting in Italy. Ponza, the island in the Bay of
Naples his forces had captured in February, was to become, he hoped, the
springboard and funnel for an Italian invasion. Twelve-hundred troops were
earmarked for it, leaving behind in Sicily just sufficient men to garrison
Palermo and the fortresses of Milazzo and Messina. The situation, he told
Bathurst, was more favorable than it had been in 1812, and though he
realized that Spain was important, Spain alone could not defeat Napoleon.
To do this, the greater part of the peoples of Europe must be brought into
the field and that meant involving Italy (“Italy is that instrument—Italy is
