WI                     SICILY: THE INSECURE BASE


Corsica and Elba was harking back more than fifteen years to the days of the
Anglo-Corsican kingdom, memories of which ill-fated episode were still fresh
in the minds of ministers; and as Admiral Pellew pointed out, both islands
would need a permanent garrison. So Bentinck was very firmly told that any
attempt to take these two islands would be a total waste of resources, and as
there was so little evidence of any popular movement in Italy, surplus troops
could best be employed in support of the Spanish in Catalonia. They could
always be recalled to Sicily and made available for Italy, if prospects there
became more inviting.!1
  A month before this dispatch was penned, Bentinck at the request of the
navy, which had been pressing for it since the previous summer, had sent a
small force of 600 men to occupy Lissa in the Adriatic, an island of greater
strategic importance than any of the southern Ionian islands. It was to serve
as a depot for trade, as a port for the Adriatic squadron, and as a means of
maintaining links with both the Italian and Balkan shores.!? But any attempt
to seize Corfu, as mentioned by Liverpool in his earlier dispatch, was never
seriously considered by Bentinck, its very powerful fortifications being de-
fended by a garrison of 13,000. Britain did not possess in Sicily the resources
for military operations, at least on any extended scale, in both eastern and
western Mediterranean.
   One way however in which some of Bentinck’s forces, once part of the
Sicilian garrison and now stationed in the Adriatic, could he thought be
more usefully employed than sitting in the Ionian islands was in helping a
Montenegrin revolt. On information received from Lissa (information that
later proved false) that there was a rising in Montenegro against the occupy-
ing French, Bentinck on 8 June 1812 authorized Admiral Fremantle, the
naval commander     in the Adriatic, to go to the help of these “freedom-
fighters,” taking whatever force he thought fit from the garrison on the
Ionian islands. He told Fremantle that it was his policy (indeed it was that of
the British cabinet) not to encourage any partial rising in Italy or the
Adriatic, but to wait until “a general effort can be made by all nations
engaged in the same cause.” But nevertheless, since it now appeared that a
revolt had in fact broken out and that war between France and Russia was
certain—a war that might very well touch off a major rising in Italy—he
thought it right to assist the Montenegrins.13
   Fremantle collected at once 1,200 troops from the Zante garrison, em-
barked 400 on his own warships and took them to the island of Lissa, and left
the remainder to follow on in troop transports as soon as they could. By the
middle of July he was getting ready to escort his little force across to
Montenegro, when he learnt that no rising had taken place. The French were,
it seemed, in complete control. Naturally, when Bentinck learned of this, he
cancelled his orders for the expedition and the troops were returned to their
billets in Zante, and his political agents brought back to Palermo.14
