             Sicily as a Base for Offensive Operations, 1812-1814            Pe

first about the timing of such an operation. Castlereagh, like most of his
ministerial colleagues, shared the views enunciated in a memorandum edited
by Huskisson in 1809, namely, not to excite any country to take up arms
against the enemy, but to give it every possible help once it had been aroused
to resistance. By April 1813 most ministers in London had lost faith in a
rising in Italy.°
   In a dispatch of June 1811 Liverpool had outlined the uses to which
Bentinck might put his troops and mentioned certain desirable objectives,
while leaving Bentinck the ultimate discretion over the choice he made of
these. If the occasion presented itself, Corfu should be seized, though at
limited cost; a force should be sent to protect Minorca, if it looked like being
threatened from Toulon; troops could be sent to Catalonia, provided Sicily
was not in danger. What Bentinck was instructed vot to do was to waste his
efforts recovering Naples. Its capture depended on French fortunes in the-
aters remote from southern Italy and, as Moore had written earlier, it was not
likely to “run away.””
   Four months later Bentinck was told to coordinate his plans for forming an
army in Italy with the Archduke Francis, a member of the house of Austria-
Este with claims to the throne of Modena. But this was merely contingency
planning, and Wellesley in writing to Bentinck emphasized that there was no
intention of encouraging the Italians to revolt or of becoming involved in a
project that might be risky or premature. The island of Sardinia, it was
envisaged, might form the base for future operations, and the sum of
£50,000 was made available to equip the Sardinians, while a further £50,000
was to be given to the Archduke Francis.* This was the fruit of a project of
Bentinck, suggested by him to Wellesley in June and put into his head by
Metternich’s agent, Colonel Nugent, an Austrian officer (though in fact an
Irishman by birth). Bentinck had thought the projected uprising was well
worth backing at so little cost, and on his return from five weeks in Sicily had
waxed even more enthusiastic. He had even proposed that he should send to
Sardinia two or three British regiments from Sicily to serve for the immediate
defense of that island and encourage that kingdom to raise and pay a new
army for Italian operations. Failing the acceptance of this proposal, he
suggested taking into British pay as many troops of the king of Sardinia as
the sum of £10,000 would furnish. The king of Sardinia however demurred,
fearing a loss of his independence and possibly also French reprisals.”
   The lack of any reliable evidence of a national Italian resistance movement
had forced Bentinck to agree reluctantly that the time was not ripe for
intervention. The claims made by Prince Moliterno to be the leader of such a
resistance struck him as being completely absurd. Looking however to plans
for the future, Bentinck submitted that Corsica and Elba would form suitable
bases for invading northern Italy, and only if these were ruled out as objec-
tives would he think of sending his troops to Spain.!° The mention of
