                Sicily as a Base for Offensive Operations, 1812-1814        115

ripe for it”). There the British could act as principals, not as auxiliaries, as
they were in Spain; and he painted himself a rosy picture of his army from
Sicily taking Naples and then recruiting as it went along, heading for the
north of Italy with its numbers swollen to 40,000.28
   Again he mentioned the political reasons for getting his army across to
Italy. The Neapolitan troops in Sicily were a continuing source of anxiety, the
Sicilian parliament was unwilling to pay them, and their officers were ready
to desert. Had the passage to Naples been less difficult, many he was sure
would long since have joined Murat. They were such a threat to security that
while they remained in Sicily British troops would have to be left behind to
ensure the safety of that island. It was for this reason that he had to tell
Bathurst, writing in May 1813, he could not comply with the latter’s request
to send back two regiments to Spain.?? To further influence the British
cabinet in favor of his Italian strategy, Bentinck sent home his secretary,
Lamb, to present his views in more detail to Castlereagh. In a long and
persuasive memorandum Lamb presented at the end of May, designed for the
eyes of Lord Castlereagh, it was argued that only by the opening up of a third
front, this time in Italy, could Napoleon be decisively defeated. Napoleon
had drained Italy of troops in order to support his campaigns elsewhere, and
all the intelligence reports received showed that Italians would rise to a man
before a French army could cross the Alps. To be forced to fight a campaign
in Italy would put an enormous, perhaps an intolerable, strain on Napoleon’s
available resources. The British corps now at Alicante could never hope to
achieve very much, because it was tied to its transports for supplies. “Every
article, even the straw for the whole of the horses for the army during the
entire winter has been sent from Sicily at a great expense and with a very
considerable quantity of shipping.” Italy, on the other hand, could supply all
an army might require. And if revolts broke out in Italy as a result of allied
successes and a British army was not then sent there to take advantage of the
situation, Austria and Russia would benefit; yet it was important to the
future of the continent and to England that Italian affairs should be taken out
of the reach of these powers and placed firmly under English protection.
Bentinck, so the memorandum went on, thought that the hereditary prince
would not offer very much opposition to undertaking this enterprise, based
as it was “upon liberal principles which appear to be necessary for its
suiccess.1 90
   It does not seem to have occurred to Bentinck that the introduction of
political arguments (and ones that might not appeal to Castlereagh) into
what was primarily a military proposition could do any thing other than to
weaken his case.
   When Bentinck wrote to Bathurst in February he sent Wellington a copy
of his letter. Sensing the danger to his plans of any withdrawal of Bentinck’s
army, then deployed in eastern Spain, Wellington wrote forcefully to
