108                     SICILY: THE INSECURE BASE


tinck became so disillusioned with his Sicilians who reacted only, as he
expressed it, to the strong man who was content to offer them “bonbons in
the one hand and the stick in the other.”?%
   Yet blanket condemnations of a whole people seldom succeed in carrying
conviction. Here they seem rather to be a reflection on Bentinck himself and
on his attempt to impose a constitution on Sicily (“in part a creation of your
own” as Castlereagh had written to him)?* through a small section of the
aristocracy, in which he had placed an unjustified faith. The people by whom
he had been “let down” were not the mass of Sicilians nor the majority of the
literate, for they had not even been consulted. It had been a mistake to allow
the old parliament to act as a constituent assembly, because by its traditional
composition it could represent only minority interests. As Enzo Sciacca has
pointed out,?° the radicals of the Demaniale and later those in the House of
Commons were absent from the constitutional debates and the making of the
constitution of 1812. He suggests (as Giovanni Aceto did earlier writing in
1827) that had the Sicilian radicals taken part in a proper constituent assem-
bly, possibly much of the disequilibrium of the new order would have been
avoided, and perhaps the constitutional experiment initiated by Bentinck
might not have failed. This is certainly a large supposition. But when Ben-
tinck got the prince to dissolve the parliament in October, the democrats in it
whom he accused of endeavoring to usurp the functions of both executive
and judiciary were not the extremists they have been painted by the constitu-
tionalist historians. Not even the most extreme of them ever tried to force the
hand of the prince over the selection of his ministers. Sciacca thinks it a pity
that some were not chosen to hold ministerial posts (an idea Castelnuovo had
earlier toyed with), for if they had been they could have done a good deal to
calm the troubled waters.?© Of course the radicals were anti-British, because
they saw in British intervention the propping up of the dominant aristocracy
and a captive monarchy, maintained through British subsidies. To them the
continued British presence was the greatest obstacle existing to the kind of
constitution they wished for Sicily.
