                                       2

        Sicily as a Base for Offensive Operations,
                        1812-1814

Qe        the threat of French invasion seemed for the moment to have
       receded from Sicily, the ministry in London was naturally anxious to
use its garrison for offensive operations. It was simply playing Napoleon’s
game to leave so large a force immobile while the war was being fought in
Spain and Portugal. Liverpool expressed the hope to Bentinck, writing in
June 1811, that it should be possible to reduce the garrison to the minimum
figure of the 10,000 men stipulated in the treaty of alliance. Could not the
Sicilians themselves contribute more to their own defense? For this purpose
the British government were dispatching immediately to Sicily 14,000 stands
of arms to help equip the Sicilian forces.!
   The deficiencies of the royal army have been referred to more than once.
Bentinck told Circello in August 1811] that he had grave doubts about its
effectiveness, consisting as it did of Neapolitans, anxious only to return to
their homes, and foreigners and deserters from the French, many of whom
were extremely disaffected. This army was not only ineffectual, a grave
burden on the royal finances, but also a serious political danger. In the past
year it had grown by as many as 5,000 men, augmented by a stream of
French deserters and prisoners of war from Catalonia, until it now numbered
19,000. At the instigation of the queen, it might, Bentinck thought, ally itself
with the French. The remedy he recommended and caused the hereditary
prince to adopt was to cut its numbers by about 5,000. As he told the prince,
a few thousand less would make no difference to recovering Naples. The
whole of its non-Neapolitan element was accordingly discharged in May
1812, the Germans being recruited by the British army, the Italians formed
into a corps of their own augmented by 2,000 prisoners of war that the
British government shipped out from England. And later in the year the king
agreed to reduce the number of his royal guards from 1,600 to 700 (half of
whom were to be Sicilian)?
  Yet, despite all these economies, Bentinck still had to lend the prince
money in June 1812 and in the following January to keep the royal army in
existence; otherwise it would have dissolved for lack of clothing, pay, and
food. The appalling state of the royal army was brought home forcibly to

                                      109
