            Sicily as a Base for Offensive Operations, 1812-1814           113

   Over the question of Catalonia, Bentinck forestalled Liverpool by sending
his brother to Portugal to coordinate plans with Wellington, and it was
agreed that Bentinck should find a force of 10,000 from Sicily to arrive in
Spain by the end of June. Even so, the final decision to choose Spain and not
Italy had been left to Bentinck’s sole discretion, though the tone of Liver-
pool’s dispatch made it clear that he hoped he would opt for Spain. In the
event, Bentinck hesitated, thought he would go to Italy after all, and infuri-
ated Wellington, who was counting on the force arriving from Sicily as part
of his overall plan of campaign. Liverpool tried to blame Bentinck for
disobeying “clear” instructions (“as positive as any which can be given to a
commander    so circumstanced”).!5 Bathurst however supported Bentinck.
He told Wellington that Bentinck’s instructions were in the last resort con-
ditional, and that though he thought his decision wrong, there was no doubt
that Bentinck had acted properly.!© By that time Bentinck had changed his
plans, and his troops were sent to Spain after all, though not the 10,000
Wellington had been promised.+7
  What had led to all these changes during the month of June 1812 had been
reports from Nugent and from allied agents in Italy that its people (especially
in the Roman states) were on the point of rising up. This was clearly wishful
thinking and depended, as Bentinck himself admitted, on whether the Rus-
sians entered the war. He justified his decision to switch from the Spanish to
the Italian plan by arguing that the force he could spare for Spain was too
small on its own to make any impact, while his 14—18,000 troops would
outnumber any army the French could bring against him in Italy, now that so
many of their men had been sent north for the Russian campaign. And any
success achieved in Italy would benefit the cause of the allies in Spain. His
force moreover would include 5,000 Neapolitan troops, thus removing a
danger from Sicily while easing the path of royal acceptance of Sicily’s recent
constitution.!8 But this was no sensible military reason for undertaking the
operation. What appeared uppermost in his mind was the risk of losing an
opportunity (perhaps one that might never recur) of leading a war of national
liberation. Bentinck’s arguments were not convincing, and Wellington, who
had his own good reasons for wanting a force in eastern Spain, was certainly
right when he wrote to Bathurst that the French would never allow an army
of 15,000 Anglo-Neapolitans to remain for long on Italian soil.’
  Within a matter ‘of less than three weeks, Bentinck had changed his mind
again. The news of a Franco-Austrian treaty and of a letter to the prince
regent sent by the Habsburg emperor that urged him to send his army to
Spain rather than into Italy (where Austrian troops at Napoleon’s behest
might well be called on to fight the British) had caused Bentinck to have
second thoughts. Maitland with 7,000 men would go to eastern Spain after
all, although Bentinck confessed he had little faith in their being able to
achieve very much there.?° As matters turned out, the late arrival of the force
