                Bentinck and British Intervention, Stage Two                   107

well received, and he threatened with trial by a military court anyone who
disturbed the peace. He had become, like Oliver Cromwell, a military dic-
tator malgré lui.1©
   This patent admission of failure to find a political solution of a liberal kind,
toward which his principles propelled him, underlined his now deep disillu-
sion with Sicilians as political animals. The hereditary prince he now re-
garded as weaker than the weakest of his subjects; Belmonte as more
dangerous as a friend than an enemy; the nobles as lacking in education,
courage, and the knowledge of public affairs; and the people as wanting the
advantages of liberty without being prepared to serve or to pay for them.!7
Bentinck seemed at last to have been converted to the views of the consul
general Fagan. The latter for months had been counselling him to use the
methods of a dictator with this people who failed to show any respect for
familiarity or kindly treatment—“too long accustomed to the rod of iron not
to get wild when you give them a certain liberty.”!8 Yet really Bentinck had
known it all along. Writing in his journal in June 1812 he had referred to the
Sicilians as “bullies, only to be managed by fear; they take advantage of the
least concessions and always construe conciliation into weakness.”!? “Vanity
was the great defect of the country” he had again confided to his journal, and
he “doubted whether [they] were made for freedom.” It was a pity, he came
to think, that the court had not paid attention to him when he first arrived in
Sicily, for it would have been easier for the British to act through one single
authority (the king) than through a Sicilian parliament.?°
   The nobles who at the beginning led the movement for the constitution
were now for the most part content to destroy it, frightened of the prospect
of universal suffrage and of the nationalization of private land. They had
imagined they were going to return to their positions in the Middle Ages,
free of the kind of royal restrictions imposed at the end of the eighteenth
century by the king’s reforming viceroys. When they realized that what they
had opened was in fact a Pandora’s box of change, they saw the time had
come to backtrack. As Joseph Smith succinctly expressed it, “Rather than
yield to the people they would yield to the crown again.”?? In these circum-
stances Bentinck had felt he had no alternative but to intervene. “Sicily can
only be saved from political convulsions by our interference . . . if we don’t
direct, the enemy will.”
   As Luisa Giardina has pointed out in her article on Bentinck and his
Sicilian journal, Bentinck had not initially been someone intent on the use of
force or convinced that he must direct the Sicilians. Rather it had been
Belmonte who had pressed him continually to be more ruthless and chided
him for being too moderate and goodnatured. But Belmonte, as Bentinck
came to realize, was largely interested in using the British to get rid of his
enemies for him, and he had even tried in Bentinck’s absence to induce Smith
and Montgomerie to arrest 560 of his opponents. Little wonder that Ben-
