110                     SICILY: THE INSECURE BASE


Bentinck when, prior to their embarkation for Spain, Sicilian regiments were
marched into Palermo to be reviewed by him and Macfarlane. “Many were
without shoes, none had great-coats, and the whole looked as if they had
been half-starved.”? The cloth needed to’ provide them with uniforms Ben-
tinck had to have sent out from England. It was this same financial exigency
that had forced the British to assume the responsibility for the royal flotilla.
   In return for thus propping up the monarchy and guaranteeing once again
the sovereignty of Sicily to the royal family, Britain obtained an important
asset in the shape of a sizeable Sicilian contingent,     available for service
outside Sicily, although within the bounds of the Mediterranean. By a treaty
agreed to in September 1812, the signing of which the king was constrained
to delegate to the hereditary prince, a division of 7,300 Sicilians was put at
the service of the British commander. Its cost was deducted from the British
subsidy and its recruitment, clothing, and equipment were to be Britain’s
responsibility. The troops that during the next eighteen months were to be
sent to fight in Spain consisted in part of these Sicilians and the recently
formed Italian Levy. This levy had had its origins in what had been called the
“Calabrian Free Corps,” formed by Stuart with the king’s permission in the
early months of 1809, when 1,500 Calabrians, fleeing from Masséna’s extir-
patory drive to eliminate the last traces of the masse, crossed over to Sicily.
Rather than allow them to be recruited into the ranks of the royal army (seen
now only as an instrument for forwarding the intrigues of the queen), Stuart
took them into British pay, and appointed a British officer, Colonel Sir John
Dalrymple, to inspect and train them. Its strength had soon risen to 500,
divided into seven companies, and it was well reported on by Stuart. Initially
bound only to serve within the territory of the kingdom of Naples, it was
agreed in 1810 it could serve throughout the Mediterranean, and 300 of this
corps were then dispatched as reinforcements to the island of Zante.5 But the
aim of Bentinck was to form a force that would one day land on the mainland
of Italy, the vanguard of a great national army to liberate that country from
its foreign rulers.
   The objects for which the Sicilian garrison could be used for offensive
operations was the subject of discussion both in England and Spain. Since the
outbreak of war in the latter country there had been Spanish and English
voices urging an expedition from Sicily to help the Spanish in Catalonia, and
this was a policy that found favor with Wellington, the British commander-
in-chief in Spain, and also with Lord Liverpool, first when he was secretary
for war and subsequently when he was prime minister. Italy was the other
possible objective. Wellesley, the foreign secretary until he was replaced by
Castlereagh in March 1812, had shown an interest in this theater, as did
Bunbury, now under secretary for war and William Hamilton, foreign under
secretary. But in holding these views, they were largely alone, and Bentinck,
who was an enthusiast for the idea of Italian liberation, was very hesitant at
