118                     SICILY: THE INSECURE BASE


detailed reconnaissance. However he soon convinced himself that he must
not let slip any occasion for rallying the Italian people and giving them the
opportunity “to assert their rights, liberty and independence.” He hoped that
another Catalonia would be created in Tuscany and that its population would
hasten to join the standard of a national revolt. It all very quickly came to
nothing. After capturing Viareggio and Lucca and beating off an attack from
Pisa, the expedition failed in its aim of forcing the port of Leghorn to
surrender. Bentinck blamed the lack of Congreve rockets, though bad
weather also played a part in curtailing the operation.*4 In any case too much
was expected of a force consisting of 1,000 men only. It is true that forty-
seven years later Garibaldi with a more famous “Thousand” achieved spec-
tacular success in Sicily, but the circumstances in Tuscany in 1813 were rather
different. It seems that where his political principles and Italian liberation
were concerned, Bentinck remained an incurable romantic.
   Shortly after this minor fiasco, another expedition was planned—this time
for a force of 5,000 men to take possession of Bastia, Bentinck having learnt
from the navy of an Italian regiment there asking the British to take it away.
Were this enterprise to succeed, Bastia, it was planned, was to act as a base for
the invasion of the north of Italy and the rest of the army of Sicily was to be
sent there as soon as possible.*5 The scheme was never carried out for, with
the news of Murat’s defection and his undertaking to join the allies, Bentinck
was told to sign an armistice. This he did on 3 February 1813 on the basis of
military cooperation to drive the French out of Italy.
   The armistice was the culmination of negotiations going back nine
months. Murat, once he had given up command of the Grand Army in
Poland, had fallen from favor with Napoleon with whom his relations had
long been strained. Murat was now anxious to secure his throne, to enlarge
his kingdom at the Pope’s expense, to aim perhaps for the throne of Italy and
to displace Britain in the role of liberator. Once the British had captured
Ponza, their contacts with Naples became quite easy, and these resulted in
Bentinck calling there en route for Spain in June 1813 in an endeavor to
persuade Murat to relinquish his claim to the throne of Naples. Murat had no
intention of doing so, as became clear once Bentinck reached Ponza, though
Bentinck hoped for a temporary accord by which both Murat and Ferdinand
would recognize each others’ claims and pledge themselves that they would
not contest them until the question of compensation was settled. Though he
did get the hereditary prince to accept “with considerable disinclination” the
principle of compensation, Bentinck could not carry Murat with him. The
latter continued to pin his hopes on the allies offering him the crown, and he
was buoyed up by the recent news of Napoleon’s victories at Liitzen and
Bautzen. Bentinck remained completely opposed to offering the crown to
Murat, convinced (as was Castlereagh) that once he was sure of it, he would
