122)                     SICILY: THE INSECURE BASE


such arguments carried little weight. Pitt cared nothing for Corsica, save as a
useful base for the fleet, and he later offered it to the Russians. Castlereagh
saw in Sicily a military station and nothing more, serving a purely wartime
purpose; and if he accepted an Ionian protectorate it was only to stop the
allies from quarrelling and to help to safeguard the Turkish Empire. He was
concerned as was William Pitt, and rightly so, with the winning of the war,
and then with constructing a durable peace—a peace based on the hard,
inescapable, and (to liberals) often most unpalatable facts of international
politics, the need to retain reliable allies and the continued support of the
other Great Powers.
   Bentinck’s dream of annexing Sicily with the willing compliance of the
Sicilians sprang from a tour he had made of the island during November
1813, the purpose of which had been to find out what reforms in the
administration of justice the mass of the people really wanted, but also to
impress on local councillors the need to elect sensible men when the next
parliament was summoned. During the tour he had experienced the typical
warm welcome that southern peoples, many of whom were simple peasants,
liked to extend to the man in power, from whom they hoped to obtain
concessions—freedom from burdensome taxes and tolls, injustices righted,
and corruption purged.? It was just the sort of spontaneous reception that
had warmed the heart of Sir Gilbert Elliot, when, as the newly appointed
Viceroy, he had made his progress through Corsica. It put the idea into
Bentinck’s head (he had never before shown signs of favoring it) that the
people of Sicily would surely welcome being annexed to the British Empire.
The Constitution of 1812 provided for an independent Sicily. If the kingdom
of Sicily was to be united once again with the kingdom of Naples, it would,
he felt sure, mean the spilling of blood. Yet Sicily, it was painfully clear, could
not exist independently, any more than Corsica could, and, as had been
shown by recent events, it was quite unable to govern itself. Sicily in the
hands of Naples would remain as it had been in the past a source of
embarrassment to the latter. Under the benevolent rule of Britain it could
become both content and prosperous, and pose no threat to its neighbor
Naples. The king of course would be compensated, probably in the form of
money, and Britain would provide 10,000 troops to guarantee his possession
of Naples.4
  All this was outlined in a letter from Bentinck, sent to the hereditary prince
on 3 December 1813, though a few days later he wrote again to explain his
proposal was not really serious, but a “dreamchild of his whimsical brain.”® It
was not however seen as such by a worried and apprehensive prince, who had
for years heard his mother declaiming against the sinister designs of the
British. Having taken possession unilaterally of Malta and six Ionian islands,
it now seemed that they wanted Sicily too. The suggestions that Bentinck had
put forward seemed to his Neapolitan mind, accustomed to the indirect
