               Speculation on the Future of Sicily and Naples               125

  Malta, but the idea of our possessing Sicily by an act which in its most
  favourable hight must be considered douce violence could not fail greatly to
  revolt them. 14

It was just such jealousy that the British had encountered twenty years
previously in relation to Corsica and that was, in regard to the Ionian islands,
to concede them a protectorate only, instead of the sovereignty that Bathurst
had wanted.
   Meanwhile events in Sicily were moving toward an unhappy conclusion so
far as Bentinck and his friends were concerned. When he had toured the
island in December, he had told local councillors that it was their duty to
elect to parliament honest and enlightened representatives, and when the
elections were held in June 1814, a lower House had been elected that was
predominantly “constitutional”’—a result obtained, almost certainly, by in-
timidation and corruption. But although the ministry now enjoyed the
support of one House, it lost that of the other, because the nobles now
turned to the king rather than submit to more losses of privilege. A political
impasse had been reached, and although Bentinck counselled a coalition, the
nobles made it clear that they would not accept one, the Belmontists being
quite determined not to work together with the Castelnuovists.!* Finally the
hereditary prince, at the request of Belmonte and others, asked the king to
resume his powers as the only way of resolving the crisis. Belmonte’s remark-
able volte face in thus turning to his enemy the king was caused by his
thinking he could only benefit personally from such a move. He thought the
king would be duly flattered but did not believe he would ever accept or that
the British would ever leave—in both of which respects he proved wrong.
Bentinck refused to allow his name to be used by the prince in approaching
the king and he refused to sign a written memorandum requesting the king
to take over the reins, since he doubted the king’s sincerity. But the king
eventually expressed publicly his determination to forget the past, to reunite
the political parties, and to complete the Sicilian constitution, on condition
that he be released from the pledge he had given to Bentinck in March 1813
not to resume his powers again without the permission of the British minis-
ter. Bentinck released him from this bond, as there seemed to be little
alternative, and the king therefore reassumed power on 5 July 1814."°
   The king’s sincerity was rightly in doubt. His attitude was currently being
influenced by a wish to please the allied sovereigns, in whose hands it lay, at
the Congress of Vienna, to return him to his kingdom in Naples. Both the
Czar and the Austrian emperor, through the channel of the Duke of Orleans,
had impressed on Ferdinand the need to adopt a more liberal attitude toward
his subjects, if his claims were to be considered favorably. The restored
Bourbon king of France, Louis XVIII, who had also found it necessary to
accept a constitution in order to recover his throne, strongly advised him to
do the same. There was however an additional reason for Ferdinand to show
