            Sicily as a Base for Offensive Operations, 1812-1814            119

cease to exert himself for the allies. Seeing that the cause of Napoleon was
lost, it would not be very long (Bentinck thought) before Murat renewed the
negotiations.?°
   Six months later this proved to be the case. Approaches were made on
Murat’s behalf through General Manhés, commanding in Calabria, and the
Neapolitan secretary of legation at the court of Vienna, the Chevalier
Schinina; but Bentinck refused to make any concessions. Napoleon’s decisive
defeat at Leipzig made Murat’s position uncomfortable, and he could not
take his army northward without exposing his kingdom in Naples. Bentinck
could therefore see no reason to prejudice the claims of Ferdinand, and he so
informed the hereditary prince.3”7 Meanwhile he was being pressed by Aus-
tria and by Lord Aberdeen, British envoy at Vienna, to sign an armistice with
Murat in order to get the latter’s help in driving the French from Italy.
Bentinck tried his best to delay conforming with this desire for a ceasefire
with Murat. He sent Colonel Graham, his aide-de-camp, to make contact
with allied headquarters and to try to convince them that the army in Sicily
remained a valuable bargaining counter in getting Murat to give up his
throne.38 His attempt failed, for the Austrians were to cut the ground from
under his feet by the treaty of military alliance that they signed with Murat in
January. Bentinck complained in vain to Castlereagh, condemning the treaty
as “impolitic, inexpedient and unnecessary.” It meant, he wrote, the aban-
donment of a great opportunity for Britain to champion the cause of Italian
nationalism, and the showering of undeserved rewards on a man whose life
had been one of crime. He tried to postpone the evil day by telling the
Austrian representatives that he had no instructions on the matter,?? but this
would not answer for very long. On 18 January Bentinck received a dispatch
sent to him from Lord Aberdeen and forwarded to him by Count Neipperg,
the Austrian envoy at the court of Naples. This made clear that Aberdeen had
agreed to Austria’s approach to Murat and was anxious that Bentinck should
also conclude a similar convention as soon as possible. While Castlereagh
himself on 22 January sent clear instructions to Bentinck from Bale that
authorized him to conclude an armistice. Bentinck therefore left Palermo on
30 January 1814, and four days later he signed the armistice with the man he
both despised and detested. Even so, he did not sign on behalf of the king in
Sicily, who refused fo acknowledge Murat’s claims, and Bentinck himself also
declined to acknowledge those claims in any way.*°
   On 28 February 1814 Bentinck sailed with an army from Sicily made up of
6,000 British troops and the remainder Italian soldiers, leaving behind to
guard the island only 4,500 men. A further contingent of 3,000 troops under
the command of General Macfarlane (almost all of them Sicilian) joined him
at Leghorn in early April.41 Bentinck disembarked at Leghorn on 7 March
1814 and a week later issued a proclamation in the name of the hereditary
