124                     SICILY: THE INSECURE BASE


rejoined to Naples and see its liberty crushed by the crown (“it is not easy to
conceive the terror universally felt at the unforgiving nature of their Ma-
jesties”), or its independence would be upheld—in which case it would fall
the victim of a combination of self-seeking barons, the king, and a licentious
people quite unable to govern themselves. If on the other hand Sicily were to
be placed under British protection, the island could become “after Ireland,
the brightest jewel in the British crown.” With Murat secure on the throne of
Naples, Sicily would need more than ever the protection afforded by British
troops. A garrison of 5,000 men (the figure mentioned in 1806 when a draft
treaty had been proposed by Howick) could be kept in Sicily in peacetime,
while Sicily could as at present provide a contingent at the disposal of Britain.
He thought that both the king and the prince would be glad to be rid of
Sicily, provided they were offered attractive terms, and the queen had fre-
quently said the same. He was only sorry he had made the suggestion
without first obtaining cabinet approval, but the moment had seemed to him
propitious and there had been no time to refer the matter to Castlereagh and
the ministry.1° In addition to writing, he had also dispatched his secretary
James Graham to Chatillon to interview Castlereagh personally, and this
James Graham did on 21 February 1814. Graham, being both “young and
romantic” (to use the words of Dr. Rosselli), convinced himself that Castle-
reagh sympathized with Bentinck’s “dream,” and reported him saying that if
Murat proved treacherous and the Bourbons were to be restored to Naples,
the British might keep Sicily; even if Murat stayed in Naples, the British
would still need their army in Sicily after the signing of a peace. This however
was not the impression Castlereagh retained of the interview, or perhaps did
not wish to retain of it, once the matter was raised by Castelcicala. He entirely
disowned the views on the subject attributed to him by James Graham. As
Rosselli charitably comments, his mind was then occupied by greater issues,
and he may not have given to what Graham said the close attention Graham
thought he had.!!
   It was not until 3 April that Castlereagh finally wrote to Bentinck, sending
him a mild reprimand. Dissociating the ministry entirely from the proposals
of the “dream,” Castlereagh emphasized the danger of making such un-
authorized speculations, especially when one had to deal with “characters so
suspicious and intriguing.”!? The last word upon the matter had really rested
with Liverpool, the prime minister, who had written to Castlereagh in
March:

  Because Bentinck finds his constitution and the Sicilian court never likely
  to work together, he sees no way out save the annexing of Sicily. If there
  were no other objections, it would be very difficult to manage the island
  with such a constitution, but you know other Powers are more jealous of
  our obtaining Bovis in the Mediterranean than in any other quarter.
  Circumstances have made it necessary for them to accept our retaining
