                Speculation on the Future of Sicily and Naples              123

approach, to be only a form of kite-flying, coming as they did from Britain’s
minister and the commander-in-chief of her army. He therefore replied in a
guarded manner. Sicily, he wrote, was sacred property that the king his father
was unable to renounce, and he could not think that Britain would wish to
deprive her ally of the kind of refuge that Sicily had provided in times of
adversity. In any case, the compensation Bentinck had mentioned seemed
quite inadequate—thereby hinting that if more were offered, the scheme
envisaged might yet be considered.®
   Bentinck replied that the plan he had outlined was something that was
entirely his own—the government in London knew nothing about it. But he
did add that Sicily must     always require some    maritime   protection, and
Britain being likely for many years to remain the world’s preponderant
seapower, she was the obvious country to provide it.”
  The prince consulted Medici, who in turn took counsel with Castelcicala,
and the two in conjunction with the king (though apparently without the
prince’s knowledge) plotted to get rid of Bentinck by raising the matter with
Downing Street. It seemed an excellent method by which, if Bentinck had
acted without instructions, the minister could be disgraced and his immedi-
ate recall procured. But both Bathurst and Castlereagh, though not un-
naturally surprised at learning of the relevant correspondence, were not
prepared to be used in this manner. Castelcicala, despite being assured that
the ministers had never heard of the scheme put forward in Bentinck’s letter
to the prince, a copy of which the ambassador had sent them, asked for
Bentinck to be removed. It appeared, he wrote, that Bentinck’s “dream” was
no dream but rather an “avowed intention”—not to give Sicily liberty but to
annex it to Great Britain. And furthermore, if Bentinck was not recalled, the
case of his master the king of Sicily must be submitted to the king of Spain. If
the king of Sicily was to be reduced to the status of a mere pensioner, he
preferred that he should receive his pension from the court of his brother
rather than from Britain. Castelcicala therefore asked for a passport to be
issued to his messenger who was to take this request to Madrid.®
   The reply he received was chilly in tone. The British government, Bathurst
wrote, had already made clear it had been no party to an idea “thrown out”
by Bentinck in what had been clearly a confidential letter. If Castelcicala had
received authority to request the recall of Lord William Bentinck, he was
asked to supply thé date on which the hereditary prince had sent such
instructions. Castelcicala’s bluff was called and his earlier boast that he had
given to Bentinck “a blow that will have broken his neck for good” was
shown up for the bombast it was.?
   All this took place in the first half of March. In early February (after
signing the armistice) Bentinck had written a long letter to Castlereagh,
setting out his case for the “dream.” At the coming peace, so he told
Castlereagh, Sicily would be faced with two alternatives. Either it would be
