120                     SICILY: THE INSECURE BASE


prince calling on the people of Italy to rise and assert their rights and
liberties. He was not alone in doing this, for Murat had already done so and
Nugent and the Austrians were to do the same.*?
   Bentinck had been ordered by Castlereagh to cooperate closely with the
Neapolitans who were now in occupation of Rome, Emilia, and Tuscany,
and he had been told that their “active assistance” was “indispensable” to
allied success. But Bentinck could not tolerate Murat, nor was he willing to
share with him the honor and glory of freeing Italy. He therefore demanded
that Murat’s army should forthwith evacuate Tuscany, which Bentinck made
out he required as a base for his planned assault on Genoa. And when he
found he could not get his way, he adopted a threatening attitude, talked of
expelling the Neapolitans, marching on Naples, and then proclaiming Ferdi-
nand IV as its rightful sovereign. Reprimanded by Castlereagh and told he
was under Austrian orders and must in future work beside Murat, he ac-
cepted Austrian mediation and agreed to withdraw from Tuscany.*3
   Genoa surrendered to Bentinck’s army on 18 April 1814 and Bentinck,
again disobeying orders, proclaimed the Republic of Genoa restored. But by
this time Napoleon had already abdicated—his decision to do so having been
caused not by allied successes in Italy but by other events to the north of the
Alps. A few weeks later Bentinck again gave encouragement to the council of
Milan in their endeavor to get accepted the concept of a free and united Italy.
Again Castlereagh intervened, telling him that he must abstain from inter-
ference in Italian affairs, since the future of Italy (and of course Sicily) must
be decided in another place.44
   It is somewhat ironical to reflect that when at last the occasion arrived for
using the army of Sicily that Britain had paid and maintained so long for a
major campaign in Italy, the effort proved to be largely wasted. Bentinck was
far more interested in championing the cause of Italian nationalism than in
working closely with his country’s allies, one of whom was his béte noire,
Murat. Reprimanded by Castlereagh for acting against the government's
wishes (“It is not an insurrection we want in Italy . . . we want disciplined
force under sovereigns we can trust”),45 he was sent on leave and gradually
replaced as British minister at Palermo, returning first briefly to the island,
which he finally left on 16 July. The military command in the Mediterranean
he kept until April of the following year.
