116                      SICILY: THE INSECURE BASE


Bathurst of the hopelessness of an undertaking involving sending the army to
Italy. Unless the government were prepared to arm, clothe, and equip an
Italian army on the scale it had done in Spain and Portugal, and in addition
put into the field a force of 30-40,000, the whole scheme was foredoomed to
failure. His anxiety was unnecessary since there was no chance of the ministry
ever agreeing to such a scheme. As Bathurst wrote privately to Bentinck,
“among our rulers . . . there is no belief of any character or energy among the
Italians.”3! The bulk of the army of Sicily therefore continued to serve in
Spain.
   What Bentinck was now contemplating was a much more limited enter-
prise, to keep Murat’s army guessing, but also to rid Sicily of the disaffected
Neapolitan troops. General Macfarlane, understandably, was not happy
about the project of launching an immediate attack on Calabria, viewing the
matter, as Bentinck did not, from a purely military standpoint. Landing
troops in the kingdom of Naples, unless the operation succeeded, would do
nothing to solve Sicilian problems and Macfarlane had little hope of success
with only two British battalions available out of a total strength of 12,000.
Bentinck was not deflected from his plan so easily. He argued that the loss of
the Neapolitan troops would cause the Sicilians to make greater efforts in
providing for their own defense and would also save them a lot of money. He
had long deplored the attitude of the native Sicilians toward military service
and their refusal to accept conscription, agreeing with what Belmonte had
said to him about their desiring contradictions—no foreigners in their army,
yet no Sicilian to be forced to serve in it; a large army to defend their island,
yet no taxes to pay for it. It was quite sufficient to his mind that there was a
chance of the plan succeeding.3? Fortunately for the reputation of both the
British forces and Bentinck, the expedition did not take place, at least not for
another eight months, and then it was sent to another part of Italy and in
quite altered circumstances. The renewed fear of a French invasion (the
combined threat from the Toulon fleet and 20,000 of Murat’s troops),
followed by the political crisis that resulted in Bentinck’s return from Spain,
meant that no expedition to Naples from Sicily would take place that year. As
for the invasion threat, it proved to be nothing but a piece of bluff. When
Bentinck cited it as a reason for his not returning two battalions to Spain,
Wellington commented somewhat tartly that in his opinion the island of
Sicily was “in no danger whatsoever,” an opinion that Admiral Pellew
endorsed. Wellington and Pellew proved to be right, but it did not alter
Bentinck’s decision.33
  What was attempted in December, however, on a very much less ambitious
scale, was the dispatch of an Italian regiment to seize Leghorn by a coup de
main. It was made on the initiative of Colonel Catinelli, the commander of
the Third Italian Regiment, and Bentinck initially had misgivings about its
chances of success, preferring it to go only to Ponza and there to make a more
