                         10
   Speculation on the Future of Sicily and Naples

A’ the end of the great war with Napoleon finally began to draw in sight,
      the whole question of Sicily’s future and its possible annexation by
Britain was raised again (somewhat unexpectedly) in the shape of what was
called “Bentinck’s Dream.” This solution to Sicily’s problems was put for-
ward quite sincerely, in the interests of the island as much as of Britain, by the
man who was now the dictator of Sicily. Its disclosure caused a temporary
sensation both at the court and in Downing Street, and this reaction led
Bentinck’s enemies to hope it might lead to his immediate recall.
   The whole question of Sicily’s future and its relationship to Britain—the
country that for the past eight years had protected it from the grasp of
Napoleon—was certainly not a novel one when it was raised in December
1813. Howick and Grenville in 1806/7 had contemplated making Sicily a
British protectorate in peacetime. Moore had certainly believed it necessary
for the duration of the war to assume the government of Sicily, though there
is no evidence that he ever thought it would be wise to retain it in peacetime. !
And the persuasive propagandist Charles Pasley in his Essay on Military Policy
had deplored the fact that Britain had failed to annex Sicily from the begin-
ning. Leckie, another active propagandist, the writer of articles in the Morn-
ing Chronicle and a series of open letters and pamphlets published in 1806/7,
as well as (almost certainly) the paper Hints for the improvement ofSicily, which
was addressed to Lord Castlereagh, wrote in this last:

  The master of Sicily regenerated holds Egypt under his foot; Tunis is his
  tributary; and the depot of the commerce of belligerents, the ee
  Powers, cease to have ships of war. He watches the fall of the Turkis
  empire, and stands with expanded wings to aes upon Greece. He
  closes the Dardanelles with Lemnos, and forbids the Russians to enter the
  archipelago.

This visionary talk of British dominance in the Mediterranean, in war and
peace, had been used earlier by apologists for making Corsica a British
possession, and the same sort of arguments were to be used a year later by
Richard Church and General Oswald to try to persuade British ministers to
take over the Ionian islands. It says much for the hardheadedness and
pragmatic approach of British statesmen, notably Pitt and Castlereagh, that

                                       121
