                               The Dénouement                                131

parliament due to be summoned in the spring, matters could not go on as
they were. “It is possible that the presence of his Lordship with the sword in
one hand and the purse in the other, may influence and control the factious
spirit of the assembly”; but once the British army was removed from Sicily,
either there would be a revolution carried out by the democrats, or the nobles
and those who supported the king would combine with the mob and the
royal troops to put the king back in his old position and do away with the
constitution. Bentinck himself, A’Court pointed out, had in a private letter to
Liverpool admitted that only British interference could save Sicily from
internal convulsion. Yet the jealousy of Britain’s allies would never permit her
army to stay there, while intervention privately by the British minister in
Palermo would merely compete with private intrigues by the ministers of
other powers, and France for instance could scarcely desire a better field for
activity than “that provided by an ignorant, profligate and . . . venal House
of Parliament.” A’Court had already made up his mind that a free constitu-
tion was not something in any way suited to the people of Sicily.”
   A month later he was duly appointed to act as deputy for Bentinck as
British minister at Palermo, during the latter’s absence in Italy, in charge of
military operations. And in his instructions from Castlereagh he was told that
his most immediate task was to get the constitution modified. The original
error, as Castlereagh saw it, had been making the king dependent on parlia-
ment in a country where the spirit of jealousy and faction was unfortunately
all too prevalent. What A’Court had to attempt to do was to ensure that only
men of property were represented in parliament, and that the crown was no
longer dependent on parliament for its normal expenses.?
   In a revealing interview Castlereagh gave to A’Court in May before the
latter left for Sicily, Castlereagh told him, in reply to his question about what
action he should take should the king resume power and the queen return,
that the time for direct interference was past and that there could now be no
warrant for behaving as Britain had done in the course of the war. As to
Sicily’s constitution, Castlereagh disclaimed all responsibility for it. Its suc-
cess had been as great as might have been expected, but he thought nothing
could save it now. “God knows,” he went on, “it was never any principle of
mine that we should meddle with the constitutions of other nations,” but
even had he wanted to, he would have been completely cured of any inclina-
tion to do so by what he had seen to happen in Sicily. He thought it would
meet the same fate as the constitutions then forming in Europe, and the best
thing that could happen was for Sicily’s government to revert to its original
form.*
  A’Court’s appointment had been canvassed for months by Castelcicala and
the king, some time before the affair of the “dream.” They had even tried to
get A’Court accredited solely to the king, until informed by Castlereagh that
the hereditary prince was the head of the state.° But there was no question
