134                     SICILY: THE INSECURE BASE


   Yet Bentinck clearly had believed that he was entering into an arrange-
ment. How far then was he justified in suggesting that Britain’s name and
honor had been smirched by Castlereagh’s realpolitik? As Professor Mack
Smith has pointed out, the king, though he was later blamed for destroying a
liberal experiment, had been supported in so doing by a large proportion of
the people of Sicily and had only dissolved the Sicilian parliament for the last
time in 1815, after the failure of four parliaments to vote the necessary
taxes.1© Charles Macfarlane, who was in Sicily only six months after the
British troops left, heard many complaints of pecuniary loss now that the
freespending forces had gone, but heard no regrets for a constitution that
people described as a kind of “madness.”!7 Earlier the king had told Ben-
tinck, “The Sicilians are not Englishmen, the habits of this country are not
the habits of yours. . . . You fancy that Sicilians can govern themselves like
Englishmen. They cannot do it. Give them this constitution and you yourself
will soon have cause to repent it.”!8 Ferdinand’s words had proved pro-
phetic.
   Since, then, the maintenance of the constitution (the creation of an en-
lightened few) rested quiet clearly on British bayonets, to describe the
withdrawal of such questionable support as being in some way “dis-
honorable” seems to stretch the meaning of the word too far. Nor could any
such withdrawal be described as unreasonable. As Charles Macfarlane em-
phasized, writing a generation after the event, “Fond as they are of liberty,
and prone to believe . . . that constitutions like our own are a panacea and fit
for all countries and all peoples, the English would not have relished paying,
for an indefinite number of years, an army of 10,000 men for the sole
purpose of protecting a political experiment in Sicily.”!9 And an experiment,
he could have added had he not made the point already, to which most
Sicilians had proved indifferent. In any case, to keep troops on the island for
that avowed purpose was bound to incur not only the anger of Austria but
the risk of an open breach with that country.2° No considerations of “honor”
could have warranted taking such a risk.
   Certainly it would have been dishonorable to permit the king to victimize
those who had loyally supported the British, but Ferdinand here remained
true to his pledge where higher officers were concerned. Settimo, who had
been the minister for war, was even offered membership of the chancellery
responsible for Sicilian affairs, though perhaps understandably he declined it.
Belmonte had died earlier in Paris. Castelnuovo and other nobles associated
with the 1812 Constitution,      chose to retire into private life, a sort of
immigration intérieure, in which they were allowed to remain undisturbed.
Nor was it any longer true that native Sicilians were kept out of office in favor
of Neapolitans. Indeed the latter complained of being swamped by a host of
job-hungry Sicilians who had followed the king when he returned from
Palermo.*! Giovanni Aceto in his history refers to the number of individuals
