                               The Dénouement                              133

Republic of Genoa, revived by Bentinck. This however was considered
impracticable, since the two cases were quite unlike. Castlereagh made clear
to A’Court, writing in September 1816, that any concert between Austria
and Britain would embarrass rather than help the king, might be wrongly
construed in Europe, and would moreover make the two countries responsi-
ble for whatever was done. While it was right to advise the king, A’Court
must not commit the British government. The best course would be to let the
king carry out his projected scheme (or subterfuge) for modifying the consti-
tution, while letting him know, privately, that Britain would tolerate neither
the extinction of any of Sicily’s ancient rights nor the persecution of any of
those who had lent their support to British authority.!° This course was
accordingly adopted, and A’Court wrote triumphantly on 5 November that
the new, modified constitution on which his private advice had been taken
(without committing his government) would ensure that nothing was done
in Sicily that could be considered reactionary. He therefore congratulated
Castlereagh on being now totally released “from all responsibility arising
from the past.”!! The king was delighted and had awarded A’Court the
highest decoration he had the power to confer (the Grand Cross of the Order
of St Ferdinand), even though British protocol forbade A’Court from accept-
ing it.!? But from the Sicilian constitutionalists the latter earned the nick-
name of “William the Bad,” in contradistinction to Lord William Bentinck,
who of course was referred to as “William the Good.”!$
  On 8 December 1816 the king declared the kingdom of Naples and the
kingdom of Sicily to be one. The new constitution he promulgated effectively
robbed the Sicilian parliament of any power to legislate or prevent the king
from raising revenue, save for extraordinary purposes. Though the privileges
granted by the crown were confirmed, freedom of the press was now abol-
ished and a measure of conscription introduced.!* There was nothing left of
the constitution over whose birth Bentinck had presided.
   The policy in regard to Sicily that he had pursued during these two years
Castlereagh defended vigorously in the House of Commons in 1821, when
rejecting a motion put forward by Bentinck for a fresh intervention in Sicilian
affairs. Castlereagh said that although the government felt strong affection
and esteem for Sicily, it was not on that account or to secure its people’s
happiness that British troops had been stationed there—in fact it had been a
military occupation. Britain’s guarantee had not been to form a constitution,
but to protect the dominions of its king. True, it had been necessary to
intervene to impress on the mind of the Sicilian government the need for a
modern constitution. Moreover if this had not been done, the government of
the island could not have’ continued and the place would have been quite
unfitted for its use as a British military base. It was never felt that Lord
William Bentinck was entering into any arrangements with respect to the
Sicilian constitution.!®
