eZ                      SICILY: THE INSECURE BASE


but that A’Court would be far more acceptable to the king and prince than
the constitutional dictator Bentinck.
   A’Court did not take very long after arriving in Sicily to reaffirm his earlier
view that the Constitution of 1812 had been a profound mistake for the
island. The Sicilian people, he told Castlereagh, were quite unfitted to be
entrusted with any sort of political power, and a strong monarchical govern-
ment was the only one that was suitable for them. This view, in fact, is not all
that different from the one Bentinck had been forced to adopt in his mo-
ments of greatest disillusion.© “If I had known,” the latter had written, “as
much of the general character of the people as I did at present, I do not think
I should ever have undertaken the business. I doubted whether these people
were made for freedom.”” All would have been well, A’Court thought, if
those who had drafted the constitution had contented themselves with lim-
ited aims—the improving of the administration, the abolition of feudal
rights, establishing equality before the law, and the introduction of fairer
taxation. But the great mistake, to his mind, had been to create deliberative
assemblies endowed with legislative power; for this meant Britain had been
forced to take sides and now found it difficult suddenly to withdraw. He felt
it acutely embarrassing to have, in the name of British honor as well as of
sheer humanity, to give support to individuals with whose principles he so
disagreed. He painted a very gloomy picture of a bankrupt island whose old
institutions had now become discredited, and whose new ones were not yet
functioning. The best friends Britain possessed in Sicily were making haste to
abandon the island, and they were not willing to return unless it became
controlled by Britain. Thus it was that the British cabinet would have to
make a crucial decision, either to support what Britain had created or to
renounce British influence there altogether. It was extremely unfortunate, he
thought, that Britain had ever interfered over the matter of a constitution:
“We have done either too much or too little. . . . we satisfied ourselves with
the shadow, when we should have seized the substance,” and by this he meant
forcing the king to abdicate (something that Bentinck had always wanted).
   For the king was now the principal difficulty, determined to ditch the
constitution yet so untrustworthy and vindictive that he would, if permitted
a free hand, soon establish a tyranny. Were it not for him, it would be quite
easy for Britain to withdraw her support and “let the constitution sink into a
form more adapted to the manners, vices and prejudices of this ignorant and
profligate people.” The only course that now seemed open was to get the
king to agree to accept a constitution of some sort, before he eventually
returned to Naples.?
   But the whole affair of the constitution took on a completely new complex-
ion with the terms of the treaty the king signed in June 1815 with Austria.
Metternich proposed to A’Court that Britain should join with Austria to
disown the Sicilian constitution, as they had already jointly disowned the
