               Speculation on the Future of Sicily and Naples              127

toward Sicily.?* Yet the king was still unable to get a new parliament to vote
him taxes (elected in August, its composition was much more democratic
than the previous one), so for twelve months he had to subsist on taxes raised
unconstitutionally and what remained of the British subsidy. Bentinck, when
he had returned from Italy, had threatened to stop the subsidy altogether
until the sums he had lent the prince were repaid, but realizing the embarrass-
ment this would cause, decided the payments might continue if parliament
made some reasonable arrangement.?? It was here that Castlereagh inter-
vened. According to the treaty of alliance, the subsidy was supposed to stop
with the war, but withholding it for even six months would not liquidate the
debts owed to Britain. Such was the state of the country’s finances that the
king might have to dismiss his army, and if this happened the bulk of the
troops would almost certainly desert to Murat. A’Court was accordingly
instructed that the British government would continue to pay one half of the
subsidy agreed upon, until the Congress of Vienna ended or 1 March next,
whichever was soonest.?4
   This windfall of the half subsidy put new confidence into the ministry in
their confrontation with parliament, but it disheartened the supporters of the
constitution who regarded its payment as tacit approval of the king’s uncon-
stitutional measures. Even so, the Sicilian government was not preserved
from bankruptcy. By the middle of March 1815 (the Congress of Vienna
being still in session), the Sicilian army was about to dissolve. Without pay
for the past six months, its officers were reduced to begging and even to
robbery by night. The Sicilian government had tried for too long to keep up
a style it could not afford, maintaining not only an expensive court, expensive
embassies abroad, a host of civil servants, not to mention pensioners, but also
an army far larger than it needed.?5 It had remained solvent only because
Bentinck had succeeded in slimming the army and in lending the government
money. Now that the subsidy was cut by half and further loans were no
longer forthcoming (and were indeed due to be repaid), the harshness of
fiscal reality must be faced.
   All this time the British garrison still remained in Sicily. Orders had been
issued in August for its immediate withdrawal, but the king had asked for it
to stay. He was careful to avoid giving any hint that he needed it for internal
security, but made out that it might be required for a possible future
offensive against Murat. Castlereagh agreed to this request because the
Congress was still deliberating and no decision had yet been reached about
the future of Naples or Murat; but he used the occasion to point out to the
king how unfounded all past suspicions had been of the British wanting to
take over Sicily.?°
   The escape of Napoleon from Elba in February and the beginning of the
Hundred Days provided Sicily with a temporary respite in weathering its
financial crisis. It also relieved Metternich of the problem posed by Murat’s
