                                      11

                          The Dénouement


Wwe the conclusion of the Hundred Days, the award by the Congress of
       Vienna of the kingdom of Naples to king Ferdinand, and the igno-
minious end of Murat, there was no longer any need for the presence of
British troops in Sicily, and the last contingent left its shores on 9 October
1815. But there still remained the vexing question of how Britain was to
extract herself with honor from Sicily’s internal situation. She had for a
period of almost three years committed herself to the support of the constitu-
tional party in Sicily (it had come to be called “the British party”) and had
shouldered a moral obligation that could not lightly be cast off. Indeed any
attempt to do so would stain Britain’s name internationally, as well as cause
an uproar at Westminster. Yet the king, who was now restored to Naples, was
notoriously opposed to the constitution, had found it quite unworkable, and
since June 1815 had tied his hands by a new treaty with Austria, a treaty that
enabled him at last to be free of his long dependence on Britain. In return for
a guarantee by Austria of military support for his dominions, he had pledged
himself politically not to tolerate any institutions that were at variance with
those permitted in Austria’s Italian possessions. In other words, no responsi-
ble government. Now Austria was an ally of Britain; her support in uphold-
ing the Peace of Vienna was paramount in Castlereagh’s eyes, and no scruples
about the constitution could be allowed to stand in the way of establishing
his principal goal, an enduring international settlement.
   During the war, Castlereagh had been willing to go along with Bentinck’s
policy and permit him to work his political experiment. As he frankly
admitted in May 1814, “I found the whole line of politics with respect of
Sicily so completely chalked out that nothing was left for me to do but to let
things take their cburse and to remain a spectator of the experiment which
was to be made and to give it a fair trial.”! But once the end of the war was in
sight, he decided that Bentinck must be replaced in his civilian capacity by the
more conservative William A’Court, then envoy extraordinary to the Barbary
States and a man known to have little sympathy with popular assemblies in
foreign countries. A’Court had presented for Castlereagh’s eyes a memoran-
dum of his views on the Sicilian situation based on his reading of the
correspondence, and this had clearly impressed the foreign secretary. He was,
A’Court   wrote, quite convinced    that, despite Bentinck’s hopes for a new

                                       129
