                               The Dénouement                               135

(none of whom he identifies by name), magistrates, and other officials who
through their political affiliations were deprived of their posts after 1815,
denied promotion, or persecuted.?? It could unfortunately well have been so,
more especially in a country like Sicily where mutual jealousies could be so
intense, but it would have been impracticable, indeed impossible, for the
British government to have intervened in any such cases unless its official
attention had been drawn to some specific cause of complaint.
   Castlereagh had acquiesced in the constitution so long as it served its
immediate purpose—keeping the island of Sicily quiet, so as to let the allied
troops there be made available for service elsewhere. But it could have no
relevance in peacetime to the foreign policy of Lord Liverpool’s government.
Yet even in wartime it had not been the entire success various ministries had
hoped for. As has been shown in earlier chapters, Bentinck was twice com-
pelled to recall a proportion of his army from Spain in order to cope with
internal unrest, was forced to delay his own departure there, and once in
Spain had had to return because of Sicily’s turbulence.
  If the question finally has to be asked whether, viewing the war as a whole,
the military and financial investment Britain made in Sicily had been worth-
while, the answer must be a qualified yes; though undoubtedly the highest
hopes entertained for it were never fulfilled. As a forward base from which to
launch effective attacks on the enemy, whether in Egypt, the Dardanelles,
Italy, the Adriatic, or Spain, there were few successes of which it could boast,
the dramatic anticlimax of Maida being the one that deserves to be best
remembered. At times there had been maintained in the island upward of
15,000 troops, yet never enough to intervene effectively or for very long in a
continental enterprise that in any case if it were to succeed needed the help of
Austria or Russia. In Spain there were some results to show, but internal
troubles in Sicily and Bentinck’s preoccupation with Italy had prevented their
being more convincing, just as the danger from the court and its followers
had earlier prevented more than a portion of the troops available from being
used in Italy or being dispatched to the Dardanelles. At all times there had
remained present the threat of invasion by the French, even if after 1810 that
threat was never a very real one. And if the British cabinet did not take that
threat very seriously after Murat’s halfhearted, aborted thrust, the court and
the generals and admirals did, and the king insisted that the minimum force
of 10,000 effective British troops, guaranteed by treaty, be maintained on the
island as long as the war with Napoleon lasted.
   Yet looked at purely defensively, the occupation had been well worth the
trouble. Without it, Malta would have been at risk—indeed Sir Alexander
Ball once wrote to Castlereagh of “the disaster which must necessarily accrue
to the inhabitants of Malta, should the French possess themselves of Si-
cily.”23 And with Malta at risk, so also would be British command of the
Mediterranean as well as Britain’s commercial interests in the Levant and
