138                     SICILY: THE INSECURE BASE


ports. Permission was given at the end of December for the export to Naples
of Sicilian produce as well as British and colonial produce and of course
British manufactures, while imports were no longer confined to iron, flour,
and rice as hitherto, but could now include all the produce of Naples, only
excluding French manufactures.*
   By the treaty of alliance of 1808 the ports of Sicily were thrown open to
the merchant ships of British subjects, and merchants were not required to
pay duties on food or military stores imported for the use of British troops.
Nevertheless some of these duties did continue to be levied, on the pretext
that the royal right to collect them had been farmed out to private bodies.
These commercial privileges granted the British were deeply resented by
Sicilians, and once the war ended in 1814, although British troops still
remained on the island until October 1815, there were complaints from
British merchants that their privileges were being ignored and that delays
continued to be imposed on the import of British goods. As A’Court wrote
indignantly to one official: “It would seem that nothing could be more
acceptable at the present moment than anything which may wear the ap-
pearance of hostility to the British interests.”>
   There were many British merchants in Sicily, most of them living in
Palermo and Messina, though the firms of Woodhouse           and Ingham were
most closely linked with the port of Marsala where they virtually controlled
the trade in wine and had kept Nelson’s fleet supplied with it.© How many
English merchants there were, how much capital they had, in what sectors of
trade they operated, and what was the extent of their profits are questions
about which it is not yet possible to be precise. The petition of the merchants
resident in Sicily made to the Council of Trade and Plantations on 27 May
1811 was signed by twenty-eight merchant firms or individuals trading on
their own.” These British merchants had protested against the tax on mone-
tary transactions imposed by the king in 1811, though this was removed after
Bentinck’s arrival. They also protested that there existed no Anglo-Sicilian
commercial treaty. It will be recalled that in 1806 the Ministry of All the
Talents initially suggested that a clause be added to the subsidy treaty then
being negotiated by which British merchants in Sicily should be given the
position of most-favored nationals, but that fierce Sicilian opposition had
caused the suggestion to be withdrawn. Two years later, Mellish impressed
on Canning the need for some such commercial agreement, since British
merchants in Sicily were in the position of those least favored, their goods
being required to pay 36 percent more than the goods of other nations.8
Canning apparently took no action, because three years later Wellesley at the
Foreign Office raised the matter again with the Board of Trade. Bathurst,
then in charge of that department, replied that there were difficulties. Britain
could not ask for commercial advantages simply because she was paying a
subsidy (one she was bound by treaty to do). Sicily would seek reciprocity
