144                     SICILY: THE INSECURE BASE


   In view of all this, why then did Pacca send the friar off with the idea that
further contact would be made at the coast during the course of the next
three nights, if he were already so sure that the pope had effectively vetoed
the scheme from the start?®
   It must be very frankly stated that the clergy do not emerge from these
incidents with any very great measure of credit. Why, it may be asked, did
Gabrielli allow the scheme to go ahead, if he knew that the pope was
completely opposed to it? Even to the extent of encouraging Fagan (it was
presumably he who saw Fagan) to try again, but this time bearing a letter?
And why did he not inform his successor as pro-secretary of state of what he
had done? And if he were hurried out of the kingdom before he had had time
to inform Pacca, why had Erskine said nothing to Pacca? And again, if Pacca
was so convinced that the pope had made up his mind for good (and Pius was
not a man to be shaken, once he had formed his own opinion), why did he
allow the Franciscan friar to think there was still a chance of some change in
the papal attitude toward escape?
   The result of what one can only call muddle, or perhaps even moral
cowardice, in refusing to tell unpleasant truths, interwoven with clerical
intrigue, was that the lives of all those on board the British frigate were
needlessly risked, the life of the brave Colonel Vanni was forfeit, and the
British were made for no good reason to hazard one of their valuable ships.
   The second attempt to rescue the pope was made in the summer of 1810
when a ship was again dispatched from Sicily, though this time it was a
Spanish operation, with the British ship acting as auxiliary only. There had
been no orders sent out from England to instruct Amherst how he was to act,
and he and Admiral Martin were content to rely on Canning’s dispatch of
June 1808 as an indication of British policy. It is true that there was now a
new administration, but Perceval’s ministry expressed no views, though it
would doubtless have been delighted if the operation had been successful.
  This time the initiative had come from the pope’s almoner, acting (or so he
wrote) on the pope’s instructions, and taking the form of letters to Sicily
addressed to a Sicilian prelate and to the Spanish minister in Palermo. These
letters, which arrived in Holy Week and whose contents at first appeared
innocuous, were found to contain a hidden message. This message was
written in invisible ink and asked the letter’s recipients to help rescue the
pope and with the assistance of the British navy to arrange for his passage to
and asylum in Malta. Given the known views of the pope, that he certainly
had not become (as some think) Napoleon’s bitter enemy, but rather that he
clung to the hope that the latter would become a latter-day Charlemagne and
emerge in the end as the Church’s defender, it seems unlikely to say the least
that he would have instructed his almoner to make the appeal set out in these
letters.” In view of the independent behavior of Cardinals Erskine and
