                      Appendix B
          Attempts Made from Sicily to Rescue
                     Pope Pius VII


Nee February 1808, when French troops were quartered in Rome be-
   cause the Pope had refused to join an offensive alliance against Great
Britain, Pius VII was a virtual prisoner there—forced to dismiss his secre-
taries and to dissolve his personal guard. It was in these circumstances that
Cardinal Gabrielli, pro-papal secretary of state until he was expelled by the
French, concocted a plot with a Scottish prelate to get the British to rescue
the pope and convey him safely to Sicily.! The Scottish prelate was Cardinal
Erskine, the same cardinal who thirteen years earlier had endeavored to get
the British government to recognize the papal court and to resume diplo-
matic relations with it in return for the then pope, Pius VI, accepting the
Anglo-Corsican kingdom and being willing to sign a concordat with it. This
time Erskine was more successful in obtaining a hearing at Westminster, and
the government there sent instructions to Drummond, their minister at the
court at Palermo, and to Admiral Collingwood, then commanding the Brit-
ish fleet in the Mediterranean, to set on foot a rescue operation.”
   In mid-July 1808 Collingwood was ordered by the Admiralty to station a
frigate off the Roman coast in order to receive on board the pope and any
cardinals who might wish to accompany him, after first getting in touch with
Drummond to coordinate plans for the operation.* Meanwhile Drummond
had heard from Canning that Collingwood had been so instructed. But
Drummond had already discovered that the queen, entirely without his
knowledge or indeed that of the king and Circello, had been involved in a
plot of her own to rescue the pope and bring him to Sicily—perhaps at the
prompting of that strange character the Irish-born painter Rogert Fagan.
The latter had lived for a long time in Rome, where he had acted as the
British agent. He knew the pope personally and had only recently been
expelled from Rome on the express order of Napoleon. On arrival in Palermo
he quickly succeeded in becoming a confidant of the queen. In June 1809 he
was to become the British consul-general in Sicily. The queen had dispatched
a Sicilian frigate with Fagan on board to the Roman coast with an invitation
to the pope to come and seek refuge in Palermo. Needless to say, the
operation, like everything else the queen undertook, had not been thought
out sufficiently well. Fagan was told the pope would not leave unless he

                                     141
