                                  Appendix B                               145

Gabrielli during the summer of 1808 in formulating a plot to which they
knew the pope was completely opposed, one may perhaps be allowed to
doubt the truth of the papal almoner’s statement that his letters were written
on the pope’s instructions.
  Padre Gil, the Spanish minister, told Amherst he would like His Holiness
to be taken if possible to Alicante. The latter was a secure resort and the
presence of the pope in Spain would have an incalculable effect on the
national struggle the Spanish were waging. The Spanish had a corvette they
could send, but they would welcome the presence of a British warship to
accompany it to Genoese waters, since it had been learned that the coast near
Savona was strictly guarded by French privateers. Amherst then approached
Admiral Martin, who expressed his willingness to detach a brig (the Eclair) to
perform the task.
  The two warships set sail in June, the Spanish warship having aboard
someone who knew both the pope and Savona, and when they reached the
Maddalena Islands, this person was sent on ahead of the rest to meet the pope
and discover from him when the corvette had best appear. He was at the
same time to offer the pope a choice of places to which he could go—first
Alicante, second Minorca, and only Palermo as a last resort.!°
   Neither Amherst nor Admiral Cotton (now in command in the Mediterra-
nean) ever had very much faith in the scheme, given the close watch main-
tained on the coast. And Cotton later wrote of its failure as one that had been
“foreseen and expected.”!! The person sent from the Maddalena Islands did
not succeed in reaching the pope until it was too late to take any action, for
the long delay had led the Spanish with British agreement to abandon the
plan. They had thought that although they might succeed in making a
landing near Savona, they would never be able to get away; and an unsuc-
cessful attempt of this sort could only endanger the life of the pope.
   Amherst was convinced that lack of security had contributed largely to the
failure of the mission. There was great reason to believe, he wrote, that the
secret of the expedition had been divulged even before the two warships had
set sail from Palermo roadstead.1? And the same had been true in 1808
when, before the Alceste had sailed for the Tiber, its mission was being
discussed in Malta.13 The court at Palermo was of course notorious for the
presence of spies there and for careless talk.
  A further attempt in 1811 to involve the British government in an attempt
to free the pope was made by Queen Maria-Carolina through a Livornese
banker called Gaspar Cifenti, but that plan very rapidly came to nothing.
Napoleon’s police got to know of the plot and Cifenti paid for it with his
life +*
   Whether the British in 1812 had any intention of trying again to take the
pope away from Savona it is not possible to say. There is no documentary
