142                     SICILY: THE INSECURE BASE


received an invitation, written out in the king’s own hand that, it was said,
the pope would recognize. After three weeks Fagan returned, only to find
himself out of favor both with the queen for having failed and with Drum-
mond, who was extremely incensed that Fagan had not consulted him. And
what was particularly galling was that surprise had now been lost. All Italy, in
Drummond’s view, must now know of the attempt, and this had made it
doubly difficult to make another with hope of success.#
  Collingwood had ordered the frigate Alceste under the command of Cap-
tain Maxwell to undertake the rescue task, but he wanted Drummond to find
for him at least two reliable men to act as agents in contacting the pope.
Drummond decided that no Sicilian would ever agree to accept such a role
unless he knew that the king was behind him, and so he decided he must
confide in the king and in Circello, whom he swore to secrecy, for on no
account was the queen to be told. It was they who eventually procured four
Catholic priests to sail on the frigate. Drummond writes of only three—a
Jesuit and two monks or friars—while Maxwell, who must here be relied on,
mentions four, though he called them all Jesuits (a term that he, as a good
Protestant, was ready no doubt to apply indiscriminately). In addition there
travelled on board the Alceste a Roman guide and a young nobleman, Count
Canizzaro, a friend of Drummond and thought by him a suitable person to
keep His Holiness company.°
   The Alceste set sail on 26 August and after first calling at the island of Ponza
to pick up a pilot who knew the area made for the coast at Fiumicino where
one of the friars and the guide disembarked. The friar managed to reach
Rome safely, had an interview with Cardinal Pacca, the papal secretary of
state, and found the latter surprised and pleased to learn that an English ship
had arrived. Although he looked like a Sicilian brigand, the friar’s credentials
were believed, even though he failed to carry on him the important letter
written (as requested) in the king’s own hand, unsigned and unaddressed,
lamenting “the gradual decay of his friend’s health” and inviting him “to try a
change of air at his villa which was accounted very healthy.”¢
   No direct answer was apparently forthcoming, but the friar was told to go
back to the coast and wait there for the next three nights for a messenger with
the pope’s reply.
   Maxwell then arranged to have waiting on shore every night his first
lieutenant, to receive the expected messenger. No one arrived on the first two
nights and the third night it blew a gale, so that no boat could approach the
shore. Whether the messenger did arrive on the crucial third night is not
known, but once the weather again permitted, a Party was sent ashore each
night to await the envoy who never came. Finally Captain Maxwell decided
he must send someone again to Rome to find out what was happening. But
here he found himself frustrated, since all the priests were too frightened to
go and asked only to return to Palermo. Maxwell sent them back on a small
