                     Appendix A
       The Economic Implications of the British
                 Occupation of Sicily


less presence of British troops in Sicily together with the payment of a
     British subsidy brought to the island an influx of capital and a vast
increase of its purchasing power. The demand of the armed forces for meat
meant that the price of cattle almost doubled, as did that of wool and corn.
The wages of agricultural laborers did not keep pace with this inflation, and it
was therefore the merchants and farmers and the landowners with their
increased rents who benefited from this situation. The attempt by the Sicilian
government to introduce a free trade in corn led in the summer of 1813 to
such a huge increase in its price that serious riots broke out in Palermo, and
not long after Lord William Bentinck was forced to reimpose price controls.
When however the war ended and British troops were finally withdrawn,
there was inevitably a collapse of prices and an end to the period of pros-
perity for those classes who had benefited by the British presence.!
   The interdiction of trade to Europe caused a wartime flowering of local
industry—silk manufacture in Palermo, the manufacture of wool, hemp, and
linen in new factories at Girgenti, and of linen at Caltanisetta. Hats, fur-
niture, even harpsichords to rival the best products of France and Spain (if
one witness is to be believed) were all being produced in Sicily during the
wartime period, while new sulphur and asphalt mines were being successfully
exploited.”
   The contraband trade with the continent was very largely in the hands of
the British, for whom Sicily became a vast entrepét for British manufactures
and for colonial goods. Britain’s minister at Palermo was authorized by the
British government to issue licenses for this trade to any vessels other than
French, though in regard to the trade to Calabria there were difficulties with
British cruisers who tended to stop any vessels crossing, purely on grounds of
security; and on one occasion in 1808 the merchants of Leeds complained to
the ministry that legitimate trade was being hampered through orders issued
by the Admiralty.
   When during the outbreak of plague in Malta in the summer and autumn
of 1813 the Sicilians imposed a rigorous quarantine, British merchants in
Sicily found that their trade was badly hit. In consequence, Bentinck felt
compelled to authorize a full-scale trade between Sicily and the Neapolitan
                                      137
