                                 Appendix A                                139

and that meant reducing the duty on wine—not just Sicilian wine, but the
wines of all wine-producing countries (other, of course, than the enemy
France)—and this the Treasury could not afford.? Only a month later,
however, the Board of Trade did produce a projet for an Anglo-Sicilian
commercial treaty that was designed to be included in the wider treaty of
1812.!° This however proved unnecessary since by the end of 1811 the main
merchants’ grievances had been removed. New instructions had been issued
by the court in regard to the seizure of British ships and to improving the
conduct of the prize court; steps had been taken to adjust the assessment of
the value of British goods entering the country to keep pace with the
lowering of prices, and an assurance had been given to London that in future
British goods might be freely transshipped without the payment of any
duty.!! There is no doubt that British manufactures, despite the court’s
grudging attitude, enjoyed a wartime boom in Sicily, and one witness who
was resident in Palermo through 1811 and 1812 writes of English cloth
being universally worn, and every kind of household necessity being not only
“on the English model” but “generally procured in England.”!? And certainly
the British community could not complain of underrepresentation where
consular services were concerned, since by 1812 there were functioning in
Sicily no less than thirty vice-consuls and consuls.1* Not however until 1816
was a trade treaty finally signed between Britain and the Two Sicilies. This
gave the subjects of both countries the status of most-favored nationals and
remitted 10 percent of the duty paid on British imported goods in return for
Britain abandoning the right of exemption from customs search.14
   Sicilian merchants for their part benefited from British naval protection
against French privateers and Barbary pirates. When the British navy arrived
off Sicily at the end of the eighteenth century, a constant state of war
obtained between the island and the Barbary states, and Sicilian trade was
either confined to vessels plying a coastal traffic or to those of some other
country whose flag the Barbary states respected. It was the British who,
through the good offices of Admiral Fremantle in 1812 (acting on behalf of
Lord William Beninck), concluded a treaty with the bey of Tunis. Four
hundred-odd Sicilian subjects being held in slavery were cheaply ransomed, a
truce was made between Sicily and Tunis to last as long as Britain was Sicily’s
ally and permission was given for boats from Sicily to fish coral along the
North African coast.!5 The economic benefits accruing from nearly ten years
of close relations between Britain and Sicily were not the perquisite of one
side only. And one major contribution to the Sicilian economy that the
British occupation of Sicily made was to the island’s merchant marine. Before
1806 Sicilian exports were carried to Europe in the foreign craft of France,
Genoa, and Ragusa. The Sicilian merchant marine consisted largely of a few
small vessels, principally engaged in a coastal trade, creeping from port to
port in the kingdom, terrified of Barbary pirates but also ignorant of naviga-
