                                  Appendix B                                  143

ship (the Acorn) together with the young Count Canizzaro—the only one to
show any courage—with a message to Drummond to inform him of events.
  Within a week Canizzaro was back, carrying with him on board the Acorn a
Roman colonel by the name of Vanni who was nominated to go to Rome.
Vanni set off but never returned, and Drummond learnt later from news-
papers that he had been arrested and shot as a spy. Maxwell of course knew
nothing of this and waited a further month off the Tiber, hoping to see the
colonel return. The weather continued to worsen steadily and on only
thirteen nights was it possible to put a boatload of men ashore. One night
one of the launches was swamped and four of the sailors taken prisoner.
Maxwell arranged an exchange of prisoners with the officer commanding
Fiumicino fort, but when the time came to carry out this exchange the
Neapolitan broke his word, and the first lieutenant of the Alceste and the party
of men accompanying him ashore under flag of truce were marched off to the
north.
   How long Maxwell continued to remain at his fruitless task we do not
know. Collingwood, on receiving his dispatch, must have decided to order
him back. Maxwell had written on 15 October of rapid currents and frequent
gales, rendering “this service rather arduous.” One cannot envisage Colling-
wood being prepared to run the risk of losing a frigate by continuing what
was clearly a failed operation.”
   The version of the story as recounted in his memoirs by Cardinal Pacca, the
pope’s pro-secretary of state, tells us a slightly different tale. According to
him, the Franciscan friar whose disguise made him look like a vagabond or
bandit did not carry any letter to authenticate either him or his mission. He
had, he admitted, been too frightened to do so—thinking (correctly) that
were he arrested and the king’s letter found on his person, he would certainly
be shot as a spy—the fate that awaited Colonel Vanni (who did carry a letter)
a few weeks later. The friar referred Pacca to Cardinal Erskine, whom the
friar had apparently seen already. Erskine’s reaction, when tackled by Pacca
about the plan as revealed by the friar was to say the least equivocal. He
disclaimed all personal responsibility, said he had been told of it by Gabrielli,
but, having then heard no more of it, had assumed the idea to have been
abandoned. As Pacca notes, it would appear that Erskine had now become
alarmed and was trying to dissociate himself entirely from a plot initiated by
himself.
   When, the following day, Pacca saw the pope, the latter agreed that he
knew of the plot, formulated by Gabrielli, but that he had never had the least
intention of leaving Rome of his own free will. His reasons being, as Pacca
adds, not merely the fear of provoking schism but his refusal to give Napo-
leon a pretext for annexing the Roman states to France by allowing himself to
become a guest in a country controlled by France’s enemies. Nor would he
agree to contemplate flight merely in order to secure his person.
