

state.

Although a dearth of seamen, owing to the draughts sent away to the army, prevented the Toulon fleet, as a body, from making any serious attempt to put to sea during the year 1813, large divisions of it, when the wind would serve also for re-turning, frequently weighed from the road, and exercised in manoeuvring between the Capes Brun and Carquaranne. In the latter part of October the British fleet was blown off its station

by a succession of hard gales, which lasted eight days ; and it 
was only on the evening of the 4th of November, that the in- 
shore squadron, consisting of the 74-gun ships Scipion, Mul 
grave, Pembroke, and Armada, Captains Henry Heathcote, 
Thomas James Maling, James Brisbane, and Charles Grant 
arrived off Cape Sicie. The main body of the British fleet at 
this time consisted of the 
ship. ( Vice-admiral (r.) bir Edward Pe 
| Caledonia . . ) Rear-admiral (w.) Israel Pellew. 
( Captain Jeremiah Coghlan. 
[ Hibernia ... , , Thomas Gordon Caulfield. 
iin o i c ( Rear-admiral (b.) Sir Richard Kins; Bart. 
112 oan-Joser . . . { ,-, , . *.,,. v '. 
( Captain William Stewart. 
100 Royal George , T. Fras. Ch. Mainwaring. 

98

(Boyne

Prince of Wales Union . Barfleur .

' .

74 Pompe'e

George Burlton. 
John Erskine Douglas. 
Robert Rolles. 
John Maitland. 
Sir James Athol Wood. 

On the 5th, at 9h. 30m. A.M., Vice-admiral Comte Erneriau, in the Imperial, with, according to the French accounts, 12, and according to Sir Edward Pellew' s letter, 14 sail of the line, six frigates, and the Victorie schooner, got under way with a strong east-north-east wind, and stood to the usual spot for exercise. Captain Heathcote's squadron was off Cape Sicie ; and the main body of the British fleet, consisting, as already shown, of nine sail of the line, had just hove in sight from the southward, standing under close-reefed topsails to reconnoitre the port. At

11 h. 30m. A.M., just as the French advanced squadron, of five sail of the line and four frigates, under Rear-admiral the Baron Cosmao, had got a little to the south-east of Cape Sepet, the wind suddenly shifted to north-west. This unexpected occur-

1813.] SIR EDWARD PELLEW AND COMTE EMERIAU. 3 rence, while it set the French ships to trimming sails to get back into port, afforded to the leading British ships a prospect of cutting off some of the leewardmost of the former, the names of which were as follows :

Gun-ship.

f Rear-admiral le Baron Cosmao-Kerjulien. loO Wagram . . . j Captain Fran(?ois Legras. Agamemnon . . , Jean-Marie Letellier.

Ulra . .

Magnanime Bore'e . Gun-frigate.

Pauline

Melpomene Penelope . Galate'e

C.-J.-Ce'sar Chaunay-Duclos. 
Laurent Tourneur. 
Jean Michel Mahe'. 
Etienne-Stanislaus Simiot. 
Charles Beville. 
Edme-Louis Simonot. 
Jean-Bapt. Bonafoux-Murat. 

The British iii-shore squadron immediately stood for the

French rear ; and at 34 minutes past noon the leading British ship, the Scipion, opened a fire from her larboard guns upon the nearest French ships, which were then standing on the opposite or starboard tack ; as did also, in succession, the Mulgrave,