

Mr. Dunbar arriving up, the prisoners were secured under the hatches, the cable cut, and sail made after the other galliot, the commander of which, on seeing the fate of his commodore, had cut and steered for Brunsbuttel, about four miles distant. The prize-galliot soon gained upon her late consort ; and, the wind

6 LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS. [1813. being light, the Blazer's cutter was despatched to cut off the fugitive from her port. This Mr. Dunbar gallantly accomplished, and with his 11 men captured, without opposition, the Danish gun-boat Liebe, of the same force as the Jonge-Troutman, and commanded by Lieutenant Writt, also of the Danish navy. This, it must be owned, was altogether a very gallant exploit, and Lieutenant Devon well merited the praises that Avere bestowed upon him for his conduct on the occasion.

Early in the month of October, Captain Arthur Farquhar, of the 18-pounder 3G-gun frigate Desiree, arrived at Heligoland, and assumed the command of the British naval force on that station. By this time the French had regained possession of Cuxhaven. After performing several important services up the Weser and Erns, Captain Farquhar, on the 30th of November,

with a small squadron of gun-brigs and gun-boats, successfully co-operated with a Eussian force in an attack upon the heavy batteries that defended Cuxhaven. Crossing the Elbe, Captain Farquhar afterwards ascended to Gluckstadt, and co-operated with a detachment of the Crown Prince of Sweden's army in reducing that important fortress. On the 5th of January, 1814,

after an investment of 1C, and a bombardment of six days,

Gluckstadt surrendered by capitulation. The British squadron which, besides the Desiree, was em ployed on the occasion, appears to have been, the 10-gun schooner-sloop Shamrock, Captain John Marshall; brig-sloop (late gun-brig) Hearty, Captain James Eose ; gun-brigs Blazer, Lieutenant Francis Banks ; and Eedbreast, Lieutenant Sir George Morat Keith ; and gun-boats, No. 1, Lieutenant David Hanmer ; No. 2, master's mate Thomas Eiches ; No. 3, Lieutenant Charles Henry Scale ; No. 4, Lieutenant Andrew Tullock ; No. 5, mid shipman John Hallowes ; No. 8, Lieutenant Eichard Eoper ; No. 10, Lieutenant Francis Darby Eomney : and No. 12, Lieu tenant John Henderson. Captain Farquhar, in his despatch, speaks also in high terms of Captain Andrew Green, who commanded a party of seamen and marines on shore, and of his assistants, Lieutenants Charles Haultain and John Archer, and midshipman George Eichardson ; likewise of Lieutenant Joshua Kneeshaw. The loss sustained by the flotilla amounted to three

men killed and 1G wounded, including Captain Eose, midshipman Kichard Hunt, and captain's clerk John Eiches.

On the 16th of December, 1812, the French 40-gun frigate Gloire, Captain Albin-Eene Eoussin, sailed from Havre, with a very strong south-east wind, which carried her as far as the

1813.J ALBACORE AND GJAMKE. 7

Lizard, and there left her, on the afternoon of the 17th, entirely becalmed. On the 18th, at daylight, the Gloire found hersel nearly in the midst of nine vessels, the greater part of them evidently merchantmen. Two of the number, however, were vessels-of-war : the nearest was the British 18-gun ship-sloop Albacore (twenty-six 32, and eight 12 pounder carronades and two long sixes, with a crew of 121 men and boys), Captain Henry Thomas Davies ; and, about four miles to the westward of her, was the 14-gun brig-schooner Pickle, Lieutenant William Figg. At 8 A.M. the Gloire, who had been standing on the starboard tack, wore with a light air of wind, and edged away for the Albacore, then bearing from north-east by north. Each ship soon ascertained that the other was an enemy ; and at 9 A.M. the Gloire hauled to the wind on the larboard tack, and made all sail to escape. Judging by this, probably, that the apparent French 40-gun frigate was an armee en flute or large store-ship, Captain Davies crowded sail in chase, followed at some distance by the Pickle ; the latter and the Albacore making repeated signals, to apprise the vessels in sight of the presence of an enemy. At 10 h. 12m. A.M., having by carrying down the breeze arrived within carronade range on the French frigate's weather quailer, the Albacore opened her fire ; whereupon the Gloire hoisted French colours and fired in return, hauling up a little, to bestow a raking broadside upon her unequal antagonist. To avoid this the Albacore tacked. The breeze soon afterwards fell to nearly a calm ; and at 11 A.M., finding her antagonist, much too strong for her, the Albacoro discontinued the action, with her fore spring-stay shot away, her rigging a good deal damaged, and, what was the worst of all, with the loss of one lieutenant (William Harman) killed, and six or seven men wounded. Strange to say, the French frigate herself did not seem disposed to renew the action, but wore and made all sail to the westward. At 1 P.M., the Pickle having closed and a light breeze having sprung up from the southward, the Albacore again made sail, and at 3 P.M. was joined in the chase by the 12-gun brig-sloop (late gun-brig) Borer, Captain Eichard Coote and 4-gun cutter Landrail, Lieutenant John Hill. At 5 P.M. the Albacore began firing her bow-chasers ; as, on coming up, did two out of her three (for the Landrail to have fired her 12-pounder carronades would have been a farce) formidable consorts. To this alarming cannonade, the Gloire replied with her stern-chasers, and con-