

Pembroke, Armada, and Pompee (who had just joined), as they followed the Scipion in line astern. At 40 minutes past noon, having passed over, the Scipion wore, to bring her starboard broadside to bear ; and in two minutes afterwards the first French shot that took effect carried away part of the Pembroke's wheel. The five British 74s, having wore round and come to, continued the cannonade with their starboard broadsides, and were then not more than a mile distant from the shore near Cape

Sepet. 
At 45 minutes past noon the advanced squadron filled and 
stood on ; and at 1 P.M. the Caledonia, Boyne, and San-Josef, 
who were far ahead of the remainder of their fleet, stood in-shore 
athwart the bows of the former. In four minutes the Caledonia 
opened a heavy fire from her larboard guns upon the sternmost 
French ship, the Wagram ; who, being then on the starboard 
tack, returned the fire with her larboard guns. The Boyne and 
San-Josef, as they arrived in succession, also got into action with 
the French rear. Having reached the wake of the Wagram, the 
Caledonia wore, and came to on the starboard tack, still en- 
gaging ; but the French ships, having the weather-gage, in a 
few minutes got out of gun-shot, and the firing, in which the 
batteries had slightly participated, ceased. 
The casualties on either side, arising from this skirmish, were 

4 LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS. [1813 not of any serious amount. The Caledonia received one shot through her mainmast and three or four in her hull ; had a shroud and some backstays cut, and her launch and barge destroyed, with three seamen slightly wounded. One unlucky shot, which fell on the San-Josef's poop, struck off the leg of each of two fine young officers, Lieutenant of marines William Clarke, and midshipman William Cuppage, and slightly wounded one marine and one seaman. The Boyne and Scipion had each

one man wounded slightly ; and the latter had another killed by an accident. The Pembroke had three men slightly wounded by shot, and the Pompee two men slightly burnt by accident ; total, 12 wounded by the enemy's fire, and one killed and two slightly wounded by accident. The Armada escaped without

any loss, but one of the enemy's shot passed through the bows of her launch and lodged in the booms.

The Agamemnon appears to have been the greatest sufferer among the French ships : she had her masts, rigging, and sails a good deal damaged, and received several shot in her hull, by which nine men were slightly wounded. The Wagram also suffered, but in a less degree, and had only two men wounded. A shot, that entered the roundhouse of the Boree, wounded two seamen, and carried away the wheel ; a splinter from which slightly wounded Captain Mahe. The Ulm had one man severely and another slightly wounded. Of the four advanced frigates, the Penelope and Melpomene were the most engaged : both received damage in their sails, rigging, and hull, and the latter had one man wounded ; making the total loss on the French side 17 wounded. Leaving a small squadron off Toulon, Sir Edward Pellew soon afterwards steered for Minorca, and on the 15th of the same month anchored in Port Malion. On