

Bayonne, Captain Martin Jortis, mounting 16 guns (twelve French 18-pounder carronades and four long sixes), with a crew on board of 86 men, partly Americans, hoisted French colours, and commenced a fire from her stern-guns ; which disabling the Mutine in her sails and rigging, occasioned her to drop astern.

The Mutine immediately commenced refitting herself, and at

8 h. 40m. again arrived within gun-shot; when the Invincible hoisted a light and opened a fire from her broadside. In this way the running fight was maintained until 10 h. 45 m. P.M. ; when, the ship having had her maintopgallantmast and jib shot away, the Mutine was enabled to close. Still it was not until after a spirited resistance of 50 minutes, which made it 11 h. 30 m. P.M., that the Invincible hauled down her colours.

The Mutine is represented to have had two men wounded in the action, but the loss, if any, sustained by the Invincible appears to have been omitted in Captain De Courcy's letter, On the 9th of September, at 3 P.M.. the British schooner Alphea, of eight 18-pounder carronades, and 41 men and boys, Lieutenant Thomas William Jones, fell in with and chased the French 14-gun privateer schooner Renard, Captain De Eoux, belonging to Cherbourg, and acknowledged to have had on board a crew of 50 men. At midnight the Alphea commenced firing her chase-guns; and at 1 A.M. on the 10th a close and spirited action commenced. After a while, the Alphea, by the

10 LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS. [1813 calm and the heavy swell that prevailed, became forced under the bows of the Renard. The crew of the privateer immediately threw into the Alphea several hand-grenades, and made an attempt to board, but were gallantly repulsed by the crew of the British schooner ; which latter then poured in a most destructive fire of grape-shot, that swept the whole of the Renard's forecastle. A second boarding attempt was made, and the Frenchmen were again beaten off. The two schooners soon afterwards burst the grapplings by which they had been held together, and separated to a short distance ; both still maintaining a furious cannonade. At 8 h. 30m. A.M., owing in a great measure to the number of hand-grenades which had been thrown into her, the Alphea blew up, and along with her, perished the whole of her gallant crew. Three or four men were seen on a piece of the wreck, but the Renard having had her jolly-boat sunk by shot, as it was towing astern, and her launch cut to pieces as it lay on the booms, could render no assistance ; nor could the poor fellows find their way to the privateer, although repeatedly hailed to do so, as they had lost their eyesight by the explosion. The loss on board the Renard, as acknowledged by her officers, amounted to five men killed and 31 badly wounded, including the captain with the loss of an arm, and three of his lieutenants. There was also a fourth-lieutenant, who took the command when Captain Le Roux was wounded. It is not un likely, therefore, that the "50 men" refer to the sailors only, and that, officers included, the Renard had from 70 to 80 men. As mounting " 14 guns," this schooner must have been about 200 tons measurement ; whereas the Alphea, one of the Bermu diari vessels, was only 111 tons. The execution admitted to have been done by the Alphea to her antagonist was highly creditable to the gunnery of the British crew, and renders it probable that, had not the fatal accident happened, the Alphea would have made a prize of the Renard, although the latter was so much superior to her in force. It was, indeed, a lamentable occurrence ; and, to heighten the misfortune, Lieutenant Jones was a very deserving officer. In the early part of October the French brig-corvette Flibus tier, mounting fourteen 24-pounder carronades and two long sixes or eights, and commanded by Lieutenant de vaisseau