

Jean-Jacques-Leonore Daniel, lay at St.-Jean-de-Luz, about three leagues north-east of the bar of Bayonne, watching an opportunity to put to sea, with treasure, arms, ammunition,

1813J TELEGRAPH AND FLlBtfSTlEfc. 11

salt provisions, and a few troops for the garrison of Santona. 
The near approach of the Marquis of Wellington's army at last 
made it necessaiy to move ; and, taking advantage of the dark 
and stormy state of the weather, the Fllbustier, at midnight, on 
the 12th, attended three " 
trincadores," or armed fishing-beets, 
weighed and stood alongshore to the south-west. At daylight 
on the 13th the French brig, then lying becalmed close under 
the heights near the mouth of the Bayonne river, was seen and 
chased by the British schooner Telegraph, of twelve 12-pounder 
carronades, Lieutenant Timothy Scriven, also by the 18-gun 
brig-sloop Challenger, Captain Frederick Vernon, and 12-gun 
brig Constant, Lieutenant John Stokes ; the latter about six, 
the former upwards of eight miles distant in the offing. 
Favoured by a partial breeze, the Telegraph rapidly ap- 
proached the Flibustier, who had by this time anchored under 

the distant protection of some batteries ; and at 6 h. 45 m. P.M. the schooner commenced cannonading the brig in a raking position ahead. The Flibustier returned the Telegraph's broadside with such of her guns as would bear. The action continued in this way until about 7 P.M. ; when finding the two British brigs in the offing approaching to take a part in the combat, the French brig set herself on fire. The schooner continued discharging her guns for about half an hour longer. Lieutenant Scriven then ceased firing, and sent his boats to endeavour to save the vessel, whose crew had already reached the shore in their boats. The schooner's boat got on board ; and ao, it is believed, did some boats from the Challenger and Constant, but too late to save the Flibustier; which at about 8 h. 10m. P.M. exploded, in sight of the English and French armies encamped on the east side of the Adour. The Telegraph had not a man hurt, nor, as it appears, a spar or a shroud shot away. For his gallantry in advancing to attack a force so much superior to his own, Lieutenant Scriven was promoted to the rank of commander ; and the Telegraph, by his continuing to be captain of her, became a sloop-of-war. Lest we should appear to have underrated the force of the Flibustier, we are bound to state, that the official account of her destruction assigns her a force of 16 carronades and two nines, with a brass howitzer, and four brass 3-pounders. The swivels and howitzer she may have mounted ; but we doubt if the Flibustier carried more than 14 carronades, chiefly because we know not of a single instance (the Abeille, as already stated, had been a foreign-built vessel 1

1 See vol. v., p. 253.

LIGHT SQtlADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS. [1813.

in which a regular French brig-corvette mounted more than 16 guns, similar to the Oreste, and a great many others that have appeared in these pages. Moreover, very little time was al-