

In this creditable performance on the part of the two brigs, the Scylla had two seamen wounded, and the Eoyalist two seamen killed, her first-lieutenant (James Waring), master (Wil liam Wilson, severely), five seamen, one marine, and one boy wounded ; total, on board the two brigs, two killed and 11 wounded. As a proof that the carronades of the brigs had produced some effect, the Weser, out of a crew of 340 men and boys, had four men killed and 15 wounded.

On the morning of the same day on which the Weser was captured, the British brig-sloop Achates, of fourteen 24-pounder carronades and two sixes, Captain Isaac Hawkins Morrison, standing to the south-south-east with the wind at south-west, fell in with the Trave, upon her weather-beam. The Achates immediately made sail in chase, and, as soon as she had forereached sufficiently, wore and stood for the French frigate. At 7h. 50m. A.M. the Achates gallantly engaged the Trave in passing, and received in return a fire that much injured her sails and rigging. At 8 A.M. a large ship was discovered bearing down. The Achates immediately hauled towards her and made the private signal ; but the stranger, instead of answering it, tacked from the brig and hauled close to the wind. In the mean time the Trave had bore up to the eastward. At noon, latitude 46 37' north, longitude 7 26' west, the Achates was again near enough to exchange shots with the Trave, and con tinued engaging in an advantageous position on her quarter, until about 8 P.M. ; when dark and squally weather concealed

the Travo from her view. In this very spirited as well as skilful attack, Captain Morrison had the good fortune not to lose a man ; but the fire of the Achates had wounded two seamen belonging to the Trave. Favoured by the darkness, the French frigate continued her course without further interruption, until, on the afternoon of the 23rd, she encountered the British 18-pounder 36-gun frigate Andromache, Captain George Tobin. At 3h. 30m. P.M. tho Trave opened a fire from her stern-chasers, but the Andro

mache did not return it until 4 h. 15 m. P.M. ; by which time she had gained a position on the French frigate's weather-quarter. The fire which the Andromache now commenced was so close and well directed, that in a quarter of an hour the Trave hauled down her colours. Indeed, had the latter been an efficient instead of a dismasted ship, further resistance would have been vain, as the British 24-pounder 38-gun frigate Eurotas, Captain John Phillimore, was approaching in the north-east. Oufc^of her 321 men and boys, the Trave had one seaman killed, her captain, second-lieutenant, two midshipmen (one mortally), and

24 seamen wounded. The Andromache's loss consisted of only two wounded, but one was her first-lieutenant, Thomas Dickin

son, severely.

Both tho Weser and Trave, being new frigates, one of 1081, the other of 1076 tons, were added to the British navy. It was considered rather singular, that frigates of that size should havo been armed upon the quarter-deck and forecastle with carronades of so light and ineffective a caliber as 18-pounders. Of these, each frigate mounted 16, making, with her 28 long 18-pounders, 44 guns. On the 9th of October, at 8 h. 30 m. A.M., the Owers light bearing north-north-east, the British bomb-vessel Thunder, Captain Watkin Owen Pell, being on her way from Spithead to Woolwich, observed a large armed lugger to windward under easy sail. His vessel being of a class likely to effect more by decoying than chasing an enemy, Captain Pell altered his course towards the shore and took in his studding-sails. The bait took, and the lu'gger, which was the Neptune, of Dun kerque, mounting 16 guns, with a crew on board of 65 men, bore up in chase. At 10 h. 30m. A.M., having arrived on the Thunder's larboard-quarter, the French captain hailed the supposed merchantman to bring to, and strike. With her numerous crew all ready, the Neptune then put up her helm, to lay her anticipated prize on board. The Thunde;