

On the llth of May, receiving information that a convoy ot enemy's vessels were lying in the channel of Karlebago, Captain Hoste proceeded thither ; but, on account of a contrary wind and strong current, the Bacchante did not arrive there until tho morning of the 15th. As the port of Karlebago afforded excellent shelter for enemy's vessels, Captain Hoste resolved to destroy

1813.J BOAT ATTACKS, ETC., IN THE ADRIATIC. 23 the works that defended it. The governor refusing to accede to the terms offered, the Bacchante anchored within pistol-shot of the battery, which mounted eight guns ; and, after a good deal of firing, a truce was hung out, and the place surrendered at discretion. The marines, and a detachment of seamen under Lieutenant Hood, landed and took possession. The guns of the place were embarked, the public works destroyed, and the castle blown up ; and the Bacchante retired with the loss of four seamen severely wounded, two of them with their arms shot off.

On the 12th of June, at daylight, the Bacchante discovered an enemy's convoy under the town of Gela-Nova, on the coast of Abruzza. As the frigate was six or seven miles to leeward of them, with a light breeze and a strong current against her, Cap tain Hoste detached the boats under Lieutenant Hood, with

discretionary orders, either to attack the convoy or to wait till the Bacchante arrived. Lieutenant Hood took with him Lieu tenant Frank Gostling, acting Lieutenant Edward Webb, Lieutenants of marines Charles Holmes and William Haig, master's mate William Lee Eees, and midshipmen James Eowe, Thomas Edward Hoste, Francis George Farewell, the Hon. William Waldegrave, Thomas William Langton, James M'lvean, and Samuel Richardson. Lieutenant Hood found the enemy much stronger than had been expected, consisting of seven large gun-boats, mounting each one long 18-pounder in the bow, three smaller gun-vessels, with a 4-pounder in the bow, and 14 sail of merchant-vessels, four of which also had guns in the bow : and the shore astern of the vessels was lined with troops intrenched on the beach, having with them two field-pieces.

"

This," says Captain Hoste, "was the force opposed to a frigate's boats; but no disparity of numbers could check the spirit of the brave officers and men employed on this service. The attack was determined on instantly, and executed with all the gallantry and spirit which men accustomed to danger and to despise it have so frequently shown; and never was there a finer display of it than on this occasion." The boats, as they advanced, were exposed to a heavy fire of grape and musketry ; and it was not until they were fairly alongside the gun-boats that the crews of the latter slackened their fire : they were then driven from their vessels with great loss. The troops on the beach, stated by the prisoners to amount to 100 men, fled on the first fire, and their two fieldpieces were destroyed by the British marines. Iu performing

24 LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS. [1813. this very brilliant exploit, the boats of the Bacchante sustained a loss of two seamen and one marine killed, and five seamen and one marine wounded. On the 22nd of April, at daybreak, the brig-sloop Weasel, cruising about four miles to the east-north-east of the island of Zirana, discovered and chased a convoy, close to the main land, making for the ports of Trau and Spalatro. As the brig approached, the vessels separated in different directions, the greater part, with 10 gun-boats, bearing up for the bay of Bos calina. These the Weasel continued to chase under all sail ; and at 5h. 30m. A.M. they anchored in a line about a mile from the shore, hoisted Trench colours, and commenced firing at her. The wind blowing strong from the south-east, which was directly into the bay, the sails and rigging of the brig were con siderably damaged before she could close. At 6 A.M., however, the Weasel anchored with springs, within pistol-shot of the gun boats ; and a furious action commenced. At the end of 20 minutes the latter cut their cables, ran closer in, and again opened their fire. This increased distance not suiting her carronades, the Weasel cut her cable, ran within half pistol-shot of the gun-boats, and recommenced the action. Three large guns, at the distance of 30 yards from each other, and 200 or 300 musketry, on the heights immediately over the British brig, now united their fire to that of the gun-boats. The engagement continued in this way until 10 A.M. ; when three of the gun boats struck their colours, two were driven on shore, and one was sunk. The remaining four gun-boats were now reinforced by four more from the eastward ; who anchored outside the Weasel, and commenced firing at her. This obliged the brig to engage on both sides, but the outer gun-boats afterwards ran in and joined the others ; all of whom now placed themselves behind a point of land, so that the Weasel could only see their masts from her deck. Here the gun-boats commenced a most destruc tive fire, their grape-shot striking the brig over the land in every part. At this time the Weasel's crew, originally short by the absence of several men in prizes, was so reduced, that she could with difficulty man four guns ; the marines and a few of the seamen firing musketry, her grape being all expended. The action lasted in this way until 3 P.M., when the gun-boats discontinued their fire. At the expiration of 40 minutes the engagement recommenced, and contimxed, without intermission, until 6 h. 30 m. P.M., when the firing entirely ceased on both sides.