

St. Sebastian consisted, besides the Surveillante, Lyra, and Sparrow, of the 38-gun frigates Bevolutionnaire and Presidente, Captains John Charles Woolcombe and Francis Mason, brig sloops Beagle, Despatch, and Challenger, Captains John Smith, James Galloway, and Frederick Vernon, schooners Holly and Juniper, and two gun-boats. On the 3 1st of August two divisions of boats from the squa dron, placed under the orders of Captains Galloway and Bloye, was sent to make a demonstration on the back of the rock of St. Sebastian. The plan succeeded, and a large proportion of the garrison was diverted from the defence of the breach which, on the preceding day, had been made in the walls. The men-ofwar brigs also weighed with a light breeze, and stood into tho harbour. At 11 A.M. the assault by the breach took place, and at 1 h. 30 m. P.M. the town was entered and possessed ; but the citadel still held out. Captain Smith of the Beagle was slightly wounded, also three or four of the seamen. On the 8th of Sep tember the breaching and mortar batteries opened a most ruinous fire upon the castle of La Motte, or citadel of St. Sebastian ; and in a very short time General Eey, the governor, sent out a Hag of truce to propose terms of capitulation, which were imme diately agreed to. In addition to the ships already named, there were present co-operating in the attack, the 18-pounder 36-gun frigate Magicienne, Captain the Hon. William Gordon, and the gun-brig Constant, Lieutenant John Stokes. Among the naval officers who distinguished themselves on the occasion, Captain Sir George Collier names Lieutenant the Hon. James Arbutlmot of the Surveillante, also midshipmen Digby Marsh, George Harvey, Henry Bloye, and William Lawson.

Id IS/) BOAT ATTACKS IN THE MEDITERRANEAN. 17

On the 18th of March the British 38-gun frigate Undaunted, Captain Thomas Ussher, chased a tartan under the battery of

Carri, situated about five leagues to the westward of Marseille.

Light winds preventing the ship from getting up, Lieutenant

Aaron Tozer oiferecl his services to destroy the battery. The

boats under his orders, assisted by Mr. Robert Clennan the 
master, acting Lieutenant Thomas Salkeld and Lieutenant of 
marines Harry Hunt, pushed off accordingly to execute the 
service. The British landed, and in a few minutes afterwards 
carried the battery, mounting four 24 pounders, a 6-pounder 
field-gun, and a 13-inch mortar ; and this although the French 
troops were strongly posted behind palisadoes, and stood until 
the marines were in the act of charging bayonets, when they 
turned and suffered a severe loss. The guns at the battery were 
all destroyed, the tartan brought out, and the boats returned to 
the ship with no greater loss than two men killed and one 
wounded. 
On the 30th, while the Undaunted was in company with the 
38-gun frigate A 

T

olontaire, Captain and senior officer the

Hon. Granville George Waldegrave, and the 18-gun brig-sloop 
Redwing, Captain Sir John Gordon Sinclair, 14 merchant 
vessels were discovered at anchor in the harbour of Morgion, 
situated between Marseille and Toulon. Lieutenant Isaac Shaw, 
first of the A 
r 