

Hoste, James Leonard Few, and Edward 0. Pocock, in pursuit of the division in the south-west. At 8 A.M. Lieutenant O'Brien in the barge captured the sternmost gun-boat, mounting two guns, one French 12, and one 6 pounder, both on pivots, and manned with 36 men, commanded by the senior French officer of the three, all of whom were enseignes de vaisseau. Leaving, to take possession of the prize, the first gig, commanded by midshipman Thomas Edward Hoste, Lieutenant

O'Brien pushed on after the two remaining gun-vessels, then sweeping with all their strength towards the coast of Calabria. Sending his prisoners below, and fastening the hatches over them, young Hoste, with his seven men, in the most gallant manner, loaded and fired the bow-gun at the retreating gun boats; which, in a little time, were also captured. This dashing enterprise, with Lieutenant O'Brien's usual good fortune, was achieved without any loss, although the shot from the gun vessels cut the oars from the men's hands as the boats were pulling towards them. For his gallantry on the above and several other occasions, Lieutenant O'Brien was promoted to the rank of commander. The Weasel not being able to overtake her two gun-vessels, two of her boats under Lieutenant Thomas Whaley and mid shipman James Stewart, and a boat belonging to the Bacchante under master's mate Edward Webb, proceeded in chase.

Bacchante's boat, taking the lead, soon overtook, and, although she carried only a 3-pounder in the bow with 18 men, captured, in spite of a warm opposition, the sternmost French gun-boat, armed the same as that already described, and having 40 men actually on board. Leaving the captured vessel to be taken possession of by the boats astern, Mr. Webb pushed after the remaining gun-boat, and carried her in the same gallant manner, and with equal impunity as to loss.

On the 14th of February, early in the morning, the Bacchante sent her barge, armed with a 12-pounder carronade, and manned with 23 officers and men under Lieutenant Hood, in chase of a vessel seen by the night-glass to bo sweeping and steering for Otranto. After pouring in a destructive fire of round shot and musketry, Lieutenant Hood, assisted by Lieutenant of marines William Haig and master's mates William Lee Eees and Charles Bruce, boarded and carried the French gun-vessel Alcinous, oi two long 24-pounders and 45 men, last from Corfu. The only person hurt on the British side was Lieutenant Hood, who received a severe contusion on the loins by a fall ; so severe, indeed, that this gallant young officer became eventually de-prived of the use of both his legs. The loss on the French side

amounted to two killed and nine wounded, and the gun-boat 
was so shattered by the carronade, that she had three feet water 
in her hold. As soon, therefore, as the prisoners were removed, 
it was found necessary to set the prize on fire. 
Notwithstanding that an officer of acknowledged merit is now 
walking on crutches, in consequence of an incurable lameness 
produced by the wound he received in this truly gallant enter 
prise, no other notice was taken in the London Gazette of Cap 
tain Hoste's letter on the subject, than a statement, that two 
letters, dated on the 14th of February, had been received : " 
One, 
reporting the capture, oif Otranto, of 1' Alcinous French gun 
boat, carrying two guns and 32 men, and of eight trading 
vessels under her convoy from Corfu ; the other, stating the 
capture of la Vigilante French courier gun-boat, from Corfu to 
Otranto with despatches, and having on board, as passenger, 
the general of artillery Corda and his staff." 