

olontaire, assisted by Lieutenants of marines Wil liam Burton, and Harry Hunt, proceeded with the boats of the

three ships, to endeavour to cut out the convoy. 
On the 31st, in the morning, Lieutenant Shaw and his party 
landed at Sourion, and, marching over the hills at daylight, 
carried the two batteries of the place in the rear, after a partial 
resistance from 40 French troops stationed at them. Five 
36-pounders in one battery, and two 24-pounders in the other, 
were thrown into the sea, one mortar well spiked, and all the 
ammunition destroyed. The boats, under Lieutenant Dey 
Richard Syer, although elsewhere opposed by two field-pieces, 
brought out 11 vessels, tartans and settees, laden with oil, and 
destroyed some others. The whole service was accomplished 
with so slight a loss as one marine killed, and two marines and 
two seamen wounded. The names of no other officers pre 
sent, than those above given, appear in Captain Waldegrave's 
letter, except midshipman Charles Wyvill, on whom great praise 
is bestowed. 
On the 2nd of May, Captain Robert Hussey Moubray, of the 
74-gun ship Repulse, detached 100 marines from that ship, 
VOL. vi. c 

18 LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SttlPS. fl8l3.

under Captain Edward Michael Ennis, along with the marines of the Volontaire and Undaunted, to destroy some newly erected works in the vicinity of Morgion ; while the boats of the squadron, under Lieutenant Isaac Shaw, first of the Volontaire, covered by the launches with their carronades and by the brig-sloop Redwing, brought out some vessels that were in the harbour. The detachment of marines landed, and drove a detachment of French troops to the heights in the rear of the harbour ; where they were kept in check until the .vessels were secured, and the batteries, on which were found nine gun-carriages and a 13-inch mortar, were blown up and destroyed. On this occasion Lieutenant Shaw was wounded ; and in the boats two men were killed and three wounded. The vessels brought out were six in number, all laden, but small. Between the 10th and 15th of May, through the judicious management of Captain Charles Napier of the 18-pounder 36-gun frigate Euryalus, the French coasting trade, to and from

Toulon to the eastward, was collected in Cavalarie road, to the number of upwards of 20 sail. Judging this convoy to be a proper object of attack, Captain Edward Brace, of the 74-gun ship Berwick, detached for the purpose the boats of the two ships under the orders of Lieutenant Henry Johnston Sweed land, assisted by Lieutenant Alexander Sandiland, first of the Euryalus, and, among others, by midshipmen John Monk and Maurice Crawford, containing, along with a detachment of seamen, the whole of the marines of the 74 and frigate, commanded by Captain William T. I. Matthews. On the morning of the 16th the united detachments landed, and in 20 minutes were in possession of the batteries, and had

begun to open a fire from them upon the retreating enemy. The

French national xebec Fortune, carrying 10 long 8-pounders and four swivels, with a crew of 95 men, commanded by Lieutenant Felix-Marie-Louis-Anne-Joseph-Julien Lecamus, tried to effect her escape ; but the Euryalus, pushing close in, cut her off. The French crew then abandoned her, leaving her, with a hole made through her bottom by a shot from one of her guns and a train laid to her magazine, at anchor with a spring on her cable, under the fire of the Euryalus, the captured fort, and the launches. The vessel was promptly boarded by a division of the bJats, and just in time to preserve her from blowing up OF sinking. The vessels found in the harbour amounted to 22, of different descriptions. The whole were either taken or de-