

lowed for the British to take an accurate account of the force 
of the Flibustier. 
On the 30th of September the two Franco-Batavian 40-gun 
frigates Trave and Weser, Captains Jacob Van-Maren andPaul 
Boelof Cantz-Laar, put to sea from the Texel, on a cruise off the 
Western Isles. On the 16th of October a violent gale of wind 
dismasted both frigates, and separated them from each other. 
On the 18th, towards 1 A.M., latitude 47 30' north, longitude 
9 18' west, the British 18-gun brig-sloop Scylla, Captain Colin 
Macdonald, fell in with the Weser, then with the loss of her 
main and mizen masts and foretopmast, steering east by north, 
on her way to Brest. After hailing the frigate several times, 
the Scylla received a broadside from her. On this the brig made 
sail ahead. At daylight both vessels hoisted their colours; but 
Captain Macdonald judged it not prudent to attack a ship that, 
although crippled in her masts, was so decidedly his superior 
in guns and men, especially as the Scylla might herself get 
crippled, and, in the severe state of the weather, be thereby 
prevented from keeping sight of the frigate ; a service on which 
the brig now assiduously employed herself. 
On the 19th, at daylight, having passed the night in burning 
blue-lights, firing guns, and throwing up rockets, to indicate 

that she was in chase of an enemy, the Scylla found herself alone, the thick weather obscuring the Weser from her view. Steering, during that day and night, a course deemed the most likely to rejoin the French frigate, the Scylla, at daylight on the morning of the 20th, fell in with the British 18-giin brig sloop Eoyalist, Captain James John Gordon Bremer. The latter, volunteering, the two brigs, with the wind from the south-west, bore away to seek and engage the enemy, then supposed to be in the east-north-east. At 9 h. 30m. A.M. the Weser was discovered in the north-east and chased ; latitude at noon 48 28 north, longitude 6 18' west. At 3 h. 30 m. P.M. the two brigs opened their fire, the Eoyalist stationing herself on the frigate's starboard-bow, and the Scylla on her starboard-quarter. At 5 P.M., being much cut up in their sails and rigging, and the Scylla having her mainmast shot through, and the Eoyalist five men badly wounded, the two brigs hauled off to repair their damages. Since 1 h. 30 m. P.M. a sail had been observed to leeward.

1813.] ACHATES AND TRAVE. 13

This was the British 74-gun ship Eippon, Captain Sir Christopher Cole, using her utmost efforts to take a part in the action. Captain Macdonald now detached Captain Bremer to recon noitre the ship to leeward. The Boyalist accordingly bore up, and the Scylla continued following the French frigate. On the 21st, at a little before daylight, the Eoyalist spoke the Eippon, and again made all sail on a wind to close the Scylla and

frigate. At 9 h. 30 m. A.M. the Scylla, taking a raking position, recommenced firing at the Weser ; and the Eoyalist placing her self on the latter's larboard-bow, soon joined in the action. In 10 minutes, finding that the Eippon was nearly within gun-shot on her lee-quarter, and that all hopes of escape were at an end, the Weser fired her larboard-guns at the Royalist, and, standing on towards the Eippon, hauled down her colours. A boat from the Eoyalist immediately boarded the French frigate ; and the Eippon, on arriving up, took the prize in tow, and conducted her to Falmouth.