

181 3.J SNAP AND FIVE FRENCH LUGGERS. 15 at the same moment put her helm down, and had barely time to fire her four carronades and a volley of musketry, when the lugger fell onboard. A portion of the British crew were on her decks in a trice ; and, after a severe conflict, in which four

Frenchmen were killed and 10 wounded, including one mortally and five very severely, the Thunder made a prize of the Neptune, and that with so slight a loss as two men wounded.

On the 1st of November in the morning, St. Vallery on the coast of France bearing south-south-east distant five miles, the 16-gun brig-sloop Snap, Captain William Bateman Dashwood, discovered five French armed luggers, three in the north-west close to windward, and two considerably to leeward. The Snap immediately wore and stood for the three weathermost luggers, but Captain Dashwood had very soon the mortification to observe their separation, and then their escape by superior sailing. At 9 A.M. the Snap bore up in pursuit of the two leewardmost vessels, and after using various deceptions, enticed one along side. The British brig immediately opened her fire, and, at the end of a 10 minutes' cannonade, captured, without the loss of a man, the French privateer Lion, of Boulogne, mounting 16 guns, with 69 men ; of whom the captain and four men were killed, and six severely wounded.

The British squadron, stationed off the .north coast of Spain to assist the patriots, was under the command of Captain Sir

George Ealph Collier, of the 38-gun frigate Surveillante. In the early part of May the force detached off the port of Castro de Urdeales consisted of the brig-sloops Lyra, Captain Eobert Bloye, and Eoyalist and Sparrow, Captains James John Gordon Bremer and Joseph Needham Taylor. Although everything was done by the three commanders and their respective officers and crews, in landing guns and bringing them into operation, the French force in the neighbourhood was too powerful to be re sisted. By great exertions the garrison, consisting of about 1150 men, was embarked on board the brigs and conveyed to Bermeo. The loss sustained by the little squadron, in the service it had performed, amounted to 10 wounded, including Lieutenant Samuel Kentish and midshipman Charles Thomas Sutton (leg amputated) of the Royalist. The principal object now was to blockade the port, and pre-vent the French garrison from getting any supplies. This was so effectually done, that on the 22nd of June, after committing upon the inhabitants enormities of the most revolting descrip tion, the French evacuated the town and retired to Santona.

The Sparrow having just at this moment arrived off the port, Captain Tayler very properly garrisoned the castle ; and such was tho precipitate flight of the French commandant, on ob serving the approach of the British brig, that he fled without destroying the artillery or powder. On the 10th of July, at 10 A.M., the breaching batteries, raised by the army of General Graham on the Chope sand-hills, were opened against the walls of St. Sebastian ; and a detachment of seamen was landed from Sir George Collier's squadron to co-operate in the attack, under the orders of the first-lieutenant of the Surveillante, Dowell O'Eeilly. The loss sustained by this detachment, up to the evening of the 21st of July, amounted to two seamen killed, Lieutenant Bobert Graham iJunlop, and five seamen wounded. The squadron stationed <>ff