

1813. ] CAPTURE OF PONZA. 19 stroyed ; and the object of the enterprise was fully accom plished, with no greater loss than one marine killed and one seaman missing. On the 18th of August an attack was made upon the bat teries of Cassis, a town between Marseille and Toulon, by the Undaunted frigate, Eedwing brig, and 16-gun brig-sloop Kite, Captain the Hon. Robert Cavendish Spencer, accompanied by a detachment of boats from the three first-named vessels, and from the Caledonia, Hibernia, Barfleur, and Prince of Wales

line-of-battle ships, part of Sir Edward Pellew's fleet. Owing to light winds, the Undaunted could not take up the anchorage that Captain Ussher intended ; but the Eedwing and Kite, in spite of a fire from four batteries that protected the entrance of the bay, swept themselves in, and took a most judicious position for covering the marines ; who, led by Captain Jeremiah Coghlan, of the Caledonia, carried the citadel battery by escalade. The marines then drove the French before them, at the point of the bayonet, and pursued them through the batteries to the heights that commanded the town. The boats, under the direction of Captain Sir John Sinclair of the Eedwing, then entered the mole, across the entrance to which two heavy gun-boats were moored, and captured them, a third gun-boat, and 24 merchant

settees and tartans. The loss sustained by the British in executing this dashing enterprise was rather serious, amounting to four marines killed, one lieutenant (Aaron Tozer), one petty officer, and 14 marines wounded. In his official letter, Captain Ussher mentions, besides those already named, the following officers as having behaved with distinguished gallantry: Lieutenants Joseph Eobert Hownam and Joseph Grimshaw, Captains of marines

Thomas Sherman and Thomas Hussey, and Lieutenants of marines Harry Hunt, Eobert Turtliff Dyer, William Blucke, John Maule, Thomas Eeeves, Alexander Jarvis, Edward Mallard, and Samuel Burdon Ellis. Lieutenant Hunt, it appears, was the first who entered the citadel battery, by a ladder, under a galling fire. On the 26th of February, in the morning, the British 12pounder 32-gun frigate Thames, then Captain Charles Napier, and 18-pounder 36-gun frigate Furieuse, Captain William Mounsey, having on board Lieutenant-colonel Coffin and the second battalion of the 10th regiment of foot, bore up for the narrow entrance (about a quarter of a mile across) to the' harbour of the island of Ponza on the coast of Naples ; and,

giving and receiving a fire from the batteries on each side, anchored close across the mole-head. Colonel Coffin and the troops were then landed, and pushed for a tower into which the enemy had retreated. The appearance of the troops, aided by the severe fire of the ships, induced the governor to hoist a flag of truce. This led to a capitulation, and the island on the same day surrendei-ed to the arms of his Britannic majesty. Nor did the British lose a single man in either service, although the batteries mounted ten 24 and 18 pounders and two 9-inch mortars ; and although the Thames Avas hulled three times and the Furieuse twice, besides having their sails and rigging a good deal cut.