

A convoy of 50 sail of armed vessels, chiefly Neapolitan gun boats, having assembled at Pietra-Nera on the coast of Calabria, to be ready to transport to Naples timber and other government property, Captain Eobert Hall, who commanded the Sicilian flotilla stationed at Messina, volunteered, with two divisions of gun-boats and four companies of the 75th regiment, under the command of Major Stewart, supplied by Lieutenant-general

Lord William Bentinck at Palermo, to destroy the enemy's works. On the night of the 14th of February, Captain Hall proceeded to the attack ; but, owing to light and contrary winds, the boats did not arrive at Pietra-Nera until nearly daylight on the 15th; when Major Stewart, with about 150 men, and an auxiliary party of seamen, commanded by Lieutenant Francis Le Hunte, landed, and, without waiting for the remainder of the force intended be be employed, pushed up a height, the posses sion of which a complete battalion, with two troops of cavalry and two pieces of artillery, were prepared to dispute. * Assisted by a corporal's detachment of the rocket corps, the British troops charged the height in the most determined manner, and succeeded only after as determined a resistance, the French colonel-commandant, Roche, and most of his officers, being killed or made prisoners, and the height literally covered with dead. The division of the flotilla under Captain Imbert had by this time commenced a most destructive cannonade on the batteries ; which held out with such obstinacy, that Captain Hall was obliged to order them to be successively stormed. This service was performed by Lieutenant Le Hunte, with a party of seamen, in a very gallant style. At 8 A.M. everything was in the possession of the assailants; the most valuable of the enemy's vessels and timber launched, and the rest on fire. Upwards of 150 French were killed and wounded, and 163

1813. BOAT ATTACKS, ETC., IN THE ADRIATIC. 21 made prisoners, including several of the principal officers. Major Stewart, whose behaviour is highly praised by Captain Hall, fell by a musket-shot while in company with the latter, pushing from the shore after the troops had embarked. The loss on the part of the navy amounted to only one boatswain and one seaman killed and seven seamen wounded. On the Gth of January, at daybreak, as the British 38-gun frigate Bacchante, Captain William Hoste, and 18-gun brig sloop Weasel, Captain James Black, were lying becalmed about five leagues to the south-east of Cape Otranto, at the mouth of the Adriatic, five gun-vessels were discovered ; three in the south-west, steering towards Otranto, and two in the south-east, steering to the eastward. Ordering, by signal, the Weasel to attend to the latter, Captain Hoste sent the Bacchante's boats, under the command of Lieutenant Donat Henchy O'Brien,

assisted by Lieutenants Silas Thomas Hood and Frank Gostling,

Lieutenant of marines William Haig, master's mates George Powell and James M'Kean, and midshipmen the Hon. Henry I. Eous and William Waldegrave, Thomas Edward