

aded the port of Triest, while a detachment of Austrian troops from the main body under General Count Nugent invested the town by land. On the 10th the French unexpectedly opened a masked battery of two guns upon the Milford, whose stern was towards the shore. Captain Markland in a few minutes got a spring upon the cable, and in a quarter of an hour disabled both guns, and killed two and wounded seven of the men stationed at them, while not a man was hurt on board the Milford. On the same day Captain Markland landed with the marines and two field-pieces ; and on the llth General Nugent returned from Gorizia, having obliged the viceroy to pass the Isongo. It was

then determined to lay siege to the castle. By the 16th the British had 12 guns in two batteries, which opened their fire and continued it nearly the whole day. Towards evening the French were driven from the windmill, and the Austrians took possession of the fort, and of two howitzers advanced there. The fire was continued with increased effect until the 29th, when Colonel Eabie, the French commanding officer, surrendered on a capitulation. Captain Eowley commanded one of the batteries on shore, and

was accompanied by Lieutenants William Hotham and Charles Moore, and midshipman Edward Ilibbert. Captain Fairfax

Moresby, of the brig-sloop Wizard, also commanded a battery, and, having been ordered to form another battery of four 32-pounders within breaching distance, he did so in the course of 56 hours, under every disadvantage of weather, and without any other assistance than 50 men from the Milford and 20 from his own sloop. Mr. William Watts, acting-master of the

1813.] BOAT ATTACKS, ETC., IN THE ADRIATIC. <.3

Wizard, and who was severely wounded, is also spoken highly of in the rear-admiral's despatch ; as is likewise Captain David

Dunn, of the armed en flute 32-gun frigate Mermaid. Captain Markland, as has been already mentioned, was also on shore in command of the marines. The loss of the British on this occa

sion amounted to 10 seamen and marines killed, and 35 wounded, 
including Mr. Watts, and a midshipman of the Wizard, Edward 
Young. 
On the 12th the Bacchante arrived off Eagusa, and was joined 
by the Saracen and three gun-boats, with a detachment of the 
garrison of Curzola on board : and, from the information of 
Captain Harper and the insurrection of the Bocchese, Captain 
Hoste lost no time in proceeding to Castel-Nuova. On the 13th, 
in the morning, the Bacchante and Saracen forced the passage 
between that castle and the fort of Eosas, and after some firing, 
secured a capital anchorage for the squadron about three miles 
above Castel-Nuova. At 10 P.M., Captain Hoste detached 
Captain Harper with the two Sicilian gun-boats, the launch and 
barge of the Bacchante and the boats of the Saracen, to capture 
the enemy's armed naval force represented to be lying between 
the island of St. George and the town of Cattaro. 
On going through the passage of Cadone, the boats received 
a heavy but ineffectual fire from the island of St. George ; and 
at midnight, when within four miles of Cattaro, Captain Harper 
found the enemy's four gun-boats in a state of revolt, and 
instantly took possession of them. He then landed and sum- 
moned the inhabitants, who immediately, at his request, armed 
en masse against the French. Having brought about this 
change, Captain Harper hoisted the English and Austrian flags 
on board the four captured gun-boats, and manning them with 