

part English, proceeded down to attack the island of St. George. On the 13th, at 6 A.M., a heavy and well-directed fire was opened from the gun-boats under the command of Lieutenant Frank Gostling of the Bacchante, upon the island, and returned from the batteries. In 15 minutes, however, the French were driven from their guns, and were eventually compelled to surrender at discretion. The possession of this island was of great import ance, as it commands the narrow channel to the narrow branch of the river that leads up to Cattaro. On the 16th of September, at daylight, the British 18-gun brig-sloop Swallow, Captain Edward Eeynolds Sibly, being well in-shore between the river Tiber and D'Anzo, discovered a brig and xebec between herself and the latter harbour. Captain Sibly VOL. VI. D

immediately despatched after them three of the Swallow's boats, Under the orders of Lieutenant Samuel Edward Cook, assisted by master's mate Thomas Cole and midshipman Henry Thomas.

After a row of two hours, the boats overtook, close under D'Anzo, the French brig Guerrier, of four guns and 60 stands of small arms ; and notwithstanding that numerous boats and two gun vessels had been sent from D'Anzo to her assistance, and kept the brig in tow until the British were alongside, Lieutenant Cook and his party gallantly carried her ; but, in doing so, he sustained a loss in his own boat, of two seamen killed and four severely wounded. On the 5th, in the morning, the 74-gun ship Edinburgh,

Captain the Hon. George Heneage Lawrence Dundas, 38-gun frigates Imperieuse, Captain the Hon. Henry Duncan, and Ee sistance, Captain Fleetwood Broughton Reynolds Pellew, sloops Swallow, Eclair and Pylades, the two latter commanded by Captains John Bellamy and James Wemyss, assembled off the

port D'Anzo, where lay a convoy of 29 vessels, which for seve ral days past had been watched by Captain Duncan. The necessary arrangements having been made by that officer for the attack, Captain Dundas merely added the force of the

Edinburgh to it. The place was defended by two batteries, mounting two heavy guns each, on a mole, a tower to the northward of this with one gun, and a battery to the southward with two guns, to cover the mole. At Ih. 30m. P.M., everything being prepared, the ships bore up, and took their stations as follows : The Imperieuse and Resistance against the mole batteries ; the Swallow against the tower ; the Eclair and Pylades against the battery to the southward, and the Edinburgh supporting the two last-named ships. Soon after the ships had opened their fire, which they did together by signal, a detachment of seamen, under Lieutenant Eaton Travers, of the Imperieuse, and the marines under Captain Thomas Mitchell, landed in the best order close under the southern battery, which Lieutenant Travers instantly car ried, driving the French in all directions. Lieutenant David Mapleton having also taken possession of the mole-head, the convoy, 20 of which were laden with timber for the arsenal at Toulon, were brought out without any loss. Before leaving the place, the British blew up all the works ; and the ships received no greater injury than a few shot in their hulls and some damaged rigging. It appears that Captain Duncan had gained some very material information respecting the strength