

1813.] BOAT ATTACKS, ETC., IN THE ADRIATIC. 25

The Weasel was now in a very critical situation : she was but a few yards from a lee-shore, almost a complete wreck, with the whole of her running, and the greater part of her standing rigging cut to pieces, most of her sails shot from the yards, her masts shot through in several places, her anchors all destroyed or rendered unserviceable, her hull pierced with shot, five of which had entered between wind and water, and her two pumps shot away between the decks, so that the crew could with difficulty keep the brig free by constantly bailing at both hatches. In addition to all this, the Weasel had already lost 25 men in killed and wounded. Captain Black, nevertheless, after dark, sent his boats, and destroyed, besides the gun-boats that had struck and gone on shore, eight of the convoy ; the boats bring ing away some of the enemy's anchors, by the aid of which the brig was enabled to warp herself out. On the 23rd, at daybreak, having warped herself about a mile from the land, the Weasel was again attacked by the gun-boats, who, taking a raking position, annoyed the brig much ; especially

as, her last cable being half shot through and the wind blowing strong in, she could not venture to bring her broadside to bear upon them. All this day and night the Weasel continued warping out from the shore, but very slowly, her people being reduced in numbers and exhausted with fatigue. On the 24th, at noon, the French opened a battery, which they had erected, on a point of the bay close to which the Weasel was obliged to pass ; and at 1 P.M. the gun-boats pulling out in a line astern, recommenced their fire. The wind was now moderate, and shortly afterwards it fell calm. At 5 P.M. the gun-boats, having got within range, received the contents of the brig's larboard broadside and sheered off ; but, owing to the calm, the Weasel was unable to follow up her advantage, and they effected their escape. In this very gallant, and, considering the extrication of the vessel from such a host of difficulties, admirably conducted enterprise, the Weasel had her boatswain (James Toby), three seamen, and one marine killed, and her commander badly wounded by a musket-ball through the right hand ; but with a modesty that did him honour, Captain Black would not suffer the surgeon to insert his name in the official report. The brig's remaining wounded consisted of her first-lieutenant (Thomas Whaley, severely), one master's mate (William Simkin, severely), one midshipman (James Stewart), 19 seamen, and two marines wounded. The loss sustained on the part of the French gun-

26 LIGHT SQUADRONS AXD SINGLE SHIPS. [1813.

boats, and at the batteries on shore, could not be ascertained, but must have been severe. On the 2nd of February, at daylight, Faro bearing southsouth-east distant six miles, the British 18-gun ship-sloop King fisher, Captain Ewell Tritton, discovered several trabaccolos near Melara steering to the so nthward. There being little wind, Captain Tritton detached the cutter and pinnace, under Acting lieutenant George H. Palmer and Mr. John Waller the gunner, to intercept the vessels. After a five hours' chase, the two boats succeeded in capturing one trabaccolo, and in running nine on shore near St. Catharine's, in the island of Corfu, five of which were totally destroyed. In executing this service, the two boats were exposed to a heavy fire of musketry from the heights, and from a one-gun battery, and sustained a loss, in consequence, of two men killed and seven severely wounded.