

181C5.J BOAT ATTACKS, ETC., IN THE ADRIATIC. 35

of D'Anzo by a gallant exploit performed a few nights previ 
ously by Lieutenant Travers ; who, at the head of a single boat's 
crew, stormed, carried, and destroyed, a tower mounting one 
gun, and brought oft' the guard as prisoners. 
On the 14th of October, at 1 P.M., the 36-gun frigate Fu 
rieuse, running along the coast towards the island of Ponza, 
observed, in the harbour of Marinelo, situated about six miles 
to the eastward of Civita Vecchia, a convoy of 19 vessels, pro- 
tected by two gun-boats, a fort of two long 24-pounders, and 
a strong fortified tower and castle. It appearing practicable to 
cut them out, Lieutenants Walter Croker and William Lester, 
and Lieutenants of marines James Whylock and William Davis, 
gallantly volunteered to storm the fort on the land side, while 
the frigate anchored before it. This service was promptly exe- 
cuted ; and, after a few broadsides from the Furieuse, the bat 
tery was carried, and the guns spiked, by the party on shore. 
The French troops retreated to the strong position of the 
castle and tower overlooking the harbour ; whence they kept 
up a constant fire of musketry through loopholes, without the 
possibility of being dislodged, although the Furieuse weighed 
and moved in, so that the whole fire of the ship was directed 
upon it. Nothing could damp the ardour of the party on shore, 
who, together with Lieutenant Lester in the boats, lost not a 
moment in boarding and cutting the cables of 16 vessels under 

a most galling fire. Two of the vessels sank at the entrance of the harbour, but the remaining 14, deeply laden, were brought out. The loss to the British in performing this service, which was over in three hours, amounted to two men killed and 10 wounded. On the 8th of November, at 8 h. 30 in. P.M., the boats of the 74-gun ship Eevenge, Captain Sir John Gore, under the orders of Lieutenant William Eichards, assisted by Lieutenant Thomas Blakiston, Captain of marines John Spurin, and master's mates

and midshipmen Thomas Quelch, William Eolfe, Henry Fisher, Benjamin Mainwaring, John Harwood, A

r

alentine Munbee, George Fraser, Bobert Maxwell, Charles M. D. Buchanan, and John P. Davey, were sent into the harbour of Palamos, to endeavour to cut out a French felucca privateer. At 11 P.M.

Lieutenant Eichards and his party boarded and carried the privateer, without having a man hurt, and by 1 A.M. on the 9th had brought her alongside the Eevenge. On the 9th Captain Ussher sent the boats of the Undaunted, under the orders of Lieutenant Joseph Bobert Hownam, as-

36 LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS. [1813. sisted by Lieutenant Thomas Hastings and Lieutenant cf marines Harry Hunt, also the boats of the Guadeloupe b^ig, under Lieutenant George Hurst and Mr. Alexander Lewis the master, into Port-Nouvelle. The batteries were stormed and carried in the most gallant manner, and two vessels captured and five destroyed, without a casualty. On the 26th of November, off Cape Eousse, island of Corsica, the boats of the British 74-gun ship Swiftsure, Captain Edward Stirling Dickson, under the orders of Lieutenant William Smith, the 4th, were detached in pursuit of the French privateer schooner Charlemagne, of eight guns and 93 men, who was using every exertion by sweeping to effect her escape. On the approach of the boats, the privateer made every preparation for resistance, and reserved her fire till the boats had opened theirs ; when the schooner returned it in the most determined manner for some minutes, until the boats got close alongside. The