

28 LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS. [1813. 
entrance of Corfu; by which the boats captured a brig and 
trabaccolo going into Corfu with grain. On the 14th the two 
frigates chased a vessel, which, on its falling calm, escaped into 
Malero. Perceiving that the five boats were proceeding to 
attack her, and fearing from the natural strength of the island 
that they would not succeed, Captain Taylor sent to desire that 
the boats would wait until the Apollo came up. The message, 
however, arrived too late, and Lieutenant Edward Hollingsworth 
Delafosse, first of the Cerberus, and Mr. Ullock, purser, of the 
Apollo, were wounded. On the arrival of the Apollo, Captain 
Taylor landed the marines ; who, after some skirmishing, cap- 
tured the island, and found eight vessels laden with grain, but 
scuttled. 
On the 24th of April, at daylight, observing a felucca run into 
St. Cataldo and disembai'k troops, Captain Taylor landed 30 
marines under Lieutenants John Tothill and Colin Campbell, 
who, by a steady charge, dislodged them from a strong position, 
made 26 prisoners, and killed one and wounded several. The 
boats in the mean time brought out the vessel, and the whole 
service was executed without loss. 
On the 17th of May, while cruising off Otranto the Cerberus 
discovered an enemy's vessel close to the land a little to the 
southward of Brindisi; and which, upon being chased, ran 

herself on shore under a martello tower. Captain Garth imme diately despatched three boats belonging to the Cerberus, under Lieutenant John William Montagu, and two belonging to the Apollo, under Lieutenant William Henry Nares, to attempt to bring out the vessel. This, after receiving her fire, they accom plished without any loss, and drove some of the enemy's troops, who had come down to protect her, a considerable way up the country. The vessel was armed with a 6-pounder in the bow and a swivel. On the next morning the boats brought off a gun from a martello tower a little further to the southward. On the 27th, observing a canopy collected in Otranto, which it was thought would push for Corfu the first north-west wind, Captain Garth, on the following morning, took a station off Faro, to endeavour to intercept them, and sent the barge and pinnace of the Cerberus and the barge and gig of the Apollo., under Lieutenants Montagu and Nares, close in shore. At about 1 A.M. the vessels came out, protected by eight gun-boats. Notwithstanding this strong force, and that they were aided by three more gun-boats from Faro, and the cliffs covered with French troops, the four British boats attacked them in the most

1813.] BOAT ATTACKS, ETC., IN THE ADRIATIC. 29 determined and gallant manner. Lieutenant Nares, in the Apollo's barge, boarded and carried one gun-boat, and midshipman William Hutchinson, in the Apollo's gig, actually boarded and carried another before the barge of the Cerberus could get alongside. In boarding another gun-boat, Mr. Thomas Eichard

Suett, master's mate of the Cerberus, was shot through the heart. This, with one seaman killed, and one marine danger ously wounded, was the extent of the British loss. The gun boats taken had each a 9-pounder in her bow and two 4-pounders abaft, and were carrying troops to Corfu. Four of the convoy were also taken. On the 17th of June, at 9 P.M., Captain John Harper, of the 18-gun brig-sloop Saracen, accompanied by Lieutenant "William Holmes and Lieutenant of marines Edward Hancock, put off with his boats containing 40 men, and at 11 P.M. landed upon the island of Zapano. After a difficult march of three miles. Captain Harper surprised and took prisoners a corporal's guard that was in advance. Pushing for the guard-house and com mandant's quarters, he then carried the whole by the bayonet, without loss, and took 36 prisoners, including the command ing officer of the two islands of Zapano and Mezzo. The