

On the 6th of January, at 2 P.M., a division of the boats of the 18-pounder 36-gun frigate Havannah, Captain the Hon. George Cadogan, placed under the orders of Lieutenant William Hamley, attacked and carried the French gun-boat, No. 8, of one long 24-poundcr and 35 men, although the vessel was prepared in every respect, and was supported by musketry from the shore to which she had been made fast. Lieutenant Hamley had no expectation of meeting an armed vessel, until, upon opening the creek in which the gun-boat lay, the boats were fired upon, and desired by the troops drawn up on the beach to surrender. Three merchant-vessels were taken at the same time ; and the British loss amounted to one master's mate (Edward Percival) killed and two seamen wounded.

On the 22nd of March the boats of the Havannah, under the same commanding officer, assisted by Lieutenant of marines William Hockly, captured, under the town of Vasto, a large trabaccolo, mounting three long French 8-pounders, and de-stroyed a similar vessel laden with oil. On the 26th, Lieutenant Hamley, assisted again by Lieutenant Hockly, captured five armed trabaccolos and five feluccas laden with salt, near the town of Fortore. In both instances, the vessels were hauled aground, and were under the protection of a strong body of military and some guns on the beach. No greater loss, notwith standing, was sustained by the British in either enterprise than two men slightly wounded. On the 17th of June, in the morn

ing, the boats of the same frigate, still commanded by Lieu tenant Hamley, landed and brought off, from under the town of Yasto and from the fire of eight guns, 10 sail of merchant-

1813.] BOAT ATTACKS, ETC. ; IN THE ADRIATIC. 27 vessels ; and that with no greater loss than three men slightly wounded.

On the 21st of December, 1812, the British 38-gun frigate Apollo, Captain Bridges Watkinson Taylor, accompanied by the brig-sloop Weasel, chased a trabaccolo tinder the protection of the tower of St. Cataldo. As this tower was reputed to be the strongest between Brindisi and Otranto, Captain Taylor resolved to attempt its destruction. The boats of the two vessels were accordingly detached on that service, under the orders of Lieu tenants George Bowen and Michael Quin. The enemy became so much discouraged at having Murat's Neapolitan colours cut down by the first shot from the Apollo's barge, that the tower was carried without the assistance of the ships or the slightest loss. It contained a telegraph, three carriage-guns, and three swivels, and was blown up. On the 18th of January, 1813, Eear-admiral Thomas Francis Freemantle, the British commander-in-chief in the Adriatic, de-tached the Apollo, accompanied by the Esperanza privateer and four gun-boats, having on board 250 troops under Lieutenant colonel Robertson, to attack the island of Augusta. On the 29th the island surrendered ; and Captain Taylor bestows great praise upon Lieutenant Bowen, first, and Mr. Thomas Ullock, purser, of the Apollo, who served on shore ; also, for their gallantry in the frigate's barge, launch, and yawl, midshipmen William Henry Brand, William Hutchinson, and William David Folkes. Colonel Eobertson having left a garrison in Augusta, the Apollo and small vessels sailed, on the 1st of February, for the neigh bouring island of Curzola ; and, on the same night, 160 soldiers, 70 seamen, and 50 marines, with a howitzer, landed at Port Bufalo, and surprised and carried a hill that commanded the town. Finding that, notwithstanding the British had got their field-guns to this spot, and that the advance was already in pos session of the suburbs, the enemy appeared determined to hold out, Captain Taylor took off the Apollo's seamen, and on the morning of the 3rd attacked and silenced the sea-batteries. This led to an immediate capitulation. The loss to the British on the occasion amounted to two seamen killed and one slightly wounded, and the Apollo had her mainmast badly wounded and her rigging much cut. On the night of the llth of April, Captain Taylor sent three boats of the Apollo, and two belonging to the 32-gun frigate Cerberus, Captain Thomas Garth, cruising in company, to take temporary possession of the Devil's island near the north