

1813,] BONNE-CITOYENNE AND HOKNET. 45 cepted ; and then the refusal would be as good as a victory to

Captain Lawrence. Accordingly, a challenge for the Hornet to meet the Bonne-Citoyenne was offered by Captain Lawrence, through the American consul, to the British consul, Mr. Frederick Landeman ; Commodore Bainbridge pledging his honour to be out of the way, or not to interfere. Without making the unpleasant avowal that his government, upon this occasion, had reduced the vessel he commanded from a king's cruiser to a merchant-ship, Captain Greene transmitted, through the consular channel, an animated reply ; refusing a meeting "upon terms so manifestly disadvantageous as those proposed by Commodore Bainbridge." Indeed, it would appear, as if the commodore had purposely inserted the words, " or not interfering," lest Captain Greene, contrary to his expectation, should accept the challenge. For, had the two ships met by agreement, engaged, the Constitution looked on without inter-fering, and the British ship been the conqueror, the pledge of honour, on the part of both American commanders, would have been fulfilled; and can any one for a moment imagine, that Commodore Bainbridge would have seen the Bonne-Citoyenne carry off a United States ship-of-war, without attempting her rescue ? It was more than his head was worth. Where was the guarantee against recapture, which always accompanies a serious proposal of this sort, when a stronger force, belonging to either party, is to preserve a temporary neutrality? The

bait, therefore, did not take ; the specie remained safe ; and the American officers were obliged to content themselves with all the benefit they could reap from making a boast of the circum stance. This they did ; and, to the present hour, the refusal of the Bonne-Citoyenne to meet the Hornet stands recorded in the American naval archives, as a proof of the former's dread, although the " superior in force," of engaging the latter. The two ships, as has just been seen, were equal in guns, and not very unequal in crews ; the Hornet having 171 men and two boys, the Bonne-Citoyenne, including 21 supernumeraries, 141 men and nine boys. But this inferiority was in a great degree compensated by the pains which Captain Greene had taken to teach his men the use of their guns. After the Constitution had sailed for Boston as already stated,

1

the Hornet continued blockading the Bonne-Citoyenne and her dollars until the arrival, on the 24th of January, of the British

74-gun ship Montagu, Captain Manley Hall Dixon, bearing the

1 See vol. v., p. 421.

40 LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS. [1813 -

flag of Kear-admiral Manley Dixon. The American sloop, on 
being chased, ran for the harbour; but, night coming on, the 
Hornet wore, and, by standing to the southward, dexterously 
evaded her pursuer. Escorted by the Montagu, the Bonne 
Citoyenne, with her valuable cargo on board, put to sea on the 
26th of January; and on the 22nd of February, in latitude 
5 20' south, longitude 40 west, the rear-admiral left Captain 
Greene to pursue his voyage alone. Some time in the month of 
April, having stopped at Madeira by the way, the Bonne 
Citoyenne arrived in safety at Portsmouth. 
After escaping from the Montagu, the Hornet hauled her 
wind to the westward, and on the 14th of February, when 
cruising off Pernambuco, captured an English brig, with about 
23,000 dollars in specie on board. Having removed the money 
and destroyed the prize, Captain Lawrence cruised off Surinam 
until the 22nd ; then stood for Demerara, and on the 24th chased 
a brig, but was obliged to haul off on account of the shoals at 
the entrance of Demerara river. Previously to giving up the 
chase, the Hornet discovered a brig-of-war, with English 
colours flying, at anchor without the bar. This was the brig 
sloop Espiegle, of sixteen 32-pounder carronades and two sixes, 
Captain John Taylor, refitting her rigging. 