

termination.

Both frigates found ample employment, during the remainder of the night, in clearing the decks of the dead and wounded, and in securing their damaged masts. At daylight on the Sth they were about five miles apart, the Arethuse to the eastward of the Amelia, and both nearly becalmed. On a light breeze springing up, the Amelia, having bent a new foresail and fore topsail, made sail before it to the southward, on her way to Madeira and England ; and the Arethuse stood back to Isle de Los, to see what had become of Captain Ollivier and his people

44 LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS. [1813. On the morning of the 10th the Arethuse was joined by the

Serra, with the late crew of the Rubis, stated then to consist of

300 men. Taking half the number on board his frigate, Captain Eouvet, with the Serra in tow, steered for France. On reaching the latitude of Madeira, however, Captain Bouvet removed every man out of the Serra, and destroyed her, as she retarded the Arethuse in her voyage. On the 18th of March, in latitude 33 30* north, longitude 40 west, the Trench frigate fell in with and boarded the Mercury and another cartel, having on board the surviving officers and crew of the late British frigate Java ;

and on the 19th of April, after having made in the whole about 15 prizes, the Arethuse anchored in St. Malo ; as on the 22nd of the preceding month had the Amelia at Spithead. Another pair of French 40-gun frigates had been nearly the same route as the Arethuse and Eubis, but, during a two

months and a halfs cruise, had not encountered a single hostile 
vessel-of-war. The Hortense and Elbe, Captains Pierre-Nicolas 
Lahalle and Jules Desrostours, sailed from Bordeaux on the 
7th of December, 1812 ; and steering for the coast of Africa, 
anchored on the 4th of January between the Bissagot islands, a 
little to the northward of Sierra Leone. They sailed soon after- 
wards, cruised a short time off the Azores, and on the 15th of 
February succeeded in entering Brest. 
While, in the early part of December, 1812, the United 
States frigate Constitution, Commodore Bainbridge, and ship 
sloop Hornet, of eighteen 32-pounder carronades and two long 
12-pounders, Captain James Lawrence, were waiting at St. 
Salvador, to be joined by the Essex, an occurrence happened 
which the characteristic cunning of Americans turned greatly 
to their advantage. In the middle of November the British 
20-gun ship Bonne-Citoyenne, of eighteen 32-pounder car- 
ronades and two long 9-pounders, Captain Pitt Barnaby Greene, 
having, while coining from Eio de la Plata, with half a million 
sterling on board, damaged herself greatly by running on 
shore, entered the port of St. Salvador to land her cargo and 
be hove down. 
When the ship was keel-out, the two American ships an-ived 

in the port. The American consul and the two American com manders now laid their heads together to contrive something which, without any personal risk to any one of the three, should contribute to the renown of their common country. What so likely as a challenge to Captain Greene ? It could not be ac->