

throw some doubt upon the accuracy of our statement respecting the relative force of the parties in the case that has just been detailed. Captain Brenton, with a particularity not common with him, states, that "the force of the Peacock was sixteen 32-pound carronades and two long sixes. 1 Admitting that neither our former work on the subject, published some years ago, nor the first edition of the present work, and into which we know our contemporary has occasionally dipped, was deemed of sufficient authority, what has Captain Brenton to say to Lieutenant Wright's letter, published in all the London papers ? Nay, what objection has he to offer to the official statement of

Captain Lawrence himself, 
" She (the Peacock) mounted sixteen 
24-pound carronades and two long nines ?" 
The counter-statement of our contemporary, it is true, may 
1 
Brenton, vol. v., p. 111. 

VOT,. VI. K

50 UGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHU'S. [1813, have little weight in this country ; but not so in the United

States not so among a people whom we are, and long have been, labouring so hard to convince of the inutility, even in a profit- and-loss point of view, of telling a falsehood. There the high rank and presumed practical experience of the author, and his long list of kings, princes, princesses, dukes, and officers of the navy, for subscribers, will produce their full effect: the

Americans will be convinced that, in the hurry of the moment, Captain Lawrence made a mistake respecting the force of his prize. By-the-by, Captain Brenton is not the only British officer who has given the Peacock 32-pounder carronades: a post-captain, who, about 18 months ago, volunteered to correct the misstatements of a very captivating writer, both for and against the Americans, did the same. That the established armament of the Peacock's class was 32-pounders, there cannot be a doubt ; any more than that the brig, being new and built

of oak, was well able to bear them. But Captain Peake pro- 
bably considered that 24-pounders gave a lighter appearance to 
his deck, and took up less room. We know not what other 
reason to assign for the change. 
We left in the port of Boston the three American frigates 
Constitution, 

1

President, and Congress. 
2 A fourth, the 36-gun 
frigate Chesapeake, Captain Samuel Evans, sailed from Boston 
on the 17th of December, 1812 ; ran down past Madeira, the 
Canaries, and Cape-de-Verds ; thence on the equator between 

longitudes 16 and 25, where the American frigate cruised six weeks. The Chesapeake afterwards steered for the coast of South America, and passing within 15 leagues of Surinam, was on the same spot on which the Hornet had, the day previous, sunk the Peacock. The frigate then cruised off Barbadoes and Antigua, and, steering homewards, passed between Bermuda and the Capes of Virginia. Standing to the northward, the Chesapeake passed within 12 leagues of the Capes of Delaware and 20 of New York, and on the 18th of April, 1813, re-entered Boston by the eastern channel ; having, during her 115 days' cruise, recaptured one merchant-vessel and captured four, been chased by a British 74 and frigate, and chased on her part, for two days, a British brig-sloop. Among the captains of British 38-gun frigates who longed, ardently longed, for a meeting with one of the American 44s, was Captain Philip Bowes Vere Broke, of the Shannon. This desire was not founded on any wish for a display of personal i See vol. v., p. 422. 2 Ibid., p. 404.