

Comparative Force of the Combatants.

Peacock.

Broadside-guns . . .

.{ }

Crew (men only) ... No. j 110 Size ... tons ; 386

Hornet. 10 297 162 460

This is what the Americans, now for the first time pretending 
to believe, that " 
24-pounders are as good as 32s," call an equal 
match ; or rather, as a brass swivel or two were stuck upon the 
capstan, or somewhere about the quarter-deck, of the Peacock, 
by way of ornament, these and the boat-carronade were reckoned 
in, and the Hornet was declared to have gained a victory over a 
superior British force. 
If, in their encounter of British frigates, the Americans were 

so lucky as to meet them with crippled masts, deteriorated powder, unskilful gunners, or worthless crews, they were not less fortunate in the brigs they fell in with. There was the Frolic, with her main-yard gone and topmasts sprung ; and here is the Peacock, with 24 instead of 32-pounder carronades, the establishment of her class, and with a crew that, owing to the nature of their employment ever since the brig had been com missioned, in August, 1807, must have almost forgotten that they belonged to a man-of-war. The Peacock had long been the admiration of her numerous visitors, for the tasteful arrangement of her deck, and had obtained, in consequence, the name of the yacht. The breechings of the carronades were lined with white canvas, the shot-lockers shifted from their usual places, and nothing could exceed in brilliancy the polish upon the traversing bars and elevating screws. If carronades, in general, as mounted in the British service, are liable to turn in-board or upset, what must have been the state of the Peacock's carronades after the first broadside ? A single discharge from them, in exercise, would have betrayed the very defective state of their fastenings ; and the feelings of Englishmen might then have found some relief in the skill, as well as gallantry, evinced in the Peacock's defence. The firing of the Hornet was admirable, and proved that her men, to the credit of Captain Lawrence and his officers, had been well taught what use to make of their guns : at the same time, it must be admitted, that the Peacock, Frolic, and all the brigs of their class were mere shells ; espe cially when compared with such a ship as the Hornet, whose scantling was nearly as stout as that of a British 12-pounder frigate. The wreck of the Peacock was visible for a long time after the action, and bore from Point Spirit, which is about six miles to the eastward of the entrance to Demerara river, north-east by east distant six leagues; making the distance between the Espiegle and Peacock, during the action, nearly 24 miles. This confirms the statement of Lieutenant Frederick Augustus

I813.J PEACOCK AND HORNET. 49

Wright, the late senior lieutenant of the Peacock, that the 
Espiegle "was not visible from the look-outs stationed at the 
Peacock's mast-heads for some time previous to the commence- 
ment of the action, and gives rather an awkward appearance to 
Captain Lawrence's statement, that the Espiegle lay about six 
miles in-shore of him, and " could plainly see the whole of the 
action." If another confirmation were wanted, it is to be found 
in the log of the Espiegle ; by which it appears, that, although 
pieces of wreck passed her on the morning of the 25th, Captain 
Taylor did not know that an action had taken place until 
informed, the same afternoon, by the governor of Demerara, of 
the Peacock's destruction. 
It was fortunate, perhaps, for the character of the British 
navy that the disordered state of her rigging prevented the 
Espiegle from sailing out to engage the ship, which, at noon on 
the day of action, she plainly saw, and continued to see for 
nearly an hour, until the Hornet tacked and stood to the south 
cast ; as, at the court-martial subsequently held upon him, 
Captain Taylor was found guilty of having "neglected to 
exercise the ship's company at the great guns." It seemed 
hard, however, to punish the Espiegle's commander for a piece 
of neglect, which prevailed over two-thirds of the British navy ; 
and to which the admiralty, by their sparing allowance of 
powder and shot for practice at the guns, were in some degree 
instrumental. 
Much good as, we flatter ourselves, we have done to the cause 
of truth, by analyzing the American accounts of their naval 
actions with the English, the inattention of a contemporary may 