

At 3h. 30m. P.M., while beating round Caroband bank to get at the Espiegle, the Hornet discovered a sail on her Aveatherquarter bearing down for her. This was the British brig-sloop

Peacock, of sixteen 24-pounder carronades and two sixes, Cap tain William Peake ; who had only sailed from the Espiegle's anchorage the same day at 10 A.M. At 4h. 20m. P.M. the Peacock hoisted her colours; and at 5h. 10m., having kept close to the wind to weather the Peacock, the Hornet tacked for that purpose and hoisted her colours. At 5 h. 25 m., in passing each other on opposite tacks, within half pistol-shot, the ship and brig exchanged broadsides. After this, the

Peacock wore to renew the action on the other tack; when the Hornet, quickly bearing up, received the Peacock's starboard broadside ; then, at about 5 h. 35 m., ran the letter close on board on the starboard quarter. In this position the Hornet poured in so heavy and well-directed a fire, that at 5 h. 50 m., having had her commander killed, and being with six feet water in the hold, and cut to pieces in hull and masts, the Peacock hoisted from her fore-rigging an ensign, union down,' as a signal of distress Shortly afterwards her mainmast went by the board.

1813.] PEACOCK AND HORNET. 47

Both the Horrtet and Peacock were immediately anchored ; and every attempt was made to save the latter, by throwing her guns overboard, by pumping and bailing her, and stopping such shot-holes as could be got at ; but all would not do, and in a very few minutes after she had anchored, the Peacock went down in five and a half fathoms water, with 13 of her men, four of whom afterwards got to the foretop and escaped, as well as three men belonging to the Hornet. An American lieutenant and midshipman, and the remainder of the Hornet's men on board the Peacock, with difficulty saved themselves by jumping, as the brig went down, into a boat which was lying on her booms. Tour of the Peacock's seamen had just before taken to her stern boat ; in which, notwithstanding it was much damaged by shot, they arrived in safety at Demerara.

Of her 110 men and 12 boys, the Peacock lost, about the middle of the action, her young and gallant commander and fo'ur seamen killed, her master, one midshipman, the carpenter, captain's clerk, and 29 seamen and marines wounded ; three of the latter mortally, but the greater part slightly. The principal damages of the Hornet are represented to have been one shot through the foremast, and her bowsprit slightly wounded by another : her loss, out of a crew of 163 men and two boys, the Americans state at one seaman killed, and two slightly wounded ; also one mortally, and another severely burnt by the explosion of a cartridge. The Hornet had three lieutenants, a lieutenant of marines, and a great show of full grown young midshipmen ; and her men were all of the usual class of "American" seamen. Her established complement was 170, but she had on board, as was frequently the case in American ships-of-war, three supernu meraries. On the other hand, eight men were absent in a prize. This reduced the Hornet's crew to 165 ; among whom we will suppose, although none were discoverable, there were three boys. The Hornet, it will be observed, mounted one gun more of a side than the Wasp, and the latter was 434 tons: the formei-, therefore, could not well have been less than 460 or 470 tons.