

American officers arrived on board the Shannon, and some ot them were finding out reasons for being ' ' taken so unaccount

ably," their first-lieutenant, Mr. Ludlow, candidly acknow ledged that the Shannon had beaten them heartily and fairly. Although it would not do for an official document, like that we have just been quoting, to contain an admission that any portion, any influential portion at least, of the crew of an Ame rican ship-of-war consisted of British seamen, the journalists,

68 LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS. [1813. pamphleteers, and historians of the United States did not scruple to attribute to the defection of the latter, the unfortunate issue of the business with the Chesapeake. " There are no better sailors in the world," says an American writer, " than our own ; and it seems hard that the war should be carried on for nothing but British sailors' rights, and that those same sailors should desert us in the moment of conflict. Cowardice is a species of treason. If renegade Englishmen are permitted to fight under our flag-, it becomes prudent not to mix our own people with them to be destroyed ; for, at the critical moment when the boarders were called, the foreigners all ran below, while not a native American shrank from the conflict." A writer in a Boston paper, after he has insisted that the " native

Americans

" on board the Chesapeake

"

fought like heroes," 
and that the British part of the crew " behaved treacherously,*' 
very naturally asks, 
" Can any of your correspondents inform 

us whether any Americans were on board the Shannon ?" We may answer, Yes, there were some (prisoners), in her hold; although not so many, by several scores, as were in the hold of the Chesapeake, in a very few seconds after the Shannon's boarders sprang upon her quarter-deck. But, had the Chesapeake, instead of 32, mustered 100, British men-of-war's men in her crew, we have not a doubt that the same result would have ensued. However expert and courageous these renegades may be when sheltered behind a bul Avark, they become paralyzed with shame, they sink into the veriest cowards in nature, when opposed face to face to their shipmates of former days, their partners in scenes which they can remember with credit. The American commanders have tact enough to see this ; hence arises the preference they give to a cannonade engagement ; hence the repugnance they invariably show, unless with a twofold superiority, to grapple with their British antagonists. Previously to our dismissing the action of the Shannon and

Chesapeake, we shall confer a service on the profession, by stating as much as we know of the means taken by Captain Broke, to endow his men with that proficiency at the guns, the effects of which were so decisive and astonishing. Every day, for about an hour and a half in the forenoon, when not prevented by chase or the state of the weather, the men were exercised at training the guns, and, for the same time in the afternoon, in the use of the broadsword, pike, musket, &c. Twice a week the crew fired at targets, both with great guns and musketry; and