

British navy. As a matter of course, a court of inquiry was hold, to investigate the circumstances under which the Chesapeake had been captured. Commodore Bainbridge was the president of the court ; and the following is the first article of the very

"

lengthy

report published oil the subject : " The court arc unanimously of opinion, that the Chesapeake was gallantly carried into action by her late brave commander ; and no doubt rests with the court, from comparison of the injury respectively sustained by the frigates, that the fire of the Chesapeake was much superior to that of the Shannon. The Shannon, being much cut in her spars and rigging, and receiving many shot in and below the water-line, was reduced almost to a sinking condition, after only a few minutes' cannonading from the Chesapeake ; whilst the

V813.] SHANNON AND CHESAPEAKE. 67

Chesapeake was comparatively uninjured. And the court have no doubt, if the Chesapeake had not accidentally fallen on board the Shannon, and the Shannon's anchor got foul in the after-quarter-port of the Chesapeake, the Shannon must have very soon surrendered or sunk." Some very singular admissions of misconduct in the officers and crew follow ; and then the report proceeds as follows : " From this view of the engagement, and a careful examination of the evidence, the court are unanimously of opinion, that the capture of the late United States frigate Chesapeake was occasioned by the following causes : the almost unexampled early fall of Captain Lawrence, and all the principal officers ; the bugleman's desertion of his quarters, and inability to sound his horn ; for the court are of opinion, if the horn had been sounded when first ordered, the men being then at their quarters, the boarders would have promptly repaired to the spar-deck, probably have prevented the enemy from board

ing, certainly have repelled them, and might have returned the boarding with success ; and the failure of the boarders on both decks, to rally on the spar-deck, after the enemy had boarded, which might have been done successfully, it is believed, from

the cautious manner in which the enemy came on board." 
It was certainly very 
" cautious 
" 
in Captain Broke to lead 
20 men on board an enemy's ship, supposed to be manned with 
a complement of 400 ; and which, at the very moment, had at 
least 270 men without a wound about them. The court of 
inquiry makes, also, a fine story of the firing down the hatch- 
way. Not a word is there of the 

' ' magnanimous conquered

foe " having fired from below, in the first instance, and killed a British marine. Captain Broke will long have cause to re-member the treatment he experienced from this "magnanimous conquered foe." So far, indeed, from the conduct of the British being "a most unwarrantable abuse of power after success," Lieutenant Cox of the Chesapeake, in the hearing of several English gentlemen, subsequently admitted that he owed his life to the forbearance of one of the Shannon's marines. When the