

cartridges, standing upon the Chesapeake's cabin-skylight for the use of the marines, caught fire and blew up, but did no injury whatever. Even the spanker-boom, directly in the way of the explosion, was barely singed. As the Shannon l.ad by this time fallen off a little, and the manoeuvres of the Chesapeake indicated an intention to haul

1 [Sir Howard Douglas, in ' Naval with one round shot and grape. II. Y. Gunnery,' says he was informed by the POWELL.] first-lieutenant of the .Shannon that this -See diagram at p. 60. was an error, for no kegs of musket-balls 3 Ibid. and no double-headed shot were used, 4 Ibid. But in this position the enbut the maindeck guns were loaded graver has not copied the drawing quite alternately with two round shot and so faithfully as he might have done.

1813.] SHANNON AND CHESAPEAKE. 57 away, Captain Broke ordered the helm to be put a-lee ; but scarcely had the Shannon luffed up in obedience to her helm than the Chesapeake was observed to have stern way, and to be paying round off. The Shannon immediately shifted her helm a-starboard, and shivered her mizentopsail, to keep off the wind again, and delay the boarding, probably until her guns had done a little more execution among a crew, supposed to be at least a fourth superior in number. At that moment, however, the Shan-

non had her jib-stay shot away; and her head-sails being becalmed, she went off very slowly. The consequence was, that, at 6 P.M., the Chesapeake fell on board the Shannon, with her quarter pressing upon the latter's side, just before her starboard main-chains. The Chesapeake's foresail being at this moment partly loose, owing to the weather clue-garnet having been shot away from the bits, the American frigate forged a little ahead, but was presently stopped, by hooking, with her quarter-port, the fluke of the Shannon's anchor stowed over the chess-tree. Captain Broke now ran forward ; and observing the Chesa peake's men deserting the quarter-deck guns, he ordered the two ships to be lashed together, the great guns to cease firing, the main-deck boarders to be called, and Lieutenant George Thomas

L. Watt, the first- lieutenant, to bring up the quarter-deck men, who were all boarders. While zealously employed outside the bulwark of the Shannon, making the Chesapeake fast to her, the veteran boatswain, Mr. Stevens (he had fought in Rodney's action), had his left arm hacked off with repeated sabre cuts, and was mortally wounded by musketry. The midshipman commanding on the forecastle, Mr. Samwell, was also mortally wounded. Accompanied by the remaining forecastle party, about 20 in number, Captain Broke, at 6h. 2m. P.M., stepped from the Shannon's gangway-rail, just abaft the fore-rigging, on the muzzle of the Chesapeake's aftermost carronade, and thence, over the bulwark, upon her quarter-deck. Here not an officer or man was to be seen. Upon the Chesapeake's gangways, about 25 or 30 Americans made a slight resistance. These were quickly driven towards the forecastle, where a few endeavoured to get down the fore hatchway, but, in their eagerness, pre-vented each other. Several fled over the bows; and, while part, as it is believed, plunged into the sea, another part reached the main deck through the bridle-ports. The remainder laid down their arms and submitted. Lieutenant Watt, with several quarter-deck men, and scrjeant Richard Molyneux, corporal George Osborne, and the first division of marines; also Lieu-