

1813.J SHANNON AND CHESAPEAKE. 61 entered the stern windows. She had two main-deck guns and one carronade entirely disabled. One 32-pounder carronade was also dismounted, and several carnages and slides broken. Her three lower masts, the main and mizen masts especially, were badly wounded. The bowsprit received no injury ; nor was a spar of any kind shot away. Her lower rigging and stays were a good deal cut : but neither masts nor rigging were so damaged that they could not have been repaired, if necessary, without the ships going into port. Out of a crew of at least 381 men and five boys or lads, the

Chesapeake, as acknowledged by her surviving commanding officer, lost her fourth-lieutenant (Edward I. Ballard), master (William A. White), one lieutenant of marines (James Broom), three midshipmen, and 41 petty officers, seamen, and marines killed, her gallant commander and first-lieutenannt (both mor tally), her second and third lieutenants (George Budd and Wil liam L. Cox), acting chaplain (Samuel Livermore), five mid-shipmen, her boatswain (mortally), and 95 petty officers, seamen, and marines wounded ; total, 47 killed and 99 wounded, 14 of the latter mortally. This is according to the American official account ; but, it must be added, that the total that reported themselves, including several slightly wounded, to the Shannon's surgeon, three days after the action, were 115 ; and the Chesa peake's surgeon wrote from Halifax, that he estimated the whole number of killed and wounded at from 160 to 170.

Of the Chesapeake's guns we have already given a full account : it only remains to point out, that the ship had three spare ports of a side on the forecastle, through which to fight her shifting long 18-pounder and 12-pounder boat-carronade. The former is admitted to have been used in that way ; but, as there is some doubt whether the carronade was used, we shall reject it from the broadside force. This leaves 25 guns, pre cisely the number mounted by the Shannon on her broadside. The accuracy of Captain Broke's statement of his ship's force is, indeed, worthy of remark : he even slightly overrated it, because he represented all his guns of a side on the upper deck, except the boat-gun, as 32-pounder carronades, when two of the number were long nines.

This will be the proper place to introduce an account of some 
of the extraordinary means of attack and defence to which, in 
their naval actions with the British, the fears of the Americans 
had compelled them to resort. Among the Chesapeake's 
" round 

and grape

"

(the only admitted cannon-shot used on board an

62 LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHU'S. [1813. 
American ship), were found double-headed shot in abundance ; 

also bars of wrought iron, about a foot long, connected by links, and folded together by a few rope-yarns, so as, when discharged from the gun, to form an extended length of six feet. Other bars, of twice the length, and in number from three to six, were connected at one end by a ring : these, as they flew from the gun, expanded in four points. The object of this novel artillery was to cut away the shrouds, and facilitate the fall of the masts ; and the plan was, to commence the action with the bar and chain shot, so as to produce, as early as possible, that desirable result: after which the American ship could play round her antagonist, and cut her to pieces with comparative impunity. So much for the materiel of her opponent ; nor was his per sonnel forgotten. The canister-shot of the Chesapeake, when opened, were found to contain, in the centre, angular and jagged pieces of iron and copper, broken bolts, and copper and other nails. The musket-cartridges, as we formerly noticed, contained each three buck-shot loose in the powder ; and several rifledbarrel pieces were found among the small-arms. As British seamen were well known to be terrible fellows for getting on board an enemy, something was to be done to check them in their advance. Accordingly, a large cask of unslacked lime was brought on board the Chesapeake, and placed on the forecastle with the head open, in order that the American crew might scatter the lime by handfuls over the assailants. A bag of the same was placed in the foretop. We do not, however, believe, that Captain Lawrence had any hand in this contrivance. One of the Shannon's early shot struck the cask, and scattered the contents, as if in retribution, over the faces and into the eyes of the projectors. We ourselves saw the remains of the lime on and about the Chesapeake's forecastle : we recollect also ob serving, that the quarter-deck and forecastle barricades of the American frigate were lined with strong netting, to catch the splinters. Lieutenant Budd, when called upon to certify as to tho number of men with which the Chesapeake went into action, swore to 381 ; but even admitting his own account of the killed and mortally wounded to be correct, the Chesapeake certainly had five men more. For instance, the prisoners out of the ship, mustered at Halifax, including 91 severely and slightly wounded, and four that were sick, amounted to 325 ; which number, added to 61, the acknowledged amount of the killed and mortally wounded, makes 386. This was three short of the number, appearing by