

58 LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS. [1813. tenant Charles Leslie Falkiner, third of the Shannon, with a division of the main-deck boarders, quickly followed Captain Broke and his small party. Lieutenant Watt, just as he had stepped on the Chesapeake's taffrail, was shot through the foot by a musket-ball fired from the mizentop, and dropped on his knee upon the quarter-deck ; but quickly rising up, he ordered Lieutenant of marines James Johns to point one of the Shannon's 9-pounders at the enemy's top. In the mean time Lieutenant Falkiner and the marines, with the second division of which Lieutenant John Law had now arrived, rushed forward; and, while one party kept down the men who were ascending the main hatchway, another party answered a destructive fire still

continued from the main and mizen tops. The Chesapeake's main top was presently stormed by midshipman William Smith (now lieutenant e) and his top-men, about five in number ; who either destroyed or drove on deck all the Americans there stationed. This gallant young man had deliberately passed along the Shannon's fore-yard, which was braced up to the Chesapeake's main-yard, which was nearly square ; and thence into her top. All further annoyance from the Chesapeake's mizen top had also been put a stop to by another of the Shan non's midshipmen, Mr. Cosnahan, who, from the starboard main yard arm, had fired at the Americans, so fast as his men in the top could load the muskets and hand them to him. After the Americans upon the forecastle had submitted, Cap tain Broke ordered one of his men to stand sentry over them, and then sent most of the others aft where the conflict was most going on. He was in the act of giving them orders to answer the fire from the Chesapeake's maintop (this was just before Mr. Smith's gallant and successful exploit), when the sentry called lustily out to him. On turning round, the captain found himself opposed by three of the Americans ; who, seeing they were superior to the British then near them, had armed them selves afresh. Captain Broke parried the middle fellow's pike, and wounded him in the face ; but instantly received from the man on the pikeman's right, a blow with the but-end of a musket, which bared his skull, and nearly stunned him. Determined to finish the British commander, the third man cut him down with .his broadsword, but, at that very instant, was himself cut down by Mindham, the Shannon's seaman, already known to us Captain Broke was not the only sufferer upon this occasion : one of his men was killed, and two or three were badly wounded. Can it be wondered, if all that were concerned in this breach of

1813.] SHANNON AND CHESAPEAKE. 5ft faith fell victims to the indignation of the Shannon's men? It was as much as Captain Broke could do, to save from their fury a young midshipman, who, having slid down a rope from the

Chesapeake' s foretop, begged his protection. Mr. Smith, who had just at that moment descended from the maintop, assisted Mindham and another of the Shannon's men in helping the captain on his legs. While in the act of tying a handkerchief round his commander's head, Mindham, pointing aft, called out, "There, sir, there goes up the old ensign over the yankee colours." Captain Broke saw it hoisting (with what feelings may well be imagined), and was instantly led to the Chesapeake's quarter-deck, where he seated himself upon one of the carronade slides.