

Shannon did haul up, and reefed topsails. At 4 P.M. both ships, now about seven miles apart, again bore away : the Shannon with her foresail clewed up, and her maintopsail braced fiat and shivering, that the Chesapeake might overtake her. At 4 h. 50 m. the Chesapeake took in her studding-sails, topgallant-sails, and royals, and got her royal-yards on deck. At 5 h. 10 m. P.M., Boston lighthouse bearing west distant about six leagues, the Shannon again hauled up, with head to the southward and eastward, and lay to, under topsails, topgallant-sails, jib, and spanker. At 5 h. 25 m. the Chesapeake hauled up her foresail, and, with three ensigns flying, one at the mizenroyalmast-head, one at the peak, and one, the largest of all, in the starboard main

rigging, steered straight for the Shannon's starboard quarter. The Chesapeake had also, flying at the fore, a large white flag, inscribed with the words : ' ' SAILORS' EIGHTS AND FREE TRADE ; " upon a supposition, perhaps, that this favourite American motto would paralyze the efforts, or damp the energy of the Shannon's men. The Shannon had a union-jack at the fore, an old rusty blue ensign at the mizen-peak, and, rolled up and stopped, ready to be cast loose if either of these should be shot away, one ensign on the main stay and another in the main rigging. Nor, standing much in need of paint, was her outside appearance at all calculated to inspire a belief of the order and discipline which reigned within.

At 5 h. 30 m. P.M., to be under command, and ready to wear if necessary, in the prevailing light breeze, the Shannon filled her main topsail and kept a close luff ; but, at the end of a few minutes, having gathered way enough, she again shook the wind out of the sail, and kept it shivering, and also brailed up her driver. Thinking it not unlikely that the Chesapeake would pass under the Shannon's stern, and engage her on the larboard side, Captain Broke divided his men, and directed such as could not fire with effect to be prepared to lie down as the enemy's ship passed. But, either overlooking or waving this advantage,

66 LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS. [1813

Captain Lawrence, at 5 h. 40 m., gallantly luffed up, within about 50 yards, upon the Shannon's starboard quarter, and, squaring his main-yard, gave three cheers. The Shannon's guns were loaded thus : the aftermost main deck gun with two round shot and a keg containing 150 musket balls, the next gun with one round and one double-headed shot, and so alternately along the broadside. 1 The Captain of the 14th gun, William Mindham, had been ordered to fire, the moment his gun would bear into the Chesapeake's second main-deck port from forward. At 5h. 50m. P.M. the Shannon's aftermost main-deck gun was fired, and the shot was seen to strike close to the port at which it had been aimed. 2 In a second or so the 13th gun was fired; then the Chesapeake's bow-gun went off; and then the remaining guns on the broadside of each ship as fast as they could be discharged. At 5 h. 53 m. P.M., finding that, owing to the quantity of way in the Chesapeake, and the calm she had produced in the Shannon's sails, he was ranging too far ahead ; and, being desirous to preserve the weather-gage in order to have an oppor tunity of crippling the Shannon by his dismantling shot, Captain Lawrence hauled up a little. 3 At 5h. 56m., having had her jib-sheet and foretopsail-tie shot away, and her helm, probably from the death of the men stationed at it, being for the moment unattended to, the Chesapeake came so sharp to the wind as completely to deaden her way ; and the ship lay, in consequence, with her stern and quarter exposed to her opponent's broadside. The shot from the Shannon's aftermost guns now took a diagonal direction along the decks of the Chesapeake ; beating in her stern-ports, and sweeping the men from their quarters. The shot from the Shannon's foremost guns, at the same time, entering the Chesapeake's ports from the main mast aft, did con siderable execution. 4 At 5h. 58rn. an open cask of musket