

1813.] SHANNON AND CHESAPEAKE. 63 the Chcsapeake's books to have been victualled by her on the morning of the action, and as many as 54 short of the regular complement established upon the ship. Several of the Chesa peake's petty officers, indeed, after their arrival at Melville island prison, near Halifax, confessed that 30 or 40 hands, prin

cipally from the Constitution, came on board ; but whose names, in the hurry and confusion, were not entered in the purser's books. In confirmation of several men having joined the ship a very short time before the action, a number of bags and ham mocks were found lying in the boats stowed over the booms ; and, in direct proof that some of the Constitution's men were on board the Chesapeake, three or four of the Guerricre's Ameri

cans, who, after that ship's capture, had enlisted on board tho Constitution, were among the prisoners taken out of the Chesa

peake, and were immediately recognised by their former shipmates, now, as stated before, serving on board the Shannon.

But, as the American officer swore that the Chesapeake commenced action with only 381 men, we shall give her no more ; and, although not above one boy, that would rate as such in a British ship, was to be seen on board the Chesapeake, we shall allow her five. In one of the lockers of the Chesapeake's cabin, was found a letter dated in February, 1811, addressed by Robert Smith, Esq., then secretary at war, to Captain Samuel Evans at Boston, directing him to open houses of rendezvous for manning the

Chesapeake, and enumerating the different classes, or ratings, at a total of 443. The Chesapeake was manned in April, 1811 ;

and as, in the American naval service, the men enlist for two years and sign articles for that period, the ship would require to be remanned in April, 1813, the very month, as we have seen, in which the Chesapeake returned to Boston. The greater part of the crew then re-entered ; and, as may be supposed, a very large proportion of those who accepted their discharge were, or rather had been, British men-of-war's men. In order to fill up the deficiency, four houses of rendezvous were opened. Tho moment a man declared himself a candidate, he received a dollar, and accompanied an officer to the ship. There he was examined as to his knowledge of seamanship, age, muscular strength, &c., by a board of officers, consisting of the master, surgeon, and others : if approved, the man signed the articles and remained where he was ; if rejected, he returned to the shore with a dollar in his pocket. So fastidious was the committee of inspection, that frequently, out of five boat-loads of men that would go cfl

64 LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS. 1 1813.

to the ship in the course of the day, three would come back, not eligible. The features of the American war would have borne a very different aspect, could British ships have been manned in a similar way. As far as appearance went, the Chesapeake's was a re-markably fine crew ; and a clear proof of the stoutness of the men was afforded, when, in the middle of the night after the action, in consequence of a strong manifestation of a desire to retake the ship, the irons, which the Americans had got ready for the wrists of the Shannon's crew, and which, to the number of 360, were stowed in a puncheon, with the head off, standing under the half-deck, came to be put upon the wrists of the Chesapeake's crew. None of the Americans found them too large, and many, when not allowed to choose such as fitted them, complained that the manacles hurt them on account of their tightness. Among the 325 prisoners, whose names were set down in the agent's book at Halifax, about 32, including the gunner, were recognised as British seamen. This fellow was an Irishman, and went by the name of Matthew Eogers ; by which name, but with, of course, a blank for his birth-place, he stands in the