

Washington " Eegister

"

formerly noticed by us. It is probable that, had the Chesapeake been taken when Captain Evans commanded her, five times 32 traitors would have been found on board of her. Nay, the men who, when the first party from the Shannon rushed on board, leaped from the Chesapeake's bows into the water were, it is natural to conjecture, deserters from British ships-of-war. That they were not all Americans, the following anecdote will prove. One of the Shannon's men, when in the act of cutting down one of the Chesapeake's men, was stopped by the imploring ejaculation, " Would you, Bill ?" "What, Jack!" "Ay, Bill, but it won't do; so here goes." Overboard the poor fellow sprang, and was seen no more. This man's name was John Waters, a fine young Bristolian, who had deserted from the Shannon, when at anchor in Halifax harbour, on the 3rd of the preceding October. We naturally turn to the return of loss at the foot of the American official account ; but we search in vain for the name of " John Waters." It is true that he most likely went by another name ; but, as it is customary to report men who fall or leap overboard, or who are not actually slain or wounded in the action, under the head of "Missing," and no such head appearing in the American returns, we conclude that all the men of the Chesapeake, whos

1813/1 SHANNON AND CHESAPEAKE. 65 shame-stricken consciences prompted them to commit self-destruction in the manner of poor Waters, were purposely omitted. We are therefore more than ever convinced that, when she commenced engaging the Shannon, the Chesapeake had on board upwards of 400 men. But, as we said before, the American sworn amount only shall be introduced into the

Comparative Force of the Combatants.

charge of her, and Lieutenant Falkiner, third of the Shannon, remained in charge of the Chesapeake. Having repaired the damage done to their respective rigging, and the Shannon having fished her mizenmast, the two frigates made sail for Halifax ; and on the 6th, at 3 h. 30 m. P.M., the prize, followed by her captor, passed along the wharfs of the town, amidst the cheers of the inhabitants, as well as of the crews of the ships-of-war that were lying in the harbour. Captain Lawrence had died on board the Chesapeake of his wounds two days before ; and Cap tain Broke, in a state of severe suffering from his wounds, was removed from the Shannon to the house of the commissioner, Captain the Hon. Philip Wodehouse. Lieutenants Wallis and Falkiner were both deservedly made commanders. Of the acting-master, Henry Gladwell Etough, Captain Broke in his official letter speaks in high terms ; also of Lieutenants of marines James Johns and John Law, and midshipmen William Smith, Hugh Cosnahan, John Samwell, Henry Martin Leake, Douglas Clavering, George Eaymond, and David Littlejohn : likewise of Mr. Aldham the purser, and

Mr. Dunn the clerk, both of whom were killed at the head of the small-arm men. Mr. Etough, and Messrs. Smith and Cosnahan, were promoted to lieutenants. For his important achievement, and, in respect to its effect on the public mind, a most important achievement it was, Captain Broke was created a baronet ; he received, also, the formal thanks of the board of admiralty, and the warm congratulations of every well-wisher to England : and his trophy, the Chesapeake, in a name by Avhich, cotipled with that of the Shannon, she will long be re-membered both in England and America, was added to the