

The act of changing the Chesapeake's colours had proved fatal to a gallant British officer, and to four or five fine fellows of the Shannon's crew. We left Lieutenant Watt, just as, having raised himself on his legs after his wound, he was hailing the

Shannon, to fire at the Chesapeake's rnizentop. He then called for an English ensign ; and, hauling down the American ensign, bent, owing to the halliards being tangled, the English flag below instead of above it. A few seconds before this, the Chesa peake's quarter gallery had given way, and the two ships were gradually separating. Observing the American stripes going up first, the Shannon's people re-opened their fire ; and directing their guns with their accustomed precision at the lower part of the Chesapeake's mizenmast, killed their own first-lieutenant (a grape-shot took off the upper part of his head) and four or five of their comrades. Before the flags had got half-way to the mizen-peak, they were lowered down and hoisted properly ; and the aggrieved and mortified men of the Shannon ceased their fire.

An unexpected fire of musketry, opened by the Americans who had fled to the hold, killed a fine young marine, William Young. On this, Lieutenant Falkiner, who was sitting on the booms, very properly directed three or four muskets, that were ready, to be fired down. Captain Broke, from his seat upon the carronade-slide, told Lieutenant Falkiner to summon the Americans in the hold to surrender, if they desired quarter. The lieutenant did so. The Americans replied, "We surrender;" and all hostilities ceased. The Shannon was now about 100 yards astern of the Chesapeake, or rather upon her larboard quarter. To enable the Shannon to close, Captain Broke ordered the Chesapeake's mainyard to be braced flat aback, and

60 LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS. [1813. her foresail to be hauled close up. Almost immediately afterwards Captain Broke's senses failed him from loss of blood; and the Shannon's jolly-boat just then arriving with a fresh supply of

men, he was conveyed on board his own ship. 
Between the discharge of the first gun, and the period of 
Captain Broke's boarding, 11 minutes only elapsed ; and in four 
minutes more, the Chesapeake was completely his. The follow- 
ing diagram will explain the few evolutions there were in this 
quickly-decided action: 

5L5im.

Now for the damage and loss of men sustained by the respective combatants. Five shot passed through the Shannon ; one only below the main deck. Of several round shot that struck her, the greater part lodged in the side, ranged in a line just above the copper. A bar-shot entered a little below the water-mark, leaving a foot or 18 inches of one end sticking out. Until her shot-holes were stopped, the Shannon made a good deal of water upon the larboard tack ; but, upon the other, not more than usual. Her fore and main masts were slightly injured by shot ; and her bowsprit (previously sprung) and mizenmast were badly wounded. No other spar was damaged. Her shrouds on the starboard side were cut almost to pieces; but, from her perfect state aloft, the Shannon, at a moderate distance, appeared to have suffered very little in the action. Out of a crew, including eight recaptured seamen and 22 Irish labourers two days only in the ship, of 306 men and 24 boys, the Shannon lost, besides her first-lieutenant, her purser (George Aldham), captain's clerk (John Dunn), 13 seamen, four marines, three supernumeraries, and one boy killed, her captain (severely), boatswain (William Stevens, mortally), one midshipman (John Samwell, mortally), and 56 seamen, marines, and supernumeraries wounded : total, 24 killed and 59 wounded. The Chesapeake was severely battered in her hull, on the larboard quarter particularly. A shot passed through one of her transoms, equal in stoutness to a 64-gun ship's ; and several shot