

distant about five leagues, the Pelican hoisted her colours.

The Argus immediately did the same, and at 6 A.M., having wore round, opened her larboard guns within grape-distance ; receiving in return the starboard broadside of the Pelican. In about four minutes Captain Allen was severely wounded, and the main braces, main springstay, gaff, and trysail-mast of the Argus were shot away. At 6 h. 14 m. the Pelican bore up, to pass astern of the Argus ; but the latter, now commanded by Lieutenant William Henry Watson, adroitly threw all aback and frustrated the attempt, bestowing at the same time a well-intended, but ineffective raking fire. At 6 h. 18 m., having shot away her opponent's preventer-brace and main topsail-tie, and thus deprived her of the use of her after-sails, the Pelican passed astern of and raked the Argus, and then ranged up on her starboard quarter, pouring in her fire with destructive effect. In a short time, having by this vigorous attack had her wheel ropes and running-rigging of every description shot away, the Argus became entirely unmanageable, and again exposed liei

stern to the broadside of the Pelican ; who, shortly afterwards, passing the broadside of the Argus, placed herself on the latter's starboard-bow. In this position the British brig, at 6 h. 45m. A.M., boarded the American brig, and instantly carried her, although the master's mate of the Pelican, Mr. William Young, who led the party, received his death-wound from the foretop of the Argus, just as he had stepped upon her gunwale. Even this did not encourage the American crew to rally ; and two or three among those who had not run below hauled down the colours. On board the Pelican, one shot had passed through the boat swain's and another through the carpenter's cabin. Her sides were filled with grape-shot, and her rigging and sails much

injured: her foremast and maintopmast were slightly wounded, and so were her royal-masts ; but no spar was seriously hurt. Two of her carronades were dismounted. Out of her 101 men and 12 boys> the Pelican lost, besides the master's mate, Mr.

Young, slain in the moment of victory, one seaman killed, and five slightly wounded, chiefly by the American musketry and langridge ; the latter to the torture of the wounded. Captain Maples had a narrow escape : a spent canister-shot struck, with some degree of force, one of his waistcoat buttons, and then fell on the deck. The Argus was tolerably cut up in her hull. Both her lower masts were wounded, although not badly, and her fore-shrouds on one side were nearly all destroyed ; but, like the Chesapeake, the Argus had no spar shot away. Several of her carronades were disabled. Out of her 122 men and three boys, to appearance a remarkably fine ship's company, the Argus had six seamen killed, her commander, two midshipmen, the carpenter, and three seamen mortally, her first-lieutenant and five seamen severely, and eight others slightly wounded ; total, six killed and

21 wounded.

1

We shall not, of course, reckon as a part of the Pelican's broadside force the two 6-pounders in her stern-ports, nor, for the reason formerly stated, the 12-pounder boat-carronade. Although a trifle shorter on deck than the Pelican, the Argus carried her 10 guns of a side with ease ; first, because, being of a smaller caliber, they took up rather less room, and next, because her tiller worked on the 'tween decks, and admitted her aftermost port to be carried nearer to her stern by several feet. The American writers dwelt upon the number of prizes which the Argus had previously made, partly with the view of raising 1