

vessels bound from St. George's Channel to Newfoundland; but, to his " astonishment," no prize fell in his way. The President subsequently made the Shetland islands, and on the 27th of June put into North Bergen for provisions and water. Water was all the commodore could obtain ; and, provided with a supply of that wholesome article, the President quitted North Bergen on the 2nd of July, and stretched over towards the Orkney islands ; and thence towards the North Cape, for the purpose of intercepting a convoy of 25 or 30 sail, which the commo dore had understood would leave Archangel about the middle of the month, under the protection of two British brig-sloops. On the 19th of July, when off the North Cape, in company with the privateer-schooner Scourge, of New York, arid in momentary expectation of meeting the Archangel fleet, Com modore Eodgers was driven from his station by, in the language of his official letter, " a line-of-battle ship and a frigate," but, in the language of truth, by the British 12-pounder 32-gun frigate Alexandria, Captain Eobert Cathcart, and 16-gun ship sloop Spitfire, Captain John Ellis. As the commodore is very brief in his account of this meeting, we shall take our narrative from the logs of the two British ships. On the day in question, at 2 h. 30m. P.M., latitude at noon (the mean of the two ships' reckonings) 71 52' north, longitude 20 18' east, the Alexandria and Spitfire, standing south-east by south, with a light wind from the northward, discovered a frigate and a large schooner in the north-north-east. The two British ships immediately hauled up in chase, and at 5 h. 30 m. P.M. tacked to the west north-west, making the Eussian as well as English private signals. At 6h. 15m. the President and her consort, who had hitherto been standing towards the two British ships, tacked from them to the north-west, under all sail, followed by the

Alexandria and Spitfire. At 7h. 30m. P.M. the Spitfire was within five miles of the President, who then bore from her

1813.] ALEXANDRIA AND PRESIDENT. 71

north-north-west. In order that there may be no doubt of 
identity in this case, we subjoin a brief extract or two from the 
letter of Commodore Eodgers. "At the time of meeting with 
the enemy's two ships, the privateer-schooner Scourge, of New 
York, had fallen in company." "I stood towards them until, 
making out what they were, I hauled by the wind upon the 
opposite tack to avoid them." 
The lightness of the night in these latitudes enabling the 
British frigate and sloop to keep sight of their enemy, no inter- 
ruption occurred in the chase. On the 20th, at 4h. 30m. P.M., 
finding that the Spitfire, as well as the President, was gaining 
upon her, the Alexandria cut away her bower-anchor. At 
4 h. 40 m. the Scourge parted company from the President, who 
was now nearly hull-down from the leading British ship. A 
schooner being unworthy game when a frigate was in sight, the 
Alexandria and Spitfire continued in pursuit of the President. 
" Their attention," says the commodore, 
" was so much en- 
grossed by the President, that they permitted her (the Scourge) 
to escape, without appearing to take any notice of her." 
At G P.M., when the Alexandria bore from the Spitfire full two 
miles south-south-east, the President bore north distant only 
six miles. From this time the American frigate continued 
gaining upon the Spitfire until Ih. 10m. P.M. on the 21st; 
when, thick weather comin on, the latter lost sight both of 
her consort and her chase. The discharge of four guns, how 
ever, by the Alexandria, enabled the Spitfire to close. The two 
British ships again making sail, the sloop, at 2h. 15m. P.M., 
again got sight of the President, in the west-south-west, and at 
4 P.M. was once more within six miles of her ; which, says the 
commodore, 
" was quite as near as was desirable." The chase 
continued, during the remainder of the 21st, to the advantage 
of the American frigate, until 8 A.M. on the 22nd, when the 
Spitfire, a fourth time, got Avithin six miles of the President ; 
who again, by the most strenuous efforts, began increasing her 
distance. 
At 6 P.M., when nearly hull-down from the little persevering 
sloop, and quite out of sight from the Alexaiidria, the President 
fired a gun, hoisted an American ensign at her peak, and a 
commodore's broad pendant at her main, and hauled upon a 
wind to the westward. Captain Ellis continued gallantly to 
stand on, until, at 6 h. 40m. P.M., Captain Cathcart, who was 
then eight miles in the east-north-east of his consort, con 
siderately signalled the Spitfire to close. As soon as the latter 