

72 LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHU'S. [1813. had done so, sail was again made ; and the chase continued throughout that night, and until 10 A.M. on the 23rd ; when the President had run completely out of sight of both " the line-ofbattle ship and the frigate," or, as an American historian says, of the "two line-of-battle ships," 1 which had so long been pur

suing her. Among the prisoners on board the President at the time of the chase, were the master and mate of the British snow Daphne, of Whitby. According to the journal of these men, published in the newspapers, they, as well as many of the President's officers and men, were convinced that the chasing ships were a small

frigate and a sloop-of-war. They describe, in a ludicrous manner, the preparations on board the President, to resist the attack of this formidable squadron. During each of the three days a treble allowance of grog was served out to the crew, and an immense quantity of star, chain, and other kinds of dismantling shot got upon deck, in readiness for action. It appears also that, when the Eliza Swan whaler hove in sight a few days afterwards, she was supposed to be a large ship-of-war, and the ceremony with tho grog and dismantling shot was repeated. After a very cautious approach on the part of the President, the chase was discovered to be a clump of a merchantman, and made prize of accordingly. In the above, as the American commodore accurately states it, "80 hours' chase," what a contrast appears in the gallantry of one party, and the pusillanimity of the other. "Will any one pretend that the flight of Commodore Eodgers was all the eifect of delusion ? What ! mistake a ship of 422 tons for a frigate, and a frigate of 662 tons for a "line-of-battle ship"? Well was it for the commodore that he did not belong to the

British navy. Well was it, too, for Captains Cathcart and Ellis, that the Alexandria sailed so ill ; for it was physically impossible that she and thd Spitfire should have come oft* victorious. Yet, that gallantry, which had urged their captains to the pursuit of so formidable a ship, a ship known by her ensign and broad pendant to be a similar frigate to those that had captured, in succession, the Guerriere, Macedonian, and Java, would have impelled them to stand by each other, until both ships had either been buried in the deep, or become the trophies of the American commodore. Overjoyed at his escape, Commodore Rodgers determined to

1 Naval Monument, p. 230.

1813.] CONGRESS AND CAPTAIN PARKER. 73 quit a region where constant daylight afforded an enemy so many advantages over him : he therefore crowded sail to the westward. On the 2nd of August, after the President had been four or five days in a good position for intercepting the trade passing in and out of the Irish Channel, a rumour of " superior force in that vicinity," another " line-of-battle ship and frigate

probably, rendered it expedient for the commodore to shift his cruising-ground. He then made the circuit of Ireland ; and, getting into the latitude of Cape Clear, steered for the banks of Newfoundland. Here Commodore Eodgers was near being