

gratified with the sight of a real line-of-battle ship and frigate, the Bellerophon 74, Captain Edward Hawker, bearing the flag of Vice-admiral Sir Bichard Goodwin Keats, and the Hyperion 36, Captain William Pryce Cumby. With this intelligence, the President bent her course towards the United States; and on the 23rd of September, when a little to the southward of Nantucket, succeeded in decoying and capturing the British 5-gun schooner Highflyer, tender to the San-Domingo 74, and commanded by her second-lieutenant, William Hutchinson. That was not all. Owing to a great deal of cunning on one side, and a tolerable share of imbecility on the other, Commodore Eodgers obtained the stations of the different

British men-of-war on the American coast; and taking his mea sures accordingly, was enabled, on the same day, to enter un-observed the harbour of Newport, Ehode-island.

The Congress frigate continued cruising, without effecting any thing of consequence, until the middle of December ; when Captain Smith succeeded in reaching, unobserved as it also ap pears, the harbour of Portsmouth, New Hampshire. One of her officers, when writing to a friend announcing his return, says : " The Congress has 410 of her crew on board, all in good health : she lost four men by sickness, and has manned a prize with a few others." The officer's friend carried this letter to a newspaper editor, and he gave it immediate insertion. There cannot there fore be a doubt, that the Congress had quitted port with at least 425 men ; and the Congress and Chesapeake were of the same

class. Some months after the arrival of the Congress at Portsmouth, the Tenedos cruised off the port ; and, during a long blockade, Captain Parker used every means in his power to induce the Congress to come out and engage him. But the fate of the Chesapeake had put a stop to the future cruises of the

American 18-pounder frigates, and the Congress, after a while, was disarmed and laid up.

74 LIGHT SQUADRONS AXD SINGLE SHIPS. [1813. On the 5th of August, off the southern coast of the United States, the British schooner Dominica, of 12 carronades, 12pounders, and two sixes, with, as an extra gun, a 32-pounder carronade upon a traversing-carriage, Lieutenant George Wilmot

Barrette, having under her convoy the king's packet Princess Charlotte, bound from St. Thomas's to England, fell in with the French, or rather, the Franco-American, privateer-schooner Decatur, of six 12-pounder carronades and one long 18-pounder traversing-carriage, commanded by the celebrated Captain Do minique Diron. 1 We have no other details than those furnished by the American papers ; but we suppose that Lieutenant Bar rette, the moment he discovered the privateer approaching, hauled off from the packet to meet her. Commencing the attack from to-windward, at a distance that best suited her long 18-pounder, the Decatur gradually closed with the Dominica, and made an attempt to board, but was repulsed. A second attempt met the same fate ; but, after the contest had lasted three-quarters of an hour, the Decatur ran her jib-boom through the Dominica's mainsail, when a third attempt, made by the whole of the French crew, succeeded ; that is, the privateer's men gained a footing upon the Dominica's deck. Here a sanguinary conflict ensued ; in which Lieutenant Barrette, although he had been wounded early in the action by two musket-balls in the left arm, fought in the most gallant manner, and, refusing to surrender, was killed. Emulating the example of their youthful commander (he was not 26), the re-maining officers and men made a noble resistance against double their numbers. Owing to the crowded state of the Dominica's deck from the presence of the boarders, and the valour of the British crew in persisting to struggle with the latter, fire-arms became useless, and cutlasses and cold shot were the chief weapons used. At length, the Dominica's brave crew became diminished to about a dozen effective men and boys ; and the Decatur's, then six times more numerous, hauled down the