

1813.] CRUISE OF THE PRESIDENT AND CONGHKSS. 69

Captain Broke, as an additional stimulus beyond the emulation excited, gave a pound of tobacco to every man that put a shot through the bull's eye. As the Shannon was always clear for action, and had on deck a sufficient quantity of ammunition for two or three broadsides, it was impossible to take her by surprise ; nor could the officers well complain of the want of a few of their cabin conveniences, when the cabin of their chief was so completely stripped of everything which was not abso lutely indispensable, of everything that could not be removed at a moment's notice. The Chesapeake's late captain was buried at Halifax on the

8th, with military honours such as a post-captain in the British navy of less than three years' standing would be entitled to ; and, unlike poor Captain Lambert at St. Salvador,

1

Captain Lawrence was folloAved to his grave by all the naval captains in port. Lieutenant Ludlow died of his wounds while at Halifax, and was also buried with military honours. On the 10th of

August a cartel arrived from Boston, and applied for and carried away the remains of the late captain of the Chesapeake and his first-lieutenant, to be deposited, with suitable ceremony, in their own country. On the 1st of May, as already stated, 2 Commodore Rodgers, with the President and Congress frigates, the latter still commanded by Captain Smith, sailed from President roads, Boston, on his third cruise. On the 2nd the two American frigates fell in with and chased the British 18-gun brig-sloop Curlew, Cap tain Michael Head ; but, by knocking away the wedges of her

masts, and using other means to increase her sailing, the brig 
effected her escape. On the 8th, in latitude 39 30' north, 
longitude 60 west, the Congress, whether by intention or acci- 
dent is not stated, parted company. 
The commodore now proceeded alone ; pleased, no doubt, at 
the prospect thus afforded him, of rivalling his brother commo 
dores in the capture, single-handed, of a "large-class" British 
frigate, and, like each of them, of being hailed on his return as 
one of the first of naval conquerors. The President cruised 
along the eastern edge of the Grand Bank of Newfoundland, 
so as to cross the tracks of the West India, Halifax, Quebec, 
and St. John's trade. Having reached latitude 48 without 
meeting anything, the commodore stood to the south-east, and 
cruised off the Azores until the 6th of June ; when, learning 
from an American merchant-vessel, that she had, four days 
i See vol. v., p. 4 21. 2 See p. 54. 

70 LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS. f!813.

previous, passed a homeward-bound West India fleet, the Pre sident crowded sail to the north-east. Commodore Eodgers, however, was too late ; and, even had the President got among the merchant- ships, the admirable sailing of their escort the Cumberland 74, Captain Thomas Baker, might have made the commodore regret that he had acted upon the information of his countryman. On the 13th of June, being then in latitude 46 north, longitude 28 west, the disappointed commodore resolved to shape a course towards the North Sea, in the hope of falling in with