

American vessel had succeeded against a British vessel nearly equal to her in guns; and, even in this case, the American vessel was doubly superior in crew, better formed in every respect, nearly a third larger, and constructed, as we have already stated, of much stouter scantling. On the 7th of September the gallant commanders of the two brigs were buried at Portland with military and civic honours ; and the few surviving officers of the Boxer, to testify their regard for their late commander, caused a tombstone, with a suitable inscription, to be placed over his grave. None of tho praises lavished upon the "fine brig-of-war Boxer

" could gain her a place among the national vessels of the United States.

She was put up to auction, and sold for a merchant-brig ; for which service only, and that in peaceable times, she was ever calculated. On the 12th of August, at 6h. 30m. A.M., the British 18-gun brig-sloop Pelican, Captain John Fordyce Maples, anchored in

Cork from a cruise. Before the sails were furled, Captain Maples received orders to put to sea again, in quest of an

American sloop-of-war, which had been committing serious depredations in St. George's Channel, and of which the Pelican herself had gained some information on the preceding day. At 8 A.M., having supplied herself with a few necessary stores, tho Pelican got under way, and beat out of the harbour against a very strong breeze and heavy sea, a proof of the earnestness of her officers and crew. On the 13th, at 7 h. 30m. P.M., when standing to the castward with the wind at north-west, the Pelican observed a firo ahead, and a brig standing to the south-east. The latter was immediately chased under all sail, but was lost sight of in tho

night. On the 14th, at 4h. 45m. A.M., latitude 52 15' north, longitude 5 50' west, the same brig was seen in the north-east, separating from a ship which she had just set on fire, and steering towards several merchantmen in the south-east. This active cruiser was the United States brig-sloop Argus, Captain William Henry Allen, standing close hauled on the starboard tack, with the wind a moderate breeze from the southward. The Pelican was on the weather-quarter of the Argus, bearing down under a press of sail to close her; nor did the latter make any attempt to escape, her commander, who had been first-lieutenant of the United States in her action with the

Macedonian, being confident, as it afterwards appeared, that he could "whip any English 22-gun" (as all the British 18-guu

1813.J PELICAN AND ARGUS. 79 brigs were called in America) sloop-of-war in 10 minutes. Let us now show the force of each of these anxious candidates for the laurel crown. The Pelican mounted the usual establishment of her class, 16 carronades, 32-pounders, and two long sixes, with a 12-pounder boat-carronade. But, unfortunately, Captain Maples, when recently at Jamaica, had taken on board two brass G-pounders. As there were no broadside ports for them, theso surplusage guns were not thrown into the hold along with tho ballast, but were mounted through the sternports, to the perpetual annoyance of the man at the helm, without a redeeming benefit in contributing, in the slightest degree, to the brig's actual force. Of her established complement of 120 men and boys, the Pelican had on board 101 men and 12 boys ; and, among her absentees, was her second-lieutenant. The Argus mounted 18 carronades, 24-pounders, and two long English 12-pounders, the same we believe that had belonged to the Macedonian. On quitting the United States upon this cruise, the Argus mustered 157 men and boys ; but she had since manned so many prizes as to reduce her crew to 127, or, as acknowledged by her officers, 125, a number that included about three lads or boys. At 4 h. 30 m. A.M., being unable to get the weather-gage, the Argus shortened sail, to give the Pelican the opportunity of closing. At 5h. 55m. A.M., St. David's Head bearing east