

" that the Pelican

had more men than the Argus, or what was the number that either vessel carried, the court did not deem it worth while to state. Nor does Lieutenant Watson in his official letter, and which doubtless was before the court, make the slightest allusion to any superiority on the part of the Pelican in number of men. But the court was not aware, perhaps, that Lieutenant Watson, and the two officers next in rank to him, had solemnly sworn, in a British prize-court, that the Argus went into action with 125

men. Lieutenant Watson officially enumerates the Pelican's 
guns, boat-carronade and all, at 21 ; and, many months before 
the sitting of the court, that officer, Lieutenant William Henry 
Allen the younger, and the brig's master, had sworn that the 
Argus mounted 20 guns ; a very 
" decided 
" 
superiority certainly. 
Upon the whole, we must conclude that these American courts 
of inquiry are less scrupulous about the truth than the expe- 
diency of the decisions they pronounce ; and yet some persons 
may consider it not very wise in the Americans, looking back on 
their previous boastings, to make the "caliber of guns" a sub 
ject of investigation. 
Unfortunately, the capture of frigate after frigate by the Ame 
ricans could not persuade the British government that the 

United States were in earnest about going to war. Hence, instead of one of the 10 or 12 dashing flag-officers, whose names have recently figured in these pages, being sent out to fight the

Americans into compliance, a superannuated admiral, whose services, such as they were, bore a very old date, arrived, early in March, 1813, in Chesapeake bay, to try the effect of diplomacy and procrastination. Had not Sir John Warren's second in command, Bear-admiral Cockburn, been of a more active turn, the inhabitants of that very exposed part of the American sea frontier, the coast around the bay in which the two admirals had

1813.] BOAT ATTACKS, ETC., IN CHESAPEAKE BAY. 83 cast anchor, would scarcely have known, except by hearsay, that war existed. But, before we proceed to give an account of the proceedings of Eear-admiral Cockbum in the rivers at the head of the Chesapeake, we have to relate a boat-attack that took place a few weeks previous to his arrival on the American coast.

On the 8th of February, at 9 A.M., while a British squadron, consisting of the 18-pounder 36-gun frigates Maidstone and Belvidera, Captains George Burdett and Eichard Byron, and 38-gun frigates Junon and Statira, Captains James Sanders and Hassard Stackpoole, was at anchor in Lynhaven bay, a schooner was observed in the north-west, standing down Chesapeake bay. Immediately the boats of the Belvidera and Statira were detached in chase. Shortly afterwards, on Captain Byron's making the signal, that the chase was superior to the boats, a fresh force of boats was sent, making nine in all, under the com-

mand of Lieutenant Kelly Nazer. On seeing the boats approaching her, the schooner, which was the Lottery, of six 12-pounder carronades and 28 men, Captain John Southcomb, from Baltimore bound to Bordeaux, made all sail to escape ; but soon found herself becalmed. At 1 P.M. she opened from her stern-chasers a well-directed fire upon the headmost boats, or those first detached. These rested on their oars until their comrades came up ; when the whole rushed forward, and, through a very animated fire of round and grape, boarded the schooner, but did not carry her until after a most obstinate resistance, in which Captain Southcomb was mortally wounded, and 18 of his men also wounded, many of them dangerously. The British sustained a loss comparatively slight, having had only one man killed and five wounded. This was a very gallant resistance on the part of the Lottery ; and Captain Southcomb, until he died, was treated with the