

[In 'Naval Occurrences' it says total 24. H. Y. POWKLL.]

181&] fELICAtt AtfD ARGUS. 81 an inference, that she had reduced her ammunition to an inadequate amount. The fact is that, after her action with tho Pelican, the Argus had more powder left than was supplied to

the Pelican at her first outfit ; and the American brig's round, 
grape, and canister-shot, exclusive of bars of iron, old iron, rusty 
nails, bayonets lashed together with rope-yarn, and other species 
of American langridge, weighed 22 cwt. With respect, also, to 
muskets, pistols, swords, and pikes, nearly twice as many were 
found on board the Argus, as were allowed to a British brig 
sloop of the Pelican's class. 
The Argus was built at Boston in the year 1799 or 1800: 
she measured 298 tons American, or 316 English ; and her 
qualifications as a cruiser called forth the following encomium 
from the editor of the National Intelligencer: 
" She is admitted 
to be one of the finest vessels in the service of her class, and the 
model of such a vessel is certainly inestimable." But the Argus 
at that time had not been captured by the British. In point of 

length, the two brigs were the same, within about four feet in favour of the Pelican ; who had also three feet more beam, and consequently was of greater measurement by nearly 70 tons. But, while the main yard of the Pelican was 54 feet 7 inches in length, that of the Argus was 55 feet 2 inches. In point of scantling the Argus had also the advantage in a slight degree. Comparative Force of the Combatants.

No.

Pelican. Argus.

Broadside-guns {

'

Crew (men only) No.

262 2'28 101 122 Size tons. | 385 | ol(J

We will set the Americans a good example by freely admitting, that there was here a superiority against them ; but then, even after she had captured the Argus, the Pelican was in a condition to engage and make prize of another American brig just like her. The slight loss incurred on one side in this action is worth attending to, not only by the boasters in the United States, but by the croakers in Great Britain. Despatching his prize, with half her crew, including the wounded, and a full third of his own, in charge of the Pelican's first and only lieutenant, Thomas Welsh, to Plymouth, Captain

Maples himself, with the remaining half of the prisoners, proceeded to Cork, to report his proceedings to Admiral Thorn borough. On the 16th the Argus arrived at Plymouth ; and VOL. VI.

soon afterwards, for the promptitude, skill, and gallantry which ho had displayed, Captain Maples was most deservedly posted. Captain Allen had his left thigh amputated by his own surgeon ; and, notwithstanding every attention, died on the 18th of August, at Mill Prison hospital. On the 21st he was buried with high military honours, and attended to his grave by all the navy,

marine, and army officers in the port. 
A court of inquiry was of course held on the surviving officers 
and crew of the Argus, for the loss of their vessel. The court 
declared, "it was proved that, in the number of her crew, and 
in the number and caliber of her guns, the Pelican was decidedly 
superior to the Argus." How it was " proved 