

94 LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS. [1813, three companies of ship's marines, the whole amounting to about 2000 men, commanded by Major-general Beckwith, embarked in a division of boats, placed under the orders of Eear-admiral Cockburn, and covered by the brig-sloop Mohawk, and the launches of the squadron. About half an hour before daylight on the 26th, the advance, consisting of about 650 men, with two 6-pounders, under Lieutenant-colonel Napier, landed two miles to the westward of Hampton, a town about 18 miles from

Norfolk, and separated from it by Hampton roads. Shortly afterwards, the main body, consisting of the royal marine battalion under Lieutenant-colonel "Williams, landed ; and the whole moved forward. As might be expected, the town, and its seven pieces of cannon, fell into the hands of the British, after a trifling loss of five killed, 33 wounded, and 10 missing. The Americans admit a loss of seven killed, 12 wounded, 11 missing, and one prisoner. A subject next presents itself for relation, upon which it is painful to proceed. As soon as the Americans were defeated, and driven from Hampton, the British troops, or rather, the foreign troops, for they were the principals, forming part of the advanced force, commenced perpetrating upon the defenceless inhabitants acts of rapine and violence, which unpitying custom has, in some degree, rendered inseparable from places that have been carried by storm ; but which are as revolting to human nature, as they are disgraceful to the flag that would sanction them. The instant these circumstances of atrocity reached the cars of the British commanding officer, orders were given to search for, and bring in. all the Canadian chasseurs distributed through the town ; and, when they were so brought in, a guard was set over them. The officers could do no more : they could not be at every man's elbow, as he roamed through the country in search of plunder ; and plunder the soldier claims as a right, and will have, when the enemy has compelled him to force his way at the point of the bayonet. No event of the war was so greeted by the government editors as the affair at Hampton. All the hireling pens in the United States were put in requisition, until tale followed tale, each outdoing the last in horror. The language of the brothel was exhausted, and that of Billingsgate surpassed, to invent sufferings for the American women, and terms of reproach for their "British" ravishers. Instances were not only magnified, but multiplied, tenfold ; until the whole republic rang with peals of execration against the British character and nation. A few

1813.] BOAT ATTACKS, ETC., IN CHESAPEAKE BAY. 95 of the boldest of the anti-government party stood up to un deceive the public ; but the voice of reason was drowned in the general clamour, and it became as dangerous, as it was useless, to attempt to gain a hearing. The "George-town Federal liepublican," of July 7, a newspaper published just at the verge of Washington city, and whose editor possessed the happy privilege of remaining untainted amidst a corrupted atmosphere, contained the following account : " The statement of the women of Hampton being violated by the British, turns out to be false. A correspondence, upon that subject and the pillage said to have been committed there, has taken place between General Taylor and Admiral Warren. Some plunder appears to have been committed, but it was confined to the French troops em ployed. Admiral Warren complains, on his part, of the