

prise, in which all were so ready to join, Captain Hanchett waved his hat for the boats astern to keep afloat. In the hurry of pulling and the ardour of the men, this warning was disregarded ; and one or two of the boats grounded. Two others, owing to their having received some shot that had passed through the sails of the Diadem's launch, sank. In the meanwhile, the Americans at the battery, well aware of the shoal, had anticipated what had happened ; and, feeling their own security, poured in their grape and canister with de structive effect. A G-pound shot, which had passed through a launch on the starboard side of Captain Hanchett's boat, and

killed and wounded several men, struck that officer on the hip,

1813.J BOAT ATTACKS, ETC., IN CHESAPEAKE BAY. 93 and he instantly fell ; but was quickly on his legs again. "While he was assisting to save the men that were struggling in the water, in consequence of their boat having been sunk, a Iangridge shot entered his left thigh. While, also, the men from the sunken boats, and who consisted chiefly of the Canadian chasseurs, or Independent Foreigners, were struggling for their lives in the water and mud, the Constellation's marines, and the American infantry, waded a short distance into the water, and deliberately fired at them. Huddled together, as the boats were when they struck the ground, and that within canister range of a battery which kept upon them an incessant fire of more than two hours' duration, it required no very expert artillerists to sink three of the boats, and to kill three men and wound 16 ; espe cially when aided by the muskets of those humane individuals who waded into the water to fire at the drowning crews. Including 10 seamen, 62 were officially reported as missing. Of these, it appears, 40 gained the shore, and

' ' deserted

" to the Americans. As more than that number of missing appear to have belonged to the two foreign companies, this creates no surprise ; especially, as the only alternative left to the men was to become prisoners of Avar. The policy of attacking Craney island, as a means of getting at Norfolk, whither the Constellation frigate had retired for shelter on the first arrival of the British in the Chesapeake, has been much questioned ; but there can be only one opinion, surely, about the wisdom of sending boats, in broad daylight, to feel their way to the shore, over shoals and mud-banks, and that in the very teeth of a formidable battery. Unlike most other nations, the Americans in particular, the British, when engaged in expeditions of this nature, always rest their hopes of success upon valour rather than numbers. But still, had the veil of darkness been allowed to screen the boats from view, and an hour of the night chosen when the tide had covered the shoals with deep water, the same little party might have carried the batteries ; and a defeat as discreditable to those that caused, as honourable to those who suffered in it, might have been con

verted into a victory. As it was, the affair of Craney island, dressed up to advantage in the American official account, and properly commented upon by the government-editors, was hailed throughout the union as a glorious triumph, fit for Americans to achieve. On the night of the 25th of June, the effective men of the 102nd regiment, Canadian chasseurs, and battalion-marines ; also,