

greatest attention by Captain Byron, on board of whose frigate he had been brought. Captain Byron then sent the body of the

Lottery's late commander on shore, with every mark of respect due to the memory of a brave officer ; and he afterwards received a letter of thanks from Captain Charles Stewart of the American

18-pounder 3G-gun frigate Constellation, at an anchor in St.

James river leading to Norfolk, watching an opportunity to put to sea. The Lottery was a fine schooner of 225 tons, pierced for 16 guns, and afterwards became the Canso in the British service. Just as Sir John Warren, with the 74-gun ships San-Domingo, bearing his flag, Captain Charles Gill, and Marlborough, bearing $4 LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SIttGtE SHIPS. [1813,

Rear-admiral Cockburn's flag, Captain Charles Bayne Hodgson Eoss, accompanied by the Maidstone and Statira frigates and

Fantome and Mohawk brig-sloops, had arrived abreast of the river Eappahannock, in their way up the Chesapeake, five large armed schooners were discovered, and were immediately chased into the river by the frigates and smaller vessels. It now falling calm, the boats of the two line-of-battle ships and frigates, con sisting of the San Domingo's pinnace, with 23 officers and men and a 12-pounder carronade, under Lieutenant James Polkinghorne and midshipman Robert Amyett Newman, Maidstone's launch, with 21 officers and men and a 12-ponnder carronade, under Lieutenant Matthew Liddon, Marlborough's barge and cutter, with 40 officers and men, under Lieutenant George Constantino Urmston and James Scott, and Statira's cutter with

21 officers and men, under Lieutenant George Bishop, total 105 officers and men were immediately detached in pursuit. After rowing 15 miles, Lieutenant Polkinghorne found the four schooners, which were the Arab, of seven guns and 45 men, Lynx, of six guns and 40 men, Eacer, of six guns and 30 men, and Dolphin of 12 guns and 98 men, drawn up in line ahead, and fully prepared to give him a warm reception. He, notwith standing, dashed at them. The Arab was boarded and carried by the Marlborough's two boats ; the Lynx hauled down her colours just as the San Domingo's pinnace arrived alongside ;

and the Eacer was carried by Lieutenant Polkinghome, after a sharp resistance. The guns of the Eacer were then turned upon

the Dolphin ; and the latter was gallantly boarded and carried by the Statira's cutter and Maidstone's launch.

The loss sustained by the British in this very gallant boatattack amounted to one seaman and one marine killed, Lieutenant Polkinghorne, another lieutenant (William Alexander Brand), one lieutenant of marines (William Eichard Flint), one midshipman (John Sleigh), and seven seamen and marines wounded. The loss sustained by the Americans was six men killed and 10 wounded. The captured schooners were very fine vessels, and of large dimensions for schooners, each measuring from 200 to 225 tons. The Eacer and Lynx, under the names of Shelburne and Musquedobit, were afterwards 14-gun schooners in the British service. Because, probably, these four formidable schooners were only privateers, the gallantry of Lieutenant Polkinghorne in capturing them with a force so decidedly inferior, did not obtain him a commander's rank until upwards of