

Americans having continued to fire upon the struggling crews of the barges after they were sunk." On the llth of July, Sir John Warren detached Bear-admiral Cockburn, with the Sceptre 74, into which ship he had now shifted his flag, the Eomulus, Fox, and Nemesis, frigate armed en flute, the Conflict gun-brig, and Highflyer and Cockchafer tenders, having on board the 103rd regiment, of about 500 rank and file, and a small detachment of artillery, to Ocracoke har bour, on the North-Carolina coast, for the purpose of putting an end to the commerce carried on from that port by means of inland navigation, and of destroying any vessels that might be found there. During the night of the 12th, the squadron arrived off Ocracoke bar ; and, at 2 A.M. on the 13th, the troops were embarked in their boats ; which, accompanied by the Conflict and tenders, pulled in three divisions towards the shore. Owing to the great distance and heavy swell, the advance division, commanded by Lieutenant Westphal, first of the Sceptre, did not reach the shoal-point of the harbour, behind which two large armed vessels were seen at anchor, until considerably after daylight : consequently, the enemy was fully prepared for resistance. The instant the British boats doubled the point, they were fired upon by the two vessels ; but Lieutenant Westphal, under cover of some rockets, pulled directly for them, and bad just got to the brig's bows, when her crew cut the cables and abandoned her. The schooners colours were hauled down by her crew about the same time. The latter vessel proved to be the

Atlas letter of marque, of Philadelphia, mounting 10 guns, and measuring 240 tons the former the Anaconda letter of marque,

of New York, mounting 18 long 9-pounders, and measuring 
387 tons. In the course of the morning the troops were landed, 
and took possession of Ocracoke and the town of Portsmouth, 
without the slightest opposition. The inhabitants behaved with 
civility, and their property, in consequence, was not molested. 
After remaining on shore for two days, Rear-admiral Cockhurn, 
with the troops and seamen, re-embarked without loss or 
molestation. Not, as it would appear, because he had performed 
the service intrusted to him, but, on account of his " not feeling 
himself competent to the attack on Newburn, now that its 
citizens were preparing to receive him." No sooner had the 
British soldiers and seamen departed, than the American militia 
nocked to the post ; thus presenting us with a new system of 
military defence. Both the prizes were afterwards added to the 
British navy, the Anaconda, by her own name, as an 18-gun 
brig-sloop, and the Atlas, by the name of St. Lawrence, as a 
14-gun schooner. 
On the llth of July, at 9 A.M., the two United States gun 
vessels Scorpion and Asp got under way from Yeocomico river, 
but soon afterwards were chased back by the British brig 
sloops Contest, Captain James Eattray, and Mohawk, Captain 
the Hon. Henry Dilkes Byng. The two brigs then came to 
anchor off the bar ; and, seeing that one of the two enemy's 
vessels, a schooner, was considerably in the rear of her con 
sort, Captain Eattray despatched in pursuit of her the cutter 
of each brig, under the orders of Lieutenant Eoger Carley 
Curry, assisted by Lieutenant William Hutchinson, and by 
midshipmen George Morey, Bradford, and Caleb Evans 
Tozer. 
Lieutenant Curry pushed up the narrow inlet of Yeocomico, 
and, when about four miles from the entrance, found the Ameri 
can schooner, which was the Asp, of one long 18-pounder, two 
18-pounder carr.onades and swivels, hauled up close to the 
beach, under the protection of a large body of militia. The 
British boats, however, persevered in their attack, and after a 
smart struggle, in which they had two men killed and Lieu- 