

1813. J BOAT ATTACKS, ETC., IN CHESAPEAKE BAY. 89 were four vessels lying in the river, together with some stores of sugar, of lumber, of leather, and other merchandise. On this occasion, five of the British were wounded. One of the Ameri cans, who entreated to have his property saved, wore military gaiters ; and had, no doubt, assisted at the firing upon the British. Agreeably to his request, however, his property was left untouched. On his way down the river, the rear-admiral visited a town situated on a branch of it. Hefe a part of the inhabitants actually pulled off to him ; and, requesting to shake hands, declared he should experience no opposition whatever. The rear-admiral accordingly landed, with the officers, and, chiefly out of respect to his rank, a small personal guard. Among those that came to greet him on his landing, were observed two inhabitants of George-town. These men, as well as an inha bitant of the place who had been to George-town to see what was going on, had succeeded in persuading the people to adopt, as their best security, a peaceable demeanour. Having ascertained that there were no warlike stores nor public property, and obtained, upon payment of the full value, such articles as were wanted, the rear-admiral and his party re-embarked. Soon afterwards a deputation was sent from Charles-town, on the north-east river, to assure the rear-admiral, that the place was considered as at his mercy ; and, similar assurances coming from other places in the upper part of the Chesapeake, the rearadmiral and his light squadron retired from that quarter. Persons in England may find it difficult to consider, as soldiers, men neither embodied nor dressed in regimentals. That circumstance has not escaped the keen discernment of the Ameri can government. Hence the British are so often charged, in proclamations and other state papers, with attacking the " inoffensive citizens of the republic." The fact is, every man in the United States, under 45 years of age, is a militiaman ; and, during the war, attended in his turn, to be drilled or trained. He had always in his possession either a musket or a rifledbarrel piece ; knew its use from his infancy ; and with it, there fore, could do as much execution in a smock frock or plain coat as if he wore the most splendid uniform. These soldiers in citizens' dresses were the men whom Bear-admiral Cockburn so frequently attacked and routed; and who, when they had really acted up to the character of non-combatants, were invariably spared, both in their persons and properties. The rear-admiral wished them, for their own sakes only, to remain

90 LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS. [1813 neutral; but General Hull, in his famous proclamation, pre-pared with so much care at Washington, invited the Canadian people to become open traitors to their country ; and visited, upon the heads of those that refused, all " the horrors and calamities of war." On the 12th of June the boats of the 18-pounder 32-gun frigate Narcissus, Captain John Eichard Lumley, containing about 40 men, under the command of Lieutenant John Cririe, first of that ship, and of Lieutenant of marines Patrick Savage, were despatched up York river, in the Chesapeake, to cut out the United States schooner Surveyor, mounting six 12-pounder carronades. Captain Samuel Travis, the American commander, had furnished each of his men with two muskets ; and they held their fire until the British were within pistol-shot. The