

as had been taken. Some of the women actually proceeded to 
the boats; and, upon identifying their property, obtained its 
restoration. 
Many of the inhabitants who had remained peaceably in theii 
houses; as a proof that they were well informed of the principle 
upon which Sir George Cockburn acted, frequently exclaimed 
to him: 

: ' Ah, sir, I told them what would be the consequence of their conduct. It is a great pity so many should suffer for a headstrong few. Those who were the most determined to fire upon you the other day, saying it was impossible you could take the place, were now the first to run away." Several of the houses that were not burnt did, in truth, belong to the chief agents in those violent measures which had caused such severity on the part of the British ; and the very townspeople themselves pointed out the houses. Lieutenant Westphal, with his re-maining hand, pursued and took prisoner an American captain of militia ; and others of the party brought in an ensign and several privates, including an old Irishman, named O'Neill. After embarking the six guns from the battery, and taking or destroying about 130 stands of small-arms, the British departed from Havre de Grace.

One division of boats, headed by the rear-admiral, then pro-

88 LIGHT SQUADflONS AND SINGLE SHIPS. [1813 ceedcd to the northward in search of a cannon-foundry, of which some of the inhabitants of Havre de Grace had given information. This was found, and quickly destroyed ; together with five long 24-pounders, stationed in a battery for its pro tection; 28 long 32-pounders, ready for sending away; and eight long guns, and four carronades, in the boring-house and foundry. Another division of boats was sent up the Susque hanna ; and returned, after destroying five vessels and a large store of flour. On the night of the 5th of ]VTay, the same party of British marines and artillerymen again embarked in the boats, and proceeded up the river Sassafras, separating the counties of

Kent and Cecil, towards the villages of George-town and

Frederick-town, situated on opposite sides of the river, nearly facing each other. Having intercepted a small boat with two of the inhabitants, Rear-admiral Cockburn halted the detachment, about two miles from the town ; and then sent forward the two Americans in their boat, to warn their countrymen against acting in the same rash manner as the people of Havre de Grace had done ; assuring them that, if they did, their towns would inevitably experience a similar fate ; but that, on the contrary, if they did not attempt resistance, no injury should be done to them or their towns ; that vessels and public property only would be seized ; that the strictest discipline would be maintained ; and that whatever provision, or other property of individuals, the rear-admiral might require for the use of the squadron, Avould be instantly paid for in its fullest value. The two Americans agreed in the propriety of this ; said there was no battery at either of the towns ; that they would willingly deliver the message, and had no doubt the inhabitants would be peaceably disposed. After waiting a considerable time, the rear-admiral advanced higher up ; and, when within about a mile from the towns, and between two projecting points of land which compelled the boats to proceed in close order, a heavy fire was opened upon them from one field-piece, and, as conjectured, 300 or 400 militia, divided and intrenched on the opposite sides of the river. The fire was promptly returned, and the rear-admiral pushed on shore with the marines ; but, the instant the American militia observed them fix their bayonets, they fled to the woods, and were neither seen nor heard of afterwards. All the houses, excepting those whose owners had continued peaceably in them, and taken po part in the attack, were forthwith destroyed ; as