

14 months afterwards.

1813.] BOAT ATTACKS, ETC., IN CHESAPEAKE BAY. 85

Ecar-admiral Cockburn was now directed, with a squadron of small vessels, to penetrate the rivers at the head of the bay, and endeavour to cut off the enemy's supplies, as well as to destroy his foundries, stores, and public works ; particularly a depot of flour, military and other stores, ascertained, by the information of some Americans, to be at a place called French town, situated a considerable distance up the river Elk. Accord ingly on the evening of the 28th of April, taking with him the brigs Fantome and Mohawk, and the Dolphin, Eacer, and High

flyer tenders, the rear-admiral moved towards the river. Having anchored the brigs and schooners as far within the entrance as could be effected after dark, the rear-admiral took with him in the boats of his little squadron, commanded by Lieutenant George Augustus Westphal, first of the Marlborough, 150

marines, under Captains Marmaduke Wybourn and Thomas

Carter, and five artillerymen, under Lieutenant Robertson, of that corps, and proceeded to execute his orders. Having, owing to ignorance of the way, entered the Bohemia, instead of keeping in the Elk river, the boats did not reach the destined place till late on the following morning. This delay enabled the inhabitants of French-town to make arrangements for the defence of the stores and town, for the security of which a six-gun battery had lately been erected. As soon as the boats approached within gun-shot of it, a heavy fire was opened upon them. Disregarding this, however, the marines quickly landed ; and the American militia fled from the battery to the adjoining woods. The inhabitants of the town, which was situated at about a mile distant, having, as far as could be ascertained, taken no part in the contest, were not in the slightest degree molested ; but a considerable quantity of flour, of army-clothing, saddles, bridles, and other equipments for cavalry ; also various articles of merchandise, and the two stores in which they had been contained, together with five vessels lying near the place, were entirely consumed. The guns of the battery, being too heavy to be carried away, were disabled ; and the boats departed, with no other loss than one seaman wounded in the arm by a grape-ahot. The Americans lost one man killed by a rocket, but none wounded.

The rear-admiral's system, and which he had taken care to impart to all the Americans captured by, or voluntarily coming on board the squadron, was to land without offering molesta

tion to the unopposing inhabitants, either in their persons or properties ; to capture or destroy all articles of merchandise

and munitions of war ; to be allowed to take off, upon paying the full market price, all such cattle and supplies as the British squadron might require ; but, should resistance be offered, or menaces held out, to consider the town as a fortified post, and the male inhabitants as soldiers ; the one to be destroyed, the other, with their cattle and stock, to be captured.