

As the boats in their way down the Elk were rounding Turkey point, they came in sight of a large estate, surrounded by cattle. The rear-admiral landed ; and, directing the bailiff, or overseer, to pick cut as many oxen, sheep, or other stock, as were deemed sufficient for the present use of the squadron, paid for them to the full amount of what the bailiff alleged was the /narket price. Not the slightest injury was done ; or, doubtless one of the industrious American historians would have recorded the fact. Having learnt that cattle and provisions, in consider able quantity, were at Specucie Island, the rear-admiral, with the brigs and tenders, proceeded to that place. In his way thither, it became necessary to pass in sight of Havre de Grace, a village of about 60 houses, situated on the west side of the Susquehanna, a short distance above the confluence of that river with the Chesapeake. Although the British were a long way out of gun-shot, the Americans at Havre de Grace, as if inspired by the heroism of their townsman, Commodore Rodgevs, fired at them from a six-gun battery, and displayed to their view, as a further mark of defiance, a large American ensign. This determined the rear-admiral to make that battery and town the next object of attack. In the meanwhile he anchored off' Specucie Island. Here a part of the boats landed, and obtained cattle upon the same terms as before. A complaint having been made that some of the subordinate officers had destroyed a number of turkeys, the rear-admiral paid the value of them out of his own pocket. The Americans, as they were driving the cattle to the boats, jeered the men, saying,

" 
Why 
do you come here? Why don't you go to Havre de Grace? 
There you'll have something to do." About this time a deserter 
gave the people at Havre de Grace, who had already been pre 
paring, notice of'the intended attack. 
After quitting Specucie Island, the rear-admiral bent his 
Bourse towards Havre de Grace ; but the shallowness of the 
water admitting the passage of boats only, the 150 marines and 
the five artillerymen embarked at midnight on the 2nd of May, 
and proceeded up the river. The Dolphin and Highflyer tenders 
attempted to follow in support of the boats, but shoal water 

1813.] BOAT ATTACKS, ETC., IN CHESAPEAKE BAY. 87 compelled them to anchor at the distance of six miles from the point of attack. By daylight the boats succeeded in getting opposite to the battery; which mounted six guns, 12 and 6 pounders, and opened a smart fire upon the British. The marines instantly landed to the left ; which was a signal to the Americans to withdraw from their battery. Lieutenant West phal, having in the mean time stationed his rocket-boat close to the battery, now landed with his boat's crew, turned the guns upon the American militia, and drove them to the extremity of the town. The inhabitants still keeping up a fire from behind the houses, walls, and trees, Lieutenant Westphal, by the admiral's orders, held out a flag of truce, and called upon them to desist. Instead of so doing, these "unoffending citizens" fired at the British lieutenant, and actually shot him through the very hand that was bearing the flag of truce. After this, who could wonder if the British seamen and marines turned to the right and to the left, and demolished everything in their way ? The townspeople themselves had constructed the battery ; and yet not a house in which an inhabitant remained was injured. Several of the inhabitants, principally women, who had fled at first, came again into the town and got back such articles