

64 armee en flute, four frigates, and five sloops, transports, and tenders, lay at anchor, the nearest within seven, the furthest off within 13, miles of Craney island. An assemblage of boats at the sterns of several of the ships, on the afternoon of that day, gave no very unequivocal notice to the people on shore, that some expedition was on foot. Accordingly, Craney island being rather weakly manned, the commanding officer at Norfolk sent 150 of the Constellation's seamen and marines to a battery ol 18-pounders on the north-west, and about 480 Virginia militia to reinforce a detachment of artillery stationed with two 24 and four 6 pounders on the west, side of the island. Captain Tar bell's 15 gun-boats were also moored in the best position for contributing to the defence of the post. After two days' parade of boats and bustle among the British ships, a division of 17 or 18 boats, at daylight on the morning of the 22nd, departed with about 800 men, under Major-general Beckwith, round the point of Nansemond river, and landed them at a place called Pig's point, near to the narrow inlet separating the main from Craney island. Owing to some error in the arrangements, unexpected obstacles presented themselves. An

attack from that quarter being therefore considered hopeless, and the position itself not tenable, the troops, in the course of the day, re-embarked and returned to the squadron. A second division of boats, 15 in number, containing a detachment of 500 men from the 102nd regiment, Canadian chasseurs, and battalion-marines, and about 200 seamen, the whole under the command of Captain Samuel John Pechell, of the Sari-Domingo, arrived, at about 11 A.M., off the north-west side of the island, directly in front of the battery manned by the Con stellation's men. Great difference of opinion prevailed among the officers engaged in the expedition, about the propriety of making the attack at that time of tide, it being then the ebb. Captains John Martin Hanchett, of the Diadem, the Hon.

James Ashley Maude, of the Nemesis, and Romilly of the engineers, were decidedly against it. Captain Pechell was for it ; and he, being the senior officer, carried his point. Captain llauchett then volunteered to lead the boats to the attack ; which he was permitted to do. Captain Hanchett's boat was the Diadem's launch, carrying a 24-pounder carronade, the only boat so armed in the division. He had taken his station about GO yards ahead of the other boats ; and was pulling, under a very heavy and long-continued fire from the batteries, directly in front of them, when his boat unfortunately took the ground, at the distance of about 100 yards from the muzzles of the enemy's guns. Captain Hanchett, who had been previously standing up in his boat, animating his men to hasten forward, luvcl wrapped round his body a union-jack, and prepared to wade on shore to storm the American battery. At that instant one of the seamen, having plunged his boathook over the side, found three or four feet of slimy mud at the bottom. A check being thus effectually given to a daring enter