

1813.J BRITISH AND AMERICANS ON CANADIAN LAKES. 105 their vessels ; and the Americans, as soon as they could credit their senses, hastened to stop the conflagration. The General Pike, being built of green wood, was saved ; but the Gloucester, and the barrack containing the stores, were entirely consumed. That Sir George Prevost was as fond of writing official letters as he was of substituting the first personal pronoxm for the third, has already appeared in these pages;

1

but, in the present instance, contrary to all precedent, he required his adjutant general, Colonel Edward Baynes, to pen the despatch. That obedient gentleman did so ; and the European public scarcely knows at this hour through whose fault it was that Sackett's

Harbour was not taken from the Americans in May, 1813.

The Canadian public, besides being in the secret, were less surprised at the result of the enterprise ; because they knew that Sir George, a few months before, had rejected an excellent opportunity of marching across the ice to Sackett's Harbour, and destroying the whole American lake-navy at a blow. On the 3rd of June, Sir James Yeo sailed from Kingston with his squadron, composed of the ship Wolfe, of 23 guns and 200 men, ship Eoyal George, of 21 guns and 175 men, brig Melville, of 14 guns and 100 men, schooners, Moira, of 14 guns and 92 men, Sidney Smith, of 12 guns and 80 men, and Beresford, of eight guns and 70 men, together with a few gun-boats. On the

8th, at daylight, the squadron arrived in sight of the American camp at Forty-mile creek ; but, as it was calm, the only vessels that could get close to the shore were the Beresford, Captain Francis Brockell Spilsbury, and the gun-boats, commanded by Lieutenant Charles Anthony, first of the Wolfe. A spirited attack by the schooner and gun-boats compelled the American troops to make a precipitate retreat, and all their camp equipage, provisions, and stores fell into the hands of the British. Sir

James then landed the troops that were on board his squadron, and steered to the westward. On the 13th he captured two American schooners and some boats containing supplies. Re ceiving information from the prisoners, that there was a dep6t of provisions at Genesse river, Sir James proceeded thither ; and, landing some seamen and marines, brought off the whole. On the 19th he took another supply of provisions from Great Sodus, and on the 29th re-anchored in Kingston. All this while Commodore Chauncey was waiting at Sackett's

Harbour for the General Pike to be got ready for sea. At length, towards the latter end of July, that fine ship was armed, manned, 1 See vol. v., p. H.

106 LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS. [1813. and stored. The Pike alone was nearly a match for the whole of Sir James Yeo's squadron : she measured about 850 tons, and mounted 26 long 24-pounders on a flush deck, another 24pounder on a pivot-carriage upon her forecastle, and a second, similarly mounted, upon her quarter-deck; and her crew, including some soldiers serving as marines, amounted to 400 men. With this ship, the Madison, Oneida, and 11 fine schooners, Commodore Chauncey sailed from Sackett's Harbour for the head of the lake. On the Sth of August, in the morning, while the American fleet lay at anchor off Fort Niagara, the British squadron hove in sight; and, that a better opinion may be formed of the situation of the parties, we will state the force of each. The British had six vessels, mounting 92 guns ; of which two were long 24-pounders, 13 long 18-pounders, five long 12 and 9 pounders, and 72 carronades of different calibers, including six 68-pounders ; and the vessels were manned with 717 officers and men. The Americans, by their own admission, had 14 vessels, armed, also by their admission, with 114 guns; of which, seven were long 32-pounders, 32 long 24-pounders, eight long 18-pounders, 19 long 12 and 9 pounders, and 48 carron ades, 40 of which were 32 and 24 pounders. Nearly one-fourth