

1813.] AMERICAN FORCE ON THE ONTARIO. 101 alongside of a trading sloop, which had been recently captured and lay a short distance off. The lieutenant did as he was ordered; and at 2h. 30m. P.M., while he and his men were in the act of securing her, the schooner blew up with a tremendous explosion. The poor lieutenant, and 10 of the fine fellows who were with him, perished ; and the remaining three men escaped only with being shockingly scorched. We shall not trust ourselves to comment upon this most atrocious proceeding. In the following remarks on the subject by a contemporary, we perfectly concur: " A quantity of arsenic among the food would have been so perfectly compatible with the rest of the contrivance, that we wonder it was not resorted to. Should actions like these receive the sanction of governments, the science of war, and the laws of nations, will degenerate into the barbarity of the Algerines; and murder

and pillage will take place of kindness and humanity to our 
enemies." 1 
The northern frontier of the United States, as is almost too 
well known to need repetition, bounds on the British provinces 
of Upper and Lower Canada. The line, or barrier, as far as wo 
need take notice of it, consists of a rapid river, the St. Lawrence, 
and the navigable lakes Ontario, Erie, and Huron. From 
Quebec to Kingston, which stands at the entrance of Lake 
Ontario, the distance is about 180 miles, but the water commu 
nication is interrupted by shoals and rapids. Lake Ontario is 
about 180 miles long and 50 broad, and is navigable for ships of 
any burden. The strait of Niagara, in length about 36 miles, 
but interrupted at one part by its famous falls, connects Ontario 
with Lake Erie ; which is about 220 miles in length, and about 
40 broad, and is also navigable for large ships. Of Lake Huron, 
it will suffice to say, that it is connected with Erie by the river 
Detroit ; on which river stands the British post of Amherst 
burgh, distant just 800 miles from Quebec. 
The regular force, scattered over the Canadas at the breaking- 
out of the war, consisted of between 4000 and 5000 men, 
chiefly fencible and veteran or invalid troops. The British com 
mander-in-chief was Lieutenant-general Sir George Prevost. 
Ontario was the only lake that contained any armed vessels be- 
longing to the British. These consisted of the Koyal George, a 
ship of 340 tons, mounting 20 guns, a brig of 14 guns, and two 
or three smaller vessels ; all manned by Canadians, and com- 
manded by a provincial officer, named Earle. The force of the 

Americans on this lake, at the commencement of the war, con i Brenton, voL v., p. 120.

sisted of only one solitary brig, the Oneida, of 16 guns, commanded by Lieutenant Melancthon Thomas Woolsey, of the national navy. The principal port of the British was Kingston ; that of the American's, Sackett's Harbour. On the 15th of July, 1812, Commodore Earle, with his squa dron, appeared off Sackett's Harbour, with the avowed intention of taking or destroying the Oneida; but a fire from two or three guns, mounted on a point of land near the harbour's mouth, Avas