

War," another American publication, adds : ' '

The commodore

was obliged to give up the chase ; his ship was making water so fast, that it required all his pumps to keep her clear, and others of his vessels were much damaged. The General Pike suffered a considerable loss of men; among whom were 22

| BRITISH AMERICANS AND 1813.] | LAKES. CANADIAN 109 ON | |
| --- | --- | --- |
| killed or the wounded bursting by | of a American Other gun." | |
| accounts stated the commodore's | in loss of at 60 men upwards | |

killed and wounded. It was therefore the damages and loss sustained by the American squadron, and not the " British bat teries on Burlington heights," upon which not a musket was mounted, that "obliged the commodore to give up the chase." The effect produced by Sir James's few long guns gave a specimen of what his carronades would have done, and his opponent allowed them to be used. In the month of May, 1813, Captain Robert Heriot Barclay was appointed to the command of the British flotilla on this lake; an appointment which had been declined by Captain William Howe Mulcaster, another of Sir James Yeo's com manders .on account of the exceedingly bad equipment of the vessels. These, owing to the loss of one of them, now consisted of five ; and they were not equal in aggregate tonnage or force to a British 20-gun ship. With a lieutenant, and 19 rejected seamen of the Ontario squadron, Captain Barclay, towards the middle of June, joined his enviable command ; and, with the aid of the seamen he had brought, a ship was forthwitli laid down at Amherstburgh, intended to be of 305 tons, and to mount as

many as 18 guns.

Since the latter end of March, Captain Oliver Hazard Perry, of the United States navy, had arrived at the port of Erie, with a numerous supply of officers and seamen, to equip a flotilla ; and, by the time Captain Barclay arrived, the American force consisted of one brig, the Caledonia, six fine schooners, and one sloop, mounting 15 heavy long guns, all on traversing-carriages. Two brigs, of about 460 tons each, to mount 18 carronades, 32-pounders, and two long twelves, had also been laid down at

Presqu'isle, and were in a state of some forwardness. The de struction of these vessels on the stocks, would have enabled the British to maintain the ascendancy on the lake, and would have averted the fatal blow that was afterwards struck in this quarter. Colonel Proctor, the British commanding ofticer at Amherst burgh, saw this ; as well as the facility with which the thing might be done, if Sir George Prevost would send him the long promised supply of troops, and about 100 sailors. He wrote letter after letter to Sir George on the subject, but all in vain,

The latter, when he had exhausted his excuses, became petulant and rude. The two American brigs were launched ; and, although they had to pass a bar, with their guns and stores out, and almost on their beam-ends, the Niagara and Lawrence, by

110 LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS. [1813 the beginning of August, were riding on the lake, in readiness for action. By the latter end of August, the Detroit, as the new ship was named, was launched ; and the next difficulty was to get guns for her. For this, the fort of Amherstburgh was stripped, and 19, of four different calibers, were obtained. It will convey some idea of the expense of hastily fitting vessels at this distance from home, to mention, that every round shot costs one shilling a pound for the carriage from Quebec to Lake Erie, that powder was ten times as dear as at home, and that, for anchors, their weight in silver would be scarcely an over-estimate. But, were the Americans on this lake any better off? In five days an express reaches Washington. It would, under the most favourable circumstances as to weather and despatch in office, .take as many months to get an article ordered from England, or even permission to stir a peg out of the common routine of service. The American vessels were therefore completely at home, while the British vessels were upwards of 3500 miles from home ;