

sufficient to deter the Canadian (we will not call him British) commodore from attempting that, with his five vessels, which the Eoyal George alone, well manned and appointed, might easily have accomplished. Emboldened by the dastardly beha viour of his opponent, Lieutenant Woolscy fitted out a captured British merchant-schooner with one long 32-poundcr and two sixes ; and, manning her with about 30 seamen and a company of riflemen to act as marines, sent her, under the command of Lieutenant Henry Wells, to Ogdensburg, on the St. Lawrence. On her way thither, the Julia encountered, and actually beat off without losing a man, the Moira of 14, and the Gloucester of 10 guns. Notwithstanding the glaring incompetency of Earle, Sir George Prevost neither removed nor censured him. About this time the British 20-gun ship Tartarus, Captain John Pasco, arrived at Quebec from Halifax ; and, had the governor-general of British America but given his sanction to the measure, the captain would have laid his ship up, and, with his officers and

men, have proceeded straight to Kingston, and superseded Earle in the command of the squadron. Instead of this, an attempt was made to hire sailors at Quebec, at one-half of the wages which the merchants were giving ; as if sailors could be of any use without an officer capable or willing (for we believe Earle, as well as Sir George, was born on the wrong side of the boundary line) to lead them against the enemy. In the month of October, 1812, Commodore Isaac Chauncey arrived at Sackett's Harbour, as commander-in-chief ; and, having brought with him a number of officers, and between 400 and 500 prime sailors, from the Atlantic frontier, was ena bled, by the 6th of November, to appear on the lake with the Oneida and six fine schooners, mounting altogether 48 guns, including several long 24 and 32 pounders ; and many of the guns being mounted on pivot or traversing carriages, were as effective as double the number. With this comparatively for

1 -

midable force, Commodore Chauncey chased the Eoyal George into Kingston, cannonaded the town and batteries, and possessed

1813.] BRITISH AND AMERICANS ON CANADIAN LAKES. 103 the entire command of the lake. On the 26th of November the Madison, a fine ship of 600 tons, pierced to carry 24 guns on a flush deck, was launched at Sackett's Harbour; and, as soon as she was fitted, the commodore shifted his broad pendant to her. Soon afterwards Sir George Prevost ordered two shipsof-war to be built, to mount 24 guns each ; one at Kingston, the other at York, an unprotected port at the opposite extremity of the lake.

On Lake Erie, while the Americans possessed only one armed vessel, the Adams, a small brig mounting six 6-pounders, the British colonial authorities, by hiring or purchasing some merchant-vessels and arming them, had assembled a force con sisting of one ship of 280 tons, the Queen Charlotte, mounting 16 light carronades, a brig of 10 guns, a schooner of 12, and three smaller vessels, mounting between them seven guns. These six vessels were manned by 108 Canadians, and subsequently by 160 soldiers in addition. On the 16th of July, at the surrender of Detroit, the Adams fell into the hands of the British, and was afterwards named the Detroit, and sent down the lake, manned by a small Canadian crew. Early in the month of October, 1812, the American government sent