

kept up a spirited fire, but was quickly boarded and overpowered VOL. VI. H

The British boats, in this affair, lost three killed and mortally wounded, and four slightly wounded ; the gun-boat, seven wounded. The last discharge from the gun, mounted on board the gun-boat, broke its carriage. That prevented the British from returning the fire of the remaining gun-boats, which had dropped down in line, hoping to retake the prize ; but which the captors towed off in triumph. As, in their attempt to save their companion, the gun-boats passed the bow of the Martin, the sloop fired upon them with effect ; and the Junon opened her fire, but her shot scarcely fell beyond the Martin. Some of the gun-boats having grounded, the remainder anchored for their mutual protection. The tide had drifted the ships' boats, as well as the captured vessel, to a considerable distance. The gun-boats that had grounded, got off, and the whole, as if to renew the attack upon the change of tide, anchored within two miles and a half of the Martin, now weakened by the absence of 40 of her best hands. However, at 5 P.M., to the surprise of the Martin's officers and crew ; and, as it afterwards appeared, to the extreme mortification of the spectators on the shore, this formidable flotilla weighed and beat up, between the Martin and the shore, without further molesting her, and arrived in safety, soon afterwards, at their station near the mouth of the river. The force that attacked the Martin, consisted of eight gun boats and two block-vessels. The latter were sloops of 100 tons each, which had been coasters. Their sides had been raised, heavy beams laid across, and the whole planked in, on the top, on each side, and at the ends ; leaving only loopholes for mus ketry (through which pikes might be used in repelling boarders), and three ports of a side : in these were mounted six long 18-pounders. The covering extended the whole length of the vessel, and was large enough to contain 60 men, the number stated as the complement of each. The gun-boats were sloop rigged vessels, averaging about 95 tons, and mounted each a long 32, and a 4-pounder on traversing-carriages, with a com plement of 35 men, the exact number found on board the prize. Each gun-boat, and block-vessel was commanded by an expe rienced merchant-master : and the whole flotilla by Master-commandant Samuel Angus, of the United States navy. On the 24th of May the frigate United States, still com-

manded by Commodore Decatnr, accompanied by the 18-pounder 36-gun frigate Macedonian, Captain Jacob Jones, and 18-gun ship-sloop Hornet, Captain James Diddle, all provisioned and

1813.] BOAT ATTACKS, ETC., IN DELAWARE BAY.

'

stored for a cruise in the East Indies, quitted the harbour of

New York through Long-island Sound, the Sandy-hook passage being blockaded by a British force. Having found in his ship a disposition to hog, Commodore Decatur had put on shore six of his carronades ; thus reducing the force of the United States from 54 to 48 guns. It was however asserted, and we believe stated, in the New York papers, that the commodore had taken on board eight medium or columbiad 32-pounders, and sent an equal number of 24-pounders from his four 'midship ports on each side to the Macedonian : and that of the latter's eight long 18-pounders removed to make room for the 24s, two were mounted on board the Hornet in lieu of her 12-pounders. Just as the United States, towards evening, arrived abreast of Hunt's-point, her mainmast was struck by lightning. The electric fluid tore away the commodore's broad pendant and cast it upon the deck ; it then passed down the after-hatchway, through the wardroom, into the doctor's cabin, put out his candle and tore up his bed, and, entering between the skin and ceiling of the ship, ripped off two or three sheets of copper just at the water's edge. No further trace of it could be discovered.