

The Macedonian, who was about 100 yards astern of the United States, on seeing what had happened, hove all aback, to save herself from the justly dreaded explosion of the latter. For tunately, not a man was hurt on the occasion. Commodore

Decatur soon afterwards anchored under Fisher's island, near the entrance of New London river, to be ready for a start the first opportunity. On the 1st of June, very early in the morning, the American squadron got under way and stood out to sea ; but at 9 A.M., just as they were clearing the Sound, the ships were discovered by the British 74-gun ship Valiant, Captain Robert Dudley Oliver, and 18-pounder 40-gun frigate Acasta, Captain Alexander Eobert Kerr. The two British ships gave chase, and the three American ships put back ; both parties hauling to the wind under all sail. At about 1 h. 30 m. P.M. the American squadron bore up for New London ; and the United States and Hornet, being too deep for their trim, started their water and threw overboard a part of their provisions. At 2h. 15m., P.M., being far ahead of the Valiant, and just within gun-shot of the United States, the Acasta fired a bow-chaser at the latter, just as the Macedonian was rounding New London lighthouse. The United States returned the shot with one from her stern. In stead, however, of bringing-to and trying to cut off the British frigate from her consort, as many of the spectators on shore ex-

100 LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS. [1813 pected to see done, Commodore Decatur stood on, and anchored with his squadron in the river. Having shortened sail, the Acasta hauled to the wind, and tacked, and soon afterwards, with the Valiant, anchored off Gardner's island, distant about 12 miles from New London. Having no persons on board acquainted with the navigation of the Sound, the British ships, particularly the 74, chased with much less effect than they otherwise would. It was not, of course, known to Captain Oliver, that he might even have followed the American squadron into New London ; and that, had the United States and her companions ascended the river beyond his reach, he might, with very little risk, there being no battery of any consequence, have placed the Valiant and Acasta against the town, and blown the houses about the ears of the inha

bitants, if they refused to deliver up the ships. For several weeks previous to this event, the New York and

Boston papers had been filled with panegyrics on their " naval heroes," whose valour they depicted as impetuous, amounting almost to rashness. Some of the papers, as if a little ashamed of what they had said, now added " a rasee " to the two British ships, and gave that as a reason that the American commodore suffered his squadron to be chased into New London. In a week or two afterwards two merchants of New York, encouraged by a promise of reward from the American government, formed a plan for destroying the British 74-gun ship

Bamillies, Captain Sir Thomas Masterman Hardy, as she lay at anchor off Fisher's island. A schooner named the Eagle was laden with several casks of gunpowder, having trains leading from a species of gunlock, which, upon the principle of clockwork, went off at a given period after it had been set. Above the casks of powder, and in full view at the hatchway, were some casks of flour, it being known at New York that the Eamillies was short of provisions, and naturally supposed that Captain Hardy would immediately order the vessel alongside, in order to get the ship's wants supplied. Thus murderously laden, the schooner sailed from New York and stood up the Sound. On the 25th, in the morning, the Eagle approached New London, as if intending to enter that river. The Eamillies detached a boat, with 13 men under Lieutenant John Geddes, to cut her off. At 11 A.M. Lieutenant Geddes boarded the schooner, and found that the crew, after having let go her only anchor, had abandoned their vessel and fled to the shore. The lieutenant brought the fatal prize near to the Eamillies, and Sir Thomas ordered him to place the vessel