

tenant Curry and five men wounded, carried the vessel. The American commanding officer, Lieutenant Segourney was killed, and nine out of his 25 in crew were cither killed or wounded.

The British set fire to the Asp, but not effectually, as the Americans afterwards extinguished the flames and preserved the vessel. In the month of July, Captain Saunders, with his frigate the

1813.] BOAT ATTACKS, ETC., IN DELAWARE BAY. 97

Junon, and the ship-sloop Martin, Captain Henry Fleming Senhouse, of 16 carronades, 24-pounders, and two long nines, was stationed in Delaware bay. On the 29th, about 8 A.M., the Martin grounded on the outer ridge of Crow's shoal, within two and a half miles from the beach ; and, it being a fallingtide, could not be floated again before the return of flood. The water ran so shoal, that it became necessary to shore the ship up ; and the same cause prevented the Junon from afterwards anchoring nearer to the Martin than a mile and three quarters. This afforded to the flotilla of American gun-boats and block vessels then in the Delaware, a fine opportunity to destroy the British sloop. They accordingly, 10 in number, advanced, and deliberately took up an anchorage at about a mile and three quarters distant, directly on the Martin's beam, on the opposite side to the Junon, and so as to bring the latter in a line with the sloop. Thus, by anchoring at the distance of three miles from the frigate, which, it was well known, could not approach nearer on account of the shoals, the American gun-boats had no force but the Martin's to contend with. All this while, crowds of citizens, on foot, on horseback, and in carriages, were hastening to the beach, in the hope to see verified, in the speedy destruction of the Martin, the wonderful accounts they had heard of American prowess on the ocean. The Martin got her topgallant masts struck, and her sails furled ; and, although he despaired of saving his ship from so formidable a force, Captain Senhouse resolved to defend her to the last extremity. The gun-boats commenced the fire, and the Martin returned it, at first with her carronades ; but, finding they could not reach, Captain Senhouse had the two 9-pounders transported from their ports, one to the topgallant-forecastle, the other to the poop. Between these two guns, and all the guns of the American flotilla, was the fire maintained for nearly two hours, without the slightest injury to the Martin. At about 2 P.M. the sternmost gun-boat in the line having separated a little from the rest, Captain Sanders made a signal for the boats manned and armed. Accordingly, three boats were despatched from the Martin, containing 40 officers and men, and four from the Junon, containing 100 officers and men, the whole under the orders of the Junon's First-lieutenant Philip Westphal. On tho approach of the boats, the gun-vessels turned their fire from the Martin against them, but at too great a distance to be effective. The single gun-boat, which was the principal object of attack,