

of the long guns and carronades were on pivot-carriages, and were consequently as effective in broadside as twice the number. The 14 American vessels, thus armed, were manned with 1193

officers and men.

Commodore Chauncey immediately got under way, and stood out, with his 14 vessels, formed in line-of-battle ; but, as the six British vessels approached, the American vessels, after discharging their broadsides, wore and stood under their batteries.

Light airs and calms prevented Sir James Yeo from closing ; and during the night, in a heavy squall, two of the American schooners, the Hamilton and Scourge, upset, and their crews unfortunately perished. On the 9tb the two parties were again in sight of each other, and continued manoeuvring during that and the succeeding day. On the 10th, at night, a fine breeze sprang up, and Sir James Yeo immediately took advantage of it, by bearing up to attack his powerful opponent ; but, just as the Wolfe got within gun-shot of the Pike and Madison, these two powerful American ships bore up, fired their stern-chase guns, and made sail for Niagara ; leaving two fine schooners, the Julia and Growler, each armed with one long 32 and one long 12 pounder on pivots, and manned with a crew of 40 men, to be captured without an effort to save them. With his two prizes,

1813.] BRITISH AND AMERICANS ON CANADIAN LAKES. 107 and without the loss of a man, and with no greater injury to his ships than a few cut ropes and torn sails, Sir James Yeo returned to Kingston. The " United States Gazette," of September 6, gave a letter from one of the General Pike's officers. The writer, having previously stated the American force at two ships, one brig, and 11 schooners, says: "On the 10th, at midnight, we came within gun-shot, every one in high spirits. The schooners commenced the action with their long guns, which did great execution. At half-past 12, the Commodore fired his broadside, and gave three cheers, which was returned from the other ships, the enemy closing fast. We lay by for our opponent, the orders having been given not to fire until she came within pistol-shot, though the enemy kept up a constant fire. Every gun was pointed, every match ready in hand, and the red British ensign plainly to be descried by the light of the moon when, to our utter astonishment, the commodore wore, and stood S.E., leaving Sir James Lucas Yeo to exult in the capture of two schooners, and in our retreat ; which was certainly a very fortunate one for him." No wonder an order soon afterwards issued from Wash ington, that no officer should write, with the intention of publi cation, accounts of the operations of the fleet and army. Sir James could not have had his assertions more ably supported than they were by the Pike's officer. The latter was mistaken, however, as to any "execution" having been done by the American squadron. The captured schooners of course made no resistance ; although the American editors trumped up a story about their desperate defence, how they tore and ripped up the enemy, &c.