

The Pike's officer has described two other " chases ;" differing chiefly from the last, in no loss having been suffered, or even shot fired. He says: "We proceeded directly for Sackett's

Harbour; where we victualled and put to sea, the next day after her arrival, August 14. On the 16th we discovered the enemy again, again hurried to quarters, again got clear of the enemy by dint of carrying sail, and returned to Sackett's Harbour. On the 18th we again fell in with the enemy steering for Kingston, and we reached the harbour on the 19th. This is the result of two cruises ; the first of which, by proper guidance, might have decided in our favour the superiority on the lake, and consequently in Canada." This is what many of the Ame rican editors called " chasing the British commander all round the lake." Commodore Chauncey, although he had lost four

of his 14 vessels, appeared in September with 11 sail ; having brought out with him the Schooner Elizabeth, of about the same force as the Growler or Julia, and the new schooner Sylph, mounting, at that time, four long 32-pounders upon pivot-car riages, and four long sixes. This schooner was described by the Americans as upwards of 400 tons. She was afterwards converted into a brig. On the llth of September, while the British squadron lay becalmed off Genessee river, the American fleet of 11 sail, by the aid of a partial wind, succeeded in getting within range of their long 24 and 32 pounders; and during five hours cannonaded the British, who did not fire a carronade, and had only six guns in all the squadron that could reach the enemy. At sunset a breeze sprang up from the westward, when Sir James

steered for the American fleet ; but the American commodore avoided a close meeting, and thus the affair ended. It was so far unfortunate for Sir James Yeo, that he had a midshipman (William Ellery) and three seamen killed and seven wounded.

In his official letter on the subject of this action, Commodore

Chauncey most uncandidly says : " I was much disappointed that Sir James refused to fight me, as he was so much superior in point of force, both in guns and men, having upwards of 20 guns more than we have, and heaves a greater weight of shot." Another partial engagement took place on the 28th of September. Commodore Chauncey, having the weather-gage, kept his favourite distance, and one of his shot carried away the

Wolfe's maintopmast; which, in its fall, brought down the 
mizentopmast and cross-jack yard. It was this, and not, as 
Mr. Clark says, 
" a manoeuvre of the commodore's," that " threw 
the British in confusion." Even with this great advantage, 
Commodore Chauncey would not venture within carronade 
range. Mr. Clark, in describing this action, speaks of the British 
" 
frigate" Wolfe, upon which he had previously mounted " 36 
guns." Only two shot from the Americans did any material 
damage; the one already mentioned, and another that struck 
the Eoyal George's foretopmast, which fell, upon her anchoring. 
Mr. Clark says: "Prudence forbad any further pursuit on the 
part of the Americans;" and the editor of the " 
History of the 