

Lieutenant Jesse D. Elliot, and between 50 and 60 petty officers and seamen, to superintend the construction of some schooners at Black Eock. On the 9th Lieutenant Elliot, with the whole of his seamen and about 50 soldiers, boarded and carried the Detroit, and a merchant-brig, the Caledonia, of one or two swivels, in her company. The former the Americans were afterwards obliged to burn, to save her from falling into the hands of a detachment of soldiers from Fort Erie ; but the Caledonia and her valuable cargo, they carried safe to Black Eock. On the 25th of April, 1813, having received a reinforcement of seamen, Commodore Chauncey sailed from Sackett's Harbour with his fleet, now augmented to 10 vessels, on board of which was a body of troops under General Dearborn, to attack the port of York, and destroy the ship-of-war there building. The Americans landed and drove away the few British troops at the post; but, previously to their retreat, the latter saved the Americans the trouble of burning the ship on the stocks, by destroying her themselves. Commodore Chauncey took away a considerable quantity of naval stores and a small unserviceable 10-gun brig, the Gloucester, and returned to Sackett's Harbour in triumph.

104 LIGHT SQUADRON'S AND SINGLE SHIPS. [1813.

On the 6th of May the British troop-ship Woolwich, Captain Thomas Ball Sullivan, arrived at Quebec from Spithead, having on board Captain Sir James Lucas Yeo, four commanders of the navy, eight lieutenantc, 24 midshipmen, and about 450 picked seamen, sent out by government expressly for service on the Canada lakes. Such was the zeal of the officers and men to get to the scene of action, that they departed, the same evening, in schooners for Montreal. In four or five days they reached Kingston ; and, although the number of seamen was not half enough to man the vessels in the harbour, now augmented by the 24-gun ship Wolfe, launched on the 5th or 6th of May, Sir James Yeo, with the aid of the provincial sailors already on the lake, and of a few companies of soldiers, was ready, by the end of the month, to put to sea with two ships, one brig, and three schooners, besides a few small gun-boats. Sir George Prevost now allowed himself to be persuaded to embark 750 troops on board the squadron, for the purpose of making an attack upon Sackett's Harbour; but, to mar the successful issue of the plan, he resolved to head the troops him self. On the 27th of May, when an excellent opportunity was afforded by the absence of the American squadron at the op posite end of the lake, the British squadron, in high glee, sailed from Kingston, and with a fair wind stood across to the enemy's dep6t. At noon the squadron arrived off Sackett's Harbour, and lay-to, with everything in readiness for the troops to disembark. Sir George hesitated, looked at the place, mistook

trees for troops, and blockhouses for batteries, and ordered the expedition to put back. Just as the ships had turned their heads towards Kingston, and, with the wind now changed, were beginning to sail before it, about 50 Indians brought off a party of American soldiers from the shore near Sackett's Harbour. Encouraged by this, Sir George permitted the squadron to begin working its way back to the American port. On the morning of the 29th some of the lighter vessels got close to the shore, and the troops were landed. They drove the Americans like sheep, compelled them to set fire to the General Pike, a new frigate on the stocks, the Gloucester, captured at York, and a barrack containing, among other valuable articles, all the naval stores taken on the same occasion. At this moment some resistance unexpectedly made at a log-barrack caused the British commander-in-chief to sound a retreat. The indignant, the victorious, officers and men were obliged to obey the fatal bugle, and the British retired to