

penned up in a lake on the enemy's borders, inaccessible by water, and to which the land-carriage, for heavy articles, ordnance and naval stores especially, was most difficult and tedious.

Early in September, Captain Barclay received a draught of 
seamen from the Dover troop-ship ; and many of these would 
have scarcely rated as " ordinaries " 
on board the regular ships- 
of-war. He had now 50 British seamen to distribute among 
two ships, two schooners, a brig, and a sloop, armed altogether 
with 63 carriage-guns. It must have been the incredibility of 
this that induced some of the British journals, in their account 
of the proceedings on this lake, to state "150," instead of 50 

seamen. It is asserted, on the express authority of Captain Barclay himself, that no more than 50 seamen were at any time on board the Lake Erie flotilla ; the complements having been made up by Canadian peasants and soldiers, men that, without disparagement to either, were sorry substitutes for British sailors. > On the other hand, the ships of the Americans, as their newspapers informed us, were equipped in the most complete manner ; and through the same channel we learned, that large draughts of seamen had repeatedly marched to Lake Erie from the sea-board. The best of riflemen were to be obtained on the spot. What else was required to render the American ships in these waters quite as effective as the best appointed ships on the ocean? On the 9th of September, Captain Barclay was lying, with his little squadron, in the port of Amherstburgh, anxiously waiting

1813.] BRITISH AND AMERICANS ON CANADIAN LAKES. Ill the arrival of a promised supply of seamen. Almost surrounded by hostile shores, his people on half-allowance of food, not another day's flour in store, a large body of Indians, whose friendship would cease with the least abridgment in their accustomed supply, close in his rear; alike hopeless of succour and of retreat, what was Captain Barclay to do ? Impelled by dread of famine, and, not improbably, of Indian treachery too, he sailed out in the evening to risk a battle with an enemy's fleet, whose force he knew was nearly double his own. The following statement will place the fact of superiority beyond a doubt :

British.

On the 10th, soon after daylight, Commodore Barclay discovered the American squadron at anchor in Put-in bay, and immediately bore up, with the wind from the south-west, to bring the enemy to action. Commodore Perry thereupon got under way to meet the British ; who, at 10 A.M., by a sudden shift of wind to south-east, were thrown to leeward of their opponents. Commodore Barclay, who carried his broad pendant on board the Detroit, so stationed his vessels that those which were the nearest to an equality of force in the two squadrons might be opposed together. The schooner Chippeway, commanded by master's mate J. Campbell, was in the van.

Then came, in succession, the Detroit and Queen Charlotte, the latter commanded by Captain Eobert Finnis, brig Hunter, Lieutenant George Bignell, schooner Lady Prevost, Lieutenant