

38-gun frigate Bacchante, Captain William Iloste, and the 18-gun brig-sloop Saracen, Captain John Harper. The loss on the occasion was comparatively trifling, amounting to only one seaman killed, and Lieutenant of marines William Haig, slightly wounded. Captain Hoste, in his letter to Eear-admiral

Fremantle on the subject, speaks in high terms of the follow ing officers : Captain Harper, Lieutenants John Hancock and Charles Eobert Milbourne, acting Lieutenant William Lee Eees. Mr. Stephen Yale, the Bacchante's master, Lieutenant Haig, and midshipman Charles Bruce. On the 28th Eagusa surrendered to the Bacchante and Saracen, and to a body of British and Austrian troops who were besieging the fortress ; and on the 13th of February, the island of Paxo surrendered, without resistance, to the British 38-gun frigate Apollo, Cap

tain Bridges Watkinson Taylor, and a detachment of troops under Lieutenant-colonel Church. In the course of January and February, indeed, by the active and gallant exertions of the different ships composing the squadron of Eear-admiral Fremantle in the Adriatic, aided by de-tachments of Austrian troops, every place belonging to the

French in Dalmatia, Croatia, Istria, and the Frioul, with all the islands in that sea, surrendered to (he allies; as, in the month of March and April, did Spezzia and Genoa to a small squadron under the command of Sir Josias Eowley, aided by a detachment of British troops and a division of Sicilian gun-boats. At Genoa the British gained possession of the French 74-gun ship Brilliant ready for launching, another 74 in frame, and four brig-corvettes, of which the Eenard that had engaged the

Swallow was one. The Brilliant was a ship of 1883 tons, and, being built of good oak, became an acquisition to the British navy ; in which she still continues under the name of Genoa.

120 LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS. ["1814.

In order to co-operate with the British army under the Mar quis of Wellington, which, on the 20th of February, had reached the banks of the Adour, a small squadron had been stationed off the mouth of the river, under the command of Bear-admiral Charles Yinicombe Penrose ; who, to get nearer to the scene of operations, had embarked on board the 24-gun ship Porcupine, Captain John Coode. On the morning of the 23rd, which was as early as the ships and the boats collected for the service could arrive off the river, the latter were detached to endeavour to find a passage through the tremendous surf that beats over the bar. At this time the British troops were seen from the ships, crossing over to the north side of the river, but greatly in want of the boats intended for their assistance. Thus stimulated, Captain Powell O'Beilly, of the 10-gun brig sloop Lyra, in a Spanish-built boat selected as the most safe for the purpose, and having with him the principal pilot, was the first to make the attempt to cross the bar, but the boat overset.

Captain O'Eeilly, however, and we believe the whole boat's crew were so fortunate as to gain the shore. Lieutenant John De benham, in a six-oared cutter, succeeded in reaching the beach ;