

The fact of this brig having surrendered is admitted by Captain Perry himself, in the following words: "It was with unspeakable pain, that I saw, soon after I got on board the Niagara, the flag of the Lawrence come down, although I was perfectly sensible that she had been defended to the last, and that to have continued to make a show of resistance, would have been a wanton sacrifice of her brave crew. But theenemy was not able to take possession of her, and circumstances soon permitted her flag again to be hoisted." The chief fault to be found with Captain Perry's letter is, that it does not con tarn the slightest allusion to the bravery of Captain Barclay, or the inferiority of his means of resistance.

As the Americans are by this time pretty well ashamed of all the bombastic nonsense circulated by the press of the United States, day after day during many months of the war, on the

subject of Captain Perry's " Nelsonic " victory, we shall not , rake the trash up again ; but we fear that the professional, and therefore presumably correct, dictum of a contemporary, that " in number and weight of guns, the two squadrons were nearly equal,"

l will make the Americans imagine, that they really had

Preriton, vol. v., p. 1S2. VOL. VI. I

114 LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS. [1813. eoino ground for their extravagant boasting. However, on referring again to our contemporary's account, we feel satisfied that little harm will arise; for, should the evident partiality that is shown to Sir George Prevost miss being seen, the state-ment, that "both the Detroit and Queen Charlotte struck to the United States ship St. Lawrence, Captain Perry," will satisfy the American reader that Captain Brenton knew very little about the action he was attempting to describe. On the 16th of September, 1814, Captain Barclay, and his surviving officers and men, were tried by a court-martial on board the Gladiator at Portsmouth, for the loss of the late Erie flotilla, and the following was the sentence pronounced : " That the capture of his majesty's late squadron was caused by tho very defective means Captain Barclay possessed to equip them on Lake Erie ; the want of a sufficient number of able seamen, whom he had repeatedly and earnestly requested of Sir James Yco to be sent to him ; the very great superiority of the enemy to the British squadron ; and the unfortunately early fall of the superior officers in the action. That it appeared that the greatest exertions had been made by Captain Barclay, in equip ping and getting into order the vessels under his command ; that he was fully justified, under the existing circumstances, in bringing the enemy to action ; that the judgment and gallantry of Captain Barclay in taking his squadron into action, and during the contest, were highly conspicuous, and entitled him to the highest praise ; and that the whole of the other officers and men of his majesty's late squadron conducted themselves in the most gallant manner ; and did adjudge the said Captain Eobert Heriot Barclay, his surviving officers and men, to be most fully and honourably acquitted." Rear-admiral Edward James Foote, president. Notwithstanding this flattering testimonial, notAvithstanding the severity of his wounds, wounds by one of which his right arm had been entirely lost, many years before the Lake Erie defeat, and by two others, received in that action, his remaining arm had been rendered permanently motionless, or nearly so? and a part of his thigh cut away, Captain Barclay was not confirmed as a commander until the 19th of November, 1813 ; and was only promoted to post-rank in 1824. The first naval event of the late war upon Lake Champlain, a lake, all, except about one-twentieth part, within the boundaries of the United States, occurred on the 3rd of June, 1813. Two American armed sloops appeared in sight of the British gar-