

but, as it was scarcely possible that one boat in 50 could then have crossed, the other boats returned, to await the result of the next tide. The tide being at length at a proper height, and all the vessels well up for the attempt, several boats drew near the bar, but hauled off again, until at last Lieutenant George Cheyne, of the 10-gun brig-sloop Woodlark, in a Spanish boat, with five British seamen, crossed the surf and ran up the river. The next was a prize-boat, manned from a transport, closely followed by a gun-boat, commanded by Lieutenant John Cheshire, who was the first that hoisted the British colours in the Adour. The remainder of the boats and vessels followed in rapid succession, ."the zeal and science of the officers tri-umphing over all the difficulties of the navigation ;" but this arduous and most perilous undertaking was not accomplished without a heavy loss of life. Captain Elliot of the brig-sloop Martial, Mr. Henry Bloye, master's mate of the Lyra, and 11 seamen of the Porcupine, Martial, and Lyra, drowned : three transport boats lost, number of men unknown; also a Spanish chasse-maree, the whole of which perished in an instant. The British army afterwards crossed the Adour and invested

Bayonne ; and, early in March, a detachment under Marshal

Beresford moved forward towards Bordeaux. On the 21st, Beai'-admi ral Penrose, with the 74-gun ship Egmont, to which

18H.J LOUIS XVIII. LANDED AT CALAIS. 121 he had now shifted his flag, anchored in the Gironde. On the

2nd of April, Captain Coode of the Porcupine, who had ascended the Gironde above Pouillac, detached his boats under the orders of Lieutenant Eobert Graham Dunlop, in pursuit of a French flotilla which was observed proceeding down from Blaye to Tallemont. On the approach of the boats, the flotilla ran on shore; and about 200 troops from Blaye lined the beach to protect the vessels ; but Lieutenant Dunlop, landing with a detachment of seamen and marines, drove the French with great loss into the woods, and remained until the tide allowed the greater part of the vessels to be brought off. One gun-brig, six gun-boats, one armed schooner, three chasse-marees, and an imperial barge, were captured ; and one gun-brig, two gun-boats, and one chasse-maree burned. This service was performed with the loss of two seamen missing, and 14 seamen and marines wounded. On the evening of the 6th the 74-gun ship Centaur, Captain John Chambers White, anchored in the Gironde, in company with the Egmont ; and preparations Avere immediately made for attacking the French 74-gun ship Begulus, three brig-corvettes, and other vessels lying near her, as well as the batteries that protected them ; but at midnight the French set fire to the Eegulus and her companions, and the whole were destroyed. Before the 9th the batteries of Pointe Coubre, Pointe Negre, Eoyan, Sonlac, and Meche were successively entered and de-

stroyed by a detachment of seamen and marines under Captain 
George Harris of the 38-gun frigate Belle-Poule. 
The entry of the allies into Paris on the 31st of March, and 
the preliminary treaty entered into between England and France 
on the 24th of April, put a temporary stop to the miseries of 
war in Europe. Louis XVIII. landed at Calais from Dover the 
same day; and on the 28th of April Napoleon embarked at 
Frejus in Provence on board the British 38-gun frigate Un 
daunted, Captain Thomas Ussher, who, on the 4th of May, 
landed his passenger in safety at Portc-Ferraro in the Isle of 
Elba. 
In the succeeding August the Scheldt fleet was divided in the 
following manner: 12 sail of the line were allowed to be re- 
tained by France ; three were restored to Holland, as having 
formerly belonged to her ; and seven others were also given to 
her, to be held in trust, until the congress at Vienna should 
decide how they were to be disposed of. The ships, generally, 
vcre a good deal broken in the sheer, and having been con- 