

1813.] BRITISH AND AMERICANS ON CANADIAN LAKES. 115 rison at Isle-anx-noix. Three gun-boats immediately got under way to attack them ; and the crews of two batteaux and of two row-boats were landed to annoy the enemy in the rear, the channel being very narrow. After a contest of three hours and a half, the two sloops surrendered. They proved to be tho

Growler and Eagle, mounting 11 guns, and having a complement of 50 men, each ; both under the command of Lieutenant Sidney Smith, of the United States navy. The British had three men wounded; the Americans, one man killed, eight severely wounded, and, including the latter, 99 prisoners. No British naval officer was present. The feat was performed by detachments of the 100th regiment, and royal artillery, under the direction of Major Taylor, of the former. On the 1st of August, some officers and seamen having arrived from Quebec, Captain Thomas Everard, late of tho

18-gun brig-sloop Wasp, with the two prize-sloops, three gun boats, and several batteaux, containing aboxit 1000 troops under the command of Colonel Murray, entered the American port of Plattsburg. Here the colonel landed with his men ; and, after driving away the American militia at the post, destroyed all tho arsenals, block-houses, barracks, and stores of every description, together with the extensive barracks at Saranac. The two enterprising officers then proceeded off Burlington and Swanton,

in Vermont ; where they seized and destroyed several sloops laden with provisions, and did other considerable injury. At this time the United States troops at Burlington, distant only 24 miles from Plattsburg, under the command of Major-general Hampton, amounted to about 4000 men. Although a letter

written by an inhabitant of Burlington, and published in most of 
the American papers, declares that the British troops "did no 
injury whatever to private property," an American historian 
states thus: " 
They (the British) wantonly burned several pri- 
vate store-houses, and carried off immense quantities of tho 
stock of individuals." 
1 

As a proof that a little energy on the part of the Americans might have averted the Plattsburg misfortune, it appears by a statement, published in the United States within three weeks after the above affair happened, that the American naval force on Lake Champlain then consisted of the President, of 12 guns, the Commodore Preble and Montgomery of 11 guns each, the Frances, of 6 guns, two gun-boats, of one 18-pounder each, and six scows, of one 12-pounder each.

Sketches of the War, p. 156.

C 116

BEITISH AND FEENCH FLEETS,

THE remarks which we ventured to submit, when commencing with the important operations of the preceding year, have left us little to do in ushering the present year into notice, beyond pointing to the usual Annual Abstract, 1 and to the prize and casualty lists attached to it. 2 The number of commissioned officers and masters, belonging to the British navy at the beginning of the year 1814, was,