

Admirals 65 
Vice-admirals 68 
Rear-admirals 76 
superannuated 29 
Post-captains -798 
superannuated 37 
Commanders, or sloop-captains . . . 628 
superannuated 50 
Lieutenants 3285 
Masters 674 

And the number of seamen and marines, voted for the service of the year, was 140,000 for seven, and 90,000 for six lunar months of it. 3

Although we can afford to say very little on the subject, it may be necessary to state that, during the preceding year, in consequence of treaties among them, Eussia, Prussia, Austria,

Denmark, and Sweden, allied themselves with England, Spain, and Portugal, against France. A counter-revolution took place in Holland, and the prince of Orange landed there from England i See Appendix, Annual Abstract, No. 22. 2 See Appendix, Nos. 1 and 2. 3 See Appendix, No. 3.

1814.] SIR EDWARD PELLEW AND BARON COSMAO-KEEJULIEN. 117 and was proclaimed sovereign prince of the United Netherlands. Before the present year was many days old, Murat deserted his old benefactor, and made peace with England. All these events, many of which are highly interesting to the historical reader, will be found amply detailed in other works exclusively devoted to the subject : our business is with occurrences that take place upon a different element, and to them we return. On the 12th of February a French squadron, of three sail of the line and three frigates, under the command of Rear-admiral the Baron Cosmao-Kerjulien, sailed from Toulon to meet a newly-built French 74 expected from Genoa. Matters in France were getting so near to a crisis, that the Moniteur could find no room in its pages for an account which, otherwise, would have been allowed a conspicuous place : hence, we can give the names of only one line-of-battle ship and one frigate, the Romulus and

Adrienne. On the 13th, at a few minutes after daybreak, this squadron, then steering to the southward, was discovered by Sir Edward Pellew's fleet. At 7h. 55 m. A.M. the six French ships tacked together, and, with a strong east wind, steered for Por querolles on their return to Toulon. At 10 h. 30m. A.M. the ships entered the bay of Hyeres by the Grande-Passe, and, in about an hour afterwards, quitted it by the Petite-Passe, still

under all sail.

The British fleet, consisting of the following 15 sail of the line, besides the Unite frigate and Badger brig-sloop, was also under all sail, advancing to cut off the French squadron from the road of Toulon, towards which it was now steering :

Gun-ship.

Caledonia

Hibernia

112 
100 
V4 

San-Jcsef . 
Royal George . 
Boyne 
Ocean 
Prince of Wn'.e. 
Union . 
Barfleur . 

Duncan Indus . Berwick .

Swiftsure .

Armada .

Aboukir .

Vice-admiral (r.~) Sir Edward Pellew, Bart. 
Rear-admiral (w.) Israel Pellew. 

Captain Edward Lloyd Graham.

( Vice-admiral (w.) Sir William Sidney Smith. 
\ Captain Thomas Gordon Caulfield. 
( Rear-admiral (b.) Sir Richard King, Bart. 
\ Captain William Stewart. 
T. Fras. Ch. Mainwaring. 
George Burlton. 
Robert Plampin. 
John Erskine Douglas. 
Robert Rolles. 
John Maitland. 
Robert Lambert. 
William Hall Gage. 
Edward Brace. 
Edward Stirling Dickson. 
Charles Grant. 
Georo Parkei. 