

122 LIGHT SQUADRONS AtfD SINGLE SHIPS. [1814.

strucfced of green wood, were in bad condition. The nine sail of the line, including two three-deckers on the stocks, were to 'be broken up.

Light Squadrons and Sinyle Ships. 
On the 20th of October, 1813, the two French 40-gun frigates 
Iphigenie and Alcmene, Captains Jacques-Leon Emeric and 
Alexandre Ducrest de Villeneuve. sailed from Cherbourg on a 

six months' cruise. The two frigates proceeded first off the

Western Isles, and then to the coast of Africa ; where they captured two guineamen, laden with elephants' teeth, &c. After taking out the most valuable parts of the cargoes, Captain Emeric burnt the ships. From Africa the Iphigenie and Alcmene sailed to the Canary Isles, in the vicinity of which they took six other prizes. On the 16th of January, at 7 A.M., when cruising off these islands, the two French frigates fell in with the British 74-gun ship Venerable, Captain James Andrew Worth, bearing the flag of Eear-admiral Philip Charles Durham, on his way to take the chief command at the Leeward Islands, 22-gun ship Cyane, Captain Thomas Forrest, and prize-brig Jason, a French letter-of-marque captured 17 days before, and now, with two guns (having thrown 12 overboard in chase) and 22 men, in charge of Lieutenant Thomas Moffat, belonging to the Venerable.

The two frigates, when first descried, were in the north-east ;

and the Cyane, the wind then blowing from the east-south-east, was ordered to reconnoitre them. Having shortened sail and hauled to the wind on the starboard tack, the Cyane, at 9 A.M., ascertained that they were enemies, and made a signal to that effect to the Venerable, who immediately went in chase. The chase continued throughout the day, so much to the advantage of the 74, that, at Gh. 15m. P.M. the Venerable arrived within hail of the Alcmene, the leewardmost frigate. After having 'hailed twice in vain, the Venerable opened her guns as they would bear ; when the French frigate immediately put her helm up, and, under all sail, laid the British 74 on board, Captain Villeneuve, as was understood, expecting that'his commodore, in compliance with a previous agreement, would second him in the bold attempt. According to another statement, and which has more the air of probability, the object of the Alcmene in bearing up was to cross the 74's bows, and by disabling her bowsprit and foremast, to deprive her of the means of pursuit. Whether Captain Emeric had agreed to co-operate or net, the Iphigenie

1814.] CAPTURE OF THE IPHIOfmE AND ALCM^NE. 123 now hauled sharp up, and left the Alcmene to her fate. A very short struggle decided the business, and before Gh. 25m. the French colours were hauled down by the British boarders, headed by Captain Worth. The conflict, although short, had

been severe, especially to the Alcmene ; who, out of a crew of 319 men and boys, lost two petty officers and 30 seamen killed, and 50 officers and men wounded, including her gallant com mander. The Venerable's loss consisted of two seamen killed and four wounded. During the time that had thus elapsed, and the additional time required to shift the prisoners and repair the trifling injury done to the 74's rigging by the frigate's attempt to board, the