

Cyane and Jason had gone in chase of the Alcmene's fugitive consort. At 10 P.M. the little Jason, having outrun the Cyane in the chase, commenced firing at the Iphigenie with her two guns, both of which Lieutenant Moffat had now got on the brig's larboard side. Such was the slow sailing of the Iphigenie, or the unskilfulness of those that manoeuvred her, that at 45 minutes past midnight the Cyane got near enough to open a fire from her bow-guns, and received in return a fire from the frigate's stern-chasers, which cut her rigging and sails a good deal. At 4 h. 30 m. A.M., on the 17th, the Cyane gallantly fired three broadsides at the French frigate, but soon found the latter too heavy for her, and dropped astern. At 5h. 45 m. A.M. Captain Forrest despatched the brig in search of the admiral, and con tinued his pursuit of the Iphigenie ; who shortly afterwards hauled close to the wind on the larboard tack, and fired three broadsides at the Cyane, nearly all the shot of which, fortunately for the latter, either went over her masts or between them. At 9 A.M. the Iphigenie bore up and steered south-west, still followed by the Cyane. The chase thus continued, the latter losing sight occasionally and again recovering it, during the remainder of the 17th, and the whole of the 18th and 19th. In the evening of the latter day the Cyane dropped astern ; but the Venerable was now fast coming up, and, at daylight on the 20th, was within two miles of the French frigate. The Yenerable, from whose mast-head the Cyane was now not to be seen, presently opened a fire from her bow-guns, and received in return a fire from the stern and quarter guns of the Iphigenie. Having thrown overboard her boats and cut away her anchors without effect, the French frigate, at 8 A.M., discharged her starboard broadside and struck her colours

124 LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS. [1814. Neither the Venerable nor the Iphigcnie appears to have suffered any loss from the other's fire : and the Cyane, whose gallantry and perseverance in the chase were so creditable to Captain Forrest, seems also to have escaped without loss. The same good fortune attended the Jason ; who with her two guns (6-pounders probably), gave so good an earnest of what Lieutenant Moffat would have done, had he commanded a vessel that mounted 20. The Iphigenie and Alcmene, being nearly new frigates, were both added to the British navy ; the first under the name of Gloire, the latter under that of Dunira, afterwards changed to Immortalite. In the latter end of October, 1813, the two French 40-gun frigates Etoile and Sultane, Captains Pierre-Henri Phillibert and Georges Du-Petit-Thouars, sailed from Nantes on a cruise. On the 18th of January, at 4A.M., latitude about 24 north, longitude (from Greenwich) 53 west, these two French frigates discovered in the north-west the British 24-pounder 40-gun frigate Severn, Captain Joseph Nourse, escorting a convoy from England to the island of Bermuda, and steering west by north, with the wind a light air from the south-east. At 7 h. 30 m. A.M. the Severn proceeded in chase; and at 8 h. 40m., finding the strangers did not answer the private signal, the British frigate bore up north by east, and made all possible sail from them, signalling her convoy to take care of themselves.