

Edward Buchan ; and the sloop Little Belt, by whom commanded we are not aware, brought up the rear. At about 11 h. 45 m. A.M. the action began ; and the Detroit became closely engaged with the Lawrence, Captain Perry's brig, supported by the schooners Ariel and Scorpion. Although the matches and tubes of the Detroit were so defective that pistols were obliged to be fired at the guns to set them off, the seamen, Canadians, and soldiers plied their guns so well that, in the course of two hours, they knocked the Lawrence almost to pieces, and, after driving Commodore Perry out of her, com pelled her to surrender ; but, having sailed with only one boat, and that being cut to pieces, the Detroit could not take posses sion of the American brig, and the latter, as soon as she had dropped out of gun-shot, rehoisted her colours. In the mean time the Queen Charlotte, with her 24-pounder carronades, had been opposed by the Niagara, supported, as the Lawrence had been, by two schooners with heavy long guns. In a few minutes Captain Finnis was killed ; and his successor in the command, Lieutenant John Stokes, was struck senseless by a splinter. The next officer, provincial Lieutenant Irvine, was without any experience, and therefore comparatively use less. The Queen Charlotte soon afterwards struck her colours. From having kept out of the range of the Charlotte's carronades, the Niagara was a fresh vessel, and to her Captain Perry proceeded. As soon as he got on board, the American commodore, accompanied by some of his schooners, bore down, and took a raking position athwart the bows of the already disabled Detroit. In a short time Lieutenant John Garland, first of the

Detroit, was mortally, and Captain Barclay himself most severely,

1813.] BRITISH AND AMERICANS OX CANADIAN LAKES. 113 wounded. The command then devolved upon Lieutenant George Inglis ; who fought his ship in the most determined manner, until, out of the 10 experienced British seamen on board, eight were killed or wounded, and every hope of success or of escape had fled : he then ordered the colours of the Detroit to be struck The Hunter and Lady Prevost surrendered about the same time ; as did the Chippeway and Little Belt, as soon as some of the American vessels overtook them on their retreat. The loss on the British side amounted to three officers and

38 men killed, and nine officers and 85 men Avounded. The officers killed were, Lieutenant S. J. Garden, of the Newfound land regiment, and John Garland, the first-lieutenant, on board the Detroit ; and the captain of the Queen Charlotte. The officers wounded were Captain Barclay most dangerously in his left or remaining arm, Mr. John M. Hoffmeister, purser of the

Detroit, Lieutenant John Stokes, and midshipman James Foster, of the Queen Charlotte, Lieutenants Edward Buchan and Francis Eoulette, and master's mate Henry Gateshill, of the Lady Prevost, and master's mate J. Campbell, commanding the

Chippeway. The loss on the American side, as taken from Captain Perry's letter, amounted to 27 killed and 96 wounded, including 22 killed and 61 wounded on board the Lawrence.