

At 30 minutes past noon the leading ship of the British fleet, the Boyne, opened a fire upon the second French ship from the rear (believed to have been the Adrienne frigate), which was immediately returned by the squadron, then running before the wind, at the rate of 10 knots, for Cape Carquaranne. The Boyne carried a press of sail, in the hope of cutting oif or driving on shore the sternmost French ship, the Romulus : but the latter kept so close to the shore, as to render the attempt im practicable, without the Boyne herself going on shore. The Boyne, therefore, had no alternative but to lay close alongside the French 74 ; who, as well as her five companions, was now steering straight for Cape Brun. A steady and well-directed fire, within half pistol-shot distance, was maintained by the

Boyne ; but to which the Romulus scarcely returned a shot, until she got abreast of Pointe Sainte-Marguerite. Being by this time nearly unrigged by the Boyne's fire, the Romulus now hauled dead-in, to run on shore between the batteries of Brun and Sainte-Marguerite. At this instant, Sir Edward Pellew, in the Caledonia, who was close astern of the Boyne, waved to Captain Burlton to haul out. No sooner had the Boyne made

a movement in obedience to this order, than the Romulus, putting her helm a-starboard, shot round Cape Brun, and, notwithstanding a broadside from the Caledonia, and her evidently disabled state from the Boyne's previous fire, succeeded in entering the road of Toulon; where the remaining ships of the

French squadron were just about to anchor.

The French batteries, particularly those of Cape Brun and

Cape Sepet, opened a very heavy and destructive fire upon the Boyne as she stood out to the southward. The Boyne at length got clear; and the Caledonia, running up alongside of her, greeted the Victory's sister-ship, who had just acted so nobly in emulation of her, with three hearty cheers ; a salute which the men of the Boyne were not slow in returning. The fire from the French batteries and ships, particularly the former, had shot away the Boyne's mizentopsail yard, and main and spring stays, greatly damaged her running-rigging and sails, badly Avounded her foremast, fore-yard, and bowsprit, disabled two of her guns, and struck her hull in several places under water. Her loss on the same occasion amounted to one midshipman (George Terry) and one seaman killed, one midshipman (Samuel Saunders), 32 seamen, six marines, and one boy wounded; total, two killed and 40 wounded. The Caledonia received no damage ; and her loss was confined to one seaman killed by an explosion.

1814.] CONCLtJDlNG OPERATIONS IN THE ADRIATIC. 119

The Eomulus is acknowledged to have sustained a loss, in killed and badly wounded, of 70, and the Adrienne of 11. The Eomulus, undoubtedly, was manoeuvred in a very skilful manner ;

and her captain, whose name we regret not being able to give, deserved credit, as well for that, as for his bravery in not striking his colours to so powerful an opponent as the Boyne. According to the French papers, the 74 from Genoa succeeded in entering Toulon on the following day, the 14th ; making 23 sail of the line, including six three-deckers, afloat in the road and harbour, besides two or three two-deckers on the stocks. On the 5th of January, after a 10 days' cannonade, the fortress of Cattaro in the Adriatic, surrendered to the British