

of their skill ; and, contrasted with the evidently unprepared state of the Clorinde, 18 hours after the battle, showed, in a very clear manner, the superiority of a British over a French crew. It was the capability to go ahead and manoeuvre, thus given, that would again, in a short time, have brought the Eurotas alongside of the Clorinde ; and it was a perfect readiness to renew the action, with, owing to the preceding day's two hours' practice at the guns, an actual increase of power, that would have made the Clorinde the prize of the Eurotas, even had the Dryad not interposed her unwelcome presence. The arrival of the Dryad and Achates, although it certainly robbed the Eurotas of her trophy, went a very little way towards dignifying the surrender of the Clorinde ; who, notwithstanding

133 LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS. [1814. her captain's previous threat, did not fire a shot in return for the one discharged at her by the Dryad. We formerly expressed a belief, that the Achates alone would have produced the same result ; but, much as was to be expected from the tried gallantry of the brig's commander, we now, looking at the number of unwounded prisoners received out of the Clorinde, and the impunity with which her principal officers escaped, think other wise. Nor do we feel disposed to award so much credit to

M. Denis-Lagarde as we formerly did ; not only because of the tarneness of his surrender, but because, with so many officers and men in an effective state, he ought, in the 18 hours that had elapsed, to have cleared away his wreck, and partially refitted his ship. The dismasted state of the Eurotas, and her serious loss in men, prove that the French crew knew in what way to handle their guns; and considering how long the Clorinde had been in commission, and how many months of the time at sea,

we must suppose that her men were competent to perform the other duties of men-of-war's men, had their officers issued the proper directions. A\ r ith good management, therefore, the Clorinde might have effected her escape before the Dryad and Achates fell in with her ; and, even had 'the prevailing westerly wind begun to blow strong, soon after the close of the action, and lasted through the night, the probability is, that the French frigate, unrefitted as she was, would still have gained a port of France. Taking the prize in tow, the Dryad proceeded with her to

Portsmouth ; and the Clorinde was afterwards added to the British navy by the name of Aurora, a Clorinde (also a French

frigate) being already in the service. For his gallantry in this 
action, and his unremitting exertions in getting the ship cleared, 
masted, and under sail in so short a space of time, Lieutenant 
Robert Smith, first of the Eurotas, was deservedly promoted to 
the rank of commander. A litigation afterwards took place on 
the subject of the head-money for the crew of the Clorinde ; and 
it was at length decreed to the Dryad, as having been the actual 
captor. 
With the exception of the particulars entered into respecting 
the guns of the Eurotas, and respecting the state of the prisoners 
received out of the Clorinde, the above account of the action 
between these frigates is essentially, and almost verbally, the 
game as that given in the preceding edition of this work. The 
accuracy of that account having been publicly impugned, we 
i See vol. v., pp. 48, 282. 