

longitude (from Greenwich) 9 J 30' west, on her way to Brest, after a tolerably successful cruise. It was at 2 P.M., when standing close hauled on the starboard tack, with the wind at south-west by south, that the Clorinde was descried by the British 24-pounder 38-gun frigate Eurotas, Captain John Phillimore, then on the former's weather-beam steering by the wind on the larboard tack. The Eurotas quickly bore up in chase ; and at 2h. 30 m. P.M. the Clorinde, whose national character and force was by this time ascertained, also bore up, under a press of sail.

While the chase is going on, we will proceed to point out some peculiarities in the armament of one of these ships, a knowledge of which will be necessary to render fully intelligible the details we have to give of the action fought between them. At the commencement of the year 1813, under the head of " British and American Navies," we stated that, among the means taken to meet the large American frigates on equal terms, some of the British 38-gun class were mounted with medium 24-pounclcrs, and allowed an increased complement of men. The first two frigates so fitted were the Cydnus and Eurotas, both built of red pine and recently launched. The Cydnus was fitted with the 24-pounder of General Blomefield, measuring 7 ft. G in., and weighing about 40 cwt. ; and the Eurotas, after having, by mistake we believe, received on board a set of long or 49 cwt. 24s, was fitted with the 24-pounder of Colonel Congreve, measuring only 7 ft. G in., and intended to weigh 41 cwt. 1 qr. 12 Ibs., but actually weighing only 40 cwt. 2 qrs. 21 Ibs. With 28 of these guns on the main deck, 16 carronades, 32-pounders, two long nines, and the usual 18-pounder launch earronade, on the quarter-deck an4 forecastle, as her regular

EtROTAS AND CtORINDE. 133 establishment, and with, we are inclined to think, one additional 24-pounder upon General Blomefield's principle, the Eurotas, commanded by Captain John Phillimore (promoted from the

Diadem troop-ship, which he had commanded since June, 1810), sailed from the Nore in the middle of the month of August, bound off Brest. On the 30th the Eurotas joined" the blockading squadron, which was under the command of Commodore Pulteney Malcolm, in the 100-gun ship Queen Charlotte, Captain Eobert Jackson. On some day in September (we believe the 14th)

Captain Phillimore invited the commodore and all the captains of the squadron on board the Eurotas to witness a trial of her 24-pounders. The guns were tried eight times, with the full allowance of powder, and double-shotted ; and they stood remarkably well. Commodore Malcolm said he should like to have Colonel

Congreve's 24-pounders on the Queen Charlotte's second and third decks ; and every one of the captains went away pleased with the gun. The following captains, with the exception of one or two, but which we cannot say, Avere present at this successful trial of the guns of the Eurotas : Captains AVilloughby Thomas Lake, Eobert Lambert, Thomas Elphinstone, Sir Michael Seymour, Henry Yansittart, George M'Kinley, George Tobin, George Harris, and Eobert Jackson. Captain Phillimore sub-sequently declared that, if well manned, he could light both sides of the Eurotas with ease ; was delighted with the guns in a gale of wind ; and found that, when the Eurotas was carrying a press of sail off Ushant, the guns did not work in the least, nor the ship seem to feel the smallest inconvenience from them. 1 On the 25th of November the Eurotas sent six of her 24-poundcrs on board the Cydnus, and received in exchange the same number of the latter's guns ; but on the 5th of the ensuing February, when the two ships again met, the Eurotas received back her six 24s, and returned to the -Cydnus those belonging to her. We must now show what ensued between the Eurotas and the