

bering, according to the depositions of Captain Denis-Lagarde and his two principal officers, 344 men and boys, the Clorinde had 30 officers and men killed and 40 wounded. From the great proportion of killed, it is probable that the severely wounded only are here reckoned. They may have amounted to 20 more ; making the killed 30, and the wounded 60. In the letter which Captain Galwey, with a proper feeling, permitted Captain Phillimore to write, the latter states, that the Clorinde had "a complement of 360 picked men," and that " M. Gerrard," one of the French officers, calculated their loss at 120 men. With respect to the complement, judging by the number of men usually found on board frigates of the Clorinde's class, and allowing, if necessary, that some may have been absent in prizes, we consider the sworn amount, 344, and that for which the head-money was afterwards paid, as likely to be the most correct. In regard to the alleged declaration of " M. Gerrard," unless the slightly wounded were in a very unusual proportion, the statement extracted from the Dryad's log is more to be depended upon ; especially, as it specifies both killed and

wounded, and accords exactly, as we shall proceed to show, with the number and distribution of the prisoners. Owing to there being three British men-of-war in company, it is natural to suppose that all the prisoners would be taken out of the

French ship, with the exception of the badly wounded. Accord ingly, out of the 314 assumed survivors of the French crew, the Dryad received on board 125, the Eurotas 92, and the Achates

57 ; leaving on board the Clorinde, by a singular coincidence, 
the exact number stated by the French officers as the amount 
of their wounded. Every one of those officers, not left in the 
Clorinde, appears to have been on board the Dryad ; among 
whom we find Captain Denis-Lagarde, M. Joseph Lemaitre, his 
first, and M. Yincent Moulac, his second lieutenant ; but we do 
not see in the list the name of " 
Gerrard," nor any name re- 
sembling it. This person, therefore, was probably one of the 
wounded left on board the Clorinde. 

Although we are by no means satisfied that the Eurotas did not mount one of General Blomefield's 24-pounders in addition

1814.| EtJROTAS AXD CLORINDE. 137 to her established armament already particularized, we shall not include that gun, nor, of course, the 18-pounder launch carronade, in the following Comparative Force of the Combatants.

Broadside-guns . |

Crew No. Size , tons

No. 
Ibs. 

Eurotag. 23 601 329 1084

Clorinde. 
22 
463 
344 
1083 

Had the Eurotas been armed the same as the generality of her class, this would have been a remarkably fair match ; but the

British ship's 24-pounders destroyed the equilibrium. Yet, with a distance which would even have suited carronades, and with the exclusive advantage of two raking fires, those 24pounders did not do so much execution, in proportion to the time they were acting, as had been done on many other occa sions by an equal number of 18s. The ship, it is true, had not been quite 10 months in commission, and had not had her guns on board many days over six months ; but even the shorter of those two periods was long enough for the men to have been taught as much of practical gunnery as should have enabled them, in a close action of nearly two hours with an inferior antagonist, to have done greater execution, in reference to what they themselves suffered, than appears to have been inflicted by the Eurotas upon the Clorinde. But, deficient as the crew of the Eurotas may have been at their guns, they were by no means so at the various other duties of their calling. The quickness with which the seamen refitted their ship was as great a proof of their spirit as it was