

Comparative Force of the Combatants.

1814.] NIGER AND TAGUS WITH C&iis. 131 away a little, discharged her starboard broadside and surren dered. The leaks of the Etoile, from the well-directed shot of the Hebrus, were so serious, that the ship could not be kept free on a wind, so as to reach Portsmouth : Lieutenant Kobert Milborne Jackson, the prize-master, was therefore obliged to bear away for Plymouth ; where, on the 29th, the prize anchored in safety. The Sultane was carried to Portsmouth ; and both the latter and her late consort, being new frigates, were added to the

British navy, the Sultane in her own name, and the Etoile under the name of Topaze. The first-lieutenant of the Hebrus, Mr. Jackson, who, besides his good conduct in the action, had, as we have seen, some difficulty in getting his charge into port, was promoted to the rank of commander.

On the 5th of January, at 10 A.M., the island of St. Antonio, one of the Cape de Verds, bearing south-east by south distant eight or nine leagues, the British 38-gun frigate Niger, Captain Peter Eainier, and 18-pounder 36-gun frigate Tagus, Captain Philip Pipon, with a convoy in company, steering to the westward, discovered nearly ahead the French 40-gun frigate Ceres, Captain Hyacinth-Yves-Potentien le baron de Bougainville; which, in company with the Clorinde, of the same force, Captain Rene-Jean-Marie Denis-Lagarde, the senior officer, had sailed from Brest in the early part of December. Both British frigates proceeded in chase with a light breeze from the east-south-east, the Niger leading. Towards evening the Ceres gained in the pursuit ; but, on the Niger's throwing overboard 800 shot, the latter got near enough, at 11 P.M., to fire three shot from her bow-chasers.

On the 6th, at Ih. 30m. A.M., the Niger fired two more shot, which the Ceres returned from her stern-guns. As the day opened, the wind drew to the north-east ; which so favoured the Tagus that, at7h. 30m. A.M., she passed the Niger, and was gaining fast upon the French frigate. At 8h. 15m., desirous to try a different point of sailing, the Ceres shortened sail and hauled to the wind on the starboard tack. As a proof that the French frigate gained little by this, in half an hour the Tagus got within gun-shot, and, hoisting her colours, opened a fire, which the Ceres, hoisting hers, presently returned. A running fight now commenced between the Tagus and Ceres, and continued until 9h. 30m. A.M. ; when, having had her maintopmast shot away, the French frigate fired a broadside and

surrendered. At this time, owing to some damage done to the

rigging of the Tagus by her opponent's stern-chasers, the Niger had headed her consort, and was in the act of opening a heavy fire upon the Ceres. Besides the loss of her maintopniast, the rigging and sails of the Ceres were a good deal cut, and some of her lower masts injured. The damages of the Tagus were confined to her rigging and sails; and neither the French nor the English sustained a greater loss than one man wounded. Being a fine new frigate of 1074 tons, the Ceres was added to the British navy, under the name of Seine, a Ceres being already in the service. It is uncertain on what day, previous to the capture of the Ceres, her consort, the Clorinde, parted company ; but we find the latter on the 25th of February, in latitude 47 40' north,