

I Naval Chronicle, vol. xxxi., p. 184.

1814.] EUROTAS AND CLORINDE. 135

By great exertions throughout the night, the Eurotas, at 5 A.M.

on the 26th, got up a spare maintopmast for a jury mainmast 
and at 6 h. 15 m., a foretopmast for a jury foremast, and a rough 
spar for a inizenmast ; the Clorinde still preserving the same 
line of bearing as on the preceding evening, but having increased 
her distance to nearly six miles. At 11 h. 30 m. A.M. Lieute- 
nant Smith spoke the English merchant-schooner Dungarvon, 
from Lisbon bound to Port Glasgow, and requested her master 
to keep between the Eurotas and Clorinde, and, in the event of 
the Eurotas not overtaking the Clorinde before night, to show 
a light and fire guns. At noon the Eurotas and Clorinde were 
about eight miles apart ; but in so different a state with respect 
to ability to renew the action, that while the latter had only 
partially cleared away the wreck of her main and mizen masts, 
the former had jury-courses, topsails, staysails, and spanker 
set, going with a northerly wind, six and a half knots through 
the water, and evidently gaining in the chase. 
But at this moment, Captain Phillimore justly observes, "to 
the great mortification of every one on board 
" 
the Eurotas, two 
sail were descried on the lee bow. The nearest of these was the 
British 18-pounder 36-gun frigate Dryad, Captain Edward 
Galwey ; the other the 16-gun brig-sloop Achates, Captain 
Isaac Hawkins Morrison. At 1 h. 15 m. P.M. the Clorinde 
hoisted French colours aft and English forward, and despatched 
a boat to the Dryad, who then shortened sail and hove to to 
receive it. The purport of Captain Denis-Lagarde's communi 
cation, as it has appeared in print, was to require terms before 
he would surrender. The doubt expressed by the French officers 
as to the ship in sight to windward being that which had reduced 
the Clorinde to such a state, was far from unreasonable ; consi- 
dering that, not only had a night intervened, but the ship now 
seen was masted, rigged and under sail, where the ship engaged 
the evening before had been left as bare as a hulk. The French 
lieutenant was quickly sent back to the Clorinde. to get ready 
her " 
resources," and the Dryad filled and stood towards her, 
to give her an opportunity of trying the eifect of them. At 1 h. 
35 m. P.M., having placed herself on the Clorinde's quarter, the 
Dryad fired one shot into her ; when the French frigate hauled 
down her colours, and was taken immediate possession of. At 
this time the Eurotas was between four and five miles off to 
windward, and the Achates about the same distance from the 
Clorinde to leeward. 

Out of a complement on board of 329 men and boys, the

136 LIGHT SQUADROXS AND SINGLE SHIPS. [1814. Eurotas had two midshipmen (Jeremiah Spurking and Charles Greenway), one first-class volunteer (John T. Vaughan), 13 seamen, four marines, and one boy killed, her commander (very severely), one lieutenant of marines (Henry Foord), one midshipman (John R. Brigstock), 30 seamen, and six marines wounded ; total, 21 killed and 39 wounded. Out of a crew on board num