

French frigate Clorinde ; whose force, it may be necessary to state, was 28 long 18-pounders, 14 carronades, 24-pounders, and two long 8-pounders, total 44 guns. At 4 P.M. the wind shifted to the north-west and fell considerably ; but the Eurotas, nevertheless, gained in the chase. At about the same time the Clorinde, then not quite four miles

distant in the east-north-east, suddenly shortened sail, and endeavoured to cross the hawse of her pursuer. This only

1 For a copy of & Icttei from Captain Phillimore, stating most of these particulars, see Appendix, No. 4.

134 LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS. [1814. hastened the junction ; and at 4 h. 45 m. the Eurotas fired a shot and hoisted her colours, as did also the Clorinde. At 5 P.M., having bore up, the Eurotas passed under the stern of the Clorinde and discharged her starboard broadside. Then, luffing up under the Clorinde's quarter, the British frigate received so close and well-directed a fire, that in the course oi 20 minutes, and just as she had reached the larboard bow of her antagonist, her mizenmast fell by the board over the starboard quarter ; and, nearly at the same time, came down the fore-topmast of the Clorinde.

The French frigate now, shooting ahead, endeavoured to cross

the bows of the Eurotas, with the intention of raking her. To 
evade this, and at the same time lay her antagonist on board, 
the Eurotas put her helm hard a-port and luffed up ; but, being 
obstructed in her manoeuvre by the wreck of the mizenmast, she 
could only pass close under the stern of the Clorinde, and pour 
in her larboard broadside. The two frigates again got side by 
side, and cannonaded each other with redoubled fury. At 6h. 
20m. P.M. the Eurotas, then close on her opponent's starboard 
beam, had her mainmast shot away ; and which, fortunately for 
her, fell over the starboard or unengaged quarter. Almost at 
the same instant the mizenmast of the Clorinde came down. At 
6h. 50m., the two ships being nearly in the same relative 
position, the foremast of the Eurotas fell over the starboard bow .; 
and in a minute or two afterwards the mainmast of the Clorinde 
shared the same iate. The Eurotas was now quite, and the 
Clorinde almost, unmanageable. At 7 h. 10 m. P.M., being then 
on the larboard bow of the Eurotas, the Clorinde set the remains 
of her foresail and her fore staysail and stood to the south-east, 
out of gun-shot. 
Captain Phillimorc, who since the early part of the action 
had been dangerously wounded in the shoulder by a grape-shot 
(the loss of blood from which, according to a published state- 
ment, 
1 had caused him to faint three times on deck), now con- 
sented to go below ; and the command of the Eurotas devolved 
upon Lieutenant Eobert Smith. The boats' masts were imme 
diately stepped on the booms, and the sails set, to endeavour, with 
a light westerly breeze, to keep after the enemy, still in the south 
east. The wreck of the masts were also cleared away, and 
preparations made for getting up jury-masts ; and in the mean 
while the ship laboured much, owing to her dismasted siate and 
a heavy swell from the westward 