

7 h. 55 m. P.M., the Marlborough opened a fire from one of her two brass 9-pounders out of the stern-ports, Avhich was so well directed, that it cut some of the rigging about the bowsprit and foremast of the Primrose, and passed through her main course. The fire was repeated from both stern guns, and continued to bo destructive to the rigging and head-sails of the Primrose; who, from the breeze freshening, was now fast approaching. At 8 h. 15 m. P.M., ranging up on the Marlborough's larboard quarter, at the distance of about 100 yards, the Primrose short-ened sail ; and Captain Phillott hailed once, and his second lieutenant, who had a loud voice, twice. The only answer returned, was the discharge of three guns, and immediately afterwards of the packet's whole broadside ; whereby the master, Mr. Leech, and two men were mortally, and three slightly wounded on board the Primrose. The latter now began firing as her guns could be brought to bear ; but, owing to the ma noeuvres of the Marlborough, the Primrose found a difficulty in firing with any effect. The Primrose then steered for the packet's quarter to run her on board, but was prevented from doing so by a boom or spare-yard that had been rigged out from her stern. The sloop's head-braces being at the same time shot away, her head-sails came aback, and she was unable for the present to close. Quickly refitting herself, the Primrose again

144 LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS. [1814. made sail, and, closing, re-opened her fire. That of the Marlborough soon slackened ; and, on Captain Phillott again hailing, the painful truth came out, that his antagonist was a British packet. The damages received by the Marlborough, as admitted by Captain Bull and his officers, were of a very serious nature. Two 32-pound shot had passed through just below the water's edge ; and the packet, in consequence, had three and a half feet water in the hold, and by its rapid increase, was reduced to nearly a sinking state. Her masts also were much injured, and her standing and running-rigging nearly all shot away. Her loss, on this unfortunate occasion, amounted to Adjutant Andrews of the 60th regiment, and another passenger, killed, and the master and nine or ten men wounded. Except a shot through her mainmast, the principal damage sustained by the Primrose has already been related : her loss amounted to one seaman killed, her master (Andrew Leech, dangerously), one master's mate (Peter Belcher severely), and 12 seamen and marines wounded. At the request of Captain Bull, the carpenter of the Primrose and one of his mates were sent on board the Marlbo rough, to assist in stopping her leaks.

The facts above detailed differ materially from those we inserted in the first edition of this work ; but we shall be exonerated from blame when we mention, that our first statement was grounded upon an apparently authentic account, already before the English public ; and which account, owing probably to the absence of the Primrose on a foreign station, was not contradicted. The minutes of a court of inquiry, held upon Captain Phillott, on the subject of this unfortimate rencounter, have since been put into our hands; and it is thus that we have been enabled to give the only correct account of the transaction