

1814.J ! RESIDENT AND TWO FRENCH FRIGATES. 147 to have attacked the Majestic. Admitting that the nature of her metal would have justified a retreat, Monsieur whoever he was should at least have waited till he had ascertained whether that metal was light or heavy. The conduct of the Majestic, in unhesitatingly bearing down to the attack, even when the want of colours and the haze of the weather rendered it doubtful whether two of the four strangers were not American frigates, places the gallantry of Captain Hayes in a conspicuous light. Even had they been the Consti tution and Essex, as Captain Hayes, before the Terpsichore showed her colours (one frigate, from her style of painting, appearing much larger than the other), conjectured they were, so excellent a crew had the Majestic, and so well skilled

were they in fighting the powerful guns which this fine ship mounted, that the result would scarcely have been doubtful : at all events, the captain and his officers would have considered such a meeting as the most fortunate epoch of their professional lives.

On the 14th of February, off Lorient, the prize to these French frigates the San-Juan, was recaptured by the British 38-gun frigate Menelaus, Captain Sir Peter Parker, the Eippon 74, Captain Sir Christopher Cole, in sight. On the same, or the preceding day, the Atalante succeeded in entering the port, towards which the Lima ship was steering when fallen in with, Lorient. On the 5th of December, 1813, the American frigate Pre sident, Commodore Eodgers, sailed from Providence, Rhode

Island, upon her third cruise ; but not unseen, for the British frigate Orpheus, Captain Hugh Pigot, obtained a distant view of her, and hastened with the information to her consort, the 74-gun ship Albion, Captain John Ferris Devonshire. On the 25th, in latitude 19 north, longitude 35 west, the President fell in with, chased, and on making them out to be frigates, and concluding them to be British, ran from, the two French 40-gun frigates Nymphe and Meduse, from Brest upon a cruise since the latter end of November. Had these ships really been British, the President would have had a narrow escape, the headmost frigate having thrown several shot over her. By altering her course in the night, the American frigate at last got clear, and, steering to the south-west, cruised to windward of Barbadoes until the 16th of January. The commodore then ran off Cayenne ; thence off Surinam, Berbice, and Demerara, and between the islands of Tobago and Grenada; thence

148 LIGHT SQUADRON'S AND SINGLE SHIPS. [1814, 
across the Caribbean sea, along the south-east side of Porto 
Rico, through the Mona Passage, and down the north side of 
Jamaica. 
Striking soundings off St. Augustine, the President, on the 
llth of February, passed Charlestown ; and, on arriving oft' 
the Delaware, fell in with, in a fog, 
" a large vessel, apparently 
a man-of-war." This ship "disappearing," the President stood 
onto the northward. "From the Delaware," says the com 
modore, in his letter to the secretary of the American navy, 
" I saw nothing, until I made Sandy Hook, when I again fell 
in with another of the enemy's squadrons ; and, by some un- 
accountable cause, was permitted to enter the bay, although in 
the presence of a decidedly superior force, after having been 
obliged to remain outside seven hours and a half, waiting for 
the tide." 
The " 
decidedly superior force 
" 
is thus explained in a letter 
from one of the President's officers: "After passing the light, 
saw several sail, one large sail to windward; backed our main 