

studding-sails; and the Atalante, ludicrously enough, still kept 
the signal flying, 
" Make more sail." The armed ship and mer 
vot,. vi. t, 

146 LIGHT SQtIADROKS AND SINGLE SHU'S. [1814.

chant-brig, meanwhile, had hauled up to the eastward, also under a press of canvas. Towards noon the wind freshened, and the Majestic gained upon the Terpsichore. At 2 h. 15 m. P.M. the latter opened a fire from her stern chase-guns. At 3 P.M., being in a good position, going at the rate of 10 knots an hour, the Majestic commenced firing her bow-guns with considerable effect, almost

every shot striking. After a running fight, which lasted until

4 h. 49 m. P.M., the Terpsichore fired a few of her aftermost guns at the Majestic, who was then within musket-shot distance, and struck her colours, but did not shorten sail. The Majestic, in consequence, fired another shot or two ; when, at 4 h. 56 m., the French frigate let all fly and brought to. The wind increasing and the prize being in a state of confusion, Captain Hayes felt himself obliged to stay by her, and to suffer the other frigate, with the ship and brig, to escape. The sea, indeed, got up so very fast, that out of 317 prisoners, 100 only could be removed ; and, in effecting that, the jolly-boat was stove and two of the prisoners drowned. The previous loss on board the Terpsichore, out of a crew of 320 men and boys,

amounted to three men killed and six wounded. The Majestic 
did not lose a man. 
We much regret our inability to give the name of the senior 
officer of these two French frigates, the captain of the Atalante. 
We should like to hold up to contempt the officer who could 
tamely suffer his consort to be cannonaded by an enemy's ship 
for one hour and three-quarters, when in a very few minutes 
he might have placed himself within a few yards of the attack- 
ing force. Not a single shot did he bestow, even in defence of 
a prize that, besides her valuable cargo, had on board 600,000 
dollars in specie. 

1 Captain Francois-Desire Breton deserved a braver commodore ; for no one surely will say, the two French

40-gun frigates (without reckoning the 20-gun ship) ought not

i The captain of the Atalante's name " Monsieur, La frc'gate I'Atalante, que 
\vasMallet; he was chased into Concar- je commando ne peut sortir d'un Port 
neau bay, on the 25th of March, 1814, by Francais que par un ordre de mes chefs ; 
the Menelaus, Captain Sir Peter Parker. je le re"clamerai, mais je ne peux pas 
On the 26th, Lieutenant Seagrove and mid- assurer que je 1'obtiendrai. 
shipman Frederic Chamier were sent in .. y 
. . 
,.,,-_.. . 

with a flag of truce, conveying a challenge eur- ic to Monsieur Mallet, inviting him to weigh, " MALLET, and not to allow a frigate of equal force to .. nnr,-, AT* keep him skulking behind the rocks and .^r

aplt ^m? ? e . fnS 8?' c

batteries of Concameau ; but, as has been Chevalier en la Legion d'Houneui shown before, the French captain was not Very eager for any combat. He returned " a .Monsieur, the following answer : Le Baronet Peter Parker."