

which has appeared in print.

On the 2nd of February, at 8 P.M., latitude at noon that day 36 41' north, longitude 22 11' west, the British 56-gun ship Majestic,

1 Captain John Hayes, steering east-half-north with the wind a moderate breeze from the south-south-east, on the lookout for the American frigate Constitution, which had sailed from Boston bay on the 1st of January, discovered on her weatherbow a ship, evidently a cruiser, standing towards her. In about 20 minutes the stranger, which, as afterwards ascertained, was the American privateer "Wasp, of Philadelphia, mounting 20 guns, found her mistake ; and wearing, stood to the north-east under all the canvas she could set. The Majestic made sail in cha?a.

1 See vol. v., p. 427. But the Majestic mounted only one 12-pounder cliasn-gun.

18H.J MAJESTIC WITH ATALANTE AND TERPSICHORE. 145 and continued the pursuit until daylight on the 3rd ; when, having got within four miles of the Wasp, she descried, about three leagues off in the south-south-east, three ships and one brig, of a very suspicious appearance, the ships especially. At

7 A.M. the Majestic made the private signal, and, receiving no anSwer, shortened sail to reconnoitre the strangers. These were not, as conjectured, an American squadron, but the t\vo

French 40-gun frigates Atalante and Terpsichore, from Lorient on the 8th of January, and their prizes, a large richly- laden Spanish ship, captured the day previous, named the San-Juan de-Baptista, carrying 20 guns and 50 men, and an unarmed merchant-brig. At 7 h. 30m. the four vessels stood towards the Majestic. Having again made the private signal without effect, Captain Hayes, at 8 h. 30 m. A.M., gave up the chase of the Wasp, and hauled to the wind on the larboard tack, with a light breeze from the north-north-east, more distinctly to make out the character of the strangers in the south. At 9 A.M. the Majestic tacked to the westward. At 9h. 15 m., jnst as she had got upon the beam of the weathermost ship, which was the Terpischore, the latter made to her consort the signal for an enemy. Captain Hayes being determined to force these ships, now clearly seen to be large frigates, to show their colours, the Majestic, at 10 A.M., tacked, hoisted her colours, and bore up for the Terpsichore. In five minutes the latter shortened sail, for the Atalante, who was some distance astern, to close ; and on the Majestic's evincing an increased eagerness to get alongside of her, the Terpsichore wore and stood towards her tardy companion, with the signal flying, " The enemy is inferior to us." The French commodore answered this with, " Make more sail." Thinking his signal had been misunder stood, Captain Breton repeated it, but merely obtained a repe tition of the answer to his first signal. As soon as the Terpsichore had joined the Atalante, which was at about 11 h. 30 m. A.M., the two frigates, formed in line ahead, with the Lima ship and merchant-brig on the weatherhow, seemed resolved to withstand an attack. But the Majestic, by her bold approach, extinguished the last remnant of reso lution in the poor commodore ; and at 11 h. 45 m., the Atalante crowded sail nearly before the wind to the south-south-east. In a minute or two the Terpsichore, hoisting French colours, followed her consort. Both French ships carried their larboard