

carronades, 18-pounders, and two sixes. The 46 guns of the 
Essex have already been described. 2 
On the 9th, at 9 A.M., Captain Porter began his attempts 
See vol. v., p. 290. 2 Ibid., p. 361 

1814.] PHCEBE AND ESSEX. 151 upon the loyalty of the Phoebe's seamen, by hoisting at his fore topgallantmast-head a white flag with the motto, " FREE TRADE

AND SAILORS' RIGHTS." This, in a little while, the Phoebe answered, with the St. George's ensign, and the motto, " GOD

AND COUNTRY, BRITISH SAILORS' BEST RIGHTS: T.RAITORS OFFEND BOTH." On this the crew of the Essex manned her rigging and gave three cheers, which the Phoebe's crew presently returned. On the 12th, Captain Porter's motto mania returned, and the Essex hoisted a flag inscribed with the words,

" GOD, OUK

COUNTRY, AND LIBERTY : TYRANTS OFFEND THEM."

On the 15th, at 7 A.M., the Essex Junior was towed out of the harbour. At 8 A.M. the Phoebe and Cherub weighed and stood after her ; and at noon, finding she could not escape, the Essex Junior returned to the anchorage, passing ahead of the Phoebe within pistol-shot. On the 23rd, when the two British ships were cruising in the bay, the Essex weighed and stood out, but in about an hour resumed her station in the harbour. On the 25th, Captain Porter had his prize, the Hector, towed out to sea and set fire to. On the 27th, at about 6h. 45m. P.M., when the Phoebe was about four miles west-north-west of the anchorage, and the Cherub about six miles north by west of her, the Essex and Essex Junior got under way with a light breeze from the westward, and stood out towards the British frigate.

On seeing them approach, the Phoebe backed her maintopsail and hoisted her colours. At this moment, by a mere accident as it appears, a gun went off from the Phoebe's windward side. This was at once interpreted by Captain Porter into a challenge. At 7 h. 20 m. P.M., as the Phoebe was in the act of wearing to bring her starboard guns to bear, the Essex and Essex Junior hauled to the wind on the starboard tack, and the former ured one gun to windward. Soon after this little flourish, Captain Porter and his lieutenant stood for the anchorage, followed by Captain Hillyar under all sail. Beyond a second attempt of the Essex Junior to escape, made and frustrated on the 3rd of March, nothing further of consequence happened until the 28th of the month, when the

Essex put in practice a well-concerted plan for freeing herself from the further annoyance of her watchful enemy. It was the intention of Captain Porter, as he himself states, to allow the Phoebe and Cherub to chase the Essex out of the bay, in order to afford to the Essex Junior the opportunity of getting to sea ; and, if the plan succeeded, the two American ships were to effect their junction at the Marquesas. The wind being, as it usually

152 LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHU'S. [1814.

is, to the southward, any scheme that would draw the two

British ships to the north-east or the lee side of the bay, could not fail to favour the escape of the two American ships. Ac cordingly, from about midnight to past 1 A.M. on the 28th, a quantity of blue -lights and rockets were burnt and thrown up in the north-east and in the north. The Phoebe and Cherub, as may be supposed, chased in those directions ; but, finding no answer returned to the lights they each hoisted, the two captains suspected who were the makers of the signals, and again hauled to the wind. Daylight found the Essex and Essex Junior at their moorings, and the two British ships rather too close to the port to justify the American ships in attempting their escape. A fresh south-south-east wind now blew, and so increased towards 3 P.M., that the Essex parted her larboard cable, and dragged her starboard anchor out to sea. Sail was presently set upon the ship ; and seeing a prospect of passing to windward of his two opponents, Captain Porter began to chuckle at his good fortune in having been blown out of the harbour. Just, however, as the Essex was rounding the point at the west end of the bay, the accomplishment of which would have set Captain Porter free, a heavy squall struck the ship and carried away her maintopmast. The Essex now bore up, followed by both British