

1814/] EUROTAS AND CLORINDE. 139 are bound, either to admit that we are misinformed on the subject, or to bring forward such proofs as will place beyond the reach of further contradiction the validity of our statements. As far as we have been able to glean them, the following are the principal, if not the only objections that were raised: 1. That the Eurotas' 24-pounders were experimental guns, and proved, defective in some (but what, we cannot say) particular, when tried in the action. 2. That the crew of the Eurotas had been taught how to fire with precision ; consequently, that the com paratively slight execution done by the Eurotas to the Clorinde did not arise from the inexpertness of her men, but from the ineffectiveness of her guns. Unfortunately, the newspapers of the day used their endeavours to circulate a much more import ant objection than either of these ; no less than that the main deck guns of the Eurotas were 18, and not 24 pounders. Let us hasten to do Captain Phillimore the justice to state, that he never made, although we do not remember that he contradicted, an assertion which could have been so easily refuted. A contemporary saw the paragraph, and, putting aside the news paper, kept it until he could give the statement again to the public, with a post-captain's name as a voucher for its accuracy, in the following words : "A frigate-action, of an interesting nature, was fought in February, 1814, between the Eurotas, a British ship, of 44 guns, 18-pounders, and La Clorinde, of the same force." 1

Taking the two serious objections in the order in which they are stated, we shall begin with the quality of the guns. As far as a trial before the action could speak for the Congreve 24-pounders, we have already shown, that Captain Phillimore himself, Commodore Malcolm, and several experienced post captains, were "delighted with them." Now for their behaviour in the action. The moment we learnt that Captain Phillimore had a complaint to allege against the guns, for some ill quality or deficiency that discovered itself in the action between the

Eurotas and Clorinde, we turned again to the official letter. Finding no complaint there, we once more looked into the ship's log ; knowing that there at least a minute of the circumstance ought to have been noted down. Not a word could we discover on the subject. We then took the pains to ascertain, if any official report, complaining of the guns, had reached the navy board. Except an application, made in March, to have the breeching-bolts of the carronades, and the cat-heads of the

i Breaton. vol. v, p. 139.

140 LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS. [1814, Eurotas made different from those of any other ship in the eervice, and a refusal of both requests, we could find no correspondence between Captain Phillimore and the commissioners of the navy. Pursuing our inquiries, we at last discovered that, on the 15th of March, 1814, an examination took place of the officers of the Eurotas on the very subject on which we desired informa tion ; and the following (all we have been able to procure) is a transcript of what purports to be the testimony of the second lieutenant of the Eurotas, Eichard Wilcox Graves : ' ' That, when the said guns were tried at Sheerness against the common 24-pounder long gun, they seemed to carry the shot, both double and single, as far as the latter ; that they bounded a little more than the long gun, but not dangerously so ; that they can be worked with two men less than the common long gun, are easier to train, and embrace a larger range or circle; that, in the action, one bolt only was drawn on the main deck, and one seizing broken, the latter of which might have been badly made , that, upon the main deck, two shot were fired from each gun in the first three rounds, and one round and one grape during the remainder of the action; that .the quantit of gunpowder was 8 lb., which was considered 2 Ib. too much, no difference of range being perceived when the guns were fired with only 6 lb. ; that there is only one gim on board the Eurotas, similar to those on board the Cydnus, upon Lieutenant-general Blomefield's principle, on account of there not being a complete set at Wool wich when the Eurotas was fitted out." From the time of her action, except to land them when docked to have her damages repaired, the Eurotas retained these same guns, until Captain James Lillicrap paid the ship off on the 6th of January, 1816 ; when the Eurotas landed her " 28 Congreve's 24-pounders