

142 LIGHT SQUADRONS AXL> SINGLE SHIPS. [1814.

that when the day of trial came, the English crew failed in accomplishing as much as might have been expected of them. But, that the men wanted neither zeal nor capacity, has already appeared in the quickness with which they refitted their ship, to go again in pursuit of their enemy. Some persons have urged as an excuse for the crew of the Eurotas, that a heavy sea was raging, which prevented them from pointing their guns with precision ; forgetting, that the crew of the Clorinde laboured under precisely the same inconvenience. "We need not refer to many pages back to show what was performed, about a month afterwards, by a British frigate with 18-pounders, and two guns less of a side than the Eurotas, against a French frigate equal in force to the Clorinde ; and the Hebrus was not put in commission until five months after the Eurotas, and was not by any means so well manned, the principal part of tho latter's crew having been draughted from the Quebec, Arethusa, and Cornelia frigates. We trust that we have now completely established the accuracy of our former statement, that the guns of the Eurotas, in her action with the Clorinde, did not perform so well as they ought ; and that the fault lay, not in the guns themselves, but in the manner in which they were handled. In conclusion, we beg to observe, that, if the slight superiority in execution which the Eurotas' 24-pounders proved themselves to possess over the 18-pounders of the Clorinde, were not clearly shown to have arisen from adventitious circumstances^with what face could we, as we so strenuously have done, deny to the Americans the greater part of the credit which they take to themselves, for having, with their 24-pounder frigates, so completely beaten the

18-pounder frigates of England ? Why was the armament of

the Eurotas changed from 18 to 24-pounders, if not to give the 
ship an increase of force ? 
On the 12th of March, at 2 P.M., latitude 43 16' north, 
longitude 1CP 56' west, the British 18-gun brig-sloop Primrose, 
Captain Charles George Rodney Phillott, while lying to on the 
larboard tack with the wind from the north-east by east, dis- 
covered, and at 2 h. 30 m. made sail after, a vessel on the lee 
bow, standing to the south-west. This vessel was the British 
brig-packet Duke of Marlborough, Captain John Bull, from 
Falmouth with a mail, bound to Lisbon. At 4 h. 20 m. P.M., ob 
serving that the strange brig had altered her course to avoid 
her, the Primrose fired a gun and hoisted her colours, a small 
1 

[Sir H. Douglas says that the 24- very inconveniently. H. Y. POWELL.]pounders, after repeated firing, bounded

1814.] ENCOUNTER BETWEEN TWO BRITISH VESSELS. 143 blue ensign, at the gaff-end, and continued in chase. Shortly afterwards, when the Marlborough was about seven miles distant, the blue ensign was hauled down, and, that the stranger might see it more distinctly, a large red one hoisted in its stead. At 6 h. 50m. P.M. the Primrose fired a shot at the strange brig, which, from her yawing about, was supposed to be a captured English merchantman ; anything, in short, but a king's packet, as she had no lower studding-sails or royals set. On first observing herself chased by the Primrose, Avhom she took for an American privateer, the Marlborough had hoisted the private signal, but the end-on position of the two vessels, their distance apart, and the circumstance of the flags being only half the established size, prevented the Primrose from making them out. After being up about two hours, by which time the Primrose had approached to within five miles, the private signal was hauled down, and the ensign and pendant only kept flying. As soon as it became dark the private night signal was made, or rather was attempted to be made, for it appears that no one on board the packet, except the gunner, knew the difference between a blue light and a false fire. At