

topsail, and cleared ship for action. The strange sail came down within gun-shot, and hauled her wind on the starboard tack. We continued with our maintopsail to the mast three hours, and, seeing no probability of the 74-gun ship's bearing down to engage the President, gave her a shot to windward, and hoisted our colours ; when she bore up for us, reluctantly. When within half gun-shot, backed her maintopsail. At this moment all hands were called to muster aft, and the commodore said a few, but impressive words, though it was unnecessary ; for, what other stimulant could true Americans want, than fighting gloriously in the sight of their native shore, where hundreds

were assembled to witness the engagement ? Wore ship to engage ; but, at this moment, the cutter being discovered coming back, backed again to take in the pilot, the British 74 (strange as it must appear) making sail to the southward and eastward. Orders were given to haul aboard the main and fore tacks, to run in ; there being then in sight from our deck a frigate and gun-brig. The commander of the 74 had it in his power, for five

hours, to bring us at any moment to an engagement, our main 
topsail to the mast during that time." 1 
" It was," adds the American writer who was so fortunate as 
to be favoured with a copy of this genuine American epistle, 
" afterwards ascertained, that the ship, which declined the 
battle with the President, was the Plantagenet 74, Captain 
1 Naval Monumnet, &c., p. 235. 

1914.] UHRE AND PRESIDENT. 149

Lloyd. The reason given by Captain Lloyd for avoiding- an engagement was, that his crew were in a state of mutiny.'' Another American historian says : "Captain Lloyd, after re-turning to England, accounted for his conduct by alleging a mutiny in his ship, and had several of his sailors tried and

executed on that charge." 
1 We are here forcibly reminded of 
the old Munchausen story, where one man declares that he 
drove a nail through the moon, and his companion, determined 
both to back and to outdo him, swears he clenched it. 
To Captain Lloyd's regret, even had the Constitution been in 
company with the President, the Plantagenet (whose crew was 
one of the finest and best disposed in the service), at noon on 
the 18th of February, the day on which this " 
strange" event 

happened, was in latitude 25 27' north, longitude 43 45' west, steering east-south-east, or towards Carlisle bay, Barbadoes. No : it was the British 38-gun frigate Loire, Captain Thomas Brown, that lay off the Hook. At 9 h. 40 m. A.M. the Loire first descried the President in the north-north-west, and, with the wind from the west-south-west, made all sail in chase ; but at 10 h. 30m., making out the President to be what she was, the Loire shortened sail and hauled to the wind. The fact is, that out of her complement of 352 men and boys, the Loire had 75 of her best men, including of course several officers and petty officers absent in prizes ; and, of the remaining 277, nearly 20 were boys, and about 40 too sick to attend their quarters : consequently, the effective crew of the Loire did not exceed 220 men. Had the Loirs been fully manned, we may readily infer what course Captain Brown would have pursued ; and, as his complement was ample, and he had been particular in exercising his men at the guns, if the President, contrary to what her movements indicated, had waited to engage, Commodore Eod gers, in all probability, would have found the conquest of a