

160 LIGHT SQUADRONS AttD SINGLE SHIPS. [1814.

the others. At 11 A.M., as if the defects in the fighting-bolts were not a sufficient disaster, the breeching-bolts began to draw. There being no immediate remedy here, an effort was made to get the brig round, in order to present a fresh broadside to the enemy ; but it was found impracticable, without falling on board the Peacock. As a last resource, and one which British seamen are gene rally prompt to execute, Captain Wales called the crew aft, to follow him in boarding ; but these gentlemen declined a measure so fraught with danger. The Epervier having now one gun only wherewith to return the fire of the 11 guns of her antago nist ; being already with four feet and a half water in her hold, and her erew falling fast beneath the heavy and unremitting fire of the Peacock, no alternative remained but to strike the colours, to save the lives of the few remaining good men in the vessel. This was done at 11 h. 5m. A.M., after the firing had lasted an hour ; during three-quarters of which the vessels lay close together, and during more than half of which, owing to the defects in the brig's armament, the successful party had it all to himself. Besides the damages already detailed, the Epervier had her fore-rigging and stays shot away, her bowsprit badly wounded, and her foremast cut nearly in two and left tottering, and which nothing but the smoothness of the water saved from falling. Her hull, as may be imagined, was pierced with shot-holes on

the engaged or larboard side, both above and below water The brig's loss, out of a crew of 101 men and a passenger, and 1(5 boys, amounted to eight killed and mortally wounded, and 1 f> wounded severely and slightly, including among the former her very gallant first-lieutenant, John Hackett; who, about the middle of the action, had his left arm shattered, and received a severe splinter-wound in the hip, but who yet would hardly suffer himself to be carried below. Captain Warrington states, we believe with truth, that the Peacock's principal injury was the wound in her foreyard. Not a shot, by his account, struck the ship's hull ; and her loss, in consequence, out of a crew of 185 picked seamen, without a boy among them, amounted to only two men wounded, neither of them dangerously. A statement of comparative force would, in this case, be next

to a nullity ; as how could we, with any show of reason, con front eight carronades that overset the moment they were fired with 10 carronades that remained firm in their places to the last. For any damage that such a vessel as the Epervier could

1814.] REINDEER AND WASP. 161 lu.ve done to her, the Peacock might almost as well have fought with the unarmed Eussian ship that hadjust quitted the former's company, and then have boasted, as Captain Warring-ton did, how many shot the Peacock placed in her antagonist's hull, and how free from any she escaped in her own. At the time she engaged the Peacock, the Eporvier had but three men in a watch, exclusively of petty officers, able to take helm or lead ; and two of her men were each 70 years of age ! She had some blacks, several other foreigners, lots of disaffected, and few even of ordinary stature: in short, the crew of the Epervier was a disgrace to the deck of a British man-of-war. Had, instead of this, the Epervier been manned with a crew of choice seamen, equal in personal appearance to those received out of.the Chesapeake and Argus, after they had been respec tively carried by boarding, we might have some faith in Captain Porter's assertion, that British seamen were not so brave as they had been represented. But, shall we take the Epervier's crew as a sample of British seamen ? As well might we judge of the moral character of a nation by the inmates of her jails, or take the first deformed object we meet, as the standard of the size and shape of her people. We must be allowed to say that, had the Epervier's carronades been previously fired in exercise, for any length of time together, the defect in the clinching of her breeching-bolts, a defect common to the vessels of this and the smaller classes, nearly all of them being contract-built, would have been discovered, and perhaps remedied. Even one or two discharges would have shown the insufficiency of the fighting-bolts. We doubt, how ever, if any teaching at the guns could have amended the Eper vier's crew : the men wanted, what nature alone could give them, the hearts of Britons. On the 28th of June, at daylight, latitude 48 36' north, longitude 11 15' west, the British 18-gun brig-sloop Eeindeer, Captain William Manners, steering with a light breeze from the north-east, discovered and chased in the west-south-west the United States ship-sloop Wasp, Captain Johnston Blakeley. The latter was the sister-ship to the Peacock, and armed every way the same. The Eeindeer, built of fir in 1804, was a sisterbrig to the Epervier, but not so heavily armed, having, on account of her age and weakness, exchanged her 32-pounder carronades for 24-pounders ; 16 of which, with two sixes and a 12-pounder boat-carronade, formed her present armament. By I P.M. the two vessels had approximated near enough to