

Eepeated signals of distress having by this time been made by 
the Avon, the Castilian tacked and stood towards her ; and on 
closing, at 11 h. 55 m., Captain Braimer was informed by Captain 
Arbuthnot, that the Avon was sinking fast. The Castilian im- 
mediately hoisted out her boats to save the people ; and at 
1 A.M. on the 2nd, just as the last boat had pushed off from the 
Avon, the British brig went down : an irrefragable proof, that 
she had not surrendered until every hope of success or escape 
had vanished. Hoisting in her boats, the Castilian filled and 
made sail to the north-east, in search of the Wasp ; but the 
latter had already run out of sight. As a reason for this, Captain 
Blakeley has alleged that he discovered two other vessels, besides 
the Castilian, in chase of him. 
Out of her 104 men and 13 boys, the Avon lost her first-lieu- 

tenant (John Prendergrast) and nine seamen and marines killed and mortally wounded, her commander, second-lieutenant (John Harvey), one midshipman (John Travers), and 29 seamen and marines wounded severely and slightly. According to Captain Blakeley, the Wasp received only four round shot in her hull, and, out of her acknowledged complement of 173 men, had but two killed and one wounded. The gallantry of the Avon's officers and crew cannot, for a moment, be questioned ; but the gunnery of the latter appears to have been not a whit better than, to the discredit of the British navy, had frequently before been displayed in combats of this kind. Nor, from the specimen given by the Castilian, is it likely that she would have performed r.ny better.

1814.] LANDRAIL AND SYREN. 167

The Wasp, unfortunately for her brave officers and crew, never reached a port of the United States : she foundered, as is supposed, between the 15th, when she was off Madeira, and the end of September. To the merit justly due to the captain of the Wasp, for his conduct in his two successful actions, America must be contented to divide her claim ; as Captain Blakeley was a native of Dublin, and, with some English and Scotch, did not, it maybe certain, neglect to have in his crew a great many Irish. The construction of so fine a ship as the Wasp, and the equipment of her as an effective man-of-war, is that pai-t of the merit, and no small part either, which belongs exclusively to the United States.

On the 12th of July the British cutter Handrail, of four 12-pounder carronades and 19 men and boys, commanded by Lieutenant Eobert Daniel Lancaster, in her way across the British Channel with despatches, was chased by the American privateer schooner Syren ; and maintained with her a running fight of one hour and 10 minutes, and a close action, within pistol-shot, of 40 minutes, in all two hours. The Landrail then surrendered, with the loss of seven men wounded. Her sails were riddled with shot-holes, and her hull much struck. The Syren, whose force was one long 18-pounder on a travelling carriage, four long 6-pounders and two 18-pounder carronades, with a crew of 75 men, had three men killed, and 15 wounded, including some of her principal officers ; a tolerable proof of the execution that may be done by two 12-pounder carronades, if well pointed. The action certainly reflects great credit on Lieutenant Lancaster and his ship's company, or rather, his boat's crew. Although the Landrail had not even room for another gun beyond the four she mounted, the American historians, in the first instance, gave her 10 guns, and afterwards, by way of amending their statement, 8 guns ; at which the Landrail now stands in their prize-lists. The Landrail was recaptured on her way to the United States, and carried into Halifax, Nova Scotia ;