

and 42 wounded, 27 of the number dangerously and severely. 
One of the men was wounded in the head by a ramrod ; which, 
before it could be extracted, required to be sawed off close to 
the skull. The man, notwithstanding, recovered. After receiv- 
ing this desperate wound, he, like his gallant chief, refused to 
go below ; saying to those who begged him to leave his gun, 
" If 
all the wounded of the Reindeer were as well able to fight as I 
am, we should soon make the American strike." 
The sails and rigging of the Wasp were a good deal cut. 
"Six round shot and many grape," Captain Blakeley says, 
struck her hull. We should imagine, from the Wasp's acknow 
ledged loss, that a few more had either perforated her thick 
sides, or entered at her port-holes. One 24-pound shot passed 
through the centre of the foremast : and yet it stood : a tolerable 
proof of its large dimensions. Out of 173 men and two boys in 
complement, the Wasp had two midshipmen and nine seamen 
and marines killed and mortally wounded, and 15 petty officers, 
seamen, and marines wounded severely and slightly. Doubt 
less, a great part of the Wasp's loss arose from the determined 
efforts of the Eeindeer's crew to board ; but how, taking the 

relative numbers as they at first stood, could 98 men succeed against 173?

Comparative Force of the Combatants.

Brondside-guns . . . 1 j,

'

Crew (jnen only) . . . No. Size . . . tons

Eeindeer. 9 198 385

Wasp. 11 338 173 539 Notwithstanding this decided disparity of force, the weaker

1 LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHU'S. [1814 party was the assailant; nor can the British commander be accused of rashness, both vessels being

" 
sloops-of-Avar." The 
force employed by the Wasp, stationed upon a floating body, 
varying a trifle in construction, would have entitled theEeindeer 
to seek her safety in flight. But, had she run from the Wasp, 
Mr. Madison would have exulted as much, in announcing that 

a British ship had been chased, as captured, by an American ship "of the same class!" and even Britons would have con sidered the act as a stigma upon the national character. This may be pronounced one of the best-fought sloop-actions of the war. The British crew had long served together, and Captain Manners was the idol and delight of his men. They were called the pride of Plymouth. Gallant souls ! they wanted but as many more like themselves as would have brought them in number within a fourth of their opponents; and the Americans would have had to rue the day that the Wasp encountered the Reindeer. On the 29th, in the afternoon, on a breeze springing up, the foremast of the prize went by the board; and on the same evening, finding the Eeindeer too much shattered to keep the sea, and too old and worthless, had she been otherwise, to be worth carrying into port, Captain Blakeley set fire to and destroyed her. The Wasp then steered for Lorient, to refit and renovate her crew, and on the 8th of July anchored in that

port. 
It will appear surprising, that an action so pregnant with cir- 
cumstances calculated to excite the sympathy of the brave of 
all nations, an action in the conduct of it from first to last so 
highly honourable to the character of the British navy, as that 
of the Eeindeer and Wasp, should be altogether omitted by an 
English naval historian ; by a writer, especially, who claims the 
honour to belong to that very profession of which the gallant 
Manners was a member. But every friend to the memory of the 
youthful hero, every well-wisher to the cause of the British navy, 
will rejoice to find, that Captain Brenton has not even glanced 
at the action of the Eeindeer and Wasp, when he discovers that, 
in the Avon's case (to which we shall come presently), the Wasp 
is described as a "brig, mounting eighteen 32-pounder carron- 
ades and two sixes, with 140 men. 1 
Eecollecting the mistake 
about the force of the Peacock, the Hornet's opponent, 
2 we have 
not a doubt that Captain Brenton would have made a similar 
mistake respecting the Eeindeer ; and then, what with under 