

VOL VI. M

ascertain that each was an enemy ; and, while one manoeuvred to gain, the other manoeuvred to keep, the weather-gage. At 2 P.M.

the Wasp hoisted her colours, and fired a gun to windward; and immediately the Eeindeer, whose colours had been pre-viously hoisted, fired a gun also to windward, as an answer to the challenge. At 3 h. 15 m. P.M., being distant about 60 yards on the Wasp's starboard and weather quarter, the Eeindeer opened a fire from her boat-carronade mounted upon the topgallant forecastle. This she repeated four times ; when at 3 h. 26 m., putting her helm a-lee, the Wasp luffed up and commenced the action with the after-carronade and the others in succession. The Eeindeer returned the fire with spirit, and a

close and furious engagement ensued. 
After the mutual cannonade had lasted about half an hour, 
the Eeindeer, owing to her disabled state, fell with her bow 
against the larboard quarter of the Wasp. The latter imme 
diately raked her with dreadful effect ; and the American rifle- 
men in the tops picked off the British officers and men in every 
part of the deck. It was now that Captain Manners showed 
himself a hero. The calves of his legs had been partly shot 
away early in the action ; yet did he keep the deck, encouraging 
his crew, and animating, by his example, the few officers re- 
maining on board. A grape or canister shot passed through 
both his thighs : he fell on his kuess, but quickly sprang up ; 
and, although bleeding profusely, resolutely refused to quit the 
deck. Perceiving at this time the dreadful slaughter which the 
musketry in the Wasp's tops was causing among his crew, this 
gallant young officer called out to them, 
" Follow me, my boys, 
we must board." While with that object in view climbing into 
the Eeindeer's rigging, two balls from the AVasp's maintop pene 
trated his skull, and came out beneath his chin. Placing one 
hand on his forehead, and with the other convulsively brandish- 

ing his sword, he exclaimed' " God !" and dropped lifeless on his own deck !

" To live with fame The gods allow to many ; but to die With equal lustre is a blessing Heaven

Selects from all the choicest boons of fate, And with a sparing hand on few bestows."

Glover.

Having lost, besides her captain, nearly the whole of her officers and more than half her men, the Eeindeer was wholly

I814.J REINDEER AND WASP. 163 unable to oppose the Wasp's overwhelming numbers. Accord ingly, at about 4 P.M., the American crew rushed on board, and received possession of their hard-earned trophy from Mr. Eichard

Collins, the captain's clerk, the senior officer alive on deck.

In a line with her ports, the Eeindeer was literally cut to pieces : her upper-works, boats, and spare spars were one com plete wreck. Her masts were both badly wounded ; particularly her foremast, which was left in a tottering state. Out of her crew of 98 men and 20 boys, the brig had her commander, purser (John Thomas Barton), and 23 petty officers, seamen, and marines killed, her first and only lieutenant on board (Thomas Chambers), one master's mate (Matthew Mitchell), one mid shipman (Henry Hardiman), her boatswain (all badly), and 37 petty officers, seamen, and marines wounded ; total, 25 killed