

ships, and at 3h. 40m. anchored within half a mile of the shore, in a small bay about a mile to the eastward of Point Caleta. The Essex then hoisted one motto-flag at the fore, and another at the mizen topgallantmast-head, and one American ensign at the mizen peak, and lashed a second in the main rigging. Not to be outdone in decorations, the two British ships hoisted their motto-flags, with a handsome display of ensigns and union jacks. At 4 P.M., when the Phoebe was standing towards the starboard-quarter of the Essex, at about a mile distant, a squall from the land caused the ship to break off, and prevented her from passing, as had been Captain Hillyar's intention, close under the American frigate's stern. At 4 h. 10 m , having fetched as near as the wind would permit, the Phoebe commenced firing her starboard guns, but with very little effect, owing to the great distance. In five minutes more the Cherub, who lay on the Phoebe's starboard-quarter, opened her fire ; the Essex returning the fire of both ships with three long i-2-pounders run out of her stern-ports. At 4 h. 30 m. P.M. the two British ships, being very near the shore, ceased firing, an$

1814.] PHffiBE AND ESSEX. 153 wore round on the larboard tack. While the Phoebe was wear ing, a shot from the Essex passed through several folds of her mainsail, as it hung in the clew-garnets, and prevented it from being reset in the strong wind which was then blowing. Her iib-boom was also badly wounded, and her fore, main, and niizen stays shot away. Having, besides increasing her distance by wearing, lost the use of her jib, mainsail, and mainstay, the Phoebe was now at too great a distance to fire more than one or two random shot. At 4h. 40m. the Phoebe tacked towards the Essex ; and Captain Hillyar soon afterwards informed Captain Tucker, by hailing, that it was his intention to anchor, but that the Cherub must keep under way. On closing the Essex at 5 h. 35 m., the Phoebe recommenced a

fire from her bow-guns, which was returned by the former, the 
weather at this time nearly calm. In about 20 minutes the 
Essex hoisted her flying-jib, cut her cable, and, under her fore 
sail and foretopsail, endeavoured to run on shore. This exposed 
her to a tolerably warm carronade from the Phoebe ; but the 
Cherub, owing to the baffling winds, was not able to get near. 
Just as the Essex had approached the shore within musket-shot, 
the wind shifted from the land, and paid her head down upon 
the Phoebe. That not being a course very desirable to Captain 
Porter, the Essex let go an anchor, and came to within about 
three-quarters of a mile of the shore. 
The object now was to get the specie and other valuables in 
the ship removed on shore ; and, as the boats of the Essex had 
been nearly all destroyed, it was considered fortunate that 
Lieutenant Downes was present with the three boats from the 
Essex Junior. A portion of the British subjects belonging to 
the crew took this opportunity of effecting their escape ; and 
others, alarmed by Captain Porter's report that " flames were 
bursting up each hatchway," flames of which not a trace could 
afterwards be discovered, leaped overboard to endeavour to 
reach the shore. In the midst of all this confusion, at about 
Gh. 20m. P.M., the Essex hauled down her numerous flags, and 
was taken possession of just in time to save the lives of 16 of 
her men who were struggling in the waves : 31 appear to have 
perished, and between 30 and 40 to have reached the shore. 
The damages of the Phoebe were trifling. She had received 
seven 32-pound shot between wind and water, and one 12-pound 
shot about three feet under water. Her main and mizen masts, 
and her sails and rigging, were rather seriously injured. Out of 
her crew of 278 men, and 22 boys, total 300, the Phoebe hfvd 