

honourable." !

Early in the month of February the first launched of the American "18-gun" ship-sloops, of which we formerly gave some account," 2 the Frolic, commanded by master-commandant Joseph Bainbridge, sailed from Portsmouth, New Hampshire. On the 20th of April, at daylight, latitude 24 12' north, longitude 81 25' west, the Frolic fell in with the British 18-pounder 36-gun frigate Orpheus, Captain Hugh Pigot, and 12-gun schooner Shelburne, Lieutenant David Hope. When the chase commenced, both British ships were to leeward ; but, in ap i 3i ;nton, vol. v., p. 161, 2 See vol. v., p. 433.

1814.] GENTLE SURRENDER OF THE FROLIC. 157 hour or two, the schooner weathered the American ship. At a few minutes past noon the Orpheus, then on the Frolic's lee-

quarter, standing upon the opposite tack, fired two shot, both of which fell short. However, they produced as good an effect as if they had struck the American ship between wind and water; and, in about half an hour, just as the Shelburne was closing her, down went the "star-spangled banner" and its stripes from the Frolic's mizen-peak. As soon as the Orpheus, who was but an indifferent sailer, could get near enough to take possession of her, this fine American sloop-of-war was found with 171 officers and men, all " high-minded Ameri

cans," on board. 
According to the report of the British officers, this gentle 
surrender was attended with a circumstance in other respects 
disgraceful to the Frolic's officers and crew. The locks of the 
great guns were broken, and the muskets, pistols, pikes, swords, 
bar and chain shot, &c., were thrown overboard, together with 
the pendant that was struck ! A Nassau paper of the 25th of 
April adds: "The purser's store-room was next sacked; then 
the men got into the gun-room and the captain's cabin, and 
pillaged them. In short, the ship, we are told, bore the sem 
blance of a town given up to the pillage of soldiery." Perhaps 
these gentlemen were determined that as their ship had not 
behaved like a man-of-war, they would destroy all appearance 
of her having been one. 
We should not have hesitated to call a French, or even a 
British captain, who had acted as master-commandant Joseph 
Bainbridge of the United States navy did in this instance act, a 
; but we will not again soil our pages with a name 

that, in the few instances in which it occurs, has not, we trust, been wrongfully applied. The court of inquiry which sat upon the Frolic's loss " honourably acquitted" the officers and crew. One excuse was, that the lee guns of the American ship had been thrown overboard. So they were, but not until long after the Orpheus had begun chasing her. Captain Bainbridge might as well have urged that he had no locks, pistols, &c., because he and his crew had destroyed and thrown them overboard just before possession was taken.

The master-commandant, who performed this exploit, is the brother of the commodore, who did so much for the national glory by capturing the Java; and, from his great interest (a sway that even republics can feel), the former is now a captain. Let, then, Captain Joseph Bainbridge, if the subject be not a