

ships captured by the Essex. On the 25th of July, 1813, Cap tain Porter despatched home the Georgiana armed with 16 guns, manned with a lieutenant and about 40 men, and laden with a full cargo of spermaceti oil, which would be worth, in the United States, about 100,000 dollars. She was captured in the West Indies, by the 18-pounder 36-gun frigate Barrossa. The Policy, laden also with a full cargo of oil, was retaken by the Loire frigate ; and the New Zealander, having on board "All the oil of the other prizes," by the Belvidera. The Eosc and Charlton were given up to the prisoners. The Montezuma, it is believed, was sold at Valparaiso. The Hector and Cathe rine, with their cargoes, were burnt at sea. The Atlantic, afterwards called the Essex Junior, was disarmed by the orders of Captain Hillyar, and sent to America as a cartel. The Sir Andrew Hammond was retaken by the Cherub; the Greenwich, burnt by the orders of the American officer in charge of her ; and the Seringapatam, taken possession of by her American crew. The mutineers carried her to New South Wales ; whence she was brought to England, and delivered up to her owners, on payment of salvage. Thus havo. we the end of all the "

prizes taken by the Essex in the Pacific, valued at 250,000 dollars;" and, as another item on the debit side of Captain Porter's account, the Essex herself became transferred to the British navy. At the risk of being charged with impiety, we must express a wish that, instead of announcing his success in the words :

"It pleased the Almighty Disposer of events to bless the efforts of my gallant companions, and my personal, very humble ones, with victory," Captain Hillyar had stated, in a plain manner, the surrender of the Essex, and left the public to judge by what means, others than the well-directed 18-pounders of the Phoebe,

156 LIGHT SQOADKONS AND S1XGLE SHIPS. [1814.

the comparatively unimportant event had been brought about.

It was only a few months before, that an American commander announced his success over a Lilliputian British fleet on Lake

Erie, in the following words : " It has pleased the Almighty to give to the arms of the United States a signal victory over their enemies on this lake." We remember, also, when looking over the log-books of British ships, and some hundreds have passed under our inspection, once coming to the words, "Mustered the crew and read prayers for the victory." And what was the " victory?" Why, the success of three ships over one, and that not until after the sacrifice of nearly 100 lives. In our view of the matter, appeals to the Deity on such occasions of blood and carnage are, to say the least of them, quite at variance with the

spirit of true religion.

The best part of Captain Hillyar's public letter is, we think, 
the following passage : " The defence of the Essex, taking into 
consideration our superiority of force, the very discouraging 
circumstance of her having lost her maintopmast, and being 
twice on fire, did honour to her brave defenders, and most fully 
evinced the courage of Captain Porter, and those under his 
command. Her colours were not struck until the loss in killed 
and wounded was so awfully great, and her shattered condition 
so seriously bad, as to render further resistance unavailing." 
Captain Hillyar penned this encomium two days after the 
action, and nothing could better evince the goodness of his 
heart ; but he soon found that he had praised the unworthy. 
As one proof among many that could be adduced, Captain 
Porter, in a letter dated in July, accuses Captain Hillyar of act- 
ing towards him with " 
perfidy." Yet the conduct of this same 
slanderer of a gallant British officer, of this same Captain David 
Porter, of whom few in his own country Avill venture to speak 
well, is declared by our contemporary to have been " 
perfectly 