

i Brenton, vol. v., p. ill. 2 Sec p. 49.

1814.] AVON AND WASP. 165 rating tho force on one side, and overrating it on the other, the merits of the action would have been entirely changed. On the 27th of August the Wasp, thoroughly refitted and manned, sailed from Lorient to resume her cruise ; and on the 1st of September, at 7 P.M., latitude 30 north, longitude 11 west, going free on the starboard tack, with the wind at south east, Captain Blakeley fell in with the British 18-gun brig-sloop Avon (sixteen 32-pounder carronades and two sixes), Captain the Hon. James Arbuthnot, nearly ahead, steering about south-west. At 7h. 34m. P.M. the Avon made night-signals to the Wasp ; which the latter at 8 P.M. answered with a blue light on the forecastle. At 8h. 38m. the Avon fired a shot

from her stem chase-gun ; and still running on to the south-west, 
fired a second shot from her starboard and lee side. At 9 h. 20 m., 
being then on the weather-quarter of the Avon, the Wasp 
was hailed by the latter, "What ship is that?" and answered 
by the question, 
" What brig is that?" The Avon replied with 
her name, but it was not heard on board the Wasp. The 
former again asked, "What ship is that?" and was told to 
heave-to and she would be informed. The question was 
repeated, and answered to the same effect. An American officer 
then went forward on the Wasp's forecastle, and ordered the 
Avon to heave-to ; but the latter declined doing so, and at 
9 h. 25 m. P.M. set her larboard foretopmast studding-sail. 
At 9 h. 26 m. P.M. the Wasp fired her 12-pounder carronade : 

whereupon the Avon commenced the action by a discharge from her larboard guns. The Wasp then kept away, and, running under the brig's lee, at 9 h. 29 m., opened her broadside. Almost the first fire from the American ship, consisting of star and bar shot, cut away, with other parts of her rigging, the slings ot the brig's gaff; and on the immediate fall of the latter, the boom-mainsail covered the quarter-deck guns on the side engaged, the only ones that would at this time bear. Shortly afterwards the brig's mainmast fell by the board. Thus rendered completely unmanageable, the Avon lost all advantage to be derived from manoeuvring; and, what with the wreck lying upon some of her guns, and the upsetting of others from the usual defects in their fastenings, the brig could make little or no return to the animated fire maintained by the Wasp ; who, on this occasion (recollecting what she had lately suifered by allowing the British an opportunity to board), fought much more warily than in her action with the Eeindeer. At 10 h. 12m. P.M., according to Captain Blakeley's minutes,

166 LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS. [1814 but at a time much nearer 11 P.M., as will presently be proved, the Wasp hailed the Avon, to know if she had surrendered, and received an answer in the affirmative. When, says Captain Blakeley, " on the eve of taking possession, "the Wasp discovered " a sail close on board of her." This sail was the British 18gun brig-sloop Castilian (same force as Avon), Captain David Braimer. It was exactly at 11 P.M. that the Castilian came near enough to ascertain that one vessel was a dismasted brig (sup posed to be the Avon), and the other a ship. The Castilian im mediately chased the Wasp, then without either light or ensign. After having hailed several times without effect, the Castilian, at llh. 40m. P.M., fired her lee guns into, or rather, as it proved, over, the weather quarter of the Wasp ; who, although this second opponent had only cut away her lower main cross-trees and damaged her rigging, did not return a shot, but made all sail before the wind.