

158 LIGHT SQUADROXS AND SINGLE SHIPS. [1814.

sickening one to him, turn over these pages, and count how 
many instances he can find of conduct like his own. Enough of 
such a character : suffice it, that the British became possessed, 
at an easy rate, of a finer 22-gun ship than any they had pre- 
viously owned ; a vessel with excellent quarters, and of extra- 
ordinary large scantling. The Frolic, or Florida, as she was 
newly named, came into British possession very opportunely for 
elucidating the merits of the three actions which we have next 
to record. 
On the 23rd of February the British 18-gun brig-sloop Eper 
vier, Captain Eichard Walter Wales (sixteen 32, and two 
18-pounder 

1 carronades), cruising off Cape Sable, captured, without opposition, the American privateer-brig Alfred, of Salem, mounting 16 long 9-pounders, and manned with 108 men; the British 38-gun frigate Junon, Captain Clotworthy Upton, in sight about 10 miles to leeward. On his way to Halifax with his prize, Captain Wales discovered that a part of his crew had conspired with the late crew of the Alfred, to rise upon the British officers, and cany one vessel, if riot both, into a port of the United States. As the readiest mode to frustrate the plan, Captain Wales persevered against a gale of wind, and on the 25th arrived at Halifax. He immediately represented to the commanding officer of the port, the insufficiency of the Eper vier's crew for any service ; and, in particular, expressed his doubts about their loyalty, from the plot in which they had re-cently been engaged. However, the affair was treated lightly ; and on the 3rd of March the Epervier, without a man of her crew being changed, sailed, in company with the Shelburne schooner, for the "protection" of a small convoy bound to Bermuda and the West Indies.

Having reached her outward destination in safety, the Eper vier, on the 14th of April, sailed from Port Eoyal, Jamaica, on her return to Halifax ; and, as if the reputation of her officers and of the flag she bore was not enough for such a crew as the Epervier's to be intrusted with, the brig took on board at Havana, where she afterwards called, 118,000 dollars in specie. On the

25th of April the Epervier sailed from Havana, in company with one of the vessels, an hermaphrodite brig bound to Bermuda, which she had convoyed from Port Royal. On the 29th, at about 7h. 30m. A.M., latitude 27 47' north, longitude 80 7' west, a ship tinder Russian colours, from Havana bound to

1 These Captain Wales had taken on board at Halifax, in lieu of the two long sixes and launch-carrouade.

1814.J EPERVIER AND PEACOCK. 159

Boston, joined the Epervier, then steering north by east, with the wind about east-south-east. Shortly afterwards a large ship was discovered in the south-west, apparently in chase of the convoy. At 9 A.M. the Epervier hauled to the wind on the larboard tack, so as to keep between her convoy and the stranger ; whom we may at once introduce as the United States ship-sloop Peacock, of 20 carronades, 32-pounders, and two long 18s, Captain Lewis Warrington, from New York since the 12th of March. No answer being returned to the brig's signals, the English ensign and pendant flying on board the Peacock did not remove the suspicions of her being an enemy ; and accordingly the Epervier made the signal to that effect to her convoy. At 9 h. 40 m. A.M. the Peacock, who had approached rapidly on account of the wind having veered to the southward, hauled down the English colours, and hoisted the American flag at almost every mast and stay. At 10 A.M., when within half gun-shot of the Epervier, the Peacock edged away, as if to bring her broadside to bear in a raking position. This the brig evaded by putting her helm up, until close on the Peacock's bow, when she rounded to and fired her starboard guns. "With this their first discharge, the three aftermost carronades became unshipped by the fighting-bolts giving way. The guns, however, were soon replaced ; and having, when she got abaft the beam of her opponent, tacked and shortened sail, the Epervier received the broadside of the Peacock, as the latter kept away with the wind on the larboard beam. Although the first fire of the American ship produced no material effect, a continued discharge of star and bar shot cut away the rigging and sails of the brig, and completely dismantled her. Just as the Epervier, by a well-directed fire, had brought down her opponent's foreyard, several of the carronades on the larboard side behaved as those on the starboard side had done, and continued to upset, as often as they were replaced and discharged. In the midst of this confusion, the main boom, having been sho-t away, fell upon the wheel, and the Epervier, having had her head-sails all cut to pieces, became thrown into a position to be raked ; but, fortunately for the brig, the Peacock had too much head-way, to rake her with more than two or three shot. Having by this time shot away the brig's maintopmast, and rendered her completely unmanageable, the Peacock directed the whole of her tire at her opponent's hull, and presently reduced the Epervier's three waist guns to the disabled state ol