

Commodore Barney's gun-boats were still lying in the Pa tuxent. An immediate attempt against this flotilla offered two advantages ; one, in its capture or destruction ; the other, as a pretext for ascending the Patuxent, with the troops destined for the attack of the federal city. Part of the ships, having advanced as high up the river as the depth of water could allow, disembarked the troops, about 4000 in number, on the 19th and 20th of August, at Benedict, a small town about 50 miles south east of Washington. On the 20th, in tbe evening, Rear-admiral

Cockburn, taking with him the armed boats and tenders of the fleet, having on board the marines under Major Robyns, and the marine-artillery under Captain James H. Harrison, proceeded up the river, to attack Commodore Barney's flotilla ; and to supply with provisions, and, if necessary, afford protection to the army, as it ascended the right bank. The boats and tenders were separated into three divisions. The first division was commanded by Captains Thomas Ball Sullivan and William Stanhope Bad cock; the second, by Captains Rowland Money and James Somervell ; and the third, by Captain Robert Ramsay ; and the whole was under the superintendence and immediate management of Captain John Wainwright, of the Tonnant. The frigates Severn and Hebrus, Captains Joseph Nourse and Edmund Palmer, accompanied by the brig-sloop Manly, Captain \ 7 incent Xewton, had been also dii-ected to follow the boats up the river as far as might prove practicable.

On opening the reach above Pig-point, the rear-admiral, who had just before been joined by Captains Nourse and Palmer with the boats of their two frigates, which they could get no higher than Benedict, discovered Commodore Barney's broad pendant in the headmost vessel, a large sloop, and the remainder of the flotilla extending in a long line astern of her. The British boats now advanced as rapidly as possible ; but, on nearing the flotilla, the sloop bearing the broad pendant was observed to be on fire, and soon afterwards blew up ; as did 15 out of the 16 remaining gun-boats. The one in which the fire had not taken was captured. The rear-admiral found 13 merchant-schooners, whicli had been under Commodore Barney's protection. Of these, such as were not worth bringing away, were destroyed. The remainder were moved to Pig-point, to receive on board the tobacco which had been there found. The destruction of this flotilla secured the right flank of the army under Major-general Eoss ; who, on the afternoon of the 22nd, with the troops, arrived and encamped at the town of Upper Marlborough, situated about four miles up the western branch of the Patuxent. The men, therefore, after having been nearly three months on board ship, had, in less than three days, marched 40 miles ; and that in the month of August, when the sultriness of the climate could scarcely be tolerated. While

General Koss and his men were resting themselves at Upper Marlborough, General Winder and his army, now joined by Commodore Barney and the men of his flotilla, were lying at their encampment at the long Old Fields, only eight miles distant. On the next morning the American troops were re-viewed by Mr. Madison, " their commander-in-chief, whose martial appearance gladdened every countenance and encouraged every heart." l Soon after the review, a detachment from the American army advanced along the road to Upper Marlborough; and, after exchanging a few shots with the