

VOL. vi. x

178 LIGHT SQUA1.HJ03S AND SINGLE SHIPS. [1814.

very trifling. Under these circumstances, the loss, on the part of the army, amounted to one captain, two lieutenants, five sergeants, and 56 rank and file killed, two lieutenant-colonels, one major, one captain, 14 lieutenants, two ensigns, 10 sergeants, and 155 rank and file wounded ; total, 64 killed and 185 wounded.

The loss sustained by the naval department amounted to only one colonial marine killed, one master's mate (Jeremiah M'Daniel), two sergeants, and three colonial marines wounded ; making a total of 65 killed and 191 wounded. The officers of the navy and of the marines, who, besides Bear-admiral Cockburn, were

present in the battle, appear to have been Captain Edmund Palmer, with his aide-de-camp, midshipman Arthur Wakefield, Lieutenant James Scott, first of the Albion, acting as Eear admiral Cockburn's aide-de-camp, Lieutenant John Lawrence, of the marine-artillery, and lieutenant of marines Althestan Stephens. As soon as the troops were refreshed, General Eoss and Eearadmiral Cockburn, with about 1000 men, moved forward from Bladensburg, and at 8 P.M. arrived at an open piece of ground, two miles from the federal city. The troops were here drawn up, while Major-general Eoss, Eear-admiral Cockburn, and .several other officers, accompanied by a small guard, rode forward to reconnoitre. On arriving opposite to some houses, the party halted ; and, just as the officers had closed each other, in order to consult whether or not it would be prudent to enter the heart of the city that night, a volley was fired from the windows of one of two adjoining houses, and from the capitol ; which volley killed one soldier, and General Eoss's horse from

under him, and wounded three soldiers. Eear-admiral Cock-

burn instantly rode back to the detachment stationed in advance, 
and soon returned with the light companies. The house was 
then surrounded ; and, after some prisoners had been taken from 
it, set on fire: the adjoining house fell with it. The capitol, 
which was contiguous to these houses, and which, according to 
an American writer, was " 
capable of being made an impreg 
nable citadel against an enemy, with little artillery, and that of 
the lighter class," was also set on fire. 
We are obliged to pause an instant, in order to correct a very 
serious rnisstatement, which, as the book in which it appears 
with two or three others lay open before us, we at first took to 
be the splenetic effusion of an American writer. But we owe 

an apology to the Americans ; for the statement emanates from the pen of a British naval officer, and here it is : "A little mus-

1814.1 CAPTURE OF WASHINGTON. J79 ketry from one of the houses in the town, which killed the general's horse, was all the resistance they met with. This was quickly silenced ; the house burnt, and the people within it put to death." l When it is considered who are usually the inmates of a dwelling-house, the statement that " the people within it were put to death," and that for " killing a horse," is calculated