

172 LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS. ("1814.

creek, in St. Mary's county, with the boats and marines, to examine the country. The militia showed themselves occasion ally, but always retreated when pursued; and the boats re-turned to the ships without any casualty, having captured four schooners, and destroyed one. The inhabitants remaining peace ably in their houses, the rear-adrniral did not suffer any injury to be done to them, excepting at one farm, from which two musket-shot had been fired at the admiral's gig, and where the property was, in consequence, destroyed. On the 26th the rear-admiral proceeded to the head of the Machodic river, in Virginia, where he burnt six schooners, whilst the marines marched, without opposition, over the country on the banks of that river; and, there not remaining any other place on the Virginia or St. Mary's side of his last anchorage, that the rear-admiral had not visited, he, on the 28th, caused the ships to move above Blackstone's island ; and, on the 29th, proceeded with the boats and marines, up the "Wicomoco river. He landed at Hamburgh and Chaptico ; from which latter place he shipped a considerable quantity of tobacco, and visited several houses in different parts of the country ; the owners of which living quietly with their fami lies, and seeming to consider themselves and the neighbourhood to be at his disposal, the rear-admiral caused no further inconvenience to them, than obliging them to furnish supplies of cattle and stock for the use of his forces, for which they were liberally paid. On the 2nd of August the squadron dropped down the Potomac, near to the entrance of the Yocomico river, which the rear-admiral entered on the following day, with the boats and marines, and landed with the latter. The enemy had here collected in great force, and made more resistance than usual, but the ardour and determination of the rear-admiral's gallant little band carried all before it ; and, after forcing the enemy to give Avay, the marines followed him 10 miles up the country, captured a field-piece, and burnt several houses, which had been converted into depots for militia arms, &c. Learning afterwards that General Hungerford had rallied his men at Kinsale, the rear-admiral proceeded thither; and, although the position of the Americans was extremely strong, they had only time to give the British an ineffectual volley before the latter gained the height, when the Americans again retired with precipitation, and did not re-appear. The stores found at Kinsale were then phipped without molestation ; and, having burnt the store-

1814.J BOAT ATTACKS, ETC., IN CHESAPEAKE BAY. 173 houses and other places, with two old schooners, and destroyed two batteries, the rear-admiral re-embarked, bringing away five prize schooners, a large quantity of tobacco, flour, &c., a fieldpiece, and a few prisoners. The American General Taylor was wounded and unhorsed, and escaped only through the thickness of the wood and bushes, into which he ran. The British had three men killed, and as many wounded. Thus 500 British marines, and 200 seamen and marine-artillery, penetrated 10 miles into the enemy's country, and skirmished, on their way back, surrounded by woods, in the face of the whole collected militia of Virginia, under Generals Hungerford and Taylor ; and yet, after this long march, carried the heights of Kinsale in the most gallant manner. Coan river, a few miles below Yocomico, being the only inlet on the Virginia side of the Potomac that the rear-admiral had not visited, he proceeded on the 7th to attack it, with the boats and marines. After a tolerably quick fire on the boats, the enemy went off precipitately, with the guns. The battery was destroyed, and the river ascended ; in which three schooners were captured, and some tobacco brought off. On the 12th the rear-admiral proceeded up St. Mary's creek, and landed in various parts of the country about that extensive inlet ; but without seeing a single armed person, although militia had formerly been stationed at St. Mary's factory for its defence, the inhabi tants of the state appearing to consider it wiser to submit than to attempt opposition. On the 15th of August the rear-admiral again landed within St. Mary's creek ; but found, in the different parts of the country, the same quiet and submissive conduct on the part of the inhabitants, as in the places visited on the 12th. Some hints thrown out by the British commissioners at the conference at Ghent, coupled with the rumoured destination of British troops shipping hi the ports of France, induced the American commissioners to intimate to their government, that an attack upon the federal city would probably be made in the course of the summer of 1814. This notice reached Mr. Madi son on the 26th of June ; and, on the 1st of July, he submitted to his council a plan for immediately calling 2000 or 3000 men into the field, and holding 10,000 or 12,000 militia and volun teers, of the neighbouring states, in readiness to reinforce that corps. On the next day he created into a military district the whole state of Maryland, the district of Columbia, and that part of Virginia north of the Eappahannock river, embracing an