

to fill the mind with horror, and to call forth execrations against the monsters who could perpetrate such an act. Fortunately for the fame of the general and admiral who presided on the occasion, the account we have just given, and the substance of which we published eight or nine years ago, is a faithful relation of all that occurred. Scarcely had the flames burst out from the capitol and the two contiguous houses, than an awful explosion announced that the Americans were employed upon the same business in the lower part of the city. By this time the remainder of the British forces from Bladensburg had arrived at the encampment. At 10 h. 30m., P.M., after a party had been sent to destroy the fort and public works at Greenleafs point, Major-general Ross, and Eear-admiral Cockburn, each at the head of a small de-tachment of men, numbering together not more than 200, proceeded down the hill towards the President's palace. Finding it utterly abandoned, and hearing probably that a guard of

soldiers, with " two pieces of cannon, well mounted on travelling 
carriages," 
2 had been stationed at, and but recently withdrawn 
from, this the American " commander-in-chief's 
" 
head-quarters, 
Eear-admiral Cockburn directed it to be set on fire. A log-hut, 
under similar circumstances, would have shared the same fate, 
and the justice of the measure not been disputed. Why, then, 
in a country where "equality of rights" is daily preached up, 
should the palace be held more sacred than the cottage ? Tho 
loss of the one falls, where it ought, upon the nation at large ; 
the loss of the other, a lamentable case at all times, solely upon 
the individual proprietor. To the building, containing the 
treasury and war offices, the torches of the conquerors were 
next applied. On arriving opposite to the office of the " National 
Intelligencer," the American government-paper, Rear-admiral 
Cockburn observed to the inhabitants near him, that he must 
destroy it. On being told, however, that the adjoining buildings 
would be likely to take fire, he desisted. The rear-admiral 

then wishing the inhabitants "goodnight," and assuring them

1 
Brenton, vol. v., p, 166. before the American committee of invts- * 
Testimony of Mr. William Simmons, tigation. 

that private property and persons should be respected, departed to his quarters on the capitol-hill. Early on the next morning the rear-admiral was seen walking about the city, accompanied by three soldiers only. Indeed, General Wilkinson says : " A single sentinel who had been accidentally left on post near the

office of the '

National Intelligencer,' kept undisturbed posses sion of the central part of the metropolis until the next morn ing ; of which there are several living witnesses." 1 At this time, too, it appears an American force of more than 4000 com batants was posted upon the heights of Georgetown, which is a continuation of the city to the westward. During the morning of the 25th the secretary of state's office was burnt, and the types and printing materials of the govern, ment-paper were destroyed. A serious accident had happened to the party sent to Greenleaf's point. Some powder, concealed in a well, accidentally took fire, killing 12, and wounding 30, officers and men. The extensive ropewalks, at some distance from the city, were destroyed by the British; and so was an immense quantity of small arms and heavy ordnance, as well as the great bridge across the Potomac ; a very prudent military measure, especially as the Americans had themselves destroyed the two bridges crossing the eastern branch. A party, under Captain Wainwright, destroyed the few stores and buildings in the navyyard, which had escaped the flames of the preceding night. As the British were in haste to be gone, and as the