

1814.] BOAT ATTACKS, ETC., IN CHESAPEAKE BAY. 169 iu chase ; but the shallowness of the water shortly compelled the Dragon to re-anchor. In the mean time the flotilla had run for shelter into the Patuxent. By way of inducing Commodore Barney to separate his force, Captain Barrie now detached two boats to cut off a schooner under Cove point ; but, not con sidering that his orders to give protection warranted such a risk, Commodore Barney allowed the vessel to be burnt in his sight. On the 6th the flotilla retreated higher up the Patuxent : and, being joined on the day following by the 38-gun frigate Loire, Captain Thomas Brown, and 18-gun brig-sloop Jasseur, Captain George Edward Watts, Captain Barrie proceeded up the river with them, the St. Lawrence, and the boats of the two 74s. The flotilla retreated about two miles up St. Leonard's creek, where it could be reached by boats only ; but the force of the latter was not equal to the attack. Captain Barrie endeavoured, however, by a discharge of rockets and carronades from the boats, to provoke the American vessels, which were moored in a close line abreast across the channel, to come down within reach of the guns of the ship, brig, and schooner, at anchor near the mouth of the creek. At one time the American flotilla got under way, and chased the boats to a short distance, and then returned to their moorings. AVith a view to force the flotilla to quit its station, detachments of seamen and marines

were landed on both sides of the river, and the American militia, 
estimated at 300 or 400, retreated before them to the woods. 
The marines destroyed two tobacco-stores, and several houses 
converted into military posts ; but still the flotilla remained at 
its moorings. 
On the 15th of June the 32-gun frigate Narcissus, Captain 
John Eichard Lumley, joined the little squadron ; and Captain 
Barrie, taking with him 12 boats, containing 180 marines, and 
30 of the black colonial corps, proceeded up the river to Bene 
dict. Here the men disembarked, and drove into the woods, 
without a struggle, a number of militia, who left behind a part 
of their muskets and camp equippage, as well as a 6-pounder 
field-piece. After spiking the latter, and destroying a store 
containing tobacco, the British again took to their boats, except 
five or six men, who had probably strayed too far into the woods. 
After quitting Benedict, Captain Barrie ascended the river to 
Lower Marlborough, a town about 28 miles from the capital of 
the United States. The party landed and took possession of the 
place ; the militia, as well as the inhabitants, flying into the 
woods. A schooner, belonging to a Captain David, was cap- 

170 LIGHT SQTTADROXS AND SINGLE SHIPS. [1814. tured, and loaded with tobacco. After this, having burnt, at Lower Marlborough and at Magruders, on the opposite side of the river, tobacco-stores containing 2800 hogsheads, and loaded the boats with stock, the detachment re-embarked. The Ameri cans collected a force, estimated at about 350 regulars, besides militia, on Holland's cliffs; but some marines, being landed, traversed the skirts of the heights, and re-embarked without molestation, the American troops not again showing themselves till the boats were out of gun-shot. The blockade of Commodore Barney's flotilla, and the depredations on the coasts of the Patuxent, by Captain Barrie's squa dron, caused great inquietude at Washington. At length an order reached the American commodore, directing him to destroy the flotilla, in the hope that the British, having no longer such a temptation in their way, would retire from a position so near to the capital. The order was suspended, owing to a proposal of Colonel Wadsworth, of the engineers ; who, with two l8-pounders upon travelling-carriages, protected by a detachment of marines and regular troops, engaged to drive