

vessels, even if they could have been floated in safety down the Potomac, were not wanted, it was very considerate in the Ame

rican government to order the destruction of the frigate, of 1600 tons, which was nearly ready to be launched, and of the fine sloop-of-war Argus, ready for sea; and whose 20 carronades, 32-pounders, and two long 18-pounders, would have assisted so powerfully in defending the entrance to the city by the lower bridge. According to the official estimate of the public property destroyed, the value has been much overrated. It appears not to have exceeded 1,624,280 dollars, or 365,463^. sterling. "With respect to private property, we have only to quote passages from

American prints, to show how that was treated. One newspaper says: "The British officers pay inviolable respect to private property, and no peaceable citizen is molested." A writer from Baltimore, under the date of August 27th, says: "The enemy, I learn, treated the inhabitants of Washington well." That the

i \Vilkinson, vol. i., p. 791.

1814.] EXPEDITION UP THE POTOMAC TO ALEXANDRIA. 181

British officers did all they could to secure the inhabitants from injury, both in their persons and properties, may also be gathered from the acknowledgment from Mr. Thompson, another American writer, that " the plunder of individual property was prohibited, and soldiers transgressing the order were severely punished." On the 25th, at 8 P.M., the British left Washington, by the way of Bladensburg. Here such of the wounded as could ride, or be transported in carriages, were provided with 30 or 40 horses, 12 carts and waggons, one coach, and several gigs. With these, preceded by a drove of GO or 70 cattle, the troops moved leisurely along. On the 29th, in the evening, they reached

Benedict, 50 miles from Washington, without a single musket 
having been fired ; and, on the following day, re-embarked in 
the vessels of the fleet. No complaints that we can discover 
have been made against the British during their retreat across 
the country; although, as an American writer has been pleased 
to say, 
" General Boss scarcely kept up his order, sufficiently to 
identify the body of his army." 
Of the many expeditions up the bays and rivers of the United 
States during the late war, none equalled in brilliancy of ex- 
ecution that up the Potomac to Alexandria. This service was 
intrusted to Captain James Alexander Gordon, of the 38-gun 
frigate Seahorse, having under his orders Ihe 18-pounder 36-gun 
frigate Euryalus, Captain Charles Napier, bomb-ships Devasta 
tion, ^Etna, and Meteor, Captains Thomas Alexander. Eichard 

Kenah, and Samuel Roberts, rocket-ship Erebus, Captain David

Ewen Bartholomew, and a small tender, or despatch-boat. On the 17th, at 9 h. 15 m. A.M., the squadron got under way from the anchorage at the entrance of the Potomac, and, without the aid of pilots, began ascending the intricate channel of the river leading to the capital of the United States. On the 18th the Seahorse grounded, and could only get afloat again by shifting her guns to the tenders in company. That done, and the guns returned to their places, the squadron again stood up the river. On the 25th, while passing the flats of Maryland-point, a squall struck the squadron : the Seahorse had her mizenmast sprung ; and the Euryalus, just as she had clewed up her sails to be in a state to receive it, had her bowsprit and the head of her foremast badly sprung, and the heads of all three topmasts fairly wrung off. Such, however, was the state of discipline on board the ship, that in 12 hours, the Euryalus had refitted herself, and was agaic under way ascending the river.