

| the of coasts the on dations Patuxent, | Barrie's squa Captain by | |
| --- | --- | --- |
| caused inquietude dron, great | at an At length Washington. | |
| the American order reached | to him directing commodore, | |
| in the the flotilla, hope destroy | that no the British, having | |
| in their a such temptation longer | retire a from would way, | |
| the to so near capital. position | order was The suspended, | |

away the two British frigates from the mouth of the creek. The colonel established his battery behind an elevated ridge, which sheltered him and his men ; and on the morning of the 26th of June a simultaneous attack by the gun-boats and battery was made upon the Loire and Narcissus. Owing to the effect of the colonel's hot shot, the impracticability of bringing a gun to bear upon his position from either frigate, and the want of a sufficient force to storm and carry the battery, Captain Brown retreated with the Loire and Narcissus to a station near Point Patience; and, with the exception of two barges, which put back, disabled apparently by the shot from the frigates, the American flotilla moved out of the creek, and ascended the Patuxent. The frigates sustained no loss on this occasion ; but Commodore Barney admits a loss of one midshipman and three men killed and seven men wounded.

On the 4th of July the 40-gun frigate Severn, Captain Joseph Nourse, joined the Loire and Narcissus ; and Captain Nourse immediately despatched Captain Brown, with the marines of the three ships, 150 in number, up St. Leonard's creek. Here two of Commodore Barney's barges were found scTittled, owing to the damage they had received in the action with the frigates. The barges and several other vessels were burnt, and a large tobacco-store destroyed. Soon after this, the British quitted the I'atuxent.

1814.] BOAT ATTACKS, ETC., IN CHESAPEAKE BAY. 171

On the 19th of July, Bear-admiral Cockburn, having been joined by a battalion of marines, and a detachment of marine artillery, proceeded up the river Potomac, for the purpose of attacking Leonard's town, the capital of St. Mary's county, where the 36th United States regiment was stationed. The marines of the squadron under Major George Lewis were landed, whilst the boats pulled up in front of the town ; but, on discovering the marines, the enemy's armed force quitted the place, and suffered the British to take quiet possession. A quantity of stores belonging to the 36th regiment, and a number of arms of different descriptions, were found there and destroyed ; and a quantity of tobacco, flour, provisions, and other articles, were brought away in the boats, and in a schooner \vhich was lying off the town. Not a musket being fired, nor an armed

enemy seen, the town was spared.

A body of militia having assembled at a place called Nominy ferry, in Virginia, a considerable way up Nominy river, Rear admiral Cockburn, on the 21st, proceeded thither, with the boats and marines ; the latter commanded by Captain John Eobyns, during the illness of Major Lewis. The enemy's position was on a very commanding eminence, projecting into the water ; but, some marines having been landed on its flank, and they being seen getting up the craggy side of the mountain, while the main body was disembarking at the ferry, the Ameri cans fell back, and, although pursued for several miles, escaped with the loss of a few prisoners. The Americans had withdrawn their field-artillery, and hid it in the woods ; fearing that, if they kept it to use against the British, they would not be able to retreat with it quickly enough to save it from capture. After taking on board all the tobacco and other stores found in the place, with a quantity of cattle, and destroying all the storehouses and buildings, the rear-admiral re-embarked ; and drop ping down to another point of the Nominy river, observed some movements on shore. Upon this he again landed with tho marines. The Americans fired a volley, but, on the advance of the marines, fled into the woods. Everything in the neigh bourhood was therefore destroyed or brought off; and, after visiting the country in several other directions, covering the escape of the negroes who were anxious to join him, the rearadmiral quitted the river, and returned to the ships with 135 refugee negroes, two captured schooners, a large quantity of tobacco, dry goods, and cattle, and a few prisoners. On the 24th of July the rear-admiral went up St. Clement's