

174 LIGHT SQUADRONS A.ND SINGLE SHIPS. [1814.

exposed coast of nearly 1000 miles ; vulnerable at every point, and intersected by many large rivers, and by the Chesapeake bay. On the 4th of July, as a further defensive preparation, the President made a requisition to the several states of the union, for 93,500 militia, as authorized by law ; designating their respective quota, and requesting the executive magis trates of each state, to detach and hold them in readiness for immediate service. Of these 93,500 militia, 15,000 were to be drawn from the tenth military district, or that surrounding the metropolis, for whose defence they were intended. On the 2nd of June the British 74-gun ship Eoyal Oak, Bear admiral Pulteney Malcolm, Captain Edward Dix, accompanied by three frigates, three sloops, two bomb-vessels, five ships armed en flute, and three transports, having on board a body of troops under Major-general Eoss, sailed from Verdon road at the mouth of the Gironde. On the 24th of July the squadron arrived at Bermuda, and there joined Yice-admiral Cochrane, in the 80-gun ship Tonnant. On the 2nd of August, having re-ceived on board the Tonnant Major-general Eoss and his staff,

Sir Alexander sailed, in company with the 18-pounder 36-gun frigate Euryalus, Captain Charles Napier, for Chesapeake bay ; and on the 14th of August arrived, and joined the Albion, Bear admiral Cockburn, off the mouth of the Potomac. On the next day Major-general Eoss, accompanied by Bear-admiral Cock burn, went on shore to reconnoitre. The rear-admiral's knowledge of the country, as well as the excellent plan he adopted to prevent surprise, enabled the two officers to penetrate further than would otherwise have been prudent. The thick woods that skirt, and the numerous ravines

that intersect, the different roads about Washington, offer important advantages to an ambushing enemy. Bear-admiral

Cockburn, therefore, in his frequent walks through the country, invariably moved forward between two parties of marines, occu pying, in open order, the woods by the roadside. Each marine carried a bugle, to be used as a signal, in case of casual separa tion, or the appearance of an enemy. It was during the excur sion with General Boss, that Bear-admiral Cockburn suggested the facility of an attack upon the city of Washington ; and General Boss determined, as soon as the troops should arrive from Bermuda, to make the attempt. On the 17th of August, Bear-admiral Malcolm arrived with the troops, and joined Vice-admiral Cochrane off the mouth of the Potomac ; and the whole proceeded to the Patuxent, situ-

1814.J BOAT ATTACKS, ETC., IN CHESAPEAKE BAY. 175 ated about 20 miles further up the bay. In the mean time Captain James Alexander Gordon, of the 38-gun frigate Sea horse, with some vessels of the squadron, had been detached up the Potomac, to bombard Fort Washington, situated on the left bank of that river, about 14 miles below the federal city ; and

Captain Sir Peter Parker, with the 38-gun frigate Menelaus ? had been sent up the Chesapeake, above Baltimore, to create a diversion in that quarter. The direct route to Washington, from the mouth of the Potomac, was up that river, about 50 miles, to Fort Tobacco ; thence, over land, by the village of Piscataway, 32 miles, to the lower bridge across the eastern branch of the Potomac ; but, as no doubt could be entertained that this bridge, which was half a mile long, and had a draw at the west end, would be defended as well by a body of troops, as by si heavy sloop-of-war and an armed schooner, known to be in the river, a preference was given to the route up the Patuxent, and by JBladensburg ; where the eastern branch, in case of the bridge at that spot being destroyed, could be easily forded.