

1 Marshall, vol. ii., p. 536.

1815.] THIRD CHASE AND ESCAPE OF THE CONSTITUTION. 2,">5

Lcander's consorts also hoisted their colours, and the Newcastle scaled her guns. The Constitution's log notices the circum stance thus: " The ship on our lee-quarter firing bfoadsides by divisions, her shot falling short of us." An officer of the Con stitution, in a letter to a friend, says: "The shot fell short

from 100 to 200 yards."

1 This would, indeed, have brought the ships near together ; but the American officer must have greatly underrated the distance. For our part, we cannot see the neces sity of scaling the guns at all : not only was the concussion calculated to check the ship's way, but it was very likely to calm the breeze, already beginning to slacken as the day drew towards its close.

At 2 h. 30 m. P.M., the Constitution having dropped the Levant considerably, the situation of the latter, in reference to the Acasta, became as critical as that of the Cyane had been. Captain Stewart accordingly made the Levant's signal to tack ; and the Levant did immediately tack. At this time, says the Acasta, "the frigate had gained on us, but we had gained on the sloop." One of the Constitution's officers gives a different statement from that in the Acasta's log. He says : " The Acasta sailed faster than the Constitution, and was gaining on her."-

At all events the Acasta, although she might drop a little astern,

was weathering upon the Constitution, and had now brought 
her to bear upon her weather cat-head. The instant the 
Levant tacked, the Leander made a signal, the nature of which 
we shall discuss presently ; and, in obedience to that signal, 
the Acasta " tacked in chase of the sloop." In a minute or 
two afterwards, according to statements that have appeared 
in print, the Leander and Newcastle successively did the same. 
When the Newcastle tacked, the Constitution was five or six 
miles to windward of her, and, 
" in the prevailing haze, nearly 
out of sight" from the deck of the Leander, from whom 
the Newcastle then bore south-east by east, and the Acasta 
north-east. 

At 2 h. 50 m. P.M., which was just 14 minutes after she had tacked, the Newcastle lost sight of the Constitution, owing to the increased haziness of the weather as the former approached the land, and the opposite course steered by the latter. The Levant, shortly after she had tacked, bore away for Porto-Praya road, and at about 3 h. 15 m. P.M. received from the Leander in passing an ineffectual fire. " At 4 h. 30 m.," says the New

castle log, " saw her (Levant) anchor. Acasta fired a broadside.

Naval Monument, p. 182. 2 Ibid.

2f)() LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS. [1815.

At 4 h. 56 m. tacked and fired our larboard broadside." An American account says : " The Levant ran into port, so as to run her jib-boom over the battery. The Acasta and Newcastle came in, and, although her colours were hauled down, fired at her a number of times. They were obliged to hoist and lower their colours twice ; yet not a gun was fired from the Levant. Lieutenant Ballard, who commanded, had ordered his men to lie on the deck, by which they all escaped injury, although con siderable damage was done to the town. It seemed unnecessary for two heavy frigates to fire into one sloop-of-war, who neither did or could make any resistance." 1 When tbe Leander opened her fire she discovered, clearly enough, the force of the ship