

Moore, of the Seahorse, in towing the nearest fire-vessel on

shore, while the others were removed from the power of 
doing mischief by the smaller boats of the Devastation, is 
spoken of in high and just terms of commendation by Captain 
Gordon. 
Notwithstanding that the Meteor and Fairy, assisted by the 
despatch-boat, a prize gun-boat, and a boat belonging to the 
Euryalus, with a howitzer, had greatly impeded the progress of 
the Americans in their w r 
orks, the latter were enabled to increase 
their battery from five to 11 guns, with a furnace for heating 
shot. On the 3rd of September, the wind coming to the north 
west, the 2Etna and Erebus succeeded in getting down to the 

assistance of the Meteor and her companions. On the 4th the frigates and prizes reached the same spot ; but the Devastation, in spite of the utmost exertions in warping her, still remained five miles higher up the river. This was the moment that the Americans made their greatest efforts to effect the destruction of the British squadron. The Erebus, who had been placed by her commander in an admirable position for harassing the workmen employed in the trenches, was attacked by three fieldpieces ; which, before they were beaten off, did the ship con siderable injury. A second attempt was now made to destroy the Devastation by fire-vessels ; but, owing to the alacrity with which Captain Baker with the boats of the squadron went to

1814.] CAPTAIN GORDON AT ALEXANDRIA. 185 her assistance, the American boats and fire-vessels retreated, and the ship was saved. In consequence of the Americans having sought refuge under some guns in a narrow creek, thickly wooded, and from which it was impossible to dislodge them, Captain Baker sustained a serious loss, including among the killed his second-lieutenant, Charles Dickinson.

On the 5th, at noon, the wind coming fair and every suitable arrangement having been made, the Seahorse and Euryalus anchored within musket-shot of the batteries, while the whole of the prizes passed between the frigates and the shoal. The three bombships, the Fairy and the Ei'ebus, firing as they passed, anchored in a favourable position for facilitating, by means of their force, the further removal of the frigates. At 3 P.M.,

having completely silenced the fire of the American batteries, the Seahorse and Erebus cut their cables, and the whole squadron proceeded to the next position taken up by the American troops ; who had here two batteries mounting from 14 to 18 guns, on a range of cliffs about a mile in extent, and close under which the ships were obliged to pass. It was not intended to make the attack that evening : but, the Erebus grounding within range of the batteries, the frigates and other vessels were necessarily called into action. On this occasion the fire of the Fairy produced the most decisive effect, as well as that of the Erebus, while the Devastation, ./Etna, and Meteor threw their shells with admirable precision. In consequence of these vigorous measures, the American batteries, by 8 P.M., were completely silenced. On the 6th, at daylight, the British squadron again got under way ; and, so satisfied were the whole of the parties on shore that their opposition was ineffectual, that they allowed the British to pass without further molestation. On the 9th the Seahorse and her companion sailed out of the Potomac, and came to an anchor in safety on the spot whence they had