

in pursuit of which the squadron had tacked. Sir George then made the signal for the Acasta to take possession of her. The Acasta did so ; and by 5 P.M. all three British ships had anchored in Porto-Praya road. On the 12th, at 6 h. 80 m. A.M., Sir George Collier went on shore to communicate with the governor, in consequence of the damage done to the houses of the town by the shot from the Acasta and Newcastle. At 1 1 A.M. Sir George returned ; and shortly afterwards the British squadron, accompanied by the prize, got under way, and steered for the West Indies. We must now pay a visit to the Constitu tion.

The moment he saw how the Acasta was weathering him, and that he had no chance of escape by bearing up, as the New castle would inevitably intercept him, Captain Stewart considered the Constitution as within an hour or two of becoming a British prize. The American officers now questioned the

British officers as to the manner in which the commodore of the chasing squadron would treat them ; and, in short, began making, in regard to their clothes and other personal effects, such arrangements as they thought necessary in the change they were about to undergo from freemen to captives. All tin's while Captains Douglas and Falcon, and the late officers of the Levant and Cyane, were blessing their stars at the good fortune that awaited them, although, as we can readily conceive, their delicacy forbade them from making a display of it before Captain Stewart and his officers. When the Cyane tacked, and the three British ships still continued in chase of the Constitu tion, not a doubt could remain that the English commodore, whoever he might be, was determined to have her. The Levant tucks ; and (can it be possible '?) all three British ships tack 1 Naval Monument, p. 182.

1815.] THIRD CHASE AND ESCAPE OF THE CONSTITUTION. 257 after her. Here is a change ! The joy of Captain Stewart and his officers was now as extravagant as their fears had been well grounded. But what were now the feelings of Captains Douglas and Falcon and the other British officers ? What were they indeed ! " The British officers on board," says the Constitution's officer, "who had expressed the utmost confidence that the Constitution would be taken in an hour, felt the greatest vexa tion and disappointment, which they expressed in very emphatic terms," 1 From the following passage in the same account, it would appear that some one of the British officers, to save as much as possible the credit of the service to which he belonged, pretended to understand the purport of a signal that was hoisted by the Newcastle, and of which we shall speak presently. Thus: "After the other ships tacked, the Newcastle made a signal that her fore-topsail yard was sprung, and tacked also."

In less than three-quarters of an hour after the Newcastle had tacked from her, the Constitution was becalmed or nearly so. As soon as a breeze sprang up, Captain Stewart steered towards the coast of Brazil, and through the West Indies home; and, early in the month of May,