

On the 27th, in the evening, after each of the ships had been aground not less than 20 times, and each time obliged to haul themselves off by main strength, and after having for five suc cessive days, with the exception of a few hours, been employed in Avarping a distance of not more than 50 miles, the squadron arrived abreast of Fort Washington. The bomb-ships imme diately began throwing their shells into the fort, preparatory to an attack the next morning by the two frigates. On the bursting of the first shell, the garrison was observed to retreat ; but, supposing some concealed design, Captain Gordon directed the fire to be continued. At 8 P.M., however, all doubts were removed by the explosion of the powder-magazine, which destroyed the inner buildings. On the 28th, at daylight, the British took pos session of the fort, and of three minor batteries, mounting altogether 27 guns, chiefly of heavy caliber. The guns had already been spiked; and their complete destruction, with the carriages, was effected by the seamen and marines of the squadron. These forts were intended for the defence of Alexandria, the channel to which the British began immediately to buoy. A flag of truce now came off with a proposal to capitulate ; and one hardly knows which to admire most, the prudence of Captain Gordon, in postponing his answer to the common council of Alexandria, until, says he, "I was enabled to place the shipping in such a position, as would insure assent to the terms I had decided to enforce," or the peremptory and humiliating conditions which he did enforce. It was in vain that the Americans had sunk their vessels ; they must get them up again, and put them in the state in which they were, when the squadron passed the Kettle

Bottoms ; the owners of the vessels must send on board their 
furniture without delay ; merchandise removed must be brought 
back ; and the merchants load their own vessels, which will be 
towed off by the captors ! 
The last article of the capitulation provides, that British of- 
ficers are to see the terms " 
strictly complied with." One of the 
officers sent on this service was. midshipman John Went Fraser 

of the Euryalus, a mere stripling. Having strayed alone to some distance from his boat, two American naval officers rode at, as if to run over him ; one, a very powerful man, caught the youth by the shirt-collar and dragged him, almost suffocating, across the pummel of the saddle, galloping off with him. For tunately the shirt-collar gave way, and the lad fell to the ground He was quickly upon his legs again, and ran towards a landing place, where hiis boat was waiting ; the American pursuing him.

1814.] CAPTAIN GORDON AT ALEXANDRIA. 183

The boat and the men in it were hid under a steep bank or wall and, on that account, could not level their carronades at the honourable gentleman as he approached. The instant he saw the boat's crew, he turned pale with fright ; and rode off in a contrary direction as fast as his horse could carry him. The