

1814.J ATTACK ON BALTIMORE. 187 their lamented commander, and all their wounded but three.

The British suffered a loss of 14 killed, including Sir Peter

Parker and midshipman John T. Sandes, and 27 wounded, including both lieutenants of marines, Benjamin George Benyon and George Poe. 1 The Americans, as a proof how little they exposed themselves, sustained a loss of not more than two or three men killed and wounded. At the head of a narrow bay or inlet of the Patapsco river, and distant from its confluence with the Chesapeake about 14 miles, stands the city of Baltimore, containing about 50,000 inhabitants. It is nearly surrounded by detached hills ; one of which, Clinkapin hill, situated on its eastern side, commands the  h. 15 m., which was as soon as the Levant had rove new

250 LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS. [1815 braces, the gallant little ship again hauled her wind, as well to ascertain the fate of her companion, as to renew the desperate contest. On approaching the Constitution and Cyane, the Levant, with a boldness bordering on rashness, ranged close alongside the Constitution to leeward, being unable to weather her; and at 8 h. 30 m. these two ships (the President and Little-Belt over again), while passing on opposite tacks, exchanged broadsides. The Constitution immediately wore under the Levant's stern, and raked her with a second broadside. At 9 h. 30m., finding that the Cyane had undoubtedly surrendered, Captain Douglas again put before the wind ; but, in the act of doing so, the Levant received several raking broadsides, had her wheel shot away, and her lower masts badly wounded. To fire her stern-chase guns, and steer at the same time, was impossible, owing to a sad mistake in the construction of this new class of vessel. Seeing the Constitution ranging up on her larboard quarter, the Levant, atlOh. 30m. P.M., struck her colours.

Out of her 115 men and 16 boys, the Levant had six seamen and marines killed, one officer and 15 seamen and marines wounded; and the Cyane, out of her 145 men and 26 boys, (making 42 boys between these two small ships !) had six seamen and marines killed and 13 wounded ; total, 12 killed and

29 wounded. The Constitution had sailed on her last cruise with a complement of 477 men and three boys, but, having manned a prize with an officer and seven men, had on board only 469. Out of this number, she had six killed and mortally wounded, and six others wounded severely and slightly. The wounded are rather out of proportion, but they are all that the

Americans have acknowledged. 1 The comparatively slight loss inflicted upon the two ships affords a clear proof, that the

Americans had begun to relax in their gunnery ; and, had the war continued, and the United States gone on equipping and manning new ships, some very unexpected reverses at sea

would have followed. 
The captain of an American frigate, who could solemnly 
declare, that a British frigate had run away from him, would 
naturally make a great boast of capturing these two sloops, as 
they may be called. Therefore Captain Stewart officially says : 
"Considering the advantages derived by the enemy, from a 
divided and more active force, as also their superiority in the 
weight and number of guns, I deem the speedy and decisive 
result of this action the strongest assurance which can be given 
1 