

American editors thought this a good joke ; and very readily informed us, that one of these worthies was the famed Captain David Porter, the other, and he that committed the atrocious and dastardly assault, Master-commandant John Orde Creigh ton, an American by adoption only, and, we rather think, an Irishman. The first of these officers, for his " brilliant deeds at Valparaiso." had recently been appointed to the new frigate at Washington, whose name, to commemorate the exploits of Cap tain Porter's favourite ship, had been changed from the Columbia

to the Essex, and Jiis gallant brother-horseman had been appointed to the new corvette Argus ; both of which ships, it will be recollected, were burnt, and their intended commanders thrown out of employment, by the entry of the British into Washington, a few days previous. This is what infuriated the two heroes, and determined them to sacrifice the first straggling Briton they could find. At the time this outrage was committed, a flag of truce was flying before Alexandria ; whose inhabitants, in a body, disavowed the act, reprobating it as became them. Such conduct on their part alone prevented Captain Gordon from enforcing the last article of the treaty. After the British had retired from Washington, the Americans recovered a little from their panic ; and took strong measures to oppose Captain Gordon's return down the Potomac. Commo dore Eodgers, with a chosen body of seamen from the Guer riere at Philadelphia, Captains Perry, Porter, and other " distinguished officers," a party of officers and men from the Con stellation at Norfolk, the men that had belonged to Commodore

Barney's flotilla, regular troops, riflemen, artillerists, and militia, all flocked to the shores of the Potomac, to " punish the base incendiaries " The American newspaper-editors, for some days, feasted their readers with the anticipated destruction of the British squadron. "It is impossible the ships can pass such formidable batteries, commanded by our naval heroes, and manned by our invincible seamen. We'll teach them how to draw up terms of capitulation." On the 31st, early in the morning, the British 18-gun brig sloop Fairy, Captain Henry Loraine Baker, after having fought her way up the river passed a battery of five guns and a large

184 LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHltS. [1814.

military force, joined Captain Gordon with Yice-admiral Coch rane's orders for him to return. On the same day, -without waiting to destroy those remaining stores which he had not the means of bringing away, Captain Gordon weighed on his return, accompanied by 21 sail of prizes, many of which, having been sunk by the enemy, had been weighed, masted, hove down, calked, rigged, and loaded, all within three days. Contrary winds again compelled the British to resort to the laborious task of warping the ships down the channel of the river, and a clay's delay occurred by the grounding of the Devastation. Taking advantage of this circumstance, the Americans attempted the destruction of the bomb-ship, by means of three fire-vessels and five row-boats, directed in person by Commodore Eodgers ; but their object was defeated by the promptitude and gallantry of Captain Alexander, who pushed off with his own boats, and, being followed by those of the other ships, compelled the re-nowned commodore to face about, and fly under as much alarm towards, as about 13 months before he had fled from, an Alex andria. The cool and steady conduct of midshipman John