

weighed 23 days before. The toil and fatigue undergone by the officers and men, and the deprivations they so cheerfully submitted to, were equalled only by their gallantry in defeating the batteries on shore, and their skill and perseverance in surmounting the difficulties of a most intricate and dangerous navigation. Happily, the loss in this daring enterprise did not exceed, on board all the vessels, seven killed, including the Fairy's lieutenant already named, and 35 wounded, including Captains Napier and Bartholomew, Lieu tenant Eeuben Paine, and master's mate Andrew Eeid, all slightly. Of the captains and other officers associated with

18B LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS. [1814 them, and of Lieutenants Henry King, first of the Seahorse, and Thomas Herbert, first of the Euryalus, Captain Gordon, in his official letter, speaks in the highest terms ; also of the master of the Seahorse, Mr. Alexander Louthean, "for both finding and buoying the channel of a navigation, -which no ship of a similar draught of water had ever before passed with her guns and stores on board." It was stated by a seaman of the Seahorse, who had served on board the President, that that frigate did not accomplish the same task under a period of 42 days, and then not without taking out her guns. We formerly noticed that Sir Peter Parker, of the Menelaus frigate, had been detached on service up Chesapeake bay. Having but recently arrived on the North American station, Sir Peter was not aware of the ambushing tricks to which a .small invading force would be exposed, in a country so filled with woods, ravines, and defiles ; and where local knowledge and skill with the rifle were an overmatch for all the valour he could bring against them. Information having reached the ship, then at anchor off Moor's-fields, that 200 American militia were encamped behind a wood distant about a mile from the beach, Captain Parker, at 11 P.M. on the 30th of August, was induced to land with 104 seamen, and 30 marines, in two divisions, one commanded by Lieuteuant Henry Crease, with midshipman Henry Finucane, the other by Lieutenant Eobert Pearce, and midshipman Frederick Chamier. It appears that Colonel Eead, the commander of the American force, stated that 170 Maryland volunteers, having been apprised of the intended attack, had retired to a small open space, surrounded by woods, distant four or five miles from his first encampment. Thither, having alarmed a small cavalry picket, the heedless seamen and marines, headed by their undaunted chief, proceeded. The enemy, with some pieces of artillery, was found drawn up in line in front of his camp. The British commenced the fire ; and, charging, drove the Americans through their camp into the woods. It was about this time that Sir

Peter received a mortal wound from a back-shot, which divided the femoral artery, and which occasioned his bleeding to death before medical assistance could be procured. Secure behind the trees, the Americans levelled their pieces with unerring aim; while the British, deceived by the apparent flight of their wary foe, rushed on through the woods, until, bewildered and em barrassed, the survivors of this adventurous band were compelled to retreat to their ship ; bringing away, however, the body o/