

[Fenimore Cooper admits tbe wounded to have been nine. H. Y. POWKLL.]

1815.] LEVANT AND CYANE WITH CONSTITUTION. 251

the government, that all under my command did their duty, and 
gallantly supported the reputation of American seamen." The 
term " 
speedy 

" may appear misapplied when, according to the

" Minutes 
" 
published in the American papers, the action began 
at 6 h. 5 m. and ended at 10 P.M., or, as the British account 
states, at 10 h. 40 m. ; but, by a mode of reckoning peculiar to 

himself, Captain Stewart declares that the action lasted only 40 minutes.

Let us suppose that the Peacock and Hornet, soon after leaving New York together, had fallen in with the Endymion, to windward of them, and (the only improbable part of the sup position) had stayed to engage the frigate until they were captured. How would the American citizens have behaved on this occasion? Why, they would have received Captains Warrington and Biddle precisely as they did Captain Stewart, and published accounts in every paper of the " heroic defence against decidedly superior force ;" not failing to point out; as they did in the Essex's action, the great disparity between carronades and long guns, when the ship carrying the latter has the choice of distance. Mr. Madison, too, in his next speech to congress, would have declared, that the two little sloops continued the unequal contest, until, as he said of the Essex, "humanity tore down the colours which valour had nailed to the mast." How would Captain Hope have behaved?

He would have told a plain tale of his good fortune, applaud ing the American commanders for havirig so long maintained a contest in which, from the nature of their armament, and from their leeward position, they could not have hoped to succeed. Before we attend to the further proceedings of the Constitu tion, we will dismiss all we have to state on the subject of her action with the two sloops. On the 28th of June, a courtmartial was held on board the Akbar at Halifax, Nova Scotia, to try the two captains and their respective officers and ships' companies for the loss of the Levant and Cyane. They were all, except three seamen of the Cyane who deserted to the Americans, most honourably acquitted for the surrender of their ships, and justly applauded for the gallant defence they had made against an enemy's ship so decidedly superior. With the exception of the three deserters, the two crews resisted the repeated offers made to them to enlist with the enemy. It was stated by the British officers, at the court-martial, that the crews of the two ships were for three weeks kept constantly in the Constitution's hold, witli both hands and legs in irons, and

252 LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS. [1815. there allowed but three pints of water during the 24 hours. This, too, in a tropical climate ! It was further proved that, after the expiration of the three weeks, upon the application of Captain Douglas, one-third of the men were allowed to be on deck four hours out of the 24, but had not the means oi walking, being still in irons ; that, on mustering the crews when they Avere landed at Maranham, five of the Levant's boys were missing ; that, upon application and search for them, two were found locked up in the cabin of the American captain of marines ; and that a black roan at Maranham was employed as a crimp, and enticed one of the Levant's boys to enter the