

American service.

On the 8th of March the Constitution, having in company, along with her two prizes, a merchant-brig of which she intended to make a cartel, anchored off the isle of Mayo, one of the Cape de Verds ; and on the next day got under way, and anchored, a few hours afterwards, in the harbour of Porto-Praya, island of Saint-Jago. While on his way to these islands, Captain Stewart had caused the Cyane to be painted so as to resemble a 36-gun frigate. The object of this was to aggrandize his exploit, in the wondering eyes of the gaping citizens of

Boston ; not one in a hundred of whom, he knew, would trouble themselves to inquire any further on the subject. The American captain would doubtless have played off the same deceptio visus upon the Levant, had he not been aware, that no efforts of the painter could make a low flush ship of 464 tons resemble a frigate. On the llth, at 15 minutes past noon, just as Captain Stewart had sent his master to bring the cartel brig under the stern of the Constitution, in order that the prisoners might be removed to her, three strange ships were discovered through the haze, standing into the harbour. These were the British 50-gnn ships Leapder and Newcastle, Captains Sir George Ealph Collier, K.C.B., and Lord George Stuart, and 18-pounder 40-gun frigate Acasta, Captain Alexander Itobert Kcrr. "We will now

step back for a moment, and endeavour to show what had brought those three ships to a spot so distant from the station en which they had hitherto been cruising, the north-eastern coast of the United States. On the 19th of December the Leander sailed from Halifax bound off Boston, and on the 24th fell in with the Newcastle and Acasta. By their captains, it appears, Sir George was informed, that the Constitution had sailed from Boston, and the Congress from Portsmouth, New Hampshire, and that the Pre-

1815.J THIRD CHASE AND ESCAPE OF THE CONSTITUTION. 253

sident was to join those ships 
" from the Delaware." 
1 
Unfor 
tunately, although it had been stated over and over again in the 
Halifax papers, neither of the three captains appears to have 
been aware that the Congress had, some months before, been 
dismantled and laid up at Portsmouth, and that the President 
was not lying in the "Delaware," but in New York. On 
turning to the Newcastle's log, to see who it was that had been 
playing off such a hoax upon Lord George, we find that, on the 
22nd, while the Newcastle and Acasta were lying at anchor in 
Cape Cod bay, 
2 the IS-gun brig-sloop Arab, Captain Henry 
Jane, joined company, 
" with intelligence that the Constitution 

had sailed from Boston on the 17th instant." Not another word is there. This, however, was quite enough to hasten the two ships in getting under way, and to make their captains wish, no doubt, that they had kept under way in front of the port which they had been ordered to watch. This story about the sailing of the American squadron, whether derived, in the first instance, from fishermen, cattledealers, or any other of the cunning New England folk, was credited by Sir George Collier ; and away went the Leander, Newcastle, and Acasta, in search of the Constitution and the