

" two other heavy frigates

"

that had sailed " in her company."

3

On the 4th of January, when off the Western Isles, the three ships fell in with a brig-prize belonging to the American privateer Perry ; and, having chased under American colours, were taken for an American squadron. The consequence was, that the prize-master of the brig voluntarily came on board the Leander, and pretended to take that ship for the President, tho Newcastle for the Constitution, and the Acasta, not for the Con gress, but for the Macedonian. In short, the fellow would have said or sworn anything that he thought would ingratiate himself with his hearers. Mr. Marshall says,

" 
Nothing could 
have happened better "4 than this farcical interview with the 
American privateer's-man. On the contrary, looking to the 
serious impression it appears to have made on board the 
Leander, we should rather say, nothing could have happened 
worse. 
On the llth of March, at h. 15 m. P.M., when, as already 
stated, they first discovered the Constitution, Cyane, Levant, 
and cartel brig, the three British ships were standing close 

hauled on the starboard tack, with a moderate breeze from the

i Published letter of Mr. Thos. Collier. * Marshall, vol. ii* p. 533. 
* See p. 247. * Ibid., p. 534. 

254 LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS. 11815.

north-east by north ; and the ships in Porto-Praya then bore from the Leander, the leewardmost ship of her squadron, north cast by north distant seven miles. In less than 10 minutes after she had discovered the approach of the British ships, the Con stitution cut her cables and stood out of Porto-Praya on the larboard tack, followed by the Levant and Cyane. At 3 P.M., just as the Constitution had got upon the Leander's weatherbeam, the three British ships tacked in chase. At this time the strange squadron was about four miles in the wind's eye of the Acasta, the Acasta about one mile upon the vveatherquarter of the Newcastle, and the Newcastle about two miles ahead of the Leander. At this time, also, the Acasta made out the strangers to be " one large frigate and two sloops." The Newcastle has merely noted down in her log, that one ship was

larger than the others ; and the Leander, in her log, describes 
all three of the ships as " 
apparently frigates." But the 
Lcander's first-lieutenant on the occasion, the present Captain 
John M'Dougall, has subsequently stated as follows: " Weather 
very thick and hazy ; took the two sternmost ships for frigates, 
tho headmost, from appearance, a much larger ship, for the 
Guerriere; who, we understood, had long 32-pounders on her 
main deck." 1 
At 1 h. 30 m. P.M. Captain Stewart found that the Constitu 

tion sailed about equal with the ships on her lee-quarter, but that the Acasta, by luffing up, was gaining her wake and rather dropping astern. It was at the same time observed, that the Cyane was dropping astern and to leeward, and would soon be overtaken by the Acasta. At 1 h. 40 m., therefore, Captain Stewart made the signal for the Cyane to tack ; expecting that the British commodore would detach a ship in pursuit of her, and that she would succeed in reaching the anchorage of Porto-Praya before the detached ship could come up with her ; or, if no ship chased, tha't she would be able to double the rear of the British squadron and escape before the wind. The Cyane, just when bearing from the Leander north-north-east distant four miles, tacked accordingly ; but no British ship tacked after her, Sir George rightly judging that she would reach the neutral port before either of the British ships could get within shot of her. The Cyane shortly afterwards bore away, and was seen no more. At 1 h. 45 m. the Leander hoisted her colours and fired a gun to windward ; and then telegraphed that, in case of parting company, the Isle of Mayo was to be the rendezvous. Both the