

One part of this statement we consider quite nugatory. What would have been the utility of the Leander, a ship confessedly " falling to leeward," continuing in pursuit of the Constitution? No, the only ship that could have pursued her with any chance of success had been ordered by the Leander to tack from her.

Most sincerely do we regret, on personal as well as on public grounds, that this last and most triumphant escape of the Con stitution, the first frigate of the United States that had humbled the proud flag of Britain, had not long ago been brought under the scrutiny of a court-martial. The blame would then have fallen where it ought to have fallen ; and, in the unpleasant task of detailing what, the more it is investigated the more it will show itself to be, the most blundering piece of business recorded in these six volumes, we should neither have had our statements called in question nor our motives misun derstood. On the 20th of January, six days after the President and store-brig Macedonian had escaped from New York, the Pea cock, Hornet, and store-brig Tom Bowline succeeded also in getting to sea. On the 23rd the Hornet parted company from her two consorts, and proceeded straight to the island of Tristand'Acunha, the first rendezvous for the squadron. On the 20th of March, Captain Biddle was informed of the peace by a neutral; and on the 23rd, at 11 A.M., when just about to anchor off the north end of the above island, the Hornet fell in with the British brig-sloop Penguin, of 16 carronades, 32-pounders and two sixes, Captain James Dickinson. Before narrating the action that ensued, it will, we consider, prove useful to point out a few of the circumstances under which the parties met. The armament of the Hornet has already on more than one occasion been shown f she now

carried in lieu of her two long twelves, two long 18-pounders ; 
and as these, owing to their great length, could not con 
veniently be fought through the foremost or usual long-gun 
ports, they were mounted amidships. She had musketoons in 
all her tops, each piece throwing GO buck-shot at a discharge, 
and upon each quarter a 3 or 4 pound brass swivel, fitted on a 
chock. All this had been done to bring the Hornet nearer to 
an ''equality" with the Loup-Cervier, in case the challenge, 
i 
Marshall, vol. ii., p. 538, ncte*. - See p. 44. 

202 LIGHT SQUADRONS AKD SINGLE SHIPS. 1.1815

to which we have already alluded, had been accepted. Her 
crew, consisting at -this time of 165 men (eight absent in a 
prize), had also, it may be presumed, been well culled prepara 
tory to the expected contest. Each man had a boarding-helmet, 
similar to those we described as worn by the crew of the Con 
stitution. 
1 

The Penguin was commissioned, for the first time, in No vember, 1813 .; and, as a proof how much brigs of that class were wanted in the British navy, there were but 81 in commis sion on the 1st of the succeeding January. After having been run up by the contract-builder in the usual slight and hurried manner, to be ready on the emergency (there being, as already stated, no more than 81 such vessels in commission), the Penguin was to be manned with equal recklessness about consequences. In respect to captain and officers generally, the Penguin might compete with any brig of her class ; but, as to men, when she did get them all on board, which was not until June, 1814, they were, with the exception, probably, of not being disaffected, a worse crew than even the Epervier's. Her 17 boys, poor little fellows, might do very well six or seven years to come. Her men, her misnamed "British seamen," consisted, except a portion of her petty officers, of very old and very young individuals ; the latter pressed men, the former discharged ineffectives. Among the whole number thus obtained 12 only had ever been in action. One might suppose, that a vessel so "manned," especially after a knowledge of the fact, that four of the same description of sloops had been captured each by an American sloop of the same nominal, whatever may have been her real force, would have been sent to escort some convoy from the Downs along the English coast ; a service in which, as against the pickaroons that usually infested the Channel, the appearance of a force was almost as effective as its reality. Oh, no. The aforesaid emergency required, that the Penguin should be sent to the Cape of