

stitute of fellow-feeling and commiseration ; for, during the time he retained possession of the Nautilus," which was until 2 P.M. on the 1st of July, " he was not once moved to make a common place inquiry after the memorialist, in his then deplorable con dition." No wonder that, throughout civilized India, the perpretator of this atrocious act is looked upon as a barbarian : let but the requisite publicity be given to the case of the Nautilus

and Peacock, and the name of Warrington will be held in equal 
detestation throughout the civilized world. 
On the evening of the 29th of December, 1822, the sloop 
Eliza, armed with one 18-pounder carronade, and with a com 
plement of 24 men (including officers), commanded by Mr. Hugh 
Nurse, admiralty mate, anchored in compliance with orders 
received from Lieutenant Hobson, off Guajaba. 
The next day (the 30th), a small vessel, felucca rigged, was 
observed standing towards the Eliza with a signal flying. Having 
approached her within five miles, the stranger tacked, and stood 
towards Green Key, still keeping the same signal flying. About 

five o'clock P.M. she was joined by a schooner, when both ves sels stood towards the Eliza. Mr. Nurse, on perceiving this, immediately prepared to slip and make sail : at 7 o'clock the schooner having taken an advantageous position upon the larboard bow of the Eliza, opened her fire upon her. The Eliza immediately slipped her cable and made sail to close, keeping up a return fire upon the schooner. The felucca had now got into action, and warmly supported her friend. At 7 o'clock, after several cool and steady manoeuvres, in order to clear the shoals

270 LIGHT SQUAimOXS AND SIXGLE SHU'S. [1815.

by which the Eliza was surrounded, Mr. Nurse found himself dose to windward of the felucca; he instantly bore up, poured in a round of grape, followed up by a volley of musketry, and boarded her on the larboard bow. The enemy made a smart resistance, but Lieutenant Nurse, although he had received a gun-shot wound in the right shoulder, cheered on his gallant crew, and in five minutes was in possession of the vessel. The schooner seeing her comrade disposed of in this summary way, made sail and escaped, and as the prize was quite ungovernable, on account of the loss of her bowsprit, Mr. Nurse judged it prudent to anchor for the night. The next day the Eliza, with her prize, made sail towards Green Key, to attack the schooner, which was ascertained to be a pirate of five guns, with a complement of 37 men : she, however, had escaped during the night. In this gallant affair, which reflects the highest credit upon Mr.

Nurse, the Eliza lost two men killed (John White and John Goflf) and eight wounded. Amongst the severely wounded were

Mr. Nurse the commander, John M'Dermott, who died of his wounds shortly afterwards, John Welsh, Edward Bambrill, and

Benjamin Inkpen ; slightly wounded, William Adams, William Watts, and Henry Wilmot. We give below the relative force of each vessel, and by so doing we shall afford the reader a better idea of the gallantry of this exploit, in which the Spaniards sustained a loss of nine killed. The remaining part of the crew of the felucca, with the exception of four made prisoners, jumped overboard.