

" lucky Old Iron-sides," as now

she well might be called, anchored in Boston. 
The three British ships, on being first discovered by the 
Constitution, were taken by the American officers for what, in 
reality, they were : the Leander and Newcastle for " 
ships of 
the line," or two-deckers, and the Acasta for a frigate. But 
the Cyane, according to her log, made out all three ships to be 
frigates, even before the Constitution cut her cables and made 
sail. 2 
Yet, on board the Leander, the Constitution, of 1533, 
the Cyane, of 539, and the Levant, a flush ship, of 464 tons, all 
put on the appearance of " 
frigates." Hence, when the Cyane 
tacked, 
" Sir George directed the Acasta's signal to be made to 
tack after her, but countermanded the order, on observing that 
she would gain the anchorage before the Acasta could close 
with her." 3 It was, therefore, the respect which the British 
commanding officer paid to the neutrality of the Portuguese 
port that permitted the Cyane to go unpursued. But in. 
less than an hour a second enemy's 

"

frigate," the Levant, 
tacks, and the neutrality of the port does not save her from 
being pursued, or from being cannonaded, 
" with her jib-boom 
over the battery," by two of the three British ships that had 
tacked after her. How does Captain M'Dougall reconcile this 1 

1 Naval Monument, p. 182. 3 gee Captain M'Dougall's paper, in 2 Ibid., p. 173. Marshall, vol. ii., p. 5:!6.

VOL. VI. S

258 LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHJI'S. [1815.

It appears, now, that it was not Sir George's intention 1hat all three British ships should have tacked after the Levant. The signal was ordered to be for the Acasta alone to tack ; but, according to the published letter of Mr. Thomas Collier, "the midshipman, Mr. Morrison, whose duty it was to make the signal, did, by mistake, hoist the general signal," or, according to another statement, and one which bears the signature of the Leander's late first-lieutenant, "in making the signal, the

Acasta's distinguishing pendants got foul, and, before they could be cleared, the Newcastle mistook it for a general signal.

It is a point, we conceive, of very little consequence how the

mistake arose. The fact is that, of all the three ships, the 
Acasta was the last that should have been ordered to tack after 
the Levant, even admitting that ship to have been the "Con 
stitution, President, Macedonian, or Congress," simply because 
the Acasta was " 
weathering," 

" getting into the wake of," and the likeliest of any of the three to overtake and bring to action the "Guerriere." On the other hand, that the Leander her self, if any ship did, was the most proper to have gone in pursuit of the supposed Constitution, President, Macedonian, or Con gress, is clear; first, because she was "falling to leeward" of the supposed Guerriere, and next, because she was the nearest of any of her squadron to the ship that, to the Leander at least, put on so fatal a disguise. Had we seen no other statement than is to be found in the three British ships' logs, we should consider that the Leander really did tack first ; for thus says her log: "Tacked ship to cut off ship from anchorage, and made