

Good Hope, to traverse the very track in which the Java had met, and been captured by, the Constitution. Accordingly, in the month of September, the Penguin sailed for her distant destination. While on the Cape station, she lost several of her men by sickness ; and, previously to her being despatched by Vice-admiral Charles Tyler, the commander-in-chief at the Cape, in pursuit of the American privateer-ship Young AVasp, tliu Penguin received on board from the Medway 74, as a loan for

i See p. 198.

1815.J PENGUIN AND HORNET. 263 that special service, 12 marines ; thus making her complement 105 men and 17 boys, or 122 in the whole. Had the vessel in sight to windward been rigged with three masts instead of two, and had she, on her near approach, proved by her signals to be a British cruiser, Captain Biddle might have marked her down in his log as a " frigate," and have made off with all the canvas he could spread. Had the ship, nevertheless, overtaken the Hornet, and been, in reality, a trifle superior in force to her, Captain Biddle, we have no doubt, would have exhausted his eloquence in lauding the blessings of peace, before he tried the effect of his artillery in a struggle for the honours of war. However, the vessel approaching was evidently a brig ; and the utmost extent of a brig-sloop's force was thoroughly known. When she first descried the Hornet in the north-west by west, the Penguin was steering to the eastward, with the wind fresh from the south-south-west. With all the promptitude that was to be expected from the gallant first-lieutenant of the Cerberus in the action off Lissa, Captain Dickinson bore up in chase. At 1 h. 45 m., P.M., Tristan d'Acunha bearing south-west, distant three or four miles, the Penguin hoisted her colours, a St. George's ensign, and fired a gun to induce the stranger to show hers. The Hornet immediately luffed up on the starboard tack, hoisted American colours, and discharged her broadside ; and the Penguin, on rounding to upon the same tack, fired hers in return. Thus the action commenced within about pistol-shot distance. The Hornet's star and bar shot soon reduced the Penguin's rigging to a state of disorder; and a tolerably well-directed discharge of round and grape, meeting no adequate return, especially as the carronades, owing to their insecure mode of mounting, turned half round almost every time they were discharged, made a sensible impression upon the Penguin's hull. At 2 h. 15m. P.M., as the Penguin drifted nearer, the

Hornet bore away, with the semblance of retiring from the contest, but in reality to take up a more favourable position for doing execution with her gunnery. Captain Dickinson, on this, bore up with the intention to board. Before, however, this gallant officer could put his plan into execution, he received a mortal wound. Lieutenant James M'Donald, who now succeeded to the command, aware of the brig's disabled state, saw that the only chance of success was to attempt his captain's measure Ac