

The Peacock, after she had been compelled to part from her consort, pursued her way to the East Indies ; and, on the 30th of June, being off Anjier in the Straits of Sunda, fell in with the Honourable Company's brig-cruiser Nautilus, of 10 carronades, 18-pounders, ant] four long nines, commanded by Lieutenant Charles Boyce. pa the Peacock's approach within hail, the lieutenant inquired if her captain knew that peace had been declared. Let us suppose, for a moment, that, just as the American commander was listening to the hail from the Nautilus, the latter became suddenly transformed into the British 22-gun ship A'olage, Captain Joseph Drury, a sister-vessel to the Cyane,

1815.] NAUTILUS AND PEACOCK. 267 and at that time cruising in the East Indies. Captain Warrington would then have promptly hailed in turn, with the best speak ing-trumpet in the ship, thanked Captain Drury for his politeness, and been the first to urge the folly, not to say wickedness of wounding and killing each other, Avhile any doubt existed about peace having been signed. But it was a vessel he could almost hoist on board the Peacock. He therefore called out : " Haul down your colours instantly." This " reasonable demand" Lieutenant Eoyce very properly considered as an imperious and insulting mandate, and, fully alive to the dignity of the British

flag, and to the honour of the service to which he was acknow ledged to be an ornament, prepared to cope with a ship whose immense superiority, as she overshadowed his little bark, gave him nothing to expect short of a speedy annihilation.

It will scarcely be credited that, about a quarter of an hour before this, Mr. Bartlett, the master of the Nautilus, and Cornet White, one of her passengers, in one boat, and Mr. Macgregor, the master-attendant at Anjier, in another, had gone on board the Peacock, in a friendly way, to communicate the news of peace. Scarcely had Mr. Bartlett stepped upon the American

ship's deck than, without being allowed to ask a question, he was hurried below. Happily, Mr. Macgregor met with rather better success. The instant he arrived on board, he communi cated to the Peacock's first-lieutenant, the most authentic information of peace having been concluded between Great Britain and America, grounded on no less authority than Mr. Madison's proclamation; which Mr. Macgregor had himself received from an American ship, passing the Straits on her way to China. What effect had this communication? Captain Warrington, whom the single word "Peace!" ought to have made pause, before he proceeded to spill the blood of his fellow creatures, ordered Mr. Macgregor to be taken below. Captain Warrington does not admit that Mr. Macgregor men tioned that peace existed; although the latter gentleman has sworn that he did, both to Captain Warrington's first-lieutenant and to his purser. As to the imputed silence of Messrs. Bartlett and White, would two officers, who had voluntarily entered on board the ship of a nation with whom they knew a peace had just been concluded, have acted in so senseless a manner as to suffer themselves to be made prisoners without some such words as, " Peace is signed," bursting from their lips ? Even the ceremony of gagging, however quickly performed, could not have stopped an exclamation, which their personal