

signal for ditto." Sir George Collier was remarkable for the kindness with which he treated his officers, and for the, in this instance, most unfortunate deference he was in the habit of paying to their opinions on points of service. By whose suggestion he tacked, let his late first-lieutenant's own words determine : " When the

Acasta had filled on the starboard tack, I observed to Sir

George, that, if the ships standing in shore were really frigates, which it was impossible to ascertain, owing to the haziness of the weather, they would be more than a match for the Acasta He replied : ' It is true, Kerr can do wonders, but not impos sibilities ; and I believe I must go round, as, when the ship that tacked first hears the Acasta engaged, she Avill naturally come to her consort's assistance.' "2

Captain M'Dougall here says, i Marshall, vol. ii., p. 537. ' Ibid., p. 538.

1815.] THIRD CHASK ANT) ESCAPE OF THE CONSTTTTTTICN. 259 " it was impossible to ascertain " whether or not a low flush ship, of 464 tons, sailing for more than an hour, at the distance certainly not of more than five miles, upon the weather beam of the Leander, and consequently with her whole broadside exposed to view, and every port, one might suppose, as easy to be counted as the ports of the Leander herself were by the Bri tish and American officers on board the Levant, was a "frigate ;" and such a frigate as, with another like her, it would bo "

impossible" for the Acasta to cope with. Lieutenant Henry Richmond, who was a midshipman on board the Leander, appears to have sanctioned Mr. Thomas Collier in saying, that " all on board

" 
the Leander fully believed that the Constitution, 
Cyane, and Levant were three American frigates. The only 
answer we shall give to this will be to subjoin the names of the 
five lieutenants who belonged to the Leander at the time. 
1st. John M'Dougall, 2d. William Edward Fiott, 3d. Eobert 
Graham Dunlop, 4th. George William St. John Mildmay, and 
5th. Eichard Weld. We believe it is not yet admitted by Cap 
tains Kerr and Lord George Stuart, that the Acasta was the first 

ship that tacked, or that the weather, at the time the Constitu tion was left to go her ways, was not sufficiently clear for the water-lines of all the ships to be seen. Mention has been made of an optional flag. The following extract from the work of a contemporary will afford the requi site information on the subject : " Sir George Collier, confiding in the zeal and judgment of the captains under his orders, had previously informed them that, whenever a certain flag was hoisted with any signal addressed to either of them, they were at liberty to disregard the signal, if they considered that, by following the order conveyed thereby, the object in view was not so likely to be attained, as by acting in contrariety thereto. The flag alluded to was entered pro tempore in the signal books under the designation of the

'

optional flag.' On its being hoisted with the Newcastle's pendants as above stated, that