

cordingly, at 2 h. 25 m., the Penguin ran her bowsprit between

2f)4 LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS. fl81.'. the Hornet's main and mizen rigging on the starboard side. The heavy swell lifting the ship a-head, the brig's bowsprit, after carrying away the Hornet's mizen-shroud, stern-davits, and Bpanker-boom, broke in two, and the foremast went at the same moment, falling in-board directly upon the foremost and waist guns on the larboard or engaged side. These guns becoming, in consequence, completely disabled, and the after-guns being equally so from the drawing of the breeching-bolts, an attempt was made to bring a fresh broadside to bear ; but the Penguin was in too unmanageable a state to be got round. In this dilemma no alternative remained ; and at 2 h. 35 m. P.M. Lieutenant M'Donald hailed to say that the Penguin surrendered. After a lapse of 25 minutes, an officer from the Hornet came on board to take possession. Out of a crew, as already stated, of 105 men and 17 boys, the

Penguin lost her commander, boatswain, and four seamen and marines killed, four others mortally wounded, and her second lieutenant (John Elwin, very severely), one master's mate (John Holmes Bond), one midshipman (John Noyes, each of whom lost a leg), purser's clerk, and 24 seamen and marines wounded, for the most part slightly. Even the Hornet was beginning to fall off in her gunnery. Most of the Penguin's men were wounded by musketry ; and the bowsprit, and the foremast along with it, fell chiefly owing to the two vessels getting foul in the manner they did, while so heavy a sea was running. The Hornet received a few shot in the hull ; one of which was so low down as to keep her men constantly at the pumps. Out of a crew of 163 men and two boys, the Hornet lost, by the acknowledgment of her officers, only two seamen killed and

11 wounded; but, according to the observation of the British officers, her loss was much greater. Just as Mr. Edward B.

Kirk, one of the Penguin's midshipmen, and the very first prisoner that reached the Hornet, was stepping upon her deck, the crew were in the act of throwing a man overboard ; but a struggle or convulsive twitch in the body occasioned his being hauled in again. The poor man's lower jaw had been nearly all shot away ; yet he lived, and was walking about the deck in the course of a few days. This shows the hurry in which the American officers were, to get their killed out of the way before the arrival of the prisoners ; and the time necessary to remove every appearance of blood and carnage contributed to the delay in sending for them. Even when the British did come on board, buckets of water were dashing about and brooms at work on all

1815.1 PENGUIN AND HORNET. 265 parts of the deck. The Penguin's second-lieutenant counted 16 of the Hornet's men lying in their cots ; and several of her men told some of their former shipmates, whom they discovered among the Penguin's crew, that the Hornet had 10 men killed by the first and second broadsides. We cannot, with any consistency, offer the trifling disparity of force in this action as an excuse for the Penguin's capture. The chief cause is to be sought in that which cannot be made