

ship made answer by signal,

'

The flags are not distinguish

able." " x We shall not stay to discuss this point, beyond sug gesting the probability, either that the wrong flag was hoisted on board the Leander, or that it had got foul and was omitted to be cleared. If neither was the case, the Newcastle must liave been nearer to the Constitution than she was to the Leander ; for we observe by her log, that the Newcastle could

i Marshall, vol. ii., p. 537, note J.

z()0 LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS. '1815 distinguish the signal made by the Constitution to the Cyaiic, as being one not in the British naval code, also that the signal afterwards made by the Constitution to the Levant was " the same signal as before." We have now a word or two to submit on the part performed by the Acasta. In two respects, the Acasta possessed a decided advantage over her consorts. She was far more advanced in the chase, and sailed better on a wind, than either of them; and she had, from the first, made out exactly the force of the three strange ships : they were, according to her log, " one large frigate and two sloops." We believe, also, that the "large frigate" was all along supposed by her to be the Constitution. When the Acasta saw the signal made by the commodore, so far to leeward, for the squadron to tack, how happened it that no signal was made in answer, expressive of the probability that some mistake had been made, in supposing that the two ships which had tacked were worth a moment's consideration, and communicating that the ship which they were all anxious to get hold of was ahead, and that she, the Acasta, was weathering her ? Or, let us suppose that the Acasta had taken no notice of the Leander's signal, but had kept on her course, Captain Kerr, if we mistake not, had an honourable wound, 1 which would have served him for an

excuse, as a similar wound, and on a similar occasion, had once 
served the greatest naval captain of the age. 
" Leave off action? 
.Now d n me if I do ! You know, Foley, I have only one eye, 
I have a right to be blind sometimes." 2 
On the subject of the " 
optional flag," in reference to the 
Acasta, we shall quote from a contemporary : " The Acasta's 
log informs us, that the enemy's force was discovered to consist 
of one large frigate and two sloops, so early as 1 P.M., the time 
when the British squadron first tacked to the eastward. If so 
we are sorry that a signal to that effect was not made, by which 
Sir George Collier's mind would have been set at ease as to the 

capability of the Acasta to cope with the two ships which had put back ; and the Leander, having nothing else to engage her attention, would of course have continued in pursuit of the other. It was very natural for junior captains to feel a delicacy in addressing signals to their commanding officer when in the presence of an enemy ; but. as Sir George Collier had formed nis opinion of the American's force from the report of Captain Kerr and Lord George Stuart, 3 he certainly could not luve ; Soe vol. 1., p. 91. 2 See vol. iii., p. 52. 3 See p. 254, i8io.] PENGUIN AND HORNETJ 261 taken offence had he been informed that the Acasta alone was more than capable of annihilating the two ships which she had tacked after." 1