

apparent in figures the immense disparity between the two vessels in the fitting of their guns, and in the effectiveness of their crews. A ship's gun, cast adrift, not only becomes utterly useless as a weapon of offence or defence, but in the very act of breaking loose, maims and disables the men stationed at it ; and, if the sea is rough, as Captain Biddle says it was in the present instance, continues to cause destruction among the crew, gene rally, until again lashed to the ship's side. How much is the evil increased, if, as in the Penguin's case, instead of one gun, several guns break loose. In the midst of all this delay and self-destruction, the enemy, uninterrupted in his operations, and animated by the feeble resistance he meets, quickens his fire ; and, conquering at last, fails not to ascribe solely to his skill and valour that victory which accident had partly gained for him. We are inclined to think that the prize was not so " riddled in her hull " as to render her destruction on the morning of the 25th a matter of necessity. The fact is that, just after the action had ended, the Peacock and Tom Bowline hove in sight ; and Captains Warrington and Biddle, having heard of the

peace, were anxioiis to get to the East Indies as quickly as pos sible, in order to have their share of the few prizes yet to be taken. The communicativeness of one of the American officers having conveyed to the ears of Lieutenant M'Donald the statement in

Captain Biddle's official letter, that the Hornet had suffered so slightly in the action, Lieutenant M' Donald took an opportu nity of mentioning the circumstance to the American captain ; when, having drowned his native cunning in wine (some of poor Captain Dickinson's probably), Captain Biddle admitted the fact, but attempted to gloss it over by stating, that it was necessary to say so and so, and so and so, in order to make the thing be properly received in the United States. Here was an acknow ledgment ! How unnecessary, then, have been all our previous labours in detecting and exposing the misrepresentations con tained in the American official accounts. Of course, we are

saved all further trouble in showing how completely Captain Biddle has misstated every important fact connected with the capture of the Penguin. Before, however, we dismiss this action, let us make one remark on the circumstance of Captain Biddle having been informed of the peace on the 20th, three days previous to the action. If that information was communi cated in such a manner as to have satisfied Captain Biddle as to the fact, there is no excuse his fondest admirers could make which should have screened him from the hands of the hangman. The action was disreputable ; the slaughter criminal. His conscience, perhaps, at this moment is his best judge ; and we are sincere when we say we hope he does not feel that sentence recorded against him, which he must feel if he fought that action, knowing the peace to have been signed.

On the 28th of April, at daylight, in latitude 3y south, longitude 34 west, the Peacock arid Hornet bore down upon, in order to capture as an Indiaman, the British 74-gun ship Cornwallis, Captain John Bayley, bearing the flag of Rearadmiral Sir George Burlton, K.C.B. The mistake was soon discovered, and a chase commenced, during which the Peacock separated to the eastward. In the afternoon the Cornwallis, when gaining fast upon the Hornet, had to heave to and lower a boat for a marine that had dropped overboard. This delay, aided by the unskilful firing of the Cornwallis on the following day, saved the Hornet ; but the chase continued until 9 A.M. on the 30th, when the 74, finding further pursuit useless, shortened sail and hauled to the wind. The closeness of the chase, how ever, had effected enough to render the Hornet, as a cruiser, utterly useless. She hove overboard her guns, muskets, cutlasses, forge, bell, anchors, cables, shot, boats, spare spars, and a con siderable portion of her ballast, and was of course obliged to steer straight for the United States.