

On the 13th the 18-gun brig-sloop Satellite, Captain James Murray, arrived from Algiers ; and on this day every captain

280 ENGLAND AND THE BAEBARY STATES. [181fi.

in the fleet received a plan of the fortifications of the place, with full instructions as to the intended position of his ship. On the 14th, early in the forenoon, the wind having- shifted to the southward, the Dutch squadron, and the whole British fleet, except the Jasper sent to England with despatches, and the Saracen left behind, consisting altogether of 2o ships and brigs, five gun-boats, and an ordnance sloop, fitted as an explosion vessel under the personal direction of Lieutenant Hichard

Howcll Fleming, of the Queen Charlotte (who was to have the command of her), and Major Gossett of the corps of miners, weighed and stood into the Mediterranean. Previous to the sailing of the fleet, each line-of-battle ship took charge of a gun-boat, and had their own launches fitted for howitzers. The flat-bottomed boats put in requisition were pre-pared for Congreve's rockets. On the 16th, early in the afternoon, just as the fleet had got within 200 miles of Algiers, the wind shifted to the eastward ; and in the evening the ship-sloop Prometheus, Captain William Bateman Dashwood, joined company direct from the port, having on board the wife, daughter, and infant child of the British consul, Mr. M'Donell. The two former, disguised in midshipmen's clothes, had with great difficulty been brought off; but, owing to the treachery of Mrs. M'Donell's Jew-nurse,

1 
the infant, while on its way to the boat 
concealed in a basket, was detained by order of the dey : as 
were also the surgeon of the Prometheus, three midshipmen, 
and the remainder of the crews of two boats, consisting in all of 
18 persons. 
" The child," says Lord Exmouth, 
" was sent off 
next morning by the dey; and, as a solitary instance of his 

humanity, it ought to be recorded by me." The consul himself was put in irons and confined in a small room on the ground

floor of his house ; nor could the most urgent remonstrances on the part of Captain Dashwood induce the dey to release his prisoners.

Captain Dashwood confirmed all that the admiral had pre-viously learnt about the preparations making by the Algerines to resist the attack ; of which they had received intelligence, chiefly, as was suspected, from the French 40-gun frigate, Ciotat, then at anchor in the bay. It appeared, also, that about 40,000 men had been marched down from the interior, and all the janizaries called in from the distant garrisons. The ships, consisting

i Upon the authority of Mr. Abraham the infant crying in the gateway, although Salaine in his very interesting " Narrative the surgeon had administered something of the expedition to Algiers,'' p. 15, note ; to compose it. but, jxxording to Lord Exmoutb, owing to

1816.] BATTLE OF ALGIERS. 281 of four frigates, mounting 44 guns each, five large corvettes, mounting from 24 to 30 guns, and between 30 and 40 gun and mortar boats, were all in port. The fortifications of Algiers, for so small a place, were of considerable strength. Upon the various batteries on the north side of the city, including a battery over the north gate, were mounted about 80 pieces of cannon and six or eight enormous mortars ; but the shoalness of the water would scarcely admit a heavy ship to approach within reach of them. Between the north wall of the city and the commencement of the pier, which is about 250 yards in length, and connects the town with the lighthouse, were about 20 more guns, the greater part of them similarly circumstanced. At the north projection of the mole stood a semicircular battery, of two tiers of guns, about 44 in all ; and to the southward of that, and nearly in a line with the pier, was the round or lighthouse bat tery, of three tiers of guns, 48 in all. Then came a long battery, also of three tiers, called the eastern battery, mounting 66 guns.