

1 See Appendix, Annual Abstract, No. 24. troduced in this place, see Appendix 8 For the lists of casualties usually in- Nos. 8, 9, 10, and 11. 3 See Appendix, No. 12.

IS16.J BATTLE OF ALGIERS. 277 the United States, the moment peace with England permitted them, sent forth, in separate divisions, as fast as the ships could be got ready, nearly the whole of their Atlantic or sea navy. On the 17th of June, off Cape de Gatte, the first division, consisting of three frigates and three smaller vessels, under Commo dore Decatur, in the new 32-pounder 44-gun frigate Guerriere, after a running fight, by one account, of 25 minutes, and by another account, of nearly two hours, captured the Algerine 18-pounder 40-gun frigate Mezoura. Mr. Madison, in his speech to congress delivered on the 5th of December, when referring to this " demonstration of American skill and prowess," says, " The high character of the American commander was brilliantly sustained on the occasion." With examples of this sort from the head of the government, no wonder that the people of the United States are such unconscionable braggarts. The American squadron also drove on shore near St. Xavier a small frigate or corvette. On the 30th Commodore Decatur concluded a treaty with the Dey of Algiers ; by which all prisoners made on either side were to be restored, and all property given up, and no mote tribute was to be demanded from the United States. The Algerine prisoners on board the squadron of Commodore Decatur amounted to 500, and the natives of the United States in the hands of the dey did not exceed 10 ; consequently his highness did not, in that respect, make a bad bargain. The American commodore afterwards sailed for Tunis and Tripoli, and obtained from those regencies payment of the few thousand dollars in dispute between the latter and some American citizens. In the case of Tripoli, 10

Danish and Neapolitan captives were given up by the bey, in lieu of a portion of the stipulated sum. In his letter to the

American secretary of state, Commodore Decatur had the 
modesty to say, that the treaty he had concluded " 
placed the 
United States on higher ground than any other nation." 1 One 
of the officers of his squadron concludes a letter to a friend with 
the following piece of pleasantry: 
" You have no idea of the 
respect which the American character has gained by our late 
Avars. The Spaniards, especially, think we are devils incarnate; 
as we beat the English who beat the French, who beat them, 
who nobody ever beat before ; and the Algerines, whom the 
devil himself could not beat." 2 
On the 23rd of May, at Bona, near Algiers, the crews of bo 

1 Sava! Monument, p. 299. 2 Ibid., p. ?95.

ENGLAND AN 7 D THE BARBARY STATES. [1816.

tween 300 and 400 small vessels engaged in the coral-fishery while on their way to celebrate mass (it being Ascension-clay), were barbarously massacred by a band of 2000 Turkish, Le vantine, and Moorish troops. These atrocities committed on defenceless Christians having at length roused the vengeance of Britain, an expedition, of a suitable magnitude, was prepared to act against the forts and shipping of Algiers, and the command was .intrusted to a .most able officer, Admiral Lord Exmouth ; who had already, a short time before, compelled the Dey of Tunis to sign a treaty for the abolition of Christian slavery, and to restore 1792 slaves to freedom. On the 28th of July, at noon, a fleet, consisting, of the fol-