

This was flanked by four other batteries, of two tiers each, mounting altogether 60 guns ; and on the south head of the mole were two large guns, represented to be 68 pounders, and nearly 20 feet long : so that the different batteries on the mole mounted at least 220 guns ; consisting, except in the case just mentioned, of 32, 24, and 18 pounders. South-west of the small pier that projects from the city to form the entrance of the mole, or harbour, and bearing, at the distance of about 300 yards, due west from the south mole-head, was the fish-market battery, of 15 guns, in three tiers. Between that and the southern extremity of the city were two batteries of four or five guns each.

Beyond the city, in this direction, was a castle and two or three other batteries, mounting between them 60 or 70 guns. Besides all the batteries we have enumerated, and which constituted the sea-defences of the port, there were various others at the back of the city, and on the heights in its environs : indeed, the whole of the guns mounted for the defence of the city of Al giers, on its sea and land frontiers, are represented to have exceeded 1000. Having to beat against a head wind until towards midnight on the 24th, when it shifted to south-west, the fleet did not make Cape Cazzina, a high promontory about 55 miles to the westward of Algiers, of the bay of which it forms the northern point, until noon on the 26th; nor gain a sight of the city until day break on the 27th. The ships at this time lying nearly becalmed , Lord Exmouth took the opportunity of despatching Lieutenant

282 ENGLAND AND THE BABBARY STATES. [1816.

Samuel Burgess, in one of the Queen Charlotte's boats, towed by the Severn, to demand of the dey certain conditions, of which the following is the substance : The abolition of Christian slavery ; the delivery of all Christian slaves in the kingdom of Algiers ; the repayment of all the money that had recently been exacted for the redemption of Neapolitan and Sardinian slaves ; peace with the king of the Netherlands; and the immediate

liberation of the British consul and the two boats' crews of the Prometheus. At 9 A.M., the calm retarding the progress of the frigate, the boat, by signal from the Queen Charlotte, pulled for the shore, carrying a flag of truce. At 11 A.M., on arriving opposite to the mole, the boat was met by one from the shore, in which was the captain of the port. The demand was presented, and an answer promised in two hours. Meanwhile, a breeze having sprung up from the sea, the fleet stood into the bay, and lay to about a mile from the city. At 2 P.M., no answer returning, Lieutenant Burgess hoisted the signal to that effect, and pulled out towards the Severn. The Queen Charlotte immediately asked, by signal, if all the ships were ready. Almost at the same moment every ship had the affirmative flag at her mast-head, and the fleet bore up to the attack in the prescribed order. At 2 h. 35 m. P.M. the Queen Charlotte anchored with springs about 50 yards from the mole head. Just as the British three-decker was in the act of lashing herself to the mainmast of an Algerine brig fast to the shore at the mouth of the mole or harbour, and towards which Lord Exmouth had directed his ship to be steered as the guide for her position, a shot was fired at the Queen Charlotte ; and almost at the same instant two other shot were fired from the opposite end of the mole at the Impregnable and ships near her, as they were advancing to their stations. Scarcely had these three guns been discharged, when Lord Exmouth, with characteristic humanity, waved his hand to a crowd of 200 or 300 soldiers and artillerymen, standing on the parapet of the mole, surveying the immense floating body so near to them. As the greater part of these were in the act of leaping through the embrasures into the lower battery, the Queen Charlotte opened her starboard broadside. Thus the action commenced, each British ship taking a part in it the instant she could bring her guns to bear. Next ahead of the Queen Charlotte, or rather upon her larboard bow, lay the Leander, with her after-guns on the starboard side bearing into the mouth of the mole, and her foremost