

It now becomes our cheerful duty to bestow on Captain Wal cott and the officers under his command the praise they deserve.

This attack took place in daylight, against a vessel advan tageously moored, manned by a crew resolved to perish or to conquer ; the boats were advanced in a calm, and for threequarters of an hour they were under a heavy fire. Every man must have done his duty, and it has been well designated by a contemporary historian, as one of the most brilliant actions in boat-service he ever remembered. 1 Captain Walcott, in his

1 Brenton.

VOL. VI. T

274 LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS. [1815 official letter, mentions the excellent conduct of Lieutenants Amos Plymsell, and James Campbell, of Messrs. Eobinson, Dawson, Shapland,

1 Gettings, and Dalyell, midshipmen ; likewise of Mr. West the surgeon, and Mr. Graham assistant-surgeon, who volunteered their servir.es. Of Captain Eoberts he speaks in the highest terms, and Mr. Bull the acting-master of ihe Tyne, receives his warmest thanks for the manner in which he piloted the ships through the constant intricate and dangerous navigation, and finally got them AVJ thin gun-shot of the captured pirate ; the loss sustained by the English was one man killed and

five wounded, the Spaniards lost 10 killed and 15 wounded.

In giving our account of this action we consulted Captain Brenton's history, but were discouraged from gleaning any information from him, in consequence of two mistakes in the first line : he calls Captain Walcott a commander and a C.B. ; he had been post more than a year, and to this day, although he merits a higher distinction, is not a C.B. He calls the Tyne a sloop ; she is a frigate. He says, " both the British commanders were made post," whereas one was posted a year previously to the action, and the other succeeded to an invaliding vacancy. He finishes by calling Mr. Thomas Bull, Mr. Ball. 2

On the 31st of January, Captain James Eyder Burton, in command of his majesty's sloop Cameleon, of twelve 32-pounder carronades and 45 men, when in company with his majesty's ship Naiad, Captain the Hon. Sir Eobert Spencer, off Algiers, made signal for a suspicious sail to windward, which Tiltimately proved to be the Tripoli, an Algcrine corvette, of 20 long 12-pounders and 150 men. When the Naiad hoisted her colours, she fired a shot ahead of the stranger. The Tripoli, in showing hers, fired a shot at the Naiad ; the signal was instantly made to chase, and both British vessels tacked to that effect with the intention of cutting off the Algerine from entering the mole of

Algiers. The Naiad having the advantage of the Cameleon, after an hour's chase, passed ahead of the Tripoli and fired into her, then tacked and stood out to sea. By this time the Came leon got close up under the enemy's lee, so close, as not only to receive the fire of the Algerine, but likewise the grape and canister of the Naiad, which ship was to windward of both the

1 Mr. Shapland being the senior mid- tain Brenton's diligent search of our shipman in this affair was promoted, and pages, out of 2000 of which he has disco-Mr. Bull was confirmed as master of the vered two typographical errors : unfor-Tyne. Innately, the editor being more diligent, 2 These inaccuracies would not have has found several more, which shall be been pointed out or noticed but tor Cap- rectified.