

1815."] CAMELEON AND TRIPOLI. 275

Tripoli and Cameleon. The fire of both ships, one so very superior in force as the Naiad, soon riddled the Algerine, but she still continued running towards the Mole, and was within gun-shot of the batteries, which opened their fire upon the Cameleon. As Sir Eobert Spencer considered he had sufficiently punished the insolence of the Algerine, the Naiad stood out to sea, and the Cameleon was recalled, as that sloop was now closely engaged with a very superior force in the Tripoli. Captain Burton, on perceiving the signal, desired his helm to be put a-lee with the intention of boarding the Algerine, but having too much head-way, the Cameleon passed under the bows of the enemy, who put her helm a-weather and bore up close under the lee of the brig, receiving from the latter her broadside. In the mean time, the Cameleon braced her head yards round, and boxed off, then filled again in chase. Being now to windward, she availed herself of her position to run the Algerine on board, which she effected, placing her bowsprit between the fore and main mast of the Tripoli. Captain Burton headed his men, and soon drove the Algerines below ; but in the act of taking his prize in tow, Sir Eobert Spencer wore round, passed within hail, arid desired Captain Burton to cut away the Algerine's anchor and abandon her. This was done, and both ships stood out.

In this affair, it is necessary to state that the only credit which can be claimed by any one is by Captain Burton. It is evident that the attacking force was sufficient to beat five vessels of the size of the Tripoli, but in the moment of boarding, the Algerine was three times more powerful in men than the Cameleon, and, although the Tripoli had been cut up severely by the Naiad, and although it is probable that the crew of the former were already beaten, yet the act of boarding so very superior a force reflects the highest credit on Captain Burton, his officers, and men. For this action he received his post-rank shortly afterwards.

( 276 )

STATE OF THE BRITISH NAVY.

THE totals in the two "ordinary" columns of the present abstract decisively show the peaceable state of the navy at the beginning of the year 1816 ; : and the totals, generally, differ but slightly from those of the abstract for the year in which the war had commenced. 2

The number of commissioned officers and masters belonging to the British navy at the beginning of the present year was,

Admirals 67 
Vice-admirals 68 
Rear-admirals 75 
,, superannuated 32 
Post-captains 851 
superannuated 36 
Commanders, or sloop-captains . 812 
superannuated 80 
Lieutenants 4064 
Masters 693 

And the number of seamen and marines, voted for the service of the same year, was 33,000.

3

Having brought to a close the wars of civilized nations, we have now to record the particulars of a short but decisive war carried on against barbarians. Partly to settle some differences with the regencies of Algiers, Tunis, and Tripoli, and partly, no doubt, to astonish Europe Avith the extent of their naval force,