

lowing 19 men-of-war, also a naval transport, a sloop with ordnance stores, and a despatch-vessel weighed from Plymouth Sound with a fine northerly wind :

Gun-ship

f Admiral (b.) Lord Exmouth, G.C.B. 
| Captain James Brisbane, C.B. 
( Rear-admiral (b.) David Milne. 

\ Captain Edward Brace, C.B. , . * Charles Ekins.

100 Queen Charlotte

98 Impregnable ( Superb 74 < Minden

( Albion 50 Leander

Gun-frigate.

Severn 
Glasgow . 
op f Granicus . 
OO < TT L 
} Hebrus 

Gun-b.-sloop.

( Heron. 
{ Mutiue 
I Britomart 
Cordelia . 
Jasper 
Belzebub . 

Fury .

Hecla . .

Infernal

40

IS

10

Bb.

William Paterson. 
John Coode. 
Edward Chetham, C.B. 
Hon. Fred. Wm. Aylmer. 
Hon. Anthony Maitland. 
William Furlong Wise. 
Edmund Palmer, C.B. 
George Bentham. 
James Mould. 
Robert Riddel 1. 
William Sargent. 
Thomas Carew. 
William Kempthorne. 
Constantine R. Moorsom. 
William Popham. 
Hon. George James Perceval. 

At 5 P.M., when the fleet was off Falmouth, Captain Paterson was ordered to hasten on to Gibraltar, to have everything in readiness against the arrival of the expedition. On the 9th of

August, at 2 P.M., Lord Exmouth anchored with his fleet in

Gibraltar bay, and found lying there, in company with tho

Minden, which had arrived only on the preceding night at 11, the following Dutch squadron :

1816.] BATTLE OF ALGIERS. 279

Gun-frigate. ,, , ( Vice-admiral Baron T. Van de Cappellan. \ Captain Antony-Willem De-Man.

40 Frederica ... , , Jakob-Adrien Van-der-Straaten. Diana , , Pietrus Zievogel. Amstel ... , , Willem-Augustus Vanderhart, 30 Dageraad ... , , Johaunes-Martinus Polders. 
Gun-corvette. 

18 Eendragt ... , , Johan.-Fred.-Chr. Wardenburtr.

Immediately on being apprised of the object of the expedi tion, Vice-admiral Van de Cappellen solicited and obtained leave to co-operate in the attack with his frigate-squadron. No time was lost by Lord Exmouth in sending on shore all articles of useless lumber and in getting on board fresh supplies of provisions and , ordnance stores, it being the admiral's intention to sail on the 12th. On the llth, however, a strong levanter set in ; and, continuing over the 12th, kept the fleet from moving.

Owing to the highly commendable regulations put in force by Lord Exmouth, an unusual proportion of powder and shot had been expended by the fleet since its departure from England. Every Tuesday and Friday the signal was made for the fleet to prepare for action ; when each ship, according to directions pre-viously given, fired six broadsides. Besides this general exercise, the first and second captains of the Queen Charlotte's guns were daily trained at a target made of laths, three feet square ; in the centre of which was suspended a piece of wood of the shape and size of a bottle, with yarns crossed at right angles, so that a

12-pound shot could not pass through the interstices without cutting a yarn. This target, which was, in 1812, first introduced into the navy by Lieutenant George Crichdon, then belonging to his majesty's ship Ehin, commanded by Sir Charles Malcolm, and which was shown to, and approved by Sir James Brisbane, when fitting out the Queen Charlotte, was hung at the foretopmast studdingsail-boom, which was rigged out for the purpose ; and it was fired at from abreast of the admiral's sky light on the quarter-deck. By the time the fleet reached Gib raltar, the target was never missed, and the average number of bottles hit daily was 10 out of 14. The confidence this gave to the ship's company was unbounded ; and, of their expertness against stone walls and living targets, we shall soon have to display the terrible effects.