

proud. 
The different sloops attached to the squadron also took their 
posts ; the Heron, Britomart, Prometheus, and Cordelia remain 
ing under way, and the Mutine anchoring on the larboard bow 
of the Impregnable. The four bomb-vessels were soon in their 
stations, at the distance of about 2000 yards from the enemy's 
works, and began their destructive discharges ; as did also the 
battering flotilla, commanded by Captain Frederick Thomas 
Mitchell, consisting of gun-boats, mortar-boats, launches with 
carronades, rocket-boats, barges, and yawls, in number 55. 
Such was the precision and destructive effect of the Queen 
Charlotte's fire, that her third broadside levelled the south end 
of the mole to its foundation : she then sprang her broadside, 
until it bore upon the batteries over the town-gate leading into 
the mole. Here gun after gun came tumbling over the battle- 
ments ; and when the last gun fell, which was just as the artij- 

1816.J BATTLE OF ALGIERS. 285 lerymen were in the act of discharging it, one of the Algerine chiefs leaped upon the ruined parapet, and shook his drawn cimiter at the ship, whose fatally pointed cannon had so quickly demolished that which, by its brave defenders at least, had been considered impregnable. The excellent position of, and the animated fire kept up by, the Leander very soon cut to pieces the Algerine gxm-boats and row-galleys ; whereby their intention of boarding the nearest British ships was entirely frustrated. Towards 4 P.M. the Lean der, by orders from the admiral, ceased firing, to allow the Algerine frigate moored across the mole, at the distance of about 140 yards from the Queen Charlotte, to be set on fire. Accord ingly, the flag-ship's barge, under the command of Lieutenant Peter Eichards, assisted by Major Gossett, of the corps of miners, Lieutenant of marines Ambrose A. E. Wolrige, and midshipman Henry M'Clintock, proceeded to execute that service. A gallant young midshipman, Aaron Stark Symes, in rocket-boat No. 8, "although," as Lord Exmouth says, "for bidden, was led by his ardent spirit, to follow in support of the barge." His boat, being flat-bottomed, could not keep pace with the barge, and became exposed, in consequence, to a cannonade that wounded himself, and killed his brother officer and nine of the boat's crew. In about 10 minutes, Lieutenant Eichards in the barge succeeded in boarding and setting fire to the Algerine frigate, and returned from the enterprise with the loss of only two men killed. The blaze was in a manner electrical ; and Lord

Exmouth testified his approbation, by telegraphing to the fleet, "Infallible." At 4 h. 15 m. P.M. the Algerine frigate in flames drifting out towards the Queen Charlotte, the latter shifted her birth to let the vessel pass. At 4 h. 24 m. Bear-admiral Milne sent a message to the commander-in-chief, communicating, that the Impregnable had sustained a loss of 150 killed and wounded (including a third of the number by the bursting of a shell from the enemy's works), and requesting that a frigate might be sent to divert some of the fire from the ship. The Glasgow was immediately ordered upon that service ; but, the wind having fallen in consequence of the heavy firing, she was unable to do more than take up, after the lapse of nearly three-quarters of an hour, a somewhat better position for annoyance than her former one. Here a short distance off the Severn, with her stern now towards that ship, the Glasgow became exposed to a severe raking fire from the fish-market and contiguous batteries ; which