

272 LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS. [IS 15 tenant Hobson and his men, but after a few days' detention, allowed them to return to their ships. The execution of their brother pirates at Jamaica, after this rare mercy, was viewed by Cayatano Arogonez as an infamous, ungenerous, savage act ;

and he resolved to take ample revenge upon all unfortunate men who should fall into his hands. He summoned his crew, and, with barbarous ferocity, excited them to bind themselves by the most sacred obligation, under the form of an oath, that hence forth no Englishman's life should be spared, and that to avoid the retaliation which would certainly ensue in the event of their capture, they swore, rather than surrender to be hung, to blow up their vessel, their crew, and their assailants. To crown this horrid act of determination, it was requisite forthwith to procure a victim, that, passing the rubicon of crime, their consciences might become accustomed to the deed, and themselves cease to shudder at murder. A cry was raised to sacrifice the black cook, a native of Jamaica (and consequently if not an Englishman, one under the protection of the English flag), whom they had removed from a vessel they had captured. In vain did the poor fellow implore their mercy. They dragged him from his occupation, and instantly spritsail-yarded him, having secured him in a position to offer the fairest mark ; these infamous villains amused themselves for 20 minutes, slightly wounding him at every shot before their savage pastime was surfeited, and the coup de grace inflicted. Against these men Captain Walcott had now to act. The pirate was cruising oif the city of Baracoa, and was described as a very fast-sailing schooner ; but as almost all the trade of Cuba, at least the coasting-trade, is carried on in vessels of this description, Captain Walcott became apprehensive that she might, by disguise, escape his vigilance ; he therefore offered the American pilot 1000 dollars to remain with him ; for, independently of the disguise which might be practised, two men-of-war schooners, belonging to the Spanish government, were cruising off the coast, and by pursuing these the pirate might escape. The pilot, however, refused ; for he declared it impossible to capture the schooner by the boats, and that, failing of success, he would become known as the informer, and be obliged to relinquish his situation as pilot in the old Bahama channel. On the 31st of March the Tyne and Thracian, being off Baracoa, the pirate was discovered. The English men-of-war were instantl-y disguised as merchant ships, their sails being set in a slovenly manner, and they stood in under easy sail to close with the schooner. For three hours

1815.] PIRATICAL VESSELS. 273 this succeeded; at the expiration of that time the pirate was seen to crowd all sail for the harbour of Mata : the disguise was abandoned, and every stitch of canvas crowded in chase. At 1 h. 30m. P.M. the schooner anchored, and moored head and stern athwart the harbour, her broadside commanding the entrance which was not more than a cable's length, and wearing the royal colours of Spain. The boats of the Tyne and Thracian were instantly hoisted out, manned and armed, the total number of men being 47 ; and Captain Walcott duly considering all the consequences of failure from the information already given, re-solved to head this desperate enterprise himself; leaving Cap tain Eoberts in command of the ships, and desiring him to do his utmost to close with the pirate in order to afford all assistance. At 3 P.M. the boats arrived within gun-shot, when all thought of subterfuge was abandoned by the pirate, the black nag was hoisted, and a spirited cannonade commenced. Caya tano Arogonez, by way of strengthening his position, had landed some of his crew with small-arms, and these men, sheltered by the trees which grew close to the shore of the harbour, opened a very harassing fire upon the assailants. In the mean time the boats continued to approach, and the crowded deck of the schooner became visible ; for three-quarters of an hour the English sustained the fire of the pirate and of tho men on shore, when a favourable opportunity occurred, three hearty cheers were given, the boats dashed alongside, and the pnnic-stricken pirates endeavoured to save themselves by flight. Twenty-eight men, however, were secured, amongst whom was their com mander. Every word of information given by the pilot was now proved correct : her description, size, armament, &c. ; and the hand of retributive justice rid the world of Arogonez and his men, for they were all hanged at Jamaica, and received more mercy in their expeditious death than they had accorded to the poor cook.