

Eliza's Force. One 18-pounder oarronade.

Complement. Midshipmen 2

Assistant Surgeon ... 1 Pilot 1 
Men . . 20 
24 

Felucca la Firme Union's Force, One long 6-pounder on a pivot. Four small carriage-guns, 4-pounders. Crew . 37

The schooner El Diableto, about the same force as the felucca.

In the official report Mr. Nurse mentions the services of Mr. George White, midshipman, whose bravery was highly con bplcuous, and Mr. Clark, the assistant surgeon, who is since dead. In March, in this year, Bear-admiral Sir Charles Eowley, the commander-in-chief in the West Indies, despatched Captain John Edward Walcott, in his majesty's frigate Tyne, having under his orders the sloop Thracian, Commander John Walter

PIRATICAL VESSELS. 271

L'oberts, to endeavour to extirpate the piratical vessels which infested the West India station, and which generally made the different ports of the island of Cuba their rendezvous. Captain Walcott commenced his arduous task of searching 400 miles of coast, in order to examine the different creeks and inlets where small vessels could be sheltered and concealed. If Captain Walcott failed in discovering the object of his search, he had the gratification of gaining information that a piratical schooner had been seen off the east end of the island of Cuba, and that she did occasionally visit a harbour in that neighbourhood, in which she disposed of her plunder to many of the residents. It may here be remembered that Captain Walcott, during his examination of the different creeks, found on an island, situated within the harbour of Nerangos, a cargo con

sisting of 1100 casks of wine and spirits ; and upon his own responsibility, considering the concealment of the wine very suspicious, and believing it to be some of the captured property taken by the pirate, he embarked it. It was afterwards condemned, and sold at Jamaica for 6000Z., two-thirds of which was deducted from the captors for government and colonial duties, thus leaving only 2000/. to be shared; whereas, had Captain Walcott failed to establish this cargo as the property of the pirates, he would have been liable to the full extent of 6000Z.

On the 28th of March the Captain of an American pilot-boat confirmed the intelligence already received relative to the pirate. She was described as a schooner, named the Zaragonaza, of 120 tons, carrying one long 18-pounder on a swivel, four long 9-pounders, and eight swivels, commanded by a desperate character named Cayatano Arogonez, having a crew of between 70 and 80 men. Captain Walcott further learnt from the informer that he had been detained on board this vessel, and that during the time of his detention, information z-eached the commander of the pirate that several men, a part of the crew of a piratical vessel, captured during a former cruise of the Tyne, had been hung at Jamaica. These men had given some proofs of a merciful disposition, for previously to their capture they had taken a small vessel tender to the Tyne in which were Lieu tenant Ilobson and 20 men. According to the general custom of the bloodthirsty savages they proceeded in their preparations to hang their captives, and actually placed the rope round the neck of Hobson and his men. The "still small voice" of con science, however, seems to have awakened the last slumber of mercy, and ultimately they not only spared the lives of Lieu-