

1S16.J BATTLE OF ALGIERS. 283 ones upon the fish-market battery. Ahead of the Leander lay the Severn, with the whole of her starboard guns bearing on the fish-market battery. Close to the Severn was the Glasgow, with her larboard guns bearing on the town batteries. In the rear of the Queen Charlotte, inclining towards her starboard quarter, at the distance of about 250 yards, and within a very few of her allotted station, was the Superb, with her starboard broadside bearing upon the f>0-gun battery, next to that on the mole-head. This ship was not as close to the Queen Charlotte as her gallant commander intended her to be (by placing her flying jib-boom over the poop of the Queen Charlotte), owing to the signal having been made "to anchor" instead of " prepare to anchor," as was directed by Lord Exmouth. Close astern of the Superb, in a north-easterly direction, the Impregnable and Albion were

to have taken their stations in line ahead ; but, not being suf ficiently advanced when the firing commenced, the Impregnable was obliged to bring to considerably outside, not only of her proper station, but of the line of bearing (about south-east from the south angle of the eastern battery) within which the attacking force had been ordered to assemble. The Impregnable thus lay exposed, at the distance of about 400 yards, as Avell to the lighthouse battery of three tiers, towards which she soon sprang her starboard broadside, as to the eastern battery of two tierx. Observing what an open space there was between the Impreg nable and her second ahead, the Superb, the Minden stood on and took up a position about her own length astern of the latter. The Albion, following, brought up, at first, close ahead of the Impregnable ; but, finding herself too near to the three-decker, she filled, and at about 3 P.M. came to again, within her own length of the Minden. The latter, quickly passing her stream cable out of the larboard gun-room port to the Albion's bow, hove the two ships close together. In this way the eight heaviest ships of the fleet took their stations ; the Queen Char lotte, Superb, Minden, Albion, and Impregnable, from the molehead in a north-easterly direction, and the Leander, Severn, and Glasgow, from the fish-market battery in a curved direction to the south-west. The station assigned to the Dutch squadron was against the batteries to the southward of the city, and it appears to have been the intention of the Dutch admiral to place the Melampus in the centre of his five frigates ; but the Diana's captain, not understanding exactly the orders given to him, did not go far enough to the northward. Seeing this, the baron gallantly

284 ENGLAND AND THE BARBARY STATES. '

f!816.

pushed tl.e Melampus past the Diana, and at about 3 P.M. anchored his frigate with her jib-boom over the taffrail of the Glasgow. The Diana and Dageraad anchored successively astern of their admiral. The two remaining Dutch frigates anchored further out ; and the corvette Eendragt, as she had been directed, kept under way, The Granicus and Hebrus frigates and the smaller vessels (except the bombs) being considered in the light of a corps de reserve, had not had any particular stations assigned to them, but were to bring up abreast of any openings they could find in the line of battle. Impelled onward by the ardent desire of filling the first of these openings, the Hebrus got becalmed by the heavy cannonade, andAvas obliged to anchor a little without the line, on the Queen Charlotte's larboard quarter. The Granicus, finding herself shooting fast ahead, hove to, with the intention of waiting until her companions had taken their sta tions. As, owing to the dense smoke which prevailed, nothing beyond the distance of a cable's length could be seen, except the Queen Charlotte's masthead flag, Captain Wise allowed 10 minutes to elapse for the ships to anchor. The Granicus then filled, let fall her foresail, set topgallantsails, and, soon gaining fresh way, steered straight for a beacon that, phoenix-like, seemed to live in the hottest of the fire. With a display of intrepidity and of seamanship alike unsurpassed, Captain Wise anchored his frigate in a space scarcely exceeding her own length between the Queen Charlotte and Superb ; a station of which a three-decked line-of-battle ship might justly have been