

Glenmore 32. In 1805 it was further applied, at Chatham, to the Kent 74, to give auxiliary strength to that ship after her return from the Mediterranean. It was then introduced, to a certain extent, in the building of the Warspite 74 ; and, after

the principle had been examined at the admiralty by a com mittee appointed for the purpose, directions were given to re

1 See Appendix, No. 14.

1817-1820.] BRITISH AND AMERICAN SEVENTY-FOUF.S. 299 build the Tremendous 74 to the full extent of the diagonal prin ciple. This was done, and the principle was extended even to the decks. The Tremendous was found so completely to answer, that the diagonal system, 1 both in building and in repairing

ships, has since become general in the British navy. The Howe, launched March 28, 1815, was the first ship laid down and built upon the principle. A rumour for a short time prevailed, that this fine first-rate, just as she had entered one of the new docks at Sheemess, was infected with the dry-rot. So far from it, there is not at the moment we are writing this, from the best inquiries we can make on the subject, a sounder ship in the British navy. Sir Robert's important improvement in giving to linc-of-battle ships a circular bow, we have already slightly touched upon :-' his ingenuity has since produced a more surprising, and an equally important change at the opposite extremity of the ship, a circular instead of a square stern. To convey an idea of the advantages of this plan we shall make a quotation from a work that treats professionally on the subject: "The sterns are also formed circular, and to add to their strength, as many timbers as possible are run up : this presents a very formidable stern battery, enables the guns to be run out so far as to prevent accidents to the stern by their explosion ; the danger arising from being pooped is considerably diminished, if not wholly prevented, and the obstruction to the ship's progress, which according to the old plan, was occasioned by the projection of quarter-gal leries, when the ships were going on a wind, is removed. In fine, by this alteration, the ships are every way more seaworthy and better adapted for defence ; qualities which are so essential and indeed indispensable in ships-of-war."* As a proof of the good opinion entertained of this plan by the lords commissioners of the admiralty, an order of the board, dated on the 13th of June, 1817, directs, that all new ships, down to fifth-rates inclusive, are to be so constructed, and all ships of the same rates receiving extensive repairs are also to have circular sterns, provided the timbers in the old or square sterns are defective. By this alteration in her construction, the ship becomes, beyond a doubt, a stronger vessel and a more

1 See a very valuable work recently Majesty's navy, by John Knowles, F.R S., published, with " Elements of Naval Ar- secretary to the committee of surveyors chitecture," entitled " An Appendix, con- of His Majesty's navy." taiuing the principles and practice of con- 2 See vol. iii., p. 509. structing ships, as invented and introduced 3 See the work referred to in note 'In by Sir Robert Seppings, surveyor of His the preceding column.