

300 STATE OF THE BRITISH NAVY. [1817-1820.

efficient man-of-war : advantages which it will require something 
more than an unsightly appearance (and even that, we presume, 
is a remediable effect) to counterbalance. The number of ships 
belonging to the British navy, which on the 1st of January, 1820, 
were repairing, building, or ordered to be built, with circular 
sterns, amounted to 67, 
1 and the number of ships building of 
teak, at the same date, amounted to 19. 2 
On a former occasion, we ventured to suggest the advantages 
that might be derived, in the construction of ships-of-war, from 
the opinions of naval officers of experience. 
3 A post-captain of 
acknowledged nautical skill, and of tried gallantry, has recently 
proved himself a very eminent naval architect. " 

Captain Hayes," says Mr. Marshall, "is the author of a pamphlet on the subject of naval architecture, his proficiency in which important science is the result of many years' professional experience and deep consideration. His proposed system, we under stand, meets a point hitherto considered impracticable, viz. : that of building a thousand vessels, if required, from a given section, without the variation of a needle's point, reducible from a first-rate ship to a cutter, each possessing excelling powers and advantages of every description in their respective class. Since the publication of the above pamphlet, in which he carefully abstained from saying, or even hinting that he had made any progress in the formation of such a system, two vessels have been built, in a royal dockyard, on his projection : the first, a cutter of about 160 tons,

4

is said to embrace stability under canvas with little ballast, great buoyancy, better stowage, and swifter sailing qualities, than any model yet designed by known schools of naval architecture. The second, a sloop-of-war,

5 is

at present absent on her first experimental cruise, in company with two other vessels of the same class, one of which was designed by Sir Eobert Seppings, and the other built by the students of Portsmouth dockyard, under the superintendence of Professor Inman." 6 In the former edition of this work, we were induced to give a brief account of the first two expeditions to the polar regions, in search of a north-west passage. Other expeditions to the same spot have since been undertaken ; and if we broached the sub ject at all, we could not expect to make it interesting, or eveu

1 For a list of names, see Appendix, * The Arrow. No. 15. 5 The Champion. 2 Ibid., No. 16. 6 Marshall, vol. ii., p. q3. s See vol. v., p. 437.

181^-1820.] PUBLISHED ACCOUNTS OF EXPEDITIONS. 301 intelligible, unless we brought down occurrences to a date far beyond the period to which this work, by its title, is restricted.

Several works have been published exclusively on the subject of these expeditions, and they are in most people's hands : consequently there is the less occasion for us to deviate from our plan, and enlarge this volume to a much greater bulk than any of its companions.