

of upwards of 1200 Christian slaves, with an engagement (of no great value certainly) to abolish the practice of slave-making in future; the restoration of 382,500 dollars for slaves redeemed by Naples and Sicily ; peace with the king of the Netherlands ; the

payment of 30,000 dollars to the British consul for the destruc tion of his effects, and a public apology to him, before the ministers and officers of the palace, in terms dictated by Captain Brisbane, for the detention of his person. Having thus accom plished, to the fullest extent, the object of his mission to

Algiers, Lord Exmouth, at midnight on the 3rd of September, weighed on his return, leaving the Prometheus to attend the British consul, and embark the few remaining slaves that were then on their way from the interior. Those only who may not be aware to what a pitch of extravagance the pretensions of the Americans have attained will feel any surprise that they should rank their performance at

1 Narrative of the Expedition to Algiers, &c., p. 37.

1816.J BATTLE OF ALGIERS. 291

Algiers very little if at all below the glorious exploit we have just done narrating: as if the act of Commodore Decatur, in exchanging 500 Algerine prisoners for 10 slaves, citizens of. the United States, could be compared with the act of Lord Exmouth ; who, with cannon-balls only to give in exchange, obtained the freedom of, including the 1792 given up to the admiral in his spring visit to the bay of Tunis,

1 upwards of 3000 slaves ; not one of Avhom, as a proof how little of selfish feeling had actuated the framers of the expedition, was a native of the British isles. The release of so many Christain slaves from the iron fangs of barbarians was, indeed, an act worthy of Britain ; an act calculated to raise the character of her navy, high as it already stood, higher still in the estimation of the world. Nor will the triumph at Algiers pass to posterity without the name of Exmouth as the leader of the brave band by whose prowess it was gained.

For the skill and valour he had displayed in consummating this glorious achievement, Lord Exmouth was created a viscount of the United Kingdom. Eear-admiral Milne, also, was made a knight-commander, and Captains Ekins, Aylmer, Wise, Mait laud, Paterson, and Coode, companions, of the Bath. All tho lieutenants named in the list in page 289, and some others, inchiding Lieutenant Fleming who commanded the explo sion-vessel, were promoted to the rank of commanders ;

and several of the master's mates and midshipmen obtained commissions as lieutenants. The Dutch admiral behaved uncommonly well ; and the following has been adduced as an instance of his self-possession in the heat of the battle : About an hour after the firing had com menced, a lieutenant of the Queen Charlotte went on board the Melampus with a message from Lord Exmouth. The baron himself attended the lieutenant to the gangway on his return, and rated the frigate's first-lieutenant somewhat sharply, for his inattention in not having shipped the best man-ropes for the British officer's accommodation. Among the meritorious individuals concerned in this expedition, the interpreter must not be forgotten. The zeal, talent, and fidelity of Mr Salame appear to have merited all the praises officially bestowed upon him, as well by the commander-in-chief as by the officers, Eear-admiral Penrose and Captain Brisbane, present at the conferences with the dey.