

Franklin 41 1312

n j i ( No. Broadside-guns . . . < ,,

Crew No'. 594 78G Size tons. 1743 2124

So much for the equality of force between an American 74 and a British 74 of the class of the Albion ; and yet, were a war to break out to-morrow, Sir William Hoste 1 would consider him self peculiarly fortunate (and where is the captain of a British 74, indeed, who would not?) in falling in with the Franklin, 1 The Albion's captain till June, 1825.

1817-1820.] BRITISH AXD AMKUICAX SKVKNTY-FOURS. 295 commanded by the most renowned of the American commo dores. We will now proceed to state a few particulars respecting the construction, equipment, and qualifications of the Franklin, the result of an inspection of the ship when she lay at Spithead in January, 1818 ; and which particulars, to the British public at least, are as novel as it is hoped they will prove interesting. The Franklin was laid down at Philadelphia in the summer of 1813, and launched in August, 1815. She is built of seasoned

live oak, admirably put together, and, like the generality of Philadelphia ships, highly finished in every part ; has a round bow, and works her cables, similarr to other three-deckers, on the second deck. We call her a three decker, because, in fact, her upper deck is continuous from stem to stern, similar to the first and second, with chocks and fittings for five ports of a sido along the waist : so that the ship can mount 30 guns on this

deck (called

" spar deck" by the Americans), similar to the 44s. 1 Her principal dimensions are as follows :

Ft. in. Length from the fore part of the stem to the back of the post} ..p- ^ at the wing transom . . .' . . / Breadth, extreme . . . . . . 50

First deck-ports apart ... 8 (> Height of ditto from water 47 Draught of water abaft, with nine months' provisions on board 24 After what has appeared in these pages respecting the Ameri can frigates, no doubt can remain, that this American line-of- battle ship is well found in all her stores, and that her guns are properly mounted and secured. She is, to all appearance, a very snug ship, and has been pronounced to be a very stiff one ; an excellent sailer on every point, and a good sea-boat. She is steered with an iron tiller 16 feet ]<uig. Her lower masts, in their naked state, are not stouter than those cf a British ship of the same dimensions, but they have each, as we noticed in the frigates, immense quarter-fishes, that make them appear of an extraordinary size ; and the whole of the rigging, both standing and running, is far stouter than would be established upon a similarly-sized ship in the British navy. Her galley, dispensary capstan, and pumps, are all of the most improved construction her pumps, indeed, are remarkable lor their simplicity, the ease with which they are worked, and the quantity of water they discharge. One error was committed by her architects. They did not i See vol. v., p. 270

20fi STATE OF TUP] BRITISH NAVY. [1817-182C calculate properly the bulk of water that a hull so stoutly built, ;uid so heavily laden with guns, would displace. Hence, her lower-deck ports are brought nearer to the water than was intended, or than is consistent with a due regard to the use of her lower battery in blowing weather. For instance, in the year 1818, the Franklin's midship lower-deck port was only 4 feet 7 inches from the water, while that of the British small-class 74 is usually 5 feet 10 inches ; but the Franklin was then victualled lor nine months, and had on board a quantity of stores for other ships in the Mediterranean. With six months' provisions on board, the height was stated to be about 5 feet 6 inches. The Independence, built at Boston, and launched eight or nine months before the Franklin, possessed the failing in a much greater degree ; her ports were within 3 feet 10 inches of the water, and she was not considered safe to cross the Atlantic without half-ports. However, the fault certainly increased the ship's stability ;