

:md the four last-built American line-of-battle ships, the Wash ington (the second), Ohio, Columbus, and North Carolina, are of greatly increased dimensions and, even with their full establishment of guns, 102 in number, carry their ports at a proper height. We have recently gleaned a few particulars respecting the last-named ship, which is now in the Mediterranean under the command of our old friend Commodore Rodgers. The Xorth Carolina measures 206 feet on the gun-deck, and is 52 feet some odd inches in moulded breadth ; which gives the ship about 53 feet 4 or 5 inches for her extreme breadth, and makes her measure about 2650 tons English. Her actual force at this time, according to the representation of a British officer who has recently been on board of her, consists of 34 medium 42-pounders on the first deck, 34 medium 32-pounders on the second deck, and 34 carronades, 42-pounders, on the third deck ; total 102 guns. Her complement now on board is 1000 men. Her lower masts and topmasts are short, but of an immense stoutness. The mizenmast is within 4 inches of being equal in circumference to the Albion's mainmast. The masts have a fish on each side from the step to the head ; and Commodore

Eodgers told the post-captain who was paying him this visit, that, in an action in- the Constitution when he commanded her, he had 32 shot through his mainmast, but did not lose it ; which he attributed to the shortness of the mast, its size, and the strengthening fish. Had we been standing by the commodore when he made this bounce, we should almost have been tempted

1817-1820.] BRITISH AND AMERICAN SEVENTY-FOURS. 297 to ask him what action it was in which he commanded the

Constitution. We have already compared together an American and a

British 74 ; we will now give a figure statement, showing the relative force of an American 74 (for so the North Carolina is officially rated) and a British 120. The force of the Caledonia has already been particularized; but her third-deck guns have since been changed from long 18 to Congreve's 24 pounders, and her present establishment gives her six, instead of two, poop-carronacles, or 126 guns in all. The following, then, will bo the comparative force of a British 120, and an American first-class 74 gun-ship :

208 STATE OF THE nUITISII NAVY. [1817-1320.

And the number of seamen and marines, voted for the service in the same four years, was, for 1817, 19,000, for 1818 and 1819, 20,000, and for 1820, 23.000.

1

We would most willingly give an account of the improvements that have of late years been introduced into the British navy; but our limits restrict us to a few superficial remarks. A great change has doubtless taken place, as well in the contour as in the arrangement of the materials that compose the fabric of a British ship-of-war. The principle of the change, as 'respects the arrangement of the materials or timber, consists in the substitution of the triangle for the rectangle, with the view of conferring upon every part of the fabric a uniformity of strength. The frame of the hold consists of a series of triangles, united by trusses ; and the openings between the ribs, or outer timbers, are filled with slips of wood, calked within and without, and rendered quite impervious to water ; so that, should a ves sel so constructed, lose her main keel, and even a proportion of the plank from her bottom, she would still remain water-tight. As one instance, the British 2C-gun ship Esk, Captain Edward Lloyd, while running between nine and ten knots, struck, near Bermuda, on a bank of coral and hard sand ; where she lay, beating heavily, 48 hours. When got afloat, the ship was found with her main keel rubbed off nearly its whole length (at one part the dead-wood was crushed up to the keelson), and yet it was not until 11 hours afterwards that the Esk began to be, and that only in a slight degree, leaky. The Vigilant revenue-cutter, driven, and apparently wrecked, upon a bed of shingles in Douglas bay, Isle of Man, and yet got off and brought in safety to Plymouth, is another remarkable instance. As a still more recent case, the 10-gun brig-sloop Frolic, employed in the packet-service, after lying eight hours on her beam-ends, upon the rocks off Sable Island, beating violently, got safe into Halifax harbour. The system of diagonal timbering, for which the British navy is indebted to Sir Eobert Seppings, one of the surveyors on the establishment, was first commenced in the year 1800, upon the