

See p. 278.

( 292 )

STATE OF THE BEITISH NAVY.

THE abstract for the year 1817 ] differs from all that have preceded it in the series, by the double arrangement of its classification, owing to the revival, by an order in council, of the ancient and only reasonable practice of rating the ships of the British navy ; namely, according to the number of carriage-guns of every sort which they respectively mounted. The memorial from the board of admiralty to the prince regent, recommending the alteration, bears date November 25, 181G : and the order in council establishing the new ratings, according to the plan sub mitted, issued in the month of February, 1817. Although this memorial of the board of admiralty was not seen by us until every abstract of the 28 was printed, and every note attached to them prepared, we find that we had anticipated nearly all the reasons urged by the board for the necessity of some amendment in the classification. The following are the two concluding paragraphs of this important memorial : " AVe trust that we shall be excused for observing to your royal highness, that it is wholly unworthy of the character of the royal navy of this king dom to maintain this, system, which though introduced by the accidental cause wo have mentioned, and without any design of deception, yet may give occasion to foreign nations to accuse us of misrepresentation, when we state that a British frigate of 38 guns has taken a foreign frigate of 44, when in fact the British frigate was of equal, if not superior force. We therefore humbly recommend that your royal highness will be pleased to order, that the rule for stating the force of his majesty's ships, which prevailed prior to 1793, and which in fact never was formally abrogated, should be revived and established ; antl that in future all his majesty's ships should be rated at the number of gun a

) See Appendix, Annual Abstract, No. 25 ; also, in particular, the notes belonging to it

1817-1820.] STATE OF THE BRITISH NAVY. 293

and carronades which they actually carry on their decks, quar 
ter-decks, and forecastles." 
A reference to the early pages of this work will raise a doubt 
as to the correctness of this passage, "which prevailed prior to 
1793," unless we explain that, as "guns," were the only species 
of ordnance named in the original order, fixing the rates of the 
ships, no ship in the British navy, prior to 1793, nor subse- 
quently indeed, did mount more "guns," that is, long guns, than 
her established or rated number; but that, as far back as 
January, 1781, 429 ships belonging to the British navy carried 
from four to 12 pieces of carriage-ordnance, or, as the French 
expressively say, 
" bouches a feu," more than their rated num 
ber, will not, we presume, be disputed. 
1 We are sorry to ob- 
serve that the new order confines the guns (for we must 
persist in including carronades within that term)" to the " 
decks, 
quarter-decks, and forecastles," because every ship belonging to 
the three higher rates of the navy still mounts six guns more 
than she rates. These guns, it is true, are 18-pounder car- 
ronades; but many of the 80s and first-class 74s have carried 
24-pounders, and may again if a war breaks out. Moreover 
the public is informed by the Admiralty navy-list, that " the 
force of each ship is stated according to the number of guns and 