

fernal, one lieutenant of marine-artillery (John James P. Bissett) and one seaman killed, one lieutenant (John Foreman), her boatswain (George Valentine), clerk (Matthew Hopkins), three midshipmen (James Barber, James M. Cross, and John H. Andrews), eight seamen, one marine-artillery, and two boys wounded.

None of the remaining three bomb-vessels, nor any of the sloops, appear to have incurred any loss. That sustained by the Dutch squadron amoiinted to 13 killed and 52 wounded; making the total loss, on the part of the allies, 141 killed and 742 wounded. The following statement will show, along with the names of the first-lieutenants (and of some of the others in the flag-ships) of the British ships, the individual loss sustained by the two squadrons, and the quantity of powder and shot

which each of the British and Dutch ships expended in the action. The quantities marked with an asterisk are doubtful : tho others are officially correct. The Impregnable, it is understood,

1816.] BATTLE OF ALGIERS.

fired two shot at a time ; which accounts for her expenditure so greatly exceeding that of either of the other line-of-battle ships.

The whole quantity of powder and shot expended in the engagement, according to Mr. Salame's very interesting narrative, was upwards of 500 tons of the latter, and nearly 118 tons of the former. This includes, of course, the quantity expended by the sloops, most of whom fired when they could do so with effect.

Mr. Salame" states, also, that the number of 13 and 10 inch shells thrown by the four bomb-vessels was 960.

SHIPS.

290 ENGLAND AND THE BAUBAIIY STATES. [1816.

As soon as daylight came, Lord Exmoutli despatched Lieu tenant Burgess with a flag of truce and a note to the dey, repeating the demands of the preceding forenoon ; and the bombs \vere at the same time ordered to resume their positions, to be ready to renew the bombardment of the city in case of a non compliance. The Algerine officer who came oif to meet the boat, and who had been captain of one of the frigates that had been destroyed, declared that the answer had been sent on the preceding day, but that no boat was to be found to receive it. On this subject, Mr. Salame says: "When we opened over the mole-head, I saw, as I thought, a boat coming out, which I supposed was that of the captain of the port, and told his lordship of it ; but, on looking with a glass, we found the mistake." 1 The fact of the boat's departure, was, however, confirmed by the captain of the port himself, when, in an hour or two afterwards, lie came off with the Swedish consul, to acquaint the British admiral that all his terms would be agreed to. On the 29th, at 10 A.M., the captain of the port again came off, accompanied by Mr. M'Donell, the British consul. On the same afternoon Captain Brisbane went on shore ; and, by the aid of the interpreter, Mr. Salame, a conference was had with the dey at his palace. Several other conferences took place, in the three last of which Kear-admiral Sir Charles Vinicombe Peurose, who had arrived on the 29th in the 36-gun frigate Ister, was present ; and the final result was, the delivery to the British