

Hibbert, Edward Stanley, and Eobert Hood Baker), one secre tary's clerk (Samuel Colston), 82 seamen, 24 marines, two marine artillery, five sappers and miners, and four boys wounded ; Impregnable, one midshipman (John Hawkins), 37 seamen, 10 marines, and two boys killed, one master's mate (George Nepean Wesley), one midshipman (Henry Quinn), 111 seamen, 21 marines, nine sappers and miners, and 17 boys 1 wounded ; Superb, one master's mate (Thomas Howard), one midshipman (Robert C. Bowen), three seamen, two marines, and one rocket-troop killed, her captain (slightly), three lieutenants (Philip Thick nesse Horn, John M'Dougall, and George W. Gunning), two midshipmen (William Sweeting and John Hood Wolseley), 62 seamen, 14 marines, and two marine-artillery wounded ; Minden ; five seamen and two marines killed, one master's mate (Charles Calmady Dent), one midshipman (Charles G. Grubb), 26 seamen, and nine marines wounded ; Albion, one assistant-surveyor (Thomas Mends), one midshipman (John Jardine), and one seaman killed, her captain (severely), one midshipman (John Harvey, mortally), 10 seamen, and three marines wounded ; Leander, one captain of marines (James Willson), one lieu

i An extraordinary number to suffer on for by the bavoc which the bursting of the board one ship. It is perhaps full as ex- shell caused among the sailors on the traordinary thr.t, out of a total of 210 main or third deck; but the small propersons killed and wounded, three only portion of officers, with even those tidy should be officers : this is partly accounted men deducted, is surprising.

288 ENGLAND AND THE BARBARY STATES. [181 fl tenant of marines (George Baxter), three midshipmen ( Lowdon, Eichard Calthrop, and P. G. Hanwall), 11 seamen, and one marine killed, two lieutenants (Henry Walker and John Stewart Dixon,) five midshipmen (Edward Aitchison, William Cole, Dawson Mayne, Henry Sturt, and George Dixon), one clerk (William W. Pickett), 69 seamen, 25 marines, four boys, and 12 supernumeraries wounded ; Severn, two seamen and one marine killed, five midshipmen (James Foster, arm amputated, Charles Caley, William Ferror, Daniel M'Neale Beatty, and William A. Carter), 25 seamen, three marines, and one boy wounded ; the Glasgow, nine seamen and one marine killed, one lieutenant (Edmund Williams Gilbert), her master (Robert Fulton), one lieutenant of marines (Athelston Stephens), five midshipmen (John Duffell, George W. Hervey, Wynne Baird, George Henry Heathcote, and Keay,) 25 seamen, three marines, and one boy wounded ; Granicus, two lieutenants of marines (William M. Morgan and William Eenfrey), one mid shipman (Eobert Pratt), nine seamen, one marine, one marine artillery, and two boys killed, one lieutenant (Henry Augustus Perkins), four midshipmen (Lewis Dunbar Mitchell, Lewis Tobias Jones, George K. Glennie, and Dacres Furlong Wise), 31 seamen, three marines, two rocket-troop, and one boy wounded ; Hebrus, one midshipman (George H. A. Pococke) and three seamen killed, one midshipman (Aaron Sykes Symes), 10 seamen, one marine, two rocket-troop, and one boy wounded ; In