

286 ENGLAND AND THE BARBARY STATES. [181G dismounted two of her quarter-deck carronades, and in a few minutes did her more serious injury than all she had previously suffered. At 7 P.M. the Leander, being greatly cut up by the fish-market battery and others on her starboard bow, ran out a hawser to the Severn and brought her broadside to bear upon them. About this time, by the incessant and well-directed fire of the mortar, gun, and rocket-boats, all the ships and vessels within the harbour were burning. The flames subsequently communicated to the arsenal and storehouses on the mole ; and the city also, in several parts, was set on fire by the shells from the bomb-vessels. The ordnance-sloop, which, fitted as an explosion-vessel, had accompanied the expedition from Gibraltar, for the purpose of being sent among the ships in the mole, was now, as they were all destroyed, placed under the directions of Eear-admiral Milne. Lieutenant Fleming, who during the action had been

commanding with great credit a battering-boat stationed close under the stern of the Queen Charlotte, proceeded, in company with Major Eeed of the engineers, to take command of the ex plosion-vessel, and to place her where an officer, sent by Eear admiral Milne, should point out. This officer was Captain Herbert Bruce Powell, a volunteer serving on board the Impreg nable. In a short time the sloop was run on shore, close under the semicircular battery to the northward of the lighthouse. There, at a few minutes past 9 P.M., the vessel exploded ; and, having been charged with 143 barrels of powder, must have operated very successfully as a diversion in favour of the Im pregnable. The whole of the ships kept up a tremendous fire upon the town and forts until about 10 P.M., ; when the upper tiers of the batteries on the mole, being in a state of dilapidation, the fire from the lower tiers nearly silenced, and the ammunition of the attacking ships reduced to a very small quantity, the Queeu Charlotte cut her cables and springs, and stood out before a light air of wind, which, fortunately for the British, had just sprung up from the land. The remaining British ships, by orders

of the admiral, began cutting also ; but, owing to their disabled state, they made very slow progress, and the Leander, Superb, and Impregnable suffered much, in consequence, from the raking fire of a fort at the upper angle of the city. Before 2 A.M., on the 28th every British and Dutch ship had come to out of reach of shot or shells, the Algerine fleet and store-houses illuminating ly their blaze the whole bay, arid greatly assisting the former in

1816.] BATTLE OP ALGIEKS. 287 picking an anchorage. As if to add to the awful grandeur of the scene, the elements began their war as soon as the ships and batteries had ended theirs. For nearly three hours the light ning and thunder were incessant, and the rain poured down in torrents. We are sensible that a diagram would have been particularly useful in this action, and had hoped to have been able to give one ; but, on consulting the logs, we found the positions of very few of the ships laid down with the requisite accuracy. Nor could we rely upon any of the few plans that have been published, having discovered mistakes in every one of them. Now for the account of casualties sustained on the part of the assailants. The Queen Charlotte had seven seamen and one marine killed, three lieutenants (George Morison King, John Sampson lago, and Frederick John Johnston, the latter mor tally), one secretary to the admiral (Joshua Grimes), one captain of marine-artillery (Charles Frederick Burton), one lieutenant of marines (Patrick Robertson), her boatswain (William Maxwell), five midshipmen (George Markham, Henry Campbell, Edward