

of which had English crews. The Company's cruisers were manned with British sailors, Hindoos, and Mahometans, and all the row-boats were under the command of Mr. William Lind guist of the Bengal pilot-service. The total number of fightingmen embarked at Calcutta and Madras in April, 1824, was 8701, of whom 4077 were British." 1 " On the morning of the 5th of May," says Sir Archibald Campbell in his despatch, "we finally put to sea, detaching a part of my force under Brigadier M'Creagh, in the Ernaiid timber ship, under the escort of H.M.'s

sloop Slaney, against the island of Cheduba, and sending 
another detachment under Major Wahab of the Madras establish- 
ment, against Negrais, proceeding myself with the main body 
for Eangoon river, which we reached on the 10th, and anchored 
within the bar." 
The principal point of attack, in the first instance, was Ean 
goon. This town stands on the Eangoon or Parnian river, and 
is situated to the eastward of Bassein or Negrais point ; which 
latter place may be said to form the eastern point of the bay of 
Bengal, and is about 420 miles from Calcutta. Eangoon is 140 
miles from Bassein point. 
The Irrawaddi or Erawadi is a large and, in many places 
deep river; it takes its rise abot the 27 of north latitude, and 
i Marshall. 

95 of east longitude ; it runs nearly due south, gradually enlarging itself until it reaches Amarapura ; there it turns in a westerly direction, running past the city of Ava, the capital of the country against which hostilities had been determined. It continues in this direction about 60 miles, when it inclines to the south-west for about 100 miles until it passes Pagahm-mew, when it again runs nearly south 250 miles to Kendowa, a town 70 miles to the southward of Prome ; here the river branches off, the eastern arm running into the river Parnian, on which Bangoon stands, the western communicating with the Kendowa or Anowkiang, one branch of which becomes the Bassein or Negrais river. The town of Bassein stands mid-distance between Negrais point and Kendowa, the whole distance being between 150 and 160 miles ; whilst Rangoon stands in the direction above named from Kendowa, and distant about 80 miles. It will be seen hereafter, how well and ably Sir Archibald Camp bell's views and plans were acted upon ; that the junction of his forces on the Irrawaddi by the rout of Bassein was effected nearly at the same time that the main body under his own command reached the point assigned. It is perhaps necessary to state, that, in consequence of the direction of the river, almost all operations were carried on near its banks, and that, as the army advanced, the boats or flotilla were always within commu nication, each supporting the other, and sharing the difficulties and dangers. The attacks were always made in conjunction, and we believe, throughout the whole war, there was not one place

assaulted, attacked, or taken, at which assault, attack, or capture the flotilla were not present. Indeed, from the nature of the country, there being no roads, and only narrow footpaths through the woods and jungles, it would have required immense labour to render them applicable to military purposes, and to carry on the war inland ; besides which obstacles, the army were unprovided with land carriages, and not half supplied even with water conveyances ; and here, again, it was by no means probable that the Burmese could be induced to render