

Lieutenant Keele, E.N., had the honour of being first in the fort. The town was deserted by its inhabitants, and no resistance of any moment was offered after the fort had been captured. The whole was accomplished with the loss of seven killed and fourteen wounded. A vast quantity of stores, ammunition, &c., fell into the hands of the victors, and the Honourable Company's gun-vessel Phaeton, was recaptured. This vessel had put into Martaban by mistake ; her captain was taken prisoner in Ava, and her crew were confined in irons. The navy lost, in this brilliant attack, two men killed and three wounded. In the official report made by Colonel Godwin, he speaks in the highest terms of the behaviour of Lieutenant Bazely of the Sophie, and of Lieutenant Keele ; to the latter, the day following the engagement, the colonel wrote a note containing his warmest acknowledgments of the gallantry and judicious conduct of the lieutenant which tended so materially to the happy results of the day. Mr. Swinton, the secretary to government, conveyed the applause of the governor- general in council to those engaged in this affair, and, after paying a just compliment to Colonel Godwin, the letter concludes thus: "You will be pleased to convey to Lieutenants Keele and Bazely, of his ma

jesty's sloops Arachne and Sophie, the acknowledgments of the governor-general in council for the zealous exertions of them selves and the British seamen under their command." In the present account of the war against Ava, we have derived but little assistance from the perusal of the work of Major Snodgrass. In every one of his descriptions, he seems to have forgotten that the navy participated otherwise than in a secondary manner, and, speaking of this attack on Martaban, the whole notice taken of the naval assistance rendered with such happy effect, according to Colonel Godwin, is summed up in these few words: "The intricate navigation of a shallow winding river, presented many impediments to an approach by water ; the latter course (the approach by water), however, was at cnce resolved on, and, by toil and perseverance, the vessels wen? finally anchored nearly abreast of the town ;" not another

1824.] THE BUKMESE WAR. 315 word, not a hint that it was owing to Lieutenant Keele's re-commendation, that Colonel Godwin availed himself of 'the enemy's boat, which became a bridge, and not one remark upon the gallantry of that officer, who with Captain Burrowes led the assault, and was first in the place ! It is our duty, as historians, to notice these glaring oversights ; and since Major Snodgrass has omitted to mention the gallant services of the navy, we have thought it our duty to refer to the commander-in-chiefs letters, and to those of Mr. Secretary Swinton, as conveying the just reward due to the exertions, the bravery, and the talent of those naval officers who shared in all the difficulties and

dangers of the Burmese Avar. 
The town of Yeh, situated to the eastward of Martaban, was 
next captured without resistance. "By the capture of these 
places," says Marshall, "the previous reduction of Mergui and 
Tavoy, and the voluntary submission of the whole coast of 
Tenasserim, the British obtained possession of very large stores 
of grain, ammunition, and ordnance, together with numerous 
boats for the conveyance of troops, and the command of all the 
Burman sea-coast from Eangoon to the eastward, a district 
ultimately ceded by treaty." 
The month of November was passed off" without offensive 