

7th Madras native infantry, accompanied by the Company's cruisers, with some gun-boats, were detached on the 2nd of

1 See Appendix, No 6. - Ibid., No. 7. 3 Marshall. V

310 THE BURMESE WAB. [1824.

August, under the orders of Colonel Miles, C.B., from Rangoon. Tavoy was the first place attacked and taken ; after which the forces embarked for Mergui, and arrived there on the Gth ol October. The batteries were silenced in an hour, the troops were landed, escaladed a stockade, which defended the place, and took the town ; after which Colonel Miles returned to Ean goon, having left a garrison in Mergui. The enemy having returned and occupied some stockades in the Dalla creek, Captain Marryat, with two mortar-boats and some gun-boats, manned by the crew of the Larne, proceeded to dislodge them on the 2nd of September. Major Eichard Lacy Evans commanded the land forces on this occasion. At 6 A.M. the boats opened their fire on the stockade, and by 9 o'clock the magazine was blown up and the guns silenced, but the enemy still held possession of the stockades, and kept up a very galling fire of musketry. The Burmese had learnt from former attacks the necessity of widening their ditches in front of their stockades, and on this occasion it was found impracticable to fix the scaling ladders, the place being secure by the river side. Major Evans landed with 150 men, and, approaching through the jungles, advanced in their rear ; the boats instantly dashed

forward towards the main stockade, and the whole was soon carried. Higher up the creek, Captain Marryat and Major Evans destroyed 30 boats, laden with arms and ammunition. In this sharp and brilliant aifair, Captain Marryat speaks highly of Lieutenant Eraser, Mr. Henry Hodder, acting-master of the Larne, Mr. Duffill, and Mr. Alexander Cranley, midshipman. Sir Archibald Campbell, in detailing the account above men tioned, speaks in the highest terms of Captain Marryat. The Burmese no sooner found the benefit which might accrue to their enemies, by the permanent occupation of a stockade which commanded the creek leading to Thontai (the capital of Dalla), than they resolved to attempt a recapture. They proceeded in their usual harassing manner, night after night, approaching under cover of the jungle, and keeping up a continued fire of musketry which kept the British always on the alert, until the 5th of September, when they made a resolute attack on the shore side with about 1800 men, at the same moment that their Avar-boats endeavoured to board the Kitty gun-brig, which was stationed oif the stockade. The signal for more assistance having been made, Captain Marryat, with the boats of the Larne, arrived in time to give most effectual aid, and to turn the scale of victory which at that moment seemed trembling

1824.J THE BURMESE WAR. 3M in the balance. The enemy seeing the reinforcement, instantly retired ; Captain Marryat as speedily followed, and five vessels, which from their scattered state were unable to escape, fell into the possession of the boats' crews of the Larne.