

In this affair the commander of the Kitty, Mr. Robert

Crawford, behaved with uncommon bravery, and beat off the war-boats. " The spears," says Marshall,

' ' remaining in her sides, the ladders attached to her rigging, and the boarding nettings cut through in many places, proved the severe contest which had been maintained, and induced Captain Mariyat to recommend the very meritorious conduct of Mr. Crawford to the favourable consideration of the governor-general in council." For the opinion of Sir Archibald Campbell upon this affair, and likewise on the general exertions of Captain Marryat and the officers and seamen under his command, we refer our readers to Nos. 8 and 9 in the Appendix. It will be seen by the letter of Sir Archibald Campbell, that, in consequence of the scurvy having broken out on board the Larne, Captain Marryat, knowing that active operations would be deferred for six weeks, had requested permission to remove his ship to Penang. " At this period," says Marshall, "the European portion of the army, fit for active service in the field, was reduced to less than 1500 : 749' British soldiers had fallen victims to the climate, and upwards of 1000 were in the hospitals. Nearly one-fourth of the Sophie's crew had died, and as many more were sick. On the death of Commodore Grant, Captain Coe assumed the

command of the Liffey, and Captain Marryat was promoted 
into the Tees." 
' 

On the 28th of August Captain Chads received the first intimation of the death of Commodore Grant. The former being then at Madras, he sailed with money for the use of the army on the 3rd of September, and, on the 15th, arrived at Eangoon, and took command of the naval forces.

Offensive operations began on the 19th of September against Penang, a point on which the enemy had established themselves, and from which they meditated, by fire-rafts, the destruction of the English naval force. Captain Chads commanded the naval department, consisting of nine gun-vessels and 16 row-boats, the boats of the Arachne and Sophie, and the Diana steam-vessel

this last vessel had been brought by the recommendation of Captain Marryat, and was of the greatest use during this harassing warfare. Brigadier-general Hugh Eraser commanded

1 See Appendix, No 10

the land forces. The expedition moved up the river on the

21st of September and returned to Eangoon on the 27th, having not only succeeded in their enterprise, but surveyed the river until it narrowed to 60 yards in breadth. Captain Chad's letter to Captain Coe gives an interesting account of the fatigues expe rienced on the expedition, and states that the naval casualty amounted to only four seamen of the Arachne wounded. 1

It was now that sickness began to spread itself around ; the incessant rains contributed much to increase the epidemic malady Avhich during this month is so prevalent in India. The hospitals were crowded, and, although every precaution was taken which prudence and foresight could suggest, yet the fever increased, and the patients, after suffering from the most overpowering exhaustion, generally died. Major Snodgrass mentions, that at this time it became necessary to remove the convalescent to Mergui and Tavoy, before mentioned as having been captured by the English, and there the change of climate contributed much to re-establish the army in efficiency. Floating hospitals were established at the mouth of the Rangoon river, and by the beginning of the month of October a very beneficial change had occurred in both the naval and military departments. The enemy occupied a stockaded position near Annauben, and likewise held possession of the pagoda of Keykloo ; these situations are about 14 miles distant from Eangoon. It was judged necessary to dislodge them, whilst another detachment, under Major Thomas Evans, was despatched to Than-ta-bain to make a simultaneous attack upon that strong position, which was 30 miles distant from Eangoon. The best reference to the active part taken by the navy is to be found in Major Evans's 2 letter to the commander-in-chief ; whilst the latter, in speaking of the meritorious exertions of the officers and seamen, pays the highest compliment to Captain Chads. The naval officers who were fortunate enough to participate in this expe dition against Than-ta-bain were Lieutenants William Burdett Dobson, Augustus Henry Kellet, and George Goldfinch; Mr. Lett, master's mate, Messrs. James Ward Tomlinson, Archibald Eeed, George Winson, Charles Mitchell, and Eobert Murray, admiralty midshipmen.