

( 302 )

THE BURMESE WAR.

NIXE years had nearly elapsed, and Great Britain, her coloiiicp and dependencies, had remained in the enjoyment of peace ; but in the beginning of the year 1824, the governor-general of India, in council, decided upon attacking the territory of the Burmese, in consequence of their having committed, on the south-east, frontier of the possessions of the East India Company, several unprovoked aggressions. In detailing the operations in Ava, during the Burmese war, it is our intention to confine ourselves as much as possible to those actions in which the naval forces were mostly employed, giving a slight sketch of the military movements, as far as is requisite to elucidate the subject. At this period Commodore Charles Grant, C.B., in the Liffey of 50 guns, was the senior officer in India, and, on being informed of the determination to resort to war, a part of the squadron under his command was placed at the disposition of the governor-general, for the purpose of affording every assistance in its power. The Larne sloop, under the command of Captain Frederick Marryat, having under his orders the Sophie brig, Captain George Frederick Eyves, was desired to proceed to the river Hooghly, and to place himself under the directions

of the supreme government. The command of the military department was intrusted to Sir

Archibald Campbell, K.C.B. ; a division of troops was embarked at Calcutta under Brigadier Michael M'Creagh, C.B., and another division at Madras under Brigadier-general "William

Macbean. Ou the 8th of April, Sir Archibald Campbell embarked with his staff on board the Larne and made sail for the appointed rendezvous of the Madras division at Port Cornwallis thither the Bengal division had already sailed. Towards the

I824.J THE BUKMESE WAR. 303 end of April it arrived, and on the 2nd of May the Madras division convoyed by the Sophie hove in sight off the harbour of Port Cornwallis. A slight delay took place in the departure of ships for their ultimate destination, Eangoon, which is the prin cipal seaport in the dominions of the King of Ava: during the interval between the 2nd of May and the 5th, on which day the fleet sailed, Commodore Grant, in the Liffey, anchored in Port

Cornwallis and took command of the naval department, con sisting of the Slaney, 20, Captain Charles Mitchell ; Larne, 20, Captain Frederick Marryat ; and Sophie, 18, Captain George Frederick Eyves. To these were added four of the Company's cruisers, under Captain Henry Hardy.

The whole force consisting, in addition to those already named, " of 18 brigs, schooners, and other small-craft (formerly pleasure-yachts on the Ganges), each armed with two light carronades and four swivels, and manned with 12 lascars, under the command of an European; 20 row-boats, lugger rigged (formerly Calcutta pilot-boats), each carrying an 18-pounder in the bow, and manned with from 16 to 20 lascars ; the Diana steam-vessel ; and about 40 sail of transports, only one or two