

Marshall VOL. VI, X

306 THE BURMESE WAR. H 824.

Jn tlic naval department Lieutenant Wilkinson and nine of his 
crew were severely wounded. 
Commodore Grant left Eangoon on the 31st of May, in con- 
sequence of severe indisposition, which on the 25th of July fol- 
lowing proved fatal ; the command of the naval department in 
the Irrawaddi (on a branch of which river Eangoon stands) 
now devolved on Captain Marryat. In Sir Archibald Camp 
bell's despatch, dated the day after Commodore Grant sailed, 
the following description is given of the enemy : 
" 
Every act evinces a most marked determination of carrying 
hostilities to the very last extremity ; approaching our posts 
day and night, under cover of an impervious and incombustible 
jungle, constructing stockades and redoubts on every road and 
pathway, even within musket-shot of our sentries, and, from 
their hidden fastnesses, carrying on a most barbarous and ha 
rassing warfare, firing upon our sentries at all hours of the 
night, and lurking on the outskirts of the jungle, for the pur- 
pose of carrying off any unlucky wretch whom chance may 
throw in their way." 
Major Snodgrass gives an equally unpromising view of affairs. 
"The enemy's troops and new-raised levies," he says, "were 
gradually collecting in our front from all parts of the kingdom : 
a cordon was speedily formed around our cantonments, capable, 
indeed, of being forced at every point ; but possessing in a 
remarkable degree all the qualities requisite for harassing and 

wearing out in fruitless exertions the strength and energies of European or Indian troops. Hid from our view on every side in the darkness of a deep and, to regular bodies, impenetrable forest, far beyond which the inhabitants and all the cattle of the Eangoon district had been driven, the Burmese chiefs carried on their operations, and matured their future schemes with vigilance, secrecy, and activity. Neither rumours nor intelligence of what was passing within his posts, ever reached us. Beyond the invisible line which circumscribed our position, all was mystery or vague conjecture."

1

From the period when the English flotilla anchored in the Irrawaddi, small cargo boats were continually captured, and these were cut down into .more manageable craft, in order to move the troops with greater facility, each being well able to hold 60 men. These boats very materially strengthened the English force, and gave a facility of movement to the land forces excessively desirable in such a country, and with such 1 See Appendix to the Burmese War, No. 1

1824.] THE BURMESE WAR. 307 an enemy as Sir Archibald describes above. The enemy, ever watchful on shore, were equally on the alert afloat. The nar rowness of the river, and the immense assemblage of vessels stretching from shore to shore, offered a fine opportunity for the employment of fire-rafts. These destructive engines were launched above Kemmendine, and it required all the vigilance of active officers and men to save the flotilla from nightly de struction. In order to frustrate, or rather effectually stop this annoyance, it was deemed requisite to occupy the stockades near Kemmendine, which commanded the river. They were attacked and carried on the 10th of June. The division under Brigadier M'Creagh, having been suc cessful against the island of Cheduba, the European forces were> re-embarked, and joined Sir Archibald Campbell at Eangoon. Major Wahab, and Captain Goodridge, having executed their orders likewise, joined the commander of the forces. In the first of these operations, Brigadier M'Creagh thus speaks of Captain Mitchell : ' '