

any assistance, they being principally in the pay of the court ot

Ava, to which and to the golden-footed monarch, as their king is titled, they pay the most submis^He obedience. We think it right to mention this, as any one perusing Major Snodgrass's book would be inclined to view the operations of the naval department as very secondary indeed to their gallant brethren in arms, who, we are quite certain, do not begrudge the laurels justly won by the indefatigable exertions and unremitting toil

1824.1 THK BURMESE WAR. 305 of ln's Majesty's and the Hon. the East India Company's

navy. 
The Liffey, preceded by the Larne, until she grounded on a 
bank at noon, led the fleet up the Rangoon or Parnian river on 
the llth of May, and anchored abreast of the town, opposite 
a battery of 14 guns ; the river about this part is calculated to 
be about 700 yards wide, the town being situated nearly 28 miles 
from the sea : its defences are described as being 
" an enclosure 
of palisades or stockades, ten or twelve feet high, strengthened 
internally by embankments of earth and protected externally, 

on one side by the river, and at the western end by a morass, over which there is a bridge. The palisade encloses the town, in the shape of an irregular parallelogram, having one gate in each of three faces, and two in that of the north : at the rivergate is a landing-place, denominated the King's wharf, where stands the battery opposite which the Lilley anchored." 1 From this battery a miserably directed and altogether insignificant fire was commenced, but which immediately was silenced by a few shot from the Liffey ; in the mean time preparations were made to land the troops, during which the battery again opened its fire, and was as easily silenced as before ; the troops were landed in three divisions, and the town was taken without the discharge of a single musket, the inhabitants, together with some British and American missionaries having been driven by the Burmese inland. On the 16th of May, Captain Richard Birch, who had been despatched for the purpose of dislodging the enemy from the village of Kemmendale, a war-boat station three miles above Rangoon, was landed with the grenadier company of his ma jesty's 38th regiment, by the boats of the Liffey, under Lieutenant James Wilkinson of that ship, about a mile from Kemmen dine, where a party of the enemy had stockaded themselves. The position was attacked and carried in a gallant style. The men being re-embarked, the boats proceeded further up the river, when a heavy fire from another stockade was opened upon them ; the boats instantly pulled towards the point, the place was assaulted and carried in spite of numerous difficuties, and 400 men who defended it were driven from the stockade at the point of the bayonet, leaving 60 of the enemy killed. A third stockade was soon afterwards attacked and carried. In these affairs the army lost Lieutenant Thomas Kerr of the 38th regiment and one private killed, and nine wounded.