

says Major Snodgrass,

' finally trium plied ovcv every device of the crafty and ingenious enemy.' During this day the Burmese Avar boatmen became extremely daring, finding their shot went further than those of the British ; upon which Captain Chads sent Captain Eyves two long 9-pounders, and enabled him to keep them further off. Still, however, they continued to evince surprising boldness, and it was thought right to endeavour to give them a check. Accordingly, the latter officer placed the whole of his disposable force of Europeans, about 80 in number (including Lieutenant Goldfinch, Messrs. Pickey, Coyde, Scott, and Murray, midshipmen ; Lieutenant Curtis Clarke, of the Bombay marine ; Mr. Lindquist, in charge of the row-boats ; and Messrs. George Boscawen, midshipman in the Hon. Com

pany's service), under the orders of Lieutenant Kellett. This force was put into the Arachne's pinnace and eight other boats, and, as the moon went down on the morning of the 4th of De cember, they shoved off, and pulling upon the contrary shore to the enemy, by daylight came abreast of and boldly made a dash at them : the Burmese were completely taken by surprise, but did not run till the British were within pistol-shot, when their confusion was great, and they fled with all haste, keeping up a smart fire. Lieutenant Kellett, in the pinnace, came up with

some of the rearmost, which were soon run ashore and deserted ; and Lieutenant Goldfinch, passing him whilst taking possession, captured one bearing the flag of the Burman chief, her crew also flying into the jungle. The chase was continued three or four miles, when Lieutenant Kellett judged it prudent to secure his prizes, having an enemy of considerable force in his rear, up another branch of the river. The result of this gallant attack was the capture of seven war-boats, one of which was 96 feet long, 13 feet 6 inches in breadth, and 6 feet deep, pulling 76 oars, and, as did three of the others, mounting a long 9-pounder on the bow. 'Lieutenant Kellett's conduct on this, and on former occasions, speaks for itself, and,' says Captain Chads,

' I trust will meet with its due reward. Lieutenant Goldfinch is a valuable officer, and merits every praise ; Lieutenant Kellett reports the high gallantly of every individual under his command. On their return they cut adrift and brought down a large floating stockade from Pagoda Point; and what adds t<> the value of this service is, that it was performed without the loss of a man.' In Sir A. Campbell's report to the Supremo Government, of the operations of his army at this period, we find the following passages :

18'J4. 1 TIIK HUHSIKSE AVAR. olfl 
" 
'During the 3rd and 4th the enemy carried on his labours 
with indefatigable industry, and but for the inimitable practice 
of our artillery, commanded by Captain Murray, in the absence, 
from indisposition, of Lieutenant-colonel (Charles) Hopkinson, 
we must have been severely annoyed by the incessant fire from 
his trenches.' 
" ' 
The attacks upon Kemmendine continued with unabating 
violence ; but the unyielding spirit of Major Yates and his 
steady troops, although exhausted with fatigue and want of rest, 
baffled every attempt on shore, while Captain Hyves, with his 
majesty's sloop Sophie, the Hon. Company's cruiser Teign 
mouth, and some flotilla and row gun-boats, nobly maintained 