

On the river the navy gallantly enacted their duty. The flaming rafts were towed clear of the vessels, and the wa^-boats which were ready to avail themselves of the confusion, retired without daring to attack. The gallant defenders of the fort were equally successful against their assailants, who were beaten back ; and Major Yates added to his well-earned fame, by his intrepid and successful resistance. Tn endeavouring to give a

1824.] THE BURMESE WAR. o!7 proper description of the attacks which, followed, we feel convinced that all our exertions would only appear a kind of shadow to those given so ably, so faithfully, and so graphically by

Marshall ; we therefore borrow from him the following account, admitting our obligation to that officer, and gladly bearing testimony to his patient research, and the excellent manner in which he has compiled his history : "Tilings were in this state when Captain Chads returned from Pegu, at 8 A.M., on the 2nd of December. He immediately sent the Arachne's pinnace up, under Lieutenant Kellett and Mr. Valentine Pickey, admiralty midshipman, to gain information and reconnoitre ; and shortly after, three row-boats, under Mr. William Coyde, midshipman, with a party of seamen to fight their guns. This assistance was most timely, the garrison being pressed in every direction ; from which critical situation,

Lieutenant Kellett's highly judicious and determined gallant conduct immediately relieved them, by clearing both their flanks of the enemy by showers of grape-shot. This service, performed by the pinnace, with a single carronade, in the face of hundreds of the enemy's boats, was the admiration of the whole garrison ; and Major Yates expressed himself to Captain

Chads in terms the most gratifying,

'

for the able assistance

Lieutenant Kellett had afforded him.' 
" 
"The Teignmouth shortly afterwards resumed her station, 
and was constantly engaged with the enemy's war-boats, which 
had long guns in their bows, and annoyed her a great deal. In 
the afternoon, finding the Burmese were making every effort to 
gain possession of Kemmendine, and as that post was of the 
last importance, both in a military and naval point of view, 
Captain Chads ordered the Sophie up for its support, with three 
more gun-boats, and those already there, under Lieutenant 
Kellett, to remain. Observing, also, that the enemy upon the 
Dalla side had begun to throw up works, he likewise directed 
the Satellite, in charge of Lieutenant Dobson, with a party of 
seamen from the Arachne, to the support of the Good Hope 
transport, and several small gun-vessels, already for some time 
stationed there. 
" 
Early on the 3rd of December, the Sophie took her station 
off Kemmendine. The enemy again brought fire-rafts down, with 
their war-boats firing shot over them, to prevent the approach 
of the British. The Sophie cleared the rafts, but the Teign 
mouth was touched by them, and on fire for a short time, BUS 
taiuing, however, no serious damage. 'British seamanship, 