

326 THE BURMESE WAR. [1824

" ' The securing of 30 of these boats, and destroying the others, took up the whole of the flood ; when Lieutenant Kellett, having most fully accomplished my instructions and wishes, returned, destroying, on his way down, quantities of materials ibr fire-rafts, and a great many canoes laden with earth-oil. The enemy's loss in killed and wounded must have been very great ; we, I rejoice to say, had not a man hurt, the steam-vessel having been stockaded to secure the people. " 'I cannot find words sufficiently strong in which to recom-

mend Lieutenant Kellett's uniform gallantry to you ; his con- 
duct on this, as well as former occasions, proves him a most 
valuable officer. Lieutenant Goldfinch, of the Sophie, I have 
also frequently had occasion to name to you, and with pleasure 
I repeat my former recommendations ; he was in the Sophie's 
pinnace, with Mr. Murray, midshipman. Mr. Tomlinson, admi 
ralty midshipman, commanded the Arachne's pinnace ; and 
Mr. Winsor, admiralty midshipman, was in charge of the steam 
vessel, and showed his usual judgment and good conduct. 
" ' 
Lieutenant Kellett speaks in the highest terms of the deter- 
mined steady conduct of every man under him, soldiers, sailors, 
and marines ; and feels much indebted to Lieutenant Collinson, 
commanding the Prince of Wales, for the able assistance that 
vessel rendered him.' 
" 
During these operations, of which Major Snodgrass takes no 
notice, Sir Archibald Campbell attacked the enemy in the same 

direction, and gained a most brillant victory. With only 1300 infantry, he stormed and carried by assault the most formidable intrenched and stockaded works which he had ever seen, de-fended by upwards of 20,000 men, under the command of the

Malm Silwah, an officer of high rank and celebrity, late governor general of Assam. In the despatch announcing this great achievement, Sir Archibald says,

' Our gallant friends afloat were determined not to let the auspicious day pass without their share of its operations. Every day's experience of the zeal and cordiality with which Captain Chads, and every individual composing the naval past of the expedition, co-operates with me in carrying on the combined service, increases my sincere obligations, and merits my warmest thanks' The loss sustained by the British

army, on the 15th of December, amounted to 18 killed and 118 
wounded. 
" 
Previously to the intelligence of Sir Archibald Campbell's last 
victory reaching Calcutta, the supreme government had issued 
a general order, of which we shall here give two extracts : 

1825.] THE BURMESE WAR. 327

" The official despatches already published in an Extraordi- 
nary Gazette having announced the late brilliant achieve- 
ments of the British arms at Rangoon, the Eight Hon. the 
Governor-general in Council now proceeds to the discharge of 
a most gratifying duty, in signifying, in the most public and 
formal manner, his high admiration of the judgment, skill, and 
energy manifested by Brigadier-general Sir Archibald Campbell., 
in directing the operations of the troops under his command, on 
that important and arduous occasion. ***** 
" ' 
The Governor-general in Council seizes this opportunity of 
expressing Ms warm acknowledgements to Captain Chads, of 
H.M.S. Arachne, the senior naval officer at Rangoon, and to 