

" In consequence of this pressing request, Captain Chads sent the Sophie back to her former station ; and with her the steam-vessel, the mortar-boat, the Prince of Wales, and a de-tachment of seamen under Lieutenant Kellett. The com mander-in-chief also directed 100 sepoys to proceed thither with Captain Eyves. " In the night of December 13th the enemy recommenced offensive operations, particularly by annoying the vessels off Kem mendine with immense fire-rafts, one of which consisted of upwards of sixty canoes, besides bamboo rafts, all loaded with oil and combustibles. On the 14th, about 2 h. 30m. A.M., their emissaries succeeded in setting fire to Eangoon, in several places at once, by which one-fourth of the town, including the quarters of the Madras commissariat, was destroyed, notwithstanding the utmost efforts of the garrison, the officers and men of the

1824.] TtiE BURMESE WAR. 355

Arachne, and the well-disposed part of the inhabitants, to 
subdue the flames. 
" The 14th passed without any other attempts on the part of 
the enemy; during the day, however, he was seen above Kem 
mendine, transporting large bodies of troops from the Dalla to 
the Eangoon side of the river. For many urgent reasons, 
Sir Archibald Campbell determined to attack him on the fol- 
lowing day, rather than wait his pleasure as to time and place 
of meeting. 
"Thinking it probable that the enemy's preparations for 
fire-rafts might be destroyed, and as he had before sent a force 
up the Panlang branch of the river, without finding any 
thing, Captain Chads now resolved to despatch one up the 
Lyne branch, under Lieutenant Kellett, consisting of the 
steam-vessel, with 40 marines and soldiers for her defence ; 
.the Prince of Wales, towed by the Diana ; and the pinnaces of 
the Arachne and Sophie. He thus describes the result of this 
expedition, in an official letter to Captain Coc, dated December 
16, 1824 : 
" ' 
Before daylight yesterday morning, they proceeded with 
the first of the flood, and at a short distance above Pagoda point, 
saw large numbers of the enemy's war-boats, at least 200, who 
retired in good order as they advanced, keeping up a smart fire 
from their long guns, five boats having them mounted, and 
taking their distance that the carronades should not reach them ; 
when about seven miles up, a raft was drawn right across the 

river, and set on fire by them, to prevent the advance of our vessels ; but an opening was found, and Lieutenant Kellett, now seeing the river quite clear, with great judgment decreasing the power of steam, deceived the enemy, and lulled them into secu rity ; when, putting on the whole force again, and casting off the Prince of Wales, he was immediately within grape and musketry distance ; the enemy finding themselves in this situation, drew up in a regular line to receive him : this little band was not, how ever, to be daunted by their show of resistance, but nobly dashed on, although the Prince of Wales was out of sight ; the heavy fire from the boat's carronades, and musketry, threw the enemy into confusion and panic, and they flew in all directions, leaving us in possession of three of their large war-boats ; one belonging to the chief, mounting three guns, and pulling 60 oars ; the other two, one in their bow, 9 and 6 pounders ; with about 40 other boats of all descriptions, many of them loaded with ammunition and provisions for their army before Eangoon.