

morning of the 7th, he had his whole force posted in the imme diate front of the British army his first line intrenched so close, that the men in their barracks could distinctly hear the bravadoes of the Burmese soldiers. Upwards of thirty fire-rafts and large boats, all lashed together, and reaching nearly across the river, were brought down against the shipping; but, although the Sophie was touched by one of them, they were productive of no mischief. " The time had now arrived to undeceive the enemy in their sanguine but ill-founded hopes. Sir Archibald Campbell made his arrangements, and at 11 h. 30 m. A.M., everything was in readiness to assault their trenches. A short but heavy can-

1824.] THE BURMESE WAR. 321 nonade ensued, and at noon the British columns moved forward to their respective points of attack. They were saluted, after a momentary pause, by a very spirited fire, in spite of which they advanced to the works, and quickly put their defenders to the route. The Burmese left many dead behind them, and their

main force was completely dispersed. On receiving this infor- 
mation, Captain Chads sent every disposable man from the 
Arachnc, under Mr. James B. Manley, acting-master, with 
twenty sepoys, in the steam-vessel, up to Captain Eyves, to 
endeavour to intercept their boats and cut off their retreat ; 
they had. however, already deserted the neighbourhood of 
Kemmendine. 
" ' 
Thus,' says Captain Chads in his official report, 

'

has this

formidable attack ended in the total discomfiture of the enemy ; having called forth from the very small force I have the honour

to command, in every instance, the greatest gallantry and uniform good conduct, under the utmost exertions by day and night, the greatest part of them having been in the boats since the starting of the expedition for Pegu, on the 2th ultimo.

*' ' From Captain Ryves I have received all the aid and counsel that a good and valuable officer could afford ; his determined perseverance in holding his ground, when the fire-rafts

came down, merit the highest commendation ; and from his 
ready and zealous co-operation with the post at Kemmendine, 
that place was greatly relieved in the arduous contest it was 
engaged in. 
" ' 
Of Lieutenant Kellett I cannot speak in terms sufficiently 
strong to express my admiration of his uniform gallantry. 
" 'Lieutenant Goldfinch's conduct has also been most conspi 
cuous, together with that of all the midshipmen named in my 
reports, not one of whom but has shown individual acts of great 
bravery. 
"'Also to Mr. Manley, the master, who has, from necessity, 
been frequently left in charge of the ship during my absence, 1 
feel much indebted.' 1 
" 'In another despatch, addressed to Sir Archibald Campbell, 
the commander of the Arachne says : 
" ' 
It becomes a most pleasing duty to me to recommend 
to your favourable notice officers in the Hon. Company's 
service, whose good conduct has been conspicuous in the recent 

1 Lieutenant Keele was then at Marta- pean troops were ordered back toltangieo ban, where he remained in command of about the end of 1824. the naval detachment until all the Euro-