

the long-established fame of the British navy, in defending the pas sage of the river against the most furious assaults of the enemy's war-boats, advancing under cover of the most tremendous fire-rafts, which the unwearied exertions of British sailors could alone, have

conquered' 
"Sir Archibald next proceeds to acquaint the governor 
general in council, that the 

'

intrepid conduct of Lieutenants 
Kellett and Goldfinch merits the highest praise ;' and he then 
adds : 
" ' 
The enemy having apparently completed his left wing, with 

its full complement of artillery and warlike stores, I determined to attack that part of his line early on the morning of the 5th.

1 requested Captain Chads, the senior naval officer here, to move up to the Puzendown creek during the night, with the gun-flotilla, bomb ketch, &c., and commence a cannonade on the enemy's rear at day light. This service was most judiciously and successfully performed by that officer, who has never yet disappointed me in my most sanguine expectations. The enemy was defeated and dispersed in every direction. The Cassay horse fled, mixed with the re-treating infantry, and all their artillery, stores, and reserve depots, which had cost them so much toil and labour to get up, with a great quantity of small-arms, gilt chattahs, standards, and other trophies, fell into our hands. Never was victory more complete or more decided, and never was the triumph of discipline and valour, over the disjointed efforts of irregular courage and infinitely superior numbers, more conspicuous.' " The naval force employed in the Puzendown creek was composed of the steam and mortar vessels, a few of the gun flotilla, and several transports' boats, with about 40 European soldiers to make an appearance. Mr. Archibald Eeed, admi ralty midshipman, was with Captain Chads, and

'

rendered him

THE BURMESE WAR. 1 1824.

much service. In the mean time, the Satellite was very closely and warmly engaged, as she had also been during the nights of the 2nd, 3rd, and 4th, with the enemy at Dalla, whose shot struck her in every direction, and greatly injured the rigging; but as Lieutenant Dobson had taken the precaution to stockade her all around with bamboo, she fortunately had not a man killed or wounded. " The Burmese left wing thus disposed of, Sir Archibald Campbell patiently waited its effect upon the right, posted in KG thick a forest as to render any attack in that quarter in a great

measure impracticable. On the same day he wrote to Captain 
Chads in the following terms : 
" ' 
My dear Sir, A thousand thanks for the essential diver- 
sion you made this morning to the left and rear of the enemy. 
Their defeat has been, indeed, most complete ; the game is, I 
think, now up with them, and the further conquest of the 
country easy thanks to all the good and fine fellows under our 
command by water and land.' 
" On the 6th, in the morning, finding the enemy still persisting 
in his attacks on Kemmendine, Captain Chads sent the mortar 
vessel up there, which rendered the post very essential service, 
and relieved the garrison considerably. The war-boats still 
continued in sight in great numbers, but at a respectful dis- 
tance. 
"On the same day Sir Archibald Campbell had the pleasure of 
observing that Maha Bandoola had brought up the scattered 
remnant of his defeated left, to strengthen his right and centre, 
and continued day and night employed in carrying on his ap- 
proaches in front of the Shwe-da-gon pagoda. This he was 
allowed to do with but little molestation, as it was rightly 
imagined that 'he would take system for timidity.' On the 