

attack of the enemy. The first I ought to name is Mr. W. Binny, agent for transports of the Bengal division, in charge of the Good Hope transport that ship, sir, with the British crew of the Eesource, who handsomely volunteered, did all the duties of a man-of-war, in silencing the enemy's guns as they mounted them at Dalla. Mr. Hornblow, agent for transports of the

Madras division, in charge of the Moira, has also shown very great zeal in forwarding all the late arduous services ; and the British crew of his ship, in charge of the mortar-vessel, have continued their usual good conduct. In the attack on the enemy's war-boats, Lieutenant Kellett speaks in high terms of the gallantry of Lieutenant Clarke and Mr. Boscawen, of the H. C. cruiser Teignmouth, and Mr. Lindquist, in charge of the row-boats ; this latter young officer I have also had much reason

to be pleased with.' " The loss sustained by the Burmese, from the 1st to the 7th of December, is supposed to have been at least 5000 men killed and wounded ; but they suffered most in arms and ammunition, which they could not easily replace ; 29 guns (of which eight were brass), 200 jingals, 900 muskets, 360 round shot, 2000 spears, and 5000 intrenching tools, fell into the hands of the conquerors ; besides which, 10,000 pounds of gunpowder, many muskets, spears, swords, and other implements, of which no account appears to have been taken, were captured and de stroyed. The British had not more than 26 killed and 252

wounded. 
" On the 8th of December Sir Archibald Campbell reported 
to the governor-general in council, that his 
' 

obligations to Cap

tains Chads and Ryves, and the officers and seamen of TL M. navy, 
were great and numerous. In Captain Chads himself,' says the 
general, 
' I have always found that ready alacrity to share our toils 
and dangers that has ever characterized the profession he belongs to, 
and the most cordial zeal in assisting and co-operating with me on 
every occasion.' 

" On the evening of the same day, Sir Archibald Campbell found that the enemy's corps of observation on the Dalla side of the river had not been wholly withdrawn, probably from ignorance of what had taken place on the 7th, in front of the Shwe da-gon pagoda; and as he was well aware they would not remain long after the news of Bandoola's defeat reached them, he at once determined to assault their works. Detachments from three regiments were immediately ordered under arms, and Captain Chads was requested to make a diversion up the creek

1824.] THE BURMESE WAR. 323 upon the enemy's right flank. After dark, all the boats assem bled alongside the Good Hope transport ; and, just as the moon arose, they moved across the river ; the troops, under Major Charles Ferrior, of the 43rd Madras native infantry, landed to the northward, whilst Captain Chads, accompanied by Lieutenant Kellett and Mr. Reed, proceeded up the creek, and opened his fire ; the Satellite doing the same to distract the enemy : the troops then advanced, and jumped, without a moment's hesita tion, into the trenches ; many Burmese were slain in the short conflict that ensued; they were driven, at the point of the bayonet, into the jungle in their rear ; and several guns, with many small-arms, taken. In this affair, the British had two killed, and several, including five of the naval detachment, wounded. Lieutenant Dobson having landed immediately after the troops, was one of the first to enter the enemy's works. "In a general order, issued at Rangoon, on the 12th of De cember, Sir Archibald Campbell again