

| | The in Council Governor-general | seizes this of opportunity | |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| expressing | Ms warm acknowledgements | to Chads, Captain of | |
| H.M.S. | the senior naval Arachne, | at to and officer Rangoon, | |

Captain Ityvcs, of N.M.S. Sophie, for their distinguished per sonal exertions, and requests the former to convey to the officers and crews of H.M. ships, of the H.C. cruisers, as well as the

officers and men of the transports who volunteered their services, 
the sense which government entertains of their gallant conduct 
in the several actions with the enemy's ivar-loats, when they so 
conspicuously displayed the irresistible and characteristic valour of 
British seamen.' 
" 
This last successful enterprise of Sir Archibald Campbell 

produced a decided change in the aspect of the war ; the enemy returned again to Donoobew, and Maha Bandoola ceased to make any offensive demonstrations. The inhabitants, released from their worst enemies, their own troops, again occupied their habitations, and the country round Eangoon once more enjoyed the blessings of repose. Before the close of the year, the Larne returned from Calcutta ; the naval force was augmented by 20 additional gun-boats, and the army received large reinforcements from Madras, Bengal, and Ceylon. Although the arms of Great Britain had been everywhere victorious, very little progress had been made since the commencement of hostilities up to the opening of the year 1825 : Sir Archibald Campbell now determined to advance, if neces

sary, even to the capital, which was 600 miles distant, or from the brilliant success of his arms, to force the enemy to accede to his terms. With this intention in view, it became necessary to despatch an expedition, to compel the enemy te evacuate the old Portuguese fort and the Syriam pagoda before mentioned, of which they had again possessed themselves, and doubly stockaded, making it a formidable post to be left in the rear. In order to dislodge the enemy from these strongholds, Lieutenant- colonel E. Elrington, of his majesty's 47th regiment,

323 THE BUHMKSE WAR. [1825. with 200 troops, were embarked on board some good boats, the naval part of the expedition being intrusted to Lieutenant Keele, We have had frequent occasion to speak in high terms of this officer, but in all his brilliant exploits he never was more conspicuous than on the attack of the Syriam pagoda, the day after the surrender of the fort. The seamen as they manned the scaling-ladders, were cheered on and headed by Lieutenant Keele, and he was the first person over the stockade : the enemy gave way before him, and the works were instantly destroyed. In moving upon Ava it was decided not to take the road by Pegu and Tonghoo, for the army was destitute of sufficient carriage to enable it to advance in that line. It became there fore absolutely necessary to keep the troops on a parallel with

the river, with a view to mutual co-operation and support, and 
likewise to receive by that communication supplies for the army. 
Captain Alexander, in the Alligator, arrived at Rangoon on 
the 22nd of January, and, being senior to Captain Chads, the 
command of the naval department devolved upon him. 
In order to command the navigation of the river Lyne, Lieu 
tenant-colonel Godwin and Captain Chads were detached with 