

operations of any moment. Mr. Greer, of the Bombay marine, in a gnn-boat, beat off two war-boats in a gallant style, the

enemy being very far his superior in force ; and on the 29th 
Captain Chads, with Lieutenant-colonel John Mallet of his 
majesty's 89th regiment, made a reconnoissance as far as the 
ancient capital of Pegu ; it does not appear, however, that the 
English forces were engaged during this four days' expedition. 
The city was found a heap of ruins, with a few houses inhabited 
by some poor men and women. 
The King of Ava, far from being overcome by the repeated 
reverses of his arms, now made a desperate effort to change the 
fortune of the war. To Maha Bandoola he intrusted the 
command of his army, and this general of high repute, who had 
been desired to sack Calcutta, and bring the governor-general in 
golden fetters to Ummerapoora, was recalled, with orders from 
his king to concentrate his force, amounting in all to about 
50,000 men, at Donoobew. 
It was on the 30th of November that Maha Bandoola made 
his approach towards Kemmendine, and, although Major Charles 
Yates was exposed to a serious attack by land and water, owing 
to Captain Goodridge of the Teignmouth having slipped his 

cable to avoid the enemy's war-boats and fire-rafts, which were floating down the river to the attack ; yet the gallant major with a handful of Europeans nobly defended his post and repulsed his assailants. This was merely a prelude to the grand attack which commenced on the 30th. The object of Bandoola was to suiTound the British army, and crush them by his num bers. On each flank of the British line, the enemy were discovered emerging from the thick jungle, and they took up their position uninterrupted by the British, who had now only the narrow channel of Rangoon open in their rear. To check a division of the enemy's force, which had crossed to the Dalla side, the Araclme, under Captain Eyves (Captain Chads not having returned from Pegu), was placed a mile in advance of the fleet, and the Teignmouth was ordered back to support Kemmendine. The enemy commenced throwing up works with

their usual rapidity, but Major Sale, with a detachment of his majesty's 13th regiment, and the 18th Madras native infantry, soon forced them to abandon their position, and ultimately de-stroyed their works. A party of the enemy having approached the Shwe-da-gon pagoda, were driven back by two companies of the 38th, under Capiain Hugh Piper and Captain Christopher Wilson, while two companies of the same regiment were equally successful the following morning in dislodging the enemy from a very strong position near the north gate of the pagoda. On the night of the 1st of December, Kemmendine was again attacked, and at daylight the enemy commenced a regular attempt upon that place ; in vain they approached this stockade, they were repulsed again and again. Our men, wearied with the incessant fatigue, as darkness closed upon them, sought their wonted repose. Short was the time allowed them; the enemy, recruited by fresh troops, now made the most desperate effort ; the flames of the fire-rafts illumined the scene ; far and wide appeared the devastating enemy, whilst the roar of the cannon, and the roll of the musketry, conveyed to the ears of those near the pagoda, the tidings of this fresh and vigorous assault.