

'

acknowledges his highest obligations to Captain Chads,' and 'requests that ho will communicate to Captain Ryves, who so effectually supported the post of Kemmendine, his warmest thanks.' The passage concludes thus : '

the conduct of both officers and men during the whole affair was characteristic of the British navy !

WHAT CAN BE SAID MOKE TO THEIR HONOUR?"

" On the evening of the 12th a deserter from the enemy informed Sir Archibald Campbell, that Maha Bandoola had re-collected his beaten troops, and received considerable reinforcements on his retreat; which latter circumstance had induced the chiefs (to whom he had for the present resigned his command) to determine on one more great effort to retrieve their disgrace. For this purpose, it afterwards appeared, they sucseeded in forming a force amounting to between 20,000 and 25,000 men ; with which they returned to Kokeen, distant four miles from the Shwe-da-gon pagoda, and immediately commenced intrenching and stockading with a judgment, in point of position, such as would do credit to the best instructed engineers of the most civilized and warlike nations. The deserter also declared it to be their intention to attack the British lines on the morning of the 14th (pronounced a fortunate day by their soothsayers), determined to sacrifice their lives at the dearest rate, as they had nothing else to expect than to do so ignominiously, by returning to the presence of their monarch, disgraced and defeated as they had been. This information was too circumstantially given to be disregarded, and Sir Archibald

324 THE BURMESE WAR. [1824 Campbell prepared accordingly: the enemy's movements, next day, left little doubt on his mind of the truth of the deserter's information. Previously to this, the Sophie had been recalled from Kemmendine, and the Hon. Company's cruiser Prince of Wales, commanded by Lieutenant William S. Collinson, ordered to relieve her. On the 13th the gallant defender of that post addressed two letters to Captain Chads, of which the following are copies :

"'My dear Sir, Mr. Midshipman Lindquist acquaints me, that I am to be attacked this night. May I beg Kellett and

his brig, and his boats, and the Powerful ? Alas ! the dear 
Sophie has forsaken me, and no prince or potentate can replace 
her in my confidence and affection. Prithee keep the Prince of 
Wales, and cheer my heart again with the presence of Sophie. 
Believe me ever your obliged and faithful, 
(Signed) 

'

C. W. YATES.'

" ' 
My dear Sir, My little band are at their post. The fires of 
the enemy are all around me. I hope you will excuse my having 
detained Mr. Lindquist, and his three boats, until I hear from 
you. I have 200 natives short of the force I had the other day, 
and 27 Europeans. If the Prince of Wales comes, I can expect 
no aid, as her commander is junior to the captain of the Teign 
mouth, which ship, having twice deserted me, I cannot look for 

aid from.

'

Yours ever faithfully,

(Signed)

' C.V. YATES.'