

a sufficient force to insure success. " The vessels employed consisted of the Satellite, Diana, Prince of Wales, 15 row gun-boats, seven boats belonging to his majesty's squadron, and several flats and canoes." 1 The officers under Captain Chads were Lieutenants Fraser, Dobson, Keele, and Kellett, acting-Lieutenants William Hall and Goldfinch ; Midshipmen Pickey, Tomlinson, Scott, Eeed, Norcok, Lett, Biffin, Wyke, Wimson, and Coyde. The surgeon of the Arachne, Mr. William Watt, voluntered his services and accompanied the expedition, which on the 5th of February, moved up the river towards Quangalee, or Than-ta-bain, a formidable stockade garrisoned by 2000 men ; the place stands upon a peninsula, and every exertion of the enemy had been rendered to strengthen the position towards the water, but the rear was altogether unpro tected. Neither the Diana nor Satellite opened their fires until within 40 yards of the stockade, although the enemy had fired upon them during their advance. The Satellite anchored by the stern and opened her broadside, whilst Captain Charles Graham on board the Diana, kept up a well-directed fire of rockets. The boats in three divisions, under Lieutenants Keele, Fraser, and Kellett, directly the enemy were observed in confusion, 1 Marshall.

lg25.J THE BURMESE WAR. 320 and the order was given to storm, pulled towards the stockade. Lieutenants Keele and Hall were the first to enter the position, and Captain O'Reilly, with the grenadiers of the 41st regiment, followed, and insured the victory. The loss sustained by the British in this affair amounted to three soldiers, four sailors, and two lascars wounded, one seaman was drowned. Thia formidable place having been taken, Captain Chads extended his operations up both branches of the river; one is called the

Panlang branch, the other, the Lyne, being the main branch, was found perfectly navigable as far as Meondaga. In the course of this survey of the river, Captain Chads on the Lyne, and Lieutenants Keele and Kellett, on the Panlang, destroyed numerous fire-rafts, and captured or burnt great numbers of war-boats. That Captain Chads on this, as well as on every occasion in which he was employed, conducted himself with courage, cool

ness, and ability, the extract of the letter in Appendix, No. 13. will sufficiently prove. Sir Archibald Campbell, on the return of the forces above mentioned, leaving Captain Eyves in charge of the shipping at Rangoon, began his march on the 13th of February. He had pre-viously resolved on moving in two divisions, one of which con sisted of 24G8 men under his own immediate orders, the first and grand object being to drive Bandoola from Donoobew where that chief had concentrated his force. "The marine column under brigadier-general, now Sir Willoughby Cotton, consisted of 799 European infantry, 250 sepoys, 108 foot artillery, and 12 of the rocket-corps : these were embarked in the flotilla, consisting of two mortar-boats, six gun-vessels, 30 armed row-boats, about 60 launches, flats, and canoes, and all the boats of the men-ofwar remaining at Rangoon, containing every disposable officer and man of the Alligator, Arachne, and Sophie, the whole escorted by the Diana and Satellite, and under the command of Captain Alexander." 1 This force was directed to pass up the Panlang river to the Irrawaddi, and driving the enemy from his stockades, to push on with all possible expedition to Donoobew. 2 A small division under Major Sale of 780 men, was destined to attack Bassein, and then to effect its junction with the other