

that Sir Archibald heard of the success of the second or marine division, and likewise that no delay had occurred, but that the boats had reached the Irrawaddi. On the 6th of March the white pagoda of Donoobew was seen by the flotilla. "

Brigadier general Cotton, and Captain Alexander proceeded to reconnoitre a succession of formidable stockades, commencing at the pagoda and increasing in strength until completed by the main work, which was lofty, and situated upon a very commanding site ; surrounded by a strong abbatis, with deep ditches, and all the customary defences : the guns appeared to be numerous, and the garrison were seen in crowds upon all the works." 1 A recon noissance was made on the left bank of the river, tne enemy opening a heavy fire from about 30 pieces of heavy artillery. Bandoola himself was at Donoobew, and refused any 'kind of surrender Avhich Brigadier-general Cotton thought fit to request by means of a flag of truce. The strength of the place having been ascertained, it was judged advisable not to attack the main work, and the landing was effected below the stockades, the flotilla commanding the river. 2

The first attack was made on the morning of the 7th, by a division of 500 men, which were divided into two columns, one under Lieutenant-colonel O'Donoghue, and the other under

Major James Basden. The boats supported the columns as they 
advanced to the attack, and although the enemy made a good 
resistance, and were nearly 3000 in number, they were forced 
1 
Marshall, vol. v., p. 166. * See Appendix, No. 14. 

3^2 TitE BtJRMESE WAR. [1825k

from the pagoda stockade, and according to the best accounts, 
about 450 were killed. The next attack was upon a second 
stockade, a few hundred yards from the pagoda, and here, 
although the British fought with a determination rarely if ever 
surpassed, they were met by an equal resistance, and after a 
long struggle, in which Captain Rose of the 89th was killed, 
and a heavy loss sustained, the attacking column was ordered 
to retire, and early on the morning of the 8th, after destroying 
the arms, and spiking the cannon captured at the first stockade, 
the troops were embarked, and fell back upon Youngyoun, a 
strong position, about nine miles below Donoobew. In this 
sanguinary conflict the naval department sustained a loss of 
two seamen killed and 13 wounded. The loss of the enemy 
could not be ascertained, but from the vigour of the assault, and 
the steady perseverance of the troops, the fire from the boats, 
and the good direction of the mortars, many men must have 
been swamped. 
About 25 miles above Sarrawah, a town which stands on the 
eastern bank of the Irrawaddi, opposite Kewdowa, stands the 
town of U-au-deet : and here it was that Sir Archibald Campbell, 
on the llth of March, heard of the unsuccessful attempt of 
Brigadier-general Cotton. The commander-in-chief instantly de- 
cided upon advancing towards Donoobew ; and after overcom 
ing all obstacles, he crossed the Irrawaddi, mentioned " as one 
of the widest and most rapid rivers of the East," 
1 on rafts and 
in canoes, and by the 18th the whole of his division had reached 
the right bank of the river. In the mean time Captain Alex- 
ander remained in great anxiety with the flotilla, about a mile 
from the white pagoda ; by day great activity was required in the 
seamen, for not unfrcquently batteries were opened upon them 
from positions hastily taken up by the enemy, and during the 
night the war-boats carried on a harassing, although unsuc 
cessful attack. On the 25th Sir Archibald took up a position 
close to the main stockade, and from the judicious arrangements 
of Bandoola, it was evident that he intended making a serious 
resistance. The Burmese, flushed with their former success, 
opened their fire upon the English. The cavalry hovered on 
their flanks, 
2 and it was evident that they courted rather than 
shunned the attack. 
"The stockade of Donoobew extended for nearly a mile 
along a sloping bank of the Irrawaddi, its breadth varying, ac- 
cording to the nature of the ground, from 500 to 800 yards 
1 
Marshall. 
- 
Snodgrass. 