

the recommencement of hostilities, Prome was surrounded by 
50,000 men, and the centre of the active force began to stockade 
and fortify the height of Napadee. On the opposite side of the 
river the enemy were equally active, and pushed a strong 
detachment forward in the hopes of regaining possession of 
Padoung-mew, a town on the western side of the Irrawaddi, 
which was bravely defended by 200 troops and a division of the 
flotilla under Lieutenant Kellett. The enemy made their attempt 
on the 25th of November, but were repulsed with some loss, 
whilst the casualties of both army and navy amounted to one 
man being slightly grazed by a musket-ball. 
In the naval department some changes had occurred. On 
the 7th of November, Captain Alexander died, and was suc- 
ceeded in command of the Alligator by Captain Chads ; J and on 
the 14th the squadron received the additional aid of Captain 
John Fitzgerald Studdert, who arrived at Eangoon in his 
majesty's sloop the Champion. 
On the 1st of December, measures having been taken for an 
attack on the enemy's lines, Sir James Brisbane, with the flotilla, 
commenced the action by a heavy cannonading of the enemy's 
centre, which was intrenched upon the Napadee Eidge, strongly 
1 See Appendix, No. 15. 

1825.] THE BURMESE WAR. 339 defended as to natural position, and consisting of 30,000 men under the Kee-wongee. This attack was intended to withdraw the enemy's attention from Sir Archibald Campbell, who imme diately sailed forth to attack Maha Nemiow, who commanded the left of the enemy's forces, and had under his command 14,000 infantry and 700 cavalry. Brigadier-general Cotton, who commanded the right division of the British forces, moved on towards Simbike, whilst the other division, under the com

mander-in-chief, forded the Nawine river, and continued along its banks. Stockade after stockade was taken without much re-sistance ; the enemy were panic-stricken and deserted their strongholds, falling victims to their opponents, who mowed them down without resistance. The massacre amounted to 300 killed, amongst which was Maha Nemiow himself. The English advanced upon Meaday, after an attack on Zeouke the following day. It is impossible to give sufficient credit to the troops, who cheerfully and without a murmur marched 20 miles, and, on the morning of the 2nd of December, drove the enemy from all their strong positions. The flotilla gallantly performed its duties ; 300 boats were captured, and stores, am munition, and guns to a large amount taken. The nature of this war of extermination can be well under stood from the account of Major Snodgrass. We extract from his journal the account of the 19th of December: "Marched upon Meaday, where a scene of misery and death awaited us. Within and around the stockades, the ground was strewed with dead and dying, lying promiscuously together, the victims of wounds, disease, and want. Here and there a small white pagoda marked where a man of rank lay buried ; whilst nume rous newly-made graves plainly denoted that what we saw was merely the small remnant of mortality which the hurried de-parture of the enemy prevented them from burying. The beach and neighbouring jungles were filled with dogs and vultures, whose growling and screaming, added to the pestilential smell of the place, rendered our situation far from pleasant. Here and there a faithful dog might be seen stretched out and moan ing over a newly-made grave, or watching by the side of his still breathing master; but by far the greater number, deprived of the hand that fed them, went prowling with the vultures among the dead, or lay upon the sand glutted with the foul repast. " As if this scene of death had not sufficed, fresh horrors were added to it by the sanguinary leaders of these unhappy men.