

1825.] THE BURMESE WAR. 333

Tho stockading was composed of solid teak beams from 15 tc

17 feet high, driven firmly into the earth, and placed as closely as possible to each other; behind this wooden wall the old brick ramparts of the place rose to a considerable height, strengthening the front defences by means of cross-beams, and affording a firm and elevated footing to the defendants. Upwards of 150 guns and swivels were mounted on the works, and the garrison was protected from the shells of the besiegers by numerous well-contrived traverses and excava tions." 1

On the 27th the garrison made a sortie on the right of the British lines, during which the flotilla boldly advanced under a crowd of sail, and exposed to the fire of the enemy's works. The Diana with a mortar-boat and four gun-vessels, pushed by the stockade and formed a junction with Sir Archibald's division, whilst the infantry, cavalry, and war-elephants, advanced upon the English. " The British cavalry," says Major Snodgrass, " covered by the horse-artillery, was ordered to charge the advancing monsters : the scene was novel and interesting ; and, although neither the elephants nor their riders can ever be very formidable in modern warfare, they stood the charge with a steadiness and courage these animals can rarely be brought to show. Their riders were mostly shot, and no sooner did the elephants feel themselves unrestrained, than they walked back to the fort with the greatest composure. During the heavy cannonade that took place between the flotilla and the stockade, Maha Bandoola, who was superintending the practice of his artillery, gave his garrison a specimen of the discipline he meant

to enforce in this last struggle to retrieve his lost character and reputation. A Burmese officer being killed while pointing a gun by a shot from the flotilla, his comrades instantly abandoned the dangerous post, and could not be brought back to their duty by any remonstrance of their chief: when Bandoola, stepping down to the spot, instantly severed the heads of two of the delinquents from their bodies, and ordered them to be stuck up upon the spot "pour encourager les autres." 1

Between the 28th and the 31st the time was employed on 
one part in the construction of batteries, and on the other, in 
improving their defences ; the approaches were made, and on the 
2nd of April the English took possession of the place without the 
loss of a man. Bandoola had been killed the night previously 
py a shell, and his troops, after the loss of their chief, made a 
i 
Snodgrass. 

334 THE BURMESE WAR. [1825 precipitate retreat ; leaving behind them 110 iron guns, 28 pieces of brass ordnance, and 269 jingals, mounted on the works, without disabling them in any way. A vast quantity of military stores fell into the hands of the conquerors, and the total loss sustained during the siege amounted to only 14 killed and missing and 69 wounded. The high sense of the services rendered by the naval department, during a period of six weeks, under every privation, surrounded by difficulties and dangers, exposed during that time in open boats, harassed day and night by the enemy with all the vicissitudes of climate, all the annoyance of their cramped situation, is ably put forth in the letter of Sir Archibald