

Several gibbets were found erected about the stockades, each

340 THE BURMESE WAR. [1825.

bearing the mouldering remains of three or four crucified victims, 
thus cruelly put to death, for perhaps no greater crime than that 
of wandering from their post in search of food ; or, at the very 
worst, for having followed the example of their chiefs, in flying 
from their enemies." 
A part of Sir James Brisbane's letter to the admiralty, in 
which he mentions the gallant services of all under his com- 
mand, and records the death of Captain Dawson, of the Arachne, 
will be found in the Appendix, No. 16. The command of the 
Arachne now devolved on Lieutenant Andrew Baird, of the 
Boadicea. 
Victory followed victory in all directions. Brigadier-general 
Cotton was equally successful against Sudda-woon, who occu 
pied the high banks on the west bank of the river. The flotilla, 
under Sir James Brisbane, again lent its powerful aid, and is 
highly spoken of by the brigadier-general in his report to the 
commander-in-chief, and it is gratifying to find that on every 
occasion the different services lent to each other the most effi- 
cient aid and cordial co-operation. 

No time was lost by Sir Archibald Campbell. The panic stricken enemy fled before him ; the English advanced in two divisions as before, whilst a small force, under Brigadier Eichard Armstrong, was embarked to act in co-operation with the naval forces under Sir James Brisbane. A line of communication having been established between Sir Archibald Campbell and the flotilla, the whole advanced. Both services had numerous obstacles to oppose, and both overcame all difficulties : the boats were kedged or tracked up the river in many places, owing to the rapidity of the stream, which rendered the former perhaps less fatiguing than eternally toiling at the oars. At

Meong a junction with Brigadier-general Cotton's division with the flotilla had been arranged, but it was useless. No enemy remained to be opposed ; every work, however strong, was abandoned. It appears, from Major Snodgrass's description, that a few resolute and well-trained men might have kept back the whole invading force. The river, in some places, is de-scribed as being so narrowed by shoals that 1he boats must pass, and did pass, within 200 yards of the banks, and the natural advantages, which had been increased by art, if properly defended, might have effectually stopped all progress towards the capital. On the 17th the united force came within sight of

Meaday. It was evacuated by the enemy. Captain Chads was sent forward to reconnoitre and although the enemy made

1825.J THE BURMESE WAR. 341 sufficient resistance to kill two men and wound two others during the reconnoissance, they fled at the approach of the advanced guard. Sir Archibald Campbell now marched upon Melloone, and arrived before it on the 29th of December. On the 26th a flag of truce had been received on board the Diana, by Sir James Brisbane, bearing intelligence that Kolein Menghie had arrived at Melloone with power to conclude a treaty of peace. The flag required a cessation of hostilities for 25 days, but as Sir Archibald had discovered the bad faith of his opponents, he offered 24 hours as the longest period, and in the mean time continued his march. Melloone was strongly occupied, but as the enemy did not appear disposed to exchange shots, Sir Archibald consented to an armistice, and once more negotiations commenced. The close of this year saw the British force of a few thousand men dictating peace as conquerors, although surrounded by an enemy nearly eight times their number, and threatening to advance upon a capital the population of which was above 150 times more numerous than our army. Such is the force of discipline, when opposed to lawless hordes. Sir James Brisbane, at the commencement of this year, was obliged, from severe indisposition, to retire to Pulo-Penaug. He died on the 19th of December 1826