

It was soon evident that the court of Ava was by no means disposed to fulfil its treaty. As long as the Burmese could gain time they were satisfied that some chance might turn the scale of victory, or that in the end, the tremendous superiority of number must triumph. Indeed, had they been commanded by any active man, with common sense, it is evident that Sir Archibald's small force might have been kept eternally on the alert, and fatigued into a retreat. To the extreme ignorance of military tactics, must therefore be attributed the fact, that a band of men, far below 8000 in number, could advance or dream of advancing into a populous country, with at least 60,000 men under arms, and concentrated, with strongholds in their rear, stockaded, fortified, every munition of war at hand, recruits to supply casualties, ample provisions, in short all that could be required to carry on a desperate contest. On the other hand, ib is true, the river afforded conveyance from Rangoon, of ammu nition, &c., but the enormous fatigue attending such transport must be considered, and that, from the smallness of the force the stockades, which stood on the banks of the Irrawaddi, and which were taken by the invaders, could not be retained, and again fell into the enemy's hands. We have seen in the preced*

342 THE BURMESE WAR. [1826.

ing pages that hundreds of war-boats thronged the river, that fire-rafts were daily constructed and nightly used, that such was the scarcity of fresh provisions even at Eangoon, that mutton was sold at five shillings the pound, a duck at eighteen, and all other articles on an equal ratio. Of the luxuries of life there were none ; to this must be added that the seamen were absent from their ships a whole year, and as Marshall remarks, " were employed rowing and tracking their boats by day against a rapid stream, sleeping in them by night, protected from the inclemency of the weather by awnings only ; rarely meeting with a fresh meal, and at one period, upwards of two months without so great a luxury." These men well deserved the thanks which Sir Archibald Campbell and their own officers so frequently bestowed upon them. On the 18th of January the Burmese commissioners again endeavoured to gain time, and requested a further delay of a Aveek : it was refused ; they had promised to evacuate Melloone on the 20th, they refused to comply with their own proposition, and war again became inevitable. Both parties laboured hard

during the night ; the English in landing 28 guns, which were in battery by 10 o'clock the next morning ; the Burmese strength ening their already powerful defences. Before noon on the 19th the English opened their fire, and every prospect of any ami cable arrangement had passed. A brigade under the command of Lieutenant-colonel R. Sale, and a division under Brigadier-general Cotton were embarked in the boats under the command of Captain Chads. The first-named brigade assembled and carried the main face of the enemy's position ; Major William Fri-th, of his majesty's 38th regiment, heading the party, the lieutenant-colonel having been wounded in the boats. The enemy gave way immediately, but were interrupted in their retreat by Lieutenant-colonel Thomas Blair, of the 87th foot, who boldly attacked and dispersed them with considerable loss. Such was the daring of one side and the imbecility of the other, that, in four hours after the opening of the battery, Melloone was in the possession of the invaders, and all the money, stores, ammunitions, and 300 cannons in the hands