

Campbell,

1 and in Captain Alexander's despatch to Captain Coe. 2

Sir Archibald, profiting by the panic, marched on the 3rd of April towards Prome, while the water division kept up a constant communication with the land column, which had been increased by the junction of Brigadier M'Creagh, on the 12th of April, at Surrawah, the whole force having again crossed the Irrawaddi. On the 24th the columns arrived in the neighbourhood of Promc, and as the enemy did not wait to be attacked, but retired without any resistance on the approach of the English, the place was taken possession of the day following, although the different stockades mounted 100 guns, and were in excellent condition to withstand an attack. With Bandoola's death, all the energy or bravery of the enemy seems to have vanished, and the British columns marched through a hostile country unmolested ; but, as the rainy season was now about to commence, the army went into cantonments, and as far as the land column was concerned, there was a total cessation of hostilities.

Major Sale's division, during the advance of the two former columns upon Prome, proceeded to attack Basscin, accompanied by the Larne, Captain Frederick Marryat, and the Mercury, Lieutenant Drummond Anderson. On the 20th of February the division arrived off the entrance of the Bassein river. It appears that on the 26th, as the ships advanced up the river, they were fired at from two stockades, which the enemy deserted directly the fire was opened upon them in return. On the 3rd of March

the ships arrived and anchored within three miles of Bassein, 
having experienced much trouble in warping up the narrow part 
of the river, and from the vessels constantly grounding. Bassein 
was at this time a heap of ruins, having been destroyed by the 
Burman chief, who had fled from the first stockade near the 
entrance of the river. Major Sale advanced about 130 miles 
i Marshall. - 
Snodgrass. 

1825.J THE SURMISE WAR. 335 towards Lamina without opposition ; finding the place deserted, he returned on the 23rd to Bassein, it being useless to attempt a pursuit of his flying enemies. The casualties in this expedition amounted to two wounded. Sickness and fatigue, however, de-

creased the ranks in a trifling degree. 
Captain Marryat having dropped down the river to Naputtah, 
proceeded thence with a small body of men against Thingang. 
The enemy, however, declined all hostilities, and Captain Mar 
ryat's terms were accepted, by which 150 Naputtah men were 
released, and provided with canoes to return to their homes. 
The arms, &c., were surrendered, and the Wongee of the town, 
a chief invested with a gold chattah, was delivered up as a 
prisoner. 
Lieutenant Fraser, on the 30th, was despatched to Pumkayi. 
The same terms were oifered and accepted as at Thingang. The 
whole coast from Negrais to Bassein, being now in possession of 
the English, was ultimately added to the conquered provinces, 
and " the enemy were deprived of all maritime possessions from 
Cape Negrais to Tenasserim." 1 
Lieutenant Wilkinson having been despatched from Prome in 
order to reconnoitre the river, captured on the 1st of May, with- 
out any loss, eight war-boats, pulling each fifty oars, and laden 
with ordnance stores. It is a proof how inefficient the enemy 
were in regard to warlike operations, as practical gunnery for 