

1 Marshall.

1825,] THE BURMESE WAR. 337 diately, and the Tenasserim provinces to be retained until the liquidation of the other. The court of Ava was expected to receive a British resident at the capital, and consent to a com mercial treaty, upon principles of liberal intercourse and mutual

advantages." There was a profusion of Oriental folly and extravagance in the reception of the English commissioners. All the pomp, the show, and the outward profession of sincerity, was abundantly showered upon Colonel Tidy and his colleague ; a jetty was built expressly for their landing ; 2000 troops escorted them to their abode ; compliments from the Kee-wongee were duly presented by the late governors of Prome and Sarrawaddy. The time between the llth and the 16th was thus occupied, when it was agreed that hostilities should cease until the 17th of October ; that a Burman minister of high rank should meet Sir Archibald Campbell at Neoun-ben-zeik, a village equidistant from both armies : and that no advancing movement should be made by the Burmese troops to swell the forces of Memia-boo, but that all the troops of Ava should be considered as partaking of the

present neutrality.

Before the conference took place, Sir James Brisbane, Knighl and C.B., in command of the Boadicea, which ship he had left at Rangoon, arrived at head-quarters, bringing with him the boats of his ship to assist in future operations. Sir Archibald Campbell and Sir James Brisbane proceeded on the 30th to the village above named, and the conference took place on the 2nd of October. A house had been erected for the purpose, and two officers of rank were deputed by the Kee-wongee to wait upon the English commanding officers, and conduct them to the house. On the part of the British, Colonel Tidy and Lieutenant

Smith were sent for the same purpose to the Kee-wongee ; the first day was spent in useless compliments about the state of the king's health, and on the following day six officers, Sir Archibald Campbell, Sir James Brisbane, Brigadier-general Cotton, Cap tain Alexander, E.N., Brigadier M'Creagh, Lieutenant- colonel Tidy, and Captain John James Snodgrass, again met the Burman deputies. The principal objection, urged on the part of the

Burmese, was the cession of territory, and much conversation took place upon the subject. The day finished by an extension of the armistice until the 2nd of November, when the determi nation of the court of Ava was to be made known. In the mean time all American and English subjects detained at Ava were to be liberated, the British, on their part, liberating all Burmese VOL. vi. z

338 THE BURMESE WAR. [1825. then confined in Bengal. On the 3rd of November Sir Archibald was informed that the court of Ava refused to listen to the terms ; neither the cession of one inch of territory, nor the payment of the slightest pecuniary indemnity could be enter tained. The answer given was, " If you wish for peace you may go away ; but if you ask either money or territory, no friendship can exist between us. This is Burman custom!" The armistice was finished, and both parties proceeded imme diately to active and offensive operations, which commenced on the 15th of November on the side of the Burmese, and which gave them some confidence from the success of the enterprise. A division of the enemy having advanced within 48 miles of Prome in a north-easterly direction, four regiments of native infantry, under Lieutenant-colonel Eobert M'Dowall, of the Madras establishment, were despatched to dislodge them. This was attempted in vain. The Burmese out-numbered their oppo nents by more than six to one, and Lieutenant-colonel M'Dowall, with 53 men, were killed, 110 wounded, and the remaining force obliged to withdraw. That the Burmese had not been idle during the long and fruitless negotiation, is evident from the fact that shortly after