

this service was performed in the face of, and under the fire of 500 musketeers, and yet not a man was hurt. Captain Alexander, in mentioning the gallant behaviour of Lieutenant Wilkinson, remarks, "that the capture of these boats liberated 3000 canoes, with families in them, driven before the retreating force of the Prince of Sarrawaddy." The months of June, July, and August were passed by Sir

Archibald Campbell at Prome. Captain Chads returned, after the occupation of that place, to Eangoon. Captain Marryat, who was promoted to the command of the Tees, left the Ean goon about the middle of May. Captain Eyves was invalided. Lieutenant Edward Blanckley of the Alligator, was promoted to the Sophie, and departed from the station shortly afterwards, leaving the Alligator and Arachne, the only men-of-war, at Ean goon. Captain Chads desired both ships, during the wet mon soon, to be unrigged and secured by means of bamboos thatched with leaves. " The gun-boats were placed at equal distances, forming," says Mr. Marshall, " a chain of posts between Ean

i Marshall.

336 THE BURMESE WAR. [1825, goon and Prome, by which means provisions were forwarded to form a depot for the ensuing campaign under a safe protection. The forces under Sir Archibald Campbell, previously to the opening of the campaign, amounted to only 6148 men. From this number he had to garrison Prome; he therefore ordered

2100 men to be sent from Eangoon and Donoobew, which would swell his effective force to 8248 men. The enemy, who viewed with increased alarm the approach of the English towards their capital, were not inactive spectators of the coming storm;

40,000 men, tinder Memia-boo, the half-brother of the king, were collected and stationed at various cities, the principal force being concentrated at Meaday. Before hostilities commenced, Sir Archibald Campbell addressed a letter to the court of Ava, dated the 5th of August, offering to enter into pacific negotiations ; but, previously to any answer being received, Memia-boo had advanced to Meaday, and it became necessary to check his approach to the British force at Prome. Brigadier-general Cotton was therefore sent in the Diana, with a small force, to reconnoitre. Captain Alexander commanded the gun-boats, and on the 15th of August tho object of the expedition was fully answered. The town of Meaday stands on the left bank of the Irrawaddi ; a nullah runs into the river immediately below it. The bank of the river was strongly stockaded, and the place altogether presented a formidable appearance. The force of the enemy was estimated at between 16,000 and 20,000 men, and a general activity pre vailed in order to render the position secure. On the 6th of September the answer to Sir Archibald Camp bell's letter to the court of Ava was delivered by two Burman deputies, under the protection of a flag of truce ; they declared their readiness to enter into negotiations, and requested that

two officers might be permitted to visit the Burman commander in-chief, in order to carry into effect the terms about to be proposed to him. Lieutenant-colonel Tidy, the deputy adjutant general, and Lieutenant Smith, of his majesty's ship Alligator, were appointed by Sir Archibald Campbell, and were accompanied by Mr. Sarkies Manook as interpreter. 1 The principal conditions of peace offered by the English were the following : " The non interference of the court of Ava, with the territories of Cachar, Munnipoore, and Assam ; the cession of the four provinces of Arracan, and the payment of a certain sum as an indemnifica tion for the expenses of the war, one moiety to be paid imme