

short distance below the Thetis.

About 10 A.M. the batteries opened their fire against Kemmendine ;

the stockade on the pagoda point at the same instant commenced a fire of musketry, and from four small pieces, apparently 4 or 6 pounders, upon the Kobert Spankie and the other two gun-vessels opposite to it,

which was returned by them, and kept up on both sides for upwards of an hour. The stockades abreast of the Thetis not having fired a shot the whole time, and observing that the flotilla did not succeed in silencing the other, I took advantage of the flood-tide just then making, to drop abreast of it in the Thetis, and after a fire of half an hour, so far silenced the enemy that from this time they only fired an occasional musket at intervals when we had ceased, but altogether so badly directed, that we had only one man wounded, belonging to a row-boai ftt that time alongsi ie the Thetis. Having observed a great number of

boats, many of a large size, collected about two miles above us, and con sidering it possible that at night, during the ebb, they might attack any of the flotilla that remained in advance, when we, from the rapidity of the current, could not render them any assistance, I thought fit to shift the Thetis, at the last of the flood, about a quarter of a mile above the point, directing the flotilla to drop with the ebb below the stockade on the opposite point, which they accordingly did. At noon on the llth, observing the signal agreed upon, when the general wanted communication with us to be made, I sent an officer to answer it, who returned with intelligence of the troops having possession of Kemmendine, and with a request from the general, that two of the gun-flotilla and two row-boats might be left at that place ; I accordingly directed the flotilla, with the above exceptions, to proceed to Eangoon with the evening's ebb. At 6 P.M. the Thetis weighed, and, with the boats ahead to tow, began to drop down the river. From the place where we had been at anchor we had seen a great smoke and flame, apparently proceeding from the back of the stockade on the pagoda point ; but which, on our opening the entrance of the creek, we discovered to be a very large fire-raft, composed of a number of country boats fastened together, and rapidly drifting down with the stream. By endeavouring to avoid the raft, together with the effect of the strong current setting out of the creek, the Thetis unfortunately grounded on the opposite bank of the river, where, in spite of every exertion, she remained until high water next morning. The raft grounded on the pagoda point, where it remained burning the whole of the night ; although occasionally large masses separated from the main body and drifted down the river. The most dangerous of these masses were towed on shore by Mr. [George] Winsor, of the Sophie, in the Lame's gig, who described them to be composed of canoes, filled with tar, matting, bamboos, &c. During the night there were some shot fired at the Thetis from the stockades, but without effect. At daylight on the 12th, having succeeded in getting her afloat, we proceeded down the river and anchored at Rangoon.