

occasions.

No. 9. See p. 311. 
Under these circumstances, I most fully coincide with you in 
opinion, that no time should be lost in proceeding to Pcnarig, where 
those comforts essentially necessary for the recovery of your crew are 
at present most conveniently to be had ; aware as I am, that the most 
urgent necessity alone induces you to suggest the removal of the ship 
under your command. I feel fully convinced that you will not lose a 

moment in returning to partake of the further, and I trust more active, operations of the approaching campaign. In taking I hope a very short leave of yourself, and the officers and men of the Larne, I shall not dwell, as I otherwise would, on the valuable and ready aid I have invariably received from you all since the commencement of the present service, embracing duties of perhaps as severe and harassing a nature as ever were experienced by either sailors or soldiers, and under privations of the most trying nature.

Any number of Malay sailors you may require to -assist in uavigatiug the Larue to Penang are at your service.

(Signed) A. CAMPBELL.

No. 10. See p. 311.

I have the honour to enclose sundry despatches from Captain Mar ryat, of iiis majesty's ship Larne, in command of the naval force in the river Eangoon, detailing various successful attacks on the enemy, while co-operating -with the army under Sir Archibald Campbell ; and I feel much pleasure in recommending to their lordship's notice that officer, as well as those named in the margin,

1 
to whose zealous ex 
ertions and cool intrepidity are to be attributed the successful results 
of the various attacks which they conducted against the enemy. I am 
pleased in having it in my power to recommend in the strongest terms 
Mr. Henry Lister Maw, midshipman of this ship, who volunteered his 
services to Sir Archibald Campbell, and who accompanied him in all 
his operations ; and I trust, from the high encomiums passed ou his 

conduct, their lordships will be pleased to consider his services, and his having been most dangerously wounded.

No. 11. See p. 312.

A chart drawn by Mr. Winsor, admiralty midshipman of the Sophie, to whom I feel much indebted for his exertion and ability, he having had the arduous charge of the steam-vessel during the whole of the time, will enable you to judge of our progress ; the Satellite was on shore three times, and the Diana once, but without the slightest injury.

It now becomes a most pleasing duty for me to express the high satisfaction I feel at the conduct of the officers and seamen I had the pleasure to command ; their privations and harassing duties were extreme, under heavy rains, guards by night from fire-rafts with the enemy's war-boats constantly watching close to them, and incessant towing of the flotilla by day ; their high spirits were unabated ; and without the utmost zeal and fatigue in the officers commanding the divisions, it would have been impossible to have advanced, manned as they are, with natives only. Lieutenant Dobson rendered me every assistance, and was of great service ; he was severely burnt on the