

22nd. From the exemplary conduct of these officers and seamen, allow me, sir, to recommend them to your favourable attention. The casualties, I rejoice to say, have been very few four seamen of the

Araclme wounded.

1 Lieutenant William Burdett Dobson and Messrs. John Duffill, George Winsor, and Thomas Fraser, acting Lieutenant and Charles Kittoe Scott. George Goldfinch, Mr. Robert Atherton,

362 APPENDIX TO THE BURMESE WAB.

No. 12. See p. 312.

ENCLOSURE. 
Camp, Rangoon, Oct. 11, 1824. 
Sir, In obedience to orders I had the honour of receiving from you, 
to feel the strength and disposition of the enemy upon the Lyne river, 
and to attack him as often as opportunities might offer of displaying 
the valour of the troops under my command, I embarked, on the 
morning of the 5th inst., with 300 men of his majesty's 38th regiment, 
100 rank and file of the 18th Madras native infantry, and a detach- 
ment of Bengal artillery, under Captain Timbrell, on board a flotilla 
of gun-boats, &c. &c., under the immediate command of Captain 
Chads. The first day's tide carried us as high as Pagoda-point, above 

Kemmendiue, at the junction of the Lyne and Panlang rivers. Having been joined by the armed transport and flotilla, at 2 r.M. next day, the whole force proceeded up the Lyne river with a flowing tide. Bodies

of the enemy were seen moving up on the right bank, while numerous 
war-boats hovered in our front, keeping up a continued but distant fire. 
After the flotilla anchored, the light boats in advance, under Lieu 
tenant Kellett, of his majesty's ship Arachne, pursued the enemy's 
war-boats ; and having closed with one carrying a gun and full com- 
plement of men, boarded and took her in the handsomest style, the 
Burmese jumping overboard to save themselves. On the 7th, after 
proceeding about four miles, I observed two stockades, which were 
taken possession of without loss, and we reached, with this tide, within 
a short distance of the large works and fortified village of Than-ta 
bain, having in the course of the day destroyed seven of the newly 
constructed war-boats. On reconnoitring the village, I found it was 
defended by three long breastworks, with a very extensive stockade, 
constructed of large teak-beams ; and fourteen war-boats, each mount 
ing a gun, were anchored so as to defend the approach to it. 
Having consulted Captain Chads, we advanced to the assault, the 
steam-boat, with the Satellite and bomb-ketch in tow, and the troops in 
their boats ready to land when ordered. In passing the breastworks, 
we received a smart running fire from jingals and musketry, which 
was returned with showers of grape from the Satellite ; and observing 
the enemy evidently in confusion, I directed the troops and scaling- 
ladders to be immediately landed, and in a few minutes every work 
about the place was in our possession. During this night, some fire- 
rafts, of a most formidable appearance, were floated down the river, 
but very fortunately they passed without touching any of the vessels. 
At six o'clock next morning, we again moved with the tide, and in 
passing a narrow neck of land at the junction of two rivers, were 
received with a brisk discharge of musketry from a long line of breast- 
works, and a cannonade from a very large stockade on our right. The 