

No. 2. See p. 308.

Having observed a disposition to recross part of their force to the. Dalla side of the river, I determined, on the 8th instant, to make as general an attack as the very woody and inundated state of the country would possibly admit of. For that purpose I formed the force to be

employed into two columns of attack ; one proceeding by land, under the command of that excellent and indefatigable officer Brigadiergeneral Macbean, for the purpose of surrounding the enemy on the land side ; while I, with the other, proceeded by water to attack their stockaded position, along the banks of the river in front. To this post

APPENDIX TO THE BURMESE WAR. 347 the enemy appeared to attach the greatest importance, and the stockades were so constructed as to afford mutual support, presenting difficulties apparently not to be overcome without a great sacrifice of lives. I therefore resolved to try the effect of shelling, and consulted with Captain Marryat upon the employment of such armed vessels as he might select to breach, in the event of our mortar practice not succeeding. The shells were thrmm at too great a distance to produce the desired effect, and the swampy state of the country would not admit of any advance.

The armed vessels, viz., the Satellite, Teignmouth, Thetis, and Jessey, the whole under the command of Lieutenant Fraser, of H. M. S. Larne, now took their stations according to a disposition made by Captain Marryat, and opened afire, which soon silenced that of 14 pieces of artillery, besides swivels and musketry from the stockades, and in one hour the preconcerted signal, of " breach practicable," was displayed at the mainmast head. The troops, as previously arranged, entered their boats on the signal being hoisted. The assault was made in the best order and handsomest

style : Major Wahab, with the native infantry, landed, and immediately 
attacked the breach, while Lieutenant-colonel (Henry) Godwin, almost 
at the same instant, pushed ashore a little higher up, and entered the 
work by escalade : the enemy kept up a sharp, but ill-directed fire, 
while the troops were landing, but, as usual, fled on our making a 
lodgment in the place. I now ordered Lieutenant-colonel Godwin to 
re-embark with the detachment of the 41st regiment, and attack the 
second stockade, which was immediately carried in the same style. 
The third stockade was evacuated by the enemy. 
The cool and gallant conduct of all the troops on this occasion was, 
to me, a most gratifying sight. To the officers and men of the breaching 
vessels every praise is due: and 1 much regret that severe indisposition 
prevented Captain Marryat from being present to witness the result of his 
arrangements. 
The inundated state of the country did not admit of any communica 

tion with Brigadier-general Macbean from the shipping, nor did I know the result of the operations of his column, until I returned to Kangoon in the evening. Nothing could be more brilliant and success ful. He took, by assault, seven strong stockades in the most rapid succession, throwing the enemy into the utmost consternation ; and ho had also the good fortune to fall in with a large body flying from a stockade attacked by the shipping, of whom a great number were killed.