

344 THE BURMESE WAR. [1826.

thereunto appertaining (taking the Saluoen, or Martaban river, as the line of demarcation on that frontier) ; to receive a British resident at Ava, and to depute a Burraan minister to reside at Calcutta ; to abolish all exactions upon British ships or vessels in Bunnan ports, that are not required from Burman ships or vessels in British ports ; and to enter into a commercial treaty upon principles of reciprocal advantage; the King of Ava, 'in. proof of the sincere disposition of the Burman government to maintain the relations of peace and amity between the nations and as part indemnification to the British government for the expenses of the war,' agreed to pay the sum of one crore of rupees, equal to about 1,000,000?. sterling (valuing the rupee at two shillings, the then rate of exchange), of which contribution the first instalment, amounting to 2,508,199 sicca rupees, was

embarked at Yandaboo, brought down the Irrawaddi (a distance of 600 miles), and ultimately conveyed by Captain Chads to Cal cutta, where it was landed from the Alligator, April 10th, 1826." Thus ended the Burman war. On the 8th of March the troops were embarked, and by the 6th of May the whole force had returned to Eangoon, and sailed for their several destinations. In conclusion, it becomes a pleasant duty to record the vote of thanks of both houses of parliament, to Sir James Brisbane, and the captains, officers, seamen, and marines, under his command, for their cordial co-operation, their skilful, gallant, and meritorious exertions, which greatly contributed to the success ful issue of the war: and to add, that Captains Chads, Marryat, and Eyves, received the companionship of the Bath, and that every lieutenant, and passed midshipman, who were employed

on this occasion, were promoted. 
In the Appendix, No. 17, will be found the proclamation of 
the governor-general in council, and it is almost useless to add, 
that the Admiralty, and the East India Company, expressed 
their approbation of the zealous and gallant conduct, displayed 
by Sir James Brisbane, Captains Chads and Marryat, and the 
other officers and men, during the long and arduous service in 
-which they were employed. Our men suffered all the privations 
incident to a hostile country, all the miseries of sickness, and 
want of common comforts, with constant exposure to harassing 
attacks from an enemy vastly superior in numerical strength, 
who disturbed them by night, and attempted to starve them by 
day, and every officer and man deserved the thanks which a 
grateful country returned them for their active, persevering, 
and meritoi ious exertions. 

APPENDIX TO THE 13UBMESE WAK.

No. 1. Sec p. 306.

IN compliance with your orders, on the 9th instant, at 11 P.M., at tlio commencement of the flood-tide, I proceeded up the river in the

Honourable Company's cruiser Thetis, accompanied by the Jessey [Penang cruiser], six of the gun-flotilla, six row-boats, and the Malay proa you were pleased to put under my command. At 2 A.M. the Jessey and the row-boats took up the position assigned them, about three-quarters of a mile below Kemmendine. The Thetis was anchored at the entrance of a creek about the same distance above Kemmendine, and abreast of the stockade from which the gun was taken on the 3rd instant, but which has since been greatly strengthened. The gun-flotilla were to have been placed abreast of the oppo site point, forming the entrance of the creek (distinguished by a pagoda), on which, since the 3rd, there has been erected a formidable stockade ; but in consequence of the ebb-tide making against them, with the exception of the Kobert Spankie and two others, they failed in their endeavours to take up their position, and were brought up a