

No. 3. See p. 308. 
Sir, I request you will accept my very best thanks for your able 
arrangement and disposition of the vessels employed in the attack of 
the enemy's stockades yesterday ; and I beg you will do me the favour 
of conveying them to Lieutenant Fraser, E.N., Captain Hardy, and the 

officers in command of the Honourable Company's cruisers Thetis and

Jessey. I had the greatest satisfaction in observing the general good conduct of the row-boats and the boats of the transports ; they carried the troops, up to the assault in very handsome style, and Captain O'Brien, of the Moira, was the first man who leapt on shore, and entered the breach with the foremost of the troops. I am, &c., (Signed) A. CAMPBELL.

No. 4. See p. 308. The Governor-general in Council unites with you in regretting, that the severe indisposition of Captain Marryat, the senior naval officer, prevented his witnessing the successful result of his judicious arrangements on the occasion alluded to. You will be pleased to assure Captain Marryat, that his lordship in council entertains the highest sense of his valuable services, and will not fail to bring them under the notice of his excellency Commodore Grant.

No. 5. See p. 308. 
I must now call your attention to the condition of H.M.S. Larne, 
whose crew I am sorry to say have been rendered quite inefficient by 
disease. Since we have been on this expedition, we have had 170 
cases of cholera and dysentery. We have had 13 deaths we have 
now 30 patients at the hospital on shore, and 20 in the sick list on 

board ; our convalescents are as ineffective as if they were in their hammocks ; they relapse daily, and the surgeon reports, that unless the vessel can be sent to cruise for a month, there is little chance of their ultimate recovery. When I sent away the expedition, under

Lieutenant Fraser, on the . 7th instant, I could only muster three officers and twelve men fit for duty. The conduct of Lieutenant Fraser, in the several expeditions which he has commanded, has been that of a gallant and steady officer ; and I am under the greatest obligations to Mr. Atherton, not only for his active services in the boats, but for carrying on the whole duty of the ship, during the absence and sickness of the other officers. The behaviour of Mr. John Duffill, master's-mate of this ship, and of Messrs. Winsor and Maw, midshipmen, lent from the Sophie and

Liffey, has been very satisfactory, and I trust, that when future oppor tunities may occur, they will so distinguish themselves as to have a

fair claim for promotion.

APPENDIX TO THE BURMESE WAE. 349

No. 6. See p. 309. I proceeded with the detachment you were pleased to place under my command, at 11 A.M., and after entering a large creek on the east side of Dalla, and proceeding about two miles, I observed two stock ades, one on the right, and one on the left bank, immediately opposite to each other, both in commanding situations, particularly that on the left bank, which I instantly decided on attacking. The boats were hove-to for a short time, to make the necessary preparations for the attack, and as soon as these were completed, the whole moved on under a heavy fire from the guns and musketry of the enemy in both stcckades. The landing was effected under an incessant fire from them, and after great labour and exertion in getting through the mud, which was remarkably stiff, and thigh deep, the scaling-ladders were placed, and the stockade stormed and immediately carried. Some of the troops then re-embarked, crossed the river, and took possession of the opposite stockade.