

ships,

No. 14, See p. 331. 
I now beg leave to acknowledge my obligations to Captain Alexander, 
C.B., senior naval officer, and commanding the flotilla, for his hearty 
and cordial co-operation on all occasions since we have served toge 
ther, and for his very great exertions on the present occasion, in bring 

ing up stores and provisions. Since we have been before Donoobew, 11 of the enemy's large class war-boats have been captured by our advanced boats, under his own immediate orders ; making, with others, evacuated by their crews, 38 first-rate war-boats now in our possession ; and I have every reason to think that only five of the large squadron, the enemy had stationed at this place, have succeeded in escaping. A vast number of other boats of an excellent description have also fallen into our hands. By Brigadier-general Cotton, and all the officers em barked, the zeal and incessant labour of his majesty's navy are mentioned in terms of high admiration.

No. 15. See p. 338.

In my former despatch, dated Feb. 24th, I gave you the names of all officers and young gentlemen commanding boats, and I again request you will be pleased to recommend them to the favourable attention ol my lords commissioners of the admiralty, with the seamen and marines 1 have had the pleasure to command, their conduct having been such as to merit the highest encomiums their privations, hardships, and fatigue, during upwards of six weeks, by day and night, in open boats, have been borne with cheerfulness, and every duty performed with alacrity Of Captain Chads I can only say, he has fully supported his former character, and has my best thanks. I trust I may be allowed to narno my first-lieutenant, Smith, an already distinguished officer. Mr. Watt, surgeon of the Arachne, a volunteer, has been of most essential service in attention to the sick and wounded.

No. 16. See p. 340.

I have much satisfaction in stating, that the whole of tLe officers and men employed in the flotilla conducted themselves throughout this service in a manner that reflects the highest credit on each individual, composed as this force is of various establishments. The officers of the

Honourable Company's marine vied with those of the royal navy in gallantry and exertion. Captain Chads, of the Alligator, who commanded the light division, displayed the same zeal, judgment, and intrepidity which have characterised his conduct since the operations in this quarter began. I have, however, the painful duty of announcing the death of Captain Dawson, of the Arachne, whose high professional character had induced me so recently to promote him to the rank of commander. The gallantry of this much-lamented officer was con spicuous on all occasions ; inviting, by his example, the exertions of all under his directions, he fell just as success had crowned our efforts.

No. 17. See p. 344. The relations of friendship between the British government and the state of Ava, having been happily re-established by the conclusion of a definitive treaty of peace, the governor-general in council performs a most gratifying act of duty, in offering publicly his cordial acknow