

APPENDIX TO THE BURMESE WAE. 353 fire of the latter was soon silenced by the well-pointed guris of the

Satellite.

The troops and pioneers were ordered then to land, and this formidable stockade was carried by assault without a struggle. It is, without exception, the strongest work of the Mnd I have ever seen the length of the front and rear faces is 200 yards, and that of the side faces 150. It is built of solid timber 15 feet high, with a platform inside all round, five feet broad and eight feet from the ground. Upon this platform were a number of wooden guns, and piles of single and double-headed wooden shot, and many jingals ; below, we found seven pieces of brass and iron ordnance. In front, the stockade is strengthened by breastworks and regular demilunes, and would contain with ease above 2000 men. In the centre of this stronghold we found the magnificent bungalow of the Kee-wongee, who, I presume, fled early in the day. I cannot doubt but the enemy's loss must have been severe, though we only found 17 dead bodies, which they had not time to

carry off.

The advanced boats having pushed up the river some miles, without seeing any other works, I considered the objects you had in view fully accomplished, and we accordingly began to move back to Kangoon. * * * I cannot adequately acknowledge my alligations to Captain Chads, for his zealous, judicious, and cordial co-opera tion ; and the spirited conduct of Lieutenant Kellett, in command of the advanced boats, attracted the notice of every one. * * * *

I need scarcely add, that every officer and man evinced, on all occasions, that cheerful readiness and determined valour you have so often witnessed. Much powder, and an immense quantity of petroleum oil, and warlike stores, were destroyed at the different stockades.

(Signed) T. EVANS.

No. 13. See p. 312.

Extract of a letter from George Swinton, Esq., to Sir A. Campbell, dated 
"Fort William, 18th March, 1825." 
I am directed to acknowledge the receipt of your despatch relative 
to the capture of the strong post of Than-ta-bain, or Quangalee, by a 
detachment of troops under the command of Lieutenant-colonel Godwin, 
aided by a party of seamen under Captain Chads and Lieutenants 
Keele and Hall. The governor-general in council is happy to observe, 
in the signal and complete success which attended the operations 
against Than-ta-bain, the same judgment, energy, and skill, on the 
part of Lieutenant-colonel Godwin, which distinguished his conduct 
on the occasion of his being detached against Martaban, and which 
VOL. vi. 2 A 

again demand the unqualified approbation and applause of his lordship in council. To Captain Chads the governor-general in council desires to express his constant acknowledgments for the distinguished share he bore in the action. His lordship in council has also noticed, with particular satisfaction, the characteristic gallantry displayed by Lieutenants Keele

and Hall, who, with their boats crews, were the first to enter the enemy's fort, followed by Captain O'Reilly of the grenadiers of his majesty's 41st regiment. His lordship in council requests that these sentiments of the supreme government may be conveyed to Captain Chads and Lieutenants Keele and Hall, through the senior officer of his majesty's