

of the victors, and this chef-d'oeuvre of Burman fortification, strongly garrisoned, was assaulted and taken with the trifling loss of nine men killed and 35 wounded. The officers of his majesty's navy, who were employed in this gallant and apparently desperate service, were Lieutenants Grote and William Smith, of the Boadicea, Valentine Pickey, of

1826. J THE BURMESE WAR. 343 the Alligator, and Messrs." Sydenham Wilde, William H. Hall, George Sumner Hand, George Wyke, Stephen Lett, aad Wil liam Coyde (midshipmen). Though the fall of Melloone convinced his majesty of Avathat his troops were unable, under any circumstances, to cope with his invaders, still it was considered that another chance should be taken, and Nie-Wooh-Breen (the king of hell), was in the well-fortified city of Pagahm-mew, with 16,000 men to turn the tide of victory. Sir Archibald Campbell now advanced to assault the place, and although the court of Ava had despatched Dr.

Price, an American missionary, who was a prisoner at Ava, in conjunction with Dr. E. Sandford of the royals, also a prisoner, both of whom arrived at head-quarters on the 31st of January, he did not delay his approach, although his force only amounted to about 2000 men to face this formidable warrior. On the 9th of February the king of hell was defeated and Pagahm-mew taken, the British loss amounting to two men killed, and fifteen wounded. The enemy were dispersed in all directions, and now sued for peace in all sincerity, imploring Sir

Archibald not to approach nearer the capital. After consider able difference as to the amount of money to be deposited as an indemnity, it was finally agreed that 25 lacs in money should be paid, and this sum was brought to Yandaboo, a place only 45 miles from the capital, by the missionary above mentioned, and paid over. The definitive arrangement was left to the commissioners already named by Sir Archibald Campbell, and Captain Chads was requested to lend his talent towards the completion of the treaty. On the 24th of February the peace was signed, the prin cipal conditions being as follows i 1 " To abstain from all future interference with the principality of Assam and its dependen cies, and also with the contiguous petty states of Cachar and Jynteea ; to recognise Ghumbeer Singh as Eajah of Munni poore (should he desire to return to that country) ; to cede in perpetuity the provinces of Arracan, recently conquered by the British, including the four divisions of Arracan, Ramree, 3 Che duba, and Sandoway, as divided from Ava by the Unnoupec towmien mountains, and also the provinces of Yeh, Tavoy, Mergui, and Tenasserim, with the islands and dependencies

1 Marshall. The anchorage is from 8 to 15 fathoms a The harbour of Kheauk-pheo, at the throughout ; and being land-locked on north end of the island of Ramree, is de- three sides, the west, east, and south, the scribed as sufficiently large to accommo- harbour is completely secured against the dfte th.e whole navy of Great Britaic. couth-west monsooij.