

Our loss, although severe, is not so great as might have been expected from the nature of the ground we had to go over, and the sharp and severe fire kept up by the enemy until the scaling-ladders were placed. The loss on the part of the enemy was but small, in con-

sequence of the vicinity of the jungle* into which they escaped the 
moment our men entered their works. 
Of the conduct of the troops, I cannot speak in too high praise, 
although it will be impossible for me to particularize the officers who 
so gallantly led their men to the assault, as they are too numerous ; 
many of them assisted in carrying the ladders to the walls. 
I felt myself highly indebted to Lieutenant Fraser, and a party of 
seamen and marines of H. M. S. Larne, whose unremitting exertions 
throughout the affair, greatly contributed to the success of the day. 
It is with regret I have to report that Mr. Maw, R.N., your acting 
aide-de-camp, was severely wounded in the early part of the day, whilst 

he and Captain John Campbell, H.M. 38th regiment, your (second) aide-de-camp, who was a volunteer on the occasion, were cheering on some of the seamen who accompanied us.

I have further to report, that the enemy, previous to their flight, threw some guns into a wet ditch that surrounded the fortifications.

We found but two small ones, which were brought away. All the houses in both stockades were destroyed by fire, and a part of the palisade pulled down, before the return of the detachment to camp.

No. 7. See p. 309.

The gallantry of the officers employed in this expedition, viz., Lieutenant Fraser, Mr. Atherton, and Messrs. Duffill, Winsor, and J. H. Norcock, deserves the highest encomiums. I am sorry that

350 APPEXDIX TO THE BURMESE WAR.

our list of killed and wounded is so heavy, but it will bo accounted for when I state, that in these attacks the Lascars, who man the other boats, will not pull into the fire unless they are led by the officers and men of H.M. sloop the Larne. The conduct of Mr. Maw, mid-shipman of the Liffey, has, during the whole period of his service here, been a series of gallantry. I have great pleasure in transmitting a letter from Sir Archibald Campbell, relative to his conduct, and adding my testimony to that of the commander-in-chief. I regret, says Sir Archibald, the severe wound received by Mr. Maw. Of this young man's gallantry of conduct and merit I cannot speak too highly : he has repeatedly distinguished himself by the most conspicuous and forward bravery.

No. 8. See p. 311. 
Sir Archibald Campbell will take an early opportunity of commu 
nicating to Captain Marryat, E.N., how gratified he was by his prompt 
support at the point assailed, and the gallant pursuit of the flying 
enemy by himself and his brave followers ; and which he will not fail 
to request Captain Marryat to communicate to the officers and men of 

liis majesty's navy, and also those of the transport service, who so handsomely came forward on this, as they have done on many former