

1S27.] THE BATTLE OF NAVARIN. 363 into the first ship that might attempt to pass the Asia's broad side. The Turkish commander, Petrona Bey, replied that he was acting in obedience to the pacha's orders, and added that he was under the impression that Sir Edward Codrington had given Ibrahim leave to send a squadron to Lcpanto. lie then sent Itcala Bey, the second in command, on board the Asia, to remonstrate, but without any effect ; and when Rcala Bey re-turned to his own ship, the Asia filled her maintopsail, and fired a gun, on which the whole fleet stood towards Navarin. Some of the smaller vessels evinced a disposition to pass the English ships, but in this they were thwarted. Sir Edward Codrington's

squadron kept in their rear until they were all clear of the gulf of Lepanto, but no sooner had both divisions arrived at the south end of Zante, than the English ships made sail, and passed ahead of the Turkish squadron, in order to look out for some assistance.

On the morning of the 3rd of October the Turkish squadron were joined by 15 more ships, two having flags at the main, the whole under the command of Ibrahim Pacha, who came in sight round the north point of Zante ; on his making a signal with a gun, the first division bore up to join him. Sir Edward Codrington immediately made the signal to prepare for action, and bore up also. A communication now took place between Ibrahim Pacha and the vice-admiral commanding the first detachment, after which the Ottoman fleet, in obedience to a signal from their chief, made sail for Navarin, although the wind was fair for Patras. The Asia and Talbot anchored in the entrance of the bay of Zante, in order to obtain coals, water, and other supplies of which they were much in want, the Dartmouth being desired to watch the Ottoman fleet. The next morning the Dartmouth communicated that several of the Turkish ships had again sailed towards Patras. The English admiral immediately put to sea, and at 6 P.M. was off Cape Papa, having the Talbot and Dartmouth in company. The largest of the Turkish ships were at anchor, the rest were

working up to the anchorage, but without any colours flying. Several shots were fired by the English, in order to force the Turkish ships to show their flags ; indeed, in this affair, the Asia fired 96 shots, and the Dartmouth 100.

That Ibrahim Pacha had no intention of fulfilling the treaty was evident. On two occasions his sacred promise had been violated, and now, finding that he could not succeed in effecting a junction with his army at Patras, and in relieving that place,

S64 THE BATTLE OF NAVARIX. [1827 he, on his arrival, with his whole fleet at Navarin, landed the troops he had embarked on board his ships, and wreaked his vengeance on the unfortunate Greeks of the Morea; neither women nor children escaped his fury, villages were pillaged and burnt, the trees were destroyed, and a devastation commenced which would have ended in rendering the whole Morea a desert. Captain Hamilton, in the Cambrian, was despatched to ascertain the truth of these reports, and, in his official letter to the English admiral, he thus describes the miseries of the poor un protected wretches : " I have the honour to inform you that I arrived here yesterday in company with the Russian frigate Constantino. On entering the gulf we observed, by clouds of smoke, that the work of devastation was still going on. The ships were anchored off the pass of Ancyro, and a joint letter