

flat against the ship's sides, but kept square as at sea in fine weather, and the ships were ordered not to anchor by the stern, which might imply a hostile intention, but to anchor with springs to their anchors. These little events we think proper to lay some stress upon, because they all prove to a certain extent a readiness to engage, but a determination not to become the assailants.

When three nations combine their squadrons, there must be, more or less, a jealousy ; in regard to the English there could be none, because Sir Edward was a vice-admiral, and both De Rigny and Count de Heiden, were rear-admirals : but with the two latter, there might have existed some slight feelings of annoy ance in regard to the post of honour, order of sailing, and so forth ; to obviate this as much as possible, the vice-admiral

determined that the order of sailing should be the order of battle ; the English and French forming the weather or starboard line, and the Eussian division forming the lee line. In this order they 1 Sir Edward Codrington's official despatch.

368 THE BATTLE OP NAVARIN. [1827.

entered the bay of Navarin. " The Asia led in, followed by the Genoa and Albion, and anchored close alongside a ship of the line ;" she was instantly moored with 30 fathoms on each cable. The Genoa came next, and was about to place her bow towards the bow of the Asia, when she was hailed by the vice-admiral and desired to take up her position with her head in the same direction as the Asia's ; this was done in good style, the Genoa passing very close to the vice-admiral, and taking up her appointed station. The Albion followed. The Asia's opponent was the flag-ship of the capitan bey; the Genoa anchored close to another ship-of-the-line, and the Albion close to a double-banked frigate. " The four ships to windward, part of the Egyptian squadron, were allotted to the squadron of Eear admiral de Kigny ; and those to leeward, in the bight of the crescent, were to mark the stations of the whole Russian squadron ; the ships-of-the-line closing those of the English line, and being followed up by their own frigates. The French frigate Armide, was directed to place herself alongside the outermost frigate on the left hand entering the harbour ; and the Cambrian, Glasgow, and Talbot, next to her, and abreast of, the Asia, Genoa, and Albion ; the Dartmouth, and the Mosquito, the Rose, the

Brisk, and the Philomel, were to look after six fire-vessels at the 
entrance of the harbour." 
1 The Turco-Egyptian fleet did not 
witness this anchorage of the allied fleet without alarm ; they 
were at quarters, their tompions out, and the guns nearly loaded 
to the muzzles, with shot, broken bars, rusty iron, and other 
materials. 
On the fleet entering the bay, a boat was sent from a fort with 
a message from the commandant, 
" That as Ibrahim Pascha had 
not given any orders or permission for the allied fleet to enter; it 
was requested that they would again put to sea." Sir Edward 
Codrington in reply, said, "that he was not come to receive 
orders, but to give them ; that if any shot were fired at the allied 
fleet, the Turkish fleet would be destroyed." 
The ships of the allied fleet had now anchored ; the sails of 
many of the ships were furled ; and on board the Asia, the band 
was desired to be sent on deck, everything appearing to wear a 
peaceful aspect, when a firing of musketry was heard in the 
direction of the Dartmouth. This occasioned the action, and arose 