

3(36 TUB BATTLE OF NAVAK1N. [1827.

states that "out of a fleet composed of eighty-one men-of-war, there remain only one frigate and 15 small vessels in a state ever to be again put to sea." The comparative force in guns has been mentioned as 1324 on the part of the allied fleet, and of 2240 on the part of the Ottoman fleet. It must, however, be admitted, that this calculation cannot be relied upon, the com parative force being,

Allied Fleets, English, French, and Russian. Sail of the line, including one 84, 1 1

Large frigates 8 
Small ditto (the Talbot) . . 1 

Brio-s . . 4 O 24

Tarco-Egyptian Fleet. 
Ships of the line, one of 84- guns, 3 
Large frigates 15 
Corvettes 18 
36 

The rest of the force is made up in gun-boats, schooners, and craft of all descriptions.

In former warfare, frigates never took part in a general engagement, and sloops, schooners, gun-boats, &c., were never fired upon without they were rash enough to court a return of shot. It will be in the memory of our readers, that at the battle of the Nile a frigate was sunk by one broadside of a line-ofbattle ship, and that consequently the vast superiority of force in the 11 sail of the line in still water, must be obvious to any man at all conversant in the destructive fire of an 80-gun ship ; four lino-of-battle ships were more than ample to destroy the 18 corvettes, when those corvettes were at anchor, and we state this without any fear of contradiction. We have seen the

Glatton beat off six frigates ; and the splendid attack of Captain Prowse in the 18-pounder 36-gun frigate Sirius, oif Civita Yecchia in 1806, where he attacked one ship-corvette, three brig-corvettes, one bombard, one cutter, and three gun-boats, took the largest and drove the rest to seek shelter, may be found in our pages. The action of the Spartan in 1810, in the bay of

Naples : and many, many other instances might be produced to show the destructive fire of one large vessel, against ten times the number of guns in smaller vessels ; but it is likewise to be borne in mind, that for five days previously to the action of

Navarin, M. Letellier, a Trench naval officer in the service of the Pacha of Egypt, had moored the Turco Egyptian fleet in euch a manner, that every broadside of both large and small vessels was directed towards the centre of the circle in which they were moored, and, as far as small vessels could be made effective, they certainly were rendered so on this occasion.

1827.J THE BATTLE OF NAVARIN. 367

It was evident to the allied admirals that to keep an efficient force as a blockade, ready to thwart the intentions of Ibrahim Pacha during the winter, would be attended with great risk, if it was not physically impossible, and would also cause an enormous expense to their respective governments ; and as the bay of Navarin was, at any rate, to them a neutral port, if not par tially an English anchorage (for the island of Sphacteria, which belongs to the British, forms part of the bay of Navarin), it was resolved by the commander-in-chief, on the grounds which will be seen by a reference to his official letter, to anchor the three fleets in the bay, alongside of the Turco-Egyptian force, and then be in readiness to use other persuasions than the speakingtrumpet, should Ibrahim continue to violate the treaty. On the 20th of October, the weather being fine, the combined squadrons stood towards Navarin. The Turco-Egyptian fleet were at anchor, moored in the form of a crescent with springs on their cables, the larger ones presenting their broadsides towards the centre, the smaller ones in succession within them, filling up the intervals." 1 The printed instructions issued to all officers in His Majesty's navy, particularly desire that every ship approaching any ship of a different nation in time of peace or war, should be prepared for action, and it would be doing Sir Edward Codrington an injustice to state that he went into the anchorage unprepared ; he ivas clear for action, but his lowerdeck ports, were not hauled