

forced, if necessary ; and when all other means are exhausted, 
by cannon-shot." 
The object of this history is truth. We have endeavoured, 
from its first page to its last, to cast aside all party-feeling all 
political controversy; our determination being to place before 
the reader, as far as our researches will permit, the truth, the 
whole truth, and nothing but the truth ; and as differences of 
opinion have existed in a great measure concerning the battle of 
Navarin, and much obloquy been lavished upon Sir Edward 
Codrington, for what was termed "an untoward event," we 
feel it but due to him to place the answer of Sir Stratford 
Canning before the public ; for although Mr. Canning's letter 
referred principally to the prevention of supplies, and in answer 
to a letter as to the power of using force, which the original 
instructions seemed, in some measure, to negative : yet it gave 
this authority to use force, if the admiral judged it requisite ; 
and thnnighout the whole paragraph above quoted, implies, if 
not orders, that the admiral should use endeavours, even to 
cannon-shot, to carry that part of such orders into execution, 
and, consequently, to make any hostile demonstration he might 
judge requisite. 

That Sir Edward Codrington felt that the speaking-trumpet was not to be cast aside hastily that cannon-shot were not to be used, but in extremity may be gleaned from his own letter to the different officers under his command :

" Asia, at sea, September 8, 1827.

sir) YOU are aware that a treaty has been signed between England, France, and Eussia, for the pacification of Greece. A declaration of the decision of the powers has been presented to the Porte, and a similar declaration has been presented to the Greeks.

1827.] THE BATTLE OF NAVARIN'. 3(51

" The armistice proposed to each, in these declarations, has been acceded to by the Greeks, whilst it has been refused by the Turks. It becomes, therefore, the duty of the allied naval forces to enter, in the first place, on friendly relations with the

Greeks ; and next to intercept every supply of men, arms, &c. 
destined against Greece, and coming either from Turkey or 
Africa in general. The last measure is that which requires the 
greatest caution, and above all, a complete understanding as to 
the operations of the allied naval forces. Most particular care 
is to be taken that the measures adopted against the Ottoman 
navy do not degenerate into hostilities. The formal intention of 
the powers is to interfere as conciliators, and to establish, in 
fact, at sea, the armistice which the Porte would not concede as 
a right. Every hostile proceeding would be at variance with 
the pacific ground which they have chosen to take, and the dis- 
play of forces which they have assembled is destined to cause 
that wish to be respected ; but they must not be put into use, 
unless the Turks persist in forcing the passages which they have 
intercepted. 
"All possible means should be tried, in the first instance, to 
prevent the necessity of proceeding to extremities ; but the pre- 
vention of supplies, as before mentioned, is to be enforced, if 
necessary; and when all other means are exhausted, by 
cannon-shot. 
"In giving you this instruction as to the duty which I am 
directed to perform, my intention is to make you acquainted 
thoroughly with the object of our Government, that you may 
not be taken by surprise as to whatever measures I may find it 
necessary to adopt. You will still look to me for further in- 
structions as to the carrying any such measures into effect. 
"lam, &c. (Signed) ED. CODRIN-GTOX." 