

from the boats under the direction of Lieutenant Smyth being sent to one of the fire-ships, from the Dartmouth, to request that the fire-ships would move a little further from the allied fleet ;

i Sir Edward Codrington's official despatch.

J827.J THE BATTLE OF NAVAHIN. 369 and if we, as historians, are inclined to make any observations as to the commencement of the action, we should say, that if a fleet of a strange nation came to anchor in a bay where another fleet was at anchor, they should have selected (that is if no ulterior measures were premeditated) such berths as would not in any manner have interfered with the vessels previously at anchor ; and the only reason which can be given for the allied fleet anchoring to leeward of the Turco-Egyptian fleet (for the wind blew into the bay) is, that had they anchored to windward, they must have been placed in a position to receive the whole fire of the Turco-Egyptian fleet, in consequence of the crescent form in which M. Letellier had moored the fleet with their broadsides all directed towards the centre. Besides it appears that boats were sent, and the Turkish commander might be justified in believing that his vessel was to be taken pos session of; for if a request is to be made, it would occur to a Turk or Christian, that one boat was as efficient as a dozen. The Turks, apprehensive that force was meditated, fired and killed Lieutenant G. W. H. Fitzroy and several of the crew. The Dartmouth immediately opened a defensive fire to cover her boats; the Sirene, Admiral de Kigny's ship, joined in the affray, with musketry only; one of the Egyptian ships fired a shot, which was the first round shot discharged, and struck the Sirene, " which, of course," as the

vice-admiral states in his letter, "brought on a return, and thus very shortly afterwards, the battle became general." " The Asia, although placed alongside the capitan bey's ship, was even nearer to Moharem Bey's, the commander of the

Egyptian ships, and since his ship did not fire at the Asia, although the action was begun to windward, neither did the Asia fire at her. Moharem Bey, indeed, sent a message, that he would not fire at all, and therefore no hostility took place between Moharem Bey's ship and the English admiral's ship for some time after the Asia had returned the fire of the capitan bey. In the mean time, however, the excellent pilot, Mr. Peter Mitchell, who went to interpret to Moharem Bey, the viceadmiral's desire to avoid bloodshed, was killed by his people, in the boat alongside, whether with or without his orders is not known, but his ship soon afterwards fired into the Asia, and was consequently effectually destroyed by the Asia's fire, sharing the game fate as his brother admiral on the starboard side, and falling to leeward a mere wreck." 1 The action, now general, was

, _ J Sir EUwar,U Ccdfington's public despatch. VOL. VI. 2 B

370 THK BATTLE OF NAVARIN. [1827.

well maintained by the Turks, and for four hours the firing con tinued, until, at the expiration of that time, the Ottoman fleet