

On the 25th of September, Sir Edward Coclrington, in the presence of Admiral de Eigny, had an interview with Ibrahim Pacha, at Navarin. The pacha commanded the Turkish fleet, and was likewise commander-in-chief of the land forces, a con siderable portion of which was at Patras. At this conference the orders of the British admiral were made known to the pacha, and much pains were taken by Sir Edward to make Ibrahim perfectly understand that he should put those orders in execution in the event of his non-compliance. After a short conference an armistice was agreed upon between the Turks and Greeks by land and by sea ; both land and sea forces were to remain in

362 THE BATTLE OF NAVAKIX.

active at Navarin until further instructions should be received from Constantinople; and, in consequence of this armistice, a part of the Turkish fleet, then outside of the harbour, was allowed to join their admiral at anchor. At this interview Sir Edward Codrington wished the terms of the treaty, or armistice, to be placed on paper, but Admiral de Rigny men tioned that the request would be considered an insult by Ibrahim Pacha, the word of a Turk being considered by the Turks themselves, and generally so by those who have had intercourse with them, as an inviolable pledge. So cautious was Sir Edward Codrington not to give offence, that his own interpreter was not present. On the following day the Asia, the flag-ship of Sir Edward Codrington, and the Sirene, a GO-gun ship, bearing the flag of Admiral de Rigny, were making preparations for putting to sea, when the dragoman of Ibrahim Pacha came on board the former ship. He stated "that his master had received information that Lord Cochrane had made a descent upon Patras, and requested to be allowed to send a competent force to frustrate his lordship's intentions." A most decided negative was given by Sir Edward Codrington, who inquired if by this message he was to understand that Ibrahim Pacha no longer considered the treaty as binding. The reply given by the

dragoman was,

' ; that if, at the expiration of an hour, he did not return, Sir Edward was to consider the treaty of the preceding day as still in force." About sunset the Asia and Sirene put to sea, the dragoman not having returned, and both admirals having the fullest confidence in the honour of Ibrahim. The

Dartmouth was left to watch the Turkish fleet, and Sir Edward Codrington, having despatched some of his ships to Malta for supplies, shaped a course for Zante in the Asia.

On the 2nd of October the Dartmouth was seen in the offing, and communicated the intelligence that a strong division of the

Turkish fleet had weighed from Navarin, and were standing to the north-west towards Patras. Immediately the Asia, Talbot, and Zebra weighed, joined the Dartmouth, and soon came in sight of the Turkish squadron, consisting of 47 sail, amongst which were two double-banked frigates, one large frigate, seven brigs, and eight corvettes. The English squadron ranged up alongside, and the ships of both nations hove to. Sir Edward Codrington sent Captain Spencer, of the Talbot, to complain of this breach of faith, this sudden and unexpected violation of the treaty, and to make known the admiral's determination to fire