

armed vessels, in various actions with the Burmese in the vicinity of

Eangoon. It belongs to a higher authority than the government of India to notice in adequate and appropriate terms, the services of his majesty's squadron, which has co-operated with his majesty's and the Honourable

East India Company's land forces, in tlie late hostilities with the government of Ava. The governor-general in council, however, gladly seizes this opportunity of expressing the deep sense of obligation with which the supreme government acknowledges the important and essential aid afforded by his excellency Commodore Sir James Brisbane, in person, as well as by the officers, non-commissioned officers, seamen, and marines of his majesty's ships, who have been employed in the Irra-\vaddi. Inspired by the most ardent zeal for the honour and interest of the nation and the East India Company, his excellency, the naval commander in-chief, lost no time in proceeding, with the boats of the Boadicea, to the head-quarters of the British army at Prome, and directing, in person, the operations of the river force, rendered the most essential service in the various decisive and memorable actions which, in the month of December last, compelled the Burmese to sue for peace.

( 358 )

THE BATTLE OF NAVA1UN.

IM the year 1827 Great Britain was at peace with all the world. Although the political horizon had been occasionally clouded since the year 1815, no act of aggression had been com mitted by any of the European powers, and a general tranquil lity prevailed : Greece was the only nation excepted. The inhabitants of that country had long groaned under the tyranny of the Turkish government; frequent insurrections of its un-happy inhabitants, in order to shake off the yoke under which they laboured, had been attempted, and as often repressed : acts of atrocious cruelty were daily committed by the imperious master, until the slaves (for in reality the poorer class of Greeks had been slaves to the Ottoman Porte) rose in greater numbers, and made a more desperate, and ultimately successful, oppo sition to their former conquerors. The disordered state of Greece afforded ample scope for piracies ; vessels of different sizes were manned and armed, and fell alike upon the Turkish ship or the unprotected merchantman of other countries, which chanced to cross their tract. Commerce was interrupted thousands of helpless creatures were butchered the loss of life was immense, until Great Britain, France, and Russia determined to interfere and to put a period to the ravages of both parties. The high contracting powers came to the following determination : "His Majesty the King of the United Kingdom of Great Britain, &c., his Majesty the King of France, &c., and his

Majesty the Emperor of all the Russias, penetrated with the necessity of putting an end to the sanguinary contest, which, by delivering up the Greek provinces and the isles of the Archipelago to all the disorders of anarchy, produces daily fresh