

from myself and the Russian captain was despatched to the Turkish commander. The bearers of it were not allowed to proceed to head-quarters, nor have we as yet received any answer. In the afternoon we went on shore to the Greek quarters, and were received with the greatest enthusiasm. The distress of the inhabitants, driven from the plain, is shocking ; women and children dying every moment of absolute starvation, and hardly any having better food than boiled grass. I have promised to send a small quantity of bread to the caves in the mountains where these unfortunate wretches have taken refuge. It is supposed that if Ibrahim remain in Greece, more than a third of its inhabitants will die of starvation." On the 13th of October, Sir Edward Avas joined by the Russian squadron. On the 14th he arrived off Navarin, where the allied squadrons of France, Russia, and England were con centrated, and placed under his directions. We have thus far endeavoured to give our readers a perfect knowledge of events

prior to the action, and we have entered into some details in 
order to show that Sir Edward Codrington evinced the greatest 
forbearance, and used every means in his power to avoid a 
collision, which an unpremeditated circumstance afterwards 
occasioned. 
The combined squadrons consisted of the following ships 
and sloops : 

English.

Gun-ship

I Vice-admiral Sir Edward Codrington. 84 Asia . . . < Captain Edward Curzon. | Commander Robert Lambert Baynes,

1827.] THE BATTLE OF 365

Gun-ship.

( Genoa

{ ( Albion .

Gun-frigate. 50 Glasgow . 48 Cambrian . 42 Dartmouth 28 Talbot .

Gun-brig. 18 Rose . . | Mosquito .

Brisk . . I Philomel .

English continued.

( Captain Walter Bathurst. 
\ Commander Richard Dickenson. 

{Captain

John Acworth Ommanney. Commander John Norman Campbell.

. Captain Hon. James Ashley Maude. , , Gawen William Hamilton, C.B.

, , Thomas Fellowes, C.B.

, , Hon. Frederick Spencer

Gun-ship.

Sdpion 
Trident 
Brcshui 
60 Sirene . 

Gun-frigate.

44 Armide

. Commander Lewis Davies.

, , George Bohun Martin. 
, , Hon. William Anson. 

, , Viscount Ingestre.

French.

. Captain Milius. 
, , Maurice. 
, , De la Bretonniere. 
. Rear-admiral H. de Rigny. 

. Captain Hugon. Schooner, A Icy on : Dauphinoise.

Russian.

. Rear-admiral Count de Heiden.

Gun-ship. Azof .

Gargonte. 
Kxekiel. 

Alexander Xewsky.

Gun-frigate.

50 Constantine. | 1'rovcrnoy.

Elena. ( Castor.

Tlie Ottoman and Egyptian fleets amounted, according to the statement made by the capitan bey's secretary, to 65 sail ; of which two were Turkish 84-gun ships, one 76-gun ship, fifteen

48-gun frigates, 18 corvettes, and four brigs. The Egyptian fleet consisted of four double-banked 64-gun frigates, eight corvettes, from 18 to 24 guns each, eight brigs, and five firevessels; making a total of 65 sail. There is a considerable discrepancy between the number of the Turco-Egyptian fleet as mentioned by the secretary ofthe capitan bey, and in Sir Edward Codrington's letter, dated 24th of October, addressed as a general order to the captains, commanders, &c., in which he