

1827.] THE BATTLE OF NAVARIN. 359 impediments to the commerce of the united states, and gives occasion to piracies, which not only expose the high contracting powers to considerable losses, but, besides, render necessary burdensome measures of protection and repression ; having, besides, received on the part of the Greeks a pressing request, to interpose their mediation with the Ottoman Porte ; and being animated by the desire of stopping the effusion of blood, and of arresting the evils of all kinds which might arise from the continuance of such a state of things, have resolved to unite their efforts, and to regulate the operation thereof by a formal treaty, with a view of re-establishing peace between the contending parties, by means of an arrangement which is called for as much by humanity as by the interest of the repose of Europe." Plenipotentiaries were nominated by the different powers to carry their determination into effect ; one of the first measures to be adopted being "a demand of an immediate armistice between the two parties, as a preliminary condition indispen sable to the opening of any negotiation." To carry these

demands into execution, Great Britain had a squadron in the Mediterranean, under Sir Edward Codrington ; the French, one under Admiral do Eigny; the Eussians one also, under Admiral Heiden ; but at this period neither the French nor Russian squadrons had joined Sir Edward Codrington. The squadrons, when united, were placed under the orders of the first-named officer, who, with the ships under his command, was already actively^employed in carrying his orders into effect.

It will be seen by the extract above, that the allied powers meditated a mediation, not an open warfare; the imposing force in the immediate vicinity to the scene of action was accounted sufficient to awe the Turks into submission, and no positive orders were, therefore, sent to Sir Edward Codrington, to have recourse to a violation of the peace existing between the Ottoman Porte and the high contracting powers ; he was desired, as well as the other admirals, to correspond with the ambassadors at Constantinople, and to conform to their directions.

Feeling that a very great responsibility rested upon him, ho applied to his excellency Mr. Stratford Canning for his opinion, apprehending that he could not prevent all collision between the contending parties, without actually having recourse to hostili ties, or, by tampering with people in whom no trust could be reposed, lower the honour, the reputation of the British flag. The reply to his application was in these words : " You are not to take part with either of the belligerents ; but you arc to

360 THE BATTLE OF NAVARIX. [1827 interpose your forces between them, and to keep the peace with your speaking-trumpet, if possible; but, in case of necessity, with that -which is used for the maintenance of a blockade against friends as well as foes ; I mean force." And in another confidential letter, dated 1st September, 1827, Mr. Canning further replied : " On the subject of collision, for instance, we agree, that, although the measures to be executed by you are not to be adopted by you in a hostile spirit; and although it is clearly the intention of the allied governments to avoid, if pos sible, anything that may bring on a war, yet the prevention of supplies, as stated in your instructions, is ultimately to be en