

ledgments and thanks to Major-general Sir Archibald Campbell and the army in Ava, by whose gallant and persevering exertions the recent contest with the Burmese empire has been brought to an honourable

and successful termination.

In reviewing the events of the late war, the governor-general in 
council is bound to declare his conviction, that the achievements of the 
British army in Ava have nobly sustained our military reputation, and 
have produced substantial benefits to the national interests. 
During a period of two years, from the first declaration of hostilities 
against the government of Ava, every disadvantage of carrying on war 
in a distant and most difficult country has been overcome, and the 
collective force of the Burman empire, formidable from their numbers, 
the strength of their fortified positions, and the shelter afforded by the 
nature of their country, have been repeatedly assailed and defeated. 
The persevering and obstinate efforts of. the enemy, to oppose our 
.advance, having failed of success, and his resources and means of 
further resistance having been exhausted, the King of Ava has, at 

length, been compelled to accept of those terms of peace which the near approach of our army to the gates of his capital enabled us to dictate. Every object, the governor-general in council is happy to proclaim, for which the war was undertaken, has been finally and most

satisfactorily accomplished.

*

To the consummate military talents, energy, and decision, manifested

356 APPENDIX TO THE BURMESE WAK.

by Major-general Sir Archibald Campbell, to the ardour and devo tion to the public service, which his example infused into all ranks, and to the confidence inspired by the success of every military operation which he planned and executed in person, the governor-general in council primarily ascribes, under Providence, the brilliant result that lias crowned the gallant and unwearied exertions of the British troops in Ava. Impressed with sentiments of high admiration for those eminent qualities so conspicuously and successfully displayed by Major general Sir Archibald Campbell, his lordship in council rejoices at the opportunity of expressing to that distinguished soldier, in the most public manner, the acknowledgments and thanks of the supreme government, for the important service lie has rendered to the Honourable East India Company, and to the British nation. The thanks of government are also eminently due to the senior officers, who have so ably and zealously seconded Major-general Sir Archibald Campbell in his career of victory.

* 
Amongst those zealous and gallant officers some have been more 
fortunate than others in enjoying opportunities of performing special 
services. The ability with which Lieutenant-colonel Godwin, of his 
majesty's 41st, achieved the conquest of the fortified town of Martaban 
and its dependencies, appears to confer on that officer a just claim to 
the separate and distinct acknowledgments of the governor-general in 
council. In like manner, Lieutenant-colonel Miles and Brigadier 
general M'Creagh have entitled themselves to the special thanks of 
government for their services ; the former, in the capture of Tavoy and 
Mergui ; and the latter, in that of the island of Cheduba. 
The limits of a general order necessarily preclude the governor- 
gencral in council from indulging the satisfaction of recording the names 
of all those officers whose services and exploits at this moment crowd 
upon the grateful recollection of the government, by whom they were 
duly appreciated and acknowledged at the time of their occurrence. 
His lordship in council requests that those officers will, collectively and 
individually, accept this renewed assurance, that their meritorious 
exertions will ever be cordially remembered. * * 
The conduct of that portion of the naval branch of the expedition 
which belongs to the East India Company has been exemplary, and 
conspicuous for gallantry and indefatigable exertion ; and it has fully 
shared in all the honourable toils and well-earned triumphs of the land 
force. * * * The governer-general in council has not 
overlooked the spirit and bravery, characteristic of British seamen, 
man'fested by several of the masters and officers of transports and 