

but I hope their defects are not more than can be made good at Malta. The loss of men in the Turco-Egyptian ships must

have been immense, as his royal highness will see by the accompanying list, obtained from the secretary of the capitana bey, which includes that of two out of the three ships to which the English division was opposed. Captain Curzon having pre-ferred continuing to assist me in the Asia, T have given the charge of rny despatches to Commander Lord Viscount Ingestrc, who, besides having had a brilliant share in the action, is well competent to give his royal highness the lord high admiral any further particulars he may require. " I enclose, for his royal highness's further information, a

letter from Captain Hamilton, descriptive of the proceedings of 
Ibrahim Pacha, and the misery of the country which he has 
devastated ; a protocol of the conference which I had with my 
colleagues, and the plan and order for entering the port, which 
I gave out in consequence. 
" I have, &c., 

" (Signed) EDWARD CODBINGTON, Vice-admiral.

"No. I. -(Translation.) 
" The admirals commanding the squadrons of the three powers 
which signed the treaty of London, having met before Navarin, 
for the purpose of concerting the means of effecting the object 
specified in the said treaty, viz., an armistice de facto between 
the Turks and the Greeks, have set forth in the present protocol 
the result of their conference. 
" 
Considering that after the provisional suspension of hosti 
lities, to which Ibrahim Pacha consented in his conference of the 
25th of September last with the English and French admirals, 
acting likewise in the name of the Eussian admiral, the said 
Pacha did, the very next day, violate his engagement, by causing 
his fleet to come out, with a view to its proceeding to another 
point in the Morea : 
"Considering that since the return of that fleet to Navarin, 
in consequence of a second requisition addressed to Ibrahim 
by Codrington, who had met him near Patras, the troops of this 

1827.] THE BATTLK OF NAVAIUX. 379

Pacha have not ceased carrying on a species of warfare more 
destructive and exterminating than before, putting women 
and children to the sword, burning the habitations, and tearing 
up trees by the roots, in order to complete the devastation oi 
the country : 
" 

Considering that, with a view of putting a stop to atrocities, which exceed all that have hitherto taken place, the means of persuasion and conciliation, the representations made to the Turkish chiefs, and the advice given to Mehemet Ali and his son, have been treated as mockeries, whilst they might, with one word, have suspended the course of so many barbarities : " Considering that there only remains to the commanders of the allied squadrons the choice between three modes of fulfilling the intentions of their respective courts, namely : " 1. The continuing, throughout the whole of the winter, a blockade, difficult, expensive, and perhaps useless, since a storm may disperse the squadron, and afford to Ibrahim the facility of conveying his destroying army to different points of the Morea and the Islands. " 2. The uniting the allied squadrons in Navarin itself, and securing, by this permanent presence, the inaction of the Ottoman fleets ; but which mode alone leads to no termination, since the Porte persists in not changing its system. " 3. The proceeding to take a position with the squadrons in Navarin, in order to renew to Ibrahim propositions which, entering into the spirit of the treaty, were evidently to the advantage of the Porte itself. " After having taken these three modes into consideration, we have unanimously agreed that this third mode may, without