

1827.] THE BATTLE OF NAVARIN. 377 to set her on fire, and it is wonderful bow we avoided the effects of their successive and awful explosions. "It is impossible for me to say too much for the able and zealous assistance which I derived from Captain Curzon, throughout this long and arduous contest ; nor can I say more than it deserves for the conduct of Commander Baynes and the officers and crew of the Asia, for the perfection with which the fire of their guns was directed : each vessel in turn, to which her broadside was directed, became a complete wreck. His royal highness will be aware that so complete a victory, by a few, however perfect, against an excessive number, however individually inferior, cannot be acquired, but at a considerable loss of life ; accordingly I have to lament the loss of Captain Bathurst, of the Genoa, whose example on this occasion is well worthy of the imitation of his survivors. Captain Bell, commanding the royal marines of the Asia, an excellent officer, was

killed early in the action, in the steady performance of his duty, and I have to mourn the death of Mr. William Smith, the master, admired for the zeal and ability with which he executed his duty, and beloved by all for his private qualities as a man. Mr. H. S. Dyer, my secretary, having received a severe contusion from a splinter, I am deprived temporarily of his valuable assistance in collecting and keeping up the general returns and communications of the squadrons ; I shall therefore retain in my office Mr. E. J. T. White, his first clerk, whom I have nominated to succeed the purser of the Brisk. I feel much personal obligation to the Hon. Lieutenant-colonel Cradock, for his readiness, during the heat of the battle, in carrying ray orders and messages to the different quarters, after my aides-de-camp were disabled : but I will beg permission to refer his royal highness for further particulars of this sort to the details of the killed and wounded, a subject which it is painful for me to dwell upon. When I contemplate, as I do with extreme sorrow, the extent of our loss, I console myself with the reflection that the measure which produced the battle was absolutely necessary for obtaining the results contemplated by the treaty, and- that it was brought on entirely by our opponents. " When I found that the boasted Ottoman word of honour was made a sacrifice to wanton, savage devastation, and that a base advantage was taken of our reliance upon Ibrahim's good faith, I own I felt a desire to punish the offenders. But it was my duty to refrain, and refrain I did ; and I can assure his royal highness that I would still have avoided this disastrous ex-

378 TIIF 15ATTLK OF NAVARIN. [1827 tremity, if other means had been open to me. The Asia, Genoa, and Albion have each suffered so much, that it is my intention to send them to England so soon as they shall have received, at Malta, the necessary repairs for their voyage. The Talbot, being closely engaged with a double-banked frigate, has also suffered considerably, as well as others of the smaller vessels ;