

had been nearly destroyed : each ship, as she became disabled, 
was deserted by the crew, after having set her on fire, and the 
frequent explosions rendered the situation of the allied fleet 
dangerous in the extreme. 
Captain Fellowes soon cleared the fire-ships, and saved the 
French admiral's ship, the Sirene, from being burnt. " Tho 
Cambrian, Glasgow, and Talbot, following the fine example of 
Captain Hugon, of the Armide, who was opposed to the leading 
frigate of that line, effectually destroyed tiieir opponents and 
also silenced the batteries." 
The smoke was so thick during the action that the guns of 
the Asia were pointed from the flag at the mast-head of tho 
capitan bey's ship. It was the only object discernible ; occa 
sionally the Asia's fire ceased, in order to allow the smoke to 
clear away. At this interval her opponent fired single shot 
until the cable was either shot away or slipped, and she drifted 

to leeward out of fire. It was during the Asia's engagement with the senior officer's ship, that her stern was exposed to the raking broadside of a frigate, and she received more damage from her than from her regular opponent. About 3 o'clock the Asia, having disposed of the capstan's ship, turned her broadside to Moharem's ship and his second ahead, both of which were soon destroyed. Moharem's ship was sadly disabled, and her second ahead, burning to the water's edge, blew up at her anchors. The French division, under De Eigny, displayed equal valour and seamanship with their old enemies, the English. The French admiral anchored athwart hawse of the first Egyptian frigate. Tho three line-of-battle ships were to have filled up the space between their admiral and the Asia, but owing to some unforeseen circumstance they were prevented taking their proper station. The Scipion, on coming to her berth, was obliged to anchor, owing to a fire-ship being nearly athwart her hawse.

The boats of the Dartmouth and Eose went instantly to her assistance, and towed the fire-ship from her position. The

Breslaw ran towards the end of the bay, near the Russian division, and there most gallantly took her share in the fight. The Sirene having .set fire to her opponent, was in imminent danger of sharing the same fate ; it is mentioned that a man from the French admiral's ship swam with a rope to the Dartmouth, and by that means the Sirene was warped from her

1827.] THE BATTLE OF NAVARIN. 371 perilous situation. The gallant conduct of Captain Hugon, of the Arrnide, we have before mentioned ; his determination to place his ship in the hottest of the action rather blinded him to the disadvantageous position he took up. The Eose, Captain Davics, immediately went to his assistance, and this equally gallant conduct was acknowledged by Admiral de Eigny in a letter to the vice-admiral, bearing date the 23rd of October. It is impossible to convey to the reader an accurate idea of the services of each ship when the names and force of their

opponents are unknown ; it must therefore be sufficient to state, that the Russian division took up their appointed station, and that by their gallant conduct, and unflinching bravery, they added their share to the ruin and devastation around. About 5 o'clock the firing along the whole line ceased. All further resistance would have been unavailing ; but the de struction did not end with the firing. The Turks, apprehensive that the vessels would become prizes to their victors, set firo to and blew up many which were still in a state of efficiency, and this wanton act of egregious folly was not confined to a few instances. We have before remarked the passage in the viceadmiral's letter relative to the almost total destruction of the Turco-Egyptian squadron, which letter was written whilst the devastation was before his eyes : he was, however, in error when he asserted that only "one frigate and fifteen smaller vessels were all that remained of this large fleet Avhich ever again could put to sea ;" for the Pelican sloop reconnoitred Navarin on the 14th of December following, and 29 sail were at anchor, amongst Avhich was one line-of-battle ship and four frigates ; two frigates fit for service, one of the Egyptian rasees in tolerable condition, five corvettes, 11 brigs, and five schooners ; all, with the exception of the five first, which were reported much shattered, in a fit state for immediate service. 1