

1 An application was made to the admi- quote from the Gazette and the Annual rally to inspect the official returns, which Hegisters. was denied ; we are therefore obliged to

1827.] THE BATTLE OP NAVARItf.

French.

3tT>/3

Gun-ship.

374 TH1C BATTLK OF NAVAIUN. [1827. Peter Mitchell ; Captain C. J. Stephens ; Mr. Edward B, Forster ; Mr. Peter Brown; Mr. Charles Bussell; Mr. A. J. T. Bowe; Lieutenant G. W. H. Fitzroy, of the Dartmouth; Mr. Brown Smythe ; Mr. W. J. Goldfinch ; Lieutenant Philip Sturgeon, and

Mr. Henry Campbell. The officers wounded severely were, Mr. J. H. Codrington ; Mr. W. V. Lee ; Mr. E. H. Bunbury ; Mr. C. Wakeham, Mr. William Lloyd ; Mr. Frederick Grey ; Mr. Thos. Addington ; Lieutenant-colonel Carador ; Mr. Henry S. Dyer ; Commander J. N. Campbell, of the Albion ; Lieutenant J. G. Durban; Eev. E. Winder; Mr. W. F. O'Kane ; Mr. James Stewart ; Captain Thomas Moore ; Mr. H. B. Gray: Lieutenant H. E. Sturt : Mr. James Chambers ; Mr. Launcelot Harrison ; Lieutenant Spencer Smith ; Mr. John Dellamore ; Mr. Joseph Gray ; Lieutenant E. S. Hay ; Mr. Alexander Calton ; Lieutenant Mr. Lyons ; Mr. Douglas Currie ; Mr. William Williams ; Mr John Isatt.

The combined Turkish and Egyptian forces, with the list of vessels destroyed, is thus given by commander Peter Eichards, who received his information from M. Letellier, the French instructor of the Egyptian navy :

182?.] THE BATTLE OP NAVARIN. 375

Wilson Croker, Esq., by Vice-admiral Sir Edward Codrington, K.C.B.. Commander-in-chief of his Majesty's ships in the Medi terranean.

" His Majesty's ship Asia, in the Port of Navarin, Sir, Oct. 21, 1827.

" I have the honour of informing his Eoyal Highness the Lord High Admiral, that my colleagues, Count Heiden and the

Chevalier de Rigny. having agreed with me that we should come into this port, in order to induce Ibrahim Pacha to discontinue the brutal war of extermination which has been carrying on since his return here from his failure in the Gulf of Patras, the combined squadron passed the batteries, in order to take up their anchorage, at about two o'clock yesterday afternoon. " The Tiirkish ships were moored in the form of a crescent, with springs on their cables, the larger ones presenting their broadsides towards the centre, the smaller ones in succession within them, filling up the intervals.

" The combined fleet was formed in the order of sailing in two 
columns, the British and French forming the weather or star- 
board line, and the Russians the lee line. 
"The Asia led in, followed by the Genoa and Albion, and 

anchored close alongside a ship of the line, bearing the flag of the Capitana Bey, another ship of the line, and a large double-banked frigate, each thus having their opponent in the front line of the Turkish fleet. The four ships to windward, part of the Egyptian squadron, were allotted to the squadron of Rear admiral de Rigny ; and those to leeward, in the bight of the crescent, were to mark the stations of the whole Russian squadron; the ships of the line closing those of the English line, and being followed up by their own frigates. The French frigate Armide was directed to place herself alongside the outer-