

most frigate, on the left hand entering the harbour; and the Cambrian, Glasgow, and Talbot next to her, and abreast of the Asia, Genoa, and Albion; the Dartmouth and the Musquito, the Rose, the Brisk, and the Philomel were to look after six firevessels at the entrance of the harbour. I gave orders that no g-un should be fired, unless guns were fired by the Turks ; and those orders were strictly observed. The three English ships were accordingly permitted to pass the batteries, and to moor, which they did with great rapidity, without any act of open hostility, although there was evident preparation for it in all the Turkish ships ; but, upon the Dartmouth sending a boat to one

376 THE BATTLE 0? NAVARK?. [1827.

of the fire-vessels, Lieutenant G. W. H. Fitzroy and several ol her crew were shot with musketry. This produced a defensive fire of musketry from the Dartmouth and La Sirene, bearing the flag of Rear-admiral de Rigny ; that was succeeded by a cannon shot at the rear-admiral from one of the Egyptian ships, which of course brought on a return, and thus, very shortly afterwards, the battle became general. The Asia, although placed alongside the ship of the capitana bey, was even nearer to that of Moharem Bey, the commander of the Egyptian ships ; and, since his ship did not fire at the Asia, although the action was begun to wind ward, neither did the Asia fire at her. The latter indeed sent a message

il

that he would not fire at all," and therefore no hostility took place betwixt our ships for some time after the

Asia had returned the fire of the capitana bey. "In the mean time, however, our excellent pilot, Mr. Peter Mitchell, who went to interpret to Moharem my desire to avoid bloodshed, was killed by his people in our boat alongside;

whether with or without his orders I know not ; but his ship soon fired into the Asia, and was consequently effectually destroyed by the Asia's fire, sharing the same fate as his brother admiral on the starboard side, and falling to leeward a mere wreck. These ships being out of the way, the Asia became exposed to a raking fire from vessels in the second and third line, which carried away her mizenmast by the board, disabled some of her guns, and killed and wounded several of her crew. This narration of the proceedings of the Asia would probably be equally applicable to most of the other ships of the fleet. The

manner in which the Genoa and Albion took their stations was beautiful ; and the conduct of my brother admirals, Count Heiden and the Chevalier dc Rigny, throughout, was admirable aud highly exemplary. "Captain Fellowes executed the part allotted to him per fectly, and, with the able assistance of his. little but brave detachment, saved the Sirene from being burnt by the firevessels; and the Cambrian, Glasgow, and Talbot, following the fine example of Captain Hugon, of the Armide, who was opposed to the leading frigate of that line, effectually destroyed their opponents, and also silenced their batteries. This bloody and destructive battle was continued with unabated fury for four hours, and the scene of wreck and devastation which presented itself at its termination was such as has been seldom before witnessed. As each ship of our opponent became effectually disabled, such of her crew as could escape from her endeavoured