

Charlotte, did 46, and the Pique the same. Such was the official oversight

NOTES TO ANNUAL ABSTRACTS. 409 as to th latter ship's proper classification, that, in the old rating, she ranked only as a 32, from the time of her capture in 1800 until the 9th of April 1813, when an admiralty-order promoted the Pique to a 36, and this without at all augmenting her force, that already exceeding the establishment of her new class. Were these three ships to be transferred to the class next below them, the average difference in size between the 37 cruisers of the latter arid them would be as much as 95 tons. Moreover, the 44 is a class that will soon disappear from the list.

(/j) The Eurydice and Ganymede. The first, of 521 tons, from mounting on her quarter-deck two more 18 -pounder carronades than established upon the

32-gun class, officially ranks as a 34. The second ship, of 601 tons, with more reason (though mounting, like all these ships, but 22 guns on the -main deck), classed also, for a while, as a 34. Subsequently the Ganymede registered (by mistake, as it would appear) a& a 26 j and thus the Eurydice was left as the only 34-gun ship in the British navy. In point of size, the Eury dice is rather exceeded by each of the three ships, with whom she and the Ganymede are here associated. Upon the whole, these two ships cannot, with any regard to consistency or practical utility, be classed anywhere else than where I have ventured to place them.

NOTES TO ABSTRACT No. 26.

(a) These six ships, the Formidable, Monarch, Powerful, Thunderer, Venge ance, and Ganges (since built at Bombay, of teak, and with a circular stern), are from the draught of the Canopus, late Franklin, captured at the battle of the Nile, and are constructing with diagonal frames. (6) Those five ships, the Chichester, Lancaster, Portland, Southampton, and Winchester, constructed with diagonal frames and circular sterns, agree in dimensions with the Java, except in being four inches broader.

NOTES TO ABSTRACT No. 27

(a) An improvement upon the old quarter-decked (R) ship-sloop class, and established with twenty 32-pounder carronades on the main deck, and six

18-pounder carronades with two long sixes upon the quarter-deck and fore

castle. One of them, the Niemen, was built of Baltic fir ; and the single ship 
of this class, in the " 
Building 
" column of No. 26 Abstract, the Atholl, was 
constructing of larch, cut from the estate of the Duke of Atholl. 
(6) Surprising, indeed, that the navy-board should continue adding new 
individuals by dozens at a time (see the preceding Abstracts), to this worthless 

class. There should have been a reference marked at ths two " ordered " ships of

410 NOTES TO ANNUUL ABSTRACTS.

class Q. One of them was named the President, built from the draught of the American frigate of that name. The other was the Worcester, similar to those noticed at (), page 408.

NOTES TO ABSTRACT No. 28.

(a) The Royal George (first named Neptune) and St. George; the lattei 
building at Plymouth, and the former at Chatham, upon the lines of the 
Caledonia, without, we believe, the alteration that had been adopted in the 
case of the Nelson. See p. 403. 
(6) The Ocean. This ship was intended to be of the same dimensions as the 
Dreadnought, Te'me'raire, and Neptune, that averaged 2121 tons, but her 
draught was extended so as to make her 2276 tons. However, the plan was 
not found to answer ; and, having foiled as a 110, the Ocean is now to try 
her success as an 80. 
(c) The Hastings, built in India of teak, and purchased by the British 
government. The first instance, we believe, of the kind, except in the smallet 