

Quarter-decked. Flush.

NOTES TO ANNUAL ABSTRACTS. 405

According to this, the Isis gained two additional ports of a side on her first, and three on her second-deck, instead of one on each, as had previously been stated. The fact is, her foremost or bow-port (meant to be vacant) on the first deck was considered to be sufficiently aft to admit a standing gun, and a fresh chase-port was cut through further forward. This gave the ship 14 guns of a side on that deck. With respect to her second-deck, the substitution of carronades for long guns caused the ports to be altered, and admitted them to be nearer together ; which at once gave the required number. The second of the two ships in the "Built" column of this class was the Java, of 1458 tons, constructed from a draught prepared by the surveyors of the navy, and made a trifle shorter and narrower than the Leander and New

castle, but established with precisely the same force in guns and men.

The principal dimensions of the Java were,

Ft. In.

Length of lower deck . . . , . 171 ll Breadth extreme 43 6 Depth in hold 14 3 Burden in tons 1458.

NOTES TO ABSTRACT No. 25.

(a) Whatever remarks may have suggested themselves upon the eligibility of this plan of reform in a national point of view, will be found in their proper place in the body of the work. Our present business is with the details of the system, particularly as they afi'ect that arrangement or classification of the ships which is the groundwork of these Abstracts.

How to effect the change from one plan of rating to the other without disorganizing the particular Abstract into which the new classification, from the date of its commencement, naturally fell, was long a subject of difficulty. At length I decided to arrange the old and new classes in the manner adopted in the Abstract before us, and to remove the ships to their new stations by the pair of converted columns ; a method that, if not quite so intelligible as could be wished, possesses the merit of not disturbing, in the slightest degree, the arithmetical connection of the figures. Class A is the same in each rating. B receives the San-Josef, and parts with the building ships, London and Princess Charlotte. C takes the latter, along with the Ocean, and gives up the San-Josef. D merely parts with the building ship Trafalgar. Old E is extinct. Old F, or new E, takes the lastnamed ship, and parts with the Ocean, and becomes exalted from the second to the first rate. Old G is extinct. Old H, or new F, receives, along with promotion, one ship, the Prince, from the last class but one (old a and new X) of the Abstract. Old K divides into new G and H, comprising the whole of the second rate ; and old L and M distribute themselves into the first five classes of the third rate I, K, L, M, and N. Old is new P; and old P, by transferring its six individuals, to the hospital and receiving-ship class,

becomes extinct. It should here 'oe remarked, that the official register of the new rating, as did that of the old, takes no note of the calibers of the guns, or of the size of the ships : hence the seven new classes, from I to P inclusive,