

vidual. The official list contains a sixth 50-guu frigate, the Acasta ; but as she carries 18-pounders on the main-deck, and is much smaller, I have ven tured to assign her another place : moreover, she is an old ship, and cannot last many years longer. (f) These five ships are the Acasta, Cambrian, Lavinia, Re'volutionnaire, and Forte. The first is the ship referred to in the latter part of the last note, and the two next ships are officially classed as 48s : the two last-named, there fore, are the only cruisers of this class requiring to have their pretensions discussed. The Re'volutionnaire, it is believed, usually mounted 18 carronades, besides two long guns, on her quarter-deck and forecastle, making 48 guns in all, and, being of 1148 tons, was well able to carry them; but she now officially classes as a 46. The Forte, measuring 1155 tons, was built,

plank for plank, from the draught of the Re'volutionnaire, and consequently possessed the same capacities. Most unaccountably, however (unless it be considered as a peace-establishment), the Forte has been assigned but 14 carronades, and on that account, though manned with a full complement of a 46, descends to a 44. Considering that a war would instantly restore the Forte to her proper rank by the side of her prototype, I have ventured so to place her (g) The Seringapatam and Tigris, building from the draught of the late French frigate Pre'sidente, afterwards named Pie'montaise. The two former,

the first of 1152, the second of 1162 (occasioned by a slight increase in her length from being constructed with a circular stern) tons, are registered as 46s; and yet, in January, 1814, the Pre'sidente appears to have mounted, along with her 28 guns upon the main-deck, twenty 32-pounder carronades and two nines upon the quarter-deck and forecastle, total 50 guns. In fact, the Pre'sidente could have mounted (she was broken up in 1815) 30 guns on her main-deck ; and so can with ease (they being pierced for 32) the two ships building from her. The official register classes as 48s the Loire and Sibylle. It is true that these ships, obtaining two additional carronades each, did mount 48 guns ; and so did the Amelia, Africane, and Madagascar. The latter, indeed, mounted 50 guns. There would be an end to all useful classification if such instances were not considered as accidental exceptions to the general rule.

(A) Take away the Naiad and Phaeton and two foreign-built ships, .the

Alceste and Madagascar, and, between any two of the remaining 34 frigates, no greater difference of size can be found than 39 tons. Nor does that occur in more than one instance. Generally, the ships do not disagree in size

beyond 15 tons.

(f) Of these three ships, the only one officially classed as a 44 is the Andro mache. The remaining two, the Pique and Unite', class as 42s. The latter certainly appears not to have mounted more than 42 guns (26 Cover's 24s on the main deck') ; but, being the largest ship of the three, the Unite' can as well mount 44 guns as the Andromache herself, when named the Princess