

riority of force, but to a great superiority of force. In other words, that they were owing to the foresight and provident arrangements of the civilian and shipbuilding departments more than to extraordinary abilities of the naval officers and men. To prove this case it will be necessary for the present writer to take quite as much a naval architect's point of view as a sailor's ; for discussions about relative skill, courage, endurance, manoeuvres, etc., are inter-minable and indeterminable, while the materialistic facts of size of ships and other tangible matters are reducible to a fixed definite conclusion. The incidents of this small war divide naturally into three classes the frigate actions, the sloop actions, and the actions upon the North American Lakes. Respecting the frigate actions, the

WITH THE UKITED STATES. 415 earlier American writers, from 1814 to 1836, endeavour to show that the three British ships separately captured by United States vessels were either superior in force or nearly equal ; but Cooper states the American ships were rather superior in some cases, and

in others " about equal

"

a favourite mode of expression with him, the word "about" being peculiarly useful. And Roosevelt, who gives more statistics than Cooper, publishes the tonnage of the American frigates as 1576 each, and that of the British 1330. But James has stated that the average tonnage of the British frigates was only 1080 tons a large and important difference. It may be added now that neither in the French, nor the English service were any frigates ever built for 18-pounder guns, of a size reaching quite 1200 tons, and but few exceeding 1100. In Charnock's "History of Marine Architecture" (1801), and Derrick's " Memoirs of the Royal Navy

"

(1806), both reliable works and

quite impartial, being published before this war, the sizes and tonnage of our "38-gun frigates" are clearly established. Since the times of James and Cooper various standard works have been published, both in England and America, affording overwhelming evidence on the subject, and these having been consulted, not with out expenditure of time and pains, by the writer of these remarks, can now be brought as impartial witnesses into court. A very competent and credible witness is Fincham, who was master ship wright of Portsmouth dockyard, and who, in 1851, published a technical work, " The History of Naval Architecture," dedicated to the Prince Consort, tracing the development of naval construction from the earliest times to his own day ; and under the year 1806

he gives the dimensions of La Guerriere, then captured from the French. These dimensions agree precisely with those published by James. Now, what says Cooper ? " That the Constitution was a larger and heavier ship than La Guerriere will be disputed by no nautical man, though it is believed that the actual difference between these vessels was considerably less than might be inferred from their respective rates. It is understood that the Guerriere was nearly as long a ship as her adversary." Here is vagueness something indefinite, and then something unknown upon that ! Why not have given the size or the tonnage ?