

Simply because it would not have answered his purpose to state, that one ship was 1090 tons and the other 1530, or nearly half as large again. But Roosevelt gives the tonnage of Guerriere at 1338, without any explanation of where obtained or from what dimensions calcu lated. A witness at once impartial and crushing is the French

416 REMARKS UPON THE NAVAL WAR OF 1812

Minister of Marine, who, in response to a direct inquiry from the writer, in December last, with that courtesy which is so agreeable a trait of the national character, sent a letter with the precise dimensions of " La Guerriere of 40 guns, built in 1799 and lost in 1806." Those dimensions* are Length on water-line, 47'10 metres; moulded breadth, 11'85 ; thus absolutely confirming James, when the thickness of the planking, omitted in the French mode, but included in English, is added. This evidence is of great importance, because English and American authors agree that the Guerriere, Macedonian, Java, and Shannon were all much of the same size. Again, the United States Navy List gives the " displacement

" 
of 
Constitution as 2200 tons, and the British standard author, Edye, 
in " 
Equipment and Displacement of Vessels of War " 
(1832), gives 
the load displacement of frigates of Guerriere and Macedonian's 
class at 1470 tons the nominal or usual tonnage agreeing with 
James. Load displacement or total weight of both ship herself 
and all on board is now adopted as the most satisfactory exponent 
of men of war. What answer have the Americans to this ? Will 
they dispute their own Navy List or the written evidence of the 

French Minister of Marine ? The lines of the British-built frigates of "38 guns" (so called), of which Macedonian was one, were published in Rees' Cyclopaedia about the year 1820. The schedules of dimensions in "Naval Occurrences" of the frigates and of the sloops are always passed over silently by our opponents, and for very good reason they are incontrovertible. As American accounts state that the Java, 38, was of 1340 tons, and that she had more than 400 men on board on commencing action, also that the guns were French 18-pounders carrying balls of 19^ Ibs. English weight, these statements have been submitted to the present Admiral Chads, son of the late distinguished Admiral Sir H. D. Chads, G.C.B., who so very gallantly fought the Java, and he is of opinion that they are quite incorrect, for his father " always considered the account of Mr. James and his statistics most exact, and if there had been any inaccuracies in them he would have pointed them out." The next difficulty with the American authors is as to the weight of the shot used by the respective combatants. Anxious to explain away the inequality of general force, they seek to make out that their shot weighed seven per cent, less than the nominal amount, but that our shot were always full weight. The writer, determined to sift this subject, applied to the Carron Iron Co. at Falkirk, Scotland, who cast guns and shot so extensively for the * In English measure, 154 ft. 6 in. by 38 ft. 10 in.