

" harbour-service," had no armament belonging to them. If en titled to no armament, why were they designated as 98, 64, 50 gun-ships, &c. ? None of the ships in the new rating carry any guns until they are fitted for

NOTES TO ANNUAL ABSTRACTS. 407 sea ; and yet all alike bear a designation significant, not of their " ordinary," but of their commissioned force. The term is meant as descriptive of a class, composed of non-effective, as well as effective ships : why, then, not include the harbour-service ships among the former ; or else class them together as " harbour-service ships," without any reference to their original rank in the navy ?

Having thus, in illustration of this rather complex Abstract, entered at a 
tolerable length into the minutiae of the plan upon which the new classifica- 
tion of the British navy is conducted, I shall proceed to point out and explain 
two or three of the more important of those few cases in which I have been 
induced, chiefly for consistency sake, to remove ships from one class to 
another, without the authority of the official list. 
(6) Until the new system, the San-Josef mounted, on every deck, the same 
number of guns as the Ville-de-Paris. It appears, however, that the former 
slap is to carry 30, instead of 32, guns upon the third-deck. Considering this 
either as a mistake in the register, or as an alteration not likely to be enforced 
when the ship is again, if she ever should be, fitted for sea, especially as the 
San-Josef is still allowed her 850 men (50 more than a 110-gun ship's com 
plement), I have classed her as a 112-gun ship. The new plan of substi- 
tuting Congreve's 24-pounders for the guns on the third-deck, by equalizing 
the calibers in the two ships, renders nugatory the distinction between the 

classes of old B and C, and occasions the Ville-de-Paris and San-Josef to approximate more closely than ever in their armament.

(c) The Impregnable registers as a 104; and yet the Trafalgar, the build- 
ing ship associated with her, in constructing from the former's draught, some- 
what enlarged it is true, but chiefly in breadth, to increase her stability. Of 
the two 106-gun ships in the official list, the second is the Royal Sovereign, of 
2175 tons, a ship armed precisely as the 104s, except in being ordered two 
additional carronades for her quarter-deck ; an alteration in a three-decker 
too insignificant and precarious to warrant the sacrifice of consistency. Thu> 
consideration has induced me to substitute the Impregnable for the Royal 
Sovereign ; and the latter accordingly remains with the 104s. 
(<f) The probability that the new plan of arming the third decks of three- 
deckers with Congreve's 24-pounders, instead of long 12 or 18 pounders, will 
extend to these ships, if any of them should hereafter be required, or be found 
serviceable enough to go to sea, is the reason that I have abandoned the 

former distinction between 18 and 12 pounder ships, and classed them, as in the official list, together. (e~) One of these ships, the Endymion, officially ranks as a 48. It is true that she mounts one gun of a side on the main-deck less than the other five ships ; out the latter were built from the same draught, and merely differ in being pierced for an additional port on the main-deck. See vol. v., p. 432. As the Eudymion is old and nearly worn out, and her five class-mates, being built of soft wood, are not likely to survive her, I have chosen to retain the former with them, rather than remove her to a class of which she would be the only indi-