

form but three in the admiralty list.

The explanation just given of the process of ramoving the line classes may suffice, without investigating the remaining classes further than to point out where, by the new arrangement, a class is raised above the heads of any other class or classes. Q, the first new under-line class, is an instance of this, having formerly rated three classes lower. The strict numerical gun-force is here, indeed, a little defective ; as the ships of the next, or R class, carrying heavier metal, and being, as well as larger, a full third stronger in frame, ought to have precedence of the ships of Q. The comparison made in a former note between the Isis in her intended, and the same ship in her actual state of construction, will best explain why a flush ship, of any given number of guns, ought to be classed above, and not with, a quarter-decked ship of the same number of guns. Thus, R and S 58s, in the new rating, rank above T 58 ; that is, they do so in the Abstract before us. But in the official register, where no such distinction is acknowledged, the ships are all huddled together in one class ; even although the ships of T are established with a less complement, by 100 men, than those of R or S. It is also worthy of remark, that, as the quarter-decked ships, now that they have the whole of their guns enumerated, rank much higher than formerly ;

so, except in the case (Q) cited in the last paragraph, and in any other (old and new R, for instance) wherein a pair of bow-chasers may have been omitted, the flush ships, mounting no additional guns, undergo no change in their clas sification. Thus, M and N, from being close neighbours, separate, the cue into Z, the other into D, with three classes intervening. In the old rating there are 50, and in the new but 42, cruising classes. According to the official register, however, there should be but 36 of the latter ; the two classes distinguished by caliber (K and M), the two by size (0 and P), and the three by decks (S, T, and E), not finding places in it, while a 34-gun class, of one individual, is added. The reason for excluding the latter from the Abstract will appear in a note to class Z, and that for admitting the whole of the former has already been stated. It should be mentioned that, when the new regulation was first adopted, two additional classes, an 82 and a 38, made their appearance in the list, and several of the ships in the other classes were differently arranged. But, shortly afterwards, the 82 was incorporated with the 80, and the 38 with the 42 ; and the other ships became, with the exceptions hereafter to be noticed, classed as they appear in this Abstract. But, besides the classes arranged under the head of " New Rating," the official list still contained a set of classes of the " Old Rating," such as the 98, the 64, the 50, the 38, the 36, the 32, and some others. The alleged reason for this was, that the ships composing those classes, being laid up for

permanent