

classes.

REMARKS UPON

##### THE NAVAL WAR OF 1812

WITH THE

UNITED STATES.

BY

H. Y. POWELL.

[First published in the 1886 edition of " James's Naval History"]

REMARKS UPON THE NAVAL WAR OF 1812 WITH THE UNITED STATES.

MOST British readers will be surprised to learn that, notwith standing the infinite pains * taken by William. James to render his history a monument of accuracy, and notwithstanding the exposure he brought upon contemporary misstatements, yet to this day the

Americans still dispute his facts, and still cling with fond tenacity to the romantic versions of their old writers. Fortunately, during the last seventy years many fresh authorities and new documents have come to light ; and it will be the endeavour of this monograph to prove conclusively the correctness of James and the mistakes of his opponents. The earlier writers on the other side the Atlantic, as Clark, Bowen, Thompson, and others, were not men of any eminence, and were sufficiently disciplined by James in his work, " Naval Occurrences

"

a laborious compilation of seven hundred pages, wherein he discussed all particulars of the war between

England and America, giving exhaustive details, and fairly publish ing the official accounts of both sides at full length. A certain amount of irritation is exhibited in this work, which was natural enough, as the author had to record various small reverses, and to deal with much exaggeration on the part of our opponents, while

he himself was a suiferer in being for nearly twelve months a detenu in the United States. After the interval of many years we can now contrive to take a general view of all the transactions in

a cooler spirit.

In 1839 a work was published (by Mr. Bentley), 
" The Naval 
History of the United States," written by- Fenimore Cooper, whose 
high reputation gave promise of excellence, more especially as, from 
his having been a young officer in the American Navy, he had the 

practical experience which was wanting in other authors. It must be said, however, that this work was not altogether worthy of his

* " Almost daily toil among dusty shelves for several years." Preface to vol. iv., edition of 1824,

414 REMARKS UPON THE NAVAL WAR OF 1812 eminent name. Written in a quiet style, and free from strainings after effect, it is deficient in statistics, and when dwelling on the war of 1812, there is a kind of suppressio veri and suggestto falsi which is surprising in a man of honour and culpable in a naval officer who should have been thoroughly acquainted with the subject. It is true that he was only a very few years afloat, and never appears to have risen above the rank of midshipman ; retiring on succeeding to a lauded estate. In his "Naval History" he affects not to take any notice of James whatever, but, it appears, had read both works by the latter, and in 1842 published articles in the " United States Magazine and Democratic Eeview," attacking them warmly, as we think with more heat than success, which will be shown presently. Unable to point out other than trifling errors, Cooper descended to hint that James was a man of dubious character, and really engaged in a grade of life quite below that of a solicitor or proctor ; this calumny, however, has been lately effectually quashed by separate written certificates obtained from two legal firms now practising in Jamaica, where James resided from 1801 to 1813. In 1882 a more candid and more detailed work was published by an American, Theodore Roosevelt, an octavo of five hundred pages, which has passed through two editions, and, if not extensively read \n England, is likely to be popular enough in the United States ; for, while admitting many errors on the part of predecessors, it labours hard to show that the war of 1812 was replete with glory for the Americans. It is impossible to deny that they gained some unexpected successes, and it would be ungenerous to dispute that they showed frequently a very respectable degree of efficiency ; yet we still must contend that those successes, as shown by William James, were in nearly every case due not only to a supe