

WITH THE UNITED STATES. 417 government during the wars of George III.'s time, and the present manager has replied that shot were cast to certain sizes by order, but that the weight was only approximate. The actual sizes are stated in the elaborate work on " Naval Gunnery," by Sir Howard Douglas,* an eminent authority, and at these sizes the British cannon-balls, by careful calculation, must also have been a little under weight as nearly as may be five per cent. less. For proof of this reference can be made to Colonel C. H. Owen's scientific book on " Modern Artillery

" (1871), where it will be seen that after the 18-pound shot had been increased of late years from 5'040 inches in diameter to 5'099, they even then weighed only 17 Ibs. 11 oz., and therefore those of the smaller size would weigh little over 17 Ibs.f As Colonel Owen was Professor of Artillery to the Royal Academy, Woolwich, and author of other cognate books, it is to be presumed his authority is final.

The second division of the subject, the sloop actions, comes next under discussion. Cooper suggests that American ship corvettes, averaging 500 tons and 160 men, were "about equal" to

British brigs of 380 tons and 120 men, and carefully avoids giving statistics of those sizes. Roosevelt states that the brigs measured

470 tons ; but if the reader refers to J. Knowles's quarto book on 
Shipbuilding (1822), he will there find the drawings to scale of such 
a brig the Raven, 18, built in 1804 and the dimensions exactly 
agree with James's figures, showing an actual tonnage of 382. 
Further, the American Captain Blakely, in sending in a formal list 
of captures to his government, enters thereupon the name of Reindeer, 
British brig of 18 guns and 382J tons (see 
" American State 
Papers (Naval Affairs)," in the British Museum). How remarkable 
that he should be at once so minute and so accurate, so different 
to published accounts in the United States. 
One J. McCauley, in memorializing the Secretary to the United 

States Navy in 1815 on behalf of American officers, uses the argument that other actions had been well rewarded when gained by superiority of force ; namely, that the Boxer, British brig, was inferior to the American brig Enterprise, and that the Macedonian, British frigate, was " not equal in any one respect to the United States, 44." Respecting the third division of this subject, the actions upon the Lakes, it is difficult at this period to obtain such precise information, but items will be pointed out; and as American accounts have

proved so fallacious on the other two divisions, we are entitled to 
* Roosevelt has kindly raised him to the peerage. 
t The weight of globes is in proportion to the cube of their diameters, 
and cast iron averages 444 Ibs. to the cubic foot, according to the British 
" School of Naval Architecture." 

418 REMARKS UPON THE NAVAL WAR OF 1812, ETC.

assume that they are not more reliable on the third. Cooper and Roosevelt endeavour to show that the British ship Confiance, at the battle of Lake Champlain on Plattsburg, must have been 1100 or 1200 tons burden. James gives her size to an inch and her tonnage at 831. If we refer to the description of the American ship General Pike, we find that she carried much the same armament as Confiance, except that the latter had, with the like maindeck armament, several carronades extra, but on spar-deck one long 24-pounder less. Now, such long gun would weigh as much as three carronades ; so the difference between the vessels need not have been more than trifling, especially as on the confined waters of Lake Champlain cruising qualities would be little available. Moreover, Lieutenant Emmons, in his " Statistical History of the United States Navy" ("by Authority"), gives the size of the