

As time passed, the ardors of war and the tribulations of neutral- 
ity, wore patience thin. The issues became aij-argument and then 
a war, for irrational and emotional reasons. 1 Too many English- 
men looked upon the Americans with contempt, insisting that the 
British government treat these bastard Englishmen as upstart com- 
mercial rivals and political incompetents. Too many Americans 
clung to the Anglophobia of Revolutionary days and desired to 
underscore the chastisement then inflicted upon England. They 
were touchily conscious that Britain, like other European powers, 
regarded America as an unimportant factor in world politics. "Brit- 
ain never has treated the Americans as an independent nation, and 
has only acknowledged it in words," the West's premier newspaper 
declared. The new Republican mood insisted upon the fullness of 
American rights. When the inadequate weapons of Jefferson and 



BELEAGUERED BRITAIN 

Madison failed to secure these rights from England, war seemed 
the only alternative to national humiliation. Realistically, there 
was less cause^for war in 1812 than at other times. However, as 
Samuel Taylor Coleridge observed (perhaps repenting his earlier 
writings for Britain's most stridently anti- American paper), "The 
malignant witchcraft of evil passions reads good men's prayers 
backward, and . . . the hot heads in both countries . . . make 
folly beget folly, both the more wrong in proportion as each is 
right." 2 

From the Jay treaty until 1 805, hotheads were kept under fairly 
successful control. When, dressed all in somber black but intent 
upon Republican hosannas rather than an obituary or a lament, 
Jefferson delivered his second inaugural address in March, 1805, 
he found it possible to pass over foreign affairs with bland, naive 
generalities. "With nations as with individuals," the President 
declared, "our interests soundly calculated will ever be found in- 
separable from our moral duties, and history bears witness to the 
fact that a just nation is trusted on its word." 3 Jefferson's view 
of the moral imperatives and Britain's attack upon American in- 
terests soon led to a sharp clash. The happy and prosperous years 
ended shortly after the beginning of Thomas Jefferson's second 
term. 

For this the polarization of European power was chiefly re- 
sponsible. Horatio Nelson's guns reaffirmed British supremacy on 
the sea in October, 1805. For many years thereafter the Royal 
Navy was almost the only effective instrument in the contest 
against Napoleon. The black-hulled ships broke up France's over- 
seas trade and were used to foster what commerce Britain could 
find. That neutrals might suffer in this process troubled English- 
men but little, for, as one pamphleteer put it, "God and nature 
having put the power of the ocean . . . into our hands, we are 
fully entitled to exercise that power for our complete security, 

2 Reporter (Lexington, Ky.) June 21, 18095 Coleridge to Allston, Oct. 25, 1815, 
Jared B. Flagg, The Life and Letters of Washington Allston (New York, 1892), 
p. 117. 