

Previous interpretations and old emphases seem to me inade- 
quate. I believe scholars have overemphasized the tangible, rational 
reasons for action and, while not ignoring, have given too little 
heed to such things as national pride, sensitivity, and frustration, 
although the evidence for this sort of thing leaps to the eye. Emo- 
tion, chance, and half choices often mold the relations between 
states as much as or more than cool reason. Such clearly was true 
in the years between 1805 and 1812. 

In this and a succeeding volume I hope to treat the period from 
1805 to 1825 as a whole, organizing my study around a central 

1<( The Origins of the War of 1812: a Survey of Chang-ing Interpretations," 
Mississippi Valley Historical Review, XXVIII (194.1-194.2), 185. 

vii 



I also owe thanks to the Public Record Office and the British 
Museum, where I spent most of a profitable year 5 to Widener 
Library, Harvard University, which, with its adjunct the Hough- 
ton Library , is an almost perfect working library j to the Manu- 
scripts Division of the Library of Congress, to the American 
Antiquarian Society, with its unparalleled newspaper and pam- 
phlet collections, only superficially tapped in two summers j and 
to the always helpful, growing library of my home base, the 
University of California, Los Angeles. Other libraries, from the 
shadow of Durham Cathedral to the palatial estate of Henry 
Huntington, have been equally kind to me, but my major effort 
has been concentrated in the repositories mentioned above. 

For the portraits which grace this volume I am indebted to many 
persons. Representations of Thomas Jefferson by Rembrandt Peale 
and of John Randolph by John W. Jarvis appear through the 
courtesy of the New- York Historical Society. The Pennsylvania 
Academy of the Fine Arts furnished me with a reproduction of 
Gilbert Stuart's James Monroe. The portrait of William Pinkney 
by Charles B. King appears through the kindness of the Maryland 
Historical Society and the Frick Art Reference Library. The Na- 
tional Portrait Gallery, London, furnished me with photographs 
of four portraits: Charles James Fox by Karl A. Hickel, Spencer 
Perceval by George F. Joseph (from a death mask by Nollekens), 
James Stephen by John Linnell, and Henry Brougham by James 
Lonsdale. Lord Ashburton and Major Simon Whitbread, re- 
spectively, sent me photographs of the portraits of Alexander Bar- 
ing by Thomas Lawrence and Samuel Whitbread by John Hopp- 
ner. The cooperation of Lawrence Gouverneur Hoes and the Frick 
Art Reference Library made possible the inclusion of John Vander- 
lyn's portrait of James Madison. Charles B. King's John C. Cal- 
houn appears through the courtesy of the Corcoran Gallery of Art, 
and the Long Island Historical Society furnished a photograph 
of the portrait of Henry Clay by an unknown artist. The Boston 
Museum of Fine Arts supplied a photograph of Gilbert Stuart's 
portrait of Josiah Quincy. Most of the portraits were selected 
because they show their subjects in the period covered by this book. 