

The American Revolution did not make Englishmen respect 
their victorious colonies. On the contrary, some dreamt of a chance 
to even the score and many others suggested that America's visible 
faults were owing to a premature separation from the mother 

8 Courier (London), Jan. 21, 1811 j A True Englishman, The War As It Is, and 
the War As It Should Be (London, 1806), p. 30. 

9 Auckland to Grey, Nov. 27, 1809, Charles Grey, Second Earl Grey, MSS, The 
Prior's Kitchen, Durham University, from ist Ld. Auckland; Times > March i, x8n. 



BELEAGUERED BRITAIN 

country. On the whole, America was considered an infant among 
nations uncouth, argumentative, boasting, essentially weak and 
entirely dependent upon Britain, ungenteelly grasping in com- 
mercial affairs. The British view, like all caricatures, contained a 
germ of truth. Candid Americans admitted that their own coun- 
try's assertiveness invited the British reaction. We have "monopo- 
lized with so little reserve every attribute of freedom, heroism, 
intelligence, and virtue," Benjamin Silliman said, "that we cannot 
be surprised if other countries, should be somewhat reluctant to 
concede, what we so indecorously demand." Be that as it may, the 
fact remains that America was, as the Edinburgh Review observed 
in 1812, "less popular and less esteemed among us than the base 
and bigotted Portugeze, or the ferocious and ignorant Russians." 10 
Even comparatively friendly journals like the Edinburgh Review 
took an extremely patronizing attitude toward the United States 
and its culture as a whole. 

London's most nationalistic newspaper wrote in 1 8 1 1 : 

Pre-eminently is America advantageous to Great Britain, and Great Britain 
is scarcely less than necessary to America, if the gradual formation of a 
learned class and of a natural gentry, if the growth of arts and sciences . . . 
if a stimulus for agriculture, if commerce and commercial cities that alone 
supply the stimulus, if union, if safety, if national independence be rightly 
placed among the necessities of a young and free country. It is British capital, 
which directly or indirectly, sets half the industry of America in motion: 
it is the British fleets that give it protection and security. 

10 Benjamin Silliman, A Journal of Travels in England, Holland, and Scotland 
(zd ed.; 2 vols.j Boston, 1812), II, 3385 Edinburgh Review, XX (1812), 460. Char- 
acteristic of the British attitude is the following- paragraph written to his mother 
by Augustus John Foster, then a young attach^ but later a somewhat more appre- 
ciative minister: "They & we are now the Two rivals in what has always given Power 
wherever it has extended, Commerce, but I trust that still & for a long time we shall 
maintain the immense superiority that we do now. They are next us in the Race, but 
in nothing else are they near us. We drove them into being a Nation when they were 
no more fit for it than the Convicts of Botany Bay, tho I must say that their leader 
Washington was a great Character, and one or two others whom the Tumult of the 
Day drove from their Counters, but since that, Interest and speculation seems to 
have taken fast hold of the whole Country to the Exclusion of every generous Feel- 
ing. . . . the Character of a Gentleman is very rare- to be found indeed here, but 
what has surprised me the Character of an Honest Man of Principle is ... full as 
rare." Foster to Lady Elizabeth Foster, Dec. i, 1805, Augustus J. Foster MSS, Li- 
brary of Congress. 