



Mr. Speaker, I would solemnly demand, what is this na- 
tional honor, this object of ministerial idolatry? Is she one 
of those infernal deities which can feed on nothing but com- 
mercial havoc and national ruin? Does she, like the demons 
of a Merina's temple, sit abstracted and ferocious, never 
smiling but on national distress, never propitiated but by 
human sacrifice? Then she is the last deity that a virtuous 
and republican people should worship. But this is not her 
character; she is a beneficent, healing, and curing goddess, 
allied inseparably to public virtue, prosperity, and happiness. 
. . . And such, notwithstanding the misdeeds that have 
been perpetrated in her name, she continues to this day. 

THOMAS GROSVENOR, 1 813 



CHAPTER 



I 



BELEAGUERED BRITAIN 



"Britain and the United States are destined to become . . . the 
predominating nations o Christendom. . . . Each an incum- 
brance to the other; when together, their severance seems to have 
been the signal for unequalled progress, and boundless prospects to 
each j not more in material dominion than in the solid and durable 
glory of widening the empire of rational thought throughout the 
world." 1 So wrote Richard Rush, the American minister at the 
Court of St. James, as he ruminated on the death of George III, 
long the very symbol of Anglo-American discord. During the 
1790*8 a rapprochement had been built upon a recognition of 
mutual interests, and when George III died in 1820 the Earl of 
Liverpool and Viscount Castlereagh were laboring to construct a 
new rapprochement. Unfortunately, in the intervening years the 
"rational thought" in which Rush took pride had too often been 
thrust aside by emotion and prejudice. A long, serious quarrel took 

1 Richard Rush, A Residence at the Court of London, Second Series (a vols.j Lon- 
don, 1845)) I> 



BELEAGUERED BRITAIN 

place, a quarrel climaxed by the American declaration of war upon 
Great Britain in June, 1812. 

This friction really sprang from one simple fact: America chose 
to be neutral while Britain struggled for her life against Napoleon. 
To keep the Royal Navy manned for the contest, England forcibly 
enlisted seamen from American merchant ships. To deprive Napo- 
leon of essential goods, but particularly to preserve or reopen 
trade with the Continent upon which British prosperity presumably 
rested, England instituted unprecedented systems of blockade 
which she called executive Orders in Council. Thus the American 
seaman lost his liberty, the merchant his ships, and the farmer 
and plantation owner a market for his grain and cotton and tobacco. 
On the other hand, England objected that Americans covered 
French property with their flag or greedily sought to replace 
Britain in European markets, vitiating the effectiveness of English 
commercial warfare. The American merchant marine seduced mar- 
iners from their duty to the King. Not one of these grievances 
was new. All existed during the first rapprochement, when Feder- 
alist sympathy for Britain, the wisdom of William Pitt and his 
foreign secretary, and the valuing of compromise over confronta- 
tion prevented a clash that might as easily have come then as a 
decade later. 