

More specifically, Englishmen believed that their military forces 
we*e defending America, and that in the event of British defeat 
she would find herself unable to protect her shores against Napo- 
leon. "The Alps and the Apennines of America are the British 
Navy," wrote the Times. "If ever that should be removed, a short 
time will suffice to establish the head-quarters of a Duke-Marshal 
at Washington, and to divide the territory of the Union into mili- 
tary prefectures.'JTn parliamentary debate over the War of 1812, 
the Earl of Liverpool rebuked the United States for failing to 
appreciate the "security and protection" England afforded. Amer- 
ica, he said, "ought to have looked to this country as the guardian 
power to which she was indebted, not only for her comforts, not 
only for -h^r rank in the scale of civilization, but for her very 
existence." 7 } 

The sharp contrast between British political isolation and the 
omnipotent power of the Royal Navy produced a very harsh policy 
toward neutrals. "The sea is ours, and we must maintain the 
doctrine that no nation, no fleet, no cock-boat shall sail upon it 
without our permission," the London Courier declared in 1811. 
Many Englishmen believed the holy crusade against Napoleon 
required Britain to exploit to the full her one effective available 
weapon. England must show no weakness that would encourage 
her enemy and increase neutral demands. She must use the naval 
power God had given her to break up the trade Napoleon carried 

6 "Battle of the Baltic," Campbell, o$. cit., p. 765 "Ode Written during the War 
with America," The Poetical Works of Robert Southey (New York, n.d.), p. 368; 
Hansard, XXI, 11395 XIV, 3495 Rush to John Adams, Aug. 8, 1812, Lyman H. 
Butterfield, ed., Letters of Benjamin Rush, II, American Philosophical Society, Mem- 
oirs, Vol. XXX (1951), pp. 1157^-1158. 

7 Times, Dec. 16, 18115 Hansard, XXIV, 585-586. 



BELEAGUERED BRITAIN 

on under neutral flags. "We had much better be at open hostility 
with both America and Prussia," wrote "A True Englishman" in 
1806, "than suffer them, as they do, to prostitute their flags to 
supply the enemy with the 'sinews of war. 3 " 8 Followers of Fox, 
Grenville, and Grey often warned that British obduracy might 
indeed drive America into the war. Their opponents, who occupied 
the seats of power after 1807, offered limited concessions to pre- 
serve American neutrality. But strident nationalists objected to 
any sign of weakness, even apology for the Chesapeake affair. 
When war came, some of the ministry's critics blamed it on too- 
great tenderness in the past. On the whole, Englishmen felt that 
the situation required an unyielding policy toward neutrals. 

Relations with the United States, the chief neutral, attracted 
far less attention, or at least less thought, than they deserved. 
Major issues, among them the conduct of the war, the treatment to 
be accorded Ireland, and the political implications of George II Ps 
renewed insanity, displaced American affairs from the center of 
the political scene. So too did titillating but less important matters 
like the sale of army commissions by the Commander in Chief's 
mistress and the raising of prices at Covent Garden. In 1809 Lord 
Auckland, an Opposition expert on American affairs, considered 
them "the least regarded & ill understood" major issue. More than 
a year later the Times, which did not particularly like America 
but understood the controversy's importance, wrote in discourage- 
ment: "There is certainly a great apathy in the public mind, gener- 
ally, upon the questions now at issue between us and our quondam 
colonies, which it is difficult to rouse, and perhaps useless to at- 
tempt." 9 This neglect played no small part in the coming of 
Anglo-American war. 