



BELEAGUERED BRITAIN 

Although at this time hoping for peace, the Courier often felt the 
young nation needed a thrashing before it would appreciate these 
truths. The Earl of Sheffield argued that firmness alone could 
check "that spirit of encroachment, that indiscriminate thirst of 
gain, that sordid jealousy" that fouled America's attitude toward 
her parent and protector^ 1 Time and again British nationalists 
warned the United States that war would not be unpopular, and 
America's British friends admitted this; British opinion would have 
supported a far more rigorous policy'toward the United States 
than the one actually adopted* 

Britain considered the American Constitution inadequate to the 
requirements of government, the nation weak in material strength 
and in will, and the Republican leaders sycophants of France 
through sympathy or through fear. The absence of aristocratic 
influence, even the most liberal Englishmen thought, condemned 
America to excesses and imbalance. "The mail takes twelve pas- 
sengers, which generally consist of squalling children, stinking 
negroes, and republicans smoking cigars," the Irish poet, Tom 
Moore, wrote at the beginning of the century. "How often it has 
occurred to me that nothing can be more emblematic of the govern- 
ment of this country than its stages , filled with a motley mixture, 
all 'hail fellow well met,' driving through mud and filth, which 
bespatters them as they raise it, and risking an wj>set at every step." 
Even the Edinburgh Review, which did not, like Moore, hate 
America, believed she prospered in spite of rather than because 
of her Constitution. "It has the appearance . . . rather of an ex- 
periment in politics, than of a steady permanent government," 
the magazine commented. Provisions encouraging party spirit 
(notably the presidential election) and federal-state conflict would 
have to be altered before America achieved real strength. 12 

As early as 1806 Jefferson complained that his country's love 



r, July 29, 18115 John B. Holroyd, Earl of Sheffield, Strictures on the 
Necessity of Inviolably Maintaining the Navigation and Colonial System of Great 
Britain (new ed.j London, 1806), pp. 317318. 

12 Moore to Mrs. Anastasia Moore, June 13, 1804, Lord John Russell, ed, Mem- 
oirs, Journal, and Correspondence of Thomas Moore (8 vols.j London, 1853-1856), 
I, 161-162; Edinburgh Review, XII (1808), 469-478. 

8 



BELEAGUERED BRITAIN 

of peace had "begun to produce an opinion in Europe that our 
government is entirely in Quaker principles." The President hoped 
that American vigor would destroy this impression, but his policies 
and those of his successor merely encouraged it. The almost total 
absence of military preparation, the empty sound and fury after 
the Chesapeake affair, the disreputable flight from the Embargo, 
successive huckstering legislation designed to find an alternative to 
war all these convinced England of America's weakness. Eight 
months before war finally came, the Times pronounced the tJnited 
States totally incapable of offensive warfare, and a few months 
later John Quincy Adams observed that the British "will yield 
nothing in Negotiation, because they have formed a settled opinion 
that America will not, perhaps that she cannot undertake a War, 
against England." 13 If war camey the British believed, they would 
determine the time and the place. ! 