

3 James D. Richardson, ed., A Compilation of the Messages and, Pa-pers of the 
Presidents (Washington, 1897), I, 378. 



BELEAGUERED BRITAIN 

and so as to ensure us the full enjoyment o the naval prosperity 
consequent upon it." Defensively, the Royal Navy prevented an 
invasion of the British Isles, permitting England to continue re- 
sistance to a despot who brought almost the entire continent of 
Europe to heel. "Britannia needs no bulwark, / No towers along 
the steep 5 / Her march is o'er the mountain-waves, / Her home 
is on the deep," ran one of the most popular ballads of the day. 4 

If Britain controlled the seas, Napoleon dominated the land. 
Two months after Trafalgar he crushed the Austrians and the 
Russians with contemptuous ease at Austerlitz, driving the Haps- 
burgs to humiliating peace. In October, 1806, he annihilated the 
Prussians at Jena and Auerstadt. The next spring he bludgeoned 
back the Russians at Friedland, and in July, 1807, he and Czar 
Alexander arranged an accommodation at the raft-borne confer- 
ence of Tilsit. The Third Coalition had gone the way of those 
before it. "We have no friend, no support, no ally in the world, 
but our own courage and heroism," the London Times proclaimed 
in the month of Tilsit. Britain was beleaguered, isolated. "If Bona- 
parte does not by an attempt at Invasion or some other great 
imprudence give us an advantage," Charles James Fox wrote while 
a leading member of the British government, "I cannot but think 
this country invariably and irretrievably ruined. . . . To be Min- 
isters at a moment when the Country is falling and all Europe 
sinking, is a dreadful situation." 6 Fortunately for Britain, some- 
what less pessimistic statesmen were at the head of affairs after 
1807. 

Englishmen honestly thought that in facing Napoleon's chal- 
lenge they fought for the entire world. "We conquer but to save," 
a patriotic poet wrote in 1 805, and Robert Southey, a far greater 
one, called his country "Freedom's own beloved Isle." Politicians 

4 Nathaniel Atcheson, A Compressed View of the Points To Be Discussed in Treab* 
ing with the United States of America (London, 1814), p. 265 "Ye Mariners of Eng- 
land," Lewis Campbell, ed., Poems of Thomas Campbell (London, 1904), pp. 6667. 

6 Times (London), July 15, 1807$ Fox to Grenville, April 18, 1806, Boconnoc 
MSS (Papers of William Wyndham Grenville, Baron Grenville) , Lostwithiel, Corn- 
wall, Cabinet Members. Only in citing manuscript collections not rigorously or- 
ganized chronologically, or undated materials, do the footnotes include volume names 
or numbers or folio numbers. 



BELEAGUERED BRITAIN 

added their amens. England, said James Stephen, was "the bul- 
wark and safeguard of all nations which the ambition of the enemy 
sought to conquer or destroy." British naval power, said the Earl 
of Selkirk, was "the last stay of the liberties of the world." This 
prideful language, these expressions of a savior complex, provoked 
an American to observe that Britain was worse than France "for 
she, adds to her wickedness the crime of hypocrisy." 6 