

Pitt's survivors, who defeated the Ministry of All the Talents 
in 1807, maintained themselves in power from then onward. Wil- 
liam Pitt had an undeservedly unfavorable reputation in the United 
States the Philadelphia Aurora congratulated America on the 
death of this "offence to God and to man" 1T but in his last 
months British policy toward the United States became more 
harsh. Most of Pitt's successors, like him devoted to vigorous 
prosecution of the war, unlike him failed to see the advantages of 
at least a partial understanding with the most important mari- 
time neutral j they also pushed aside the comparative economic 
liberalism that had been their master's. A notable exception was 
Earl Bathurst, a quietly unobtrusive and efficient protege of Pitt's 
who served for a long time as president of the Board of Trade and 
often occupied the Foreign Office ad interim. More than any other 
Pittite, Bathurst recognized the importance of preserving American 
neutrality, if only for economic reasons. 

Encouraged by American weakness, angered by the way neu- 
tral trade enriched the United States and eased pressure upon 

17 Aurora (Philadelphia), March zi, 1806. This obituary notice also described 
Pitt as "the English Robespierre" and "the late execrable frime minister of England." 

12 



BELEAGUERED BRITAIN 

France, devoted to the strengthening of British commerce, most 
Pittites advocated a harsh policy toward Americans. )Their leader. 
Spencer Perceval, was always eager for battle with his parlia- 
mentary enemies and ready to face any Napoleonic challenge. 
His piety, simplicity, and uncompromising view of the war made 
him very popular in Commons. Perceval was also stubborn and 
intolerant of criticism, and his ideas, particularly in the commercial 
field, often simplified Pitt's almost to the point of caricature. Perce- 
val opposed toleration of American trade with the West Indies and 
sponsored the Orders in Council of November, 1807. His system 
received enthusiastic support from lesser members of the faction, 
perhaps most consistently from George Rose, a statistics-laden 
veteran at the Board of Trade, and from Daniel Stuart, editor of 
the Courier, one of the most important and certainly the most 
anti- American journal in London. Although cabinet colleagues 
sometimes doubted the wisdom of Perceval's policies, the force 
of his opinions and his strength in Parliament defeated major 
challenges until 1812. 

The transformation of the Pitt party, which had helped to con- 
struct Anglo-American understanding in the i79O ? s, is best illus- 
trated by the Earl of Liverpool. Although his father, the first 
earl, was a bitter enemy of the United States and its trade, as a 
young man Liverpool loyally supported Pitt's policy of concilia- 
tion. In 1 80 1 he became foreign secretary, and while at Downing 
Street he presided over the most moderate American policy Brit- 
ain adopted in the first forty years of American independence. 
Liverpool earned a reputation as a friend of the United States, 
and in 1807, when the United States returned the Monroe- 
Pinkney treaty for modifications, Secretary of State Madison ex- 
pected Liverpool, now again in the Cabinet, to support the changes 
America desired. 18 The weakness and the apparent Francophilia of 
the Jeffersonian regime caused Liverpool to abandon his early 
attitudes. He supported the Orders in Council, and minimized the 
dangers of American retaliation. In 1810 he wrote: 