

Between the government's supporters and that large group 
most conveniently called the Opposition wandered a number of 
factions. Viscount Sidmouth, very unpopular with the country but 
in firm command of some twenty votes in Commons, had presided 
over the liberal American policy of Liverpool (then Lord Hawkes- 
bury) as head of the ministry from 1801 to 1804. Americans con- 
sidered him a friend, and in 1 8 1 2 he did decline to enter the Cab- 
inet until assured that the Orders in Council would be changed. 

21 Years later an American minister at London described Canning as "sarcastic 
as well as logical in debate, and sometimes allowing his official pen to trespass in the 
former field j but in private circles, bland, courteous, and yielding." Richard Rush, 
A Residence at the Court of London, ed. Benjamin Rush (30! ed. 5 London, 1872), p. 
236. Many years passed after Canning's first foreign-secretaryship before such a bal- 
anced estimate was possible, 

15 



BELEAGUERED BRITAIN 

But Sidmouth did not like the Americans nor did he fear them. 
Neither he nor his followers participated actively in any but the 
closing debates over the orders. Marquis Wellesley, who headed 
another faction, was arrogant, ambitious, untrustworthy, and 
lecherous. Wellesley acted as though he were still a virtually inde- 
pendent sovereign in India, and he tended to look upon Americans 
as a slightly superior breed of the type he had defeated in the 
Mahratta wars. Except when forced while foreign secretary to 
turn his attention to American affairs, the marquis ignored them. 
He shared, however, the general prejudices of Sidmouth. 

The uneasy coalition of Foxites and Grenvilles, backbone of the 
Ministry of All the Talents and after 1 807 the core of the Opposi- 
tion, unvaryingly supported conciliation of the United States. 
They numbered approximately as many as the Pittites but were 
not so attractive to Sidmouths, Wellesleys, independents, and the 
Crown. 22 After Fox's death in 1806 they lacked effective leader- 
ship in the House of Commons. Friction between the two wings 
frequently deprived them of unity. "Are we not a good deal in 
the same situation with the poor Spaniards," one of them discon- 
solately asked, "united in nothing but our dislike of those to whom 
we are opposed . . . and fighting for the mere sake of fighting 
without an acknowledged executive Power to direct or controul 
our exertions?" With some justice a semiofficial American news- 
paper praised the Opposition as commanding "the best talents and 
the purest . . . patriotism of England," 23 but they were steadily 
worsted by less able but better-organized, more determined men. 

For this Lord Grenville, an intelligent man but a poor party 
leader, was largely responsible. Although Grenville did not favor 
absolute surrender to American demands (on impressment, for 
example), he frequently spoke proudly of the policy he had fol- 
lowed as foreign secretary under Pitt and urged a similarly mod- 
erate approach. He and his principal commercial adviser, Lord 
Auckland, favored liberal treatment of American trade, and they 