

Baring, Brougham, and many of the Opposition of course an- 
swered the first question with an unequivocal affirmative. The 
banker argued that England should encourage American trade 
with any nation whatsoever, since the Americans usually used the 

28 Hansard, XXI, 771$ XXIV, 632. 

19 



BELEAGUERED BRITAIN 

proceeds of European sales to purchase British manufactures. The 
Americans carried on an extensive trade in English goods, pene- 
trating with these cargoes to ports of the Continent where English 
ships could not go ; to strike at American shipping was to destroy 
the best means of evading Napoleon's Continental System. Baring 
considered America more valuable as a neutral than she would be 
as an ally. The Edinburgh Review agreed, saying that "the neu- 
trality of the new world is our best safeguard from the subjuga- 
tion of the old. While America covers the ocean with her ships, 
England may defy the conqueror of Europe ; she will trade, in 
spite of him." Like Baring, Brougham stressed that American 
prosperity really benefited Britain: "Can any but the veriest drivel- 
ler in political science, doubt for a moment that her gains are our 
gains j . . . that the less she traded with other nations, the less 
she will trade with ourselves ; and that to confine her foreign com- 
merce to her trade with England, would be to diminish, if not to 
destroy this trade also." In stressing the importance of exports 
to America, the Opposition spoke the language of the compara- 
tively new, politically undervalued manufacturing interests. It 
challenged traditional economic theory, which held that one na- 
tion's commercial gains were another's losses, and minimized the 
plausible claim of shipping and colonial interests that they would 
be harmed by the growth of American shipping and exports. Fi- 
nally, as Lord Melville once reasonably pointed out, the benefit 
of expanded trade was mutual. America, too, might be asked to 
make concessioons to secure it. 29 

Until 1 8 1 1 and 1812, when a massive depression forced a reas- 
sessment, most Englishmen repudiated the arguments of Baring 
and Brougham, clinging stubbornly to maxims of the past. They 
looked upon America as a many-tentacled rival. Her ships plied 
the oceans as replacements for British merchantmen, capturing, 

59 Alexander Baring, An Inquiry into the Causes and Consequences of the Orders 
in Council; and an Examination of the Conduct of Great Britain towards the Neutral 
Commerce of America (London, 1808), pp. 153156 and fassim; Edinburgh Re- 
view, XIV (1809), 4.755 Henry Brougham, Orders in Council; Or, An Examination 
of the Justice, Legality, and Policy of the New System of Commercial Regulations 
(ad ed.5 London, 1808), p. 575 Hansard, XII, 797. 

20 



BELEAGUERED BRITAIN 

as one indefatigable English conservative complained, nineteen- 
twentieths of the carriage between the two countries as well as 
increasing shares of the traffic between Europe and outlying parts 
of the globe. 30 America undermined British colonies in the Carib- 
bean by producing competing crops on her own Southern planta- 
tions and by carrying to Europe the produce of non-British is- 
lands in that tropical sea, and then America had the temerity 
to ask for freedom to trade with British territories as well. When 
Fox and Grenville proposed legislation to regularize American 
trade with English colonies. Lord Mulgrave grumpily objected 
that "the great advantage of possessing colonies, was the enjoy- 
ment of an exclusive trade with them." Finally, traditionalists ar- 
gued that America eagerly replaced Britain in European markets, 
striking a blow at English commercial prosperity and relieving 
economic pressure upon Napoleon. In sum, the conservative na- 
tionalists believed that shipping and commerce lay at the root of 
England's greatness. These must be encouraged and encouraged 
too by application of the traditional remedies of restriction, regu- 
lation, and stifling of competition. "The commerce is connected 
with the strength and glory of England," one pamphleteer's 
peroration read, "and he who respects the strength and glory of 
England, will contemplate her Navigation and Colonial System, 
but with the sentiment . . . ESTO PERPETUA." 31 In war- 
time this system might be extended by the application of naval 
power*,,, 