

Lord Howick, Fox's successor as factional leader in 1 806, shared 
with Holland a dislike of monopolistic ambition. While favoring 
"the utmost limit of reasonable concession/ 3 he nevertheless dis- 
trusted the Jeffersonian regime, saying that "in the language and 
the conduct of the latter Government, enough has appeared to 
create a well-founded doubt, whether this policy, however care- 
fully pursued, would have been successful." 2T His father's death 
transferred Howick to the House of Lords as Earl Grey in 1807, 
a crippling blow to him and his party, for Lord Henry Petty and 
Stephen Ponsonby, who attempted to fill the shoes of Fox and 
Howick, failed dismally. Not until Henry Brougham secured a 
seat in 1 810 did the Opposition find an effective leader, and even 
then only on the single issue of the Orders in Council. This able, 
offensively ambitious Scot marshaled the troops that brought down 
the orders in 1812, but he never achieved the parliamentary pri- 
macy that once belonged to Fox. 

Although they never attained the lead in Commons, Alexander 
Baring and Samuel Whitbread most forcefully presented the two 
strains of Opposition argument against the ministry's American 
policy. Whitbread, a self-made man in the brewing business, was 
stout, uncultured by the standards of British aristocracy, and often 
violent in debate. He was also probably the most extreme republi- 
can in Parliament, and his attitude sometimes embarrassed Grey, 
whose sister he had married. He was almost the only member of 
Parliament who praised America without reservation. In 1812 

26 Hansard, IX, 806-807. 

27 Grey to Grenville, Jan. 3, 1808, Charles Grey, Some Account of the Life and 
Opinions of Charles, Second Earl Grey (London, 1861), p. 190. 

18 



BELEAGUERED BRITAIN 

he said that she was "extremely popular" with him and that he 
looked upon her Revolution "with reverence and admiration." 
In 1813, after war began, he declared, "If truth must be spoken, 
. . . America had always been in the right, . . . until, by the 
declaration of war she had changed her situation." 28 Whitbread's 
political arguments for America were paired by Alexander Baring's 
emphasis upon the value of her trade. Baring, who married a Fed- 
eralist senator's daughter and whose banking house had heavy in- 
vestments in the United States and handled the accounts of many 
American merchants as well as of the United States government, 
worked more than forty years for peace between the two countries. 
Although often attacked as a self-seeker interested only in the 
profits of Baring Brothers & Company, his devotion to liberal 
principles went further than that. None could deny that his writ- 
ings and his parliamentary speeches were, with the possible ex- 
ception of Brougham's, which began somewhat later, the most ef- 
fective statement of the argument that British prosperity depended 
upon the fostering of American trade. 

f Most Englishmen agreed with Baring that commercial consider- 
ations, not theories of government, ^vere the most important as- 
pects of Anglo-American relations, fehould America's trade be 
encouraged, even if it flowed to Britain's enemies or to neutrals, 
so that the United States could purchase larger amounts of British 
goods with her profits and perhaps, with her shipping, supply 
Great Britain with an indirect outlet for her own manufactures? Or 
should Britain consider the Americans commercial rivals whose 
prosperity must be checked, whose expanding commerce could 
only cut into British trade, destroy the benefits of empire, and 
weaken economic warfare against the archdevil of the Tuileries? 
Over these questions Englishmen contended throughout the Na- 
poleonic wars. 