

22 



BELEAGUERED BRITAIN 

mercy. Despite efforts to encourage alternative areas o supply, 
the islands drew most of their foodstuffs and cooperage materials 
from the United States. From 1801 to 1805 they annually im- 
ported nearly $6.5 million worth of American goods, after 1807 
commercial restrictions reduced this traffic, but in a twelve-month 
period in 1810-1811, when trade was comparatively free, more 
than $4.5 million worth of American provisions flowed to the Brit- 
ish colonies. The Americans believed that the West Indies need for 
food provided an obvious way of bringing pressure upon the en- 
tire empire. "If we shut up the export trade six months the Is- 
lands would be starved," a Republican commercial expert wrote 
in 1806; ". . . the West India islands are dependent on it [the 
United States] for the necessaries of life, both for the white and 
black population." 33 In seeming confirmation of this analysis, 
colonial governors frequently found it necessary to suspend the 
Navigation Acts so that American ships might bring grain and other 
goods to the British islands. 

On the other hand, America's role in the Caribbean strength- 
ened the arguments of British restrictionists. Beginning about 1 805, 
a huge oversupply of coffee and sugar developed in world mar- 
kets. Exports from British colonies fell off, to the dismay of planta- 
tion owners, financiers, and the shipping interest. To reduce com- 
petition the British government attempted to eliminate or at least 
restrict the quantity of cotton, sugar, and coffee the Americans 
carried away in exchange for cargoes they brought, but this was 
only a minor aspect of the problem. The chief challenges to British 
interest lay in the explosive development of American cotton ex- 
ports and the steady growth of American traffic in French and 
Spanish colonial goods imported into the United States and then 
reshipped to Europe, where they entered into competition with 
British colonial produce. In 1806 and again in 1807 American re- 
exports totaled $60 million. British colonialists, shippers, and the 
politicians they influenced called for action to reduce the pressure 

33 Jacob Crowninshield, "Some Remarks on the American Trade, 1806," ed. John 
H. Reinoehl, William and Mary Quarterly, 3d Series, XVI (1959), 96-97. For an 
able discussion of the British colonial economy see Lowell J. Ragatz, The Fall of the 
Planter Class in the British Caribbean, 17631833 (New York, 1928). 



BELEAGUERED BRITAIN 

of American competition, to which they ascribed the depression 
of English colonial trade. While this explanation oversimplified 
the case, there could be no denying that Americans profited tre- 
mendously from the reexport trade, as well as from the increas- 
ing export of her own cotton, nor that the loss of these profits 
would be a serious blow to the United States. 34 

No colonial trade compared in size, of course, with that carried 
on between the home islands and the United States. Under normal 
conditions this traffic was the most important branch of commerce 
for both countries and also the largest single component of inter- 
national trade. America often purchased roughly one-third of all 
British exports, including those to the colonies, and usually took 
more than did the entire continent of Europe. For the Americans 
this branch of trade was equally important. In 1806 more than 
$20 million worth of goods produced in America were shipped to 
Britain, four-ninths of all exports of domestic produce and more 
than the total trade to either France or Spain, despite the huge 
reexport trade to those countries. After passage of the Embargo 
Anglo-American trade declined, but the portion that continued 
was far more substantial than is generally recognized. 35 