

22 For a careful estimate of factional strengths in the Parliament of 1807 see 
Michael Roberts, The Whig Party, r 8 0718x2 (London, 1939), pp. 333345. 

23 George Tierney to Whitbread, Dec. 29, 1808, Whitbread MSS. 

16 



BELEAGUERED BRITAIN 

bitterly attacked the Orders in Council for risking Britain's share 
of it. "With the friendship of America/' Grenville wrote in 1809, 
"we might rest a husbanding & defensive system on the basis of an 
extensive commerce, & so might still survive the storm. Without 
such a resource what hope have we?" Grenville's personal failings 
made him ineffective in forwarding his views. In power, he stressed 
the probable unfavorable consequences of any new departure. In 
opposition, he avoided as much as possible "the irksome & hope- 
less duties of Parliament," gloomily concluding that the govern- 
ment occupied a nearly impregnable position. 24 Throughout, he 
clung to a conviction that Napoleon could not be defeated, that 
Britain's days of glory had passed. Grenville's loss of fire, his de- 
cline since the fall of his cousin's ministry in 1801, was a catas- 
trophe for Anglo-American comity. 

Whereas Grenville had an undeserved reputation as an Ameri- 
canophobe, his political ally, Charles James Fox, was remembered 
in the United States as a friend of the Revolutionary struggle. 
Whatever Fox really thought of America per se in the closing 
years of his life (and he neither wrote nor spoke on the subject), 
he did favor a conciliatory policy toward her as best for Britain, 
and he opposed monopolistic, mercantilist trade policies of the 
sort that challenged America. The Foxite paper, the London 
Morning Chronicle, probably the most widely read in the kingdom, 
consistently took a pro- American line; Cobbett once suggested 
that the editor, James Perry, acted as though he "had a general 
retainer from the Americans." ^ Fox's nephew and protege, Lord 
Holland, steadily supported conciliation. He once summarized 
Foxite doctrine, a combination of economic liberalism and political 
sympathy, in the following words: 

In every friendly intercourse between two countries, there was ... al- 
ways a mutual advantage: but this reciprocity of interest was most remark- 
able, as it existed between the united states of America and Great Britain. 
. . . The republican institutions of America, like those of every govern- 

24 Grenville to Grey, May 26, 1809, Grey MSS; Grenville to Auckland, Sept. 16, 
1810, William Eden, Baron Auckland, MSS, British Museum (Add. MSS 344.12- 
344.71, 45728-45730)) Add. MSS 34458- 

25 Cobbett>s Register, XII (1807), 182. 



BELEAGUERED BRITAIN 

ment in which a true spirit of freedom prevailed, contained energies which 
were capable of being called forth to meet any difficult crisis that might 
occur. . . . Nothing therefore could appear . . . worse policy than to 
wish to see any thing like disunion among the people of the United States. 
Indeed, the more powerful and the more wealthy they became, the better 
it would be for this country. As they became more populous, the customers 
for our manufactures would become more numerous, and increase of riches 
would only give them increased means of consumption. 26 