

On the other hand, Jeffersonians appeared sufficiently pro- 
French to give Napoleon aid short of war. Rejection of the Monroe- 
Pinkney treaty, the proclamation of 1807 banning Royal Navy 
ships from American ports, and slight differences between the 
demands made upon France and those made upon Britain as con- 
ditions of raising the Embargo all reinforced this British conviction. 
It became, a pro-American pamphleteer in London complained, 
"not less general, I had nearly said universal, than erroneous." 
As time passed and as the Republicans' obvious dislike of Na- 
poleonic autocracy became too obvious to ignore, some explained 
the American bias in terms of greater fear of Napoleon than of 
Britain. William Cobbett, for example, declared that the Ameri- 
cans detested France more than England but had been encouraged 
to press claims against Great Britain by ministerial weakness. 
George H. Rose, sent to America on a special mission at the end 
of 1807, summed up this feeling when he wrote: "Though Mr. 
Jefferson's Sympathy with the internal policy of France can no 
longer exist, His Antipathy to her Rival is unabated ; and though 

13 Jefferson to Thomas Cooper, Feb. 18, 1806, Thomas Jefferson MSS (Coolidge 
Collection), Massachusetts Historical Society j Times, Oct. 28, i8iij Adams to Abi- 
gail Adams, March 30, 1812, Adams Family MSS (microfilm), Massachusetts His- 
torical Society, Vol. CXXXV. 



BELEAGUERED BRITAIN 

he may view Bonaparte with little of affection^ he certainly does 
it with considerable awe." Even Opposition leaders like Lord 
Grenville and Opposition journals frequently complained of 
American bias for France. Only a few important figures, among 
them Henry Brougham, Alexander Baring, and the American- 
born pamphleteer George Joy, steadfastly repudiated this accu- 
sation. On the whole, the British people shared the opinion of 
Robert Southey, who described the Republicans as the "Vile instru- 
mpnts of fallen Tyranny" after Napoleon's exile to Elba. 14 
/ Englishmen usually corresponded with Americans who were 
Federalists (or merchants, much the same thing), Federalist news- 
papers reached Britain more rapidly and in greater number than 
those of their opponents, and, as the American minister at London 
complained, Federalist pamphlets alone were reprinted in Britain. 
Thus Britain entertained illusory expectations of a Federalist re- 
turn to power and received news that confirmed the impression 
of American weakness and Republican Francophilia. When a long 
diatribe against the Embargo by Timothy Pickering reached Eng- 
land in the spring of 1 808, a member of the Cabinet exulted: "This 
letter . . . will prove a great embarrassment to the opposition, 
and particularly to Lord Grenville, in his promised motion for 
the recall of the Orders in Council." PAs predicted, Grenville's 
motion failed to get off the ground, The- Republicans complained 
that Federalist attacks were almost treasonable, and William Cob- 
bett, who with characteristic unpredictability shifted from violent 
opposition to forthright support of the American cause, warned 
Pickering and his confreres that they played into the hands of 
those in Britain who most hated the United States. 1 ' 5 Nevertheless, 
the flow of Federalist material to England continued. One-sided 