

14 George Joy to Grenville, n.d., enclosed in Joy to Samuel Whitbread, Feb. 24, 
1809, Samuel Whitbread MSS, Southill Park, Biggleswade, Bedfordshire; Cobbett's 
Political Register (London), XIII (1808), 1145 Rose $rio to Canning, secret and 
confidential, Feb. 6, 1808, Foreign Office Archives, Public Record Office, FO 5/56; 
"Ode Written during the War with America," Works of Southey, p. 367, 

15 William Pinkney to Madison, private, Dec. 21, 1807, William C. Rives Col- 
lection, Library of Congress j Harrowby to Countess of Harrowby, April 28, 1808, 
Dudley Ryder, ist Earl of Harrowby, MSS, Sandon Hall, Staff ordshire 5 Cobbett*s 
Register, XX (1811), 397-398. 

IO 



BELEAGUERED BRITAIN 

news helped confirm England's unfavorable portrait of the Ameri- 
cans. 

At no time did a powerful phil-American clique develop in 
either house of Parliament. When Charles James Fox, Lord Gren- 
ville, and their lieutenants urged compromise with the United 
States, they seldom argued in terms of affection for America. Fol- 
lowers of the Cabinet that issued the Orders in Council were more 
vindictive than the ministers, and the great mass of floating mem- 
bers (nearly half the House of Commons) was almost equally hos- 
tile. The temper of the Commons thus forbade important conces- 
sions to America. Many pensioners and placemen sat in the House, 
boroughmongers controlled a third or more of the votes, other 
and sometimes less important issues reduced the American ques- 
tion to second rank, and at the time of many important divisions 
the number of absentees (sometimes as many as two-thirds of the 
membership) would have scandalized even the American Con- 
gress. In 1809 Jefferson expostulated that the British government, 
compared at least with others since the age of Walpole, was "the 
most corrupted & corrupting mass of rottenness which ever usurped 
the name of government." 16 Bad though it may have been, and 
arrogantly unconcerned as it was with American affairs, this Par- 
liament and this system of government carried the war against 
Napoleon to a victorious conclusion. 

In the persons of the aged and presumably vindictive George III 
and, after his final attack of insanity, his allegedly more liberal 
son, the Prince Regent, royal influence played an important part 
in British politics. The Crown powerfully influenced, if it did not 
control, the election of at least a hundred members of Parliament, 
and the sovereign played an active role in the construction of new 
ministries. After William Pitt's death in 1 806 George III reluc- 
tantly accepted the Ministry of All the Talents, which included 
his old foe, Charles James Fox. The next year the weight of the 
Crown was thrown against the government and it fell from power. 
The King supported the ministry that followed, and in general 

16 Jefferson to William Lambert, Sept. 10, 1809, Thomas Jefferson MSS, Library 
of Congress. 

II 



BELEAGUERED BRITAIN 

he approved its policies. But he did not oppose the Talents because 
he objected to their comparatively mild American policy, and he 
neither sought to encourage nor enthusiastically praised the rigid 
line adopted by their successors. The Prince Regent, who took 
over the powers of the sovereign in 1810 and 181 1, was thought 
more liberal than his father, primarily because in his youth he had 
consorted with Fox. Americans hoped the Regent would return 
the heirs of Fox to power, and on several occasions American 
diplomats at London thought they detected conciliatory tend- 
encies in his conversation. But the Prince of Wales supported the 
ministry of Spencer Perceval and did not urge him to repeal the 
Orders in Council. After PercevaPs assassination the Regent made 
no effort to secure a pledge of repeal from the politicians arrang- 
ing a new ministry. As far as American affairs were concerned, the 
selfish, lazy Prince Regent played no more important a direct 
part than his father. 