

18 Madison to Monroe and Pinkney, May 20, 1807, Department of State Archives, 
National Archives, Instructions, All Countries, Vol. VI. 

13 



BELEAGUERED BRITAIN 

The Situation of Affairs in America appears to us here to be as little likely 
to lead to any amicable settlement, as they have been at any time for the 
last three or four Years. It is a Satisfaction, however, to reflect, that the 
Cause of our Country appears to gain ground in many parts of the United 
States, and if some material Change should not occur in the System of the 
Government, the result will probably be, the Separation of the Eastern 
from the Southern States. This Event, whenever it takes place, (and it 
will take place at no very distant period) will have the effect at least of 
securing the British Possessions in North America, from any Danger ar- 
riving from Foreign Aggression. 19 

Liverpool was essentially a pragmatist, and when after the War 
of 1812 he felt British interests best served by reconciliation he 
loyally supported the policies of his subordinate, Castlereagh. In 
the critical years before the war the facts seemed to him to justify 
a more rigorous policy. In similar fashion many Pittites aban- 
doned the policies followed by their leader in the lygo's. 

Essentially a disciple of Pitt, and in his own mind the most 
logical heir, was George Canning. Canning served as foreign secre- 
tary from 1807 to 1809. Thereafter, thanks to his own arrogance 
and a quarrel with Castlereagh, he was out of the government 
and often opposed it in Parliament. The Americans regarded Can- 
ning as their worst enemy, a not surprising attitude in view of the 
language Canning allowed himself to use in his diplomatic corre- 
spondence and speeches. Canning considered America a perversion 
of republicanism j in 1813 he asked sarcastically, "Who would have 
expected to have seen this favourite child of freedom leagued with 
the oppressor of the world? " and added, "In the republic of 
America we look for the realization of our visions of republican 
virtue in vain." 20 Nevertheless, Canning, along with Bathurst, 
attempted to preserve American neutrality by modifying the Or- 
ders in Council, and in 1812 he supported the Opposition attack 
upon the entire system. Although he paid too little attention to 

10 Liverpool to Sir James Craig, April 4, 1810, MSS of the first and second Earls 
of Liverpool, British Museum (Add. MSS 38190-38489, 38564-38581), Add. MSS 
38323. 

20 Hansard, XXIV, 640-642. 

H 



BELEAGUERED BRITAIN 

American sensibilities, the policy he favored was closer to the old 
Pitt tradition than the policy actually followed. 21 

Also somewhat apart from orthodox Pittites stood the tiny fac- 
tion called "the Saints." These evangelicals supported the Minis- 
try of All the Talents because it opposed the slave trade, but most 
of them later backed PercevaPs ministry. By far the most important 
for Anglo-American relations was James Stephen, a sturdy, ob- 
stinate, argumentative lawyer of the West Indian interest, and a 
man possessed of almost equal hatred of Napoleon and Jefferson. 
In 1805 Stephen's polemic, War in Disguise; Or y the Frauds of 
the Neutral Flags y touched off attacks upon American commerce. 
In succeeding years his pen and voice stirred up feeling against 
the United States. Stephen, who knew Perceval well and fre- 
quently advised him on maritime policy, was popularly supposed 
to be the father of the Orders in Council. He defended them 
vehemently until the very end, when he absented himself from 
the House of Commons to avoid listening to the announcement 
of suspension. As a faction, however, the Saints took no consistent 
position on American policy. One of them, William Wilberforce, 
philosophically apportioned the blame for friction equally be- 
tween the two countries. His desertion of the Orders in Council 
played an important part in their demise. 