

Those who argued in this fashion usually had their way from 

1805 to 1812. Except for the brief Ministry of All the Talents in 

1 806 and 1 807, British governments sought not to foster trade but 
to monopolize it. To solve Britain's problems, increased pressure 
upon American neutral commerce often suggested itself. For some 
this was merely a tactical response to the international situation 

30 John B. Holroyd, Earl of Sheffield, The Orders in Council and the American 
Embargo Beneficial to the Political and Commercial Interests of Great Britain (Lon- 
don, 1809), pp, 1416. 

^Hansard, VI, 10355 Jerome Alley, A Vindication of the Principles and State- 
ments Advanced in the Strictures of the Right Hon. Lord Sheffield (London, 1806), 
pp. 89-90. 

21 



BELEAGUERED BRITAIN 

or a projection of the feeling that, in resisting Napoleon, Britain 
was defending the entire free world. For others it had the broader 
purpose of restricting American growth and her rise to the first 
rank of powers. British policy combined about equal parts of 
monopolistic mercantilism and a desire to strangle Napoleon. And 
although the British system included far more concessions to 
American sensibilities than is usually recognized, even basically 
Anglophile citizens of the United States, like Rufus King, com- 
plained against the monopolistic implications of English policy. 
In 1811 Henry Clay declared that "the real cause of British ag- 
gression, was not to distress an enemy but to destroy a rival." 32 
As Clay suggested, England had rejected the analyses of Baring, 
Brougham, and the Edinburgh Review. \ 

Few people in England or America jFully understood the two 
nations' commercial interdependence. The Earl of Sheffield, who 
wrote pamphlets bearing the lengthy but explanatory titles of 
Strictures on the Necessity of Inviolably Maintaining the Naviga- 
tion and Colonial System of Great Britain and The Orders in 
Council and the American Embargo Beneficial to the Political and 
Commercial Interests of Great Britain, erroneously argued that the 
United States was or could almost painlessly be made absolutely 
subordinate and dependent upon Britain in the commercial sphere. 
(Jefferson equally fallaciously thought his country could wield 
the whip hand.) Pessimists and alarmists, among whom Baring 
must sometimes be included, were wrong when they asserted that 
America could without difficulty ride out the storm of commercial 
restriction while Britain would be grievously harmed. (In the 
same 'fashion, many Federalists spoke of the impossibility of 
challenging the strong, resilient economy of Britain.) Anglo- 
American trade had multiplied rather than contracted after sepa- 
ration of the two nations in 1783, and each country was the best 
customer of the other. Neither could afford to toss away cavalierly 
this huge trade. 

The British West Indies, the colonial area trading most ex- 
tensively with the United States, did indeed seem at America's 

lsy zath Cong, ist sess., pp. 599601. 