



CHAPTER 



II 



REPUBLICANISM 
AND NEUTRALITY 



Parliament met in the world's largest city, the metropolitan focus 
of Anglo-American civilization. By contrast, the American gov- 
ernment sat at Washington, a young city considered by most Eu- 
ropeans and not a few Americans almost a travesty of a national 
capital. 1 Only 6,000 people, settled in straggling little villages 
along the axis of Pennsylvania Avenue from the Eastern Branch 
to Georgetown, lived in the District of Columbia. The arrival of 
140 congressmen and 34 senators strained the modest capacities of 
Washington boardinghouses ; several congressmen often shared a 
bedroom, and the dining rooms frequently served as small caucus 

1 One British minister, Augustus John Foster, mildly challenged the opinions of 
other foreign visitors, but his comments are cool enough: "I would not, of course, 
compare the life we led at the American capital with the mode of spending time in 
any of the great European cities where amusements are so varied and manners are 
much more refined, but making allowances for its size and strange position I cannot be 
so severe in describing it as some travellers have been." Richard B. Davis, ed., Jeffer~ 
sonian America: Notes on the United States of America . . . by Sir Augustus John 
Foster, Bart. (San Marino, 195 4), p. 108. 

32 



REPUBLICANISM AND NEUTRALITY 

or committee rooms. For its formal business Congress had to make 
do with the north wing of the Capitol, completed in 1 807. The 
roof soon leaked, and acoustics in the legislative chambers, par- 
ticularly the House, were so bad that many a fiery oration escaped 
the hearing of congressmen distant from the speaker. At no time 
was Washington more than the political capital of the nation, for, 
whereas London was also the center of British economic life, in 
America the commercial cities of Boston, New York, Philadelphia, 
and Baltimore shared this function. Washington and London sym- 
bolized the contrast between republican America, a young nation 
with a white population of scarcely 5 millions, and aged, ordered 
Britain, with nearly four times as many people. 

Political life in the United States was in many respects simpler 
than in Britain, where factionalism made the tenure of govern- 
ments insecure. After 1801 the decline of Federalist strength con- 
ferred almost dictatorial powers upon the Republicans, provided 
they could maintain discipline. In 1805 the Federalists held only 
one quarter of the seats in each of the houses of Congress, and 
until the War of 1812 temporarily aided them, their share never 
much exceeded one-third. For this their own weakness was pri- 
marily responsible, for, the Louisiana Purchase aside, the Jeffer- 
sonians had accomplished remarkably little. Federalists allowed 
themselves to become identified with separatism, with disloyal 
Anglophilia, with supercilious disregard for less successful fellow 
citizens. Except in Connecticut they had to fight for their political 
lives, even in the old bastion of Massachusetts. The broad national 
appeal that once brought them support even in the South evap- 
orated, although a few Southern Federalists remained in Congress 
even after 1805. Federalism might profit from Jeffersonian mis- 
takes or Republican divisions, but it was sterile ; its days of useful- 
ness had passed. 