

4 Quincy to Eliza S. Quincy, n.d., Edmund Quincy, Life of Josiah Quincy (Boston, 

34 



REPUBLICANISM AND NEUTRALITY 

ity leader in the war Congress of 1811-1812, had prejudices 
almost equally deep. For tactical reasons he imposed a flexible 
policy upon the party, but he never admitted the sincerity of the 
Republicans upon any important issue. From 1805 to 1812 Fed- 
eralists seldom offered more than carping, negative criticism. 

Pessimism and despair largely explain Federalist rigidity. Their 
enemies 3 victories convinced them that the people had been se- 
duced by visionary or corrupt politicians. It scarcely occurred to the 
Federalists, who had usually simply assumed that the people 
would follow the lead of the virtuous and the wellborn, to try to 
equal Republican organizational efforts, at least on a national 
scale. "Neither learning, morals nor wisdom seem any longer to 
be regarded as objects of public esteem & favour, 35 Rufus King 
wrote in 1807. King therefore continued in retirement, and active 
Federalists considered themselves the rear guard of a band of 
heroes, not the vanguard of a political movement. They opposed 
as evil almost anything the Republicans supported, to the dismay 
of some of their number like Noah Webster, who wrote: "There is 
a way to preserve the confidence of the populace, without a sacri- 
fice of integrity. In morality, an honest man must make no con- 
cessions that violate the laws of right. But political measures are 
rarely connected with moral right & wrong , at least the greatest 
proportion are mere matters of expedience." By 1811 the habit of 
rigid opposition against which Webster complained had become a 
fixation, leading the Federalists to absurd lengths. "Instead of a 
patriotic opposition to an oppressive government," their congres- 
sional leader complained, "they are in great danger of degenerat- 
ing into a mere faction, ready to quarrel with anything which may 
endanger, or adopt anything which will promote, party success." * 

A loosening grip upon the press contributed to the decline of 
Federalism, particularly since newspaper columns were the princi- 



1867), p. 134. Cf. John Randolph: "The gentleman has powers, and of no ordinary 
cast} and he has certainly given to the House a strong- proof of his candor, whatever 
it may have been of his discretion." Annals, loth Cong., ad sess., p. 1465. 

5 King to Noah Webster, n.d. [June 30, 1807?], Charles R. King, The Life and 
Correspondence of Rufus King (6 vols.j New York, 1894-1900), V, 355 Webster to 
King, July 6, 1807, ibid. y V, 38 5 Quincy to Eliza S. Quincy, n.d. [Dec., 18 1 1], Quincy, 
o<p. cit.y p. 241. 

35 



REPUBLICANISM AND NEUTRALITY 

pal vehicles of political propaganda. 6 The Boston Columbian Cen- 
tinel and the Connecticut Courant of Hartford spoke the language 
of Federalist orthodoxy in New England, and lesser journals 
echoed them. After 1 808 the Baltimore Federal Republican, man- 
aged by a former employee of the Department of State discharged 
by Madison, carried on a campaign of unequaled viciousness 
against the administration. On the whole the Federalists were ill 
served, at least south of the Hudson. Well before the War of 
1812 Republican newspapers outnumbered those of their rivals, 
and a majority of the most important newspapers in the land op- 
posed Federalism even if they did not unwaveringly support Jeffer- 
son and Madison. The National Intelligencer, edited at Wash- 
ington by Samuel Harrison Smith, profited from its monopoly of 
congressional reporting and its important position as administra- 
tion spokesman to become the most widely read paper in the coun- 
try. William Duane's Aurora often used its energy to attack rival 
Pennsylvania Republicans, but, as befitted an Irish republican, 
Duane even more consistently attacked Federalism and Great 
Britain. At Boston the Independent Chronicle carried the war to 
the enemy so aggressively that the French minister considered it 
America's most Francophile journal. Only in New York City, 
where but three of the fourteen newspapers were Republican and 
the strongest of these, the Columbian, was a supporter of Clinton- 
ian Republicanism rather than of the administration, was the party 
in a bad way. Jefferson frequently complained of the public press. 
Actually Republican papers were better edited and more widely 
distributed than those of their rivals. 7 