

29 



BELEAGUERED BRITAIN 

States. Most went to the British Isles and aided the British econ- 
omy. Even in 1801-1802, when Europe was at peace and the 
oceans were open, Britain purchased goods worth twice as much 
as the American produce shipped to France. In wartime the pro- 
portion was even higher ; in 1806 the United States exported $20 
million worth of her own goods to Britain and only $2.7 million 
worth to France. Total American domestic exports topped $41 
million in 1 806 and reached a peak of nearly $49 million in 1 807. 
That year, 64 million pounds of cotton, 1.2 million bushels of 
wheat, 62,000 hogsheads of tobacco, and large amounts of hemp, 
beef, corn, and other commodities were shipped abroad. Some of 
these goods were exported in larger quantities later on in terms 
of bulk, the peak of cotton and tobacco exports did not come until 
1 8 10 but a falling price level and reduced exports of foodstuffs 
meant that the peak value of 1807 was not again reached. Still, 
except during the Embargo, exports remained about double what 
they had been in the early 1790'$. Until at least 1807 the Ameri- 
can farmer was correspondingly prosperous. 

The reexport trade expanded even more spectacularly, from an 
infinitesimal amount in 1791 to $60 million in 1806. In 1806, 47 
million pounds of coffee, more than 146 million pounds of sugar, 
and nearly 2 million pounds of cotton imported into the United 
States were reexported to Europe. The government encouraged 
this commerce by returning, in the form of drawbacks, almost all 
customs duties levied at the time of the original importation. This 
trade permitted goods from French and Spanish colonies in the 
Caribbean, as well as the lie de France and Bourbon, to reach the 
home country. It cast the protection of a neutral flag over supplies 
Napoleon woefully needed, frustrating the Royal Navy's efforts 
to break up French commerce. It contributed to a worsening de- 
pression in the British West Indies by providing competitive goods 
that increased the oversupply in Europe. Britain scarcely benefited 
at all, for less than 5 per cent of all reexported commodities went 
to England and her colonies. Many Englishmen angrily pro- 
nounced American merchants and shipowners effectively allied 
with the Emperor Napoleon. 

30 



BELEAGUERED BRITAIN 

The passage of time enables us to be dispassionate, to see that 
Alexander Baring argued correctly when he attempted to convince 
his countrymen that American prosperity was in effect their own. 
It is, however, characteristic of the entire period that emotion and 
not reason governed British attitudes. Faced with prospects so 
bleak that Lord Grenville virtually turned his back upon office 
to avoid responsibility for the national humiliation he considered 
inevitable, consoled only by a conviction that England acted as 
the defender and, God willing, the savior of the entire world, 
painfully aware that the Americans formerly symbols of suc- 
cessful rebellion and now of republicanism were steadily ad- 
vancing in wealth and self-esteem, Englishmen understandably 
allowed themselves to treat the United States in a brusque, cavalier, 
contemptuous fashion. To say this is not to condone the interrup- 
tion of American trade, to palliate the brutal attack upon the 
Chesapeake y to justify the forcible seizure of American seamen. 
In fact, Britain would best have served her own interests if she 
had done none of these things. But Britain was beleaguered, and 
those under siege are not likely to allow dispassion and long-range 
thinking to dominate their policy. 