

The violence of this propaganda caused frequent complaints of libel. In 1812 Gov- 
ernor Elbridge Gerry of Massachusetts officially declared that 262 libelous articles 
had been published in the past thirteen months, not counting- those directed at for- 
eign governments or individuals or at rival newspaper editors. Republican Gerry 
declared that only twenty-five of these had appeared in Republican papers. Charles 
Warren, Jacobin and Junto } or Early American Politics as Viewed in the Diary of Dr. 
Nathaniel Ames (Cambridge, 1931), p. 213. 

7 Isaiah Thomas, History of Printing in America, II, American Antiquarian 
Society, Transactions and Collections^ VoL VI (2d ed. $ Albany, 1874), pp. 294 304 j 
Louis M. Se"rurier to Minister of Foreign Relations, March 10, 1812, Archives des 
Affaires Etrangeres, Correspondance Politique, tats-Unis (photostats, Library of 
Congress), Vol. LXVII. 

36 



REPUBLICANISM AND NEUTRALITY 

The great triumvirate at the head o the Republican party ex- 
plains its success far more than increasing newspaper support or 
the erosion of Federalism. Thomas Jefferson's simple and often 
noble ideals, his insistence upon the unique virtue of the American 
experiment, his sturdy but moderate republicanism, his dislike of 
pomp and ceremony these appealed deeply to American citi- 
zens. Less loved but widely respected, James Madison admirably 
conducted the business of the Department of State and loyally sup- 
ported the efforts of Jefferson, with whom he was in close rapport. 
Albert Gallatin, similarly devoted, installed at the Treasury the 
fiscal simplicity required by Republican doctrine and often served 
as a useful balance wheel to restrain the ardors of his chief. Jef- 
ferson and his two lieutenants dominated American politics and 
American diplomacy. The battles were fought upon issues they 
pushed to the fore. 

Jefferson attracted the blind, even excessive, loyalty of many 
Republicans. In 1808 an idolatrous clergyman declared: "With 
the philosopher, the statesman, the patriot Jefferson at the helm, 
our country assumed an attitude which the angels of God surveyed 
with approbation, and which excited the rancors of the enemies 
of Freedom!" 8 Although Federalists attacked him while he lived 
and some nineteenth-century historians were critical, in our time 
Thomas Jefferson has become one of the central figures in the 
American pantheon Jefferson the democrat, the defender of un- 
derdogs, the man of catholic interests, the liberal philosopher, the 
uniquely perceptive American patriot. Perhaps it is time to reassay 
the Virginian, at least as chief executive and grand strategist of 
American diplomacy. Perhaps a half-felt sense of inadequacy 
caused Jefferson to order that no mention of his presidency be 
chiseled into the stone that marks his grave. 

In 1805 Jefferson had passed the age of sixty, a fact of more 
than ordinary significance since the story of his life is in part the 
story of a gradual shedding of youthful enthusiasms. He was tall 
and carelessly stooped, thin, freckled, grey of hair, somewhat shy 