

Although Britain shipped large quantities of metal goods and 
pottery, books, and even some cheese and salt across the Atlantic, 
textiles were the major export. The great expansion of Midland 
mills had already begun, and particularly during war the chief 
market for cottons produced in Manchester, Birmingham, and 
lesser centers lay across the Atlantic. In 1806, for example, Britain 
sent to America cottons and woolens worth $4.1 million, more than 
half her textile exports and nearly one-quarter of all British ex- 
ports of whatever kind. American citizens needed English cloth 
almost as much as British factories required a market. Like other 
branches of commerce, the textile trade demonstrated the two na- 
tions' interdependence. 

Certain British interests, long especially cherished by Parlia- 
ment, claimed that America attained prosperity at their expense. 
"They think our prosperity filched from theirs," Jefferson ob- 
served in i8io. 39 Merchants, traders, and plantation owners 
blamed the West Indian depression on American competition. 
Shipowners expressed dismay at the rise of the American merchant 
marine, which, one anti-American pamphleteer claimed, deprived 
England of an income of $18 million a year. 40 More generally, 
many Englishmen, bearing the burden of a contest they believed 

38 See Heckscher, o$. cit., p. 324, for the percentages. They do not quite agree with 
the figures Heckscher gives for the value of the trade on page 245. See also Crouzet, 
o>p cit., II, 884, 886. 

39 Jefferson to William Duane, Nov. 13, 1810, Andrew A. Lipscomb and Albert E. 
Bergh, eds., The Writings of Thomas Jefferson (Memorial ed.; 20 vols.j Washing- 
ton, 1903-1904), XII, 434. 

40 /on f ;|cV the House of Commons y LXVII (1812), 761, 7685 Joseph Marryat, 
Hints to Both Parties; or Observations on the Proceedings in Parliament ufon the 
Petitions against the Orders m Council (London, 1808), p. 20. 

27 



BELEAGUERED BRITAIN 

a struggle for the world's freedom, felt jealousy rather than grati- 
fication when they saw America thriving. Almost all English 
travelers commented unfavorably on the acquisitiveness of Ameri- 
cans, the single-mindedness with which they pursued profit. Britons 
scoffed when, in his first inaugural address, Jefferson hailed his 
country as a "rising nation, spread over a wide and fruitful land, 
traversing all the seas with the rich productions of their industry, 
. . . advancing rapidly to destinies beyond the reach of mortal 
eye." Englishmen pointed out how much America owed to the 
Royal Navy, which, by driving Britain's enemies from the seas, 
had in effect conferred a huge commerce upon the neutral United 
States. "Their own fair Trade has increased immensely & yet," 
Augustus Foster complained, "they would have the carrying all 
the French & Spanish, there is not, thanks to our Tars, a single 
French or Spanish merchantman that now navigates these Seas 
& these Jews want to navigate for them." Many Americans agreed 
that their countrymen pushed too hard, that national interests had 
been subordinated to individual greed. "Where interest prevails 
& patriotism is little known," a Jeffersonian minister lamented 
when Massachusetts protested the Embargo, "we can hope noth- 
ing from the latter without some present hopes of the former. 
Prosperity has been at the helm & has corrupted us." 41 Extreme 
Republicans and British nationalists agreed on one thing, at least. 
Nominally, America showed a deficit in her trade with Britain. 
But English statistics are unsatisfactory and incomplete, and, as 
the Secretary of the Treasury himself pointed out, his reports, based 
upon costs at American seaports, included freightage on imports 
from Britain but omitted it on exports. The profits of transatlantic 
carriage, almost monopolized by the Americans, surely reversed 
the theoretical deficit. Furthermore, Americans often transferred 
the proceeds of European sales to Britain for expenditure there 
(Alexander Baring estimated that three-quarters were so trans- 