

8 John Foster, An Oration, Pronounced- by Rev. Jo An Foster > on the jth of July, 
1808 (Salem, 1808), pp. 1112. 

37 



REPUBLICANISM AND' NEUTRALITY 

and a difficult conversationalist in large groups or with strangers 
but brilliant and far-ranging when in full flight. As president he 
adopted informal, democratic protocol at the White House and 
abandoned the custom of personal appearances before Congress 
on the ostensible ground that the members might be overawed. 
The party's rank and file idolized him. 

Jefferson considered himself a philosopher, and in a sense he 
was. But, as Charles Wiltse has observed, Jefferson applied rather 
than originated theories of human behavior; he was a Locke or a 
Lenin, not a Hobbes or a Marx. To some at the time William 
Plumer, for example and to others since, he appeared almost too 
rational and studious. Wiltse comments, "Jefferson's humanity is 
always of the head rather than of the heart. ... If he claims 
equality for all men, it is not because he feels that men are equal, 
but because he reasons that they must be so." 9 True though this 
is, it misses another part of Jefferson's thought, the petty prejudices 
that sometimes influenced him. In 1819 John Quincy Adams, by 
this time himself a sturdy Republican, came upon a letter written 
by Jefferson nearly a decade before. Adams commented that the 
letter was "a mixture of profound and sagacious observation, with 
strong prejudices and irritated passions. It is a sort of epitome of 
his political opinions and feelings. Jefferson is one of the great men 
whom this country has produced, one of the men who has con- 
tributed largely to the formation of our national character to 
much that is good and to not a little that is evil in our sentiments 
and manners." 10 Jefferson's correspondence contains many flashes 
of philosophy, philosophy reflected in the course of action he 
urged upon the state. But the sage of Monticello never organized 
his thought in a cohesive whole (how many American political 
philosophers have?), and he was, far more than he realized, the 
prey of impulse and emotion. "Eclectic" and "adaptable" are the 
adjectives best applied to his concepts. 

By the time he left office in 1809, Jefferson had modified many 

9 Charles M. Wiltse, The Jefersonian Tradition in American Democracy (Chapel 
Hill, 1935)? P- 5- 

10 Entry of Dec. 27, 1819, Charles F. Adams, ed., Memoirs of John Quincy Adams 
(12 vols.j Philadelphia, 1 8 74.! 8 77) % IV, 492. 

38 



REPUBLICANISM AND NEUTRALITY 

of his theoretical precepts in the interest of realism as he saw it. 
Committed to a narrow interpretation of the Constitution, he ex- 
panded the activities of the federal government more, at least, 
than any president between Washington and Jackson. On his own 
admission he acted unconstitutionally in arranging the acquisi- 
tion of Louisiana, subordinating theory to national good. The 
Embargo was of such dubious constitutionality that the Republi- 
cans did not permit it to be submitted to the Supreme Court for 
review. The earnest advocate of republicanism, Jefferson once 
praised an elaborate pyramidal hierarchy of popular and elected 
assemblies rising from town meetings of the New England sort to 
Congress and the president. Later he came, with some justice, to 
consider the New England gatherings seditious and to doubt the 
wisdom of Congress, primarily because of "the wonderful credu- 
lity of the members ... in the floating lies of the day, . . . 
[of which] no experience seems to correct them. I have never 
seen a Congress during the last 8. years," Jefferson continued, "a 
great majority of which I would not implicitly rely on in any ques- 
tion, could their minds have been purged of all errors of fact. 35 n 
The minds of Congress and the people could not be purged, and 
in practice Jefferson fell back upon the theory that the adminis- 
trators of government were stewards of the people, in whose in- 
terests and with whose support the expert, the rational, and the 
intelligent might govern. The result of these two accommodations 
of theory to contemporary conditions was government that often 
differed only in form from that of John Adams. 