

36 Foster to Lady Elizabeth Foster, Nov. i, 1807, Foster MSS$ Cabot to Pickering, 
Dec. 1 8, 1808, Henry Cabot Lodge, Life and Letters of George Cabot (Boston, 1877), 
p. 4025 Crouzet, op. cit., I, 98100. Heckscher, op. cit., pp. 337338, estimates that 
Britain never imported more than one-sixth of the grain she consumed, and on the 
average only one-sixteenth. The standard treatment of this topic, from which figures 
in this paragraph have been taken, is W. Freeman Galpin, The Grain Supply of Eng- 
land during the Napoleonic Period, University of Michigan Publications in History 
and Political Science, Vol. VI (New York, 1925). 

25 



BELEAGUERED BRITAIN 

efforts to increase European textile production, the Continent 
never absorbed more than a small fraction of the exports that 
normally flowed to Britain. For their part English mills depended 
heavily upon American supplies. Although Americans faced com- 
petition from British colonies and other areas, they provided al- 
most exactly one-half of all British cotton imports until the Em- 
bargo and made huge shipments of raw cotton spasmodically in 
later years. 

Two factors somewhat eased Britain's dependence upon the 
United States. In the first place, the glut after 1805 delayed the 
impact of reduced American supplies. Lord Sheffield even main- 
tained that Britain "benefitted [from the Embargo] by an ac- 
cumulating inactive stock [of cotton] being called into active de- 
mand." Second, the uncertainty of American supplies spurred the 
development of alternate sources. For example, Britain imported 
only 3,500 bags of cotton from Brazil in 1808. Thereafter the 
trade mushroomed almost as rapidly as that with America had a 
decade earlier, and in 1814 England bought more than 100,000 
bags of Brazilian cotton. Thus, although Great Britain found the 
United States by far the easiest and cheapest source of supply, 
America was not the only one; the day of "King Cotton," if it 
ever existed, still lay in the future. The United States, on the 
other hand, was almost entirely dependent upon England as a 
cotton market. 37 

Britain most needed the American market for her manufactured 
goods, particularly since it was precisely these that Napoleon most 
consistently prohibited entry to the Continent. Down to 1807 the 
Americans purchased about one-third of all exported British goods, 
roughly $50 million worth every year. The Embargo reduced but 
did not eliminate this trade (the proportion of British exports 
sent to the United States never dropped below 1 5 per cent) . After 
a revival in 1810, when America purchased $48 million worth 
of British goods, nearly one-quarter of English exports, the Ameri- 

37 Sheffield, Orders in Council, p. ax. In addition to the sources t'\ * above, see 
G. W. Daniels, "American Cotton Trade with Liverpool under the i^mbargx* and 
Non-Intercourse Acts," American Historical Review, XXI (19151916), 276287. 

26 



BELEAGUERED BRITAIN 

can market finally dried up when nonimportation went into effect 
early in i8n. 38 In that year the United States imported only $6 
million worth of British goods, thus contributing mightily to the 
deepening of a depression that had already commenced in Eng- 
land. Custom, easy transportation, a viable credit system, and the 
slow development of American manufactures all conferred upon 
England a huge market in the United States, a market essential 
to her prosperity. 