

Politically and economically the most important American com- 
modities shipped to Britain were foodstuffs and cotton. Despite 
a spectacular expansion of grain production during the Napoleonic 
Wars, the British Isles could not feed themselves. In 1807 Eng- 

34 Far less important, but still substantial, was America's trade with British India. 
Despite expiration of the commercial articles of the Jay treaty and thus of the formal 
basis for Indian- American trade, this commerce continued. The Americans came to 
have a share of Indian trade approximately half as large as that of the East India 
Company, and neither the British government nor authorities in India paid much 
heed to the company's reiterated desires to curb American rivals. In this area, at least, 
the ministry recognized that both countries benefited from the fostering- of trade. On 
this subject see Holden Furber, "The Beginnings of American Trade with India, 
i784.-i8i2," New England Quarterly, XI (1938;, 235265. 

35 This and succeeding paragraphs rest on information from widely scattered 
sources. Perhaps most important are Eli F. Heckscher, The Continental System (Lon- 
don, 1922) 5 William Smart, Economic Annals of the Nineteenth Century, I (London, 
1910) ; George R. Porter, The Progress of the Nation, rev. F. W. Hirst (rev. ed.j 
London, 1912) ; Adam Seybert, Statistical Annals . . . of the United States of 
America (Philadelphia, 1818)5 Francois Crouzet, L'Economie Britannique et le 
B locus Continental (2 vols. j Paris, 1958). 

24 



BELEAGUERED BRITAIN 

land imported 2 million bushels of wheat from the United States 
and only 1.25 million bushels from all other countries. That year 
a young British diplomat at Washington wrote, "War with the 
World America excepted, which is our granary, I think we might 
maintain, but, I hope we shall not quarrel with our Bread & But- 
ter." Ordinarily American grain did not dominate the British 
market, primarily because Napoleon often tolerated huge exports 
from the Continent. From 1800 to 1812 the Americans provided 
only about one-quarter of all British wheat imports, and the chances 
of literally starving England into submission by cutting off this 
trade were slim indeed. Britain, a Federalist critic of Republican 
economic warfare wrote, "brews into beer more than we ever sell 
to her, and almost as much as we can spare to the whole world." 
The prospects of American supplies powerfully affected the price 
level in Britain, and the British West Indies and later Wellington's 
Peninsular army required American foodstuffs. It can reasonably 
be asserted, however, that the Anglo-American grain trade was 
most important as a means of disposing of an American surplus, 
not as a source of British supply. 36 

May the same be said of American cotton exports? From 1805 
until the declaration of war in 1812, America annually exported 
more than 46 million pounds of her cotton, and at least 80 per 
cent went to Great Britain. In a good year like 1807 the Ameri- 
cans received more than $13 million from England for cotton 
alone. Without the British market American plantations would 
have had no excuse for existence. In theory, an alternate market 
existed on the Continent, and American farmers often complained 
that the Royal Navy prevented them from exploiting it. (With 
more justification, the same complaint was made with respect to 
tobacco, another important export.) However, despite Napoleon's 