

The Federalists lacked leadership as well as a positive program. 
John Adams' retirement to Quincy removed him from the scene 
almost as effectively as Aaron Burr's pistol had quieted Hamilton, 
and the party fell into the hands of lesser leaders neither so well 
balanced as Adams nor so bold as Hamilton. Rufus King of New 

33 



REPUBLICANISM AND NEUTRALITY 

York, whose services during and after the Constitutional Conven- 
tion entitled him to leadership, rusticated on Long Island, observ- 
ing the political scene, farming, playing with his nephews and 
nieces, but rarely attempting to influence the party. In foreign 
affairs, although an undoubted Federalist, King was a loyal Amer- 
ican, judging each issue upon its merits as he saw them and con- 
ferring his support upon the administration when he thought it 
acted wisely. 2 Had Federalism been led to constructive criticism 
by King or a man of his stamp, it would have had a reason and per- 
haps a hope for success. Instead, narrow and unreasonable men 
like Timothy Pickering, Barent Gardenier, and Josiah Quincy took 
command. Pickering in particular opposed any moderate course 5 
he was described by one critic as possessed of "the stern severity 
of a Roman Cato" and by an ally as "a perfect hater of democratic 
fraud and villainy," 3 and this severity and hatred became his most 
notable characteristics. In the Senate and in pamphlets and news- 
paper articles he showed himself willing to risk the Union itself 
if this would advance the cause of Federalism and Great Britain. 
Barent Gardenier, a New Yorker who led the Federalist clique in 
the House of Representatives during the Embargo, differed little 
from Pickering in his political outlook. His successor as file leader 
wrote of Gardenier, "He is a man of wit and desultory reading, 
accustomed to the skirmishing and electioneering violence of New 
York. He brings it all into debate in an honest, unguarded, incon- 
siderate manner, very well calculated to inflame the party passions 
opposed to him, but not to make converts." 4 Josiah Quincy, minor- 

2 John Quincy Adams also might have been considered for leadership. But, dis- 
couraged by the disloyal carping of other Federalists and doubtless also influenced by 
the treatment accorded his father in 1800, Adams drifted toward Republicanism, and 
in 1808 he attended the Republican caucus. That his sturdy nationalism and his in- 
terest in the rights of American neutral commerce found an easier home in the Re- 
publican party is an added condemnation of Federalism in this period. Similarly 
alienated by Federalism's drift were such persons as William Plumer of New Hamp- 
shire and, more slowly, Oliver Wolcott, the ultra-Hamiltonian secretary of the 
treasury under Adams. 

3 William Plumer to William Plumer, Jr., Dec. 30, 1805, Charles S. Hall, Benja- 
min Tallmadge (New York, 194.3), p. 184.5 Bigelow to Hannah G. Bigelow, Dec. 
29, 1 8 10, Clarence S. Brigham, ed., "Letters of Abijah Bigelow, Member of Con- 
gress, to His Wife, 1810-1815," American Antiquarian Society, Proceedings, n.s., 
XL (1931), 312. 