

14 Jefferson's farewell to the citizens of Washington, 1809, Joseph I. Shulim, The 
Old Dominion and Napoleon Bonaparte (New York, 1952), p. 279; Jefferson to 
Kosciuszko, April 13, 1811, Lipscomb and Bergh, o$. cit n XIII, 41425 Jefferson to 
Thomas Cooper, Feb. 18, 1806, Jefferson MSSj Jefferson to William Wirt, May 3, 

1811, Lipscomb and Bergh, op. cit., XIII, 60 j Jefferson to Charles Pinckney, Feb. 2, 

1812, Thomas Jefferson MSS (Coolidge Collection), Massachusetts Historical Society. 

15 Jefferson to William Short, June 12, 1807, Lipscomb and Bergh, o<p. cit., XI, 
2275 Jefferson to Gallatin, July 10, 1807, ibid., XI, 267-2685 Jefferson to Walter 
Jones, March 5, 1810, ibid., XII, 371. 

^ Irving Brant, James Madison: Secretary of State (Indianapolis, 1953), performs 
valuable service in emphasizing Madison's positive contributions to Jeffersonian diplo- 
macy, but in attempting to restore the balance he perhaps goes too far in the other 
direction. 

42 



REPUBLICANISM AND NEUTRALITY 

better informed than his chief, although his foreign correspondents 
were far less numerous. Despite the plague of many minor illnesses 
Jefferson, too, was not free from frequent migraine headaches 
Madison was a tremendous worker, and his contributions to the 
political success of the Republican party and the development of 
American policy were scarcely less than those of Jefferson him- 
self. 

Differences in age, temperament, position, and reputation made 
Madison definitely the subordinate of Jefferson until 1 809. Madi- 
son's mind ran in narrower channels. Although far abler at detailed 
analysis, he was less decisive, tending always to magnify the 
dangers of any proposed course. (This served him ill when he 
became president and lost or discarded Jefferson's guidance.) Fed- 
eralists called Madison the mere hired attorney of the President, 
a slander that had a bite of truth within it. An able advocate, a 
shrewd debater, a master at marshaling facts, down to 1809 the 
Secretary showed little boldness or originality. In January, 1806, 
a long pamphlet, the product of several month's labor by the 
Secretary, was quietly laid on the desks of Congress. It bore the 
forbidding title, An Examination of the British Doctrine, Which 
Subjects to Capture a Neutral Trade , Not Open in Time of Peace. 
Characteristically, the pamphlet was anonymous, although the 
author soon became known. Equally characteristically, it was an 
overwhelming and in many respects devastating, but almost totally 
dispassionate, dissection of one aspect of British maritime policy. 
It was verbose and too complicated for ordinary readers. Above all, 
the pamphlet contained no suggested remedy for the evil of Brit- 
ish insult, and it merited John Randolph's scornful comment: 
"After all, what does it contain? A remedy for the evil? No; a 
formal declaration that we are diseased! Sir, we wanted no ghost 
to tell us that." 17 An Examination of the British Doctrine, the 
chef-d'oeuvre of Madison's secretaryship, properly reflected his 
strengths and weaknesses. 