

While schismatics usually could find hallowed party doctrines 
to justify their rebelliousness, as a responsible national leader Jef- 
ferson could not permit himself to be enslaved by antique doctrine. 
His old prejudices against ocean commerce and native manufactur- 
ing gradually softened, although he still gave his greatest devotion 
to agriculture. In 1 809 he wrote, in characteristically simple and 
mechanical terms : 

An equilibrium of agriculture, manufactures & commerce is certainly be- 
come essential to our independence, manufactures sufficient for our own 
consumption of what we raise the raw materials (and no more) . commerce 
sufficient to carry the surplus produce of agriculture, beyond our own con- 
sumption, to a market for exchanging it for articles we cannot raise (and 
no more.) these are the true limits of manufactures & commerce. 28 

A desire for national self-sufficiency and his recognition of the 
interests of a large nonfarming segment of the population caused 

27 Smith to j Dec. 14, 1805, Samuel Smith MSS, Library of Congress, Letter 

Book 18057. 

28 Jefferson to Sir James Jay, April 7, 1809, Jefferson MSS. 

49 



REPUBLICANISM AND NEUTRALITY 

Jefferson to shift toward this more realistic view of economic 
balance. 

Jefferson and his followers never abandoned one old Republi- 
can ideal, reduction of the national debt as rapidly as possible. 
Between 1801 and 1812 the government showed a deficit in only 
one year, 1 809. In the best years federal income was nearly double 
expenditure. In 1806 and 1807 two-fifths of the government's 
income went to reduce the debt, and in 1 808 Jefferson and Gallatin 
came within half a million dollars of dividing receipts equally 
between expenditures and debt retirement. Between 1801 and 
1812 the Republicans reduced the national debt by $38 million, or 
about 40 per cent. 

Increased customs receipts, not reduced expenditures, really 
produced the surpluses. Almost no income came from internal 
taxes, for the hated Federalist excises had been repealed. Despite 
increased sales of public lands after 1804, income from this source 
never much exceeded 5 per cent of the government's receipts. The 
Treasury depended almost entirely upon customs revenue, the 
fruit of America's prospering foreign trade. Except during the 
Embargo this ran at about double the Federalist level and made 
possible the debt retirement so cherished by Jefferson, Madison, 
and Gallatin. 

Republican fiscal policy had unfortunate consequences. Par- 
simony and retrenchment meant inadequate preparation for war, 
which reduced American influence and made Madison's task more 
difficult after 1812. Nearly total reliance upon customs revenues 
meant serious financial problems whenever trade restrictions or 
war reduced this income, and the abolition of internal taxes de- 
stroyed a potentially broad tax base. Concentration on debt reduc- 
tion allowed the government to ignore the creation of a federal 
credit system. Amortization of the debt and government on the 
cheap were not the prescriptions needed from 1807 to 1812. 