

17 James Madison, An Examination of the British Doctrine, Which Subjects to 
Capture a Neutral Trade, Not O$en in Time of Peace (Philadelphia, 1806), re- 
printed in Gaillard Hunt, ed., The Writings of James Madison (9 vols.; New York, 
1900-1910), VII, 204-375 j Annals, 9th Cong-., ist sess., p. 600. 

4-3 



REPUBLICANISM AND NEUTRALITY 

Yet Madison was not a mere thinking machine. He had pride, 
ambition,, and independence coupled with haunting personal mis- 
givings which no doubt help to explain his frequent illnesses after 
becoming president. Reserved in official intercourse, in private life 
he was more sociable than Jefferson. A British diplomat, who dur- 
ing the trying months just before the American declaration of 
war thought him "rather too much the disputatious pleader," 
added that, at parties, Madison was "a social, jovial and good- 
humored companion full of anecdote and sometimes matter of 
loose description relating to old times, but often of a political and 
historical interest." 18 Almost without exception, those who knew 
Madison well liked him. But his compact figure, carefully pow- 
dered hair, and neat dress all in marked contrast to Jefferson 
furthered his reputation as a clerkly type of man. 

Secretary of the Treasury Gallatin performed somewhat the 
same function as Madison, acting as an occasional brake upon 
Jefferson and, in his own special field of finance, as the initiator 
of detailed policy. Gallatin also served as a channel of informal 
communication with Congress, partly because he lived nearer 
Capitol Hill and partly because his brother-in-law, Joseph Nichol- 
son, was until 1807 an important member of the House of Repre- 
resentatives. Although by common consent able and dedicated, 
Gallatin was not popular. His foreignness offended some Republi- 
cans perhaps also jealous of his ability. Some, restive under control 
but too craven to attack the more powerful Virginia chieftains, 
took their anger out upon Gallatin. Jefferson, who deeply re- 
spected Gallatin and recognized that finance and foreign affairs 
were closely mingled, unceasingly consulted the Secretary of the 
Treasury. When they did disagree Gallatin nevertheless devoted 
his full energies to support of the policy Jefferson desired. In the 
last eighteen months of Jefferson's administration Gallatin's pri- 
vate voice supported measures looking to war. Commenting on 
British and French insults, he wrote: "Let those nations pursue 
what course they please, I feel a perfect confidence that America 
will never adopt a policy which would render her subservient to 

18 Davis, of. cit., p. 155. 

44. 



REPUBLICANISM AND NEUTRALITY 

either, and that . . . she will meet with fortitude the crisis . . . 
which may result from the difficult situation in which she is 
placed." 19 

With the Republicans enjoying overwhelming majorities in 
both houses of Congress, the executive, when it bestirred itself, 
could work its will upon the legislature during most of Jefferson's 
two terms. John Adams, who had had his difficulties with Con- 
gress and clung to much of the old Washington idea of a president 
above party, complained that "Wisdom and Justice can never be 
promoted till the Presidents office instead of being a Doll and a 
Whistle, Shall be made more independent and more respectable; 
capable of mediating between two infuriated parties," 20 but Jeffer- 
son proved that by acting as party leader the president could exert 
irresistible leverage. Republican floor leaders were chosen and dis- 
charged by the president, party caucuses imposed discipline upon 
legislators (or at any rate most of them), and the administration 
provided the text of some legislation to be passed by its agents. 
Until the selection of Henry Clay nearly three years after Jeffer- 
son's retirement, the speaker of the House acted merely as one 
comparatively minor administration spokesman, and the vice- 
president never established an important position in the Senate. 21 
Not a single important piece of Jeffersonian legislation suffered 
defeat, and serious opposition did not appear until after a schism 
within Republican rankybrought into the open in 1805 by the 
proposal to bribe Francef, The Embargo and its supplements sailed 
easily through Congress despite the misgivings of many Republi- 
cans. \ 