

On some occasions the President declined to direct his agents. 
In 1 806, probably because he felt that any American legislation 
threatening to cut into British exports would bring the ministry 
to its senses, Jefferson did nothing to indicate to Congress the 

19 Gallatin to Charles Pinckney, Oct. 24, 1808, Albert Gallatin MSS, New-York 
Historical Society. 

20 John Adams to Rush, July 25, 1808, Benjamin Rush MSS, Library of Congress. 

21 For Jefferson's leadership of Congress see Ralph V. Harlow, The History of 
Legislative Methods in the Period before 1825, Yale Historical Publications, Mis- 
cellany, Vol. V (New Haven, 1917)) 165-193. 

45 



REPUBLICANISM AND NEUTRALITY 

form he wished the legislation to take. The House of Representa- 
tives milled in confusion for weeks, and the Non-importation Act 
that emerged was a jest rather than a serious weapon against Eng- 
land. Similar silence at the White House contributed decisively 
to the confusion accompanying repeal of the Embargo Act during 
the last months of Jefferson's regime. Sometimes the President 
concealed from Congress the reasons for action he had taken or 
desired the legislators to take. In 1807, for example, he rejected 
the Monroe-Pinkney treaty without even submitting it to the 
Senate and, although in private conversations he explained his 
reasons to some senators, he withheld the treaty and the cor- 
respondence relating to it for more than a year. 22 The Embargo 
message, only one short paragraph, failed to mention several im- 
portant reasons for adopting this policy. In short, while Jefferson 
frequently explained his desires to legislators willing to execute 
them, on other important occasions he drew back into his shell. 
His choice of times to remain inert proved extremely unfortunate 
for his party and for the United States. 

The President found the management of Congress increasingly 
difficult during his second term. The Republicans were individual- 
ists, more skillful in opposition than in execution. The collapse of 
Federalism, which had served as a useful focus for their dislikes, 
actually weakened their vigor. Factionalism developed; New Eng- 
land Republicans showed hostility to their Southern brethren, 
the Quids professed to be more orthodox than Pope Thomas, and 
individual feuds and antipathies came into the open. From 1 805 
to 1808 these difficulties caused debate and delay more often 
than serious trouble. In the closing months of Jefferson's adminis- 
tration and throughout Madison's reign they often proved un- 
fortunately decisive. 

Most Yankee Republicans, even those who came from inland 
areas, took a far more favorable view of commerce than South- 
erners. Others who had triumphed by narrow margins over Feder- 

22 The documents and correspondence were presented to Congress only in March, 
1808, fifteen months after the treaty was signed at London. Annals, loth Cong., ist 
sess., pp. 18691870. 



REPUBLICANISM AND NEUTRALITY 

alist opponents tended to look askance at policies that might per- 
mit their enemies to return to power. Not a few, feeling that they 
had fought the party's most difficult battles and deserved a fair 
share of influence and power, were jealous of the primacy of their 
Southern colleagues. Jefferson rewarded several Yankee followers 
with cabinet positions 5 in 1805 he made Barnabas Bidwell the 
administration spokesman in the House of Representatives, and 
in 1807 General Joseph B. Varnum of Massachusetts became 
speaker of the House. None of the New Englanders proved par- 
ticularly helpful. The great Massachusetts merchant, Jacob Crown- 
inshield, who captured Pickering's seat in 1 802, died in the spring 
of 1808 after a long illness which deprived the party of his poten- 
tially important services. Bidwell proved a failure as House leader 
and later an embarrassment, for he decamped to Canada in 1810 
when a shortage was discovered in his accounts as county treasurer 
just at a time when Madison contemplated appointing him to the 
Supreme Court. "The republicans [here], talk of principles, but 
seek offices," the Republican governor of Massachusetts told Jef- 
ferson in 1808, "they talk of public good, but want places of 
emolument." 2S Unfortunately, this analysis was only too true. 
The most spectacular of the Republican dissidents, John Ran- 
dolph of Roanoke, owned a plantation fittingly named "Bizarre/' 
Randolph, the most splenetic orator in Congress, a vigorous whip- 
wielding foe of those who crossed him but courteous and gentle- 
manly to others, by turns an effeminate boy and an aging man 
plagued by real and psychosomatic illnesses, led the congressional 
Republicans during the first years of Jefferson's tenure. In 1 805 
he broke with the President, thereafter opposing with unique 
violence almost everything Jefferson supported. In 1 81 1 Jefferson 
wrote that his former protege's "exclusion [from Congress] alone 
would give greater security to our government, than the repeal 
of the British orders." 24 Randolph's political attitudes were usu- 
ally the product of his hatreds for Napoleon, for greedy ship- 