

Almost all Americans shared the President's feeling that, 
"Kindly separated by nature and a wide ocean from the extermi- 
nating havoc of one quarter of the globe; too high-minded to en- 
dure the degradations of the others; possessing a chosen country," 
the United States might best advance her prosperity and security by 
avoiding connections with Europe. "May God deliver us from the 
contagious politics, which have convulsed the old world . . . ," 
a Republican Fourth of July orator declared. "We wish not the 
deadly embrace of Gallic friendship, or the corrupted influence of 
the British cabinet; for the moment either become intermingled 
with our policy, from that moment we may date the defection of 

33 Turreau #5 to Minister of Foreign Relations, Jan. 20, 1806, AAE, CP, E-U, 
Vol. LIX. 

34 Morris to Marquis of Stafford, Sept. 14, 1807, Anne C. Morris, ed., The Diary 
and Letters of Gouverneur Morris (2 vols.$ New York, 1888), II, 500. 

53 



REPUBLICANISM AND NEUTRALITY 

our national prosperity and happiness." A Republican campaign 
committee in New York expressed the same thought by appealing 
(there is some irony in this) to the wise advice in Washington's 
Farewell Address. "This is the only true policy," the committee 
stated, "that American rulers can honestly or providently pursue. 
The moment we enlist ourselves by sliding even imperceptibly 
into European politics, intrigue and warfare, we must abandon 
our peaceful, commercial, and hitherto prosperous system" for full 
participation in the broils of Europe. 35 

Americans considered their way of life superior to that of 
Europe. They desired to preserve it by avoiding contaminating 
contact, not to expand it through aggressive crusading. George W. 
Campbell, at the time the most prominent congressman from the 
West, said in 1806, "It would have been well for us ... if the 
American flag had never floated on the ocean ... to waft to this 
country the luxuries and vices of European nations, ... to excite 
the jealousies and cupidity of those Powers whose existence . . . 
depends on commerce, and to court, as it were, their aggressions, 
and embroil us in their unjust and bloody contests." 36 Although 
Federalists and most Republicans rejected such anticommercial 
views, they shared the isolationist sentiment underlying Camp- 
bell's words. All agreed that the United States had a unique char- 
acter and unique interests best served by peace and withdrawal. 

Many Americans believed that the chance to pursue isolationist 
policies depended upon a balance of power in Europe. They 
counted upon La Grande Armee and the Royal Navy to form a 
rough equilibrium, not only giving the United States diplomatic 
leverage but at the same time preventing either France or Britain 
from turning possibly threatening attention to the United States. 
As good isolationists, of course, the Americans did not intend to 
commit their own power to prop up a European balance, but in 

35 James D. Richardson, ed., A Compilation of the Messages and Papers of the 
Presidents (Washing-ton, 1897), I, 3235 Estes Howe, An Oration, Delivered in 
Worcester, (Massachusetts^) on the Fourth of July, 1808 (Worcester, 1808), p. 135 
General Republican Committee, of the City and County of New York, A Circular 
Letter, . . . in Vindication of the Measures of the General Government (New 
York, 1809), p. 96. 