

Federalists accused Jefferson and orthodox Republicans of being 
sycophants of Napoleon. The truth was far more complicated. 
Affection for imperial France influenced only a tiny handful of 
Republicans, certainly not Jefferson himself. If the same was not 
true of the Federalists and Britain, still the Anglophilia of the 
bulk of the party and even of many of its leaders, who tended 
always to be more extreme than their followers, had very real 
limits. Appealing for national union in 1808 (but also no doubt 
well aware of the Federalists' reputation for placing British inter- 
ests ahead of American), Noah Webster rightly stated: "It is a 
truth beyond controversy that the number of men who would 
consent to surrender our national rights or succumb to the domi- 
nation of either power, who would place our independence under 
the protection of the British navy or our maritime rights under 
the protection of France is inconsiderable and comparatively of no 
weight or influence." 32 Views of the rival belligerents were the 
product of many things, among them the possibility of domestic 
political advantage, a general desire to preserve isolation and 
neutrality, a fairly widespread if often naive appreciation of the 
balance of power, and finally of differing sympathies. Policy and 
attitude fluctuated according to news of decisions at the Tuileries or 
Whitehall, on the rolling field of Austerlitz or the open sea off 
Cape Trafalgar. Generalization baffled perceptive diplomats, and 
stupid ones, like France's General Turreau, simply threw up their 
hands and despaired of firm analysis. "Their System with regard 

warned Jefferson that national unity and military effectiveness required the con- 
struction of frigates. "Without this," he wrote, "our Union will be a brittle China 
vase, a house of Ice or a Palace of Glass." John Adams to Jeflerson, June 28, 1812, 
Jefferson MSS (misdated at 1813 in Lipscomb and Bergh, o*f>. cit. y XIII, 289290). 
32 Noah Webster (fseud. Public Spirit), "To All American Patriots," May, 1808, 
Harry R. Warfel, ed., Letters of Noah Webster (New York, 1953), p. 301, 

52 



REPUBLICANISM AND NEUTRALITY 

to foreign countries is to have none," Turreau complained. ". . . it 
is the events of the day which determine their policies." ** In truth, 
American policy combined deep-seated principles with the prag- 
matism bewailed by Turreau. 

Most widely held of these principles was isolationism, already 
almost a national tradition. Although the undeclared Franco- 
American war and the Louisiana crisis both temporarily drew 
America into the European vortex, John Adams and Thomas 
Jefferson returned to isolation as rapidly as possible. No respon- 
sible American wanted an alliance with the Emperor Napoleon, 
however serious American complaints against Britain, and when 
the nation proceeded to war with England in 1812 it made very 
clear that this did not imply any connection with France. A few 
Federalists wanted to join the British crusade against France; in 
1806 Gouverneur Morris, writing to an English friend, bewailed 
the fact that "you stand alone, and those who ought to side with 
you keep aloof, are awed, and subdued," and regretted that Amer- 
ica had not become "your firm and useful ally." M Not many shared 
Morris' view. The most rabid Anglophiles, even those whose 
affection for Britain led them to sedition, rarely desired to join 
England's war. Sympathy and open commerce, but not alliance: 
such was the high Federalist creed down to 1812. 