

In the field of foreign policy the contrast between Jefferson and 
his predecessor became more marked. Jefferson strangely com- 
bined idealism and utopianism with pragmatism and cynical craft. 
He revered international law, interpreting it, however, in a fash- 
ion that coincided with American interests, a fairly easy task when 
the law of nations had not been codified and many of the available 
authorities had written to defend the rights of small neutrals. 
Next only to moral law and the general interests of humanity 

11 Jefferson to Madison, March 17, 1809, James Madison MSS, Library of Con- 
gress. 

39 



REPUBLICANISM AND NEUTRALITY 

(which justified the otherwise absurd concept that the American 
frontier should lie along the Gulf Stream) , the President believed 
that the usage of nations and treaties should govern international 
relations. 12 Rational application of these should and ultimately 
must bring an end to quarrels between states. Meantime it was 
better to insist upon one's rights than to compromise, better to 
reject, for example, any partial settlement of the problem of 
impressment until Britain agreed to abandon the practice entirely. 
Jefferson thus differed sharply from Adams, who never abandoned 
claims of right but was prepared to compromise them in practice 
if the United States could profit thereby. In this, too, Jefferson 
was somewhat in contrast with Madison, whose diplomacy after 
he became president was more flexible than that of his mentor and 
friend. 

Jefferson could also be an alarmist. In 1803 he seriously con- 
sidered an alliance with Great Britain, a futile and dangerous 
project entirely unnecessary to the task of keeping France out of 
Louisiana. In 1 805, with even less reason, he recurred to this plan, 
only to meet with stubborn opposition in his Cabinet. In 1806 the 
President procured from Congress, without quite admitting that 
he was doing so, an appropriation of $2 million to bribe French 
support in an American quarrel with Spain. Later the President 
leaped hastily into the Embargo, although the germ of his plan 
had been in his mind for years. For most of 1808 he clung stub- 
bornly to this measure, so disastrous to American prosperity and 
inefficacious in coercing Europe, only to abandon it, on the basis 
of exaggerated reports of impending rebellion in New England, 
when the Embargo most needed his support. These hasty, ill- 
digested actions Jefferson justified to himself as part of a larger 
search for justice and right. 

The President recognized that the world did not share his re- 
spect for international law. One of the most frequent themes in his 
correspondence is a protest against the way the din of Napoleonic 
struggles turned European statesmen from reason to emotion and 

12 Wiltse, op. cit., pp. 178 ff. 

40 



REPUBLICANISM AND NEUTRALITY 

even idiocy. "I consider Europe as a great mad-house, & in the 
present deranged state of their moral faculties to be pitied & 
avoided/' Jefferson declared in 1808. In Britain, he believed, "all 
the bulwarks of morality & right have been broken up." In 1 8 1 1 
he told Kosciuszko, "It would have been perfect Quixotism in us 
to have encouraged these Bedlamites, to have undertaken the re- 
dress of all wrongs against a world avowedly rejecting all regard 
to right." 13 Unfortunately, many of Jefferson's policies ignored 
the very emotionalism to him, lunacy against which he in- 
veighed. The Nonimportation Act, the Embargo Act, even the 
attempt to bribe Napoleon might have succeeded in normal times, 
but-they were themselves the fruit of international abnormality. 