

"The rage for sinking the national debt a few years earlier," as 
Robert R. Livingston called it, made Republicans desire to cut the 
armed forces to the bone, a desire so effectively implemented that 
in 1 806 the navy had only one frigate on active service. In addition, 

50 



REPUBLICANISM AND NEUTRALITY 

Republicans considered the armed forces potential agents of des- 
potism. In Macon's words, "It is not ... an easy matter to raise 
an army, but it is easier to do this than to get clear of one when 
raised. ... I scarcely know which is worst, war or an army with- 
out war." 29 Furthermore, the navy seemed a symbol of Federalist 
involvement in foreign quarrels at the behest of nonagricultural 
interests. Far more Republican, far cheaper, fully as effective for 
defense, less likely to involve America in foreign wars, Jefferson 
thought, was an armada of gunboats which could be manned by 
skeleton crews until sea militia sprang to arms in an emergency. 
Whereas U.S.S. Constellation had cost more than $300,000, a 
gunboat cost only $10,000 to $14,000. Jefferson built hundreds. 
After 1812 they became a macabre monument to his hasty, ill- 
digested ideas in a field of which he knew little. 

Most Federalists and not a few Republicans criticized the gun- 
boat policy. Seaport politicians objected that gunboats and harbor 
fortifications were inadequate for defense and utterly incapable 
of carrying war to the enemy. From London, after humiliating 
experience at the hands of Britain and France, James Monroe 
wrote: "It is by the means which we have of injuring them only 
that they regard us, and their regard is proportioned to those 
means. . . . They are infidels 'till the measure is executed, that 
we will resort to any other than such as embargoes, which affect us 
as much as them. 55 30 Monroe's heretical suggestion that a naval 
squadron be built failed to move Jefferson, and although Madison 
refurbished the navy he made no attempt to expand it. During the 
war session of 1811 12 Republican votes defeated a building 
program. Traditional sentiments produced these votes, along with 
a feeling that, it being too late to challenge Britain at sea, a building 
program might merely encourage her to strike before America 
accumulated an effective force. 31 The failure to develop military 

29 Livingston to Madison, Jan. 8, 1810, Madison MSSj Macon to Nicholson, 
Jan. 31, 1806, Joseph H. Nicholson MSS, Library of Congress. 

30 Monroe to Randolph, June 16, 1806, Stanislaus M. Hamilton, ed., The Writings 
of James Monroe (7 vols.j New York, 18981903), IV, 464. 

8 * This argument appealed to Republicans of otherwise different views, among 
them Jefferson, Joseph Story, and John Quincy Adams. The elder Adams, however, 

51 



REPUBLICANISM AND NEUTRALITY 

defenses, like the policy of rigorous financial retrenchment, under- 
mined the effectiveness of American protests before 1812, con- 
vinced Britain she need never fear more than an ineffectual war 
against her, and cost the United States heavily when war came. 
In precisely those areas most requiring flexibility, Jefferson and 
his followers proved most rigid. 