

Jefferson hated war. He felt that the greatest possible American 
contribution to the happiness of mankind lay not in a military 
crusade for justice but in the careful preservation of America's 
position as "the sole repository of the sacred fire of freedom & self- 
government" at a time when repression swept the world. "Peace 
. . . has been our principle, peace is our interest, and peace has 
saved to the world thiapnly plant of free and rational government 
now existing in it," he declaimed to Kosciuszko. On the other 
hand, as early as 1806 the President saw the danger of encourag- 
ing Europe to believe America treasured peace above all else. "This 
opinion," he said, "must be corrected when just occasion arises, or 
we shall become the plunder of all nations." As chief executive 
Jefferson did little to correct this opinion, but as the War of 1 8 1 2 
approached he became more and more reconciled to the use of 
force. In May, 1811, he still hoped for peace, but added: "When 
peace becomes more losing than war, we may prefer the latter on 
principles of pecuniary calculation." In 1812 he was sure the hour 
had come: "we are to have war then? I believe so, and that it is 
necessary, every hope from time, patience & the love of peace is 

13 Jefferson to David B. Warden, July 16, 1808, Thomas Jefferson MSS, Library of 
Congress; Jefferson to George Gilpin, Sept. 7, 1809, ibid.; Jefferson to Tadeusz 
Kosciuszko, April 13, 1811, Andrew A. Lipscomb and Albert E, Bergh, eds., The 
Writings of Thomas Jefferson (Memorial ed.j 20 vols. ; Washington, 19031904), 
XIII, 41. 

41 



REPUBLICANISM AND NEUTRALITY 

exhausted, and war or abject submission are the only alternatives 
left us. I am forced from my hobby, peace." 14 The dualism, the 
ambivalence in Jefferson's attitude was characteristic of his entire 
thought, supple rather than stubborn, accommodating rather than 
principled, ever flexible. 

Jefferson never quarreled seriously with his chief subordinates, 
James Madison and Albert Gallatin. The two Virginians and the 
Genevese-Pennsylvanian shared broad, general concepts which ran 
above the crosscurrents of compromise: a deep patriotic nationalism, 
a vague but nonetheless sincere liberalism, and a desire for peace. 
Jefferson, primus inter pares, never had to impose his major ideas 
upon unwilling lieutenants. He frequently sought and often ac- 
cepted the advice of the two secretaries. At first Jefferson polled 
his Cabinet on all important issues, granting to himself only one 
vote. Despite usual unanimity the system proved cumbersome 
and unsatisfactory. During the post-Chesapeake flurry of govern- 
mental activity, the President substituted consultation with indi- 
vidual members of the Cabinet, and after leaving office he praised 
this arrangement because it left the president freer to make the 
ultimate decisions. 1 ' 5 

Secretary Madison, self-effacing and inevitably cast into the 
shade by Jefferson's titanic figure, was no mere sycophant. If he 
seldom took issue with the President, it was because they shared 
common convictions or because, within a broad conceptual frame- 
work, Jefferson permitted his friend to lay out the details of 
policy. 16 On international affairs James Madison was probably 