

23 James Sullivan to Jefferson, April 2, 1808, Jefferson MSS. 

24 Jefferson to John W. Eppes, March 4, 1811, Thomas J. Coolidge, ed., "Letters 
of Thomas Jefferson," Massachusetts Historical Society, Proceedings, ad Series, XII 
(1899), 270. 

47 



REPUBLICANISM AND NEUTRALITY 

owners who sought national protection for their filthy and selfish 
trade, and above all for Jefferson and Madison, who had betrayed 
the Republican cause as Randolph saw it. These hatreds, plus a 
feeling of kinship for Britain and fear of the effect of war, particu- 
larly as it might strengthen the federal government, made him 
oppose almost all measures of resistance to Britain. Although his 
scorn and sarcasm often spurred his opponents to resistance rather 
than surrender, Randolph was an extremely able debater (when 
healthy), a masterful parliamentarian, and a very troublesome 
enemy to the followers of Jefferson. 25 

Nathaniel Macon and James Monroe, two other Republican 
wheel horses, at times shared Randolph's feeling that Jefferson 
had abandoned the old party traditions of limited government, a 
peaceful foreign policy, and the superior importance of agriculture. 
For personal and political reasons Monroe broke with his fellow 
Virginians and became a silent but definite anti-Madisonian candi- 
date for the presidency in 1808. Thereafter he drifted steadily 
away from Randolph, back toward his original allegiance. Na- 
thaniel Macon, speaker of the House of Representatives until 
1807, followed somewhat the same path. In 1806 he joined Ran- 
dolph in opposing resistance to Britain on the issues of the reexport 
trade and impressment, partly because he was unwilling that the 
South should sacrifice for Northern interests and partly because 
he was convinced that "public force and liberty cannot dwell in the 
same country. 37 26 Macon soon abandoned Randolph and resumed 
support of the administration, perhaps in part because British 
restrictions began to harm the agricultural as well as the mer- 
cantile interest. Without these two veteran Republicans, Randolph 
and the handful of Tertium Quids, as they called themselves, did 
not seriously threaten the administration after 1 808. 

25 Benjamin Rush expressed a widespread view of Randolph when he wrote: "I 
have long: considered him as a mischievous boy with a squirt in his hands, throwing 1 
its dirty contents into the eyes of everybody that looked at him. A kicking or a 
horsewhipping would be the best reply that could be made to his vulgar parlia- 
mentary insolence. It is only because the body which he insults is what it is that he 
has been so long tolerated." Rush to John Adams, April 26, 1810, Lyman H. Butter- 
field, ed., Letters of Benjamin Rush, II, American Philosophical Society, Memoirs, 
Vol. XXX (1951), p. 1042. 

26 Annals, 9th Cong., ist sess., pp. 686698. 

48 



REPUBLICANISM AND NEUTRALITY 

In the Senate, too, there were stirrings of opposition to Jeffer- 
son, and Madison later suffered humiliation at the hands of sena- 
tors who called themselves Republicans. William Branch Giles 
of Virginia, a congenital opponent of almost everything not sug- 
gested by himself, grumbled a great deal against Jeffersonian 
policy. The President's tactful treatment of Giles and a broken 
leg that kept the Senator away from Washington in 1805 and 
1806 delayed a rupture. After supporting the Embargo in 1807 
and Madison's candidacy in 1808 Giles shifted to opposition. 
Maryland's Samuel Smith, a wealthy merchant, selfish and ambi- 
tious, almost always acted as his interests dictated, and his former 
Federalism made him distrust extreme Republicans. In 1805, 
commenting on an electoral campaign in Virginia, he wrote, "It 
is a struggle . . . between those who would carry Democracy to 
lengths dangerous to civil society, . . . and those whose good 
sense, talents, & abilities, produce the present state of things & wish 
to proceed no further in reform." 27 Smith would oppose extremists 
in his own party, even if it meant temporary alliance with some 
Federalists. 