



66 



CHAPTER 



III 



IS NATIONAL INDEPENDENCE 
A DREAM?" 



Neither YorktcS^n nor the Peace of Paris made American inde- 
pendence secure.) During the lySo's the young nation suffered 
humiliation at "British hands while royalist France, midwife at 
America's birth, treated her as an upstart ingrate and sought to 
maneuver her as a satellite. Even after the Constitution, many 
Americans considered the nation an experiment of doubtful per- 
manence. The French Revolutionary wars added to the buffet- 
ing America received. France demanded the support of fellow 
republicans 3 Britain paid little attention to neutpal complaints as 
she wielded her naval power against her enemy , ; The Washington 
administration secured American prosperity by the Jay treaty of 
1 794, but only at the cost of ignoring or compromising many claims 
against England and provoking an undeclared war with France 
which lasted from 1798 to 1800. Jiy 1805 America could look 
back upon twenty years of increasing prosperity interrupted only 
by the mild depression of 17973 the Pinckney treaty with Spain 

67 



* C IS NATIONAL INDEPENDENCE A DREAM ? ?? 

in 1795 and particularly the Louisiana Purchase had improved 
her position; politically and economically she daily gathered 
strength. These successes had often been obtained at the price of 
postponing the assertion of many American rights to a later day. 
This was the part of wisdom, not of greatness. 

In May, 1 803, Franco-British war recommenced after the inter- 
lude of the Peace of Amiens. America soon felt the effects of this 
struggle a outrance. For a decade the United States suffered 
severely at the hands of European belligerents. Like Holland and 
Denmark, she found herself treated as a pawn or a shuttlecock by 
Britain and France. In the autumn of 1 807 a ragged group of fron- 
tiersmen, gathered in a wretched little town on the Mobile, put 
their names to a declaration of American rights in which they asked, 
"Is national independence a dream?" * Far-reaching belligerent 
invasions of American sovereignty, rights, and honor made a nega- 
tive answer by no means obvious. 

Napoleon seldom showed respect for America. So great was his 
contempt that, as Admiral Mahan has said, he "blinked at the 
fundamental fact that, while Great Britain ruled the sea, the neu- 
tral was the ally of her enemy." 2 Instead of encouraging America's 
European trade, which would have benefited him directly and 
perhaps more quickly involved the United States in war with 
Britain, from 1807 onward he did everything possible to restrict 
it. John Armstrong and Joel Barlow, the American ministers at 
Paris, suffered humiliation at the Emperor's hands, either through 
active rebuke, condescending cynicism, or (if the American was 
fortunate) silent neglect. On the question of Spanish Florida, 
which Jefferson and many of his followers wished to acquire for 
America, Napoleon clearly showed his cynicism. He shifted his 
attitude his actions scarcely had the continuity to be called policy 
according to interests of the moment and particularly his esti- 
mate as to whether the carrot or the stick would prove most effec- 