

1 James Caller et aL, The Declaration of the American Citizens, on the Mobile, 
with Relation to British Aggressions (Mobile, 1807), p, i. 

2 Alfred T. Mahan, The Influence of Sea Power upon the French Revolution and 
Empire, 1793-18 12 (2 vols.j Boston, 1892), II, 355. 

68 



"IS NATIONAL INDEPENDENCE A DREAM?" 

tive with the Americans. The Emperor's subordinates frequently 
urged him to adopt a more friendly policy toward the United 
States. Napoleon never considered this necessary. 
-* Not only contempt for America but even more an understand- 
able conviction that the British war was an overriding concern 
caused Napoleon to subordinate his American policy to efforts to 
cripple England's economy. Deprived of hope at sea by Nelson,, 
Napoleon believed commercial warfare "the only way to strike a 
blow at England and force her to peace." Specifically this meant 
"remorseless war against English merchandise/ 3 3 an effort to de- 
stroy her export trade, undermine the pound's stability, and some- 
times to force her to purchase French goods on very unfavorable 
terms. In November, 1806, an imperial decree issued at Berlin de- 
clared the British Isles in blockade (although Napoleon obviously 
lacked the naval power to enforce his edict) an^prohibited all trade 
with Englishmen or in British merchandise^esselFconimg from 
British ports were ordered seized. A little more than a year later a 
second major decree, this time promulgated at Milan, reinforced 
and expanded the Berlin Decree. Besides reasserting earlier prin- 
ciples, this declaration announced that ships that submitted to Brit- 
ish regulations or allowed themselves to be searched at sea by the 
Royal Navy would be considered to have lost their neutral charac- 
ter and would therefore be subject to confiscation. Since the great 
Frenchman dominated most of Europe, this attempt to destroy 
British trade was quite properly called the Continental System. 
/ The Continental System never completely sealed off Britain. 
\t various times Spain, Sweden, and Russia opened their ports to 
British goods, and John Quincy Adams rightly observed that the 
Continental System was somewhat like "an attempt to exclude the 
air from a bottle, by sealing up hermetically the mouth, while 
there was a great hole in the side." Furthermore, the states Napo- 
leon dominated had no desire to sacrifice their own commerce to 

3 Napoleon to King Louis of Holland, Dec. 3, 1806, Corres<pondance de Napoleon 
I er (32 vols.5 Paris, 1858-1870), XIV, 345 Napoleon to Eugene, Viceroy of Italy, 
Sept. 29, 1807, ibid., XVI, 66. 

69 



IS NATIONAL INDEPENDENCE A DREAM ? J? 

serve Paris. Even in Holland, the neighbor of France ruled by 
Napoleon's brother, huge amounts of smuggling took place. There 
and elsewhere French officials often connived at violations of the 
system they were deputed to enforce. Finally, particularly after 
1809 but to a degree from the very beginning, Napoleon showed 
himself willing to permit trade that was nominally interdicted, 
provided only that his treasury profited or that Britain was de- 
prived of specie. By 1810 the Continental System had become, 
to quote Adams again, "little more than extortion wearing the 
mask of prohibition." 4 The drive for commercial advantage which 
became such an important part of the Continental System made it 
particularly offensive, since Napoleon forbade to the Americans 
trade that he actively prosecuted himself. 