

49 John Melish, Travels in the United States of America, in the Years 1806 & 1^07, 
and i(?op, i#io, & iBn (2 vols.j Philadelphia, 1812), Ij 212213. 

50 Jefferson to John Adams, July 5, 1814, Lipscomb and Bergh, of. cit., XIV, 145. 

62 



REPUBLICANISM AND NEUTRALITY 

repeal of the Berlin and Milan decrees, James Madison carefully 
avoided suggesting that America owed the Frenchman either grati- 
tude or affection. 

Since they considered Britain the chief threat to American inter- 
ests, however, the Republicans often wished Napoleon well. In 
1 807 William Duane summarized contemporary Republican opin- 
ion when he wrote, "Bonaparte, independent of the service he 
renders mankind by curbing the tyranny of Britain, cannot be an 
object of regard to us; but as the avenger of neutral wrongs, and 
the asserter of neutral rights every voice should be raised for his 
triumph. ... he is the best negociator we have." Duane wrote 
before the worst French excesses began, and not many Republicans 
were so bitterly Anglophobe as he. In the years preceding the War 
of 1812, Republicans sided only very reluctantly with Napoleon. 
Without doubt many of them shared the tortured feelings of a 
Baltimorean who expostulated, "What a cursed Gov*. is that of Gr. 
Britain, that we cannot wish her success against the worst of 
Tyrants , and that she damns the best cause by her motives, & her 
manner of advancing it! " 51 

Although most Republicans considered British policy not only 
insulting but also a threat to American prosperity, they often 
reached this conclusion comparatively reluctantly, and the rise of 
Napoleonic tyranny caused many of them to dream of an accom- 
modation with England. Randolph of Roanoke repeatedly empha- 
sized that the friendly France of 1778 and the republican France 
of 1793 had been replaced by a vicious enemy whose crimes should 
cause Americans to forget the Anglophobia that had so long 
plagued them. John Taylor of Caroline considered France, not 
Britain, the natural enemy of the United States because of the 
sharp contrast between their forms of government, America's un- 
willingness to see Spanish colonies fall under Napoleon's sway, and 
her destiny to play the role of the Emperor's chief rival should 
England fall. 52 Taylor steadily favored compromise with Britain, 

51 Aurora^ June 18, 18075 Nathaniel F. Williams to Story, Dec. 31, 1808, Joseph 
Story MSS, Library of Congress. 

152 Annah , xoth Cong., ist sess., pp. 1910-19115 John Taylor to Monroe, Nov. 24., 
1811, James Monroe MSS, New York Public Library. 

63 



REPUBLICANISM AND NEUTRALITY 

and in 1811 he urged his friend Monroe to accept appointment 
as secretary of state so that he could work for an Anglo-American 
settlement, Monroe himself definitely favored Britain over France 
from 1805 until 1811, shifting only toward the end to the War 
Hawk position. 

Nor was it only among the doctrinaire or Quid wing of the party 
that such sentiments could be found. Jefferson, through negotia- 
tions with Britain in 1806, and Madison, in conversations with 
David M. Erskine three years later, virtually offered to align 
American policy with Britain, although they asked important con- 
cessions in return. Jefferson in particular considered Britain per- 
fidious, selfish, politically corrupt, and tyrannical upon the seas. In 
1810, for example, Federalist suggestions that Britain, unlike 
France, could be trusted to show good faith caused Jefferson to ex- 
postulate, "Her good faith! The faith of a nation of merchants! 
. , . Of the friend and protectress of Copenhagen! Of the nation 
who never admitted a chapter of morality into her political 
code!" 53 Nevertheless, both Jefferson and Madison appear to 
have realized that, however difficult of attainment, an adjustment 
with England would best serve American interests. The acts sup- 
plementary to the Embargo were really pleas to Britain to come 
to some understanding with the United States. Both presidents 
dropped the early Republican demand that Britain abandon im- 
pressment. From 1808 to 181 1 administration policy, if it inclined 
in any direction, favored Britain over France, and down to the very 
eve of the declaration of war President Madison hoped against 
hope for a settlement with England. Even Henry Clay, the future 
leader of the War Hawks, declared in a famous oration in 1810 
that, if accommodation could be had with only one of the belliger- 
ents, he preferred that it be with Britain. 