

It would of course be easy to overemphasize this half-concealed 
but very real desire for English friendship. Many Republicans 
considered it unobtainable if desirable; they shared the feeling of 
John Adams, by this time himself nearly a Republican, that the 
"deadly wounds . . . inflicted on both sides" had regrettably 

53 Jefferson to John Langdon, March 5, 1810, Lipscomb and Bergh, of. cit., XII, 
375- 

64 



REPUBLICANISM AND NEUTRALITY 

made reconciliation impossible. "Contempt and disgrace," said 
Adams, "never can be forgotten by human Nature, and hardly, 
very hardly forgiven by the sincerest and devoutest Christian- 
ity." 54 The legacy of Anglophobia the Republicans had carried 
with them from the 1790*3 had by no means disappeared, even 
though European political events had caused a reorientation of 
party policy. As American patriots and nationalists, the Republi- 
cans chafed under British insult. Unlike so many Federalists, they 
refused to accept the idea that American interests should be sub- 
ordinated to those of Great Britain. 

There was, furthermore, among some Republicans, if not a 
majority of the party or its leadership, a bitter, undeviating, un- 
alloyed hatred of the British, a hatred modified neither by time 
nor by political circumstances. Dr. Benjamin Rush thought that 
only one-tenth of the American people shared this hatred, and 
Augustus Foster, the last prewar minister to the United States, 
said that pure, distilled dislike of Britain was confined to a very 
few Americans. Still, the sentiment did exist, and episodes like 
the Chesapeake affair often fanned it into flame. The Independent 
Chronicle and the Aurora steadily spread anti-British vitriol over 
the nation. Duane went so far as to declare that only those nations 
that resisted England could prosper. "The friendship of Britain 
is damnable" he declared, "it is deadly it is destructive her 
blessings are curses" Other Republicans asserted that Britain main- 
tained herself on the plunder of war or that, facing a visible doom, 
she desired to draw a happier part of the world into the same 
vortex. "Her disposition is unfriendly $ her enmity is implacable; 
she sickens at our prosperity," a War Hawk declared in 1811, 
summarizing a strain never totally absent from Republican think- 
ing. 55 ! 

The attitudes of the administration party, which was so much 

54 John Adams to Lloyd, March 12, 1815, James Lloyd MSS, Houghton Library, 
Harvard University. 

65 Rush to Earl of Buchan, July 8, 1811, Butterfield, op. cit. } II, 10885 Davis, 
op. cit., p. 24.95 Aurora, March 17, 18065 A Citizen of Otsego County, "Union the 
Bond of Peace" The Origin and Progress of the Present Difficulties between the 
United States and Great Britain, and France Considered (Utica, 1809), p. 17; Inde- 
pendent Chronicle (Boston), March 23, 18075 Annals, i2th Cong., ist sess., p. 459 
(R. M. Johnson). 

65 



REPUBLICANISM AND NEUTRALITY 

larger and so much less homogeneous than the Federalists, natu- 
rally presented a more complex picture than those of their oppo- 
nents. Different factions had quite different attitudes, and many 
individuals, like Jefferson himself, changed position from time to 
time. As a party the Republicans did not suffer from Anglophobia 
so deep they desired a war against England. They shared the gen- 
eral national desire for peace and isolation. They took the nation 
into the War of 1812 as a consequence of specific British actions, 
policies that threatened American interests and above all chal- 
lenged the self-respect of the young nation. As patriots, not as 
Anglophobes, the Republicans cast down the gage of battle. 