

Federalists often accused their rivals of being pro-French. They 
brought forward little proof of their assertion. They simply as- 
sumed its truth, many of them because they believed that anyone 
who did not share their own feelings for Britain must be in league 
with Napoleon. "The obsequiousness of this country to the despot 
of Europe needs no proof or illustration from me," a Federalist 
clergyman stated in 1812. "This has been so often proved as to 
need no confirmation. I might as well prove that the sun shines." 
With more than a little justice, the Pennsylvania Republican 
hinted that the Federalists' own allegiance to Britain caused them 
to assume their rivals' connection with France. "The ghost of 
murdered Banquo was visible, only to the disordered imagination 
of the guilty Macbeth," this Republican journal noted. 48 

47 Quincy to Eliza S. Quincy, March 26, 1812, Quincy, o$. cit.j p. 254. 

48 Parish, Q'p. cit*, p, 1 1 j Pennsylvania Republican (Harrisburg) , Dec. 10, 1811. 

61 



REPUBLICANISM AND NEUTRALITY 

The Federalist charge was preposterous, for the old easy parallel 
Federalism and Britain, Republicanism and France had long 
since ceased to exist. (No more true was the alternate Federalist 
charge that Jefferson had allowed himself to be cowed into doing 
Napoleon's bidding.) Turreau and Serurier criticized the adminis- 
tration's attitude almost as frequently as British ministers did. John 
Melish, a British traveler who spent a great deal of time in the 
United States between 1806 and 1811, declared not only that 
most Americans desired an accommodation with Britain but that, 
"as to partiality for Bonaparte and the French, it was my sincere 
opinion, very deliberately formed, that there was none." 49 The 
undeclared naval war of the 'nineties, and above all the develop- 
ment of imperial rule, had caused Jefferson and his followers to 
abandon the view of France they took around 1789. InlSiO, when 
Napoleon announced repeal of the French decrees, many Republi- 
cans briefly raised their voices to praise him. Such praise was rare 
and for the most part confined to this particular period of time; 
especially during the war session did the Republicans assail the 
Corsican and deny that sympathy for his cause motivated their 
policy. 

Neither Thomas Jefferson nor James Madison had the slightest 
affection for Napoleon Bonaparte. Jefferson considered Napoleon 
a great and rapacious despot, the betrayer of a revolution that had 
once promised so much for human liberty and rational progress. 
The Republican leader's correspondence abounds with strictures 
upon Napoleon, and after the Emperor's first abdication in 1814 
Jefferson wrote, astonishment mingled with pleasure, "The 
Attila of the age [is] dethroned, the ruthless destroyer of ten 
millions of the human race, whose thirst for blood appeared un- 
quenchable, the great oppressor of the rights and liberties of the 
world, [is] shut up within the circle of a little island in the Medi- 
terranean." 50 Jefferson's lieutenant and successor shared his feel- 
ings. Even at the time he welcomed Napoleon's announcement of 