

The problem of course lay in the way one viewed the threat to 
the balance of power. Probably more Jeffersonians than admitted 
it publicly believed, like the President himself, that Napoleon 
posed a potentially dangerous threat to the United States. 39 After 
Austerlitz few Republicans thought a proper balance required 
further Napoleonic victories, although in 1809 the bitterly Anglo- 
phobe Aurora declared, "France has fought our battles had Brit- 
ain triumphed, we should have been enslaved." For the most part 
Republicans argued that the collapse of British resistance was "a 
remote and extremely improbable contingency," as Senator Giles 
put it. 40 Furthermore, Republicans believed an existing danger 
must not be subordinated to a distant, shadowy threat. They ac- 

38 Aurora (Philadelphia), March 15, 18065 Annals, loth Cong., 2d sess., p. 3795 

Turreau $"23 to Minister of Foreign Relations, Nov. , 1806, AAE, CP, E-U, 

Vol. LIXj Alexandria Daily Gazette, Nov. 2, 1811. Perhaps the most elaborate 
exposition of the balance-of-power thesis will be found in Robert Hare, A Brief View 
of the Policy and Resources of the United States (Philadelphia, 1810). At one 
point (p. 21) Hare declares that "our security from the oppression of either of the 
great belligerents, is in any considerable degree dependent on a due balance of their 
power." Thomas Ritchie's Richmond Enquirer also placed great emphasis upon the 
balance of power. 

39 In this connection see Plumer to Jedediah Morse, Feb. 24, 1806, William Plumer 
MSS, Library of Congress; Enquirer (Richmond), March n, 1806$ Pickering to 
Rebecca Pickering, Dec. 20, 1806, Octavius Pickering and Charles W. Upham, The 
Life of Timothy Pickering (4 vols.j Boston, 1867-1873), IV, 101. 

40 Aurora, July 31, 1809$ Annals, toth Cong., 2d sess., p. 378. 

56 



REPUBLICANISM AND NEUTRALITY 

cused Federalists of using the balance-of-power argument to con- 
done British crimes, and in some instances this led them to deny 
the validity of the argument altogether. In 1810 Henry Clay de- 
clared, "I cannot subscribe to British slavery upon the water, that 
we may escape French subjugation on land," and during the war 
session he sco fifed, "We are invited, conjured to drink the potion 
of British poison actually presented to our lips, that we may avoid 
the imperial dose prepared by perturbed imaginations." 41 In their 
inmost hearts, however. Republicans cherished the idea of a Euro- 
pean balance that would permit their nation to secure justice and 
enjoy peace. 

/Federalists took a far simpler view. They considered Napoleon 
the v mily real threat to equilibrium. As Fisher Ames expressed it, 
"If France dictates by land and sea, tve fall without an effort. The 
wind of the cannon ball that smashes John Bull's brains out, will 
lay us on our backs with all our tired honours in the dirt." Federal- 
ists did not minimize the chances of Napoleonic victory, and they 
celebrated as their own the triumphs of Nelson and Wellington, 
Some even declared that a "triumph over Great-Britain, at this 
critical moment would be more fatal to us than defeat." ** 