

36 Annals, 9th Cong., ist sess., pp. 706-707. 

54 



REPUBLICANISM AND NEUTRALITY 

principle they hoped for one and in fact sometimes tried to exploit 
it. As Madison later admitted, the United States would not have 
gone to war against Great Britain in 1812 had the collapse of 
Napoleon been foreseen. 

President Jefferson wrote frequently of America's interest in 
the balance of power. After Trafalgar and Austerlitz, he com- 
mented on the "awful spectacle . . . the world exhibit [s] at this 
instant, one man bestriding the continent of Europe like a Colossus, 
and another roaming unbridled on the ocean, but even this is better 
than that one should rule both elements, our wish ought to be 
that he who has armies may not have the dominion of the sea, and 
that he who has dominion of the sea may be one who has no armies, 
in this way we may be quiet." Such reasoning naturally led Jeffer- 
son to hope for a European stalemate. In 1815 he even half re- 
gretted the conclusion of the European warfare, writing in lan- 
guage very similar to that he had used a decade before: "we were 
safe from the enterprise of Bonaparte because he had not the 
fleets of Britain to bring him here, and from those of Britain be- 
cause she had Bonaparte on her back, but we have now, the con- 
querors of Bonaparte to fear, with the fleets of Britain at their 
willing command. 5 ' 3T 

Most of his countrymen shared Jefferson's basic view. All Fed- 
eralists prayed for Napoleon's downfall, only a few for the de- 
struction of the French nation. An occasional Republican still hoped 
for British collapse, notably William Duane, who in 1806 de- 
clared that "nothing could more effectually secure and $er$etuate 
the 'peace and happiness of America than the humiliation of Eng- 
land, and her reduction to her natural place, among the third or 
fourth rank of powers in Europe." Most, like Jefferson himself, 
wished to see Britain chastised, not destroyed. In 1809 Senator 
Giles even justified war against England on the ground that Amer- 

37 Jefferson to Thomas Lomax, Jan. n, 1806, Jefferson MSSj Jefferson to Camp- 
bell, Oct. 15, 1815, George W. Campbell MSS, Library of Congress. For an extended 
discussion of the Republican leader's position, see Lawrence S. Kaplan, "Jefferson, the 
Napoleonic Wars, and the Balance of Power," William and Mary Quarterly, 3d Series, 
XIV (1957)) 196217. Kaplan concludes that Jefferson was very interested in the 
balance of power, that he felt France no real threat to it, and that he unwisely 
slanted American policy in a pro-French direction. 

55 



REPUBLICANISM AND NEUTRALITY 

ica could not seriously increase the threat to British existence, surely 
a weird argument for war. Minister Turreau believed the principal 
reason Americans failed to hail Napoleon's struggle to destroy 
Britain's sea dominion was their belief that it was "necessary to 
maintain between these two rival Powers, a balance useful to the 
United States, since otherwise France would obtain on the ocean 
the same power that She has obtained on the continent." A Feder- 
alist journal circulating in the District of Columbia reminded con- 
gressmen assembling for the War Hawk Congress that "all parties 
in times past have agreed to what has been emphatically called the 
first article of our political creed, as it relates to other nations: 
That as jar as our influence extends y it ought to be used to kee^p 
them equally balanced; that on this defends the 'peace and safety 
of our country" 38 