

Closely aligned with English thought as they were in so many 
areas, the Federalists thus came to accept Britain's own view of 
herself as savior of the world. "Who," asked Timothy Pickering, 
"... can . . . see Britain struggling for existence, and magnani- 
mously opposing herself to a power which threatens, & with a rod 
of iron, to rule the world, and not bid her God-tyeed? Who can 
think of Trance lord of the navies as well as the armies of Europe,' 
and not contemplate America as one of her provinces?" George 
Cabot, arguing that Britain defended "the independence of the 
civilized world," pronounced her justified in ignoring the cavils 
of those for whom she fought. Scores ojL Federalist pamphleteers 
and speakers echoed the same theme^Timothy Pickering's famous 
toast, "The World's last hope Britain's fast anchored Isle," de- 

41 Annals, nth Cong., ist and zd sess., p. 581$ i2th Cong-., ist sess., p. 600. 

42 Ames to Pickering, Feb. 14, 1806, Timothy Pickering MSS, Massachusetts 
Historical Society, Vol. XXVII 5 Columbian Centinel (Boston), Dec. 23, 1807. 

57 



REPUBLICANISM AND NEUTRALITY 

livered at a Boston dinner for a British minister recently declared 
non grata by Madison, drew a roar of approval from its hearers. 
John Lowell, a wealthy Boston lawyer whose health forced him 
to professional retirement which he used to produce a steady stream 
of Federalist pamphlets, repeatedly stressed that "the fall of Brit- 
ish independence would destroy all hope of maintaining our own." 
Even moderate Federalists like Rufus King, who were prepared 
to admit some good in Jeffersonian policy and even to support 
limited resistance to Britain, believed England defended the world 
against French domination. "If England sink, her fall will prove 
the, Grave of our Liberties," King declared in i8o8. 43 

The truth or falsity of the rival American analyses is not the 
important thing. The point is that both parties saw, or forced them- 
selves to see, or believed the people saw, the European struggle 
in terms of the balance of power. They did not wish either great 
belligerent to secure an unalloyed triumph - y in particular, they 
did not desire Napoleon to become arbiter of the world. Almost 
without exception, Americans thought in terms of the national 
interest, which seemed to require rough parity in Europe. This 
often led Federalists to oppose any resistance to Britain because it 
would make her defense more difficult, and induced so deep a 
hatred of Jeffersonian policy that they frequently advised English- 
men how to destroy its effectiveness ; nevertheless, a great deal 
of^Pederalist sedition sprang from their view of world politics. 
f Of course, this view was also deeply colored by the powerful 
strain of Anglophilia that ran through Federalist)! The govern- 
mental structure and the social fabric of Britain seemed to the 
Federalists almost models of their kind. Not cool reason but emo- 
tion often caused Federalists to proceed from this sympathy to 
support of the British military cause. Republicans, on the other 
hand, detested Britain and indeed had originally built their party 