

43 Samuel E. M orison, The Life and Letters of Harrison Gray Otis (2 vols. 5 
Boston, 1913), II, 21} Pickering- to Ames, Feb. i, 1806, Pickering- MSS, Vol. XIV; 
Cabot to Pickering 1 , Feb. 17, 1806, Henry Cabot Lodge, Life and Letters of George 
Cabot (Boston, 1877), p. 3535 John Lowell, An A$*peal to the People, On the Cause 
and Consequences of a War with Great Britain (Boston, 181 x), p. 355 King to Picker- 
ing, Feb. 5, 1808, Rufus King MSS, New- York Historical Society. 

58 



REPUBLICANISM AND NEUTRALITY 

almost literally on opposition to England and to apparent British 
influences in the United States. Their political views bespoke emo- 
tionalism as much as did those of Federalists, and in the eagerness 
of political strife both parties took positions far in advance of those 
they would have found justified by reason. In 1807, before the 
worst excesses of partisanship had begun, a federal judge com- 
plained, "I think myself sometimes in a Hospital of Lunaticks, 
when I hear some of our Politicians eulogizing Bonaparte because 
he humbles the English 5 & others worshipping the latter, under 
an Idea that they will shelter us, & take us under the Shadow of 
their Wings." 44 

Federalists loved Britain largely because she was, in Pickering's 
wards, "the country of our forefathers, and the country to which 
we are indebted for all the institutions held dear to freemen." 
America had learned much from British justice, particularly that 
it must serve the interests of man as well as of the state, and she had 
learned her lesson so well that many Federalists shared Henry 
Lee's opinion that Great Britain and the United States were the 
"only two nations of the many in the world who understand the 
meaning of liberty, . . . [the] best political blessing of God to 
man." Federalists considered the English constitution an almost 
perfect blend of aristocratic leadership and popular government, 
especially praiseworthy when contrasted with Napoleonic tyranny 
or the leveling democracy Jefferson was accused of desiring. They 
believed Britain far more Christian than France, where atheism 
and Romanism warred for supremacy. In law, in politics, in cul- 
ture, and in her moral condition England was a model state, blem- 
ished at worst by minor defects which time would quickly cure. Old 
Luther Martin, the Maryland politician who had long ago aban- 
doned his early principles and embraced Federalism, expressed 
his party's view when he wrote in 1 8 10 to congratulate the English 
minister, Francis J. Jackson, on his imminent return "to, not a 
fancied Eutopia, but to a glorious Reality to a Country, which 
the Creator in his infinite Goodness disconnected from the rest 

44 Richard Peters to Pickering, Feb. 4, 1807, Albert J. Beveridge, The Life of 
John Marshall (4. vols.j Cambridge, 1916-1919), IV, 6n. 

59 



REPUBLICANISM AND NEUTRALITY 

of the World, and destined . . . for the abode and the protection 
of all that is best, most perfect, most virtuous, most dignified, most 
noble of the human race, of all that distinguishes Man from the 
Brute and from the Daemon." 45 Language could scarcely go 
further than this, yet many Federalists shared Martin's senti- 
ments. 