

Hatred of Napoleon was the twin of Anglomania. Federalists 
saw no redeeming quality in the despot of the Tuileries, and they 
frequently suggested that he threatened the moral fiber of the en- 
tire Christian world. Comparatively mild was a Pennsylvania con- 
gressman's assertion that Napoleon was "the great enemy of the 
liberties of mankind" or even the Alexandria Gazette's claim that 
he was "one of the greatest tyrants the world ever saw." When 
warmed to their task, Federalists described the Emperor and 
believed what they said as a "monster, at whose perfidy and cor- 
ruption Lucifer blushes and Hell itself stands astonished" or a 
"rival of satan himself in guile and mischief, and his most con- 
spicuous agent here on earth." Just after the declaration of war 
in 1812, a clergyman in Massachusetts stated that the "contest 
is no longer between rival candidates for fame, but immediately 
between Christ and Anti-christ, between Almighty God, and that 
atheistic Power, who exalts himself above all that is called God." 
Continuing the Biblical approach to politics, the minister assured 
his flock that the forces of God would triumph through Britain. 
"Her banners will wave victorious on the plains of Armageddon, 
while the blood of her enemies will flow to the horses bridels, and" 
this last apparently applied to Mr. Madison "the flesh of their 
vassal kings furnish a supper for all the vultures of heaven." 46 

The extravagance of the Federalists' love for England and of 
their detestation of Napoleon harmed them politically. If the argu- 

45 Pickering to Edward Pennington, July 12, 1812, Henry Adams, ed,, Documents 
Relating to New-England Federalism (Boston, 1877), p. 3895 Cabot to Pickering, 
March 12, 1808, Lodge, o$. cit. y p. 385 j Henry Lee to Madison, Aug. 19, 1811, 
Madison MSSj Luther Martin to Francis J, Jackson, Aug. 29, 1810, Francis James 
Jackson MSS, Public Record Office (FO 353/58-61), FO 353/59. 

46 Annals, nth Cong., 3d sess., p. 1007 (William Milnor) j Alexandria Gazette, 
May 15, 18125 Annals, nth Cong., 3d sess., pp. 1039104.0 (Blaisdell) j David 
Osgood, A Solemn Protest against the Late Declaration of War (Cambridge, 1812), 
p. 135 Elijah Parish, A Protest against the War (2d ed.j Newburyport, 1812), pp. 10, 
20 2 1 . 

60 



REPUBLICANISM AND NEUTRALITY 

ments had been reasonably expressed, the nation might have 
accepted the theses that Britain had made valuable contributions 
to the American heritage and that Napoleon offered nothing but 
a potential threat. The Federalists' emotion-charged words alien- 
ated many moderates upon whom they must count if they were 
to reverse Jeffersonian policy. The depth of their feeling, the 
hyperbole of their language created the impression that they 
placed Britain's cause above that of the United States. Sometimes, 
although not often between 1805 and 1812, the impression re- 
flected fact 3 more frequently, the dividing line between Anglo- 
philia and treason became blurred. Blunders by Jefferson and 
Madison presented Federalism with a golden opportunity to re- 
coup. Outside New England the party proved unable to take ad- 
vantage of it. In 1 8 1 2 Josiah Quincy, leader of the corporal's guard 
still fighting in the House of Representatives, wrote his wife that 
"there is a foolish leaning upon [Great Britain] . . . among 
some of our friends, which, at the same time that it does little 
credit to their patriotism, does infinitely less to their judgment. 
The truth is, the British look upon us as a foreign nation, and we 
must look upon them in the same light." 47 Quincy, who sometimes 
failed to act upon his own prescription, nevertheless accurately 
indicated Federalism's major failing. 