

British action within sight of the coast particularly irritated 
Americans, Cruisers mounted an almost continuous blockade until 
withdrawn a bit in 1 8 1 2 in a belated effort to lessen American 
resentment. Off New York, for example, they frequently halted 
almost every ship leaving the harbor. Sometimes one or two dozen 
merchantmen awaited British inspection, and even those not sent to 
admiralty courts for trial often lost a favourable tide, a useful wind, 
or perhaps even an advantageous market as the result of delay. 13 
Even the British consul at New York, who could not be accused 
of affection for the Americans, urged the navy to exercise restraint. 
In 1807 th e British minister at Washington wrote: 

I am persuaded that more 111 will has been excited ... by a few trifling 
illegal Captures immediately off this Coast and some Instances of insulting 
Behaviour by some of His Majesty's Naval Commanders in the very Har- 
bours and Waters of the United States than by the most rigid Enforcement 
of the Maritime Rights of Great Britain against the Trade of the United 
States in other Parts of the World. It may easily be conceived to be highly 
grating to the Feelings of an independent Nation to perceive that their 
whole Coast is watched as closely as if it was blockaded, and every Ship 
corning in or going out of their Harbours examined rigorously in Sight of 
the Shore by British Squadrons stationed within their Waters. 14 

12 "Coup d'oeil on an American War," n.d. [Dec., 1807], Spencer Perceval MSS 
(examined while temporarily on deposit at the Register of National Archives, London) , 

33/99- 

13 Basil Hall, Fragments of Voyages and Travels (new ed.j London, 1850), ist 

Series, p. 57. 

14 Barclay to Captain John P. Beresford, private, May 28, 1806, George L. Rives, 
ed., Selections from the Correspondence of Thomas 'Barclay (New York, 1894), pp. 
2422435 David M. Erskine #25 to Canning, Oct. 5, 1807, Foreign Office Archives, 
Public Record Office, FO 5/52. 

75 



' C I S NATIONAL INDEPENDENCE A DREAM?' 5 

David M. Erskine here touched upon one of the central reasons 
that British assaults aroused more resentment than those of France. 
Americans also complained strenuously against British admiralty 
courts. Whereas French judges admittedly acted virtually as agents 
of the Emperor, British tribunals at least claimed to be free to 
apply law rather than government policy. Their apparent hypoc- 
risy and the vices of some judges affronted Americans, who de- 
scribed the entire system as one of "lawless plunder." 15 Some 
American complaints, particularly against Sir William Scott, justice 
of the High Court of Admiralty, were unjustified, 16 but the system 
was bad enough without exaggeration. Ships were condemned on 
trivial evidence, and at least after the Essex case in 1 805 the burden 
of proof lay with the owner and not the captor of the ship brought 
to trial. Furthermore, admiralty courts burdened even innocent 
shipowners with heavy costs. One writer estimated that from $9 
to $13 million worth of American property was always awaiting 
trial by British courts. Another pointed out that court costs fre- 
quently reached $5,000 per case, and even as much as $2,000 or 
$3,000 when the case was dismissed in early stages. Still a third 
critic estimated that in fees, loss of market, and immobilization of 
ships admiralty courts cost American shipowners several million 
dollars yearly. Alexander Baring declared that captains of the 
Royal Navy always carried appeals to higher courts, hoping to 
force shipowners into compromise simply to escape the toils of 
British law. Privateersmen, Baring claimed, often brought into 
port ships that had violated no British decree whatsoever, extorting 
from the owner $500 or $600 as the price of not taking the case 
to court. 17 Such practices flourished because captors were seldom 