

1805, Rives Collection; Joy to Madison, Dec. 31, 1805, James Madison MSS, Library 
of Congress. The Pitt government would have done well to have held extensive 
conversations with Scott on this matter, but Mulgrave preferred to scoff at his opinions. 

25 Monroe to Madison, Nov. 6, 1805, Rives Collection? Monroe to Fox, Feb. 25, 

1806, FO 5/515 Monroe and Pinkney to Holland and Auckland, Aug. 20, 1806, and 
enclosure, ibid. The British minister at Washington reported a year later that indirect 
trade between Spain and her colonies continued to be almost unmolested. Merry #44 
to Fox, Sept. 28, 1807, FO 5/49. 

81 



< IS NATIONAL INDEPENDENCE A DREAM ? ?? 

strate a prize rightfully his ; henceforth the burden of proof lay 
with the shipowner. Second, the hasty enforcement of the new prin- 
ciple insulted the United States. Many ships sailed from American 
ports in the spring of 1 805 trusting that English practice of five 
years' standing would be continued. Without warning they were 
halted and haled into admiralty courts.lBuch action justified Amer- 
ican complaints that the Royal Navy sought plunder for itself 
rather than strangulation of Napoleon. Federalist merchants struck 
home when they asserted that "it cannot become the integrity and 
magnanimity of a great and powerful nation, at pnce, and without, 
notice, to reverse her rule of conduct." Most important of all, thei 
new departure clearly showed that Britain intendectxto act without 
concern for precedent or American sensibilities. In Jah^ary, 1806, 
Rufus King noted that although seizures had fallen offx^as the 
Business is fitted to the Rule 77 there was no assurance Britain would 
not proceed further and "put an end to . . . [all] Trade in Colo^. 
nial Articles between the U.S. & Europe." 26 |The Essex decision 
ended a comparatively long period of moderate interference with 
commerce and clearly foreshadowed increasing blows against Amer- 
ican trade. 

In July, 1805, a week after his return from Madrid and Paris, 
James Monroe protested the new seizures and then sought an in- 
terview with Foreign Secretary Mulgrave to expand upon his 
grievances. Mulgrave declined a special appointment, writing, "I 
am not aware of any recent occurrence of so pressing a nature" as to 
justify one. At a regularly scheduled interview toward the end of 
August, Lord Mulgrave obstinately defended the Rule of the War 
of 1756 and made no attempt to explain that the Essex principle 
was not so far-reaching as Monroe feared. The two men "parted 
as remote from an accord as could possibly be." Subsequently Mul- 
grave and his under-secretary, George Hammond, blandly insisted 
that no new principle had been adopted, a statement true only in 
the most legalistic sense. For the rest of the year Monroe had to be 

26 Protest of Boston merchants, New-York Evening Post, Feb. 7, 1806$ King- to 
Christopher Gore, Jan. 26, 1806, Rufus King* MSS, New-York Historical Society, 
Vol. XI. 

82 



C IS NATIONAL INDEPENDENCE A DREAM ? * * 