

1>5 George Joy, The Dispute with America, Considered in a Series of Letters from 
a Cosmopolite to a Clergyman (London, 1812), p, 27. 

16 Rare praise of Scott by those friendly to American claims is to be found in ibid., 
p. 285 William Lyman to Madison, Jan. 14, 1806, Consular Letters, London, Depart- 
ment of State Archives, National Archives, Vol. IX j and, by an Englishman, in Alex- 
ander Baring, An Inquiry into the Causes and- Consequences of the Orders in Council; 
and an Examination of the Conduct of Great Britain towards the Neutral Commerce 
of America (London, 1808), p. ysn. Baring declared that Scott tried "to distribute 
that real justice which unfortunately is not always within his reach." 

17 Medford, of. cit, 9 p. 102$ Jacob Crowninshield, "Some Remarks on the American 
Trade, 1806," ed. John H. Reinoehl, William and Mary Quarterly, 3d Series, XVI 

76 



< I S NATIONAL INDEPENDENCE A DREAM ? ' 3 

burdened with more than a share of court costs, even when they 
lost a case. 

Federalists often pointed out, with justice, that America gained 
as well as lost from the efforts of belligerents, that by driving 
French ships from the seas Britain had fostered the development 
of the American merchant marine, that if only one ship of three 
escaped interception the merchant's balance would show an over- 
all profit. Fisher Ames once complained that his fellow Americans 
reacted too emotionally to British assaults upon their commerce. 
"We have hated those most who oftenest make us feel our im- 
potence. The British have done this, by their searches of our vessels, 
even while our trade became a monopoly in consequence of British 
naval triumphs," he expostulated. Ames misunderstood public 
opinion, which reacts more often to humiliation than to material 
hurt. British regulation of American commerce could no more be 
tolerated by a self-respecting nation than similar activities by 
Napoleon. The British Orders in Council, John Quincy Adams 
observed, "strike at the very root of our independence.'* 18 In this 
sense they were most deeply resented in the United States. 

Until 1 805 British assaults upon American commerce were rela- 
tively moderate, compared at least with those to follow. Attacks 
begun in that year reflected a broad national determination to step 
up the pace of war against Napoleon. This spirit found expression 
in James Stephen's famous pamphlet, War in Disguise. Neutrals 
and the enemy alone, Stephen argued, profited from British self- 
restraint, particularly from the Polly decision of 1800, which 
granted the reexport trade almost complete immunity from seizure 
when carrying goods, albeit circuitously, from enemy colonies to 
the metropole. Ship after ship sailed contemptuously past patrolling 
English vessels, often laden with goods converted only by fraud 
into nominally neutral property. To deprive Napoleon of the 
sinews of war and to prevent the United States from sheltering 

(1959), n^j John M. Taylor to Monroe, Aug. 6, 1806, James Monroe MSS, Library 
of Congress; Baring, o-p. cit., pp. 94~95> 95 n - 