

In 1 804 and 1 805 Pitt's government, closely in tune with rising 
public sentiment, increased the rigor of its American policy, and by 
the time William Pitt died early in 1806 a serious controversy had 
developed. Refusal to extend commercial articles of the Jay treaty, 
toleration of renewed impressment, hauteur in dealing with James 
Monroe, attempts to restrict the trade of American vessels with the 
British West Indies all these were parts of a policy Cobbett 
rightly assailed as "a pretty equal measure of arrogance and im- 
becility." The greatest American grievance was the Essex decision, 
which marked the end of British tolerance of the reexport trade. 
An American War Hawk later described this decision as "the foun- 
dation and commencement of the system of vexation and injury 
under which we ... [have] suffered." 21 England showed that, 
without even a bow to American sensibilities, she would alter her 
rules of maritime behavior as the spirit moved her. 

The Essex decision replaced the Polly decision as the chief guide 
for British courts. Sir William Scott's Polly decision, later com- 
municated to the Americans in even more explicit paraphrase, 
granted the reexport trade almost complete immunity from seizure. 
In effect, the decision stated that landing of goods in America and 
payment of even the smallest duties neutralized cargo being borne 
circuitously from the Caribbean to Europe. American reexports 
rose from $40 million in 1 800, the last year of the first Anglo- 

20 Edinburgh Review^ VIII (1806), i 355 Times (London), Oct. 24, 18055 Baring, 
op. cit., p. 25 Holland to Fox, Jan. 3, 1806, Charles J. Fox MSS, British Museum 
(Add. MSS 4.7559-4.7601), Add. MSS 47575- 

21 Cobbett? } s Register, IX (1806), 1705 Samuel McKee in American Statesman 
(Lexington, Ky.)> Sept. 7, 1811. 

79 



C IS NATIONAL INDEPENDENCE A DREAM ? ?J 

French war, to more than $60 million in 1805. The Rule of the 
War of 1756 became virtually a nullity, so unimportant indeed 
that Alexander Baring later maintained that it was resuscitated 
"merely because the only remaining neutral had a defenseless com- 
merce." In a series of minor decisions, admiralty courts sought to 
tighten enforcement of the Rule of the War of I756, 22 but Amer- 
ican merchants ignored these irritants as long as the overwhelming 
proportion of reexported cargoes crossed the Atlantic unmolested. 
Then, in the spring of 1805, Master of the Rolls Sir William 
Grant handed down the Essex decision of the Lords Commissioners 
of Appeals. 23 The Essex* cargo of wine, bound from Barcelona to 
Havana but briefly landed in the United States, was condemned 
although the owners had performed the requirements laid down 
in the Polly case. Grant held that the landing was an attempt to 
deceive, noted that virtually all duties had been returned as draw- 
backs, and emphasized that the owners, during the two years 7 grace 
given them to collect evidence of a bona fide importation into Amer- 
ica, had brought forward no proof. Since Spain had not permitted 
Americans to share in commerce between the home country and 
Cuba in time of peace. Grant confirmed the decision of a lower 
court condemning the Essex* cargo. Legalistically speaking, the 
decision distinguished but did not reverse the Polly case. In the 
earlier decision Scott explicitly upheld the Rule of the War of 1 756 
and merely stated that landing and payment of duties were but 
one test of a bona fide importation. In practice, of course, the Essex 