

content with written protests. Only a hope that Austerlitz would 
reduce British arrogance and then the prospect of Fox's succession 
restrained the American diplomat from throwing up his position 
in disgust. 27 

It would have been easy to explain to the United States the true 
dimensions of the Essex decision. With reluctance, the Jefferson 
administration might even have accepted the new policy if assured 
that Britain did not intend to cut off all indirect trade in colonial 
produce. But the ministry did nothing until March, 1 806, when 
the King's Advocate, Sir John Nicholl, finally prepared a memo- 
randum which the Board of Trade passed on to American mer- 
chants. Nicholl, who defended the Essex principle and denied that 
it represented an abandonment of stare decisis, admitted the deci- 
sion had been abused: 

Some Vessels were seized which probably would not otherwise have been 
detained, under a notion that it was illegal for an American ship to convey 
Colonial Produce from America to Europe; and the misapprehension be- 
came so strong, that it was fully believed by many here, and by more in 
America, that special Instructions to that Effect had been issued by His 
Majesty's Government, though I believe such a measure never in the 
slightest Degree entered into its contemplation. 

Britain, said Nicholl, sought only to prevent fraudulent evasions 
of the Rule of the War of 1756, not to cut off the entire reexport 
trade of the United States. 28 

Not until May, 1806, nearly a year after the original verdict, 
did a British judge issue a full-dress amplification of the Essex 
decision. Then, when a new tack taken by the Ministry of All the 
Talents had in a sense made it superfluous, Sir William Grant chose 
to elucidate it in the case of the ship William. Grant reviewed 
prior cases, including the Essex case, to show the consistency of 

27 Monroe to Mulgrave, July 31, 1805, enclosed in Monroe to Madison, Aug. 6, 
1805, Despatches, Great Britain, Vol. XII j Monroe to Madison, Aug. 20, 1805, 
and enclosures, ibid.; "Minute of a Conversation between Mr. Erving & Mr. Ham- 
mond," Aug. 30, 1805, ibid.; Monroe #35, #39 to Madison, Oct. 18, Dec. 23, 
1805, ibid. 

28 Sir John Nicholl to Board of Trade, March 20, 1806, Greenwich Hospital 
Miscellanea, Public Record Office, Adm 80/116. 

83 



* ' I S NATIONAL INDEPENDENCE A DREAM?' 5 

British courts. He closed by reaffirming that American ships could 
no longer count on "mere voluntary ceremonies" in American ports 
to protect them. Unlike its predecessor, this decision was well ad- 
vertised in advance and soon spread before the world. The King's 
Advocate, doubtless to educate the new ministry to his point of 
view, secured Lord Auckland's attendance at the Cockpit to hear 
the decision. The next day Auckland reported to the ministry's 
leader, "The tendency of that Judgment is to set aside the Preten- 
sions of the Americans to legalize their cargoes by a fictitious land- 
ing & reshipping, & by a pretended payment of duties, &c. The 
Judgment was given with great ability ; but will create a very 
strong sensation. That whole subject calls for an immediate & very 
solemn Consideration." 29 Auckland's concern and that of the Brit- 
ish government arose too late to prevent serious friction with 
America. 