

6 Jan. 4, 1808. 

71 



c c 



IS NATIONAL INDEPENDENCE A DREAM?' 5 



chances of acquittal or release in a British admiralty court than 
in a French one. 7 

Napoleon's policy toward American commerce was thus vehe- 
mently hostile. Logic seemed to call for an attitude that would 
encourage Americans to penetrate the British naval wall, bringing 
raw materials sorely needed by Europe and carrying away manu- 
factures that would profit the Continent and cut into British exports 
to America. Consistency seemed to require a policy that would 
lend credence to Napoleon's pose as defender of the rights of 
neutral commerce. Yet actually the Emperor showed as little re- 
spect for America's rights and even less for her political importance 
than did British leaders. He tried to scourge rather than inveigle 
America into hostility to England, repeatedly stating that she must 
suffer at his hands until she effectively resisted English outrages. 
In effect he attempted to direct the general course of American 
policy, refusing to admit that the United States had a right to 
choose passive neutrality. 

General Louis M. Turreau, French minister to the United 
States until early i8ir, was a fitting agent of Napoleon. Turreau, 
who had only a fraction of his master's intelligence, shared with 
Napoleon contempt for America. The general beat his wife (on at 
least one occasion to the accompaniment of violin playing by the 
secretary of legation designed to drown out her cries) and if he 
never used force with Jefferson and Madison this was the only 
resource he omitted. The Americans needed no glimpse at his 
dispatches to know that he considered them selfish, spineless, and 
incompetent. Ultimately Napoleon replaced Turreau with Louis 
Serurier, a more tactful diplomat but almost equally disdainful of 

7 Report of Secretary of State Monroe, July 6, 1812, American State Papers. Class I. 
Foreign Relations (6 vols.j Washington, 18321859), III, 583585. Monroe's 
figures have often been misconstrued, leading many to say that France alone seized 
more ships than Britain from 1803 onward or from 1807 to 1812. For this reason 
it seems advisable to reproduce the following figures drawn from this report. 

British seizures French seizures 

1803 to orders of 1807 528 1803 to Berlin decree 206 

After November, 1807 389 Under Berlin and Milan decrees 307 

Total 917 After "repeal" 45 

Total 558 

72 



< < I S NATIONAL INDEPENDENCE A DREAM? 73 

American worth. Clearly the French monarch and his representa- 
tives considered American independence, perhaps not a dream, 
but at least a limited commodity. 

British assaults upon America exceeded Napoleon's in material 
impact if not in cynicism. Some conflict between Britain and Amer- 
ica was inevitable, for, as an English diplomat serving in Washing- 
ton put it, "The two greatest Commercial Nations in the Globe 
cannot move in the same Spheres without jostling one another a 
little where we were aiming blows at the French Marine, we want 
Elbow room and these good Neutrals wont give it to us, & there- 
fore they get a few side Pushes which makes them grumble." 8 
The Americans, however, felt they were subjected to more than 
"a few side Pushes. 5 ' Britain seized hundreds of American mer- 
chantmen and interrupted the sale of agricultural produce abroad 5 
she forced American seamen into service under the Union Jack 5 
her Canadian agents intrigued among Indian tribes resident in the 
United States ; she rejected or ignored American protests. From 
1805 to 1812 there was scarcely a moment when a storm did not 
loom over Anglo-American relations. Naval officers, diplomats, 
legislators, and statesmen plunged into the fray. Newspaper edi- 
tors and pamphleteers on both sides of the Atlantic added their 
bit to the cacophony. In 1810 William Cobbett complained that 
to the real issues there had been added "the greatest curse of all, 
. . . volumes innumerable written upon the subject. There have 
been, including both sides, not less than from six to ten able bodied 
writers, and (what makes the thing more serious) most of them 
lawyers, too, hard at work." 9 Cobbett despaired of renewed amity, 
and insult and accusation had indeed become almost habitual. In 
some ways it is surprising that war did not come until 1812. 