

18 Ames to Quincy, Dec. 6, 1807, Seth Ames, ed., Works of Fisher Ames (2 vols.j 
Boston, 1854), I, 405406; Adams to Harrison G. Otis, March 31, 1808, Ford, 
op. cit t> Ill, 200 20 1. 

77 



C IS NATIONAL INDEPENDENCE A DREAM?' 5 

enemy property under the Stars and Stripes, Stephen urged rigor- 
ous execution of the Rule of the War of 1756 the prohibition to 
neutrals in time of war of traffic closed to them in peace and com- 
plete disruption of the colonial trade, even when carried on through 
American ports and under the American flag. Such action would 
have the more than collateral advantage of restoring British ship- 
ping and commerce to their wonted preeminence. Basically, as 
befitted a publication that appeared on Trafalgar day, James 
Stephen's pamphlet was a clarion call for more aggressive exploita- 
tion of Britain's sea dominion, for stronger blows against the enemy 
and against neutrals. 

Stephen later denied that War in Disguise had been written at 
the Pitt ministry's behest. Only in a technical sense was this denial 
true, for Stephen submitted his manuscript to Sir William Scott, 
who in turn showed it to Pitt and then advised Stephen to print it 
privately, since "if it sh d carry our Pretensions somewhat higher 
than the Convenience of Publick Affairs may allow, it will commit 
Government less" than if it seemed to have "any stamp of Official 
Communication upon It." Soon after publication, the American 
minister forwarded a copy of War in Disguise to the Secretary of 
State, commenting, "It is said to be a ministerial work, or rather 
under its auspices." 19 This was the usual opinion in London. The 
semiofficial status of War in Disguise seemed confirmed when 
Stephen, whose identity as its author had become known, received 
from the Pittites a seat in the House of Commons. 

Stephen deserved his seat. War in Disguise, playing ably upon 
a growing chord in English sentiment, provided apparent justifica- 
tion for a shift in policy already under way and impressed even 
Pitt's enemies with its exposition of neutral subterfuges. Thus, for 
example, the Edinburgh Review called it "a pamphlet of great 
merit" and agreed with Stephen that frauds by neutrals required 
British counteraction. The London Times believed Stephen had 

19 James Stephen ($seud. The Author of "War in Disguise") , ed., The Speech of 
the Hon. J. Randolph . . . with an Introduction by the Author of "War in Disguise" 
(London, 1806), p. xviii; Scott to Pitt, Aug. 25, 1805, Chatham MSS, Public Record 
Office, Vol. CLXXVIj Monroe to Madison, Oct. 26, 1805, William C. Rives Collection, 
Library of Congress. 

78 



< C I S NATIONAL INDEPENDENCE A DREAM ? ' ? 

clearly proved that "it was high time to put an end to a system so 
prejudicial to the commercial interests of the country. 3 ' Opponents 
of restrictive measures found themselves overwhelmed. Alexander 
Baring, who denied that American prosperity had been achieved 
at British expense, had to admit that this "delusive opinion" was 
generally held, primarily because the argument had been "too ably 
illustrated by the author of 'War in Disguise. 5 " Small wonder 
that Fox's protege, Lord Holland, called War in Disguise "an 
abominable & mischievous work." 20 