

2 ^ Baring, O'p. cit. } p. 775 Orby H. Mootham, "The Doctrine of Continuous 
Voyage" (unpublished M.Sc. [Econ.] thesis, University of London, 1926), p. sSnj 
C. J. B. Gaskoin, "The Legend of the Essex" (typescript, Gaskoin MSS, London 
School of Economics), pp. 1113. Mr. Gaskoin, with whom the author was privileged 
to have correspondence, died before publishing his valuable work on the Essex, His 
entire manuscript of thirty-two pages is probably the most detailed single examination 
of this case and its implications. Gaskoin's verdicts are unreservedly hostile to the 
United States. 

23 The exact date of the decision is still open to question. James Stephen, War in 
Disguise- Or, the Frauds of the Neutral Flags (London, 1805), P- 60, gives the date as 
May 22, 1805. The only available transcript of this laconic decision is attached to 
Monroe #35 to Madison, Oct. 18, 1805, Despatches, Great Britain, Vol. XII, where 
the date is given as June 22, 1805. The earlier date seems more likely, since it alone 
allows time for news of the decision to have reached captains at sea before the out- 
break of seizures early in July. 

go 



c c 



IS NATIONAL INDEPENDENCE A DREAM?' 5 



decision made it much easier to secure condemnation of reexports. 
Landing and payment of duties alone would no longer satisfy Brit- 
ish courts. 24 

I British commanders at first believed they had received license 
to seize all ships engaged in indirect voyages. Further decisions 
soon made clear their error, and toward the end of 1805 seizures 
fell off sharply as American shipowners exercised greater caution 
or developed shrewder subterfuges to conceal evasion of the arbi- 
trary British rule. In November Monroe reported home, "Our 
merchants here say that the rule . . . may be easily complied 
with, & will do no more harm except in the cases that have or may 
occur before it is known in America: that cargoes may be sold &c 
[in America before reshipment], & that fact is known and antici- 
pated here by those who make the rule." The number of reported 
seizures proved exaggerated. In February, 1806, Monroe com- 
plained to Fox that 1 20 vessels had been seized as a result of the 
Essex decision. By August, on the basis of better information, Mon- 
roe and Pinkney reduced the figure to 6i. 25 Certainly the new rule 
did not long discourage American merchants, for reexports dropped 
only about i per cent in 1 806. 

The decision's real importance lay deeper. In the first place, 
British courts abandoned the position that the captor must demon- 

24 Sir William Scott, Britain's foremost admiralty judge, loyally applied the prin- 
ciples of the superior court, beginning 1 with the case of the Enoch in July. But he 
obviously believed that it was unsound law and risky politics. In August he urged 
the Foreign Secretary to turn his attention to the problem and perhaps modify the 
principle. Scott to Mulgrave, Aug. 9, 1805, Law Officers Reports, FO 83/2204.. In 
October Mulgrave told Pitt that, because Scott was out of sympathy with the new 
policy, he would be of no help in preparing an answer to Monroe's written protests. 
Mulgrave to Pitt, Oct. n, 1805, transcript, Pretyman MSS, Cambridge University 
(Add. MSS 6958) , Vol. XVII. In November and December James Monroe and George 
Joy, an American in London, both reported to Madison that Scott had only feebly 
defended the principle when applying it in his own court. Monroe to Madison, Nov. 6, 