

Almost all Britons believed impressment vitally necessary. The 
number of men in the navy rose from 36,000 in 1792 to about 
120,000 in 1805. England's merchant marine lost as many men 
as it could spare, and large numbers of foreigners had to be enlisted 
in British service. The Edinburgh Review estimated that one- 
eighth of the navy's seamen were foreigners, and the American con- 
sul at London claimed that 1 5,000 Americans were serving in the 
Royal Navy, although not all Americans were impressed and many 

31 John Adams, "The Inadmissible Principles of the King of England's Proclama- 
tion of October 16, 1807, Considered," Charles F. Adams, ed., The Works of John 
Adams (10 vols.j Boston, 1850-1856), IX, 3275 Independent Chronicle (Boston), 
May 27, 1811. 

85 



* C I S NATIONAL INDEPENDENCE A DREAM? 35 

claimed as Americans were British subjects according to English 
law. 32 To maintain the existing level of manpower and above all 
to discourage desertion to American merchantmen it seemed im- 
perative to make use of impressment. 

Certainly voluntary enlistment could not meet Britain's needs. 
Service in the Royal Navy was onerous, and able-bodied seamen 
received only 30 to 35 shillings (about 7 dollars) per month. The 
Americans paid able-bodied seamen 25 to 35 dollars for service 
much less painful, and they made strenuous efforts to enlist Eng- 
lishmen, for America had far too few trained seamen to support 
her maritime expansion. Thousands of British seamen avoided or 
deserted service in the Royal Navy by joining the crews of Ameri- 
can merchantmen. "The temptation," a class-conscious English- 
man observed, "is greater than human Nature, or rather their 
nature can be expected to withstand." a3 These men, patriotic on- 
shore Britains believed, could not be granted immunity from serv- 
ice in the crusade against Napoleon, and the threat of recapture 
must be held over the heads of other seamen tempted to desert 
from the Royal Navy to American vessels. Unless impressment 
continued, the Royal Navy's strength was bound to evaporate. 

America's bitterest enemies, James Stephen among them, recog- 
nized that impressment humiliated the United States, particularly 
since naval officers often acted capriciously or cruelly toward crews 
mustered for their inspection. No responsible Englishman justified 
the forced enlistment of native Americans, although ministers 
often permitted Admiralty bureaucrats and naval commanders to 
evade requests for the release of Americans. On the other hand, 
nobody of importance save Cobbett favored ending impressment, 
although in 1806 the Ministry of All the Talents considered 
sharply limiting impressment in return for firm American com- 
mitments on the return of deserters. After criticizing excesses com- 
mitted by the navy, Sir William Scott declared that "the Right 

32 Christopher Lloyd, edL, The Keith Papers, III, Navy Records Society, Publica- 
tions, Vol. XCVI (1955), p. 1555 Edinburgh Review, XLI (1824), i6ij Lyman 
to Madison, Oct. 23, 1807, Consular Letters, London, Vol. IX. 