

The incidence of impressment at any given time simply revealed 
the degree of the Royal Navy's need. The forced enslavement of 
even a dozen Americans, any number sufficient to show that honest 
mistakes were not the sole problem, was in principle as important 
as the impressment of thousands. Daily mustering of crews under 
the Stars and Stripes by foreign officers and Britain's unwillingness 
to negotiate an end to the practice showed the incompleteness of 

4T Lyman to Madison, May 22, 1806, Consular Letters, London, Vol. IX; Holland 
and Auckland to Monroe and Pinkney, Nov. 8, 1806, FO 5/51. 

48 Lyman to Monroe, Aug. n, 1811, Consular Letters, London, Vol. IX; Zimmer- 
man, Q'p. cit., p. 2565 Lyman to Pinkney, May 10, 1810, Consular Letters, London, 
Vol. 1X5 Beasley to John W. Croker, Dec. 19, 1811, Admiralty Papers, Public Record 
Office, Adm 1/3856; Beasley to Monroe, Jan. 21, Feb. 15, June 25, 1812, Consular 
Letters, London, Vol. IX. One of the few students to challenge the usual view that 
impressment declined just before the War of 1812 is Patrick C. T. White, "Anglo- 
American Relations from 1803 to 1815" (unpublished Ph.D. dissertation. University 
of Minnesota, 1954)^. 146. 

93 



<C IS NATIONAL INDEPENDENCE A DREAM? 55 

American freedom and, as old John Adams argued, suggested that 
"the spirits of Lord Bute and Lord George Germain [had] risen 
again at St. James's. 55 49 

In March, 1806, Jefferson 5 s friend, Judge John Tyler, wrote to 
him praising the war against Barbary but adding that "while we 
go to very great lengths to relieve 200 citizens from the shackles 
imposed by a barbarous nation, we seem to have doubts about the 
propriety of emancipating 3,000 now in the hands of Great Britain, 
who is said to be the most civilized nation in the world. . . . But, 
by the great God of heaven, I had rather not exist as a man or nation 
than to suffer such violations of the rights and liberty of our citi- 
zens. 55 50 A few Republican legislators, most notably Robert Wright 
of Maryland, shared Tyler 5 s feelings to the extent of urging that 
Britain be coerced into abandoning impressment. For the most part, 
however, Americans seemed not unwilling to tolerate this national 
degradation. Certainly from the beginning of 1808 until the War 
Hawk Congress impressment took a back seat to oth^r complaints 
against Britain. Americans showed more concern for their pros- 
perity than for national rights or the liberty of seamen. 

The administration's wavering course certainly did not add to 
the nation 5 s dignity. John Adams 5 administration had worked hard 
to secure the release of American seamen and attempted to negoti- 
ate an agreement with Britain for the reciprocal return of deserters 
which would have made it possible for England to end impress- 
ment on the high seas. While steadfastly refusing to admit the 
legality of impressment, however, the Federalists never risked na- 
tional humiliation by making a direct challenge they were unpre- 
pared to follow up. Not so Jefferson and Madison. In 1 806, having 
made an agreement on impressment a sine qua non of any settle- 
ment, they rejected a treaty negotiated by Monroe and P'inkney 
primarily because it passed over the subject in silence. A few months 
later, on the other hand, they considered surrendering all British 
seamen in American employ, or at least those who had served less 