

While Britain claimed no right to impress American seamen, 
she refused to admit that American naturalization relieved an emi- 
grant of obligations to his homeland. An American law of 1802 
authorized naturalization only five years after immigration. The 
United States insisted that naturalization conferred full rights of 
citizenship, absolving new citizens from former obligations, al- 
though, as Federalists and Englishmen frequently emphasized, 
American courts often denied the right of American citizens to 
abandon their allegiance and Congress never passed legislation to 
the contrary. Some Americans, among them Oliver Ellsworth and 
Rufus King, maintained that naturalization merely doubled a 
man's obligations. In King's words, "Naturalization when it con- 
fers new Rights, does not, and cannot dissolve, old duties the 
Performance of which within his own, or a common Jurisdiction, 
the former sovereign may compel." The United States govern- 
ment, however, maintained the contrary as far as those who as- 

39 Erskine #5 to Howick, Feb. 2, 1807, FO 5/52. For a review of American 
theory on this question, see Zimmerman, op. cit., pp. 19-21, 2526. 

40 Madison to Joy, May 22, 1807, Madison MSS. 

89 



'!$ NATIONAL INDEPENDENCE A DREAM?' 5 

sumed American citizenship were concerned. In doing so it chal- 
lenged British practice. Thousands of former Englishmen were 
claimed as citizens by both countries. Many served on ships that 
might be boarded at any time by British officers, for of the nearly 
1 1 ,000 naturalized seamen registered with American papers in 
1805 an overwhelming majority had been born in Britain. Board- 
ing officers only too often failed to show much concern for niceties 
of legal theory, particularly in questions of citizenship, and John 
Quincy Adams was probably fairly near the mark when he claimed 
that three-quarters of those impressed had been born in America. 
Still, even officers who exercised restraint were bound to impress 
seamen claimed by the United States as citizens. Sharply contrast- 
ing views of allegiance created a large area in which disagreement 
was not only possible but inevitable. 41 

These opposing definitions, a tendency on both sides to doctor 
figures for political purposes, and delayed and incomplete reports 
make it extremely difficult to establish the precise dimensions of 
flight from British service on the one hand and impressment on the 
other. Rough estimates are possible, however. In 1812, the Ad- 
miralty claimed that at least 20,000 Englishmen were serving in 
the American merchant marine. Earlier Gallatin had estimated that 
about 9,000 Englishmen (English even by American definition) 
served under the American flag. In other words, about one-half 
of the able-bodied seamen serving on ships engaged in foreign 
trade were British. The Secretary of the Treasury calculated that 
the Americans recruited about 2,500 Englishmen each year. 42 

41 King to Peter B. Porter [?], Dec. IG, 1811, King- MSS, Vol. XIII; report of 
Secretary of State Monroe, Feb. 19, 1813, American State Papers. Class IV, Commerce 
and Navigation (2 vok; Washington, 1832-1834), I, 968$ John Quincy Adams, 
A Letter to the Hon. Harrison Gray Otis , . . on the Present State of Our National 
A fairs (Salem, 1808), p. 135 I-Mien Tsiang, The Question of Expatriation in 
America Prior to 1907, Johns Hopkins University Studies in Historical and Political 
Science, Series LX, no. 3 (Baltimore, 1942), pp. 32-40. Zimmerman, op. cit., pp. 
274275, notes that only 400 applications for release were refused on grounds of 
British citizenship, but this figure fails to include hundreds who reluctantly accepted 
the King's bounty after serving some time, or in some other way provided the navy 
with an excuse for denying discharge. It is impossible to determine with any degree of 
accuracy how many impressed seamen could actually be claimed as citizens by both 
nations. 