

Predictably enough, Federalists often accepted British argu- 
ments. Sometimes they emphasized that all Europe tolerated the 
practice or, more hopelessly, that America could not hope to end 
it even by war. 37 More often, however, they stressed the argument 
that Britain had a right to recover those who deserted British 
service. Luther Martin argued that America, by receiving English 
deserters in her ships, became the aggressor in events culminating 
in the British attack upon the U.S.S. Chesapeake. Dr. George 
Logan, working for peace as he had during the Franco-American 
quarrel a decade before, told his friend Madison that the United 
States had no right to erect "a sanctuary for fugitives," particularly 
so long as it insisted upon punishing deserters from its own military 
forces. The Columbian Centinel pronounced unjust the "AT- 
TEMPT to make American merchant ships an asylum for English, 
Scotch, and Irish runaway seamen," and warned that the recruit- 
ment of foreigners not only deprived natives of employment but 
threatened to involve America in a war for the interest of scum 
who deserted their own flags for the Stars and Stripes. 38 While 
there is no indication that such arguments convinced a majority 
of Americans, Federalists did create doubt in many minds and per- 
haps delayed exploitation of the impressment issue until just before 
the declaration of war in 1 8 1 2. 

The American government did not deny Britain's claim to her 
own seamen. Jefferson and Madison were prepared to tolerate 
impressment as long as it took place in British ports and was applied 

36 Annual Register, 1810 (London, 1812), pp. 258-259. 

^Columbian Centinel (Boston), July 25, Nov. 4, 1807. 

38 Luther Martin ('pseud. Vindex), The Honest Politician, Part I (Baltimore, 
1808), p. 36$ George Logan to Madison, Jan. 10, 1810, Madison MSSj Columbian 
Centinel , Dec. 9, 1807. 

88 



<C IS NATIONAL INDEPENDENCE A DREAM?'' 

solely to British subjects, even though they might be serving in 
American ships. In 1807 Madison argued with some justice that, 
since almost all ships eventually visited England, all that was 
required of Britain was patience. 39 Britain felt that she could not 
afford patience, and since the 1790'$ she had been impressing sea- 
men on the high seas. All American governments challenged the 
legality of this practice. They recognized the right of search when 
used to seek out contraband or military personnel of the enemy, 
but they denied that the same right justified search for British 
seamen. The claimed right was made worse by the means of exe- 
cuting it, Americans declared. "That an officer from a foreign ship 
should pronounce any person he pleased, on board an American 
ship on the high seas, not to be an American Citizen, but a British 
subject, & carry his interested decision on the most important of 
all questions to a freeman, into execution on the spot," Madison 
complained, "is anomalous in principle, . . . grievous in practice, 
and . . . abominable in abuse." 40 