

^Like seizures, the impressment of American seamen increased 
in\805 and troubled Anglo-American relations until war came. 
In coldly economic terms the loss of seamen counted far less than 
the loss of ships and cargoes, and the recruiting of British seamen 
by American ships more than balanced the loss of men through 
impressment. In terms of human right and national self-respect, 
impressment posed an extremely serious challenge. "This author- 
ized system of kidnapping upon the ocean," as John Quincy Adams 
called it, condemned Americans to many years service in the Royal 
Navy, sometimes even to death in a foreign monarch's battles. The 
American, tar could ask aid of "no judge, no jury, no writ of habeas 
corpus" He was forcibly enlisted in the Royal Navy as a result 
of a decision a boarding officer made as to his citizenship. He knew 

2& Christopher Robinson, ed., Reports of Cases Argued and Determined in the 
High Court of Admiralty, V (London, 1806), 396-3975 Auckland to Grenville, May 
14, 1806, Boconnoc MSS (Papers of William Wyndham Grenville, Baron Grenville), 
Lostwithiel, Cornwall, Lord Auckland 1806. 

30 Adams, "Reply to the Appeal of Massachusetts Federalists," n.d., Henry Adams, 
ed., Documents Relating to New-England Federalism. (Boston, 1877), p. 178. On the 
entire subject of impressment, particularly as seen from the American side, the standard 
work, heavily relied upon here, is James F. Zimmerman, Impressment of American 
Seamen^ Columbia University Studies in History, Economics and Public Law, Vol. 
CXVIII, no. i (New York, 1925). 

8 4 



"IS NATIONAL INDEPENDENCE A DREAM? 53 

that even if American representatives learned of his detention his 
release would probably be long delayed. Occasionally a seaman 
threatened with impressment mutilated himself, cut off his hand 
perhaps, to destroy his usefulness to the British; often he endured 
weeks of intermittent flogging before he consented to take up his 
assigned tasks on an English man-of-war. In the end the Royal 
Navy usually had its way. 

This practice, so evil in its effect upon individual seamen, had 
even more serious implications for the nation. No state that per- 
mitted crews under its flag to be mustered by a foreign officer, that 
tolerated detention of its citizens by another nation, could seriously 
maintain a claim to complete sovereignty. When John Adams de- 
clared that Jefferson "has not been behind either of his predecessors 
in his zeal for the liberty of American seamen," the ex-President 
merely invited criticism of himself as well as of Washington and 
Jefferson, for protests and half measures satisfied them all. By 
impressment even more than by seizures Britain challenged Amer- 
ica's stature. Replying to Federalist complaints that France treated 
American commerce as badly as Britain did, a Boston newspaper 
reminded its readers that "there is another atrocity incident solely 
to Great Britain, of the blackest and most savage complexion, which 
would alone convict her of being beyond all comparison to the 
greatest aggressor. We refer to the barbarous THEFTS OF 
AMERICAN CITIZENS!" 31 