

49 xhe Inadmissible Principles of the King of England's Proclamation . . . ," 
Charles F. Adams, ed., Works of A dams > IX, 315. 

50 John Tyler to Jefferson, March 25, 1806, Lyon G. Tyler, The Letters and 
Times of the Tylers, I (Richmond, 1884), 211-212. 

94 



c c 



IS NATIONAL INDEPENDENCE A DREAM ? ?? 



than two years, if only the British would give up impressment. Fig- 
ures produced by Gallatin showed the American merchant marine 
unable to stand the loss of men., and Jefferson and Madison dropped 
the project. 51 After the Chesapeake affair the administration united 
this attack upon a national naval vessel with the quite different issue 
of impressment from merchantmen, and for a time refused to con- 
sider the issues separately. Only a few months later, in negotia- 
tions with a special British envoy, they consented to separate the 
two. 52 After February, 1808, Jefferson and Madison virtually ig- 
nored impressment, except to seek the release of individual seamen. 
Secretaries of state repeatedly directed William Pinkney, the min- 
ister at London, to concentrate on commercial rights rather than 
seamen, and as late as the summer of 1811 the administration 
scarcely made anything of impressment in its extensive discussions 
with a new British minister. The feebleness of Republican leaders 
encouraged Americans to accept impressment as a price of peace, 
however galling to national pride. 

Britain's policy on seamen and on neutral commerce clearly sug- 
gested that she considered America a comparatively inconsequen- 
tial power. Even the concessions occasionally offered were at best 
partial recognition of American claims, liberal only in that they 
offered more than English political opinion desired. Other policies 
reinforced the impression given by the treatment of American 
ships and crews/ Officials in Canada freely communicated with In- 
dians south of the Great Lake|f These officials did not, as the Amer- 
icans charged, attempt to pf ovo^e the tribes to war with the United 
States. They did, however, seelc to make sure, particularly after 
the war scare following the Chesapeake affair in 1807, that if war 
came the tribes would not fight against England, and they steadily 

"^ Gallatin memorandum, April 13, 1807, Rives Collection; Gallatin to Jefferson, 
April 13, 1 6, 1807, Thomas Jefferson MSS, Library of Congress; Madison to Gallatin, 
April 17, 1807, ibid,; Jefferson to Madison, April 21, 1807, ibid. In his memorandum 
Gallatin estimated that 67,000 men were in American crews, 42,000 of them in 
ships engaged in foreign commerce. He estimated 9,000 of the latter to be British, 
more than one-fifth of the crews and exactly half of the 18,000 able-bodied seamen, 
the most important component of the crews. 

152 This development may conveniently be followed in Madison's memoranda of 
his conversations with George H. Rose, the British envoy, in Gaillard Hunt, ed., 
The Writings of James Madison (9 vols.j New York, 1900-1910), VIII, i-n. 