

95 



<C IS NATIONAL INDEPENDENCE A DREAM ? 5? 

sought to reduce American influence over Indians resident in the 
United States. Even the selection of ministers to Washington 
showed Britain's lack of respect. There appeared at the American 
capital first an untried youth, then a pair of arrogant professionals 
who acted more like commanders than negotiators, and finally, 
after a long and contemptuous interlude, a pleasant enough but 
inept young man of no particular reputation. 

In the face of British hauteur the American nation groped 
weakly toward effective national sovereignty. Commercial warfare 
failed to vindicate national rights. By reducing importations from 
Britain it did contribute to a growing campaign to cast off depend- 
ence upon Lancashire. In an amusing reversal, Jeffersonians be- 
came apostles of autarky. Almost every presidential message on 
the state of the union congratulated America on the growth of in- 
dustry, and President Madison even claimed this increase "more 
than a recompense" for losses suffered by shipowners and exporters. 
Some Federalists, on the other hand, so far forgot Alexander Ham- 
ilton's teachings as to argue that industry threatened the nation's 
well-being. "Who that has seen the happy state of society through- 
out our villages," the Connecticut Courant asked, "can wish it to 
be exchanged for the dissipated and effeminate manners and habits, 
which extensive establishments of manufactures, never fail to bring 
in their trains?" 53 

Manufacturing developed slowly. In 1810 there were 269 cot- 
ton mills and 153 iron furnaces in the United States, most of them 
very small. The British Board of Trade occasionally showed con- 
cern over the growth of American manufacturing, and in 1 8 1 1, on 
the basis of reports from the United States, William Cobbett wrote, 
"To American commerce, . . . now bid adieu, I think forever." 
Cobbett was premature. Congressmen affected homespun suits 
("more wretched Stuff cannot be conceived," the British minister 
sniffed), 54 newspapers congratulated the nation, and the census of 

153 James D, Richardson, ed., A Compilation of the Messages anci Papers of the 
Presidents (Washington, 1897), I, 484-485; Connecticut Courant (Hartford), April 
6, 1808. 

154 Cobbett's Register, XIX (1811), 558$ Erskine to Canning, separate, Nov. 12, 
1808, FO 5/58. 

96 



c C IS NATIONAL INDEPENDENCE A DREAM ? ?? 

1 8 10 reflected increasing interest by adding new statistics on manu- 
facturing. However, although American industrial accomplish- 
ments foreshadowed the future, they did not substantially reduce 
present dependence upon Britain. 

In literature and the arts American dependence was even more 
substantial. Already West and Copley had won respect for Ameri- 
can painting, 55 but in most other areas there was little of which to 
boast. Only the most enthusiastic patriot could claim that such 
accomplishments as Alexander Wilson's study of American orni- 
thology were more than a beginning. The Porfolio> America's first 
literary magazine, was founded in 1801, but it was a pale copy of 
English models, pale at least in everything except its criticism of 
Republicanism. Americans preferred to receive their reading ma- 
terial from Britain, devoured accounts of English travelers in 
America for information about their own land, and accepted British 
standards. Samuel F. B. Morse, discussing alleged French influ- 
ence upon the United States with a member of Parliament, rightly 
answered that British influence predominated. "As a proof," Morse 
reported to his parents, "I urged the universal prevalence of Eng- 
lish fashions . . . and English manners and customs 5 . . . the 
neglect with which they treated their own literary productions on 
account of the strong prejudice in favor of English works } that 
everything, in short, was enhanced in its value by having attached 
to it the name English." 56 