

5d Joseph B. Varnum to Plumer, Dec. 6, 1807, William Plumer MSS, Library 
of Congress 5 Calhoun to Dr. James Macbride, Feb. 16 [17?], 1812, Robert L. Meri- 
wether, ed., The Papers of John C. Calhoun, I (Columbia, S.C., 1959), 90-91. 



IOO 



CHAPTER 



IV 



THE TREATY OF 1806 



"Oh, my country! How I leave my country!" With these words, 
William Pitt died in his rented villa on Putney Heath shortly 
before sunrise on January 23, 1806. The expiring Chancellor's 
concern was understandable. He had just received news of Napo- 
leon's crushing victory at Austerlitz. Despite Nelson's success at 
Trafalgar the war seemed no nearer a victorious conclusion than 
it had when Pitt drove Henry Addington from power in 1804. 
As a war leader the great Pitt left much to be desired. Further- 
more, he stood alone at the summit of his party. His energetic 
disciples Liverpool, Canning, Castlereagh, and Perceval among 
them had not yet the prestige to succeed the master. Who, then, 
was to replace the man who had dominated English politics for a 
quarter of a century? 

While in theory the choice lay with the King, for the moment 
the answer was virtually forced upon him. No single leader could 
replace Pitt, but a coalition of Foxites and Grenvilles might. Re- 
luctantly the King turned to his old enemy, Charles James Fox, 
and to Lord Grenville; from the royal point of view each had 

101 



THE TREATY OF l8o6 

dangerous ideas on the Irish issue, but at least they could keep the 
government going. Within a week the new ministry, dubbed by 
supporters the Ministry of All the Talents, entered upon its un- 
easy reign. 

All the Talents a euphemism, and an incomplete euphemism 
at that. The talented supporters of Pitt had no share in the new 
government, although the ministry extended feelers to Bathurst 
and, later in the year, to Canning. The government rested upon 
the Fox, Grenville, and Sidmouth factions, and in the distribution 
of offices a balance among these groups was far more important 
than ability. Grenville, more acceptable to George III than Fox, 
headed the ministry. Fox took the Foreign Office and installed his 
able lieutenant, Lord Howick (soon Earl Grey), at the Admiralty. 
Sidmouth and his conservative friend Ellenborough received cabi- 
net seats. All in all it was not a strong ministry. Grenville was tired, 
Fox ill, Sidmouth unpopular, and the others were untried. 

Most important of all, Fox and Grenville disagreed over almost 
every major issue of policy except Ireland. How should the war 
be fought? How financed? How far should Britain go in negotia- 
tions with Napoleon? These and other issues could be answered 
only by compromise, not by real decision. While nothing indicates 
that Grenville and Fox clashed over American policy, a Pittite 
pamphleteer was certainly correct in a more general sense when 
he commented upon the commission appointed to negotiate with 
Monroe and Pinkney : "The American commission was an epitome 
of the cabinet 5 in neither was there a combination, but a collision 
of talents. Every measure was a compromise. . . . The result was 
a total want of principle." l 