

At the Foreign Office Fox found only fifteen subordinates to 
help him face multitudinous problems. Adjustment to Austerlitz 
and the exploration of chances of peace with Napoleon required 
most attention, but he could not ignore American relations. Events 
of the past year, notably the publication of War in Disguise, the 
Essex decision, and the implications of Trafalgar, had brought 

1 Thomas P. Courtenay (peud. Decius) , Observations on the American Treaty 
(London, 1808), p. 92. 

IO2, 



THE TREATY OF l8o6 

affairs to a pitch unknown since the crisis preceding the Jay treaty. 
As far as the press of business and the parlous state of his health 
would permit. Fox had to give attention to the American problem. 
The fabled friend of American revolutionists, he seemed ideally 
suited for the task of making a settlement. Beside him stood his 
colleague, Grenville, architect of the first Anglo-American rwp- 
prochement a decade earlier. 

The beginning was promising. The American minister, James 
Monroe, informed Washington that he had high hopes of fair 
treatment from the new secretary, who had even promised to sus- 
pend seizures under the Essex precedent. Fox's lack of information 
prevented detailed discussions until April, but even this delay did 
not discourage Monroe. In the United States the administration 
permitted its kept journal to inform the people that the "past lives 
[of the members of the new Cabinet] are a pledge that they will 
be animated by principles of honor, of justice, and of reciprocity." 
The British secretary of legation, Augustus Foster, who although 
he had grown up among the Foxite coterie feared too great con- 
cession to the United States, wrote to his mother: "I hope they will 
keep old England firm; these Wretches speculate on our Debase- 
ment, & consequent Compliance with all their unreasonable de- 
mands." 2 

The new ministry did not plan to debase itself before Americans. 
It did see the need for some gestures, some concessions. Symboli- 
cally, Fox recalled the minister at Washington, Anthony Merry, 
who had alienated all but extreme Federalists, and sent in his place 
David M. Erskine, the thirty-year-old son of the famous liberal 
lawyer and present lord chancellor. Young Erskine had no diplo- 
matic experience and, at Washington from 1806 to 1809, never 
showed either perceptivity or strength. His American wife, a 
chunky damosel somewhat given to unusually deep decolletage, 
and his father's liberalism. (young Erskine had the motto, "Trial 

2 Monroe $40 to Madison, Jan. 28, 1806, Department of State Archives, National 
Archives, Despatches, Great Britain, Vol. XII j Monroe to Madison, private, March 
n, 1806, ibid*; Monroe $46 to Madison, April 20, 1806, ibid; National Intelli- 
gencer (Washington), March 29, 1806; Foster to Lady Elizabeth Foster, May 3, 
1806, Augustus J. Foster MSS, Library of Congress. 

103 



THE TREATY OF I 8 O 6 

by Jury," painted on his coach) gained him a favorable reception. 
He restored good relations between the legation and the American 
government, partly because, to Foster's disgust, he affected the in- 
formality of Jefferson's court, but principally because he did not 
challenge American positions. The President and the Secretary of 
State liked Erskine - 7 in this sense he served Fox's purpose. 3 