

Since cooks and cabin boys disagreed, this lack of administration 
leadership became particularly important. Representative Gregg 
("a MfsRepreseKfeLtive," Gallatin allegedly called him 14 ) argued 
for a strong course. Such action, he and allies like Jacob Crownin- 
shield argued, would show America's determination far better than 
half measures, might even cause England to back down before the 
ban went into effect. In any event, the more powerful the weapon 
the quicker the cure 3 Britain would be almost immediately forced 
to her knees by the sudden loss of the entire American market. To 
warnings that action of this sort might provoke British retaliation, 
Representative Gregg replied: "Great Britain is ... too well 

12 Quincy to Oliver Wolcott, Jr., Feb. 3, 1806, Wolcott Family MSS, Connecticut 
Historical Society, Vol. XX. 

13 Bayard to Richard Bassett, Jan. 31, 1806, Elizabeth Donnan, ed., Papers of 
James A. Bayard y 17961815, American Historical Association, Annual Report, 1913, 
II (Washington, 1915), 165; National Intelligencer, March 19, 26, 1806; entry 
of Feb. 25, 1806, Charles F. Adams, ed., Memoirs of John Quincy Adams (12 vols.; 
Philadelphia, 1874. 1877), I> 4 1 5? entry of March 8, 1806, Brown, op, cit. y p. 44.6; 
Annals, 9th Cong., ist sess., pp. 771772. 

14 Richard B. Davis, ed. Jeffersonian America: Notes on the United, States of 
America . . , by Sir Augustus John Foster, Bart. (San Marino, 1954), p. 236. 

IO9 



THE TREATY OF l8o6 

acquainted with her own interest, to persevere in this lawless sys- 
tem at the hazard of losing customers, whose annual purchases of 
her manufactures and other merchandise exceeds . . . thirty mil- 
lions of dollars." 15 

Republicans more cautious than Gregg disputed his predictions. 
Th-gpeupJ|id^^ -GalfafinV^^ 

Eppes^, widower of Jeff erson^s" daughter 5 antd'*Barhabas Bidwell, 
a-new- ^ongressm^s^^ 

influence In Aejfcfowe. These men preferred a selective ban, a 
mild but definite warning to England to mend her ways before 
the United States proceeded to harsher measures. They argued 
that it would be far wiser to forbid the importation only of goods 
that could neither be obtained elsewhere nor be made in America, 
for the Treasury vitally needed the duties on many British goods 
and the ordinary citizen required them for himself. A complete 
ban would harm the United States more than Britain. But the 
Nicholson group's chief argument was that the United States dared 
not run the risk of Gregg's policy. Through all of their speeches 
runs a steady theme of fear, fear either that any demonstration of 
vigor would prejudice negotiations at London or, worse, that 
Britain would reply with sterner measures. What Joseph Nichol- 
son and his followers wanted was to demonstrate to their constitu- 
ents and to Britain, at the least possible cost, that Congress was 
determined to defend American rights. As the fat, cynical Federal- 
ist, Samuel Taggart, put it, the Republicans believed "something 
must be done, they don't very well know what, but it is above all 
necessary to vent our indignation against Britain in some way or 
other." 16 They had no heart for a fight, and in the end Nicholson 
even proposed to delay action on his own mild resolutions. 