

Patriots thought this dependence undignified. Noah Webster 
and Joel Barlow, one a Federalist and the other a Jeffersonian, 
agreed that cultural independence was required to reinforce politi- 
cal separation from Britain. "I consider this species of dependence 
as extremely prejudicial, as it regards our political interest," Web- 
ster wrote to Barlow. "In truth, we shall always be in leading 
strings till we resort to original writers and original principles in- 

155 Copley's reputation gained him a commission to paint, for 1,650, a group por- 
trait of the Prince Regent and some friends. The Regent, however, refused to pay 
Copley, who was left with possession of the portrait. Arthur Aspinall, ed., The Letters 
of King George IV, I (Cambridge, Eng., 1938), a62n. 

56 Morse to Mr. and Mrs. Jedediah Morse, Jan. i, 1813, Edward L. Morse, ed., 
Samuel F. B. Morse, His Letters and Journals (2 vols.j Cambridge, 1914), I, 9091. 

97 



CC IS NATIONAL INDEPENDENCE A DREAM?' 5 

stead of taking upon trust what English writers please to give us. 53 
In 1 806 Webster published the first fruit of his own lexicographical 
endeavors, A Compendious Dictionary of the English Language^ 
designed not only to emphasize American language but also, by 
questioning the authority of the great Dr. Johnson, to show that 
the United States could challenge British scholarship. The next 
year Webster's friend Barlow brought out the Columbiad > the 
culmination of twenty-five years of work to produce an American 
epic poem. Robert Fulton, to whom Barlow dedicated his work, 
heartily praised the ambitious undertaking: "The poem will be for 
ever quoted as proof of American Genius the printing will shew 
our perfection in that art, and the manner in which it is gotten up 
. . . will I hope shew the Europeans that there is some taste in 
America and will be more." 57 Webster's work was really only an 
introduction to later, more important studies, and Barlow's epic 
bored many who praised its patriotism 5 yet these were the major 
productions of American writers in the years just before the War 
of 1812. A more effective campaign for independence awaited the 
end of the war. 

British reviews laughed at American cultural pretensions. An 
exception was the Edinburgh Review > politically the most favor- 
ably inclined of all major English journals, which brutally criti- 
cized the volumes of Thomas Ashe and other British travelers 
hostile to the United States. But even the Edinburgh Review gen- 
erally assailed the work of American writers. A review of Chief 
Justice John Marshall's biography of George Washington sug- 
gested that such poor treatment of a noble American theme clearly 
demonstrated "the poverty of ... [American] literary attain- 
ments." The magazine saw little merit in the Columbiad > explained 
its faults as the natural consequence of the poet's work in a country 
with no literary tradition or audience, and condescendingly added 
that, if Barlow worked a few years in Britain, he might aspire to 
equality with the lesser English poets. In sum, the Edinburgh Re- 