

67 Webster to Barlow, Nov. 12, 1807, Charles B. Todd, Life and Letters of Joel 
Barlow, LL.D. (New York, 1886), pp. 247-2485 Fulton to Trumbull, Dec. 16, 1806, 
Col. John Trumbull MSS, Yale University Library. 

98 



IS NATIONAL INDEPENDENCE A DREAM ? >? 

view believed that the "destruction of her whole literature would 
not occasion so much regret as we feel for the loss of a few leaves 
from an antient classic. 35 5S Truthful though the comments of the 
Edinburgh Review and her even more strident competitors might 
be, or perhaps because they came so near the truth, they wounded 
American sensibilities. 

In many ways, then, the young American felt the sovereignty 
of his nation challenged and her character insulted by Britain. 
Some challenges suggested an inferiority of status most important 
in the realm of the spirit. It would be ridiculous to suggest that the 
impressment of American seamen or the interruption of American 
trade did not pose a material challenge, to argue that the loss of 
thousands of men and hundreds of ships had only a symbolic im- 
portance. These very tangible pressures played a fundamental part 
in the coming of war. Still, since the nation could, after all, prosper 
despite foreign interference, it is most important to recognize the 
moral implications of the challenges America faced. Britain treated 
the new republic as if Yorktown had been an incomplete victory. 
To many, like the citizens on the Mobile, independence seemed 
almpst a dream. 

K few months after a British frigate attacked U.S.S. Chesapeake, 
^he Speaker of the House of Representatives wrote: "It is highly 
Interesting to this Nation to remain in a State of peace, if it can be 
done on honourable Terms; but too much Blood and Treasure 
have been Expended in the acquisition of our Independence and 
importance as a Nation, for us to Relinquish the one, or Suffer the 
Other to be tarnished." Led by an irenic president, the nation chose 
what appeared to be an honorable alternative to war. Thanks to 
many things the weaknesses of Jefferson and Madison, the self- 
ishness of some citizens, the cowardice and the disloyalty of others 
the alternative road led only to further humiliation. "Hereto- 
fore," an eager young War Hawk, John C. Calhoun, wrote in 
1 8 12, "the conductors of our affairs, have attempted to avoid 
and remove difficulties by a sort of political management. They 
thought, that national honor and interest could both be maintained 

158 Edinburgh Review, XIII (1808), 14.8-1705 XV (1810), 24-40, 44.6. 

99 



CC IS NATIONAL INDEPENDENCE A DREAM?' 3 

and respected ... by commercial arrangements and negotia- 
tions. . . . This might suit an inconsiderable nation. . . . Ex- 
perience has proved it improper for us. Its effects have been distrust 
at home and contempt abroad." 59 These remarks could as aptly 
have been made in 1 805 or 1 807 or at any time after Jefferson led 
the nation to risk its honor by pressing claims that only war could 
vindicate. Not until Calhoun's day, however, did the truth of 
these sentiments seem apparent to the President and a substantial 
part of the Congress. Until then, America sought without success 
to preserve her honor simultaneously with her peace. 