

In another gesture, the new Fox-Grenvilie ministry introduced 
legislation to regularize the trade of American ships with the Brit- 
ish West Indies. This trade, a direct violation of the Navigation 
Acts, had been permitted by local executive orders for years be- 
cause of the wartime shortage of British shipping. In April, 1806, 
Lord Grenville's friend Auckland, who believed the extension of 
American commerce should be encouraged, introduced a govern- 
ment bill regularizing and even extending this permission. His 
proposal soon came under attack from many Pittites who had en- 
dorsed similar concessions in the 1790'$. George Rose, in particu- 
lar, spoke at length about the sanctity of the Navigation Acts and 
the superfluity of conciliating a weak, contemptible nation like the 
United States. Sir William Grant (now in his politician's role) 
professed himself willing to meet reasoned arguments or even 
<c the last resort of nations to enforce their will the thunder of 
cannon," but he opposed concession to a nation wielding the unfair 
weapon of economic coercion. Not until July, and after a final 
session lasting until half past two in the morning, did the ministry 
secure passage of the American Intercourse Act. 4 

Another, and the most important, of Charles James Fox's ges- 
tures to the United States, necessarily disguised because of the 
growing obduracy of British opinion, fell woefully short of the 
mark. This was the Order in Council of May 1 6, 1 806, more com- 
monly known as Fox's Blockade, a device designed to supersede 

3 James Hillhouse to Rebecca Hillhouse, Jan. 2, 1807, Hillhouse Family MSS, Yale 
University Library; entry of March 2, 1807, Everett S. Brown, ed., William 
Plumer's Memorandum of Proceedings in the United States Senate, 18031807 (New 
York, 1923), p. 6355 Foster to Lady Elizabeth Foster, Nov. i, 1807, Foster MSS. 

4 Auckland to Grenville, April 17, 18, 23, May 17, 1806, Boconnoc MSS (Papers 
of William Wyndham Grenville, Baron Grenville), Lostwithiel, Cornwall, Lord 
Auckland 1806; Grenville to Auckland, May 16, 1806, ibid.; Hansard, VI, 595597, 
834-839, 10315 VII, 94-100, 336-347) 686-729, 969-1010. 

IO4 



THE TREATY OF l8o6 

the Essex case as the predominant regulation of neutral commerce. 
The Foreign Secretary disapproved of the Essex decision, not least 
because it replaced easily applied tests with complicated evidential 
problems certain to provoke controversy. In the early months of 
the new ministry seizures declined, either because of quiet hints 
from ministers or because their reputation as moderates enjoined 
caution upon naval commanders, but the basic problem still re- 
mained. 

In the spring of 1 806 Fox and Auckland began to search for some 
device to regularize the position of the American reexport trade 
or to replace the Essex decision. One suggestion, endorsed if not 
initiated by the King's Advocate, Sir John Nicholl, was to establish 
a system of certificates by which British consuls in America could 
affirm that cargoes from the United States were truly neutral prop- 
erty. By this method, in one stroke the Rule of the War of 1756 
would be preserved, yet the Americans could carry on an extensive 
trade with France in colonial produce. This system smacked too 
much of the French example and would certainly have been con- 
sidered an affront by the United States, since it openly demon- 
strated distrust of American governmental procedures. Thus, 
although at first the suggestion interested the Cabinet, Lord Gren- 
ville soon insisted upon dropping it. 5 The idea of a test of some 
sort, like that of the Polly decision but perhaps more rigorous, sur- 
vived to arise again during the Monroe-Pinkney negotiations. 