

A fortnight after announcing Fox's Blockade, the British gov- 

6 Grenville to Auckland, n.d., Auckland MSS, Add. MSS 34457, fol. 195. 

7 Monroe #49 to Madison, May 20, 1806, Despatches, Great Britain, Vol. XII. 

106 



THE TREATY OF l8o6 

ernment received jarring news from New York that destroyed any 
hope, however unfounded, that the new decree would mollify 
the United States. Within American territorial waters a carelessly 
aimed shot from H.M.S. Leander, fired to warn a vessel that neg- 
lected to come to, struck and killed a member of the crew, John 
Pierce. With Piercers publicly exposed body to whet their temper, 
mobs roamed the streets of New York, a British flag was burned, 
and consul Barclay, who deplored his own navy's action, feared 
for a time that his house would be burned and he himself seized 
as a hostage. British officers on shore actually were arrested but 
subsequently secretly released by city authorities. (The British 
squadron commander, Captain Henry Whitby, later reported he 
had been ready to use force to recover them.) Federalist speakers 
emphasized that Jefferson's neglect of the navy encouraged British 
insults, but all parties agreed that Pierce must be avenged. The 
Aurora and the Richmond Enquirer even talked of a declaration 
of war. 8 

Had adequate naval forces been available, Jefferson and Madi- 
son might have taken strong action. As it was, they felt forced to 
fall back upon those favorite weapons of Jeffersonian diplomacy, 
a proclamation and a protest. 9 The President directed the three 
British ships off New York to leave American waters. To enforce 
compliance he cut off their supplies. At the same time the admin- 
istration instructed James Monroe to demand that Britain court- 
martial Captain Whitby. Then Jefferson and Madison sat back 
to wait, hoping they had satisfied the minimum demands of Ameri- 
can anger and that the British government would offer atonement 
for Whitby's action. 

Fox did his best to meet American expectations. When first re- 
ports of the killing reached London, the Foreign Secretary sent 

8 New-York Evening Post, April 26, 18065 Barclay to Merry, April 27, 1806, 
George L. Rives, edL, Selections from the Correspondence of Thomas Barclay (New 
York, 1894), pp. 2322335 Captain Henry Whitby to Captain John P. Beresford, 
May 6, 1806, enclosed in Beresford to William Marsden, May 19, 1806, Admiralty 
Papers, Public Record Office, Adm 1/496; New-York Evening Post, April 28, 18065 
Aurora (Philadelphia), April 29, 18065 Enquirer (Richmond), May 6, 1806. 

d Cabinet memorandum. May i, 1806, Paul L. Ford, ed., The Writings of Thomas 
Jefferson (10 vols.j New York, 18921899), I, 315-316. 

107 



THE TREATY OF l8o6 

word to Madison that his government deeply regretted Pierce's 
death. This attitude contrasted markedly with that of the British 
press, which blamed the Americans for the incident and virtually 
dared them to make it a casus belli, The ministry ordered Captain 
Whitby home to face investigation a month and a half before 
James Monroe presented the formal complaint against him. By 
this time Fox lay on his deathbed at a ducal establishment in Chis- 
wick. One of his last acts or one taken in his name was to inform 
the American minister that Whitby had been recalled. 11 Unfortu- 
nately, this could not wipe away American memories of a fatal 
invasion of their national waters. 