

This tack temporarily abandoned, the government chose to go 
ahead with another scheme. It declared the entire northern coast 
of Europe from Brest to the Elbe under blockade but added that 
this blockade would be rigorously enforced only from the Seine 
to Ostend j elsewhere, neutral ships could visit enemy ports if they 
did not carry contraband or goods owned by the enemy, and if they 
neither came from nor were bound for other enemy ports. By this 

5 Auckland to Howick, private, May 3, 1806, Charles Grey, Second Earl Grey, 
MSS, The Prior's Kitchen, Durham University, from ist Ld. Auckland 5 Nicholl to 
Auckland, May 9, 1806, William Eden, Baron Auckland, MSS, British Museum 
(Add. MSS 34412-34471, 45728-45730), Add. MSS 3445^5 Grenville to Auckland, 
May 9, 1806, ibid.; Grenville to Auckland, n.d. ibid., Add. MSS 34457, fols. 194- 
1955 Nicholl to , n.d., ibid., fol. 198. 

105 



THE TREATY OF l8o6 

measure the government gained praise from some, like the Times, 
who demanded vigorous action against the enemy, for the decree 
extended the areas under blockade. At the same time Fox and his 
colleagues intended to imply that the more inclusive but indefinite 
principle of Grant's decision would not be applied to American 
ships bound for enemy ports outside the critical zone along the 
English Channel As Lord Grenville put it, "With respect to 
America . . . you open to her for the carriage of Colonial Produce 
(whether the Enemy's or not, for after actual importation into 
the U.S. they are indistinguishable) not only the ports of the At- 
lantic & Mediterr*. but also those of Holland & Flanders, & I think 
ii>4he present state of commerce it will be right so to do." 6 
\ Unfortunately, although Fox's Blockade succeeded in reassuring 
Englishmen that its authors intended to fight the war with vigor, 
it faild^. in the equally important object of conciliating the United 
States./Probably because he feared an outcry from his country- 
men^ox withdrew an earlier promise to abandon the Essex prin- 
ciple explicitly. In Monroe's words, the new decree "imposed the 
suspension desired, but in a manner w h . seemed as if it was intended 
to mask the object from view." 7 This concealed abandonment of 
the British position satisfied neither American public opinion nor 
the Jefferson administration. For years the United States had pro- 
tested against blockades not maintained by cruising squadrons actu- 
ally in the vicinity. Now, from the very mouth of a ministry 
nominally friendly, there issued a new order extending blockades 
over hundreds of miles of coast. Whether Fox's Blockade was ever 
enforced in the traditional fashion, or whether it remained a purely 
nominal blockade, became the subject of debate in later years. In 
1806 America refused to accept the argument that the new order 
was simply another decree of the usual type. All but the most parti- 
san Federalists refused to believe that even the Royal Navy could 
maintain a blockade according to the old standards along such 
an extensive stretch of coastline. 