

The Gregg resolutions, which at least had the virtue of direct- 
ness, might have attracted broader support had they not collided 

15 Annals, 9th Cong., ist sess., p. 540. The entire debate appears in this volume, 
pp. 167878 passim, but Senate speeches are rarely reported at length. Specific refer- 
ences are made here only for direct quotations. 

16 Taggart to Rev. John Taylor, March 12, 1806, George H. Haynes, ed., "Letters 
of Samuel Taggart, Representative in Congress, 1803-1814," American Antiquarian 
Society, Proceedings, n.s., XXXIII (1923), 189. 

IIO 



THE TREATY OF l8o6 

with a deep prejudice that tortured many veteran Republicans. 
Even those who believed America pledged to defend commercial 
interests often regretted it; in George W. Campbell's words, "it 
would have been better for the American people, if Government 
had never given protection to commerce, out of sight of our own 
territory, or beyond the reach of cannon from our own shores." 
There was something uncomfortable, if not positively sinful, in 
hazarding the future of an ideal agricultural society to protect 
commercial interests, particularly since the controversy might be 
narrowed even further to a contest for the right to carry on a 
reexport trade in non-American produce. Crafty merchants, not 
honest farmers, benefited from such a trade. In vain did New Eng- 
land Republicans point out that it was impossible to exchange the 
entire agricultural surplus for specie, that merchants were forced 
to trade much of it for colonial goods they subsequently reexported 
to French dominions. For the sake of national honor, Republicans 
were ready to rally in defense of American rights; they were not 
ready to budge beyond the Nicholson resolutions unless propelled 
by administration pressure. "If the President had any plan, which 
he would assume the responsibility to propose, I have no doubt of 
his securing a majority to adopt it," wrote a bitter critic of Jeffer- 
son. 17 But no word came from the White House. 

Against this background congressional Republicans brawled for 
more than a month. For two weeks in March, after a long delay 
during which the Republicans found themselves unable to patch 
up their differences, debate raged in the House of Representa- 
tive/. On March 5 and 6, John Randolph delivered magnificent 
if disjointed speeches, each of them more than two hours long, 
in which he vilified Jefferson and Madison, warned that com- 
mercial warfare would lead to armed convict, and declared himself 
unwilling to fight for the re'export trade: \ 

No, sir, if this great agricultural nation is to be governed by Salem and 
Boston, New York and Philadelphia, and Baltimore and Norfolk and 
Charleston, let gentleman come out and say so. ... I, for one, will not 

1T Annals, 9th Cong-., ist sess., pp. 706-7075 Pickering to King-, Feb. 20, 1806, 
Rufus Kingr MSS, New-York Historical Society, Vol. XI. 

Ill 



THE TREATY OF l8o6 

mortgage my property and my liberty, to carry on this trade. ... It is not 
for the honest carrying trade of America, but for this mushroom, this fungus 
of war . . . that the spirit of avaricious traffic would plunge us into war. 18 