

Negotiations ran on spasmodically from August 23 until the 
end of the year. Including intragovernmental discussions as well 
as sessions with the Americans, Auckland counted thirty or forty 
conferences, and he claimed that one marathon argument with 
Monroe and Pinkney lasted seven hours, another took four and a 
half hours. After initial exploratory conversations. Fox's final 
illness and death (he died on September 13) halted the negotia- 
tions. Toward the end of October Auckland and Holland recalled 
the subject to the government's attention, and for the next fort- 
night there was a flurry of activity during which the Americans 
agreed to abandon the sine qua non on impressment. A second 

40 Jefferson to Monroe, Oct. 26, 1806, Jefferson MSS. 

41 Timesy June 23, 1806; Lord Temple to Auckland, Aug 1 , 17, 1806, Auckland 
MSS, Add. MSS 34456. 

123 



THE TREATY OF l8o6 

hiatus followed, then another brief spurt that arranged the prob- 
lem of the reexport trade. Basic agreement was reached by Decem- 
ber 6, but not until the last day of the year did the four plenipo- 
tentiaries meet at the Foreign Office to sign the treaty. 

The negotiators discussed practically every facet of Anglo- 
American relations except the disputed portions of the Canadian 
boundary. For the most part, the Jay treaty formulas were re- 
peated with respect to neutral rights and Anglo-American trade. 
The Americans insisted on an article on trade with India but then 
accepted a provision somewhat tightening the restrictions on Ameri- 
can ships, though not so much as the East India Company desired. 
By mutual agreement the treaty omitted stipulations on trade with 
the British West Indies. The sympathetic ministry dared not risk 
public protest by making a formal concession. On the whole, al- 
though Madison and the English commissioners each considered 
that the other party benefited most from these articles, the discus- 
sions confirmed an earlier prediction by Holland and Auckland 
that "in the Commercial arrangements there will be more detail 
than difficulty." 42 

In a trifling, tactical concession, the British accepted America's 
request to extend her territorial waters. Monroe and Pinkney did 
not press for the Gulf Stream line, and discussion centered on a 
boundary one or two leagues from shore. Sir John Nicholl, who 
steadily opposed concession, wrote that the American claim could 
not "be maintained as a matter of right . . . ; and if it be granted, 
it should be ... as a concession depending for its basis upon 
corresponding concessions/ 3 for it would severely handicap the 
Royal Navy. At the strong behest of its commissioners, the Brit- 
ish government finally agreed to a minor extension of American 
jurisdiction, provided that no third party not extending similar 
recognition should be sheltered from the Royal Navy by the new 
line. The British hoped that this concession, although made prac- 

42 Holland and Auckland to Howick, Oct. 20, 1806, FO 5/51. Commercial discus- 
sions, extensively recorded in various journal entries and copies of letters in Adm 
So/iiy, are summarized in Wilson H. Elkins, "British Policy in Its Relation to the 
Commerce and Navigation of the United States of America from 1794 to 1807" 
(unpublished Ph.D. thesis, Oxford University, 1936), pp. 211246 and 