

"This fungus of war" Republicans flinched at the phrase. But 
on this occasion, as so often in the future, Randolph's lash drove 
them to rally together. Gregg's resolutions were beaten on March 
1 3, but by an overwhelming margin the Republican phalanx passed 
Nicholson's four days later. Randolph himself abstained, and only 
about a dozen Republican schismatics, sharing his feeling that agri- 
cultural prosperity should not be risked to aid the reexport trade, 
joined" the Federalist band in opposition. 

fkfter the success of Nicholson's resolutions, passage of a bill 
was largely anticlimactic. Presented on March 25, 1806, the bill 
listed for exclusion precisely those imports Nicholson had originally 
suggested: some metal goods, cloth made of hemp or flax, high- 
priced woolens, glass, finished clothing, and sundry other articles 
including "beer, ale, and porter." /The most important imports 
from Britain cottons, cheap wodlens, iron and steel did not 
appear on the list, and the House beat down attempts to add them. 
In a further demonstration of fear and leaderlessness, the House 
agreed to suspend the act until November 15 to allow time for 
further news from England 5 perhaps even the threat of lost mar- 
kets would induce British compliance, or perhaps Fox would ar- 
range a settlement. This last weakening of the act evoked from 
Randolph one of his most famous passages: 

Never in the course of my life have I witnessed such a scene of indignity 
and inefficiency as this measure holds forth to the world. What is it? A 
milk-and-water bill, a dose of chicken broth to be taken nine months hence. 
... It is too contemptible to be the object of consideration, or to excite 
the feelings of the pettiest State in Europe. . . . You cannot do without 
the next Spring and Fall importations; and you tell your adversary so. 
... [It is] a law which . . . cannot be executed, and than the execution 
of which nothing is further from the minds of its framers. 19 

Randolph's justifiable scorn availed naught. The House approved 
tiie bill, and after a brief delay the Senate concurred. Although an 

18 Annals, 9th Cong., ist sess., p. 557. 
p. 851. 



THE TREATY OF I 8 O 

absentee, James A. Bayard, favored the bill, John Quincy Adams 
cast the only affirmative Federalist vote in either house. 2 / 
, As Adams should hat^ seen, the Nonimportation Act of 1 806 
was worse than useless. When at last seriously enforced in the 
spring of 1808, nonimportation became an important ancillary to 
the Embargo, but the passage in 1806 of weak legislation to take 
effect only after months of delay was neither an effective act of 
coercion nor a wise prelude to friendly negotiation. Strong action 
against Britain required no justification, and an argument could 
be made for commercial warfare. None could be made for this bill 
As Randolph warned, the world's greatest commercial power was 
unlikely to be impressed by such a gesture. Indeed this posture of 
feeble defiance strengthened the hands of those in Great Britain 
who insisted that America was malignantly but ineffectively anti- 
British. /William Plumer, like Adams an independent, analyzed 
the act irbr more accurately than his fellow Yankee when he wrote: 
"It has not sufficient energy tb operate on the fears, but may wound 
the pride, of Great Britain." ^ 