

34 Abbot E. Smith, James Madison: Builder (New York, 1937), p. 254.. 

35 Jefferson to Monroe, May 4, 1806, Lipscomb and Bergh, of. cit, y XI, 1095 
Jefferson to Monroe, Oct. 26, 1806, Jefferson MSSj Jefferson to John Tyler, April 
26, 1806, ibid. 

1 2O 



THE TREATY OF l8o6 

did not want to see Napoleon reign over all Europe, were realistic 
enough to attempt to exploit his victories for America's benefit. 

For other reasons it also seemed unwise to compromise. Na- 
poleon's support in the quarrel with Spain over Florida was so 
important that it must not be jeopardized by an Anglo-American 
accommodation, unless that settlement were so favorable that the 
Florida question shrank to secondary importance. Finally, par- 
ticularly after the militant declarations of the preceding winter, 
Jefferson feared the psychological consequences of a retreat: "The 
love of peace which we sincerely feel & profess, has begun to pro- 
duce an opinion in Europe that our government is entirely in 
Quaker principles." se 

More than two years later, when Jefferson at last released the 
instructions, some concluded that the administration had intended 
the negotiations to fail. The French minister reported, "They are 
long, diffuse and seem equally designed to embarrass the progress 
of the Plenipotentiaries as to direct them." Later, echoing a fre- 
quent Federalist theme, James A. Bayard argued: "Your Presi- 
dent never meant to have a treaty with Great Britain. ... If he 
had intended it, he would never have fettered the Commissioners 
with sine qua nons which were insuperable." 37 Such criticism missed 
the point. Madison and Jefferson were not sinister Machiavellians. 
They believed that Fox would grant American demands. If he 
did not, they were prepared to wait, confident that time would 
bring compliance. This fumbling and confused analysis speaks 
eloquently of the diplomatic ineptness of the President and his 
chief lieutenant. 

Pinkney reached London late in June, 1806. Probably to their 
mutual surprise, he and Monroe hit it off at once. During the entire 
subsequent negotiations there is not a hint of disagreement. On the 
whole, Monroe told Pinkney, the British government's attitude 
appeared favorable. Fox seemed on the verge of important con- 
cessions. Considering his reluctance to promise compensation for 

36 Jefferson to Cooper, Feb. 18, 1806, Thomas Jefferson MSS (Coolidge Collec- 
tion), Massachusetts Historical Society. 

37 Turreau #14. to Minister of Foreign RelationSj May 20, 1808, Archives des 
Affaires Etrangeres, Correspondance Politique, tats-Unis (photostats, Library of 
Congress), Vol. LXI; Annals, xoth Cong., zd sess., pp. 394-395. 

121 



THE TREATY OF l8o6 

seizures largely tactical, Monroe thought England would agree to 
return to the Polly principle and even hoped to reach a settlement 
on impressment. 38 Less hopefully., on the very day Pinkney reached 
London Fox fell fatally ill of dropsy,, the price finally exacted 
for a life of dissipation. To the extent that his influence was needed 
to keep the Cabinet in line (as the Americans erroneously thought), 
this was a crushing blow. 