

31 In the commercial area Madison showed flexibility. If unrestricted most-favored- 
nation status was unobtainable, he was prepared to accept mere equalization of the 
burden of charges on ships of both nations. He offered to accept restrictions on the 
cargoes American ships could carry away from the West Indies after bearing supplies 
thither. He did not insist upon the opening of British North America. But he did 
caution Monroe and Pinkney to draft any agreement in such a fashion that, if Ameri- 
can ships were not granted entry into Caribbean ports, British ships from the colonies 
could not demand entry into American ports under the most-favored-nation principle, 
and he warned that only extensive trading rights would justify the envoys in agreeing 
to forswear the right of discriminatory legislation to force open the islands. Madison 
was supremely confident that Britain's own needs "must necessarily produce that effect 
at no distant period." 

32 Madison laid down extremely detailed specifications here, but his failure to insist 
upon compensation as a sine qua non perhaps suggests that he too had come to realize 
that Essex seizures were not so numerous as the first reports had indicated. 

118 



THE TREATY OF l8o6 

ment, either by substituting for it an agreement for the return of 
deserters or by arranging to confine the practice to British ports, 
as Rufus King had sought to do in 1803. As Madison well knew, 
these limitations would undermine the entire practice, at least in 
English eyes. "Yet," said the instructions, a so indispensable is 
some adequate provision for the case, that the President makes it a 
necessary preliminary to any stipulation requiring a repeal of the 
act shutting the market of the U. States against certain British 
manufactures." Similarly, the United States insisted upon more 
liberal treatment of the reexport trade as a condition of repeal of 
the Nonimportation Act. "It is much to be desired," wrote Madi- 
son, "that the general principle [of the right to trade freely in 
colonial goods] in its full extent, be laid down in the stipulation. 
But as this may not be attainable and as much ought not to be risked 
by an inflexible pursuit of abstract rights, . . . you are left at lib- 
erty if found necessary to abridge the right in practice." In short, 
the United States would exchange acceptance of the old Polly defi- 
nition of broken voyage (plus perhaps a requirement that goods be 
reshipped in a different vessel) for British repudiation of the 
harsher Essex restraints. The two sine qua nan's really meant that 
the United States demanded a return to the halcyon days before 
seizures and impressment became serious problems. 33 

The instructions reflected the constant desire of James Madison 
and his superior to limit war's impact and to extend commercial 
intercourse. They spoke the language of the Enlightenment and 
of the whole career of Thomas Jeif erson, its most consistent Amer- 
ican spokesman. Naturally American interests would benefit if Brit- 
ain accepted the proposed regulations, but this is not the sole rea- 