

33 A memorandum by Jefferson conveniently summarizes the whole instructions, 
and shows that the basic outline was settled in March, although the instructions them- 
selves were not prepared until two months later: " . . we may enter into treaty with 
England, the sum of which should be to settle neutral rights, not insisting on the 
principle of free ships, free goods and modifying her new principles of the 'accustomed 
trade* so as to give up the direct, & keep the indirect commerce between colonies & 
their metropols, restraining impressmts. of seamen to her own citizens in her own 
ports, & giving her in commerce the right of the most favored nations without entering 
into details. Endeavor to get a relinqumt of her right of commerce with our Indians, 
or insist on security for our people trading with hers. Endeavour also to exclude 
hostilities within the gulph stream." Entry of March 14, 1806, Ford, o-p. cit., I, 310. 

119 



THE TREATY OF l8o6 

son Jefferson and Madison advanced them. They deeply believed 
that restricted warfare and broadened commerce would improve 
the lot of all men. Philosophically, and from the point of view 
of abstract justice, there was much to commend the instructions. 
But, as Abbot E. Smith has commented, "it was less necessary that 
Madison should have a clear conception of the rights to which 
the United States was theoretically entitled, than that he should 
understand the European situation and have a fair notion of what 
he was likely to get without fighting." 34 

What, then, decided Jefferson and Madison to put these items 
forward? James Monroe thought them a trap designed to destroy 
his own political reputation. While this collateral benefit may 
have crossed Madison's mind it almost certainly was not decisive. 
Among other things, the President and the Secretary woefully 
overestimated the impact of nonimportation, blindly convincing 
themselves that this weapon would bring England to her knees. 
If the Nonimportation Act was the stick, the proposed commercial 
treaty was the carrot. Ignoring obvious evidence of British indiffer- 
ence to expiration of the Jay treaty's commercial articles, Jefferson 
and Madison clung to a conviction that England would recognize, 
at least ultimately, that she could not maintain her economy with- 
out extended American trade. Time, they felt sure, would make 
these obvious truths visible even to the blind. 

Jefferson and Madison expected much from Fox, described by 
the President as one in whom "I have more confidence than in any 
man in England." When Fox fell ill the President considered it 
a crippling blow, for "his sound judgment saw that political in- 
terest could never be separated in the long run from moral right, 
& his frank & great mind would have made a short business of a 
just treaty." Furthermore, European calamities, so Jefferson rea- 
soned, made good relations with one of the world's few remain- 
ing neutrals imperative for Britain. To quote him again, "the 
change in the ministry & the events of Europe will I think ensure 
a friendly settlement with her." as Jefferson and Madison, who 