

To replace Fox, the Cabinet asked a young man. Lord Holland, 
and a diplomatic veteran, Lord Auckland, to take on what Gren- 
ville called "a work I fear of no light labor or difficulty." Holland 
and Auckland accepted with alacrity. At an introductory dinner 
given by Grenville, Lord Auckland said to the Americans, a note 
of warning against inflexibility tingeing his courtesy, "I trust we 
shall be able to do some good to mankind, if your powers are suf- 
ficiently extensive." 39 

Holland and Auckland made almost as harmonious a team as 
Monroe and Pinkney. Holland, Fox's favorite nephew, spoke for 
his dying uncle's faction in the Cabinet, Auckland for his old friend 
Grenville. The thirty-three-year-old Holland, already plagued 
by gout, had no diplomatic experience and none too great a knowl- 
edge of public affairs. He tended, his fellow commissioner believed, 
to proceed without sufficient regard for the necessity of conciliat- 
ing English pressure groups manufacturers, shipowners, colo- 
nials, the East India Company. On the other hand, as an expansive 
and friendly litterateur bearing Fox's family name, Holland very 
favorably impressed the Americans. Auckland, already over sixty, 
was far more experienced. He had been, among other things, the 
channel of clandestine peace feelers during the American Revolu- 
tion, the negotiator of a famous commercial treaty with France, 
and a long-time member of the Board of Trade. Auckland was the 
real cutting edge of the commission. On learning of his appoint- 
ment, Jefferson commented, with his invariable aversion to anyone 
connected with Pitt or Grenville, that the old diplomat was "too 

38 Monroe to James Bowdoin, June 20, 1806, Monroe MSS. 

39 Grenville to Auckland, Aug. 9, x8o6, Auckland MSS, Add, MSS 344565 Monroe 
and Pinkney #3 to Madison, Aug. 15, 1806, Despatches, Great Britain, Vol. XIV. 

122 



THE TREATY OF l8o6 

much wedded to the antient maritime code & navigation princi- 
ples of England ... to make [us] expect either an early or just 
result." 40 Actually, Auckland had always worked and would, like 
Holland, continue to work for the settlement of Anglo-American 
disputes. 

Lord Grenville and Fox's successor. Lord Howick, deeply de- 
sired to avoid a serious clash with America. On the other hand, 
particularly after Fox died, the administration's political weakness 
made concession difficult. The service ministries and some im- 
portant segments of British opinion opposed significant concessions. 
As the Times put it, "If the Americans have any real ground of 
complaint, let them be removed ... 5 it is what is due to them. 
. . . But in doing this they cannot expect that we shall surrender 
to them the smallest particle of that equitable system of maritime 
policy in which we owe our greatness and our prosperity." Gren- 
ville and especially Auckland knew the danger of challenging 
such sentiment. Furthermore, congressional posturing had irri- 
tated them. No doubt Lord Auckland nodded smilingly as he read 
the opinion of a friend that "it is absolutely necessary that America 
should be taken off the high horse she has lately mounted but in 
taking a Lady off her horse care must be taken not to offend her 
delicacy or shew her legs." 41 