

The British reaction confirmed Plumer's analysis. Most Eng- 
lishmen considered the new law a bluff, potentially far more harm- 
ful to the United States than to England: "Can the Americans do 
without our goods? This is to ask: can they go naked . . . ?" 
Among ministers, only Lord Grenville expressed substantial fear 
of the act, and his concern sprang from its coincidence with loss of 
the Prussian market 5 anxious over its immediate effects, he was 
at the same time convinced that any ban would be "only tem- 
porary because Am a . wants to buy our goods at least as much as 
we want to sell them." Lord Auckland, the Cabinet's American 
expert, expressed a more general view when he called the Nonim- 
portation Act a "foolish and teasing measure." 22 And Britain was 
in no mood to be teased. In May and June, Fox and his under- 
secretary complained to Monroe. The Foreign Secretary said that 

20 Morton Borden, The Federalism of James A. Bayard (New York, 1955), p. 75 
entry of April 10, 1806, Adams, op. cit. y I, 43Z. 

21 Plumer to John Goddard, April 14, 1806, William Plumer MSS, Library of 
Congress. 

22 Cobbetfs Political Register, X (1806), 973; Grenville to Auckland, Sept. 6, 
1806, Auckland MSS, Add. MSS 344575 Auckland to Grenville, Nov. 25, 1806, Fitz- 
patrick, o$. cit., VIII, 442. 



THE TREATY OF l8o6 

the law "had the air of a menace, and that it was not agreeable to 
do things by compulsion." Monroe vainly attempted to convince 
Fox that the postponed date of implementation showed that Amer- 
ica intended no menace. In September the British virtually told 
the Americans that they could not negotiate seriously while the 
act hung over their heads. The American representatives, Monroe 
and Pinkney, then promptly urged their government to push 
back still further the effective date. Even this did not satisfy Lord 
Holland, who pressed Monroe to recommend total repeal, since 
"it is very difficult to yield any thing while such a law is in force 
or even suspended in terrorem over our heads." 23 Except for 
Grenville's letter, all the evidence indicates that the threat of non- 
importation did not spur Britain to concession. On the contrary, 
both in the short and the long run it had a baneful psychological 
effect. 

Shortly after learning of the Nonimportation Act, Fox derived 
some solace from information that a special minister had sailed to 
join James Monroe in full-dress negotiations. Many people in 
America, even ardent Republicans, preferred renewed negotia- 
tions to commercial warfare. In February the Senate called upon 
the President to give Britain one more chance to demonstrate her 
reasonableness. Jefferson subsequently denied that he had had 
anything to do with this resolution. A number of opponents, re- 
membering the uproar when Jay was sent to England in 1794, 
believed that the administration "had the address behind the 
scenes to induce . . . the Senate without any direct application 
from the President to resolve that further negociation ... is 
requisite." 24 Senators, among them Samuel Smith of Maryland, 
then urged Jefferson to appoint a special minister to join Monroe, 
both to emphasize the importance of the negotiation and because 
Monroe had a reputation, undeserved at this time, for Anglo- 