

Ambition and patriotism probably explain Pinkney's accept- 
ance. He and his wife, the sister of Commodore John Rodgers, 
had ten children, and in Baltimore he earned about $ 15,000 a year. 
As a man largely self-made, William Pinkney well knew what it 
meant to abandon an extremely prosperous practice. But he was 
ambitious, and supremely confident that his talents would bring 
him success in whatever he undertook. His air of self-confidence 
was compounded by a certain foppishness, so that even Joseph 
Story, who deeply admired Pinkney, commented, "His first ap- 
pearance is not prepossessing. He has the air of a man of fashion, 
of hauteur y of superiority, and something, I hardly know what to 
call it, of abrupt and crusty precision." 27 Pinkney had a great deal 
to be egotistical about, for he was among the greatest lawyers of 
his generation. 

In 1806 Pinkney worked for an Anglo-American compromise. 
Doubtless he still believed Napoleon a greater threat than Britain 5 
perhaps he hoped to reconstruct the rapprochement his friend 
King had helped to build a decade before. From 1807 onward, 
after Monroe's departure and particularly after the Chesapeake 
affair, Pinkney became more bellicose than the administration at 
home. He loyally executed his superiors' commands, but his corre- 
spondence makes it obvious that a more decisive policy would 
have pleased him better. 

Neither Republicans nor Federalists viewed Pinkney in this 
light at the time of his appointment. Federalists grumbled that 
he had sold out. Most Republicans failed to see the wisdom of 

27 Story to Samuel P. P. Fay, Feb. 18, 1812, William W. Story, Life and Letters 
of Joseph Story, I (Boston, 1851), 216. There is no adequate biography of Pinkney, 
although a great deal of information can be found in Henry Wheaton, Some Account 
of the Life, Writings, and Speeches of William Pinkney (New York, 1826), and 
William Pinkney, The Life of William Pinkney (New York, 1853). A sketch by 
John J. Dolan is in the Dictionary of American Biography, XIV, 626629. 

116 



THE TREATY OF l8o6 

appointing a Federalist to join Monroe. As late as 1 808 Republican 
senators threatened to oppose Pinkney's confirmation as perma- 
nent minister, arguing that his Federalist background made him an 
almost certain Anglophile. 28 Monroe and his supporters considered 
the appointment a trick inspired by Madison to cut a political rival 
down to size. "I hope," wrote John Randolph, "that Mr. Monroe 
. . . will have concluded all matters with the Court of London 
before that federal interloper P. can arrive to share the honor which 
does not belong to him." Monroe himself was bitterly disappointed, 
both from personal pique and because the appointment stymied 
promising conversations with Fox. 29 

William Pinkney and his family sailed from Baltimore on May 
21,1 806. Although he had been selected in March and the Cabinet 
had outlined his instructions at that time, Pinkney's departure was 
actually rather precipitate. He had no chance to see Jefferson, who 
was vacationing at Monticello, before leaving. Favorable winds 
speeded Pinkney's passage to Liverpool. He nevertheless had 
twenty-nine days to reexamine Madison's instructions, all fifteen 
sheets of them, and perhaps to reread the Secretary's learned 
disquisition on American rights, which Madison had thought- 
fully provided in twelve copies. Pinkney can hardly have been 
surprised by anything he read, but he must have realized, egotist 
though he was, that he faced an almost impossible task. 