

53 Holland and Auckland to Howick, Oct. 20, 1806, FO 5/51. 



THE TREATY OF l8o6 

centered on the proposals to require a delay in America and to 
reship goods in a different ship. Therefore the Cabinet decided 
to go back to an emphasis upon duty charges, insisting at the same 
time that only a limited amount of duty be returned on reexporta- 
tion. At a long meeting on December 6, and "after much Debate & 
Doubt/ 3 Monroe and Pinkney accepted this proposal in principle. 54 
The negotiators eventually agreed upon real charges of 2 per cent 
on colonial goods and I per cent on those from Europe, neither 
burden particularly onerous. 

In effect, the British ministry agreed to retreat from the Essex 
decision to the Polly decision, under which American trade had 
flourished. In practical terms, and omitting all questions of the 
basic legality of British practices, the Grenville government had 
made an important conciliatory gesture. Had the treaty gone into 
effect, British ultras would have complained vehemently 5 on re- 
ceiving rumors of relaxation of the Essex principle, for example, 
the Courier warned that "in less than three years the carrying 
trade of this Country will be annihilated. War, therefore, with 
America, . . . rather than concession! War with America rather 
than the abandonment of the rule of 1756." 55 Moreover, while 
accepting the British proposal as far as it went, Monroe and Pink- 
ney did not consider it to quiet all other American claims. They 
believed "the sole Office of this Article . . . [was] to give to 
certain defined Facts the Effect of breaking the Continuity of a 
Voyage. . , . It does not . . . determine, or admit . . . that in 
any Cases, the Voyages . . . will become illegal, if any or all of 
these Facts should appear to be wanting" 56 Still, because most 
shipowners would, for their own security, conform to the treaty 
regulations, the agreement promised to lessen friction and pave 
the way to continued American prosperity. 

Only a few days after agreement on the reexport trade, the 
negotiators learned of Napoleon's Berlin Decree. Holland and 

54 Ibid, and endorsements j Auckland to Grenville, Nov. 28, 1806, Fitzpatrick, 
of. cit. y VIII, 445 j entries of Dec. i, 6, 1806, journal of negotiations, Adm 80/117. 

65 Jan. i, 1807. 

56 Monroe and Pinkney to Holland and Auckland, Dec. 31, 1806, Monroe MSS, 
NYPL. No British records indicate that this letter was actually delivered, but the 
Americans expressed the same reservation orally. 

132 



THE TREATY OF l8o6 

Auckland immediately told the Americans that Britain must now 
at least reconsider her decision to modify the Rule of the War of 
1756, since its rigorous execution might be required to meet Na- 
poleon's edict. Perhaps it would be best to put the negotiations to 
sleep until it could be determined whether or not the United States 
intended to resist Napoleon's pretensions. The American pair re- 
acted strongly. They assured the two lords that the United States 
would resist the new decree and argued that "surely it would be 
both magnanimous & Wise . . . of Great Britain to presume that 
the United States would do what they ought to do, & to proceed 
accordingly as i nothing had happened." The British gave in to 
this reasoning, but they insisted upon annexing to the treaty an 
official note reserving to England the right of retaliation against 
France, as well as nonratification of the treaty, if the Jefferson 
administration failed to take effective action. 57 