

The Americans explained their decision to the Secretary of 
State in a lengthy apologia drafted by Monroe. They argued that 
the Grenville ministry, which sincerely desired to meet Madison's 
wishes, dared not risk a public outcry in England. The formal Brit- 
ish note, while avoiding the opprobrium of surrender by treaty, 
had been delivered after cabinet consultation and could be con- 
sidered as binding as any treaty stipulations. Rather than abandon 
the chance of gains in other areas, the commissioners had decided 
to accept a declaration in conformity with the spirit of Madison's 
demands, particularly since they believed that the Ministry of 
All the Talents had already restricted the practice. Finally, the 
ministers reported that, since they had emphasized that they were 
acting in violation of their instructions, the British government 
could not be surprised if Jefferson and Madison chose to disavow 
them. 51 Basically the decision came down to this: the commission- 
ers rejected the high principle of their superiors. 1 They considered 
impressment, at least as then carried onf a lesser evil than severe 
limitations on the reexport tradej national dignity less important 

50 Holland and Auckland to Howick, Nov. 8, 1806, Grey MSS, United States} 
Holland and Auckland to Monroe and Pinkney, Nov. 8, 1806, enclosed in Monroe 
and Pinkney $6 to Madison, Nov. n, 1806, Despatches, Great Britain, Vol. XIV j 
Monroe to Pinkney, Nov. 9, 1806, Monroe MSS. 

51 Monroe and Pinkney $6 to Madison, Nov. n, 1806, Despatches, Great Britain, 
Vol. XIV. 

129 



THE TREATY OF l8o6 

than material profit. Many Americans, both Republicans and Fed- 
eralists, agreed with them in 1806. 

Perhaps none of the proposals on impressment would have 
ended the issue. The voracious American appetite for seamen and 
the advantages of service on American merchantmen meant that 
Englishmen would almost certainly continue to flock to the Stars 
and Stripes. The British government, however, missed an excellent 
opportunity to bring the United States to its side and to reduce 
the vitiating drain of manpower. The margin was narrow. With 
Holland in the lead, the British nearly made an important con- 
cession, only to be restrained by the frowns of civil servants at the 
Admiralty, by Sir John NicholPs strident pseudo legalisms, by 
Howick's doubts, and above all by fear of parliamentary opposi- 
tion. Even after the Cabinet's decision, Lord Howick tried to con- 
struct something effective out of the various pro jets that littered 
his desk, and if pressed further the Cabinet might possibly have 
reversed itself. But the Americans' nerve cracked first, and they 
accepted the comparatively meaningless note of November 8. In 
the short run this was a victory for England if not for a ministry 
sincerely seeking reconciliation, but the triumph turned to ashes, 
first with Jefferson's decision to reject the treaty and some years 
later with renewed controversy that played a part in the coming 
of war. 