

124 



THE TREATY OF l8o6 

tically worthless by the reservation, would have a salutary effect 
upon the American psyche. 45 

As early as September 6 ? when Holland met the Americans for 
a Saturday conference in the nearly empty Foreign Office, the Brit- 
ish realized that impressment and the reexport trade formed the 
chief American concerns. At that meeting Holland began by re- 
iterating a request, previously made in a note prepared under the 
eye of the Cabinet, that the Nonimportation Act be suspended. 
Monroe and Pinkney immediately asked "with what colour . . . 
could they call upon Congress to undo what they had done, when 
nothing but the bare opening of a Negotiation had taken place." 
Would Lord Holland promise a favorable answer to their demands 
on impressment and indirect trade? To this Holland replied that, 
while the American position could not be accepted in toto y 

he & his Colleague were sincerely disposed to make any compromise on 
these two Points that could be devised, consistent with the Dignity and 
Interests of the two Countries, & that they were losing no time in collecting 
the Opinions of different Classes of Men, whose information was useful & 
whose sanction was, in some measure, necessary to secure any concession that 
might be made . . . from unmerited unpopularity & Misrepresentation. 

Holland's answer meant that, within limits which merchants and 
Admiralty officials would help to establish, he and Auckland, and 
presumably their superiors, agreed to negotiate on the basis of the 
American demands. Accepting his assurance at face value, Pinkney 
and Monroe thereupon replied that they would ask their govern- 
ment to suspend the act, as they soon did. 44 

Holland left the meeting with a clear picture of the American 
position. He understood that Madison's instructions made agree- 
ments on seamen and shipping sine qua now?. He even divined 
that these instructions were far more inflexible on impressment 
than on the reexport trade. The young lord warned Grenville that 

4a Nicholl to Howick, Nov. 17, 1806, Adm 80/1175 Holland to Auckland, n.d. 
[Nov. 18-20, 1806], Auckland MSS, Add. MSS 34457, fols. 199-2005 Holland 
and Auckland to Howick, private, Nov. 14, 1806, FO 5/51; entry of Nov. 21, 1806, 
journal of negotiations, Adm 80/117. 

44 Entry of Sept. 6, 1806, journal of negotiations, Adm 80/117. 

125 



THE TREATY OF 1806 

"good humour & good will are only to be purchased by very con- 
siderable concessions on one or both of these points." 45 On the 
British side, the story of the ensuing negotiations lies in the con- 
struction of these concessions and the checkreins imposed upon 
Holland and Auckland by the Cabinet. On the American side, it 
lies in the decision of Monroe and Pinkney to reverse the priority 
between Madison's two ultimatums and consequently to sign a 
treaty relaxing the Essex principle but silent on impressment. 

The British very nearly agreed to end impressment on the high 
seas. Holland believed the Americans could be trusted, in exchange, 
to deliver up seamen fleeing from British service. Auckland was 
more doubtful, being particularly impressed by Admiralty evi- 
dence showing that the Americans often induced desertion from 
British ships and issued fraudulent certificates of American citizen- 
ship. Lord Auckland, meeting with Monroe and Pinkney while 
Holland was in close mourning for his uncle, "insisted much on 
the Difficulty which this notorious Practice would raise in fram- 
ing any Article for the due security of the essential Interests of the 
British Navy. Much conversation ensued on the Subject, but with- 
out any satisfactory result." 46 Nevertheless, when the British com- 
missioners, on October 20, submitted a long report to Howick 
designed to reinvigorate the negotiations made dormant by Fox's 
death, Auckland joined his young colleague in urging the govern- 
ment to accede to American wishes. 