

For various reasons, among them a desire to compensate Monroe 
and Pinkney for their surrender on impressment, the Cabinet ac- 
cepted fairly liberal rules for the reexport trade. The ministry did 
not feel bound by the Essex decision, which had occurred under 
the aegis of Pitt's government, and it had far less sympathy for 
British shipowners and colonialists than its predecessor. Although 
impressment might be defended as an imperative of war, breaking 
up the reexport trade smacked too much of commercial selfishness. 
Even Sir John Nicholl admitted that the requirement of trans- 
shipment in America had "for its object considerations more of 
commerce than of War." The British commissioners also sym- 
pathized with the American complaint against "the unsteadiness 
of our Rules of decision" brought on by elimination of the Polly 

130 



THE TREATY OF l8o6 

criteria. Nicholl 3 the captor's losing counsel in that case, agreed 
that "in order to avoid practical Inconvenience and Litigation, it 
seems desirable that certain Criteria should be settled, rather than 
that each Case sh d . depend upon its own Circumstances." 52 

Prior to Fox's death Pinkney and Monroe made it clear that, 
like Nicholl, they particularly desired to regularize the situation. 
As Holland and Auckland later reported. 

The American Commissioners deny in general the principle of the rule of 
1756, but at present they more particularly complain that in the recent 
detentions we have transgressed the rule laid down by ourselves [in the 
Polly case]. . . . 

Thus without actually admitting our right to interfere even with the 
direct trade between the Colonies of our Enemies and the Mother Country, 
... all that they require of us, Is a clear and permanent definition of the 
circumstances which constitute the difference between a continuous and an 
interrupted voyage, it being already settled that whatever interrupts the 
voyage legalizes the trade. 

While recognizing that in theory the shipper's intent and not the 
amount of ceremony in American ports was decisive, the British 
commissioners nevertheless proposed to meet the American initia- 
tive. Sir John Nicholl, mobilized once again, drafted an article 
requiring that colonial goods be landed in America, warehoused 
for at least one month, and reshipped in a different vessel j Nicholl 
did not insist upon the imposition of customs charges in the United 
States which would equalize the cost of rival British and Ameri- 
can shippers. 53 Pinkney in particular strenuously resisted Nicholl's 
recommendations, and the negotiators had not reached agreement 
when discussions were suspended in September. 

When meetings resumed, impressment at first dominated the 
discussions. At the end of November, with that subject finally out 
of the way, Howick circulated through the Cabinet recommenda- 
tions made by Auckland and Holland. Pinkney's complaints had 

52 Holland and Auckland to Howick, Oct. 20, 1806, FO 5/515 Nicholl mem- 
orandum, Dec. 15, 1806, enclosed in Nicholl to Auckland, private, Dec. 15, 1806, 
Adm 80/117. 