

127 



THE TREATY OF l8o6 

doubted that the Americans would execute their part of the bar- 
gain/ 8 

The next afternoon Auckland and Holland informed the Amer- 
icans that the Cabinet had decided to break off negotiations on im- 
pressment. Loyally executing Madison's instructions, "M r Mon- 
roe & M r Pinkney entered severally into long & warm arguments 
for the Purpose of refuting those reasonings on which the right 
is asserted & intimated that if a satisfactory Article could not be 
given to them as to this point, all the other Objects of Negotiation 
were of so secondary a nature that it would not be material to 
proceed to them." All hope seemed at an end. Two days later, con- 
vinced the Americans meant what they said, Lord Auckland urged 
Grenville to reconsider, arguing that "in the present state of the 
World . . . even a colourable reconciliation & friendship with the 
United States would be of an importance infinitely outweighing the 
Objections to the Article in question after such amendment as it 
might have admitted." 49 The British government remained ada- 
mant, and Auckland proceeded disconsolately to another session 
that afternoon. 

This meeting marked the turning point. To the Britons 5 amaze- 
ment, the Americans gave up what had seemed an irrevocable 
determination. The report of the British commissioners is the full- 
est statement of the arguments that swayed Monroe and Pinkney. 
Auckland and Holland emphasized the difficulty of constructing 
a stipulation 

such as would be consistent with the security of a Right essential to ... 
our Naval Power, & such at the same time as they & their employers would 
deem admissable. We urged strongly . . . that it would be neither friendly 
nor wise to press us further for a stipulation which might be injurious to a 
Claim from which we cannot depart, & which is at present exercised so as 
to afford no reasonable cause of complaint. We proposed to them to suspend 

48 Ho wick to Holland, Nov. 2, 1806, Grey MSS, to Ld. Holland 5 Nicholl memo- 
randum, Nov. 3, 1806, FO 5/1045 entry of Nov. 4, 1806, journal of negotiations, 
Adm 80/117. 

49 Entry of Nov. 5, 1806, journal of negotiations, Adm 80/1175 Auckland to 
Grenville, Nov. 7, 1806, Boconnoc MSS, Lord Auckland 1806. 

128 



THE TREATY OF l8o6 

or lay aside this part of the Negotiation, by receiving from Us an indefinite 
but conciliatory statement respecting it 5 & to proceed forthwith to the other 
Articles of the Treaty in which we foresee no insuperable difficulty 

In the result the American Commissioners gave way to these suggestions, 
though with some hesitation & reluctance. 

The elated Englishmen forwarded to Howick the draft of an of- 
ficial note to the Americans, sufficiently "indefinite but concilia- 
tory," promising that orders would continue to be given "for the 
observance of the greatest caution in the impressing of British 
seamen" and inviting the Americans to continue negotiations on 
other points. The next day, with Howick's approval, they sent 
the note to Monroe, who transmitted it to Pinkney with a cover- 
ing note of cautious approval. 50 