

The treaty deprived America of her most effective weapon, so 
Jefferson and Madison believed, for securing a binding limitation 
on impressment in the future. Toward the close of the negotiations 
Lord Auckland succeeded in inserting a ban on "the foolish and 
teasing measure of non-importation" and others like it. The United 
States pledged itself to lay down the weapon of commercial war- 
fare for ten years. Since the Republicans were unprepared to fight, 
this meant that for a decade seamen on American merchant ships 
must depend solely on protests and exhortation for their defense. 
This concession capped the general impression of American sub- 
ordination, an impression that caused the Irish-born editor of the 
Aurora to ask his readers, "Will you abandon your rights? Will 
you abandon your independence? Are you willing to become colo- 
nies of Great Britain?" 6T 

66 Madison to Monroe and Pinkney, Feb. 3, 1807, Instructions, Vol. VI; King- to 
Gouverneur Morris, March 30, 1807, postscript, Charles R. King, The Life and. 
Correspondence of Rufus King (6 vols. $ New York, 18941900), V, 135 Madison 
to Monroe and Pinkney, May 20, 1807, Instructions, Vol. VI. In the February 
instructions, Madison had stated that impressments in American waters had "at no 
time been more numerous or vexatious," but this does not necessarily invalidate the 
belief, apparently shared by the British and American negotiators in London, that 
the total number of incidents in all theaters was comparatively low. 

67 March 10, 1807. 

137 



THE TREATY OF l8o6 

In moral terms, Duane's queries answered themselves. But 
Monroe and Pinkney, faced with political realities, felt that Amer- 
ica could not afford utopianism. As Monroe commented, "in all the 
points on which we have had to press this gov*., interests of the 
most vital character were involved . . . , at a time too when the 
very existence of the country depended on an adherence to its 
maritime pretensions." The envoys signed the treaty when it 
appeared that Napoleon planned an immediate assault upon neu- 
tral commerce. America needed British friendship, both to rein- 
force pressure on France (which did not implement the Berlin 
Decree against American commerce until Jefferson rejected the 
treaty) and to encourage the apparent English drift toward greater 
rceognition of neutral rights indicated by Fox's Blockade and the 
disavowal of Whitby. Although "little more than a project," the 
treaty, Monroe said, started Britain in the right direction. "By ar- 
ranging our differences in peace with England her merchants would 
have calculated on its preservation, & embarked most extensively 
in trade [with us] .... The interest in that country for the con- 
tinuation of peace wo d . have increased daily," forcing any ministry 
to avoid a clash with the United States. 68 

At least, Monroe and Pinkney argued, they had obtained im- 
portant immediate advantages, and like the British they had sur- 
rendered in principle no claims that could not be reactivated later. 
While the treaty omitted impressment, the promised restraints 
and the actual rarity of the practice, which the reduction of rival 
naval power at Trafalgar might permit to continue, created fairly 
favorable conditions. Article XI, on the reexport trade, perhaps 
imposed more stringent requirements than the Polly decision or 
the King-Hawkesbury exchange of 1 801, which made only general 
reference to duties and drawbacks, but it did destroy the Essex 
decision. With ground rules clearly laid out, American merchants 
might continue the trade that had already brought so much pros- 
perity. 