

Monroe and Pinkney deemed the declaration a small price to 
pay for a treaty. The Berlin Decree, which threatened to destroy 
American commerce, shocked them as much as the British. The 
Americans seem to have considered Napoleon the greater threat, 
as they did throughout the negotiations, despite substantial griev- 
ances against Britain. They even suggested ways to improve the 
note by strengthening the passage that contrasted English restraint 
and the Emperor's sweeping edict, and Lord Holland permitted 
them to edit the final draft to make it as inoffensive as possible. On 
the morning of December 31, 1806, the four plenipotentiaries 
affixed signatures and seals to the treaty, ending what Auckland had 
earlier described as "our eternal negotiation." 58 

The treaty of 1806 provoked, and continues to provoke, con- 
troversy. British nationalists, considering reaffirmation of the Jay 
treaty's commercial articles a concession to the Americans, argued 
that Monroe and Pinkney ought to have paid a price for it. They 
objected that the United States had not surrendered her claim to 
trade with the British West Indies nor accepted the legality of 

57 Entry o Dec. 9, 1806, journal of negotiations, Adm 80/117. 

58 Auckland to Grenville, Dec. 27, 1806, Boconnoc MSS, Lord Auckland i8o6j 
Holland to Monroe, Dec. 9, 1806, Monroe MSS, NYPLj Holland and Auckland 
to Monroe and Pinkney, Dec. 31, 18063 FO 5/515 Auckland to Monroe, Dec. 14, 
1806, Monroe MSS, NYPL. 

133 



THE TREATY OF l8o6 

impressment nor agreed to end Its "war in disguise," The com- 
promise on reexport trade, one pamphleteer protested, was really 
"a stipulation, vexatious enough to continue the complaints of 
America, but too weak to secure the interests of Britain." The 
treaty's opponents believed that "we have not by our moderation 
obtained a reciprocity of advantage." 59 

Holland and Auckland answered these assaults in essentially 
political terms. They believed increasing hostility the only alterna- 
tive to a treaty, and they asserted that they had paid a small price 
for reconciliation. Commenting on attacks in the Courier and the 
Morning Post, Auckland's secretary wrote to him : 

Did you ever see such impudent & barefaced misrepresentations. Concession 
to America What concession was made to her except two additional miles 
of maritime jurisdiction & that so clogged with exceptions as to be merely 
an empty compliment. In the article on colonial trade greater difficulties 
were thrown in her way than those specified by Ld Hawkesbury in his letter 
to Rufus King [formally confirming the Polly principle] & yet the whole 
article is represented as a boon to America for which we have nothing in 
return. 

Auckland himself argued that the treaty contained not a single 
"abandonment ... of any one Claim, or Principle, or right, or 
Usage, Colonial or Commercial." He trusted however that the 
treaty would quiet America, "& I feel [this] ... in the disjointed 
state of the world to be a Result of great political Importance." 60 
Within a few months news reached England in April Jeffer- 
son's rejection of the treaty blasted Auckland's hopes. In February, 
when the President learned that his ambassadors intended to over- 
leap impressment, he and his Cabinet agreed to maintain the sine 
qua non on seamen and to refuse to give up commercial warfare, 
"the only peaceable instrument for coercing all our rights,' 5 as long 
as this and other issues remained. Jefferson believed a we had 
better have no treaty than a bad one. it will not restore friendship, 