

Moreover, the treaty implied American inferiority perhaps more 
clearly than that signed by John Jay in 1794 and so bitterly exe- 
crated by Republicans. Jay secured compensation for British seiz- 
ures, but his successors entirely failed to do so and perhaps, by 
their unaccountable failure to press this point, prejudiced future 
American claims. Jay's article on trade with India returned, but 
in tightened form. There was nothing but contemptuous silence 
toward American requests to share commercial traffic with Brit- 
ain's colonies in the Western Hemisphere. And, although the 
treaty rescinded the Essex decision, the provisions on the reexport 
trade showed deep suspicion of American procedures, exceeded 
the Polly decision (particularly by withholding permission to re- 
export Asian goods to the West Indies), and seemed to consider 
toleration of indirect trade as a gift extended by Britain and not 
a right. Commenting that "we have not the power of Resistance, 
and if we had, I fear we would not have the Will," Senator Smith 
at first favored accepting the provision; later this commercial 
spokesman concluded that, while American traders could prosper 
under it, the article was too dishonorable to accept. 65 The declara- 
tion on Berlin, even as emended by Monroe and Pinkney, affronted 
their superiors. Jefferson and Madison, who fully recognized Brit- 
ain's right to retaliate and would have approved reciprocal state- 
ments reserving her position and America's, did not like "the form 
& face chozen" for the unilateral announcement approved at 
London. 

Failure on impressment stirred American sensibilities most of 
all. Jefferson and Madison knew too well the proclivities of British 
commanders to believe that general directives would restrain them. 

64: Madison to Monroe and Pinkney, May 20, 1807, Instructions, Vol. VI. These 
instructions contain the fullest official criticism of the terms of the treaty. 

65 Samuel Smith to Madison, March 14, 1807, Rives Collection 5 Samuel Smith 
to Madison, April 18, 1807, Samuel Smith MSS, Library of Congress. 

136 



THE TREATY OF l8o6 

As Madison dryly remarked, the "remedy proposed in the Note 
from the British Commissioners, however well intended, does not 
inspire the confidence here which gave it so much value in their 
judgment." National interest, Republicans held, required a formal 
stipulation, and at least one moderate Federalist believed Jefferson 
"absolutely obliged, if he regards the national honour, to send 
the Treaty back." In the most important passage in a formal cri- 
tique sent to London in May, Madison wrote that the President 
"cannot reconcile it with his duty to our seafaring citizens, or with 
the sensibility or sovereignty of the nation, to recognize even con- 
structively, a principle that would expose on the high seas, their 
liberty, their lives, every thing in a word that is dearest to the 
human heart, to the capricious or interested sentences which may 
be pronounced against their allegiance, by officers of a foreign Gov- 
ernment." 66 