

Holland and Auckland believed that Britain, in return for the 
surrender of her traditional claim to impress on the high seas, 
would garner substantial advantages. Monroe and Pinkney made 
no objection to impressment in British ports, and, although this 
was a concession that the Federalist, King, had refused to make in 
1803, "they would probably suffer us to include within these limits 
the whole extent of the British Channel, though they would not 

45 Holland to Grenville, Sept. 6, 1806, Boconnoc MSS, Cabinet Ministers. 

46 Auckland to Howick, Sept. 12, 1806, Grey MSS, from ist Ld. Auckland 5 entry 
of Sept. 22, 1806, journal of negotiations, Adm 80/117. The most detailed treatment 
of this subject is Anthony Steel, "Impressment in the Monroe-Pinkney Negotiation, 
18061807," American Historical Review, LVII (19511952), 352369. 

126 



THE TREATY OF l8o6 

admit such a construction of jurisdiction to appear on the face 
of the Treaty." Furthermore, the American commissioners had 
offered the support of their government and courts "for the re- 
covery of our Seamen., within the limits of their jurisdiction." 
Holland and Auckland also believed the Americans would permit 
British captains to stop merchantmen at sea, muster the crew, and 
require the master (unless he agreed that a suspected man was 
indeed an Englishman and gave him up) to submit proof to a 
competent tribunal empowered to punish any captain who did have 
Englishmen in his crew. Auckland and Holland suggested that the 
agreement be limited to a short period, after which obvious short- 
comings could be corrected or the arrangement dropped. Obviously 
the British negotiators foresaw many difficulties. On the other 
hand, they did propose to surrender a practice Britain had insisted 
upon for centuries, primarily because, in their words, "without 
some regulation upon it, no permanent or sincere reconciliation 
with the United States can be expected." 4T 

At first the Cabinet reacted favorably. The commissioners re- 
ceived permission to discuss a pro jet with Monroe and Pinkney 
and did so in several conversations. Details alone seemed to be 
holding up agreement. But, on November 2/Howick, whose ex- 
perience at the Admiralty may have stiffened his position, wrote 
to Holland: "If the object for which we have hitherto insisted on 
our rights to impress British Sea Men on the High Seas could be 
obtained by any more gentle means, nobody would be a more stren- 
uous advocate for such a change than I should. But I cannot satisfy 
myself that any sufficient security could be devised, & I am cer- 
tain what is proposed would be none." The next day Sir John 
Nicholl submitted a report that ringingly vindicated the legality 
of impressment. On November 4 the Cabinet examined three 
alternative proposals, one submitted by the Americans and two 
concocted by Holland and Auckland. The ministers decided not 
to risk any relaxation of impressment, primarily because they 

47 Holland and Auckland to Howick, Oct. 20, 1806, FO 5/51. Portions of this 
report are reproduced In Steel, op. cit^ pp. 356358. 