

Like most policy the Embargo reflected many motives, some of 
them quite indirect. Jefferson, who even in moments of unrelated 
crisis never lost sight of his Florida objective, doubtless hoped 
resistance to England would encourage Napoleon to favor Ameri- 
can ambitions to the southward. Failure to resist, on the other hand, 
might cause the French emperor to assail the United States 5 in the 
words of the Boston Independent Chronicle, "If, by the most 
humiliating concessions we could avoid a war with England, will 

24 Gerry to Madison, Feb. 19, 1806, Madison MSSj Joseph I. Shuliin, The Old 
Dominion and Napoleon Bonaparte (New York, 1952), p. 2305 Robert R. Livingston 
to Madison, July 12, 1807, Rives Collection 5 Erskine #22 to Canning, July 31, 
1807, FO 5/52, 

150 



EMBARGO 

the other nations at war with her be tame spectators of such a com- 
promise?" Later on the President also justified continuance of the 
Embargo as an experiment, so that "on future occasions our legis- 
lators may know with certainty how far they may count on it as an 
engine for national purposes." 25 

Without any doubt the chief aims of the Embargo were precau- 
tionary and coercive. Madison and, as time passed, Jefferson placed 
great faith in the coercive power of an embargo. Although they 
thought that total loss of the American market, already constricted 
by the Nonimportation Act, would hurt Great Britain, they counted 
most on nothing less than imperial starvation. In the Secretary's 
view no part of the Empire would escape. "It can no longer be un- 
known to the most sanguine partizan of the Colonial Monopoly," 
he said, "that the necessaries of life and cultivation can be furnished 
to ... [British Caribbean possessions] from no other source than 
the United States." The United States supplied vitally needed 
naval stores. "Lastly it should not be forgotten that the United 
States are one of the Granaries which supply the annual deficit of 
the British harvests," a particularly important point when Prussian 
and French grain might be withheld. 26 Such one-sided calculations 
minimized American dependence upon trade with Britain, and 
the whole project rested upon an assumption that England would 
react rationally( The Adamses, father and son, more realistic than 
the President, correctly pointed out that in time of war reason often 
went by the board. The Embargo "affects their interests no doubt," 
John Quincy Adams noted, "but nations which sacrifice men by 
the hundred thousands and treasure by the hundred millions in 
War, for nothing, w worse than nothing, pay little attention to 
their- real interests."! 27 

| Like Senator Adams, Jefferson supported an embargo primarily 

<l < 

^Independent Chronicle (Boston), Nov. 12, 18075 Jefferson to Gallatin, May 
i5> July **> sSoS, Gallatin MSS. 

26 Madison to Monroe and Pinkney, May 20, 1807, Instructions, Vol. VI. For 
a convincing* demonstration that Madison had for years advocated commercial 
coercion, see Irving Brant, James Madison: Secretary of State (Indianapolis, 1953), 
pp. 397-4-03. 