

Actually, public opinion required no Jeffersonian stimulus. The 
whole nation demanded satisfaction. In Virginia, militia patrolled 
the coasts to prevent supplies from reaching British ships. Thomas 
Ritchie, editor of the Richmond Enquirer, abandoned the pen 

5 Steel, o$. ck., p. 265. 

6 Niles' Weekly Register (Baltimore), Sept. 28, 1811. 

7 Steel, of. cit., passim; Berkeley to Bathurst [?], Aug. 13, 1807, Francis Bickley, 
ed., Report on the Manuscripts of Earl Bathurst (London: Historical Manuscripts 
Commission, 1923), pp. 63655 Berkeley to Marsden, Aug. 17, 1807, Adm 1/4.97. 

142 



EMBARGO 

(and the pleasures of his honeymoon) for the sword, and Winfield 
Scott, a young lance corporal, captured a boat crew that landed to 
seek provisions. At New York a mob removed the rudder from 
an English ship, cut the rigging, carried off the sails, and demol- 
ished gun carriages. Consul Barclay's house had to be protected 
by police, and a traveling British diplomat found it wise to adopt 
an alias. All over the nation, public meetings denounced the British. 
In Boston the Federalist leadership unsuccessfully attempted to 
block one town meeting but then, as a measure of political pru- 
dence, found it expedient to endorse a second. Two thousand peo- 
ple gathered to hear a youthful Federalist deliver a strident speech 
in behalf of resolutions pledging support to the national govern- 
mofitl 8 ^\ 

\Some Americans urged a declaration of war, ind many more ex- 
pected one. "The probability of war," wrote William Wirt, "is 
very strong: because it is scarcely presumable that British arrogance 
& injustice will give us that satisfaction which alone will appease 
the spirit of this nation and between the alternatives of war & 
dishonorable surrender, our countrymen will not long hesitate." 
But many patriots wished to give Great Britain a chance to make 
atonement. From Boston Elbridge Gerry reported that "there is no 
desire here, to engage in a war with Great Britain, if it can hon- 
orably be avoided 5 . . . but if national redress cannot be ob- 
tained^ ... , peace . . . would cease to be beneficial & honor- 
able.^The old Republican wheel horse, Nathaniel Macon, urged 
restraint, adding, "Peace is everything to us, especially in this part 
of the nation." Robert R. Livingston, another staunch Republi- 
can, agreed that "our national happiness & prosperity depend upon 
the preservation of peace" and urged one more special mission to 
London. 9 Rallying, Federalist writers brought out pamphlets that 

8 Charles H. Ambler, Thomas Ritchie (Richmond, 1913), pp. 4243; Winfield 
Scott, Memoirs of Lieut. General Scott, LLX>., I (New York, 1864), 19205 Tench 
Coxe to Madison, July 2, 1807, James Madison MSS, Library of Congress; Richard 
B. Davis, ed., Jefersonian America: Notes on the United States of America . . . by 
Sir Augustus John Foster, 3 art. (San Marino, 1954), p. 2935 Samuel E, Morison, 
The Life and Letters of Harrison Gray Otis (2 vols.; Boston, 1913), I> 276277. 