

21 Champagny to Armstrong, Oct. 8, 1807, AAE, CP, E-U, Vol. LX. 

148 



EMBARGO 

which will. )J Federalists later claimed that news of the November 
orders reached-America only after the Embargo message had gone 
to Congress. Although this was true of their text, London papers 
arriving on December 1 8 made Jefferson so certain of the general 
content that he included a description in the first draft of his calif or 
an embargo, only to be dissuaded by the more cautious Madisony 
All congressmen knew that Britain was preparing to strike. To omit 
the orders from any list of precipitants of the Embargo, John 
Quincy Adams later scoffed, was like "laying your finger over the 
unit before a series of noughts, and then arithmetically proving 
that they all amount to nothing. 5 }/ 22 

Jefferson had totally miscalculated. In June and July he re- 
strained the demand for war, counting on his ability to reinvigorate 
it if Monroe failed to secure a settlement of the Chesapeake affair 
and an end to impressment. As this unrealistic hope dwindled, the 
President came more and more to anticipate and perhaps to wel- 
come a war. Down to the very moment of recommending an em- 
bargo, the President, although sometimes contradictory, spoke far 
more favorably and often of war, or at the very least of accepting 
the gage of battle cast down by Britain. News of enforcement of 
the Berlin Decree did not alter Jefferson's basic position, and four 
days before the Embargo message a Republican senator wrote, 
"(in confidence} the man in the Stone House is of opinion that 
the Die is Cast.' 7 23 But the popular spirit had evaporated, the 
orators had fallen silent. In July Jefferson could have had war but 
did not want it j now he probably wanted it but could not hope to 
get it. He fell back upon the supreme weapon of commercial war- 
fare, a general embargo. The choice was not entirely unpalatable, 
since if by some chance war should come, the recall of ships and 
seamen was only prudent. And the efficacy of commercial pressure 
was an article of faith among Republicans. 

22 Jefferson to Thomas M. Randolph, Nov. 16, 1807, Jefferson MSS; Jefferson 
to Madison, July 14, 1824., Rives Collection; Adams to Otis, March 31, 1808, 
Worthington C. Ford, ed., The Writings of John Quincy Adams (7 vols.j New 
York, 19141917), III, 20 1. 

23 Nicholas Gilinan to Eustis, Dec* 14, 1807, William Eustis MSS, Library of 
Congress. 

149 



EMBARGO 

Threats to the British pocketbook had a long, patriotic history 
in the United States. The first of these, in colonial times, aimed to 
prevent British sales in America, whereas in 1 807 the United States 
aimed principally to eliminate English sources of supply. This 
type of pressure had been tried briefly in 1794, prior to the Jay 
treaty, when an embargo quickly created a serious food shortage 
in the British West Indies. What had worked in 1 794 seemed even 
more premising now, for Britain had lost much of her European 
trade/ In 1806 Elbridge Gerry argued for an embargo, both to 
keep American shipping within the protection 6f its own harbors 
and to bring pressure to bear upon England. JA year later the 
Richmond Argus suggested closing all trad^until Europe came 
to its senses. Robert R. Livingston recommended an embargo "that 
we may keep what we have at home and daily get more of our 
seamen & property out of the reach of the piracy of Britain so as 
to leave, with the debts we owe them, a ballance in our hands to 
compensate the injuries we may receive." That summer the Secre- 
tary of State warned the British minister that, while a Chesapeake 
settlement might prevent war, only a general adjustment could 
prevent Congress from adopting "very strong Measures of Re- 
straint upon the Intercourse between Great Britain and the United 
States. 3 ' 24 For various reasons a general embargo rather than selec- 
tive pressure upon Britain became Jeff ersonian policy in December, 
1807. That the Embargo aimed chiefly at England was, however, 
understood in Washington, London, and Paris. 