

9 Wirt to Peachey R. Gilmer, July 18, 1807, William Wirt MSS, Library of 
Congress 5 Gerry to Thomas Matthews, July n, 1807, Elbridge Gerry MSS, Massa- 

143 



EMBARGO 

defended Berkeley's order or at least suggested that Jeffersonian 
weakness had invited it. 10 Within a month after the attack talk of 
war had subsided, and at the beginning of September the French 
minister reported his disgust at the "fear and servile deference" 
shown toward Britain. The brief flame had burned itself out 5 the 
imperatives of honor became passive. Joseph H. Nicholson wrote 
to Gallatin, his brother-in-law, "The public mind has been suf- 
fered to brood so long . . . that I fear its ardor is cooling down. 
Spirit enough is however left, to blaze, when the constituted au- 
thorities will blow the coals." X1 

Initially Jefferson chose to play the part of a damper rather 
than a bellows. He sought to keep the public conflagration just 
short of open flame, hoping the heat of anger would force London 
to settle the Chesapeake affair and even abandon impressment. 
When he received word of Humphreys' brutal attack, the Presi- 
dent wrote the governor of Virginia to urge restraint so that Con- 
gress, when it met, could have freedom to decide "whether, having 
taught so many other useful lessons to Europe, we may not add 
that of showing them that there are peaceable means of repress- 
ing injustice, by making it the interest of the aggressor to do what 
is just." With cabinet approval Jefferson issued a proclamation 
closing American waters to British warships, a device designed to 
satisfy the popular demand for action and at the same time reduce 
the chance of further incidents. 12 The President explained that 

chusetts Historical Society j Macon to Gallatin, Aug. 2, 1807, Henry Adams, The 
Life of Albert Gallatin (Philadelphia, 1879), P- 3^ 2 > Livingston to Madison, July 
12, 1807, William C. Rives Collection, Library of Congress. 

10 David Everett ($seud. An American) An Essay on the Rights and Duties of 
Nations, Relative to Fugitives from Justice; Considered <with Reference to the Affair 
of the Chesapeake (Boston, 1807) 5 Thomas G. Fessenden, Some Thoughts on the 
Present Dispute between Great Britain and America (Philadelphia, 1807) 5 A Gen- 
tleman at New- York, The Voice of Truth; or. Thoughts on the Affair between the 
Leonard and Chesapeake (New York, 1807) ; John Lowell ($seud. A Yankee 
Farmer), Peace without Dishonour War "without Hope. Being a Calm and Dispas- 
sionate Enquiry into the Question of the Chesapeake (Boston, 1807). 

11 Turreau #43 to Minister of Foreign Relations, Sept. 7, 1807, Archives des 
Affaires trangeres, Correspondance Politique, 6tats-Unis (photostats, Library of 
Congress), Vol. LX; Nicholson to Gallatin, Sept. 10, 1807, Albert Gallatin MSS, 
New- York Historical Society. 

12 Jefferson to Cabell, June 19, 1807, Andrew A. Lipscomb and Albert E. Bergh, 
eds., The Writings of Thomas Jefferson (Memorial ed. 5 20 vols. 5 Washington, 1903- 