

On June 22, a day after Humphreys arrived, the Chesapeake 
stood to sea, bound for the Mediterranean. She was hailed by the 
Leopard and, suspecting nothing, came to | Lieutenant JohnlVIeaHe^ 
boarded her to hand Commodore Barron a copy of Berkeley's order 
and a note from Captain Humphreys expressing hope that peace 
could be maintained. After fruitless discussion in Barren's cabin, 
Meade returned to his ship. Humphreys argued further through 
the hailing trumpet, then fired a shot across the Chesapeake*^ bow. 
Finally, as the captain later reported, "conceiving . . . that my 
Orders would not admit of deviation, I lament to state, that, I 
felt under the necessity of enforcing them, by firing into the United 
States Ship." After ten minutes of action (if such -a-wosd may 
be used fati-a^ nri&-sideLeajiimimd:e), Barron surrendered. A 
second boarding party from the Leopard mustered the American 
crew and removed four deserters, including Ratford, who was 
dragged from hiding. 4 

3 Berkeley to Humphreys, June i, 1807, enclosed In Berkeley to Marsden, July 4, 
1 80 7> Admiralty Papers, Public Record Office, Adm 1/497. For particulars of the 
provocation for this order and for the subsequent incident, see Henry Adams, History 
of the United States during the Administrations of Jefferson and Madison (9 vols.j 
New York, 18891891), IV, 120, and, from, the British point of view, Anthony 
Steel, "More Light on the Chesapeake," Mariner's Mirror y XXXIX (1953), 243- 
265. 

4 Humphreys to Captain J. E. Douglas, June 22, 1807, enclosed in Douglas to 
William Wellesley Pole, June 24, 1807, Adm 1/1729. 

141 



EMBARGO 

Humphreys, who doubted the wisdom of Berkeley's order, 
executed it moderately. From among the scores of known deserters 
and Englishmen on the American ship, he took only four. Jenkin 
Ratf ord was soon hanged at Halifax. The other three were Ameri- 
cans, two of them Negroes and thus demonstrably non-British, but 
all three had escaped from the Royal Navy in a British ship's gig. 
The two Negroes, furthermore, had actually deserted from an 
American merchantman and enlisted in the Royal Navy in 1806. 
For his restraint Captain Humphreys, who was placed on half pay 
in 1808 while Berkeley escaped punishment, received no credit 
from either government. After all, whether so ordered by his 
superior or not, and whatever the provocation provided by the 
Chesapeake, called by one English scholar "a kind of fly-paper for 
picking up deserters and other wandering British seamen," 5 
Humphreys had violated American sovereignty. As Niles said, 
"It is of no importance . . . whether the men were Americans or 
not whether they had been impressed or entered the British 
service voluntarily." 6 

""Many British officers, with that paranoid attitude of whining 
superiority so common among them, chose to believe England the 
aggrieved party. When their supplies were cut off, certainly a 
mild enough act of reprisal, commanders in the* Chesapeake ^em- 
barked upon a campaign of petulant interference with American 
shipping. Berkeley at first believed the American outcry artificially 
maintained by Jefferson for political purposes, then shifted from 
a conviction that the Americans would only bluster to a real fear 
of war, pleaded for reinforcements, and even talked about an an- 
ticipatory attack upon New York as a salutary lesson. 7 