

Considering the comparative power of Britain and America, the 

68 Monroe to Jefferson, Jan. n, 1807, Feb. 27, 1808, Jefferson MSS$ Monroe 
to John Taylor, Jan. 9, 1809, Monroe MSS. 

138 



THE TREATY OF l8o6 

Napoleonic threat, the later failure of commercial warfare to se- 
cure a reasonably speedy victory over England, considering too 
America's immense material interest in an arrangement with Brit- 
ain, Monroe and Pinkney seem justified. Nobody can be sure, of 
course, that ratification of the treaty would have led, as they hoped, 
to a further reconciliation or even prevented the antineutral pro- 
ceedings of the ministry that succeeded Grenville's in 1 807. But 
it is even more unreasonable to test the commissioners 3 hopes 
against British activities after the treaty failed, to say that the 
Orders in Council of 1807 or impressment proves that any agree- 
ment would at best have been transitory. At worst Britain would 
have had to make some gestures to preserve a rapprochement; at 
best she might have worked positively to improve it. Monl-oe and 
Pinkney not only spoke the traditional accents of American real- 
ism 3 they also opened the door to peace and uneasy friendship. 
They did these things at the cost of important moral considera- 
tions, and Jefferson and Madison expressed more nobly the new 
nation's aspirations. But if the administration rejected compromise 
in the interest of idealism and psychological equality, by its future 
course it condemned itself, lacking the will to vindicate these com- 
mendable objectives. Certainly "a quiet nap" could neither long 
endure nor prove truly restful. 



139 



CHAPTER 



V 



EMBARGO: ALTERNATIVE TO WAR 



Vice-Admiral Sir George Cranfield Berkeley, M.P., owed his ap- 
pointment as commander in chief on the American station to the 
Ministry of All the Talents. Grenville, at least, knew Berkeley 
well enough to have misgivings about his selection, 1 but the ad- 
miraPs brother commanded a number of votes that marched into 
the ministerial lobby at division time, as did Berkeley himself be- 
tween tours of sea duty. Consequently, Howick offered Berkeley 
the American command. In the spring of 1806 the admiral arrived 
at Halifax and initiated a steady stream of complaints against the 
Admiralty, against Jefferson, against the United States, which, 
with scant regard for normal channels, he forwarded directly to 
Grenville. 2 

Berkeley believed the United States would back down whenever 
Britain refused to compromise. In the spring of 1807, in Chesa- 

1 Grenville to Thomas Grenville, Oct. 23, 1807, Thomas Grenville MSS, British 
Museum (Add. MSS 41851-4.1859), Add. MSS 41852. 

2 See the letters from Admiral Berkeley to Grenville in Boconnoc MSS (Papers 
of William Wyndham Grenville, Baron Grenville), Lostwithiel, Cornwall, Letters 
Jan. to Sept. 1806, under the following- dates: Feb. 12, 14, April 13, July 29. 

140 



EMBARGO 

peake Bay, a number of deserters from the Royal Navy received 
protection from local authorities, and many of them even enrolled 
in the United States Navy. One of these deserters, Jenkin Ratford, 
a short, swarthy former tailor from London, enlisted on U.S.S. 
Chesapeake and railed at British officers on the quays and streets of 
Norfolk. Since American authorities refused to return Ratford 
and the others, one solution alone occurred to Berkeley's unsubtle 
mind. The admiral "required and directed [his subordinates] in 
case of meeting with the American frigate the Chesapeake at Sea, 
and without the limits of the United States to shew to the Captain 
of her this order; and to require to search his Ship for the desert- 
ers." 3 Captain Salusbury P. Humphreys sailed in Berkeley's flag- 
ship Leopard to carry this fateful order to the ships at Norfolk. 