

The instructions lay on Madison's desk for three weeks after 
they were drafted. Perhaps the administration delayed so that 
the demands could travel in company with reports of angry out- 
bursts from all parts of the Union, thus showing the British 
government that a united people was ready for war. Even then 
England was unlikely to be panicked into concession, for the 
President's proclamation had shown that the executive, at least, 
still hoped to preserve peace. Far more probably, Jefferson and his 
subordinates expected to be able to maintain national unity for 
months and decided to use it as a weapon to force affairs with Eng- 
land to a climax. If the ministry proved stubborn, they believed, 
the American people would endorse resistance more vigorously 
than when it could be argued that Berkeley spoke for no one but 
his cantankerous self. Although not always candid in letters to the 
obstreperous Philadelphian, William Duane, on this occasion Jef- 
ferson probably expressed very nearly his true feelings when he 
wrote: 

Although we demand of England what is merely of right, reparation for 
the past, security for the future, yet as their pride will possibly, nay prob- 
ably, prevent their yielding them to the extent we shall require, my opinion 
is, that the public mind, which I believe is made up for war, should main- 
tain itself at that point. They have often enough, God knows, given us 
cause for war before; but it has been on points which would not have 
united the nation. But now they have touched a chord which vibrates in 
every heart. Now then is the time to settle the old and the new. 16 

15 Madison to Monroe, July 6, 1807, Department of State Archives, National 
Archives, Instructions, all countries, Vol. VI. 

16 Jefferson to Duane, July 20, 1807, Lipscomb and Bergh, of. cit., XI, 291.' 

146 



EMBARGO 

By October America knew for certain that Britain would not 
surrender impressment. Although returning congressmen found 
in the National Intelligencer a scarcely cryptic invitation to choose 
between "a direct resort to war, ... or ... a surer reparation 
through the medium of commercial regulation/' Jefferson tended 
toward the more vigorous course. The first draft of his annual mes- 
sage reviewed British aggressions in language that seemed to in- 
vite a declaration of war. Gallatin returned the draft with many 
changes, warning the President that public ardor had cooled. The 
final version reprobated British actions in language sufficiently 
strong to alarm London. Still, the President neither asked for a 
declaration of war nor suggested that one was inevitable. 17 For 
more than a month the new Congress remained in uneasy uncer- 
tainty. 

Among the derelictions charged against Britain by Jefferson, 
an Order in Council dated January 7, 1807, figured most promi- 
nently after the attack on the Chesapeake. When Holland and 
Auckland required the Americans to accept a note reserving the 
right of retaliation against the Berlin Decree, they spoke of no 
theoretical contingency. Already the government was at work upon 
an order forbidding coastal trade between enemy ports. Grenville 
and Howick calculated that this would strike at French communi- 
cations and, particularly when garnished with an eloquently bel- 
ligerent preamble claiming that French action released Britain 
from the traditional limits of war, would demonstrate at home that 
the ministry intended vigor. At the same time the government 
hoped not to interfere seriously with America's transatlantic trade. 18 
On both scores the Cabinet miscalculated. Perceval and Castlereagh 
attacked the declaration as ineffective. After initial hesitation Mad- 
ison also attacked the order, on the grounds that it directly chal- 