

144 



EMBARGO 

"the usage of nations" required him to seek satisfaction before 
opening hostilities, that delay would permit American ships to 
return to havens at home, and that this was good Republican 
doctrine "the power of declaring war being in Congress, the 
Ex[ecutive] should do no act committing them to war, when it 
is very probable that they may prefer a non-intercourse to war. 5 ' l3 

As repeated accounts of British arrogance flowed in from Nor- 
folk, Jefferson became more bellicose. He and his Cabinet dis- 
cussed plans for an attack on Canada, canvassed the financial re- 
quirements of war,. and planned to use gunboats if the British 
squadron extended its harassment of shipping. Leaving the final 
decision until fall, Jefferson departed for Monticello on August i . 
There, further news from Europe led him to feel that war was 
nearly inevitable. Early in September, writing to a member of his 
Cabinet, he declared that a real settlement with England was 
unlikely, although if the Baltic were closed to her trade Britain 
might "temporize with us. But if peace among the continental 
powers of Europe should leave her free in her intercourse with 
the powers who will then be neutral, the present ministry . . . 
will not in my opinion give us the necessary assurances respecting 
the flag. In that case, it must bring a war soon, and if so, it can 
never be in a better time for us." 14 

Four days before the President fled the heat of Washington, 
Nicholas Biddle, a young friend of Madison's, sailed on UJS.S. 
Revenge bearing instructions to Monroe on the "assurances re- 
specting the flag" required by the United States. "A formal dis- 
avowal of the deed, and restoration of the four seamen to the ship 
from which they were taken, are things of course and indispensa- 
ble." Failing this, America reserved her right and here the in- 
structions hinted at war but left the way open to less decisive action 



1904), XI, 256257; memorandum of July 2, 1807, Thomas Jefferson MSS, Library 
of Congress. Jefferson and the secretaries also agreed to mobilize the gunboats, recall 
naval vessels from the Mediterranean, and send strong instructions to Monroe. 

13 National Intelligencer (Washington) , July 8, 18075 Jefferson to Thomas M. 
Randolph, July 5, 1807, Jefferson MSS. 

14 Memoranda of July 26, 28, 1807, Jefferson MSS 5 Jefferson to Madison, Sept. 
3, 1807, Lipscomb and Bergh, of. tit., XI, 3585 Jefferson to Jacob Crowninshield, 
Sept. 3, 1807, ibid.y XI, 356-357- 

145 



EMBARGO 

"to resort to means depending upon the United States alone." 
The United States required more than a settlement of the Chesa- 
peake incident. "As a security for the future, the entire abolition 
of impressment from vessels under the flag of the United States 
[not merely from warships] ... is also made an indispensable 
part of the satisfaction" demanded. Madison directed Monroe to 
insist upon this great surrender without even offering, at least 
initially, any compensatory regulations to discourage the enlist- 
ment of British seamen in American ships. 15 