

27 Adams to Ezekiel Bacon, Dec. 21, 1808, Adams Family MSS (microfilm), 
Massachusetts Historical Society, Vol. CXXXV. 

151 



EMBARGO 

to protect American property. Whether peace or war impended, 
under existing circumstances "it-would be the greatest folly for the 
Americans to sport their property between the contending powers 
of Europe.'* 28 Furthermore, by depriving the belligerents of 
American merchantmen as targets, an embargo "saves us the neces- 
sity of making their capture the cause of immediate war." In time, 
political developments or the growth of "some sense of moral 
duty" might change the whole equation. If not, the President by 
no means intended to maintain terrapin habits forever, wise though 
a temporary withdrawal into the shell might be. "The alternative," 
he said, "was that or war. for a certain length of time I think the 
embargo is a less evil than war, but after a certain time it will not 
be so. if peace should not take place in Europe, & if both France and 
England should refuse to exempt us from their decrees & orders, as 
we shall strenuously urge, it will remain for Congress ... to say 
at what moment it will become preferable for us to meet war." 29 
The President, through indecision and weakness, later permitted a 
policy initiated as a temporary precaution to become a semiperma- 
nent institution. 

Summarizing all the arguments, but giving priority to the pre- 
cautionary aspect, the National Intelligencer stated: 

The ocean presents a field where no harvest is to be reaped but that of 
danger, of spoliation and of disgrace. 

Under such circumstances the best to be done is what has been done ; a 
dignified retirement within ourselves. . . . 

It is singularly fortunate that an embargo, whilst it guards our essential 
resources, will have the collateral effect of making it the interests of all 
nations to change the system which has driven our commerce from the 



ocean. 30 



As a short-run insulation from danger, the embargo could be justi- 
fied. If maintained for long it became a craven surrender to Euro- 
pean edicts. As time went on, Republican emphasis shifted from 

^Independent Chronicle, Nov. 12, 1807. 

29 Jefferson to John Taylor, Jan. 6, 1808, Jefferson MSSj Jefferson to Major 
Joseph Eggleston, March 7, 1808, ibid. 

30 Dec. 23, 1807. 

152 



EMBARGO 

"dignified retirement" to the originally collateral aim of coercion., 
a more positive course but also one open to the pragmatic test of 
success or failure. 

On December 17, 1807, Jefferson convened his Cabinet to dis- 
cuss an embargo message, perhaps, as John Quincy Adams later 
stated, after conversations with congressional leaders had convinced 
him that a declaration of war could, not be obtained. The ministers 
unanimously agreed to request a law forbidding the departure of 
all ships, American and foreign, and the Attorney General trans- 
mitted a resolution in this sense to a member of the House for 
introduction. Overnight Albert Gallatin came to the conclusion 
that the decision had been too "hastily adopted on the first view of 
our foreign intelligence, 55 particularly newspaper accounts of the 
November orders. He urged the President to eliminate controls on 
foreign ships, fearing retaliation against far more numerous Amer- 
ican vessels abroad, and to recommend a definite term for the 
embargo, for, said the Secretary, a l prefer war to permanent em- 
bargo." At a second cabinet meeting Gallatin's first suggestion was 
adopted, his second refused. In the afternoon Jefferson sent to 
Congress an extremely short message suggesting an embargo on 
American ships and goods and, more elliptically, war preparations. 
With the message Jefferson transmitted the British proclamation 
on impressment and Champagny's declaration that the Berlin 
Decree would be enforced, but at Madison's urging the President 
said nothing of impending British orders. At the Secretary's sug- 
gestion, too, the President specifically recommended an embargo 
instead of simply calling the possibility to Congress' attention. 31 