

As in the Senate, Jefferson's message was immediately followed 
by introduction of a bill. Randolph, seeking the lead as usual, 
quarreled with Benjamin Crowninshield for this honor, and for 
a time the House engaged in vapid debate. Then the Senate bill 
arrived. The House, setting aside its own version, rushed through 
the first two readings of the new bill. Here, too, debates are un- 
reported, but enough opposition developed so that action could 
not be completed. The next day the House devoted an entire ses- 
sion to the Embargo, and John Randolph vehemently opposed it, 
perhaps shifting his ground because members emphasized the 
coercive rather than the precautionary purpose which he alone 
approved. Timothy Pickering even thought it might be possible 
to defeat the bill, but over the Sunday recess the administration 
brought pressure to bear upon Republican legislators. On Monday 
a solid phalanx of eighty Republicans overwhelmed various mis- 
chievous motions, and John Randolph failed to turned the tide 
with a tearful address not at all in his usual hectoring style. At 
eleven in the evening the House approved the bill by almost two 
to one. The forty-two opponents, said the President, were made 
up of "one half Federalists, % of the little band [Randolph and 
his coterie] , the other fourth of republicans happening to take up 
mistaken views of the subject." 35 Some of these Republicans, who 
objected only to Jefferson's furtive methods and his timing, soon 
supported the system, particularly after the mission of George H. 
Rose demonstrated that Britain spurned concession. Others drifted 
in the direction of Federalism without adopting its name. The 
defection of one Republican out of five, despite alarming news 
from Europe and heavy administration pressure, should have 

35 Annals , loth Cong., ist sess,, pp. 1216-1228; Pickering to Timothy Williams, 
Dec. 21, 1807, Timothy Pickering MSS, Massachusetts Historical Society, Vol. 
XXXVIII; Taggart to Rev. John Taylor, Dec. 22, 1807, George H. Haynes, ed, 
"Letters of Samuel Taggart, Representative in Congress, 1803-1 8 14," American 
Antiquarian Society, Proceedings, n.s., XXXIII (1923), 225; Jefferson to Thomas 
M. Randolph, Dec. 22, 1807, Jefferson MSS. 

155 



EMBARGO 

warned the administration that the new policy would seriously 
challenge its command of the loyalties of the American people. 

At three in the afternoon the next day, December 22, 1807, 
Thomas Jefferson signed the Embargo Act. The act was scarcely 
more than a sketch of policy. Republicans disagreed as to its wis- 
dom or, if they supported it, as to its true purpose. Some, like 
Macon, considered it valuable for its coercive effect ; others, like 
Wilson C. Nicholas, endorsed it as a means to save American 
property. Being only vaguely understood, and with no terminal 
date indicated, the Embargo could appeal to many factions. Those 
who wanted war supported it as an indispensable prelude j those 
who wanted peace approved it either as an escape from harsher 
anti-British action or as a potentially powerful economic weapon 
that might bring England to her knees. Jefferson had secured his 
object, had pressured the Congress into passage of the act without 
revealing his own motives. But if he should fail either to advance 
to war or to secure British and French relaxation of the assault 
upon American commerce, the President's magnificent feat of 
legislative dexterity would turn to ashes in his mouth. 36 