

^Columbian Centinel (Boston), Jan. 21, 18095 Richardson, o$. cit. 9 I, 4.58. 
47 Annals, loth Cong., ist sess., pp. 1653-1657. 
48 Ibid., p. 2136 (D. R. Williams). 



EMBARGO 

continued with an enforcement act which forbade shipments to 
parts of the United States adjacent to foreign lands unless specifi- 
cally approved by the President and authorized collectors to take 
custody of any unusually large stocks in border communities. This 
act became law on the last day of the session of 1808. 

In the summer of 1808, after gathering much information dur- 
ing a visit to New York ? Gallatin wrote to the President that "if 
the embargo must be persisted in any longer," new legislation must 
be passed to "invest the Executive with the most arbitrary powers 
& sufficient force" to execute them. He suggested that not a single 
vessel be permitted to move without presidential approval, that 
collectors be permitted to seize goods "any where" and to remove 
rudders and rigging from any suspected vessels, and that "a little 
army" be collected along the Canadian frontier. These suggestions, 
perhaps designed as much to shock the President into a reconsider- 
ation of his policy as to make the Embargo effective, did not shake 
the Chief Executive, who replied, "I am satisfied with you that if 
the orders & decrees are not repealed, & a continuance of the em- 
bargo is preferred to war (which sentiment is universal here), 
Congress must legalize all means which may be necessary to obtain 
it's end." 49 

The fruit of such talk was the last of this series of acts, not passed 
until January, 1809. The act of 1809, passed over wild Federalist 
shrieks against tyranny, permitted anticipatory seizures, forbade 
the loading of ships without permission from federal officials, pro- 
vided for the arrest of goods traveling toward the border by road, 
required almost impossible proof of innocence from the owners of 
ships "blown off course" or "captured" while engaged in coastwise 
voyages, and authorized an increased maritime force and the use 
of militia to enforce the laws. This string of restrictions, which 
came too late to breathe effectiveness into the Embargo, did show 
the lengths to which Jeffersonians were prepared to go. It also 
clearly demonstrated the coercive purpose of the system, revealed 
the pervasiveness of violations, and turned the hitherto largely 

49 Gallatin to Jefferson, July 29, 1808, Jefferson MSSj Jefferson to Gallatin, Aug. 
ii, 1808, Gallatin MSS. 

164 



EMBARGO 

peaceable opposition of New England into nearly revolutionary 
remonstrance. Unwittingly, advocates of the Embargo had plunged 
a knife into its expiring body. All that now remained to be done 
was to concoct an alternative policy war or concealed surrender 
and total the losses and the gains of the great Jeffersonian experi- 
ment. 

Some argue that., in one sense at least, the Embargo was clear 
gain: America did not become involved in war. But did the Em- 
bargo preserve peace? Neither Britain nor France ever considered 
a declaration of war on the United States. War at American initia- 
tive was, to put it mildly, highly unlikely 5 the Embargo cannot be 
defended as a shrewdly applied Jeffersonian poultice which reduced 
congressional war fever. Had American ships continued at sea the 
resulting captures might conceivably have had to be considered 
a castts belli, it is true. The belligerents, however, seized less than 
i per cent of those ships permitted to sail during the life of the 
Embargo, and in any event for more than three years after repeal 
America did not make seizures an excuse for war. War immediately 
after the Chesapeake incident was possible, but by the time of the 
Embargo Act Jefferson had led his people farther from the brink 
than even he desired. The verdict, "not proved," must be passed 
upon the claim that the Embargo preserved peace. 