

As coercion, the Embargo obviously failed. Domestic opposition 
of course undermined its effectiveness, and Jefferson's enemies 
were the enemies of national policy determined by Congress. Still, 
such opposition might have been foreseen. As early as February, 
1808, Senator Nicholas' brother warned, "The success of it must 
depend greatly on the impression which will be made abroad as 
to it's continuance and I fear the clamour of the federalists and 
the under tone of Mr, Madison's opponents will give no very 
favorable idea of our fortitude or perseverance." Yet the intensity 
of opposition surprised Jefferson. Instead of preparing the way 
for a graceful withdrawal, he sought to make the Embargo effective 
by more stringent enforcement. The President tied American pres- 
tige to the Embargo's success as a means of extorting European 
concession, a very risky gamble indeed. John Randolph, expressing 

165 



EMBARGO 

for once the thoughts of many, commented: "If it had any opera- 
tion on the belligerents I could be content to bear its ruinous conse- 
quences, but in France & England it is equally disregarded." 50 

Napoleon regarded the Embargo complacently. The Royal 
Navy had already interdicted most transatlantic trade. As for the 
colonies, which lost an important source of supply. Napoleon did 
not particularly value the few remaining in French hands. At first 
the Emperor objected to the Embargo because it fell short of war 
with England. In the autumn he gave it his blessing, since it fitted 
in nicely with his Continental System. An official report, largely 
his own, stated: "The Americans, a people who owe their fortune, 
prosperity, and almost their existence to commerce, have given 
the example of a great and courageous sacrifice. They have for- 
bidden ... all commerce . . . rather than shamefully submit 
to the tribute which the English attempt to impose upon the navi- 
gators of all nations." A short time later, in a message opening 
the Corps Legislatif, Napoleon repeated the same theme. The 
American representative at Paris reported in August, 1808: "We 
have somewhat over-rated our means of coercing the two great 
belligerents to a course of justice. . . . Here it [the Embargo] 
is not felt, and in England ... it is forgotten. . . . The Em- 
peror would prefer to it, a war on our part with G.B., but would 
prefer it, to any state of things, except that of a war." 51 

In Britain, too, the effect was far less than Jefferson had hoped. 
Consul Lyman told the President, "Not all the expences and 
burthens of the war excite so much apprehension or complaint as 
the want of our commerce," and William Pinkney more moder- 
ately reported that "the Embargo pinches here." But George H. 
Rose, on a special mission to the United States, correctly concluded 
that the Embargo hurt America most, and even David M. Erskine, 
the regular minister, who was more sympathetic to the United 

50 John Nicholas to Nicholas, Feb. 8, 1808, Nicholas MSSj Randolph to Nicholson, 
Nov. 13, 1808, Joseph H. Nicholson MSS, Library of Congress. 