

The Embargo fell upon the people as a bewildering shock. "We 
are all much alarmed by the Embargo laid on," a Richmond cor- 
respondent wrote Nicholas, "not knowing how to judge of its 
probable duration, nor the real object for which the measure has 
been resorted to." Debate in both houses during the winter failed 
to clarify either of these points. Although urged to issue a public 
manifesto justifying the Embargo, perhaps rallying the nation be- 
hind a clearly defined policy, the administration for months de- 
clined to do so. In August, 1808, Jefferson finally composed a 
form letter to be sent to towns petitioning against the Embargo (he 
soon had to ask the publisher of the National Intelligencer to print 
150 copies to save interminable copying). His letter, even then, was 
hardly revealing. 37 

As a result, unscrupulous Federalists had a field day. They of 

36 This verdict coincides, except in shading, with the excoriation of Jefferson in 
Henry Adams, History, IV, 176177. 

37 Thomas Rutherford to Nicholas, Dec. 27, 1807, Wilson Gary Nicholas MSS, 

Library of Congress; Jefferson to , Aug. 26, 1808 (form letter), Jefferson 

MSSj Jefferson to Samuel H. Smith, Sept. 9, 1808, ibid. 

156 



EMBARGO 

course emphasized the hardships of withdrawal from the ocean, 
sometimes forecast that Britain would reply with war, and scoffed 
at the presumed effectiveness of pressure upon England, which, 
they pointed out, would receive a virtual monopoly of world ship- 
ping as compensation for loss of the American market. The most 
often reiterated argument was the totally fallacious one that Jef- 
ferson and his followers, through either fear or sympathy, had 
obeyed Napoleonic orders. Federalists pointed out that the new 
law hit Britain far more than France and reminded the people that 
a request for Minister Armstrong's correspondence from Paris had 
been refused during the Embargo debate j surely, they cried, some- 
thing sinister lay behind these facts. So shrill did the accusations 
of French influence become, and so touchy were the Republicans, 
that in March Congressman Campbell challenged a persistent 
tormenter, Barent Gardenier, to a duel in which he seriously 
wounded the New York congressman. 

Campbell's pistol silenced only one critic. For the most part 
Republicans had to depend upon the less decisive weapon of news- 
paper editorials. Editors concentrated on two themes, urging the 
nation to trust a beloved president and, particularly after official 
news of the November orders fell like a sledge hammer upon 
Anglophiles, claiming that the Embargo "dashed the philter of 
pillage from the lips of rapine." In the Aurora, Duane brought 
both themes together when he posed the rhetorical question: 
"Americans, have you not cause to revere the man whose policy 
has not only secured you by wise measures from war for three years 
past, but who has rescued you by a timely and effective measure of 
energy and prudence, from the fangs of piratical depredation?" 
Only rarely did administration journals emphasize the Embargo's 
coercive aspects, and they definitely denied that a desire to strike 
England more than France had played any part in passage of the 
measure. "Being one intended . . . chiefly for our own security, 
even if it should have an unequal operation on the different powers 
of Europe, should we," the National Intelligencer asked, "be 
under the less obligation to adopt it?" a8 In the spring Jefferson 