

/The Senate rushed the Embargo through in one afternoon. On 
receipt of the message a committee headed by Samuel Smith with- 
drew to consider the draft, already prepared, of a bill. The four 
Republican members had a brief, spirited struggle with John 
Quincy Adams. Adams objected to the paucity of information 

31 Adams, "Reply to the Appeal of Massachusetts Federalists," n.d., Henry Adams, 
ed., Documents Relating to New-England Federalism (Boston, 1877), p. 1885 
Gallatin to Jefferson, Dec. 18, 1807, JefTerson MSS; Richardson, o$. cit., I, 4335 
Brant, o<p. cit., pp. 394395; Raymond Walters, Jr., Albert Gallatin (New York, 
*957)> PP- 198-199- 

153 



EMBARGO 

Jefferson provided, as well as to the bill's vagueness. In reply 
Senator Smith brought forward every argument he could think 
of, in particular urging faith in Jefferson and asserting that an 
embargo would give the administration an invaluable weapon in 
negotiations with a special British envoy about to arrive. Incom- 
pletely satisfied by Smith's arguments, the Massachusetts inde- 
pendent nevertheless consented to endorse the Embargo, to aid 
the President and to save commerce from loss. He had no faith in 
it as more than a short-term device and in February, 1 808, called 
foj/its repeal. 32 

Having secured unanimity within the committee, Smith re- 
pdrted the bilL/By a narrow margin the Senate agreed to suspend 
the rules requiring three readings on separate days, then turned 
to a brief, unreported debate on the bill's merits. The-^ill passed 
by a vote of twenty-two to six, with six senators absent.; 3 Among 
the minority were two Republicans, William Maclay ID? Pennsyl- 
vania and William H. Crawford of Georgia, who objected not 
to the Embargo but to overly precipitate action. Four or five hours 
after Jefferson recommended an embargo, the Senate had done 
his bidding. 

The House of Representatives proved slightly more recalci- 
trant, as much from indecision, weakness, and lack of leadership 
as from opposition to the President. Few people respected the 
Tenth Congress, for, as Senator Adams observed, the legislators 
repeatedly showed "great embarrassment, alarm, anxiety, and 
confusion of mind, but no preparation for any measure of vigor, 
and an obvious strong disposition to yield all that Great Britain 
may require, to preserve peace, under a thin external show of dig- 
nity and bravery." 3 * Republican unity had been undermined by 
a bitter battle to choose a successor to Nathaniel Macon as speaker. 
Joseph B. Varnum of Massachusetts triumphed by the thin mar- 
gin of one vote and immediately rewarded his supporters with 

32 Entry of Dec. 18, 1807, Charles F. Adams, ed., Memoirs of John Qmncy 

Adams (12 vols.j Philadelphia, 18741877), I, 4915 Stephen R. Bradley to , 

Sept. 21, 1824, Ford, op. cit., Ill, i68n-i69n. 

33 Annals, loth Cong., ist sess., pp. 50-51. 

34 Entry of Nov. 17, 1807, Charles F. Adams, op. cit., I, 476. 

154 



EMBARGO 

choice committee assignments. At Embargo time and later, internal 
frictions weakened the Republican majority's will, even if not 
enough to bestow success upon the Federalists. 