

In New York the Embargo destroyed ex-Governor Morgan 
Lewis' hopes of regaining his post in a three-cornered fight with 
Clintonians and Federalists. At state elections in April and May, 
1808, the Federalists made surprising gains at the expense of 
both rival factions j in 1809 they recaptured the New York legis- 
lature for the first time in a decade. In Jefferson's home state, senti- 
ment stirred in the Tidewater and the back country, and for the 
first time in many years the Federalists sent a strong minority to 
the legislature at Richmond. The Republicans actually lost only 
a few states, partly because many elections took place before Amer- 
icans felt the full impact of the Embargo. However, the rising 
Federalist vote, the equivocal Republicanism of many congress- 
men who saved their seats, and the defeatism of leaders like Sulli- 
van boded ill for the administration. 

If the Embargo was considered as a prelude to war, a precaution, 
or shock treatment of European psyches Jefferson talked of all 
these occasional violations did not much matter. In any event 
all risk would be borne by the transgressing shipowner. As the 
coercive emphasis increased in the spring of 1808, becoming the 

40 Jefferson to Gallatin, Aug. 19, 1808, Gallatin MSS. 

159 



EMBARGO 

only possible excuse for the continuation of a policy that had 
demonstrably failed in its other aims, airtight enforcement of the 
Embargo assumed new importance. The President devoted most 
of the energies of his last year in office to this task. Although Albert 
Gallatin found the entire policy distasteful, he labored with all 
his might to make the Embargo work, and Treasury agents were by 
far the most active body thrown into the fray. The Navy Depart- 
ment provided less help, for Robert Smith sent his few ships cruis- 
ing in often uncoordinated fashion along the coast, once proposed 
a gallivanting squadron cruise to the Caribbean (nominally to 
search out Embargo violators in more pleasant climes), criticized 
the whole scheme on semipublic occasions, and even encouraged 
the false belief that he himself had opposed it at cabinet meetings 
in December, 1807. 

The success of enforcement fluctuated wildly. In the interval 
between first news of the Embargo and the establishment of a 
regulatory system, American shipowners hastily dispatched hun- 
dreds of vessels to sea. With the connivance of the collector at 
New Orleans, forty-two ships escaped from that port alone. Most 
vessels sailing at this time did not return to American waters during 
the life of the Embargo. After this outburst the Embargo was com- 
paratively well enforced for some months, as the American people 
waited to see what lay in store for them. During the summer of 
1808 land traffic across the Canadian border, not sailings from the 
Atlantic coast, posed the chief problem. A few outbursts of law- 
lessness occurred in the South, some transgressions in Chesapeake 
Bay and at New York, and substantially more frequent violations 
in New England. Only at the end of the year, as it became apparent 
that not war but a long embargo was most likely, and as the politi- 
cal climate became more and more hostile to the whole system, 
did there arise the last great surge of criminality which destroyed 
the Embargo and shook its sponsor's reputation. By the time the 
Embargo became "a mere brtttum folmen" as Matthew Carey 
called it, 41 it had already failed as a measure of rapid coercion. 