

The most notorious violations took place among vessels nomi- 

41 Matthew Carey, The Olive Branch, or Faults on Both Sides, Federal and 
Democratic ($d ed.; Boston, 1815), p. 37. 

160 



EMBARGO 

nally engaged in coasting trade. Areas contiguous to British pos- 
sessions developed an unaccountable demand for goods of all sorts, 
a high proportion of which slipped across the border by land or 
water. Nineteen thousand barrels of flour reached Passamaquoddy 
Bay, for example, in the first week of May. Many ships found 
themselves forced by often imaginary bad weather or constructed 
circumstance to run to foreign ports for safety, sometimes all the 
way across the Atlantic. Benjamin Crowninshield once reported 
two incidents of this sort to Gallatin. The Commerce, bound nomi- 
nally from Massachusetts to New Orleans, called at Havana on 
the fairly feeble excuse that her water casks were exhausted j while 
in Cuba, she took on a cargo of sugar. The captain of the Hope, on 
the same course, put in at Havana because of damage to his main- 
mast, which he claimed had been split by lightning, although 
Crowninshield sardonically noted that one of the crew had died 
at Havana, apparently from wounds suffered when he had set off 
a powder charge in the mast. 42 Against this sort of evasion, the 
administration fought back. It required heavy bonds for good 
behavior, and it established a system of licenses limiting the amount 
of provisions that could be shipped to any particular state. State 
governors issued the licenses, and Sullivan, for one, proved so 
liberal that the entire project became ludicrous. 

Until autumn, at least, the collateral effects of direct violations 
counted for more than any relief they gave Britain and France. 
The Embargo pitted American citizens against one another. The 
government marched troops to the frontiers, sent gunboats and 
frigates scurrying up and down the coast, passed law after law and 
issued directive after directive. And yet violations continued. As 
a result many Americans came to believe the Republicans had 
adopted Federalist methods without having the capacity to execute 
them, while at the same time the violations strengthened the con- 
viction of America's enemies abroad that her republican form of 
government made any forceful policy impossible. Gallatin, who 
saw this keenly, wrote in dismay, "I had rather encounter war itself 
than to display our impotence to enforce our laws.' 5 43 

42 Benjamin Crowninshield to Gallatin, Sept. 23, 1808, Gallatin MSS. 

43 Gallatin to Madison, Sept. 9, 1808, Rives Collection. 

161 



EMBARGO 

In addition to direct violations, important loopholes drained 
the system of effectiveness. While the Embargo anesthetized 
American shipping and exports, it did not affect foreign ships or 
goods. Although the Nonimportation Act banned certain British 
goods, effective application of this law did not begin until the 
spring of 1808, and in any event the list of forbidden items was 
comparatively limited. Throughout the Embargo large numbers 
of British ships arrived to sell cargoes of English wares, a circum- 
stance that must have made the Embargo even more galling to 
the owners of vessels tied up at the wharves. Foreign ships had to 
leave in ballast (or break the law, as many did), and under normal 
circumstances the voyages would have been unprofitable, but in 
the absence of American competition they could be made to pay. 
For some unfathomable reason the administration never secured a 
law forbidding the exportation of specie, so cash sale was still pos- 
sible. Consequently, although imports and arrivals from Britain 
fell off, they by no means ceased. Arrivals at Philadelphia, for 
example, though dropping by 50 per cent from 1807 to 1808, still 
continued at a rate about three-quarters of the average of preceding 
years. Just before learning of repeal of the Embargo, an experi- 
enced British civil servant wrote: "Every Article is permitted to 
enter the American ports as usual. . . . The Americans very good 
naturedly allow us openly to supply their wants, but will not supply 
ours in return, except by smuggling." 44 