

38 Scioto Gazette, July 19, 1808, quoted in Beverley W. Bond, The Civilization 
of the Old. Northwest (New York, 1934), p. 270; Aurora (Philadelphia), Jan. 21, 

157 



EMBARGO 

frequently wrote of the Embargo as a temporary measure. But in 
the summer of 1 808 he began to talk of it as a permanent policy and 
a weapon of coercion. 

Successful coercion required the almost unanimous support of 
the American people, both to enforce self-denial and make it clear 
to Britain that the United States did not flinch. Here Jefferson was 
disappointed, for opposition to his policy proved far deeper than 
he anticipated, thanks primarily to the pressure of economic dis- 
tress and a broad willingness to believe national honor no less 
sullied by one-sided trade than by head-in-the-sand withdrawal. 
All over the country, even in Jeffersonian strongholds, the Hydras 
of opposition arose. In August, from a vantage point at New York, 
Gallatin warned his chief that only Virginia, South Carolina, 
Georgia, and the nearly voteless West could be considered safe. 
The impending national election, he said, might well go against 
the Republicans if the Embargo continued. A month later the Secre- 
tary of the Treasury more accurately warned that, even if candi- 
dates bearing the Republican label formed a majority in the next 
Congress, the keystone of Republican policy would almost cer- 
tainly be overthrown, since "there is not patriotism & union suffi- 
cient to bear with patience, where there is no stimulus." 39 In the 
election, using the Embargo as almost their only issue, Federalists 
tripled their electoral vote of 1804 and doubled their share of the 
House of Representatives. 

Political discontent penetrated most deeply in Massachusetts, 
only recently redeemed from Federalism. Anglophilia ran deep in 
the Bay State, as did distrust of Virginia leadership, and many 
Yankees preferred the risks of wartime trade to embargo. Although 
Governor Sullivan won reelection by a narrow margin, at April 
elections the Federalists recaptured the General Court. The new 
legislature promptly elected, well ahead of time, a replacement for 
John Quincy Adams, and Adams, who knew at the time that his 

18085 National Intelligencer, Jan. 4, 1808. For a slightly different conclusion see 
Lawrence S. Kaplan, "Jefferson, the Napoleonic Wars, and the Balance of Power," 
William and Mary Quarterly, 3d Series, XIV (1957), 200-202. 

39 Gallatin to Jefferson, Aug. 5, 1808, Jefferson MSSj Gallatin to Madison, Sept. 
9, 1808, Rives Collection. 

158 



EMBARGO 

vote for the Embargo would probably destroy him politically, 
equally promptly resigned from the Senate. By summer Governor 
Sullivan's will had begun to erode, along with that of many loyal 
Republicans, and Jefferson came to fear an outbreak of rebellion, 
although in August he was confident that his own supporters and 
"that portion of the federalists who . . . would not court mob- 
law would crush it in embryo." 40 It would be nonsense to suggest 
that all Massachusetts rallied to Federalism. Marblehead and 
Salem, for example, remained Republican, and in the latter town 
Joseph Story and William Gray, the state's most prominent ship- 
owner who actually shifted to Republicanism in 1 808, successfully 
led a fight against resolutions denouncing the Embargo. Ezekiel 
Bacon and Henry Dearborn assured Gallatin that Federalist suc- 
cesses were only hard won and perhaps temporary. Nevertheless, 
the Embargo resuscitated Massachusetts Federalism. This rebirth 
encouraged England to resist American claims for redress. 