

Six hundred American vessels sailed for foreign ports with the 
permission of their government. Early in 1808, as Jefferson com- 
plained, "the H. of R. were surprised into the insertion [in a sup- 
plementary act] of an insidious clause permitting any merchant 
having property abroad, on proving it to the executive, to send a 
ship for it." 45 Presumably because he desperately needed other 
powers granted by the bill, the President accepted this rider. The 
clause encouraged merchants to make perjured declarations which 
would return a handsome profit, and the administration interpreted 

44 Edward G. Lutwyche to Sheffield, Feb. 25, x8o9, Earl of Sheffield MSS, Wil- 
liam L. Clements Library. See also Herbert Heaton, "Non-Importation, 1806-181 a," 
Journal of Economic History, I (1941), 187. 

45 Jefferson to Cabell, March 13, 1808, Jefferson MSS. 



EMBARGO 

the law to mean that merchants might export American goods to 
exchange for foreign wares contracted for but not paid for prior 
to December, 1 807. Jefferson and Gallatin did confine most of the 
operation of this clause to goods from the West Indies rather than 
from Europe. Nevertheless, it had serious results. In a report 
covering only the period to the end of September, the President 
acknowledged that 594 vessels totaling some 87,000 tons had re- 
ceived permission to sail 5 by December more than 400 of these 
ships had returned with cargoes which relieved the pressure upon 
British exporters. 46 Departures continued until January, 1 809, just 
before the entire system collapsed in ruins. 

The legislative history of the Embargo, which clearly shows the 
problems the administration had to face, also demonstrates the 
gradual rise to predominance of the coercive motive. Within a 
month after the original act, its deficiencies made necessary a sup- 
plementary law extending controls to the coasting trade, fisheries, 
and whaling, and establishing a complex system of bonds and 
penalties to give teeth to enforcement. In March Congress passed 
a second supplement. Its chief purpose was to outlaw exportation 
to Canada. Thus Congress demonstrated that the protection of ships 
and seamen and their withdrawal as a possible prelude to war were 
not the only motives for the Embargo system. In a speech that 
nearly got him expelled from the House, Barent Gardenier charged 
that the original act had been "a sly, cunning measure," designed 
to appear as a precautionary measure but really intended as the first 
shot in a campaign of pressure on Britain. 47 Actually, the Em- 
bargo's supporters appear not to have been so Machiavellian 5 
nobody proposed to follow embargo with war, and the emphasis 
therefore naturally shifted from precaution to coercion. 

When John Randolph twitted his opponents for having at- 
tempted "to cure the corns by cutting off the toes," a sturdy Repub- 
lican replied, "I will cut off the toes, feet, and head too, and perish 
with the whole nation rather than succumb." 48 Autoamputation 