

63 Adams to Giles, Nov. 15, 1808, Ford, of. dt., Ill, 247. 

173 



EMBARGO 

and England." 64 The tactical moment for pressure had passed. 
Only a doctrinaire pacifist or an unreasoning Anglophile, both of 
which Jefferson definitely was not, could take unalloyed pleasure 
frojp.-this. 

The Embargo had other unfortunate aspects. It provided an 
excuse for ineffective military preparations when force was the 
only language the world understood. According to Senator Adams, 
the President himself passed word that arming was unnecessary. 65 
In any event, after lengthy debates in which members loudly pro- 
claimed their willingness to make any sacrifice for the nation, Con- 
gress passed no military bills of any consequence. Second, the Em- 
bargo made Europe believe that commercial coercion could be 
scorned because it would harm the United States more than those 
against whom it was wielded. Consequently, the British proved 
far less willing to compromise in the face of renewed economic 
threats under Madison. Then, too, the policy Jefferson followed 
during his last year as president convinced Britain of America's 
essential cowardice. After the Leopards broadsides, the nation 
called for war and the administration insisted that Britain must 
drop impressment. In December the United States settled for an 
embargo, and the next month, without even waiting to see how 
this measure would affect England, the administration told Erskine 
and then the special envoy, George H. Rose, that the Chesapeake 
affair could be settled even if Britain did not agree to cease im- 
pressing seamen. 66 

Most important of all, instead of waiting for the Embargo to 
force British overtures, the Republicans openly sought an escape 
from their own Frankenstein. a l take it to be an universal opinion," 
Jefferson wrote, "that war will become preferable to a continuance 
of the embargo after a certain time." To avoid this catastrophe 
Jefferson appealed to the reason and the cupidity of the belliger- 
ents. In the middle of April, 1808, a report presented by Senator 

64 Turreau #7, $xo> #14 to Minister of Foreign Relations, Jan, 30, April 24, 
May 20, 1808, AAE, CP, E-U, Vol. LXL 

6 Entry of March 29, 1808, Charles F. Adams, op, cit^ I, 524. 

66 Erskine #z to Canning, Jan. 28, 1808, FO 5/575 Rose #4 to Canning, Jan. 18, 
1808, FO 5/56. 

174 



EMBARGO 

Anderson but actually drawn by the Secretary of State recom- 
mended that the President be given the power to suspend the Em- 
bargo if conditions so warranted. 67 Within a few days this recom- 
mendation became law. 

Madison quickly instructed Pinkney and Armstrong to use this 
law as a lever at London and Paris and himself interviewed 
Erskine. Without entirely giving away American policy, upon 
which indeed the Cabinet did not settle for another month, he 
nevertheless made the Englishman understand that the United 
States would not insist upon repeal of the order of January, 1 807, 
but, on the other hand, would not require France to suspend the 
municipal regulations forbidding the landing of British goods even 
when carried in neutral ships. Otherwise the offers were roughly 
similar: if either power ended actions against American commerce 
while its rival remained obdurate, the United States would in turn 
suspend the Embargo in favor of the conceding power and turn a 
firm face toward the other. 68 