

77 Adams to Charles F. Adams, Dec, 2, 1828, Samuel F. Bemis, John Quincy 
Adams and the Foundations of American Foreign Policy (New York, 1949), p. 15 on j 
Jefferson to Dearborn, July 16, 1810, Lipscomb and Bergh, of. aA, XII, 398-4005 
Jefferson to Thomas M, Randolph, Jan. 2, 1809, ibid., XVIII, 258-259. 

78 Story to Joseph White, Jr., Jan. 4, 1809, William W. Story, Life and Letters of 
Josef h Story (Boston, 1851;, pp, 174-1755 Joseph Story, "Autobiography," ibid*, 
pp. 183-1865 Story to Edward Everett, n.d. ibid., p. 187. For the information re- 
ceived from Massachusetts by Story at this time, see particularly the letters of Joseph 
White, Jr., in the Joseph Story MSS, Library of Congress, 

1 80 



EMBARGO 

Nathaniel Macon, Speaker Varnum, and Madison's brother-in- 
law, James G. Jackson, desired to continue it, but these men found 
few allies. With only two dissenting votes (one was Gardenier's), 
the House endorsed Campbell's Report, a ringing but meaningless 
declaration of unwillingness to submit to foreign aggressions. Con- 
gress passed the Enforcement Act, but more for reasons of con- 
sistency than for devotion to the system, which few people expected 
to last beyond the spring. The visible confusion and longwinded- 
ness of legislators caused Ezekiel Bacon to observe that the debates 
on the Embargo "might justly be esteemed not the least amongst 
those many inconveniences which were imputed to it." Most con- 
gressmen, wanting to get rid of the Embargo, sought an escape that 
would not dishonor them. The search was difficult because most 
of them refused to consider the logical alternative, war. At the end 
of 1808 Gallatin wrote disgustedly: "A majority will not adhere 
to the embargo much longer, and if war be not speedily determined 
on, submission will soon ensue." 7d 

As always, the Secretary of the Treasury had a keen eye for 
congressional currents. On January 24 Wilson C. Nicholas at- 
tempted to salvage something from the impending wreck by mov- 
ing that forcible resistance should, at a date to be fixed by Congress, 
replace the Embargo. He had always believed, Nicholas said, that 
"when the embargo failed, we must resort to the valor and patriot- 
ism of our citizens. Sir, we have too much reason to believe that 
the moment is at hand when nothing else can extricate us from 
our difficulties." Nicholas and others close to the administration 
proposed June I as the date of transformation. A majority was 
unwilling to wait that long, and more than half the Republicans 
joined the Federalists in rejecting it. In a last-ditch effort to save 
the Embargo, George Troup then moved to shelve the entire 
subject, but only twenty-five members voted with him. The House 
inserted March 4, fittingly enough the terminus of Jefferson's 
term, as the date of repeal. Next, it approved the repeal resolution 

79 Annals , loth Cong:., id sess., $assim; Varnum to Eustis, Nov. 19, 1808, Eustis 
MSSj Gallatin to Nicholson, Dec, 29, 1808, Adams, Gallatin, p. 384. 