

The British West Indies proved less vulnerable to American 
pressure than expected. Prices of course rose sharply. Flour jumped 
from $7 to $22 a barrel when news of the Embargo arrived, and 
by fall reached $40. Although the Embargo worked comparatively 
efficiently in breaking up trade with English colonies, many ships 
that sailed to get goods "already owned" in the Caribbean carried 
grain and flour to exchange for them. The British government 
mobilized alternative sources of supply and quintupled its exports 
of flour to the colonies. Jamaica received just about half the normal 
supply in 1808, and this, though causing severe hardship and elim- 
inating reserve supplies, enabled life to continue. Early in the life 
of the Embargo, Erskine urged his government to show "the 
People of this Country that the Threat to starve His Majesty's 
Islands in the West Indies, is as vain as it is illiberal and disgust- 
ing." Canning, Perceval, and company were happy to oblige. 57 

This is not to say that the British government made no efforts 
to encourage violation of the Embargo. As early as March, 1808, 
Spencer Perceval proposed only slightly disguised inducements to 
American lawbreakers, but Canning and Castlereagh briefly dis- 
suaded him with the argument that "the Embargo . . . seems to 
be working so well for us without our interference, that ... no 

66 Louis M. Sears, Jefferson and the Embargo (Durham, 1927), pp. 284-285$ 
Heckscher, of. cit., pp. 174175, 245$ Barclay to Admiral John B. Warren, private, 
Sept. 3, 1808, George L. Rives, ed,, Selections from the Correspondence of Thomas 
Barclay (New York, 1894), p. 283. 

157 Galpin, of. cit^ pp. 91-945 Monthly Review; or Literary Journal (London), 
LIX (1809), 1735 Erskine #20 to Canning, June 4, 1808, FO 5/57. 

169 



EMBARGO 

new step should be taken." In April an Order in Council approved 
neutral trade to the West Indies, even by ships without papers, and 
also promised that ships engaged in trade approved by Britain 
would be exempt from seizure even if war should break out. Al- 
though phrased in general terms, this order obviously applied ex- 
clusively to violators of the American Embargo. William Pinkney 
considered it "a sneer upon our honor, national and individual," 
and the Secretary of State, with that hyperbole he favored in diplo- 
matic correspondence, agreed that a "more extraordinary and dis- 
honorable experiment is perhaps not to be found in the annals of 
modern transactions." Nevertheless the policy continued. Like the 
local authorities' cynical opening of Halifax to American ships, 
it tempted shipowners to send their vessels to sea whenever they 
could evade Gallatin's agents. 58 These British expedients reflected 
a political desire to speed Republican self-destruction at least as 
much as a hope to obtain needed supplies. 

The Embargo, then, failed as an instrument of coercion, al- 
though its continuation a few months longer might have allowed 
the United States to escape with honor, for early in 1809 the Brit- 
ish government began to show interest in the restoration of trade. 
The Embargo's failure was obvious by the fall of 1 808, before the 
onset of the moral, political, and economic rot that brought down 
the entire system in ruins. Events of the closing months were dra- 
matic and, for the nation as well as for Jefferson, tragic, but the 
President's failure predated that climax. He had woefully over- 
estimated British dependence upon American supplies, although 
the figures were at hand and even hurled in his face by Federalists. 
He had completely ignored the adaptability of British trade, al- 
though its transformations since the outbreak of war in 1792 ought 
to have been a warning. He had counted upon a rational reaction to 
pressure, although his own experiences in the American Revolu- 