

At the end of June Pinkney broached the subject with Canning. 
The Foreign Secretary at first contented himself with not un- 
friendly questions, but at their third meeting a month later he 
asked Pinkney to present his offer in writing. After a long delay 
during which Pinkney wrestled with various drafts of an official 
note, a fourth meeting was arranged at which the Secretary re- 
ceived Pinkney's note with cryptic vagueness. Canning then left 
town for a vacation, and when the American minister went to 
the Foreign Office to ferret out information he came away with a 
total blank. He noted uneasily that British spirits had been raised 
by American opposition to the Embargo, an influx of illegal cargoes 
from the United States, optimism about the Latin American mar- 
ket, and exhilarating news of Baylen and Vimeiro. 69 

67 Jefferson to Madison, March n, 1808, Lipscomb and Bergh, o$. dt., XII, 
ii 12 j Annals, roth Cong., ist sess., pp. 364368. 

68 Madison to Pinkney, April 30, 1808, Instructions, Vol. VI j Madison to Arm- 
strong, May 2, 1808, ibid.; Erskine to Canning, separate and confidential, April 26, 
1808, FO 5/5 7 j Erskine #17 to Canning, May 2, 1808, ibid. 

^ Pinkney to Madison, private, June 29, 1808, Despatches, Great Britain, Vol. XV 5 
Pinkney to Madison, Aug. 4, Sept. 6, 1808, ibid.; Pinkney to Madison, private, Sept. 
7, 1808, ibid.; Pinkney to Madison, private, Sept. 10, 1808, Rives Collection. 

175 



EMBARGO 

Canning's answer, finally produced on September 23, justified 
Pinkney's fears. The silent, respectful Foreign Secretary of earlier 
meetings was replaced by the more characteristic Canning. Britain, 
he said, unreservedly rejected the American offer, nor could she 
consent to any important modifications of her system until Napo- 
leon gave prior evidence of weakness by abandoning his decrees. 
If intended as coercion, Canning declared, the Embargo was un- 
just, for it should have been directed solely at France, the power 
whose maritime innovations had forced Britain to retaliate. If, on 
the other hand, "as it has been more generally represented by the 
Government of the United States," Canning continued with acutely 
unpleasant reference to Madison's disingenuous declarations, 

the Embargo is only to be considered as an innocent municipal Regulation, 
which affects none but the United States themselves, . . . His Majesty 
does not conceive that he has the right or the pretension to make any Com- 
plaint of it; and He has made none. But in this light there appears to be not 
only no Reciprocity but no assignable Relation, between the Repeal . . , 
of a Measure of voluntary Self-restriction, and the Surrender by His Majesty 
of his Right of Retaliation against his Enemies. 

This sneer was followed by arrogance. While denying that Britain 
hated the United States or was jealous of her prosperity, Canning 
demanded respect for English methods on the ground that "the 
Strength and Power of Great Britain are not for herself alone, but 
for the world." 70 The Savior stood forth against the Antichrist 
of the Tuileries. 