

Northerners and Southerners sometimes argued over the priority 
of suffering between their sections. Many complaints were po- 
litically motivated, aimed either at securing repeal of the Embargo 
or demonstrating the inanity of Jeff ersonianism. The United States 
was youthful and resilient 5 it could perhaps afford a year of 
privation. None of these things alters the essential fact that Jeffer- 
son had sacrificed the economic well-being of his country for a 
phantom, had asked superhuman self-denial from a nation that 
had perhaps been corrupted by prosperity. "We are almost the only 
sufferers," expostulated a Mary lander j "a chance of getting a liv- 
ing, is better than inevitable starvation" complained a Connecti- 
cut editor. 62 More and more Americans came to share these senti- 
ments, and economic reality supported them. 

Nor were economic losses the sole cost. The year of embargo 
destroyed national unity far more than two years of open warfare 
with Britain did later on. The nation was forced to fight political 
battles that had been all but settled before Jefferson's message of 

60 John Lambert, Travels through Canada, and the United States of North Amer- 
ica, in the Years 1806, 1^07, &f 1808 (sd ed.j 2 vols,; London, 1816), II, 214, 
294.5 James D. Phillips, "Jefferson's 'Wicked Tyrannical Embargo,'" New England 
Quarterly y XVIII (1:94.5), 4.725 entry of Aug. 12, 1808, The Diary of William 
Bentley, D.D. (4 vols.j Salem, 1911-1914), III, 3775 Warren to Wellesley Pole, 
Sept. 23, 1808, Adm 1/4985 Barclay to Captain Bromley, Feb. 15, 1808, Rives, 
op. cit. y p. 274. 

61 Caroline F. Ware, "The Effect of the American Embargo, 1807-1809, on the 
New England Cotton Industry," Quarterly Journal of Economics^ LX (1925-1926), 
672-688. 

62 Entry of Jan, 5, 1808, Diary of Bentley, III, 3775 William Patterson to Nich- 
olas, Dec. i, 1808, Nicholas MSSj Connecticut Courant (Hartford), Feb. 17, 1808. 

172 



EMBARGO 

December, 1807., Pickering, the Junto, and their cohorts verged 
toward sedition. John Quincy Adams, one of the victims, properly 
observed that "we have too many among us who, to say the least, 
are ready to let the rights of the country go, provided they can see 
their political opponents overwhelmed in the same ruin." ^ By 
stubbornly supporting a policy so harmful to the nation, so unlikely 
of success, and so conducive to the false charge of French influ- 
ence, the President at least acted the part of a catalytic agent in 
precipitating this poison. 

In the autumn of 1807 the United States had briefly enjoyed a 
particularly advantageous tactical position vis-a-vis England. The 
raft-borne negotiations at Tilsit had joined Prussia and Russia to 
Napoleon's Continental System, Junot controlled Portugal for 
his master, and by the Treaty of Fontainebleau Godoy committed 
Spain to a role as Napoleon's jackal. The attack upon Copenhagen 
drove Denmark to the French side. Not for the last time in her 
history, Britain faced a nearly united continent. At the same time, 
although the Emperor had begun to enforce the Berlin Decree 
against Americans, the balance of insult clearly lay with the Eng- 
lish, as far as the United States was concerned. Never again were 
conditions so favorable for the exertion of pressure, provided that 
pressure was effective and not merely self -immolating. Yet Jeffer- 
son turned to embargo, partly voluntarily and partly because he 
had too successfully dampened war sentiment after the Chesapeake 
affair. Within a few months the last remnants of willingness to 
endorse strong measures disappeared, American sentiment became 
muddied by Napoleonic insults, notably Champagny's cavalier 
treatment of Armstrong, the seizure and destruction of American 
ships, and particularly the Decree of Milan, which reached America 
early in 1808. In January Turreau fatuously reported that the 
nation was drifting toward war with Britain, but in May he had 
to admit that this analysis had been wrong and even claimed that 
he had never meant it. a A war with that Power would never obtain 
public assent," he stated, and the administration itself "intends, 
today more than ever, to stand equally balanced between France 