

71 Hansard, XII, 1 8 j Times (London) , Jan. ^3, 1 809 j Hansard, XII, 87, 800-801 j 
Courier, Feb. 20, 1809. 

72 Bathurst memorandum, July 29, 1808, FO 5/61. 

177 



EMBARGO 



talked alternately about strengthening the Embargo and replacing 
it with war, either against Britain or against both major belliger- 
ents. 73 Gallatin's position was even more complicated. Although 
formerly opposed to a permanent embargo, he now felt that the 
policy "having been adopted ought, if there was virtue enough in 
the eastern people, to be continued." Doubting Yankee virtue, he 
confessed himself baffled, and the papers from his pen reflect his 
uncertainty. He presented a report on means to make a permanent 
embargo effective, prepared for Congressman Campbell a mani- 
festo sternly demanding vigor but leaving open the choice between 
war and embargo, and capped his labors with a financial statement 
which seemed to show that the Treasury could stand the shock of 
war. These apparently contradictory productions are not incom- 
patible: Gallatin favored decisiveness, and he was prepared to sup- 
port any forthright policy. As he wrote to Jefferson, for himself 
and the Secretary of State, "considering the temper of the legisla- 
ture . . . , it would be eligible to point out to them some precise 
& distinct course. As to what that should be we may not all perfectly 
agree. ... I feel myself nearly as undetermined between en- 
forcing the embargo or war as I was on our last meetings. But I 
think that we must (or rather you must) decide the question 
absolutely, so that we may point out a decisive course either way 
to our friends." 7 * 

The prodding of his two chief lieutenants failed to stir Jefferson 
into action. The lame-duck President virtually abdicated, merely 
living out the days until he could depart for the quiet bliss of 
Monticello. a l think it fair to leave to those who are to act on 
them, the decisions they prefer, being to be myself but a spectator," 
he wrote. 75 Ideally speaking, the President would probably have 
preferred to continue the Embargo. As a compromise with political 
reality, he favored continuing it for a fixed period, with war to 

73 Madison to Pinkney, Nov. 9, 1808, Letters and Other Writings of Jam* 
Madison (Congressional ed.j 4 vols.j Philadelphia, 1865), II, 4255 Erskine #4,6 to 
Canning, Dec. 3, 1808, FO 5/58, 

74 Annals, loth Cong., ad sess., pp. 232-2365 undated memorandum, Gallatin MSS, 
Vol. XV 3 Henry Adams, Gallatin, pp. 412-413$ Gallatin to Jefferson, Nov. 15, 1808, 
Jefferson MSS. 

75 Jefferson to Levi Lincoln, Nov. 13, 1808, Jefferson MSS, 

178 



EMBARGO 

follow unless the European belligerents came to their senses in 
the interim. But he did not officially communicate these conclusions 
to Congress, and he allowed the usual channels of executive influ- 
ence to dry up. 

The situation in New England was chiefly responsible for Jeffer- 
son's paralysis. There, courts frequently refused to convict those 
charged with violations of the Embargo. Town after town voted 
memorials calling for repeal, and the General Court instructed 
Massachusetts congressmen to work for it. The Enforcement Act 
of January, 1809, provoked even more stentorian protest. The 
Massachusetts legislature, proclaiming its loyalty to the union 
"according to its original purpose, 7 ' violently attacked the exten- 
sion of federal power as a breach of the Constitution. "On such 
occasions," declared the Senate, "passive submission would, on the 
part of the people, be a breach of their allegiance, and on our part 
treachery and perjury," while the House proclaimed that "every- 
thing which freemen hold dear, is at stake." Governor Trumbull 
and the Connecticut legislature rallied behind their neighbors/ 6 