

Early in 1809, when both houses of Parliament weighed what 
Grenville called "the insulting and sophistical answer written by his 
Majesty's foreign secretary of state," the Foxite, Grenville, and 
Sidmouth factions attacked the government. The Times, although 
opining that "Mr. CANNING'S late Declaration was a keen and 
acutely reasoned State Paper," nevertheless found it "repulsive" 
because it seemed to condemn the country to a continuation of the 
endurance contest with France. Tierney, erroneously assuming that 

70 Canning to Pinkney, Sept. 23, 1808, enclosed in Pinkney to Madison, Sept. 24, 
1808, Despatches, Great Britain, Vol. XV. 

176 




THOMAS JEFFERSON 
Portrait by Rembrandt Pe-d& 




JAMES MONROE 

Portrait by Gilbert. Stuart 




WILLIAM PINKNEY 
Portrait by Charles B* King 




JAMES STEPHEN 
Portrait by John Linnell 




Courtesy, National Portrait Gallery, London 

SPENCER PERCEVAL 
Portrait by George JF, Joseph 



EMBARGO 

the anger provoked by Canning's letter would determine America 
to continue the Embargo, asked, a ls it not deplorable, sir, that for 
the sake of a few pointed periods, and well-turned sentences, any 
individual . . . should do such incalculable mischief . . . ?" 
But the government had no regrets. Canning scarcely deigned to 
discuss his American policy, Bathurst sarcastically suggested that 
the Grenville family knew more than most about the dangers of 
arousing America, and Liverpool limited himself to a brief state- 
ment that America "had shewed no disposition to act properly 
towards us," since while demanding repeal of the orders she had 
consented to continuance of France's municipal regulations ex- 
cluding British goods. Summing up the government's attitude 
toward "an offer on the part of America to abandon a measure 
which has been proved to be injurious to no power so much as her- 
self," the Courier said, "we cannot allow that necessity calls 
upon us to depart entirely from our policy towards an enemy, 
in order that America may be relieved from a burden which she 
pettishly placed upon her own shoulders." ri 

The act of April, 1808, passed even before coercion had had a 
fair trial, simply convinced the British that in a contest of wills 
Jefferson and his people would first give way. At the same time 
the mere existence of the Embargo made it highly unlikely that 
a prestige-conscious ministry would offer anything that might be 
considered a surrender. Bathurst, who believed the Orders in 
Council no longer desirable, felt that "repealing them in conse- 
quence of the American Embargo would be fatal to this Country, 
and to the friends of this Country in America." All he could sug- 
gest was some device like that tried by Fox in 1 8o6, 72 and this was 
too much for his colleagues, who did not make even a first tentative 
gesture until it was obvious that the Embargo was dying. 

Rebuffed in its pleas to Britain and France, challenged by in- 
creasing opposition at home, the administration eddied without 
purpose in the closing months of Jefferson's regime. Madison 