

These inflammatory protests, supported by a rising tide of 
Violence a mob at Gloucester destroyed a revenue cutter, for 
example caused many supporters of the Embargo, including 
Jefferson, to wonde^whether it could be continued without pro- 
voking civil war." A flood of inquiries from Washington descended 
upon John Quincy Adams, and Adams later came to believe that, 
through his replies warning of the danger, "I was the efficient 
cause of the substitution of the Nonintercourse for the Embargo, 
which I verily believe saved the country from a civil war." Jeffer- 
son himself fixed the responsibility on Joseph Story, wM> arrived 
somewhat tardily at Washington as replacement for a dead con- 
gressman. Story, a "pseudo-Republican," Jefferson said, convinced 
Ezekiel Bacon that only a repeal of the Embargo could prevent 
civil war, and Bacon in turn convinced his colleagues in the House. 
The President oversimplified. Newspaper reports, letters, and 

76 Walter W. Jennings, The American Embargo, 1807-18 og 3 University of Iowa 
Studies in the Social Sciences, Vol. VIII, no. i (Iowa City, 1921), pp. 123-1*4$ 
Herman V. Ames, ed., State Documents on Federal Relations (Philadelphia, 1906), 
pp. 26-36, 38-42- 

179 



EMBARGO 

travelers from Massachusetts undermined Republican wills. Many 
congressmen eagerly sought escape from the Embargo throughout 
the session, although Story may have added his warnings at an 
important moment. When the President implied, as he did, that 
he himself was immune from the panic that swept Capitol Hill, 
he toyed with the truth, for the virus infected him as much as any- 
one else. In an admission that some honor would have to be jetti- 
soned to keep the nation afloat, he wrote, "We must save the 
Union j but we wish to sacrifice as little as possible of the honor 
of the nation." 77 

Joseph Story's course was not quite so clear-cut as legend sug- 
gests. A reluctant supporter of the Embargo, he desired to give it 
a fair trial. On his arrival at Washington in December, 1808, he 
discovered with surprise that many Republicans wished to continue 
it indefinitely. On January 4 he wrote home to ask if the amazing 
rumors of incipient rebellion were true, and at about the same time 
he received letters informing him that the danger of open resistance 
had diminished. Story did indeed fear that the new enforcement 
act would rekindle the crisis in Massachusetts, and he believed it 
would be very hazardous to continue the Embargo for any sub- 
stantial length of time. He did not anticipate an immediate revolt, 
to say nothing of an effective one. Story's open break with his 
party, maintained despite the pressure of administration whips, 
contributed much more to defeat of the Embargo than his alleged 
retailing of rumors of approaching civil war. 78 

The political hazards of stubbornness, hazards made more obvi- 
ous by Story's disaffection, and the failure to secure European con- 
cessions doomed the Embargo. A few congressmen, among them 