

6 Morning Post (London), April 20, 1807; unsigned Rose memorandum, n.d., 
FO 95/5155 Courier (London), Nov. n, 1807. 

.188 



CANNING AND PERCEVAL 

to Monroe, whose departure actually was delayed, he offered a 
fulsome toast to Anglo-American friendship, and a little later he 
announced (although perhaps insincerely) that had Jefferson ap- 
proved the treaty the British government would have followed 
suit. 7 Otherwise, Canning was complacently silent on American 
affairs. 

When the note from Monroe and Pinkney forcibly recalled 
them to his attention, Canning's first reaction was to seek domestic 
political advantage. He asked Holland and Auckland the extent 
of the assurances on impressment the two Americans said they had 
received. The two lords informed him that, after the formal article 
was dropped, "it was our private wish to keep that question in a 
state of presumed negotiation to the close of the war; still however 
maintaining the unimpaired exercise of the right though carefully 
avoiding every abuse of it." 8 No political mileage could be made 
out of this, and Canning certainly did not intend to accept an article 
on impressment, to say nothing of other changes sought by the 
Americans. For the rest of the summer he allowed the matter to 
rest. 

Only in October, 1807, did Canning finally bestir himself, com- 
posing one of those unnecessarily obnoxious communications that 
so angered Americans. Some of the excuses for nonratification, he 
cuttingly observed, "are such as can be Matter of Discussion only 
between the American Government and its Commissioners ; since it 
is not for His Majesty to enquire, whether . . . the commissioners 
. . . have failed to conform themselves ... to the Instruc- 
tions of their Government." Canning declared that to renegotiate 
on the basis of the rejected treaty "is a Proposal wholly inadmis- 
sible." 9 If there was to be a tabula rasa, both sides of the slate must 
be wiped clean. The Times later criticized "the sententious manner 
in which Mr. CANNING dismisses the ... mutilated deed," 10 

7 Canning to Holland, April 2, 1807, FO 5/545 Times (London), April 28, 1807$ 
Courier, Aug. n, 1807. 

8 Holland and Auckland to Canning, private, July 28, 1807, Greenwich Hospital 
Miscellanea, Public Record Office, Adm 80/117. 

& Canning to Monroe and Pinkney, Oct. 22, 1807, FO 5/54- 
10 Feb. 24, 1808. 

189 



CANNING AND PERCEVAL 

but few in Britain suggested that the Foreign Secretary had erred 
other than in the form of his answer. 

Canning broke his silence only after the Chesapeake affair had 
obliterated the treaty as an issue. On July 24, 1807, Admiral 
Berkeley's dispatches reached Portsmouth, and a courier galloped 
to London with them. In the Lords that evening, Holland asked 
for information on "the subject of much discussion, . . . the re- 
port of hostilities having actually commenced." Hawkesbury put 
him off with a conventional expression of the government's desire 
for peace. Then, along with Eldon, who left the woolsack, he 
departed for an emergency cabinet session. 11 The ministers decided 
to disavow and recall Berkeley, but they later gave him a more 
important command. Although Britain offered compensation for 
the attack, Canning firmly refused to allow President Jefferson to 
connect this incident with the general problem of impressment. 