

It is possible that the Cabinet considered asserting a right to 
search some foreign warships. The Foreign Office archives contain 
a long, rather inconclusive memorandum by Sir John Nicholl on 
this question. Nicholl justified hostile action, perhaps general war 
and perhaps merely the use of force against a specified ship, toward 
a state sheltering deserters, but he inclined to the belief that the 
decision should be made by the government, not by the commander 
on the spot, "tho even of this there may be possible exception." An 
equally lengthy memorandum, probably by Perceval, reviews the 
arguments pro and con but firmly states: "My opinion is clear 
that it is both most expedient & most right ... to give up the 
right of Search of Ships of War." On July 30 Lord Bathurst wrote 
that, although Berkeley's conduct had been unauthorized, some 
legal opinion held that the American attitude justified retalia- 
tion: 

It seems admitted by S r William Scott and S r John Nicholl . . . that our 
right of Search is derived from the circumstance of one of the parties being 
belligerent; and that the Neutral, by allowing men belonging to the Ships 
of War of the belligerents to enter into his Service, steps out of his Character 
of Neutral, by depriving the belligerent of his means of carrying on the 
War. All this would however have been a fitter subject of remonstrance 
from this Country, than an Order at once from our Admiral. Large allow- 
ances must be made for the provocations which he has for some time re- 
ceiv'd: and had this arrived after a Victory instead of a defeat in Poland, 
we should have thought he had acted with great Spirit, and had been fully 
justified in his Orders. 17 

16 Canning to Monroe, July 25, 1807, FO 5/34-5 Sun (London), July 30, 1807. 

17 Nicholl, "Principles and Positions Applying to the American Question," n.d. 
FO 5/104; "Memoranda of heads of arg* on the Execution of the Right of Search of 
American Ships of War & Trade," Spencer Perceval MSS (examined while tempo- 
rarily on deposit at the Register of National Archives, London), 29/31-33; Bathurst 
to Harrowby, private, July 30, 1807, Dudley Ryder, ist Earl of Harrowby, MSS, 
Sandon Hall, Staffordshire. See also Canning to George III, Aug. 2, 1807, Royal 
Archives, Windsor Castle. 

193 



CANNING AND PERCEVAL 

The Cabinet thus reviewed the question before Canning declared 
to Monroe that His Majesty's government did not claim a right 
to search neutral warships. 

With this question settled, perhaps by default, the Foreign 
Secretary turned his attention once again to Monroe. Canning ap- 
parently decided that delay was the best course, especially after 
Jefferson raised the issue of impressment. The President's procla- 
mation banning the Royal Navy from American waters seemed to 
some Englishmen a provocative act requiring a riposte. Doubtless 
with the recent expedition to Copenhagen in mind, Hawkesbury 
talked about sending an emissary to America accompanied by a 
naval force and armed "with full power to commence hostilies" if 
the United States refused to withdraw the proclamation. Lord 
Buckinghamshire, a close friend of the Berkeleys, declared that 
the "inhospitality of M r . Jefferson's proclamation" should be met 
by an embargo on all American shipping in British ports. For the 
most part, however, Englishmen rightly regarded the proclama- 
tion as an indication that the United States did not plan to rush 
into hostilities. 18 Canning shared this impression, although he 
made a great deal of the proclamation in his notes to Monroe, 
arguing particularly that it would affect the amount of reparation 
to be tendered. 