

Canning undoubtedly scored a technical triumph over Monroe. 
At a meeting on July 29, he agreed that the American would have 
to hand in a formal note of protest. When Monroe thereupon 
hastily produced a letter of complaint, on the basis of newspaper 
reports only, Canning had an opening which, after consultation 
with the Cabinet, he exploited to the full. His reply, sent four days 
later, rebuked the envoy for a protest "not brought forward either 
by the authority of the Government of the United States, or with 
any precise knowledge of the facts." He added haughtily that, 

18 Hawkesbury to , n.d,, Charles D, Yong-e, The Life and Administration 

of Robert Banks, Second Earl of Liverpool (3 vols.j London, 1868), I, 241-2425 
Buckinghamshire to Auckland, n.d., William Eden, Baron Auckland, MSS, British 
Museum (Add. MSS 34412-34471, 45728-45730), Add. MSS 34-457) &>1. 353$ 
Pinkney to Madison, private, Aug. 13, 1807, William C. Rives Collection, Library of 
Congress} Times } Aug. 10, 1807, 

194 



CANNING AND PERCEVAL 

after offering assurances that Britain would not condone Berkeley's 
action, "I may perhaps be permitted to express my Surprize . . . 
at the Tone of that Representation which I have just had the 
Honour to receive from you." The Foreign Secretary, very skill- 
fully anticipating Jefferson's course, emphasized his own agree- 
ment with Monroe that the Chesapeake affair was "of itself of 
sufficient Importance to claim a separate and most serious consider- 
ation," not mixed with other issues. 19 

Poor Monroe! At the end of August he received James Madi- 
son's instructions to unite impressment and the Chesapeake affair. 
After his experiences with the Monroe-Pinkney treaty, he dared 
not deviate from his orders. He weakly put forward the American 
position first at an interview and then in a lame, watered-down 
official note. The Foreign Secretary replied with a strong com- 
munication, the fruit of two days' reflection in the country. He 
firmly declined to link the two issues. He denied that troubles over 
impressment grew out of British hostility toward America, insisting 
rather that the similarity of the two peoples caused unavoidable 
problems. Then, in a very characteristic passage employing phrases 
he had already used orally and taking advantage of Monroe's in- 
cautious admission that citizenship was difficult to determine, Can- 
ning wrote that "these Circumstances cannot furnish an argument 
for the Suspension of the exercises of the right with respect to 
America, unless it be contended that multiplicity of frauds and 
difficulty of detection are reasons against Suspicion, or motives for 
acquiescence." Canning closed by somewhat modifying the harsh- 
ness of his position, informing Monroe that he would send a special 
minister to Washington to try to settle the Chesapeake problem. 20 

Both parties knew who had won the duel. Monroe abandoned 
his efforts and, with relief, handed the London mission to William 
Pinkney. Canning congratulated himself on his success: "If they 
had taken our atonement by itself, as we offered it, they would have 