

Other editorial writers, several using the heading "War with 

13 Grenville to Thomas Grenville, Oct. 23, 1807, Thomas Grenville MSS, British 
Museum (Add. MSS 4.1851-41859), Add. MSS 418525 Thomas Grenville to Lord 
Buckinghamshire, Oct. 9, 1807, Richard P. T. N. B. C. Grenville, Duke of Bucking- 
ham and Chandos, Memoirs of the Court and Cabinets of George the III (4 vols.j 
London, 1853-1855), IV, 205$ Bathurst to Buckinghamshire, n.d., ibid., IV, 2x1. 

14 Times, Aug. 5, 18075 Caledonian Mercury (Edinburgh), July 30, 1807. 

191 



CANNING AND PERCEVAL 

America," made this language seem moderate. The Morning Post, 
strongly ministerial, argued that the "order of Admiral Berkeley 
to search the American frigate, appears to have been dictated by 
the most delicate caution, and to have enjoined nothing which was 
not fully justified by the extraordinary circumstances of the case." 
The paper added its trust that "Great Britain will not be ... 
scrupulous and delicate about forms in enforcing her maritime 
rights, when her very existence depends upon the due maintenance 
of them." The Courier declared it time "to pause in our career 
of forbearance" and added that, if by seducing British seamen 
"America has offered us an insult, she must either give us ample 
reparation, or we must go to war." When the Portland government 
decided to disavow the attack, the Courier went along grumpily, 
warning the Americans to expect more of the same medicine if they 
did not abandon their career of provocation. Enemies of the regime 
agreed, notably William Cobbett, who "contend [ed] for the right 
of searching for deserters, upon the general principle, that the seas 
are the dominion of those who are able to maintain mastery over 
all that swims upon them." 15 

The still new and insecure government might easily have 
whipped up support by cultivating such opinion. Instead, the 
Foreign Secretary acted quickly to minimize the effect of the un- 
fortunate clash. Upon the arrival of Berkeley's preliminary dis- 
patches, he wrote to Monroe, who as yet had received neither in- 
structions nor official information, that "if the British Officer 
should prove to have been culpable, the most prompt and effectual 
Reparation shall be afforded to the Government of the United 
States." Canning then called in George Sansom, spokesman for 
merchants trading with the United States. He told Sansom and 
this information was soon in the papers that, while he could not 
predict the future, his first exchanges with Monroe made him 
hopeful of a settlement. Through Sansom he assured the public 
that "Ministers will neither compromise the honour of their coun- 
try, nor give any sanction to a wanton attack upon any other State 

15 Morning Post, Aug. 6, 1807 j Courier, July 27, Aug. 10, 1807 j Cobb&ttfs Register, 
XII, 245. 

192 



CANNING AND PERCEVAL 

with which we are in amity." 16 This statement, which warned 
extremists that the Royal Navy might have been at fault, also made 
it quite clear that the British government did not intend to be 
rushed into either war or surrender. 