

The new ministry, Jefferson complained, included men who 
were "true Pittites, and anti-American." Madison agreed but did 
not feel that this doomed the chances of improving the Monroe- 
Pinkney treaty. Among other things, he considered it possible that 
"the new Cabinet will be less averse to a tabula rasa for a new 
adjustment, than those who framed the instrument to be super- 

8 Cobbett* s Political Register (London), XII (1807), 420 j Leeds Intelligencer > 
Dec. 25, 1809. 

4 Sidmouth to Abbot, Oct. 18, 1807, Charles Abbot, Lord Colchester, ed., The 
Diary and Correspondence of Charles Abbot, Lord Colchester (3 vols.j London, i86i)> 

ii, I3 *. 

187 



CANNING AND PERCEVAL 

seded." He pressed for some enticing concessions on seamen, and 
he warned Jefferson that "a final failure of the negotiation must 
lead to a very serious posture of things." New instructions were 
therefore dispatched to Monroe and Pinkney toward the end of 
May, 1807. If Britain wanted a treaty, the instructions declared, 
she must accept at least six changes in the unratified document 5 
if she preferred broad informal arrangements, the American gov- 
ernment would accept them, provided they were equitable and did 
not tie America's hands. Of the ultimatums, Madison's instructions 
most emphasized impressment, although he also sought an indem- 
nity for past seizures and at least some modification of the note 
reserving Britain's right to retaliate against the Berlin Decree. 
When the Secretary's instructions reached London in July, 1 807, 
his agents immediately asked Canning to resume negotiations. 5 

This request embarrassed Canning. Many supporters of the 
Perceval government considered the treaty a craven surrender. 
In the Morning Post's view, "nothing but madness or folly could 
induce the Americans to refuse their acceptance." George Rose, to 
whom the Cabinet turned for advice, hostilely dissected the treaty 
in a long memorandum, and the Courier concluded that "it is a 
Treaty almost entirely in favour of America, with scarcely one 
stipulation favourable to the commerce of this country nay, so 
far from it, that it contains stipulations hostile to it." 6 On the other 
hand, the agreement promised at least an armistice with America, 
and British rejection would have outraged the Opposition. Cer- 
tainly the Foreign Secretary must have felt that by rejecting the 
settlement Jefferson had unwittingly saved him from a difficult 
decision. He permitted supplementary articles completed before 
Grenville's fall to die with their sponsors. At a farewell dinner 

5 Jefferson to Madison, May i, 1807, Andrew A. Lipscomb and Albert E. Bergh, 
eds., The Writings of Thomas Jefferson (Memorial ed.j 20 vols. 5 Washington, 
1903-1904), XI, 1995 Madison to Jefferson, April 24, May 4, 1807, Thomas Jeffer- 
son MSS, Library of Congress; Madison to Monroe and Pinkney, May 20, 1807, 
Department of State Archives, National Archives, Instructions, All Countries, Vol. VI 5 
Monroe and Pinkney to Canning, July 24, 1807, Foreign Office Archives, Public 
Record Office, FO 5/54. 