

Aside from Portland, the new government represented, far 
more than its predecessor, a gathering of talents. Four members 
Perceval, Hawkesbury, Canning, and young Palmerston subse- 
quently headed ministries of their own. Castlereagh became per- 
haps the greatest British foreign secretary, and Bathurst served for 
many years as an inconspicuous but very capable minister. Of 
course, these men had to make room for the inevitable baggage of 

184 



CANNING AND PERCEVAL 

borough-mongering noblemen, and several, notably Canning and 
Castlereagh, still showed signs of political immaturity. Grenville 
and Howick naturally remained outside the government, and Sid- 
mouth and Wellesley did not join it for some time. Still, the abili- 
ties were there, narrow and rough-honed though they might be. 
With relatively few changes in personnel, this Cabinet fought the 
war through to a triumphant conclusion. 

Behind the ducal fagade, Spencer Perceval was the most influen- 
tial minister. The expense of a huge array of offspring made him 
reluctant to abandon his legal practice to become chancellor of the 
Exchequer. In a transaction loudly criticized by the Opposition, 
Perceval received an almost unprecedented lifetime appointment 
as salaried chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster, and he abandoned 
the law and the attorney-generalship for an active role in the fight 
against Napoleon. By nature quiet and courteous, Perceval often 
flared up into anger when criticized. Habits of the law had bred 
in him a certain narrowness, but he also had determination, per- 
haps even stubbornness. With him the anti-Napoleonic crusade 
took absolute priority. He opposed all but minimum concessions 
to neutrals, and he never understood America's failure to see that 
the Emperor threatened world liberties. In his view, the Orders 
in Council and Wellington's war in Spain were England's two best 
weapons, and he resolutely refused to abandon either in the face 
of protests from the United States and from interested British 
groups. 

For the first eighteen months of the ministry's life, this dogged, 
unobtrusive man had as a colleague the mercurial George Can- 
ning, who received the Foreign Office. Canning had had subordi- 
nate experience as under-secretary in the Foreign Office in the 
1 790'$, and few in the House of Commons could equal him as an 
orator. Canning grasped more quickly than his colleague the essen- 
tials of a new situation, and he favored decisive action without 
abandoning flexibility. To the applause of his mentor, Pitt, Chan- 
ning had married money and position, but his own relatively un- 
patrician family background kept him out of the Establishment. 
Many doubted his political stability. By turns a Foxite, a supporter 

185 



CANNING AND PERCEVAL 

of Pitt, and then a more unyielding Pittite than the ex-Minister 
himself Canning had nevertheless negotiated for office with the 
Ministry of All the Talents, which obviously shared few of the 
principles of his dead patron. 