

In the context of the times these actions were less harsh than 
they sometimes appear. From the British point of view powerful 
provocation existed for some action against America, if not for an 
armed assault upon the United States Navy. Berkeley had of 
course reported the incidents around Norfolk that inspired his 
order. The admiral declared that, despite conciliatory efforts on 
his part, American authorities encouraged rather than discouraged 
desertion. In addition, the Chesapeake enlisted many Englishmen. 
Doubtless British guesses did not err on the side of moderation, 
but Berkeley at least claimed that the total was about 1 50. A later, 
completely independent estimate provided for the government 
placed the number at 200 and added that Decatur, who replaced 
Barron after the attack, had refused to permit 60 or 70 English- 
men to return to the Royal Navy although they desired to do so. 
Furthermore, the ministry soon learned that three of the four 
deserters taken from the Chesapeake had volunteered for service 
in the Royal Navy and only one Jenkin Ratford, an undoubted 
Englishman had been impressed. 12 These ameliorating circum- 
stances helped Berkeley escape severe punishment. 



IX, 926-9275 Star (London), July 27, 1807. 

12 Berkeley to Marsden, Feb. 2, March 23, July 27 (with enclosure), 1807, Ad- 
miralty Papers, Public Record Office, Adm 1/4975 Warren to Wellesley Pole, March 
28, 1808, and enclosure, Adm 1/498. 

190 



CANNING AND PERCEVAL 

The fact that the Opposition had appointed the admiral virtually 
immobilized them. Lord Grenville believed that "there is not in 
any one writer on the Law of Nations a trace to be found of any 
claim to search Neutral Ships of War for deserters." While he 
therefore declined to defend Berkeley in the House of Lords, be- 
cause of his own responsibility and close ties with Berkeley's 
brother he followed a very restrained course. On the government 
side, Bathurst, the admiral's brother-in-law, worked to prevent 
hasty action, however justified. Bathurst was more interested in 
saving the admiral and his wife from a winter voyage home than 
in demonstrating to the American government that Britain dis- 
approved of the assault. 13 

In going as far as it did that is, in disavowing the attack and 
reaffirming that Britain did not claim a right to search warships 
the government acted contrary to English opinion. Almost every 
popular journal defended the attack and proclaimed its deathless 
devotion to the right of search, even when applied to neutral war- 
ships. The leading Opposition newspaper, the Morning Chronicle, 
supported later by the Edinburgh Review, stood almost alone in 
arguing to the contrary. Some papers, among them the Times and 
the Caledonian Mercury, expressed hope that war could be avoided. 
But even the Times generally defended Berkeley for his forth- 
rightness. "It is impossible an insult and act of manifest injustice 
like this [seduction]," said the Times, "could have been passed 
over by any British Officer who knew his duty, and left to a tedious 
and protracted discussion between the two Governments." The 
Caledonian Mercury commented: "We should think it a very great 
misfortune for this country to have to go to war with America at 
this time; but we should consider it as a much greater misfortune, 
if the Government of this country should tamely permit its rights 
to be violated, or its flag to be insulted by any power whatever." 14 