

181 



EMBARGO 

by seventy-six to forty. The date was February 3, 1809, a little 
more than thirteen months after the nation had embarked upon 
its campaign of privation. 80 

What followed was anticlimax, more closely connected with the 
birth of the Nonintercourse Act, although the Embargo's enemies 
feared that some legerdemain would reverse the decision. At sev- 
eral caucuses loyal Republicans pressed the deserters to accept the 
Nicholas plan. Led by Ezekiel Bacon, for Story had returned 
home, the dissidents, predominantly from New England and 
Pennsylvania, held firm. At the end of February the Noninter- 
course Act passed, not because it was popular but because it included 
repeal of the Embargo. In the words of one Northern Republican, 
"the people, as well as himself, were so heartily tired of the em- 
bargo that they would be glad to get anything else in place of it." 
A few days later Jefferson departed from a Washington to which 
he never returned, commenting, "Never did a prisoner, released 
from his chains, feel such relief as I ... on shaking off the 
shackles of power." 81 

His most ambitious venture in foreign policy had failed, save 
only in perhaps delaying the outbreak of war with England 
and that, until a less favorable time. The Embargo imposed many 
of the disadvantages of war on the nation by destroying trade j 
it secured none of the prospective advantages, such as the conquest 
of territory or the capture of enemy ships and commerce at sea. 
Diplomatically, Jefferson failed either to coerce or seduce the Euro- 
pean belligerents. Economically, the Embargo proved ruinous at 
home. Politically, it encouraged fissiparous tendencies in Republi- 
canism and temporarily reinvigorated the most unpleasant forms 
of Federalism. If Jefferson had acted strongly at the opening of 
his last Congress, he might have achieved an acceptable substitute 
for the Embargo. By his inertia he was negatively responsible for 
its continuation until February, 1 809, and for the disgraceful scenes 
of humiliation and panic which sullied America's reputation for 

80 Annah , loth Cong., 2d sess,, pp. 1172-1350. 

81 Brant, op. cit., pp. 478-479 j Annals, loth Cong 1 ., ist sess,, pp. 1541, 436, 
451-452; Jefferson to du Pont de Nemours, March 2, 1809, Lipscomb and Bergh, 
o-p. cit., XII, 259-260. 

182 



EMBARGO 

years. In 1810, writing of repeal, Jefferson said, "This is the im- 
mediate parent of all our present evils, and has reduced us to a low 
standing in the eyes of the world." 82 He himself was at least a 
godparent, for his system and his tactics encouraged the political 
rebellion of the Tenth Congress. The philosopher-king had asked 
too much of his people. 

82 Jefferson to Dearborn, July 16, 1810, Lipscomb and Bergh, of. cit. } XII, 399. 



CHAPTER 



VI 



CANNING AND PERCEVAL 



Throughout the life of the Embargo the United States confronted, 
not the compromise-minded ministry of Fox and Grenville, but 
a new government dedicated to vigorous prosecution of the war 
against Napoleon. In March, 1 807, as a result of unwise, irresolute 
tinkering with the Irish problem, the Ministry of All the Talents 
fell from power. Few mourned its passing, even among ministers 
themselves. A new government under the nominal leadership of 
the Duke of Portland united Pitt's supporters and others who had 
served under Addington. The premier himself had little to recom- 
mend him save the weakness that made his lieutenants willing to 
serve under him rather than under one of their own number. 