

A diplomatic veteran personally friendly to Canning penetrated 
to the root of the matter when he wrote, shortly after Canning 
took office: "Canning possesses the peculiar talent of justifying 
ably and forcibly all he does . . . and that so rapidly and so elo- 
quently that it is very difficult not to be carried away by what he 
says. He is unquestionably very clever, very essential to Govern- 
ment; but he is hardly yet a Statesman y and his dangerous habit of 
quizzing (which he cannot restrain) would be most unpopular in 
any department which required pliancy, tact, or conciliatory be- 
haviour." * In interviews with William Pinkney, Canning was un- 
failingly patient and even courteous ; in their formal exchange of 
notes the American often worsted Canning simply because the 
latter could not restrain his pen. As Lord Henry Petty pointed out, 
when Canning's notes were published in America "the whole pub- 
lic mind . . . was insulted by his ill-placed irony." William B. 
Giles, for example, assailed Canning's "prevaricating letters and 
sophisticated expositions," and later complained that "he chooses 
to act by tricks and contrivances, ... by a mental retort, flowing 
solely from his own visionary mental conceits." Britain, said Giles, 
had entrusted her affairs to "a parcel of punsters" in "the adminis- 
tration of the energetic, the sarcastic, the facetious, the joking Mr. 
Canning." 2 The Secretary's official papers and his unrestrained 
parliamentary oratory affronted the United States nearly as much 
as his government's policies. 

England supported the new ministry primarily because it prom- 
ised energetic action, for Napoleon's triumphs propelled Britain 
not in the direction of peace but toward more rigorous warfare. 

1 Entry of March 14, 1807, James H. Harris, Earl of Malmesbury, ed,, Diaries 
and Correspondence of James Harris, First Earl of Malmesbury (ad ed.; 4. vols.j 
London, 1845), IV, 375. In a slightly different form, this chapter has appeared in 
American Historical Review, LXIII (19571958), i 22. 

2 Hansard, XII, 1208-1209; dnnals, loth Cong., 2d sess., p. 371 j nth Cong., ist 
and 2d sess., pp. 496497. 

186 



CANNING AND PERCEVAL 

The rights of neutrals were scorned j as William Cobbett put it, 
in typically forthright language, "Our power upon the waves en- 
ables us to dictate the terms, upon which the ships of all nations 
shall navigate. . . . Not a sail should be hoisted, except by stealth, 
without paying us tribute." Such thinking produced, among other 
things, the brutal attack upon Copenhagen 3 significantly, the Op- 
position did not present a united front against this aggression. With 
feeling at such a pitch, it is small wonder that the Portland ministry 
did not adopt a liberal policy toward, as one conservative journal 
put it, "a nation that owes to it half the property she possesses, and 
is destined, to owe to it her preservation from the fate that has 
attended Continental Europe." 3 

During these years many Englishmen had little respect for 
Jefferson. "America," one statesman wrote, ". . . is no longer a 
bugbear 5 there is no terror in her threats." 4 Down to 1807 words 
and not deeds seemed to be the rule. Thereafter, evasion, domestic 
opposition, and its obviously great effect at home vitiated the effect 
of the Embargo. Although British diplomats sometimes warned 
that war was possible, they all usually reported the government 
torn by dissension, Federalism gaining ground, and hostilities un- 
likely. Even so, the government never treated the Americans so 
harshly as, for example, it treated the Danes. It desired American 
neutrality. Although the Cabinet's devotion to rigorous warfare 
made it avoid self-limiting devices like Fox's Blockade or the 
Monroe-Pinkney treaty, the ministry did make certain limited 
efforts to conciliate the United States. 