

America answered the increasing virulence of the Anglo-French 
war upon commerce with the Embargo. Most Englishmen agreed 
that this "most singular act, . . . little short of an absolute seces- 
sion from the rest of the civilized world," was legitimized by inter- 
national law, "however we may complain of the spirit which has 
produced it." 37 Some thought the Embargo would harm England 
almost as much as a war with the United States. But most Britons 
at first considered it a positive assistance, despite the loss of Ameri- 
can supplies, or at least more harmful to France than to the British 
Empire. By restraining American shipping and exports the Em- 
bargo virtually ended the problem of neutral trade with France 
and conferred upon Great Britain a near monopoly of trade with 
the few remaining neutrals. The rising challenge to Jeffersonian- 
ism and the return of unemployed seamen to British service also 
served British interests. So George H. Rose reported, and Erskine, 
a man of very different political attitudes, agreed with him. 

George Canning accepted this reasoning. When Pinkney brought 
him official notice of the Embargo, the Foreign Secretary received 

36 Erskine #12 to Canning:, April 3, 1808, FO 5/575 Reporter (Lexington, Ky.), 
May 7, 18085 Alfred T. Mahan, Sea Power in Its Relation to the War of 1812 (2 
vols.; Boston, 1905), I, 178. 

37 Times, Jan. 27, 1808. 

204 



CANNING AND PERCEVAL 

requested Bathurst to meet with him to discuss future policy. Gren- 
ville eased the government's path by pledging the Opposition to 
refrain from recriminations if the government rescinded the Orders 
in Council. In mid-April Auckland, who planned to attack the 
orders in the House of Lords, wrote to Grenville: "It was hinted 
to me today that it was desirable to postpone this subject for a few 
days when it was probable that something w d . be announced re- 
specting it." 40 

The Opposition, the country, and America did not have long to 
wait. As early as July, 1808, Earl Bathurst suggested that the 
orders be replaced by a strict, geographically less extensive block- 
ade of France and her immediate dominions, "a strong Order 
against France, which would not be liable to the present Objections 
& which America would certainly not feel as an advantage gained 
over us." Nothing came of this plan, which closely resembled Can- 
ning's suggestions of 1807, primarily because of the Cabinet's un- 
willingness to seem to surrender to the Embargo. Nor did the Earl 
secure cabinet approval when he put forward the same proposal 
in October. 41 In April, 1809, Bathurst and Canning tried again. 
The president of the Board of Trade and the Foreign Secretary 
agreed that the Embargo's impending repeal provided a good 
psychological setting, and Canning urged speedy action since a 
"fresh arrival from America might embarrass us." Bathurst circu- 
lated through the Cabinet a memorandum accompanied by a note 
of approval from Canning. Not a single minister objected to the 
general proposal, although Perceval apparently convinced them 
that the orders of 1807 should be gently replaced rather than 
directly repudiated. On April 27 and 28 the most important mer- 
chants trading with America, including Alexander Baring, met 
with Bathurst to discuss details of the new system. 42 