

"The best way of protecting our own Commerce," Sir John 
Nicholl wrote in August, "is by pressing upon that of the Enemy. 

25 Henry Adams, History of the United States during the Administrations of Jeffer- 
son and Madison (9 vols.j New York, 1889-1891), IV, 8o~8ij Joseph Marryat, 
Concessions to America the Bane of Britain; or the Cause of the Present Distressed 
Situation of the British Colonial and Shipping Interests Explained, and the Proper 
Remedy Suggested (London, 1807)5 Pinkney to Madison, private, Dec. 31, 1807, 
Rives Collection j Wilson H. Elkins, "British Policy in Its Relation to the Commerce 
and Navigation of the United States of America from 1794. to 1807" (unpublished 
Ph.D. thesis, Oxford University, 1936), pp. 194-196} Alexander Baring, An Inquiry 
into the Causes and Consequences of the Orders in Council} and an Examination of 
the Conduct of Great Britain towards the Neutral Commerce of America (London, 
1808), pp. i2. 

198 



CANNING AND PERCEVAL 

... If they can have no Commerce but through our means, they 
will resort to us." In August neither Nicholl nor James Stephen, 
who offered the same advice to Perceval, could bring the Cabinet 
to break its usual summer vacation. Six weeks later the ministers 
began to reassemble. Castlereagh wrote to Perceval on October I, 
urging retaliation against Napoleon's commercial assault. The next 
day the Sun announced that the government would retaliate in 
some fashion, and within a week the Times called for "the prohi- 
bition of all carrying trade whatsoever, except that of British manu- 
factures and colonial produce 5 and . . . the seizure of all ships 
sailing in the European seas, except such as are bound to or from 
England." 2e 

The Cabinet worked out the Orders in Council during a fort- 
night at the end of October. On the twelfth, Perceval circulated 
a long memorandum which argued that, since Napoleon had long 
since cast off the restraints of international law, England might act 
similarly. Neutrals, said Perceval, "if they complain justly, . . . 
will direct their complaint against those whose proceedings against 
us & our Trade, make it indispensable ... to retaliate." Anyway, 
neutrals had abandoned their privileged status, since a state that 
failed to force Napoleon to observe its rights "ceases to be a Neutral, 
by ceasing to observe that impartiality which is the very life and 
soul of neutrality." 27 These arguments formed the core of the 
British defense of the Orders in Council for the next five years. 

The American government never admitted that the priority of 
sin rested with Napoleon, usually pointing to Fox's Blockade in- 
stead. And even Lord Sidmouth, to say nothing of Jefferson and 
Madison, objected that it was unfair to assert that America had 
tolerated the Berlin Decree, thus forfeiting her claim to British 
leniency. At the time of the November orders, Perceval and his 
colleagues had no idea how the Americans would react to the first 

26 Nicholl to Canning, Aug. 15, 1807, FO 83/22051 Stephen to Perceval, Aug. 17, 
1807, Perceval MSS, 33/15 Castlereagh to Perceval, Oct. i, 1807, Charles W. Vane, 
Marquess of Londonderry, ed., Correspondence, Despatches, and Other Papers, of 
Viscount Castlereagh, Second Marquess of Londonderry (12 vols.j London, 184.8- 
1853), VII, 87-885 Sun, Oct. 2, 18075 Times, Oct. 6, 1807. 