

By the exchange of memoranda sketched above, the general line 
to be taken was decided by October 26, 1807. On November 10 
the semiofficial Courier announced that stringent new regulations 
were in the offing, regulations that might require temporary sacri- 
fices but would strike down the baneful American reexport trade. 
On the eleventh William Pinkney rushed to the Foreign Office 
to try to prevent action, but only the Under-Secretary was there to 
meet him. It was too late. That same day the most important new 
Orders in Council were issued. The orders were extremely difficult 
to understand committees of merchants visited the Foreign Office 
several times seeking enlightenment but Perceval's summary was 
fairly accurate: "If you [France] will not have our trade, as far 
as we can help it you shall have none. And as to so much of any 
trade as you can carry on yourselves, or others carry on with you 
through us, if you admit it you shall pay [us] for it." 30 

The cabinet members agreed to certain relaxations to make the 
orders more palatable to the United States. They did so although 
this weakened their attempts to establish a commercial monopoly. 
Canning exaggerated when he described the concessions as proof 
that England "was actuated by the same Sentiments of Moderation 
by which His Majesty's conduct has been uniformly governed." 31 
Britain might consider it a concession to permit American domestic 

20 Bathurst memoranda, n.d., Perceval MSS, 36/205 Bathurst to Perceval, Nov. 
5, 1807, ibid., 36/2122$ Canning- memorandum, Oct. 14, 1807, ibid., 36/5. 

30 Courier, Nov. 10, 1807$ Sun > Nov. n, 18075 Pinkney to Madison, Nov. 17, 1807, 
Despatches, Great Britain, Vol. XV $ Perceval to Abbot, received Dec. i, 1807, Abbot, 
op, cit., II, 134. 

31 Canning #10 to Erskine, Dec. i, 1807, Bernard Mayo, ed. Instructions to the 
British Ministers to the United States, 17011812, American Historical Association, 
Annual Report, 1936, III (Washington, 1941), 242246. 

201 



CANNING AND PERCEVAL 

produce, except cotton, to proceed to the Continent without paying 
a transit duty in England. The United States considered the direct 
trade unquestionably legal and knew that, except in cotton, there 
was little competition between British colonial and American prod- 
uce in the European market. The obvious selfishness o the duty on 
American cotton embarrassed Canning and his colleagues ; within 
a few months they placed American and West Indian cotton on an 
equal footing by forbidding all cotton shipments to the Continent. 
This negative gesture failed to satisfy Pinkney or his superiors. 32 

Two more important concessions appeared in the thicket of con- 
fusing regulations. Contrary to the Rule of the War of 1756, Brit- 
ain did not interrupt direct trade between enemy islands and the 
United States. America had always eagerly sought this trade, and 
the Cabinet hoped that to permit it would show Britain's modera- 
tion. Second, the Cabinet agreed, over Castlereagh's objections and 
contrary to Perceval's original plan, to permit America to reexport 
even the produce of enemy colonies through Britain to Europe 
upon payment of duties. These relaxations of the Orders in Coun- 
cil aimed, in Perceval's words, "to make it quite Clear ... to 
America if she is wise to prefer the Neutral Trade, that will be left 
to her, to the total stoppage of her trade with the Enemy, & with 
ourselves too which war might occasion." 3S 