

44 Times , April 29, 1809. 

45 Canning to Bathurst, private, April 15, 1809, Bickley, 0$. cit., p. 90. 

207 



CANNING AND PERCEVAL 

Grenville's pledge to keep silent. Conservatives objected that the 
government had truckled to the United States. Journalistic enemies 
of the regime loudly proclaimed their satisfaction that the govern- 
ment had finally seen the misguidedness of a policy that wiser 
men had always opposed. The Morning Chronicle positively 
crowed over the corpse of the November orders, and added, "What 
has induced Ministers to make such concessions, so contrary to the 
boasted policy they have hitherto promulgated, we do not pretend 
to determine" Privately, Opposition leaders of course agreed. Lord 
Grenville wrote, "Ministers have at last given up their nonsensical 
orders in Council." 46 

Ministerial papers attempted to tread a narrow line between 
these two attitudes. Pointing out that the Embargo had been re- 
pealed, they denied that the new order was a surrender to America, 
although emphasizing that Pinkney had "been heard to express 
himself in the highest terms of satisfaction, of the liberality and 
candour of his Majesty's Ministers." While the old orders had 
been effective, government supporters argued, the Cabinet now 
desired to test American bona fides by a wise experiment. The 
Morning Post wrote that "after experiencing the most beneficial 
effects from . . . the Orders in Council . . . , our Ministers 
have fairly met, by a liberal regulation of those Orders, the 
amicable provision of the last Act of the American Legislature 
[the Nonintercourse Act], in respect to the terms upon which its 
commercial intercourse with this country should be renewed." 
The new blockade, it was claimed, would actually operate more 
effectively against French commerce, and the measure would bring 
greater unity in England, "as it concedes some points much dwelt 
upon by the Opposition, in both Houses of Parliament." 4T These 
arguments were expressed in a defensive manner 5 they were also 
obviously contradictory. 

Less than eighteen months after issuing the Orders in Council 
of November, 1 807, the Portland government had in effect aban- 

46 Morning Chronicle (London), April 28, 1809$ Grenville to Grey, April 28, 
1809, Grey MSS, from Ld. Grenville. 

47 Edinburgh Evening C our ant, May i, 1809; Morning Post) April 29, 1:809$ 
Caledonian Mercury, May i, 1809. See also Courier, particularly April 28, 1809. 

208 



CANNING AND PERCEVAL 

doned them. The Embargo was perhaps partially responsible for 
this, although Britain refused to act until the Americans had been 
driven from their ground and had provided a plausible opening 
through the Nonintercourse Act. The course of the war, and par- 
ticularly the shift of the Spanish Empire to the British side, im- 
pelled England in this direction, since the November orders be- 
came partially obsolete. Doubtless Erskine's reports, which grossly 
exaggerated the new administration's desire for an accommodation 
with England, led the Cabinet to believe James Madison would 
modify Jefferson's policy. At any rate, the British government 
did shift its policy at a critical moment in the war, did seek at least 
a tacit understanding with the United States. All that seemed re- 
quired was similar wisdom and good spirit on the part of the new 
American government. If the Foreign Secretary and his colleagues 
had been better informed about the situation in the United States, 
they would certainly not have embarked so hopefully upon this 
course. As one shrewd merchant engaged in American trade wrote, 
"a good has been done, but with an ill grace, and I fear more from 
necessity than choice. If however other concessions are made, al- 
most equally essential, I think a foundation will be laid for the 
restoration of ... friendly intercourse." * 8 The ministry was 
fully satisfied that it had taken an important step, and it sat back 
to await American plaudits. 