

William Pinkney reacted ecstatically to the new policy. Officially 
he reported that "a great Step has been taken towards the complete 
accomplishment of our Wishes." In a private letter to the Presi- 
dent, he wrote of his "hope that this Measure will open the Way 
to Reconcilement between this Country and America. . . . Our 
Honour is now safe, and by Management we may probably gain 
every thing we have in View." Such disparate personages as Sir 
Francis Baring, John Trumbull, and Napoleon shared Pinkney's 
opinion. 49 At almost exactly the same time, however, that the new 

48 Mullett to Whitbread, May 3, 1809, Samuel Whitbread MSS, Southill Park, 
Biggleswade, Bedfordshire. 

49 Pinkney to Smith, May i, 1809, Despatches, Great Britain, Vol. XVI 5 Pinkney 
to Madison, private, May 3, 1809, Rives Collection; Sir Francis Baring to King, 
May 2, 1809, Rufus King MSS, New- York Historical Society, Vol. XII 5 Trumbull 

209 



CANNING AND PERCEVAL 

order was issued, across the Atlantic the President and Secretary of 
State Robert Smith concluded negotiations with David M. Erskine 
which granted America even more favorable terms. The decree 
for which Earl Bathurst and George Canning had labored merely 
puzzled Madison, led newspaper editors to suspect thai England 
planned to go back on concessions made through Erskine, and was 
only rarely recognized for what it was, a major shift in British 
policy. 50 

Late in 1 808 David Montagu Erskine held important conversa- 
tions with American leaders. At the first of these, with President 
Jefferson, Erskine clearly showed that he feared war would follow 
embargo. First Madison and then Gallatin and Robert Smith 
played upon this fear, but Canning's subsequent actions indicate 
that Erskine's government did not take it very seriously. The 
Foreign Secretary found far more interesting a second aspect of 
Erskine's reports. The President and the President-elect allowed 
Erskine to understand that the administration preferred peace to 
war, although, they said, it was under heavy pressure from Repub- 
lican rank and file. In a private talk at Gallatin's home, the Secre- 
tary of the Treasury went even further (or so at least Erskine 
reported; Gallatin subsequently challenged his account). As did 
Madison in subsequent instructions to Pinkney, Gallatin pointed 
out that when nonintercourse passed it would place England and 
France on an equal footing. With it would end the discrimination 
of the Nonimportation Act and Jefferson's post-Chesapeake proc- 
lamation and thus the excuse for British complaints against Ameri- 
can bias. The Secretary added that a law forbidding the employ- 
ment of foreign seamen would soon come before Congress. Erskine 
claimed that Gallatin even stated that the United States might 
modify its opposition to the Rule of the War of 1756. The British 



to King 1 , April 30, 1809, ibid.; Champagny to Hataterive, May 13, 1809, Archives des 
Affaires )trangeres, Correspondance Politique, fitats-Unis (photostats, Libiary of 
Congress), Vol. LXII. 