

196 



CANNING AND PERCEVAL 

In many ways. Canning could feel that he had satisfactorily 
handled the Chesapeake affair. At home., he had steered a care- 
ful course, one that dampened the initial emotional outburst in 
Berkeley's favor and yet avoided outright surrender. Diplomati- 
cally, he had acted cautiously until it seemed that America again 
intended to bluster rather than fight. Essentially his policy was 
delay, and he succeeded in his object. He might, more imagina- 
tively, have used the American retreat on impressment as the path 
to a settlement, but such a course presupposed greater respect for 
America and more humility than Britain had. Canning had escaped 
making an apology and yet had avoided war. 

A proclamation recalling British seamen to the Royal Navy, 
issued in October, 1 807, is another indication of Canning's attitude. 
This document, although often criticized by Americans as arrogant 
(John Adams later called it "that most atrocious of all violations 
of the Law of Nations"), undermined anti- American feeling by 
strongly reaffirming the right of impressment while at the same 
time publicly stating that Britain did not claim a right to search 
warships. Cobbett attacked it as a surrender j James Stephen be- 
lieved it a concession, but a wise one j Vansittart considered it a fool- 
ish abandonment of a bargaining point. 24 Thus one cannot accuse 
Canning and the other ministers of issuing a proclamation which, 
in the context, was anti- American. 

After the possibility of immediate war over the Chesapeake had 
ended, but well before that issue became a nagging, unpleasant 
memory, the British government proclaimed the Orders in Council 
of November, 1807. These orders were the Portland ministry's 
greatest single contribution to eventual war. They ended a short 
period of comparatively lenient treatment of American commerce 
signalized by moderation in the High Court of Admiralty. They 
checked a trend toward Francophobia in the United States, a trend 
only interrupted by the Chesapeake affair, and provided a principal 
field of controversy between London and Washington in later 
years. For these Orders in Council George Canning certainly bears 

24 John Adams to Benjamin Rush, Dec. 29, 1812, Adams Family MSS (microfilm), 
Massachusetts Historical Society, Vol. CXXIj Cobbetfs Register, XII, 642, 673-683$ 
Stephen, "Coup d'oeil on an American War," n.d. [Dec., 1807], Perceval MSS, 
33/98105; Vansittart to Sidmouth, Oct. 21, 1807, Sidmouth MSS, 

197 



CANNING AND PERCEVAL 

a large share of the responsibility. But he was not their author, 
urged some modifications, and would have preferred a different 
system. 

Long before November, 1 807, it was obvious that British action 
was in the wind. As early as February Perceval, then in opposition, 
called for a complete interdiction of trade between Europe and the 
two Indies, and Joseph Marryat's well-received pamphlet, Con- 
cessions to America the Bane of Britain, argued that the Caribbean 
colonies 3 economic plight sprang chiefly from a a relaxation of those 
maritime rights which our forefathers fought and bled to estab- 
lish.^ In July a House of Commons committee produced a strident 
report, ascribed by Pinkney to George H. Rose, which urged strong 
measures against American commerce in order to save West Indian 
trade. Even the risk of war was justified, the report maintained, 
since the "one grand and primary evil [is] ... the facility of 
intercourse between hostile colonies and Europe, under the Ameri- 
can neutral flag." The outcries of West Indian interests were 
echoed by the East India Company, suffering from the double 
pressure of oversupply and a reduced European market, and by 
some manufacturers, merchants, and shipowners formerly engaged 
in European trade. 25 Commerce declined in the summer of 1807, 
particularly after Napoleon stepped up enforcement of the Berlin 
Decree in August. By the year's end all northern Europe was closed 
to trade except Sweden, soon for that reason to be attacked by 
Russia at Napoleon's behest. The nation of shopkeepers seemed 
in imminent danger of insolvency. 