

27 Perceval memorandum, Oct. 12, 1807, Perceval MSS, 36/2. 

199 



CANNING AND PERCEVAL 

real enforcement of the decree. Of the ministers, only Bathurst 
questioned the right that Perceval postulated. Canning wrote, "I 
have never for a moment doubted the justice of retaliating to the 
full extent." He soon warned Monroe and Pinkney that since "the 
American Government has [not] taken any . . . effectual Steps, 
with respect to the decree of France," Britain reserved the right of 
retaliation. 28 

Details of the November orders proved more troublesome than 
the decision, in general terms, to act. Perceval had proposed to 
cut off trade only in colonial produce. In cabinet discussion his 
plan was considerably broadened, apparently largely at the sug- 
gestion of Westmorland, the Lord Privy Seal. PercevaPs plan, 
to leave to neutrals and all recognized that this meant chiefly 
the United States direct trade with France in their own produce, 
was replaced by a clumsily stated but fairly complete ban on all 
trade with France and her satellites save that which passed through 
Great Britain, paying duties to the Crown. 

Only two cabinet members, Bathurst and Canning, expressed 
serious misgivings. Portland entered a mild protest but was almost 
ignored. Bathurst criticized the new orders most strongly, both in 
PercevaPs original form and in the final version. Canning recog- 
nized the dangers of the nakedly selfish form taken by the orders, 
with their almost open purpose of gaining for Britain a near monop- 
oly of trade with the Continent. Rather cynically he suggested that 
he preferred to "keep out of sight" the most flagrant discrimination 
in favor of British trade. Like Portland, he favored a less extensive 
but even tighter blockade, one less offensive to neutrals: "I would 

28 Sidmouth to Bragge Bathurst [Dec. i, 1807], George Pellew, The Life and 
Correspondence of the Right Hon^ le Henry Addington, Viscount Sidmouth (3 vols.j 
London, 1847), H> 4^75 Bathurst memoranda, n.d., Perceval MSS, 36/305 Canning- 
memorandum, Oct. 14, 1807, *bid.; Canning 1 to Monroe and Pinkney, Oct. 22, 1807, 
FO 5/54. All studies of this problem, the most detailed of which is Adams, op. cit^ 
rest primarily on the Perceval MSS, which contain numerous cabinet memoranda. 
Most historians have based their conclusions upon excerpts cited by Adams and by 
PercevaPs biographer. Spencer Walpole, thus opening the way to possible error. Most 
of the memoranda are unsigned, or at best signed with only a scrawled initial. Walpole 
guessed at the authorship of most of them, but at least several of his guesses are open 
to criticism. The memorandum assigned by Adams to Hawkesbury is almost certainly 
by Westmorland, although Walpole marked it with Hawkesbury's name. The Perceval, 
Canning, Bathurst, Castlereagh and Portland memoranda are signed or titled. 

200 



CANNING AND PERCEVAL 

rather confine the measures to a part of the Countries in the occu- 
pation of the Enemy (a large part to be sure 5 France & Holland 
for instance) and apply it in all its rigour to that part, than extend 
it to the whole, & relax it generally by complicated exceptions and 
regulations." 29 While the United States certainly would not have 
silently tolerated such a scheme. Canning was either somewhat 
more respectful of American rights or more aware of the possibili- 
ties of diplomatic controversy than his colleagues. 