

The Times inveighed against "this system of concessions to 
Americans." Grenville, Grey, and company bitterly assailed the 
government for cooperating in Napoleon's project to destroy 
international trade. But most of the nation fell into line behind the 
government. All the important newspapers except the Morning 
Chronicle, even some that had advocated moderation during the 
Chesapeake crisis, supported the orders. The appearance of energy 
secured for them what Alexander Baring called "that ephemeral 
popularity which but too generally attends measures of novelty 
and violence." It would be months before their economic effect 
could be weighed. As one of Grey's lieutenants put it, "Nothing 

32 Canning to Erskine, separate, March 4, 1808, Mayo, op. cit., p. 248 and n.j 
Pinkney to Madison, Feb. 23, 1808, Despatches, Great Britain, Vol. XV, 

3a Castlereagh to Portland, Oct. 26, 1807, Perceval MSS, 36/15-161 Perceval 
memorandum, Oct. 12, 1807, ibid., 36/2. 

2O2 



CANNING AND PERCEVAL 

can be worse than the present State of Trade and therefore every 
novelty, which holds out even a chance of Improvement, is wel- 
come." 34 In the spring of 1808 London and Liverpool merchants 
trading with America showed signs of restiveness, but the Orders 
in Council remained generally popular at least until the summer. 

At the parliamentary session beginning in January, 1808, the 
Opposition attacked the new policy. Perceval blandly denied 
charges that he was jealous of American prosperity or would wel- 
come a war with her. War would harm both (although America 
most), he said. "The prosperity of America was the prosperity of 
Great Britain, and he was as anxious to preserve peace with Amer- 
ica, consistently with the rights and interests of this country, as any 
man." But international conditions required vigorous action, and 
the Orders in Council could not be further tempered. Perceval 
and his colleagues therefore sought legislative authority for charges 
upon goods in transit to Europe. With Lord Henry Petty, Baring, 
and Auckland's son in the van and Howick, recently advanced 
to the Lords as Earl Grey by his father's death, sorely missed 
the Opposition charged against the bill. They never rallied more 
than a third of the House of Commons to their side. After a session 
lasting until six in the morning, the House approved the Orders 
in Council Bill, and before the end of March the Lords added their 
approval. Although he admitted that Opposition members, par- 
ticularly Petty, had often spoken ably, Perceval concluded with 
satisfaction that "the discussion . . . has set those orders so com- 
pletely in their right light that there is no chance of their being 
able now to make any impressions upon the public against them." 35 

Although neither Monroe nor Rose received the new regula- 
tions before departing for America, Canning soon sent Erskine a 
lengthy justification of the orders, pointing out the lucrative chan- 
nels still left open to American trade. After conversations in Wash- 
ington, the British minister reported, "this Government does not 