



222 



CHAPTER 



VII 



AMERICA'S HUMILIATION 



"The Lord the Mighty Lord must come to our Assistance, or I fear 
we are undone as a nation." * Thus wailed a Republican leader, 
not merely a carping Federalist, at the end of February, 1 809. But 
Jehovah did not deign to aid his chosen people. Instead, He sent 
James Madison as his vice-gerent, and the new President was no 
Moses. Madison never pointed out any route to a promised land 
of peace and plenty, and for more than two years the United 
States wallowed in purposeless humiliation. 

Although Federalism made a striking comeback in 1808, recap- 
turing New England, Madison easily won election as Jefferson's 
successor. Vice-President George Clinton, an ambitious schismatic, 
could not even gain a majority of the electoral vote of his own 
state of New York. In Virginia, where James Monroe encouraged 
the use of his name against Madison, the administration ticket 
beat him by five to one. Federalism, bankrupt and divided, no 

1 Macon to Nicholson, Feb. 28, 1809, Joseph H. Nicholson MSS, Library of Con- 
gress. 

223 



AMERICA'S HUMILIATION 

longer had a truly national appeal. Madison won almost by de- 
fault. 

The new president took up his station on March 4, 1809. "I re- 
pair," he said, "to the post assigned me with no other discourage- 
ment than what springs from my own inadequacies to its high 
duties. 53 This conventional self-depreciation seemed sincere on this 
occasion, for as Madison began his inaugural address he was pale 
and trembling. His audience strained to hear an oration that proved 
to contain nothing striking. In a dull, often platitudinous way, the 
President recited his principles in a series of clauses rather than 
individual sentences. Some Federalists, comparing the inaugural 
address with Jefferson's, concluded that the new administration 
would be more moderate. Actually the speeches simply reflected 
the different styles of thought of the two Republicans. The Na- 
tional Intelligencer described the speech as "chaste and nervous," 
meaning forceful, but actually "nervous" might better have been 
used in the more modern sense. The President apparently realized 
that his administration had not begun favorably. At the inaugural 
ball that evening he "seemed spiritless and exhausted," not tri- 
umphant. As soon as decency permitted, he hustled off to bed. 2 

Several years later an exceptionally scurrilous Federalist print 
unfairly described James Madison as the "political 'pirnf to Thomas 
Jefferson, and Vice-Roy to the Grand Emperor of France." The 
President disliked Napoleon as much as he disliked Perceval, and 
he seldom sought Jefferson's advice. Madison's mistakes were his 
own. Enemies (and even Republicans like Senator Worthington) 
thought him weak and irresolute. "Something may be expected 
from his timidity," the London Morning Post predicted, "but 
nothing from his justice or his liberality." Friends (and General 
Turreau) agreed with Gallatin that "Mr. Madison ... is slow 
in taking his ground, but firm when the storm arises." 3 Even his 