

Early in April, two and a half months after being framed, the 
instructions arrived at Washington by special messenger. Since 
Erskine had no desire to humiliate the United States, he abandoned 
some of the Foreign Secretary's requirements of his own volition, 
while Madison, working through the new Secretary of State, 
Robert Smith, induced him to drop others. In arranging reparation 
for the Chesapeake, the English negotiator failed to mention Can- 
ning's insistence upon formal revocation of the proclamation ban- 
ning British warships. He did get the Americans to drop a demand 
that Berkeley be punished, but in return he accepted a note, nomi- 
nally from Smith but actually written by the President, which 
insultingly declared that the United States believed punishment 
"would best comport with what is due from His Britannic majesty 
to his own Honor." 55 

The young Englishman knew Smith and Madison would never 
formally accept Canning's three stipulations, even to gain repeal 
of the orders. He did not reveal that they were sine qua non y s. 
Instead, knowing that he violated his instructions but insisting that 
he adhered to their spirit, the envoy accepted informal American 
explanations. The final settlement, the first important executive 
agreement in American history, took the form of an exchange of 
notes: Erskine promised that the Orders in Council "will have 
been withdrawn, as respects the United States on the lo th , day of 
June next," and Smith replied that trade with Britain would ac- 
cordingly be reopened. As Canning had originally suggested, 
Erskine and Smith left the working out of details until a special 
envoy could come from England. "In the mean Time," Erskine 
wrote, "no injury can be derived, I conceive, from that conditional 
Agreement." 56 

News of the agreement reached London by semaphore from 
Portsmouth on May 21. The next day Canning drafted an angry 

54 King; to Trumbull, July 31, 1809, King MSB, Vol. LXXX. 

55 Erskine $19 to Canning, April [18], 1809, and enclosures, FO 5/63. 
50 Erskine ^20 to Canning, April 20, 1809, an< J enclosures, ibid. 

212 



CANNING AND PERCEVAL 

rebuke to Erskine, stopping just short of formal disavowal o the 
arrangement. On the twenty-third the Cabinet discussed the situ- 
ation for four hours, which suggests that no formal decision had 
yet been made 3 there were even rumors, highly improbable but 
possible, that a majority of the Cabinet desired to accept the agree- 
ment, but that George III blocked this because of the insulting 
passage on Berkeley's punishment. 57 If Canning wavered tempo- 
rarily, he soon returned to his usual firmness. At a levee the next 
day, the Foreign Secretary drew Pinkney aside, "and, after ob- 
serving that he was sure that I had anticipated what he was about 
to say, informed me that they must disavow M r . Erskine," 58 Earl 
Bathurst informed merchants trading with America that the gov- 
ernment would not ratify the agreement, and a short time later 
Canning told the House of Commons that Erskine had acted in 
complete disregard of his instructions. Formal disavowal soon fol- 
lowed. 