

Lord Grenville privately declared himself grieved that Britain 
had turned its back upon an opportunity to "cultivate . . . the 
only connection which promises us any real advantage." But Lord 
Grey was cautious, and the party newspaper did not exploit the 
issue at the time (although later it did so). Even the Times, then 
in a maverick stage, reversed itself within a week after initially 
praising the agreement as a step toward amity. 59 Not a single im- 
portant public voice challenged the government. 

As a matter of fact, both Opposition and ministerial papers criti- 
cized the ministry for its attempt to cushion the impact of repudia- 
tion in America. The government announced that American ships 
that sailed for Europe in a belief that the Orders in Council had 
been lifted would be permitted to complete their voyages. Annoyed 
at this concession to their rivals, 200 London merchants attended 
a protest meeting and sent a delegation bearing resolutions to wait 

57 Joy to Madison, May 24, 1809, James Madison MSS, Library of Congress; John 
Melish, Travels in the United States of America^ in the Years 1806 & i8oj, and 
1809, /<?/<?, & 1811 (2 vols.j Philadelphia, 1812), I, 355. 

58 Pinkney to Smith, May 28, 1809, Despatches, Great Britain, Vol. XVI. 

59 Grenville to Grey, May 26, 1809, Grey MSS, from Ld. Grenville j Grey to 
Grenville, May 25, 1809, Boconnoc MSS, M r . Grey IA Howick Earl Grey, 1808- 
18135 Morning Chronicle, Jan. 21, 1 8 1 1 5 T*Vtf, May 23, 25, 26, 31, 1809. 



213 



CANNING AND PERCEVAL 

upon the Board of Trade. Along the same line, the Times com- 
plained that, "as American warehouses are now full of goods, they 
will of course be emptied, and the Continental markets supplied, 
we may say for years, after the permission to trade with them 
directly has ceased: so that the injury is not limited to the duration 
of two months, but will be sensibly felt by the English merchant, 
so long as the hoard of merchandize poured into the Continental 
markets during those two months is in a state of consumption." eo 
By its gesture to American sensibilities the government reaped far 
greater unpopularity than it did by rejecting the agreement itself. 

The disavowal nevertheless deserves very serious consideration. 
Why did Canning and his colleagues reject this settlement? As a 
preliminary, it must be emphasized that the minister departed 
widely from his instructions. Samuel Whitbread rashly accused 
Canning of misleading the House of Commons on the content of 
the instructions, but later he had to withdraw this charge. Other- 
wise the Opposition, except Erskine's father, found it best to ignore 
this point. The British, if not yet the Americans, considered the 
violation of diplomatic instructions a serious matter, seldom to 
be condoned, particularly in a young neophyte. 

Specifically, Erskine ignored orders by failing to insist upon any 
of Canning's three stipulations. In the Foreign Secretary's view, 
silence or mere oral agreement on these matters meant either that 
Britain abandoned an important position or that Madison had 
changed his attitude in an unfavorable way since Erskine's earlier 
reports. As Canning agreed, the Rule of the War of 1756 lay 
dormant in 1809, since France had lost not only all her own 
colonies except Guadeloupe, but also the trade of the Spanish 
Empire. 61 Still, the ministry wanted America on record, since the 
rule might again become important if Napoleon gained control 
of the Spanish dominions. It was far from acceptance to have the 
Secretary of State state orally that the rule would cause no trouble 
in the future, thus leaving him free to declare, as he did later, that 