

we are not so well prepared for resistance as we were one year ago. All or 
almost all our mercantile wealth was safe at home, our resources entire, 
and our finances sufficient to carry us through the first year of the con- 
test. Our property is now afloat; England relieved by our relaxations might 
stand two years of privations with ease; we have wasted our resources with- 
out any national utility ; and, our treasury being exhausted, we must begin 
any plan of resistance with considerable and therefore unpopular loans. 60 

68 Timothy Woodbridge, An Oration, Delivered at Great Harrington . . . July 4, 
1809 (Stockbridge, 1809), pp. 15-165 King to Trumbull, April 24, 1809, King 
MSS, Vol. LXXX. 

69 Connecticut Courant (Hartford), July 26, 18095 National Intelligencer (Wash- 
ington), July 26, 18095 Gallatin to John Montgomery, July 27, 1809, Albert Gallatin 
MSS, New-York Historical Society. 

219 



CANNING AND PERCEVAL 

The Erskine agreement, like the Embargo, had ended in total de- 
feat. This time, save perhaps for a certain precipitancy in accept- 
ing Erskine's promises, the administration could not be blamed. 

Canning knew that rejection of the agreement would seriously 
affront the United States. He attempted to repeat his post-Chesa- 
peake delaying tactics, particularly by the dispatch of another spe- 
cial envoy. For the mission the Foreign Secretary very unwisely 
selected Francis James Jackson, an arrogant man whose appoint- 
men to America Rufus King had blocked in 1801. Jackson it was 
who had transmitted the ultimatum that preceded the bombard- 
ment of Copenhagen, an ominous augury, although this time Jack- 
son bore no ultimatum. Through him, the Foreign Secretary again 
offered to settle the Chesapeake affair, despite the offensive passage 
on this subject in Smith's note. Canning wisely instructed his emis- 
sary not to press the original British offer on commerce, but rather 
to offer to transmit to London any American suggestions, and he 
did recapitulate the advantages conferred upon American com- 
merce by the order of 1 809. Although the instructions contained 
much argumentative and condescending language, Canning re- 
frained from directing Jackson to read them to the Secretary of 
State. Their substance was about what might have been expected, 
for Canning believed that Madison, Smith, and Gallatin had in- 
veigled Erskine into a one-sided agreement which they knew vio- 
lated his instructions. The Foreign Secretary expected American 
anger to last for some time, but nothing in the Republican record 
suggested that the President or Congress would do much more 
than complain. Since British warehouses bulged with goods just 
received from America, Canning saw little reason to take the diplo- 
matic initiative. 

Secured from adversity by an exceptionally high salary, the 
promise of at least one year's service, an entourage of eighteen 
servants, and the company of the formidable Prussian baroness he 
had married, "Copenhagen" Jackson reached Washington in Sep- 
tember. He took over the Erskines' double house. "A Scotchman 
with an American wife who would be a fine lady," the fastidious 
envoy commented after observing his quarters' uncleanly condt- 