

Erskine completely misread Canning's intentions. On the basis 
of Erskine's reports, the Foreign Secretary believed it just possible 
that the new Republican administration would transform the policy 
of the old. Thus, although Canning spoke with cautious approval 
of the first "Symptom of a System of Impartiality," he really 
sought something more than an equally balanced America. As he 
put it, "the Sincerity of the good disposition professed by ... 
the new American Administration, is the point the most important 
in the View of the British Government." Would America, while 
staying out of the war, join Britain in economic pressure upon 
France? This was the question. The restrained, lawyerlike attitude 
of Madison and Smith did not meet Canning's hopes j their casu- 
istry over his stipulations destroyed hopes of finding a nonbelliger- 
ent ally. Canning did not share the obvious American desire to 
work toward eventual removal of all British and French restrictions 
on trade. He sought a system whereby Britain should "relax or 
modify His [Majesty's] Measures of Retaliation and self-Defence, 
in proportion as those of Neutral Nations should come in aid of 
them and take their Place." 6r> 

Then, of course, there was the important question of prestige. In 
Canning's view Erskine had acted "as if His Majesty had proposed 
to make Sacrifices to propitiate the . . . United States, in order to 
induce it to consent to the Renewal of Commercial Intercourse." 66 
Doubtless the Foreign Secretary, who found the American habit 
of publishing diplomatic correspondence annoying, thought ahead 
to the inevitable day when President Madison would publish evi- 

65 Canning 1 $2, $4 to Erskine, Jan. 23, 1809, Mayo, of. cit, 9 pp. 264, 2675 
Canning $"3 to Jackson, July i, 1809, ibid.) p. 284. 
QQ Ibid., p. 283. 

2l6 



CANNING AND PERCEVAL 

dence o his triumph, evidence showing how skillfully he had 
forced Britain to abandon conditions she had set. The arrangement 
Erskine accepted did no more than meet an offer previously ex- 
tended both diplomatically and, through the Nonintercourse Act, 
legislatively. England had steadily rejected suggestions of recipro- 
cal repeal since the early days of the Embargo. Must she now 
confess her weakness by assenting? Most Englishmen saw only 
one possible answer to this question. As Canning said to Pinkney, 
in the existing state of the world, Britain not only could not con- 
cede, she must not even seem to concede. 

Finally, and this is seldom noticed, the Erskine-Smith under- 
standing undermined the Order in Council of 1809. Lord Erskine 
later declared the real issue was not whether his son had violated 
his instructions, "but whether Ministers after they had them- 
selves revoked the orders in council by their order of the 26 th of 
April last, which reduced the differences with America to literally 
nothing were justified in not giving a latitude to their minister there 
to settle the small remainder." 6T His lordship missed the point. 
The April order had the form of a spontaneous act, not a surrender. 
This concealed, carefully framed offer to the United States re- 
opened much European trade j however, the Netherlands remained 
excluded so that the United States, which claimed a right to trade 
there, would also have to recede from its position. Whether Madi- 
son would have accepted this offer is problematical, but Erskine's 
broader concessions relieved him of the necessity of deciding. While 
George Canning would have preferred a tight agreement along 
the lines of his instructions, he must have been very angry that the 
less ambitious but still helpful plan embodied in the new Order 
in Council was never seriously tested. 