

Historians have often criticized Canning and the Cabinet for 
acting on such reasoning, arguing that rejection of the agreement 
helped to bring war three years later. Would the Erskine agree- 
ment really have ended discord? Later on Napoleon was shrewd 
enough to announce voluntarily the repeal of his decrees; in 1809 
he might have tried the same gambit under pressure, and if he 

67 Lord Erskine to Grey, Sept. 28, 1809, Grey MSS, from Ld. Erskine. 

217 



CANNING AND PERCEVAL 

had, we can only guess the consequences. Even without Napoleonic 
repeal, it is by no means certain that the Erskine agreement would 
have welded the United States to Britain for any length of time. 
The issue of impressment, for one thing, still remained, quiescent 
but potentially explosive. Actually, each side sought something 
quite different: America wanted neutral commerce (especially 
with France and her dependencies) restored to the seas 3 Britain 
wanted a nonbelligerent ally in the struggle against Napoleon. 

The ministers, then, may have shown little imagination j they 
may be criticized for refusing to run risks in the search for a raf- 
yrochement. They certainly showed that they valued apparent 
advantages (actually largely illusory) for British commerce higher 
than American friendship. They did not act as they did simply 
because they detested Republicanism, James Madison, or the 
United States. If anyone deserves chief blame for the Erskine 
agreement, it is the man whose name it bears. He first misled 
Canning about the situation in America, then fumbled the Foreign 
Secretary's attempt to bind the United States to Britain's side, and 
also fatally undermined the gesture put forward in the Order in 
Council of April, 1 809. 

In American hearts David M. Erskine aroused false hopes, the 
blighting of which contributed to a general feeling of frustration, 
national dishonor, and dissatisfaction. Probably no other event 
from 1783 to 1815 was so generally celebrated as the Erskine 
agreement. Church bells rang, cannons boomed, candles illuminated 
windows, and, most important of all, the heavy flow of commerce 
to England was, albeit briefly, renewed. For the benefits of the 
agreement, some pious folk looked "with sentiments of fervent 
gratitude, beyond human agency, up to that awful Being, who 
guides and governs the affairs of men." Most Americans con- 
sidered the Deity a passive spectator, and one of the attractive 
things about the Erskine agreement was that credit could be 
claimed by both parties. "One side rejoice because they think that 
the Embargo &c a . has brought England to terms," wrote Rufus 
King, and "the other side rejoice because they believe that the 
opposition to the late Measures of Congress has obliged the ad- 

218 



CANNING AND PERCEVAL 

ministration to abandon their system, and to accept a Reconcilia- 
tion with England." 68 

Then, three months later, came the news of Britain's disavowal. 
Ending the happy competition for credit, the parties now sought 
to apportion blame. Extreme Federalists blamed the administra- 
tion for its trickiness with Erskine, Erskine for his simple-minded 
abandonment of his instructions j sometimes they pointed out that, 
under the new Order in Council, "our trade will have the same 
latitude, it was to enjoy by Mr. Erskine's arrangements and as 
qualified by our own laws, except Holland, and French Italy." 
Administration journals, and in private such Federalist leaders as 
King and Christopher Gore, declared that Canning's three condi- 
tions were entirely inadmissible. Republicans argued that the 
entire affair had probably been a trick to open a temporary chan- 
nel of trade (two-thirds the normal amount of British exports went 
to the United States in 1809 as a result of the temporary relaxa- 
tion of controls), and asserted that rejection of an agreement con- 
cluded in good faith "has capped the climax of atrocity towards 
this country." President Madison reluctantly broke his vacation at 
Montpelier to confer with the Cabinet at Washington. In some 
embarrassment, for his authority to act was uncertain, he issued on 
August 9 a proclamation again prohibiting trade with England. 
America had been humiliated once more. The Secretary of the 
Treasury gloomily commented that 