

70 Canning #i-#s to Jackson, July i, 1809, Mayo, op. cit., pp. 277-287. 

22O 



CANNING AND PERCEVAL 

tion, "are not the best people to succeed on such an occasion." So- 
cially, Jackson received great consideration from Robert Smith 
and the President ; professionally, he suffered a real defeat at 
their hands. Instead of simply following Canning's instructions 
to preserve silence after repeating the Chesapeake offer, Jackson 
let himself become involved in the sort of disputation at which 
Madison excelled. Goaded by American notes, signed by Smith 
but written by the President, Jackson committed one indiscretion 
after another. In November the President quite justifiably declared 
that he would have nothing more to do with Jackson and would 
insist on his recall. The baroness angrily reported to her brother- 
in-law, "Francis being accustomed to treat with the civilized courts 
... of Europe and not with savage democrats, half of them sold 
to France, has not succeeded in his mission/ 3 and Jackson himself 
sent the Foreign Office a forty-five-page apologia which took the 
legation secretary fourteen hours to copy. 71 But Madison had j had 
his triumph. "Copenhagen" Jackson spent the rest of his allotted 
year traveling about the United States. He accepted entertainment 
by Federalist bigwigs ready to welcome any enemy of Madison, 
and he prepared and subsidized propaganda in antiadministration 
journals. 72 

Shortly after Jackson's arrival in America, Canning's intrigues 
against Castlereagh blew the British government apart. Canning 
passed into the political wilderness. Until he returned to the For- 
eign Office in 1 822, Canning had little influence upon policy toward 
America, although in 1812 he supported the Opposition call for a 
committee of inquiry into the Orders in Council. At that time 
he made it clear that, while he still favored commercial warfare 
against France, he strongly objected to the license system and par- 
ticularly to its selfishness. 73 

When Canning left office in the fall of 1809, Anglo-American 

71 Jackson to Mrs. Jackson (mother), Oct. 7, 1809, Lady Jackson, ed., The 'Bath 
Archives: a Further Selection from the Diaries aud Letters of Sir George Jackson (2 
vols.j London, 1873), I, 17; Mrs. Francis J. Jackson to Sir George Jackson, Nov. 21, 
1809, tbid. 9 I, 575 Jackson #19 to Canning, Nov. 16, 1809, FO 5/64. 

72 Josephine Fisher, "Francis James Jackson and Newspaper Propaganda in the 
United States, 18091810," Maryland Historical Magazine, XXX (1935)) 931135 
Francis James Jackson MSS, Public Record Office, FO 353/58-61 'passim. 

73 Hansard, XXI, 1139-1149. 

221 



CANNING AND PERCEVAL 

relations were strained. They had deteriorated since the fall of the 
Ministry of All the Talents. However, by comparison with his suc- 
cessor, the pompous and inflexible Marquis Wellesley, Canning 
followed a liberal American policy. The chief charge against him 
is the appointment of Jackson, a bad choice for a mission of tran- 
quilization, but even this failure had no immediate practical con- 
sequences. Despite defects of character which irritated Americans 
and later influenced historians, George Canning was not an Ameri- 
canophobe. He favored policies more moderate than those advo- 
cated by his colleagues and far more intelligent than those for 
which the British press shrilly called. The Foreign Secretary pre- 
vented the Chesapeake affair from becoming even more serious 
than it was. He questioned the wisdom of the Orders in Council 
of November, 1 807, and doubtless supported the almost unnoticed 
concessions they contained. He and Bathurst secured the virtual 
repeal of those orders through the new policy adopted in 1809. 
Perhaps Britain should not have rejected the Erskine agreement, 
but it was the minister himself, not Canning, who created the crisis, 
and even here the government attempted to lessen American re- 
sentment by conceding special privileges to ships that sailed after 
the agreement was signed. Thus, under Canning's leadership, 
Britain made several gestures to the United States. These conces- 
sions failed in their purpose, primarily because Canning and all 
England misunderstood Jeffersonianism and overestimated the 
amount of condescension America would tolerate. A lack of vision, 
a failure of understanding, rather than malevolence, may be 
charged against George Canning. 