

2 James D. Richardson, ed., A Compilation of the Messages and Papers of the 
Presidents (Washington, 1897), I, 466-4685 Margaret B. Smith to Susan B. Smith, 

March , 1809, Gaillard Hunt, ed., The First Forty years of Washington 

Society . . . the Family Letters of Mrs. Samuel Harrison Smith (London, 1906), 
pp. 58-64; National Intelligencer (Washington), March 6, 1809. 

3 Federal Republican (Baltimore), Jan. 27, 18125 Roy J. Honeywell, "President 
Jefferson and His Successor," American Historical Review, XL VI (19401941), 64 

224 



AMERICA'S HUMILIATION 

most loyal supporters did not claim that the President was a natural 
leader. 

The selection of a secretary of state revealed Madison at his 
worst. He planned to nominate Gallatin, but Senate opposition 
frightened him. Rather than fight, Madison at first thought of pur- 
chasing Senator Samuel Smith's support by offering the Treasury 
to the Senator's brother. When Gallatin, arguing that Robert 
Smith had scarcely distinguished himself as secretary of the navy, 
objected on the reasonable ground that Madison's plan would 
saddle him with the work of two departments, the President de- 
cided to leave his chief lieutenant at the Treasury. He named the 
utterly incompetent Robert Smith to the Department of State. 
This arrangement had no advantage save that it postponed quar- 
rels with Samuel Smith and Senator Giles, who, eager to secure 
the State Department for himself, had spearheaded the opposi- 
tion to Gallatin. Smith's appointment brought a disloyal subor- 
dinate into the administration's inner circle. It convinced ambitious 
congressmen that the new administration could be defied with im- 
punity and forced the President to take onto his own shoulders 
most State Department business. 

This episode merely marked the beginning of Madison's 
troubles. Gallatin aroused lesser men's jealousy, and his advance- 
ment to second position in the party hierarchy increased the num- 
ber of his enemies. The Secretary fought constantly with the 
Smiths, and the two brothers sometimes found allies in their rela- 
tive, Wilson C. Nicholas, and the erratic, ambitious Giles. De- 
spite Giles's untrustworthiness, Madison let him continue as nom- 
inal administration leader in the upper house. In January, 1809, 
congressional votes, nominally on naval policy but actually chal- 
lenges to Madison and Gallatin, showed how the President had 
lost control. More than half the Republican senators and one-third 
of the representatives deserted their leaders. 4 



75; Morning Post (London), April 17, 18095 Gallatin to Nicholson, Dec. 29, 1808, 
Henry Adams, The Life of Albert Gallatin (Philadelphia, 1879), p. 3 8 4- 

4 Gallatin memorandum, "The Navy Coalition o 1809," n,d., Albert Gallatin 
MSS, New- York Historical Society. 

225 



AMERICA'S HUMILIATION 

Seldom has Congress floundered more visibly than in the ten 
weeks from December, 1808, to Madison's inauguration. All 
agreed the nation must find some foreign policy upon which it 
could stand. But Jefferson had abdicated, Madison did not re- 
place him, and rebellious congressional cliques found common 
ground only in attacks upon authority. "I do not believe," David 
M. Erskine reported, "that there are ten men who think alike upon 
any one important measure." Federalists opposed both war and 
commercial restrictions in fact, everything. Some Republicans 
wanted to continue the Embargo system $ nonintercourse was orig- 
inally conceived as an adjunct to the Embargo, and in a last spasm 
the Enforcement Act of 1809 passed. Others, like Giles, George 
W. Campbell, and Attorney General Rodney, personally favored 
a declaration of war on one or both belligerents. Perhaps the larg- 
est group simply drifted, in Joseph Story's words, "without a guide 
or the wish for a guide." The net result was chaos. "You will see 
with regret," the President-elect wrote Pinkney in February, "the 
difficulty experienced in collecting the mind of Congress into some 
proper focus. On no occasion were the ideas so unstable and so 
scattered." 5 