

Our Southern friends . . . now tell us that they are entirely willing to 
limit the Embargo, if we will at the same time unite in authorizing Letters 

7 Annals, loth Cong., id sess., pp. 514-521. 

227 



AMERICA'S HUMILIATION 

of Marque to issue upon its repeal, that they are willing to support our com- 
mercial rights by the present System or by War as we shall think best, but 
that they will never consent to take non intercourse & non-importation as 
a substitute for the Embargo, that they will in Preference to this give up 
the whole ground of resistance to belligerent aggressions. ... I am satis- 
fied that N. England will not bear the Embargo . . . [or] War, the 
other parts of the union will support their commercial rights in no other 
Way, because they say the Nation can do nothing short of it honorably. 
The Result, in my opinion is that the rights of Commerce will be abandoned 
by the Nation. 8 

House action on resolutions presented by Wilson C. Nicholas 
confirmed the accuracy of Bacon's prediction. Nicholas 5 proposal, 
that at a date to be fixed, presumably in June, the United States 
repeal the Embargo and use force to reestablish its rights, was the 
logical capstone to the structure that Gallatin and his friends de- 
sired. This added burden turned the fissures in the facade into 
ever-widening cracks which brought down the whole structure. 
The Virginian, in effect paraphrasing the argument of Campbell's 
Report, declared that he had always believed that "when the 
embargo failed, we must resort to the valor and patriotism of our 
citizens. Sir, we have too much reason to believe that the moment 
is at hand when nothing else can extricate us from our difficulties." 
The House refused to follow Nicholas either in his logic or his 
patriotism. In the debate only John W. Eppes supported his col- 
league without reserve- other members explored alternatives rang- 
ing all the way from immediate war to total submission. By an 
approximate two-to-one margin the House defeated a proposal to 
fix June I as the date for the decisive shift from Embargo to force, 
primarily because congressmen were unwilling, or believed New 
England unwilling, to tolerate the Embargo even that long. Then 
it voted approval of the section repealing the Embargo, to take 
effect within a month. On the evening of February 5 "a large & 
commanding Caucus of 50 or 60 was summoned," Bacon reported, 
"at which we nerveless seceders were pressed by all the force & 
all the weight of the Government machine to meet on the ground 

8 Bacon to Story, Jan. 22, 1809, Joseph Story MSS, Library of Congress. 

228 



HUMILIATION 

of immediate or contingent War." Bacon and Orchard Cook an- 
swered harangues by Nicholas, Eppes, Giles, and other bellicose 
Republicans. The seceders kept their nerve. 9 

The Gallatin-Nicholas-Campbell plan collapsed in a shambles. 
"The only honorable course was from Embargo to war," Nicholas 
wrote to Madison. "I fear we cannot now obtain it, and I fear we 
must submit to the plan least disgraceful." 10 The next day con- 
firmed Nicholas 5 fears, for the House defeated his proposal to 
vindicate American rights by force. Since, of Nicholas' scheme, 
only Embargo repeal remained, and that at an early date, the 
House had in effect voted in favor of submission to European 
arrogance only eight weeks after Campbell's nonsubmission resolu- 
tion had been well-nigh unanimously approved. The Republicans 
desperately caucused again, ultimately agreed that they could not 
agree on any course to vindicate the nation's honor, and decided to 
shift responsibility to the Foreign Relations Committee. Many 
Republican rebels and Federalists opposed this step, fearing that 
the committee might attempt to reverse the decision rescinding the 
Embargo, and reference to the committee was secured by the nar- 
row margin of sixty-five to fifty-five. Obviously no new bill, to 
stand a ghost of a chance of passage, could require very much in 
the way of national sacrifice. 