

Gallatin believed that above all the United States must not 
show the white feather by abandoning resistance. "If the Embargo 
is taken off/' he wrote, "I do not perceive yet any median between 
absolute subjection and war," 6 and he and presumably Madison 
concocted a plan to slide the nation toward war. They and friends 
in the legislature decided to continue the Embargo until June, with 
an understanding that Congress, in a special session, would then 
declare war against those who continued to mistreat American 
commerce. If the announced intention to go to war frightened Brit- 
ain or France, or if the American people became belligerent enough 
to support a declaration, or if European events made the com- 

5 Erskine $10 to Canning, Feb. d, 1809, Foreign Office Archives, Public Record 
Office, FO 5/62; Story to Fay, Jan. 9, 1809, William W. Story, Life and Letters of 
Joseph Story, I (Boston, 1851), 1771835 Madison to Pinkney, Feb. u, 1809, 
Letters and Other Writings of James Madison (Congressional ed.j 4 vols.j Phila* 
delphia, 1865), II, 429. 

6 Gallatin to Nicholson, Oct. 28, 1808, Nicholson MSS. 

226 



AMERICA'S HUMILIATION 

batants change their commercial policies, such a course might end 
in triumph or at least decision. All were unlikely. The proposed 
policy essentially only postponed the issue and sought to purchase 
acceptance of the Embargo for six more months by promising to 
lift it in the spring. 

As secretary of state and president-elect, Madison might have 
been expected to launch the new policy. Instead the task fell to 
Gallatin, who prepared a long paper designed to prepare the way 
for action. On November 22, 1808, Congressman Campbell pre- 
sented this manifesto to the House of Representatives. After re- 
viewing the disputes with England and France, the report declared, 
"There is no alternative, but war with both nations, or a continu- 
ance of the present system." Selective war or reopened commerce, 
which Britain's sea dominion would enable her to monopolize, 
would have the effect of alliance with one of the offending powers 
against the other. Although Campbell's Report stopped short of 
calling for a declaration of war, it did suggest that war might soon 
be forced upon the United States. The Tennessee congressman 
asked his colleagues to approve resolutions asserting their inten- 
tion to maintain American rights, closing American ports to the 
offending colossuses, and speeding military preparations. 7 The 
House completed action on Campbell's resolutions within a month 
and then resolved in favor of a special session at the end of May. 

So far so good, but behind the fagade lay rotten timbers. Fissures 
had already appeared, particularly in substantial Republican defec- 
tions in balloting on Campbell's resolution against trade with Brit- 
ain and France. New England Republicans pressed for an escape 
from the Embargo before June, and Southerners and administra- 
tion supporters sought to keep them in line. The leader of the New 
England group, Ezekiel Bacon, pessimistically described the situa- 
tion at the end of January in a letter to Joseph Story, who had re- 
turned to Boston: 