

Once again the Secretary of the Treasury attempted to give some 
direction to Congress. His annual report revealed the first deficit 
in years and pointed out that partial commercial restriction was 
unenforceable. Therefore, the Secretary declared, the United 
States must either return to complete embargo or abandon the at- 
tempts at restriction, a so far at least as they affect the commerce 
and navigation of the citizens of the United States." Nathaniel 
Macon introduced a bill drafted by Gallatin which adopted the 
second alternative. The bill freed American merchantmen to go 
wherever they chose and permitted importation of British and 
French goods brought in American vessels. At the same time 
Macon's Bill #i closed American ports to merchantmen and 
warships of England and France, promising to remove this pro- 
hibition if either power rescinded its decrees. Since French ships 
could not and British merchantmen did not often come to the 
United States, this proposal could hardly be coercive. It would 
at least shift the burden of restriction from Americans to their 
oppressors, reopen trade, and assure increased receipts for the 
Treasury. The administration intended, as Bacon put it after talks 
with Gallatin, "to have a principal regard for our own Convenience, 
keeping up at the same time a sort of Protestation against the in- 
fringements of our rights." 29 

More subtle possibilities also existed. Britain might retaliate 
against the ban on her ships by excluding American merchantmen, 

28 Annals, nth Cong., ist and zd sess., p. n68j Richardson, o$. cit. y I, 473-477. 

29 Adams, o$. cit. y pp. 412-4135 Annals, nth Cong., ist and zd sess., pp. 754~755 J 
Bacon to Story, Nov. 27, 1809, Story MSS. 



AMERICA'S HUMILIATION 

as Jackson seems to have wished $ if she did so, by her own actions 
England would make effective the ban on trade which supporters 
of the Embargo had long insisted would force her surrender. Or, 
as Jackson, Turreau, and Timothy Pickering believed, the free- 
ing of American ships might be "for the Purpose of bringing on a 
War with Great Britain by the Collisions that will arise out of an 
Attempt in this Country to renew it's commerce with France." 30 
(Some Republicans did find this a reason for swallowing the bill, 
but it probably played no part in the original plan.) Finally, a small 
number of bitter Federalists, particularly Barent Gardenier and 
Philip B. Key, favored Macon's Bill # i because "in its operation 
it will be complete non-intercourse with France and free trade with 
England" since the Royal Navy could control the destination of 
American ships. 31 

Ranged against the bill, in addition to Republican factionalists 
who opposed everything from the other end of Pennsylvania Ave- 
nue, was a motley alliance of Federalists and war men. The Fed- 
eralists desired completely free trade, and feared British retalia- 
tion if Macon's bill passed. Republican radicals wished to try 
convoys, letters of marque, war anything to show more spirit. 
"If the conduct of the nation were not more energetic," one of 
them said, ". . . we should forfeit the little character we had 
acquired, and call down on us the contempt of every nation on 
earthy we should become contemptible even in our own eyes. . . . 
We had . . . tried this system for several years j it had done no 
good, and it was time to try some other." 32 This argument was 
two years premature in 1810. By the narrow margin of seventy- 
three to fifty-two, the moderates and the administration men gained 
passage of the bill after three weeks of debate. 