

12 Tallmadge to Tapping Reeve, Feb. 27, 1809, Charles S. Hall, Benjamin Tall- 
madge (New York, 1943), p. 2015 Annals^ loth Cong 1 ., 2d sess., pp. 353387. 

13 Annals, loth Cong., 2d sess., p. 407 (Bayard). 

14 As an indication of the rot within Republicanism, it is interesting to note that 
at the beginning of the session Varnum had been prepared to support continuation 
of the Embargo or a declaration of war. Varnum to Eustis, Nov. 19, 1808, William 
Eustis MSS, Library of Congress. 

230 



AMERICA'S HUMILIATION 

one hand and Jackson and Campbell on the other, declined to 
vote. The Senate accepted this lesser version of its own bill the 
next day, with reluctance and greater opposition. 

The bill passed solely because it represented the lowest common 
denominator between those who would accept any substitute simply 
to confirm escape from the Embargo, and those who desired to 
make some sacrifices in defense of national interests and honor. 
Compromise is one of the strongest features of the American legis- 
lative system, but the Nonintercourse Act carried it to extremes. 
As a bitter Republican put it, just before the House vote, "the 
passage of this bill would be a novelty in legislation, for ... it 
had not a friend in the House." Moreover, the final result was a 
defeat for congressional supporters of the incoming administration, 
a defeat for which James Madison was at least partially responsible. 
The administration undoubtedly desired a bill at least appearing 
to be the prelude to forceful measures, not simply a retreat from 
the Embargo. But after Gallatin's initial efforts executive leader- 
ship virtually collapsed. Although Madison perhaps provided at 
least the language of Wilson C. Nicholas 5 proposal, the President- 
elect made no strenuous efforts to get it passed, hastily accepted 
its defeat and suggested the futile measure of nonintercourse as a 
substitute, and failed to lift a finger in support of letters of marque. 
"The fact is," Ezekiel Bacon wrote to Joseph Story, "the admin- 
istration have been completely beaten ... by the Non Inter- 
course." 15 Bacon asked Story to keep the information secret. Why, 
it is difficult to determine, for nothing could conceal the executive's 
political poverty. 

The Nonintercourse Act contained scraps of various plans. The 
act repealed the Embargo, closed trade, both export and import, 
with the British Empire and the areas controlled by Napoleon 5 
prohibited armed British and French ships from entering Ameri- 
can ports 5 and authorized the President to reopen trade with a 
power that ceased to violate American maritime rights. Nobody 
seriously believed that England and France, able to stand up 

15 Annals , loth Cong., ad sess., p. 1539 (William Milnor) 5 Bacon to Story, 
Feb. 26, 1809, Story MSS. 

231 



AMERICA'S HUMILIATION 

against the Embargo, would be effectively coerced by this lesser 
pressure. "We have trusted our most precious interests in this leaky 
vessel," scoffed John Randolph in one of those colorful metaphors 
that studded his speeches, "and now, by way of amendment, we 
are going to bore additional holes in this machine, which, like a 
cask, derives all its value, if it have any, from being water-tight." 
Everyone knew that once American ships left their harbors they 
would go where they chose, for, as the Richmond Enquirer put 
it, the "calculation, that you can permit your vessels to go to sea, 
and whilst at sea, restrain them in their traffic, is void." In the first 
four months of the new administration seventy-nine ships sailed 
from New York in nominal search of a market in the Azores. 
There is no reason to believe that merchants elsewhere engaged in 
evasion on a lesser scale. 16 Here was commercial warfare clothed 
in provisions most troublesome to the United States itself, most 
burdensome to the honest American merchant. 