

237 



AMERICA'S HUMILIATION 

1809, John Armstrong asked France, in response to the new 
American law, to modify or repeal her decrees, even clandestinely 
if necessary. Urged on by his foreign secretary, fearful of the new 
Order in Council's effect on American opinion, and briefly alarmed 
by Erskine's settlement, Napoleon considered concession. In the 
confused days after Aspern and Esslihg he found time to prepare 
a decree restoring American commerce to its status before the Milan 
Decree. Then word reached Schoenbrunn, where the Emperor 
had his headquarters, that the British government had repudiated 
Erskine. The threat of an Anglo-American reconciliation evap- 
orated, and the Nonintercourse Act failed to chastise or tempt 
Napoleon. In June Champagny directed authorities left behind at 
Paris to temporize with Armstrong. 26 

That summer, his position bolstered by the victory at Wagram, 
Napoleon stepped up his assaults on American commerce. On Au- 
gust 22, in a note prepared under his master's eye, the Duke of 
Cadore (to which title Champagny had advanced) informed Arm- 
strong that France would not relax her decrees until the British 
withdrew theirs. 27 For the rest of the year the French seized what- 
ever American ships they could and forced their satellites to adopt 
a similar policy. 

When Congress met in November, 1 809, America faced dolorous 
prospects. William A. Burwell, who favored effective action against 
Britain, confessed that "the spirit of the nation is evaporated, and 
... I despair of taking any measure . . . which would not 
meet with such opposition as to make it useless." French seizures, 
more numerous than Britain's, offset Jackson's gaucheriesj men of 
trade and some farmers desired free commerce above everything 
elsej and internal rivalries and lack of leadership destroyed the 
Republican party as an instrument of legislation. The President's 
annual message, which criticized the European powers and con- 

26 Armstrong to Minister of Foreign Relations, May 2, 1809, AAE, CP, E-U, Vol. 
LXII; Champagny to Napoleon, May 26, 1809, ibid.; Napoleon to Champagny, 
June 10, 1809, Correspondence de Napoleon 1** (32 vols.j Paris, 1858-1870), XIX, 
no-in 5 Champagny to Hauterive, June 13, 1809, AAE, CP, E-U, Vol. LXIL 

27 Cadore to Armstrong, Aug. 22, 1809, AAE, CP, E-U, Vol. LXII; Napoleon to 
Cadore, Aug. 17, 21, 1809, Correspondance de Nafoleon, XIX, 414, 438439. 

238 



AMERICA'S HUMILIATION 

gratulated Americans on their good health and prosperity, re- 
frained entirely from recommending any policy. 28 In the first 
months of the session little was done. The Senate voted to outfit 
American frigates, a cheap gesture attractive to many only because 
it promised to embarrass Gallatin and the Treasury. Both cham- 
bers condemned Jackson. The effect was largely nullified by vo- 
ciferous opposition in the House, where debate often lasted until 
dawn and forty-one congressmen ultimately voted against a reso- 
lution supporting their own government. 