

Without extorting concessions from Downing Street in exchange, 
the new system actually favored Britain over France. The Em- 
bargo had hurt Britain more than France since she carried on 
larger commerce with the United States; the Nonimportation Act 
and the Chesapeake proclamation singled out Britain for special 
resentment. The new act, closing American harbors to both coun- 
tries' armed vessels and prohibiting importations from either, put 
the rivals on an equal basis in law. In practice, these provisions 
actually worked against France, since the French had few over- 
seas alternatives as export markets or points of shelter for their 
ships. "This decision," the French foreign minister complained, 
"is unfavorable to France against which the United States can have 
no complaint that she has attempted to invade their sovereignty 
nor to have committed acts of violence against their coasts and their 
vessels." 17 

16 Annals , loth Cong., zd sess., p. 1466$ Enquirer (Richmond), Feb. 10, 18095 
Herbert Heaton, "Non-Importation, 1806-1812," Journal of Economic History, I 
(1941), 192. Per contra, not a single ship sailed from New York for the Azores while 
American commerce with Britain was opened by the Erskine agreement. Ibid. y p. 193. 

17 Champagny to Hauterive, June 13, 1809, Archives des Affaires trangeres, 
Correspondance Politique, tats-Unis (photostats, Library of Congress), Vol. LXII. 

232 



AMERICA'S HUMILIATION 

Above all, the partial resumption of trade obviously favored 
England. The Royal Navy would make sure that relatively few 
American ships slipped into enemy ports, whereas the French 
could hope to intercept only a small proportion of those ships that 
chose to violate the law by sailing to England. Furthermore, within 
a short time a lively business developed in neutral ports, where 
British ships bearing English manufactures exchanged cargoes with 
American vessels carrying raw materials from the United States. 
Once again the Royal Navy saw to it that France did not similarly 
profit. Minister Turreau reported to Paris that "of every one hun- 
dred ships which leave the Ports of the Union for the high seas, 
the real object of ninety of them will be to satisfy the needs and 
the desires of England. 3 ' 18 

These effects of the new law, with the disgraceful scenes that 
had accompanied its passage, led Englishmen to consider it a vic- 
tory. Even before the act passed, David M. Erskine predicted 
that "it would be rather a nominal Prohibition than a rigorous 
Enforcement," and he never changed his opinion. Newspapers 
that supported the Portland ministry exulted over the American 
surrender. William Cobbett, who did not like the British Cabinet, 
grudgingly admitted that it had gained a victory. The Americans, 
wrote Cobbett, "know that their cargoes will come to England. 
. . . Aye, and they intend they shall come here, too ; only their 
silly, their empty pride, will not let them acknowledge it. . . . No 
triumph can be more complete than that of ministers, in this 
case." 19 Not for years did the United States recover from the 
effect of the Nonintercourse Act. 