

With this feeble weapon the new administration faced the Euro- 
pean titans. Ritualistically, Secretary Smith wrote Pinkney and 
Armstrong that, if one power lifted its decrees, the special session 
of Congress planned for the spring would "authorize acts of hos- 
tility on the part of the United States against the other," Neither 

18 Turreau 9^13 to Minister of Foreign Relations, April 15, 1809, ibid-. Since 
Anglo-American trade was free for several months after the Erskine ageement, it is 
impossible to determine from annual statistics how much illegal trade was carried on. 

19 Erskine #12 to Canning, Feb. 10, 1809, FO 5/62$ Colberts Political Register 
(London), XV (1809), 533. 



AMERICA'S HUMILIATION 

Britain nor France, nor the American government itself, can have 
taken this very seriously. For the Americans, the conversations 
with David M. Erskine in the middle of April offered far more 
promise. They led to the temporary reopening of trade and ap- 
parent reconciliation with England. Seventy-two American vessels 
reached Liverpool in a five-day period in June, and Minister Tur- 
reau left Washington to avoid riotous celebrations. At its special 
session Congress promptly passed a law continuing nonintercourse 
with France. It did not even take up more stringent measures, as 
Smith had indicated it would, but David M. Erskine reported 
that, if France remained obdurate, these would probably follow 
soon. Then, in midsummer, there arrived news that Canning had 
rejected his subordinate's undertaking, primarily, Pinkney told 
Madison, because faltering at the last session of Congress had con- 
vinced Britain of America's "Inability to persevere in a System 
which was on the point of accomplishing all its Purposes." 20 An- 
gry, weak, baffled, and uncertain, Madison's government returned 
to the grounds of the Nonintercourse Act. 

The conversations with Francis James Jackson, which provided 
the administration with a technical diplomatic triumph, did not 
result in any substantive advantages. The special envoy declined 
scornfully to show any anger over the reclosing of British trade, 
observing sarcastically that "it was for America to determine 
whether it would be for her advantage to convey her Productions 
and receive those of other Countries through a circuitous Route, 
and by the expensive Intervention of a third Party." Nor did 
Jackson believe that the failure of his mission would be followed 
by hostilities: "That there is an Intention in this Government to 
go to War with Great Britain I do not believe; their Views do not 
assume that Magnitude; and if they did, support would not be 
given by the Country at large." New instructions sent to Pinkney 

20 Smith to Pinkney, March 15, 1809, Department of State Archives, National 
Archives, Instructions, All Countries, Vol. VII 5 Smith to Armstrong, March 15, 
1809, ibid.; memorandum of June 15, 1809, enclosed in Joseph Bailey to Canning 1 , 
June 17, 1809, FO 5/665 Turreau $ : ^^ to Minister of Foreign Relations, June 10, 
1809, AAE, CP, E-U, Vol. LXIIj Erskine #28 to Canning, July 3, 1809, FO 5/635 
Pinkney to Madison, private, Aug. 19, 1809, Rives Collection. 