

234 



AMERICA'S HUMILIATION 

in January, 1810, proved this accurate, for in them the American 
government took the initiative in seeking an accommodation de- 
spite the insults it had received. 21 

The only possible excuse for inviting a further rebuff was the 
hope that the reconstruction of the British ministry would lead to 
a policy more favorable to the United States. For months, with the 
tacit encouragement of colleagues who later abandoned him, Can- 
ning intrigued for Castlereagh's removal from the War Office, and 
failure of the Walcheren expedition brought these intrigues to a 
head. Tangled negotiations followed. The upshot was the departure 
from the Cabinet of both rivals (at a subsequent duel Castlereagh 
wounded Canning) and continuation of the government under 
PercevaPs leadership. The Duke of Portland, whose incompetence 
had been accentuated by a mild stroke, was put out to grass. The 
new ministry seemed very weak. Grenville and Grey rejected over- 
tures, Canning carried his followers (few in numbers, but effective 
workers) into opposition, and the Sidmouths remained outside the 
government. For some weeks offices went begging, and the Morn- 
ing Chronicle sanctimoniously complained that "it is really dis- 
graceful to a great Empire, that PERCEVAL and Co. should be 
allowed ... to put up to a sort of Dutch auction, the Great Of- 
fices of Government." When the Cabinet was finally completed, 
the Times expostulated, "Surely this is not to be borne." 22 Political 
experts agreed that the government would have to tread warily 
if it wished to retain power for even a few months. 

Since the Cabinet had divested itself of imaginativeness in oust- 
ing Canning and had shucked off at least the traditions of Whiggism 
by retiring Portland, only its weakness was encouraging to the 
United States. The State Department received word from its rep- 
resentative in London that, "though the Members of the late 
Cabinet, who have shewn themselves particularly hostile to our 
Rights and Interests, . , . are to be at the Head of the new Gov- 
ernment, they will be less adventurous and more manageable than 

21 Jackson #7, #19, to Canning-, Oct. 17, Nov. 16, 1809, FO 5/645 Smith to 
Pinkney, Jan. 20, 1810, Instructions, Vol. VII. 

22 Morning Chronicle (London), Oct. 31, 1809; Times (London), Nov. i, 1809. 

235 



AMERICA'S HUMILIATION 

heretofore on all American Topicks." The President was not so 
optimistic. He believed the change "likely to make bad worse" 
unless the affairs of England were brought to an "extremity" by 
"the quackeries and corruptions of an administration headed by 
such a being as Perceval." 23 

Richard Colley Wellesley, Marquis Wellesley, the one im- 
portant infusion of new blood, surprised Canning and the Oppo- 
sition, both erstwhile political allies, by accepting the Foreign 
Office. The marquis liked office, he knew that the ministry would 
give determined support to his brother in the Peninsula, and Perce- 
val needed whatever abilities and parliamentary accretions he could 
find. While not without capacity, as his service in India showed, 
Wellesley had most of Canning's failings and few of his strengths, 
although, primarily because his public papers had no fire, he never 
affronted American opinion as his predecessor had done. His per- 
sonal attitude toward the United States is practically indiscernible, 
since he generally accepted the Cabinet's lead. As this suggests, 
Marquis Wellesley's most notable characteristic was sloth. In the 
winter of 1810-1811 no instructions, other than formal circulars, 
issued from the Foreign Office, and Francis James Jackson later 
commented that Wellesley "never goes to the Office, and is visible 
nowhere but in his harem." George III, who detested Wellesley, 
had urged that Bathurst continue in the office he had taken 
ad interim. By that time, however, florid letters were already en 
route from Seville, announcing that "I have obeyed the Sum- 
mons of my Sovereign, & ... I enter the King's Councils 
with a firm intention of devoting my exertions to His Majesty's 
cause." 24 