

The House committee and Senator Giles both produced plans 
designed to conceal American disgrace as far as possible. The 
House version, presented by Wilson C. Nicholas for a committee 
of which he, Campbell, and Bacon were the most prominent mem- 
bers, apparently owed much to the suggestion of the President- 
elect, 11 who belatedly made his wishes known. It proposed only 
to prohibit trade with Britain and France and to close American 
ports to their armed vessels. In the Senate the proposal which a 
Federalist called "the hopeful and lowly begotten Child of Farmer 
Giles" was somewhat bolder. In addition to provisions like those 

9 Annal$ y loth Cong., zd sess., p. 1172$ Bacon to Story, Feb. 5, 1809, Story MSS. 

10 Nicholas to Madison, Feb. 9, 1809, William C. Rives Collection, Library of 
Congress. 

11 Irving Brant, James Madison: Secretary of State (Indianapolis, 1953), pp. 
4.78-479. 

,229 



AMERICA'S HUMILIATION 

put forward in the House Giles proposed to grant to the President 
the power to reopen trade with either country, should it cease to 
pillage American commerce, and to issue letters of marque against 
the nation that continued its unlawful edicts. Giles admitted that 
the plan did not meet his own wishes, which were for war. He 
hoped that by spring the country would be ready for a declaration, 
considered this the best stopgap that could be found, and warned 
against adopting any lesser plan: "Strike only one key lower, sir, 
and I fear it will end in national disgrace and dishonor." 12 

While the Senate accepted the lead of the Virginia musician, the 
House preferred to play a lower note. In the upper chamber Fed- 
eralists argued that, since Giles's plan virtually invited indirect 
or illegal trade with the major belligerents, it could not really be 
intended as a measure of coercion and must therefore be "nothing 
more than a part of that miserable mosquito system, which is to 
sting and irritate England into acts of hostility." 13 Although half 
a dozen dissidents, including William H. Crawford and Nicholas 
Gilman, joined with an equal number of Federalists to oppose it, 
a bill was jammed through in one day, its supporters declining to 
reply to their critics. The House of Representatives thereupon 
dropped its own bill, which nobody defended with even a sem- 
blance of enthusiasm. The low-noters, however, easily struck out 
letters of marque, the chief attraction to the proponents of vigor. 
On February 2,5, 1 809, administration supporters, led by Madison's 
brother-in-law, Congressman Jackson of western Virginia, tried 
unsuccessfully to restore letters of marque or add other positive 
provisions. Twice they sought adjournment to rally their dispirited 
forces. Speaker Varnum's vote defeated this maneuver, 14 and the 
resistance of Jackson and his friends collapsed. Two days later 
the bill passed by a vote of eighty-one to forty. Both Federalists 
and disappointed Republicans opposed it or, like Taggart on the 