

49 Smith to Pinkney, Oct. 19, 1810, Instructions, Vol. VII j Morier #15 to Welles- 
ley, Oct. 26, 1 8 10, FO 5/72. 

249 



AMERICA'S HUMILIATION 

settlement in instructions sent to Armstrong as recently as July but 
actually extremely unlikely after the secret Trianon Decree. The 
President, however, again did not make American action against 
Britain dependent upon the accuracy of his anticipation. Finally, the 
instructions declared that America assumed that, in addition to the 
decrees of Berlin and Milan, all other maritime edicts violating 
her rights had been withdrawn. 50 James Madison well understood 
the equivocal nature of Cadore's letter but had determined never- 
theless to seize the opportunity it presented. 

Since this decision led ultimately to war, the President's reason- 
ing must be analyzed, his justifications examined. To him the mo- 
ment seemed fleeting. Napoleon's notorious combination of vola- 
tility and stubbornness made it likely that, if the United States 
delayed or haggled, the French autocrat would immediately swing 
back to the decrees he had so tenaciously defended. It could be 
argued that the prohibitory French duties and even the licenses 
which Napoleon, to Madison's great anger, made a condition of 
trade with his dominions were really "domestic regulations," for 
surely a state had a right to impose conditions upon trade with it- 
self. The issue of sequestered property was embarrassing, but only 
because the President had chosen, in the July instructions, to make 
restoration a condition of settlement. Macon's Bill #2 required 
the belligerents to cease their violations, not to make amends for 
past robberies. Finally, simply because Cadore's letter was so equiv- 
ocal, the President could adopt whatever interpretation seemed 
most desirable, perhaps even lead France to accept his view. 

Commercially, these arguments made little sense. "Municipal 
regulations" and licenses stifled trade with Europe nearly as effec- 
tively as the decrees. The approved trade did not compare in value 
with the American ships, nearly 200 in all, for which com- 
pensation had been sought. Yet if America did not secure pay- 

50 Smith to Armstrong-, Nov. 2, 1810, Instructions, Vol. VII. These instructions 
declared that the United States would demand repeal of Fox's Blockade as well as 
of later Orders in Council, but they also warned that America did not consider herself 
pledged to^ make the abandonment of other blockades a condition of any agreement 
with Britain. While seeking to make England respect her rights, America did not 
accept the French definition of what those rights were. 

250 



AMERICA'S HUMILIATION 

ment as a condition of anti-British action one could hardly expect 
so rapacious a man as Napoleon to grant it later on. Politically, 
Madison accepted great risks. Napoleon's entire career demon- 
strated his trickiness and bad faith. The Cadore letter left the door 
open for him to exercise these qualities and gave Britain a plausible 
excuse for refusing to relax the Orders in Council. Should it be 
demonstrated and only one day after the French promise al- 
legedly went into effect Madison could have no proof one way or 
the other that the Berlin and Milan decrees had not really been 
lifted, even for American commerce alone, the President would 
face serious criticism at home and abroad. 