

246 



AMERICA'S HUMILIATION 

in her orders of Council and in the principles of blockade which 
she has tried to establish," 46 This being so, did French action 
justify American action under Macon's Bill? Congress clearly 
failed to anticipate conditional action, and in the strictest legal sense 
the Cadore letter was inadequate. The law did not even authorize 
the President to call upon the recalcitrant belligerent to lift his 
decrees an action only to be followed in ninety days by noninter- 
course until the other ceased to violate American commerce, and 
the Napoleonic declaration referred to a date months in the fu- 
ture. Still, the Cadore letter at least raised the hope that the end 
sought by Congress could be attained. America's harassed situation 
made inevitable a political rather than a purely legal decision. 
The risks of acceptance, however, were enormous, unless the Em- 
peror clearly intended to follow the Cadore letter with more spe- 
cific action favorable to American commerce. 

Quite the contrary was true. On the very day of the Cadore let- 
ter, the Trianon tariff established customs regulations that effec- 
tively stopped most importations. This device, really the same 
scheme that Armstrong had refused to countenance a month earlier, 
showed that the commercial benefits of repeal would at best be 
minimal. The new tariff, which appeared in the Moniteur, reached 
America at the same time as the Cadore letter. Napoleon's second, 
even more important action was secret, although he could not con- 
ceal its implementation. By the so-called Trianon Decree (officially 
dated August 5 but actually made a few weeks later), he ordered 
the sale of sequestered American ships and cargoes. The decree 
applied only to arrivals since the spring of 1809 and did not spe- 
cifically order their condemnation, although transfer of the pro- 
ceeds to the treasury certainly implied that a final decision had 
been taken. When at last Albert Gallatin procured a copy in 1821, 
he declared that publication in 1 8 10 would have altered the entire 
direction of American policy. "It is unnecessary," he added, "to 
comment on such a glaring act of combined injustice, bad faith, 
and meanness as the enacting and concealment of the decree ex- 
hibits." Even in 1 8 10 the tenor of French policy was clear enough. 

40 Cadore to Turreau, Aug. 23, 1810, AAE, CP, E-TJ, Vol. LXIV. 

247 



AMERICA'S HUMILIATION 

The Duke of Cadore admitted to Armstrong that arrivals, though 
no longer subject to automatic seizure under the Rambouillet De- 
cree, would be subject to the Berlin and Milan decrees at least 
until November. Armstrong also learned that release of ships al- 
ready in French hands was extremely unlikely, and he immediately 
perceived that the Trianon tariff virtually obliterated the com- 
mercial advantages to be drawn from the Cadore letter. All these 
things he reported to Washington, albeit in his usual imprecise 
way, before leaving for the United States on September I2. 47 