

Napoleon considered the United States a harlot whose embraces 
could be cheaply purchased, and throughout the winter of 1 8 r O-i I 
Armstrong's successor, Jonathan Russell, struggled vainly to con- 
vince the Emperor that American charms deserved a higher price. 
Russell, a lawyer, merchant, and politician from Rhode Island, 
previously distinguished chiefly for his devotion to Republican 
orthodoxy, considered himself a Francophile and later warmly 

62 Madison to Jefferson, Oct. 19, 1810, Hunt, ed. 5 Writings of Madison, VIII, no. 

63 Serurier #22 to Minister of Foreign Relations, July 24, 1811, AAE, CP, E-U, 
v ol. LXV. 

252 



AMERICA'S HUMILIATION 

advocated a war against Britain. At Paris, however, he found it 
impossible to accept Napoleon's policy without protest. At first, 
it is true, the new charge proposed for tactical reasons to suffer 
disappointment in silence: 

Having a right from the tenor of the verbal & written communications of 
this Government to consider the revocation of the Berlin & Milan decrees 
to be absolute, I have thought it unwise, whatever doubts the British Cab- 
inet may affect to entertain on the subject, to ask for an explanation here 
which might at once be construed into a justification of these doubts by 
indicating a participation in them and leave this government at liberty to 
give to those communications whatever meaning the views of the moment 
might decide. 54 

Increasing French hostility to American commerce, Britain's in- 
sistence upon clearer proof of revocation of the decrees, and finally 
the instructions of November 2 caused Russell to alter his tactics. 
To London he sent optimistic accounts of French policy and what 
meager evidence he could obtain showing that the decrees had 
been repealed, but he did so only to assist American efforts to bring 
the Orders in Council to an end. His reports to Washington and 
his talks with French officials show that his real views were quite 
different. From November onward, more and more firmly, even 
irritably, the American charge pressed the imperial government 
for explanations. "The Emperor was only asked," he repeated 
three times in one conversation, a to provide the opportunity for an 
honorable and vigorous war against England." 55 Russell became 
increasingly pessimistic as Napoleon's intentions unfolded. 

Imperial policy operated in three distinct spheres united by 
a common theme of disdain. Although he avoided directly saying 
so, Napoleon declined to release or make compensation for Ameri- 
can ships seized under his various decrees before November. The 
United States affected to consider him pledged to do so, but Jona- 
than Russell did not force this issue to a crisis. Second, the French 
monarch in effect withdrew most of the advantages he had presum- 

54 Russell to Smith, Sept. 26, 1810, Despatches, France, Vol. XII. 

55 Srurier to Minister of Foreign Relations, Nov. 7, [1810], AAE, CP, E-U, 

Vol. LXIIL 

253 



AMERICA'S HUMILIATION 