

Far more promptly, the Senate demonstrated its wishes. With 
Samuel Smith in the van it emasculated the bill on the very first 
day of debate, eliminating one provision after another until only 
the ban upon armed ships remained. Senator Smith later claimed 

30 Jackson #z6 to Canning, Dec. 13, 1809, FO 5/64. 

31 to Jackson, Jan. 22, 1810, Francis James Jackson MSS, Public Record 

Office (FO 353/58-6i), FO 353/6i. 

32 Annals, nth Cong*., ist and ad sess., p. 1161 (Sawyer). 

24O 



AMERICA'S HUMILIATION 

that he opposed the House bill because it would provoke retalia- 
tion, and all the Federalist senators voted with him on this ground. 
But Smith also claimed that the House version undermined Sen- 
ate efforts at stronger resistance/ 3 and a majority subsequently 
joined him in calling for convoys. Thus it is apparent that in the 
Senate, as in the House, motives were mixed. Over the anguished 
protest of young Henry Clay, who preferred "the troubled ocean 
of war, demanded by the honor and independence of the country, 
with all its calamities and desolation, to the tranquil and putrescent 
pool of ignominious peace, 33 34 the Senate passed the gutted bill. 

Deadlock ensued for five weeks. Conference committees failed 
to find a compromise. Both houses voted to stand firm, although 
by the margin of only two votes in the Senate (Federalist votes 
aiding) and seven in the House. On April 6, Nathaniel Macon 
wrote that he expected adjournment without any action having 
been taken. 

In this letter the ex-Speaker minimized proposals made that 
morning by Congressman Taylor of South Carolina, and it is an 
indication of the feebleness of administration leadership that two 
weeks later Macon still did not know whether or not these pro- 
posals had the blessing of the White House. 35 Yet they led to a 
solution, although nobody liked them and Macon reluctantly in- 
troduced them to the House in his capacity as committee chairman. 
Taylor's scheme was the epitome of weakness: the removal of all 
restrictions on commerce plus a promise to restore total nonin- 
tercourse against the recalcitrant if one of the European powers 
ceased to violate American commerce. The bill, which to Macon's 
discomfiture became known as Macon's Bill #2, in effect com- 
bined surrender and bribery, "held up the honor and character 
of this nation to the highest bidder." 36 

Both House and Senate tried to strengthen Macon's Bill #2. 
The House voted to add discriminatory duties of 50 per cent on 
imports from Britain and France. The Senate, with Smith again 



pp. 604609. 
pp. 579"582. 

35 Macon to Nicholson, April 6, 21, 1810, Nicholson MSS. 

36 A nnals , nth Cong 1 ., ist and id sess., p. 1772 (Gholson). 

241 



AMERICA'S HUMILIATION 

in the van, amended the bill so that it permitted the President to 
use armed force in defense of commerce. Federalist senators voted 
for this amendment, doubtless as much to present Madison with 
an embarrassing choice as to further the interests of trade. Once 
again the two chambers deadlocked. Federalists gleefully ob- 
served the friction: 