

44 Armstrong to Smith, July 10, 1810, Despatches, Frances, Vol. XI. 

245 



AMERICA'S HUMILIATION 

Macon's Bill, "my decrees of Berlin and Milan will not have any 
effect after November first," if in the interim the Orders in Council 
of 1807 should be repealed or a the Congress of the United States 
shall fulfil the engagement it has made to reestablish its prohibi- 
tions on English commerce." Two days later, still prodding his 
bewildered subordinate, Napoleon sent him the pro jet of a note 
to Armstrong, and on the morning of August 5, 1810, Cadore 
placed an official declaration of policy in the hands of the American 
minister. This note generally followed the tack of Napoleon's 
letter and pro jet, although the specific requirement that the United 
States prohibit trade with England was replaced by a vaguer de- 
mand that the Americans, "conformably with [Macon's Bill] 
. . . , shall cause their rights to be respected by the English." 45 
Whether this phrase was preferred as an unusual concession to 
American sensibilities or as a veiled invitation to pile more vigor- 
ous measures on top of nonintercourse with Britain is not clear. 

The Cadore letter, as the declaration came to be known, raised 
other and more serious questions. Was it really correct to say that 
the decrees were "revoked," when their effect was not to cease until 
November and then only if one of two conditions was fulfilled? 
Quite obviously not 5 as Cadore himself soon stated, the "decision 
of ELM. is ... conditional. Its execution will depend on the 
measures which the United States shall take if England persists 

45 Napoleon to Cadore, July 31, 1810, Corraspondance de Napoleon, XX, 6446455 
Napoleon to Cadore, Aug. 2, 1810, and enclosure, ibid., XXI, 125 Cadore to Arm- 
strong 1 , Aug. 5, 1810, enclosed in Armstrong to Smith, Aug. 5, 1810, Despatches, 
France, Vol. XI. Cadore stated in a report to the Emperor that at Napoleon's order 
he had made "kindly declarations" to Armstrong on July 25, but no record of this 
talk is preserved. Cadore also stated that he had prepared his letter to Armstrong on 
July 29 j this was probably one of the very early drafts. Cadore to Napoleon, "Frag- 
ment de rapport," July 30, 1810, AAE, CP, E-U, Vol. LXIV. A draft of the Duke's 
letter, stating that France would repeal her decrees, "pourvu que" Britain withdrew 
her orders if the United States took measures against England, was changed by the 
Emperor, who inserted the phrase a bien entendu que," which became important in 
later discussions. Cadore to Armstrong, draft, Aug. 2 [?], 1810, AAE, CP, E-U, 
Vol. LXIV. This change, as well as the alteration mentioned in the text, raises baffling 
questions, and with some hesitation it may be suggested that the alterations possibly 
sprang from a desire on Napoleon's part to make the phraseology as loose as possible, 
both to increase the chances of Anglo-American disagreement and to preserve his own 
freedom of action. The possibility that both changes were designed to make the note 
sound somewhat less peremptory cannot, however, be dismissed. 