

The President never expected Macon's Bill #2 to bring about 
repeal of the Orders in Council. The next instructions to Pinkney 
even admitted that the act benefited British commerce. Britain 
considered the bill as the best possible evidence that the United 
States was too weak to support her claims either by commercial 
pressure or by war. Throughout the winter British diplomats had 
reported with increasing assurance that, despite the Jackson affair, 
American opinion was turning in their favor, making war impos- 
sible. When Macon's Bill finally passed, the British consul at Nor- 
folk commented that "after the Hurricane of Passion in which the 
Congress opened their Session, it is truly laughable to witness the 
miserable, feeble, Puff, in which they evaporated. It is indeed a 
very comfortable reflection that with every disposition to injure 
Great Britain, they have found themselves totally unable to do 

38 Adams to John Pope, Sept. 10, 1810, Worthington C. Ford, ed., The Writings 
of John Quincy Adams (7 vols.j New York, 1914-1917), III, 5015025 Plumer 
to Adams, May 18, 1810, William Plumer MSS, Library of Congress 5 John Tyler 
to Jefferson, May 12, 1810, Lyon G. Tyler, The Letters and Times of the Tylers^ I 
(Richmond, 1884), 247; National Intelligencer, May 28, 1810. 

3d Madison to Pinkney, May 23, 1810, Rives Collection} Madison to Jefferson, 
May 25, 1810, James Madison MSS, Library of Congress. 

243 



AMERICA'S HUMILIATION 

so." London newspapers almost universally interpreted the act 
as a surrender to Britain brought about by the wise firmness o 
the ministry and the self-immolating effects of American com- 
mercial warfare. "Thus," declared the Sim, "after a long and 
obstinate perseverance, in measures which while they were in force 
destroyed the trade of America, reduced her revenue, and ruined 
her Merchants, the American Government has found it necessary 
to abandon her schemes of impotent resentment against Great 
Britain." 40 

America's political defeat opened pleasing commercial prospects. 
For the first time since 1 807, aside from the brief Erskine interlude, 
British ships, goods, and imports were freed from American re- 
striction and the added expense of clandestine or indirect trade. 
Exports to the United States almost regained the peak reached in 
1807, the last previous year of untrammeled commerce. The 
clamor of manufacturers against the Orders in Council subsided to 
a whisper. At the same time American shippers embarked accu- 
mulated goods in such quantities that a shipping shortage developed 
in the United States. "Our great Staple Trade has seldom, if ever, 
been more brisk than it is at this moment," a Leeds newspaper 
exulted. 41 In the long run this influx meant oversupply in Britain 
so great that the President's own tobacco sold at only threepence 
a pound. In the early summer of 1810 a halcyon day seemed to 
be dawning j the position of Perceval's ministry and the Orders in 
Council approached impregnability. 