

A more completely divided, bewildered disorganized set of men hardly 
exists. . . . The Cabinet is I believe equally bewildered with Congress; 
the Senate and the House of Representatives act in such entire harmony 
that when the one says I will the other says I wont. No majority in one 
House can calculate on a majority in the other, nor do I believe the Presi- 
dent has really any majority that he can calculate upon in either. 

Finally, in desperation, each house dropped its demands. "The 
result," said Josiah Quincy, who could always be counted upon 
to describe Republican shortcomings in harsh language, "was . . . 
a sort of bargain that, if the Senate would agree not to protect 
commerce, the House would agree not to burden the people with 
an additional tax." 37 In the form originally suggested by Taylor, 
the^Sll passed both houses and became law in May, 1 8 10. 

/To most observers Macon's Bill #2 seemed to be surrender 
ak$ in that sense a fitting successor to the Nonintercourse Act. From 
far away St. Petersburg, John Q. Adams expressed his approval 
of the new law on the ground that it was less irritating to the 
belligerents than its predecessor, and William Plumer endorsed 
it on the frankly pusillanimous ground that "we cannot sn/tch 
the trident from George, or the thunder bolt from Napoleon.;; We 
ought to stand still, wait events, & shape our course accordingly." 
Adams and Plumer were almost alone. Governor Tyler of Vir- 
ginia complained, "We have lost our resentment for the severest 
injuries a nation ever suffered, because of their being so often re- 
peated," and asked, "Is not Tt^is an undeniable proof of the bad 
state of morals in our country?" fThe National Intelligencer > which 

37 Taggart to Rev. John Taylor, April 27, 1810, George H. Haynes, ed., "Letters 
of Samuel Taggert, Representative in Congress, 1803-1814," American Antiquarian 
Society, Proceedings, n.s., XXXIII (1923), 3475 Annals, nth Cong., ist and 2d sess., 
pp. 2051-2052. 

242 



AMERICA'S HUMILIATION 

avoided comment as far as possible, clearly showed that it ex- 
pected no good to follow. 88 

The President, who played no visible part in framing the new 
bill, took a characteristically mixed view of it. In general he con- 
sidered it feeble, noncoercive, and even disgusting. He also be- 
lieved, or at least ascribed to the bill's supporters the belief, that 
the captures that would inevitably follow would "teach the ad- 
vocates for open trade, . . . the folly, as well as the degradation 
of their policy' 5 and perhaps prepare the nation for war at the next 
session of Congress. Madison, with an almost unique perceptive- 
ness, also foresaw the possibility that the very imbalance of the 
bill, "which puts our trade on the worst possible footing for 
France," might inspire Napoleon to change his policy. 39 To take 
comfort from the losses facing American citizens and from the un- 
evenness of the bilPs effect was perhaps undignified, but these 
things were, indeed, the best that could be said for a law that 
marked the virtual abandonment of positive policy. 