

French policy appeared to pose no danger to Britain. The Em- 
peror's entourage, it is true, steadily urged him to relax his decrees, 
and for some weeks early in 1 810 he toyed with the idea. Instead, 
his own greed and stubbornness, pique at the blatantly pro-British 
effect of the Nonintercourse Act, and Armstrong's irritating mix- 
ture of wheedling and obstinacy made him speed up his assault on 
American commerce. On March 23, 1810, by the Rambouillet 
Decree, the French monarch ordered all American ships that en- 

40 Smith to Pinkney, July 5, 1810, Instructions, Vol. VII 5 James Hamilton to 
Jackson, May 21, 1810, Jackson MSS, FO 353/59; Sun (London), June 9, 1810. 
Intelligencer ', June n, 1810. 

244 



AMERICA'S HUMILIATION 

tered his ports seized, whether or not they had touched at British 
ports or had been visited by the Royal Navy. "The late confisca- 
tions by Bonaparte," Madison wrote, "comprize robbery, theft, & 
breach of trust, and exceed in turpitude any of his enormities, not 
wasting human blood." 42 Anger perhaps caused some presidential 
exaggeration, but the truth was bad enough. 

Within a few months the Emperor abruptly reversed his course. 
He may have been alarmed by reports of rising Francophobia in 
the United States, although his contempt for the young republic 
makes this unlikely. He certainly saw an opportunity to embroil 
the United States with Britain by relaxing his decrees. Equally 
certainly, he recognized that the European economy required goods 
only the Americans could provide. As early as June, with the com- 
mercial motive uppermost in his mind, the Emperor considered a 
plan to withdraw the decrees insofar as they affected American 
trade. With considerable cynicism he proposed to replace them 
with customs regulations that would effectively prohibit the im- 
portation of goods for which he had no need or which were pri- 
marily the produce of Britain's colonies. Repeal, in Napoleon's 
mind, thus would be purely nominal: "We will engage ourselves 
to nothing," he said, "but we can ... let those goods which we 
need enter." John Armstrong informed the agent sent to consult 
him that only effective relaxation of the decrees for all American 
goods would satisfy. 43 As a result the Emperor dropped the idea 
for a short time. 

In July the American minister presented to the Duke of Cadore 
a copy of the National Intelligencer containing Macon's Bill. Ca- 
dore offhandedly dismissed it on the ground that France could 
scarcely allow her policy to be influenced by newspaper reports. 44 
At the end of the month the Foreign Minister's sense of punctilio 
was impatiently thrust aside by his master. The Emperor wrote to 
Cadore that Armstrong should be informed that, as a result of 

42 Madison to Jefferson, May 25, 1810, Madison MSS. 

43 Napoleon, "Notes for the Minister of the Interior," June 25, 1810, Corre- 
spondance de Napoleon, XX, 501502 5 Armstrong to Smith, July 18, 1 810, Despatches, 
France, Vol. XL 