

Accounts by way of England, which preceded Armstrong's dis- 
patches, reached America late in September. Federalist newspapers 
denounced the Cadore letter as a trick to bring about increased 
friction with England, They pointed out that the alleged repeal 
was so framed that Britain could have no motive to reciprocate 
and America, in commercial terms, scarcely a greater one: "After 
all, the bait does not half cover the hook." The Aurora hailed Na- 
poleon's action and urged the use of force to prevent British inter- 
ference with Franco-American trade, and the Lexington Reporter 
reached absurd (and ungrammatical) heights when it declared: 
"France has performed the penance which we demanded. . . . 
Thank God, the removal of the French decrees have placed us 
exactly again in the clean straight forward path." Reasonable 
Americans took a more moderate view. A Washington correspond- 
ent reported, "It is admitted on all hands, by candid men, that the 
manner in which French has accepted our proposition, is ungra- 
cious. The question, however, is, whether it is not better, all circum- 
stances considered, to close with the offer, than reject it." As late 
as October 24 the National Intelligencer declined to take a stand on 
the French offer or to predict the administration's decision. 48 

With the confidence that, we may presume, has characterized 

47 Gallatin $"186 to Adams, Sept. 15, 1821, and enclosure, Henry Adams, ed., 
The Writings of Albert Gallatin (3 vols.j Philadelphia, 1879), **> 196-1995 Cadore 
to Armstrong (dictated by Napoleon), Sept. 7, 1810, AAE, CP, E-U, Vol. LXIV$ 
Armstrong to Madison, private, Aug. 5, 1810, Madison MSSj Armstrong to Smith, 
Sept. 10, 1 8 to, Despatches, France, Vol. XI. 

^Connecticut Courant (Hartford), Oct. 10, 18105 Aurora (Philadelphia), Oct. z, 
iSioj Reporter (Lexington, Ky.), Oct. 20, 1810$ Columbian (New York), Oct. 6, 
18105 National Intelligencer , Oct. 24, 1810. 

248 



AMERICA'S HUMILIATION 

fish from time immemorial. President Madison believed it possible 
to feed on the bait without swallowing the visible hook. Delay 
would encourage Napoleon to pull his line from the stream, 
whereas immediate acceptance might cause Britain to cast even 
more appetizing food upon the water. At Madison's direction the 
Secretary of State sent word to London on October 19. If the 
eagerly awaited dispatches from Armstrong confirmed the authen- 
ticity of Cadore's letter (still known to the American government 
only through newspaper reports), and if Britain failed to withdraw 
her regulations, "on the first day of November the President will 
issue his proclamation conformably to the act of Congress, and . . . 
the non-intercourse law will consequently be revived against Great 
Britain." At the same time Robert Smith warned the young British 
charge, John P. Morier, that English obduracy would threaten 
"the future Harmony between the two Countries." 4g 

On November 2 the President officially proclaimed that the 
"edicts of France have been so revoked as that they ceased on the 
first day of the present month to violate the neutral commerce of 
the United States." Instructions sent to Paris on the same day 
showed that the President actually took no such simple view of the 
matter. The instructions avoided as far as possible any specific 
declarations which would require French response and were, in 
effect, a rather tortuous attempt to turn Napoleon's "bien entendu" 
back upon himself. They declared that the United States was acting 
upon the assumption that "the reservations under the expression 
'it being understood' are not condition precedent affecting the oper- 
ation of the repeal." Although necessary to justify action under 
Macon's Bill, the language of Cadore's letter made this dubious 
French correspondence unknown to Madison made it positively 
fallacious and the President wisely did not insist that France 
accept this interpretation before the United States acted. Similarly, 
the instructions declared that the American government presumed 
that France had agreed to restore sequestered American property 
or would soon do so, an action made a necessary preliminary to any 