

Madison's decision rested primarily on one conviction which he 
felt compelled him to take the risk of accepting the French decla- 
ration. Recent history demonstrated that the United States could 
expect only humiliation if it tried to exert pressure upon both 
major belligerents at the same time. "The new scene opened by 
the revocation of the Fr. Decrees," Madison wrote in recalling 
his attorney general to discuss it, "will I hope terminate in a re- 
moval of the embarrassments which have been as afflicting as they 
have been unexampled. It promises us, at least an extrication from 
the dilemma, of a mortifying peace, or a war with both the great 
belligerents." As the Erskine agreement had already shown, the 
President was prepared to use agreement with one great power 
as a lever in negotiations with the other. In 1810 he was not san- 
guine about the prospects of British repeal. He took consolation 
in the thought that, even if this desirable end could not be attained 
without war, the nation would unite when the time came to assert 
its rights by force. "We hope from the step," he wrote to Jefferson, 
"the advantage at least of having but one contest on our hands 
at a time." 51 

Like so many Republican calculations, this one assumed that 
logic always governed men's decisions. Ignoring American parti- 
sanship and Anglophilia, Madison expected the people to rally 
behind the government's demand for justice from England. "I do 

51 Madison to Rodney, Sept. 30, 1810, Rodney Family MSS, Library of Congress 5 
Madison to Jefferson, Oct. 19, 1810, Hunt, ed., Writings of Madison, VIII, 109. 

251 



AMERICA'S HUMILIATION 

not believe," he said, "that Cong 8 , will be disposed, or permitted 
by the Nation, to a tame submission ; the less so as it would be 
not only perfidious to the other belligerent, but irreconcilable with 
an honorable neutrality." 52 Minimizing England's emotional com- 
mitment to the Orders in Council, the President hoped Britain 
would seek material advantage through concession 5 if she did not, 
he expected Perceval to be too vulnerable to domestic criticism 
to press an armed conflict with the United States. These miscalcu- 
lations grew out of Madison's central mistake, a belief that Napo- 
leon could be trusted to execute the bargain he offered. The Presi- 
dent was not so foolish as to expect generosity, and the instructions 
of November 2 showed him at least fearful that Napoleon would 
narrowly construe the Cadore letter. But surely the Emperor 
would see the advantage of uniting America against England, and 
the even greater potential disadvantages of insulting a people al- 
ready restive under continued aggravation. Such seem to have 
been the presidential calculations. Hindsight shows us that most 
of them were wrong, but the initial decision is understandable. The 
President is most to be condemned for failing to revise his analysis 
when new facts became available. "The revocation of the De- 
crees of Milan and Berlin has become a personal affair with Mr. 
Madisson," the French minister reported nine months later. "He 
announced it by his proclamation and has consistently maintained 
it since." 53 Perhaps in part because he had suffered such deep hu- 
miliation through the Erskine agreement, James Madison refused 
to admit that he had erred. 