

263 



WAR HAWKS ARE FLEDGED 

tained an unusual proportion of young men. Of course Clay and 
Grundy were only thirty-five, Richard M. Johnson (a two-term 
veteran, incidentally) was thirty, Calhoun a youth of twenty-nine. 
On the other hand, two Republicans, William Findley and John 
Smilie, had been born in Ireland eighty years before, and Robert 
Whitehill boasted eighty-three years, at least eight more than the 
oldest Federalist. The Federalist file leader, Josiah Quincy, was 
only thirty-nine, and two of his lieutenants, Harmanus Bleecker 
and Henry M. Ridgely, were thirty-two. As a matter of fact, the 
average age of the members of the Eleventh and Twelfth Con- 
gresses was almost exactly the same. When Congress finally voted 
on war in June, 1812, those voting for it had an average age of 
forty-seven ; the opponents, just under forty-six. New members 
on both sides were of almost exactly the same age. 6 

Of course, Congress bore the stamp of its leadership, but leaders 
had been young before. Robert Goodloe Harper had not reached 
thirty-five when he led the Federalists during the undeclared war 
with France, and Randolph, Bacon, Eppes, and Campbell stepped 
forward to the front rank before reaching forty. In the new Con- 
gress, if such leaders as Richard M. Johnson, Langdon Cheves, 
and Peter B. Porter were youthful, they were also veterans of 
previous service. Essentially not youth but effectiveness, vigor, 
and tenacity distinguished the new leadership. 

Another generalization may be made about the new Congress : 
there is little evidence that individual contests were mandates 
against past diplomacy. In strongly Federalist Delaware, it is true, 
Henry M. Ridgely squeaked through by the infinitesimal margin 

6 The following table is compiled from Harrison, of. cit., omitting from the age 
calculations eight members whose birth date is unknown. 

For war Against <war 

Number Age Number Age 

Members of i2th, preceding, and succeeding Congresses 29 50.5 16 4.8.9 

Members of i2th and succeeding Congresses 24. 40.3 6 44.0 

Members of i2th Congress only 15 47.6 15 42.1 

Members of i2th and preceding Congresses n 51,8 12 47.5 

Total and average 79 47,0 49 45.9 

The average age of members of the House, including those not voting in June, was 
46.2 years when the Congress convened. 

264 



WAR HAWKS ARE FLEDGED 

of seven votes, 7 which may suggest growing restiveness in that 
state. In Pennsylvania and Massachusetts, where the Republicans 
did particularly well, the foreign policy issue did not stand alone. 
In the Bay State the Republican victory was so surprising that, 
according to Christopher Gore, it "entirely destroyed the spirit of 
the Federalists" ; feebly fighting the legislative election six months 
later, 8 they permitted the selection of a General Court that named 
Joseph B. Varnum to replace Timothy Pickering in the Senate. 
But in November, 1810, Bay State Republicans for the most part 
only regained congressional seats they had lost in the great reac- 
tion against the Embargo two years before. In Pennsylvania, voting 
took place just after Cadore's letter became known. The Republi- 
cans gained a near sweep, losing only one of the three Philadelphia 
seats and capturing the rest of the state. James Milnor, the Fed- 
eralist who succeeded in Philadelphia, ran nearly 2,000 votes be- 
hind the Republicans elected with him under the state's system of 
plural representation. 9 Frequently, in these states and others, per- 
sonality rather than principle as usual proved decisive. John G. 
Jackson, who had been crippled in a duel with a North Carolina 
Federalist congressman, observed disgustedly after the defeat of 
his anointed successor that "here the People vote for men more 
than principles." 10 