

Passage of a new nonintercourse bill directed at Britain adver- 
tised Republican doubts. Macon's Bill provided that trade should 
end ninety days after the President proclaimed that only one bel- 
ligerent, the other having rescinded its decrees, continued to violate 
American commerce j this action did not require legislative sanc- 
tion. Thus the nonintercourse bill introduced by John W. Eppes 
exposed doubts that the actions of Napoleon or Madison truly 
met the requirements of Macon's Bill, and bad news from France 
soon led Eppes himself to propose postponing the bill "until the 
doubts hanging over our foreign relations were dissipated." In 
debate, Republicans declared American faith pledged by the proc- 
lamation even if it were based on a Napoleonic lie. Randolph 

58 Russell to Monroe, private and confidential, July 13, 1811, Despatches, France, 
Vol. XII. 

50 Richardson, 0$. cit., I, 483; Gallatin to Madison, n.d., Rives Collection j Morier 
#12 to Wellesley, Feb. 4, 1811, FO 5/745 Taggart to Rev - J olm Taylor, Feb. 25, 
1811, Haynes, o$. cit t) p. 358 

255 



AMERICA'S HUMILIATION 

harried them with lashing metaphor, Gardenier with ponderously 
impressive logic. Randolph's motion for outright repeal of Macon's 
Bill failed only by a margin of forty-five to sixty-seven. Congress 
then laid Eppes's bill aside for three weeks to await arrival of the 
new French minister, Louis Serurier, Serurier disappointed Re- 
publicans, for, as Quincy observed, "the Minister is as parsimonious 
as his master is voracious. He has not condescended to extend one 
particle, not one pinch of comfort to the Administration." 60 How- 
ever, news from France that post-November arrivals would be 
admitted when the United States cut off British trade decided the 
Republicans to go ahead. After scenes of turbulence and animosity 
exceeding even those of Embargo days, the Eppes bill was rammed 
through the House at sunrise on February 28, 1811. The Senate 
and Madison quickly added their assent. 

This commercial legislation, the last of a series running back to 
the Nonimportation Act five years before, contained interesting 
new provisions. The bill required American courts to accept Madi- 
son's proclamation as conclusive evidence of French repeal. In the 
absence of such a precaution, some of the many Federalists still 
on the bench might rule that the decrees had not really been 
rescinded, thus destroying the legal grounds for condemnation of 
ships trading with England. No government could permit hostile 
judges to overthrow its policy in such a fashion- on the other hand, 
this provision strengthened the Federalist claim that the govern- 
ment itself knew the decrees were still in force. Second, although 
the Eppes bill authorized the President to continue prohibitions 
on British commerce until the Orders in Council were removed, 61 
the act did not cut off all Anglo-American trade, chiefly because 
Americans wanted commercial warfare to be as little painful as 
possible. The new act, which turned away British ships and goods, 