

ably granted to American ships coming to European ports. Vessels 
that arrived between November and the news of American prohibi- 
tions on English commerce in February were not permitted to 
depart or to sell their cargoes until the latter date. Napoleon's 
repeal, in other words, was shown to be conditional on effective 
American action toward British trade. Although Cadore's successor, 
the Duke o Bassano, finally informed Russell in May that post- 
November arrivals could proceed with their business, 56 France still 
insisted upon licenses and ciphered letters of permission from her 
consuls in America, thus stopping all but a trickle of trade between 
the two countries. The Continental System had been altered in 
form far more than in substance. 

The third phase of Napoleon's policy clearly showed that the de- 
crees had not been rescinded for American ships bound to and from 
enemy ports. A few ships visited at sea by the Royal Navy escaped 
condemnation when they came within the reach of French power, 
but the decrees, particularly that of Milan, were otherwise rigor- 
ously enforced. Ships touching at British ports continued to be 
seized, on the basis of Napoleonic reasoning very similar to that 
Canning used in demanding permission for the Royal Navy to 
enforce American prohibitions against trade with France. "One 
should say, 33 the Emperor declared in a session with his subordi- 
nates, "the Decrees of Berlin and Milan are repealed as to the 
United States j but, as all ships touching at English ports or des- 
tined there are ships without character, which American laws punish 
and confiscate, they may be confiscated by France. 33 One year after 
the Cadore letter, Jonathan Russell ruefully observed that the 
French had not released one ship bound to or from an English 
port. 67 All protests had been vain. 

Because an economic crisis gripped Britain by the end of 1810, 
Napoleon refused to relax his commercial warfare, even at the risk 
of American displeasure. Politically, he saw the advantage of 
refusing clarifying, liberalizing declarations. Russell believed that 

56 Bassano to Russell, May 9, 1811, ibid., Vol. LXVII. 

57 Note dictated in the councils of Administration and of Commerce, April 29, 
1811, Corres-pondance de Nafoleon, XXII, 14.4-1465 Russell to John S. Smith, private 
and confidential, Aug*. 2, 1811, Samuel Smith MSS, Library of Congress. 

254 



AMERICA'S HUMILIATION 

"the great object ... is to entangle us in a war with England. 
They abstain therefore from doing any act which would furnish 
clear & unequivocal testimony of the revocation of their decrees 
least it should induce the extinction of the British orders & thereby 
appease our irritation against their enemy." The French carefully 
arranged releases and condemnations to muddy rather than clarify 
the waters. 58 

The French attitude disheartened President Madison. His an- 
nual message, presented in December, disappointed Turreau, who 
considered it a "cold and methodical expose" rather than a rallying 
cry against England. It would have been much worse had not 
Gallatin urged his chief to adopt a more confident tone. Early in 
February, in one of those malicious or stupid indiscretions that soon 
cost him his post. Secretary Smith "declared . . . confidentially 
[to the British charge] his Opinion that those Decrees were not 
repealed, and that before the rising of the present Congress the 
whole of their restrictive commercial System would be entirely 
done away with." A partisan Federalist declared three weeks later 
that scarcely five members of Congress believed the decrees "effi- 
ciently repealed." 59 