

67 Taggart to Rev. John Taylor, April 27, 1810, Feb. 4, i8n, Haynes, of. dt., 
PP- 347 3 354- 

260 



CHAPTER 



VIII 



WAR HAWKS ARE FLEDGED 



Even before the Eleventh Congress gathered for its last session, 
selection of a successor had begun. By the time Speaker Varnum 
closed the session and headed home to Dracut, most states, in- 
cluding all the large ones except Virginia, had held their elections. 
The next winter Congressman Wright declared that defeat of half 
of his former colleagues showed that the country repudiated their 
craven policies. 1 This Republican veteran, already sixty years old, 
did not claim that the new members represented a rising generation 
more vigorous than his own. Nevertheless, the Twelfth Congress, 
led as it so frequently was b^ very young men ex-Senator Clay, 
the bridegroom Calhoun, bitter Felix Grundy later acquired an 
aura of youthful vigor. The facts do not demonstrate that the 
American people consciously sought such a Congress in the elec- 
tions of 1 8 10 i i, nor is it clear that the Twelfth Congress deserved 
its reputation. 

An able historian summarized the usual view when he wrote, 
"Everywhere but in New England, men who temporized or fa- 

1 Annals, izth Cong-., ist sess., p. 472. 

261 



WAR HAWKS ARE FLEDGED 

vored negotiation were turned out of office and their places given 
to those . . . who frankly stood for war 5 young, energetic, active 
men, preponderantly from the West and the frontiers of the older 
sections." Thomas Jefferson, writing to James Monroe shortly 
after the Virginia election, took a sharply different view. The ex- 
President, then in a pacific mood which he assumed Monroe shared, 
stated: 

the last two Congresses have been the theme of the most licencious reproba- 
tion for printers thirsting after war, some against France, & some against 
England, but the people wish for peace, they feel no incumbency on them 
to become the reformers of the other hemisphere, and, to inculcate, with 
fire & sword, a return to moral order, when indeed peace shall become 
more losing than war, they may owe to their interests, what these Quixots 
are clamouring for on false estimates of honor, the public are unmoved by 
these clamours, as the re-elections of their legislators show, and they are 
firm to their Executive on the subject of the more recent clamours [for 
decisive action]. 2 

Isolated on his hilltop, Jefferson had cut back his newspaper sub- 
scriptions, and he was not privy to the views of Madison and the 
government. Was he therefore an inaccurate observer? 

The Twelfth Congress did not have markedly more new mem- 
bers than either of its two immediate predecessors. If those of the 
dozen replacements who entered the Eleventh Congress and later 
secured election to the Twelfth are considered as carry-overs, 
eighty-three veteran members returned to the new Congress along 
with fifty-nine new representatives/ The Tenth Congress contained 
ninety-six veterans, the Eleventh dighty-six. The Congress elected 
in 1812-13, after expansion made necessary by the census of 1810, 
had eighty-five old members and just under a hundred newcomers. 
The twelfth Congress merely conformed to the pattern of the 
times. JSome states, notably New York and South Carolina, re- 
turned far fewer new members than after the last preceding elec- 
tion. In other states there was a substantial turnover. This often 