

63 May 1 8, 1811. 

257 



AMERICA'S HUMILIATION 

Council, primarily because they wished Britain to take advantage 
of Cadore's statement that the decrees would be lifted, even for 
English trade, if Britain abandoned the orders. The Times shilly- 
shallied, ultimately favoring British repeal despite suspicions of 
French fraud. Ministerial prints declared that no reasonable per- 
son, not even the creatures at Washington, could possibly consider 
the Cadore letter the sort of repeal that called for British reci- 
procity. The Courier, as always the most strident British paper, 
declared: "There is but one Navy in the World, the British 
Navy. ... As long as BONAPARTE persists in his present 
system, we warn all Powers that the Continent is in a state of 
blockade, and they must not presume to trade with it without our 
leave." * 

Merchants engaged in American trade steadily pressed the 
government to revoke the orders and thus prevent action under 
Macon's Bill. They were turned from one official to another 
from Rose to Bathurst to Wellesley to Under-Secretary Hamilton 
until at last they ceased their importunities. The government 
even refused to sanction the dispatch of one American vessel to 
French ports as a test case, to prove whether or not the decrees 
still stood. 65 Wellesley was equally obdurate with William Pink- 
ney. He wrote that the Cadore letter could not be considered 
sufficient evidence of repeal, adding that "whenever the repeal of 
the French Decrees shall have actually taken effect, . . . His 
Majesty will feel the highest satisfaction in relinquishing a system, 
which the conduct of the Enemy compelled him to adopt." Subse- 
quent notes repeated the same theme. 66 

^Morning Chronicle, Aug. 20, 18105 Times, Aug. 20, Dec. 20, 1810; Star (Lon- 
don), Aug. 1 8, iSioj Sun, Aug. 18, iSioj Courier (London), Jan. 21, 1811. 

165 Times, July i, 1811, printing an account by a participant. 

66 Wellesley to Pinkney, Aug. 31, 1810, enclosed in Pinkney to Smith, Sept. 3, 1810, 
Despatches, Great Britain, unnumbered volume j Wellesley to Pinkney, Dec. 29, 
1 8 10, FO 5/72; Wellesley #i to Foster, April 10, 1811, Mayo, o-p. cit., pp. 3 10-3 18 j 
John S. Smith to Monroe, May 25, 1811, Despatches, Great Britain, Vol. XVII. 
Wellesley also made it clear that the Cabinet would insist upon repeal of substitute 
regulations which restored the decrees in another guise and, for its own part, would 
not consent to withdraw regulations anterior to those of November, 1807, nor to 
relax its claimed right of blockade. 

258 



AMERICA'S HUMILIATIO 



N 



This British reaction ended the last hope of a bloodless American 
triumph. Madison had risked much in accepting Cadore's assur- 
ances at more than their face value, and by the spring of 1 8 1 1 
all the world could see he had failed. France had briefly roused 
American hopes, then quickly fallen back to a policy of tantalizing 
hints and crude menaces. Far from uniting American opinion 
against Britain as Madison had hoped, the President's policy, by 
reinforcing the plausibility of Federalist claims that he was a min- 
ion of France, led to disunity of the most dangerous kind. Welles- 
ley's declarations, challenging on all too supportable grounds the 
fundamental premise of American policy, diverted attention from 
permanent issues. As the National Intelligencer had observed, 
America's claims against Britain were absolute, not conditional. 
Madison's great folly was to emphasize the one claim that did 
involve conditions, rather than to recoil in search of new avenues. 
The President had placed American policy in an untenable posi- 
tion. Aside from another humbling surrender by the United States, 
only an uncharacteristic act of Napoleonic charity or abject British 
capitulation could provide a peaceful exit. The ultimate alternative 
was war, a war the administration sometimes considered likely and 
even desirable, but a war for which it had neither psychologically 
nor militarily nor even financially armed the nation. 