

The danger in considering the election a barometer of public 
opinion is very apparent. The New York canvass, inconclusive in 
any event, took place in May, 1810, far too early to make it ex- 
pressive of sentiment at the time the War Hawk Congress met. 
In state elections held in 1811, Republicanism of the Clintonian 
variety defeated the orthodox. Felix Grundy of Tennessee won 
in a contest in which the principal issues were not questions of 
international relations but rather land policy, his recent arrival in 

7 John A. Munroe, Federalist Delaware, 1775-1815 (New Brunswick, 1954), p. 
235^ 

8 Gore to King, May 5, 1811, Rufus King MSS, New- York Historical Society, 
Vol. XIII. 

9 Credentials, izth Congress j Dice R. Anderson, "The Insurgents of 1811," Amer- 
ican Historical Association, Annual Re-port, 1911, I (Washington, 1913), 173- 

10 John G. Jackson to Madison, April 19, 1811, James Madison MSS, Library of 
Congress. 

265 



WAR HAWKS ARE FLEDGED 

the state, and his training as a lawyer, a profession mistrusted 
by rude frontiersmen. 11 In Maryland the election of three men 
who later voted for war proved but little, for they succeeded three 
retiring members who had advocated strong measures. In Virginia, 
where voting did not take place until April, 1811, the success of 
six Federalists, as well as Randolph and one of his followers, 
largely offset the election of fourteen administration supporters. 
The question of war does not appear to have been an issue, and the 
new congressman from Jefferson's district, Hugh Nelson, proved 
to be a peace man. John G. Jackson's seat fell into Federalist hands 
for the first time since 1793. Randolph's reelection, in a contest 
with John W. Eppes, perhaps showed a mild trend in favor of the 
government. Although Eppes did not actively campaign, he won 
a few more votes than the candidate who opposed Randolph in 
1 809 ; on the other hand, he was far better known than Randolph's 
earlier rival. 12 

Two states most often considered hotbeds of the war spirit, 
Kentucky and South Carolina, contributed to the haphazard over- 
all pattern. In the Blue Grass State, Anthony New, a War Hawk, 
trounced Matthew Lyon, a veteran Republican who had long since 
abandoned the radicalism that marked his views in the 1790'$. The 
other selections proved little. Three incumbent Republicans were 
returned unopposed, as was Henry Clay, who succeeded a man 
appointed to federal office. Clay, who had previously served briefly 
in the Senate, announced that he preferred "the station of an im- 
mediate representative of the people." This commendably demo- 
cratic sentiment was reinforced by an awareness that his particular 
talents would find a more fertile field in the lower house. Replying 
to Monroe's congratulations on his election, Clay wrote, "Accus- 
tomed to the popular branch of a Legislature, and preferring the 
turbulence ... of a numbrous body to the solemn stillness of the 

11 Joseph H. Parks, Felix Grundy: Champion of Democracy (University, La., 
194.0), pp. 33-37. 