

2 Charles M. Wiltse, John C. Calhoun y Nationalist, 1782-1828 (Indianapolis, 
194.4), p. 53 j Jefferson to Monroe, May 5, 18115 Thomas Jefferson MSS, Library 
of Congress. 

262 



WAR HAWKS ARE FLEDGED 

reflected either a small shift in closely balanced constituencies or 
the habit of rotation in office. New Hampshire, for example, did 
not reelect one congressman from 1806 through 1812, and about 
one-third of the Pennsylvania and Virginia delegations were regu- 
larly new members. Many congressmen not reelected, perhaps 
half, declined to stand. John Taylor of South Carolina, the real 
author of Macon's Bill, did not run only because he was being 
promoted to the Senate. 3 

Although the Republicans gained about a dozen seats, 4 includ- 
ing some held by Clintonians and other dissidents, they did not 
quite recover the majority held during Jefferson's second term. 
The Republicans gained most in states north of the Potomac, par- 
ticularly in Massachusetts and Pennsylvania/ A few Republican 
veterans, among them John Rea of Pennsylvania and Matthew 
Lyon of Kentucky, each of whom had served four terms, lost con- 
tests with other Republicans. In general, no clear pattern emerges. 
It is not demonstrable that a great upsurge of public feeling flung 
aside Federalists and cautious Republicans in favor of avowed 
War Hawks, although in seven or eight states the election took 
place just after news of the Cadore letter arrived. 5 This news, 
unaccompanied by information revealing the equivocal nature of 
French repeal, should have provided those who favored strong 
action against Britain with an effective talking point. 

Equally doubtful is the contention that the new Congress con- 

3 James L. Harrison, ed., Biographical Directory of the American Congress, 69th 
Cong., xd sess., H. Doc. 783 (1928) provides the membership of all Congresses as 
well as brief sketches of the members. The sketches are not always entirely accurate, 
and they are often silent and sometimes incorrect on party affiliation. For membership 
and dates of birth the volume is very useful, and it provides most of the information 
in this and succeeding paragraphs. 

4 Niles? Weekly Register (Baltimore), Dec. 5, 1812, breaking down the party 
affiliations by states, concludes that the House contained 106 Republicans and 36 
Federalists. 

5 Connecticut, Delaware, Georgia, Ohio, Pennsylvania, Massachusetts, North Caro- 
lina, and South Carolina all voted between October i and the end of 1810. For dates 
of election and the issue of credentials, see Credentials, i2th Congress, Legislative 
Section, National Archives. In Kentucky, on the other hand, the election took place 
in August, just after news of the Rambouillet Decree, which Henry Clay described 
as "an act of infamous treachery, if not of open robbery." This news apparently did 
not help the Federalist cause. Clay to Rodney, Aug. 6, 1810, James F. Hopkins, ed., 
The Papers of Henry Clay, I (Lexington, Ky., 1959), 481. 