

In March, 1811, the Eleventh Congress dispersed, leaving be- 
hind a record that reflected no credit on itself or the President. 
In the two years since Jefferson had ridden off to Monticello, 
the United States had continued its modest progress in manufac- 
tures. It had obtained a small portion of the Floridas and was on 
the brink of a campaign, equally lacking in nicety, to despoil the 
Spanish Empire of more of that province. The critical issues had 
not been solved. With a majority of two to one over the Federal- 
ists, Republicans had proved unable to develop any consistent legis- 
lative policy. Factionalism and administration reservations de- 
feated a bill to recharter the Bank of the United States, depriving 
the nation of an instrument sorely needed in any effective mar- 
shaling of financial strength. Just before Madison's inauguration, 
Republican factionalism spawned the Nonintercourse Act, and the 

259 



AMERICA'S HUMILIATION 

Eleventh Congress put Macon's Bill #2 on the statute book. Each 
bill represented a relaxation of will; each also provided a brief 
moment of triumph, triumph that only made the ensuing humilia- 
tion more bitter. The nation's capacity to absorb insult had been 
found generous. Whether or not it was inexhaustible remained to 
be seen. 

As chief executive during these years, James Madison was given 
much of the blame. This criticism often overshot the mark. The 
President knew what he wanted as a sequel to the Embargo, he 
acted decisively with Francis James Jackson, he showed boldness 
in accepting the Cadore letter, he even reached the reluctant con- 
clusion to support the Bank of the United States, which he had 
so firmly opposed twenty years before. Not decisiveness was lack- 
ing, but the quality of leadership. The effect of democratic theory 
upon Republican practice, the difficulties of succeeding a man who 
had long overshadowed him, the disciplinary decay that had set 
in before his inauguration all these created challenges that Madi- 
son had not the strength to overcome. 

"Jefferson by a system of intrigue and low cunning managed 
the party," wrote Samuel Taggart, but "M[adiso]n is a mere 
puppet or a cypher managed by some chiefs of the faction who 
are behind the curtain." Taggart's partisan language aside, this 
fairly accurately described the role once played by Jefferson. It 
woefully missed the mark with Madison. No one "managed" the 
President. On the other hand he himself did very little managing, 
of Congress or of public opinion. "Little better than a man of 
straw," not "half the independence of an old clucking hen" so 
too wrote the Federalist congressman. 67 That Taggart, Randolph, 
the opposition press, and even disgusted Republicans could make 
such claims is far more important than the truth or falsehood of 
what they said. The appearance of weakness was as fatal to an 
effective exercise of presidential leadership as weakness itself. 
American self-respect required more than had been tendered the 
nation in the recent past. 