

60 AnnaUy nth Cong., 3d sess., pp. 863, 1017. 

61 Irving Brant, James Madison: the President (Indianapolis, 1956), p. 250, 
suggests that the administration, through Eppes's original bill, aimed to correct an 
oversight in Macon's Bill, which failed to authorize a restoration of free trade if a 
belligerent revoked its decrees after nonintercourse against it had gone into effect. 
Doubtless this aspect was involved, but it was scarcely emphasized in debate or cor- 
respondence. Had Madison been confronted by British repeal, there seems no reason 
why he could not have proclaimed at least provisional repeal of nonintercourse until 
a special session met. 

256 



AMERICA'S HUMILIATION 

did not prohibit the departure o American vessels or produce to 
England. Furthermore, virtually admitting that until passage of 
the act shippers might justifiably have expected nonintercourse 
never to go into effect, the law permitted the entry of cargoes em- 
barked from Britain before February. The last legal cargo of Eng- 
lish goods arrived at New York toward the end of April, bringing 
to a close spring importations of approximately normal size. There- 
after, although in the fall Niles* Register suggested that the act be 
better enforced or else retitled "An Act for the Better Encourage- 
ment of Roguery and Other Purposes," nonimportation seems to 
have been effective. With return cargoes forbidden by American 
law, exports to Britain also fell off sharply, although those of cot- 
ton and tobacco remained fairly stable. 62 

After Eppes's bill there could be no turning back if even the 
shreds of America's reputation were to be preserved. Still, to per- 
severe was not easy in the face of increasing evidence of French 
perfidy. The National Intelligencer professed to believe stead- 
fastness more important than adjustment to the facts: "Shall we, 
like chaff before the wind, be driven by every breeze that wafts a 
rumor across the Atlantic?" But in the same article the Intelli- 
gencer virtually admitted that not breezes but a gale blew from 
the Tuileries, for it declared: "If both [nations] continue their 
aggressions, we must eventually set them both at defiance." The 
administration's mouthpiece argued that no amount of sin on Na- 
poleon's part excused Britain, for "our rights are absolute, not 
contingent." 63 

Self-evident to Americans, this last assertion naturally received 
little endorsement in Great Britain. The Orders in Council had 
long been defended sometimes honestly, often insincerely as 
acts of retaliation to last only as long as the Continental System. 
Britons therefore considered the meaning of imperial action criti- 
cally important, and London newspapers joined battle over the 
Cadore letter. Opposition sheets urged repeal of the Orders in 

62 C. Northcote Parkinson, ed., The Trade Winds: a Study of British Overseas 
Trade during the French Wars (London, 1948), p. 2225 Niles* Weekly Register 
(Baltimore), Oct. 26, 18115 Heaton, o<p. cit. y p. 194; Francois Crouzet, ISEconomie 
Britannique et le Blocus Continental (2 vols.j Paris, 1958), II, 703704, 