

Although Robert Smith briefly considered the appointment to 
honorable exile at St. Petersburg what would John Quincy 
Adams, the incumbent, have thought had he known that the 
President so considered it? he soon decided on an open break 
with the administration. Writing to his brother, Smith declared 
that Madison's "overthrow is my object and most assuredly will 
I effect it." The chosen vehicle was a pamphlet published in June 
despite the Senator's warnings. In his Address to the People of the 
United States, the ex-Secretary ascribed to the President the two 
Macon bills, "as unwise as humiliating," and in general sought to 
show that Madison's policy had been pro-French. Some of Smith's 
details were accurate: abandonment of the demand that France 
make compensation for seizures as a condition precedent to action 
against Britain, Madison's refusal to permit Smith to grill the new 
French minister on the exact state of imperial policy. There were 
also obvious falsehoods j who could but laugh when Smith claimed 
that during the Jefferson administration Madison relied upon him 

15 Memorandum on Smith's resignation, April , 1811, Gaillard Hunt, ed., 

The Writings of James Madison (9 vols.j New York, 19001910), VIII, 137149. 
Macon commented that Madison's offer of the St. Petersburg- legation was characteris- 
tic of the President, who "cannot yet say no quite easy enough." Macon to Nicholson, 
Sept. 21, 1811, Joseph H. Nicholson MSS, Library of Congress. 

268 



WAR HAWKS ARE FLEDGED 

for stylistic improvement of diplomatic correspondence? And the 
address breathed such malignance and pomposity that few could 
take it seriously, even Federalists ordinarily delighted to have 
evidence of Madison's Francophilia. William Lee and Joel Barlow 
answered the Address, but in general the administration let the 
ex-Secretary hang himself with his own rope. It was, said Ran- 
dolph's friend., James M. Garnett, "one of the rare instances of a 
man's giving the finishing stroke to his own character, in his eager- 
ness to ruin his enemy." 16 

Before Madison challenged Smith, he had already decided that 
James Monroe should be the new secretary of state. The Presi- 
dent's choice was possible only because Monroe's feelings had 
undergone a steady change since he returned home in December, 
1807, and let his name be put forth against Madison in the presi- 
dential election. Early in 1 809 Monroe offered his services as a 
special envoy to London and Paris. Such a mission, he said, might 
result in a settlement with one power which would let America 
concentrate her fire against the other. (Monroe clearly showed 
that he preferred arrangement with Britain, since he believed 
Napoleon aimed ultimately at the conquest of America.) The 
outgoing president, who declined Monroe's offer, correctly in- 
terpreted it as evidence his old protege was drifting back into the 
fold. Toward the end of the year, when Monroe declined appoint- 
ment as governor of Upper Louisiana, he made it clear he would 
accept higher office if the new president offered it. 17 