

27 Morier to Jackson, Jan. 24, 1811, Francis James Jackson MSS, Public Record 
Office (FO 353/58-61), FO 353/615 Morier to Bagot, Sept. 17, 1817, Sir Charles 
Bagot MSS, Levens Hall, Westmorland, Letters Received 1817. 

28 Foster's background is sketched in the introduction to Richard B. Davis, ed., 
Jeffersonian America: Notes on the United States of America . . . by Sir Augustus 
John Foster, Bart. (San Marino, 1954), and this volume of course contains his account 
of the winter in Washington. More information about the young man and his mother 
will be found in Vere Foster, ed., The Two Duchesses (London, 1898). 

274 



WAR HAWKS ARE FLEDGED 

of contemptuous comments he was particularly amused when an 
uncouth congressman urinated in his fireplace and when other 
legislators, confusing caviar for jam, had to spit out their overly 
large mouthfuls but he successfully concealed his contempt be- 
neath a bland exterior. At Washington Foster cut a wide social 
swath and spent, he later claimed, 9,000 on entertainment. "Mr. 
Foster is a pretty young gentleman," a Federalist commented. 
"But his appearance is too much that of a boy for a Minister Pleni- 
potentiary. He looks as if he was better calculated for a ballroom 
or drawing room, than for a foreign minister." Foster's diffident 
manner did not project British sternness to congressmen, and his 
inner antirepublicanism prevented him from accurately weighing 
events. "Foster is a very gentlemanlike young man, quite equal to 
do nothing at his post," Francis Jackson observed. Jackson incor- 
rectly thought this "now the best possible policy to follow." 29 
The days of Rose and of Jackson himself had passed. 

The Cabinet failed to see this. The ministers believed the United 
States would soon realize what seemed so obvious, that France 
had not really repealed her edicts. Then the Americans would 
either reverse their policy or insist upon effective French repeal, 
and then Britain might withdraw the Orders in Council. There 
seemed to be no hurry. Presidents had talked angrily, Congress 
had stirred before. Elections known to the Cabinet by April, 1 8 1 1, 
gave no clear hint of a new departure. Consequently the most 
important instructions handed to Foster merely rehearsed the 
arguments justifying the Orders in Council. Other instructions 
directed Foster to protest against the threat to Spanish West Flor- 
ida without using "any hostile or menacing language." England 
did not intend to "vindicate the Rights of Spain by force of Arms." 
Thus these foolish instructions ordered Foster to irritate the Amer- 
icans by criticizing their policy without authorizing him to make 
protests powerful enough to serve any useful purpose. On the other 

29 Taggart to Rev. John Taylor, Dec. 30, 1811, George H. Haynes, ed., "Letters 
of Samuel Taggart, Representative in Congress, 1803-1814," American Antiquarian 
Society, Proceedings, n.s., XXXIII (1923), 3745 Jackson to George Jackson, Feb. 19, 
x8n, Lady Jackson, ed., The "Bath Archives: a Further Selection from the "Diaries 
and Letters of Sir George Jackson (2 vols. ; London, 1873), I, 213. 