

Two practical alterations, one soon withdrawn, somewhat sof- 
tened the instructions. The British government made it clear that, 
while insisting upon the legitimacy of blockades, it considered Fox's 
Blockade submerged in the Orders in Council. "That Blockade," 
read the instructions, "would not be continued after the repeal of 
the Orders in Council, unless it should be maintained by an ade- 
quate force . . . according to the acknowledged Law of Nations." 
PercevaPs memorandum reveals his fear that the United States 
would adopt the French view that blockades, to be legal, must 
include investment by land and sea. If America did not, however, 
this particular issue would disappear. The other, short-lived con- 
cession involved ships that had been captured after sailing from 
American ports in an honest conviction that the Cadore letter 
would bring about repeal of the Orders in Council. Condemnation 
proceedings against these ships, both Perceval's memorandum and 
the instructions stated, would be stayed "as long as any hope can 
be entertained of prevailing on America to correct that error [ac- 
cepting Cadore's letter], and to render justice to Great Britain." 

277 



WAR HAWKS ARE FLEDGED 

Unfortunately, later in the month the Cabinet abandoned hope 
of changing America's mind and told Foster that condemnation 
would no longer be stayed. 32 

Some of Perceval's arguments had force. As he charged, French 
repeal had been conditional and incomplete. Napoleon's definition 
of blockade did not accord with traditional practice, nor could Eng- 
land possibly accept it. Fox's Blockade had perhaps conformed with 
the requirements of international law. It might even be that "the 
rights of all Maritime States, and . . . the general prosperity of 
Navigation and Commerce throughout the Civilized World" de- 
pended upon successful British resistance to Napoleon. Except 
with that messianic argument Britain could in no way defend her 
insistence that America tolerate the Orders in Council until Europe 
admitted English goods. Uncandidly, the instructions claimed that 
British policy had been "calculated for the purpose of encouraging 
the Trade of Neutrals through Great Britain," whereas actually 
the license system, revivified after temporary suspension following 
the Order in Council of 1809, notoriously discriminated against 
neutrals. The ministry, which announced tenderness for innocent 
American merchants deluded by their government and stayed con- 
demnation of their ships, did not release these vessels and, quickly 
abandoning hope for a major shift in American policy, soon vin- 
dictively condemned the innocents. Whether reasonable or not, 
the instructions of April, 1811, were undeniably obdurate. Can- 
ning's flashing phrases and Wellesley's ponderous sentences added 
up to about the same thing. Unlike Canning, the marquis had the 
misfortune to act when America was at last raising itself from 
the mire. 

Supplementary instructions prepared on the eve of Foster's de- 
parture showed that Britain, if she shifted her policy at all, in- 
tended to move toward greater firmness. Not only did Wellesley 
announce that court proceedings on the Fox would proceed, he 
also ordered Foster to protest the new nonintercourse legislation 