

The Little Belt President clash helped breed the psychological 
setting for war. Englishmen considered it an unprovoked attack 
made successful only by the bully's size. They feared that, unless 
forced to apologize, America would lose all respect for the mistress 
of the seas. Most British newspapers reprinted a gleeful American 
statement that "She Stoops to Conquer, or the Mistakes of a Night, 
a new play with an old title, was performed with loud applause 
... off the Capes of Virginia, by the frigate President, and a 
British picaroon, to the gratification of all America." 26 This atti- 
tude, so offensive to Britons, was indeed widespread in the United 
States. The shrill cheers for Rodgers showed that the American 
people, while not yet ready for full-scale war, were ashamed of the 
debilitating, sterile policies of the recent past. 

Six weeks after the sea fight, a British minister at last arrived 

24 Morning Chronicle (London), July 17, 1811 j Courier (London), July 17, 1811. 

25 Foster #2, #7, #11 to Wellesley, July 2, 18, Sept. 17, 1811, FO 5/76. 

(London), July i, 1811. 

273 



WAR HAWKS ARE FLEDGED 

in America. Since August, 1810, a charge, John Philip Morier, 
had headed the legation. Morier told Jackson, "I had rather get 
into a soupe, by a conduct spirited & spurning at their infamous 
proceedings toward us, than by one of the milk and water kind," 
but he actually followed a moderate course. He became compara- 
tively popular in Washington and, years later, looked back upon 
his stay with complacent pleasure. 27 Although young, Morier had 
had diplomatic experience in Eastern Europe, and in other times 
his seminoble pedigree would have been considered a compliment 
to the United States. As it was, his junior diplomatic rank out- 
weighed everything else. As a matter of prestige, the United States 
could not continue Pinkney as minister to London while a mere 
charge headed the British mission to America. In 1 8 1 1 Pinkney 
returned home. 

Too late to prevent Pinkney's departure, the slothful marquis 
settled upon Augustus John Foster as the new minister. Foster's 
parents, unless one accepts the romantic stories that the Prince 
Regent actually sired him, were a member of Parliament and an 
earPs daughter who, upon being widowed, had become first the 
mistress and then the wife of the Duke of Devonshire. His aunt 
was married to the Earl of Liverpool, a cabinet member. After an 
Oxford education Foster toured Europe in the grand style, then 
served in the United States under Merry. Recently he had been 
charge d'affaires at Stockholm. 28 With his mother's assistance, 
Foster actively sought the Washington post, hoping it would lead 
to rapid advances in the diplomatic corps. His availability further 
condemns Wellesley for letting the post remain vacant so long. 

In 1 8 1 1 Foster was thirty-three. He was handsome, self-assured, 
and so confident of his superior breeding that he felt able to ignore 
American crudities and insults. Foster's diary and letters are full 