

32 Wellesley #6 to Foster, April 29, 1811, Mayo, ed., Instructions, p. 323. Welles- 
ley to Prince Regent, May 15, 1811, Royal Archives, indicates that two weeks later 
these instructions had still not been dispatched. 

278 



WAR HAWKS ARE FLEDGED 

and to warn America, although discreetly, that Britain was not 
unarmed for a commercial contest. "A perseverance in the . . . 
hostile measures already commenced towards our Maritime and 
Commercial Rights and Interests," Wellesley huffed, "will com- 
pel us to resort to adequate means of [economic] retaliation." 33 

Augustus Foster sailed in H.M.S. Minerva early in May, 1 8 1 1. 
He left behind a broken romance with the girl who later married 
Lord Byron, but he carried with him a staff of seven servants and 
a new secretary of legation, Anthony St. John Baker. On June 29, 
when the Minerva arrived off Annapolis, a deserter leaped over- 
board to risk the three- or four-mile swim to shore. The same 
day William Pinkney sailed into the bay in U.S.S. Essex. Ignoring 
the possible symbolism of these events, Foster entered upon his 
duties with a good spirit. After a brief stay in Georgetown he 
established a new legation in the Seven Buildings, at Pennsylvania 
Avenue and Nineteenth Street, rejecting the old legation selected 
by Merry as too small and too distant for his purposes. On July 2 
Monroe introduced Foster to the President. Four days later, after 
an Independence Day celebration from which Foster prudently ab- 
sented himself, Madison entertained him pleasantly at the White 
House, and the secretaries soon followed suit. Already the new 
minister had begun talks with Monroe. CC I found in the American 
Secretary, a tone & manner of the most mild & conciliatory nature," 
he reported. 34 

This tone did not last long. Foster's instructions precluded any 
real mutuality, as the Secretary of State learned when the British 
minister revealed the contents at one of their first meetings. State 
Department files, not available to Monroe while he sulked at 
Albemarle, showed how much Britain had changed since the days 
of the Ministry of All the Talents, This information aided Madi- 
son, most effective and stubborn in private discussion, in bringing 
the new secretary to his own position. Even before Foster arrived, 
the administration newspaper declared that if his negotiations 

83 Wellesley #6, #7 to Foster, April 29, 1811, Mayo, ed., Instructions, pp. 

323-324$ Wellesley #8 to Foster, secret, April , 1811, ibid., pp. 324-325. 

34 Foster #i, #2 to Wellesley, June 29, July 2, 1811, FO 5/76. 

279 



WAR HAWKS ARE FLEDGED 

failed, as they were almost certain to do, the United States must 
rigorously enforce nonimportation or "substitute for it some meas- 
ure more consonant to the feelings of the nation." 35 This charac- 
teristically opaque language at least showed a determination not 
to abandon the ground to Britain. Apparently with little protest, 
James Monroe fell in with this line. To have done otherwise would 
have been politically ruinous, for Monroe had burned his bridges 
with Federalists and Republican dissidents. 