

Actually, Rodgers apparently carried only general orders nearly 
a year old. Neither these orders nor any others that have come to 
light directed Rodgers to use force to recover seamen recently im- 
pressed, and Monroe subsequently denied that any such orders 
had been issued. The nation believed they had, and the National 
Intelligencer's equivocal language strengthened this impression. 22 

Just after sundown on May 1 6, 1 8 1 1 , after a long chase, Rodgers 
overhauled H.M.S. Little Belt, a Danish-built sloop taken at 
Copenhagen. A brief cannonade followed, and the Little Belt 
struck her colors. Each commander subsequently claimed the other 
had fired first. For the Englishman this would have been fool- 
hardy, considering the disparity of force, unless he was convinced 
that the President was French. On the other hand, a slight pre- 
ponderance of the evidence supports Rodgers 3 claim that the Little 
Belt did fire first. In any event, the evidence was conflicting enough 
to permit both governments to support their respective com- 
manders. Whatever Madison and his Cabinet desired, the public 
reaction made it prudent to do so. Even the Columbian Centinel y 
Boston's Federalist bellwether, supported the recovery of im- 
pressed seamen by force. This, it said, "would not be War, but 
Reprisal, justified by the Law of Nations." The National Intelli- 
gencer soon announced that commanders who forcibly vindicated 
national rights would get administration support. 23 

The conflict naturally produced an equivalent reaction in Eng- 
land. A few newspapers emphasized the difficulty of establishing 
which commander had fired first, and the Morning Chronicle 

21 Samuel Smith to John S. Smith, May 23, 1811, Samuel Smith MSS. 

22 Charles O. Paullin, Commodore John Rodgers (Cleveland, 1910), pp. 211212, 
22 off.} National Intelligencer (Washington), May 23, 1811. 

^Columbian Centinel, May 29, 18115 National Intelligencer > June 6, 1811. The 
Centinel combined its defense of the forcible recovery of deserters with the usual 
personal assaults upon Madison. 

272 



WAR HAWKS ARE FLEDGED 

charged that the clash, for the precipitation of which, however, 
it blamed Rodgers, sprang ultimately from the Cabinet's "folly in 
not confirming the arrangement that Mr. Erskine so sensibly 
made." Most papers threw the entire responsibility on the Ameri- 
cans. The Courier even called for war: "The blood of our mur- 
dered countrymen must be revenged, and war must ensue. The 
conduct of America leaves us no alternative." 24 The government 
contented itself with a well-publicized dispatch of naval reinforce- 
ments to the American theater. 

At Washington, Secretary Monroe's initial moderation pleased 
the new British minister, Jackson's long-delayed successor. Mon- 
roe's mildness did not last long. The administration accepted 
Rodgers' story, fixing blame on the Little Belt, and realized that 
America had been exhilarated by this retaliation for the insult 
offered to Barron four years before. In the middle of July and 
again in September, the United States government categorically 
declined to consider a British request for reparation, at least until 
the earlier Chesapeake affair had been settled. Even then, the 
British minister predicted, admission of guilt was highly unlikely. 25 