

18 Jefferson to Monroe, Jan. 25, 1811, Monroe MSSj diary entry of Jan. 12, 1811, 
Bruce, 0$. cit. y I, 348, 

19 Monroe to Tazewell, March 14, 1811, Monroe MSSj Monroe to Brent, March 
18, 1811, ibid.$ Monroe to Madison, March 23, 1811, ibid.; Madison to Monroe, 
private, March 26, 1811, Madison MSS$ Monroe to Madison, March 29, x8xx, 
Monroe MSS. 

270 



WAR HAWKS ARE FLEDGED 

eliminate Monroe as a presidential candidate in 1812, and the 
British charge, Morier, went even further when he combined with 
this a suggestion that sheer economic necessity had influenced 
Monroe. 20 A number of considerations actually caused the gover- 
nor to accept national office. Despite the deep wound suffered at 
the hands of Jefferson and Madison, Monroe remained basically 
a loyal Republican, at least to the extent of believing that the suc- 
cess of Federalism or of factionalism would be fatal to the nation. 
His own appointment, he hoped, would contribute to party unity. 
Personal ambition, of course, also played a part in his decision 5 
in no other way could he so effectively restore himself to the front 
rank of presidential contenders, even if he would have to await the 
completion of Madison's second term. Finally, Monroe obviously 
expected to alter the direction of American policy. As al- 
ways, he considered peace with Britain the object of highest 
priority. He wanted to work for it j he assumed, like so many con- 
temporaries, that he could thrust his will upon Madison j and he 
was confident the British Cabinet would provide no insuperable 
obstacle. Within a short time Monroe would learn that British 
demands went far beyond any that he was prepared to accept. 

The first step toward conversion resulted from a naval clash 
in May, 1811, brought on by a spate of impressments near the 
American coast, "We are all in a Bustle," Samuel Smith wrote 
to his son, "in Consequence of the Cruel Conduct of Four British 
Cruizers who have been off the Coast for these few weeks, they 
press the Young Men from our Coasters & in one Instance a Young 
Man who never had been at sea before." Early in May Commodore 
Rodgers sailed from Norfolk in U.S.S. President) and the Ameri- 
can people leaped to the conclusion that he had been ordered 
to demand the release of impressed Americans. "Indeed the im- 
pressments can no longer be tolerated," Senator Smith continued. 
"Pusyllanimity has been Charged on the President," and the na- 
tion hoped that he had changed his course. Few desired that war 



Centinel (Boston), April 10, 1811$ Gore to King, May 5, 1811, 
King MSS, Vol. XIII j Federal Republican (Baltimore), April 4, i8nj Morier 
$23 to Wellesley, May 9, 1811, Foreign Office Archives, Public Record Office, 
FO 5/74. 

271 



WAR HAWKS ARE FLEDGED 

should follow, "but if it should, the Nation will meet it on this 
Ground with Alacrity, all parties are outraged, federal & Democrat 
are all ... united on this point." 21 When even Samuel Smith 
declared himself ready to rally behind the President, the national 
temper was certainly aroused. 