

275 



WAR HAWKS ARE FLEDGED 

hand, instructions on the Chesapeake affair were tailored to fit 
Pinkney's view, as Wellesley understood it, of what the United 
States required. 30 

In preparing Foster's main instructions, on the Orders in Coun- 
cil, the Foreign Office drew heavily upon a memorandum prepared 
by Spencer Perceval. 31 Since Perceval was the most forthright 
defender of the orders in the Cabinet, the memorandum and the 
instructions, though loosely organized, are a comprehensive de- 
fense of the British position. The Orders in Council, Perceval main- 
tained, retaliated against the Berlin Decree, which released Britain 
from the restraints of international law. When the French aban- 
doned the principles of the Continental System, Britain would 
gladly withdraw her edicts. She could not consider the Cadore let- 
ter adequate, and its acceptance by the United States was an un- 
friendly act. The letter proclaimed not absolute but conditional 
repeal, as subsequent French action made clear. Even more im- 
portant, the repeal promised by Cadore was meaningless, since 
other French regulations had virtually the same effect as the Ber- 
lin and Milan decrees. These so-called municipal regulations, 
Perceval said, by "prohibiting all Commerce in British articles 
all over the Continent, would leave the most pernicious & injurious 
parts of the Berlin & Milan decrees in full force & operation." 
The Perceval ministry clearly intended to make America suffer 
the loss of a continental market as long as Britain did. Selfishness 
so naked could be clothed only in terms of economic necessity, not 
right} the British usually tried to keep this unattractive garb out 
of sight. 

The British government refused to consider Fox's Blockade of 
1806 part of the same system as the Orders in Council, but main- 
tained that it met the requirements of international law because 

30 Wellesley to Prince Regent, May 15, 1811, Royal Archives, Windsor Castle. 
For the instructions see Bernard Mayo, ed., Instructions to the British Ministers to 
the United States, 1791-1812, American Historical Association, Annual Report, 
1036, III (Washington, 1941), 310 fE. 

31 Perceval memorandum, n.d., Spencer Perceval MSS (examined while temporarily 
on deposit at the Register of National Archives, London), A/i5$ Wellesley #i to 
Foster, April 10, 1811, Mayo, ed., Instructions, pp. 310318. The following para- 
graphs rest on these two sources. 

276 



WAR HAWKS ARE FLEDGED 

Fox had proclaimed it only after receiving assurances that the 
Royal Navy could make it an effective and not a mere paper 
blockade. If Britain consented to lump this regulation with the 
Orders in Council, admittedly illegal except as retaliation, France 
could claim that Britain was confessing her own priority of guilt 
against the law of nations. At the same time, apparent acceptance 
of the extremely restrictive French definition of blockade would 
compromise England's right to restore blockades like Fox's if con- 
ditions later made them advisable. The last paragraph of the in- 
structions, doubtless prepared with an eye to future publication 
in navy-proud Britain, put the argument in high-flown language: 
"No Extremity can induce His Royal Highness to relinquish the 
ancient and established Rules of Maritime War, the maintenance 
of which is indispensable, not only to the Commercial Interests, 
but to the Naval Strength, and to the National Honor of Great 
Britain, as well as to the rights of all Maritime States, and to the 
general prosperity of Navigation and Commerce throughout the 
Civilized World." 