

Although Foster believed Monroe's attitude milder than Madi- 
son's, their conversations do not bear him out. Monroe made 
suggestions which he said were his own, but on no occasion did these 
compromise basic American positions. Bait dangled by the Secre- 
tary on his own responsibility left the United States free to try 
a more attractive fly or even a naked hook later on. On most sub- 
jects the Secretary was certainly firm enough. He rejected the 
British protest against threats to West Florida, observing casually 
that the province must sooner or later fall into American hands. 
He adopted an increasingly rigid line on the Little Belt affair. 
He insisted that his government would never admit that Cadore's 
letter had not resulted in repeal of the decrees. "I know of no 
arguments, no mode of reasoning, which can avail in a discussion 
with such tempers," Foster complained with some asperity. Only 
increased French action against commerce, the minister believed, 
would shake Madison and Monroe from their position. 36 

Two items indicated that the administration still hoped for set- 
tlement with Britain, even if it meant offending France. Monroe 
told Foster that the President considered the British position on 
Fox's Blockade satisfactory. America welcomed the assurance that 
future blockades would be effectively maintained, and would not 
join France in demanding formal revocation of the blockade of 
i8o6. 37 Monroe put forward an important hint concerning the 
Orders in Council. "He assured me," Foster reported, "that if 
Great Britain would issue such a conditional and ambiguous prom- 

35 National Intelligencer > April 16, 1811. 

36 Foster #3, #5, #6, #7, #8 to Wellesley, July 5, 7, it, 18, 18, 1811, 
FO 5/76. 

37 Foster #5, #6 to Wellesley, July 7, 12, 1811, ibid. 

280 



WAR HAWKS ARE FLEDGED 

ise of a revocation of Her Orders as France did of the decrees last 
August, that it will be considered enough to authorize the cessation 
of the operation of the Non-importation act against her Com- 
merce." 38 Two fake repeals would be considered to cancel each 
other out. Foster felt unable to meet this tremendous leap toward 
common ground with even a genteel step forward. When the Brit- 
ish Cabinet finally tiptoed in this direction months later, America 
had clambered back to higher terrain. 

Far from urging his government to pick up Monroe's hint, 
which might have cut the ground from under future War Hawks, 
Foster advised firmness and adopted it himself. 39 In formal notes, 
he demanded America's proof of French repeal and threatened 
retaliation if nonimportation continued. After reading one of these 
notes Madison wrote: "Foster seems more disposed to play the 
diplomatist, than the conciliatory negotiator. His letter though 
not very skillfully made up, is evidently calculated for the public 
here, as well as for his own Govt. In this view his evasion & sophis- 
tical efforts may deserve attention." Attention they got, in two 
assaults upon the British position prepared jointly by Madison 
and Monroe. These notes, somewhat defensive in discussing French 
repeal and the American interpretation of "municipal regulations," 
were devastating when they ripped into Foster's statement that the 
orders would be maintained until Napoleon permitted British 
goods to enter the Continent. 40 When the notes became public 
through transmission to Congress iq. tlie autumn, England's audac- 
ity astounded even the Federalists., TSjhis demand apparently made 
the administration, or at least Monroe, realize the barrenness of 
all hopes for an immediate accommodation. "A demand so entirely 
inconsistent with the rights of the U States, and degrading to them 
as an independent nation," Monroe wrote an English correspond- 
ent, "has been viewed in no other light than that of evidence ofsa 
determined hostility in your government against this country/ 