

The crisis did not come until after Foster's return to Washing- 
ton. In July, 181 1, responding to Harrison's reports of approach- 
ing war, Secretary Eustis ordered a detachment of regulars to the 
governor's aid. Three days later the Secretary wrote that Madison 
still hoped for peace and trusted that Harrison would follow a 
pacific policy. As Madison and Eustis should have known, per- 
emptory orders alone could restrain the aggressive governor. Har- 
rison gathered together an expedition of regulars and volunteers, 
construed in his own fashion directives from Eustis, and plunged 
northward to break up the Indian forces and establish white pos- 
session of the Fort Wayne cession. At dawn on November 7, 181 1, 
Indians from the Prophet's Town attacked Harrison's army. At 
the cost of about 200 men, Harrison narrowly held his position, 
then burned the Indian settlement and retired precipitately to the 
Ohio. News of this encounter, called the battle of Tippecanoe, ran 
swiftly across the nation. 43 

Americans blamed the British for the Indian troubles. During 
the crisis preceding the Jay treaty and again after the Chesapeake 
affair, friction with the Western tribes had accompanied difficulties 
with England. Few Americans accepted^as coincidental a recur- 
rence of this friction in 1810 and i8n/As early as 1810, calling 
for the conquest of Canada, Henry Claf demanded: "Is it nothing 
to us to extinguish the torch that lights up savage warfare?" News- 
papers in Clay's part of the country took up the cry. One called 
for decisive action to wipe out the threat of "the tomahawk and 
scalping knife, which for many years past, and at this very mo- 
ment the inhuman blood-thirsty cabinet of St. James had inces- 
santly endeavored to bring on the women and children of our west- 

43 For the chain of events leading to the battle of Tippecanoe, see Freeman Cleaves, 
Old Tfy'pecanoe: William Henry Harrison and His Time (New York, 1939), pp. 
63 ff.j Dorothy B. Goebel, William Henry Harrison, A Political Biography, Indiana 
Historical Collections, Vol. XIV (Indianapolis, 1926), pp. 115 ff. 

283 



WAR HAWKS ARE FLEDGED 

ern frontiers." Another sanctimoniously bewailed the fact that 
"British intrigue and British gold . . . has greater influence with 
them [the Indians] of late than American justice and benevo- 
lence." 4 * 

After Tippecanoe such complaints multiplied. Andrew Jackson 
denounced "Secrete agents of Great Britain" as catalysts of the 
attack. The Lexington Reporter asked if Congress intended to 
"treat the citizens of the Western country as they have treated the 
[impressed] seamen" for eighteen years, then added, "The whole 
body of Western citizens call for the probing of this British villiny 
to the bottom." Back East, Duane's Aurora proclaimed that "war 
has been begun with British arms and by the Indians instigated 
by British emissaries. The blood of American citizens have already 
been shed in actual war, begun undeclared." 45 Denunciations con- 
tinued throughout the winter, until even Foster recognized their 
importance. 