

55 On the alliance of South and West see Pratt, Expansionists of 1812. Pratt states 
but hardly emphasizes his view that the Indian menace and the South-West alliance 
were only a part of the entire picture, but even so the latter argument does not seem 
convincing, although an informal logrolling understanding may have existed. The 
nearest expression of a real understanding is to be found in the speech by Felix Grundy, 
Annals, i2th Cong., ist sess., pp. 426-427. For Northern desires for Canada, see 
Connecticut C our ant (Hartford), which opposed war, Jan. 15, 18125 John A. Harper 
(a War Hawk) to Plumer, May 13, 1812, quoted in Pratt, Expansionists of 1812, 
p. 149. 

289 



WAR HAWKS ARE FLEDGED 

our maritime rights, by an invasion of her provinces, as the only 
quarter in which she is vulnerable." 56 On such a program alone 
could supporters of war from all parts of the nation unite. 

During these months Canada and the Orders in Council re- 
ceived far more emphasis than impressment. Every day of the 
year, two or three men fell into the clutches of press gangs, 57 and 
yet America showed little concern. In February, 1811, Congress- 
man Wright proposed that the United States make an end to 
impressment as well as to the Orders in Council a prerequisite to 
renewed commercial intercourse witja? -England. Only twenty rep- 
resentatives supported the proposal?. The Madison administration 
virtually ignored impressment in negotiations with Foster. The 
President's annual message in November, 1811, wherein there 
appeared a catalogue of British crimes, remained silent on the kid- 
naping of seamen. Niks' Register^ one of the few to place impress- 
ment at the head of the list of American grievances, complained in 
the autumn of 1811 that the practice had gone on so long "the 
acuteness of feeling so natural on account of it, has become blunted, 
and our sailors have begun to make a kind of calculation upon it. 
How base and degrading! How inconsistent with our pretensions 
to sovereignty and independence!" Even John Quincy Adams, 
who believed America ultimately must fight on this issue, advised 
a cabinet member that "it seems clearly better to wait the effect 
of our increasing strength and of our adversary's more mature de- 
cay, before we undertake to abolisFvt by War." 58 Not until later 
did war men emphasize impressment^. 

British insults and ship seizures/even in coastal waters of the 

56 Virginia, Argus (Richmond), Nov. n, 18115 Liberty Hall (Cincinnati), Jan. i, 
1812 j Annals, i2th Cong-., ist sess., p. 793 (Porter). 

67 The rate of impressment is very difficult to establish. James F. Zimmerman, 
Impressment of American Seamen, Columbia University Studies in History, Economics 
and Public Law, Vol. CXVIII, no. i (New York, 1925), p. 256, estimates that from 
750 to 1,000 seamen a year were impressed in this period. Rufus King, however, 
believed that "perhaps at no former period have the impressments been less numerous." 

King* to , private, Dec. 10, 1811, King 1 MSS, Vol. XIII. For a contrary view, 