

claiming that "the barbarous Thefts of American Citizens . . . have of late increased 
to an astonishing degree," see Independent Chronicle, May 27, 1811. 

58 Wiles' Register, Nov. 2, i8nj Adams to Eustis, Oct. 26, 1811, Adams Family 
MSS (microfilm), Massachusetts Historical Society, Vol. CXXXV. 

29O 



WAR HAWKS ARE FLEDGED 

United States, roused far more feeling. In August, 1811, ELM.S. 
Tartarus seized two merchantmen off Norfolk. When she boldly 
followed this action by a visit to the American port, the British 
consul warned the captain, "For God-sake if you are not already 
gone get to sea as fast as you can." The Tartarus cut her cable 
and scuttled out of the harbor just ahead of mob action. Later in 
1 8 1 1 British squadrons established virtual blockades of Chesapeake 
Bay and New York harbor. Rumor suggested that Admiral Yorke's 
squadron, reportedly dispatched to America after the Little Belt 
affair, would enforce by arms a demand for satisfaction. The few 
available American naval vessels put to sea to show the flag and 
perhaps resist British aggressions by force. 59 Although in 1 8 1 1 the 
British seized fewer ships than in other years, captures aroused 
strenuous American criticism. 

All these things war on the Wabash, Foster's demands, naval 
arrogance, and even the temporarily overlooked continuation of 
impressment seemed to show mounting British scorn for the 
United States. Thomas Jefferson might argue, as he did in Sep- 
tember, that America's reputation would rise if she showed her 
wisdom by remaining immune from Europe's madness. 60 But more 
and more of his countrymen felt that only direct action could 
vindicate the nation's character. Of course, to disentangle honor 
and self-interest is often difficult, and editors and congressmen 
frequently cloaked material appeals in the rhetoric of honor, sov- 
ereignty, and independence. Still, materially the United States 
was little if any worse off than in previous years. It seems reason- 
able to believe that the psychological consequences of British 
assaults, and the accumulating embarrassment over the cowardly 
policy followed since 1806, were the chief influences stirring the 
American people in 1 8 1 1 . 

References to national honor foreshadowed later congressional 
emphasis upon this valuable but intangible feeling. To a British 

59 Hamilton to Capt. John Pasco, Aug. 29, 1811, and Pasco to Admiral Sawyer, 
Jan. 19, 1812, both enclosed in Sawyer to Croker, Feb. 29, 1812, Admiralty Papers, 
Public Record Office, Adm 1/5025 Graham to Monroe, Sept. 6, 1811, Monroe 
MSSj Paul Hamilton to Madison, Sept 9, 17, 1811, Madison MSS. 

60 Jefferson to Eppes, Sept. 6, 1811, Jefferson MSS. 

291 



WAR HAWKS ARE FLEDGED 

correspondent Monroe wrote, "Instead of the insults & injuries 
which are so constantly offered to the U States, & to their govern- 
ment, . . . treat us as a nation having rights, possessing passions, 
and much sensibility to national honor, & the result would not 
fail to be satisfactory." Newspapers echoed the cry. The New- 
Hampshire Patriot, for example, argued: "Things have now ar- 
rived at that crisis, that something spirited must be done, or the 
United States will become proverbial for servility and debasement. 
. . . At present we feel all the evils, without reaping any of the ad- 
vantages of a war. . . . Let us at once . . . declare to the world, 
in the language of our fathers, that c the States are, and of right 
ought to be, FREE, SOVEREIGN, and INDEPENDENT. 3 
At least philosophically, many Federalists agreed that independ- 
ence and honor must be defended. "The Honor of a Nation is the 
only legitimate cause of war," declared Rufus King, but he and 
many other Federalists insisted that Napoleon had challenged 
American honor as much as Britain had. 61 