

38 Foster #8 to Wellesley, July 18, 1811, ibid. 

39 Foster $6 to Wellesley, July 12, 1811, ibid. 

40 Irving Brant, James Madison: the President (Indianapolis, 1956), pp. 340-343; 
Madison to Monroe, July 2, 1811, Monroe MSS. Madison's letter, certainly misdated, 
should probably read August 2, 1811. 



WAR HAWKS ARE FLEDGED 

Threateningly, perhaps with emphasis for political effect in Brit- 
ain, the Secretary added: "War, dreadful as the alternative is, 
could not do us more injury than the present state of things, and it 
would certainly be more honorable to the nation, and gratifying to 
the publick feelings." 41 

By the end of July, 1811, deadlock clearly had been reached. 
The President and the Secretary withdrew to Virginia, carrying 
on correspondence by courier. Monroe suffered a painful injury 
when brushed from his horse, but he was able to take whatever 
action was required by notes that flowed southward from the de- 
partmental clerk left in charge at Washington. Meanwhile, Foster 
wended his way northward to Philadelphia, a favorite summer 
mecca of diplomats. In Chester he dined at a tavern owned by a 
member of Congress. Neither there nor anywhere else did he pick 
up information that caused him to warn his government that the 
American temper might be changing. The country's alarm over 
reports that Britain would declare war as retaliation for nonimpor- 
tation or the attack on the Little Belt, Foster reported, "proves 
pretty forcibly how very little is to be dreaded that this Country 
will originate measures of hostility against us." 42 

While Foster, Madison, and Monroe vacationed, news of an 
impending Indian war flowed through the Appalachians. In Octo- 
ber, 1809, Governor William Henry Harrison of the Indiana 
Territory inveigled Indians assembled at Fort Wayne into a ces- 
sion of nearly 3 million acres. The Madison administration, while 
ratifying this treaty, directed Harrison not to occupy the ceded 
territory immediately. The weak warnings of Secretary of War 
Eustis, however, deterred the governor far less than threats de- 
livered to him in the summer of 1 8 10 and again in 1 8 1 1 by Tecum- 
seh, speaking for a new Indian league organized by Tecumseh 
himself and his brother, the Prophet. Harrison's provocative state- 
ments to the legislature, accounts of increased subsidies to tribes 

41 Monroe to [Holland?], n.d., Monroe MSS, fol. 3145. This letter, written in 
reply to one of July 15, was probably sent in late September or early October. Hamil- 
ton, op. cit t> V, 191, suggests that it was addressed to Auckland, but references to 
Fox, Holland's relative, make Holland the more likely addressee. 

42 Foster #16 to Wellesley, Sept. 17, 1811, FO 5/76. 

282 



WAR HAWKS ARE FLEDGED 

that visited Canada, and, in 1 8 1 1 , news that Tecumseh had gone 
southward to attempt to add other tribes to his confederacy ignited 
a real fear of Indian hostilities all along the Western frontier. 
Foster, who made passing reference to propaganda connecting 
Britain with the Indians, did not consider it particularly important. 