

287 



WAR HAWKS ARE FLEDGED 

TOMAHAWK of British savages, is now again devastating our 
frontiers, Hemp at three dolars. Cotton at twelve dollars. Tobacco 
at nine shillings. Thus will our farmers, and wives and children, 
continue to be ruined and murdered, whilst those half-way, qwd, 
execrable measures and delays preponderate." 52 The Reporter's 
columns probably fairly accurately reflected Western feelings, 
placing on an almost equal level of importance the rights of seamen 
(and through them the nation), Indian warfare, and economic 
depression. 

An emphasis on Western war spirit can distort the national pic- 
ture. The frontiersman certainly was more volatile, more directly 
subject to pressure, and perhaps also more sensitive to the impera- 
tives of honor. However, at least during the summer and fall of 
1811, well after the congressional elections, feelings of frustra- 
tion and even bellicosity temporarily influenced the entire nation, 
not merely the sparsely populated West/ The Little Belt affair 
aroused all sections. Economic pressure fell upon the nation fairly 
generally, although not so heavily on food growers in the Middle 
States. South Carolina, for example, suffered seriously when the 
price of cotton fell by two-thirds from 1808 to 1811. During the 
war session her congressmen served in the front ranks of the war 
men, often frankly admitting that commercial motives placed them 
there. 53 At Boston prices fell substantially, although not so sharply 
as at New Orleans, and, according to Senator Smith, Baltimore's 
commerce was in "a deplorable situation." 54 Port towns, even in 
New England, became increasingly bellicose. Huge segments of 
Northern opinion steadily resisted the ultimate remedy, partly 
because they saw that war with England would not cure commercial 
ills, but the greatest opposition to war developed only after hostili- 
ties proved to be neither a certain nor a quick solution. In 1811 

52 Jackson, divisional orders, March 7, 1812, Bassett, of. cit., I, 222; Reporter , 
Dec. 10, iSiij March 14, 1812. 

53 Margaret K, Latimer, "South Carolina a Protagonist of the War of 1812," 
American Historical Review, LXI (19551956), 9*4"~929 

54 Taylor, "Prices in the Mississippi Valley," p. 155$ Samuel Smith to John S. 
Smith, June 13, 1811, Samuel Smith MSS. 

288 



WAR HAWKS ARE FLEDGED 

1 8 12, unlike 1808-18095 most New England Republicans stayed 
loyal. Finally, while the outbreak of hostilities on the Wabash 
most directly threatened transappalachia, virtually the entire 
country believed that the conflict had revealed Britain as an in- 
veterate, jealous, intriguing enemy. The anti-British trend did not 
unite the East or even the South, nor was it long-lived. Tem- 
porarily, it affected the entire nation. 

Thus the cry for Canada. Doubtless there were sectional reasons 
for urging its conquest: Westerners sought to end the Indian men- 
ace, Southerners conceivably hoped to purchase support for their 
Florida aims by backing war against Canada, some Northerners 
believed annexation would shift the center of power within the 
Union to the free states. 55 The central, universal theme was far 
simpler: strike at Canada, the most vulnerable British target, the 
easiest way to inflict punishment and extort concession. ^The great 
advantage to be derived from the acquisition of these possessions," 
a Richmond paper declared, "will not accrue so much from the 
tenure of them as a conquest, . . . but from the very important 
consequences which their loss will occasion to the British." In Cin- 
cinnati the Liberty Hall warned Britain that unless she rescinded 
the Orders in Council and abandoned impressment (Indian in- 
trigues were not mentioned), "the most valuable of all her colo- 
nies, will be torn from her grasp, & thus she will accelerate her 
own destruction." This view found steady expression in newspa- 
pers and in the halls of Congress. "What," asked a leading War 
Hawk in January, 1812, ". . . is the object of all our military 
preparations? The object has been repeatedly avowed to be to re- 
taliate on Great Britain the injuries which she has inflicted upon 