

63 Napoleon, Note dictated in the councils of Administration and of Commerce, 
April 29, 1 8 1 1, AAE, CP, E-U, Vol. LXVII; Cadore #8 to Serurier, May 16, 
1811, ibid,. Vol. LXIV; Montalivet, Report to the Council of Commerce, Nov. 25, 
1 8 1 1, quoted in Frank E, Melvin, Napoleon's Navigation System (Menasha, Wise., 
1919), p. 2905 memorandum enclosed in Bassano #17 to Serurier, Dec. 30, 1811, 
AAE, CP, E-U, Vol. LXIV 5 Russell to Samuel Smith, private and confidential, June 
29, 1 811, Samuel Smith MSS. 

64 Foster $"20 to Wellesley, Nov. 5, x8xx, FO 5/77. For Se*rurier j s opinions see his 
dispatches $-9, $*n, #14, $ 18-^23, #31 to Bassano, April lo-Oct. 23, 1811, 
AAE, CP, E-U, Vols. LXV-LXVI. 

293 



WAR HAWKS ARE FLEDGED 

To seek amelioration of French policy and also to demonstrate 
to the American people his hopes for warmer relations, Madison 
dispatched a new minister to Paris in July, 1811. Russell had al- 
ready been in charge of the legation nearly a year, and further 
delay in sending a minister would be harmful both with Napoleon 
and the American public. As early as February, 1811, Madison 
had chosen Joel Barlow for the post at Paris. The barrenness 
of Serurier's communications delayed the envoy's departure and 
made Barlow himself wonder if the trip would be worthwhile. 
When mildly favorable news arrived from Paris, however, the 
President ordered Barlow to sail. His instructions recapitulated 
American complaints against France and warned that "much is 
yet to be done by her, to satisfy the just claims of this Country. 
To revoke blockades of boundless extent, in the present state of 
her marine, was making no sacrifice. She must indemnify us for 
past injuries and open her ports to our commerce on a fair and 
liberal scale." Madison and Monroe had no illusions about Na- 
poleon's basic attitude. The man whom Barlow replaced had at 
least as few. He declared that ships touching at British ports con- 
tinued to be excluded from the Napoleonic empire and stated also 
that he had no good proof the French decrees had been repealed. 65 

Gallic policy embarrassed newspapers supporting the adminis- 
tration. The National Intelligencer admitted that Napoleon con- 
tinued to mistreat American commerce "in a most vexatious and 
unprincipled manner," but went on to argue, "still he has complied 
with the letter of our law" His municipal regulations, said editor 
Gales, did not affect the justice of America's claims against Britain 
or the propriety of nonintercourse. The Independent Chronicle^ 
New England Republicanism's most effective voice, took the same 
position. Its editor, Benjamin Russell, admitted that Napoleon 
had treated the United States badly but added, pointing particu- 
larly to impressment, "the question is not which nation alone is 
culpable, as they are both so: The only question is, which is the 

65 Bar low to Jefferson, May 2, 1811, Jefferson MSSj Monroe to Barlow, July 
26, 1811, Department of State Archives, National Archives, Instructions, All Coun- 
tries, Vol. VII 5 Russell to John S. Smith, private and confidential, Aug. 2, 1811, 
Samuel Smith MSS. 