

Certainly the great Corsican continued to show little respect for 
the United States. His policy was confusing, complex, and con- 
tradictory, partly because he wished to sow discord between Britain 
and America. Napoleon no longer subjected to automatic con- 
demnation ships visited at sea by the Royal Navy. He did seize 
those that touched at British ports, although formal condemnation 
was delayed. Furthermore, as the Czar drifted toward ultimate 
war with Napoleon, American trade with Russia suffered as a 
symbol of the break between the two emperors. As soon as the 
ice broke up in 1811, American ships entered the Baltic to take 
advantage of Russia's break with the Continental System. Na- 
poleon replied by ordering the confiscation of all American ships 
bound for Russia. 62 Although his Danish satellites often executed 
Napoleon's policy, Americans knew who deserved the blame. 

Napoleon treated American trade with France almost equally 

61 Monroe to [Holland?], n.d., Monroe MSS, fol. 31455 Ne<w-Ham<p$hire Patriot 

(Concord), Oct. 29, iSiij King to , private, Dec. 10, 1811, King- MSS, Vol. 

XIII. 

62 Napoleon, Note dictated in the councils of Administration and of Commerce, 
April 29, 1811, AAE, CP, E-U, Vol. LXVII; Cadore #8 to S^rurier, May 16, 
1811, ibid., Vol. LXIV; Napoleon to Duke of Massa, Sept. 6, i8n, Le'on Lecestre, 
ed., Lettres Inedites de Napoleon i^ (2 vols.5 Paris, 1897), II, 159. 

292 



WAR HAWKS ARE FLEDGED 

harshly, and his announcement that ships arriving after Novem- 
ber, 1810, might sell their cargoes had little practical effect. The 
Trianon tariff and the requirement of certificates of origin signed 
by French consuls impaired trade. Fearing clandestine importa- 
tions of British goods. Napoleon prohibited the introduction of 
sugar, coffee, and tobacco, with or without certificates of origin. 
He insisted that the Americans carry away only goods of which 
he had a surplus, notably silks and wines. Like the British, Na- 
poleon issued licenses authorizing departures from his regulations. 
American merchants did not snap them up as he had anticipated, 
and the United States government complained that the licenses 
were an unfair condition of trade. All told, only forty-nine cargoes 
were admitted to French ports in the year after repeal allegedly 
went into effect. "It is hardly worthwhile to go to war with Eng- 
land for such an object," wrote Jonathan Russell. 63 

Louis Serurier, the bland, experienced diplomat who arrived at 
Washington in February, 1811, to replace the vesuvian amateur. 
Turreau, found it impossible to soothe American sensibilities, 
Serurier believed that Madison was basically pro-French, and 
unlike most observers he considered the President strong enough 
to dominate American policy. Nevertheless, first in the spring, 
again before Madison and Monroe left on vacation, and once more 
in the fall, the Frenchman received strenuous complaints from 
them. Without compensation for seizures prior to November, 18 10, 
and increased freedom for trade, they told Serurier, they could 
not lead the American people into more vigorous anti-British ac- 
tion. So strong was feeling against France that when Congress 
opened Augustus Foster thought his own country had a golden 
opportunity, by only minor concessions, to "render the whole Coun- 
try cordially united with Us." 64 