

when, to their ostensible object was super-added another, utterly irrecon- 
cilable with the idea of blockade, namely, that of forcing British manufac- 

9 Board of Trade minutes, Public Record Office, Feb. 16, 1810, BT 5/21. 

10 Adam Seybert, Statistical Annals . . . of the United States of America (Phila- 
delphia, 1818), p. 70115 Frank E. Melvin, Napoleon's Navigation System (Menasha, 
Wise., 1919), pp. 33o-33i> 33"i. 

305 



REPEAL OF THE ORDERS 

tures and British colonial produce into the ports of the Continent. . . . 
Thus, while, with one hand, we hermetically sealed the ports of France and 
Holland, against neutral commerce with the other, we opened the same 
ports, by means of Licenses, to the shipping and mariners of our enemies 
while we closed one door upon America, we opened another, and a 
wider, to Denmark, Prussia, Holland, and, even France herself. 11 

Friends of the Orders in Council joined Phillimore in criticism 
of the license system. As early as 1808, in a pamphlet written to 
defend the November orders, Joseph Marryat attacked licenses 
on the twin grounds that they relaxed pressure upon Napoleon and 
exposed merchants to "the arbitrary and variable will" of members 
of the Board of Trade. The Quarterly Review objected that li- 
censes were dishonorable, since they granted to British traders 
privileges denied to Americans and other neutrals. In 1 8 1 1 Philli- 
more devoted an entire pamphlet to the evils of this traffic, 12 and 
Lord Sidmouth and George Canning, opponents on virtually 
every other issue, both objected to it in 1812. 

The license trade also strengthened American complaints against 
the entire British system. Because the Emperor's policy was fully 
as selfish and discriminatory as that of England, he too at first 
roused the anger of the United States. "The collusive scheme 
which has been hatched on the banks of the Seine and reared to 
maturity in the purlieus of the British Exchange . . . ," the Na- 
tional Intelligencer declared, "is a coalition for the prostration of 
neutral commerce." After France announced repeal of her de- 
crees, American complaints concentrated against British licenses. 
In April, 1812, in an effort to stave off war, the ministry offered 
to abandon them. It was too late. The President's war message ac- 
cused Britain of seeking "a monopoly . . . for her own com- 
merce and navigation. She carries on a war against the lawful 
commerce of a friend that she may the better carry on a commerce 

11 Joseph Phillimore, A Letter Addressed to a Member of the House of Commons, 
on the Subject of the Notice Given by Mr. Brougham, for a Motion Respecting the 
Orders in Council and the Licence Trade (zd ed.j London, 1812), pp. 2223. 

12 Marryat, op. cit., pp. 38 fLj Quarterly Review (London), V (1811), 461-462$ 
Phillimorej Reflections on the Licence Trade. 

306 



REPEAL OF THE ORDERS 

with an enemy." la In effect, the license trade revived the hated 
Orders in Council of November, 1807, under another name. 