

301 



REPEAL OF THE ORDERS 

William Pinkney stayed away from the House of Commons' sub- 
sequent debate so that he would not seem to be gloating over 
ministers' discomfiture. But it was not to be. Whitbread's vitriolic 
opening speech, in which he accused Perceval and company of ruin- 
ing British trade and seeking a war with America, probably alien- 
ated more men than it convinced. Baring, Grattan, and Lord Henry 
Petty spoke more moderately, and Stephen and Canning, for the 
government, said almost nothing that had not been said a score 
of times, but again the independent members hung back. After a 
debate lasting until breakfast time, the government won by a 
vote of 83 to I45. 3 

In two successive sessions the Opposition had made the Orders 
in Council a major item of complaint. They came close to success 
in 18095 Stephen even told Brougham he thought the end near 
for the system over which they had fought. 4 Yet final success 
eluded Grenville, Whitbread, and Brougham. Many M.P.'s who 
might otherwise have been tempted to join the Opposition felt 
that surrender either to Napoleon's decrees or Jefferson's Em- 
bargo would probably simply encourage further demands. Time 
and again ministerial speakers accused their enemies of truckling 
to France or to America. At a time of national crisis this was an 
effective debating tactic. 

Primarily, parliamentary attacks failed because they did not 
strike fire in the country. No major London newspaper except the 
Morning Chronicle, and few outside the capital, had criticized 
Perceval's system. Few of Brougham's witnesses before the House 
of Commons in 1808 were leading businessmen, many could be 
accused of self-interest, and they obviously represented only a frac- 
tion of the commercial world. In London the Committee of Amer- 
ican Merchants defeated a proposal to petition for repeal of the 
orders, forcing Alexander Baring to circulate one on his own. A 



3 Hansard, XII, 771-803; Liverpool to George III, Feb. 17 [iS], 18095 
Archives, Windsor Castle; Auckland to Grey, March 6, 1809, Charles Grey, Second 
Earl Grey, MSS, The Prior's Kitchen, Durham University; Pinkney to Richard 
Sharp, March 5, 1809, Samuel Whitbread MSS, Southill Park, Biggleswade, 
Bedfordshire; Hansard, XII, 11591210. 

4 Smith to John Allen, Feb. 21, 1809, No well C. Smith, ed., The Letters of Sidney 
Smith (2 vols.; Oxford, 1953)5 Ij 155. 

302 



REPEAL OF THE ORDERS 

Liverpool meeting chaired by a government MJP. and unfairly 
packed, the Morning Chronicle charged endorsed the orders. 
Colonial interests and shipowners supported the government, as 
the pamphleteering efforts o Nathaniel Atcheson (secretary of 
the Society of Shipowners), Joseph Marryat, and Lord Sheffield 
demonstrated. Most important of all, the great bulk of the com- 
mercial world hung back, refusing to support either side. Three 
years later, when businessmen at last spoke up against the orders, 
an early critic wrote: "I have never ceased to regret that they did 
not afford us their aid when we would have arrested the Evil in 
its Origin! Their Efforts now I fear will be too late!" 5 The com- 
ment was apt. 