

68 Foster #22 to Wellesley, Nov. 9, 1811, FO 5/775 Serurier #28 to Minister 
of Foreign Relations, Sept. 18, 1811, AAE, CP, E-U, Vol. LXVL 

69 Nov. 2, 1811. 

296 



WAR HAWKS ARE FLEDGED 

Britain to strike first. 70 Since Madison still hoped Britain would 
come to her senses and offer honorable terms, and probably also 
because he did not want or expect war before spring, he adopted 
many of Gallatin's suggestions without accepting his subordinate's 
central thesis, that nonimportation was preferable to war. 

The first half of the message 71 recounted the events of the past 
year: Foster's demand that "commerce should be restored to a 
footing that would admit the productions and manufactures of 
Great Britain, when owned by neutrals, into markets shut against 
them by her enemy" j his threats of retaliation for nonimportation ; 
the British protest on Florida; the Little Belt affair. The Presi- 
dent passed over impressment in silence, a course perfectly natural 
if he still hoped for a negotiated settlement but inconsistent with 
a determination to lead the people to high moral ground. Nor did 
Madison even suggest British responsibility for the Indian diffi- 
culties soon to blaze into conflict at Tippecanoej these he blamed 
only on "a fanatic of the Shawanese tribe." Finally, adapting a 
paragraph provided by Gallatin, Madison sharply criticized French 
policy. This he had to do to anticipate and blunt charges of par- 
tiality, but again the effect was to dampen American ardor. Over 
all, the roster of insults differed very little from those provided 
for Congress every fall since 1805. 

Nevertheless, the President recommended military prepara- 
tions. England, he said, persevered in her unjust course. "With this 
evidence of hostile inflexibility in trampling on rights which no 
independent nation can relinquish, Congress will feel the duty of 
putting the United States into an armor and an attitude demanded 
by the crisis, and corresponding with the national spirit and ex- 
pectations." Madison spoke equivocally of naval increases, and his 
suggested strengthening of commercial restriction left the way 
open for a lengthy dependence upon it before putting the new mili- 
tary machine into motion. Since military improvements had been 
proposed before, and since Madison carefully avoided any clear 
indication that he would subsequently ask for a declaration of war, 

70 Gallatin memorandum, n.d., William C. Rives Collection, Library of Congress. 

71 Richardson, 0$. */., I, 4.91-496. 

297 



WAR HAWKS ARE FLEDGED 

the annual message o 1 8 1 1 can only be considered a modest step 
forward. Still, the message did mark an advance. Without abandon- 
ing the opaque prose, the multifarious conditional clauses, or the 
wearisome commas of his earlier presidential papers, Madison had 
sidled in the direction of greater vigor. 

Copies of the address sped to all parts of the nation within 
ten hours to Philadelphia, two and a half days to Boston and 
citizens set to work to parse it. Federalists and some extreme War 
Hawks criticized it. In perhaps the most vicious attack, the Vir- 
ginia Patriot pronounced it an "imbecile prelude to an imbecile 
course . . . inadequate to bring us back to that honourable sta- 
tion . . . from which the head of the democratic party . . . has 
precipitated the nation." The Columbian Centinel found the 
message both "threatening" and "not unlike many of its predeces- 
sors," but even the Centinel had to admit that "if the facts re- 
specting Mr. Foster's mission-are as stated, there can hardly exist 
a chance for an accommodation." 72 