

294 



WAR HAWKS ARE FLEDGED 

greatest and most iniquitous aggressor?" 66 To Republicans, there 
could be but one answer. 

The quarrel with France partially offset growing anger against 
England. On the other hand, for a people increasingly conscious 
of their honor, the very fact of Britain's insistence that President 
Madison had been duped provided a reason for not letting Franco- 
American relations deteriorate to the breaking point. Total paral- 
ysis and complete humiliation must be avoided. Paradoxically, the 
very incompleteness of Napoleonic repeal made some Americans 
even more insistent that the country resist British demands. 

Americans of all parties shared the feeling of malaise. Was it not 
time, Benjamin Rush asked one of the two ex-presidents with whom 
he corresponded, for a third declaration of independence, to com- 
plete those of 1776 and 1800? "Lighthorse Harry" Lee, a Revo- 
lutionary hero of undoubted Federalism, wrote to Madison in 
August that, while he still hoped for peace between the "only two 
nations ... in the world who understand the meaning of lib- 
erty," he believed that a "continuance in the present state of half 
war, is of all others the most debasing to the national character 
& nearly as injurious as war itself to individual prosperity. Take us 
out of the odious condition," the general pleaded, "by restoration 
of amity, or by drawing the sword." From London Senator Smith's 
son wrote that, if the United States hoped to have its rights re- 
spected, it must show a willingness to fight for them. "If we have 
no respect for ourselves, others will have none for us," said John 
Spear Smith. "We shall never write ourselves into the character 
and reputation our temporizing & cringing policy has lost us." 6T 
The charge shared the anti-Madison bias of his father, but his com- 
ments on the policies of the President reflected a spirit that was 
national and even stirred James Madison himself. 
/ Before leaving for Montpelier in July, Madison had issued a 

^National Intelligencer ', June 15, 18115 Independent Chronicle, May 27, 1811. 
Later news, showing that Napoleon had decided to admit ships arriving after Novem- 
ber, affected the attitude of administration newspapers remarkably little. 

67 Rush to Jefferson, Aug. 26, 1811, Jefferson MSSj Lee to Madison, Aug. 19, 
1811, Madison MSSj John S. Smith to Samuel Smith, Oct. 20, 1811, Samuel Smith 
MSS. 

295 



WAR HAWKS ARE FLEDGED 

proclamation calling Congress into session a month before the 
usual date, Foster expected the new Congress to have a more re- 
spectful view of British power than its predecessors, and Serurier 
had recently reported with disgust that America's spirit had evap- 
orated when London news made it clear that Admiral Yorke had 
not been directed to attack the United States. 68 The last autumn 
of peace was a golden one, and dry roads and eager anticipation 
carried the new congressmen to Washington more rapidly than 
usual. Even John Randolph, whose attendance was as erratic as 
his personality, was present when Congress opened on November 
4, and of all the major leaders only John C. Calhoun, whose bride 
expected a child, arrived after the session got under way., Of 144 
members, 1 20, an unusually large proportion, sat in the representa- 
tives' chamber on November 5, 1 8 1 1, to hear the President's third 
annual message. All wondered if James Madison would make his 
wishes known. Far to the west the Lexington Reporter waited with 
unconcealed suspicion for the message: "If a president stands as a 
mere stock, or block, or statue, and barely . . . refers to the docu- 
ments with which he furnishes congress . . . , it is perfectly in- 
different whether we have a British agent, a monarchist , or federal- 
ist for president. But we are assured . . . that the president's 
message will be decisive this year. If so, we will be decisive also/' 69 
Although Madison's message satisfied the Reporter and was 
generally interpreted as a call to action, the national climate really 
made it so. In Britain, where the text preceded accounts of its re- 
ception, newspapers almost unanimously agreed that the Presi- 
dent's message, while unfriendly, did not differ substantially from 
earlier ones. As a matter of fact, Madison himself seems to have 
planned to send in a more vigorous statement. His secretary of 
the treasury, called upon as always to comment on the draft, this 
time urged moderation. Gallatin's arguments mingled Republican 
constitutional theory, a pessimistic assessment of America's eco- 
nomic resources, and fear that a clear warning of war might tempt 