

Although Josiah Quincy said the message disappointed congres- 
sional War Hawks, most Americans believed that it presaged a 
forceful, honorable policy. Even William Duane, whose Aurora 
spearheaded the anti-Madison cabal in Pennsylvania, praised it. 
In Boston even the Federalist prints were said to "fall four tones 
below their usual sound," and at Quincy old John Adams labori- 
ously scratched out a letter to James Monroe thanking him for 
sending a copy of the message. Sometimes, as in the Virginia Argus, 
plaudits appeared in company with embarrassed explanations of 
past weakness or suggestions that a mere show of determination 
would cause Britain t<> back down. Others announced willingness 
to go the whole way.. "In '76," declared editor Ritchie of the al- 
ways bellicose Richmond Enquirer, "we strove for our existence, 
as a nationj and now we must strive for our rights, as one." The 
National Intelligencer also considered Madison's message a call 
for a new American jehad. No earlier message, it said, had "kindled 

72 Virginia Patriot (Richmond), Nov. 12, i8nj Columbian Centmel^ Nov. 9, 
1811. 

298 



WAR HAWKS ARE FLEDGED 

a holier and brighter flame." The President had done his duty ; the 
rest lay with Congress and the nation. 73 

Metaphorically, it would be far more apt to say that Madison's 
message fell upon the surface of a rising tide and was borne with 
it. Since the spring of 1811, after the selection of the Twelfth 
Congress, the American people had increasingly begun to grope 
for some means of redemption. It remained to be seen whether 
the desire for vindication would last any longer or receive more 
presidential encouragement than that which followed the assault 
upon U.S.S. Chesapeake four years earlier. .Cynics believed not, 
believed that the cries of the War Hawks \tfere insincere, that the 
presidential message would not lead (and was not designed to 
lead) to effective action. The message, one Connecticut congress- 
man wrote a fortnight after its delivery, "sleeps' .quietly in the 
Arms of the Committees to whom it has been sent." T f 

/ 

73 Quincy to Otis, Nov. 8, 1811, Harrison Gray Otis MSS, Massachusetts Historical 
Society} Aurora, Nov. 7, 1811 j Levi Bartlett to Josiah Bartlett, Dec. 16, 1811, Josiah 
Bartlett MSS, Library of Congress; John Adams to Monroe, Dec. 19, 1811, Monroe 
MSSj Virginia Argus, Nov. n, 18115 Enquirer (Richmond), Nov. 8, 1811; National 
Intelligencer, Nov. 7, 1811. 

74 Tallmadge to Frederick Wolcott, Nov. 18, 1811, Charles S. Hall, "Benjamin 
Tallmadge (New York, 194.3), p. 207. 



299 



CHAPTER 



IX 



REPEAL OF THE ORDERS 



In a more leisurely fashion than the War Hawk Congress two 
months before. Parliament convened at Westminster after the 
Christmas holidays of 1811. Almost immediately the Orders in 
Council came under heavy attack. Had this attack succeeded 
quickly, the fillip to America's commerce and particularly to her 
self-respect would have prevented a declaration of war. Ironically, 
Britain surrendered just a few weeks too late to preserve peace, 
while America, so accustomed to English obduracy that she ignored 
omens of concession, embarked upon war just too soon to enjoy 
the fruits of Britain's surrender. 1 