

Until the summer of 1810 the United States found it difficult 
to protest effectively. Napoleon's brutal treatment of American 
commerce, the Nonintercourse Act and Macon's Bill #2, the 
dreadful impression of lack of will produced by flight from the 
Embargo all these virtually precluded a vigorous campaign. 
With a dilatoriness that irritated William Pinkney, Lord Welles- 
ley vaguely turned aside American complaints. In August, 1810, 
Pinkney concluded that argument was useless in the face of "the 
obvious Unwillingness of this Government to touch ... on any 
thing connected with . . . the System of the Orders in Council." 14 

One week later Pinkney received news of the Cadore letter 
from John Armstrong. On August 25, 1810, the American min- 
ister requested His Majesty's government to execute its pledge 
to withdraw the orders when French regulations were repealed. 
Hastening back from Dorking, where he had been idling on the 
plea of illness, Wellesley immediately entertained Pinkney at 
dinner. Apparently fearing that America would join the French 
camp, he promised prompt cabinet discussion of French repeal, 
nomination of a new minister within a fortnight, and settlement 
of the Chesapeake affair. Wellesley's panic if that is what it was 
failed to affect his colleagues, for none of the promises was exe- 
cuted. Wellesley even coolly informed Pinkney that England 
could not act until "the repeal of the French Decrees shall have 
actually taken place," or, in other words, until November i, at 
which date Cadore's pledge came into operation. Although Welles- 
ley's shift angered Pinkney, he recognized the plausibility of this 
argument and decided to permit the summer to pass without fur- 
ther protest. 15 

^National Intelligencer (Washington), Sept. 24, 18105 Castlereagh #9 to 
Foster, April 10, 1812, Bernard Mayo, ed., Instructions to the British Ministers to the 
United States, 1791-1^12, American Historical Association, Annual Report, 1936, 
III (Washington, 1941), 364-3675 James D. Richardson, ed., A Compilation of 
the Messages and Papers of the Presidents (Washington, 1897), I, 502. 

14 Pinkney to Smith, Aug. 14, 1810, Department of State Archives, National 
Archives, Despatches, Great Britain, unnumbered volume. 

15 Pinkney to Wellesley, Aug. 25, 1810, Foreign Office Archives, Public Record 

307 



REPEAL OF THE ORDERS 

On November 3, as soon as he received a Moniteur announcing 
the restoration of American commerce, Pinkney again demanded 
British repeal. A month of inconclusive jousting followed until, 
early in December,, the Foreign Secretary asked Pinkney to present 
his full arguments in writing. Pinkney's long note, dated Decem- 
ber i o, summarized the American position. Arguing that the French 
decision was not conditional but "absolute, precise and unequivo- 
cal/ 7 he called upon Britain to execute her promise of reciprocal 
repeal. Pinkney's elaborate exegesis on the Cadore letter, designed 
to show that French repeal did not depend on American or British 
action, was more ingenious than convincing 5 it justified Perceval's 
endorsement, "Surely this is sophistical or rather trifling." More 
forcefully, Pinkney argued that in any event the Orders in Council 
monstrously violated American rights, particularly since they re- 
warded British trade at the expense of neutrals. 16 As Wellesley 
no doubt intended, the note of December 10 forced the British 
Cabinet to make a decision. The delay since August, partly the 
fruit of the Foreign Secretary's own sloth, also reflected honest 
doubt in the Cabinet; now, the Cabinet had to make up its mind. 