

Had the general blockade proclaimed by the order of 1 809 been 
fully enforced, the Percevellian system would probably have es- 
caped serious attack even longer than it did. The order professed 
to be cc a blockade, peculiar, indeed, in its nature, but strict and 
rigorous in its operation, and unparalleled in its extent." 8 In its 
original form the new regulation met the demands of those who 
hoped to cripple Napoleon by cutting off vital imports. It also 
ended the complaints of men who argued that the complicated sys- 
tem, established by the orders of 1 807, of licenses and fees designed 
to introduce British goods into the Continent was bad policy, un- 
fair to neutrals, and illegal to boot. 

The difficulty was that Perceval, Stephen, and Rose did not 

MSS (examined while temporarily on deposit at the Register of National Archives, 
London), 33/445 Stephen to Perceval, May 23, 1808, ibid., 33/16. 

7 Hansard, XII, 1183. 

8 Joseph Phillimore, Reflections on the Nature and Extent of the Licence Trade 
(2d ed.j London, 1811), p. 46. 

304 



REPEAL OF THE ORDERS 

wish to deprive Napoleon of all sources of supply. They merely 
wished to make sure that those sources should be British, or at least 
that the English should profit from all European importations. 
After learning that the new order had not mollified the United 
States, the British government began once again to issue special 
licenses. Upon application to the Board of Trade, ships and car- 
goes received exemption from the blockade of Europe. Theo- 
retically, American ships were not discriminated against in the 
issue of licenses. In actual practice the Board of Trade found Eu- 
ropean flags far more useful and more amenable to control. Since 
no trade to the French Empire could be safely carried on without 
them, licenses were extremely valuable, worth sometimes as much 
as 15,000 on the open market, where they were freely traded. 
Disappointed merchants accused members of the Board of Trade 
of corruption, and in 1810 the board sought prosecution of the 
Morning Chronicle for allegedly slanderous hints that George 
Rose had profited from the sale of licenses. 9 The entire system 
combined, or seemed to combine, selfishness, discrimination, fraud, 
corruption, and even collusion with France. 

Although others had issued licenses, the Perceval ministry was 
the first to make exemption from the law the rule rather than the 
exception. In 1808, doubling the number issued the preceding 
year, it authorized nearly 5,000. In 1809, despite the pause to 
await America's reaction to the new order, more than 15,000 li- 
censes were issued. For the next three years, the number ranged 
between 15,000 and 2O,ooo. 10 Far from being a general blockade, 
the new Order in Council became a screen behind which the min- 
istry attempted to manipulate trade for its own mercantilist ends. 
Joseph Phillimore, a bitter enemy of the practice, summed it up 
when he wrote that scarcely had the orders of 1807 and 1809 
been issued, 