

1 The repeal of the orders is a very neglected subject. Henry Adams, History of 
the United States during the Administrations of Jefferson and Madison (9 vols, ; New 
York, 18891891), VI, 267288, discusses it, but his account is somewhat colored 
and he did not and could not examine a number o important sources. Very helpful 
recent studies, based on a wider sampling of British materials, are Reginald Horstnan, 
"British Opinion and the United States of America, 18061812" (unpublished M.A. 
thesis, University of Birmingham, 1955), and Francois Crouzet, UEconomie Bri- 
tannique et le Blocus Continental (2 vols.j Paris, 1958), II, 809-829 and 'passim. 
Few other students have made a real attempt to understand English developments 
culminating in repeal of the Orders in Council, 

30O 



REPEAL OF THE ORDERS 

The movement for repeal contains other ironies. For one thing, 
the assassination of Spencer Perceval delayed rather than speeded 
repeal. For another, defense of the orders collapsed after two years 
during which, having ridden out heavy criticism, they seemed be- 
yond successful attack. The depression which felled them began, 
not while British trade was under pressure from American restric- 
tions, but when that trade was freest. Contemptuous scorn for 
American threats encouraged Englishmen to believe the danger 
of war fading, and a leisurely course consequently possible, at the 
precise moment when a last-ditch War Hawk drive carried America 
into war. 

In 1 808 and again in 1809, the Opposition had attacked the Or- 
ders in Council. In 1 808 they forced Parliament to hear witnesses, 
and Henry Brougham and Samuel Whitbread effectively exam- 
ined them. Most independent members either accepted James 
Stephen's argument that the trade recession had preceded rather 
than followed the orders, or felt that the new system should be 
given a more lengthy trial. In some embarrassment the Opposi- 
tion dropped the issue rather than force it to a division. 2 

The next year the Opposition coupled the general issue with 
complaints against Canning's cavalier rejection of the American 
offer to suspend the Embargo. In the Lords one session lasted 
until three in the morning, primarily because Grenville spoke at 
great length about the importance of the American market and 
the danger of provoking the United States to war. The comments 
of Melville and, to an even greater degree, of Sidmouth showed 
that doubts about the orders had spread to uncommitted peers. 
When the Lords voted (proxies being counted, as they so often 
were in that chamber), 70 ballots were cast in favor of Grenville's 
motion, only 115 against. In a report to the King, Lord Liverpool 
professed to be satisfied. Actually, considering the ministry's usual 
strength, the size of the opposition vote was an astonishing shock. 
Lord Auckland half expected it to be followed by repeal, and 

2 Journals of the House of Commons, LXIII, 163-417 passim; Journals of the 
House of Lords, XL VI, 493-524. fassim; Morning Chronicle (London), Feb. 22, 
1808; Hansard > X, 11821183, 1 3 041 3 05 j Horsman, op. cit., pp. 140145. 