

In the discussions, Spencer Perceval argued that French repeal 
was not bona fide a contention that became the heart of Britain's 
position but merely "a Notification of a Conditional Decree at 
a -future date" which Napoleon might well refuse to implement. 
Several of Perceval's colleagues nevertheless felt that Britain 
should at least lessen her pressure upon neutral commerce. "How 
can the question of interpretation be decided," asked the Earl of 

Office, FO 5/725 Pinkney to Smith, Aug. 29, 1810, Despatches, Great Britain, un- 
numbered volume j Wellesley to Pinkney, Aug. 31, 1810, enclosed in Pinkney to 
Smith, Sept. 3, 1810, ibid.; Pinkney to Smith, Sept. 24, 1810, ibid. In accordance 
with instructions from Smith, however, Pinkney presented a long 1 note assailing Fox*s 
Blockade and coupling it with the Orders in Council as a violation of American 
rights. Pinkney to Wellesley, Sept. 21, 1810, FO 5/72. Tactically, this may have 
been unwise, for it discouraged repeal of the orders j on the other hand, it put the 
American position on the record and made clear that any British repeal that omitted 
this blockade would leave an important issue between the two countries. 

16 Pinkney to Wellesley, Nov. 3, 1810, FO 5/72$ Wellesley to Pinkney, Dec. 4, 
1 8 10, enclosed in Pinkney to Smith, Dec. 14, 1810, Despatches, Great Britain, un- 
numbered volume 5 Pinkney to Smith, Dec. 14, 1810, ibid.; Pinkney to Wellesley, Dec. 
10, 1810, FO 5/72. 

308 



REPEAL OF THE ORDERS 

Harrowby, "but by allowing the trial to be made: i.e. by suspend- 
ing the execution of our orders? ... I am ... at a loss to find 
stateable grounds on which we can refuse to repeal at least our 
orders of Nov 1 807 & April 1 809. They profess'd to be retaliatory. 
That which oblig'd us to retaliate is done away." Lord Bathurst, 
too, felt that good faith as well as wise tactics required England 
to rescind the orders issued since November, iSoy. 17 

Several ministers raised the specter of war with America. The 
First Lord of the Admiralty warned, "We have full employment 
at present for all our money y Ships, & Troops." He wished to sus- 
pend the blockade of Europe long enough for France's real pur- 
pose to become clear to the Americans. Another colleague won- 
dered "how far we could carry the opinion of ye People . . . with 
us to support an American difference upon the nice reasoning 
whether France has repealed her decrees or not, when to a com- 
mon observer she seems to have done so & to have satisfied the 
American Government." Earl Bathurst warned that a "war with 
America will not readily be supported upon so cold & disputable 
a point." He added that "our orders, as at present executed, are 
. . . difficult to defend, and their effect [is] not thought to be 
very advantageous." Both those who wished more trade with 
France and those who desired none, the Earl stated, would op- 
pose the government if it stood on the existing system. 18 

The premier warned his compromise-minded colleagues that 
appeasement would probably only increase American demands. 
Perceval said that, while he would reluctantly consent to rescind 
all the orders if the Berlin and Milan decrees had really been 
repealed, he would not support half measures: "If we do not re- 
peal them in toto, we do not keep our word and I think we may 
depend upon it, we shall not gain our object, if that object be to 
avoid the Consequences from America, which we may apprehend 
from not respecting them. . . . America would be much less 