

To stir the public both Brougham and Baring composed 
pamphlets attacking the Orders in Council. Baring argued that 
mistaken jealousy of America's prosperity, which really rewarded 
Britain by swelling her export market, lay behind the orders. He 
predicted that they would lead to a declaration of war or to 
commercial retaliation almost as harmful. Baring's Inquiry into 
the Orders in Council came under attack, most strenuously from 
Cobbett, who argued that it was not only "long and most soporific" 
but also a reflection of Baring's personal interest in American 
trade. Brougham's study, less open to these charges, was also far 
broader than Baring's pamphlet, for, as the subtitle declared, it 
was An Examination of the Justice, Legality > and Policy of the 
New System of Commercial Regulations. Both essays alarmed 
James Stephen, 6 and Baring's work provided the minutiae while 

5 Times (London), March 9, 10, 18, 18085 Morning Chronicle, March 18, iSoSj 
Crouzet, of. cit. 3 I, 34.53485 Nathaniel Atcheson, American Encroachments on Brit- 
ish Rights (London, 1808) j Joseph Marryat, Hints to Both Parties; or Observations 
on the Proceedings in Parliament ufon the Petitions against the Orders in Council 
(London, 1808) 5 John B. Holroyd, Earl of Sheffield, The Orders in Council and the 
American Embargo Beneficial to the Political and Commercial Interests of Great 
Britain (London, 1809) $ Mullett to Whitbread, May 4, 1812, Whitbread MSS. 

6 Alexander Baring, An Inquiry into the Causes and Consequences of the Orders 
in Council; and an Examination of the Conduct of Great Britain towards the Neu- 
tral Commerce of America (London, 1808), passim; CobbetPs Political Register 
(London), XIII (1808), 273-274$ Henry Brougham, Orders in Council} Or, An 
Examination of the Justice, Legality, and Policy of the New System of Commercial 
Regulations (2d ed.j London, 1808) 5 Stephen to Perceval, n.d., Spencer Perceval 

303 



REPEAL OF THE ORDERS 

Brougham suggested the outline for future efforts, but neither 
seems to have convinced many people at the time. 

For the next two years the Orders in Council encountered no 
challenge so serious as that of 1809. The Opposition became con- 
vinced that the country could not be aroused, and, encouraged by 
the Embargo's collapse, the British government adopted a more 
flexible line toward the United States. As James Stephen put it, 
after repeal of the Embargo it could no longer be said that a we 
had a threat hanging over our heads to frighten us into the conces- 
sion j the experiment had been tried, it was put in force against 
us, and completely failed. 3 ' 7 The government felt free to issue, 
at the behest of Bathurst and Canning, the Order in Council of 
April, 1809, which most Englishmen considered a more than fair 
offer to the United States. Canning also opened negotiations 
through Erskine which resulted in an exposure of Madisonian de- 
mands so sweeping that even the Opposition did not defend them. 
The Orders in Council pretty much disappeared from the political 
scene, to be replaced by such items as the Walcheren expedition, 
scandal at the Horse Guards, war in the Peninsula, and, later on, 
the political consequences of George IIPs new attack of insanity. 