

47 O$. cit., VI, 286. 

321 



REPEAL OF THE ORDERS 

than help to inspire the beginning, in January, o the final attack 
upon the orders. 

The new Parliament opened with political developments that 
first threatened and then seemed to strengthen the position of the 
orders. In January Lord Wellesley, who really hoped either to 
be given a stronger position by Perceval or to form a new min- 
istry around his own person, offered his resignation. The Prince 
of Wales, regent since 181 1 but only just invested with full pow- 
ers, opened negotiations with Grenville and Grey, and it appeared 
that the entire Percevellian structure would collapse. The Op- 
position leaders declined the Regent's offers, however, and no 
parliamentary combination emerged. After a good deal of vacil- 
lation the Prince came to the aid of ministers with whom he had 
quarreled for years. "The Prince Regent," he sanctimoniously 
declared, "is the last person in the Kingdom to whom it can be 
permitted to dispair of his Royal father's recovery," and it ill be- 
hooved a loyal son to create a situation in which, upon regaining 
health, George III would discover the government in the hands 
of men he detested. 48 The Prince Regent's declaration astounded 
political observers, since his filial piety had been far less notable 
than his hatred of Perceval. It nevertheless encouraged the min- 
istry to attempt to carry on with the aid of royal support. 

In the shuffling of offices that ensued, Viscount Castlereagh re- 
ceived the Foreign Office. Although a notable failure at the War 
Office from 1807 to 1809, Castlereagh wanted to return to it. But 
for Liverpool's unwillingness to change offices, the opening of the 
greatest foreign-secretaryship in British history would at least 
have been delayed. In 1812 Castlereagh seemed at best an assidu- 
ous, unemotional, loyal politician 5 he had shown no signs of imag- 
ination, and the Times noted that "his name, above all others, is 
noted for mischance: he has been the very darling of misfortune." 
Castlereagh's appointment was soon followed by greater attention 
to American affairs, more mildness in language and even in policy, 
but no evidence that he had a liberal concept of Anglo-American 

48 Prince Regent to Ministers, [Feb. 13, 1812], Arthur Aspinall, ed, The Letters 
of King George IV, I (Cambridge, Eng., 1938), 5-6. 

322 



REPEAL OF THE ORDERS 

relations. Castlereagh's colorless mien and PercevaPs continua- 
tion in power led Jonathan Russell to conclude: "The successor 
of Lord Wellesley will follow whithersoever Mr. Perceval may 
lead. . . . Whatever uncertainty might have hitherto enveloped 
the designs of this government ... no longer exists its course 
is now distinctly marked out nor," added Russell, now as angry 
as Pinkney had been, "can ours well remain doubtful." 49 

The state of the Opposition also discouraged hope. Except for 
Henry Brougham, the attacking forces were almost an army with- 
out generals. Lord Grenville, pessimistic about the prospects of 
success, enjoyed retirement at Boconnoc too much to stir from 
Cornwall. Illness often prevented Lord Auckland, probably the 
best informed on Anglo-American trade, from contributing more 
than his proxy in the House of Lords. Grey and Erskine gave 
scarcely more help. In the Commons, although Stephen Ponsonby 
nominally led the Opposition, Brougham depended chiefly upon 
the support of Alexander Baring and Samuel Whitbread, one a 
young banker married to an American and the other a parvenu 
brewer. Neither was the sort of person likely to influence the House 
of that day, and even members of the Opposition distrusted Whit- 
bread. When, in February, 1 8 1 2, he moved for papers on Ameri- 
can relations, the Speaker privately noted with satisfaction that 
"neither Ponsonby, Tierney, nor any of the Grenvilles attended 
to support Whitbread." 50 Opposition rivalries forced Brougham 
to carry the parliamentary load almost alone. 51 