

The government therefore brushed aside parliamentary com- 
plaints. The exchange of notes between Wellesley and Pinkney, 
and the American's departure, failed to bring on an important de- 
bate in either chamber. In June an attack by Samuel Whitbread 
misfired, Perceval arguing that debate would prejudice Foster's 
negotiations. When the Commons discussed distresses in the manu- 
facturing towns, only Baring stressed the importance of the lost 
American market. The ministry fairly easily convinced the House 
to let the economic cycle run its natural course. 24 

The Cabinet also permitted the condemnation of the Fox and 

23 AnnaU -, nth Cong., sd sess., p. 1017 (Quincy) 5 Hansard, XXI, 765. 
^Hansard, XIX, 111-113 5 XX, 339-34-3) 43i~437, 609-610. 

312 



REPEAL OF THE ORDERS 

other American vessels that had sailed for France in the autumn 
of 1810, expecting the Cadore letter to bring withdrawal of the 
Orders in Council. In May, upon learning that Congress had 
voted nonintercourse with England, Wellesley withdrew the ob- 
jection to court proceedings which he had expressed in January. 
Sir William Scott, who heard the case, granted the Fosfs advocate 
a delay to produce further evidence rumored to have arrived from 
Paris. The justice's final decision, shot through with distrust of 
France and criticism of Madison, at the same time showed great 
reluctance to strike at American commerce. Scott declared that, 
while the Orders in Council could not outlive the decrees, in the 
absence of official notification that these had been repealed, "I 
think I am bound to pronounce that no such revocation has taken 
place, and therefore that the Orders in Council subsist in perfect 
justice as well as in complete authority." 25 Wellesley's original 
intervention, Scott's delay and then his cautious language can now 
be seen to indicate official misgivings. At the time, particularly 
when coupled with Foster's demands, the Fox decision appeared 
to close the door on American hopes opened by the Cadore letter. 
Opponents of the Orders in Council refused to admit that they 
"subsist [ed] in perfect justice." Joseph Phillimore argued that 
the "Orders in Council proclaim a blockade by notification j that it 
is a fundamental principle of the Law of Nations that a blockade 
by notification alone, is irregular and null." Only the stationing 
of ships off blockaded ports legalized a blockade, but under the 
orders Britain prosecuted one not so much offshore as upon the 
open seas. 26 Defenders of the orders answered, as had Scott, that 
France had first violated the law of nations 5 Britain simply exer- 
cised the right of retaliation which was universally admitted to 
govern such situations. This right, Perceval's supporters never 
tired of repeating, had been most eloquently stated in the preamble 
to the order of January, 1807, issued by the Ministry of All the 
Talents. 

25 Christopher Robinson to Wellesley, Jan. 29, 1811, FO 83/22055 Wellesley to 
Robinson, May 18, 1811, ibid.; Thomas Edwards, ed., Reports of Cases Argued and 
Determined in the High Court of Admiralty (London, 1812), pp. 311-326. 