

The fear of war fluctuated rather than accumulated. It was very 
pronounced in January and early February, and this perhaps ex- 
plains the comparative moderation of the speech from the throne 
as well as the strong Opposition emphasis at that time. On the 
other hand, some members of Parliament felt obligated to sup- 
port the government at a moment of crisis. When Samuel Whit- 

43 Morning Chronicle, Jan. 27, 18125 Times, Jan. 28, 1812. 

44 Hansard, XXI, 773, 7825 Beasley to Monroe, June 15, 1812, Consular Letters, 
London, Vol. IX j Star (London), June 5, 18125 Robert I. Wilberforce and Samuel 
Wilberforce, The Life of William Wilberforce, IV ( 2 d ed.j London, 1839), 5- 

320 



REPEAL OF THE ORDERS 

bread sought a full-dress debate on British policy on February 13, 
the government replied that this would only encourage American 
bellicosity. Spencer Perceval declared that the government, while 
"alive to all the advantages of reconciliation with America," could 
not allow Britain's essential maritime rights to be called into ques- 
tion. Whitbread secured only twenty-three votes. 45 

From February until May, war fears diminished as a result 
of contradictory news from America. Success of the call for a com- 
mittee to examine the effect of the Orders in Council owed very 
little to a war scare, being based almost solely on the hardships 
of depression. As a matter of prudence the government ordered 
three regiments to Canada, but the War Office directed its Canadian 
commander to return two of them for more urgent service else- 
where if, as expected, the war threat evaporated. Late in February 
an American representative at London wrote that "the general 
opinion [is] that we do not mean to go to war, notwithstanding 
all our preparationj and the idea of our taking Canada is laughed 
at." Another reported, "I cannot perceive the slightest indication 
of an apprehension of a rupture. 53 46 

Toward the end, after the fate of the orders had really been 
settled, reports of renewed American activity stirred England 
once again. On May 9 the Foreign Office sent a tentative war warn- 
ing to the Admiralty. In June ominous reports from Foster helped 
to precipitate a hasty notification of repeal. Still, the danger of 
permanent loss of the American market, far more than any fear 
of the military and naval consequences of a war, brought this about. 
Although Henry Adams declared that "the danger ... of an 
American war caused the sudden . . . surrender," 4T it is as cer- 
tain as such things can be that the British feared war only insofar 
as it threatened to extend and perhaps make stronger the com- 
mercial pressure that had already deepened the depression. In a 
direct sense, the antics of the War Hawk Congress did little more 

45 Hansard, XXI, 762-801. 

46 Liverpool #10 to Prevost, April 2, 1812, Colonial Office Records, Public Record 
Office, CO 43/23 $ Beasley to Monroe, Feb. 28, 1812, Consular Letters, London, Vol. 
IX} Russell to Monroe, private, March 20, 1812, Russell MSS. 