

17 Perceval memorandum, Dec. 19, 1810, Wellesley MSS, Series II (Add. MSS 
37274-37318), Add. MSS 37292; Harrowby-Bathurst memorandum, [Dec. 15, 
1810?], ibid. 

18 Yorke memorandum, Dec. 22, 1810, ibid.; "W" [Westmorland?] memoran- 
dum, n.d., ibid., fol. 2365 Harrowby-Bathurst memorandum, [Dec. 15, 1810?], ibid. 

309 



REPEAL OF THE ORDERS 

likely to go to war with us, if we appeared fearlessly & decidedly 
to uphold our System, than if we seemed to shrink from it in part, 
keeping it alive as to the remainder." Specifically, Perceval warned 
that Fox's Blockade and the order of January, 1807, which Bath- 
urst hoped to use to break up intra-European trade, were integral 
parts of the American demands upon Britain. 19 

The Chancellor of the Exchequer had his way, and it can be 
argued that his success set in train the events culminating in war 
a year and a half later. At least four members of the Cabinet, how- 
ever, supported concessions, and even Perceval admitted that it 
might be necessary, later on, to alter Britain's course. A full year 
before the Opposition's last, successful attack upon the Orders in 
Council and before American nonimportation began, the Cabinet's 
determination had weakened. Unfortunately, no hints of minis- 
terial doubts reached the Americans. Just after Christmas Welles- 
ley wrote Pinkney that Britain demanded less equivocal proof of 
French repeal. In Pinkney's opinion, the firm British note proved 
"what scarcely requires proof, that, if the present Government 
continues, we cannot be friends with England." 20 

The American therefore decided to return home, leaving the 
legation in the hands of a charge. Although first conceived of and 
nominally explained as retaliation for Britain's failure to send a 
replacement for Francis J. Jackson, Pinkney's withdrawal re- 
flected his conviction that he could serve no further useful purpose 
at London. Nagged by illness and prodded by anger, he sent a 
sputtering reply to Wellesley's declaration and requested an audi- 
ence of leave. The Foreign Secretary attempted to prevent Pink- 
ney's departure by belatedly appointing Foster, but Pinkney merely 
replied sarcastically, "I presume that, for the Restoration of Har- 
mony between the two Countries, the Orders in Council will be 
relinquished without Delay, that the Blockade of May 1 806 will be 
annulled, that the Case of the Chesapeake will be arranged . , . , 
and, in general, that all such just and reasonable acts will be done 

19 Perceval memorandum, Dec. 19, 1810, ibid. 

20 Wellesley to Pinkney, Dec. 29, 1810, FO 5/725 Pinkney to Smith, Jan. 17, 
1 8 1 1, Despatches, Great Britain, unnumbered volume. 

310 



REPEAL OF THE ORDERS 

as are necessary to make us Friends." When Wellesley coldly 
replied that Foster's appointment was "not in consequence of any 
Change of System," Pinkney went ahead with his plans. 21 On 
the last day of February, 1 8 1 1, he took his leave of the Prince Re- 
gent and ended his mission. 