



of our hands into those of other powersto prevent America from engrossing the 
whole trade of Europe, while we are excluded from it. This may be called sordid and 
pitiful and pedlar-like. . . . But we trust we shall always have Ministers sufficiently 
sordid and pedlar-like to think the commerce of this country worth preserving at any 
rate and at any risk." 

30 Hansard^ XV, 345348. The quoted phrase is Grenville's. 

81 Maury to Madison, April u, 1811, James Madison MSS, Library of Congress. 

32 This statement differs somewhat from the general theme of Frank O. Darvall, 
Popular Disturbances and Public Order in Regency England (London, 1934), which 
gives greatest emphasis to the lost American trade as a cause of depression and dis- 
tress. As far as the initiation of the crash is concerned, timing alone seems to demon- 
strate that this is not so, although it is incontrovertible that American commercial 
pressure deepened and lengthened the depression and above all that, as in 1808 and 
1809, many people considered renewed American intercourse a panacea for economic 
ills. For a general discussion of the factors causing depression see Crouzet, of. cit. y II, 
615640. 

315 



REPEAL OF THE ORDERS 

Depression gripped England for two years. Trade fell off ap- 
proximately one-fourth, although the government attempted to 
demonstrate, by juggling already questionable customs figures, 
that the drop was inconsequential. To see the fallacy of this asser- 
tion, Brougham replied, "we have only to turn our eyes towards 
our gaols filled with debtors, our poor houses crowded with the 
objects of mendicity, and our midland counties, where so great is 
the distress, that the people are driven even to insurrection." Al- 
though food prices rose, the general price level declined sharply, as 
did wages. Seven thousand business firms failed, Lancashire pro- 
duction dropped more than 40 per cent, and at the height of the 
crisis more than 15,000 paupers received relief in Liverpool alone. 
In March and November, 1 8 1 1, there were scattered popular dis- 
turbances. Then, after a brief period of calm, a whole series of 
riots swept the Midlands in the spring of 1812. The riots formed 
an effective backdrop to the more respectable protests of factory 
owners, who blamed the Orders in Council for the depression. 33 

American policy, which did not precipitate the depression, cer- 
tainly worsened it. Since return cargoes were illegal and Britain 
in any event faced oversupply rather than shortage, imports from 
the United States declined sharply in 1811. Far more serious was 
the end of American purchases. In 1810 more than one-sixth of 
all British exports went to the United States $ in 1 8 1 1 America took 
less than 5 per cent of England's exports, all of them illegally 
after February. The loss represented one-half of the total decline. 34 
William Cobbett declared, "The system of the Emperor Napoleon 
has completely succeeded. . . . [We are] completely cut of 
from the continent of Europe and the United States of America" 35 