

Early in 1 8 1 2 news of the War Hawk Congress began to arrive 
in England. Since as early as 1808 the Opposition had warned 
against "add [ing] America to the long and formidable catalogue 
of our enemies." Few took this danger seriously until 1812. Amer- 
ican news, particularly the Foreign Affairs Committee's report, 
allowed the Opposition to emphasize this fear. In the Lords Auck- 
land declared that, even if his other arguments could be ignored, 
the danger of war made repeal imperative, for "as to the horrible 
idea of going to war . . . , he could not for one moment enter- 
tain it, or suppose that their lordships would consent to continue 
the Orders in Council, if they should be proved to lead to that 
unfortunate consequence." In the other house Whitbread raised 
the question in even more forceful language: 

War with America . . . would be a great evil : and war once commenced, 
no man could tell what might follow. It was an easy thing to talk and write 
of putting down America, of inflicting chastisement, &c. as if it was in the 
power of England to annihilate her: we might talk this well, but we could 
not put America down. She was there where we had placed her; it was not 
in the power of England to annihilate her, and it was therefore the interest 
of England to be her friend. 42 

In January, 1812, the Morning Chronicle warned that, by di- 
verting the Royal Navy, an American war would give Napoleon 
a chance to rebuild his naval power, while the dispatch of British 
troops to Canada would weaken efforts in Spain and elsewhere. 
The Times, whose shift from support of the orders to a middle 

41 Hansard, XXII, 1102; Liverpool to Wellington, private, April 28, 1812, MSS 
of the first and second Earls of Liverpool, British Museum (Add. MSS 38190-38489, 
38564-38581), Add. MSS 38236. 

^Hansard, X, 312; XXI, 1066, 770. 

319 



REPEAL OF THE ORDERS 

position hinted at a drift among political independents, declared 
at the same time: "The aspect is, in truth, most threatening , as 
every measure tending to war has been carried by a large maj ority ." 
The paper went on to report Congressman Porter's call for an 
invasion of Canada, commenting, "We are far from making mock- 
ery of these efforts." 43 

James Stephen declared that if war came it would be the fault 
of America and not of Britain. One backbencher argued that the 
only honorable way to meet the war threat was to issue a declara- 
tion in advance of an American one. More effectively, defenders 
of the orders asserted that the United States was, as usual, merely 
bluffing. The American consul at London, looking back some 
months later, observed that "there existed among the people two 
opinions . . . , the one, that we never intended to go to war, and 
the other, that our Government, if so inclined, would not hazard 
it on account of the opposition it would meet with from the East- 
ern States." Many maintained this position until the very end. 
Even as Congress debated Madison's war message, a die-hard 
newspaper scoffed, "We have so often been threatened and then 
forgiven ... by the American democratics, that we have our 
doubts whether they are really in earnest even on the present occa- 
sion." Wiser heads shared the feelings of William Wilberforce, 
a wavering supporter of the government, who pointed out the 
dangers of acting on this hypothesis: "It may be soj but nine times 
out of ten it is a game of brag, wherein each party depends upon 
the giving way of the other, or would not himself push on so 
warmly." 44 