

26 A Letter to a Member of the House, p. 13. 

313 



REPEAL OF THE ORDERS 

To this the Opposition had ready replies. They insisted that the 
doctrine of retaliation no longer applied, since Napoleon had re- 
pealed his Continental System. At the very least a decent respect 
for international law required Britain to test his good faith. To 
maintain that he had in effect reimposed his system by domestic 
regulations, rather than international acts, was no answer, since 
this was outside the law of nations. 27 It was dangerous to push too 
far the assertion that French repeal made obligatory the rescind- 
ing of the orders, for by the end of 1 8 1 1 the incompleteness of 
Napoleon's repeal was fairly obvious. Thus Alexander Baring, 
who had previously put the issue in its simplest form, argued at 
the end only that "at the time America declared that France had 
revoked her decrees, she had fair ground for saying so, and there- 
fore just reasons for expecting us to follow up the commencement 
of conciliation on the part of France." 28 

More effectively, legal critics pointed out that the orders aimed 
at "profit and monopoly, and not retaliation or self-defence." The 
Orders in Council and the ancillary license trade really closed the 
Continent only to Britain's commercial rivals. As William Cobbett 
put it, referring to two famous prize fighters whose battles titillated 
England, "If Belcher were to beat Mr. Perceval and Lord Liver- 
pool in the street, Crib would not, for that reason, be justified in 
beating them too." America, not France, suffered most from the 
British system. Surely, then it was absurd to assert that the Orders 
in Council were justified by the right of retaliation. 29 

27 The same argument occurred to one member of the Cabinet In the discussions 
of December, 1810: "I must confess, I do not see, what right, we have to complain 
of these severe Custom House regulations What right America has to complain of 
these Custom House Regulations as any Invasion of Neutral Rights much less that 
we have any reason to complain of America trading to France under these regula- 
tions, or not quarreling with France on account of this Municipal Code." "W" [West- 
morland?] memorandum, n.d., Wellesley MSS, Add. MSS 37292, fol. 233, 

** Hansard, XXII, 1106. 

^Edinburgh Review, XIX (1812), 307$ Cobbett's Register, XX (iSn), 262. 
The licensing system made it even more difficult to sustain the retaliation argument. 
The ministry and its supporters usually evaded discussion of this flagrantly unfair and 
discriminatory device, but, toward the end, perhaps out of desperation, they became 
more frank. On March 5, 1812, the London Courier defiantly declared that the li- 
cense trade <c is an attempt, under the pressure of a war carried on by the enemy upon 
new, extraordinary, and extravagant principles, to prevent trade from passing out 

314 



REPEAL OF THE ORDERS 

Perceval's enemies relied most heavily upon the argument that 
the orders had undermined Britain's economy. Down to the sum- 
mer of 1 8 10, because England enjoyed comparative prosperity, this 
argument was ineffective. The best the Opposition could do was to 
suggest that this prosperity sprang, not from the Orders in Council, 
but from "the extended commercial genius of the country, from the 
benignant influence of our happy constitution, and the unexampled 
industry of our population." 30 In 1810, by sheer coincidence, at 
the same time that the Cadore letter opened the orders to a differ- 
ent sort of attack, the most painful depression since 1797 struck 
England. The strains of rapid industrialization and a series of bad 
harvests no doubt played a part in the crash, but wartime de- 
velopments were more immediate causes: overspeculation in Latin 
American trade, the multiplication of paper money to finance the 
war, a great glut in warehouses and factories brought on by reduced 
trade with Europe. The license trade failed to relieve the pressure 
of oversupply, particularly after the Trianon tariff made it far 
less profitable, and the American consul at Liverpool accurately 
stated that the "distresses are more to be attributed to the difficulty 
of introducing goods from this Country into the ports of the Con- 
tinent than to any other Cause. 55 31 In the precipitation of this de- 
pression, Madison's policy played no part. The crash followed the 
ineffective restraints of the Nonintercourse Act and coincided with 
the entire removal of restrictions under Macon's Bill. 32 