

The government attempted to minimize Pinkney's withdrawal. 
Friendly newspapers, which ascribed it to American petulance 
over the vacancy in Britain's legation at Washington, argued that 
the appointment of Foster showed that negotiations would con- 
tinue. On the day of Pinkney's audience with the Regent, Spencer 
Perceval told the House of Commons that "nothing in the man- 
ner in which the American minister, now about leaving this coun- 
try, took his departure, . . . could give reason to any one to sup- 
pose that ... an interruption [in negotiations] had occurred." 22 
Insofar as Foster's later disputations with Monroe could be de- 
scribed as negotiations, this was true, but no serious discussions took 
place at London after Pinkney's departure. 

For nearly five years, since he had first arrived to join Monroe, 
Pinkney had served at London. Representing feeble administra- 
tions, confronted by the granite stubbornness of a ministry that 
considered this quality a virtue, he could hardly be expected to 
argue Perceval, Canning, or Wellesley into submission. He more 
than held his own in disputes with them, and his notes and dis- 
patches, when later published, helped to mobilize opinion in the 
United States. He seldom made a misstep, his reports were far 
more accurate than those of his American contemporaries at other 
capitals or of the British representatives at Washington, and his 
close association with Opposition leaders helped to inspire their 
campaign against the Orders in Council. During most of his stay 
Anglophobes attacked Pinkney for his alleged subserviency to 
England j at the end of his mission Federalists attacked him one 

21 Pinkney to Wellesley, Jan. 14, x8n, FO 5/795 Wellesley to Pinkney, Feb. 15, 
i Six, #&.; Wellesley to Pinkney, private, Feb, 15, iSn, ibid.; Pinkney to Wellesley, 
Feb. 17, x8xx, ibid.$ Wellesley to Pinkney, private, Feb. 23, 1811, ibid.; Pinkney to 
Wellesley, Feb. 5&3> 1811, ibid. 

** Morning Post (London), March i, i8nj Sun (London), March i, 1811$ 
Hansard, XIX, 113. 



REPEAL OF THE ORDERS 

called him "our metaphysical mechanic ... at St. James" as 
a crafty intriguer, malevolently determined to bring about war 
with Great Britain. In actual fact, to quote a tribute by Samuel 
Whitbread, he was "a man of sound sense and strict integrity, and 
had uniformly appeared to be actuated by a sincere desire to con- 
ciliate the government of this country." 23 His conversion into a 
War Hawk, the product of his conviction that ordinary diplomacy 
could no longer hope to succeed, illuminated the ominous drift in 
Anglo-American relations. 

Pinkney's departure failed to shock the Cabinet into any action 
except Foster's appointment. Those ministers who had favored 
compromise at the end of 1810 made no further efforts during 
most of 1811. The Cabinet saw that the French decrees had not 
really been repealed. They believed neither that Britain was obli- 
gated to repeal the Orders in Council nor that her trade with the 
Continent would benefit if she did so. They expected the Americans 
to become disgusted with Napoleon, and in any event the angry 
American disunity so evident to all convinced them that the United 
States would not act forcefully against Great Britain. Finally, Brit- 
ain did not feel the impact of America's commercial restrictions 
until late in the spring, after Parliament adjourned, and then the 
ministers hoped that economic warfare would boomerang, as they 
thought it had done in the days of the Embargo and Noninter- 
course acts. 