

317 



REPEAL OF THE ORDERS 

that the Orders in Council had ruined the export trade, sacrificed 
an annual market of 12 million to cut off a paltry trade between 
America and France, and stimulated the permanently harmful 
growth of American manufacturing. The first of Brougham's 
massive assaults upon the ministry, ably backed by Baring, soon 
developed the same points in the House of Commons. Manufac- 
turers' petitions, far more numerous than those presented in 1 808, 
descended upon Parliament. A young American visitor, writing 
home to unconvinced, stanchly anti-Madisonian parents, reported 
that "it is the opinion of some of the best politicians in this country 
that, should the United States either persist in the Non-Inter- 
course Law or declare war, this country would be reduced to the 
lowest extremity." 38 

To meet their critics, government supporters put forward several 
arguments. There was the familiar assertion that repeal of the or- 
ders would cripple the already depressed shipping interest. 39 There 
was the announced belief that America was utterly dependent 
upon British manufactures. One member of Parliament scornfully 
proclaimed: "As for America, she could not do without Birming- 
ham she could not even shave herself, or catch her mice without 
their aid." The Board of Trade officially reported that stories of 
increasing American manufactures were probably propaganda to 
frighten England into concession. 40 

Taking full advantage of incomplete and often contradictory 
statistics, governmentalists also argued that the recession was at 
worst a very mild one, that it had no connection with the American 
market, or that commercial famine hurt America far more than 
Britain. "If the measures which she had thought proper to adopt 

58 Times, Feb. 13, 18125 Hansard, XXI, 104.31045, 1092-1116, 1126-1131 > 
Morse to Jedediah Morse, March 25, 1812, Edward L, Morse, ed,, Samuel F. B, 
Morse , His Letters and Journals (2 vols.j Cambridge, 1914), I, 67. 

39 John W. Croker, A Key to the Orders in Council (London, 1812), p. 17: < The 
British shipping 1 interest would be annihilated, and that of America would rise up 
in its stead. M 

40 Hansard, XXII, 431; Board of Trade minutes, Jan, 16, 1812, BT 5/21. To the 
taunt a Boston paper replied: "If America cannot shave herself, she can shave old 
England, as the battles of Bunker-Hill, Saratoga, c. plainly evince: And as to 
mousing, we ask, who manufactured the mouse-tra^s in which BURGOYNE and 
CORNWALLIS were 'taken? '" Independent Chronicle (Boston), May 25, 1812. 

318 



REPEAL OF THE ORDERS 

were injurious to us," declaimed George Rose, "what were they 
less than ruinous to her? . . . America . . . must be suffering 
in her resources in every direction. 3 ' As late as April, 1812, 
Lord Liverpool asserted, "The Distress in the Commercial Dis- 
tricts of this Country . . . arises from temporary and incidental 
Causes." 41 Mounting attacks and continued depression ultimately 
made a mockery of these defenses of government policy. 