

335 



REPEAL OF THE ORDERS 

trade in British goods, a requirement Foster had been instructed 
to insist upon. Nevertheless, after some delay the Liverpool minis- 
try made this obviously fraudulent document the sole excuse for 
withdrawal of the orders, primarily as a device, none too successful, 
to conceal its own weakness. 

Brougham finally got around to a formal motion against the 
Orders in Council on June 16. Save for the absence of James 
Stephen, who usually intervened in any debate upon them, there 
was no indication that the government intended to give way. 
Brougham opened the proceedings with an extremely lengthy 
speech, chiefly a summary of the testimony taken during the pre- 
ceding six weeks. As in March, Rose and Baring followed him, 
repeating the usual arguments, Rose's speech in favor of the orders 
supports the hypothesis, put forward at the time, that the Cabinet 
intended to hold firm yet a little longer if the temper of the House 
permitted. Apparently it did not, for when Baring sat down Castle- 
reagh rose from the front bench and, after denying that the French 
decree recently received really met the requirements laid down 
by Britain, declared: 

Nevertheless, it might not be unwise to put the country in a situation to 
receive explanations upon it. If the American government should be found 
disposed to make representations to France, to induce her to satisfy the 
just expectations contained in his royal highness the Prince Regent's declara- 
tion [of April 21], Great Britain would be disposed to consent to the sus- 
pension, for a limited period, of the restrictive system of both countries ; or, 
in other words, she would consent to suspend the Orders in Council, if 
America would consent to suspend her Non-Importation act. 

A brief baffled silence, then a confused hubbub followed these 
opaque words. Whitbread bobbed to his feet to say that he was, 
"as on most occasions, completely unable to understand the mean- 
ing of the noble lord. He begged the noble lord would say what 
it was he meant." Clarity was undoubtedly not exactly what Castle- 
reagh desired. Under harassment he ultimately agreed that the 
government intended to suspend the orders without even waiting 
to see if the United States would at the same time renew inter- 
course with Britain. Ponsonby, titular leader of the Opposition, 

336 



REPEAL OF THE ORDERS 

pronounced the whole proceeding "a confession both to France 
and America, that the English government had resorted to meas- 
ures which bore so hard on herself, that she could not persevere 
in them." Brougham, who exulted almost childishly at a victory 
for which he could claim chief credit, agreed to withdraw his 
motion until the government announced its full intentions. 71 

The Cabinet debated its next move for just a week, a delay 
strengthening the feeling that Castlereagh's announcement had 
been a tactical step, not the result of a fixed decision. Some minis- 
ters desired to stop at a temporary suspension of the British system. 
If the United States raised its price, the orders could easily be 
restored 3 if, on the other hand, America reacted favorably, the 
disgrace of surrender would be lessened by a parallel relaxation 
across the Atlantic. Other cabinet members, perhaps a narrow 
majority, argued for going the whole way. They pointed out that 
American law provided for the abandonment of nonimportation 
after the cessation, not merely the suspension, of English edicts. 
The Opposition, its blood up, now insisted on outright repeal, and 
in the long run there was little practical difference between the 
two courses, since the orders could be reproclaimed if the United 
States refused to open trade with Britain. 72 