



REPEAL OF THE ORDERS 

Chronicle, the most influential newspaper urging abandonment of 
the orders, carried an article upon relations with America, and the 
Chronicle had a large circulation, much of it outside London. 

So too did Cobbetfs Political Register, and unlike the Chronicle 
Cobbett could not be accused of merely accepting the Opposition's 
lead. Until the end of 1810 Cobbett vehemently attacked the 
United States. He then reversed himself and began an equally 
violent attack upon the British government and its commercial 
system. In February, 1812, he demanded not only repeal of the 
orders but also an end to impressment. When the orders were with- 
drawn, Cobbett concentrated his fire on impressment, and after war 
began he wrote, a The grievance ... is certainly very great, and 
cannot be expected to be borne by any nation capable of resist- 
ance." 55 Cobbett was almost always long-winded and sometimes 
viciously unfair. However, his wide circulation, like that of the 
Chronicle, ensured diffusion of the arguments against the orders 
throughout the British Isles. 

An overwhelming majority of businessmen, a representative 
portion of the press, and a solid Opposition bloc thus opposed the 
Orders in Council. This did not reflect any particular love of Amer- 
ica, although Russell exaggerated when he wrote, "We are really 
unpopular in this country & in case of a rupture shall have much 
fewer friends than in '75." Cobbett came nearer to the truth when 
he declared, "Nothing, I am convinced, will ever make an Ameri- 
can war popular in England.' 3 56 While a feeling of kinship and 
memory of the costs of the American Revolution doubtless im- 
pressed many Britons, the central concern of all those who took 
America's part was the loss of the export trade. 

Perceval's enemies faced formidable obstacles. Conciliation 
could be pictured as abject surrender to an upstart republic and 
the betrayal of cherished maritime principles, and defenders of the 
orders made the most of these arguments. The London Courier 

65 Annual Register ', 1811 (London, 1812), p. 49$ Globe (London), Jan. 27, 1812$ 
Cobbett's Register > XXI (1812), 65-77. 

66 Russell to Barlow, Feb. 26, 1812, War of 1812 Papers, William L. Clements 
Library, Ann Arbor 5 Cobbett's Register, XXII (1812), 107. 

326 



REPEAL OF THE ORDERS 

regularly scoffed at the chances of an American war "we hardly 
think she will be mad enough to risk it" and defended the orders 
even after the government had given them up, deprecating this 
"sacrifice of a great national right" on the ground that a "yielding 
policy is never wise, no, not even, with a mere view to commercial 
gain, a profitable policy." 5T The Sun y another leading metropoli- 
tan paper, the Quarterly Review, and the Gentleman's Magazine 
spoke much the same language. Two other important organs, usu- 
ally on the side of the government, were somewhat less bellicose. 
The Star exhibited doubts from the beginning, and, when the 
Americans presented new evidence in May, 1812, that Napoleon 
had given up his decrees, the paper became an advocate of appease- 
ment. The Times, which generally backed the ministry, increas- 
ingly criticized the license trade and particularly the government's 
claim that the orders could not be lifted, even for American com- 
merce alone, until Napoleon freely admitted British commerce. 
Thus there were serious differences of opinion even among those 
who usually supported the administration. As early as January, 
1812, Cobbett thought he saw evidence that the Courier and the 
Times were preparing the way for flight from the Orders in Coun- 
cil. 58 