

49 Ibid., I, 19115 Charles K. Webster, The Foreign Policy of Castlereagh, 1815-1822 
(London, 1925), Introduction passim; Times, May 19, 18125 Russell to Monroe, 
private, Feb. 19, 1812, Despatches, Great Britain, Vol. XVIII. 

Charles Abbot, Lord Colchester, ed., The Diary and Correspondence of Charles 
Abbot, Lord Colchester (3 vols.j London, 1861), II, 369. Ponsonby warned Whit- 
bread in advance that he would not be present. Ponsonby to Whitbread, Feb. 13, 
1812, Whitbread MSS. Wellesley, on the other hand, believed that Foster's corre- 
spondence should be presented to Parliament in order to unite the country and thus 
discourage an American declaration of war. Perceval defied the recommendation of 
his outgoing 1 foreign secretary. Wellesley to Perceval, private, Feb. 6, 1812, Perceval 
MSS, 1/58. 

51 Had he so desired, the Prince Regent could have made Brougham's task much 
easier. There is some reason to believe that the Regent favored a conciliatory policy 
toward America. At an unusual private reception of the newly arrived charg6, the 
Prince listened carefully to an explanation of American policy and commented to 
Wellesley, who was present, in a fashion that implied at least partial acceptance of 

323 



REPEAL OF THE ORDERS 

Fortunately, Brougham received great support outside the 
House, particularly from businessmen whose voices commanded 
the respect of independent members. Earlier, Baring had correctly 
observed that "the great interest in American intercourse is with 
manufacturers scattered over the whole country, . . . who are 
never able to act as a body with a weight corresponding to their 
importance." 52 In 1812 the intensity of the depression and the 
alluring nostrum of an American market for once united business- 
men. They swamped Parliament with petitions signed by thou- 
sands although some of them, including Josiah Wedgwood, in- 
sisted that laborers not be allowed to join the protests. From the 
Midlands, the North, from ports trading with America, petitions 
descended upon London, overwhelming less broadly supported 
counterpetitions from rival groups at Glasgow and Liverpool. 
When the House of Commons held hearings on these representa- 
tions, 150 witnesses appeared, almost all of them businessmen. 
Twenty-two Birmingham men testified, principally metal goods 
manufacturers. Three Sheffield steel and cutlery makers, leading 
potters (including Wedgwood), cotton and woolen magnates, and 
commission merchants all appeared before the House. Of the 
major business areas only London was sparsely represented (by 
two merchants, an insurance man, and three silkmakers) j neither 
Baring nor Thomas Mullett, a regular correspondent of Whit- 
bread's and a steady advocate of repeal, testified. They were scarcely 
missed. The witnesses that did appear made an impressive case. 
The testimony is full of such passages as, "Has had nine ships 
... at one time. Now has not one, but is satisfied, that if the Or- 
ders in Council were repealed, he should have a great many," or, 
"Has Orders from America for the whole of his goods, provided 
the Orders in Council were rescinded." 53 