

To strengthen his parliamentary defenses Perceval brought 
Viscount Sidmouth into his Cabinet. Sidmouth, who made agree- 
ment on maritime policy a condition of union with the government, 
insisted upon termination of the license trade. Perceval agreed, 
both to silence parliamentary enemies and to conciliate America. 

unimportant that he even argued that a Franco-American war would not serve 
British interests. He believed that the opportunities for evasion of the Continental 
System through use of American ships were far more important than any military con- 
tribution the United States could make. 

62 George Eden to Auckland, March 4, 1812, William Eden, Baron Auckland, MSS, 
British Museum (Add. MSS 34412-34471, 45728-45730), Add. MSS 344585 Russell 
to Monroe, private, March 4, 1812, Despatches, Great Britain, Vol. XVIII 5 diary 
entries, March 3, 4, 1812, Phipps, op. cit. y I, 4494515 Brougham to J. Walker, 
March 6, 1812, Brougham, Life and Times of Henry Brougham^ II, 8-1 1 j Brougham 
t Thorneley, March 4, 1812, ibid.) II, 12-13; Hansard) XXI, 11631164. 

330 



REPEAL OF THE ORDERS 

If we "offer to America the renunciation of our Licenses/' he 
wrote, "undoubtedly we shall appear to be making, as we shall 
undoubtedly be making a greater sacrifice for accommodation, than 
if these Licenses had never been granted." Sidmouth did not reply 
to the suggestion that the more violent the crime, the more credit 
one would get when ceasing it, but he and his friend Vansittart 
agreed to join the government. On April 10 Castlereagh sent new 
instructions to Foster. After lamely defending the use of licenses 
in the past, these instructions offered to abandon them if the 
United States would reopen trade with Great Britain. 63 Consider- 
ing the strength of PercevaPs desire to monopolize European 
trade, he had made a significant surrender, although far too late 
to assuage the Americans. 

A week later the Cabinet made another gesture that misfired. 
On April 2 1 the ministers issued a formal statement of policy. This 
declaration reviewed events since the Cadore letter, argued that 
France sought simply to trick the United States, and stated that 
the orders would continue until Britain received an unambiguous 
statement of French repeal. In London and in America people 
assumed the ministry had decided to stand on the Orders in Coun- 
cil, and this declaration played a decisive part in the American 
decision for war. PercevaPs reputation for inflexibility had served 
his country ill. The declaration really sought to convince domestic 
opponents and Americans, if they remained reasonable, that refusal 
to repeal the orders had been forced upon Britain by French 
policy. The whole paper was shot through with virtual pleas to 
France to provide a plausible excuse for withdrawal of the orders. 64 

The camouflage soon fell away from the government's retreat. 

63 Perceval to Sidmouth, March 15, 1812, First Viscount Sidmouth MSS, County 
Record Office, Exeter, Devon 5 Sidmouth to Perceval, March 15, 1812, ibid.; Castle- 
reagh #9 to Foster, April 10, 1812, Mayo, o<p. cit., pp. 363-367. Perceval had 
little hope that this step would conciliate the Americans, although he considered it 
worth trying and, from a domestic point of view, necessary. Perceval memorandum, 
n.d., Perceval MSS, A/I3- Sidmouth, on the other hand, expected the United States 
to be assuaged, and he was one of the few prominent politicians in England (Willber- 
force was sometimes another) who took the war threat seriously. 