

328 



REPEAL OF THE ORDERS 

disasters," toward which the Cabinet's "mean and profligate policy" 
was propelling the country. In general, he and Baring, his principal 
supporter, preferred to emphasize the depressed state of trade. 
They blamed this on the Orders in Council and the license trade, 
and they attacked the shift from commercial retaliation against 
France to an attempt to secure European trade at the expense of 
America as unwise, economically harmful, and unjust. Perceval, 
Stephen, and Rose replied that the depression could not be blamed 
on the orders, since these had first been followed by three years 
of economic improvement. They also defended their system as 
a legitimate and proper effective exercise of the right of retaliation, 
but at the same time they were drawn into a perhaps too-frank 
exposition of their attempts to favor British commerce at America's 
expense. Both sides quoted freely from customs reports and ton- 
nage figures, which hardly enlivened the debate. Attempting to 
revitalize the Opposition, Samuel Whitbread closed the debate 
with an emotional harangue, but his jaw ached and the speech 
lacked his usual force. 

Midway through the night George Canning gave the debate 
its moment of drama. He assailed the government for transform- 
ing the Orders in Council from a blockade into "a measure of com- 
mercial rivalry." The former Foreign Secretary declared a he was 
for giving the Orders in Council a full, unlimited, unmitigated 
vigor of operation, restoring them to their first spirit. . . . They 
were most perfect as they approached towards a belligerent meas- 
ure, and receded from a commercial one." Supporters of the minis- 
try considered this a disingenuous excuse for opposition actually 
inspired by pique at Castlereagh's advance. Still, the speech was 
in character, for in 1809 Canning had urged a rigorous general 
blockade and had played no part in its later relaxation through 
licenses. Some ministerial backbenchers growled "hear! hear!" 
at Canning's calls for vigor and directness, but few joined their 
former colleague in supporting Brougham's motion. 61 

01 Hansard, XXI, 1092-1164$ diary entry, March 3, 1812, Edmund Phipps, 
Memoirs of the Political and Literary Life of Robert Plumer Ward, Esq. (2 vols.j 
London, 1850), I, 445-450. Brougham considered American military strength so 

329 



REPEAL OF THE ORDERS 

At half past four in the morning the legislators wearily filed 
past the Speaker's chair into the division lobbies. One hundred 
and forty- four members supported Brougham, 216 opposed 
him. Although some considered the result a government victory. 
Brougham himself was encouraged by his showing. He urged 
businessmen to redouble their pressure upon Parliament, confident 
a majority could be brought to demand repeal and prevent "a 
rupture with our best customers and most natural, the free and 
English people of America." Brougham's vision was sure. The 
ministry won this battle primarily by mobilizing country members 
who would not stay throughout the session. Many supporters, par- 
ticularly merchants sitting in the House, could not be counted 
upon to remain loyal much longer. Canning's defection cost the 
Cabinet only about a dozen votes, and the Prince Regent's friends 
(except Sheridan, who ostentatiously absented himself) backed 
the administration. But the Melville and Sidmouth factions joined 
with the Opposition, and Wilberf orce and his coterie deserted their 
fellow Saints, Perceval and Stephen. A small group headed by 
General Gascoyne, Brougham's colleague from Liverpool, for- 
merly an earnest defender of the orders, showed the effect of com- 
mercial pressure by voting for the motion. 62 For the first time the 
Orders in Council aroused deep concern among floating members 
of the House of Commons. 