

64 Enclosure in Castlereagh to Foster, April 21, 1812, Mayo, of. tit., p. 37211. 
Hansard) XXII, 853-856, prints the wrong proclamation at this point 

331 



REPEAL OF THE ORDERS 

The Cabinet postponed a debate on the orders in the House of 
Lords, and Grenville heard rumors o angry disputes among 
ministers and between the Cabinet and the Regent. 65 Then, on 
April 28, the government, which had so ferociously resisted the 
same suggestion in March, declined to oppose a new call for a 
committee. George Rose, who announced the decision, and James 
Stephen declared that they expected the committee to find no evi- 
dence against the orders. Stephen caustically stated that "if the 
yellow fever raged in the country, and it was the belief of many 
persons that it proceeded from the Orders in Council, he would 
consent that the subject should be examined, merely for the sake 
of removing the false impression." Perceval half admitted that 
there might be substance in his opponents' arguments: "Supposing 
. . . that it were proved that the distresses complained of were 
in some degree, or altogether, occasioned by the Orders in Council, 
it would still remain a question for parliament to decide, whether, 
weighing the disadvantages against the benefits, they should be 
abandoned." The premier added, in a show of strength, that ac- 
ceptance of a committee by no means meant he was committed 
to repeal. Nevertheless, the government could not conceal that 
it had been forced to give way, and it had no answer to the taunts 
with which Tierney greeted the announcement. 66 

In both houses of Parliament witnesses appeared before com- 
mittees of the whole. In the Commons, working in relays for as 
many as eight hours at a time, Brougham and Baring examined 
friendly witnesses j James Stephen cross-examined them and pre- 
sented a few shipowners and colonialists in rebuttal. Although it 
lasted for weeks, the testimony added little that was new, serving 
chiefly to emphasize the business community's conviction that only 
repeal of the orders and recovery of the American market would 
end the depression. For the first time, as a result of the impression 
the hearings conveyed, Jonathan Russell allowed himself to be 
hopeful. "In my intercourse with men both in & out of power since 

65 Grenville to Thomas Grenville, April 22, 1812, Thomas Grenville MSS, British 
Museum (Add. MSS 41851-41859), Add. MSS 41853. 

66 Hansard, XXII, 1092-1 1 12. 

33* 



REPEAL OF THE ORDERS 

my arrival here/' he wrote, "I think I have witnessed a gradual 
softening of temper towards us and a less & less disposition to 
proceed to extremities. It is the increasing want of our intercourse, 
however, more than an apprehension of our aims, that leads to this 
conciliatory spirit." Russell did not yet risk a direct prediction 
that the orders would be repealed, at least so long as Perceval re- 
mained in power. 67 

On May 1 1 administrative business kept Spencer Perceval away 
from Commons until late in the day. Shortly after five, hurrying 
to hearings already well under way, he entered the lobby of the 
House alone. James Bellingham, who conceived himself to have 
been mistreated by the ministry, stepped forward and fired a pistol 
at point-blank range. Perceval died instantly. Chaos ensued as 
lords and commoners, in scenes reminiscent of the Gunpowder 
Plot, raced through corridors, examined closets, and seized arms 
to defend themselves against further attack. Not for some time 
did it become apparent that Perceval's murder was the solitary act 
of a man with a deranged mind. 