

The new government groped toward repeal of the Orders in 
Council. Quite obviously the threat of an American war did not 
trouble the ministers, and neither they nor the Opposition under- 
stood the importance of rapid action. (In the interregnum follow- 
ing PercevaPs death, Brougham insisted that the hearings continue, 

334 



REPEAL OF THE ORDERS 

but nobody suggested that repeal must be settled immediately,) 
The Cabinet sought some arrangement that would permit them 
to abandon an untenable position without admitting defeat at the 
hands of parliamentary enemies and mercantile opinion. In the 
days immediately following their confirmation in power, Liver- 
pool and Castlereagh received delegations of merchant complain- 
ants. Liverpool urged them to tolerate the system just a little 
longer on the grounds that the Americans would soon give way, 
permitting a graceful withdrawal which would not encourage them 
to raise their demands. 69 As it turned out, it was already too late 
to prevent an American declaration of war, but the activities of 
these last weeks show clearly that domestic political and economic 
considerations, not American maneuverings, brought about repeal. 
On May 20, while the ministers still held office ad interim, 
Jonathan Russell presented to Castlereagh a French decree he had 
just received from Joel Barlow. This decree, dated April, 1811, 
unequivocally repealed the pronouncements of Berlin and Milan 
for the Americans, and the American charge professed to believe 
it the formal instrument Britain demanded. The new paper was 
rightly suspected to be a French forgery, predated for effect but 
actually recently concocted in reply to the English declaration of 
policy, to bring about repeal of the orders or further embroil Brit- 
ain and the United States. Russell found it embarrassingly trans- 
parent, Castlereagh told the House of Commons it was "so pal- 
pable a juggle" the government intended to ignore it, and the 
Morning Chronicle joined ministerial prints in challenging its 
authenticity. 70 The false decree did not give formal approval to 

69 Star, June 13, 15, 1812. 

70 Russell to Castlereagh, May 20, 1812, and enclosure, FO 5/90 j Russell to 
Monroe, private, June 30, 1812, Despatches, Great Britain, Vol. XVIII; Hansard, 
XXIII, 287288; Morning Chronicle, May 23, 1812. Irving Brant, "Joel Barlow, 
Madison's Stubborn Minister," William and Mary Quarterly, 3d Series, XV (1958), 
442443, clearly shows that Barlow considered the decree a forgery but potentially 
useful to the interests of the United States. See especially Barlow to Madison, May 12, 
1812, William C, Rives Collection, Library of Congress, where the American min- 
ister expresses a strong suspicion that the decree "was created last week ... & in 
consequence of my note of the i st of May" asking proof of French repeal. "I know not 
in State-ethics by what name such management is called," Barlow wrote. Three days 
after denouncing the decree Castlereagh sent it to the law officers for comment. Crouzet, 
of. dt., II, $24n. 