

The ministry received firmer support from the shipping and 
West India interests, inveterate enemies of a liberal policy toward 
America, and from traders with the Peninsula and some other parts 
of Europe. Four large groups of shipowners, one from London, 
petitioned Parliament, and four owners appeared as witnesses in 
favor of the orders. Among them was John Gladstone (father of 
William), soon Canning's sponsor in a successful challenge for 
Brougham's seat in Liverpool. Another witness was Joseph Mar- 
ryat, the pamphleteering defender of the orders, who spoke at this 
time for the West India traders. For the parliamentary hearings, 
however, the ministry could find, aside from a small group of 
Londoners, only four Liverpudlians and one Glaswegian to sup- 



67 March 5, June 17, 1812. 
Cobbett>s Register, XXII, 107. 



327 



REPEAL OF THE ORDERS 

port its cause. Not a single manufacturer testified in favor of the 
orders. 59 Although Parliament had a habitual sympathy for colo- 
nialists and especially the merchant marine, successful defense of 
the orders required far broader support among the nation's busi- 
ness leaders. 

If the parliamentary Opposition suffered from internal weak- 
nesses, so too did the government. Bathurst, like some of his col- 
leagues, had secret doubts about the wisdom of maintaining the 
orders. In the House of Commons PercevaPs chief support came 
from James Stephen, George Rose, and, after Wellesley resigned, 
Lord Castlereagh. Stephen, spiritual father of the orders he de- 
fended "with a firmness that amounted to obstinacy," 60 was a 
choleric, rambling, ineffective debater. Rose aroused mistrust as 
one of the most notorious place- and profit-hunters in England, 
and Castlereagh as yet had no important parliamentary following. 
In addition, two important figures, Wilberforce and Canning, 
veered toward the Opposition camp in the early months of 1812. 
Although outright defeat was unlikely, Perceval occupied an un- 
happy position. 

The session's only pitched battle on the Orders in Council (and 
the first on this subject since 1809) took place on March 3, 1812. 
Henry Brougham had given notice that he intended to move, that 
day, for an investigation of the Orders in Council and the license 
trade. The whole parliamentary world recognized the importance 
of the occasion, and absent members flocked to Westminster; Coke 
of Norfolk traveled up from Holkham and another M.P. aban- 
doned the pleasures of Shropshire hunting for the combat at St. 
Stephen's. Actually, aside from "a long declamatory speech of 
very loud tone" by Brougham and another by Canning, eagerly 
awaited since he had helped frame the orders, the speeches were 
not particularly interesting, although more than 350 M.P.'s sat 
through the night to hear them. 

Brougham alluded briefly to a war with America, "the last of 

59 Hansard, XXIII, 202-205, 238-2395 Minutes of Evidence, passim. 
60 Henry Brougham, The Life and Times of Henry Lord Brougham (2 vols.j 
Edinburgh, 1871), II, 5. 