

The drama of PercevaPs death and his extreme "Englishness" 
provoked lachrymose sentiments among his peers, although in 
some cities the lower classes cheered his demise. Parliament voted 
pensions to his widow and his covey of children, and even Samuel 
Whitbread stepped out of character to deliver a graceful eulogy. 
"I confess," Lord Grenville dourly wrote, "I am a little sick of 
the Apotheosis of a man whom I believe to have been a very good, 
moral, & charitable man in private life, but as factious a partisan 
in opposition, & as bad a Minister in Government as the Country 
ever saw." 08 Strongly partisan Perceval certainly was, an able, 
determined, indefatigable, dedicated politician of narrow views. 
He had held the Cabinet together through the war's gloomiest 
years despite failures, the opposition of distinguished men, and 
internecine quarrels which would have led a more pessimistic, less 
tenacious man (like Grenville himself) to despair. Perceval died 

67 Russell to Monroe, private and confidential, May 9, 1812, Despatches, Great 
Britain, Vol. XVIII. 

e8 Grenville to Thomas Grenville, May 15, 1812, Thomas Grenville MSS, Add. 
MSS 41852, 

333 



REPEAL OF THE ORDERS 

just as the success of Wellington and the prospect of Franco- 
Russian conflict lightened the English skies. Unfortunately, con- 
firmed in his prejudices by his friend Stephen, he followed a 
disdainful policy toward America for too long, and war quickly 
followed his death. 

Bellingham's pistol shot caused a ministerial crisis that lasted 
for a month. Offices, Catholic policy, and military strategy formed 
far more important items of discussion than the Orders in Council 
and American affairs only because all apparently recognized the 
inevitability of repeal. Intensive negotiations between PercevaPs 
survivors on the one hand and Wellesley and Canning on the 
other revealed no disagreements on American policy. Grenville 
and Grey, who virtually threw away a chance to return to power 
because of their own lassitude, pessimism, and desire for revenge 
on their former friend, the Regent, had long planned to make 
repeal one of their first acts. Lord Moira, a personal friend of the 
Prince who received a commission to form a government, counted 
withdrawal of the Orders in Council among the chief items in his 
proposed program. Neither Wellesley, the Opposition, nor Moira 
found it possible to patch together a parliamentary majority, and 
on June 8 the Prince Regent formally reinstalled the remnants 
of PercevaPs ministry under the leadership of the Earl of Liver- 
pool. This result, the least expected of all (except by Lord Grey, 
who steadily forecast it), aroused derision. Even Liverpool had 
scant hope that the Cabinet would be able to maintain itself. Actu- 
ally, he was beginning the longest uninterrupted premiership in 
British history since Walpole. Although Canning rejected ex- 
tremely generous offers made him in the summer of 1812, the 
government's parliamentary position steadily improved. Even 
before a successful election in the fall, it had a majority in the 
House of Commons of approximately seventy. 