

4 Foster #35 to Wellesley, Dec. 21, i8ji, FO 5/77. 

345 



^ASSEMBLED WISDOM OF THE COUNTRY 3 ' 

On foreign policy, congressmen divided into a kaleidoscope of 
shifting factions so intricate and febrile that classification baffled 
even the members. Nathaniel Macon discerned at least six factions 
in the House, none large enough to work its will unaided. Samuel 
Taggart, a rancidly bitter Federalist but also an indefatigable 
analyst, divided the Republicans into four groups. The first of 
these, the War Hawks, was largely counterbalanced by a second 
clique composed of Republicans determined to preserve peace even 
if it meant continuing economic warfare. In the middle lay what 
Taggart called the "scarecrow" party, "those who vote for war 
without any sincere intention to go to war, but in hopes that Great 
Britain may be intimidated by the din of our preparations to relax 
her system so that they will eventually come off with flying colors." 
A fourth group, usually voting for measures of preparedness, did 
so to embarrass Madison rather than to bring on hostilities or run 
a bluff against Britain. 5 Taggart admitted that many representa- 
tives did not fall neatly into any group, and he perhaps overem- 
phasized the importance, if not the intensity, of anti-Madisonian 
feeling. Otherwise the Massachusetts congressman's description 
suggests the divisions that actually existed. 

The true War Hawks, the Montagnards of the Twelfth Con- 
gress, had the cohesive vigor that had bestowed success upon Maxi- 
milien Robespierre and an earlier minority. Clay, Cheves, and 
Lowndes shared with an equally bellicose senator, George Bibb 
of Kentucky, a boardinghouse proudly described by Lowndes as 
"certainly the strongest war mess in Congress." A Massachusetts 
Federalist considered these men and a tardy arrival, John C. Cal- 
houn, the strongest men in the Republican party, and added that 
they, "although deluded by the false glare of Democracy, are 
gentlemanly & apparently at least candid men." 6 This foursome 
shared the lead with Felix Grundy, who was perhaps even more 

5 Macon to Nicholson, Nov. 21, 1811, Joseph JL Nicholson MSS, Library of 
Congress} Taggart to Rev, John Taylor, Jan. 20, 1812, George H. Haynes, ecL, 
"Letters of Samuel Taggart, Representative in Congress, 1803-1814," American 
Antiquarian Society, Proceedings, n.s., XXXIII (1923), 376-377. 

Lowndes to Elizabeth Lowndes, Feb. 9, 1812, Harriott H. Ravenel, Life and 
Times of William Lowndes (Cambridge, 1901), p. 100$ William Reed to Pickering, 
Feb. 1 8, 1812, Timothy Pickering MSS, Massachusetts Historical Society, Vol. XXX. 

346 



'^ASSEMBLED WISDOM OF THE COUNTRY 53 

eager for war than his coadjutors but sometimes harmed the cause 
by his lack of discretion. Some War Hawks questioned the purity 
and even the legality of the reexport trade and detested the men 
who carried it on, they repeatedly declared they did not wish the 
United States to fight for it. Others were prepared to expand the > 
navy to defend all commerce and, equally important, to increase 
the weight of the nation in international affairs. All had in common 
a deep belief that "we have suffered national degradation too long, 
and endured insult and injury with too much patience." The 
senator who wrote these words added, toward the end of February, 
that the government "must vindicate the rights & honor of the 
nation. There appears at present no honorable ground upon which, 
war can be avoided a change in the measures of G. Britain . . . 
could alone preserve peace and there is not any . . . reason to 
calculate on such an event." 7 National honor was the War Hawks 5 
central concern. 