

The thirty-seven Federalist congressmen (there were also seven 
senators) were too few to be able to afford factionalism. Nine lived 
together at Birch's, 70 rods south of the Capitol, and five more at 
Coyle's boardinghouse, a traditional Federalist hostelry, arrange- 
ments that also facilitated a united front. Aided by Harmanus 
Bleecker of Albany, an energetic and personable young man, Josiah 
Quincy commanded the Federalists. Their ranks included able 
men, as strong in debate as the War Hawk leaders, but the tactical 

351 



''ASSEMBLED WISDOM OF THE COUNTRY'' 

design adopted after vigorous dispute required them to curb their 
appetites for opposition. 

The plan was Quincy's. Rufus King, who feared the scheme 
would misfire, and Timothy Pickering, always the advocate of 
blunt attack, warned against it, and unsophisticated constituents 
often complained, but the congressional delegation accepted it. 
Quincy's scheme was based upon a conviction that "Federalists, 
in abandoning the doctrines of Washington, of efficient protection, 
have lost their discriminative character, and, in their fears about 
the event of the European contests, their national character. In- 
stead of a patriotic opposition to an oppressive government, they 
are in great danger of degenerating into a mere faction" without 
political appeal. He proposed to support military legislation, to 
avoid being provoked into defense of England, and to keep gener- 
ally silent in debate, letting the Republicans expose their own 
internal disagreements. Quincy, who of course did not want war, 
argued, perhaps not entirely sincerely, that the "present situation 
of the commercial parts of the country is worse than any war> even 
a British one" u Destruction of Republican rule by exposing the 
incapacity of that party seemed the only way to restore prosperity. 

Almost all Federalists believed the Republicans did not mean 
what they said when they talked of war. "It has been," wrote 
Quincy, "the burden of their successive songs, every session, for 
six years past." Two Federalists visited Foster to urge England to 
maintain the Orders in Council so that the Republicans would be 
forced to the wall. Another wrote to Francis J. Jackson in the 
same sense: 

The only way to dislodge the prevailing party from the post of power, is by 
saddling them with a war which they have neither the means [nor] the 
ability to conduct, or by allowing them to place themselves in a situation 
. . . which would expose their weakness and pusillanimity, and render 
them contemptible ... in the eyes of all mankind. The first situation, I 
believe, . . . they could not be kicked into, while we enjoy the delightful 

14 Quincy to Eliza S. Quincy, n.d. [Dec., i8n], Edmund Quincy, Life of Josiah 
Quincy (Boston, 1867), p. 2415 Quincy to Otis, Nov. S, 1811, Harrison Gray Otis 

MSS, Massachusetts Historical Society. 

352 



^ASSEMBLED WISDOM OF THE COUNTRY 5 ' 

spectacle of seeing them decoyed or turned into the other, like a flock of 
geese into a pen. We have them snug enough, and if they make their 
escape the British government will have to answer for the crime of res- 
cuing them. 