

On June 23, prodded by Brougham's call for a new debate, 
Castlereagh made it known that the government had revoked the 
Orders in Council. Significantly, he met with a group of "Mem- 
bers from the Manufacturing Counties" before the House con- 
vened. The revocation, which actually took the form of a new 
Order in Council, was then communicated to Parliament. The 
government insisted that the repeal was voluntary, a gesture of 

71 Hansard, XXIII, 486-5485 Crouzet, of. cit., II, 826. Instructions sent to Foster 
the next day outlined the government's Intentions at this point. Britain planned to 
suspend the orders as of August i, with suspension to last until May, 1813, unless 
French conduct permitted an extension beyond that date. Suspension was conditional 
upon the removal of American restraints on British trade and the use of her ports 
by the Royal Navy. Castlereagh $20 to Foster, June 17, 1812, and enclosure. Mayo, 
o#, cit., pp. 381-385. 

72 Russell to Monroe, private, June 30, 1812, Despatches, Great Britain, Vol. 
XVIII} Joy to Madison, June 20, 1812, Rives Collection j Hansard, XXIII, 587592, 
719. 

337 



REPEAL OF THE ORDERS 

conciliation inspired but not required by the French decree. It 
insisted that new measures against American trade would follow 
if nonimportation continued. These qualifications were largely 
bravado 3 the Percevellian system followed its creator into the 
grave. 73 

Revocation provoked general celebration, particularly in the 
Midlands, and Brougham and the other heroes of the battle were 
tendered testimonial dinners. Workers found employment once 
again, and factories put on extra shifts to produce goods for the 
American market. Fifty ships sailed from Liverpool for the United 
States within two weeks, bearing, it was reported, more than 2 
million yards of calico cloth as well as a supply of good English 
cheese for the White House. 

The resumption of trade, coinciding with news of the outbreak 
of war between France and Russia, created unusual optimism in 
England. Cobbett, it is true, warned his countrymen that America 
would not be satisfied until impressment ceased, and the Courier 
gloomily predicted that America, "seeing us yield one point, will 
press the others." The great majority of the press congratulated 
the country on its good fortune. In Parliament, the happy climax 
of an arduous campaign intoxicated the Opposition. Brougham 
praised the ministry's "frank and manly conduct," and he and Lord 
Lansdowne pledged their supporters to rally around the govern- 
ment if America challenged any of Britain's undoubted maritime 
rights. Grenville and Grey agreed with Auckland that the tardy 
repeal of the orders should "have been follow'd rather by an 
impeachment than by a compliment," and Sydney Smith wrote, 
"I am very much affronted with Brougham's panegyric upon the 
Ministry. It was injudicious and savoring of pomp. Their late 
measures were surely not conceded, but extorted. Their jaws were 
forcibly distended, and an emetic thrust down their throats. Are 
they to be praised for rendering what they could not retain, and 
to be told that their compulsory sickness does them the highest 
honor?" The flood of congratulation buried these complaints. 