

s Like Senator Campbell, almost all the War Hawks would have 
considered American honor satisfied by repeal of the Orders in 
Council, and all would have been satisfied if impressment also 
ceased. If, as they expected, Britain made no concessions, Camp- 
bell, Clay, and Calhoun, as well as followers like William R. King 
and John A. Harper, were lightheartedly prepared to go to war. 
After all, war did not seem so serious in those days. The easy 
conquest of Canada and the speedy starvation Q the British West 
Indies were articles of faith among Americans! David Rogerson 
Williams, speaking for the entire faction, said, that it "appeared 
to him much easier to settle the terms of a new peace, than to patch 
up the old quarrel. When he considered the limited extent of our 
demands, and the nature of the pressure on the enemy, he could 
not but believe our objects would be attained."; 8 

7 Campbell to Blount, Nov. 29, 1811, Weymouth T. Jordan, George Washington 
Campbell of Tennessee: Western Statesman, Florida State University Studies, Vol. 
XVII (Tallahassee, 1955), pp. 95-96$ Campbell to Blount, Feb. 24, 1812, George 
W. Campbell MSS, Library of Congress. To warnings of the cost of war, another 
War Hawk, William Widgery, replied: "What is all our property, compared with 
our honor and our liberty. It is not commerce only for which we are about to fight, 
but for our freedom also." Annals, i2th Cong., ist sess., p. 658, 

8 Annals, i2th Cong., ist sess., pp. 689-690. 

347 



^ASSEMBLED WISDOM OF THE COUNTRY 53 

Some Republicans who took war more seriously nevertheless 
voted with the War Hawks. They favored what Taggart called 
the "scarecrow" policy, arms bills and noisy oratory to frighten 
England into surrender. Within this group could be found Clin- 
tonians, who seized the preparedness issue as a stick to belabor the 
administration, but also many old-line Republicans, who were not 
yet ready for war but recognized that self-immolating policies 
would no longer serve. For some the policy was sheer bluff 3 for 
others it was a temporary expedient, with no future course charted 
out y still a third group recognized that war might possibly follow 
but considered the risk worth taking. Naturally, the success of this 
policy depended upon the impression of sincerity conveyed by 
Congress, and scarecrow men often spoke almost like War Hawks 
in public. William Findley, an exhausted radical, declared in 
December that "the time was fast approaching when we must 
repel national insults or surrender our independence," but in al- 
most the next sentence he made the elliptic statement that prepara- 
tion was the best way to avoid war. Toward the end, in an obvious 
effort at escape, some thirty of these men joined with Federalists 
to support a proposal for adjournment which would probably have 
prevented a declaration of war. 9 

Until Christmas time the administration's position fell short 
of the War Hawks but still beyond the bluffers. The President 
and the Secretary of State considered it possible that Britain could 
be frightened into surrender. On the other hand, the government 
(or at least Monroe) saw that, as the Secretary put it, "we have 
been so long dealing in the small way, of embargoes, non-inter- 
course, and non-importation, with menaces of War &c that the 
British Government has not believed us." If Britain remained 
firm, the administration was prepared to fight in the spring. Mean- 
while, they would try to inveigle Foster and his superiors by a 
judicious combination of threats and enticements. The President 
repeatedly told Foster that the United States asked no sacrifice 
of principle on Britain's part, that America would not insist on 
England's admitting that she had wrongly questioned the Cadore 