

This will no doubt nd you at Washington, where the assembled wisdom 
of the Country is to decide upon its fate. It is rny sincere prayer that all 
may come armed with the courage & energy so necessary in these times, 
and determined to set out on a new system for obtaining redress. Without 
this, we may rest ad infinitum in the mean and degrading position we have 
so long had. If we have no respect for ourselves, others will have none for 

34* 



"ASSEMBLED WISDOM OF THE COUNTRY'' 

us, resistance is the only means of meeting oppression, for tyrants are rarely 
merciful, and Power in the hands of Nations is used only for their own in- 
terest. We shall never write ourselves into the character and reputation our 
temporizing & cringing policy has lost us. 1 

As John Spear Smith argued, America could regain European 
consideration and self-respect as well only by breaking loose 
from past policy. "Courage & energy," so long lacking, were now 
required in even greater measure. The session saw a struggle be- 
tween Republicans possessed of these qualities and others who, for 
one reason or another, wished to temporize. Since the Federalists 
avoided alliance with any Republican group, while the administra- 
tion did not throw its full weight into the struggle, the battle lasted 
for more than seven months. In June, 1812, a burst of desperate 
energy carried the declaration of war against England. 

At the outset, vigor triumphed in Henry Clay's selection as 
speaker of the House, James Varnum now sat in the Senate as the 
replacement for Pickering. Ex-Speaker Macon was tinged with 
Quiddism. William Bi]bb of Georgia, another front-runner, was 
an administration hack. On the Sunday before Congress met, a 
group of Republicans caucused'to seek"a*"more satisfactory nominee. 
They settled upon Henry Clay. Jrlaving greater determination 
and numbers than other factions, this group fixed its choice upon 
the party, and Clay easily secured election. So unknown was he 
that Augustus Foster almost ignored his selection, while the Co- 
lumbian C&^Unel confused him with his cousin, Matthew Clay 
of Virginia. V 

^IthpH^h backed by both young and old men, the Kentucky 
gamecock epitomized the new generation of Republicans. An un- 
restrained nationalist, a supporter of manufacturing as well as of 
agriculture, a rip-roaring orator, a debonair favorite of the ladies, 
a bold gambler at cards and politics how different from the 
generation of Jefferson, Madison, and Macon! Clay did not have 

1 John S. Smith to Samuel Smith, Oct. 20, 1811, Samuel Smith MSS, Library of 
Congress. 

2 Bernard Mayo, ed., Henry Clay f Spokesman of the New West (Boston, 1937), 
p. 403 and n.j Foster #24. to Wellesley, Nov. 12, 1811, Foreign Office Archives, 
Public Record Office, FO 5/77$ Columbian Centinel (Boston), Nov. 9, 1811. 

343 



'^ASSEMBLED WISDOM OF THE 



the intellectual powers of the two presidents (a friendly critic, 
William Plumer, observed, "He declaims more than he reasons")? 
but he had more force. During two part terms in the Senate he had 
opposed half measures, and in the summer of 181 1 he wrote ahead 
to Washington that if Britain "persists in them [the Orders in 
Council] , and France is honest and sincere in her recent measures, 
I look upon a War with G. Britain [as] inevitable." 3 Clay desired 
to embrace, not to evade the inevitable. 