

.j pp. 501, 1315-1316. 

348 



<C ASSEMBLED WISDOM OF THE COUNTRY 5 ' 

letter, and even that he personally "would be satisfied provided 
their [the orders 5 ] practical effect was to cease without any public 
abandonment of them. 55 On the other hand, in comments too often 
minimized by Foster, the President and the Secretary repeatedly 
refused to bring into question the validity of French repeal, warned 
that the use of force would eventually come, and delayed publica- 
tion of correspondence that might lessen anti-British feeling. As 
time passed the administration's line gradually tautened, but on 
the whole it clung to the hope, as described by Serurier, that decla- 
rations and military preparations would "suffice to convince the 
English Ministry of the strong intention here to resist, and to 
determine it not to add another powerful enemy to the terrible 
enemy it confronts. 55 10 With far less enthusiasm than the War 
Hawks, the President faced a war he still hoped to avoid. 

The administration kept its own counsel, except for one meeting 
between Monroe and the Foreign Affairs Committee. Many con- 
gressmen thought the executive shared the opinions of scarecrow 
men or possibly even of the peace faction. Hugh Nelson, a neigh- 
bor of Madison's, believed he expressed the President's feelings 
when he challenged War Hawk declarations that the United States 
was pledged to war, 11 and many War Hawks harbored doubts of 
the administration. Those determined to avoid war hoped for 
presidential support when the crisis came. 

This last Republican group, described by Henry Adams as 
"honest and perhaps shrewd men . . . , who saw more clearly the 
evils that war must bring than the good it might cause, 55 considered 
war a quixotic exercise. Many, like former Attorney-General Rod- 
ney, still thought 9tasi,t commercial pressure alone would bring 
England to her knees. Others, sharing the feelings of a Republican 
newspaper in Trenton, believed that the true policy of the United 
States was "$eace y while peace is either practicable or tolerable. 

10 Monroe to Taylor, June 13, 1812, James Monroe MSS, Library of Congress* 
Foster #29 to Wellesley, Nov. 29, 1811, FO 5/775 Foster #7 to Wellesley, secret, 
Jan. 31, 1812, FO 5/84 j S&rurier #4,2 to Minister of Foreign Relations, Jan. 12, 
1812, Archives des Affaires 6trangeres, Correspondance Politique, tats-TJnis (photo- 
stats, Library of Congress), Vol. LXVII. 

11 Nelson to Charles Everett, Dec. 16, 1811, Hugh Nelson MSS, Library of Con- 
gress. 

349 



"ASSEMBLED WISDOM OF THE COUNTRY'' 

Notwithstanding the embarrassments o our trade . . . , the na- 
tion was probably never so prosperous as at the present moment. 
. . . And shall we jeopardize or sacrifice this prosperity by war, 
if war is avoidable?" The Trenton True American endorsed pre- 
paredness but added, "Peace is a gem which ought not to be rashly 
flung away it may cost much toil, and blood and treasure to re- 
cover it." Many New England Republicans, Adam Boyd of New 
Jersey, Nathaniel Macon, and others took this position until Fed- 
eralist taunts and the logic of the situation created by War Hawks 
and their disingenuous allies caused them, like the True American, 
to support the war declaration, although with great reluctance. 
Others, most notably Senator Worthington of Ohio, opposed war 
on the issue of timing until the very end. 12 