

Nor did revocation show that Britain took very seriously the 
threat of an American war. Hostilities were feared, if at all, not 
for themselves, but because they threatened to close still more 
firmly the door to the American customer. The embargo of March, 
1812, passed largely as a prelude to war, troubled England chiefly 
for economic reasons. Even Henry Brougham argued that the 
United States was too weak to pose an important military threat 
or to arouse jealousy: 

Jealousy of America! I should as soon think of being jealous of the trades- 
men who supply me with necessaries, or the clients who entrust their suits 
to my patronage. Jealousy of America ! whose armies are yet at the low . . . 
whose assembled navies could not lay siege to an English sloop of war: 
jealousy of a power which is necessarily peaceful as well as weak . . . 
[and] is placed at so vast a distance as to be perfectly harmless! 77 

Great Britain clung to this view even after the United States de- 
clared war. The Cabinet believed American strength and will so 
contemptible that it expected Madison to revoke the declaration 
af tep learning that the Orders in Council had disappeared. 

While news of repeal was still on its way to him by ship through 
Baltic, John Quincy Adams expressed a hope that, "with 

77 Hansard, XXIII, 504-505. 

340 



REPEAL OF THE ORDERS 

a little more Patience and Forbearance, we shall see the downfall 
of that infamous compound of Robbery, Perjury, and Fraud by 
the weight of its mischief recoiling upon its authors, without being 
obliged on our part to resort to force for its destruction." Adams' 
hope was fulfilled 5 so too was his gloomy expectation that Perce- 
vaPs death would delay the denouement too long to prevent an 
American declaration of war. When news of repeal reached the 
United States, the Aurora crowed that "the Leviathan of the sea 
has floundered and crouched to the terrapn! The sovereign 
pedlar of the seas has lowered topsails to the Yankee cockboat" 
In the same article, however, William Duane called for a vigorous 
campaign to take Montreal before winter. Like many of his coun- 
trymen, Duane considered the Cabinet's tardy concession too little 
to stop a war that it might have prevented. The Raleigh Star de- 
clared: "Their wit has come too late." 78 

78 Adams to John Adams, June 29, 1812, Adams Family MSS (microfilm), Massa- 
chusetts Historical Society, Vol. CXXXIXj Aurora (Philadelphia), July 30, 18125 
Raleigh Star, Aug. 7, 1812. 



341 



CHAPTER 



X 



"THE ASSEMBLED WISDOM 
OF THE COUNTRY" 



John Spear Smith, the young charge d'affaires selected by Wil- 
liam Pinkney, had previously visited St. Petersburg and Paris. At 
neither capital did the youth show more than a passive interest in 
politics. Six months' exposure to British frigidity (and particularly 
to Lord Wellesley) changed all that. Like Pinkney before him 
and Jonathan Russell afterwards, young Smith concluded that 
the traditional policy of protests, pinpricks, and commercial war- 
fare imperiled America's interests and reputation. Two weeks 
before Congress gathered, Smith wrote to his father, the Senator 
from Maryland: 