

The new speaker quickly showed that he did not intend to be a 
mere figurehead. Down to his time the speakership had been pri- 
marily an honorific office, with the holder expected to respond 
to the directions of more powerful leaders. As internal feuds and 
presidential caution weakened administration control, a great 
vacuum opened. Henry Clay stepped in to fill it, making policy 
decisions himself, treating the other leaders of the House as his 
lieutenants, often descending frdin the rostrum to speak in im- 
portant debates, and effectively wielding hitherto almost unused 
powers to check the obstructiveness of the Federalists and their 
passing ally, John Randolph. The expulsion of Randolph's favor- 
ite bitch, a massive hound who had accompanied her master to 
the House in the days of other speakers, symbolized the new 
regime. 

In appointing standing committees, Clay made no pretense of 
seeking balance. He packed them, almost ignoring the Federalists 
and making sure that War Hawks outnumbered moderate Repub- 
licans. All the chairmen had had some previous experience in the 
House, and the Speaker did not push them forward more rapidly 
than was then normal. Ezekiel Bacon, who headed the Ways and 
Means Committee, had already served four years $ David R. Wil- 
liams of North Carolina, chairman of the Military Affairs Com- 
mittee, was returning for a third term after a two-year absence $ 
and Peter B. Porter, who received the most important assignment 
of all, chairman of the Foreign Affairs Committee, had been a 

3 Entry of Feb. 13, 1807, Everett S. Brown, ed., William Plumer's Memorandum 
of Proceedings in the United, States Senate, 1803 iS 07 (New York, 1923), p. 60 8 j 
Clay to Rodney, Aug. 17, 1811, Rodney Family MSS, Library of Congress, This and 
subsequent paragraphs draw heavily upon Mayo, op. cit^ pp, 40 1 ff . 

344 



^ASSEMBLED WISDOM OF THE COUNTRY 7 ' 

member of the Eleventh Congress. Only the Naval Affairs Com- 
mittee's Langdon Cheves could be considered a newcomer, and 
even he had served during one previous session. The chairmen, 
except for Cheves, disappointed Clay and perhaps made him wish 
that he had totally ignored the qualification of prior service. Wil- 
liams proved eccentric, opposing several important measures of 
preparedness} Bacon was a loyal party man rather than a War 
Hawk, and he deserted in the battle over naval building; Porter 
wavered during the winter and resigned before the job had been 
finished. Fortunately for Clay, other committee members served 
his purpose better than the chairmen. On the Foreign Affairs 
Committee he placed three War Hawks cut from the classic pat- 
tern youthful, newly elected, vigorous Calhoun, Grundy, and 
John Adams Harper, a thirty-two-year-old from New Hampshire 
subsequently denied reelection by more pacific constituents. Joseph 
Desha shared all the attributes of these men except inexperience, 
and the two moderate Republican members usually went along 
with the majority. John Randolph, whose membership was almost 
traditional, and the sole Federalist member, Philip Barton Key, 
who fought for the British during the Revolution, found them- 
selves swamped. So did minority members on other committees. 
Whether the Congress contained, as John Spear Smith thought, 
"the assembled wisdom of the Country," is a moot point. The 
British minister, whose praise came hard, reported that the "present 
Congress has certainly brought with it a considerable accession to 
both Houses of men of talents and respectability, although there 
still continue in it too many low and uneducated Individuals who 
are too ignorant to have any opinion of their own." 4 Others pre- 
ferred to emphasize the debilitating effect of Republican factional- 
ism. With a presidential election in the offing, many Clintonians 
opposed anything that might benefit Madison. Reapportionment 
made necessary by the census of 1810 became the first order of 
business, emphasizing the conflicting interests of North and South 
and opening differences never completely forgotten in debates over 
national issues. 