

At the extremity of the Republican party, so far from the War 
Hawks that they entered into virtual alliance with the Federalists, 
stood John Randolph and a handful of Quids. Weakened as usual 
by illness and hypochondria, Randolph nevertheless delivered 
more major orations than any other opponent of war, and as always 
his lashing tongue raised the hackles of his enemies. The North 
Carolina schoolteacher, Richard Stanford, used more restrained 
language. He opposed the conquest of Canada on the ground, 
borne out by later history, that in British hands it served as a 
"pledge for her better behaviour." Stanford scoffed at the easy 
way congressmen compared individual and national duels for 
honor. "The truth is," he said, a we cannot liken, nor will the simili- 
tude hold good between an individual's honor, or his sensibility to 
it, and that of a nation." 13 At least until the spring, few Federalists 

12 Henry Adams, History of the United States during the Administrations of Jeffer- 
son and Madison (9 vpls.j New York, 1889-1891), VI, 170-171 j Rodney to Gallatin, 
Oct. 20, 1811, Albert Gallatin MSS, New- York Historical Society} True American 
(Trenton), Nov. 18, 1811$ May 18, 18125 journal entry, June 14, 1812, Thomas 
Worthing! on MSS, Library of Congress. 

^Annals, i2th Cong., ist sess., pp, 673, 511513, A similar complaint, made to 
Monroe by an outside observer, declared that congressmen "never touch the subject, 
but ... blare out in Emotions. . . . among these Gentlemen, eternal changes are 
rung upon 'public feelings^ national sensibilities , national Honor, & even the peculiarly 
royal & military phrase of National Glory. The small voice of reason . , , is seldom 
heard." Walter Jones to Monroe, Dec. 8, 1811, Monroe MSS. 

350 



^ASSEMBLED WISDOM OF THE COUNTRY*' 

spoke as frankly as Stanford and Randolph in opposing the estab- 
lishment of national honor as a mainspring of policy. 

Even this description makes Republican factions seem more 
tidy, more cohesive than they were. Actually, members floated 
from camp to camp or concealed their true views behind the glare 
of oratorical fireworks. Many simply drifted with the wind, con- 
founding all attempts to place them. The Quids never numbered 
more than six or eight, but the other three groups probably divided 
fairly evenly the Republican membership of the House. The War 
Hawks and the scarecrow men, if aided by their share of the 
drifters, usually found it possible to get their way, although in 
several instances success came by a very narrow margin. 

In the Senate an even more complicated situation prevailed. 
The Republican membership spread from George Washington 
Campbell, still the advocate of positive action as he had been earlier 
as a congressman, to Richard Brent, an alcoholic Virginian still 
clinging to the essentially Anglophile position that he had shared 
with his friend, James Monroe, a year earlier. Brent opposed 
measures looking to war, although at the last moment he tottered 
into the chamber to vote for the declaration. Somewhere between 
the extremes represented by Campbell and Brent lay Samuel 
Smith, William B. Giles, Michael Leib of Pennsylvania, and New 
Hampshire's Nicholas Gilman, all primarily individualists moved 
chiefly by a desire to crimp James Madison's political future. Al- 
though the major debates took place in the lower house, on two 
occasions passage of the army bill and the declaration of war 
the Senate played an important part. 