

78 Castlereagh to Prince Regent, June 23, 1812, Royal Archives j Hansard, XXIII, 

715-721, 7i6n~7i8n. 

338 



REPEAL OF THE ORDERS 

Repeal of the Orders in Council gave popularity to a ministry 
whose hold had been tenuous and established the government in 
a position vis-a-vis America which the nation was prepared to 
endorse. 74 

Henry Brougham later declared, "The repeal of the Orders 
in Council was my greatest achievement." 75 As leader of a cam- 
paign in which too many prominent Opposition figures had lost 
hope, Brougham could legitimately claim great credit. He de- 
served testimonial dinners, although he might have accepted more 
modestly the plaudits that came his way. For Brougham could 
not have succeeded without the well-nigh unanimous support of 
the business community. Abandonment of the orders is one of the 
first examples in British history of a government's surrender to 
outside, nonpolitical opinion. The defection of men like Gascoyne 
and Wilberforce, who sat for commercial areas in the Midlands, 
warned the government that it could not count upon its followers. 
The cessation of licenses, though it might rekindle the enthusiasm 
of those who favored commercial war a outrance y could not assuage 
the business community. Long before PercevaPs death, after the 
March debate or at least by early April, swelling industrial protest 
doomed the orders. When Midland representatives met with Lord 
Castlereagh on the day repeal was announced, some objected to 
the casuistry of basing it upon the new French revelation. "Aye," 
said the Foreign Secretary, "but one does not like to own that we 
are forced to give way to our manufacturers." 7e 

The depression of 1810, totally unconnected with events in 
America, secured for the United States what Jefferson's Embargo 
had been unable to obtain. The British business community reacted 
hesitantly to the depression at first, for many of its members nor- 

74 Cobbett's Register, XXII, 10275 Courier, June 17, 18125 Hansard, XXIII, 715- 
7195 Auckland to Grey, June 29, 1812, Grey MSS, from ist Ld. Auckland? Smith 
to Lady Holland, June 7, 1812 [?], Smith, op. cit., I, 222. Cobbett later declared that 
the Opposition's fatuous pledges on this occasion encouraged the ministers to refuse 
further compromise and thus became responsible for the continuation of the War 
of 1812, Cobbett's Register, XXIII (1813), 687. 

70 Life and Times of Henry Brougham, II, i. 

76 Diary, June 24, 1812, Robert I. Wilberforce and Samuel Wilberforce, The Life 
of William Wilberforce (2d ed.j 5 vols.j London, 1839), IV, 35. 

339 



REPEAL OF THE ORDERS 

mally counted themselves supporters of Perceval and anyway dis- 
liked the very idea of outside pressure upon Parliament. America's 
resumption of nonimportation in 1811, the result of Napoleonic 
caprice rather than of acute Madisonian analysis, deepened the 
depression in England. Manufacturers and merchants became con- 
vinced that only reopened sales to America could restore pros- 
perity, and they undertook the campaign of protest which finally 
forced the government to give way. The final result did not vindi- 
cate the Jefferson-Madison theory of the invincibility of American 
commercial pressure. The Republican leaders had always assumed 
that this pressure alone would cripple European nations, whereas 
success actually depended upon the coincidence of American pres- 
sure with depression in Europe. In prosperous times, as in 1807 
and 1808, Great Britain could have ridden out the storm. 