

commodity, far more seriously challenged by impressment and a 
check on exports than by other British measures. 

Scarecrow men and moderates destroyed any chance that Con- 
gress would appear determined to vindicate American rights. Not 
one true Republican opposed the resolutions it took a bold man 
to confess he considered the United States too weak to resist ag- 
gression but several declared that a vote for Porter's resolutions 
did not commit them to support specific legislation recommended 
by the committee, to say nothing of a declaration of war later on. 
Macon talked this way, and Adam Boyd and Hugh Nelson. Speak- 
ing, as he thought, for the administration against enemies who 
desired to maneuver it into early war, Nelson descanted at length 
on the dangers of armed conflict, the questionable wisdom of per- 
mitting America to become an adjunct of Napoleon, and the neces- 
sity of preserving freedom of action. According to Samuel Taggart, 
Nelson's speech "carried terror and dismay into the ranks of the 
war party." 26 By expressing doubts shared by many silent Repub- 
licans, the Virginian threatened the War Hawk program of steady 
preparation culminating in war, and at the same time gravely re- 
duced the possibility that the strategy of bluff would succeed. His 
was the most important speech of the debate. 

In oratorical fireworks John Randolph's two major orations 
carried the palm. Since Quincy's Federalists left the debate to 
their opponents, Randolph bore almost the entire burden of chal- 
lenging the report. The master of Bizarre was ill and tired. His 
speeches suffered through disorganization, but individual passages 
had his trade-mark. He accused Republicans of apostasy to their 
own creed, referring to the conflict between Macon and Grundy 
by saying, "If we must have an exposition of the doctrines of Re- 
publicanism, he should receive it from the fathers of the church, 
and not from junior apprentices of the law." He twitted Grundy 
for his "gordian knot" statement and emphasized the folly of 
tilting the balance of power in favor of Napoleon, "him who had 
effaced the title of Attila to the 'Scourge of God!' " In his most 

26 Nelson to Charles Everett, Dec. 16, 1811, Nelson MSSj Taggurt to Rev. John 
Taylor, Dec. 14, 1811, Haynes, of. cit^ p. 369. 

358 



'^ASSEMBLED WISDOM OF THE COUNTRY'' 

famous passage Randolph declared, "Agrarian cupidity, not mari- 
time right, urges the war. Ever since the report . . . came into 
the House, we have heard but one word like the whip-poor-will, 
but one eternal monotonous tone Canada! Canada! Can- 
ada! " If war came, he said, it would not be "a war for our homes 
and fire-sides a war that might generate . . . manly sentiments 
but, a war of rapine, of privateering, a scuffle and scramble for 
plunder." 27 This accusation, later taken up by historians, over- 
looked the fact that most references to Canada simply pointed to 
it as the easiest target for American military power. 