

37 Annals , i2th Cong-., ist sess., pp. 10411042, 1050-1056. For the entire de- 
bate, incompletely reported, see pp. 1092-1155. 
pp. 1 1 091 no. 

364 



'^ASSEMBLED WISDOM OF THE C O U N T R Y ? * 

The next day a far more serious blow fell. The salt tax, a major 
source of revenue and linchpin of the entire group of internal taxes, 
suffered defeat by a vote of fifty-seven to sixty. In general the 
vote followed sectional rather than factional lines, although the 
leading War Hawks and sternest Federalists supported the levy 
for quite opposite reasons. Congressmen from the West, where free 
salt licks abounded, voted for it. Agrarians from the coastal states, 
which purchased large amounts of salt, opposed it. In alliance with 
those who opposed any new taxes, in principle or to slow war prepa- 
rations, they had their way. The National Intelligencer com- 
plained that Congress had moved hastily without considering the 
implications of its action. After having decided "the greater ques- 
tion" by authorizing military increases, the paper argued, it was 
silly to balk at "the comparatively unimportant question of taxa- 
tion," particularly since the main costs of war would be met 
through loans. 39 Still, ruin once again threatened the war move- 
ment. 

After a week end of troubled thought and conversation, Thomas 
Gholson of Virginia came to the rescue. He announced that he had 
changed his mind, now supported the salt tax, and moved recon- 
sideration. Gholson did not pretend to be enthusiastic, but, said 
he, "I ... would vote two dollars a bushel on salt, rather than 
see the present course of policy frustrated. Mr. Speaker, we who 
form the majority have all the same end in view: the maintenance 
of the rights, honor, and independence of the country against the 
lawless aggressions of our enemy." Ten Republicans, all but two 
from coastal states south of the Hudson, rallied to this call and 
changed their votes. The salt tax was restored by a vote of sixty- 
six to fifty- four. 40 Bitter personal attacks on Gallatin and a venge- 
ful proposal to place heavy taxes on Western distillers failed to 
shake the newly constructed majority. 

On March 4, exactly four months after the opening of Congress, 
the tax bill passed the House of Representatives. Almost no Re- 
publicans opposed it on the final roll call, although forty, includ- 
ing Peter B. Porter and David R. Williams, absented themselves. 

39 Jbid.y pp. 111411155 National Intelligencer, Feb. 29, i8ia. 

40 Annals, i2th Cong., ist sess., pp. 11181127. 

365 



''ASSEMBLED WISDOM OF THE COUNTRY 53 

Federalists voted in the negative to concentrate the blame for 
higher taxes upon their opponents. 

When this long battle opened. Senator Bayard wrote, "I shall 
consider the taxes as the test, and when a majority agree to the 
proposed taxes, I shall believe them in earnest and determined 
upon war." At the end of the fight James Madison wrote to Mon- 
ticello that, having "got down the dose of taxes," Congress could 
be expected to proceed to war in the spring. 41 Without doubt the 
war men had achieved an important victory j had they lost the 
fight for tax resolutions, the game would have been up. But it 
was essentially a defensive victory. Scarecrow men still had an 
avenue of escape, and Federalists would certainly abandon their 
passive tactics when the final crisis came. Furthermore, Bacon's 
resolutions were only resolutions, not law. Final action did not 
come until after the declaration of war, and even then the op- 
pressive internal taxes were left for consideration the next fall. 
Apparently the War Hawks dared not risk failure by pressing for 
legislation, while moderate Republicans, who feared their con- 
stituents or still hoped for peace, preferred silence to action. 