

The additional army bill could not be taken seriously. It estab- 
lished a target figure beyond America's reach although no more 

29 Ibid., pp. 54.6-548, 564-566; S6rurier #39 to Minister of Foreign Relations, 
Dec. 9, 1 81 1, AAE, CP, E-U, Vol. LXVI 5 Federal Republican (Baltimore), Jan. 2, 
18125 Campbell to Jackson, Bee, 24, 1811, Andrew Jackson MSS. 

80 Annals, i2th Cong:., *st sess., pp. 35-97, 596-691, passim. 

360 



^ASSEMBLED WISDOM OF THE COUNTRY 53 

than adequate to the requirements of effective war. 31 Frequent 
congressional references to the psychological effect upon Britain 
lessened the law's effectiveness as an instrument of bluff. A realistic 
program, instantaneously executed, would have served this end far 
better. Foster declared the bill "more an electioneering than a war 
measure," 32 and he was right. Giles aimed to hurt Madison. The 
small group of Federalists who joined Quincy to support the larger 
force acted with Machiavellian motives. Moderates gave in to 
avoid ridicule and to mask the nakedness of the strategy of bluff 
far more than because they were convinced by arguments for 
25,000 as opposed to 10,000 men. The administration detested 
the end product, which reflected upon its own original plans and 
saddled it with a politically harmful burden, 

In a different fashion, the fate of a bill to expand the navy 
showed Congress' divided mind. As soon as the army legislation 
passed, Langdon Cheves brought in his committee's recommen- 
dation for the construction of a dozen ships of the line and twenty 
frigates. This proposal quickly ran into determined opposition. 
Many Republicans, even sincere War Hawks, opposed expan- 
sion of a service they considered a heritage from Federalism. 
Others objected to the expense or argued that a building program 
could not be completed in time to frighten England. Defeatists 
repeatedly declared that the United States could never hope to 
challenge the Royal Navy with success. In vain did Cheves argue 
that national unity required action to defend commerce, "the sec- 
ond great interest of the country." In vain did Henry Clay, de- 
scending again to the floor, attempt to rally inland votes by point- 
ing out the need for sea defense of the great outlet of Western 
produce at New Orleans. Despite almost unanimous Federalist 
support, despite paring down of the original plan, the House re- 
jected naval building on January 27 by a vote of sixty-two to fifty- 
nine. Calhoun, Cheves, Lowndes, and two dozen other Republi- 

31 In an account written some time later, Lowndes declared that Secretary of War 
Eustis, who drafted the bill, sabotaged the 25,000 figure. William L. Lowndes, 
Historical Anecdotes, and Observations, MSS, Library of Congress. In any event, few 
more than 1,000 men were enlisted in the army between January and May. 

32 Foster #3 to Wellesley, Jan. 16, i8iz, FO 5/84-. 

361 



"ASSEMBLED WISDOM OF THE COUNTRY'* 

cans, mostly from states north of the Delaware, voted for the 
proposal. Fifty congressmen who later voted for war, the entire 
Pennsylvania delegation as well as Westerners and Southerners 
including David R. Williams and Felix Grundy, killed the frigate 
bill. 33 With it died the chance of strengthening the war spirit in 
coastal areas. 