

In the most reasonable War Hawk speech, his maiden effort, 
Calhoun replied to two of Randolph's central arguments. While 
admitting that the European blockade kept agricultural prices 
down, he denied that a desire to force open the transatlantic market 
was more than a subsidiary motive for war; patriotism and honor 
were the chief factors, he said. Calhoun also rebutted Randolph's 
argument that Napoleon posed a greater threat than England. 
Since America could not fight both at once, prudence required her 
to select the more vulnerable. "It is absurd," said Calhoun, "for 
us to talk of the balance of power, while they by their conduct smile 
with contempt at our simple, good-natured policy." 28 Calhoun's 
speech was the sole reply to Randolph. Other Republicans passed 
their time affirming that cause for war existed, while disagreeing 
whether it should be declared, even at some distant date in the 
future, 

Nearly three weeks after Porter's Report the House concluded 
debate. The resolutions sailed through easily, not more than 
twenty-two votes being cast against any of them, although Quincy 
failed to prevent a handful of Federalists from breaking away to 
join Randolph, Stanford, and other Quids in opposition. Louis 
Serurier thought the President's message and the report had 
"placed Congress, like the administration, in one of those positions 
from which it is no longer possible to retreat." On the other hand, 
Federalists scoffed at the slow pace. In two days, said the Baltimore 



Sy lath Cong-., ist sess., pp. 441455, 525546. 
28 Ibid., pp. 482-483. 

359 



''ASSEMBLED WISDOM OF THE 



Federal Re-publican, the huge Republican majority could pass 
legislation to implement the sentiments in Porter's resolutions. 
"They do not choose, they prefer to bluster and bully, and talk big, 
and take the chance of frightening the Prince Regent into a repeal 
of edicts, to which they have submitted for four years." Congress 
passed no legislation before the Christmas recess, and Senator 
Campbell feared none would be passed. 29 

After the holidays, action on army and navy bills demonstrated 
Congress' weakness. A new law authorized short-term volunteers 
without settling their purpose, and the conditions of enlistment 
made it practically useless. Congress also emasculated the admin- 
istration's plan for an additional army of 10,000 men to serve for 
three years. This army, although theoretically tailored to the re- 
quirements of a campaign against Canada, was actually planned 
to be just large enough to impress Britain and just small enough 
to require no impossibly burdensome additional taxation. In the 
Senate, to embarrass Madison, GiJ.es presented an amendment ex- 
panding the army to 25,000 men. This forced the administration, 
as well as those who favored a sedate pace toward a war they still 
hoped to avoid, either to oppose a larger and presumably more 
effective army or to accept a measure that cast doubt on their own 
original purpose and would require extensive new taxes. Faced 
with this dilemma, the Madison men and the moderates first stood 
firm behind the original plan. War Hawks, on the other hand, 
were perfectly willing to move more rapidly if they could find 
the votes. Led by Henry Clay, who intervened in debate for the 
first time/they abandoned the plan arranged at the Foreign Affairs 
Committee's session with Monroe and accepted Giles's proposal. 
Eventually, faced by Senate firmness and the difficulty of seeming 
to support half measures, opposition collapsed. With only minor 
changes, Giles's bill became law. 30 