

The panic owed more to congressmen than to the man upon 
whom they wished to shift the blame. A war movement cast into 
such despond by a statement of costs necessarily appeared a feeble 
thing, and the war men's desire for delay showed that they had 
no faith in the people's firmness or else still hoped to escape with- 
out proceeding to open war. Gallatin's letter to Bacon was a private 
one, not intended for immediate publication, as he later convinced 
reasonable men like Clay. Although neither the Secretary nor 
Madison left any record of their intentions, as prudent adminis- 
trators they must have felt that Congress should consider the costs 
of war when gaily legislating preparation for it. The tax proposals 

86 Plumer to Harper, Jan. 28, 1812, Plumer MSS$ Roberts to Matthew Roberts, 
Feb, 3, 1812, Roberts MSSj Grundy to Jackson, Feb. 12, 1812, Andrew Jackson MSS$ 
Dearborn to Gallatin, March 29, 1812, Gallatin MSSj National Intelligencer, Jan. 
28, 1812$ Aurora, Jan. 25, 18125 Harper to Plumer, Feb. 17, 1812, Plumer MSS. 

363 



''ASSEMBLED WISDOM OF THE COUNTRY'' 

were too detailed to be communicated orally, like Monroe's prom- 
ise to the Foreign Affairs Committee. Sometime the question of 
money had to be faced, however, and Gallatin asked for no more 
revenue than seemed absolutely necessary. It was not his fault that 
congressmen found the bill of particulars an unpleasant sight. 

For four weeks gloomy Republicans tried to screw their courage 
to the sticking point. In an air of forced humor, the members con- 
sidered a proposal to tax marriage licenses in the District of Colum- 
bia, Clay observing that "marriage ought not to be taxed, but 
promoted," while Smilie facetiously proposed a bounty instead of 
a tax. Finally, on February 17, Bacon reported for the committee. 
In addition to loans to carry the main burden, he proposed doubled 
import duties } a direct tax of $3 million levied on the states j an 
impost of 20 cents a bushel on salt; a stamp act j taxes on distillers, 
tavernkeepers, wine sellers, and vendors of foreign merchandise 5 
and excises on sugar and carriages. 37 The outline generally fol- 
lowed Gallatin's suggestions. The most interesting thing about 
Bacon's report was that it proposed to impose the new taxes only 
when war actually began. While this gesture might somewhat 
lessen voter resentment, it confessed that many members still 
hoped to avoid war, created a good reason for opposing a declara- 
tion, and destroyed the opportunity for financial preparedness, all 
without materially easing the path of the tax program. 

The House accepted increased import charges after only one 
day of debate. Internal taxes encountered serious difficulty. James 
Fisk, a Vermonter usually allied with the war men, proposed to 
set these taxes aside, saying that "as all were agreed these taxes 
were war taxes, he thought it time enough to agree upon them 
when war became certain j . . . there was no doubt the resources 
of the country were amply sufficient whenever Congress deter- 
mined to call them forth, but he saw no necessity for alarming 
the people with odious taxes beforehand." Peter B. Porter seconded 
Fisk's motion. Although easily beaten, this proposal drew the 
ominous support of Fisk, Porter, and other Republicans. 38 