

Having ensured unpreparedness on land and sea, "the assembled 
wisdom of the Country" turned to financial requirements. Only a 
few carefree congressmen, like William Widgery of Maine, con- 
sidered taxation an easy problem: "We are told, a war will be very 
expensive. Granted. What is money? What is all our property, 
compared with our honor and our liberty?" For most congressmen 
the cost cast a shadow over the army and navy bills. On January 
10 Albert Gallatin sent fiscal proposals to Ezekiel Bacon, chairman 
of the Committee on Ways and Means. Scarcely one remunerative 
area escaped the eye of the Secretary of the Treasury, who pro- 
posed to double import duties, tax salt, levy excises, and institute 
a stamp tax like that which had aroused a furor against Britain in 
1765. Unlike most Yankee Republicans, Bacon opposed naval 
building. When he released Gallatin's letter at the height of the 
battle over frigates, suspicious War Hawks thought he did so to 
kill the naval program. 34 

Bacon's revelations cast a cold douche upon the war spirit. The 
National Intelligencer came to Gallatin's support 5 the Richmond 
Enquirer, although critical of details, suggested that determined 
Virginians would not let a few taxes cool their ardor 5 and some 
reasonable Republicans observed that the unpleasant dose must 
be swallowed to ensure national strength. 85 Otherwise, at least 
until Henry Clay accepted the inevitability of taxation and exerted 
his influence, Republicans almost unanimously denounced Gal- 

3 Annals^ i2th Cong., ist sess.j pp. 8o3~ioo5 fassim, 

34 Ibid., p. 658; Gallatin to Bacon, Jan. 10, 1812, Henry Adams, ed,, The Writ- 
ings of Albert Gallatin (3 vols. 5 Philadelphia, 1879), I, 5015175 Grundy to Jack- 
son, Feb. 12, 1812, Andrew Jackson MSSj Harper to Plumer, Feb. 17, 1812, William 
Plumer MSS, Library of Congress. 

^National Intelligencer, Jan. 28, 18125 Enquirer, Jan. 25, Feb. 8, 14, 1812$ 
Troup to Governor D. B. Mitchell, March 17, 1812, Edmund J. Harden, The Life 
of George M. Troup (Savanah, 1859), p. 107. 

362 



'^ASSEMBLED WISDOM OF THE COUNTRY 5 ' 

latin. William Plumer, Jonathan Roberts, and Felix Grundy 
wanted to postpone taxes until the declaration of war, which alone 
could make them necessary. The Secretary of the Treasury re- 
ceived a letter from a former colleague, Henry Dearborn, report- 
ing that New Englanders ask a why is it necessary to check the 
ardour of the people at so critical a moment, why not postpone 
. . . [most of the] taxes . . . until war shall have actually com- 
menced, then the people will expect to bear such taxes as circum- 
stances shall require. 35 Less restrained critics added charges of 
"Apo staoy and TREACHERY" to attacks upon Gallatin's wis- 
dom - y indeed, many believed the recommendations showed that 
he and his administration desired to avoid war. Young John A. 
Harper swallowed reports that the letter to Bacon had been pre- 
pared in arrangement with Foster, adding, "If reports are true, 
Foster's carriage is frequently seen at Gallatin's house at such hours 
of the night as honest men are asleep." Even a Republican who 
believed that Congress would ultimately vote taxes and then war 
admitted that this "does not seem as palpably true now as a few 
weeks ago. To say that the retrograde step is commenced . . . 
would be saying too much 5 but that the war mercury has sunk a 
little, nobody here can doubt. The letter of the Secretary of the 
Treasury has done this." 30 