

United States, 1791- 1812, American Historical Association, Annual Report, 1936, 
III (Washington, 1941), 318319$ James D. Richardson, ecL, A Compilation of the 
Messages and Papers of the Presidents (Washington, 1897), I, 4965 National In- 
telligencer (Washington), Nov. 14, iSiij Enquirer (Richmond), Nov. 19, iSiij 
Foster #23 to Wellesley, Nov., 12, 1811, FO 5/77. The United States declined to 
accept reparation for the lives lost in the attack, on the theory that no payment 
could compensate for them. The two surviving men from the Chesapeake two had 
died were returned to the deck of the ship from which they had been taken. The 
Admiralty moved very slowly, however, and the seamen were not delivered to the 
Chesapeake, then in Boston harbor, until July n, 1812, a month after the American 
declaration of war. Anthony St. J, Baker 9f n to Castlereagh, July 23, 1812, FO 
5/8*. 

* Aurora (Philadelphia), Feb. 5, 1810. 

20 Annals, i2th Cong., ist sess., pp. 483-484. Augustus Foster reported that in 
a preliminary vote the committee had determined upon convoys, only to be forced 
by John Randolph to reverse this decison. The make-up of the committee, however, 
makes War Hawk defections the critical factor. Foster 9^31 to Wellesley, Dec. 18, 
i8n,FO 5/77. 

355 



''ASSEMBLED WISDOM OF THE COUNTRY'' 

led to an early clash with the Royal Navy, but a majority, includ- 
ing several War Hawks, was unready to go that far. They had 
no desire to open themselves to ridicule by bringing in bellicose 
resolutions and then finding themselves deserted by their own 
party leaders. Finally, at a long committee meeting that lasted 
well into the night, the Secretary of State pledged the administra- 
tion to support a declaration of war in the spring, if measures of 
preparedness did not bring about a British surrender in the mean- 
time. Only after this promise did the committee decide to recom- 
mend military legislation to the House. The news soon spread, 
but many emphasized that the redemption of Monroe's pledge 
was not only conditional but also months away. That the war men 
feared the government would renege is obvious from Grundy's 
account of the meeting with Monroe, in which he said: "Rely, on 
one thing, we have War or Honorable peace before we adjourn or 
certain great personages have produced a state of things which will 
bring them down from their high places, If there be honest men 
enough to tell the truth loudly." 21 Suspicions did not evaporate 
until Madison finally presented a war message to Congress six 
months later. 

The committee report, which bore the name of chairman Peter 
B. Porter, reached the House on November 2,9. Emphasizing the 
threat posed by the Orders in Council, but also dilating on impress- 
ment, the report declared that "the period has arrived, when, in 
the opinion of your committee, it is the sacred duty of Congress to 
call forth the patriotism and resources of the country." The com- 
mittee recommended legislation to bring the regular army up 
to statutory strength, the enlistment of three-year men and other 
volunteers, the approval of drafts of state militia, outfitting of the 
navy, and authorization for merchant ships to arm. 22 Porter's Re- 
port encouraged congressional neophytes like Jonathan Roberts 
and prowar journals like the Richmond Enquirer, frightened 