

The Alexandria Gazette reminded fellow Federalists of the fable 
of the boy who cried "Wolf," but Federalist congressmen pre- 
ferred their own legends, among them a belief that the Republicans 
were too weak to go to war. 15 

The state of the nation made Federalist blindness understand- 
able. As Henry Adams put it, "A passion that needed to be nursed 
for five years before it acquired strength to break into act, could 
not seem genuine to men who did not share it." Of course, fourteen 
of the seventeen state legislatures passed resolutions favoring an 
end of pacifism j this was but a normal and indeed habitual occupa- 
tion of legislators. Of course, War Hawks talked as though war 
was inevitable 5 Federalists knew they were not so confident as 
they seemed. The public seemed resigned rather than bellicose. 
The anger roused by the Little Belt affair, Foster's demands, and 
even Indian warfare (although climaxed by news of Tippecanoe 
shortly after Congress met) soon subsided into sullen dislike of 
Britain. Early in 1812 Serurier reported that the people, although 
ready to face war, did so unenthusiastically. Two months later 
Taylor of Carolina warned Monroe that the country wanted war 
no more than it had wanted to fight France in I798. 16 Federalists 
concluded that the danger of war did not exist, for at times of equal 
or even (in 1807) greater public excitement members of Congress 
had shown no inclination to abandon peace. 

For the first months of the session Augustus Foster viewed the 
situation almost as complacently as the Federalists. Foster lived 
at the center of town, whereas his rival, Serurier, had rented Bar- 
low's house three miles away. The Britisher met everybody, at 

15 Quincy to Otis, Nov. 25, 1811, Otis MSSj Hanson to Jackson, March 7, 1812, 
Francis James Jackson MSS, Public Record Office (FO 353/58-61), FO 353/61; 
Alexandria Gazette , Jan* 22, 1812. 

16 Adams, op. /., VI, 1135 Se'rurier $"42 to Minister of Foreign Relations, Jan. 
12, 1812, AAE, CP, E-U, Vol. LXVII; Taylor to Monroe, Jan. 2, 1812, Monroe 
MSS. 

353 



"ASSEMBLED WISDOM OF THE COUNTRY'' 

official occasions, on visits to Federalist and even War Hawk hos- 
telries, and particularly at his own entertainments. Foster kept 
what Serurier described as "une forte bonne maison," and he some- 
times dined as many as 200 guests at a time, a practice which ex- 
hausted his expense account by mid-December. Federalists and 
all sorts of Republicans attended his parties. Amidst all these 
sources of information, the British minister failed to see any clear 
indication that war impended. In his November reports he sur- 
rounded very qualified hints of possible war with contrary evi- 
dence. Thereafter, even in describing difficult conversations with 
the President, Foster emphasized the ease with which American 
resentment could be turned aside. Almost any offer would draw 
the final sting, he reported in the last dispatch of the year, "pro- 
vided an appearance of conciliation is exhibited." 17 