

The young envoy might have learned something from the re- 
ception of his offer to settle the Chesapeake issue. As early as June, 
1810, Lord Wellesley told William Pinkney that England would 
drop the demand, made through Rose, Erskine, and Jackson, that 
America rescind the proclamation banning British ships from Amer- 
ican waters. The eclat of making a settlement was reserved for the 
new minister to America, and formal instructions were not issued 
until April, 1811. Even then Foster dawdled. At last, just before 
Congress met, he presented the British offer. Madison ignored it 
in the message that greeted the legislature and, after accepting it, 
passed the correspondence on to Congress without a single sign 
of gratification. The National Intelligencer commented in the 
coldest possible fashion, and less official Republican journals sug- 
gested that the British action was "merely an attempt to paralize 
the proceedings of Congress." Foster fatuously reported that the 
settlement was "regarded by NT. Monroe and myself as a kind of 
stepping stone to a general arrangement." 18 He failed to discern 

17 Serurier #4.3 to Minister of Foreign Relations, Jan, 21, 1812, AAE, CP, E-U, 
Vol. LXVIIj Foster to Wellesley, most secret, Dec. 28, 1811, FO 5/77* See also 
Foster $2 0^35 to Wellesley, Nov. 5~Dec. 21, x8ix, ibid. 

18 Pinkney to Smith, private, June 13, 1810, Department of State Archives, Na- 
tional Archives, Despatches, Great Britain, unnumbered volume 5 Wellesley $ra to 
Foster, April 10, 1811, Bernard Mayo, ed., Instructions to the British Ministers to th& 

354 



^ASSEMBLED WISDOM OF THE COUNTRY 5 * 

that, while the administration had to accept an offer that met Amer- 
ican demands, Madison and Monroe had no desire to use it to 
dampen what they considered a useful spirit o antagonism toward 
Britain. 

Although failure of the Chesapeake settlement demonstrated 
that American love could not be purchased with tardy tinsel, dur- 
ing the first three weeks of the session Foster and the Federalists 
seemed correct in minimizing the chances of war. Congress did 
absolutely nothing, the administration failed to stir, and war men 
and bellicose editors became restive. After all, Congress had come 
together with a great bustle in 1807, and the next year the House 
whooped through the noble resolutions presented by George W. 
Campbell. "Strike but the chord that sounds of war, 35 a correspond- 
ent wrote to William Duane's Aurora in 1810, "and we fly as 
regularly to proclamations as Quixotte to arms." 19 Republican 
factionalism, Madison's reputation for hesitation, failure to credit 
the sincerity of men who said they would vote for war when the 
time came all these gave plausibility to the thesis that war was 
very unlikely. 

Nor did the Foreign Affairs Committee's report on Madison's 
message provide clear evidence that Congress desired war. Joseph 
Desha urged the committee to recommend convoys to protect 
American trade with Europe, 20 a step that would certainly have 