

45 A masterpiece of narrative history, untangling this complicated affair, is Samuel 
E. Morison, "The Henry-Crillon Affair of 1812," By Land and By Sea (New York, 
*953)> PP 265-286. Ernest A. Cruikshank, The Political Adventures of John Henry 
(Toronto, 1936), deals with the careers of Henry and Crillon in exhaustive detail. 
Manuscript references to the adventurers are too numerous to cite. Richard B. Davis, 
ed.> Jeffersoman America: Notes on the United States of America . . . by Sir Augus- 
tus John Foster, Bart. (San Marino, 1954), pp. 70 ff., and Georges de Caraman, "Les 

370 



^'ASSEMBLED WISDOM OF THE COUNTRY'' 

At first Federalists suffered while their opponents exulted. 
Young Harper saw, or thought that he saw, Pitkin begin "to kick 
and squirm. . . . Quincy looked pale . . . and was much agi- 
tated as was Tallmadge, Champion and finally there was little 
difference between them, except in Deacon Davenport, on whose 
face I actually saw, not only great drops of sweat, but it really ran 
down copiously on his face." The National Intelligencer burst 
forth with an exultant editorial. Foster flew into a panic, listened 
glumly to Federalist complaints that England had compromised 
them on the eve of success, and endorsed Serurier's reported com- 
ment that "if this event does not produce a war nothing will do 
so." 46 

The tide quickly turned. Even in the debate that followed the 
President's message, Thomas Gholson and William R. Troup con- 
gratulated the Federalists on Henry's inability to produce evidence 
that any of them were disloyal. Led by Quincy, Federalists forced 
Monroe to admit that the Department of State could not tie in- 
dividual Americans to Henry's disclosures. They soon tracked 
down the payments to Henry, and some Republicans joined them 
in protesting the expenditure of $50,000 for his empty reports. 47 
Recovering his sang-froid, Foster visited the White House, where 
he was the center of attention but received no insults from the 
crowd and only courtesy from the President. Ezekiel Bacon urged 
the government to abandon an affair that threatened to backfire. 
Federalist newspapers took the offensive, alleging a trick to in- 
fluence the impending Massachusetts election, charging that noth- 
ing Henry had revealed compared with the activities of Madi- 
son's agents in Spanish Florida, and particularly emphasizing that 
Henry's failure to find Federalists whom he dared trust vindi- 

6tats-Unis II Y a Quarante Ans," Revue Contemforaine, ist Series, III (1852), 
229 if., give the accounts of the British minister and a French attache. 

46 Harper to Plumer, March n, 1812, Plumer MSS; National Intelligencer, March 
10, 1812; Foster $14 to Wellesley, secret, March 12, 1812, FO 5/84. 

^Annals, i2th Cong., ist sess., pp. 11621196$ Quincy to Otis, March 19, 1812, 
and enclosure, Otis MSS; N ties' Register y March 21, 1812; Sentinel of Freedom 
(Newark, N.J.), March 24, 1812. The second volume of the Annals for this session 
bears the misleading subtitle, "i2th Congress, 2nd Session," but this obvious error has 
been corrected here and below. 