JOHN RANDOLPH 
Portrait by John W. Jarvis 




Courtesy, Museum of Fine Arts, Boston 
JOSIAH QUINCY 
Portrait by Gilbert Stuart 



^ASSEMBLED WISDOM OF THE COUNTRY 5 ' 

States as lightly as ever. French corsairs and douaniers the length 
of the Empire continued to harass American commerce. 

Publication o the Henry letters, produced by the administra- 
tion to reveal an intrigue between Federalists and British agents, 
promised at first to provide a psychological equivalent for the 
settlement with France which eluded Madison and Monroe. John 
Henry, an Irishman who became a secret agent for Canadian 
authorities after living for some time in the United States and even 
serving in the United States Army, journeyed to Boston during 
the Embargo to investigate the extent of disaffection there and 
perhaps open regular communication with dissidents. Henry, ac- 
companied by his wife and two young children, was received in 
friendly fashion by leaders of the town, for he had obtained im- 
pressive letters of introduction, had married into a prominent 
Philadelphia family, and was known to some from the days of his 
army service in Boston. The British agent learned that New Eng- 
land detested Jefferson and the Embargo information that he 
could have found in the newspapers but he heard so little re- 
liable secessionist talk that he never dared open himself to any 
Americans. Paid only 200 by Governor-General Craig, rebuffed 
when he sought appointment as spy-cum-consul in Vermont, re- 
fused additional payment when he traveled to London, John 
Henry set out for America to gain revenge upon an ungrateful 
ministry. He planned to sell to the United States government 
his old reports to his British employers. This scheme appears to 
have been suggested by a personable young Frenchman who called 
himself Count Edouard de Crillon (but was actually an experi- 
enced rogue named Soubiron), with whom Henry became friendly 
during his trip to London. Crillon offered to manage negotiations 
with the American authorities. 

Stopping in Boston only long enough to procure letters of in- 
troduction from Governor Gerry, Henry and Crillon proceeded 
to Washington. Crillon introduced himself to the French minis- 
ter and offered to serve his country by securing publication of the 
incriminating documents. Serurier was too fastidious to enjoy in- 

369 



''ASSEMBLED WISDOM OF THE COUNTRY'* 

trigue, and he was Intelligent enough to doubt Crillon's identity. 
(The count later sought money from Foster to keep the docu- 
ments secret. Foster, recognizing him as an impostor, exposed 
inaccuracies in Crillon's story at a dinner to which prominent War 
Hawks were invited.) Still, the French envoy felt he could not 
cast aside an opportunity to forward the war movement. He gave 
his blessing to the conversations Crillon opened with the Secretary 
of State. Serurier's recommendations, Gerry's letters, and reiter- 
ated assurances from the sottish Senator Brent, who became an 
intimate of Crillon's, caused Monroe and Madison to accept the 
man doubted by almost everyone else in town. Early in February 
Monroe agreed to pay $50,000 for copies of reports to Craig which 
supposedly incriminated Great Britain and the Federalists. This 
sum, subsequently transferred to Crillon by Henry for a non- 
existent chateau in France, represented the entire available secret 
service fund, and it was paid for letters Monroe had never once 
been allowed to see. When Monroe received the copies, he dis- 
covered that they were filled with emendations, omissions, and 
rows of asterisks designed to hint that incriminating passages had 
been removed. The Secretary asked Henry to name Federalists 
who had engaged in treasonable conversations with him. The 
traitor demurred, self -righteously declaring that while he sought 
revenge upon ingrates in London he would not compromise Amer- 
ican friends who had confided in him. Presumably Madison and 
Monroe realized that their eagerness had betrayed themj there 
was no proof of a conspiracy. Perhaps they might better have given 
up the game at this point. But at least the letters showed that a 
British spy had visited America. Therefore, on March 9, just after 
the House endorsed Bacon's tax proposals, the President sent the 
Henry papers to Congress, accompanied by a letter solicited from 
Henry to suggest that no money had been paid for them. 45 