

Throughout the debates the specter of Franco-American rela- 
tions continually appeared. Honest men found it difficult to sup- 
port an active policy toward Britain while ignoring Napoleonic 
insults. They knew that the country's unity would be incomplete 
while France's crimes counterbalanced England's. Men deter- 
mined upon peace, whatever the price, exploited the obvious argu- 
ment that both European powers treated American commerce so 
badly that a contest with one alone was unjustifiable. "Shall we 
confine our indignation to injuries received from one quarter," 
the Alexandria Gazette asked, "and be totally insensible to the 
deadly blows received from another?" By the beginning of 1812 
few could maintain that the Berlin and Milan decrees had been 
repealed in more than the most technical sense, ^nd most Ameri- 
cans believed they had not been repealed at afl. In July, 1811, 

41 Bayard to Andrew Bayard, Jan. 25, 1812, Elizabeth Donnan, ed., Papers of 
James A. Bayard, 1796181$, American Historical Association, Annual Report, 1913, 
II (Washington, 1915), 1905 Madison to Jefferson, March 6, 1812, Gaillard Hunt, 
ed., The Writings of James Madison (9 vols.j New York, 1900-1910), VIII, 182. 

366 



OF THE COUNTRY'' 

watching events from St. Petersburg, John Quincy Adams wrote 
that "France had already violated her own engagements in a 
manner which absolved us from all obligation." 42 For tactical rea- 
sons most War Hawks denied that French repeal fell short of 
America's legitimate demands. In their hearts they had to agree 
with Adams. 

President Madison also concealed his misgivings. Naturally, 
the President had reasons of pride for refusing to confess that he 
had been tricked by the Duke of Cadore's imperial master, even 
the admission that he had taken an unsuccessful long-shot gamble 
would be uncomfortable. Moreover, the United States govern- 
ment had made the alleged French repeal the most important 
basis for its demand that Britain withdraw the Orders in Council, 
and it could not abandon one without abandoning the other. Not 
realizing that the policies of Jefferson and himself had convinced 
England that she need not fear war, Madison hoped that visible 
American determination would drive Great Britain into surrender. 
A retrograde step in French relations would lessen this already 
feeble hope. At Paris and Washington American diplomacy there- 
fore combined private complaints with an absolute unwillingness 
to admit, either in public or in conversations with British repre- 
sentatives, that French repeal was questionable. Secretary Monroe 
had to argue, in successive interviews with Foster and Serurier, 
first that the decrees were and then that they were not repealed. 
Still, this ludicrous policy was almost the only one open to Madi- 
son, caged in as he was. 

Joel Barlow, who arrived at Paris in September, 1811, utterly 
failed in his mission. Not for two months did Napoleon condescend 
to receive him. Even then the Emperor replied to Barlow's felicita- 
tions with remarks that contained, as the American put it, "some 
symptoms of the same obliquity which has been so long continued," 
This, as well as the very belated negative reply to his protest against 
past and current treatment of American commerce, should have 
shown Barlow that the situation called for direct action. Instead, 