

42 Alexandria Gazette, Nov. 7, 18115 Adams to Thomas B. Adams, July 31, 1811, 
Adams Family MSS (microfilm) , Massachusetts Historical Society, Vol. CXXXV. 

367 



''ASSEMBLED WISDOM OF THE COUNTRY'' 

the poet-diplomat allowed himself to be diverted when the French, 
seizing upon an isolated passage in his communication, offered to 
negotiate a new commercial treaty. Barlow failed to see that, at 
best, this injected new, confusing issues into Franco- American 
discussions, and that, at worst, the French offer was a smoke screen 
(as it actually was) to hide unwillingness to settle larger problems. 
From December onward the American talked of little but a com- 
mercial treaty. Madison warned him that, until France made com- 
pensation for past seizures, "there can be neither cordiality nor 
confidence here 5 nor any restraint from self redress in any justi- 
fiable mode of effecting it; nor any formal Treaty on the subject." 
In the search for his will-o'-the-wisp, however, Joel Barlow con- 
tinued to turn away from America's deepest concerns. 43 

At home, Madison and Monroe had no more success. Both 
officials warned Serurier time and again that effective action 
against England depended upon satisfactory relations with the 
French Empire. The climax of these conversations came on New 
Year's Day, when Napoleon's envoy paid a formal call at the 
White House. Bitterly criticizing continued French seizures, the 
President angrily declared that "such proceedings were in his 
eyes just as definite acts of hostility as were those of England, 
against which the Republic was taking up arms." Fortunately for 
Serurier, the swirling crowd separated them before he had to ab- 
sorb any more presidential ire. In an equally spirited conversation 
at the State Department, Monroe threatened to call off the cam- 
paign against England. On French repeal, he said, "all the present 
system of the administration is based, and ... if it were not 
really unconditional, . . . war . . . with England [would be- 
come] very imprudent, and without purpose." 4 * Serurier advised 
his superiors to make some gesture to inspirit the Americans, and 
Bassano so urged Napoleon, but the Emperor valued the United 

43 Barlow #3 to Monroe, Nov. 21, 1811, Despatches, France, Vol. XIII ; Barlow 
to Bassano, Nov. 10, i8n AAE, CP, E-U, Vol. LXIV 5 Bassano to Barlow, Dec. 27, 
1811, ibid.; Madison to Barlow, Feb. 24, 1812, Hunt, of. cit. y VIII, 177-182. 

44 Serurier #41 to Minister of Foreign Relations, Tan. 2, 1812, AAE, CP, E-U, 
Vol. LXVII. 

368 




Courtesy, National Portrait Gallery, London 

CHARLES JAMES FOX ALEXANDER BARING 

Portrait by Karl A. Hickel Portrait by Thomas Lawrence 



SAMUEL WHITBREAD 
Portrait by John H of pier 



HENRY BROUGHAM 

Portrait by James Lonsdale 
Courtesy, National Portrait Gallery, London 




JAMES MADISON 
Portrait by John Vanderlyti 



JOHN C. CALHOUN 

Portrait by 
Charles B. King 




HENRY CLAY 

Portrait by an unknown artist 




