

Party doctrine and personal preference caused President Madi- 
son to follow a silent course. Republican constitutional theory 
glorified the legislature at the expense of the executive, providing 
an excuse for presidential silence on the question of war. This 
silence angered, among others, Speaker Clay, who bluntly told 
the administration: "Altho' the power of declaring War belongs 
to the Congress, I do not see that it falls less within the scope of 
the President's constitutional duty to recommend . . . measures 
. . . than any other which, being suggested by him, they alone 
can adopt." In dealing with legislative problems Madison showed 
none of the boldness, even rashness, that led him to accept the as- 
surances of Erskine and Cadore. In the war session he did nothing 
to prevent preparedness legislation, but he also did far less than 

4 William Crawford to Madison, March 28, 1812, James Madison MSS, Library 
of Congress; Thomas Lehre to Madison, March 30, 1812, ibid.; James Barbour to 
Madison, March 30, 1812, ibid. 

5 Calhoun to Macbride, March 22, April 18, 1812, Robert L. Meriwether, ed., 
The Papers of John C. Calhoun, I (Columbia, S.C., 1959), 955 99100. 

379 



WAR AT LAST 

he might have done to encourage it. In pacific times this intelli- 
gent man might have been a successful president. But he was not 
cut in the heroic mold. "Madison may be good," an editorialist 
commented, "but in a national view, there is a great distinction be- 
tween Good, and GOOD ENOUGH." 6 Left to himself, with a 
Congress like the Tenth, James Madison would have been a com- 
plete failure in 1812. 

This is not to say that because he lacked determination when 
dealing with his Cabinet, his party, and the legislature the Presi- 
dent took a cowardly, indecisive view of America's position. His 
enemies accused him of attempting to preserve the support of 
both War Hawks and peace men for the election of 1 8 12 or, later, 
suggested that he supported war only after War Hawks threat- 
ened to prevent his reelection. 7 This was nonsense. Since the very 
beginning of the session Madison's analysis had been based upon 
more honorable grounds. It combined simplicity and complexity, 
optimism and pessimism in baffling degrees, but it was consistently 
maintained. 

Toward the end of November Madison told Foster that for 
America "anything was better than remaining in such a state" as 
the existing one. (Madison naturally failed to add that the state 
of the nation owed much to his own activities as secretary of state 
and president.) If war became the only alternative, the President 
would face it. Summarizing his position, although characteris- 
tically bestowing the power of choice upon Congress and directing 
his musings to an American safely distant at St. Petersburg, the 
President wrote that the question "simply is, whether all the 
trade to which the orders [in Council] are . . . applied, is to be 
abandoned, or the hostile operation of them, be hostilely resisted. 
The apparent disposition is certainly not in favor of the first 