

371 



^'ASSEMBLED WISDOM OF THE COUNTRY'' 

cated the party from the stale charge of treason. 48 Aside from 
causing a Federalist boycott of the White House which reduced 
grocery and liquor bills, the President benefited in no way from 
the disclosures. He had made the most stupid if not the most im- 
portant misstep of his presidential career. 

As a result of the Henry fiasco, Foster returned with renewed 
confidence to his original diagnosis, that the Republicans were 
bluffing and had no intention of going to war. Firmness on Brit- 
ain's part, he reported, "appears likely to be attended with the 
very best effects." The war threat did not trouble the commercial 
world. Long past the turn of the year, ships regularly departed 
for Europe and insurance rates remained steady. This, said Foster, 
showed "how little in earnest the Government are supposed to be 
by the mercantile part of the Community." Over and over again, 
Federalists congratulated themselves on the perspicuity of their 
initial analysis. From the first, Federalists had argued that war 
talk was "rather manufactured for exportation than home con- 
sumption being destined to go to Europe ... to flatter France 
and terrify Britain." Now they asked, "What reason have we to 
conclude that they are more serious now than they were several 
years ago? . . . We have heard the same sort of gasconade in 
Congress more than three thousand times." 49 

In Congress, War Hawks angrily denied the bluff charge. Out- 
side it, their allies' comments showed that they really feared it 
might be true. "You went to the house-tops, and proclaimed re- 
sistance," a bellicose editor, Thomas Ritchie, reminded congress- 
men. "You talked big $ you deprecated submission and threatened 
war." Ritchie warned that those who deserted now would be held 
responsible* by their constituents for the destruction of the country's 
reputation j Jonathan Russell, who knew he would have to endure 

48 Journal entry, March n, 1812, Foster journal, Augustus J. Foster MSS, Library 
of Congress 5 Bacon to Gallatin, March 15, 1812, Gallatin MSS 5 Columbian Centinel, 
March 18, 21, 1812$ Alexandria Gazette, March 13, 18125 Federal Republican, 
March n, 12, 18125 Rhode Island American and General Advertiser (Providence), 
March 17, 1812; Connecticut Courant (Hartford), April i, 1812; Foster to Wellesley, 
separate and secret, March 24, 1812, FO 5/85. 

4& Foster #7 to Wellesley, secret, Jan. 31, 1812, FO 5/845 Taggart to Rev. John 
Taylor, Dec. 2, 1811, Haynes, o^>. cit., p. 3655 Alexandria Gazette, April 14, 1812. 

372 



'^ASSEMBLED WISDOM OF THE COUNTRY 5 ' 

the taunts of all London i America backed down, wrote, "I hope 
it will not prove to be merely a show. I should indeed hang my 
head if there were any retrog[r] ade movement after so much blus- 
tering." 50 The War Hawks were not certain of their fair-weather 
friends. 

The aura of insincerity sapped the effectiveness of the threat to 
England. Senator Giles had less attractive reasons for insisting 
that the new army be expanded from 10,000 to 25,000 men, but a 
good one was his assertion that the impression of weakness, "the 
necessary result of our former measures, has become so general, 
both at home and abroad, that we have much to do to retrieve our 
lost reputation." Dr. Stevenson Archer, a young War Hawk from 
Maryland, warned members of the House that Britain was un- 
likely to be impressed by anything short of force. "She knows too 
well," he said, "your conduct heretofore, to believe you are in 
earnest." 51 The campaign of intimidation failed in 1807; there 
was no reason to believe it would succeed in 1 8 12. 