

Nevertheless, in ways that few foresaw, the events from No- 
Vember to March contributed to the coming of war. They convinced 
Britain that the United States was merely repeating a stale and 
rather ineffective drama, and discussion of the orders proceeded 
under the assumption that neither a new nor a speedy denouement 
need be anticipated. On the other hand, the legislation passed by 
Congress created a sort of momentum which eventually imprisoned 
many who believed that they had preserved their freedom of 
action. In March a Federalist, Abijah Bigelow, exulted that "the 
poor souls have got themselves into a sad dilemma, they know not 
how to go forward, or how to retreat, and what is still more dis- 
graceful they have no settled plan whfcfo they mean to pursue, they 
depend upon the chapter of accidents.^ jtJnfortunately for Bigelow 
and his friends, "the chapter of accidents" pushed moderate Re- 
publicans and bluffers toward the War Hawks. When congres- 
sional posturing failed to bring about British concessions, when 

50 Enquirer , March 27, 18125 Russell to John S. Smith, Feb. n> 1812, Samuel 
Smith MSS. 

51 Annals , i2th Cong., ist sess., pp. 4.1, 561. 

373 



CC ASSEMBLED WISDOM OF THE COUNTRY 55 

the country rang with charges that Congress had never intended 
to go to war, when humiliating surrender stared the scarecrow men 
in the face, a reluctant vote for war became the only palatable 
alternative. After all the oratory, Jonathan Russell observed, 
Congress must go on or "the notoriety we shall have given to our 
cowardice by our blustering will expose us to the injustice & con- 
tumely & the contempt of every nation which will condescend to 
take the trouble to spurn or plunder us." 52 Preparedness agitation 
worked in a way certainly not anticipated by Federalists and mod- 
erate Republicans who abetted it. Probably not even the War 
Hawks understood the long-range implications of the campaign 
they spearheaded. 

In the first months of 1812 the odds on war baffled everyone, 
both because of evidences of bluffing and because, as Taggart noted, 
"the war fever ... has its hot and cold fits." "The War Chariot 
drags on heavily," the Columbian Centinel noted toward the end 
of January, and George Poindexter, the delegate from the Missis- 
sippi Territory, was almost alone in predicting eventual war. Felix 
Grundy feared betrayal. So did George M. Troup of Georgia, 
although he noted that "nothing short of war or free commerce 
. . . can satisfy the expectations of the Southern people, who have 
been bearing the brunt of the restrictive system from the begin- 
ning." At the beginning of February Federalists Taggart and Reed 
became blindly enthusiastic and estimated that not more than half 
a dozen representatives were ready to vote for war. Randolph was 
more doubtful. James A. Bayard, a cautious Federalist who feared 
that the doldrums might merely presage a new storm, neverthe- 
less concluded: "One can discover very little war spirit in either 
House of Congress. And yet the members will tell you very coldly, 
that war is inevitable. But I have found no one willing to declare 
war and very few to adopt any measure of hostile character." 53 
War prospects appeared very slim. 