

politics. One paper pointed out that the spring sun had already 
dried the roads, and it asked why troops had not been raised and 
directed northward to take advantage of the perfect campaigning 
weather. Steadfast as ever for war, the Lexington Re-porter noted 
with disapproval, "Ever since her sailing the cant word has been, 
the Hornet, the Hornet what a sting she will bring on her re- 
turn! !" The Reporter wryly repeated a Federalist jibe that the 
Hornet would never return, giving the Republicans an excuse for 
permanent inactivity. 56 

When Washington's most beautiful season arrived, the only 
storms to be seen lay on the brows of troubled congressmen. The 
autumn had been pleasant, with good pheasant shooting enjoyed 
by James A. Bayard and Augustus Foster, who exchanged political 
information as they hunted 5 the winter had been brief but cold, 
permitting sleighing in the usually snow-free District. By the mid- 
dle of March frogs were piping in the little creek that crossed 
Pennsylvania Avenue below the Capitol, and with the change of 
seasons Foster expanded his entertainments, which no longer 
needed to be entirely indoors. Now he reported dinners of up to 
500 persons, and it seemed that he meant to feed the entire pop- 
ulation of Washington if that would lessen the chances of war. 
Four months had passed since Congress met, and yet no one could 
argue that the nation was prepared for war, psychologically or 
materially. Impractical army legislation, a refusal to expand the 
navy, grudging approval of the principle of new taxes these were 
almost as useless as no preparation at al|. In March the nation was 
as far from war as it had been at the beginning of November. Or 
so at least it seemed. 

56 National Intelligencer, March 19, 18125 Aurora, March n, 18125 Sentinel of 
Freedom, March 10, 18125 Reporter (Lexington, Ky.)> March 21, 1812. 



376 



CHAPTER 



XI 



WAR AT LAST 



"What a Ridiculous Farce has been played off in the Face of the 
Nation," a former congressman expostulated as March ended. 
". . . why Sir, Congress have made themselves so Ridiculous and 
insignificant that all their War Measures are regarded . . . just 
as men would Regard Boys cracking Nuts at [a] Distance." 1 
March saw the nadir. From then on, prodded by the threat of dis~ 
grade. Congress moved slowly and sometimes erratically toward 
wat% The declaration passed by a narrow margin, and many of the 
majority went along with deep misgivings. .The people obviously 
did not want war, and if further delay had been permitted their 
voice would have prevented it. Still, war came, bringing the trials 
and the glory (here, infrequent glory) which follow in the train 
of Mars. America embarked upon a second war for independence, 
a war to recover the nation's honor and affirm her claim to act as 
an independent power. 

In midafternoon on March 20, 1812, Lieutenant Green, borne 

1 James Kelly to Pickering, March 30, 1812, Timothy Pickering- MSS, Massa- 
chusetts Historical Society, Vol. XXX. 