

377 



WAR AT LAST 

across the Atlantic by the Gleaner, chartered at a cost o 5,000, 
arrived at Washington with instructions from Wellesley to Foster. 
Unless Wellesley, who had already offered his resignation, de- 
sired to embarrass his successor, expensive haste had no purpose. 
The instructions repeated the old, old declaration that, French 
repeal being fraudulent, Britain would continue the Orders in 
Council. They rebuked Foster for entertaining ideas of compro- 
mise. 2 The strategy of bluff appeared to have failed. War talk 
recommenced. "There is," Hezekiah Niles declared, a no middle 
course left for the United States to pursue. The embargo system, 
at once the safest and best, has been disgraced by the time-serving 
conduct of its friends war or submission present themselves 3 and 
all that sophistry can devise, the fear of [un] popularity invent, 
or personal pusillanimity dictate, cannot offer another alternative." 
William Duane, visiting Washington to sell a house to his rival 
editor, Joseph Gales, thought the future far less clear. And, al- 
though Madison recommended and Congress passed a general em- 
bargo within a fortnight of the Hornet's arrival, Louis Serurier 
doubted the Republicans 3 sticking power. With some relief but 
not complete conviction, he soon reported that Madison's journal, 
the National Intelligencer, had adopted a bellicose line. 3 

The President's embargo message, as the full story will show, 
gave an illusory appearance of decisive leadership. Still, after a 
winter during which the White House had. most closely resem- 
bled the oracle at Delphi, any appearance of forthrightness took on 
significance. Since his November message the President had pretty 
much kept his own counsel. In January, to expose England's rigid- 
ity, he submitted to Congress correspondence between Monroe and 

2 Journal entry, March 20, 1812, Foster journal, Augustus J. Foster MSS, Library 
of Congressj Wellesley $i to Foster, Jan. 28, 1812, Bernard Mayo, ed., Instructions 
to the British Ministers to the United States, 1701-2812, American Historical 
Association, Annual Report, 1936, III (Washington, 1941), 34.03445 Wellesley 
#2 to Foster, secret, Jan. 28, 1812, ibid., pp. 344-346. 

3 Harper to Bartlett, March 22, 1812, Josiah Bartlett MSS, Library of Congress; 
Niles 3 Weekly Register (Baltimore), April 4, 1812$ Duane to Jefferson, July 17, 
1812, Worthington C. Ford, ed., "Letters of William Duane," Massachusetts Historical 
Society, Proceedings^ 2d Series, XX (1907), 3505 Serurier #52, #53 to Minister 
of Foreign Relations, April 9, 19, 1812, Archives des Affaires trangeres, Corre- 
spondance Politique, tats-Unis (photostats, Library of Congress), Vol. LXVII. 

378 



WAR AT LAST 

Foster 5 in March he made public the Henry letters, with conse- 
quences that reflected upon his good sense and harmed the war 
movement. Otherwise the President acted more like William Mc- 
Kinley in 1898 than James Knox Polk in 1846, and War Hawks 
and peace men both claimed him. Republicans pleaded for a clear 
lead, and late in March several imploring letters reached the 
White House within a few days. 4 The embargo message, an ap- 
parent answer to this prayer, did not convince suspicious men. In 
March John C. Calhoun temporarily abandoned his doubts of the 
administration., writing, "Their Zeal and intelligence can not now 
be doubted. 55 Shortly after the message his doubts returned, and 
he commented, "Our President tho a man of amiable manners 
and great talents, has not I fear those commanding talents, which 
are necessary to controul those about him. . . . He reluctantly 
gives up the system of peace. It is to be hoped, that as war is now 
seriously determined on, the Executive department will move with 
much more vigour. Without it it is impossible for Congress to pro- 
ceed." 5 A single message extorted by demanding legislators could 
not destroy Madison's reputation for weakness. 