

6 Clay endorsement on Clay to Monroe, March 15, 1812, James F. Hopkins, ed., 
The Papers of Henry Clay, I (Lexington, Ky., 1959), 637; Virginia Patriot (Rich- 
mond), May 12, 1812. For this and the subsequent paragraphs I am indebted to Theo- 
dore C. Smith, "War Guilt in 1812," Massachusetts Historical Society, Proceedings, 
LXIV (1932), 319345) and Irving Brant, James Madison: the President (In- 
dianapolis, 1956), passim, though my interpretation of Madison's position differs 
sharply from their interpretations. 

7 Brant, op. cit., pp. 452 if., convincingly demolishes this old canard. 

380 



WAR AT LAST 

alternative, though it is more than probable, that if the second 
should be adopted, the execution o it will be put off till the close 
o the Session approaches." Not a single piece of reputable evi- 
dence suggests that the President abandoned this conviction at 
any time, although he reserved the right to decide later whether 
hostility should be shown with a fly whisk, a club, or a sword. 
When Foster described Monroe as a a mild moderate man, . . . 
with whom I am happy to say it has been my good fortune to be 
on the best terms," he really was indirectly comparing the Secre- 
tary and the less complaisant President. On April I, just at the time 
here being discussed, Foster scribbled in his diary, "go to the Presi- 
dent's He very warlike, calls our orders tantamount to Letters 
of marque." 8 But if he spoke freely to Foster, Madison never 
made his position clear enough to give direction to Congress, and 
throughout the winter, while resignedly prepared to go to war, 
the President hoped for some acceptable solution to the nation's 
problems which would make war unnecessary. 

As Bernard Mayo has observed, the President "seemed less in- 
tent upon harnessing the chariot of war than upon driving the old 
coach of diplomacy." He combined warnings and invitations in 
his conversations with Foster. So frequent were his suggestions that 
Britain, without doing serious damage to herself, might modify 
her restrictions upon commerce in a way palatable to the United 
States, that Foster finally reported: "The name of the Orders in 
Council has become more objectionable to him than the sub- 
stance." Undoubtedly the British envoy misunderstood Madison, 
who surely required benefits of substance as well as of form. On 
the other hand the Chief Executive would almost certainly have 
accepted an accommodation that did not concede all that some 
Americans desired. Even when he recommended an embargo to 
Congress, a step the political world interpreted as a harbinger of 
war, the President went out of his way to inform Foster that timely 

8 Foster #25 to Wellesley, Nov. 21, 1811, Foreign Office Archives, Public Record 
Office, FO 5/775 Madison to Adams, private, Nov. 15, 1811, Gaillard Hunt, ed., The 
Writings of James Madison (9 vols.$ New York, 19001910), VIII, 1675 Foster 
#14. to Wellesley, secret, March 12, 1812, FO 5/845 journal entry, April i, 1812, 
Foster MSS. 