

20 Monroe to Gales, [April 3, 1812?], Monroe MSS, NYPL; National Intelli- 
gencer (Washington), April 7, 9, 14, 18125 Mayo, Henry Clay, p. 506. 

387 



WAR AT LAST 

course of policy intended to be pursued." Federalist analysts di- 
vided into three groups. Some believed that, the plan of bluff 
having failed, a our Government has no choice left but either to 
recede from the ground they have taken or proceed to the last 
resort. . . . The high sense of honour which the advocates of the 
present measures profess forbid a retreat [ 5 ] there is therefore no 
alternative only to fight." Others simply confessed themselves 
baffled. An important part of the party, including the two leaders, 
Quincy and Bleecker, still refused to believe the Republicans were 
in earnest. "The levies do not progress, no important strength is 
proposed to the fortification of our seaboard, no addition to our 
navy, no plan for arming our merchantmen is ... suggested," 
Quincy wrote. "Can any man believe ... an Embargo, accom- 
panied by such a state of things is preparatory to war?" On the 
floor of the House, a month after the embargo, Bleecker declared, 
"No, sir, rely upon it there will be, there can be, no war . . . 
within sixty days. Whatever may be thought of it here, the peo- 
ple know that we cannot go to war, at the expiration of the em- 
bargo. . . . They think . . . that for the Government to go to 
war in our present unprepared state, would be little short of an 
act of treason." 21 

The Federalists had no cohesive policy of their own. Senator 
Chauncey Goodrich wanted the party to announce its own plan 
for protecting commerce. Others accepted the prospect of war, cer- 
tain that it would ruin Republicanism and at least bring to an end 
the detested policy of commercial restrictions. Quincy convinced 
himself that the administration had, all along, simply sought to 
smuggle a permanent embargo in through the back door, and he 
abandoned the policy of self-restraint for open opposition. "I 
think," he wrote, "the present state of things, which administra- 
tion will continue, if they can, worse, both to morals, & to liberty 
than war with any nation." Still others, most notably Philip B. 



States Gazette (Philadelphia), April 15, 18125 Taggart to Pickering, 
April 3, 1812, Pickering MSS, Vol. XXX 5 Quincy to Wolcott, April 15, 1812, Wol- 
cott Family MSS, Connecticut Historical Society, Vol. XXIV $ Annals, i2th Cong., 
ist sess., pp. 13801381. 

388 



WAR AT LAST 

Key, thought a quiet course least likely to provoke the Republi- 
cans into war. Federalists agreed only to refuse to subscribe to the 
loans Gallatin sought. Wealthy Bostonians, the Columbian Cen- 
tinel explained, "lend no money to the ruling faction, for the same 
reason that they would not lend swords to the tenants of a lunatic 
hospital." 22 This decision apart. Federalists milled in confusion 
as deep as that within Republican ranks. 

Augustus John Foster listened to Federalists of all opinions, 
continued to entertain even the most determined War Hawks, and 
frequently visited Madison and Monroe. The embargo did not 
trouble him, and at the end of April he reported, "My hopes of 
a favourable issue . . . continue to increase." (In this same dis- 
patch he even went so far as to ask for a six-month leave of ab- 
sence, since business was at a stand! ) Not until May 3 did he sug- 
gest that Madison might support the use of force. Almost imme- 
diately afterward he hazarded a guess that "the Bubble will soon 
burst. I am assailed on every side with tremendous Stories but the 
ruling party seems to be in a State of Desperation & if we refuse 
them pabulum to their rage they must burst with the Violence of 