

39 1 



WAR AT LAST 

the emptiness of hopes for French sympathy during a war with 
Britain, the hazards seemed far more important. Late in the spring 
the first election returns began to come in. Ultimately, although 
Madison won reelection and some antiwar congressmen were re- 
tired, only the feebleness and the lack of cohesion of the Federalist- 
Clintonian opposition prevented a Republican disaster. Such War 
Hawks as William Widgery, John Adams Harper, and Burwell 
Bassett went down to defeat. Of course, most elections took place 
after the incapacity of Madison's war leadership had become patent, 
and after, too, it could be seen that the nation had been thrust un- 
prepared into a war. Certainly, however, the people of the United 
States did not share the gay bellicosity of leaders who by guile, 
threats, patriotic appeals, and the favor of fortune managed to 
carry the nation into war in June, 1812. The War Hawks were 
not borne forward by a rising tide of public sentiment. Rather did 
they seize the last possible moment before an ebb should leave 
them exposed on the beach. 

At no time, even when war sentiment was at its peak, did en- 
thusiasm sweep the nation. In January Louis Serurier wrote: "This 
war promises well ; it is not made with enthusiasm; it is coldly 
undertaken. Honor may decide the Chiefs of the Nation ; but the 
Citizens make up their minds according to their interest. . . . 
They regretfully take up arms; they take them up sluggishly; but 
they will not easily put them down and not without being satis- 
fied on points which England may find it difficult to abandon," A 
foreigner might be able to afford such a cool view, but the lack 
of enthusiasm did not please War Hawks. Some hoped that Eng- 
land could be provoked into an attack which would inflame the 
country. For the most part, war men hoped their own perfervid 
speeches would raise "the (too sluggish) people to their own stand- 
ard of Insanity," as an acid Federalist put it. They hoped that 
patriotic emotions would rally Americans behind them, once armed 
conflict had actually begun. 26 

26 Serurier #42 to Minister of Foreign Relations, Jan. 12, 1812, AAE, CP, E-U, 
Vol. LXVIIj Reed to Pickering, April 25, 1812, Pickering MSS, Vol. XXX. In one 
of his many brilliant passages, Henry Adams (History of the United States during the 
Administrations of Jefferson and Madison [9 vols.j New York, 1889-1891], VI, 

39 2 



WAR AT LAST 

Some war sentiment existed. Congressmen were not so foolish 
as to proceed without any public support at all. Nearly a dozen 
state legislatures passed resolutions for the defense of American 
rights, and mass meetings endorsed equally bellicose sentiments. 
Circumstances sometimes vitiated their impact, as the Virginia ex- 
ample shows. In January the House of Delegates resolved that 
"the period has now arrived when feace, as we now have it, is 
disgraceful, and war is honorable." But Taylor of Caroline said 
none of his neighbors desired war, and the best Jefferson could 
report was that "all regret that there is cause for war, but all con- 
sider it as now necessary." The Valley, stronghold of anti-Republi- 
canism, opposed war. In April Norfolk's congressman, a frequent 
truant from Washington, found his home town hoping for peace. 
In June Senator Giles brought forward Richmond and Man- 
chester petitions declaring that, if unfortunately the nation's honor 
made war imperative, it should be declared against France as well 
as England. 27 