

Sentiment for a double war (or "triangular war," as it came to 
be called) was widespread. The Kentucky legislature specifically 
attacked both major belligerents, and four other legislatures re- 
ferred to France by implication. A mass meeting at Charleston, 
South Carolina, attended by Federalists (with Charles Cotes- 
worth Pinkney in the van) and Republicans, declared that both 
Britain and France had given adequate cause for war. 28 Almost 

210211) observes: "The experiment of thrusting- the country into war to inflame 
it, as crude ore might be thrown into a furnace, was avowed by the party leaders, 
from President Madison downward, and was in truth the only excuse for a course 
otherwise resembling an attempt at suicide. Many nations have gone to war in pure 
gayety of heart} but perhaps the United States were first to force themselves into a 
war they dreaded, in the hope that the war itself might create the spirit they lacked." 

27 Annals, i2th Cong., ist sess., pp. 112114; Taylor to Monroe, Jan. 2, March 
12, May 10, 1812, William E. Dodd, ed., "Letters of John Taylor, of Caroline 
County, Virginia," John P. Branch Papers, II (Richmond, 1908), 3^7^339 5 Jefferson 
to Nelson, April 2, 1812, Andrew A. Lipscomb and Albert E. Bergh, eds,, The 
Writings of Thomas Jefferson (Memorial ed.; 20 vols. ; Washington, 19031904), 
XIII, 1385 Charles H. Ambler, Sectionalism in Virginia from 1776 to 1861 (Chicago, 
1910), pp. 9293; Davis, o$. cit., p. 945 Dice R. Anderson, William B. Giles 
(Menasha, Wise., 1914), pp. 181-182. 

28 Annals, i2th Cong., ist sess., p. 10205 John H. Wolfe, Jeffersonian Democracy 
in South Carolina, James Sprunt Studies in History and Political Science, Vol. XXIV, 
no. i (Chapel Hill, 1940), p. 247. 

393 



WAR AT LAST 

every set of resolutions emphasized American honor. "We are a 
Humbled & degraded Nation," a Baltimorean wrote Henry Clay, 
"and If the Stand that is now Taken is departed from, Without 
bringing England to Justice, we may as well give up our Republi- 
can Government & have a Despot to rule over us. 53 29 The Speaker 
doubtless agreed, but he and his colleagues knew that many of 
their supporters found it difficult to understand why British in- 
sults, but not French, required war. 

The opponents of war outnumbered its supporters, whether 
troubled or untroubled. Lowndes, former Congressman Jackson, 
old John Adams (now Republican in his sympathies), and many 
other backers of war admitted this. Joseph Nicholson warned his 
brother-in-law, Albert Gallatin, that the "apathy of the Nation 
is not yet thrown off and never will be," and Jefferson's former 
minister to Paris, Robert R. Livingston, became nearly apoplectic 
in describing the crisis into which Congress had thrust the Re- 
publican party by insisting upon war. 30 There were stirrings in 
North Carolina, Maryland, and other Republican states. Josiah 
Bartlett, who approved of war in principle, found his New Hamp- 
shire constituents hopeful that a declaration could be postponed 
until fall, and he came to share their sentiments. In Pennsylvania, 
whose congressional delegation provided the largest group of war 
men, public opinion turned sharply. Petitions flooded Congress, 
and just before the declaration of war Dr. Benjamin Rush pre- 
dicted that the state would go Federalist in the fall elections. Aside 
from the West (and even here Ohio was a notable exception) and 
perhaps Georgia, not a single state, even the traditionally Re- 
publican ones, failed to provide evidence of antiwar feeling. 31 