

13 Unsigned [Randolph?] memorandum, March 30-31, 1812, Samuel Smith MSS, 
Library of Congress. 

384 



WA R AT LAST 

House. 14 This vote, like the even more discouraging one on the 
tax resolutions, left it very uncertain that a majority for war could 
be attained. 

The House bill sought, belatedly, to cut off the flow of Ameri- 
can supplies to Spain and Portugal, as several legislators stated 
in the debates. The bill also aimed to clear American ships from 
the ocean where they would be easy prey for British cruisers when 
war came, and this purpose too was openly avowed. Finally, the 
embargo aimed to convince the American and perhaps the British 
people that Congress was in earnest. Not one of these purposes 
was completely achieved. The Senate weakened the embargo 5 it 
was almost everywhere evaded 5 and, at least in the days just after 
Madison signed the bill, the administration weakened its impact 
by playing a mixed game. 

The Senate passed the embargo by a vote of twenty to thirteen, 
with Giles and Samuel Smith, two leading Republican dissidents, 
joining Federalists in opposition, A Federalist senator privately 
claimed that many more Republicans who disliked it submitted to 
the demands of party solidarity. Even this grudging approval 
came only after the Senate had completely transformed the mean- 
ing of the bill. On the motion of Michael Leib, another vin- 
dictively anti-Madisonian Republican, the embargo was extended 
from sixty to ninety days. 15 Everyone understood that the Senate 
wished to give time for further negotiations and at worst to put 
off the evil day of war as long as possible. From a vigorous meas- 
ure, the embargo bill had been transformed into a temporizing one. 
When the revised version was returned to the House of Repre- 
sentatives, Josiah Quincy taunted the Republicans for insincerity, 
declaring that the embargo was not a step forward, as the war 
men claimed, but rather "a substitute for the question of war." The 
Federalist's taunts decided War Hawks to accept the Senate bill 
rather than risk another quarrel with the Senate like that which 
had paralyzed the government before the passage of Macon's Bill 

14 Annals, zath Cong., ist sess., pp. 15871598. 

15 Ibid., pp. 187-189. 

385 



WAR AT LAST 

in 1810. On April 4 Madison's signature made the ninety-day 
embargo bill a law. 16 

Just as senatorial action robbed the bill of its appearance of 
vigor, so the flight of ships from American ports deprived it of 
its coercive and precautionary effect. Even before the President 
sent his message to Congress, rumors of an impending embargo 
had spread as far as Baltimore. With the approval of John C. Cal- 
houn, who did not desire insiders alone to benefit, Quincy, James 
Emott of New York, Senator Lloyd of Massachusetts, and others 
immediately sent word northward. Their warning reached port 
cities ahead of official announcements of the act. 17 The deputy col- 
lector of customs at Boston kept his office open until nine in the 
evening so that all who desired could secure papers for their ships, 
and, despite a fog that delayed some departures, more than eighty 
ships escaped. Revenue cutters caught only three or four. At New 
York four were arrested of a total of a hundred or more. Foster 
reported officially that the embargo had misfired j less seriously, 
he wrote to his mother, "The Embargo has put us all in a fuss. 
Great Quantities of corn & flour have gone off so I hope Spain 
& Portugal will not suffer. Theres hardly enough left at New York 
for the bakers." 18 Grain shipments to Lisbon and Cadiz post- 
poned to a distant day the impact of shortages. Anticipation of the 
embargo cast onto the seas and even into British ports hundreds 
of merchant vessels which risked capture when war came. The 
massive exodus, largest since Erskine's agreement three years be- 
fore, destroyed the intentions of the embargo's authors. 