



it." 



Until the very end Foster stuck to a belief that even minor 
changes in British policy would end all chances of war. He repeat- 
edly wrote that Madison and Monroe, particularly the latter, had 
pleaded for some gesture that would permit them to turn back. 
"Mr. Monroe in a conversation which I lately had with him," 
Foster reported in May, "expressed his wish that we would ex- 
change our orders for blockades which might answer the same 
purpose." One week before Madison finally completed his war 
message, the Englishman advised his government that even the 
most nominal change in the Orders in Council would have a 
striking effect. Foster correctly divined the administration's hope 

22 Goodrich to Roger Griswold [?], April 7, 1812, William G. Lane Collection, 
Yale University Library} Tallmadge to McHenry, April n, 1812, Bernard C. Steiner, 
The Life and Correspondence of James McHenry (Cleveland, 1907), p. 576$ Quincy 
to Wolcott, April 15, 1812, Wolcott MSS, Vol. XXIV 5 Columbian Centinel, May 6, 
1812. 

389 



WAR AT LAST 

for peace, but woefully underestimated the price it would ask. Like 
the Federalists, he found it hard to believe that a new day had 
dawned. 23 

Foster's hope for peace was badly served by America's interpre- 
tation of parliamentary news that arrived during these critical 
months, for the United States clung as stubbornly to a dated in- 
terpretation as he did. At London, Jonathan Russell completely 
ignored hints that the orders would fall. He steadily reported 
that they would last as long as the Perceval ministry, and he in- 
terpreted the declaration of April, 1812, as a sign of firmness. In 
a letter received by Monroe shortly before the final crisis Russell 
wrote: "Indeed I am convinced that whoever wishes for the respect 
of this highminded people must occasionally fight them." Ameri- 
can papers considered the initial defeat of Brougham's motion for 
an investigation the death knell of American hopes, totally over- 
looking the uncertainty of government speakers and the strength 
of the Opposition tally. In March the Columbian Centinel, Bos- 
ton's Federalist bellwether, expected the orders to collapse within 
three months, but in April and May it declared that no chance of 
repeal existed. On May 5, learning that Perceval's tenure had 
been confirmed, Monroe directed Russell to warn American mer- 
chants in London that a rupture impended 3 ominously, he also 
asked Russell to stay in Britain as an agent for prisoners when war 
broke out. 24 Neither the President nor Congress saw an easy exit 
from the position in which preparedness legislation and the em- 
bargo had placed them. 

Late in March, as the first, discouraging parliamentary reports 
arrived from England, news of renewed French outrages reached 
Washington. This pillaging of American commerce, primarily grain 
ships bound for the Peninsula, became more dramatic when an in- 
discreet French commander explained apologetically, after putting 