

The Secretary of State journeyed to Capitol Hill for a con- 
ference with the committee on the afternoon of March 30. The 
administration, he said, believed that Congress ought to declare 
war before adjourning if Britain did not abandon her hostile pol- 
icy, a course that Foster's recent declarations made unlikely. The 
Secretary indirectly suggested an embargo of sixty days to allow 
time for the Hornet to return with news from Europe. Monroe 
reported that the nation was inadequately prepared for war 5 he 
admitted that he considered preparedness legislation valuable 
largely as "an appeal to the feelings of the foreign Govt."5 and 
he did not pledge the administration to ask for a declaration of 
war when the Hornet returned. This negativism communicated 

11 Russell to Monroe, private, Jan. 14., iSiz, Department of State Archives, Na- 
tional Archives, Despatches, Great Britain, Vol. XVIII 5 Russell to Barlow, Jan. 14, 
1812, Jonathan Russell MSS, Brown University Library 5 Hay to Monroe, Jan. 23, 
1812, James Monroe MSS, New York Public Library 5 Madison to Jefferson, April 3, 

1812, Hunt, o/. tit., VIII, 1865 Jefferson to Gibson, April 12, 1812, Thomas 

Jefferson MSS, Library of Congress. On this entire subject see W. Freeman Galpin, 
"The American Grain Trade to the Spanish Peninsula, 1800-1814," American His- 
torical Review, XXVIII (19221923), 2444. 

12 Clay to Monroe, March 15, 1812, Hopkins, of. cit., I, 6375 Porter, Smilie, and 
Calhoun to Monroe, March 24, 1812, Monroe MSS, NYPLj Porter to Monroe, 
March 30, 1812, ibid. 

383 



WAR AT LAST 

itself to Chairman Porter, who suggested that Congress postpone 
an embargo until after a short recess and even push back a declara- 
tion of war until September. Calhoun brusquely replied, "Some 
decisive measure is required that would give a tone to our legisla- 
tion which has not been hitherto perceived," and John A. Harper 
bluntly asked the Secretary if the administration would recom- 
mend an embargo. Monroe answered, "If you give me the necessary 
assurance that it will be acceptable to the House the Executive 
will recommend it." He declined to promise a manifesto rallying 
the country for war, saying, "The Executive will not take upon 
itself the responsibility for declaring that we are prepared for 
war. 53 13 This qualified courage, this caution, this desire to thrust 
responsibility upon Congress was the best that the committee 
could extort from Monroe or from the President, whose reaction 
Monroe reported to the congressmen the next day. 

On April I the President recommended a general embargo in 
a cryptic one-sentence message submitted to a secret session. Porter 
quickly presented a bill for a sixty-day embargo, but his remarks 
showed that he had no enthusiasm either for an embargo or for 
war. Nathaniel Macon attempted to postpone a decision, and with 
support from Quincy and the Federalists he came within three 
votes of attaining his objective. Randolph denounced the project 
as a fake, since the nation could not be ready for war in two months 5 
time, and he objected that it was "too high a price to pay for the 
consistency of gentlemen who think they have gone too far to 
recede. 55 Grundy, Clay, Smilie, and Adam Seybert, on the other 
hand, declared that this was a real step toward war and that the 
President so considered it. The war men drove the House forward, 
and at an early hour in the evening the House of Representatives 
passed the bill reluctantly fathered by Porter by a vote of seventy 
to forty-one. Only a handful of congressmen who later voted for 
war opposed the embargo, but ten failed to vote at all, and the 
seventy favorable votes fell short of a majority of the whole 