

Most observers expected the House to follow the War Hawks' 
lead without difficulty, although Macon wrote, the day after the 
message, "It is doubtful this morning . . . whether Congress 
are as firm, for war as they have been thought." 53 The Republicans 
had an overwhelming majority, and in a presidential year con- 
siderations of party unity bulked larger than normally. Many 
felt that after the bellicose speeches of the past seven months it 
would be an open confession of weakness to reject the war bill. 
The arrival, on June 3, of the Prince Regent's declaration, mis- 
takenly interpreted as a sign of stubborn devotion to the orders, 
aided the War Hawks. Still, a large number of Republicans did 
not want war and knew their constituents opposed it. A visit home 
noticeably cooled David R. Williams. Samuel Ringgold of Mary- 
land, previously the object of Federalist mirth for allegedly "hav- 

51 Madison to John Nicholas, April 2, 1813, Hunt, o$. cit iy VIII, 242; Madison to 
Wheaton, Feb. 26-27, 1827, ibid., IX, 273-274.. The President emphasized that 
by mere coincidence, and not because the United States wanted to aid Napoleon, the 
climax with England came at the same time that the invasion of Russia began. 

52 Bleecker to Theodore Sedgwick, Sr., June 27, 1812, Sedgwick MSSj Taggart 
to Rev. John Taylor, June 23, 1812, Haynes, op. cit., p. 405. dnnals, i2th Cong., ist 
sess., pp. 1629-1637, covers the House proceedings at this time. 

53 Macon to Nicholson, June 2, 1812, Nicholson MSS. 

406 



WAR AT LAST 

ing had a project of the declaration of war so long in his pocket 
that it was at length worn out," lost his enthusiasm and report- 
edly told Monroe that war would ruin his political future. Wil- 
liam Richardson, who held Varnum's old seat, returned from a 
six weeks 5 visit to the Bay State opposed to war. All these men 
ultimately voted for the declaration, but they supported it reluc- 
tantly. Many hoped the Senate would save the nation from the 
consequences of their own votes in the House. "I think the business 
was too hasty," Dr. Josiah Bartlett wrote, "& did not give the Bill 
my assent in first stage [but] after it had passed with no material 
alteration I was against its postponement as it would look like re- 
tracing the steps & shew a vacillating disposition which the times 
totally forbid but I did hope the Senate would have so altered the 
Bill at their house as to give it the character of Reprisals by grant- 
ing restrictive letters of Marque but they did not see fit." 54 Had 
the members of Congress voted as they wished in their hearts, the 
bill would not have passed. 

Nevertheless, the declaration of war moved rapidly through the 
House of Representatives. On June 3 John C. Calhoun, who re- 
placed Porter at the head of the Foreign Affairs Committee when 
the New Yorker scampered off to the easier and more lucrative 
task of selling supplies to the army, presented the committee's 
manifesto and a bill declaring war on England. The Federalists, 
deprived of the opportunity to debate publicly, remained silent, 
and the House adjourned at an unexpectedly early hour. On June 
4 the representatives met at eleven o'clock. Information that Madi- 
son wished them to delay until he could send a new message threw 
them temporarily into consternation, raising fears that the Presi- 
dent intended to recede from the ground he had taken. When the 
message arrived it proved to contain only an exchange of corre- 
spondence between Foster and Monroe. After beating back three 
attempts at delay, the House passed the war bill by a vote of 
seventy-nine to forty-nine. One of the majority had been sworn 