

33 Randolph to Garnett, April 21, 1812, John Randolph MSS, Library of Con- 
gress 5 New-York Herald, May 23, 1812. 

395 



WAR AT LAST 

the American people opposed it ; Foster more cautiously settled 
on 80 per cent. 34 Doubtless Foster and the Federalists exaggerated. 
During the spring, however, and particularly after the Massa- 
chusetts election, no Republican 'had the temerity to claim that the 
American people demanded war. 

Unfortunately for the irenic, most protests against war did not 
come until the die had in effect been cast. Until the embargo, op- 
ponents of war did not feel it worth the energy to protest against 
a course expected to be abandoned in the end. "We are told," Hugh 
Nelson complained to Jefferson, "the people do not believe we 
mean war. Is this possible. If our countrymen do not believe us, 
how can we expect that foreign govts will." The country showed 
comparatively little alarm, John Randolph stated in the war de- 
bates, only "because the public are totally unaware of the high 
price at which this House holds its own consistency that the ruin 
of the nation weighs nothing in the scale against it." James A. 
Bayard sought to delay the Senate's vote on war because "the gen- 
eral opinion abroad was, that there would be no war." 35 Had Con- 
gress convinced the people of its determination, had not the Re- 
publican past created an indelible impression of weakness, by an 
ironic turn of chance the War Hawks would have been deluged 
with such forceful expressions of public anger that they probably 
could not have carried a declaration of war. Unwittingly Madison 
had served the cause better than he knew. 

Congress did consider the embargo a major step toward war. 
The War Hawks spent the ensuing six weeks defending their 
position against the attacks of Federalists and wavering Republi- 
cans rather than in active legislation. Some were tempted to sup- 
port a proposal to suspend nonimportation, a plan perhaps put 
forward as a move toward escape but attractive to Clay, Lowndes, 
Cheves, and Calhoun since it would permit prewar stockpiling. 

34 Taggart to Rev. John Taylor, May 13, 1812, George H. Haynes, ed., "Letters of 
Samuel Taggart, Representative in Congress, 1803-1814," American Antiquarian 
Society, Proceedings, n.s., XXXIII (1923), 3995 New-York Herald, May 19, xSizj 
Annals, i2th Cong., ist sess., pp. 1388-1389, 1405-1406; New-York Herald, June 
17, 1812; Foster #48 to Castlereagh, secret, June 21, 1812, FO 5/86. 
^ 3{ > Nelson to Jefferson, April 27, 1812, Thomas Jefferson MSS (Coolidge Collec- 
tion), Massachusetts Historical Society j Annals, i2th Cong., ist sess., pp. 288, 1388. 

396 



WAR AT LAST 

Wiser men pointed out that the proposal would encourage Eng- 
land to believe that America was totally dependent upon her, and 
Monroe, "tremblingly alive to any a^earance o relaxation/ 5 
strenuously opposed it. 36 The plan died. 

Toward the end of March congressmen began to talk of ad- 
journment. This talk became widespread after the embargo, when 
war men thought legislative preparation complete. Some realized 
that the country would interpret a recess as further evidence that 
Congress desired to escape a crisis, and John A. Harper threatened 
to present a war manifesto to the House of Representatives and 
dare members to go home without debating it. 3T Other War Hawks 
expected citizens to urge their congressmen to war, while the Fed- 
eralists, wiser than their enemies, supported an adjournment for 
precisely the opposite reason. Republican waverers wanted to take 
the temperature of their constituents and delay the final vote on 
war. 