

48 See Richardson, o$. cit., I, 499-505, for the entire message. 

49 The President's argument that the British showed their inveterate hostility by 
declaring Fox's Blockade to be "comprehended" in the orders, and by refusing to 
encourage Napoleonic repeal o the allegedly retaliatory Berlin Decree by repealing 
the blockade, was a particularly weak passage in the address. The President well 
knew, from Monroe's conversations with Foster, what the British position really 
meant. 

404 



WAR AT LAST 

one hand, and, on the other, offers to join Britain if she withdrew 
her regulations while France remained stubborn, had failed to 
bring the Cabinet to its senses. "Such," said the President, "is the 
spectacle of injuries and indignities which have been heaped on 
our country, and such the crisis which its unexampled forbearance 
and conciliatory efforts have not been able to avert." 

The use of hyperbole did not destroy the essential truth of Madi- 
son's indictments of England. In Henry Adams 5 words, "For five 
years, the task of finding excuses for peace had been more dif- 
ficult than that of proving a casus belli." 50 That impressment and 
hovering off American shores had scarcely been mentioned in 
recent diplomatic correspondence, until the former was pushed 
to the fore at the very end, proved only that the American gov- 
ernment had lost hope of peaceful arrangements, not that the acts 
were less criminal. The British restrictive system was, as Madison 
stated, heavily tinctured with selfishness. Had Madison em- 
phasized the harmfulness of the orders, he would have been on 
more solid ground. To connect their justice with French repeal, 
and to assert in the face of the evidence that French repeal was a 
fact, simply invited criticism, although the administration's policy 
since 1810 made emphasis on this theme almost inevitable. 

In later years Madison came fairly close to apologizing for his 
decision to present a war message in June, 1812. "The circum- 
stances under which the war commenced on our part," he wrote in 
1813, "require that it should be reviewed with a liberality above 
the ordinary rules and dispositions indulged in such cases. It had 
become impossible to avoid or even delay war, at a moment when 
we were not prepared for it, and when it was certain that effective 
preparations would not take place, whilst the question of war was 
undecided." The moment, Madison observed in retrospect, ap- 
peared propitious. Napoleon's Grand Army lay poised for an at- 
tack on Russia. "Had the French Emperor not been broken down 
as he was, to a degree at variance with all human probability, and 
which no human sagacity could anticipate, can it be doubted," the 
President asked, "that G.B. would have been constrained by her 

50 History, VI, 221. 

405 



WA R AT LAST 

own situation and the demands of her allies^ to listen to our rea- 
sonable terms of reconciliation." 51 In this spirit James Madison 
joined the War Hawks. 

Both House and Senate considered Madison's message behind 
closed doors. Although common in the upper house, executive ses- 
sions were rare in the House, and three times the opponents of war 
sought to lift the injunction of secrecy. Thrice beaten, Federalists 
declined to debate the question and began to prepare an appeal to 
the nation stating their reasons for opposing war. 52 Theoretically, 
secrecy speeded legislative action and concealed American inten- 
tions from the enemy. Actually, it took Congress more than two 
weeks to pass a declaration of war, and nobody certainly not 
Foster failed to learn that war was being discussed. Secrecy did 
deprive Federalists of the opportunity to assail Republican in- 
consistencies before a public audience and delayed exposure of the 
majority's misgivings. 