

On April 10 the House of Representatives approved a recess 
in principle by a vote of seventy-two to forty. Thirty-one who 
later voted for war, including such stanch War Hawks as Calhcfcgnj' 
Williams, Johnson, and Widgery, voted for the resolution 7 /A 
joint committee of both chambers agreed to adjourn until May 
1 8, and this proposal would almost certainly have gone through 
had not the Senate voted to extend the date to June 8. This smacked 
too much of evasion, and War Hawks rallied to oppose it. Jonathan 
Roberts cleverly proposed that the members of Congress give up 
pay and travel money during the recess, thus saving the Treasury 
$40,000. Rather than accept Roberts' proposal, many of the ma- 
jority that sought a recess joined with W^r Hawks to shelve the 
subject by a vote of sixty-two to fifty-five. /Thus, Foster observed, 

the advocates for Peace tho' a Majority, in all Probability, were defeated 
... by the address of the more decided advocates for war, who shewed 
the others that although they might have an adjournment, yet it should be 
to their Cost. . . . To the Faction who were swayed by such motives we 

36 Annals , i2th Cong., ist sess., pp. 237-239, 1288-1290$ Randolph to Garnett, 
April 14, 1812, Randolph MSS. 

37 Harper to Plumer, April 29, 1812, William Plumer MSS, Library of Congress. 

397 



WAR AT LAST 

perhaps may have to attribute more importance than they deserve: for they 
were taken off their Guard and being confident of adjournment voted 
against the Resolution as amended thinking they should be able subsequently 
to regain the lost Ground. 

This confidence proved ill advised. Although the Senate agreed to 
a shorter period, the House now rejected by eight votes a proposal 
it would have whooped through a week earlier. By this extremely 
narrow margin, a margin that could have been reversed had not 
a number of antiwar men gone home without waiting for a recess, 
the war movement avoided a fatal check. Jonathan Roberts had a 
right to be proud of what he described in his memoirs as "an art- 
ful stroke." 38 

The desire for a recess was often coupled with a scheme to send 
a special mission to Europe. By clearing the air in France a mission 
might conceivably have broadened support for war against Eng- 
land if it did not arrive in London (as the event proved would 
have happened) in time to receive repeal of the Orders in Council. 
On the other hand, like an adjournment, the appointment of a 
mission would have discouraged the war spirit that did exist, and 
all Washington believed the chances of a settlement slim indeed. 
Nevertheless, the mission was widely discussed and was thought 
to have the President's blessing. The details of this affair are ob- 
scure, and Senator Worthington's story that Grundy and Clay 
threatened to oppose Madison's reelection if he persisted in this 
plan cannot be accepted. There is no reason to doubt that congres- 
sional leaders reminded Madison that a special mission would, 
by demolishing the government's already scanty reputation for 
determination, jeopardize Republican electoral prospects. 39 