399 



WAR AT LAST 

May 22, weeks after she was expected and after, too, false reports 
of her arrival had thrown sessions of Congress into confusion, the 
Hornet arrived. Monroe's office became suffocatingly crowded as 
officials and citizens sought to learn if she brought any news that 
would enable America to escape gracefully from a war. The dis- 
patches disappointed everyone. As Minister Serurier received no 
instructions to guide him, and Joel Barlow's reports made it clear 
that Napoleon continued irascible, hope had to be abandoned for 
a settlement with France which would ease the path to war with 
Britain. Although unofficial accounts aplenty showed that the Or- 
ders in Council were being heavily attacked, Russell's reports 
held out no prospect of repeal. Anger, confusion, and gloom spread 
through Washington. Serurier had an uncomfortable conversation 
with Monroe when they met at Speaker Clay's, the Secretary com- 
plaining that the administration had been betrayed by France. 
There were reports that the Cabinet, which met on two consecutive 
days to discuss future policy, contained almost as many opinions 
as members. The National Intelligencer, however, insisted that 
England was the chief enemy "let it not be said that the mis- 
conduct of France neutralizes in the least that of Great Britain" 
and Monroe's conversations with Foster made it seem that there 
was nothing to hope from England. 41 

Although not hostile in tone, Castlereagh's instructions to Fos- 
ter, which formed the most important part of the Hornefs budget 
of information, showed how little Britain understood America. Bas- 
ing his argument largely on a recent report by the Duke of Bassano, 
the Foreign Secretary declared it was now obvious, as England had 
maintained all along, that France had not repealed her decrees. 
America had been tricked. 

It is impossible America should not feel under these Circumstances that 
She has not only an Act of Justice to perform by Great Britain, but that 
France has deliberately attached Conditions to the Repeal of Her Decrees 
which she knew Great Britain could never accept, hoping thereby to fo- 

41 Federal Republican (Baltimore), March 13, 18125 S&rurier #57 to Minister 
of Foreign Relations, May 27, 1812, AAE, CP, E-U, Vol. LXVIIj Foster #38 to 
Castlereag-h, May 23, 1812, FO 5/8 6 j National Intelligencer, May 30, 1812. 

400 



WAR AT LAST 

ment Disunion between Great Britain and America. America can never 
be justified in continuing to resent against Us that failure of Relief, which 
is alone attributable to the insidious Policy of the Enemy. ... we are 
entitled to claim at Her Hands, as an act not less of Policy, than Justice, 
. . . that She should cease to treat Great Britain as an Enemy. 

The truth of this analysis of French policy seemed so obvious to 
Castlereagh that he expected the Americans to share it. He hoped 
the evidence of imperial perfidy would provide the United States 
with "an opportunity of receding without disgrace from the preci- 
pice of War. . . . To rescue America from the influence of France, 
is of more importance, than committing Her to War with that 
Power." To sweeten the pill for America, Castlereagh offered to 
regulate licenses so that the two countries might share European 
trade, or even to abandon them entirely. 42 "At any other time," 
as Theodore C. Smith has observed, "this would have at least 
opened the way for renewed negotiations, but not in i8i2." 43 
Castlereagh and his colleagues totally misread the situation in 
America. The instructions, far more pleading than threatening, 
actually determined Madison to abandon his hedging for peace. 
On May 27 and 28 Foster discussed the British argument and 
proposed concession with Monroe and Madison. The Americans 
ignored the proposal on licenses, to which they had formerly at- 
tached so much importance. They stubbornly reiterated that the 
Berlin and Milan decrees had been repealed. Seizing upon Castle- 
reagh's declaration that England would insist upon complete, un- 
conditional French repeal and abandonment of the municipal 
regulations shutting off British commerce with Europe, they de- 
clared this an extension of England's demands. "With this formal 
notice," Madison recalled fifteen years later, "no choice remained 
but between war and degradation, a degradation inviting fresh 
provocation & rendering war sooner or later inevitable." The 
foreign Secretary's instructions, Madison told Jared Sparks in 
1 830, were "intended to show an utter disregard of the complaints 