

54 Taggart to Rev. John Taylor, May 9, 1812, Haynes, 0$. cit., p. 399; Davis, 
o$. cit.y pp. 9 5-9 6 j journal entry, May 29, 1812, Foster MSSj Taggart to Pickering, 
May n, 1812, Pickering MSS, Vol. XXX $ Bartlett to Ezra Bartlett, June 18, 1812, 
Bartlett MSS. 

407 



WAR AT LAST 

in only the day before, and another, who had taken an extended 
French leave, returned to the Capitol one hour before the vote. 
In the next few days seven other absentees arrived, among them 
Ezekiel Bacon, Richard Cutts, and Abijah Bigelow, who had been 
delayed together on the packet between Rhode Island and New 
York. The votes of the returnees would not have altered signifi- 
cantly the margin by which the declaration of war passed. 55 

The sectional aspect of the vote is often overstressed. Except 
for three North Carolinians Quid Stanford, Federalists Joseph 
Pearson and Archibald McBryde congressmen from the states 
south of Virginia voted as a bloc. The nine members from beyond 
the mountains all voted for war, and Henry Clay of course would 
have done so had he not been in the chair. Although solid, the real 
South and the West provided slightly less than one-third of the 
affirmative votes. A few members from upstate New York, Ver- 
mont, New Hampshire, and the Maine district may possibly be 
considered frontiersmen, but they scarcely affect the generaliza- 
tion. The core of the war coalition, thirty-five in all, came from 
Pennsylvania, Maryland, and Virginia, squarely in the middle 
of the nation. In each state there had been grumblings. Neverthe- 
less, all but one Pennsylvania Republican and the six from Mary- 
land (out of a state delegation of nine) remained firm. In Virginia, 
Randolph and the Valley Federalists opposed the declaration, but 
four Republicans who had been rumored ready to do so 56 rallied 
behind their party's cause, and the state delegation split thirteen 
to five in favor of war. Although in most ways a Southern state, 
the Old Dominion had little direct interest in the conquest of 
Florida or Canada and in Indian warfare, and party loyalty and 
the need for an export market explain the support given to the bill. 
Finally, it must be noted that congressmen from north of the Dela- 



^Annals, izth Cong., ist sess., pp. 1546-1554? Charles M. Wiltse, John C. Cal- 
houn, Nationalist, 1782-1828 (Indianapolis, 1944), pp. 64-655 Annals, i2th Cong., 
ist sess., p. i6 3 7j Taggart to Rev. John Taylor, June 5, 1812, Haynes, op. cit., pp. 
01- 



401-403 



. 

56 Taggart to Rev. John Taylor, May 9, 1812, Haynes, o$. <&., p. 39 8, listed five 
Republican deserters who were expected to join the seven Federalists and Quids. They 
were Taliaferro, Burwell, Smith, Nelson, and Matthew Clay, but the latter was absent 
on the final roll call. 

408 



WAR AT LAST 



ware River provided the war resolution with its majority. Their 
seventeen votes,, cast in opposition to majority sentiment in the 
area, could not have been spared, and the six Massachusetts votes 
for war were outnumbered by those from only three other states. 
Although it is difficult to cast the prowar Northerners in any par- 
ticular pattern (is William Widgery, of Portland, Maine, to be 