

James Madison did not feel that the times called for any un- 
usual departure from Republican forms, and his deference to Con- 
gress was fitting since the war impulse had come from its members 
rather than the White House. As always, the President left the 
reading of his message to a clerk who droned it out for almost half 
an hour. Nor did Madison directly endorse any particular course. 
The decision between peace and war, a war "avoiding all connec- 
tions which might entangle . . . [the United States] in the con- 
test or view of other powers" and prosecuted only until an op- 
portunity for peace occurred, "is a solemn question which the 
Constitution wisely confides to the legislative department of the 

4 ' 7 James D. Richardson, ed. 5 A Compilation of the Messages and Papers of the 
Presidents (Washington, 1897), I, 4995 Madison to Jefferson, May 25, 1812, Hunt, 
o$. cit.) VIII, 1911925 Monroe to Gallatin, June i, 1812, Gallatin MSS. Lowndes, 
years after the event, put some scattered memories onto paper. "One of the most curious 
anecdotes" he recalled was "the effort of the Executive to prevent a declaration of 
war. . . . after the Presidents message was sent in ... considerable effort was made 
to substitute something & less letters of marque &c. . . . as far as I know none of 
the Cabinet unless it were Hamilton were adverse. Grundy was brought over. I re- 
member being one of a good many Sen 8 . & Rep 8 , at this time (Crawford was one) 
talking it over. We determined to adjourn & go home doing nothing, or have a War 
in common form." William L. Lowndes, Historical Anecdotes, and Observations, 
MSS, Library of Congress. Assuming that Lowndes could not have made up this 
story out of whole cloth, it appears to intimate that Gallatin carried out Monroe's 
suggestion. It will be noted, however, that the President's name is not specifically 
mentioned by Monroe or Lowndes. Two possible conclusions are that the President 
prudently concealed his attitude or that his secretaries felt it possible to ignore his 
wishes. 

403 



WAR AT LAST 

Government." The President unnecessarily asked "early delibera- 
tions" on the question. 48 All he professed to do was to recapitulate 
the evidence and, in his final paragraph, to suggest that a decision 
on French relations be postponed until further word came from 
Barlow. Sometimes Madison was eloquent, sometimes labored and 
intricate, as when he declared that by impressment "a self -redress 
is assumed which, if British subjects were wrongfully detained and 
alone concerned, is that substitution of force for a resort to the 
responsible sovereign which falls within the definition of war." On 
the whole, the message compared unfavorably with the annual 
message presented seven months before. 

The President attempted to show that Great Britain was already 
prosecuting an undeclared war against the United States: "We 
behold . . . on the side of Great Britain a state of war against the 
United States, and on the side of the United States a state of peace 
toward Great Britain." Impressment, particularly of native Ameri- 
cans, was an act of war that neither "remonstrances and expostula- 
tions" nor friendly offers to regulate the employment of seamen 
had been able to bring to an end. Indian warriors attacked the 
West, presumably at Britain's behest. English warships violated 
American territorial waters. "Pretended blockades," particularly 
Fox's of i8o6, 49 permitted American commerce to be "plun- 
dered in every sea." Most important of all, the British Cabinet, 
"not content with these occasional expedients for laying waste our 
neutral trade, . . . resorted ... to a sweeping system of block- 
ades, under the name of orders in council, which has been molded 
and managed as might best suit its political views, its commercial 
jealousies, or the avidity of British cruisers." Justified as retalia- 
tion, although long since "deprived of this flimsy veil" by French 
repeal, the Orders in Council and the ancillary license trade were 
really a war upon American commerce. Economic pressure on the 