

At noon on June 25, having shaken the last friendly congres- 
sional hand, Augustus Foster rode out of the capital in which he 
had served gaily but without success. After a leisurely and un- 
molested journey overland, he sailed from New York on July 12. 
Already General Hull had set in motion the army that was ex- 
pected to sweep through Canada, and Commodore Rodgers in the 

68 Foster minute of June 23, 1812, enclosed in Foster #49 to Castlereagh, June 
24, 1812, FO 5/8 6 j Monroe to Russell, June 26, 1812, Instructions, Vol. Ij Monroe 
to Taylor, June 13, 1812, Monroe MSS. 



WAR AT LAST 

Constellation had sought to bring to battle H.M.S. Belvidera, a 
British warship sighted off New York. Scores of vessels now near- 
ing the American coast with word that the Orders in Council had 
been repealed were to become the first important prizes of the war. 
For a second and last time, through mutual misunderstanding, 
America and Britain had failed to find the road to peace. 



417 



CHAPTER 



XII 



"THIS UNNATURAL WAR" 



Although America's declaration of war came only after seven 
years of controversy and as many months of noisy congressional 
action, it surprised Great Britain and the United States. The Eng- 
lish, who did not want war, were serenely confident of the result. 
"We cannot fear a war with any power in the world," the Times 
commented, " . . . but it is not unmanly to say, that we regret 
the sad necessity ... of carrying the flame and devastation of 
war to a part of the world which has not seen a hostile foot for 
thirty years." 1 After repeal of the Orders in Council, Britain dis- 
counted all bad news from the United States, sure that America 
would abandon notions of a quixotic struggle when she learned of 
her great victory over the chief symbol of discord. 

Even news of the declaration of war caused only muted debate 
in Britain. Henry Brougham expected a speedy armistice, and 
Alexander Baring advised him to support the government on 
existing issues, confident that Madison could not continue the war 
for two weeks after news of repeal arrived. The Sun unreasonably 

1 Times (London), June 5, i8iz. 

418 



UNNATURAL WAR >> 



complained that, in his war message, "Mr. MADDISON reca- 
pitulates all the subjects of complaint against this country, . . . 
but he cautiously avoids answering any of the charges that have 
been preferred against the American Government." In an editorial 
lacking its usual splenetic fire, the Courier answered Madison point 
by point and warned that war might continue despite England's 
surrender of the orders. The Morning Chronicle, while complain- 
ing that the Americans had acted precipitately and objecting that 
"there is, in Mr. MADISONPs paper, a querulous spirit, which 
betrays more of the littleness of the lawyer than the enlarged and 
national indignation of a Statesman," let its chief criticism fall 
upon the ministry. The Chronicle asserted "that our mode of pro- 
ceeding towards America has been most irritating to her, as well 
as most injurious to ourselves that the charge against us, of obsti- 
nate perseverance in error, from pride rather than conviction, is 
just ... and that we have, in truth, more reason to impute 
to our own imbecile Councils, all the calamities that may spring 
from this unnatural war, than to the influence of the French on 
the councils of America." The Caledonian Mercury and the Times 
agreed that, with the orders repealed, impressment was too "paltry 
an affair for two great nations to go to war about." Madison's mes- 
sage, the Times stated, "sums up all her grievances against us 5 
and to speak candidly, she makes a fair shew." 2 Only later did 
humiliating naval defeats, the threat to Canada, and America's 
refusal to make peace after learning of the revocation of the orders 
ignite British anger against President Madison. 