

Even if these five of the eight waverers voted with their Repub- 

rancour that he gave his opinion, and he voted against the declaration of war . . . 
from pure conviction that there was not sufficient ground for it, as well as the persua- 
sion that we were really fighting for our existence and at the same time for the cause 
of liberty and independence all over the world against military despotism and irreli- 
gion." Davis, o$. cit., pp. 192-194. 

^Poulsotfs American Daily Advertiser (Philadelphia), June 19, 18125 David 
Howell to Gallatin, Oct. 20, 1811, Gallatin MSS. 

62 Journal entry, May 23, 1812, Foster MSSj Gregg to , June 4, 1812, True 

American and Commercial Advertiser (Philadelphia), June 16, 1812. 

412 



WAR AT LAST 

lican colleagues, the decision still rested with the three great schis- 
matics, William Branch Giles, Samuel Smith, and Michael Leib. 
Jonathan Roberts detested Leib so much that he threatened to 
kick him where it would do the most good. Giles had always advo- 
cated vigor, at least in theory. Sounding him out, John A. Harper 
hoped for the best, but he admitted that Giles "is however deadly 
hostile to Mr. Munroe, and not much in love with Mr. Madison." 
Nobody dared guess how Samuel Smith would finally vote. After 
talking both ways, on June 2 he refused to reveal his intentions to 
Augustus Foster. None of these men cared a snap for party sup- 
port, Republican success, and particularly Madison's reputation. 
No wonder Monroe complained, during the Senate's debates, that 
nominal Republicans were a much greater problem than avowed 
Federalists! 63 

On June 10 Gregg moved to substitute naval reprisal and letters 
of marque for full war. The motion passed by seventeen to thirteen, 
with all the doubters except Samuel Smith and Franklin voting 
for it. Even if Bradley did not arrive in time, the opponents of war 
appeared to have a safe majority. On June 12, however, they failed 
by fifteen to seventeen to carry a resolution placing England and 
France upon the same footing, gaining the votes of Pope, its au- 
thor, and Samuel Smith, but losing those of four timid men who 
thought that one enemy at a time even if only a half enemy was 
enough. Gregg's resolution, called up again, lost on a tie vote. 
Senator Giles's vote was the key 5 for reasons that can only be 
explained as the fruit of his own eccentricity, he abandoned the 
position he had taken a couple of days before. With these two nar- 
row defeats, the peace movement passed the peak, although the 
antiwar men still had the support of exactly half the Senate and 
could pray for the speedy arrival of Bradley's coach. "I know you 
are anxious to be informed what we are doing, or what we will do," 
Macon wrote to his friend, Judge Nicholson, "to tell this would 

63 Roberts to Matthew Roberts, June 17, 1812, Roberts MSS$ Harper to Plumer, 
June 14., 1812, Plumer MSSj journal entry, June 2, 1812, Foster MSS$ Monroe to 
Taylor, June 13, 1812, James Monroe MSS, Library of Congress. 