

413 



WAR AT LAST 

require a greater man, than I ever saw, and though this is telling 
nothing, yet it is telling all, it is telling what is literally true." 
Hunter told Foster that "they were all in the wind again." w 

Although rain fell in torrents on the fifteenth, all the senators 
in town attended the session at the Capitol. They voted down two 
attempts at delay and, by the narrow margin of two votes, defeated 
Michael Leib's proposal to issue letters of marque and reprisal, 
the same to take effect against France as well as England if positive 
proof of repeal of the Berlin and Milan decrees was not forthcom- 
ing. Then, by a vote of nineteen to thirteen, the Senate passed the 
war bill to a third reading. All the waverers, disappointed in their 
hopes for a limited war, swung over to join the majority. The next 
day Bayard could mobilize only eleven votes behind his proposal 
to delay a final decision until November, and only nine for a delay 
until July. Pope and Worthington informed Foster that the game 
was up, but outside observers were tortured by doubt. Roberts 
wrote that "all that is diabolical is is at work in the Senate. . . . 
It is shrewdly suspected some of Fosters bills of exchange has 
dropped in the Senate. . . . the suspense we are in is worse 
than hell!!!!" 65 

After beating aside a last attempt to limit the war to the ocean, 
proposed this time by the unpredictable Giles, the Senate finally 
approved a declaration of war on June 17. Since Pope, although 
opposed, declined to vote against a great national decision, the 
tally was nineteen to thirteen. According to Jonathan Roberts, 
Gregg voted for war only to assure War Hawk support for his 
gubernatorial candidacy, and certainly neither Gregg nor his col- 
league, Leib, wanted war. Foster said that two or three senators 
shifted only when they saw that their negative votes would not 
prevent a declaration of war, 66 and, as the votes on letters of marque 

64 Macon to Nicholson, June 12, 1812, Nicholson MSSj journal entry, June 14, 
1812, Foster MSS. 

65 Journal entry, June 17, 1812, Foster MSS 5 Roberts to Matthew Roberts, June 
17, 1812, Roberts MSS. 

66 Annalsy i2th Cong 1 ., ist sess., p. 2975 Davis, o$. cit., p. 100. Timothy Pickering 
composed two memoranda, dated 1822 and 1828 (Pickering 1 MSS, Vol. LII, fol. 775 
Vol. XL VII, fol. 84) , in which he stated that Madison, who did not want war, counted 
on Samuel Smith, John Smith of New York, Leib, and Gregg to oppose it. According 

414 



WAR AT LAST 

showed, a majority obviously would have preferred to avoid one. 
If Giles had remained firm, or if Bradley had arrived earlier he 
first appeared in the Senate two days after the declaration the 
majority might have held together. In the pinch, with letters of 
marque defeated on a tie vote, Republican waverers preferred a 
declaration of war to postponement or surrender, for either of these 
courses would expose the hollowness of the vigor which so many 
of them professed to support. Doubtless Giles, Smith, and Leib 
(who, with Leib's friend, William Duane, had ostensibly sup- 
ported positive action for some years) consoled themselves, too, 
with the thought that if the war went badly the accounting could 
be laid at Madison's door, not theirs. 