

Thus, after a struggle of seven and a half months, the War 
Hawks worked their will. Epithets aside, the Federal Re-publican 
spoke accurately in saying that the country had been dragged a by 
the blind and senseless animousity of a few 'new-hatched unfledged 
comrades,' who are but boys in public affairs, and who, in fact, have 
not been seen before by the American people on the public stage." 
The true War Hawks were a minority, even of the Republican 
party. The mistakes of their opponents and the apparent stubborn- 
ness of Great Britain had created a situation in which Congress was 
at last "driven, goaded, dragged, forced, kicked" into war, as the 
always impatient Lexington Reporter put it. "I have to remark on 
this extraordinary measure," wrote Foster, "that it seems to have 
been unexpected by nearly the whole Nation ; & to have been car- 
ried in opposition to the declared sentiments of many of those who 
voted for it, in the House of Representatives, as well as in the 
Senate, in which latter body there was known to have been at one 
time, a decided Majority against it." 67 

At three in the afternoon on June 18, Monroe called Foster to 



to Pickering 1 , Smith told a friend that the President even called him in to urge him to 
vote against war, only to be scornfully rejected. Such a story, filtered through at least 
two bitter enemies of Madison, must be entirely discredited, but, allowing for extreme 
distortion, it perhaps gives a shred of presidential support to Monroe's scheme for 
limited war, mentioned above in note 47. 

67 Federal Republican, June 18, 18125 Reporter, June 27, 18125 Foster #47 to 
Castlereagh, June 20, 1812, FO 5/86. 

415 



WAR AT LAST 

the State Department to inform him officially of the declaration 
of war. Foster understood Monroe to suggest that compromise 
might still be possible. Two days later they met again and "en- 
deavoured to frighten one another for a whole Hour by descanting 
on the Consequences of War." Then Monroe asked Foster and 
his secretary to take tea with him. Since bad weather delayed the 
departure of Madison, who at this moment of climax had decided 
on a vacation at Montpelier, Foster was able to pay a final call 
at the White House on June 23. The two men exchanged regrets 
that war had come. Hinting that he hoped for a limited war, Madi- 
son stated that he opposed "pushing matters to extremes." In in- 
structions sent to Russell three days later, however, the American 
government made it virtually certain that this would be neither 
a limited nor a short war. Impressment as well as the Orders in 
Council had to cease if the war were to come to a speedy end, 
Monroe declared. Speed was imperative, for if much time passed 
the invasion of Canada might force the United States into "com- 
promitment" with its inhabitants and "the effect, which success, 
(which could not fail to attend it) might have on the public mind 
here 55 would make it "difficult to relinquish Territory which had 
been conquered." The administration had convinced itself that 
Canada was a simple matter of marching, that a mere declaration 
of war might well bring down the British government. "My candid 
opinion is," Monroe had recently written to his old friend, Taylor 
of Caroline, "that we shall succeed in obtaining what it is important 
to obtain, and that we shall experience little annoyance or embar- 
rassment in the effort." 68 