

CONGRESSIONAL ACTION ON THE DECLARATION OF WAR, 1812 



A Residence of congressmen voting for war i 

* Residence of congressmen voting against war 
(Congressmen absent and not voting are omitted.) . 




409 



WAR AT LAST 

considered a frontiersman or the representative of a seaport?), a 
preponderance of them came from areas interested in overseas com- 
merce. Since many of these places had been centers of disaffection 
under the Embargo, it is possible that, like some Federalists, their 
congressmen considered any alternative better than commercial 
self-restriction. Since the representatives of other port towns from 
Philadelphia and Baltimore to Charleston and Savannah also 
voted for war, one might only half-f acetiously declare that hostili- 
ties commanded the support of a great crescent along the seaboard. 
In any event, the sectional pattern will not do as an explanation 
of the vote for war. 

Far more important was party regularity. The Republicans had 
a tradition of incredible factionalism, but June, 1812, obviously 
was a special occasion. Although the dangers of going to war against 
the country's wishes were obvious, to back down at this late date 
would expose the Republicans to ridicule almost certain to cost 
them their political hold. Even if the declaration passed by a nar- 
row margin over substantial Republican defections, the political 
consequences might be unfortunate. Far better to vote for war and 
trust the country to rally behind its leadership. Hezekiah Niles 
gave Republican strength in the House of Representatives as io6. 57 
Ten were absent on June 4.5 a few, like Randolph and Stanford, 
had long since been Republicans in name only; and most of the 
six New York Republicans who voted against war were Clintonians 
hopeful of unseating James Madison in the election of 1812. 
Ninety per cent of the real, available Republican membership 
backed the bill. Some twenty were veterans who had supported 
the Embargo four and a half years before, and a few, including 
Macon's nephew, Willis Alston ; Jefferson's old secretary, Wil- 
liam A. Burwellj Ohio's lone congressman, Jeremiah Morrow ; 
and the antique Pennsylvania duo, John Smilie and William Find- 
ley, had voted steadily for every Republican measure since that 
time. Others, the timid, the disputatious, and the wavering, were 
mobilized for the last trial. 

As everyone knew, the Senate would dispose of what the House 

57 Niles 9 Register, Dec. 5, 1812. 

4IO 



WAR AT LAST 

proposed, and the margin promised to be extremely narrow. On 
June 4, when the representatives passed the war bill, six senators 
Giles, Lloyd, Hunter of Rhode Island, Franklin of North Caro- 
lina, Bradley of Vermont, and Alexander Campbell of Ohio 
were away from Washington. All were expected to oppose the 
bill passed by the House. 58 The failure of a committee, named on 
June i and composed in equal parts of war men, waverers, and 
Federalists, to report a bill speedily seemed a good omen for peace. 
Not until June 8, when all the absentees except Bradley and 
Alexander Campbell had returned, raising attendance to thirty- 
two, did the committee report out the war bill. 59 