

42O 



C *THIS UNNATURAL 



tive support extended to the government spoke volumes for the 
ineptitude of Congress and the President during the winter. 

Five weeks after the declaration of war America learned that 
the Orders in Council had been repealed. Noting particularly that 
Castlereagh had reserved the right to restore the system in May, 
1813, if French or American conduct so required, Madison inter- 
preted the development as a trick to turn America from war. War 
Hawk journals quickly shifted to impressment and indemnities 
for past seizures. Attacking Alexander Baring, one of America's 
best English friends, for saying the orders were America's only 
major complaint, the Lexington Reporter wrote that "we will take 
the liberty to inform him that whenever peace is made, he will find 
that the SCALPS and lives of the FARME[R]S in the western 
world will not again be abandoned to British savages, and that 
the liberty of our seamen will have some weight in the scale." The 
National Intelligencer soon quieted the Reporter's fears that the 
administration would be "deceived by this trap of our eternal 
enemies." On August 25 it contrasted conditional British repeal 
with the absolute revocation of the French edicts and added, "A 
public act of one belligerent, so deliberately framed, so worded, 
is in derogation from and violation of our standing neutral rights. 
A war against such inadmissible pretensions ... is a war for the 
freedom, sovereignty and independence of ... the American 
Union." "It should take more to make peace than to prevent war," 
Jefferson declared. "The sword once drawn, full justice must be 
done." 5 A concession which, if known in time, would have pre- 
vented war, utterly failed to move the two nations toward peace. 
The Americans raised their terms, and England angrily rejected 
what seemed an attempt at extortion. 

The war continued for two and a half years, and for nearly 150 
years it has challenged those who seek to explain its coming. Con- 
temporary Federalists found a simple explanation in alleged Re- 

5 Madison to Gallatin, Aug. 8, 1812, Henry Adams, ed., The Writings of Albert 
Gallatin (3 vols.j Philadelphia, 1879), I, 523-, Reporter (Lexington, Ky.), Aug. 23, 
i8i2j National Intelligencer (Washington), Aug. 25, 18125 Jefferson to Robert 
Wright, Aug. 8, 1812, Andrew A, Lipscomb and Albeit E. Bergh, eds., The Writings 
of Thomas Jefferson (Memorial ed.j 20 vols.j Washington, 19031904), XIII, 184. 

421 



CC THIS UNNATURAL 



publican subserviency to France. A New York dominie declared 
God had brought on war so that the young republic might chastise 
the British government, "a despotic usurpation A superstitious 
combination of civil and ecclesiastic power A branch of the 
grand antichristian a^ostacy Erastian in its constitution and ad- 
ministration and Cruel in its policy." 6 Actually, neither God nor 
Napoleon seems an adequate explanation for the war, and historians 
have sought to establish the importance of more mundane influ- 
ences. 