

Its opponents could count on twelve votes, including all the 
Federalists and Nicholas Oilman, a maverick Republican now 
virtually a Federalist, reflected from Vermont in 1810 over the 
opposition of William Plumer and orthodox Republicans. Two 
Republicans, Worthington of Ohio and Pope of Kentucky, were 
firmly in their camp. As early as April, on the strength of news 
from France, Pope, who had formerly supported the administra- 
tion, told Foster that "the dispute between our two Countries was 
now only one upon paper. The Trade to France was null, and 
besides our Situation was to be considered as well as the State of 
the whole World." Pope opposed war knowing that it would cost 
him his political future in bellicose Kentucky. Worthington, who 
had been impressed briefly while a young man, nevertheless 
thought it "folly and madness to get into the war for abstract 
principles when we have not the power to enforce them." He hated 
France and knew the Ohio frontier was nearly defenseless. 60 If 

58 Bayard to Andrew Bayard, June 4, 1812, Elizabeth Donnan, ed., Papers of James 
A. "BayarcLy 17961815, American Historical Association, Annual Report, 1913, II 
(Washington, 1915), 198. Bayard himself had only just returned to Washington. 
Campbell, kept in Ohio by illness in his family, would have voted against war. Sears, 
op. cit. y p. 177. 

59 Annals , i2th Cong., ist sess., pp. 265-298, follows the Senate proceedings. Only 
two speeches are reported in detail. 

60 Journal entry, April 9, 1812, Foster MSS; journal entry, May [12 or 13], 1812, 
Thomas Worthington MSS, Library of Congress. Foster praised Worthington as "a 
very worthy man" and went on: ". , . although he had once been impressed himself 
. . . and was consequently against our doctrine on the subject of impressment, saying 
he would rather live on a crust than be so disgraced, yet it was without the smallest 

411 



WAR AT LAST 

Stephen Bradley, who explained in interviews as he posted south- 
ward that opinion in New England had convinced him to oppose 
war, arrived in time, the opponents would number thirteen. They 
had good reason to hope for the support of Joseph Howell of 
Rhode Island, a weak man (as even his father admitted) under 
heavy pressure from his constituents. 61 Those who wished to ratify 
the House decision could count on only ten votes, even assuming 
that Senator Brent, to whom Foster had assigned an aide to keep 
him drunk or convert him with alcohol, did his duty. 

No fewer than eight senators, Republicans all, were thought to 
entertain doubts in varying degrees. Anderson of Tennessee had 
been a sturdy War Hawk and in the end voted like one. In May 
his comments at a dinner given by Foster led the Englishman to 
write in his journal that Anderson "is much softened down, speaks 
of young Men having wished to go into violent Measures & thinks 
the news being bad from France, favorable, & that an Union of 
Interests between England & America would be a good Thing. 55 
Franklin of North Carolina also surprised Foster by voting steadily 
for war. John Smith of New York and John Condit were consid- 
ered at least partially committed to the antiwar cause. Alexander 
Gregg, a professional Pennsylvania politician for whom, appar- 
ently, nobody had much respect, had lost the bellicosity shown 
when he introduced Gregg 5 s Resolutions in 1806. As a published 
letter of his stated, he wanted the Senate to substitute letters of 
marque, possibly against both belligerents, for a declaration of 
war, leaving the ultimate decision until fall when the nation would 
be better prepared and the foreign situation clearer. 62 