

Most nineteenth-century historians emphasized British outrages 
against American commerce. Admiral Mahan said that the orders 
"by their enormity dwarfed all previous causes of complaint, and 
with the question of impressment constituted a vital and irrecon- 
cilable body of dissent which dragged the two states into armed 
collision." Henry Adams apparently considered this maritime em- 
phasis inadequate, but, as Warren Goodman suggests in an able 
historiographical article, he modified rather than abandoned the 
traditional view, although he did hint that Canadian-directed im- 
perialism played a part. 7 Despite a dislike of Jefferson and Madi- 
son so bitter that he sometimes doctored the evidence, Adams' 
volumes remain the most complete, often the best written, and, 
when used with proper caution, the most useful survey of the entire 
period. After a lapse of some years, A. L. Burt reemphasized mari- 
time causes in a graceful summary of the era. 

For two decades before the appearance of Burt's work in 1 940, 
scholars sought to explain the motives of the West, the section 
that most unanimously supported war. Louis M. Hacker, then in 
a Marxist phase, suggested that a greedy desire for fertile Canadian 
farm land lay behind the fagade of arguments for national honor. 
Julius W. Pratt contradicted Hacker's position, largely by disprov- 
ing the central hypothesis, that there was no longer good agricul- 

e Alexander McLeod, A Scriptural View of the Character ', Causes and Ends of the 
Present War (New York, 1815), p. 97. 

7 Alfred T. Mahan, Sea Power in Its Relation to the War of x8 12 (2 vols. j Boston, 
1905), I, 2j Warren H. Goodman, "The Origins of the War of 1812: a Survey of 
Changing Interpretations," Mississippi Valley Historical Review, XXVIII (194.1 
1942), 173. Including texts and general histories, Goodman examined forty-three 
treatments of the subject. 

422 



CC THIS UNNATURAL W A R ' > 

tural land on the American side of the frontier. 8 Then, following 
a line already sketched by Dice R. Anderson, Pratt in his turn 
suggested a bargain between frontiersmen and Republicans of 
the North, who desired Canada, and Southerners, who wanted to 
absorb Florida. Sectional jealousies, Pratt concluded, broke down 
this alliance only after it had brought on war. Pratt found it diffi- 
cult to demonstrate a real bargain, and there is reason to believe 
that the South did not almost universally desire the acquisition 
of Florida, as he maintained. But not without merit is Pratt's thesis 
that Western Anglophobia was stirred by the menace of Indian 
warfare believed to be inspired by Canadian authorities. 9 Finally, 
George R. Taylor put forward the argument that the West, eco- 
nomically overextended and suffering from depression from 1808 
onward, blamed its troubles on the restrictive edicts of Europe and 
advocated war to break down this barrier to prosperity. In April, 
1812, Augustus J. Foster anticipated this interpretation: "The 
Western States having nothing to lose by war, . . . [are] clamor- 
ous for it, ... being likely even to gain in the Exports of their 
produce while the exportation of that of the Atlantic shall be im- 
peded." 10 Moreover, there was always the chance that war, or even 
the threat of war, would drive England to surrender the orders. 