

26 Annals y i2th Cong., ist sess., pp. 1403, 1592* journal entry, March 18, 1812, 
Foster MSS 5 Calhoun to Virgil Maxcy, May 2, 1812, Robert L. Meriwether, ed., 
The Papers of John C. Calhoun, 1 (Columbia, S.C., 1959), 1015 Annals, i2th Cong., 
ist sess., p. 15885 Bayard to Rodney, June u, 1812, James A. Bayard Letterbook of 
Letters to Caesar A. Rodney, New York Public Library. 

434 



<C THIS UNNATURAL W A R * > 

gle for our liberty," he scarcely exaggerated. When a Republican 
Fourth of July meeting at Boston toasted "The War The second 
and last struggle for national freedom A final effort to rescue 
from the deep the drowning honor of our country/ 3 the sentiment 
was apt. 27 

In his first annual message after the outbreak of war, President 
Madison declared: 

To have shrunk tinder such circumstances from manly resistance would 
have been a degradation blasting our best and proudest hopes; it would 
have struck us from the high rank where the virtuous struggle of our fa- 
thers had placed us, and have betrayed the magnificent legacy which we 
hold in trust for future generations. It would have acknowledged that on 
the element which forms three-fourths of the globe we inhabit, and where 
all independent nations have equal and common rights, the Americans 
were not an independent people, but colonists and vassals. 

A year after the war ended, Henry Clay similarly stressed the 
theme of national honor and self-respect. "We had become the 
scorn of foreign Powers, and the contempt of our own citizens," 
he said. " . . . Let any man look at the degraded condition of this 
country before the war; the scorn of the universe, the contempt 
of ourselves. . . . What is our present situation? Respectability 
and character abroad security and confidence at home. . . . our 
character an$ Constitutions are placed on a solid basis, never to 
be shaken. "(Tears later, Augustus J. Foster philosophically wrote: 
"This war.^us certainly productive of much ill-blood between 
England and America, but in the opinion of the Speaker, Mr. Clay, 
and his friends it was as necessary to America as a duel is to a youiig 
naval officer to prevent his being bullied and elbowed in society;. 
. . . JBaleful as the war has been, I must confes^vthat I think in 
this rfespect something has been gained by it." T/The President, 
the Speaker, and the envoy, who stood at the cenfehof affairs dur- 
ing the war session, effectively summarized the one unanswerable 

2T Thomas J. Rogers to Roberts, March 22, 1812, Roberts MSS; Annals, i2th 
Cong., ist sess., p. 13995 Independent Chronicle (Boston), July 6, 1812. 

28 James D. Richardson, ed., A Compilation of the Messages and Papers of the 
Presidents (Washington, 1897), I, 5205 Annals, *4th Cong., ist sess., pp. 777, 7835 
Richard B. Davis, ed., Jeffersonian America: Notes on the United States of America 
. . , by Sir Augustus John Foster, Bart. (San Marino, 1954)^ PP- 4-5- 

435 



"THIS UNNATURAL WAR** 

argument for war. All the insults suffered by the United States, 
even the most important o them all, the Orders in Council, posed 
a greater threat in the realm of the spirit than in the world of tlie 
acp6\intant and the merchant, the seaman and the frontiersman. 
(That war became imperative in June, 1812, does not mean that 
the American people desired it or that it could not have been 
avoided by greater wisdom in earlier years. Castlereagh's state- 
ment, in 1813, that "Great Britain has throughout acted towards 
the United States of America, with a spirit of amity, forbearance, 
and conciliation," 29 was simply preposterous. While the policy of 
England was far less rigid than Americans often suggested, the 
self-righteous spirit of messianism engendered by the Napoleonic 
wars and a woeful underestimation of the price of American good 
will combined to prevent a reconciliation Jefferson and Madison 
eagerly desired. In America, most of the Federalists served their 
country ill, for, blinded by their own hatred of Napoleon and 
their inveterate contempt for the politicians who had displaced 
them, they sabotaged peaceful American resistance to British out- 
rages and repeatedly declared that the Republicans lacked the 
fortitude to go to wai^. Roberts wrote in his memoirs, "There had 
all along been an idea' cherished by the opposition, that the majority 
would not have nerve enough to meet war. This I believe, mainly 
induced Britain to persist in her aggressions. If she could have been 
made to believe . . . that we were a'united people, & would act 
as such, war might have been avoided. 55 ; The Independent Chron- 
icle complained with a good deal of justice, "In every measure of 
government, the federal faction have rallied in opposition, and 
urged the Ministry to persist in their Orders. They forced the 
United States to the alternative, either to surrender their inde- 
pendence , or maintain It by War." (3 American disunion was clear 
enough, the desire to avoid war quite obvious. Despite the tempo- 
rary and transparent policy advocated by Quincy, the Federalists 
contributed to that disunion and to British stubbornness. 