

425 



THIS UNNATURAL W A R * ' 

not wanting, and the long-term results were probably beneficial. 
Still, the war came just when the United States might have en- 
joyed without a struggle the immense benefits of the neutrality 
in which so much Christian forbearance (or cowardice) had been 
invested. Neither side sought the War of 1 8 1 2, and in the short 
run it was tragically unnecessary. 

The United States did not go to war to add new states to the 
Union. A very few ebullient men from the North may have desired 
this. For sectional reasons the South and the West opposed it. A 
few advance agents of manifest destiny believed, as the Reverend 
McLeod put it in 1815, that the war was "a contest, not only to 
prevent the recolonization of these states, but also in the Providence 
of God for extending the principles of representative democracy 
the blessings of liberty, and the rights of self-government, among 
the colonies of Europe." Even McLeod counted more on the im- 
perialism of ideas than on military conquest. For most Americans 
Canada was but a means to an end, "a blow that might have given 
a speedier termination to the controversy," as Niles put it. At 
most, the occupation of the British provinces seemed the best means 
to reduce the enemy's power. A loyal Republican paper in Virginia 
commented: 

The great advantages to be derived from the acquisition of those possessions 
will not accrue so much from the tenure of them as a conquest, . . . but 
from the very important consequences which their loss will occasion to Brit- 
ain; and among these consequences we may reckon the suppression of a 
great deal of smuggling, the curtailment ... of the British fur trade and 
the disseverance of the West India Islands from Great Britain. 16 

So feeble was the desire for permanent incorporation of Canada 
within the Union that within six weeks after the destruction of 
British power in Upper Canada at the battle of the Thames in 1 8 13, 
the Western militia had returned to their homes. 

From the opening o,f the war session, both supporters and ene- 
mies of war proclaimed that an attack upon Canada would be the 

^McLeod, op. a/., p. 2205 Nile? Weekly Register (Baltimore), March 28, 1812$ 
Virginia Argus (Richmond), Nov. n, 1811. 

426 



* C THIS UNNATURAL 



principal American offensive. Congress ostensibly tailored the new 
army to the requirements of this campaign. All the Republicans., 
at least, believed that even the slightest effort would result in 
victory. "In four weeks from the time that a declaration of war is 
heard on our frontier/ 3 John C. Calhoun declared, a the whole of 
Upper and a part of Lower Canada will be in our possession." 
When Federalists complained that their opponents sought to es- 
tablish a standing army that might menace American liberties^ 
Trenton's True American replied, a lt will be a moving, fighting^ 
conquering) army and as soon as its duty is done, it will be dis- 
banded." 1T Had Bermuda or Jamaica been vulnerable to attack 
by a flotilla of Jefferson's gunboats, the War Hawks would have 
been equally satisfied to invade them. 