

29 Hansard, XXIV, 364. 

30 Memoirs (photostat), II, 14, Roberts MSSj Independent Chronicle, July 16, 
1812. 

436 



C< THIS UNNATURAL 



Still, the Republican chieftains must bear primary responsibility 
for the war and the factionalism that made it an almost fatal test 
of the sturdiness of the nation they themselves had done so much 
to build. Whereas Washington and Adams kept objectives and 
means in harmony with one another, their successors often com- 
mitted the United States to seek absolute right with inadequate 
weapons. Compromise, when sought, was usually offered at an 
impossible time. The justice of American demands is nearly un- 
deniable, but the two Virginians, who prided themselves on the 
coolness of their logic, failed to perceive that justice was not a 
weapon in itself. They provided it with insufficient support, and 
they expected warring powers to view collateral problems with 
the same coolness that America exhibited. Economic warfare rested 
upon a rigid, mechanical conception of international trade. Al- 
though it was, of course, felt by the belligerents, it proved far more 
harmful to America, economically and morally, and served chiefly 
to convince Europe of the cowardice of the United States. 

t The two presidents secured not one important diplomatic objec- 
tive after 1803. They scarcely challenged the development of 
factionalism within the Republican party, factionalism that de- 
prived Congress of any real sense of direction. They provided 
public opinion with far too little leadership. They |il*d their fol- 
lowers often spoke loudly and carried no stick at all.; When at last 
a small group of congressmen declared that the time for half meas- 
ures had ended and carried a majority with them down the road 
toward war, neither Great Britain nor th^xAmerican people be- 
lieved the destination would be reached., 1 Thus British concession 
was discouraged and national union miae impossible. In a state 
of military and psychological unpreparedness, the United States 
of America embarked upon a, war to recover the self-respect de- 
stroyed by Republican leaders. Old John Taylor of Caroline wrote 
to the Secretary of State on the'&ay of the declaration of war, "May 
God send you a safe deliverance." 31 

81 Taylor to Monroe, June 18, 1812, William E. Dodd, ed., "Letters of John 
Taylor, of Caroline County, Virginia," Jo An P. Branch Papers, II (Richmond, 1908), 
34*- 

437 



NOTE ON THE SOURCES 

This work examines a controversial period in American history as well as 
aspects of the major European war of the nineteenth century. Available 
materials are so multitudinous that a mere listing might conceal the most 
important. American and British manuscripts and contemporary publica- 
tions are the principal foundations of this work, and the most important 
new contributions have come from these primary sources. Finally, the 
student of Anglo-American relations in this period is particularly fortunate 
in the bibliographical aids available to him. The excellent basic guide edited 
by Samuel F. Bemis and Grace G. GrifHn (Guide to the Diplomatic History 
of the United States [Washington, 1935]) has been supplemented and 
in a sense brought up to date, at least so far as secondary materials are con- 
cerned, by the masterful bibliographical article of Warren H. Goodman 
("The Origins of the War of 1812: a Survey of Changing Interpreta- 
tions," Mississippi Valley Historical Review y XXVIII [1941-1942], 1 71- 
186) and the more recent Harvard Guide (Oscar Handlin et aL y eds., 
Harvard, Guide to American History [Cambridge, 1954]). Consequently 
this note attempts no historiographical essay and singles out only those ma- 
terials, principally contemporary, which have been especially useful. The 
footnotes indicate books and articles helpful at particular points, either for 
fact or interpretation. 