

The three most important studies of the entire period from 1805 to 
1812 are those of Henry Adams, Alfred L. Burt, and Irving Brant. No 
student of these years can fail to owe a great debt to Henry Adams, History 
of the United States during the Administrations of Jefferson and Madison 
(9 vols.; New York, 18891891), especially Vols. Ill VI. Adams is 
almost unreservedly hostile toward the Republican leaders and, as Irving 
Brant has shown, is not above shading the evidence in a fashion modern 
historians would consider improper. Although Adams worked more deeply 
among British manuscripts than any who have followed after him, his 
attitude toward England is colored with the nationalism of the period in 
which he wrote. Nevertheless, in the vigor of his judgments, in his capacity 
for magnificent prose (amidst, may it be said, extremely lengthy quotations 
and paraphrases), and in the breadth of his vision, Henry Adams still chal- 
lenges those who follow him. Alfred L. Burt, The United States y Great 
Britain, and British North America from the Revolution to the Establish- 

439 



NOTE ON THE SOURCES 

-jnent of Peace ajter the War of 1812 (New Haven, 1940), covers a longer 
period in far less space than Adams. Burt's work, with a few exceptions 
on the British side, rests primarily upon printed materials, both primary 
and secondary. His judgments are judicious, but Burt perhaps fails to cap- 
ture the emotional fire of the period. The same criticism cannot be made 
of Irving Brant, James Madison: Secretary of State (Indianapolis, 1953) 
and James Madison: the President (Indianapolis, 1956), for Brant is 
a strong partisan of the Republicans and particularly of Madison himself. 
Like those of Adams, Brant's verdicts are provocative, and many of them 
are particularly useful in forcing a reconsideration of the usual assumption 
that Madison was a weak or even incompetent secretary and president. 
Based as they are upon an intensive study of primary materials available 
in the United States, including copies of British diplomatic correspondence, 
Brant's volumes provide a great deal of information available nowhere 
else; on the British side, because of the intensive focus upon Madison, they 
are less satisfactory. I frequently disagree with Brant, but his viewpoint, 
like that of Adams, cannot be ignored by anyone attempting to untangle 
the threads of this period. 

Because of serious errors and omissions in American State Papers > Foreign 
Relations, Vols. II-III (Washington, 1832-1833), the Department of 
State's official correspondence must be consulted in the original or on micro- 
film available from the National Archives. The following departmental 
files have been used: Diplomatic Instructions, All Countries, Vols. VI- 
VIII; Despatches, Great Britain, Vols. XII-XVIII (including one un- 
numbered volume); Despatches, France, Vols. X-XIII; and Consular 
Letters, London, Vol. IX. The latter contains much information on im- 
pressment and the campaign against the Orders in Council. Annals of Con- 
gress, 9th Congress-I2th Congress (Washington, 1852-1853), do not 
fully reflect congressional sentiment because they were pasted together years 
later from newspaper accounts, Senate debates often went unreported, and 
the Federalists too often fluctuated between extravagant criticism and tacti- 
cal silence. Nevertheless, they are an invaluable source. 