

Even Indian warfare did not inspire important demands for 
Canadian conquest in the winter of 1811-12. "Much of that re- 
sentment against the British, which prevailed so strongly in the 
western states," a Kentucky historian of the war stated, ". . . may 
fairly be attributed to this source." Even this Western chronicler, 
however, declared that the Orders in Council became more intoler- 
able than any other source of complaint against England. 18 After 
Tippecanoe desultory warfare took place along the frontier, but 
most Indian tribes remained at peace until General Hull surren- 
dered his army to Isaac Brock in the summer of 1812. Although 
Grundy and the Lexington Reporter remained irate, the Indian 
menace played a comparatively minor part in congressional debates 
until the very end of the session, when all complaints against 
Britain were being brought together to support a declaration of 
war. At that time congressmen emphasized Britain's interference 
in American affairs rather than the material consequences to one 
section. 

The most important, most justified American complaints against 
England sprang from Britain's exercise of her maritime power. 

17 Annals, iath Cong., ist sess., p. 13975 True American (Trenton), May iS, 
1812. Later in the war, however, many Americans, including Madison and Monroe, 
were tempted by the dream of incorporating Canada into the United States. 

18 Robert McAfee, History of the Late War in the Western Country (Lexington, 
Ky., 1816), pp. 2, 7. 

427 



f< THIS UNNATURAL 



Substantively, through the loss of seamen, ships, and cargoes, 
America suffered greatly from impressment, blockades, and the 
Orders in Council. The sovereign spirit and the self-respect of the 
American nation suffered perhaps even more every time a seaman 
was removed from beneath the Stars and Stripes or a merchant 
vessel was haled to trial before an admiralty court that paid scant 
heed to international law. The penalties of neutrality are often 
dear, and perhaps only the weak, the phlegmatic, or the noble are 
capable of enduring them. Jefferson and Madison might fit into 
one or the other of these categories. Ultimately the nation felt 
taxed beyond endurance. However necessary to British prosecution 
of the contest with Napoleon impressment and attacks upon neutral 
commerce might be, they finally brought war with America. For- 
tune rather than justice postponed the outbreak of war beyond the 
gloomiest days of Britain's struggle, when American entry might 
well have played an important part. 

Impressment, Frank A. Updyke has observed, was "the most 
aggravating and the most persistent" American grievance. By 
1812 the press gangs had been at work for twenty years. In many 
instances probably even the majority the British forcibly re- 
called a king's subject to his allegiance rather than kidnapped an 
American. More often than was generally admitted, the Admiralty 
released mariners mistakenly seized. Still, impressment formed an 
ultimately intolerable insult to national sovereignty; When, during 
the war, the Federalist legislature of Massachusetts undertook an 
investigation to show that very few seamen had been impressed, 
John Quincy Adams angrily and accurately declared the question 
irrelevant: 