

Both the British government anc}/the Federalists later com- 
plained that the President only resuscitated the impressment issue 
after the Orders in Council had disappeared. They pointed out 
that, particularly in the Erskine negotiations, the administration 
had allowed impressment to pass in silence. In 1813 Lord Castle- 
reagh described it as "a cause of war, now brought forward as such 
for the first time." 21 These criticisms showed only that the admin- 
istration had been backward in defending the rights of citizens, or 
that the President and Congress had been willing for a time to 
exchange the kidnaping of Americans for the benefits of neutrality. 
Neither Lord Castlereagh nor Timothy Pickering, who as secretary 
of state had himself vehemently protested the practice, should have 
been surprised that the American people considered impressment 
an insult. 

Even more than impressment, with which congressmen and 
newspaper editors often coupled them, the Orders in Council 
showed Britain's contemptuous disdain for American protests 
against her use of sea power. The forcible enlistment of seamen 
could be expressed in dramatic human terms. The Orders in Coun- 
cil more massively and more selfishly assaulted the United States. 
Their material cost was impressive. Although the number of 
seizures actually fell after 1808, the year beginning in October, 
1811, saw an increase of nearly 50 per cent. The orders and the 
Essex case had long since reduced the reexport trade to a shadow 
of its former size. After a spurt stimulated by Macon's Bill #2 
and the Cadore letter, the export of native American produce fell 
drastically after the spring of 181 1. By far the greatest proportion 
of this decline came in exports to Britain, particularly because re- 
turn cargoes were forbidden and the United Kingdom suffered 
from glut. 22 Agriculturists and plantation owners, some shipowners, 
and the average congressman ascribed the decline to Britain's 

21 Hansard, XXIV, 371. 

22 Adam Seybert, Statistical Annals . . . of the United States of America (Phila- 
delphia, 1818), pp. 79-80, 93, 112-113. 

430 



**THIS UNNATURAL WAR >J 

Orders in Council, which prevented Americans, from developing 
the presumably lucrative Continental market. At the same time, 
particularly because the British permitted their own subjects to 
trade with Europe under license, the Orders in Council seemed 
humiliating. Since at least November, 1807, the English had 
presumed to legislate not only for their own people but also for 
the commercial world. Economic necessity and national right alike 
cried out against the Orders in Council. 

Everyone in Washington during the months from November 
to June placed the Orders in Council at the head of the list of 
American grievances. Louis Serurier and Augustus Foster, Feder- 
alists and Republicans were in agreement. When the British minis- 
ter asked Chauncey Goodrich, a Federalist senator, "what was re- 
quired of us by Men of fair Views, he replied, take off the Orders 
in Council and come to some Arrangement about Impressment." 
In November President Madison considered British maritime 
policy the transcendent issue between the two countries. Porter's 
report declared that the orders "went to the subversion of our 
national independence" and were "sapping the foundation of our 
prosperity." 23 Throughout the winter congressmen assailed the 
orders, drowning out the "whip-poor-will cry" for Canada of 
which John Randolph spoke. Repeal, Madison noted years later, 
would have postponed war and led to renewed negotiations on 
impressment "with fresh vigor & hopes, under the auspices of suc- 
cess in the case of the orders in council." The orders, he told Jared 
Sparks in 1 830, were the only issue sturdy enough to bear a decla- 
ration of war. 24 