

The strength of this issue depended in part upon the reinforce- 
ment provided by impressment and other grievances, the flying 
buttresses of the central structure. Had the orders stood alone as 
a British challenge, war would probably not have come in 1812. 
But they became the key to the drive for war. No other factor, 

28 Journal entry, May 18, 1812, Foster MSSj Madison to Adams, private, Nov. 15, 
* 8 1 1, Gaillard Hunt, ed., The Writings of James Madison (9 vols.j New York, 
19001910), VIII, 166167. 

24 Madison to Wheaton, Feb. 26-27, 1827, Hunt, o<p. cit. y IX, 2735 journal entry, 
April 1 8 [-2 3], 1830, Jared Sparks MSS, Houghton Library, Harvard University. 

431 



"THIS UNNATURAL 



not even impressment, which most directly affected Northeast- 
erners, struck all sections so impartially. Not even impressment 
exceeded the orders as a threat to America's position as a sovereign 
power. The Orders in Council were four years old when the 
Twelfth Congress met, going on five when America declared war. 
Why this delay? A natural desire to escape war partly explains 
it. Unreal faith in the power of trade boycotts, more justified ex- 
pectations from the Erskine agreement, optimism engendered by 
the Cadore letter, hope that the Prince of Wales would replace 
his insane father's ministers with more friendly men, the antici- 
pated impact of American measures of preparedness in Great Brit- 
ain all these counseled delay- When war ultimately came in 
June, 1812, the Orders in Council were the central issue. The 
requirements of consistency and a growing realization that Ameri- 
can honor had been nearly exhausted were the immediate precipi- 
tants. 

Since at least 1806 the United States government, and more 
particularly Republican congressmen, had proclaimed that Amer- 
ica would not settle for whatever neutral trade the belligerents 
chose to let her enj oy. Profitable as such trade might be (and it 
often was extremely rewarding), the United States would demand 
its rights. Of course Jefferson, and especially Madison, did not 
demand utter surrender from their opponents, and they did not 
press certain claims they considered comparatively insignificant. 
In principle, however, they insisted that Britain and France recog- 
nize American rights and tailor their policies to them. Commercial 
pressure failed, political bargaining did not succeed, pleas for 
justice rebounded hollowly across the Atlantic. Still America main- 
tained her claims, aiid the only remaining, weapon to secure them 
was military power. The War Hawk Congress initiated prepared- 
ness, and the administration discreetly encouraged it, in the hope 
that England would surrender to this weapon what she had denied 
to Boycotts, bargaining, and complaint. 

Once efkbarked upon this course it became almost impossible to 
turn back. jMtany who voted for military measures without wantiaag 
war found it difficult to recede from the ground they had taken. 

432 



CC THIS UNNATURAL 