

No Nation can be Independent which suffers her Citizens to be stolen from 
her at the discretion of the Naval or military Officers of another. . . . The 
State, by the social compact is bound to protect every one of its Citizens, and 
the enquiry how many of them a foreign Nation may be allowed to rob 
with impunity is itself a humiliation to which I blush to see that the Legis- 
lature of my native state could defend. . . . The principle for which we 
are now struggling is of a higher and more sacred nature than any ques- 

428 



< THIS UNNATURAL 



tion about taxation can involve. It is the principle of personal liberty, and 
of every social right. 19 

Failures of American arms and a European peace that halted im- 
pressment caused Adams, along with Madison and Monroe, to 
accept a peace silent on impressment. In principle, however, he was 
correct. America might well have gone to war on this issue, perhaps 
at the time of the Chesapeake affair. 

Although officially the American government made very little 
of impressment from 1 808 onward, the people could not forget it. 
During the war session, and particularly in the spring, impressment 
aroused more and more heat. Niles* Register, which began publi- 
cation in 1811, rallied opinion on this issue. "Accursed be the 
American government, and every individual in it," an imprecation 
ran, "who . . . shall agree to make peace with Great Britain, 
until ample provision shall be made for our impressed seamen, and 
security shall be given for the prevention of such abominable out- 
rages in the future."! A Quid and a Republican who hoped to avoid 
war told Foster this was the most ticklish problem to explain to 
their constituents, and even the stanchly antiwar senator, Thomas, 
Worthington, found impressment almost impossible to tolerate. 
"He says, 15 Foster wrote in his diary, "he would rather live on a 
Crust in the Interior than live degraded." Foster, who repeatedly 
suggested that modification of the orders would prevent a declara- 
tion of war, nevertheless recognized the renewed importance ac- 
corded to impressment*; On April 23 he wrote, "Very inflammatory 
paragraphs and letters on the subject . . . have lately been circu- 
lated in the American papers, and as the causes of war become more 
closely canvassed, that arising out of the practice of impl^anent 
seems to be dwelt upon with considerable vehemence." 2 f When 
war approached, the War Hawks had a singularly effective propa- 

19 Frank A. Updyke, The Diplomacy of the War of 1812 (Baltimore, 1915), p. 3, 
Adams to Plumer, Aug. 13, 1813, Adams Family MSS (microfilm), Massachusetts 
Historical Society, Vol. CXXXIX. 

20 Ntles* Register, April 18, 1812 (italics omitted) 5 journal entries, April 19, 22, 
May 24, 1812, Foster journal, Augustus J. Foster MSS, Library of Congress 5 Foster 
#28 to Castlereagh, April 23, 1812, FO 5/86. 

429 



C< THIS UNNATURAL 



ganda point in this violation o the rights of individual Americans 
who deserved better of their country. ; 