



The iOjOOO-man army proposed by the House of Representatives 
had an ostensible military purpose, but its supporters valued it 
chiefly as a demonstration of American determination. "We are 
not at war yet tho j David R. Williams hopes in god we soon shall 
be. Till we are at war I shall not go above 10,000 additional 
troops/ 7 Jonathan Roberts wrote in December. As time passed, 
Roberts became more and more bellicose. In February he wrote, 
"There seems to be no disposition to relax our war measures but I 
believe every body would be exceeding glad to remain at peace." 
A month later he stated, "I am well convinced we have no hope 
of peace but by vigorous preparations for War," but he added 
that he was ready to vote for war. 25 As the spring passed, Roberts 
found his Quaker principles weakening, and he attended meetings 
very infrequently. In May and June this man, who had come to 
Washington determined that affairs should be forced to a solution 
and yet still hopeful war could be avoided, found himself more 
and more firmly committed to the cause of the War Hawks. The 
logic of the situation carried the Pennsylvanian and many of his 
colleagues forward. 

In May John Randolph declared that, although many members 
of the majority would not follow the same course if they had it to 
do over again, "they have advanced to the brink of a precipice, and 
not left themselves room to turn." John Smilie admitted as much, 
arguing that while he would have preferred a further attempt at 
commercial coercion he now felt it necessary to go on toward war, 
since "if we now recede we shall be a reproach among nations." 
Willis Alston of North Carolina told Foster in March that Con- 
gress "should have originally taken another Course, now too late, 
it would have been better to protest against the belligerents & let 
Qommerce thrive, this should have been done from the Beginning." 
Alston voted with the War Hawks on every important roll call. 
Speaker Clay and his supporters counted on and made frequent, 
effective reference to consistency in the closing months of the 
session. ^After the pledges we have made, and the stand we have 

25 Roberts to Matthew Roberts, Dec. 20, 1811, Feb. 3, March 2, 1812, Roberts 
MSS. 

433 



''THIS UNNATURAL 



taken/' Clay asked his colleagues, a are we now to cover ourselves 
with shame and indelible disgrace by retreating from the measures 
and ground we have taken?" Remembering the reputation of the 
Tenth Congress, many representatives felt that the answer was 
as obvious as Clay pictured it. Thus legislators who were really 
"scarecrow men" came to support a declaration of war. James A. 
Bayard, one Federalist who had foreseen this danger from the 
beginning, chided a friend for his shortsightedness, saying, "You 
have thought the thing all along a jest & I have no doubt in the 
commencement it was so, but jests sometimes become serious & end 
in earnest." 26 So it was in 1 8 1 2. 

Consistency in congressmen, in a party, or in an administration 
became national honor when applied to the country as a whole. 
Since the acquisition of Louisiana in 1803, America had endured 
a steady diet of diplomatic humiliation. Jefferson, Madison, and 
the Congresses of their time attempted to reverse European policy 
by applying economic pressure. This tactic failed because Congress 
lacked staying power and Republican leaders underestimated the 
strength of emotions abroad. Defeats continued. Napoleon's an- 
nouncement of repeal merely worsened the situation, for his cynical 
contempt and the gullibility of the American administration soon 
became apparent. Republicans had jeopardized the national char- 
acter and the reputation of the United States j they had created 
a situation from which war was almost the only honorable escape 5 
they had encouraged England, where unfortunately such encour- 
agement was too little needed, to act almost as though Lord Corn- 
wallis had won the battle of Yorktown. a We have suffered and 
suffered until our forbearance has been pronounced cowardice and 
want of energy," a friend wrote Jonathan Roberts. Although talk 
of honor perhaps came too easily to the lips of some patriotic orators, 
the danger was real. When John C. Calhoun asserted that "if we 
submit to the prentensions of England, now openly avowed, the 
independence of this nation is lost. . . . This is the second strug- 