

Fortunately, the papers of the leading Republicans Jefferson, Madi- 
son, Monroe, and Gallatin are all readily available. The chief collections 
of the correspondence of the first three are at the Library of Congress, 
much Madison material being in the William C. Rives Collection. In 
addition there is Jefferson correspondence in the Massachusetts Historical 
Society (Coolidge Collection), extremely valuable Monroe manuscripts 
(particularly for the negotiation of 1806) in the New York Public Library, 

440 



NOTE ON THE SOURCES 

and a small and unimportant Madison collection at the same place. Gal- 
latin's papers are in the New- York Historical Society. These collections 
displace the printed selections, particularly because the incoming corre- 
spondence is often especially useful. No major collection of Robert Smith's 
papers is available or has been published, although the Maryland His- 
torical Society has a small Robert and William Smith collection. 

Although William Pinkney's papers have disappeared, the other Ameri- 
can representatives at London left valuable collections. In addition to the 
Monroe MSS, there is an important series of John Spear Smith letters in 
the Samuel Smith MSS, Library of Congress, and useful material in the 
Jonathan Russell MSS, Brown University Library. 

The Library of Congress has the manuscripts of at least a score of 
Republican figures. Some, notably the papers of Joseph H. Nicholson, Wil- 
son C. Nicholas, and William Plumer, are extremely helpful. Unfortu- 
nately, other collections (for example, those of Henry Clay, George W. 
Campbell, and Thomas Worthington) are extremely small. Two recent 
publications, Robert L. Meriwether, ed., The Papers of John C+ Calhoun, 
Vol. I (Columbia, S.C., 1959), and James F. Hopkins, ed.. The Papers of 
Henry Clay, Vol. I (Lexington, Ky., 1959), bring together the very 
limited political correspondence of these two men. The DeWitt Clinton 
MSS at Columbia University and the Thomas McKean Papers at the His- 
torical Society of Pennsylvania help explain local Republican politics, and 
the memoirs (photostats) and especially the correspondence of Jonathan 
Roberts in the latter repository reveal as well as any single collection the 
ebbs and flows in the War Hawk Congress. The Adams Family MSS, 
Massachusetts Historical Society, now available on microfilm, help to show 
the drift of John and John Quincy Adams toward Republicanism. The 
younger Adams' particularly trenchant comments have been printed in 
Worthington C. Ford, ed., The Writings of John Quincy Adams, Vols. 
III-IV (New York, 1914), and Charles F. Adams, ed., Memoirs of John 
Quincy Adams, Vols. I-II (Philadelphia, 1874). 

Federalists left even more plentiful manuscript materials than their po- 
litical opponents. Comparatively moderate, loyal Federalism may be fol- 
lowed in James A. Bayard, Letterbook of Letters to Caesar A. Rodney, 
New York Public Library; in Elizabeth Donnan, ed., Papers of James A. 
Bayard, 1796-1815, American Historical Association, Annual Report, 
*9*3> Vol. II (Washington, 1915); and in the Rufus King MSS, New- 
York Historical Society, although King's correspondents were usually more 
immoderate than he was. The Wolcott Family Papers, Connecticut His- 