

Although I do not presume to deal exhaustively with Franco-American 
relations, French sources have aided development of the central theme. 
Most notable are the Archives des Affaires trangeres, available in photo- 
stat form at the Library of Congress. Other useful materials include Corre- 
sfondancedeNa'polonI er ,Vol$.XI~-XX'VII (Paris, 1862-1869); Leon 
Lecestre, ed., Lettres Inedltes de Napoleon I er (2 vols.; Paris, 1897) ; and 

444 



NOTE ON THE SOURCES 

Louis M. Turreau de Garambouville, A^ergu sur la Situation Politique de$ 
tats-Unis d'Amerique (Paris, 1815). 

Forty American newspapers and an equal number of pamphlets have 
been used in the research for this study, all of them available in the ex- 
tremely broad collection of the American Antiquarian Society. Although all 
have been valuable in fixing the temperature of American politics from time 
to time, attention need here be called to only a few of the most representa- 
tive newspapers. The National Intelligencer (Washington) spoke clearly 
for the administration. More bellicose were the Aurora (Philadelphia), the 
Independent Chronicle (Boston), the Enquirer (Richmond), and, for the 
West, the Reporter (Lexington, Ky.^.Niles* Weekly Register (Baltimore), 
first published in 1811, supported the War Hawks. The Columbian (New 
York), founded in 1809, P ut forward the Clintonian position. The Fed- 
eralist position was stated in the various pamphlets of John Lowell, the 
Columbian Centinel (Boston), the New-York Evening Post, and, so 
stridently that it later provoked mob action, by Alexander C. Hanson's 
Federal Republican (Baltimore), founded in 1 808. An impressive con- 
temporary summary of the positions of both parties, combined with an 
appeal for unity in the face of Britain, is Matthew Carey, The Olive Branch^ 
or Faults on Both Sides y Federal and Democratic (3d ed.; Boston, 1815). 

British periodicals similarly cover the political spectrum. The arguments 
against restricting American trade were most strenuously put by the Edin- 
burgh Review y the Morning Chronicle (London), and various provincial 
journals. Representing two quite distinct portions of the middle ground, 
and particularly useful because they reveal a shift among the uncom- 
mitted, are Cobbett's Political Register (London) and the Times (London). 
The defense of the Orders in Council was most energetically prosecuted 
by the semiofficial Courier (London) and, from its founding in 1809, 
the Quarterly Review (London). James Stephen, War m Disguise; Or, 
the Frauds of the Neutral Flags (London, 1805), and Alexander Baring, 
An Inquiry into the Causes and Consequences of the Orders in Council; 
and an Examination of the Conduct of Great Britain towards the Neutral 
Commerce of America (London, 1808), clearly set forth the rival positions. 
The Goldsmiths' Collection (University College, London), the British 
Museum and its newspaper branch at Colindale contain all the above ma- 
terial and much more which is cited only in the footnotes. For a discussion 
of British opinion based upon some of these materials, see Reginald Hors- 
man, "British Opinion and the United States of America, 1806-1812," 
unpublished M.A. thesis, University of Birmingham, 1955. 