Political Economy of Conscription in Napoleonic France 1061

identified as especially impervious to the government’s conscription
efforts. Back-of-the-envelope calculations based on these results suggest
that there would have been 27 percent more draft dodgers roaming
France in 1810 had the regime refused to ramp up its use of discrimina-
tory conscription in 1809.6
   Finally, we discuss a series of reforms the Napoleonic regime intro-
duced to address draft evasion in the medium and long run. These included
the centralization of conscription enforcement, the use of draconian forms
of punishment for draft dodgers (as well as their families and villages),
and the involvement of the military in the fight against draft evasion.
   This article contributes to the literature on administrative reform and
nation-building in economic history. A growing body of research in the
social sciences sees the modern nation-state as the result of a process of
rationalization of public sector institutions (North, Wallis, and Weingast
2009; Dincecco 2015). This process involved the creation of professional
bureaucratic bodies to allow governments to enforce policies and supply
public goods more effectively (Balla and Johnson 2009; Johnson and
Koyama 2014; Cox 2020; Hao and Liu 2020) and has been identified as
key to economic development (Besley and Persson 2010; Johnson and
Koyama 2017). Our argument is particularly relevant to existing work
emphasizing the connection between warfare and state formation in
Western Europe (Downing 1992; Gennaioli and Voth 2015). According
to this literature, pressure from military competition contributed to the
decision of many European states to reform their fiscal regimes and
increase their ability to tax (Besley and Persson 2010; Dincecco and
Prado 2012). Our paper distinguishes itself from existing work in this
field by providing an economic and empirical analysis of a specific histor-
ical case of nation-building efforts driven by the regime’s military needs.
It shows that the latter prompted the Napoleonic regime to introduce an
array of consequential domestic reforms, including the centralization of
the administration of military conscription, the reliance on the national
army for domestic policing, and the enforcement of the draft.

          DRAFT EVASION IN POST-REVOLUTIONARY FRANCE

   Conscription was the cornerstone of France’s post-revolutionary mili-
tary system. Between 1800 and 1813, the Napoleonic regime drafted

  6
    Confidence in our results is strengthened by qualitative evidence from primary sources. High-
ranking officials of the Napoleonic government, like Lacuée, explicitly took the variation in the
prevalence of draft evasion across French regions into consideration when designing recruitment
policies.
