Political Economy of Conscription in Napoleonic France 1059

was not a new phenomenon. Deserters have been, from the perspective
of military leaders, a scourge as old as war itself. Whenever soldiers’
conditions approximated the intolerable—due to weather, lack of rations,
or officers’ abuse—the option of abandoning camp became a palatable
alternative. Often, this meant defeat for the few who had decided to stay.
In some cases, whole armies had “vanished into thin air” due to desertion
(Parker 1996, p. 57).
   Desertion is even more of a threat to an army that relies chiefly on
mandatory military service (Piano and Rouanet 2020). Less than fully
compensated for their services, and the risk war poses to their lives,
conscripts face a higher temptation to “dodge” than do volunteers,
whether domestic professionals or foreign mercenaries. As soon as
the French government adopted large-scale conscription, draft evasion
numbers skyrocketed. Within just a few years, 200,000 draft dodgers and
deserters were roaming France’s countryside (Forrest 1989, p. 169). The
inability to contain draft evasion threatened to put the country at a disad-
vantage against its many enemies. It also produced a wide array of social
ills, including the rise of banditry and crime, as draft dodgers joined the
French underworld to make a living while hiding from the authorities. If
he wished to accomplish his plans for European dominance, Napoléon
needed to find a solution to the problem of draft dodging first.
   This article provides an economic analysis of the Napoleonic regime’s
efforts to mitigate the threat widespread draft evasion posed to its mili-
tary objectives. These actions can be understood as rational responses
to the phenomenon of draft dodging under the specific circumstances of
early nineteenth-century France. Rates of draft dodging varied drasti-
cally across departments, a variation that contemporaneous and histor-
ical accounts attribute to a combination of geographic characteristics
and cultural factors. Local geography could frustrate the government’s
efforts to administer conscription by providing draft dodgers with plenty
of escape routes and hiding places. Cultural factors, such as a dislike for
the revolutionary policies of the regime, could increase resistance to the
draft, including among local officials.
   In response to widespread draft evasion, the French regime adopted a
policy of discriminatory conscription enforcement. The presence of draft
dodgers within a region made it more likely for others to evade conscrip-
tion, which generates a policy externality by congesting the government’s
efforts to police and enforce a given conscription rate. To mitigate this
congestion problem and reduce the overall number of draft dodgers at
no extra cost, the government started setting a department’s conscrip-
tion rate based on its marginal cost of enforcement. Departments where
