Political Economy of Conscription in Napoleonic France 1065

the Hautes-Loire, conscription efforts were being frustrated “because
the mountains make it almost impossible to catch fugitives.” The same
problem seemingly afflicted the Italian border: on 6 August 1806, Fouché
warned that hundreds of soldiers dispatched to Italy were abandoning
their posts every month to return home via the many mountain passes in
the Alps (Fouché 1913, p. 453).
   The efforts to curb draft dodging eventually culminated in a major
reform of the conscription system. The reform was the brainchild of Jean-
Gérard Lacuée, who, as Napoléon’s minister of war, had been in charge
of enforcing the military draft. In 1808, Lacuée compiled a report on the
status of conscription in France. In it, he classified departments on a scale
of 1 to 5 according to their historical resistance to conscription efforts.
He then advocated for the use of his classification in calculating each
department’s contribution of men to the French military. The reform was
implemented in 1809 as a short-term palliative to the country’s growing
military needs.
   Simultaneously, the government was experimenting with a series of
policies to solve the problem of draft dodging in the long term. These
included such innovations as the centralization of conscription adminis-
tration away from local officials and the use of the military against the
country’s own citizens. Newly created army units were tasked with deter-
ring, preventing, and punishing draft dodging. One particularly controver-
sial strategy was to force the families of draft dodgers to provide food and
shelter to the very troops entrusted with catching them. Other coercive
and discretionary strategies involved the disarmament of entire commu-
nities and collective fines against townships with high draft evasion rates,
among others.
   With its mix of administrative reforms and draconian policies, the
Napoleonic regime successfully reduced draft dodging. According to
French officials, draft dodging rates collapsed by over two-thirds in just
five years (Woloch 1986). Figure 1 shows the pattern of draft dodging
rates across France between 1806 and 1810 in the different groups of
departments identified by Lacuée. The decline of draft evasion across
France contributed to Napoléon’s and his army’s, the Grande Armée’s,
decade-long strike of almost uninterrupted successes on the battlefield, at
least until 1812.

                          DATA DESCRIPTION

  To analyze the problem of draft dodging during the Napoleonic regime
and the latter’s policy response, we leverage novel archival evidence from
