1064                            Rouanet and Piano

draft dodgers plenty of hiding spots, such as caves and rocky coastlines.
Departments further away from the nation’s capital were also often seen
as prone to draft dodging, especially those sharing a border with another
country.
   The French government was keenly aware of the variations in
geographical characteristics and their effect on draft evasion. In a report
to the minister of war from 1806, the prefect of the department of Lozère
attributed “the little success of the levy” to his department’s “mountains,
its gorges, its woods and the toughness of the climate which ... offer
conscripts almost certain means to escape the searches and pursuits of the
gendarmerie.”9 The administrative correspondence between local prefects
and the central government offers more evidence that public officials
perceived geography as a major constraint to conscription enforcement.10
A consistent theme of these reports is the difficulty of apprehending draft
dodgers in “rugged” regions. In a letter to Paris from 1813, the prefect
of the department of Lozère lamented that conscripts were escaping
villages just minutes after the draft, but gendarmes could do little more
than stand there as draftees climbed up the mountains near their villages
and quickly disappeared into the woods (Waquet 1968, p. 199). Prefects
and sub-prefects often complained about the difficulty of dispatching and
receiving information about conscription enforcement from the more
remote villages and towns in their district.11 According to one prefect,
“the extreme dissemination of [the administration’s] constituents” was
to blame for the failure to eradicate draft evasion from his department,
in part due to the difficulty of “maintaining [communications] with the
mayors of the jurisdiction” (Deferrière 1804, p. 380).
   We find similar examples in the correspondence between Napoléon
and his chief of police, Joseph Fouché.12 In September 1804, the latter
wrote to Napoléon that “[in the departments of] Loire, Lozère, and Tarn,
mountains offer safe asylum [to draft dodgers] and make [their] pros-
ecution almost impossible” (Fouché 1964, p. 285). In 1806, he reported
that in the department of Pyrénnées-Orientales, “the mountains and the
vicinity of Spain make the efforts of the gendarmerie futile,” while in
  9
    Archives Nationales, F/9/209 n.1317. See also the prefect of Lozère’s (1806) comprehensive
Mémoire sur la conscription dans le département de la Lozère, Archives Nationales, F/9/209,
especially pp. 7–8, 13.
  10
     See Waquet (1968) and the correspondence in boxes F/9/150 to F/9/260 in the Archives
Nationales.
  11
     See Deferrière (1804) and Mémoire sur la conscription dans le département de la Lozère,
Archives Nationales, F/9/209.
  12
     Translations of Fouché’s police reports mentioning problems concerning conscription
in mountainous departments as well as conscripts fleeing abroad are available in Online
Appendix E.
