1058                              Rouanet and Piano

hand in the second half of the sixteenth century. New tactics that relied
on the coordinated use of firearms were introduced, to the advantage of
larger armies (Latzko 1993). Average army size went rapidly from a few
thousand to tens and, on a few occasions, hundreds of thousands. For
instance, the French army numbered 50,000 men in the 1550s. The same
figure was 150,000 by the 1630s (Parker 1976, p. 206).3
   The tactical and technological changes brought about by the military
revolution proved rather expensive for European rulers. Larger armies
meant more salaries, uniforms, weapons, and rations. The growing effec-
tiveness of gunpowder artillery required the construction of more exten-
sive fortifications (Batchelder and Freudenberger 1983). Burdened with
these new financial requirements, sovereigns initiated a series of reforms
of their public institutions. As one military historian put it, “the growth
of an effective bureaucracy was an essential prerequisite for the creation,
control, and supply of larger and better-equipped armies” (Parker 1996,
p. 147). Of particular importance were public institutions dedicated to
taxation. Following the onset of the military revolution, European states
moved away from a “domain model” of public finance—which had domi-
nated the continent throughout the Middle Ages and relied on the exploi-
tation of the ruler’s private assets—to more direct taxation of national
output (Bonney 1999).
   During the Revolutionary and Napoleonic periods, France became the
leader of a “new military revolution” (Parker 1996, p. 149). One consequen-
tial element of the latter was the decision to abandon traditional methods for
military recruitment, which rested mostly on foreign mercenaries and, to a
lesser extent, domestic volunteers. Instead, the French government started
to rely heavily on military conscription, an uncommon practice throughout
the ancien régime. While France already introduced the principle of the
military draft in 1793 (a measure formalized in 1798), it was only under
Napoléon that conscription became foundational to the country’s mili-
tary system and a permanent feature of French society. Every year during
Napoléon’s reign, tens of thousands of civilians were forced to abandon
their homes and villages and join the army for the following several years.
   Napoléon needed conscription to accomplish his military objective of
a French-dominated continent. It did not take long for him to run into
an obstacle to his vision of a French mass army: draft dodging.4 This
  3
   See also Onorato, Scheve, and Stasavage (2014).
  4
   Throughout the paper, we use the phrases draft dodging and draft desertion interchangeably.
As we discuss, the French government distinguished between different types of desertion. For the
purposes of our argument, we will focus mainly on what the French called réfractaires, or “draft
dodgers,” that is, individuals who, once they had been drafted, failed to join the military unit to
which they had been assigned.
