1062                            Rouanet and Piano

more than 2.4 million Frenchmen to serve in either the army or the
National Guard (Woloch 1986, p. 110). The foundations for the conscrip-
tion system had been established with the Loi Jourdan of 1798.7 In prin-
ciple, once the government had identified the army size necessary to meet
the country’s military needs, each of France’s administrative units—or
departments—was to contribute the same percentage of its able-bodied
male population between the ages of 20 and 25 (Forrest 1989, p. 39).
   Draftees were selected by a random lot administered by local authori-
ties. It was a slow and cumbersome process fraught with obstacles. Lack
of communication between Paris and the rest of the country would often
lead to confusion over how the system was supposed to operate. Local
governments lacked the administrative capacity and often the will to
enforce the law against their constituencies. Potential conscripts took
advantage of any loophole in the system to avoid military service: The
law allowed exemptions for men in poor health, men below a certain
height, and married men.
   Predictably, fraud was widespread (Rouanet and Piano 2020). People
would pretend to be afflicted by all sorts of disqualifying medical condi-
tions, often with the complicit assistance of their doctors. The introduc-
tion of the draft resulted also in a boom in marriages, as bachelors and
their families rushed to find single women, many of them widows, willing
to get wed for money (Pigeard 2000, p. 236). Besides these instances of
fraud, the most significant obstacle to the smooth operation of the draft
was draft dodging. The Napoleonic regime, like the republican govern-
ment before it, was aware of the danger it posed, and the “[administra-
tion of c]onscription overshadowed every problem of administration in
Napoleonic France. In an immediate sense, given its imperial ambitions,
the regime’s survival depended on it” (Woloch 1986, p. 101). Enforcing
conscription was no easy task. Already following the levée en masse of
1793, draftees had to be “literally dragged from their homes” (Nafziger
1988, p. 11):
   The extensive documentary evidence in the administrative records, especially the
   prefects’ reports, leaves no doubts that contemporaries regarded conscription as
   an unmitigated evil, to be resisted by all means (Woolf 2002, p. 159).

The inability of the regime to stop the hemorrhage of men from its ranks
would end up contributing to the military defeats of 1812 and 1813—
when eight out of every ten Frenchmen of age had been drafted into the
  7
    Online Appendix K provides a brief overview of the history of French military institutions
between the revolution and the rise of Napoléon and a discussion of Napoléon’s reform of the
country’s military system.
