Political Economy of Conscription in Napoleonic France 1063

armed forces—and, ultimately, to the fall of Napoléon himself (Delbrück
1985, p. 414).
   In post-revolutionary France, desertion took one of three forms. First,
a man liable for military service may not show up altogether to his
hometown’s draft lottery. Second, once drafted, he may go into hiding
and never join his battalion. Finally, he may leave his unit after having
joined it. The French government distinguished between these categories
as a matter of law. It referred to those falling within the former two as
réfractaires, or “draft dodgers,” while the latter was known simply as
déserteur.8 Draft dodgers accounted for the largest share of deserters;
most conscripts “disappeared” before they had ever joined their battal-
ions (Forrest 1989, p. 65). In the aftermath of the introduction of the Loi
Jourdan, over 200,000 conscripts escaped their military obligations and
never reported to their units (Forrest 1989, p. 169). By 1797, the coun-
try’s armed forces had shrunk from a nominal 700,000 men to an effec-
tive figure of 400,000. Draft dodgers accounted for much of the differ-
ence (Best 1998, p. 89).
   Resistance to conscription varied drastically from one region to
another. In some areas, draft defiance became “so strong as to turn into
rebellion” (Best 1998, p. 90), while others showed much greater compli-
ance. Historians of post-revolutionary France have identified a wide array
of factors to explain this variation. Forrest (1989) divides these into four
categories: ideology, social forces, economic factors, and geography.
   Regions that had been historically indifferent to the principles and poli-
cies of the revolution, like those of Southern and Western France, were less
willing to supply men for military service (Elting 1997, p. 325). Similarly,
communities in rural and more traditionally minded regions, like the
Vendée, encouraged or failed to discourage draft evasion. Compliance
with conscription was also associated with local economic circumstances.
For instance, farmers seem to have been especially unwilling to abandon
their fields for long stretches (Forrest 1989, p. 79). Finally, geography was
an influence behind the relative prevalence of draft dodging:
   Mountains, dispersed habitation, upland pasture, rocks and caves, treacherous
   marshlands familiar only to the local population, smugglers’ hill tracks that were
   part of a very private village connaissance all offered escape and evasion [to draft
   dodgers] (Forrest 1989, p. 124).

Contemporaneous accounts blamed high draft evasion rates on a wide
array of geographical characteristics. Rugged regions offered potential
   8
     The punishment for draft dodgers was generally less severe than for those who abandoned
their units during active employment (Piano and Rouanet 2020).
