1068                            Rouanet and Piano

Bertrand (1985, p. 17) explain, these relays were used “by young recruits
to join their units” and ensured that troops traveling by foot could find
“shelter for the night and a daily ration of bread.” While potentially
endogenous to desertion rates, these relays were built before the formal
adoption of large-scale conscription in 1798 and can thus be interpreted
as having affected the central government’s enforcement costs.
   Unfortunately, Lacuée’s data did not include the height of soldiers
or their socio-economic background. We obviate this limitation by
collecting data about the 1820 draft cohort in the Archives Nationales.22
These include information about the average height of young men eligible
for the draft and the structure of the local economy. We rely on the latter
to construct an “agricultural sector” variable measuring the percentage of
men eligible for the draft working on farms.
   We employ these data to explore: (1) the sources of variation in the
rate of draft dodging across France; (2) how the imperial government
responded to this variation rationally by implementing a system of
discriminatory conscription; and (3) how the system of discriminatory
conscription enforcement affected France’s fight against draft evasion.
   Key to our analysis is the claim that geographical characteristics
systematically influence the ruler’s calculus via their effect on the cost
of enforcing conscription and preventing draft dodging.23 Our main
geographic variable of interest is terrain ruggedness as defined by Riley,
DeGloria, and Elliot (1999). We also generated other geographic vari-
ables measuring the distance from Paris, whether a department is adja-
cent to the border, the year a department was created/annexed, wheat
suitability, proximity to the sea, township density, and elevation.
   Terrain ruggedness measures “topographic heterogeneity in wildlife
habitats providing concealment for preys and lookout posts” (Nunn and
Puga 2012, p. 21). Terrain ruggedness is measured by first dividing a terri-
tory into (926x929 ms) squares. Ruggedness is then calculated by taking
the square root of the sum of the squared difference in elevation between
the center of our original square and the elevation of each of the eight
neighboring squares.24 Akin to Nunn and Puga’s (2012) argument that
ruggedness affected the ability of European colonists to capture slaves
in West Africa, we take ruggedness to proxy the exogenous constraint
  22
      AN, see boxes F/9/150 through 259.
  23
      In Online Appendix F.4, we also show that geography influenced the choice of conscription
enforcement technology. The gendarmerie employed fewer mounted—as opposed to on foot—
brigades in more rugged departments, even though they were more effective at fighting desertion
on average. Horses could not operate easily in rugged terrain and therefore lost much of their
advantage for enforcing conscription in mountainous regions.
   24
      This method is described in more detail in Nunn and Puga (2012, pp. 21–22).
