Political Economy of Conscription in Napoleonic France 1071

department of Haute-Vienne.27 The departmental archives of Haute-
Vienne give access to the registers recording background information on
each conscript for the year 1807.28 Since these are individual-level data,
we know height, place of origin, occupation, and desertion status for each
cohort member, including whether they deserted before joining their units
(“draft-dodgers”) or after (“deserters”). This makes the data collected for
the Haute-Vienne much more detailed—but less comprehensive—than
Lacuée’s data. The department of Haute-Vienne is an ideal candidate for
a case study on the effect of geography as it contains both mountainous
and non-mountainous regions (Texier-Olivier 1808, pp. 11–14). We
organize the individual-level data at the cantonal level, with cantons (or
justices de paix) being the second-smallest French administrative divi-
sion after municipalities.29 Figure 3 shows a map of terrain ruggedness
across Haute-Vienne’s 26 cantons.
   After analyzing variation in the capacity to enforce conscription and
how Napoleon’s administration reacted by drafting less in regions where
enforcement costs were highest, we provide evidence that discriminatory
conscription worked. It reduced the draft evasion rate in regions most
prone to draft dodging relative to regions with low draft dodging rates.

                              ECONOMETRIC ANALYSIS

Geography and Draft Evasion
   The relationship between geographical characteristics and the preva-
lence of draft evasion is confirmed by the results of a formal empirical
test. Specifically, we estimate a baseline OLS specification of the form:

                    Di,t = βlog(Ruggedness) + Xi′ + δt + ζi + ϵi,t ,                           (1)

where Di,t is the draft dodging rate for department i at time t. Our main
independent variable is the natural logarithm of Ruggednessi; Xi′ is a vector
for department-level geographic and economic variables we describe in
the previous section. Finally, δt and ζi are year and military division fixed
effects, respectively. Given their centrality to conscription enforcement,
   27
      Haute-Vienne lies within the Nouvelle-Aquitaine region of France. Its southwestern territories
are occupied by the Massif Central, a mountain range covering a large section of southern France.
   28
      The archival data are from the Archives de Haute-Vienne (hereafter AHV), 1/R/50. They
can be found online at https://archives.haute-vienne.fr/rechercher/archives-en-ligne/registres-
militaires/registres-militaires-recherche-par-registres (accessed on 1 November 11 2021).
   29
      To construct each canton’s boundary, we identified each municipality and to which canton
it belongs (Texier-Olivier 1808). We then construct polygons around each municipality whose
interior consists of all points closer to any given municipality than any other. Finally, we merged
the polygons into cantons.
