Political Economy of Conscription in Napoleonic France 1069

that geographic conditions forced on the French government’s efforts to
eradicate draft evasion.25
   Figure 2 shows the variation in draft dodging rates (top) and the log
of ruggedness (bottom) across France’s departments between 1806 and
1810. The black and red borders are for departments—the country’s main
administrative units—and military divisions, respectively.
   A military division was an administrative unit encompassing an
average of five departments. Military divisions were created in 1793 to
contribute to the administration of the draft (de Halle 1803). From year
XI (1802/03) onward, police control was vested in the généraux de divi-
sion (Forrest 1989, p. 221). Those generals were “charged with super-
vising military service, gave the impetus to the sedentary troops, to the
depots, to the garrison regiments,” and were “natural chiefs of the forces
of the interior” (Capefigue 1842, pp. 37–38). Napoléon saw military divi-
sions “as an important check, and sometimes counterbalance, to the civil
authority of the prefects” (Woolf 2002, pp. 81–82).
   To bolster our case about the relationship between geography and
conscription, we also consider alternative variables that potentially influ-
enced draft dodging and may bias our results if omitted. First, we create
a measure of national identity following Johnson (2015), who draws on
data from Hyslop (1934).26 Second, we measure the local popularity of
revolutionary ideology using data from Tackett (1986) on the percentage
of French clergy who swore an oath to the Constitution in 1790 (Online
Appendix G.3). Third, we use Le Bris’ (2019) data on local legal systems
across France to account for institutional differences between the north
and the south of France before the revolution (Online Appendix G.4).
Until the revolution, France did not have a national legal system. Rather,
some regions (mostly in the north) were governed by customary law,
while others (mostly in the south) had written legal codes. Finally, we
account for the effect of the allocation of soldiers to different theaters of
war on draft dodging (Online Appendix G.1). Fighting on different fronts
may have entailed substantially different risks for soldiers, influencing
the conscript’s decision to dodge the draft.
   To further explore the relationship between ruggedness and draft
evasion, we reproduce an econometric exercise with data from the
   25
      In a similar application, Carter, Shaver, and Wright (2019) find that terrain ruggedness has
large direct and indirect effects on a state’s ability to enforce a monopoly of violence over its
territory.
   26
      Hyslop created an index for national identity using the grievances from the local population
compiled in preparation for the Estates Generals in 1789. Our national identity variable is
described in detail in Online Appendix G.2.
