1072                              Rouanet and Piano




                                      Figure 3
                             RUGGEDNESS IN HAUTE-VIENNE

Source: Nunn and Puga (2012).

we include military division fixed effects to mitigate any potential bias
due to division-specific characteristics.
   The use of ruggedness in this context comes with a significant draw-
back. Specifically, the Alpine departments of France have high ruggedness
values due to the presence of tall mountains with large glaciers. Yet, they
are unlikely to provide good shelter for fugitives like draft dodgers. Above a
certain altitude, fugitives’ survival is compromised by the very low temper-
atures and the lack of sources of nourishment. The bottom panel in Figure 4
shows how a handful of observations introduce skewness in the data. The top
panel shows that the use of the natural logarithm of Ruggedness mitigates
the potential bias introduced by the inclusion of the Alpine departments.30
   Table 1 reports the results of six OLS specifications on the effect of
geographical characteristics on draft dodging rates across French depart-
ments. The coefficients of our main explanatory variable (“Log of rugged-
ness”) are large, positive, statistically significant across all specifications,
  30
     In Online Appendix F.1.2, we adopt two strategies to deal with rugged areas that are unlikely
to be relevant to a conscript’s draft evasion choice. First, we recalculate the mean of terrain
ruggedness for each department while excluding all land more than 2 km above sea level. Second,
we exclude land covered by glaciers and mountainous rocks without any vegetation. We then
reproduce the results in Table 1. The results are consistent with those using the natural logarithm
of ruggedness and confirm that the inclusion of observations with very high altitudes introduces
bias in the analysis, thus further justifying our choice to use the natural log of ruggedness as our
main independent variable.
