Political Economy of Conscription in Napoleonic France 1083

years, the reforms produced the desired effect. By 1812, Napoléon had
reduced draft dodging rates throughout France drastically. The effects of
reforms were not limited to draft evasion figures. They left the French
state stronger and in better control of its territory (Grab 2003, p. 52).
   Napoléon’s short-run response to the problem of draft evasion has a
straightforward economic logic.44 A rational response to varying draft
enforcement costs is to set local conscription rates higher for those depart-
ments with lower enforcement costs and lower for those with higher
costs. This strategy has the advantage of reducing the number of draft
dodgers at the national level (thus raising the effective size of the armed
forces) at no additional cost. Thus, though the regime may have started
with the presumption of an equitable administration of the draft, it was
forced to abandon its principles and practice geographic discrimination
by the reality of a country as large and diverse as France.

Econometric Analysis

   We now provide empirical evidence for the claim that the Napoleonic
regime’s de facto draft policy was discriminatory against departments
with lower conscription enforcement costs. We begin by investigating
the relationship between a department’s geographic characteristics
and its nominal conscription rate. We do so by testing the following
specification:

                 Ci,t = βlog(Ruggedness) + Xi′ + δt + ζi + ϵi,t ,               (2)

where Ci,t is the conscription rate for department i at time t. The conscrip-
tion rate is defined as the number of men a department is required to draft
divided by that department’s population of male citizens of conscription
age. All variables on the right-hand side are defined as in Equation (1).
   Table 3 reports the results of five OLS specifications. Columns (1)
through (4) have the same independent variables as in Table 1, except for
the variable “Exemption rate,” which measures the percentage of men
considered unfit for military service. Men shorter than 1.48 meters (or
4.85 feet), the hearing-impaired, and men afflicted by a wide array of
diseases were exempted from military service. The local population’s
health was thus a major constraint on conscription efforts. Naturally, we
should expect the government to draft fewer men in regions with poorer
overall health conditions.
  44
     Online Appendix J develops a simple formal model of discriminatory conscription
enforcement.
