1078                             Rouanet and Piano

and so forth (Rouanet and Piano 2020).36 As a result, the ease with which
replacements could be found varied substantially across departments.
The results from Column (5) show that the portion of replacements is
negatively related to a department’s draft dodging rate.37 Including this
variable only strengthens the coefficient for our main independent vari-
able. Finally, Column (6) shows that our results are robust to including
elevation as a control.

Robustness Checks
   A series of robustness checks further corroborates the validity of our
results. First, we investigate whether our results are robust to the substi-
tution of ruggedness for an alternative measure of geographical charac-
teristics (Online Appendix F.1.1)38: a department’s average slope (and its
natural log). The results are entirely consistent with those of our baseline
specification. We also perform a zero-skewness Box-Cox power trans-
formation on our ruggedness variable. This is an alternative method to
taking the natural logarithm to mitigate the skewness in our measure of
terrain ruggedness. We find that the estimated positive effect of geograph-
ical characteristics on draft evasion is robust across all these strategies.39
   A department’s draft dodging rate may be affected by its neighbors’
geographical and environmental characteristics. We generate buffers 30
km deep around each department and then calculate the average terrain
ruggedness for these modified polygons to account for this possibility.
The results (Table 14 in Online Appendix F.1.3) are consistent with those
of our baseline specification and significant at the same thresholds. In
fact, they are larger than those in Table 1.
   We also investigate whether our results are robust to excluding influ-
ential observations (Online Appendix F.2). We run the same regressions
  36
     Buying a replacement in 1810 in Avignon cost almost 6,000 francs, which represented from
two to ten years of income for a peasant (Pigeard 2000, p. 237). For comparison, four or five
horses in the Napoleonic period cost around 2,000 francs. Military replacement was therefore quite
expensive. From 1806 to 1809, between 4.3 and 5.3 percent of conscripts hired a replacement.
  37
     Napoleonic officials seem to have been aware of this fact. See the report to Napoleon
dated 5 April 1806, by the prefect of the Department of Lozère, who proposed deregulating the
replacement market to fight draft dodging in “the departments where the success of conscription
meets obstacles” (Archives Nationales, F/9/209).
  38
     We also reproduce the specifications from Table 1 using terrain ruggedness instead of its
natural log.
  39
     The only specifications producing statistically weaker results are the ones that do not
account for rightward skewness, as when we rely on unadjusted values for ruggedness and slope.
This is due to very high but practically irrelevant values of ruggedness within France’s Alpine
departments. Once areas with such values are excluded, “Ruggedness” and “Slope” become
positive and statistically significant. See Online Appendix F.1.2. Excluding “Distance from
Paris,” which is highly correlated (0.64) with ruggedness, also leads both “Ruggedness” and
“Slope” to become statistically significant.
