1076                               Rouanet and Piano

and stable when we use comparable samples.31 A one standard deviation
increase in our measure of terrain ruggedness predicts an increase in the
draft dodging rate of 2.9 to 6.3 percentage points. An increase in the log of
ruggedness from the 25th to the 75th percentile of the distribution predicts
a 4 to 8.8 percentage point increase in the draft dodging rate. This effect is
large and economically significant, as the average draft dodging rate over
our entire period (1806 to 1810) was 14.9 percent.
   Other geographic characteristics do not appear to have as strong an
effect. In the case of distance from Paris, the coefficient is positive across
specifications but only marginally significant. Proximity to the border
also positively affects the draft dodging rate throughout, consistent with
the idea that border departments offer avenues for conscripts to evade
their military obligations. Being a bordering department increases the
draft dodging rate by 2.2 to 4.7 percentage points on average. However,
this effect is not statistically significant at conventional levels when we
employ Conley standard errors to correct for spatial autocorrelation.
   Our specifications also include the “Township density” variable, equal
to the number of townships (the smallest administrative unit) per km2.
The coefficient of this variable is expected to be negative: the more
distant and thinly connected the townships are to each other, the more
difficult it is to enforce conscription. The results in Table 1 are consistent
with this expectation. Across all specifications, the “Township density”
coefficient is negative. However, its magnitude is largely reduced when
we include additional controls, as in Columns (4) and (5), and the coef-
ficients become statistically insignificant. This may be due to the inclu-
sion of the number of military relays per 10 km2 in 1795 as a control.
This variable allows us to control for previous investment in military
infrastructure—especially as the ease with which the movement of troops
occurs is likely to be a determinant of draft evasion. However, town-
ship density and the number of military relays appear to be highly corre-
lated, and our data may not be comprehensive enough to identify the
independent effect of each variable.32 Nevertheless, more military relays
   31
      Changes in the magnitude of the “Log of ruggedness” coefficients are mostly due to changes
in the number of observations, as some departments lack data for some of the controls. For
instance, when, as in Column (5), we must rely on just 292 observations, ruggedness coefficients
for the other specifications approximate more closely that from Column (5) and are respectively
equal to 6.33, 4.80, 4.84, and 5.74.
   32
      The correlation coefficient between “Military relays” and “Township density” is 0.53. One
potential issue is that military infrastructure is endogenous to draft evasion. To address this issue,
we run the regression in Column (5) using the average number of postal offices per 10 km2 or the
prevalence of the road network instead of military relays. The establishment of postal offices or
roads is unlikely to be caused by conscription, but it may face similar geographical constraints.
The results, included in Online Appendix F.3.4, are virtually the same as in Table 1, except that it
makes the coefficient of “Township density” statistically significant.
