Political Economy of Conscription in Napoleonic France 1077

per 10 km2 within a department significantly predict lower draft dodging
rates.
   One potential concern concerning the validity of our results is that
ruggedness may affect draft evasion indirectly through its effect on other,
omitted variables. To address this issue, we use a wide range of controls
collected from archival documents and primary sources. Hence Column
(2) in Table 1 includes controls for a department’s wheat suitability
and whether a department is adjacent to the seashore. Column (3) adds
controls for economic outcomes, specifically a department’s urbaniza-
tion rate and tax revenues per capita. In Column (4), we further include
measures for a department’s literacy rate, the percentage of conscripts
working in the agricultural sector, and the average height of able-
bodied men of conscription age.33 Including these variables addresses
the possibility that ruggedness affects draft dodging rates via its effect
on a department’s overall productivity.34 Less productive departments
may have lower educational attainment and nutrition levels, which may
affect young men’s willingness to join the army or ability to pay for a
replacement.35 Similarly, poorer departments may have lower levels
of nutritional investment, which may affect the average height of their
populations. Since Napoléonic France had a minimum height require-
ment for its conscripts, lower average heights may reduce the need to
evade the draft in the first place. Finally, Column (4) controls for the
year a department was created, as this may proxy local administrative
capacity.
   In Column (5), we include one additional control: the number of mili-
tary replacements hired within a department. The system of military
replacement gave conscripts the ability to hire another man to serve in
the army in their stead. This institution was made legal de facto on 16
April 1799, and formalized in 1800 and 1802. It was, however, heavily
regulated by the Napoleonic regime, especially from 1806 onward. For
instance, conscripts could only be replaced by men from the same depart-
ment; replacements had to meet stricter physical and moral requirements,

  33
     Note that the inclusion of these variables significantly reduces the number of observations
available since these data were not available for the Belgian, German, and Italian departments.
  34
     For instance, collecting the 1,500 francs fine for draft dodging was virtually impossible in
poor regions.
  35
      The prefect of Lozère notices that draft dodging is highest in mountainous parts of his
department and parts “where the lights of education are the rarest” and mentions the difficulty
of finding “intelligent” local officials (Mémoire sur la conscription dans le département de la
Lozère, AN, F/9/209). In Online Appendix F.3.3, we use different literacy measures with no
substantial effects on our results. For a broader discussion of the relationship between education
and military recruitment, see Aghion et al. (2019).
