1080                              Rouanet and Piano

   Figure 5 plots the cantons’ terrain ruggedness and draft dodging/deser-
tion rates before and after a draftee has left the Haute-Vienne department.
Table 2 reports the results once we replicate our econometric tests using
canton-level data from the Haute-Vienne department.42 These results give
further credence to the validity of our previous findings.
   As shown in Columns (1) through (4), a canton’s average terrain
ruggedness is positively correlated with higher draft dodging rates. This
relationship is statistically significant whenever our specifications include
canton-specific controls. Also consistent with our hypothesis, the results
in Columns (5) to (8) show that a canton’s terrain ruggedness does not
predict desertion away from home. The coefficients on Ruggedness are
always statistically indistinguishable from zero, and their magnitude and
sign are inconsistent across specifications.43

                               NAPOLÉON’S RESPONSE

Discriminatory Conscription Enforcement

   The Napoleonic regime’s response to these circumstances was twofold.
In the short run, hard-pressed by the immediate need for soldiers, it adopted
a strategy of “discriminatory conscription enforcement.” Theoretically,
the burden of military conscription was to be proportional to a depart-
ment’s population. However, “as the government became more and more
desperate in its quest for able-bodied men for the battalions, it showed
less concern for equity and geographical spread” (Forrest 1989, p. 40).
In Eventually, some departments came to bear a much larger share of the
burden, relative to their population, than others (Woolf 2002, p. 160). For
example, in 1808, when the country drafted close to one percent of its
population, departments like Yonne, only one hundred miles from Paris,
were supplying twice as many soldiers per capita than other departments
like the Rhône in Eastern France and the Hautes-Pyrénées in the south.
   These short-run efforts were accompanied by a long-term strategy
aimed at reducing draft evasion rates throughout the country and occu-
pied territories. In pursuit of this goal, the Napoleonic regime introduced
a series of reforms to the administration of military conscription. Over the
  42
     Since there are no extreme values of ruggedness in Haute-Vienne, we preferred using
ruggedness instead of the log of ruggedness as our independent variable. Using the log of
ruggedness changes neither the sign nor the significance of our results, except for the first
specification in Table 2, where the log of ruggedness is statistically insignificant.
  43
     Since these results rely on a small number of observations, we performed a sensitivity
analysis using a “leave one observation out” routine for the specification in Table 2, Column (3).
All coefficients produced with this method are positive and significant at the 1 percent threshold.
