Political Economy of Conscription in Napoleonic France 1079

as in Table 1 while removing the ten most and least rugged departments.
Finally, we follow Belsley, Kuh, and Welsch (2005) by omitting all
observations for which |DFBETA| > 2 /N, where N is the number of
observations and where DFBETA is a measure of the difference in the
estimated coefficient for the ruggedness coefficient (scaled by the stan-
dard error) when including and excluding from the sample. When we
replicate our baseline specifications using this method, the resulting coef-
ficients remain positive and statistically significant.
   Finally, we investigate whether the relationship between draft evasion
and our geographic characteristics is robust to the control of variables
such as national identity, adherence to the revolutionary ideology, legal
origins,40 and the allocation of soldiers to different theaters of war (Online
Appendix G). The results of these robustness tests, all of which support
our findings, are discussed in the Online Appendix.

Case Study: Haute-Vienne

   One potential criticism of our approach is that geographical features
like terrain ruggedness may affect a department’s draft dodging rate
indirectly, for instance, via its effect on unobserved social, economic,
and cultural characteristics. To mitigate such concerns, we replicate our
empirical strategy as expressed in Equation (1) but for just one region of
France—the department of Haute-Vienne.
   Unlike our cross-departmental data, the Haute-Vienne data includes
measures both for domestic draft dodging and for desertion while serving
on the front-line outside of France in 1807. Suppose our hypothesis is
correct and ruggedness affects draft dodging chiefly via its effect on the
ability of the government to enforce conscription. In that case, a canton’s
average terrain ruggedness should be positively correlated with draft
dodging rates within the canton but not with the desertion rate among
people from the same canton after they have joined their military units.41
   40
      Until the revolution, France did not have a common national legal system. Rather, some
regions (in the northern part of the country) were governed by customary law akin to English
common law, while others (in the south) had written legal codes.
   41
      If conscripts who have deserted away from home do so to make their way to their hometown,
then canton-level ruggedness could be positively related to desertion away from home as well.
Similarly, high desertion rates occurring before leaving for the army may make it harder for
authorities to find other kinds of deserters as their resources are stretched thin. In that case,
too, the relationship between desertion and the ruggedness of conscripts’ home regions may
be positive. On the other hand, a higher level of ruggedness may lead conscripts to substitute
desertion in other regions with desertion in their home region, where it is easier to hide and escape
the authorities. By changing the relative cost of different kinds of desertion that way, it is possible
for desertion outside of the department of Haute-Vienne to be negatively related to the ruggedness
of home counties.
