1094                      Rouanet and Piano

there were only so many able-bodied men of age that could be drafted
from a department before it would have negative social and economic
consequences. The more young men joined the army, the fewer of them
were left to work the fields or in factories. To mitigate these adverse
effects, the regime took a series of innovative actions aimed at reducing
draft dodging rates throughout the country once and for all.
   Napoléon’s first innovation was to centralize the administration of the
country’s conscription system. Traditionally, this task had been within
the purview of local officials. However, influenced by their constituen-
cies’ sensibilities, they had proven unreliable agents of the state. As early
as 1799, Napoléon had to grapple with local authorities’ insubordina-
tion in matters of conscription. When he tried to draft 33,000 new men,
only one-third of them actually joined their units. Moreover, many of the
ones who did were unfit for service. Overall, mayors were complicit in
the locals’ fraudulent attempts to avoid military service: “Especially in
southern France, mayors issued false certificates of marriage or phys-
ical disability to men called up” (Elting 1997, p. 322). Still, by 1806,
France’s Chief of Police was writing to Napoléon to inform him that
the mayors of several localities near Toulouse were refusing to enforce
the draft (Fouché 1964, p. 823). In at least one instance, the mayor of a
town in the department of Ariège was accused of burning the identifica-
tion documents of the local youth (Fouché 1922, p. 231). Fouché himself
later recommended that “energetic, impartial commissioner[s]” be sent
by the central government to oversee the administration of conscription
in rural departments (Fouché 1964, p. 252). Eventually, the regime reor-
ganized the entire system by entrusting its administration to prefects and
sub-prefects, who were selected by and worked directly for Paris. Starting
in 1806, prefects and sub-prefects were to oversee recruitment and the
physical examination of all potential draftees (Woloch 1986, p. 106). The
government also regrouped towns and villages into larger administrative
districts called cantons to administer the draft. This change was made with
the explicit goal of “[weakening] personal favoritism” in the conscrip-
tion process and increasing its efficiency (Woolf 2002, pp. 158, 161).
   Punishment for draft dodgers became more severe and its enforcement
stricter (Forrest 1989, p. 105). Their families were turned into targets
of government action as well. For instance, “the seizure of hostages
from uncooperative families or the billeting of troops on them until they
produced their boy” became one of the government’s “most effective”
tools to deter draft evasion (Best 1998, p. 91). The regime even intro-
duced a bounty of 12 francs to be paid out to anyone who captured a
draft dodger (Elting 1997, p. 322). In some departments, especially those
