1086                               Rouanet and Piano

   We find a large and statistically significant effect of ruggedness on a
department’s conscription rate. A one standard deviation increase in the
natural logarithm of ruggedness predicts a fall in the conscription rate of
between 0.8 and 2.4 percentage points.45 An increase in the log of rugged-
ness from the 25th to the 75th percentile of the distribution predicts a
decrease in the conscription rate by 1.2 to 3.3 percentage points. To put
these results into perspective, the conscription rate across departments
between 1806 and 1810 was around 29.6 percent. In other words, the
probability of getting drafted fell by about 5–10 percent when living in
one of the more rugged departments. Table 3 also shows that the coef-
ficient on the natural log of ruggedness becomes much larger in Column
(4). This result is not driven by the inclusion of military relays but rather
by the fact that, in order to include the controls in Column (4), we must
sacrifice over one-third of our observations.46
   The regressions in Table 3 also find that a one percentage point increase
in the exemption rate led to a 0.3 percentage point decrease in the rate
of conscription. A one standard deviation increase in the same variable
predicts a 3 percentage point fall in the conscription rate. Moreover, living
in departments adjacent to the border lowered the probability of being
drafted by around 1.5 percentage points, and this effect is statistically
significant throughout. Finally, we find that living in a maritime depart-
ment lowers the probability of being drafted.47 In the Online Appendix,
we provide the results of robustness checks akin to those for Table 1.
None affect the overall pattern of these results.

The Lacuée Plan: An Event Study

   This section complements the results of our formal econometric
exercise with an event study. Conscripts evading their military obliga-
tions generate a policy externality. Draft dodgers make draft evasion
more appealing to nearby conscripts by congesting the law enforcement
system, thus lowering the probability of punishment.48 Recall that one
simple solution to this problem, from the point of view of the rational
ruler, is to draft less in regions where it is the largest. By reducing the
conscription rate in departments with a high draft dodging rate, the ruler

   45
      The variation in the magnitude of the log of the ruggedness coefficient is almost entirely due to
variations in the size of the sample due to missing observations when including additional controls.
   46
      When we replicate the results in Table 3, keeping sample size constant across specifications,
the gap between the coefficients on the log of ruggedness in Columns (3) and (4) largely disappears.
   47
      This is consistent with Forrest’s (1989) claim that shipowners lobbied the central government
relentlessly to reduce the burden of conscription on their industry.
   48
      See Gaviria (2000) for an application of this idea to violent crime in Columbia.
