1088                             Rouanet and Piano

where Ci,t is the share of the population conscripted in department i at time
t. Since our goal here is to assess the impact of Lacuée’s plan instead of
the cross-departmental variation—as was the case in previous sections—
we include both δt and di , which are the full set of time and department
fixed-effects51; Xit is a vector of additional time-varying controls and ϵit
is the error term52; τ pre and τ post are the sets of years prior and after the
treatment, respectively—1809 serves as the base year since it is only
after that date that Lacuée massively increased the use of discriminatory
conscription.
   Our variable of interest is Ti. In one set of specifications (Table 4,
Columns (5)–(8)), Ti is an indicator variable set to 1 if department i is
classified by Lacuée as belonging to categories 4 or 5, and zero other-
wise.53 In another set of specifications (Table 5, Columns (5)–(8)), Ti is
the natural logarithm of department i’s average terrain ruggedness. Both
strategies yield similar results. Conscription rates for some departments
fell dramatically following Lacuée’s reform. The coefficients on the inter-
action term between Ti and 1810 are negative and statistically significant
across all specifications—consistently meeting the 1 percent threshold
when we employ the indicator variable approach and the 10 and 5 percent
thresholds when we use the log of ruggedness.54
   Figure 6 provides a graphical representation of our results. The top
panel suggests that the French government may have begun discriminating
in favor of departments in categories 4 and 5 already in 1809. However,
the largest drop in their conscription rate came the following year. We do
not find evidence of any such pre-trend in the bottom panel. Overall, the
two figures suggest that the variation in nominal conscription rates across
French departments was indeed a conscious policy response by Paris to
the threat that draft dodging posed to its short-term military objectives.
   Was Lacuée’s reform effective at reducing draft evasion rates? We
attempt to answer this question in Tables 4 and 5 (Columns (1)–(4)).
Across all eight specifications, we find a large, consistent, and statis-
tically significant effect of belonging to categories 4 or 5 and having
higher terrain ruggedness on the draft dodging rate for year 1810, that
  51
      Including department fixed effects when estimating equations Equations (1) and (2) would
have prevented us from including ruggedness, which is a time-invariant variable, as a covariate.
Estimating equation Equation (3) does not pose the same problem because we are interested in
changes in the effect of ruggedness on conscription rates. Including departments fixed effects as
controls simply allows us to account for potential department-specific, time-invariant factors.
   52
      We include control for changes in conscription rates for departments at the border and
maritime departments as changes in the demand for sailors and soldiers may have been stronger
closer to theaters of war.
   53
      Fifty out of 111 departments were either category 4 or 5.
   54
      As in the other tables, we report Conley standard errors with a 100 km threshold.
