Political Economy of Conscription in Napoleonic France 1087

can mechanically reduce the overall number of draft dodgers in those
regions. This fall in the number of draft dodgers leads to less conges-
tion in the law enforcement system, thus increasing its effectiveness and
reducing the national draft evasion rate.
   In 1808/09, Lacuée, as minister of war, developed and implemented a
plan to address the draft-dodging problem that embodied this very logic.
Lacuée divided France’s departments into five categories. This classifica-
tion was based on his experience with conscription enforcement in the
years prior. Departments in category 1 had proven less averse to conscrip-
tion than those in category 2, and so on, with category 5 departments being
perceived as the most likely to defy the government’s conscription efforts.
Lacuée suggested the use of the national conscription rate in combination
with his new classification to calculate each department’s specific conscrip-
tion rate. Category 1 departments were to contribute one-third more men
per capita than the national rate. Category 2 ones were to contribute one-
fourth more. Category 3 departments were assigned exactly the national
rate, while departments in categories 4 and 5 had to contribute one-fourth
and one-third fewer men per capita than the national rate, respectively.
Although Lacuée explicitly allocated the burden of conscription for
1809 on a discriminatory basis, discrimination for that year remained
relatively mild.49 Conscription efforts in 1810, on the other hand, were
characterized by a massive ramp-up of discriminatory conscription.50
   The adoption of Lacuée’s reform constituted an explicit embrace of
the principle of discriminatory conscription. The minister himself had
argued that the practice of setting departmental conscription rates equal
to the national rate had proven a failure. According to his reasoning,
attempting to draft more men in departments with high draft-dodging
rates would only lead to more of the same. By refusing to use discrimi-
natory conscription, Lacuée (1808) told Napoléon, “we would multiply
the number of [draft-dodgers], and we would thus come to ensure their
impunity.” If our previous results on the relationship between geography
and conscription are correct and if the Lacuée plan was effectively imple-
mented, we expect the (negative) effect of ruggedness on a department’s
conscription rate to have increased in its aftermath. To test this hypoth-
esis, we estimate the following specification:

       Ci,t = δt + di + Στ∈τ pre βτ × δτ × Ti + Στ∈τ post βτ × δτ × Ti + X′i,t + ϵi,t ,       (3)

  49
     The “best” departments saw an increase in their contingent size of 9 percent relative to their
population, while the “worst” departments experienced a 9 percent decrease.
  50
     Lacuée’s report to Napoléon, 6 April 1809, Archives Nationales, AF/IV/1124.
