Political Economy of Conscription in Napoleonic France 1097

                                 CONCLUSIONS

   Political economists and economic historians have recently started
paying attention to the relationship between military technology and
practices on the one hand and institutional change and long-run economic
performance on the other. Most such work has focused, in the European
context, on the military revolution and political transformation in the
Early Modern Era. In this paper, we explore a new and just as consequen-
tial episode in European history and the development of modern political
institutions: the Napoleonic regime in France. Under Napoléon’s leader-
ship, France perfected a new way of war that relied on a national army.
At its helm, Napoléon would (briefly) achieve his vision of French mili-
tary hegemony over the European continent. However, to realize this
vision, he had to overcome one fundamental obstacle: draft evasion. The
new military system relied on the forcible conscription of young men for
its recruitment. These young men were not always willing to comply and
often opted to escape their military obligations instead.
   Napoléon’s response to the problem of draft evasion was twofold.
In the short run, the regime opted for the discriminatory enforcement
of conscription across its regions. Using an original dataset based on
archival evidence on draft dodging and conscription over this period,
we show that a region’s geographical characteristics (a major determi-
nant of conscription enforcement costs) predict its conscription rates as
well as its draft dodging rates. We also provide qualitative evidence from
historical sources that members of the Napoleonic regime were aware
of the varying propensity of local populations to evade their military
obligations. The sources confirm that this information influenced the
decision-making process behind the administration of conscription in
France.

                                  REFERENCES

Aghion, Philippe, Xavier Jaravel, Torsten Persson, and Dorothée Rouzet. “Education
     and Military Rivalry.” Journal of the European Economic Association 17, no. 2
     (2019): 376–412.
Arbellot, Guy, Bernard Lepetit, and Jacques Bertrand. Atlas de la Révolution Française,
     Vol. 1. Paris: Editions de l’EHESS, 1985.
Bairoch, Paul, Jean Batou, and Pierre Chevre. The Population of European Cities
     from 800 to 1850: Data Bank and Short Summary of Results. Geneve: Center of
     International Economic History, 1988.
Balla, Eliana, and Noel D. Johnson. “Fiscal Crisis and Institutional Change in the
     Ottoman Empire and France.” Journal of Economic History 69, no. 3 (2009):
     809–45.
