1096                         Rouanet and Piano

Russian campaign of 1812 (Grab 2003, p. 161). A combination of two
factors changed the new conscripts’ calculus (Woloch 1986, p. 127).
First, the news from Russia caused domestic turmoil and affected the
regime’s ability to enforce conscription effectively. Second, the Russian
campaign and the subsequent retreat through Central Europe had come at
an enormous human cost. Not one-third of the men who had left France
in the summer of 1812 would make it back home by the following winter
(Furet 1996, p. 264): “The misery and abandoned of retreating columns
of wounded soldiers further blackened the atmosphere” (Woloch 1986,
p. 127).
    Though defeat put an end to his regime, it did not stop Napoléon’s
reform from having long-lasting consequences. This was especially true
for France. Napoléon left the country “a society organized through war
and dependent on war” (Best 1998, p. 92). His belief that the army’s hier-
archical structure was the superior form of organization led him to extend
it to all aspects of public administration and social life, from the central
bureaucracy and public education to family law (Best 1998, p. 118).
    If the principles of military organizations were becoming universal,
the place of the army in society was also changing. Napoléon understood
that the potential of the new military organization was not limited to the
pursuit of foreign policy. Armies could be employed to ensure compli-
ance with the regime’s goals domestically as well (Best 1998, p. 205). No
single policy contributed more to the process of centralizing state power
and to the increasing involvement of the armed forces in domestic policy
than Napoléon’s fight against draft evasion:
  Enforcing conscription and strengthening its machinery contributed to the
  build-up of the State’s power. ... [T]hrough the draft, more than any other policy,
  the central state increasingly became a reality the governed were unable to ignore
  (Grab 2003, p. 52).

The appeal of the new system was so strong that just a few years after the
Bourbon Monarchy had been restored, Louis XVIII, who had dismantled
the Grande Armée upon ascending to the throne (Nafziger 1988, p. 26).
The King quickly made Napoléon’s reforms his own, re-established the
national army, and re-introduced mandatory military service and promo-
tion by merit (Best 1998, pp. 217–18). This legacy was not limited to
France. Napoléon’s military innovations and reforms were adopted by
his former enemies and allies alike. Austria, Prussia, Spain, and even
Britain had to recognize their superiority and made Napoléon’s model
of the national army their own in their march toward the nation-state
(Delbrück 1985, pp. 450–51).
