

 J. Tone, The Fatal Knot: the Guerrilla War in Navarre and the Defeat of Napoleon (Chapel Hill, North Carolina, 1994).

 J. Tone, ‘Napoleon’s uncongenial sea: guerrilla warfare in Navarre during the Peninsular War, 1808–14’, EHQ, XXVI, No. 3 (July, 1996), pp. 355–81.

 A. Uffindell (ed.), On Wellington: the Duke and his Art of War by Jac Weller (London, 1998).

 M. Urban, The Man who Broke Napoleon’s Codes: the Story of George Scovell (London, 2001).

 J. Veríssimo Serrao, História de Portugal, VII: a Instauracão do Liberalismo, 1807–1832 (Lisbon, 1984).

 R. Vidal, Historia de la Guerra de la Independencia en el Campo de Gibraltar (Cadiz, 1975).

 P. Vilar, Hidalgos, Amotinados y Guerrilleros: Pueblo y Poderes en la Historia de España (Barcelona, 1999).

 Marqués de Villa Urrutia, Relaciones entre España e Inglaterra durante la Guerra de la Independencia Española: Apuntes para la Historia Diplomática de España de 1808 a 1814 (Madrid, 1911–1914).

 P. Vitorino, As Invasoes Francesas (Oporto, 1945).

 S. Walpole, The Life of the Right Honourable Spencer Perceval, including his Correspondence with many Distinguished Persons (London, 1874).

 S. Ward, Wellington’s Headquarters: a Study of the Administrative Problems in the Peninsula War (Oxford, 1957).

 J. Weller, Wellington in the Peninsula, 1808–14 (London, 1962).

 S. Woolf, Napoleon’s Integration of Europe (London, 1991).

===== FILE: OEBPS/xhtml/chapter1.xhtml =====
The Peninsular War

 1

 Lisbon

 THE ORIGINS OF THE PENINSULAR WAR

 Weary, ragged and dishevelled, the French troops crested the rise. Gleaming in the distance, they could see the broad waters of the River Tagus, with, beside them, the towers of Lisbon. To reach this spot near the town of
Sacavem, they had endured weeks of forced marching in torrential rain across some of the roughest country in the Iberian Peninsula. Indeed, thousands of their comrades had fallen by the wayside, all that was left being a handful
of picked grenadiers. Still worse, it was all for nothing. Another European capital was on the point of falling to Napoleon, true, but the chief prize was vanishing before the invaders’ very eyes, the Tagus being filled with the
sails of a large convoy of shipping heading for the open sea. Going with them were the Portuguese royal family, the Portuguese navy, the contents of the treasury, and thousands of the country’s leading citizens. Napoleon, in
short, had been foiled.

 But why had the emperor intervened in Iberia? Admirers of the emperor have on the whole sought to explain his actions in the context of either political idealism (the desire to extend the benefits of the French Revolution),
family loyalty (the need to find thrones for Napoleon’s numerous brothers and sisters) or strategic necessity (the strategic demands of a war that was none of his own making). For their opponents, meanwhile, the answer lies
rather in dreams of conquest, hatred of the Bourbons, dissatisfaction with Spain as an ally, and the character of the emperor himself. Whichever view is taken, there is general agreement that in the summer of 1807 he was at the
zenith of his power. Master of Holland, Switzerland, northern Italy and a much expanded France, in the autumn of 1805 he had been confronted by Britain, Russia, Austria, Sweden and Naples. In a matter of months, however, crushing
victories at Ulm and Austerlitz (Slavkov) had produced the surrender of Austria; the cession of Venetia to the French-controlled Kingdom of Italy, of the Tyrol and Vorarlberg to Bavaria, and of the Dalmatian littoral to France;
the occupation of Naples; the evacuation of all British and Russian forces from the central European theatre; and the conversion of Prussia into a de facto French ally. Russia and Britain, indeed, had themselves considered peace,
only for their overtures to founder on Napoleon’s ambition, the emperor’s conduct in fact becoming so immoderate that within a year Prussia had been forced to go to war to defend her interests. Heavily defeated at Jena and
Auerstädt on 14 October 1806, the Prussian armies had then for the most part surrendered without a fight. Having in the meantime occupied Berlin and inaugurated the Continental Blockade – his great master-plan for forcing the
British out of the war by economic means – the emperor went on to invade Poland and East Prussia. Repulsed in a bloody draw at Eylau (Bagrationovsk) in early February 1807, on 14 June he secured his revenge, shattering the main
Russian army at Friedland (Pravdinsk) and forcing Alexander I to sue for peace.