

 Negotiated during the famous meeting between Napoleon and Alexander at Tilsit (Sovetsk), the treaties that followed brought with them both a major reorganisation of Eastern Europe and a great increase in Napoleon’s power.
Already master of Germany, whose constituent states he had reorganised and united in the Confederation of the Rhine, the emperor turned his attention to Poland, whilst at the same time settling scores with Prussia. Thus, the
latter was stripped of all her Polish territories, the bulk of these lands being formed into a new vassal state known as the Grand Duchy of Warsaw. As for her western lands, these became the basis of the Grand Duchy of Berg and
the Kingdom of Westphalia, of which the former was given to Joachim Murat, who was married to Napoleon’s younger sister, Caroline, and the latter to his younger brother, Jerome. In the later Treaty of Berlin, meanwhile, the
Prussians were also compelled to pay a heavy indemnity and restrict their army to 42,000 men.

 With Prussia humbled and Germans and Poles alike firmly incorporated in the Napoleonic system, there yet remained Russia. Unusually for him, Napoleon had in fact treated her with great magnanimity at Tilsit, not only employing
his considerable personal charm to captivate the somewhat naive Alexander I, but sparing him the indignity of an indemnity and tossing him a slice of Prussian Poland. Beneath the surface, however, Russia was simply being snared
as an instrument of the emperor’s purposes. Thus, easily persuaded to join the Continental Blockade – in Russia as elsewhere, resentment of Britain was rife – Alexander also agreed to put pressure on Sweden, Denmark and Austria
to do the same, to go to war against Britain, recognise the Napoleonic settlement in the rest of Europe, allow the French to resume control of the much-disputed Ionian Islands, and generally give the emperor carte blanche.

 Napoleon, then, was in a commanding position. Russia was friendly, Prussia shattered, and Austria temporarily neutralised. Thrones or other suitable positions had been found for most of the emperor’s brothers and sisters as well
as a variety of other figures connected with the régime – Joseph was King of Naples, Louis, King of Holland; Jerome, King of Westphalia; Murat and Caroline, Duke and Duchess of Berg; Elise, Duchess of Parma; Eugene de
Beauharnais, Viceroy of Italy; and Marshal Berthier, Prince of Neufchâtel – so that familial duty could be said to have been well satisfied. By the same means, meanwhile, Napoleon had established a network of ‘family courts’ that
could legitimise the Bonaparte dynasty, attract the loyalty of the aristocracy, and promote French culture. Ruling at his whim as they did, Napoleon’s satellite rulers could also be expected to remain loyal to his rule, as could
those princes who had survived the emperor’s earlier reorganisation of Germany.

 Setting aside Spain – notionally a close ally, but one that in practice had increasingly to be kept under observation – the one disappointing feature of the situation was the continuing failure to defeat Britain. However,
supreme at sea though she was, the latter’s position was far from unassailable. Indeed, her strategic difficulties were enormous. In the first place, her only allies were Sweden and Sicily (whither the King and Queen of Naples
had fled following the occupation of their mainland domains in 1806), neither of whom possessed the capacity to defend itself unaided, let alone conduct the large-scale military campaigns that Britain needed from coalition
partners. On the contrary, both needed defending, when troops were exactly what the British were short of. Whilst the number of men they had under arms had soared, far too many of them were serving in forces that could not be
required to serve abroad. Still worse, neither Britain nor her colonies could be entirely stripped of regular troops. Though the British strove to employ local auxiliaries and foreign manpower, the result was that they did not
have sufficient men to do very much themselves. Nor was raising a respectable field army the only problem: setting aside the dangers of storm and shipwreck, transporting even the most modest expeditionary force required large
numbers of specialised ships, whilst simply getting the forces involved on and off ship was a most complex undertaking.