

 For victory to come, then, Napoleon probably had only to wait. Waiting, however, was not in his nature, and he was in any case obsessed by the constant need to secure fresh triumphs and thereby, as he put it, ensure that he
continued to be feared. In consequence, no sooner were the discussions at Tilsit over than he was looking around for a new target. The obvious choice was Portugal. Pretexts for an attack were plentiful: she was not part of the
Continental Blockade, had been defaulting on the indemnity she had been paying France since the ‘War of the Oranges’ of 1801, and had frequently allowed British warships to revictual from her shores. There was much to gain:
Portugal possessed wealthy colonies and a substantial fleet. And finally she ought to present few problems: her army was minimal and her ruler, the Prince-Regent, João, notoriously dull-witted.

 The result was not long in coming. On 19 July 1807 the emperor sent orders to his Foreign Minister, Talleyrand, to the effect that Portugal was to be instructed to close its ports to Britain’s shipping, arrest all British
subjects, confiscate all British merchandise, and declare war. Within a few days, meanwhile, word had also gone out to concentrate a large force at Bayonne preparatory to a march on Lisbon. Such a march, of course, could only be
made across Spain, but this presented few difficulties. For years the Spanish royal favourite, Manuel de Godoy, had been trying to get Napoleon to intervene in Portugal, and he was delighted with the news. Unsettled by rumours
that Fernando IV of Naples was to be persuaded to surrender Sicily to Joseph Bonaparte in exchange for the Balearic Islands, he may also have seen co-operation as a means of propitiating Napoleon. Occupation forces were therefore
soon being mobilised in Galicia, León and Extremadura, the Spanish ambassador in Lisbon also being ordered at all times to take his cue from his French counterpart.

 Threatened by France and Spain alike, Portugal now found herself in a situation that was perilous in the extreme. Often wrongly stigmatised as a decayed despotism in which obscurantism vied with inefficiency, under the
leadership of the Marques de Pombal, the chief minister of José I (1750–1777), she had in fact become the very model of enlightened absolutism. Key reforms included the complete reorganisation of the government of empire and
metropolis alike, a great reduction in the power of the Church and the nobility, the establishment of a modern army, and the creation of a modern system of education. The arts and sciences had been encouraged, and everything
possible done to stimulate economic development, whether it was through the abolition of religious discrimination, the implementation of measures designed to prevent any erosion of the slave labour-force that worked the estates
of Brazil, the introduction of new crops in the empire, the extension of Portugal’s role in the slave trade, or the stimulation of Portuguese exports. Pombal had long since vanished from the scene – indeed, he had ended his life
in disgrace – but his influence had survived and allowed textiles and the wine trade to thrive. Nor had the Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars been much of a setback. There had been war with France from 1793 to 1797 and a brief
Spanish invasion in 1801 (see below), but hostilities had been nominal and trade buoyant, whilst the definitive peace treaty had cost her no more than the cession of a small part of the Alentejo and the payment of indemnities to
Madrid and Paris.