

 These difficulties were doubly unfortunate for they forced Britain back on methods of war – above all, blockade and colonial aggrandisement – that could not but antagonise potential partners on the Continent whilst at the same
time confirming suspicions that the British were determined to avoid the sort of commitment they required of their allies. Nor were the methods of warfare on which they relied particularly cost-effective: colonial offensives were
notoriously wasteful in terms of lives, whilst blockading Europe’s coasts inflicted immense wear and tear on the Royal Navy. Some amelioration in the demands on Britain’s resources was at hand – by the end of July 1807
expeditionary forces that she had sent to South America and Egypt had capitulated in exchange for their evacuation – but even so the sinews of war were clearly at a premium.

 The political foundations of the British war effort were no more solid. In office since March 1807, the Portland administration may have been more committed to the struggle than its predecessor, the so-called Talents, but it was
also very vulnerable. Amongst Whigs like Richard Sheridan, Earl Grey and Lord Holland, it was felt that Napoleon personified the cause of progress. In the course of the 1790s, a number of Whigs – most famously Edmund Burke, but
also the current Prime Minister, Lord Portland – had become supporters of the war, but this gain had been offset by the defection of a number of disillusioned Tories to the peace party. Meanwhile, if the failure of the talks of
1806 had temporarily silenced the peace party, the Portland administration was also hampered by other factors. The Foreign Secretary, George Canning, was a man of questionable judgement whose determination to defeat the French
blinded him to political realities, and made him impatient with more circumspect colleagues. To make matters worse, Portland himself was aged and unwell, whilst the Cabinet also had to run the risk of losing the support of the
throne. In ordinary circumstances, the latter would not have been an issue, King George III loathing Napoleon and sharing his ministers’ antipathy to the Catholic emancipation that was the foremost domestic issue of the day, but
the king was prone to bouts of porphyria that periodically left him completely incapacitated and threatened to replace him with the pro-Whig Prince of Wales.

 However, Britain’s stability cannot just be measured in terms of Westminster. Just as important was the Continental Blockade. Over the course of time and by dint of changing circumstances, Britain was able to circumvent the
effects of the Blockade by developing new markets and building up undercover links with the Continent, but in 1807 it was by no means clear that matters would work out so well, and all the more so as that year had seen the United
States move in the direction of a total embargo on all trade with Britain. Hit by both a squeeze on exports and a general increase in the price of raw materials, indeed, many industries were in the grip of a severe slump. Matters
being worsened still further by the actions of French commerce raiders and a poor harvest, the handloom weavers of Lancashire mounted an impressive campaign to petition Parliament for a minimum wage, whilst many northern
merchants and manufacturers began to organise petitions for peace. Hand in hand with these demands, meanwhile, went others for political change: in the general elections of 1807, for example, Westminster, then the most
representative seat in the country, returned the popular demagogues, Sir Francis Burdett and Lord Cochrane, on a platform of electoral reform.