

 Whilst all this had been going on, Madrid had been making little trouble (aside from anything else, on 29 August French troops had suddenly invaded the so-called Kingdom of Etruria * ). Nevertheless, deeply mistrustful of Godoy,
the emperor decided to bind the Spaniards to his plans even more closely. In consequence, 25 September saw the emperor make contact with Godoy’s personal representative in Paris – one Eugenio Izquierdo – and agree the Treaty of
Fontainebleau. In brief, Portugal was split into three with the north handed over to the King and Queen of Etruria, the centre kept under military occupation until the end of the war and then disposed of according to
circumstance, and the south given to Godoy, Napoleon in the meantime agreeing both to guarantee the existing domains of the Spanish Bourbons and to allow Carlos IV to style himself ‘Emperor of the Two Americas’. † Also settled
was the question of how Portugal would actually be occupied, the basic plan being that 28,000 French and 13,000 Spanish troops would march on Lisbon from León, whilst another 16,000 Spaniards moved across the frontier from
Galicia and Extremadura. Meanwhile, a further 40,000 French soldiers would be assembled at Bayonne to ward off British raids, although it was agreed that these troops would not enter Spain without the prior agreement of Madrid.

 By the time that Fontainebleau was formally ratified on 29 October 1807, French troops were already deep inside Spain. Last-minute efforts at negotiation by the Portuguese had been quashed by threats that, unless they
surrendered forthwith, the house of Bragança would be deposed, and on 18 October the first French forces started crossing the Spanish frontier. At their head marched the notoriously fiery and ambitious General Jean Andoche Junot,
a close associate of Napoleon who had first met him at the siege of Toulon in 1793 and had since distinguished himself in Italy, Egypt and Palestine, as well as serving as French ambassador to Lisbon. Nicknamed ‘The Tempest’,
Junot had his sights set on glory – he had never had an independent field command, had missed the dramatic campaigns of 1805–1807, and been denied the marshal’s baton that had fallen to so many of his colleagues – whilst, apart
from a few battalions composed of Swiss mercenaries or the scrapings of the old Hanoverian and Piedmontese armies, the 25,000 men that he commanded were all veteran units of the French line.

 Despite persistent heavy rains that tired Junot’s troops and slowed their advance, Fontainebleau therefore looked set to become a reality. Yet already a series of events in Spain were rendering it a dead letter. At the centre of
this crisis stood the hated royal favourite, Manuel de Godoy, but to understand the tension that surrounded him we must first pay some attention to the context in which he had the misfortune to operate. The details of the
situation will be addressed in due course, all that needs to be said for the moment being that the period from 1788 to 1807 had witnessed a transformation in the history of Spain. In 1788 – the year when the great enlightened
absolutist, Carlos III, had been replaced on the throne by his son, Carlos IV, she had been a world power. Consisting of the Philippines, Cuba, Puerto Rico, Trinidad, Santo Domingo, the whole of southern and central America (with
the exception of Brazil and the Guyanas), and large parts of the present-day United States, including Texas, Arizona, New Mexico, California and Florida, her colonial empire brought her income that in the period 1786–1790
averaged 540,000,000 reales. Fabulously rich in terms of their resources – silver, for example, was mined in vast quantities in Peru and Mexico – these territories for the past thirty years had been exploited ever more
ruthlessly: in the period 1756–1760 revenue had only averaged 304,000,000 reales. Being in large part the product of private commerce and investment, only a fraction of this money – perhaps 100,000,000 reales per year – ever
reached the treasury, but even so Spain still possessed that other hallmark of world power: a fleet that in 1788 numbered 76 men-of-war and 51 frigates, and included the 136-gun Santísima Trinidad, which was then the largest ship
in the world. Permanent alliance with France in the form of the so-called Family Compact bought Spain security in Europe and support against Britain. And finally in the person of Carlos III, who had come to the throne in 1759,
Spain had possessed a monarch of immense vigour and personal dynamism, who was determined to extract the utmost from his dominions both at home and abroad, and not afraid to take on the vested interests of the Church, the
nobility and the commercial élite.