

 So much for the context. Who, though, was Manuel de Godoy? An obscure scion of the provincial nobility, Godoy had first come to Madrid in 1787 as a private soldier in the royal bodyguard, and had quickly attracted the attention
of María Luisa, the wife of the future Carlos IV, on account of his ‘manly bearing’. No sooner had Carlos III died, then, than Godoy succeeded in gaining the favours of the royal couple to such an extent that by 1792 he held the
rank of captain general (field marshal), was a grandee of the first class, and had been appointed chief minister. Astonishing as this last promotion may appear, however, it was not the result of mere caprice. With his court the
focus of a bitter struggle between the rival factions known as the ‘wigs’ and the ‘cravats’, Carlos felt that the safest course was to award power to a man whose loyalty was owed to him alone. Yet power did not equate to
security. Whether or not he was genuinely the queen’s lover (and it is probable that he never was), the belief that he owed his position only to his sexual prowess could hardly be avoided. At the same time, too, his advancement
angered the grandees who dominated the court, and all the more so because his advent as chief minister had aborted what they had seen as an opportunity to reverse the Bourbons’ creeping erosion of their status. * Lacking a power
base of his own, Godoy could only rely on continued royal favour and his own patronage. Neither could be depended on – the former could be withdrawn at any time, whilst the latter was likely to win him as many enemies as it did
friends – but year in, year out, Godoy made sure that he wrote to the king and queen several times a day so as to keep them appraised of his every decision. As for his palace, it was constantly thronged with ‘almost all those
distinguished by their birth, their position, their wealth, or their reputation … young gallants who had … gone there to show themselves off and seek conquests in matters of love, and persons of dubious reputation who wanted to
mingle with their betters and … secure some advantage or other’. 1

 Thoroughly demonised as he later was, it is worth paying some attention to Godoy’s qualities and character. Whilst no one would pretend that the favourite was either a paragon of virtue or a genius, he was by no means lacking in
talent. On the contrary, his letters show a man of considerable grasp, whilst he was not foolish enough to think that he could dispense with the advice of men such as the artillery expert, Tomás de Morla. Independent observers
also frequently recognised that he had his good points. If Lady Holland was deeply critical, remarking that his ‘only ambition … is to amass immense wealth’, and further that ‘habitual and constitutional indolence impede the
execution of any great enterprise’, her husband was more charitable, recognising that, ‘never in his heart a friend of the Church’, he showed a genuine desire ‘to reform abuses … to improve the condition of the people of Spain,
and, above all, to reward, encourage and promote every kind of useful talent’. 2 Similarly, in 1807 Blanco White wrote that his patronage was ‘not always … the reward of flattery or … servility’, that ‘he showed great respect for
talents and for literature’, and that ‘he was not void of … vague wishes of doing good’. 3 And, ‘instant statesman’ though he was, he was no country bumpkin: