

 Napoleon’s sudden ultimatum spelled disaster, however. As the eighteenth century had progressed the Brazilian gold, sugar and tobacco that had hitherto been the bedrock of Portugal’s well-being had begun either to run out or to
fall in value. Some relief was obtained by the discovery of diamonds and an increase in the cultivation of cotton, but even so the emphasis had increasingly begun to shift to the metropolis’ own products and manufactures. As
Britain took a large part of the wine that was Portugal’s chief export, joining the Continental Blockade was unthinkable, and yet fighting France and Spain was not much of an option either: whilst some attempt had been made to
reorganise the army since the peace of 1801, no more than twenty thousand men were under arms out of a theoretical total of some forty-eight thousand.

 In the circumstances, then, the only hope was either to conciliate Napoleon whilst at the same time avoiding a total breach with London, or to enlist British support while staving off Napoleon. Needless to say, the chief
minister – António de Araújo de Azevedo – attempted both courses of action. Thus, whilst Napoleon was told that Portugal was prepared to declare war on Britain and close her ports to her ships, Araújo jibbed at agreeing to arrest
her subjects or seize her goods. As for the British, they were secretly informed that hostilities would be confined to form alone, the Portuguese simultaneously requesting their assistance.

 Napoleon as yet being unready to go to war – the troops concerned had to be scraped together from a variety of depots all over France, whilst their Spanish counterparts faced enormous logistical difficulties – Lisbon was
therefore told that it need only detain British subjects on a provisional basis and sequester rather than confiscate their goods, the original deadline of 2 September also being extended for a further month. Yet this meant
nothing: thanks to Britain’s recent bombardment of Copenhagen and seizure of the Danish fleet, the emperor was more inclined to severity than ever.

 In Portugal, the government’s resolve was stiffening. Although news had now been received that no aid would be forthcoming from the British, reports from Paris suggested that Napoleon’s entourage could be bribed into dissuading
him from taking action. As a mark of good faith, the batteries that protected Lisbon from the sea were therefore placed in a state of defence and six thousand troops thrown into the coastal fortress of Peniche, but Napoleon was
once again told that the government would not go beyond its original agreements, and large amounts of gold and jewels were placed at the disposal of certain confidential agents in Paris. Whether a more positive answer would have
made any difference is unclear, but Napoleon now had all the pretext that he needed whilst his intervention force – the so-called First Corps of Observation of the Gironde – was ready for action. No sooner had he received the
Portuguese answer, then, than he ordered its commander, General Junot, to cross the frontier.