

 His manner … was graceful and attractive. Though he had neither education nor reading … his whole deportment announced … that mixture of dignity, politeness, propriety and ease, which the habits of good company are supposed
exclusively to confer. He seemed born for a high station. Without any effort he would have passed wherever he was for the first man in society. 4

 Godoy’s circumstances were not made any easier by the fact that in March 1793, Spain was dragged into war with revolutionary France. Though less damaging in its impact than its successors, the struggle was still disquieting
enough. The Spanish troops went hungry, whilst the invasion of Roussillon that was their chief contribution to the fighting was marred by much hesitation and indecision and eventually became bogged down before the walls of
Perpignan. The following year, indeed, the Spaniards were driven out. A counter-invasion of Catalonia was confined to its northern fringes, but by now the army was exhausted – it had, after all, never expected to have to fight a
war with France. As for popular enthusiasm for the war, it had long since ebbed (if, indeed, it had ever existed). In consequence, the early summer of 1795 saw the French overrun the Basque provinces and reach the Ebro,
hostilities then being brought to an end by a treaty signed at Basel on 22 July.

 For a brief moment Godoy was genuinely popular, whilst a grateful Carlos IV rewarded him with the title of Prince of the Peace, France’s terms having proved remarkably generous. However, Britain was now certain to threaten the
Spanish empire, whilst in April 1796 the then General Bonaparte invaded Italy and proceeded to sweep all before him, thereby threatening the important marriage interests that the Bourbons had established there. In short, a fresh
alliance with France was essential in the form of the Treaty of San Ildefonso of 18 August 1796 and with it, less than two months later, came war with Britain.

 If Godoy had actually been the idler of legend, it is possible that his position might have been much easier. However, the favourite was rather impelled by the conflict to turn to reform. In doing so, however, he immediately
jeopardised the chief bastion of his rule. Already aged forty in 1788, Carlos IV was a man of limited intelligence whose chief passions were hunting, collecting clocks and watches and playing practical jokes on his courtiers.
Though not inclined to surrender the very real advantages that the enlightened absolutism personified by Carlos III had brought to the Spanish monarchy, he was also deeply fearful of revolution. All too well aware that the fall
of Louis XVI had begun with a ‘revolt of the aristocracy’, he was therefore bound to be antagonistic towards Godoy’s reforms, whilst at the same time being highly susceptible to the insinuations of the very groups whom Bourbon
policy had always sought to muzzle. Last but not least, reform would also hit the monarchy itself. As the Danish ambassador wrote in January 1799: