

 Whilst the people groan in misery … the queen squanders money on her favourites. At present this position is occupied by a certain … Mallo, * a former garde du corps of neither talent nor reputation. 5

 Godoy, then, was riding for a fall. That said, his instincts were perfectly sound. At the heart of his policy was an insistence that he would ‘never trust the French’. 6 As he later wrote, ‘In so far as France is concerned, the
only thing that can be counted on is that the French will never be friends of anything other than their own interests.’ 7 In consequence, his first target was the army, which he was determined should be given an adequate system
of recruitment, a modern system of tactics and a better-trained officer corps, and pruned of such costly encumbrances as the royal guard. From 1796 onwards, he therefore became engaged in a spasmodic campaign to secure these
goals, only to find that his every effort was blocked by the protests of powerful vested interests within the military establishment, vetoed by the throne, or derailed by popular opposition. When the great crisis came, little had
been achieved other than to tinker with a few details and pack the high command with his favourites. Also, with financial worries deepening, soldiers and even officers went hungry and unpaid: ‘The state of the troops blockading
Gibraltar was such that on many days each company had to detach a number of soldiers to gather wild herbs and roots for their meals,’ wrote one observer, whilst the Danish ambassador complained, ‘The officers of the army and navy
are not paid, and I have frequently had captains knocking on my door to ask me for a hand-out.’ 8 Far from building up a party in the army, then, Godoy earned the hatred of some officers, especially in the royal guard (whose
strength he did at least succeed in halving), the contempt of many others, and the loyalty of virtually none.

 Nor was the army the only institution to be alienated by the régime. Under great financial pressure, eager to win some credit with caroline bureaucrats, determined to create a clientele amongst the hierarchy, and much influenced
by the thinking of such liberal economic theorists as Gaspar Melchor de Jovellanos, the state also turned its attention to the Church. In consequence, the latter found that the regalist pressure of the past century was greatly
intensified, with much use being made of the state’s control of ecclesiastical appointments. More dramatically, a start was also made on the expropriation of the Church’s wealth: by 1808 it had been stripped of something over
fifteen per cent of its property (which was very considerable, some twenty per cent of arable land being in the hands of the clergy). To suggest that the process turned the whole ecclesiastical establishment against Godoy would
be an exaggeration, for there were plenty of clerics – the so-called Jansenists – who favoured reform. For all that, however, much of the clergy did come to hate Godoy, reformists being angry at his failure to give them full
support, traditionalists unable to diassociate him from this desamortización, and all shades of opinion united in their condemnation of his lifestyle, which was, beyond doubt, extremely scandalous. As if it was not bad enough
that, despite having taken the hand of Carlos IV’s niece, he lived openly with his mistress, Pepita Tudó, there were constant rumours that he sold favours for sex. ‘His Excellency’, wrote the young officer, Pedro Agustín Girón,
‘was pretty much inclined to the fair sex. To please him and lend oneself to his desires was the surest way to favour, whilst it was always women who most had his ear. In consequence, there were many men so base that they brought
their wives and daughters to the audience of that … voluptuous vizier.’ 9 As one diplomat wrote: