

 The number of women to be found in the Ministry of State was truly scandalous … Husbands … were never the ones who came to solicit favours, whilst even of the celibate … those who did so were few enough, their interests … rather
being represented by wives, mothers or prostitutes. In this way the anteroom of the minister-favourite became a great seraglio. 10

 To return to revenue, it was not just the Church that was targeted. With the cost of the war with England mounting and the government bonds issued to finance the struggle perpetually depreciating, the need for fresh money was
pressing. Yet the economic situation was extremely poor, and it therefore seemed unwise to pass the burden on to the mass of the population: indeed, there had already been fierce anti-taxation disorders in Galicia in 1791. If the
era of Godoy was one of opportunity for men of property, it was also one of increased pressure. Thus, from 1798 onwards pudientes were subjected to a series of forced loans, whilst new taxes were imposed on servants, horses,
mules and carriages, on all rental income, and on the establishment of new mayorazgos.

 Driven by the desire to prepare Spain for a renewed conflict with France which he believed to be inevitable, Godoy was therefore pushing the frontiers of reform far beyond those attained by the governments of Carlos III.
Meanwhile, the economic, cultural and educational issues that had been central to the caroline enlightenment also continued to be pressed. Price regulation was lifted from all manufactures; a new weekly newspaper was sent to all
parish priests in an attempt to spread knowledge of modern agricultural methods and popularise the works of such foreign writers as Young and Bentham; a variety of technical colleges were started; and Jovellanos assisted with the
publication of his seminal Informe de Ley Agraria, a treatise that proposed wholesale desamortización. Faced by these reforms, the French diplomat, Bourgoing, waxed lyrical:

 The present moment seems to be the most favourable of any that has for a long time occurred. A minister in the flower of his age, to whose will everything is subservient, and who appears seriously intent on the welfare of his
country; a monarch to whom the purity of his manners and a robust constitution promise length of years; abundance of excellent plans [and] of men of genius to conceive new ones … a nation in which the government is so organised …
that the discontented may with ease … be kept in awe … How many circumstances here conspire to facilitate the execution of projects of national improvement! 11

 This judgement, however, was a shade over-optimistic. It was not just that ilustrados such as Jovellanos who should have been natural allies of Godoy were alienated by his licentiousness and venality. Within the government the
favourite faced a ‘Trojan horse’ in that a worried king and queen insisted on the inclusion in the reformist ministry of 1798 of the traditionalist Marqués de Caballero as Minister of Grace and Justice. A man of whom it was said
that he was neither gracious nor just nor caballero (i.e. gentlemanly), Caballero spent the next few years harassing the cause of reform, and in fact succeeded in persuading Carlos to dismiss many of its leading supporters
(Jovellanos was even imprisoned) and to clamp down on the Jansenists, many of whom were sent into internal exile. Outside the government, meanwhile, élite resentment of Godoy found a focus in the Prince of Asturias, or heir to
the throne, Prince Fernando. Emotionally stunted and neglected by his parents, Fernando came to hate Godoy, believing that he had stolen the affection of los reyes. Such adolescent jealousy – in 1800 Fernando was sixteen – might
have counted for nothing, had he not become surrounded by a number of figures with a grudge against Godoy, most notably the cleric, Juan de Escoíquiz, the Duque del Infantado, and the Conde de Montijo. * To make matters worse, in
1801 the favourite had been fully restored to favour. Thanks to French pressure, in 1801 Spain had been forced to go to war against Portugal in order to put pressure on Britain. Fearing, perhaps, that another general might
perform the role of Lafayette in France, Carlos appointed Godoy to take command of the Spanish army. The resultant ‘War of the Oranges’ † proved victorious, but so many problems were experienced that Godoy was then given the
specially created post of generalissimo with the brief of resuming the military reforms curtailed in 1798 (a position which he combined with the role of eminence grise: though not a minister, he remained very much at the centre
of affairs).