

 All, alas, was not what it seemed, the façade of power and dynamism masking many structural problems. Trade links with the empire were extraordinarily weak, whilst the colonies now cost so much to govern and defend that they
were verging on becoming a drain on the treasury. The navy had endless problems finding the manpower it needed to sail its ships, whilst, with the burden of imperial defence increasingly transferred to colonial militias, the army
was a mere skeleton. Indeed, recent military operations – the siege of Gibraltar of 1780–82 and a series of descents on the Moors – had not been encouraging. At present this was not too much of an issue, for the Spanish armed
forces had just about managed to meet the demands placed on them, but the auguries for the future were not good: with frustration steadily increasing among the criollos of America, for example, what would occur if a revolt broke
out there? What, too, would ensue were the Family Compact with France to be revoked? Still worse, colonial revenue was irreplaceable: as we shall see, Spain was not devoid of economic development, but growth was patchy, whilst
domestic taxation was impeded by the immunities enjoyed by the Church and the nobility. With much of the country desperately poor, too, there was no way that the domestic market could absorb the products of Spanish industry, just
as there was no way that Spanish industry could produce enough to keep the colonists from turning to the merchants and manufacturers of other countries.

 If Spain cannot be said to have been in decline, her great-power status was at least precarious. Still worse, between 1788 and 1808 there occurred a series of events that shattered it beyond repair, plunging the élites into
confusion and uncertainty and large sections of the populace into untold misery. Structuralists will contend that the loss of the colonies was inevitable, but, whilst that may well be the case, the fact remains that the catalyst
was provided by the wars of 1793–5, 1796–1802 and 1804–8. At the same time, it may further be argued that without these same wars the circumstances would have been very different: Spain might still have lost her empire, albeit
probably at a somewhat later date, but she would not have experienced the trauma and turmoil that actually became her lot. And, as it was, Godoy and Carlos IV found themselves coping both with a disintegrating situation for which
they ultimately paid the price and a foreign predator who was blind to the limits of Spanish power: not the least of Napoleon’s delusions in the aftermath of Tilsit was that Spain was a veritable ‘sleeping giant’ that had only to
be given an efficient administration for her collapsing fortunes to be transformed. No longer, however, would the government in Madrid preside over a world power in its own right: just as the wealth of the Spanish empire would
henceforward pour into the French treasury, so the Spanish navy and colonial militias would become agents of French imperialism.