

 Thus far we have spoken of the crisis of the antiguo régimen very much in social and economic terms. Important though these were, it also had a political and ideological dimension. Let us take, for example, the question of the
army, which was thoroughly detested. In the first place, and most obviously, it was the first line of defence against such activities as riot, smuggling and banditry. In the second, it was an economic burden: every time a
regiment moved, it was entitled to requisition all the carts and mules that it needed, whilst the populace also had to pay the cost of any soldiers billeted in their homes. In the third, officers and men alike were notorious for
the bullying manner which they adopted towards civilian society, further offence being caused by the presence of large numbers of foreign mercenaries and deserters. And, in the fourth, it was a constant reminder of the threat of
compulsory military service, the brunt of which was borne almost exclusively by the poor. *

 If the army was a constant source of irritation, even more was this the case with the régime’s cultural policy. Crudely speaking, under Carlos III and Carlos IV alike this aimed at civilising the masses. To combat Spanish
backwardness what was needed was the encouragement of education and cleanliness, the spread of enlightenment, the elimination of vice, and the inculcation of a new work ethic. Hence the régime’s support of the Societies of
Friends of the People, interest in popular education, aversion to bullfighting, construction of new cemeteries away from populated areas, and determination to purify Spanish Catholicism of many of the popular traditions with
which it was adulterated. So far, so good, perhaps, but there was also a darker side to the story. Some of its aspects were simply ridiculous, as witness the attempt to replace both la zarzuela and the classical drama of the
Golden Age with a new ‘enlightened’ theatre, and, still more so, the insistence that the populace should shed their traditional dress (the all-enveloping cloak typical of lower-class men was regarded as an ideal cover for bandit
daggers). Others, however, were downright sinister, for also encompassed by the policy were the criticism of charity, the denunciation of all forms of holiday and popular entertainment, the desire to eradicate all manifestations
of folk-culture (even traditional songs and carols were frowned upon), and the criminalisation of poverty. Underlying the whole was a terror of the common people – el populacho – that is almost palpable: ignorant, savage, brutal,
irrational and vicious, they had to be subjected to a diet of constant labour and denied any outlet for their emotions.

 All this was dangerously provocative. For a population such as that of eighteenth-century Spain, the various communal rituals and celebrations that were so hated by the ilustrados were the very stuff of life. Welcome
interruptions in an otherwise unending round of drudgery and boredom, they were also vital manifestations of identity. For Carlos III and the various ecclesiastical reformers whom he patronised, such traditional ceremonies as the
burial of the sardine in Murcia may have been examples of the darkest ignorance and superstition, but for the towns involved they were the lifeblood of the community, and the source of much local pride. Take them away, indeed,
and the people would be deprived of the supernatural help that was its only protection against misfortune, a fear that could only be intensified given the growing tendency of traditionalist preachers to argue that Spain’s ills
stemmed from divine punishment of Godoy. Allied to all this was the question of xenophobia, and, particularly, francophobia. In many parts of Spain, economic rivalry, the presence of a substantial French community, folk memories
of the War of the Spanish Succession, and, most recently, the anti-revolutionary propaganda associated with the war of 1793–1795 had led to considerable anti-French feeling. Yet, with the petimetre – the fashionable young fop who
affected French dress and French manners, and peppered his speech with gallicisms in order to curry favour and demonstrate his own superiority – already becoming something of a stock figure, and the Enlightenment being portrayed
by traditionalist clerics as a satanic plot, in popular eyes for what did Bourbon cultural policy stand if not frenchification and the destruction of Spain’s very identity? Just as early manifestations of Bourbon reformism had
helped provoke serious disturbances in 1766, so Godoy was playing with fire in continuing to impose it in the Spain of the 1790s; indeed, of all his actions there was probably none more unpopular than his prohibition of
bullfighting in 1805.