

 To return to Godoy’s enemies at court, the real heart of the growing conspiracy was not Fernando at all, but rather the magnates headed by Infantado and Montijo. For such men, one fact stood out above all else. Throughout the
eighteenth century the old aristocracy had been increasingly under threat, whether it was from the growth of the bureaucracy, the creation of a new ‘nobility of service’, or the erosion of the link that had hitherto firmly linked
the concept of nobility with that of martial prowess. ‘From that bitter period’, lamented an anonymous commentator, ‘dates the humiliation of the nobility of Spain’, whilst, as the Duke of Wellington later remarked:

 The grandees! I give you my word … they are no more … than the valets … are in my house. Are you aware that they cannot leave Madrid without the king’s permission, and that such permissions are granted seldom, and only for a
couple of months? And, still more: they are so abased as to consider leaving the court … the greatest misfortune. 12

 In 1794, indeed, Montijo had been sent into internal exile for protesting at the aristocracy’s prostration. The ignorant and cowardly Fernando being the perfect puppet, Infantado and Montijo therefore decided to make use of him
to put things to rights, to which end they convinced Fernando that the favourite intended to oust him from the succession, matters being much helped in this respect by the prince’s marriage in October 1802 to María Antonia of
Naples, the princess detesting los reyes, Godoy, and the French alliance in approximately equal measure. Alas for Spain, however, Fernando was not well served by his advisers. A vain and superficial character possessed of
boundless ambition, Escoíquiz was a blind admirer of Napoleon seemingly devoid of foresight (indeed, the emperor later described him as ‘the true author of all the ills of Spain’ 13 ). ‘Till called upon to take an active part in
affairs … thought to possess great capacity for them’, Infantado was described as ‘un sot, and the greatest I think I ever met with’ and ‘a giddy pate, much given to wantonness’, whilst García de León y Pizarro remarked that ‘his
head was so weak that he always moved in the opposite direction to that of sense and reason’. 14 As for Montijo, he was described as ‘a bold man full of knowledge, but one possessed of so frivolous and unquiet a character that he
could only play a role in the most agitated epoch’, and even as ‘one of the worst and most turbulent men to have flourished in our day’. 15

 Whilst factious courtiers and a rebellious crown prince might provide sufficient explanation for a palace revolution, they cannot account for events of the magnitude of those which now followed. To understand the cataclysm that
Spain was about to experience, we must move beyond the court to the burgeoning social crisis precipitated by the war with Britain. Until 1795 Spain had escaped relatively unscathed from the Revolutionary Wars. From 1796 conflict
with Britain brought a dramatic change, however. Despite her powerful navy, Spain was unable to prevent the blockade of her ports, whilst the length of her sea lanes rendered her particularly vulnerable to commerce raiding. Some
trade still got through, whilst the British even licensed the export of a few products, but even so the impact was disastrous, whilst the flow of bullion from the empire was also interrupted: hence the financial difficulties that
helped precipitate the assault on the Church.