

 For Godoy, all this was a catastrophe, the general (and wholly incorrect) view being that the whole affair had been an audacious attempt to eliminate Fernando, and the banishment of Escoíquiz et al. a monstrous abuse of justice.
Even more disastrously, meanwhile, the affair convinced Napoleon of either the need for, or the possibility of, intervention. Which is the case, it is impossible to say. The emperor knew that Godoy could not be trusted and was
dissatisfied with Spain’s performance as an ally, but had hitherto expressed no intention of taking any hand in her affairs. Yet the idea that she might be transformed into another family monarchy can hardly have been alien to
his mind: there had been talk of such a move since at least 1804, whilst, anxious for a throne, the dashing Murat was actively promoting the idea. Whatever the truth of the matter, things now started to happen. Charged by Carlos
IV with complicity in Fernando’s plotting, the emperor announced that the prince was under his protection and forbade any mention of France in connection with Fernando and his accomplices, and on 13 November ordered the 25,000
men he had been holding in reserve at Bayonne – the Second Corps of Observation of the Gironde – to cross the frontier into northern Spain. Meanwhile, fresh troops – the Corps of Observation of the Ocean Coasts and Division of
Observation of the Western Pyrenees – were concentrated at Bourdeaux and Saint-Jean-Pied-du-Port under Marshals Moncey and Bessières, and magazines established at Bayonne and Perpignan, strenuous attempts also being made to
acquire as much intelligence as possible about Spain’s armed forces, fortresses, roads and political situation.

 The confrontation in El Escorial, then, led directly to French intervention, but whether Napoleon as yet intended to overthrow the Bourbons is another matter. As Marshal Bessières told one of his aides-de-camp, ‘So long as
Napoleon remains in power, no European throne can be filled by a Bourbon.’ 16 Nor had the Spanish state done much to rehabilitate itself in his eyes. As usual, mobilisation had gone very slowly, whilst news was soon reaching the
emperor that Junot’s forces, which by now were massing on the Portuguese frontier, were going hungry. * Yet despite all this there is still no evidence that he was planning a change of dynasty prior to the end of 1807. In January
1808, indeed, Napoleon was still thinking of a marriage alliance: meeting his estranged brother, Lucien, in Mantua, he persuaded him to send his daughter, Charlotte – the only Bonaparte girl available – to Paris as a bride for
Fernando.

 If Napoleon was undecided, he was certainly keeping his options open, whilst his preparations were stimulated still further by the news that 7,000 British troops had arrived at Gibraltar from Sicily. Commanded by General Pierre
Dupont, the 25,000-strong Second Corps of Observation of the Gironde was therefore moved from Vitoria to Valladolid, where it was ideally placed to march on Madrid, the Corps of Observation of the Ocean Coasts and Division of
Observation of the Western Pyrenees sent to replace it in Navarre and the Basque provinces, and yet another new formation – the Division of Observation of the Eastern Pyrenees – mobilised at Perpignan. Not counting the forces of
Junot, over 50,000 French troops were now in Spain, and still others massing on the frontiers. Small wonder, then, that Godoy was starting to feel distinctly alarmed.