

 Hardly surprisingly, by 1800 Spain was in a state of ferment. Peasant risings occurred in Galicia and Asturias in 1790–1791, Galicia in 1798, Valencia in 1801, and Bilbao in 1804, there were bread riots in Segovia, Madrid and
many pueblos in La Mancha, whilst numerous communities attempted to mount a legal challenge against their señores. As for the demands of the Church, many peasants pretended that they had produced less than was actually the case,
or circumvented the tithes altogether by introducing new crops which were not specifically subject to them. Finally, there was also much resistance to the régime’s political and social reforms. In the Basque provinces, for
example, the notables were outraged by Godoy’s attempts to whittle away the fueros still further in accordance with the centralising policies of Carlos III, and they engaged in a fierce campaign of obstruction and propaganda.
More humbly, all over Spain, townsfolk and peasants who had been forced to see their loved ones buried in new-fangled municipal cemeteries stole their bodies back at night and tried to restore them to the protection of the old
resting-places; more particularly, in Madrid the growing afrancesamiento of the court was met by the swaggering majos – shopkeepers, artisans, taverners and labourers who, together with their women, dressed in exaggeratedly
traditional style and took pleasure in picking fights with petimetres.

 To return to national politics, it was the existence of this complex web of resentment, resistance, hunger and despair that enabled the anti-Godoyist faction in the court to reach out to the people, and all the more so as the
fashion which had emerged amongst the nobility of mingling with the Madrid crowd in disguise gave the conspirators an ideal means of spreading scurrilous rumours. Thus it was that when María Antonia of Naples met an early death,
stories spread that she had been poisoned; still worse, it was put about that Godoy was plotting to seize the throne, the conspirators also distributing a series of insulting cartoons making much of Godoy’s supposed relationship
with the queen; Fernando, meanwhile, was portrayed as an injured innocent who would rescue Spain from all her ills.

 Effective though this propaganda was, there is no reason to suppose that at this stage Spain was heading for anything more serious than the riots of 1766 (when mob violence had toppled an equally unpopular chief minister). What
changed the situation was Spain’s ever more precarious international position. In this respect it cannot be denied that Godoy’s aims had gone disastrously astray. Far from being enabled to rebuild her strength, Spain rather had
been seriously weakened. On the one hand, with the government deprived of much of the revenues of the American empire, there was little that Godoy could have done to strengthen the Spanish army even had his plans encountered less
opposition. On the other, even such strength as Spain had was dissipated with the Spanish fleet suffering a number of serious defeats, and Portugal being invaded in 1801. Following the French lead, peace was signed with Britain
in March 1802 – the price was the loss of Trinidad – but in little more than a year Britain and France were at war again. Conscious of the dangers of a fresh conflict, Godoy made frantic efforts to stay neutral, but in the event
the best he could do was to persuade Napoleon to allow Spain to redeem the pledges made in the Treaty of San Ildefonso by a subsidy of six million francs per month. Onerous as this arrangement was (the government had to raise the
necessary money by means of an extortionate loan on the Paris market), it did not even achieve its aims: arguing that in reality Spain remained allied to France, Britain went back to war with her in October 1804. The result was a
return to economic disruption and, above all, the catastrophic defeat at Trafalgar on 21 October 1805, in which the bulk of Spain’s remaining seapower was destroyed.