

 Had Spain been economically stagnant, this development need not have mattered. However, the reign of Carlos III had seen her exports increase dramatically. At the same time, in some areas agriculture had switched to cash crops,
whilst industry had experienced a certain modest growth. In Catalonia, for example, the peasantry had increasingly turned to the production of wine and brandy, whilst an important cotton industry had grown up around Barcelona
that by the late 1780s employed as many as 100,000 workers. In Guadalajara the wool factory – the largest and most ambitious of a whole series of industrial establishments set up by successive Bourbon monarchs as models for
future development – by 1791 had 24,000 employees. In Valencia, boosted by the ready availability of the raw material, a silk industry existed that at its greatest extent had more than four thousand looms. In Granada there was
another silk industry that employed some two thousand looms in 1798, a woollen industry with over seventy different manufacturers, and much cultivation of the hemp and flax demanded by the shipyards of Cartagena. In Seville, the
famous tobacco factory employed over 1,500 people, whilst barrel-making and other crafts related to the colonial trade gave employment to many artisans in and around Cádiz. Around Santander the liberalisation of commerce and
establishment of several foundries and shipyards led to an economic boom based on flour, iron, leather, forestry, charcoal-making, and basket-work. And finally, as well as developing as a major centre for the export of Castilian
wool and grain, Bilbao was the centre of an important iron industry that in 1790 sent four thousand tons of iron goods to the empire alone.

 Of course, neither industry nor agriculture produced wholly for the empire or even for the export market in general: only fifty per cent of Spanish exports went to the empire, whilst the proportion of Spanish agricultural and
industrial production that went abroad was gradually falling. Yet the war’s effects should not be minimised. By 1805, for example, cotton was employing only some 30,000 people in Catalonia. Elsewhere things were even worse. Raw
materials often came by sea, as did much of the imported grain on which whole areas of the country were more or less dependent. In addition, the navy and merchant marine formed a market for a whole host of ancillary industries,
whilst giving work to thousands of muleteers, woodcutters, stevedores and the like. With the British patrolling the seas more or less unmolested, the war’s impact was therefore catastrophic, and all the more so as there was no
room for manoeuvre: many industries were hopelessly archaic, the domestic market in recession, and a protectionist France positively hostile to Spanish exports.

 In fairness to Godoy, it must be said that Spain’s alliance with France was not the only cause of her difficulties. On the contrary, she was also assailed by an extraordinary crop of natural disasters that included unseasonal
weather, floods, droughts, earthquakes and even plagues of grasshoppers. With considerable proportions of the harvest repeatedly lost and the population experiencing steady growth (between 1752 and 1797 it increased by
approximately ten per cent), the result was, first, several subsistence crises, and, second, a great acceleration of the inflation that had been afflicting Spain since the 1780s. And, as if all this was not enough, large parts of
Spain were swept by terrible epidemics of malaria and yellow fever.