

 Before looking at the events that followed, however, we must first return to Portugal, where João and Araújo had now agreed to implement all Napoleon’s demands immediately, and were asking only for a guarantee of the Bragança
dynasty. Their efforts, however, were to no avail. Concerned that the British might send an army to Lisbon, Napoleon ordered Junot to hasten his march (hence the shift to the Tagus valley). Exhausted by the difficult march they
had to make to reach the Tagus, on crossing the frontier on 19 November, his troops found themselves facing a mere track that led through a barely populated desert of mountain and scrub. What followed was beyond doubt a terrible
ordeal, as witness the account of General Foy:

 The army suffered incessantly from the bad weather. In Portugal the autumnal rains are a positive deluge … Twenty times a day the columns of infantry were broken in fording the swollen … rivers. The soldiers straggled along at
random, and, ceasing to be restrained by the ties of discipline and the presence of their leaders, they had no longer the appearance of an army, but rather of a medley of individuals exasperated by distress. 17

 Driven on mercilessly at a rate of over twenty miles a day, more than half the troops had fallen sick or turned to marauding by the time Junot regained a better road at Abrantes, whilst he also had to abandon most of his guns.
So desperate was the situation, indeed, that the French commander had to form the élite companies of his first two divisions into provisional battalions, and it was with these men, no more than 1,500-strong, that he finally
marched into Lisbon on 30 November.

 For the Spaniards, meanwhile, things had not gone much better. According to Thiébault, ‘General Caraffa’s Spanish division lost 1,700 or 1,800 men from hunger or fatigue, drowning in torrents or falling down precipices.’ 18
This, surely, is an exaggeration, but even so it is clear that the confusion was considerable. As Girón remembered of the first day’s march:

 It seemed impossible that that short and easy march could have been directed by soldiers. Units got lost, the soldiers dispersed, and in a word the disorder and confusion reached such a point that I can affirm that I have never
seen its equal in the wake of the most complete defeats. 19

 Once again it was a poor advertisement for the Bourbon state, and one that Napoleon was unlikely to forget. All the more was this the case as Spain was currently acquiring greater prominence in his strategic plans. Thus, the
operations that he was planning in the Mediterranean – the conquest of Sicily, the relief of the beleaguered garrison of Corfu, and the invasion of Egypt – made Spanish naval support very valuable, and yet the Spanish navy was in
a pitiable condition. Reduced to perhaps fifteen serviceable men-of-war, even these were mostly in need of many repairs, whilst crew, spares and supplies were all extremely scanty. Only with the greatest difficulty, indeed, were
six ships from Cartagena got to sea with the aim of joining the French squadron at Toulon. With all this, of course, Napoleon was much displeased, and all the more so as nothing would dissuade him from the belief that, thanks to
her empire in America, Spain was awash with money. If this potential was not realised, the reason was simple: the Spaniards were corrupt; the Spaniards were inefficient; the Spaniards were incompetent; all that was needed
therefore was the strong hand of France.