

 Trafalgar was not the killing blow of legend. Spain had really ceased to be a naval power before a single cannon had been fired. Ships she had in abundance, but already there were not the means to fit them out, and neither the
training and experience to sail them nor the resources to build more (major naval construction had effectively ceased in 1797). Nor should the trauma of the battle be exaggerated. Counting the many men who drowned as their
shattered ships foundered in the terrible storm that set in after the battle, Franco-Spanish casualties may have numbered as many as 14,000 men, of whom at least 5,000 were Spaniards. Amongst the coastal communities that provided
Spain’s sailors, this was certainly a blow, but at the popular level the impact was negligible. Except for those who had lost family in the battle, even the educated classes were not much moved by it: Spain, after all, still had
plenty of warships, and there was no reason to think that the defeat had any particular significance. If poets such as Quintana penned many odes to the combat, their theme was dead heroes rather than a dead empire. The navy, it
was generally agreed, had fought with honour, whilst the government reinforced this impression by showering the survivors with promotions and adding extra increments to the pensions paid to the widows of those who had been killed.

 Yet defeat still rankled, for the fleet was perceived as having put to sea at the behest of a France that was not prepared to defend Spain’s interests. On the contrary, indeed, Napoleon snubbed Madrid at every turn. With the
very raison d’être of the alliance scattering the seabed off Trafalgar, the empire now under direct threat (Britain was not only patronising such revolutionaries as Francisco Miranda, but had occupied Montevideo and Buenos
Aires), and his own popularity at a new low, Godoy began to cast around for some form of escape. Encouraged by friendly overtures from Russia, in the autumn of 1806 Godoy was presented with what seemed the perfect opportunity in
the form of war between France and Prussia. Contemporary wisdom holding that the Prussian army was the best in Europe, he immediately issued a proclamation calling Spain to arms. Great was the consternation in Madrid, therefore,
when Napoleon smashed the Prussians at Jena and Auerstädt. Desperate to escape the emperor’s wrath, Godoy maintained that his actions had been directed not against the French but the British – cannily phrased, his proclamation
had not specified whom Spain was supposed to fight – congratulated Napoleon on his victories, and agreed both to join the Continental Blockade and dispatch a division of 14,000 men for service with the grande armée (commanded by
the Marqués de la Romana, this ended up in Denmark as part of the assistance sent her when she attacked Sweden in company with Russia in February 1808).

 With the signing of the Treaty of Fontainebleau, it appeared that salvation was at hand, but in fact the appearance of the French armies coincided with a dramatic deterioration in the situation. In addition to doing all that
they could to blacken the favourite’s reputation and ensure that the machinery of power could be immediately taken over by them should Carlos IV die, the fernandino conspirators had early in 1807 decided to guarantee the
succession of their figurehead by marrying Fernando into the Bonaparte family (the fact that the only possible candidates were very junior did not deter them). Secret negotiations were opened with the French ambassador, in the
process of which Fernando was persuaded to write a letter openly begging Napoleon’s protection. However, tipped off that a plot was afoot, in a dramatic confrontation at the royal palace of El Escorial on 27 October, Carlos and
María Luisa confined the prince to his quarters and ordered an investigation into his affairs. Fernando’s papers apparently revealed little more than that he hated Godoy, wanted him imprisoned, and had been in some sort of
contact with Napoleon. None the less, the king and queen decided that the prince had been plotting their overthrow. Bullied into admitting that this had indeed been his aim, Fernando was eventually pardoned, but those he named as
his collaborators – Escoíquiz, Infantado, Montijo and various others – were arrested and, despite the collapse of an attempt at a show trial, sent into internal exile.