

 Already, though, the strong hand of France had failed in Portugal. João may have attempted to propitiate Paris, but he had also been careful to keep open his links with the British, who had promised to help the royal family
escape to Brazil. Preparations for flight were therefore soon under way, and on 29 November a convoy of eight men-of-war, four frigates and twenty-four merchantmen put to sea and headed for the Atlantic, where it was met by the
British naval squadron that had been sent to blockade the Tagus some weeks since. With them went not just the whole of the royal family, but the entire contents of the treasury and the national archives, many works of art, and
large numbers of the nobility, the bureaucracy, and the wealthier inhabitants of Lisbon, attended by perhaps half the coin in circulation in the country. Also safely aboard ship, meanwhile, was the British merchant community and
much of its trading stock.

 Back in Lisbon the entry of the invaders was hardly a triumphal one, the few men that accompanied the frustrated Junot resembling nothing more than the remnants of a beaten army: so exhausted were they that many of them could
not carry their own muskets. Some units had been reduced to one tenth of their original strength, whilst it was not for three weeks that the French commander could count upon the services of even 10,000 men. ‘The state we were
in … is hardly credible’, wrote Thiébault. ‘Our clothing had lost all shape and colour; I had not had a change of linen since Abrantes. My feet were coming through my boots.’ 20 With the aid of the Spaniards, however, the country
was gradually subjected to military occupation, garrisons being placed in such towns as Oporto, Setúbal, Faro, Almeida and Elvas. Meanwhile, a determined effort was made to overawe the populace; the property of all those who had
fled to Brazil was confiscated, along with much Church plate and all the estates of the royal family; an indemnity of 100,000,000 francs imposed; and the army formed into a new Portuguese Legion and sent off to garrison duties in
Germany (it was eventually destroyed in Russia in 1812). As for the regency that had been left behind by João, it was abolished and replaced by a new ‘council of government’, the Bragança dynasty being finally proclaimed to have
been overthrown on 1 January 1808.

 As was usual with France’s conquests, however, pillage and exploitation were cloaked in the guise of benevolence and reform. Thus, Junot had entered Lisbon proclaiming that its inhabitants had nothing to fear from him, and in
fact made repeated efforts to ensure that his troops behaved in a reasonable fashion (forbidding them, for example, to frequent taverns after seven o’clock in the evening). There soon appeared, too, a translated version of an
address which Napoleon had recently made to the clergy of Milan in which he maintained himself to be a loyal friend of the Catholic Church. The British, it was claimed, had imprisoned João, whilst Junot’s every action was dressed
up as an act of grace and favour (much was made, for example, of the abolition of the army), and numerous promises made of improvements in education and public works. Meanwhile, a start was also made on the sort of political,
social and economic change that characterised the rest of the Napoleonic empire: a corregedor-mór was appointed to head the administration in each province in the style of the French prefect; discussions were initiated on a
constitution; many convents and monasteries were suppressed; and beggars and street vendors were persecuted in the name of public order.