

 Rewarded for his efforts by Napoleon with the title of Duke of Abrantes, Junot could count on a number of collaborators. Not the least amongst these, of course, were many representatives of the resident French community. Most of
them being engaged in commerce, they naturally welcomed the eclipse of their British rivals and provided the French commander with a large number of officials, including every single one not just of the new corregedores but also
of the ministers whom Junot appointed to head the various arms of the administration. That said, however, there was no lack of Portuguese assistance. Bedazzled by dreams of sharing in the glory of the grande armée, for example,
large numbers of army officers volunteered for service with the new Portuguese Legion, whilst, in line with developments in other states, the nobility, the bureaucracy, the intelligentsia and the commercial classes all provided
the French with many adherents. With the Church urging submission to the new régime, Junot therefore had no difficulty in filling the ranks of the administration or, indeed, in assembling a delegation that in April 1808 travelled
to France to ask Napoleon to give the French commander the throne.

 If the educated classes gave the French much assistance, matters were by no means as rosy as Junot was inclined to pretend. On the contrary, from the earliest days of French occupation there was a considerable degree of violence
and unrest. Whether this was overtly political is unclear: whilst the appearance of growing numbers of anti-French posters and handbills was unambiguous in its message of loyalty to the Braganças, the same cannot be said with any
certainty of the fights that quickly began to break out between the French soldiery and members of the populace. Nor should much be made of the fact that the roads were becoming more and more dangerous: with the economy in chaos,
the magistracy denuded of personnel and the populace experiencing a severe increase in taxation, an upsurge in lawlessness was inevitable. As Foy points out, indeed, entering Lisbon the French encountered ‘swarms of robbers and
vagabonds’ who had ‘flocked from their hiding holes’ and engaged in ‘scenes of disorder like those of which [the capital] was the theatre after the earthquake of 1755’. 21 As for the fact that nearly one third of the Portuguese
Legion had deserted by the time that it crossed the frontier into Spain, heavy rates of desertion were nothing new. Yet the violence with which the French responded – according to Foy, an inhabitant of Mafra was executed merely
for ‘uttering invectives against the French army’ 22 – inevitably encouraged xenophobic tendencies. At the same time, the collaborators included many men who had benefited from Pomballine reforms that had concentrated wine
production in fewer hands but ruined many peasants in the process. Nor were the circumstances of Junot’s arrival much help because the Portuguese had seen not ‘heroes of a superior species, colossusses, demigods’, but mere men,
and not just that but men with ‘hardly enough strength to keep the step … [and] nothing but rusted firelocks and cartridges imbued with water’. 23