

 All these disasters were inflicted on a country that was already in the grip of serious tension. As might be expected, agricultural issues were well to the fore. In the Cantabrian mountains, for example, the problem was
essentially one of access to the forests that cloaked the hillsides. Vital to the region’s peasantry as a source of food and pasturage, this had for some time been under increasing threat. On the one hand, the industries that had
sprung up along the coast were consuming ever greater quantities of timber (by the 1790s wood was having to be brought in from as far away as Burgos). On the other, especially in the Basque country, the richer elements of the
peasantry – indeed, the term is really a misnomer in this context – were steadily advancing their position at the expense of their poorer fellows. Thus, large amounts of land that had been used as common pasturage were cleared
and brought under the plough, whilst many smallholders were forced to sell out. With many municipalities forced to embark on the sale of the common lands, by the first years of the nineteenth century a powerful group of middling
and even large proprietors had therefore emerged who were quick to monopolise the last vestiges of Basque peasant democracy (in all the Basque provinces the assemblies associated with their traditional fueros had survived).

 In other parts of the country the problem was rather more financial. Throughout Spain the campesinos were obliged to pay the traditional dues of tithes and first fruits to the Church. In addition to these ecclesiastical levies,
there were also the dues owed under the feudal system. Although the feudal lord – the señor – might be the monarch, an absentee grandee, a member of the petty provincial nobility, a monastery or convent, a bishopric, one of the
four medieval military orders, or even a municipal corporation, a very great number of Spain’s villages, towns and even cities were subjected to such obligations. The details varied from place to place, but in general the señor
was owed as much as a quarter of all produce as rent for the land and a variety of other dues and fees, enjoyed a series of monopolies on such activities as milling and baking, controlled local government, and ran his own courts,
thereby being enabled to exploit the commons for his own profit and tax the most basic agricultural activities. Nor were the señores the only pudientes, most of Spain being dominated by a powerful rentier class composed of
lawyers, officials, merchants and others who rented the señores ’ land, and then either sublet it at a great profit to peasant smallholders or alternatively farmed it with armies of landless labourers. For such men, meanwhile,
common sidelines were usury and speculation. And on top of all this there was heavy taxation, the people being subjected to a bewildering variety of taxes, levies and monopolies.

 To make matters worse, the Spanish countryside was already desperately poor. Only in a very few areas such as parts of Navarre and Catalonia was life tolerable. Otherwise the picture was uniformly grim. In Galicia, for example,
the land was subdivided into tiny plots that were too small to support a family. In Old Castile and La Mancha, farms were better-sized but burdened by poor soil, low rainfall and rack-renting. And in Extremadura and Andalucía the
classic form of farming was the great estate given over to vines, cereals or olives farmed by landless labourers who had access to employment for only part of the year. As a result, war and natural disaster meant complete
destitution, the catastrophe being intensified by the damage done by desamortización to Church charity (in this respect it is also worth noting that a decree of 15 September 1803 gave those who bought Church land carte blanche to
raise rents as they wished). Hospitals, poorhouses and orphanages were crammed to overflowing; many peasants lost their smallholdings; desperate labourers and their families fled to the cities in search of work only to find that
there was no choice but for them to swell the ever-growing crowds of beggars, thieves and prostitutes; dockers, muleteers, artisans and out-workers lost their employment by the thousand; and the countryside was terrorised by
gangs of bandits and desperate jornaleros out to find work by any means available. Meanwhile, of course, the pudientes were able to extend their estates at bargain prices (in that they were able to buy Church land with
depreciated state bonds), escape the worst effects of taxation, shrug off or evade the pressures of the state, drive up rents and engage in wholesale grain speculation.