

 The point of this démarche is rather unclear, but the most likely explanation seems to be that Napoleon hoped at one and the same time to justify his conduct hitherto and provoke the Spaniards into a resistance that would give
him the pretext he needed to overthrow the monarchy. If this is the case, then he was certainly successful, Carlos IV agreeing with Godoy and his other advisers that he should initiate preparations for flight to America by way of
Seville. The court already having moved to the palace of Aranjuez on the River Tagus south of Madrid, it was well placed for such a move, but, to gain time, the favourite also ordered the royal guard to move there from its
barracks in Madrid, whilst at the same time directing a variety of Spanish troops to hold the line of the Tagus. Garrisons stationed in the French zone of occupation were ordered to make no resistance and a conciliatory response
was made to Napoleon’s demands, but, even so, nothing could disguise the fact that war was imminent. As a miserable Godoy lamented, ‘I am in such a state … that I should like to put on … a sack and go and hide in a corner.’ 26

 The French, meanwhile, were on the move again. On 20 February, Joachim Murat had been appointed to the command of the 60,000 French troops who were now in Spain, whilst on 2 March he was ordered to establish his headquarters in
Vitoria, where he soon received the support of a 6,000-strong detachment of the Imperial Guard. On 6 March the French occupied the fortress of San Sebastián, Murat the next day receiving instructions to launch the forces of
Dupont and Moncey southwards towards Madrid, whose occupation, the emperor’s lieutenant was told, was to be followed by the dispatch of Godoy and the Spanish royal family to a meeting with Napoleon at either Burgos or Bayonne.
Though half-hearted efforts were still made to convince the Spaniards that all was well – the march on Madrid, for example, was explained by talk of securing Cádiz against the British besieging Gibraltar, or even sending troops
to north Africa – the gloves were clearly off. As Napoleon wrote to Murat, ‘I hope with all my heart that that there will be no war, and am only taking so many precautions because it is my habit to leave nothing to chance. But if
there is a war, your position will be a very good one.’ 27

 The trap, then, was about to shut, but events were now disrupted by fresh developments. For Fernando and his supporters – the so-called fernandinos – the war that now threatened was unthinkable. First of all, they remained
convinced that the emperor intended to place Fernando on the throne or, at least, get rid of Godoy, and, second, they believed – quite rightly – that war would lead to defeat and the overthrow of the entire dynasty. Terrified of
what might occur, Fernando therefore summoned Montijo, and ordered him to organise a rising that could present the emperor with a fait accompli in the form not only of a new régime, but of a new monarch only too eager to throw
himself on Napoleon’s mercy and do his will in every particular. Fernando, in short, would have been king, but he would have gone down in history not as el deseado but as el afrancesado.