

 Setting this aside, however, opportunism was the key. Napoleon had been motivated neither by an altruistic desire to spread the benefits of freedom and enlightenment, nor by a gigantic strategic combination, nor by an
overwhelming clan loyalty that made the creation of family courts the centrepiece of French foreign policy. Strategic, ideological and historical factors were present in his thinking, certainly, but in the last resort what
mattered was, first, the emperor’s character, and, second, the force of circumstance. Forever eager to demonstrate his prowess, impose his stamp upon affairs, and demonstrate his contempt for diplomacy, the emperor was confronted
with a situation in which nothing seemed to stand between him and a stroke that was more audacious than anything that he had yet attempted. Never had he been more wrong.

===== FILE: OEBPS/xhtml/chapter10.xhtml =====
The Peninsular War

 10

 Pancorbo

 THE EMERGENCE OF GUERRILLA WAR, 1808–1810

 Tough and experienced, the French dragoons glanced around them. On all sides there was nothing to be seen but miles of rock and scrub backed by towering mountains. News having reached the commander of the post at the miserable
village of Pancorbo that a band of guerrillas was about to stage an ambush somewhere between there and Miranda de Ebro, he had decided to send out a strong patrol. Nothing had happened as the men rode through the terrible gorge
of Pancorbo – a long defile that enjoyed the reputation of being one of the most dangerous places in the whole of Spain – but, moving on, one of the soldiers suddenly caught the flash of sunlight on metal. Shouting the alarm, his
commander soon had the dragoons galloping up the slope overlooking the road. Taken by surprise, a handful of figures rose out of the scrub and fled in confusion. Braver than the others, one or two stopped to fire the occasional
shot, but most of them lost no time in mounting the horses they had left tethered in the rear. In the general confusion, two men flung themselves on the same horse whilst another grabbed a stirrup in the hope of being pulled to
safety, only for the three of them to find their way blocked by a dragoon who flourished his blade and moved in for the kill, shouting triumphantly. From the scrub behind him, however, burst one of the leaders of the men who had
attacked the French column. A Catholic priest, Father Jácobo, he emptied his pistols at the surprised dragoon who hastily spurred away. Still with the French in hot pursuit, the little party continued its dash for safety. Ahead
of them loomed a large rock, and suddenly, from its summit there rang out a volley that tumbled several Frenchmen from their saddles and caused the others to swerve aside. Dismounting, the dragoons opened up with their carbines,
but already the guerrillas were melting away. Their ambush had been sprung and a number of them killed, but they had lived to fight another day, and that, in a sense, was all that mattered.

 Fought out near the village of Bugedo on the highroad from Madrid to the French frontier on 30 October 1809, this skirmish conjures up a vision of people’s war that has come to epitomise the Iberian struggle against Napoleon.
For most readers, indeed, two images will be conjured up by mention of the Peninsular War. On the one hand, there is the invincible ‘thin red line’ of Wellington’s infantry, and on the other the cruel and sinister figure of the
Spanish guerrilla: as is widely recognised, indeed, it was the struggle in Spain and Portugal that actually introduced the word to the English language. * Furthermore, it has long since become a historical commonplace to explain
the defeat of the French through the juxtaposition of these two images. Thanks to the guerrillas, it is argued, the French armies were forced to remain spread out over the entire face of the Peninsula so that the numerically
inferior Anglo-Portuguese forces could defeat them in detail. At the same time, the presence of Wellington’s army in Portugal prevented the French from concentrating all their forces on the guerrillas, and thus saved the
Spaniards from annihilation. Caught between British and Portuguese bayonets and popular hatred, the invaders found themselves enmeshed in a predicament – the famous ‘Spanish mousetrap’ – from which escape was all but impossible.
For a variety of reasons, British, American, French, Spanish and Portuguese historians have all tended to emphasise this aspect of the war against the French at the expense of other forms of resistance and to treat the subject
only in the most positive of terms. However, at the time opinions on the subject were bitterly divided, whilst there is also much evidence that the impact of the guerrillas was more ambiguous than has generally been argued. As
this chapter will show, indeed, few aspects of the Peninsular War are more complex.