

 In stirring up revolt, there was little difficulty. Across the Peninsula there was a widespread conviction that the French were out to do no more than rescue Fernando from the clutches of Godoy. ‘Our troops’, wrote Lejeune, ‘had
been welcomed in Spain … and the loyal populace, who … received us as if we were their brothers, impatiently awaited the day when the emperor … would remove the hated minister.’ 28 Acting from ignorance as much as intent, the
French had done nothing to dampen such hopes:

 The French … knew not what was the work which they were destined to perform, but, hearing nothing from their hosts but curses upon the authors of the misfortunes of the country, they associated themselves with the public
indignation, and … repeated that the army was come into Spain only to execute justice upon a villain. 29

 Nor at this point had Napoleon assumed the demon-like qualities that he was soon to acquire in the eyes of most Spaniards. Amongst the educated classes, indeed, he was widely admired – the emperor himself later remarked that the
régime was ‘never afraid of him’ and ‘looked on him as a defender of royalism’ 30 – whilst, influenced by vague ideas that the emperor had saved the Church from the revolutionaries, the populacho were content to follow the lead
of their betters. As Foy wrote, ‘It was obvious that the reign of Napoleon had entirely effaced the antipathy of Catholic Spain to [the] new France.’ 31 Yet beneath the surface trouble was brewing. ‘The soldiers’, wrote the young
English seminarian, Robert Brindle, ‘were quartered in private houses and brought distress and misery into every family. Their right to anything which they chose to covet few had the hardihood to call in question. If complaint
were made, it must be preferred to a French officer, and insult or an additional grievance were the result.’ 32

 At this stage virtually the only troops actually at Aranjuez were the royal guard, whose aristocratic officer corps had never forgiven Godoy either his lowly origins or the fact that he had cut its size by half. Meanwhile, the
population of Aranjuez were wholly dependent on the court for their prosperity, and were currently much swelled by the hordes of courtiers and retainers who travelled with the royal family on their seasonal migrations from one
royal palace to the next. At the same time, many of the villages around Madrid happened to be fiefs of the leading fernandinos and could thus be galvanised into action by economic means. Yet such economic means were probably
barely needed. As the populace retained a touching faith in the protection supposedly afforded them by the monarch, the news that the king intended to abandon them caused as much fear as the idea that Godoy might evade his doom
caused fury. Disguised as one ‘Uncle Joe’, Montijo had within a very few days succeeded in massing a large crowd around the palace at Aranjuez, and whipping the guards’ hatred of Godoy to fever pitch. Initially it seems that the
plan was for the revolt to be sparked off by the departure of the royal family, but, thanks to Carlos’ vacillation, such an event stubbornly failed to materialise. However, in the end no catalyst was needed. As the Secretary of
State, Pedro Cevallos, informed the Secretary of the Council of Castile: ‘About one o’clock in the morning [of 18 March] there occurred a clash between some hussars and Guardias de Corps, and this was followed by the assembly of
many soldiers and civilians who had taken fright at rumours that the king and queen and royal family were leaving.’ 33 The hussars referred to were members of Godoy’s recently formed personal bodyguard – ‘a troop of brilliantly
uniformed soldiers who were regarded by their fellows with envy and hated by the people’ 34 – the violence with which they were assaulted setting the scene for three days of mayhem. Nor was the trouble confined to Aranjuez. In
Madrid, for example: