

 In those parts of Spain held by the French throughout, irregular resistance continued to simmer throughout the summer of 1808, as in Navarre where one Andrés Eguaguirre gathered together a force of 800 men in the vicinity of
Estella and established a base at the mountain shrine of Santiago de Lóquiz. Navarre was always to be a focus of la guerrilla: by August 1809, indeed, it had become the haunt of the famous Martín Javier Mina y Larrea (‘El Mozo’),
whose exploits had soon acquired dimensions that were positively legendary. As the French zone of occupation expanded, however, so the phenomena of guerrilla resistance multiplied. Many of the initial bands in Old Castile had
been eclipsed following the French retreat from Madrid – in some instances, as in that of El Empecinado, they were even persecuted by the Patriot authorities – but they now reappeared, whilst new groups emerged that were formed
on the basis of fugitives from such defeats as that of Gamonal. As an example, we might cite the forces commanded by Juan Díaz Porlier that sprang to life in the area of Palencia early in 1809. These bands had soon been
supplemented by others, of which the most prominent were those of Jerónimo Merino, Bartolomé Amor, Jerónimo Saornil, Tomás Príncipe (‘Borbón’) and Lucas Rafael. Also affected were the Basque provinces, León, Extremadura and La
Mancha. Thus, Vizcaya became the beat of Francisco Longa and Antonio Jaureguí (‘El Pastor’); León of cavalry raiders sent out from Ciudad Rodrigo, in whose ranks a peasant named Julián Sánchez García had soon obtained a
commission; Extremadura of Toribio Bustamente; and La Mancha of Francisco Abad Moreno (‘Chaleco’), Juan de Tapía, Juan Palarea (‘El Médico’) and, above all, El Empecinado, whose ever-growing band scored numerous successes in the
region of Cuenca and Guadalajara. And, last but not least, mention should be made of Aragón. Initially cowed by the capture of Zaragoza, Aragonese resistance was revived by such leaders as Felipe Perena, Ramón Gayán, Juan Baget,
Miguel Sarasa (‘Cholín’) and Fidel Mallén, who achieved a number of successes, including forcing the surrender of 750 men who were cut off by a flash flood near Monzón, defeating two French columns in the vicinity of Jaca, and
wiping out a patrol of 70 Frenchmen at Bernaus. After Belchite, meanwhile, the bands were reinforced by a strong partida formed on the basis of regular troops detached from Blake’s army under Pedro Villacampa, the latter
establishing a powerful base at the mountain sanctuary of Nuestra Señora del Tremedal and taking prisoner a company of the Fourteenth line at the Puerto del Frasno near Almunia on 29 August.

 By the summer of 1809, then, the guerrillas were certainly making themselves felt. To quote Miot:

 By that time the Junta had … adopted the formidable system of guerrillas. Spread out in parties in every part of the territory … that the French occupied, they did us more damage than the [Spanish] regular armies by intercepting
all our communications and forcing us never to send out a courier without an escort or leave isolated soldiers on the roads … Large parties of guerrillas … often advanced to the gates of the capital. General Franceschi … one of
the most distinguished officers of the army, was taken prisoner by them, along with young Anthoine, a nephew of the king who was then an aide-de-camp of Marshal Soult. The hatred and fury of the Spaniards was carried to the last
excess: they breathed vengeance and exercised it on any Frenchman who fell into their hands. This small-scale warfare quietly undermined us. We only possessed the ground actually occupied by our armies, and our power did not
extend beyond it. The business of administration ceased, and there was neither order, nor justice, nor taxation. 9