

 Such, too, was the impression of Heinrich von Brandt, who not only fought the guerrillas in Aragón but wrote what may be regarded as the first serious study of the Spanish guerrillas:

 Local causes, added to hatred, revenge and other passions … brought the mountaineers together … From corps thus formed … the boldest and most determined stepped forward as leaders … As long as the guerrillas were thus
constituted, they made no formidable appearance as a body, but were nevertheless extremely dangerous to the French. They formed the basis of an actual armament of the people, and were soon upon every road and path … and eagerly
seeking for plunder … They rushed with the utmost rapidity upon their booty, or placed themselves in order of battle according to the nature of the undertaking … As soon as the enterprise was completed everyone went his own way,
and armed men were scattered in all directions … Thus the communication on all roads was closed. Thousands of enemies were on the spot, though not a single one could be discovered; no courier could be dispatched without being
taken; no supplies could set off without being attacked … At the same time, there existed no means of striking out at a combination of this kind. The French were … obliged to be constantly on their guard against an enemy, who,
while continually flying, always reappeared, and who, without actually being seen, was everywhere. It was neither battles nor engagements which exhausted their forces, but the incessant molestations of an invisible enemy who, if
pursued, became lost among the people, out of which he reappeared immediately afterwards with renewed strength. The lion in the fable, tormented to death by a gnat, gives us a true picture of the army at that period. 10

 Finally, much the same language is employed by the hussar officer, Rocca:

 In these mountainous provinces of the north of the Peninsula, the French, although always conquerors where the … Spaniards showed themselves in battle, were not … the less assailed by clouds of armed mountaineers, who, never
coming near to fight in close ranks, or body to body, retreated from position to position, from rock to rock, on heights, without ceasing to fire even in flying. It sometimes required entire battalions to carry an order of a
battalion to another distant one. The soldiers, wounded, sick or fatigued, who remained behind the French columns, were immediately murdered. Every victory produced only a new conflict. Victories had become useless by the
persevering and invincible character of the Spaniards, and the French armies were consuming themselves … in continual fatigues, nightly watchings and anxieties. 11

 When they moved south in 1810, the French merely took the problem with them. Whilst the towns of Andalucía on the whole rallied more or less willingly to King Joseph, the countryside remained hostile. Particularly determined
centres of resistance were encountered in the mountains that fringed the coast – the Serranía de Ronda and the Alpujarras – where the chief figures were Andrés Ortiz de Zarate, José Serrano Valdenebro and Juan Fernández Cañas, a
good example of their activities being the successful attack that they launched against the French garrison of Ronda on 9 March 1810. His regiment having been stationed in the district, Rocca was soon in the thick of the fighting: