

 Though the French staged elaborate celebrations and festivities, the crowds that they attracted were hardly proof that Junot’s rule was popular. Only events in Spain sufficed to transform unrest into revolt, however. Here
Napoleon remained set on regeneration, but uncertain as to how to proceed. At this point he was still free to depose Carlos IV and replace him with Fernando, whom he knew to be not only extremely compliant, but also much loved by
the people. Why, then, did he fail to embark upon so obvious a course? The answer is simple: Spain appeared to be in a state of utter disintegration; her army was ill-prepared for war; and he was constantly being told by the
various agents he had sent across the Pyrenees that there was a general disposition to accept any solution that he cared to impose. The Spanish Bourbons could not be trusted, whilst there was no reason to believe that a régime
headed by Fernando VII would be any more efficient than one headed by Carlos IV. Lucien, it transpired, was unwilling to permit the match between Charlotte and Fernando. And, finally, with ever larger numbers of troops in Spain,
there simply seemed no reason why he should not solve the problem in a radical fashion that would at one and the same time reinforce his prestige, ensure that Spain was transformed and create another throne for his family. Who,
after all, could frustrate such a course? The Spanish army was decrepit, and popular revolt in his experience at best a minor threat to be accepted and crushed as a matter of course. Warned by Fouché that Spain might not be an
easy target, he therefore exploded:

 What are you talking about? Every reflecting person in Spain despises the government; the Prince of the Peace … is a scoundrel who will himself open the gates of Spain for me. As to the rabble … a few cannon shots will quickly
disperse them. 24

 To the very end Napoleon kept his options open – ‘Murat assured me in 1814,’ wrote Lord Holland, ‘that he had no instructions … Not a syllable had been communicated to him of the object of his expedition’ 25 – but the end of the
Bourbon dynasty was now looming. Hence the letter that he sent to Alexander I of Russia on 2 February 1808 suggesting a march of 50,000 French and Russian troops on Constantinople from their respective bases in present-day
Croatia and Romania with a view to partitioning the Ottoman empire, the aim being to buy off possible Russian objections to the blow to the balance of power presented by the removal of the Bourbons.

 At all events developments now gathered pace. Backed up by heavy reinforcements, between 9 and 12 February the Divisions of the Eastern and Western Pyrenees crossed the border into Navarre and Catalonia, occupied Pamplona and
Barcelona, and seized control of the citadels that dominated the two cities. By now thoroughly alarmed, the Spanish government had for some time been pressing for an explanation of France’s conduct, whilst at the same time
requesting the implementation of the promised partition of Portugal and requesting a Bonaparte bride for Fernando. To all these communications the emperor had replied with a mixture of disdain and obfuscation, whilst at the same
time continuing to proclaim his friendly intentions. Faced by increasing evidence of French duplicity, Godoy responded by ordering the Spanish troops in Portugal to return to Spain, (most got away apart from those in Lisbon of
whom the majority were disarmed and interned). The 24th of February, meanwhile, brought another shock. In a long memorandum Napoleon accused Spain of disunion and bad faith and announced that he no longer considered himself bound
by Fontainebleau. Spain was now promised the whole of Portugal, true, but in exchange she would have to surrender all the territory that she possessed between the River Ebro and the Pyrenees and sign a permanent and unlimited
alliance with France.