

 According to the traditional view, the subject is simplicity itself. The Spanish people were outraged at the overthrow of Fernando VII, and the French had only to appear amongst them for acts of spontaneous resistance to erupt.
In the words of Marshal Suchet:

 The … greater part of the population, sometimes without any distinction of age or sex, embarked on that active and obstinate species of contest which brought enemies upon us in all directions and exhausted us far more than
regular engagements. Each district formed … its own guerrilla for the purpose of protecting its territory and co-operating in the common defence. Peasants, land owners, fathers of families, priests and monks unhesitatingly
abandoned their dwellings … in order to swell the … bands forming against us. 1

 With matters made still worse by the arrogance and misbehaviour of the invading forces and the repression and atrocity in which they increasingly engaged – ‘Had some of our amateurs of fine art … been picked out and shot’,
remarked Captain Elzéar Blaze, ‘the war would not have become national … These dilapidations were the cause of the war to the death which the Spaniards waged against us’ 2 – it was not long before the zones occupied by the
imperial forces had been gripped by a savage irregular war. All the more was this the case as the Patriot authorities and many elements of the Church did everything that they could to incite the population to armed resistance. To
quote Sébastian Blaze:

 The monks skilfully employed the influence which they still enjoyed over Spanish credulity … to inflame the populace and excerbate the implacable hatred with which they already regarded us … In this fashion they encouraged a
naturally cruel and barbarous people to commit the most revolting crimes with a clear conscience. They accused us of being Jews, heretics, sorcerers … As a result, just to be a Frenchman became a crime in the eyes of the country.
3

 Also helpful in explaining the rise of resistance, it could be argued, was the social, geographical and historical context of the Iberian Peninsula. For example, both Spain and Portugal were rugged countries which contained
extensive stretches of inaccessible mountain and steppe. As Suchet noted:

 The Spanish peninsula … is covered with lofty chains of mountains extending in all directions … supported by the internal plateau of the country … The result … is that the waters must … force their way to the sea … by … deep and
rugged gullies … It is impossible to travel the distance of a few leagues without meeting one or many of these defiles … The ravines are generally dry, and yet impassable … In every … direction, communications are extremely
difficult: the provinces are isolated from each other [and] the towns and villages separated by immense distances and built upon heights, or enclosed within walls, [and] surrounded by splendid forests of olive trees … Whole
tracts of land are covered with broom and heath. 4

 In both Spain and Portugal, too, the populace were inured to hardship, suspicious of foreigners and well versed in ways of life – above all, banditry and smuggling – that were characterised by violence and involved constant
skirmishes with the security forces. It was, indeed, the conviction of General Bigarré that the bedrock of the entire phenomenon was the ‘customs guards and smugglers who covered the whole of the country under the Prince of the
Peace’, Captain Blaze, meanwhile, noting that, as the Spaniards were ‘accustomed to extol the exploits of the robbers and smugglers’, the chieftains ‘have always been in readiness to become chiefs of the guerrillas’. 5 Thanks to
the ordenança, the alarmas, the miqueletes and the somaténes – ‘forces that greatly tend to promote the national armament [and] might also combine to render a sudden change from peace to war likely to prove even acceptable to …
the Spanish people’ 6 – there was also a widespread tradition of popular mobilisation against invasion, whilst the substantial mobilisation of the war of 1793–95 had produced a considerable degree of military experience (famous
guerrilla leaders who had fought in this struggle included Juan Martín Díez – El Empecinado – and Julián Sánchez García – El Charro).