

 Hardly had night fallen than a furious crowd invaded the house of Don Diego, the younger brother of the favourite. Having smashed in the doors and discovered that the building was empty, they began to throw all its rich
furniture out of the windows … until they had made an enormous pile of tables, beds, wardrobes and pianos, to which they set fire … When the plebe had finished enjoying this … costly bonfire, they … headed for the house of the
Príncipe de Branciforte, Godoy’s brother-in-law. However, a notice had been put on the door … announcing that the property of the favourite and his close relatives had been confiscated … This was enough to calm down the rioters,
and they spent the rest of the night processing through the streets … and drinking at the cost of the taverners … [The next day] the whole garrison … were called out of their barracks by bands of women bearing pitchers of wine in
their hands, and … the soldiers, mixing with the people, bore in their firelocks the palm branches which, as a precaution against lightning, are commonly hung at the windows. 35

 In Toledo a bust of Godoy was hung from a gibbet; in San Lucar de Barrameda a botanical garden he had established was wrecked, and, last but not least, in Zaragoza, radicalised by recent regulations that had extended the
academic year by three months, the students of the university forced their lecturers to barricade themselves into the building’s cloister and seized the portrait of the favourite that hung in the main lecture hall. Placed on a
makeshift hurdle, it was then dragged through the streets to the broad street known as the Coso that served as a plaza mayor. There, wrote one of the leaders, ‘We made a bonfire whose flames leapt higher than the roofs,
whereupon, having been well kicked and spat upon, His Excellency … was thrown upon the fire.’ 36

 Back in Aranjuez, the king and queen were terrified. With the bulk of the guard in a state of rebellion and the favourite himself hiding in the attic of his palace, whence he had fled as the mob poured through the main door,
Carlos IV quickly agreed to have Godoy arrested, but, under Montijo’s orchestration, the disturbances continued unabated. Told by one regimental commander that only Fernando would enjoy the loyalty of the troops, Carlos and María
Luisa caved in, and on the morning of 19 March abdicated the Crown into the hands of their son. Driven from his hiding-place by thirst, meanwhile, Godoy narrowly escaped a lynching, and was placed under close arrest.

 For all its popular aspect, there is no doubt as to what the so-called motín de Aranjuez represented. Inspired by elements from outside its ranks though it may have been, a section of the army – in this case the royal guard –
had sought to impose its views upon the body politic by ‘pronouncing’ against the régime. Challenged by this call to arms, Godoy and his royal patrons found that they had few defenders. The officer corps as a whole was
disgruntled by the failure of the favourite’s reforms to make any difference in its situation, and his orders to resist the French were already being widely disobeyed; much of the upper nobility and the Church was hostile;
reformist circles had long since lost all faith in Godoy’s political credentials; and the common people were in a state of open revolt. As for Fernando, he was seen as a saviour, the reception that he received when he rode into
Madrid on 24 March being captured by Alcalá Galiano: