

 Repeated since Napoleonic times, these arguments have since been reinforced by other, more recent examples. Thus, resistance has frequently been tied to poverty and growing social tension, the key factors here being, first, the
extent to which French occupation fuelled pauperisation and, second, the collaboration of so many of the pudientes. Though detailed social analysis was not a forte of the early nineteenth century, in support of this view there is
at least the common association of the guerrillas with robbery and pillage. Thus, for Von Brandt, the strongest motive for their appearance was ‘the hope of plunder’, whilst for the British observers, Sydenham and Larpent, they
were ‘regular freebooters [who] subsisted on the pillage of the country’ and ‘a sort of banditti’. 7 In the same way, it has also been claimed that enlightened absolutism had made less progress in Spain and Portugal than
elsewhere with the result that the reforms of the new régime grated on them far more than would otherwise have been the case. Tantamount to suggesting that resistance was the product of backwardness – or, as the French would have
put it, of savagery, ignorance and want of civilisation – this latter argument could be supplemented by arguing that Spain was Catholic and therefore given over ipso facto to obscurantism, superstition and counter-revolution. One
here returns, of course, to common French complaints: ‘With regard to knowledge and the progress of social habits, Spain was at least a century behind the other nations of the continent. The … insular situation of the country and
the severity of its religious institutions had prevented the Spaniards from taking part in the disputes and controversies which had agitated and enlightened Europe.’ 8

 Evidence for the argument that the guerrillas’ essential characteristics were their spontaneous origins, popular composition and ideological motivation is therefore not hard to find. As for their contribution to the struggle,
the invaders had begun to come under attack by bands of irregulars from the earliest days of the war. In Andalucía, for example, the alcalde mayor of Montoro, Juan de la Torre, led a band of peasants in a series of attacks on
Dupont’s communications which, amongst other incidents, saw the massacre of the seventy-strong guard that had been left to hold the Puente de Alcolea following the occupation of Córdoba. De la Torre was quickly captured, but the
whole district between Córdoba and the Sierra Morena was soon swarming with guerrilla bands led by such figures as Pedro de Valdecañas, José Cruz, Ramón Argote, Ignacio Gómez and Antonio Cuesta. Most famous of these early
guerrillas, however, is Juan Martín Díez. Nicknamed ‘El Empecinado’, he is supposed from early April onwards to have led a group of twelve men in a series of attacks on French couriers in the neighbourhood of Aranda de Duero. In
several cases, meanwhile, these actions were accompanied by a brutality that set the scene for the entire war, there being reports – possibly exaggerated – of men being stoned to death, boiled in oil, sawn in half, or buried up
to their necks in the ground and left to die of thirst.