

 In truth, in all the different scenes of popular enthusiasm that I have witnessed, nothing … has ever equalled those which I now describe. The cheers were loud, repeated and delivered with … eyes full of tears of pleasure,
kerchiefs were waved … from balconies with hands trembling with pleasure … and not for a moment did the passion … or the thunderous noise of the joyful crowd diminish. 37

 Popular though the new king was, his security was far from assured. Murat had occupied the city only the day before, and, despite increasingly abject attempts to win France’s favour, refused to recognise Fernando; still worse,
indeed, Carlos IV was persuaded to protest against his abdication and appeal to Napoleon for assistance. With the two rivals openly craving his mediation, the emperor was placed in an ideal position to recast the situation as he
wanted, Carlos, María Luisa and Fernando alike being summoned to meet him for a conference at Bayonne (as a sop to the former king and queen, Godoy was rescued from captivity and whisked to safety in France). With all the
protagonists in the drama united in his presence, Napoleon exploded the waiting bombshell: the rival kings were both to renounce the throne and hand it to the emperor. To this demand Carlos made no resistance, and on 5 May, after
some days of unedifying squabbles, such feeble defiance as Fernando was willing to offer was also overcome, the throne now being formally signed over to Napoleon in exchange for generous pensions for the royal family and
guarantees of territorial and religious integrity for Spain herself.

 With the whole of the Peninsula now apparently subjugated, Napoleon appeared to have achieved his every objective. Even as the Bourbons departed to a decorous exile – Carlos, María Luisa and Godoy to Italy, and Fernando, his
brother, Carlos, and uncle, Antonio, to Talleyrand’s chateau at Valençay – however, the Peninsula was astir. Why, though, had the emperor acted as he had? For answer we can do no better than turn to Napoleon himself:

 The old king and queen … had become the object of the hatred and scorn of their subjects. The Prince of Asturias was conspiring against them … and had become … the hope of the nation. At the same time [Spain] was ready for great
changes … whilst I myself was very popular there. With matters in this state … I resolved to make use of this unique opportunity to rid myself of a branch of the Bourbons, continue the family system of Louis XIV in my own
dynasty, and chain Spain to the destinies of France. 38

 The preoccupation with raison d’état is repeated in other sources. As he told Roederer, for example:

 Spain … must be French. It is for France that I have conquered Spain; it is with her blood, her arms, her gold. I am French in all my affections … I do not do anything except for … love of France. I dethroned the Bourbons for no
other reason than it was in the interest of France to assure my dynasty. I had nothing else in view except French strength and glory … I have the rights of conquest: call whoever governs Spain king … viceroy or governor general,
Spain must be French. 39