

 Such doubts were also shared by many British observers. To quote Sir Thomas Graham:

 There are points where it is of infinite consequence … that there should be armies, for, useful and important as … the guerrillas are, that is not enough, let them be ever so much spread over the face of the country. They can
never stop the march of a considerable body of the enemy. 31

 The guerrillas, then, were neither invulnerable to defeat nor in themselves sufficient to save Spain. Still worse, however, in a number of ways they sapped the ability of unoccupied Spain to defend itself. Eager to expand their
forces, guerrilla leaders kidnapped parties of regular troops, seized horses that might otherwise have mounted much-needed cavalry units, and hijacked men who had been raised for the army by the quinta. Meanwhile, aided and
abetted by press and propaganda alike, they much exaggerated their exploits – in Wellington’s army ‘to lie like a guerrilla’ was a commonplace remark – with the result that the increasingly desperate position of the Spanish
armies was to some extent hidden from view, thereby providing unwilling local authorities with a splendid pretext for failing to enforce conscription. But, above all, the mere existence of the guerrillas encouraged desertion.
Strongly influenced by traditional fears of military service and forced into the ranks by ballots characterised by corruption and injustice, the soldiery soon found that life in the army confirmed their worst suspicions. Not only
were food, clothing and pay all in short supply, but disease was rampant and casualties heavy. By contrast, the guerrillas, whose praise the Patriot press was singing ever more loudly, offered multiple advantages, including freer
discipline, a better chance of survival, greater rewards and, perhaps above all, the chance to remain in the patria chica. With desertion easy – many Spanish soldiers had to wear at least some items of civilian clothing, whilst
both march and camp discipline were notoriously lax – we therefore continually come across such figures as Josep Bosoms, a Catalan infantryman turned bandit who escaped from jail to become a guerrilla, and José Fombella, an
Asturian cavalryman who established himself at the head of a group of fellow deserters in the Cantabrian mountains. Nor were such cases isolated, every defeat seeing hundreds of men scattering into the hills to join existing
bands or form new ones of their own. Amongst the leaders we have mentioned alone, indeed, Amor, Príncipe and Espoz y Mina were all deserters. As the British diplomat, Thomas Sydenham, put it, the partidas therefore ‘prevented the
recruiting of the regular armies, for every Spanish peasant would naturally prefer rioting and plunder and living in free quarters with the guerrillas to being drilled and starved in the regular army’. 32

 It will, of course, be objected by admirers of the guerrillas that true examples of the genre did not engage in ‘rioting and plunder’. Such arguments are not helpful, however. Thus, even leaders who seem to have been genuinely
altruistic in their motives attracted followers of baser intent. Equally, to pretend that partidas, commanded by men who quickly revealed themselves to be bent on nothing more than plunder and personal aggrandisement, were not
guerrillas when they regularly attacked the French and their collaborators is completely unsatisfactory. French-style accusations that none of the guerrillas were anything more than brigands go too far, but even so the
association of partidas and plunder was strong enough to become proverbial, ‘¡Viva Fernando y vamos robando!’ (‘Long live Fernando and let’s go robbing!’) becoming something of a catch-phrase. The question is one to which we must
return, but for the time being let us simply note the ambiguity inherent in the figure of a cabecilla named Vitoriano Díez encountered by Elzéar Blaze. Nicknamed ‘Chagarito’, he cut a sinister figure: