

 Given sufficient time and sufficient troops, then, the French could restore order in the occupied territories. All the more is this the case because there was a gradual change in the nature of la guerrilla. Throughout Spain, in
the early days of occupation the partidas for the most part consisted of small groups of men who dispersed to their own homes after each operation and were bound together only by the most informal links. This was never wholly the
case: we find, for example, that the Aragonese band of Felipe Perena, active from January 1809, was in fact a unit of infantry raised in May 1808 entitled the Segundo Regimiento de Voluntarios de Huesca that had been serving as
the garrison of Huesca, and, further, that Perena himself was a regular officer who had spent the period since 1795 hunting down bandits in the region and had been appointed governor of the city by José Palafox. * But even such
bands as fitted the stereotype could not long maintain it. Both Martín Javier Mina and El Empecinado, for example, are supposed to have started with twelve men. Backed by followings of this sort, they could indeed live and fight
amongst the populace. Once the twelve men had become several hundred, though, this clearly became impossible, the guerrilla bands tending to assume a semi-permanent status and live off the populace. According to the traditional
view, this ought to have posed no problems, but in fact the people as a whole were for the most part not interested in fighting, as witness, for example, the picture presented by the Condado de Niebla at the moment of its
occupation early in 1810:

 All energy and patriotism was gone. The egoism of many landowners … the fear and ignorance of the mass of the people, and the sagacity of the enemy, who had been both buying the hearts of the rich and … terrifying the spirits of
the poor, ensured that many pueblos submitted to the yoke of el rey intruso. As for those places that remained free, they suffered from the same egoism, their justices acting in an arbitrary manner that did not recognise … any
other law than that of their caprice … From this it followed that in every pueblo many stragglers and deserters were hidden without either the justices or, much less, their parents … making any attempt to get them to return to
their regiments. 16

 For an authentic view from the populacho, meanwhile, we can do no better than turn to the memoirs of Gregorio González Arranz, a peasant from Roa, who had just turned twenty when the war began and had been managing the family
farm following the death of his father the previous year. Thus:

 In the course of 1811 the guerrillas … of General Jerónimo Merino and … El Empecinado caused my mother many worries by continually trying to force me to take up arms and fight against the usurpation. I was having to bear the
full weight of our small holding, as my mother was not accustomed to go out of the house except … to go to church, whilst her other children, my sisters, were only little girls. Although we repeatedly made great financial
sacrifices to secure my exemption, the pressure did not cease, and so my mother advised me to get married. On 6 February 1811 I therefore wed María Berdón Altable. 17