

 Such was the obvious truth of this point that, despite much propagandist cant, a clear realisation emerged that it was futile to trust to the guerrillas for Spain’s salvation. Let us take as an example a pamphlet that was
published in Cadíz in 1810:

 As a method of waging war, popular insurrection is almost always … far more costly than the use of regular forces. When protected by a regular army, at the right moment the former can reinforce the latter, but otherwise the only
result is momentary success avenged later with great sacrifice … Is it still doubted that the kingdom is lost if we do not raise large armies? Let us suppose that Spain becomes the tomb of twenty thousand French soldiers every
year … Napoleon has necessarily to subjugate Spain or lose his reputation … and, now that the north [i.e. Austria] is quiet … it is not difficult for him to send … 100,000. 28

 Nor was this an end to the argument:

 It is held … that our arms cannot match those of the enemy when both sides are fighting in large forces. From here stems the foolish idea that instead of increasing our armies, we should rely solely on the use of partidas and
the defence of towns [by the inhabitants] when the war that we are waging on the contrary demands large armies that are capable of imposing themselves on the enemy … It is true that Madrid was defended heroically by its own
people, that La Mancha has devoured many Frenchmen without the aid of any troops, and that the enemy was expelled from Galicia by the peasantry alone. Nevertheless, Madrid is occupied by the enemy and La Mancha in reality
controlled by them, whilst Galicia would also fall into their hands if there was not a large army to protect it. Little by little the French extend their dominions whilst we celebrate a riot in some village or an attack by some
guerrilla band. 29

 In view of the fact that he was the commander of the much vaunted forces of the Serranía de Ronda, the ideas of José Serrano Valdenebro in this respect are still more interesting. Thus:

 Although war is being waged in these mountains in the style of Viriato, * flattering results cannot be expected … A band of patriots situated in mountains that are almost inaccessible will hold off the bravest soldiers. However,
should the latter fall back to more accessible terrain, the picture changes … The peasant wages a petty war … How can this man fight in a terrain where infantry can press upon him or cavalry ride him down? Furthermore, the
peasants are … little more than unmanageable. There is neither union nor regularity … in their movements. This is not surprising: amongst troops who have not been fashioned by the strictest discipline, they cannot be achieved …
Valiant in skirmishing, they do not understand that shock action is the chief weapon on the battlefield … Whilst troops do not realise that battles are won by the sword and bayonet, all is lost. Fire is only a chimera … Advancing
on the enemy with union and bravery … is what brings victory. 30