

 Great ferocity existed … amongst the guerrilla chiefs … The curate Merino … was revolting in cruelty: he took some hundred French prisoners on one occasion and hanged fifty or sixty of them … in order to avenge the death of
three of his men. 14

 Moving on, one has the impression of the generation of a see-saw struggle that neither side could win. Typical enough, perhaps, are the experiences of Bigarré as temporary governor of Aranjuez in 1811:

 The guerrilla leaders, Morales and El Abuelo, were constantly making incursions in the vicinity … One extremely hot day, the sentries stationed at the Ocaña gate were taken by surprise, and these two chieftains … galloped down
the street that led to the main square … shouting, ‘Long live Fernando VII!’, followed by 500 of their men. Warned of what was going on by one of the sentries, I jumped on my horse, and … charged them with such impetuosity that
they took flight, galloped out of the gate, and dispersed in the countryside … Seeing that [El Abuelo] was only a short distance ahead of us, I rode out to get him followed by my aides-de-camp and about twenty chasseurs  … With
my horse at top speed, I suddenly found myself faced by a canal eighteen feet wide. This I attempted to leap, but my horse was not good enough to make such a jump, and I was thrown right into the middle, along with my
aides-de-camp and four of the light horsemen … I felt the effects of the fall for some months, but I was not going to let El Abuelo … get away with it … On 6 June I heard from one of [my spies] … that El Abuelo and his guerrillas
were going to spend the … night of the seventh at Uclés … At a quarter to ten, 400 infantry … and twenty-five light horse … arrived outside the town … Charging into the town, they met no resistance … Having been shown the house
where El Abuelo stayed whenever he spent the night at Uclés, I ordered it to be surrounded … Several shots were fired at us … but in the same instant the doors were forced by some voltigeurs  … Rushing inside, they killed four
guerrillas … but El Abuelo, who had been in bed with his wife, saved himself by scrambling out of an attic window … in his nightshirt, and jumping down into the garden. Although more than twenty shots were fired at him, he then
managed to gain the safety of the open country. 15

 In fact, however, by dint of bitter fighting and much hard marching, it was possible to subdue the partidas. By early 1810, for example, Suchet had captured such guerrilla strongholds as Benasque, Nuestra Señora de la Aguila and
Nuestra Señora del Tremedal, won a series of skirmishes, laid waste a number of districts particularly noted for their support of the guerrillas, sacked, amongst other places, Calatayud and Saliente, and carried out many
executions. The troops endured heavy casualties and were worn out by the endless marching and counter-marching, whilst final success remained dependent both on protecting the conquered territories with adequate garrisons and
clearing Navarre, La Mancha or Catalonia as well. Yet the achievement is still worthy of note: for the next two years Aragón remained quieter than many other provinces.