

 This wide variety of social background encompassed a wide range of motives. Setting aside a handful of mavericks who were eager to escape the cloister or influenced by liberal views, the dozens of ecclesiastics who headed
guerrilla bands may be assumed to have seen the war in terms of the defence of the Church and the traditional order (it is notable, for example, that Merino ended his days as a Carlist, although, with a brother who was a bandit,
it is clear that he also had links with the world of crime). For many of the representatives of the propertied classes, too, the issue may be assumed to have been at root an ideological one, although one in this instance
dominated more by concern for the privileges of the nobility. Much the same applies to many of the army officers, although here other pressures – desire for promotion or the orders of superiors – could also have been involved.
Beyond the established oligarchy, however, the situation is less clear. There are many stories of rape or murder leading to a desire for revenge (as is, in fact, the case with such figures as Jerónimo Merino, Lucas Rafael and
Cámilo Gómez as well), whilst traditional accounts have always made much of patriotism and love of Fernando VII. The existence of such factors is impossible to prove or disprove, but in view of the widespread disaffection which
we have already noted the influence of dios, rey y patria must at the very least be doubted. Leadership of a guerrilla band could bring enormous gains – in 1808 a younger son of an extended peasant household with few prospects,
by the end of the war Espoz y Mina was a mariscal de campo with hopes of gaining the viceroyalty of Navarre * – and it is therefore impossible not to suspect, say, the two Minas of being nothing more than adventurers. In the
cases of Pedrazuela and Piloti, meanwhile, the evidence is even clearer: the former was eventually executed by the Spanish military after engaging in a reign of terror in the Montes de Toledo which cost the lives of at least
sixty innocent civilians, and the latter revealed as a fraud. As for the plethora of bandits and deserters, to believe in stories of their patriotism stretches credulity to the extreme. In the circumstances of 1808 violence and
extortion could very easily be garbed in a cloak of patriotism, and thus it was that many bandits simply continued in their old ways in the guise of freedom-fighters. In one or two cases, indeed, the uprising came as a godsend:
in Málaga, for example, one enterprising chieftain whose band had just been imprisoned by the authorities hatched a daring plot to rescue his followers by petitioning the Junta Central for permission to recruit a guerrilla band
from imprisoned bandits and smugglers as the men most accustomed to irregular warfare. Entirely happy to prey on the French (so long, of course, as the targets were suitably ‘soft’), they in practice had no allegiance to either
side, and were in fact frequently recruited by the invaders as spies or counter-guerrillas, a good example here being Saturnino Abuín, a bandit who for some time served under El Empecinado before falling out with him and going
over to the French. En route from Ronda to Málaga, indeed, Joseph personally secured the services of a noted local smuggler named López.