

 As regular officers, La Romana and Villalba might be expected to disapprove of irregular forces. However, their opinions were also shared by the civil authorities. In the words of the Junta of Najera, for example, ‘All [the
guerrillas] wish to be independent commanders, and to dispose of the effects of the nation, and, still worse, the municipalities and the citizenry, as sovereigns, whilst they frequently make use of the infamous word “traitor” to
satisfy their greed.’ 24 Still more explicit is the report of Manuel Loynaz, a government commissioner sent to Navarre by the Junta Central in June 1809:

 Who would believe that, in addition to the continual vexations that they experience at the hands of the French, these loyal … vassals of Your Majesty are experiencing others just as bad at the hands of Spaniards in the form of
the so-called guerrilla bands that have been infesting this unfortunate kingdom, along with the neighbouring districts of Castile? The disorder which these men commit is such that it is impossible to portray it without feeling a
sense of horror. The least they do is to demand exhorbitant rations … They all ride about on the horses which they have stolen from unfortunate peasants who need them for their labours. As I myself have experienced, no
respectable citizen can ride from one pueblo to another without being robbed … Almost all the leaders … are men long known for their misconduct … and the consequence is that they wage war on the richest pockets. 25

 The result of all this was a vicious circle of alienation that played straight into the hands of the French. To quote Suchet:

 The Aragonese … felt a growing affection for the … troops … ‘Los nuestros’ they always said when speaking of us … They considered our steady and regular occupation as a means of escaping the frequent inroads of Mina and
Villacampa, which, from the very circumstances of their being transitory, were attended with disorder and only left evil consequences behind them without being productive of any salutary result. 26

 This, doubtless, is over-congratulatory, but, even so, by the winter of 1809 Villacampa was complaining that he was ‘unable to supply the troops … because the inhabitants abandon their homes the moment they have news of our
arrival’. 27

 What is beyond doubt, meanwhile, is that the guerrillas’ best efforts were not enough to halt the march of French occupation. The latter was slowed down, certainly – so busy did the Aragonese and Navarrese guerrillas keep Suchet
in the summer and autumn of 1809 that the march on Valencia which was supposed to follow the fall of Zaragoza had to be postponed until the following year, and even then was undertaken with so few troops that it had to be
abandoned. Yet, for all that, no territory could be claimed to have been liberated by partisans alone: lacking artillery, the partidas could not batter down the walls or gates of the fortresses improvised from old castles or
monasteries into which French garrisons withdrew when they were in trouble (when, that is, they did not enjoy the protection of city walls or Vauban-style bastions), and were rarely granted the time necessary to reduce a target
through starvation. And, at the same time, the French still made significant gains, defeating the Spanish field armies, taking Gerona and occupying the whole of Andalucía.