

 On 1 May I was with a detachment of forty-five hussars commanded by a captain; we were going to seek, cut straw [look for fodder] … at some farms belonging to the village of Setenil … We said to each other, as we passed through
a defile about half a league from the town [that] the enemy must have been very ill-advised not to have placed an ambuscade in that place … by which they might have done us a great deal of harm without running any risk
themselves … When we had done foraging, we set out again by the same road … The captain, by whose side I was marching, repeated … that it was lucky that the enemy had not placed any ambuscade in the pass. He had scarcely spoken
the words when four or five shots … killed the three last mules in the convoy and the trumpeter’s horse, which was before us; our horses instantly stopped. The captain was to have marched on first, but the horse he rode …
hesitated. Seeing this, I spurred my horse … and passed the defile alone. The serranos  … discharged all their pieces as I passed. Two balls only reached me: the first passed through my left thigh; the other entered my body. The
captain followed me … and arrived safe and sound at the other side of the pass, and of the whole detachment, there were only the last four men killed because the enemy suspended their fire for a few minutes while they loaded
their guns a second time. 12

 However, fighting did not just take place in the Serranía de Ronda and the Alpujarras. In the area of Jaén, for example, numerous guerrilla bands operated in the Sierra de Segura and the Sierra de Cazorla of which the most
notable appear to have been those led by Pedro de Alcalde, Juan Uribe and Bernardo Márquez. Finally, just to complete the story, later conquests – Asturias, for example, and Valencia – all produced cabecillas of their own, of
which the most noted were Jaime Alfonso (‘El Barbudo’) and Agustín Nebot (‘El Fraile’) both of whom were to be active in southern parts of the Levante in 1812–13, whilst it should be noted, too, that resistance in areas with a
long history of occupation did not just remain static. Thus, in Navarre, the capture of ‘El Mozo’ by the French was followed by the emergence of an even more effective commander in the person of his distant relative, Francisco
Espoz Ilundaín, the latter being better known as Francisco Espoz y Mina, a nom de guerre that he took in an effort to associate himself with the triumphs of his predecessor. Equally 1810 saw the militias and scattered bands
maintained by the Patriot junta that had managed to survive in the locality revivified by their amalgamation under the command of the retired army officer, José Joaquín Durán y Barazábal.

 Wherever the French went, then, their presence provoked considerable irregular resistance. What, though, was the effect of la guerrilla on the war? First, and most obviously, it was beyond doubt the chief factor in the
reputation for savagery which has ever since characterised the struggle. Hundreds of men were brought before the various tribunals established by the French and sentenced to death: between May 1809 and June 1812 Valladolid saw
fifty-two death sentences for ‘brigandage’, whilst 1811 saw another twenty-two in Jaén alone. Such formal proceedings were but the tip of the iceberg, however, the memoirs of French soldiers being littered with accounts of
wayside shootings and hangings, whilst there were plenty of French commanders who executed prisoners and hostages without trial (to take just one example, General Kellermann became known as the ‘hangman of Valladolid’). In
October 1809, for example, there were at least eighteen such executions in Pamplona, two other mass shootings in July 1811, and December 1812 accounting for another seventy-eight. In Galvana in the province of Palencia thirty-two
‘brigands’ were hanged in April 1809, whilst in Olite July 1811 saw the execution of eight men whose sons were reputed to be with Espoz y Mina. And it was not just those taken in arms or their families who suffered: in January
1809 Chinchón witnessed the execution of a hundred people chosen at random in reprisal for the murder of two or three French soldiers. To all this, the guerrillas responded in kind. Tales of wholesale torture are probably
exaggerated, though Elzéar Blaze complains that a friend ‘was buried … in the ground, all but his head, which served the savages as a mark at bowls’. 13 But, even so, things were bad enough. As Bell wrote: