

 This chief … after making war upon the French, turned his arms against the Spaniards in his leisure moments in order to keep his hand in. He had struck such terror into Castile that the Spaniards had joined the French to
endeavour to take him. Betrayed by one of his men, he was seized in a venta  … A few days afterwards he suffered the most horrible of deaths … but this example did not deter other brigands from pursuing the same course. 33

 To argue, then, that the guerrillas were at the very least a mixed blessing is therefore sensible enough even if it is going too far to maintain that they inflicted more damage on the Allies than they did on the French (the very
circumspect opinion of Thomas Sydenham was that ‘the guerrillas did as much mischief to the country as they did to the French, but, in as much as they certainly did considerable damage to the enemy, they were on the whole useful
to the common cause’ 34 ). From the very beginning, indeed, both juntas and generals did everything that they could to encourage the formation of partisan bands. In June 1808, for example, no less a figure than the highly
conservative Gregorio García de la Cuesta sent an officer named Manuel García del Barrío to raise the upper Pisuerga valley in revolt; in July José Palafox sent two agents to do the same in Navarre; and in December the Marqués de
la Romana attempted to stir up resistance amongst the inhabitants of Galicia and León, one of his staff officers even producing a manual of guerrilla warfare, notable though this was more for its enthusiasm than its practicality
(one of its suggestions was for a wheeled cheval de frise that could be propelled into action by galloping horses in the style of an equine bulldozer!). Not to be undone was the Junta Central, which, as we have seen, issued
commissions to large numbers of petitioners who wanted to raise guerrilla bands and encouraged enlistment in their ranks by means of the decree of the corso terrestre.

 From this it follows that the guerrillas as a whole always had much closer connections with the military and civil authorities than has generally been suggested. Who, however, were the guerrillas, and why did they spring to
arms? Though some chieftains have come down to us as mere names, of others we know a great deal. Francisco Espoz y Mina, Juan Martín Díez (‘El Empecinado’), Julián Sánchez (‘El Charro’), and Francisco Aznar Moreno were peasants;
Francisco Abad Moreno (‘Chaleco’) and Antonio Jaureguí (‘El Pastor’) shepherds; Ignacio Gómez a retired sergeant; Toribio Bustamente (‘Caracol’), a postal courier; Francisco Longa a blacksmith; Antonio Pedrazuela an unemployed
actor; and Antonio Piloti a gunsmith. Jerónimo Merino, Lucas Rafael, Antonio Marañón (‘El Trapense’), Ramón Argote, Antonio Jiménez, Policarpo Romeo, Antonio Temprano – a rogue figure chiefly interested in pillage – José Pinilla,
Juan de Tapía, Jácobo Alvarez, Francisco Salazar, Juan Délica, Juan Mendieta (‘El Capuchino’), and Agustín Nebot (‘El Fraile’) were all priests or ecclesiastics. José Serrano Valdenebro was an ageing naval officer known for his
writings on the art of war caught by the French conquest of Andalucía on his estates at Cortes de la Frontera, whilst other men of property who became cabecillas include the labradores, Cámilo Gómez and Miguel Sarasa, and the
Aragonese textile manufacturer, Fidel Mallén, in which connection we should also mention such representatives of the professional classes as Isidoro Mir, José Martínez de San Martín and Alfonso Marzo y Torres. Martín Javier Mina
(‘El Mozo’) and Juan Palarea (‘El Médico’) were both students. Amor, Príncipe and Fombella were deserters of dubious intent. Pedro Juanez, Mariano de Renovales, Saturnino Abuín (‘El Manco’), Anselmo Alegre (‘El Cantarero’),
Ignacio Alonso (‘Cuevillas’), Díez, Bosoms, Saornil, and the future Valencian leader, Jaime Alfonso (‘El Barbudo’), were all bandits or smugglers (though Renovales had succeeded in obtaining the rank of brigadier from Palafox and
began his career as a partisan after escaping from a convoy of prisoners being sent to France). Finally, Manuel Jiménez Guazo and Juan Manuel de Soria were officials, and Pedro Villacampa, Felipe Perena, Juan Díaz Porlier (‘El
Marquesito’), José Joaquín Durán, Pedro Lamota, Juan López Campillo, and Antonio Cuesta, all serving or retired army, navy or resguardo officers.