

 So much for the leadership, but what of the rank and file? A substantial force – according to a press report that circulated very widely at the end of 1812, at that point the 20 most important partidas numbered no fewer than
38,500 men – the bulk of those involved came from humbler elements of the rural populace. Of one group of nineteen captured vallesoletano guerrillas, for example, seven were peasants, three shepherds, two barbers, one a
shoemaker, one a butcher and one a tailor. Equally, of fifteen volunteers from the valley of Echauri, fourteen were peasants. As for the remainder, aside from a smattering of students, clerks, shopkeepers and taverners, most seem
to have been ecclesiastics, there even being a few bands known as cruzadas whose ranks were entirely composed of monks and friars.

 Why, though, did these men fight? The traditional view, of course, is that they rushed to take up arms in defence of dios, rey y patria – in short, that they were engaged in an ideological struggle – but, setting aside the
ecclesiastics, only in such exceptional cases as the district of northern Navarre known as La Montaña is there any evidence that this was the case. In this area, the rural populace was relatively prosperous with the vast majority
of households not only owning their own land but possessing holdings of a size that was sufficient for their own needs. Even those who rented land were for a variety of reasons assured of dues that were as low as they were
stable. Thanks to the mild climate, steady rainfall and use of appropriate techniques that were well within the capacities of even the humblest households, productivity was high as well, whilst both the cost of living and
taxation were much lower than elsewhere. Social tensions were also low – differences in wealth between neighbours were rarely noticeable and municipal government organised on an extremely democratic basis – and señorialismo
hardly an issue at all: very few villages in the Montaña had to pay feudal dues and mayorazgos were hardly to be found, whilst in some districts as much as eighty per cent of the population could claim noble status. Last but not
least, relations with the Church were excellent: almost no land was in ecclesiastical hands, there were few monasteries or convents, the district was free of the clerks in minor orders and the like who were such a parasitical
presence elsewhere, and parish priests lived in close proximity to their flock, came from the same stock and existed in sufficient numbers to minister to their congregations on a regular and effective basis. In such areas,
defence of the traditional order made perfect sense, whilst agriculture was organised in such a way that production could continue even if the bulk of the men were away, the terrain of the district perfect for irregular warfare,
and the people accustomed to the idea of fighting invaders as irregular miqueletes. Given the rapacity and violence of the French forces, the anti-clericalism of the josefino régime, the economic disruption caused by the transfer
of Spain’s customs frontier to the Pyrenees – thousands of the inhabitants of the Montaña either marketed produce in France or were engaged in the wholesale smuggling of French imports to the rest of Spain – it is therefore
hardly surprising that participation in the guerrillas was widespread.