

 To get information, supplies and reinforcements, then, the guerrillas had increasingly to resort to violence, whilst the tendency was increased still further, as we shall see, by the dubious nature of many of their leaders, not
to mention their general wastefulness and lack of system.

 So general is the picture of the brutality and oppression associated with the guerrillas that it is impossible to deny it. From all sides the story is the same. To quote Heinrich von Brandt, for example:

 The guerrillas cared even less about their compatriots than we did and certain chiefs held sway over the countryside by terror alone. When they intercepted requisitioned cattle, it was in order to confiscate them for their own
profit. When they themselves requisitioned something it was usually upon pain of death. 18

 If Brandt is deemed suspect as a representative of the imperial forces, then let us take Augustus von Schaumann, a fellow German serving as a commissary in Wellington’s army. Thus, speaking of the forces of Julián Sánchez – of
whom the British officer, William Bragge, wrote that he had never seen ‘a more verminous looking set of fellows’ 19 – he remarked:

 They were very much feared. No Spanish municipal authority would have dared to refuse them anything. Even the inhabitants of small towns submitted to their orders without complaining. Let me give just one example of this. One of
my muleteers had a young and extraordinarily pretty girl with him … One afternoon … a guerrilla dashing past, suddenly halted and … peremptorily commanded her to jump up behind him on the horse’s back and galloped away with her.
The parted couple did not dare to protest against this treatment by even one syllable of complaint! 20

 Turning to Spanish sources, we find complaint after complaint. Let us quote, for example, the Marqués de la Romana on the subject of Juan Díaz Porlier, whom a British liaison officer described as ‘a vain boy not above eighteen …
who is at best but chief of a band of robbers who can by no means be said to be under his command or … ever be induced to make an attack on any force capable of resistance’. 21

 The complaints against Don Juan Porlier with regard to the misuse of the powers that he claims to have been conceded him have been so repeated that I consider it of absolute necessity that Your Excellency … make him understand
how reprehensible his conduct is, and that … true patriots should only occupy themselves in offending the enemy. 22

 Lower down the ranks, we have Luis de Villaba, an artillery officer who served in the siege of Zaragoza. Thus:

 The guerrillas who go by the name of Patriots should be exterminated: they are gangs of thieves with carte blanche to rob on the roads and in the villages. If some of them have brought benefits, the damage that others have
wrought is one thousand times greater … Those who believe these bands … to be very useful are many, but if they meditate on the desertion from the enemy that has not occurred for fear of being murdered … the burnings and other
disasters suffered by the villages … the many highwaymen and bandits who carry out their crimes under this pretext, and finally the manner in which their disorder and independence has caused all kinds of evil, they will
understand how far the disadvantages outweigh the benefits. 23