

 Just as interesting is the response of many guerrillas to the attempts at militarisation that we shall discuss below, the response of rank and file often being desertion, mutiny or other forms of resistance.

 To all this there can be opposed many qualifications. For example, it is clear enough that the many bands that were operating with the sanction of the appropriate civil or military authorities ought to be distinguished from the
many gangs of freebooters that roved the countryside entirely on their own account. Operating without any check at all, indeed, it was doubtless the latter who should be held accountable for many crimes. Still worse, perhaps,
were the large gangs of deserters that preyed on all sides indiscriminately. Travelling to Madrid with his family, for example, a leading josefino official from Palencia was held up and robbed by a gang of twenty French
deserters, whilst in 1809 the village of Pajares de Adaja witnessed a group of Irish soldiers, who had fled Wellington’s army, rob several houses and then murder the mayor and the parish priest. Yet, for all that we are a long
way from the legend, and even the hope of plunder was not sufficient to bring in the recruits required, with many of the partidas in practice relying on compulsion. For example, on 30 August 1811 Longa visited Orduña with a force
of cavalry and forced all the young men of the district to come away with him, whilst according to the founder of the Bank of Spain, Ramón Santillán, on 13 June 1809 Merino descended on Lerma and ‘threatened to treat as traitors
any young men who refused to join him immediately’. 40 Santillán was taken, but his neighbour, González Arranz, was more lucky:

 Married though I now was, there was no escape. A party under the command of a brother of El Empecinado named Don Damaso Martín … carried me off with a number of other young men, both married and unmarried, to the town of Riaza,
which was where El Empecinado was at that point. Such was the distress of my mother at my absence … that, leaving our house, she set off in pursuit, dragging my father-in-law along with her. Arriving at Riaza, she managed to
secure my definitive exemption by means of a combination of pleading and bribery. My companions were less fortunate, for they were taken away … very few of them ever returning to their homes. 41

 González Arranz, it transpires, was doubly fortunate, the Aragonese cabecilla, Sarasa, supposedly executing twenty men of Ainsa who tried to prevent him from taking their sons. With many of the local juntas established in the
occupied regions also doing their best to enforce the quinta, towns such as Ciudad Rodrigo therefore saw the arrival of streams of fugitives. Many of the partidas were in any case actually flying columns of regular troops such as
those commanded by Pedro Villacampa, and there were even generals who became directly involved in la guerrilla, as witness, for example, La Romana’s surprise attack on Villafranca del Vierzo in March 1809.