

 Elsewhere, however, it is a rather different story. Even in Navarre there were strong regional differences. The south of the province lies in the Ebro valley – the Ribera – and is in many respects a complete contrast to the
Montaña. Rather than dispersed as in farmsteads of the north, the populace were concentrated in large ‘agro-towns’ such as Corella and Tudela, of which most were señorios of either the Church or the upper nobility. Peasant
proprietorship was unknown and even tenant farming scarce and more precarious, the bulk of the inhabitants being dependent on day labour. Municipal government was in the hands of closed oligarchies drawn from the propertied
classes, whilst the towns were filled with numerous clerks in minor orders and other ecclesiastics who seemed to do little to earn their privileged position, and dominated by numerous religious houses that owned much land.
Parishes, too, were much bigger than those of the Montaña with the result that the Church was far less able to reach out to the populace through the medium of pastoral care. With patterns of labour much less compatible with
periods of absence – in the Montaña much cultivation was carried out jointly by the extended family or even the entire community, whilst women were able to take over much of the work – it is therefore hardly surprising that the
Ribera produced far fewer recruits for la guerrilla than did the regions further north.

 Whatever their state, the populace often had good reason to hate the French. For a classic instance of the supposed result, we have only to turn to the memoirs of Joseph Sherer:

 In a village about three leagues from Pamplona … I met with a very fine man, a native of Aragón and a guerrilla … I asked him where he lived and under whom he served. ‘Señor,’ said he, ‘I have no home, no relations, nothing save
my country and my sword. My father was led out and shot in the market place of my native village; our cottage was burned; my mother died of grief; and my wife, who had been violated by the enemy, fled to me, then a volunteer with
Palafox, and died in my arms in a hospital in Zaragoza. I serve under no particular chief: I am too miserable, I feel too revengeful to support the restraint of discipline and the delay of manoeuvre … But I have sworn never to
dress a vine or plough a field till the enemy is driven out of Spain.’ 35

 Yet despite such evidence, it is clear that only in relatively small parts of northern Spain can the guerrilla struggle be said to fit the normal stereotype. On the other hand, hatred of the French and devotion to dios, rey y
patria were by no means the only reason to join the partidas. For example, Próspero Marco, who enlisted in Merino’s band, wanted to avenge himself on a local landowner who had tried to eliminate him as a rival for the hand of a
particular girl by having him arrested by the French, and El Empecinado’s sometime lieutenant, Abuín, was a murderer on the run from justice. Equally, of the group of nineteen guerrillas from the Valladolid area mentioned above,
no fewer than ten were deserters, whilst at Horcajo de los Montes an agent of the Junta Central named José Crivell formed a band of sharpshooters by the simple means of threatening to march any man who refused to enlist off to
the nearest headquarters (at nearby Navahermosa, however, Crivell was less fortunate, the population rising in revolt rather than submit to his demands). Rather less ambiguous, perhaps, was the action of the many prisoners of war
who gave their guards the slip and found refuge with the nearest partida, but even so there is no firm evidence that such fugitives were motivated by anything other than opportunism. Finally, also in flight, except in the
opposite direction, were the assorted Italian, German and Polish deserters who ended up with such bands as that of Espoz y Mina.