

 Faced by such a situation, for many young men the guerrillas offered an attractive alternative, and all the more so given the decree of the corso terrestre of 25 February 1809. Thus, Matías Calvo – a deserter who had fled the
second siege of Zaragoza – joined the forces of Espoz y Mina when the death of his father pushed his family over the edge, whilst one of Merino’s earliest collaborators was Julián Pablos, an erstwhile member of Godoy’s bodyguard
who had been living in poverty in his home town of Lerma ever since the dissolution of his regiment at Aranjuez. With the guerrillas also engaging in forced requisitioning, banditry – always an escape for the poor – had now been
legitimised, whilst the war against the afrancesados meant that plenty of pretexts could be found to settle scores with the pudientes; hence the scenes witnessed when Ronda was briefly occupied by the serranos in March 1810:

 The very day … we left Ronda, the mountaineers entered it … shouting with joy and discharging their pieces exultingly in the streets. The inhabitants of each village arrived together, marching without order, and … loaded their
asses with whatever they found … till the poor beasts were ready to sink under the weight of the booty … The prisons were forced, and the … criminals they contained ran instantly to take revenge on their judges and accusers.
Debtors obtained receipts from their creditors by forcible means, and all the public papers were burned in order to annul the mortgages that the inhabitants of the town had upon the … mountaineers. 37

 The evidence that the leitmotiv of the rank and file of the guerrilla movement was plunder rather than patriotism is overwhelming. British soldiers, for example, often found themselves under attack, O’Neil complaining that the
guerrillas ‘often fell upon and murdered our men if they strayed from the ranks’, and even going so far as to say that ‘they were almost as great a terror to us as to our foes’. 38 Even if such events as the fight O’Neil
describes between himself and a guerrilla sporting a musket and a pack that had once belonged to a British rifleman are put down to attempts on the part of civilians to defend their property, in Navarre Espoz y Mina suppressed a
number of bands who had been oppressing the populace, whilst he famously complained to a friend that he was terrified of his men and feared that they were capable of stabbing him to death at any moment. In view of the sack of
Ronda, also interesting is Francisco Ballesteros’ account of what he found when he took over command in Algeciras in 1812:

 The commander of the cruzada, his guerrilla band, and all the others that infested the region were one of the objects that called for my consideration. They had lent many services, but the pueblos  … were loudly complaining of
their excesses and vexations. I examined the truth of their expositions with my own eyes. The commander of the cruzada might have been a man noteworthy for his patriotism, but his disposition did not appear to me to be one
suitable for a guerrilla. As for the partidas  … I became convinced that they were … prejudicial to the nation, and did not hesitate a moment in ordering their disbandment. 39