

 If, as is obvious, a large number of modifications have to be made to the traditional picture of the guerrillas, how should this affect our perception of their value to the Allied war effort? As we have seen, the partidas were
incapable of preventing the French armies from occupying ever greater tracts of Spanish territory, let alone ejecting them from any that they had conquered, whilst their presence may well have accelerated the disintegration of
regular resistance. This said, it can be argued that such was the state of the Spanish armies that Spain would have been certain to have been overrun anyway, the guerrillas at the very least serving to slow down the French
advance, disrupt the consolidation of the josefino state, force the French to abandon their cloak of benevolence, keep alive the spirit of resistance, persuade the British that Spain was still worth fighting for, force Napoleon
to pay a heavy price for intervention in the Peninsula, and save Wellington from being thrown into the sea. Such arguments cannot be entirely set aside, for the complexity of la guerrilla did not prevent it from causing the
invaders immense difficulties. Subject to constant harassment, the imperial troops lost thousands of unnecessary casualties and found it hard to engage in both reconnaissance and foraging. Isolated garrisons were constantly being
blockaded with the result that much time had to be wasted in rushing to their relief. Communication between different forces became extremely difficult to maintain, the isolated courier and his escort being an ideal target for
the partidas. Convoys were forever being held up and ambushed, with the result, as with dispatches, that they had to travel under the protection of many hundreds of troops. Every square inch of conquered territory had to be
physically garrisoned and still more men deployed in mobile columns to scour the hills and mountains for the guerrillas and destroy their bases. More and more replacements and reinforcements were required from France with the
result that public confidence in the emperor was undermined, and yet the armies actually facing Wellington and the Spanish armies remained starved of men: organised in temporary ‘march battalions’, many of the new conscripts were
sucked into the struggle to keep open the roads that led to the frontier, in which task they invariably suffered much heavier losses than would have been the case had it been possible to dispatch them directly to their units. The
constant threat of retribution helped restrict collaboration with the josefino régime (in many areas afrancesado officials were regularly kidnapped and put to death). And, finally, the discipline and morale of the occupying
forces were seriously damaged: in Jaca, for example, half the garrison appears to have deserted in a single month in 1809, whilst more than one observer spotted the graffito, ‘This war in Spain means death for the men, ruin for
the officers, and a fortune for the generals.’ 42 At times, indeed, one comes across a sense of genuine despair. July 1810 saw one officer complain, ‘I really cannot do this any more … Every wood, every mountain hides a band of
insurgents, and in every town that has not been abandoned we have as many enemies as there remain inhabitants.’ 43 But most graphic of all is a dispatch sent to Marshal Berthier by the French officer entrusted with Asturias after
its reoccupation in 1810: