

 Spain, then, most certainly was not saved by the guerrillas, the fact being that it is quite clear that until 1812 the French had the potential to overrun the entire Peninsula. Pour more men across the Pyrenees, indeed, and
Napoleon would eventually win. Yet, if only because the military record was so dismal in other respects, many Spanish politicians and publicists took exaggerated comfort from the activities of the guerrillas and elevated them to
the role of national heroes, whilst the issue was also exploited by the important faction determined to argue that the struggle against Napoleon was a veritable ‘people’s war’. In doing so, however, they obscured the equally
valuable contribution of the unlucky but ever-persevering regular army. Humiliated and jealous, considerable elements of the officer corps were thereby impelled towards the political interventionism that plagued Spanish history
for the next century and a half. The military impact of the guerrillas may therefore still be open to question, but the bitterness of their legacy is undisguised.

===== FILE: OEBPS/xhtml/chapter11.xhtml =====
The Peninsular War

 11

 Cádiz

 THE MAKING OF THE SPANISH REVOLUTION, 1810–1812

 The hastily converted theatre was stuffy in the late summer heat. Crowded around a central dais were the ninety-nine deputies who had arrived in time to attend the first session of the new assembly whilst the public galleries
were thronged with army and militia officers, churchmen, place-seekers, journalists, the representatives of polite society and a variety of British and Portuguese guests. After hours of debate the moment had arrived for the first
vote. On the table was a decree introduced by the Extremaduran deputies, Diego Múñoz Torrero and Manuel Luján. It was a dramatic moment. The renunciations of Bayonne, it was proclaimed, were null and void on the grounds that the
monarch did not have the right to dispose of the throne without consulting the Spanish people. As for the cortes, it was, the two deputies argued, a legitimate assembly that embodied the sovereignty of the nation. As such, it had
the right to embark on a fundamental reform of the governance of Spain, which, for good measure, would take as a basic principle the separation of powers between the executive, the legislative and the judiciary. At stake were the
very principles of absolutism. Yet, to immense applause, the measure was carried by a large majority. Spain, it seemed, had formally embraced the course of revolution.

 Implicit in the decree passed on the evening of 24 September 1810 were the seeds of deep division, but for the time being all was jubilation and excitement: politically naive as they were, many of the delegates had not realised
what they had done, whilst the decree was in any case susceptible of interpretations that constituted no threat to the old order whatsoever. When one of the regents – the aged Bishop of Orense, Pedro Quevedo y Quintana – refused
to swear the oath of loyalty to the cortes which was immediately required of every authority in Spain, he therefore received no support. Meanwhile, the general mood of harmony and optimism was reinforced by a certain sense of
security. Although the French had in theory been besieging the new capital for the past seven months, in practice it was impregnable. Cádiz was built at the end of a sand spit nearly five miles long jutting out from a triangular
piece of land known as the Isla de León. To reach the island, meanwhile, an attacker would have to fight his way across a wide strip of creeks and salt marshes known as the Río Sancti Petri which could only be traversed by means
of a narrow causeway-cum-bridge known as the Puente de Suazo. As for bombardment, the only possible site for a siege battery – a peninsula that half closed the mouth of the great harbour protected by the Isla – was held by troops
ensconced at its seaward end in the fort of Matagorda. Batteries and redoubts commanded the entire length of the Sancti Petri; the Puente de Suazo had been blown up; the isthmus was studded with defences; and Cádiz itself
protected by massive walls. Every boat for miles around, meanwhile, had been scuttled, burned or taken over to the Isla de León, whilst the harbour was full of British and Spanish warships, the Spaniards having also fitted out a
large number of gunboats and launches that could patrol the whole length of the Sancti Petri. Troops, meanwhile, existed by the thousand, Alburquerque’s army and the Voluntarios Distinguidos having been reinforced by 3,000
soldiers who had fled Seville and reached the sea at Ayamonte and a strong Anglo-Portuguese brigade commanded by General William Stewart (shaken by their experiences, the Spaniards had abandoned their earlier scruples about a
British garrison). Finally, in September the local authorities decreed the mobilisation of the entire male populace between the ages of sixteen and fifty-five, laying down that, depending on their resources, they should join
either the privileged Voluntarios Distinguidos or the ordinary milicias urbanas (those who were unfit to serve were to pay a redemption fee proportionate to their income).