

 Nor was this an end to it. Militarised though they may have been, the guerrillas could not be trusted to put up a good fight. As Porlier complained:

 We will continue to … find it hard to obtain any result from the troops for a long time unless they are organised as they ought to be … I say this on account of what happened in the last action: I would have lost half my men had
not the cavalry saved everyone. It was impossible to contain the infantry’s disorder or … remedy their confusion and fear. 48

 Increasingly dependent on the structures of the Patriot state for orders, arms and ammunition, the more or less regularised partidas of such figures as Espoz y Mina, El Empecinado, Sánchez, Durán, Villacampa, Longa, Merino and
Porlier were in effect tied to the fortunes of the regular armies. That left, of course, the cloud of bands that remained wholly irregular in nature, but, for all their considerable nuisance value, Chagarito and the rest were
little threat, and could not hope to withstand the might of the imperial state. Meanwhile, the fortunes of both regular and irregular bands were linked to those of the regular armies in yet another sense: in Aragón, for example,
la guerrilla had flourished in the course of Blake’s offensive in the summer of 1809, only to be placed under increasing pressure following the disaster at Belchite. Capture such cities as Tarragona, Valencia, Badajoz, then, and
the French would be well on their way to the defeat of the partidas.

 Where, then, is one to leave the question? All too clearly, the guerrillas were not the heroic defenders of the fatherland of legend. A complex phenomenon that in many respects defies definition, they embraced a variety of forms
and motivations, but it is evident that the rank and file, and even some of the leaders, were little interested in questions of ideology or patriotism. Yet, even at its most primitive, la guerrilla was always a considerable
nuisance to the French. By 1812, moreover, it had evolved considerably. As brigades and even divisions of regular troops, such bands as those of Espoz y Mina undoubtedly packed a heavier punch, whilst they had also begun to
establish liberated zones from which they were increasingly difficult to expel. In this way the seeds were laid for the very important role that they played in the eventual liberation of Spain. The costs, however, had been
enormous. The resistance of the regular armies had been sapped, large parts of Spain had been overrun, and relations with the populace had generally gone from bad to worse: guerrilla requisitioning was hated, the partidas blamed
for every French reprisal, and the invaders provided with considerable mileage for their propaganda. French rule remained unpopular, certainly, but there was less and less inclination to resist. In short, the political advantages
that supposedly accrued to the Patriot cause through the actions of the guerrillas had ceased to apply, if, that is, they had ever applied in the first place. As for the military advantages associated with them, even though they
had helped to keep the war alive this hardly served as a substitute for the disciplined regular armies which Spain so desperately needed.