

 Though far from perfect – many partidas that regularised their positions continued to lead a distinctly chequered existence – this development was reinforced by the efforts that were made to form the guerrillas into regular
units subject to military discipline. The advantages of this course of action were many: as regular soldiers dressed in uniform, the guerrillas would find it harder to abscond; as regular soldiers trained to fight in a formal
fashion, they would be more effective than a mob of individuals; as regular soldiers subject to discipline, their excesses could be contained more easily; and as regular soldiers organised in units, they could supply themselves
from the countryside in a far more efficient and less wasteful manner than could mere partidas. From as early as 1809, then, the civil and military authorities alike embarked on a policy of, quite literally, regimentation. Many
of the irregulars’ rank and file were bitterly opposed to this process, fearing that it would make them soldiers by the back door. Yet the guerrillas did not present a united front on this issue. On the contrary, their chiefs
were frequently eager allies of the authorities. By forming their followers into regular commands, they could assure themselves of receiving the support of the government in arms, uniforms and supplies. Not only did this increase
their military capabilities, but it also reinforced their prestige, a vital consideration given the ad hoc nature of their authority. At the same time, the introduction of military discipline provided them with a greater chance
of quelling discontent amongst their followers, whilst, with disciplined troops at their command, they were more able to overawe rival leaders and to portray them as mere bandits. Possession of regular commissions could also
offer an escape from the tutelage of local juntas – El Empecinado, for example, had a hard struggle to shake off the pretensions of the Junta of Guadalajara – whilst, at least until the reforms enacted by the cortes of Cádiz, it
also brought entitlement to the numerous judicial and fiscal advantages conferred by membership of the officer corps. Finally, there was also the question of the inferiority complex evidently suffered by many guerrilla commanders
of civilian origins vis-à-vis the often disdainful and supercilious officers of the regular army, in which respect the adoption of military norms also became a form of self-defence.

 By the end of 1811 all the most famous bands had undergone the process of militarisation. However, the adoption of military forms brought with it unexpected drawbacks. As bands became more complex in their structure, so they
presented the French with an easier target. To quote Heinrich von Brandt:

 Rendered incapable by their great numbers to conceal themselves from a vigilant enemy and suddenly to disappear from him without giving battle as they had formally done, they were now frequently overtaken, surprised, defeated
and dispersed. 47