

 If service with the guerrillas was frequently purely a means of escaping worse alternatives, it was also very often the fruit of economic necessity. Not only was the burden of French requisitioning and taxation extremely heavy,
but the populace were already for the most part poverty-stricken, and the propertied classes only too eager to save themselves at the expense of the poor (French levies were, for example, frequently funded by imposing extra taxes
on basic foodstuffs). As a further means of raising money, meanwhile, many municipalities sold off considerable amounts of common land, thereby depriving many of the humbler elements of the community of firewood, pasturage, food
and raw materials (chestnuts and wild asparagus came from the commons as did the esparto grass used in such activities as basket-weaving). As most municipalities had also rented out parts of the common land in small parcels at
reasonable rents, there also disappeared many vital tenancies. In such places as the Montaña where the land involved was sold off in small parcels, this policy was softened in its effects, but all too often it went in large
units, the result being that the oligarchy consolidated their control of the local economy still further. A good example is Guipúzcoa where a study of 9 pueblos has shown that 14 per cent of the 1,458 purchasers got 71 per cent
of the land (and, still worse, that a mere 12 purchasers took almost one-fifth of the property involved). Thanks to the requisition of so many draught animals and carts by the contending armies, in many areas agricultural
activity seems virtually to have come to a standstill, whilst nature was no more kind to Spain in the period 1808–1814 than she had been in the years before the war. Thus, the harvest of 1811 was particularly disastrous, the
result being that wheat prices shot up dramatically (in Burgos, for example, wheat rose from 80 reales the fanega in June 1811 to 244 by the close of the year). Yet the populace were in no condition to respond to the crisis. With
the French imposing strict limits on movement and clamping down on many traditional aspects of street life, opportunities to find alternative sources of income were limited, and all the more so as industry was at a standstill and
many señores unable to pay their existing retainers and domestic servants, let alone take on fresh hands. In short, hunger and despair reigned on all sides.

 Let us quote, for example, Carnicero’s account of life in Madrid:

 There were so many unfortunates in the streets … that it was impossible to move along them without the stoniest heart being wrung and saddened … Some people could be heard complaining that it was three o’clock in the afternoon
and they had still not broken their fast; others had death clearly written in their faces; others were fainting from want; and still others had just breathed their last … At one spot there was a group … of children abandoned by
their parents crying and begging for bread; at another there was a number of tearful widows surrounded by their little ones; a little further some young girls assuring passersby that they were begging so as not to prostitute
themselves; on this corner a few priests humbly asking for alms, and on the next persons of the highest character … doing exactly the same. So many were the poor … that however much they wandered the streets … they could not get
enough to see them through the day … Going back to their homes … they therefore quietly … lay down to die. 36