

 My situation calls for Your Highness’ attention. The forces of the enemy are growing whilst their organization is gaining in consistency … Pablo has united Barcena and Porlier under his command … and is maintaining himself … on
the Pigüeña. A number of small parties are operating in the area of Teverga and Quirós. The road from Oviedo to León is frequently attacked by Castañón. Escandón is raiding my posts along the coast … The destruction of various
bridges has made it very hard for the little help that I can send to arrive as promptly as it should, whilst matters are being made worse by the fact that all the little combats that are taking place are causing me dead and
wounded. The action that has just taken place at Fresno cost me 160 combatants. Meanwhile, the number of sick is being augmented by the bad weather and the state of nakedness in which the soldiery finds itself … A spirit of
discontent is growing and desertion has begun to make itself felt … The spirit of insurrection impedes all supply, for the inhabitants flee before our troops … I need at least 2,000 men, replacement officers and NCOs, and a
shipment of powder, and for the rest will do the impossible. 44

 If more specific justification is required for the role played by the guerrillas in the first years of the war, it is only necessary to look at some of the events of the campaign. It was the irregular resistance springing up in
the Sierra Morena that persuaded Dupont to halt his march before the battle of Bailén. It was a letter intercepted by Spanish guerrillas at Valdestillas that allowed Sir John Moore to launch the offensive of December 1808 in
reasonable safety. It was the guerrillas of Old Castile who hid Soult’s travails in Portugal from the eyes of Ney, Victor and Joseph, forced the French commanders to engage in full-scale military operations just to decide what
they should do next, and persuaded them to evacuate Asturias almost as soon as they had conquered it. It was the guerrillas of Aragón who saved Valencia from invasion in 1809. And finally it was the capture of a secret message
from Joseph to Soult by some guerrillas near Avila that saved Wellington from disaster in the aftermath of Talavera.

 Clearly, then, the guerrillas played a major role in the campaigns that have been examined thus far. That said, though, it is difficult not to feel that the guerrilla movement’s many peculiar characteristics were an obstacle in
its operations. Love of booty, for example, could reduce attacks on the French to a farce: when the bands of Mina the younger and a noted smuggler named Ignacio Alonso joined forces for an attack on Tudela on 28 November 1809,
the two groups ended up pillaging the town and then fighting one another over the spoils. Rivalry between different commanders meant that even this level of co-operation was not always forthcoming, whilst there were also endless
disputes over the control of territory. So serious were they that the more unscrupulous cabecillas were not above murdering their rivals: one of the first steps that Espoz y Mina took in Navarre, for example, was to arrest and
execute the head of another band named Pascual Echevarría. All too often the result was chaos. Nowhere was this problem worse than in the area south of the River Ebro centred on the modern-day provinces of Soria and Logroño where
two royal commissioners, numerous local juntas and a multiplicity of guerrilla bands were all jockeying for position with one another by the autumn of 1809. As a memorial from Logroño complained: