

 The various juntas that control the province all regarding themselves as being equal, they all act as they see fit without agreeing any plan or system and in consequence frequently fall foul of each other. The result is mutual
jealousy … and endless quarrelling … This evil has spread to the guerrillas, and it is unfortunately … the case that the important services which they have been rendering … have been marred by disputes … which have often ended up
with the weaker band being disarmed. 45

 Meanwhile, the more irregular partidas could never be relied upon to harass the enemy on a consistent basis, just as many cabecillas found it impossible to prevent their men from coming and going more or less at will. As for
doing any fighting, they could be all but useless. Thus:

 I went on my way without incident as far as … Briviesca, but between that place and Burgos we saw twenty mounted Spaniards appear suddenly around a low hill. They fired several shots at us without effect; then my escort [of six
gendarmes ], my servant and I drew our swords, and went forward without deigning to reply to the enemy, who, judging from our resolute attitude that we were the kind of people to defend ourselves vigorously, went off in another
direction … Between Palencia and Dueñas I fell in with an officer and twenty-five men of the Young Guard escorting a chest of money for the garrison at Valladolid. The … guerrilleros of the neighbourhood were just attacking the
detachment. On seeing my escort galloping up … they stopped short … But one of them … called out that no French troops were in sight, whereupon the brigands advanced boldly towards the tempting treasure wagon. I naturally took
command and bade the officer of the guard not to fire until I gave the word. Most of the enemy had dismounted … and … many had only pistols. I had placed my infantry behind the wagon, and as soon as the Spaniards were within
twenty paces I made them come out and gave the order to fire. This was obeyed with terrible precision: the leader … and a dozen of his men dropped. The rest bolted at full speed towards their horses. 46

 Nor is this surprising, the fact being that many so-called guerrillas really were nothing but brigands. Typical enough were the so-called muchachos de Santibánez, a gang of bandits hailing from the district of Plasencia headed
by Miguel Caletrión, Miguel Dosado and Antonio Serrano. Throughout their career, they pretended to be partisans, but in fact the majority of their victims, whom they regularly treated with the utmost cruelty, were shepherds,
migrant labourers, muleteers and peasants.

 The Patriot authorities were not unaware of these deficiencies, nor, still less, of the pillage on which many of the bands subsisted. From as early as December 1808, then, the Junta Central was issuing orders whose purpose was
to impose a structure on the guerrillas whilst at the same time ensuring that every band was subordinated to the appropriate military authorities. Very soon, indeed, those wishing to organise a partida had to obtain the sanction
of the Junta Central itself, one of the comisarios regios that it sent out to act as its representatives in the occupied provinces, a provincial junta, or the commander of the army based in the district in which the person
concerned wished to operate. Muddled though the chain of command often remained, the result was that at least in theory a gap began to open up between those who were genuinely fighting the French and those who were simply bandits.