

 With power in the hands of gaditano commerce, things could only get worse. Having profited immensely from the colonial trade – in 1802, for example, Cádiz is claimed to have imported goods from Spanish America of a value
equivalent to the whole of Britain’s total exports for that year – the merchants who dominated the junta were unlikely to look kindly on a rabble of rebellious criollos, pardos and mestizos. As well as having to fight the French,
successive Regencies therefore found themselves committed to a highly expensive second front, which by 1814 had absorbed some 20,000 troops. The reverse side of the coin, meanwhile, was that the government was not allowed to make
any significant concessions, as witness, for example, the furious reaction occasioned by the fake decree of free trade, not to mention the constant refusal to admit that there was any serious cause for rebellion (at best the
insurgents were regarded as self-seeking degenerates – there was a common perception that the American climate had encouraged sexual profligacy and sapped the moral and intellectual fibre of the criollos – who had gulled the
savage and uncivilised masses into following their lead).

 Whilst worsening the Regency’s financial difficulties, the American revolutions also affected relations with the British. As had been made clear after Talavera, Wellington’s forces could not be expected to intervene in the
hinterland of Spain until relations between the Allies had been placed on a very different basis. From the beginning Canning had sought to link aid to Spain with greater access to the trade and bullion of her colonies on the
grounds that the Continental Blockade would otherwise render further assistance impossible. Reasonably enough given the immense quantities of British goods being smuggled into the American territories – £1,000,000 worth was
shipped to them in 1808 from Jamaica alone – the Spaniards saw things very differently. Only a few years before, British troops had attacked Buenos Aires and Montevideo and allowed them to be swamped with cheap goods, whilst the
British in any case had a long record of preying on the American trade and had in recent years given succour to such fugitives as the Venezuelan revolutionary, Miranda. Fearing that relinquishing the mother country’s commercial
monopoly would jeopardise the Patriot cause’s most important source of income, the Junta Central had therefore refused to make any concessions except in exchange for a guaranteed subsidy. Yet obduracy on the part of Spain
provoked intransigence on the part of Britain, and thus it was that the American colonies came to be a major bone of contention.

 With the revolts of 1810, matters became more complicated still. On the one hand, the Perceval administration could not openly support a revolt against its most important ally, but, on the other, it feared that the rebels might
be driven into the arms of the French, wished to forge good relations with them, and had a strong interest in seeing them attain their independence. The result was a most unhappy compromise. Whilst British representatives in the
Caribbean and elsewhere were forbidden to give direct assistance to the rebels, insurgent emissaries were received in London. Furthermore, rather than agreeing to Spanish demands that it should help put down the rebels by force,
the British government offered to mediate between the belligerents in the hope of securing terms – amongst them, needless to say, a liberalisation of trade – that would restore the Americans to their allegiance.