

 In the face of these resources, the French had had to confess themselves thwarted. Once a forlorn effort to persuade the garrison to surrender had been rejected, all that could be done was for the French troops that had reached
the shoreline (the corps commanded by Marshal Victor) to make camp and embark on an attempt to bombard the city into surrender (in addition, Joseph wrote to Napoleon appealing for naval assistance, but this was never forthcoming,
the emperor knowing better than to risk a second Trafalgar). Large numbers of troops and guns were therefore pushed forward to attack Matagorda and this was eventually subjected to so much punishment that the garrison was
evacuated on 22 April. For a graphic description of the fighting, we have only to turn to the memoirs of Joseph Donaldson, a young Scottish soldier of the Ninety-Fourth Foot, who had been ordered to help man one of the fort’s
cannons. Thus:

 At last when everything was prepared, they commenced their operations … Five or six batteries, mounting in all about twenty guns and eight or ten mortars, opened their tremendous mouths, vomiting forth death and destruction …
Death now began to stalk about in the most dreadful form. The large shot were certain messengers where they struck. The first man killed was a sailor … The whole of his face was carried away … The French soon acquired a fatal
precision with their shot … killing and wounding men with every volley. I was on the left of the gun at the front wheel. We were running her up after loading. I had stooped to take a fresh purchase [when] a cannon ball … carried
the forage cap off my head and struck the man behind me on the breast, and he fell to rise no more … The carnage now became dreadful: the ramparts were strewed with the dead and wounded, and blood, brains and mangled limbs lay
scattered in every direction … The action was kept up the whole of that day during which we lost the best and bravest of our men … By this time three of our guns were rendered unfit for service, and they had made a great
impression on our parapet, with a breach in the end of the bomb-proof [ sic ] … It being found that we could not keep the place, boats were sent to convey us to Cádiz. 1

 With Matagorda in their hands, the French could harass the harbour and isthmus and even shell Cádiz itself. Special mortars of an enormous size were eventually constructed for this purpose at Seville, and the city was thereafter
periodically bombarded. The gunners’ efforts, however, proved completely ineffectual and the only result was to swell the confidence of the gaditanos and persuade them that they were heroes. As Alcalá Galiano wrote:

 From December 1810 bombs … fired by the enemy batteries had started to fall inside Cádiz. However, these shots … came very infrequently, and then only a few at a time. At the same time, in order to carry so far, the projectiles
had had to be increased in weight, and were consequently mostly made up of lead without much space for powder. As a result, they caused little damage … and in the end little notice was taken of them other than to make them the
subject of humour. In theatre and streets, then, a popular couplet was sung … ‘From the bombs fired by the popinjays, the girls of Cádiz make hair curlers.’ 2