

 To the Spaniards, of course, all this was totally unacceptable, for inherent in the very concept of mediation was the idea that they should make substantial concessions. As a result, the Regency would only agree if the British
promised to assist in repression should the negotiations fail. As for the British, they were regarded with more hostility than ever. Writing from La Coruña, Sir Howard Douglas noted a worrying tendency ‘to attribute all our
measures to selfish policy’, whilst Henry Wellesley went so far as to claim that the American revolts ‘have been the principal cause of all the trouble and vexation I have met with in my different communications with the
government’. 10 Only to be expected, this obduracy aroused much anger in London, and all the more so when it began to be coupled with the dispatch of troops to America, the consequence being that a British campaign in Spain was
rendered less likely than ever.

 In the early months of its existence, then, the Regency was in serious trouble. The war continued, certainly, but such was the battering to which the Spaniards had been subjected that there seemed to be little in the way of the
occupation of most of what remained of Patriot Spain. Asturias and Galicia had been stripped of most of their troops for the campaign of Tamames and Alba de Tormes, and plunged into confusion by La Romana, who, not content with
overthrowing the junta in Oviedo, had also outraged the Galician notables by trying to substitute military for civilian government. The 10,000 soldiers who remained were deserting in droves and terrorising the populace, whilst in
Galicia in particular the alarmas were running amok, the effect of popular mobilisation having been to form ‘gangs of smugglers and bandits who are better dressed and armed than our own troops’. 11 Not that this was difficult:
one British officer described the Galician forces as ‘a wretched rabble … attended by a numerous corps of officers equally ignorant of military duty as the men, who … were all raw recruits not exercised above eight days and the
greater part not even knowing how to load and fire’. 12

 Galicia, indeed, provided the Patriot authorities with the problems with which they would everywhere have to contend in the wake of liberation. Arms, uniforms and equipment were all wanting. Costs were enormous: La Coruña was
swarming with supernumerary officers, whilst the province had to sustain two different headquarters as the territorial command was in the hands of the Captain General, Noroña, and its field counterpart in those of General Mahy.
Thanks to an increase in smuggling, a general breakdown in law and order, the collapse of trade and industry, and the death or flight of many local magistrates, income was in decline (46,000,000 reales were received as income in
1808 as opposed to only 38,500,000 in 1810): by the end of 1811, indeed, there was a monthly deficit of some 5,300,000 reales. How this situation was to be resolved was not clear, however. For example, an extraordinary
contribution of 60,000,000 reales levied in April 1811 produced only 7,250,000 reales in the first six months, the re-established Junta of Galicia complaining bitterly of ‘the league that we note among the well-to-do classes to
avoid contributing to the public necessities, a monstrous league that is sustained by every kind of crime’. 13 Nor were the military authorities much help, Mahy having fallen out with the new junta and being described as a man
whom ‘nothing appears capable of moving … to exertion’. 14 But, above all, the whole province was swarming with bandits. Always a problem in poverty-stricken and over-populated Galicia, their numbers had been swollen by draft
evasion, desertion, despair, the sale by fleeing soldiers of their arms and ammunition, and the fact that many jails had been thrown open by the insurgents of 1808. A series of draconian proclamations and police regulations did
no good whatsoever. The number of bandits seems to have roughly doubled, gangs in operation in 1810 including those of Antonio Ferro, Tomás Mínguez, Bernardo Montans, Antonio Vázquez and Francisco Rodríguez. Noted for their
cruelty – the usual tactic amongst such groups was to descend on isolated farmhouses and carry off all that they could find, having first employed the most horrific tortures to reveal the presence of any hidden valuables – such
men instilled a common sense of insecurity and lack of confidence that augmented the general unrest and made it still harder for the authorities to impose their writ.