

 A government established as if by a favour or condescension must needs be the slave … of a junta that had in its favour … the fact that it was composed of respectable inhabitants of the city to which it could be said that …
Spain had been reduced. The opinion of Cádiz was inevitably in favour of its junta and against the last fruit of the central. 7

 Although the loss of so much territory meant that the duties paid in Cádiz now represented a disproportionately large part of the government’s domestic income, matters might not have been so bad but for two other issues. In the
first place, the junta was not particularly efficient: as one British observer wrote, ‘The members are too numerous for an executive government, and … have so ill arranged the distribution of the different branches of the
government that in the few days they have acted, they have already been found to clash.’ 8 Far more important, however, were developments in central and South America. From the days of Carlos III the criollo community had come
increasingly to resent Spanish rule, such feelings having been much sharpened by the extension of Godoy’s desamortización to America, the evil reputation of the Spanish court, and the manner in which the intermittent war against
Britain from 1796 to 1808 had both given the inhabitants a taste of the benefits of free trade and convinced them that they now had much less need of Spanish protection. Inspired by loathing of the French and fear that their
influence might stir up the same sort of bloody racial revolts as those that had rocked the Caribbean in the 1790s, the criollos had initially joined the peninsulares in rallying to Fernando VII. Patriotic donations poured in,
whilst Santo Domingo – today the Dominican Republic – which had been ceded to France in 1795 in the Treaty of Basle, was reconquered by local militias dispatched from Puerto Rico who defeated the French garrison at Palo Hincado.
Yet the colonies remained restive: other than suspending a much resented decree of 1804 that had effectively forced all those who had borrowed from Church funds – the chief source of credit in America – to pay back what they owed
to the state, the Junta Central had failed to address criollo grievances. For example, the local authorities continued to be dominated by peninsulares, whilst an offer of political representation was marred by the fact that the
colonies were only allocated ten deputies as opposed to twenty-six for metropolitan Spain. In just the same way, whilst the latter was allotted one cortes deputy for every fifty thousand inhabitants, the American territories got
one for every hundred thousand with the added stipulation that the headcount would only include pure-blood Europeans. Add to all this the fact that the Junta had proved completely inept in its handling of the rather confused
situation that had developed in the Viceroyalty of the Río de la Plata in the wake of the British invasion of 1806–7, and it will be appreciated that an explosion was inevitable.