

 The Spanish cavalry is an encumbrance and worse than none, and their means in field artillery very trifling … It is undoubtedly trusting to a broken reed to confide in the steadiness and discipline [of] such troops in the open
field. 20

 Finally we come to the Levante and Catalonia. Taking Valencia first of all, its forces numbered only 12,000 men, most of whom were untried, whilst its political situation was extremely unstable. Thus, from May 1808 to March 1809
the original Captain General, Conquista, had come under unremitting attack from La Romana’s brother, José Caro – in 1808 an obscure naval captain whose dreams of grandeur fitted in very well with the demands of family loyalty –
and the revolutionary faction headed by the Bertrán de Lis clan. Thanks very largely to the support given to the anti-Conquista camp by the Barón de Sabasona, who had been sent to Valencia by the Junta Central as its
commissioner, this struggle was eventually ended by Conquista being forced to resign. However, the results were not those foreseen by the progressive elements who had dominated the campaign against the old Captain General. Thus,
appointed to the Captain Generalcy in Conquista’s place, Caro arrested all the bertrandelistas, drove out Sabasona, and mobilised the mob to ensure that the government allowed him a free hand, thereafter running Valencia very
much as a personal satrapy whose rule, as one observer put it, was characterised by ‘neither courage, nor strength, nor talent’. 21

 Next, then, is Catalonia. Though large parts of the south and west were still free, including the fortified cities of Lérida, Tarragona and Tortosa, its forces were even less able to undertake anything of any consequence than
those of Valencia. Whilst a new commander had been found in place of Blake in the person of the young Enrique O’Donnell, who had made a name for courage and daring in the operations round Gerona, no more than 7,000 men were
available for field operations, whilst attempts to introduce conscription merely stirred up popular hostility and undermined the new Captain General. In truth, however, O’Donnell was hardly an inspiring leader, Lord Holland very
fairly describing him as ‘unsteady, intemperate … unreasonable and regardless of truth and character’. 22 As for the somaténes, they were now so wedded to banditry and pillage that they were all but useless. La guerrilla
continued, true – on 18 December 1809, for example, the commander of the French forces in the region, Marshal Augereau, was himself ambushed near Figueras in the course of his return from a short vist to Perpignan – but for a
long time most of the fighting had been the work of detachments of regular troops and the volunteer tercios de miqueletes formed by the Junta of Catalonia at the start of the war.

 Wherever one looks, then, the picture is the same. Popular disaffection, lack of resources and political intrigue together ensured that the Patriot armies could henceforth seek to do little more than hang on to such territory as
they still occupied whilst at the same time joining with the guerrillas of the interior in harassing the invaders. Worse, the situation was still deteriorating. Hastily organised expeditions against Astorga, Ciudad Rodrigo,
Tarragona, Valencia and Badajoz may all have failed to obtain the surrenders expected in the wake of the fall of Seville, but Asturias and central Extremadura were reoccupied and the city of Murcia raided and stripped of its
valuables, whilst in Catalonia Augereau inflicted terrible punishment on the somaténes of the north, revictualled Barcelona, and, despite a gallant and prolonged defence, eliminated the strategically placed fortress of
Hostalrich. In Aragón, meanwhile, having captured the younger Mina and inflicted several other blows on the guerrillas, who had seized the opportunity constituted by the abortive march on Valencia to make all sorts of trouble,
Suchet resolved to attack Lérida. An important objective whose capture would open the way for co-operation between the garrisons of Aragón and Catalonia, this city was well-fortified and full of troops, whilst its governor,
García Conde, put up a fierce fight, but on the night of 13–14 May the walls were successfully stormed. Built on a towering hill above the town, the citadel might have held out for some time more, but Suchet dealt with the threat
in ruthless fashion by first driving the unfortunate civilian population inside its walls at bayonet point and then subjecting its packed courtyards to heavy artillery fire. The effects were appalling – at least 500 people died,
including many women and children – and within twenty-four hours García Conde had duly surrendered. With Lérida secured, Suchet then turned on Mequínenza and besieged that place as well, securing its surrender on 12 June. And,
finally, and in some ways most importantly, on 21 March Junot’s corps attacked Astorga, which was protected only by its old city wall, and proceeded to subjugate it in a month-long siege, in which the Spaniards distinguished
themselves by fighting an attempt to storm the defences to a standstill and only surrendering when they ran out of ammunition.