

 It should not be thought that the Spaniards had been idle in the course of these campaigns. On the frontiers of Galicia an attempt was made by Mahy to check the siege of Astorga. Equally, in Catalonia Enrique O’Donnell launched
attack after attack on Augereau’s forces and came very close to winning a considerable victory at Vich, though a risky dash at Lérida took his army out of the shelter of the mountains and led to a severe reverse at Margalef. From
Badajoz, meanwhile, two divisions of La Romana’s army – those of Ballesteros and Contreras – were dispatched to the remote Condado de Niebla from where they repeatedly sallied out and attacked isolated French garrisons, at one
point advancing to within twenty miles of Seville. At the same time, assured of the help of the British fleet, possessed of numerous safe harbours and well provided with schooners, launches, gunboats and other small craft, the
Patriots were also able to make much use of seapower. From the late spring, then, La Coruña and Cádiz saw the departure of a series of expeditions in which small forces of regular troops either landed in remote towns and villages
and established bases from where they could harass the French or launched surprise commando-style attacks on such vulnerable enemy garrisons as that of Santoña.

 In the interior, too, the struggle continued. As an example, one might cite the case of El Empecinado. Now the head of a band of volunteers that numbered at least 500 men, on 9 March, for example, the Castilian commander
attacked a French column near Sigüenza, evaded an attempt to take his men in the rear by a second force that was lying in wait for just this purpose, and finally fought off the combined forces of his assailants. For some time
chiefly engaged in hunting down bandits and recruiting his forces, on 30 June he reappeared and forced the garrison of Brihuega to take refuge in the castle that dominated the town. Further raids followed: on 7 July the target
was Sigüenza, on 16 July Brihuega, and on 26 July Torrelaguna. Despite being immersed in a series of intrigues, meanwhile, Porlier was just as active. No sooner had Bonet got his troops into Oviedo, for example, than the
guerrilla leader descended on Infiesto and captured many prisoners and supplies, his efforts leading to Oviedo being given up twice over before the invaders finally settled down within its walls.

 Spanish heroism notwithstanding, the French were clearly in the ascendant. With Patriot Spain gradually being ground down, indeed, defeat could only be avoided if the British consented to take a greater role in the struggle. Yet
Britain’s ability to save Spain promised to be distinctly limited. Content though Napoleon was to see what remained of the Patriot cause conquered and overthrown, his attention was fixed on Portugal. Exasperated with the
inability of his generals to finish the job, he had throughout the autumn been talking of leading an army on Lisbon and throwing Wellington into the sea. Engrossed in his divorce of Josephine and search for a new bride, in the
end he did not come, but the project of an attack on Portugal was not forgotten, and on 17 April the corps of Soult (now commanded by General Reynier), Ney and Junot and a variety of others units – most importantly, a temporary
corps of reinforcement battalions that was still in France – were designated the Army of Portugal, and Marshal André Masséna appointed to be their commander. Avaricious, lecherous, and in poor health, Masséna still rated among
the very best of Napoleon’s commanders, and, after a series of discussions in which it was decided that he should march on Lisbon via Ciudad Rodrigo and Almeida, on 26 April he set out for Spain.