

 Help, then, could not be expected from Galicia and Asturias, but what of the Kingdom of León? Setting aside Astorga, which was garrisoned by the Galicians, the chief bastion of resistance here was the fortress of Ciudad Rodrigo
which was reasonably well-garrisoned, but gripped by social ferment. Thus:

 We find ourselves in something approaching a state of anarchy here, and are exposed to the risk of tragedy, for the junta is consumed with fear of the people and dares not bring either delinquents or deserters to justice … In
eight months of horrible events, we have not seen a single punishment. 15

 Composed largely of rebellious part-time local militia – the Voluntarios de Ciudad Rodrigo – the garrison was in any case unable to undertake much more than the cavalry raids of Julián Sánchez (now the commander of a regiment
known as the Lanceros de Castilla). As for the Army of the Left, terribly mauled at Alba de Tormes, this had spent the winter cantoned in the barren mountains between León and Extremadura and had lost over half its strength to
desertion and disease. As the Junta of Ciudad Rodrigo reported:

 The army is at present occupying the Sierra de Gata … If the station of the troops is judged solely in terms of fighting battles, it can with all security be said that it is as advantageous as could possibly be desired. But as
it is also necessary … to think in terms of the means that the countryside can provide, it must be confessed that they could not be more fatal … Rich in wine and oil, the area does not produce grain … and this has produced a
complete want of discipline amongst the soldiery, who are going out to steal on the public roads in the guise of foraging. 16

 Very soon, moreover, the area was weakened still further. Confirmed as commander of the Army of the Left by the new régime – it will be remembered that he had been reappointed to the position by the insurgents who had briefly
seized power in Seville in January 1810 – La Romana had led most of the troops that remained southwards to establish a fresh base at Badajoz. However, though not without its problems, La Romana quickly falling out with the Junta
of Extremadura, this did at least create a solid nucleus of resistance on King Joseph’s western flank. Indeed, reinforced by such troops as Albuquerque had left in the Extremaduran fortress and provided with fresh supplies of
food and clothing, the Army of the Left was to cause considerable mischief in the months that followed. As the British intelligence officer, Cocks, wrote, ‘The Marquis of Romana’s corps now forms part of our army … The men are
very good: I saw part of them engaged the day before yesterday and they behaved most bravely.’ 17

 Badajoz, then, represented a solid bulwark, but, across the whole of the south of Spain from the Portuguese border to Alicante, there was nothing other than the even more imposing focus of resistance represented by Cádiz. Thus,
most of the remnants of the old Army of the Centre had reached safety in Murcia and been taken over by General Blake, who had just resigned the Catalan command after a bitter dispute with the Junta of Catalonia over the fall of
Gerona, but the state of these forces was desperate in the extreme and it was to be the winter before they were even remotely ready for action. Another force had reached the Condado de Niebla, but its state was much the same: all
the units were infected by ‘the seed of dispersion’, whilst the cavalry ‘lacked carbines and pistols, and in some instances had no swords … or saddles’. 18 And even the garrison of Cádiz was not to be trusted. According to Roche,
for example, ‘They … are, if possible, of a worse description than I have seen in the armies … badly fed, paid and almost without clothing’. 19 As for Sir Thomas Graham, he was even more scathing: