

 Despite these efforts, in practice little changed. The individual members of the Regency attracted much scorn, the only joy that one British officer could find being that Wellesley now had ‘only five blockheads to transact
business with instead of thirty-four’. 4 Though few statesmen would have been equal to the task, it therefore proved incapable of satisfying the army’s wants, checking political intrigue, or completing the fortifications of their
capital. Meanwhile, intrigue was rife and the Minister of War, General Eguía, an inveterate nepotist. As for the administration, such was the muddle that in May 1810 an obscure Treasury official in the pay of Cuban agents was
able to cause chaos by getting a fake decree granting free trade to all Spain’s colonies promulgated by slipping it in with a pile of papers that had been sent to the Minister of Finance for signature.

 Not surprisingly, Britain’s new ambassador, Henry Wellesley, was in despair:

 It is impossible not to perceive that they have many of the same defects which so strongly characterised the proceedings of the Supreme Junta … The same want of energy and firmness, the same system of procrastination … prevails,
I am sorry to say, in the proceedings of the Council of Regency … Although six weeks have elapsed since the Spanish army arrived at the Isla de León … no attempt has been made to render them more efficient … They continue to be
ill-clothed,… ill-fed, and their discipline totally neglected. The pay of some of the … corps is eight, and of others (I believe) fourteen months in arrears. 5

 In fairness to the Regency, however, it was operating under difficult conditions. Not the least of its problems was the behaviour of the Junta of Cádiz. A new body that had ousted its predecessor in a de facto coup d’état in the
chaos of January 1810, it was dominated by a clique of merchants headed by one Tomás Istúriz, and later described as being perhaps ‘the one which has aspired to most power among all the juntas of Spain’. 6 Intent at the beginning
on seizing the very governance of Spain, it was only persuaded to recognise the Regency with the greatest difficulty and thereafter devoted itself to the alternative policy of seizing control of as large a share of the revenue as
possible so as to force the radical political agenda which it espoused upon the new régime. Knowing that he was an ‘out’ who had fallen foul of the Junta Central, the junta had invited Alburquerque to become its first president,
but the latter very soon got wise to its designs and denounced it to the Regency, accusing its members of overweening ambition and financial peculation. Much too afraid of the junta, which had behind it the weight of the entire
merchant community, to respond to this warning, the Regency chose rather to pack Alburquerque off to London as its ambassador. Already undermined by the fact that it could be represented as a creature of the despised Junta
Central, the result was that it found itself saddled with a situation in which it had no option but to accede to the junta’s demands for control of the whole of Cádiz’s customs revenues. As Blanco White noted, indeed: