

 With food abundant and even falling in price, there was in fact no hope of success, and that despite both hurricane and epidemic – a great storm destroyed many ships in the spring of 1810, whilst the city was for much of the
time ravaged by yellow fever.

 For the time being, then, all eyes could focus on the political situation. In essence, this was dominated by three factors: the instructions that had been left by the Junta Central concerning the convocation of the cortes; the
installation of a new council of regency; and the emergence of Cádiz itself as a major player in the political process. In so far as the first is concerned, on 28 October 1809 the Junta Central had, as we have seen, announced
that, after a three-month electoral process beginning on the first day of the New Year, the cortes would open on 1 March. On 1 January 1810, meanwhile, instructions had appeared that the suffrage was to be extended to all male
house-holders over the age of twenty-five. Voting was to be public, whilst the electors were to choose not deputies but parish representatives whose job it was to attend district-level assemblies. These would then choose deputies
to send to the provincial meetings that would be the bodies from which the members of the cortes would finally emerge, the number involved being determined by a ratio of one deputy to every fifty thousand inhabitants. Also
allowed to elect deputies (one in each case) were the provincial juntas and all those towns and cities that had been represented in the cortes of the antiguo régimen. All that was left unclear was the crucial question of whether
or not the new assembly should have a single chamber, or, to put it another way, whether the clergy and nobility should have their own organs of representation. *

 From 1 February 1810 – the date when it first met – the implementation of these various decrees had been in the hands of the new council of regency selected in its death throes by the Junta Central. Composed of General Castaños;
the erstwhile minister and president of the Junta of Seville, Francisco de Saavedra; Admiral Antonio Escaño; an official of the Ministry of State named Miguel de Lardizábal who had represented his native Mexico in the Junta
Central; and the Bishop of Orense (who was then still in Galicia and did not appear in Cádiz until 29 May), this was a highly conservative body which in theory enjoyed absolute power. As the leading reformer, Argüelles,
complained:

 Its authority was as absolute and arbitrary as that of the governments of the past. There was no remedy against the use of power. The freedoms of speech and of publication … were as chained up as they were before the
insurrection. 3

 Nor was this surprising, for the new body was in large part a creation of the amalgam of all the old councils of the Bourbon state set up by the Junta Central known as the Consejo Reunido, the members of this body being deeply
opposed to all forms of political progress. However, its leading figure, Castaños, was much given to dissemblance and compromise, and forswore a second chamber in favour of restoring the various councils brought together in the
Consejo Reunido in the hope that such a move would clip the wings of the new assembly in a fashion that, whilst more subtle, was no less effective. With this matter out of the way, the Regency reserved its energies for matters
more directly related to the war effort. Over the course of the next few months, a series of decrees appeared that limited the power of the provincial juntas still further, established a permanent general staff, formed a new
artillery academy in place of an earlier one that had been destroyed when the French captured Seville, and gave the Spanish infantry a new table of organisation that would have got rid of many surplus regiments. At the same time,
too, such aid as was possible was funnelled to the struggling Spanish armies, whilst a conscious attempt was made to improve relations with the British, whose interests in Patriot Spain were now represented, after a brief
interregnum in which the embassy had been occupied by Frere’s brother, Bartholomew, by Wellington’s youngest brother, Henry Wellesley.