

 Awaiting the marshal were some 65,000 men. However, all was not well with this army. The ponderous siege train that would be needed to breach the walls of the two fortresses that blocked the way was still on the road from
France. Junot and Ney were notoriously obstinate and self-willed characters who were jealous both of each other and of Masséna. (‘The emperor does not believe that Ney and I are capable of commanding our troops’, Junot told his
wife. ‘We have been put in a state of tutelage.’ 23 ) With feelings already running high, Masséna did not help matters by, first, turning up with his latest mistress dressed in dragoon uniform and sporting the coveted cross of
the Legion of Honour, and, second, offending Ney by interfering with his staff. At the same time, several of the divisional generals were nursing grievances of various sorts; many of the troops were inexperienced conscripts;
morale was low; and sickness was widespread. In consequence, the campaign opened in an atmosphere of acrimony. There were also serious supply difficulties, whilst the guerrillas caused the French enormous problems. The troops,
wrote Masséna’s chief-of-staff, Pelet, ‘never had wine or brandy and often no more than a half or even a quarter ration of bread … and … lacked cartridges even at the beginning’; meanwhile, ‘Several Germans, Swiss and Italians
have deserted from the French … who all speak with horror of prolonging the war in Spain as they dare not individually leave their camp. The Spanish guerrillas lie in wait to destroy them, and have become so impudent of late that
they have even attacked a mass of considerable force.’ 24

 In consequence, it was not until mid-June that operations began with Ney’s corps laying siege to Ciudad Rodrigo. A fairly small place, Ciudad Rodrigo was imperfectly fortified, but its garrison was more than adequate and
possessed of plentiful supplies of food and ammunition, whilst its governor, Andrés Pérez de Herrasti, was a good soldier whose resolve was strengthened by the belief that he could count upon the support of Wellington’s army,
whose advanced elements were only a few miles to the west. Guarantees, indeed, had been received that Wellington would do everything that he considered possible to relieve the city, but careful reading of the British commander’s
letters should have shown Herrasti that in practice relief was unlikely. Given the fact that 12,000 of his troops had had to be detached to the Guadiana valley to keep watch on Reynier, who had until this point been occupying the
area around Mérida, Wellington had only 33,000 men on the Ciudad Rodrigo front. Sufficient to drive away the besieging forces though these were, any such action must inevitably have produced the immediate concentration of enemy
troops numbering some 50,000 men. Even if the Anglo-Portuguese army escaped disaster, it would still have had to retreat post-haste and leave Ciudad Rodrigo to its fate, so why, Wellington reasoned, incur the risk in the first
place?