

 What counted, then, was discipline, organisation and financial support. Backed by these advantages, the small group of very talented ideologues that was all that Spanish liberalism could count upon was able to impose its will
upon a confused and divided cortes and time and again win the support of the mass of deputies who were committed to the principle of reform, but had no clear idea as to what reform should entail. Thus it was that the cortes
embarked upon the course encapsulated by the Constitution of 1812. Great stress was placed on the idea that this document was a reflection of tradition, but this was a mere fiction: for all the liberals’ claims, its roots lay
firmly in the Enlightenment, establishing, as it did, all the basic civil liberties except that of religion, and in general dealing a heavy blow to corporate privilege. Thus, the cortes itself, being unicameral, made no
recognition of the estates, whilst there was to be equality before the law, freedom of economic opportunity and employment, and equal liability to taxation and military service. Meanwhile, the principle of the separation of
powers was declared, the nation proclaimed to be sovereign and the most severe restrictions placed upon the power of the king. Real power therefore belonged to the cortes, which was to meet each year and to enjoy complete control
of taxation as well as a dominant role in legislation. Last but not least, no changes in the Constitution would be permitted for at least eight years, Fernando being expected to swear an oath of loyalty to the entire document as
soon as he returned from exile.

 Though it was hostile to the throne, in many respects the Constitution followed the goals of enlightened absolutism. Thus, provincial privilege was removed and Spain declared a unitary state, her governance being completely
remodelled. The king was to be aided by a council of state whose composition was laid down by law, and the network of councils that had stood at the apex of administration and justice was replaced by seven new ministries. As
taxation was to be assessed in an equal and proportionate fashion, it followed that the nobility and the Church, and, indeed, such favoured provinces as the Basque territories, would now lose their fiscal exemptions and have to
contribute their full share of revenue. And, in contrast to the confusion that had characterised the antiguo régimen, uniformity would also characterise local government and the administration of justice. Thus, Spain would
henceforth be divided into provinces of equal size administered by civil governors known as jefes políticos, who would be assisted by elected councils. Also elected, meanwhile, would be the councils that would rule each locality,
the system being completed by a unitary system of law courts which envisaged a supreme court in Madrid, a district court in each province and a stipendiary magistrate in every district.

 In forcing this programme through, the liberals did not, of course, have things all their own way. The number of hardline traditionalists in the assembly might have been relatively few, but they were not devoid of courage,
whilst they had also been encouraged by the relatively lenient treatment accorded the Bishop of Orense, who had simply been allowed to retire to his diocese. As one liberal muttered darkly, indeed: