

 Thus far Spanish liberalism appears a model of patriotic altruism, but in fact it dovetailed neatly with the interests of substantial elements of the propertied classes. Despite all their praise for the people, few even of the
most radical could conceive of their direct participation in politics. Products of a cultured élite, the liberals were terrified of the unruly mobs who had overthrown the old order and determined to defend private property, their
arguments being a reflection of powerful economic interests. Thus, by 1808 Spain was witnessing the emergence of a prosperous oligarchy of notables that, whilst often noble in origin, in practice owed its status to commercial
investment. Reinforced by the influx of wealth brought by the commercial boom of the late eighteenth century, these nouveaux riches had sought to capitalise upon their prosperity through the acquisition of status, land and
office, and benefited greatly from desamortización, whilst also acquiring substantial interests as government creditors (it was in large part their money that had financed the extensive issues of paper currency on which Godoy had
increasingly relied). Clearly, then, the creation of a free market in land acquired a new significance, for it implied the entrance into the market of enormous holdings that had never been available before. Spain, in short, was
to be reordered for the benefit of a new élite, the much-lauded Spanish people actually having little stake in the future for which they were supposedly fighting.

 Between this programme and that of the second position revealed in the debates of 1808–10 there was a surprising amount of common ground despite the fact that the latter may essentially be described as legitimist. Prior to the
uprising Spain had, as we have seen, been a bastion of enlightened absolutism. In the course of the uprising of 1808 many of the ministers and officials who had been active in this tradition had given their allegiance to Joseph
Bonaparte, but some had chosen the Patriot cause, the most notable being Jovellanos and Floridablanca. With the death of the latter in December 1808, the chief proponent of this position became Jovellanos, and it was largely his
influence as one of the representatives for Asturias that has allowed some observers to stigmatise the Junta Central as being conservative and even counter-revolutionary. Yet, in fact, Jovellanos shared many of the liberals’
perceptions. Heavily influenced by Adam Smith, he had always condemned such phenomena as entails, the prohibition of enclosure in favour of the rights of pastoralists, and the survival of communal property. A Jansenist, he had
also favoured the hispanisation of the Church and the abolition of the Inquisition (or at least the transfer of its powers to the episcopate). Like the liberals, too, he opposed provincial privilege, and, above all, was deeply
committed to progress in science and education, calling for freedom of the press, a reduction of illiteracy, and greater study of agronomy and economics. Where Jovellanos differed from the liberals, however, was in his political
analysis. Terrified by the French and Spanish revolutions alike and unable to conceive of a society that could function without the guidance of the nobility and the Church, he never argued for the abolition of entail per se but
merely suggested its limitation. At the same time, still less did he desire a new concentration of the land in the hands of wealthy oligarchs, looking rather to the creation of a settled and prosperous peasantry. Faced by the
events of 1808 he had concurred in the resumption of sovereignty by the nation, but wanted to balance this by maintaining the bicameral principle and opposing the radical programme of political and institutional reform proposed
by the liberals. For Jovellanos, in fact, Spain already had a constitution in the form of the fundamental laws that she had inherited from the medieval era, and all that was necessary to abolish despotism to restate them.