

 It appeared that the Bishop of Orense counted for more than the whole of the nation … there emerging a party that supported his opposition. In that moment, perhaps, was born the discord that eventually degenerated into civil
war. What was the obstinate refusal of that prelate to swear free and full obedience to the cortes if not the seeds of civil war? 33

 Nor did the liberals’ enemies lack talent. Rather than simply opposing reform tout court, for example, traditionalist clerics such as Francisco Javier Borrull, Pedro de Inguanzo and Jaime Creus made use of the arguments of
Montesquieu in favour of mixed monarchy to defend the privileges of the nobility and press for a second chamber, and they often cut an impressive figure in debate. Traditionalist pamphleteers, meanwhile, began to publish
newpapers that openly opposed the liberals, whilst producing a series of biting critiques of Spain’s military performance that rubbished notions of ‘people’s war’ and pressed the idea that the cortes should not waste time on
political reform but rather dedicate itself to the war effort. Still other figures, meanwhile, chose the path of open confrontation: the deposed regent, Lardizábal, for example, caused a storm of controversy, by publishing a
bitter denunciation of the cortes in which he denied its legitimacy, opposed the principle of the sovereignty of the people and claimed that it was dominated by a faction of unrepresentative suplentes, whilst the Marqués del
Palacio resigned his command rather than swear the oath of allegiance required by the decree of 24 September 1810.

 As the traditionalists (or, as they gradually became known, serviles – literally, ‘the slavish ones’) soon learned, however, they were powerless. Hardly surprisingly, they therefore turned to intrigue. No sooner had the cortes
opened than the Castaños regency had resigned, the liberals securing its replacement by an anodyne body composed of General Blake and two obscure admirals named Ciscar and Agar. To redress the political balance, it was obvious
that the serviles ’ best hope was to engineer a change, and they soon discovered that they found ready allies in agents of the wife of the Prince Regent of Portugal, the infanta María Carlota. The sister of Fernando VII, la
Carlota or the Princess of Brazil, as she became known, was a tough and determined woman who saw herself as duty bound to conserve all the rights and prerogatives of the Spanish throne, whilst at the same time harbouring dreams
of an Iberian monarchy that would unite Portugal, Spain and the whole of Latin America. From 1808 onwards, she had therefore been scheming both to establish a regency in Spain and to place herself at its head. With the formation
of a regency, these efforts were redoubled, and the serviles not surprisingly welcomed them with open arms, whilst at the same time seeking to win the support of the British, who were known to be most dissatisfied with the
failure of the cortes to address Spain’s military needs. As Wellington complained: