

 According to liberal rhetoric, Spain owed such success as she had won in the war to the people, from which it followed, first, that the privileged estates had lost their right to pre-eminence, and, secondly, that reform was the
key to victory, every defeat being blamed on failure to keep up its momentum, and thus to keep popular devotion at white heat. To quote Argüelles:

 Reform was an essential part of the mission of the congress. Circumstances inseparable from a popular insurrection … stamped it with the … aspect that it displayed from its very origins [and] conserved throughout its work … But
even if this had not been the case, reform was a weapon that could not but be employed against a conqueror as crafty as he was daring who was himself using it to subjugate the nation. 30

 But reform was necessary not just for the present, but for the future, because only thus could Spain’s independence be safeguarded once and for all. As one liberal newspaper later proclaimed:

 The Spaniards are fighting to be independent, to be free. But will shedding their blood, facing death and exterminating the French be enough to achieve these two great objects? Let us suppose that the latter are ejected from our
territory. If virtue, love of the fatherland and the conviction of what we ought to be do not put us in the respectable position that is the child of enlightenment (without which there can be no nations, but only hordes of
savages); if we do not establish a system of government founded on just, wise and beneficent laws; if we do not banish from amongst us the multitude of errors of every sort that has kept us brutalised … will we truly be able to
acclaim our victory? Will we really be safe from fresh attempts on the part of the usurper, or any other power that wishes to enslave us? 31

 In ancien-régime Spain, however, liberty was an impossibility, for freedom of property was blocked by the extensive lands held in perpetuity by the Church and the nobility, and freedom of occupation by such obstacles as the
influence of the guilds and the nobility’s monopoly of direct entry to the officer corps. Meanwhile, too, there was no semblance of equality before the law, with the Church, the nobility, the army, the military orders, the guilds
and the Basque provinces all enjoying their own fueros, the Mesta – or sheep-owners’ confederation – possessing the right to let their flocks traverse the length and breadth of the land without let or hindrance, and large areas
still being governed by seigneurial jurisdiction. What was required was therefore the destruction of all forms of privilege, the creation of a free market in land with all its attendant property rights, the sale of the lands of
the Church, the abolition of all restrictions on economic activity, and the establishment of a unitary state. Also vital was a written constitution that would guarantee basic freedoms, impose limits on the power of the monarchy,
and provide for the representation of the people on the basis of proportionality rather than of privilege (the old estates would therefore be swept away in favour of a unicameral assembly). Finally, the Church must be reformed so
as to reduce the power of the papacy and purge it of the Inquisition and the religious orders, thereby making it both more ‘national’ and less burdensome.