

 With the outposts of the famous Light Division literally in sight of their lines, the French were therefore left to proceed with the siege in peace. Hindered by heavy rain and a series of sorties, progress was slow, but on 25
June all was finally ready for the bombardment. The scene is described by Pelet:

 At dawn every battery opened fire at the same time with their forty-six guns … Soon guns were firing vigorously from both sides and the noise was terrible. Those who had never before seen a siege believed that everything would
be destroyed. 25

 In the face of this barrage, Pérez de Herrasti put up a good fight, whilst he was ably supported by Julián Sánchez, who had led his cavalry out of the town and ‘did good service by making frequent attacks on our trenches’. 26
French casualties were heavy – Masséna himself was badly bruised when a bursting shell pelted him with stones and earth – whilst food and ammunition were soon running short. Ney’s troops were growing more and more frustrated –
there was talk, indeed, of killing the entire garrison – but at length a combination of mining and bombardment produced a major breach in the southern perimeter. As for the situation in the city, it was impossible:

 Bombs were falling … with great rapidity … On every side arose thick clouds of dust and smoke, pierced by the flames of the fires. The wreckage … was tumbling down with great noise, and … small magazines exploded periodically
with tremendous detonations … Everything adjoining [the breach] had been crushed, pounded and destroyed. The … devastation extended to the middle of the city. 27

 Exhausted and deprived of all hope, on 9 July the governor surrendered, though even then he delayed until the last minute: the column organised for the assault was actually rushing in when the white flag was finally raised.

 Militarily correct though the decision not to help Ciudad Rodrigo was, in political terms it was unfortunate. Many officers of the Anglo-Portuguese army questioned the failure to advance, thereby initiating a mood of doubt and
disillusion that was to dog Wellington for much of the coming campaign. As for the Spaniards, they were furious. Pérez de Herrasti openly accused Wellington of betrayal, whilst the local population complained bitterly that the
British were simply trying to prolong the war for their own selfish ends. Collaboration with the French was thereby stimulated – some members of the garrison were so angry that they changed sides – and further doubts sown with
regard to British good faith. As even Wellington was forced to admit, indeed, ‘However unreasonable it may appear … the people of Spain are by no means satisfied that His Majesty’s troops have taken so active a share … in the war
as might have been expected from them.’ 28

 With the fall of Ciudad Rodrigo the road was open for the invasion of Portugal, but this must be left to a later chapter in favour of the political situation in Cádiz. Amidst a military situation that was deteriorating by the
day – the one bright spot was that in Valencia Caro’s arrogance and incompetence had led to his being overthrown by his own officers – preparations had been going ahead for the opening of the cortes. In those areas that were
unoccupied by the enemy, the elections had been held in regulation fashion, whilst they also went ahead even in a few of the provinces that were dominated by the French. Few details have survived as to the sort of debates and
discussions that accompanied the electoral process, let alone whether there was any of the manipulation, falsification and official pressure that was later to be so characteristic of the Spanish political system. All that can be
said is that, the indirect voting system favouring property and education, two-thirds of the 725 electores de partido were drawn from the clergy, and the remainder from administration, local government and the liberal professions
(or, to put it another way, the landed classes, and, in particular, those who had profited from desamortización ).