

 The cortes appear to me to suffer under the national disease to as great a degree as the other authorities; that is, boasting of the strength and power of the Spanish nation till they are seriously convinced they are in no
danger, and then sitting down quietly and indulging in their national indolence. 34

 Underpinning Wellington’s dissatisfaction was a measure of ideological alarm. As he wrote to Henry Wellesley, indeed, ‘I am apprehensive that the cortes are becoming a national assembly.’ 35 Yet even so there is no doubt that
the liberals had a real case to answer. Setting aside the fact that the Constitution of 1812 proved shot through with flaws that made it very difficult to operate, as even the highly progressive Blanco White admitted:

 The debates of the cortes are full of knowledge and excellent ideas, but they more resemble conversations than debates … In the same day a multitude of matters are dealt with, at times in accordance with what occurs to each
[deputy], and it is not seen … that speaking other than to the motion is not allowed, that one speaker cannot be interrupted by another, and that an individual cannot speak more than once upon a subject. 36

 Still worse was the fact that the military situation continued to deteriorate. For the liberals, the Constitution was ‘the most formidable army that the French have had to face, for it has transformed … a horde of savages into a
nation of free men’. 37 Yet in practice the reforms supposed to revive Spain’s fortunes made no difference whatsoever. In consequence, servil pamphleteers were provided with the most obvious arguments for undermining the whole
liberal project. To quote El Ciudadano Imparcial:

 If the time that many learned men have until now employed on matters concerning friars and the Inquisition … had been spent on alerting the nation, discussing the means of subsistence … the organisation of the armies and the …
supply of clothing, food and arms … there would undoubtedly be more enthusiasm among the troops, a greater willingness to serve … fewer desertions, better discipline, and less indulgence towards criminals who are at present
generally seen … as miserable victims of nakedness and hunger. 38

 Once again such views were echoed by Blanco White, who was rapidly earning the hatred of his erstwhile friends. Thus, condemning the cortes ’ ‘absolute lack of attention to the improvement of the Spanish army’, he complained:

 This truly clamours to the sky. The human mind can hardly conceive the idea of putting under discussion and controversy how and with whom Fernando VII should be married when there is within sight of the cortes a disorganised
army, incapable of doing anything in favour of the cause … which is the mockery of its enemies for its want of discipline … What have the cortes done in this most important matter, the only one, it could be said, which clamours
for their attention? 39

 What made matters still worse was that fear of reaction in the eyes of many critics had very quickly led the liberals to force through a reglamento that reduced the power of the Regency to a cypher. To quote Blanco White again: