

 In cases where there was no possibility at all of holding elections, or where, as in the cases of the colonies, they would inevitably be much delayed, a different procedure was followed. Such provinces were initially represented
by substitute deputies chosen by such of their residents who happened to be present in Cádiz and the Isla de León. A census was organised to discover who was eligible to vote in these contests, and the electorate was found to
total 1,334. Small though the resultant provincial electoral colleges undoubtedly were, they do not appear to have been much smaller than those that met in other parts of Spain, whilst their assemblies were certainly not
hole-in-the-corner affairs, but formal meetings presided over by senior officials. Setting aside the thirty American deputies, moreover, only twenty-one representatives of Spanish constituencies were ever elected in this fashion,
whereas the total number of seats in the cortes came to over 300. Also significant is the social composition of the deputies. Of the 185 deputies elected for metropolitan provinces (as opposed to the provincial juntas and the
cities represented in the assemblies of the antiguo régimen ), 42 were officials; 61 ecclesiastics; 16 army officers; 23 members of the liberal professions; 10 noblemen or landowners (though see the qualification made above); and
the remaining 33 unknown. Taking all categories of deputy together, around two-thirds of the total were members of the clergy. By contrast, merchants and manufacturers were notable for their scarcity, and the populacho wholly
absent.

 If considerable attention has been paid to these issues, it is because of the controversy that has always attached to the elections of 1810 and, still more so, the events that followed. When the cortes opened, it was, as we have
already seen, quickly captured by a radical agenda. For those hostile to the work of the cortes, this was the result of force, fraud and circumstance: heavily influenced by the Enlightenment, Cádiz was the only city in Spain
where it was possible to stir up a mob in favour of radical reform; the mercantile community controlled the government; the principle of representation by estates had been overthrown; and the interior, supposedly conservative,
was under-represented, with such deputies as it had being suplentes elected by undemocratic means and drawn from elements that were likely to sympathise with revolutionary politics. For liberal and Marxist historians, by
contrast, the picture is very different: far from being an unrepresentative minority who had gained power by foul means, the political movement that became known as the liberals were rather a group who were backed by the full
weight of public opinion and, more particularly, a Spanish bourgeois revolution. *

 In reality, however, neither explanation is wholly tenable. Implicit in such arguments is the concept of a head-on clash between revolution and counter-revolution, but in 1810 only a tiny minority would have had such a
perception of the situation. Thus, if we take the question of whether the cortes should have one chamber or two, men of clearly progressive tendencies – the most obvious example is José Blanco y Crespo, a liberal of such
heterodox views that he fell out with the clique who came to dominate gaditano politics and had to go into exile in England where he adopted the name Blanco White – could be found supporting the bicameral thesis and men of
traditionalist ones the unicameral alternative. In just the same way, the principle of popular sovereignty received the backing that it did because many traditionalists believed that the renunciations of Bayonne had broken
fundamental laws which laid down that any change in the succession had to be laid before a cortes.