

 Nor are arguments of a social or geographical nature much help. One of the few manufacturers to be found amongst the deputies – the Catalan, Salvador Vinyals – was to prove an arch-traditionalist, and one of the few titled
aristocrats – the Conde de Toreno – a leading liberal. As for the ecclesiastics, the fact that many of them were both Jansenists – a group within the Catholic Church that wished to see the power of the Pope reduced in favour of
that of the bishops – and members of the secular clergy ensured a considerable degree of clerical support for the radical programme. Finally, there is little hard evidence that men duly elected in the Castiles or Navarre would
have voted any differently in 1810–1812 from the suplentes that took their place in Cádiz. In any event this latter group were in no way a united force: if they included the liberal leaders, Agustín Argüelles, Manuel García
Herreros and Evaristo Pérez de Castro, they also threw up the reactionary Peruvian, Blas Ostolaza, and Francisco Eguía, a singularly old-fashioned Bourbon general who was to play a major role in the restoration of absolutism in
1814. Moreover, even if the emphasis given to the question of the suplentes is not as misplaced as this suggests, they were balanced by the fact that the two provinces with the most deputies – Galicia (twenty-three deputies) and
Catalonia (twenty) – both produced delegations that were strongly traditionalist.

 The answer to this question, in fact, lies in nothing more complicated than muddle. Three different programmes were on offer at Cádiz, but this was in large part simply not appreciated. Of the three positions found in the
cortes, the most coherently expressed and argued was that of the liberals. Underpinning this was a classic combination of political perception and economic interest. Influenced by Rousseau and Smith, a growing minority had come
to argue the need for a thorough renovation of society, the starting point of their theory being that in the Middle Ages Spain had enjoyed an age of liberty – and hence felicity – which had then been eclipsed by centuries of
despotism. To restore this ‘golden age’ it was necessary to take account of the basic rules that in their eyes governed human conduct – first, that all men were employed in the pursuit of happiness; second, that the only possible
measure of happiness was material wealth; and, third, that all men were created equal. From this it followed that the role of government was to create a society in which prosperity could be pursued by all men on an equal basis,
this in turn requiring that all men should enjoy equality before the law and have the absolute right freely to acquire, own and dispose of property as they saw fit. Given the war, however, all this was doubly important, for the
liberals argued that the people had risen against the French not to sustain the rights of despotism, but to recover their own lost liberty. Viewed in this fashion, indeed, the cortes became ‘the reward for the constancy and
heroism of the Spanish nation, which, having bought its liberty at the cost of such generous sacrifices, earned the right to come together … to break the chains of external and domestic tyranny alike’. 29