

 Cautious though this programme was, it formed a marked contrast to that of the traditionalist party who had emerged as the third main element in Patriot politics. With all their dreams of a puppet monarchy swept away by
Napoleon’s overthrow of the Bourbons, the outbreak of a general uprising they were unable to control, the elimination of José Palafox, and finally the formation of the Regency, they yet remained a powerful force that embraced
substantial elements of the clergy and nobility. Insisting that the rising was a crusade for Church and King so as to undermine arguments in favour of radical change, their tactic was on the one hand to demand that the cortes
concentrate on the war effort, whilst on the other interpreting reform as a return to Spanish tradition. An exemplar of this programme’s many advocates was Juan Pérez Villamil, the senior official who had helped pen the famous
bando de los alcaldes de Móstoles in the wake of the Dos de Mayo (cf. here ). Though as much enamoured of popular heroism as any liberal, for Pérez Villamil the past was still valid, liberty – and, indeed, a constitution – lying
in the existence of the fundamental laws inherited from the past. Far from being overthrown by the introduction of dangerous foreign innovations – it was a constant theme of traditionalists that the ideas of the liberals were
drawn from the French Revolution – these should rather be reinforced. We thus return to the position adopted by Jovellanos, but, for all that, it would be a mistake to believe that Pérez Villamil was in agreement with him. On the
contrary, for Pérez Villamil and his fellows, the royal reformism that the erstwhile minister represented was just as much a cancer as the ideas of the liberals, the solution being to turn back the clock: in 1810, for example, we
find the future traditionalist deputy, Francisco Borrull, not only defending the rights of the nobility but also demanding the restitution of the Valencian fueros overthrown by Felipe V in 1707.

 The trouble was that these three positions not only had a great deal in common with one another – after all, all of them coincided in upholding the sovereignty of the people, denouncing ‘ministerial despotism’, and calling for a
return to a mythical medieval ‘golden age’ – but also employed a common discourse, it being de rigueur for all parties to lard their speeches and pamphlets with endless references to a mass of medieval precedents. For political
neophytes of the sort that filled Cádiz and the Isla de León in the autumn of 1810, it was therefore all too easy to fall into the trap of co-option and manipulation, and all the more so as there was a general desire for reform:
the informes sobre cortes solicited by the Junta Central had almost all called for a cortes and expressed particular interest in changes in the military estate, there being widespread agreement on the need for the subordination
of the military to the civil power, the exclusion of the army from the administration, the opening of the officer corps to all classes of society, and the suppression of the army’s numerous privileges. Beyond that, it is true,
there was little agreement, but the deputies could easily be persuaded to vote for those who had the most radical answers to what, after all, were radical problems. All that was required was clever oratory and a measure of
political organisation, and these the liberals possessed in abundance. Thus, the best speakers in the assembly, most notably the Asturian deputy, Agustín Argüelles, were all liberals, whilst they had in many cases known one
another for years. Argüelles, Toreno and the most capable of their many allies in the press, Alvaro Flórez Estrada, whose paper, El Tribuno del Pueblo Español, was to become the most outspoken mouthpiece of the liberal cause, had
all studied at the University of Oviedo, for example, as had the slightly more moderate Angel de la Vega Infanzón, and the senior Treasury official, José Canga Argüelles. A tight, united group who met regularly outside the
chamber, possessed a clear agenda, planned their tactics in advance and trusted one another implicitly, these men were quickly able to forge alliances with such like-minded deputies as the progressive ecclesiastics, Juan Nicasio
Gallego, Diego Múñoz Torrero and Joaquín Lorenzo Villanueva. Through long-standing links with the mercantile community – many of them had, after all, been resident in Cádiz since the start of the siege – they were also able to
conjure up a mob. Thus, as traditionalist critics have always argued, the public galleries were frequently packed with crowds that had been primed to applaud liberal orators and decry their opponents, one or two of whom were on
occasion all but lynched, even some liberals becoming alarmed at ‘the disorderly manner in which the crowd that filled the public galleries took part in debates and coerced the deliberations of the cortes ’. 32