

 The Portuguese army is recruited by conscription constitutionally, very much in the same manner with the French army, but … it must be recollected that for the past fifty years … the troops have never left their province, and
scarcely ever their native town; and their discipline, and the labours and exertion required from them, were nothing. Things are much altered lately, and, notwithstanding that the pay has been increased, I fear that the animal is
not of the description to bear up against what is required of him, and he deserts most readily. 4

 Yet this was not the worst of the trouble. Very poorly paid, the officers consisted of a mixture of men who had grown old in the service without hope of obtaining promotion and inexperienced boys who had joined up since 1808.
Such men being incapable of instilling their units with fighting spirit – many of them, indeed, were perpetually absent – the rank and file lacked any pride in their appearance and made little effort to master their calling. No
sooner had he arrived, than Beresford plunged into a sustained campaign to restore the army’s morale. The officer corps was purged – in 4 months no fewer than 215 officers were cashiered and at least a further 107 ordered to
retire – whilst a series of regulations both stressed the need for discipline, cleanliness and attention to duty and laid down severe penalties for those who broke them. Degrading punishments and the casual use of violence were
forbidden; an intensive programme of training instituted; and the men given proper medical treatment. Pay was raised for all ranks, whilst considerable efforts were made to ensure the men’s comfort, whether it was through the
replacement of the cauldrons traditionally used for cooking with smaller and more manageable camp kettles, or the issue of orders directing that blankets were not to be used to keep out the rain on the march, but rather kept dry
and only got out at night. And, last but not least, the campaigns of 1809 were made use of to give the troops some experience of life in the field, the result being that by the end of the year there had been a considerable
improvement. To quote Charles Boutflower:

 On the twenty-eighth [of December] we … marched to Thomar. Marshal Beresford is at present there. We had an opportunity of seeing one of the regiments at parade … They were well clothed and made an excellent appearance. The
soldier-like manner in which they went through their evolutions astonished the English officers. I should really expect much from them if opposed to an enemy. 5

 Despite doubts that ‘their … officers, though very much improved and mostly young men, have scarce experience and firmness enough to control them as we could wish’, such opinions were shared by William Warre. At least the
officers now had the means ‘of living like gentlemen and with respectability’, whilst, as he continued:

 I am anxious that the campaign should begin, and to be able to judge of what our Portuguese will in reality do. I confess I have very great hopes of them. Their discipline is most wonderfully improved, perhaps fully as good as
necessary for active service, and only wants confirming … Our cavalry is also getting into a very respectable state, and [is] now very tolerably mounted. 6