

 From all I have learned of the state of the enemy’s force at present in the Peninsula, I am of opinion that unless the Spanish armies should meet with some great misfortune, the enemy could not make an attack upon Portugal; and
[that] if events in Spain should enable the enemy to make such an attack, the force at present in Portugal is able to defend that country. If in consequence of the peace in Germany the enemy’s army in the Peninsula should be
largely reinforced, it is obvious that the enemy will acquire the means of attacking Portugal … Even in this case, however, I conceive that till Spain shall have been conquered … the enemy will find it difficult, if not
impossible, to obtain possession of Portugal. 1

 Yet implementing his plan would not be easy. Whilst Wellington would obviously need the co-operation of the Portuguese Regency (see here ), this was distinctly uncertain. Thus, the Convention of Sintra (see Chapter 4) and
Beresford’s ruthless remodelling of the army had already given rise to many fears of British intentions, whilst matters were not helped by British opposition to their allies’ pursuit of the restoration of Olivenza – a small
frontier district seized by the Spaniards following the ‘War of the Oranges’ of 1801. With other quarrels developing over slavery, free trade and the payment of the subsidy (fixed in December 1809 as the cost of maintaining
30,000 men), it was hardly to be expected that Wellington would have everything his own way.

 Though some elements of the Portuguese administration might snipe at the British general, in the long run they could not prevail. Sometimes bamboozled by the intrigues of his wife, the Prince Regent nevertheless remained loyal
to the Alliance, it being thanks to him, indeed, that Beresford had been appointed to command the army. Determined to restore order to the Alliance, in August 1810 João therefore took advantage of the resignation of one of its
members to remodel the Regency along lines that he hoped would make for smoother relations. Thus, both the British ambassador, Charles Stuart, and a member of the powerful Sousa Coutinho family were offered a place in its ranks.
Sousa Coutinhos already holding the posts of Secretary of State, ambassador to London and ambassador to Cádiz, it was clearly hoped that the clan would feel that its interests were so bound up with the British Alliance that it
would have no option but to sustain it for good.

 Until these changes occurred, however, the Portuguese administration was free to resist British influence more or less as it wished, Beresford’s position being rendered tolerable only by the firm support of the Minister of War,
Miguel de Pereira Forjaz. In so far as the condition of the army was concerned, then, much less was achieved than Wellington would have liked, but even so enough was done to allow it to take the field alongside the British. Thus,
when Beresford arrived in Portugal, its troops were in a ruinous condition. Arms, clothing and footwear were all in short supply – as late as December Beresford was complaining, ‘Few regiments of militia … are complete in arms,
and we have not even enough for the regulars when completed’ 2 – whilst the men were described as ‘very obedient, willing and patient, but also naturally dirty and careless of their persons, dreadfully sickly and [possessed of] a
natural … want of fortitude which makes them yield immediately to … fatigue’. 3 Recruitment having been slow, the regiments, as we have seen, had still been scattered around the country in their depots, whilst desertion was
rampant, fifty men fleeing a unit stationed at Peniche in a single night. To quote Wellington: