

 All the preparations for embarking … the army … are already made … If the enemy should invade this country with a force less than that which I should think so superior to ours as to create the necessity for embarking, I shall
fight a battle to save the country … and if the result should not be successful … I shall still be able to retire. 22

 Whether or not this optimism was justified, the invasion of Portugal was certain to prove extremely difficult, and all the more so as Masséna initially had only 68,000 men (even that figure, indeed, could only be obtained by
calling in the corps of Reynier which until then had been occupying the Tagus valley and keeping open communications with Marshal Soult). Despite a desperately difficult supply situation, however, on 21 July the French crossed
the frontier and headed for Almeida, which, in spite of strong suggestions from Wellington that it should retreat, was still being covered by the Light Division. Retreat would certainly have been advisable, for Almeida lies some
two miles east of the River Côa, which flows in a deep gorge and in 1810 was only crossed by a single narrow bridge. Craufurd, though, was a reckless, quarrelsome and touchy figure, bitter at what he felt to have been a blighted
career. Rendered overconfident by several months of skirmishes in which the French had never once bested his men, he therefore decided to stand and fight. Yet in doing so he was taking a great risk, and that for no good reason,
for he could hardly hope to stave off the coming siege for more than a day or two. All that can be said in Craufurd’s favour, indeed, was that he had managed to find a reasonably good defensive position for his men; that he kept
a sharp watch; that his handling of the battle that followed was reasonably skilful; and, finally, that he had brought the Light Division to such a pitch of readiness that it proved equal to almost any crisis.

 Yet at all events disaster was averted. Fighting began at dawn on 24 July with a general advance on the part of Ney’s corps that was fiercely contested by Craufurd’s men:

 The whole plain in our front was covered with horse and foot advancing towards us. The enemy’s infantry formed line and, with an innumerable multitude of skirmishers, attacked us fiercely; we repulsed them; they came on again,
yelling, with drums beating, frequently the drummers leading … French officers like mountebanks running forward and placing their hats upon their swords and capering about like madmen, saying as they turned to their men, ‘Come
on, children of our country. The first that advances, Napoleon will recompense him!’ 23

 Quickly turned out of their initial position, the troops were soon scrambling for the bridge, and for a moment catastrophe threatened. The bridge became blocked by Craufurd’s guns and transport, whilst French cavalry charged in
amongst the retreating infantry and began to cut them down. The Forty-Third regiment, indeed, were soon in real trouble:

 Our line was … contracted, and brought under the edge of the ravine. In an instant 4,000 hostile cavalry swept the plain, and our regiment was unaccountably placed within an enclosure of solid masonry at least ten feet high …
with but one narrow outlet … A few moments later and we should have been surrounded, but … we contrived to loosen some large stones, when by a powerful exertion we burst the enclosure … There was no room to array the line, no
time for anything but battle; every captain carried off his company as an independent body, the whole presenting a mass of skirmishers, acting in small parties and under no regular command … Having the advantage of ground and
number, the enemy broke over the edge of the ravine … and their hussars … poured down the road, sabring everything in their way. 24