

 If these sights were shocking, however, they were also the mark of Allied victory. Implicit in the savagery visited on the unfortunate inhabitants of such towns as Venda Nova, Pombal and Leiria in March 1811 was a winter of
suffering that had broken Marshal André Masséna’s Army of Portugal, and put an end to a campaign that had seemed to offer the hope of victory. To understand Wellington’s triumph, we must return to 1809. As the British commander
realised, Austria’s defeat at Wagram would almost certainly mean the invasion of Portugal. But for Wellington such a prospect held no fear, for he was convinced that, unless the French came in absolutely overwhelming force, such
an invasion could be thrown back. (His political masters, by contrast, were less sanguine, but, as they could not simply abandon Portugal, they left Wellington to act very much as he wished.) In essence, his plan started with the
integration of the Portuguese troops and his own forces to allow him to do battle with the invaders and throw them back at an early date, to which end a number of obvious defensive positions along the roads from the frontier were
strengthened with redoubts and other fortifications. Should the French prove unstoppable, however, then the defenders would fall back on Lisbon, which he planned to cover with an impregnable system of defence works – the famous
Lines of Torres Vedras – whilst at the same time stripping the countryside of its resources and mobilising a guerrilla war. With the French brought to a standstill and restricted in their foraging, victory was assured. Though
convoys of food and reinforcements might with some difficulty be got to them from the border, it was unlikely that enough men could ever be brought up to allow the French to break through. Even if they did, the entire field army
would be available to fling them back as Wellington planned to garrison his forts solely with militiamen. Provision, it is true, was made for evacuation from the port of Sao Julio south-west of Lisbon, but the further line of
fortifications built to protect this bolt hole did not seem likely to be needed. With the Lines impossible to outflank, the Tagus impossible to cross, and the Allies able to bring in unlimited food by sea, sooner or later the
French must retreat.

 Though not without its problems, this plan was one of the most perfect schemes of defence that has ever been devised. Thus, making use of the facts, first, that the French could only conquer Portugal by conquering Lisbon, and,
second, that they could in practice only reach Lisbon from the north, it exploited both the Portuguese capital’s geographical situation and the poverty of the Portuguese countryside to the full, whilst at the same time bringing
into play traditional responses to invasion in the form of the ordenança and the devastation of the countryside in a scorched-earth policy (a similar tactic had actually been employed against the Spaniards as recently as 1762).
In consequence, despite serious worries about his army, Wellington was quietly confident. As he wrote to Lord Liverpool on 14 November 1809: