

 Before we go on to discuss what actually happened in the third invasion of Portugal, we must say a little more about the Allied field army. Thus, in addition to the 26,000 Portuguese regulars who were available for service in
the summer of 1810 and such oddments as the survivors of the Loyal Lusitanian Legion, Wellington had perhaps 31,000 British troops. His army now assumed the basic shape that it was to retain for the rest of the war, consisting,
as it did, of five British line infantry divisions, the ‘light’ division, and four cavalry brigades. Each infantry division consisted of between two and five infantry brigades, of which at least one was usually Portuguese, and a
battery of artillery, and each brigade consisted of three or four infantry battalions and an extra company of riflemen (the remaining Portuguese troops were formed into an independent infantry division, three independent infantry
brigades and a cavalry brigade). Special mention ought to be made of the Light Division, whose two brigades each only mustered two and a half battalions and were the only ones in the army to contain both British and Portuguese
battalions. Highly trained and possessed both of many riflemen and of a high opinion of themselves, they were an élite force. As for the generals who commanded the divisions and brigades, whilst they numbered several products of
seniority whose competence and courage alike have been called into question – as Wellington complained, ‘Really when I reflect upon the characters and attainments of some of the general officers of this army … I tremble’ 18 –
their ranks also included some of Britain’s very best commanders. Thus, in command of the Second Division was the genial Sir Rowland ‘Daddy’ Hill, a bluff, solid and reliable figure much liked by all who came into contact with
him, whilst the Third Division was led by the tough and indomitable Sir Thomas Picton, and the Light by Robert Craufurd, a highly efficient soldier who had proved his worth over the past few months commanding the army’s
front-line pickets. As for the troops, although sickness was a problem amongst those units that had been sent to Spain following involvement in the abortive Walcheren campaign, * they were fresh, rested and raring for a fight. To
quote the guards officer, Aitchison, ‘[The troops] are in high health and excellent spirits, and should it be our lot to engage the French on 27 or 28 July we shall celebrate the anniversary of Talavera in a victory as brilliant
and more complete.’ 19

 This opinion, to be sure, was not shared by every officer in the army – on the contrary, throughout 1810 Wellington had been plagued by ‘croakers’ who had been writing home prophesying disaster – but the British commander was
supremely confident. ‘I am positively in no scrape,’ he wrote to William Wellesley-Pole, ‘and, if the country can be saved, we shall save it.’ 20 As for the chances of the French actually taking Lisbon, he thought it highly
unlikely, informing Henry Wellesley that ‘three times [20,000 men] will not obtain possession of Portugal, or possibly four times’. 21 And even then all would not be lost: