

 They have done very well in overthrowing the Regency which wanted to impede their congregation so badly, but they have done very ill in forming a most weak executive power as a result. They wished to conserve the sovereign
power, but have lost it for themselves and the executive power, their creation. 40

 For the supporters of the Princess of Brazil, this, of course, was a godsend, for traditionalist pamphleteers could argue that the root of Spain’s ills was weak government, from which it followed that what was needed was a
strong regency headed by a member of the royal family. Thus:

 Bad as our former system of government was, we should not have changed it at so critical a time … but, supposing that we had to do so, we should have preferred that constitution which, although perhaps not the most free … was by
its nature the most energetic … Yet what we have done is precisely the opposite … We say that the entire nation should not breathe anything but war, but we wish to wage this war without subjecting ourselves to the severe
discipline of a military government and idle under the rule of a democracy that comes very close to anarchy and is incapable of preserving tranquillity and good order. 41

 In the end, as we shall see, these arguments were to destroy the liberals, but such was the dexterity of their leaders that in the short term they were more than a match for them. Exploiting the fact that the princess was a
notorious opponent of the British, they hinted that Wellington might be offered the command of the Spanish armies – a constant goal of Marquess Wellesley, who had now become Foreign Secretary. Meanwhile, when criticism of Spain’s
deteriorating military situation finally became too intense to ignore, in an extremely clever move they launched a pre-emptive strike by replacing Blake and his colleagues with a new five-man body headed by the Duque de Infantado
(a noted servil, Infantado could hardly be objected to by traditionalists, and yet he was at the same time no danger, being notoriously indolent and simple-minded).

 In political terms, then, the liberals were able to maintain control of the situation. Nor, indeed, were they quite so negligent as their opponents implied. Hardly had the cortes met, for example, than it decreed a new levy of
80,000 conscripts whilst in March 1811 it firmly threw itself behind the principle that military service should be universal. Various efforts, too, were made to improve the quality of the troops, most notably through the
establishment of a central training depot on the Isla de León, whilst, in a major change, the armies were stripped of their old territorial denominations. * Meanwhile, a variety of reforms were enacted that aimed to restore order
in the colonies, whilst liberal deputies and pamphleteers never ceased to preach the need for all-out war against the French and to attempt to whip up popular enthusiasm for the struggle. Last but not least, the desamortización
that was at the heart of their social and economic policy had become the one means by which the war could be financed, for it was only through the expropriation and sale of the lands of the Church and the municipalities that the
state could obtain the revenue that it needed.