

 In all this, meanwhile, Beresford, who had been given the rank of field marshal, was assisted by large numbers of British officers and sergeants (indeed, Beresford contended that their presence was not just a help but an
absolute necessity, his argument being that the Portuguese were so lazy by nature that only British officers could be trusted to get anything done). Initially drawn from volunteers procured amongst the forces of Sir John Cradock,
they were later supplemented by men recruited from units that were still at home, enthusiasm for such transfers being stimulated by the fact that they were accompanied by a guaranteed step in rank (so that a captain in the
British service became a major in that of Portugal). Initially distributed amongst the Portuguese at a rate of about three per battalion, the 350 men who were eventually involved undoubtedly engendered much jealousy. In some
ways, however, this was all to the good, while Beresford was careful not to let the British dominate the army altogether: plenty of Portuguese officers were allowed to command battalions, regiments and brigades, whilst all units
or sub-units placed under the command of British officers had Portuguese seconds. To save face still further, Portuguese generals were given territorial commands or appointed as governors of fortresses such as Elvas, and the army
allowed to form brigades of its own rather than being split up amongst British units.

 The British officers sent to Portugal were not all paragons of virtue: indeed, Wellington, who had opposed the promotion automatically given them in the Portuguese service, considered their selection to have been ‘unlucky’. 7
But at least their presence served to homogenise the Allied armies. Thus, Portuguese line infantrymen carried ‘Brown Bess’ muskets and learned the British system of drill and manoeuvres, whilst the existing force of light
infantry was expanded by fifty per cent and in some cases equipped with the Baker rifle. Other issues, however, proved harder to deal with. Because of a lack of horses, for example, only a relatively small force of cavalry could
be built up. Far worse, however, was the attitude of the populace to the war. The picture that we have of Portugal, indeed, is rather similar to that which we have of Spain. Amongst the propertied classes there was much froth –
the merchants of Lisbon, for example, rallied enthusiastically to the special militias that they raised and enjoyed putting on fine uniforms and playing at soldiers in the safety and comfort of the capital – but the people were a
different matter. Banditry was rife – even wounded British soldiers were not safe from robbery – and the ordenanças behaved in a notoriously disorderly manner during the campaign of 1809, a number of regular troops having to be
left in Oporto on account of ‘the possibility of the people being unquiet’. 8 A new system of conscription was introduced, but military service was, as before, thoroughly detested. Despite intensive efforts to evoke a patriotic
response amongst the populace, indeed, resistance remained the norm. Many of them being criminals, troublemakers, village idiots or men suffering from serious physical handicaps, conscripts often had to be locked up and manacled.
The men, wrote Aitchison, ‘are pressed like seamen in England and bound together’, whilst in Douglas’ words, ‘You must not expect to hear of a sergeant conducting a party of men voluntarily enlisted as soldiers, but fancy for a
moment a … mounted policeman with a rope fastened to the saddle … of the horse, and at a distance of two yards … twenty or thirty on the string.’ 9 Not surprisingly, then, between May 1809 and October 1810, no fewer than 10,224
of the 23,885 men inducted into the army ran away. Savage penalties were decreed for the punishment of deserters and those who harboured them, but, with deaths from disease also very high, the army grew very slowly and never
attained full strength (assessed at a nominal strength of 56,000 men, in September 1808 it possessed 18,000 men; in September 1809 42,000; and in August 1810 perhaps 47,000).