

 Yet in the last resort all this is by the by. The new Regency was, if anything, worse than its predecessor. As García de León y Pizarro complained, indeed:

 The office of the Regency was a sorry picture … Ever frivolous, Infantado disrupted every discussion with irrelevancies, and spent most of his time fiddling with sword or braid, or looking at a miniature or something else of the
sort … Except when some matter relating to the navy came up, when he would regularly come out and force through the most unwise decision. Villavicencio, who was a man but little committed to justice, spent all his time pacing up
and down and smoking cigars in a lavatory next to the office. Abisbal had more spark, but no judgement to go with it, whilst Wellesley had only to offer him 200 pairs of shoes for the troops for him to forget honour, the decorum
of the fatherland and the public interest alike … Mosquera was punctual, hardworking and honourable, which is more than can be said for the others, but his knowledge was limited to a few old laws … As for Rivas, I shall not even
speak of him, for, though ill-intentioned, he was insignificant. 42

 By the time that the new Regency had been installed in January 1812, Patriot Spain’s situation had deteriorated still further. Having seized power in Cádiz, the liberals could not escape responsibility for this situation, whilst
the divisiveness of the various measures that we shall see them introduce in the period that followed the promulgation of the Constitution on 19 March 1812 ensured that they became still more enmired. In the end Spain was to be
saved from disaster but not so the liberals. Committed to the fiction that the struggle against Napoleon was a people’s war, they had sought to justify their revolution in military terms. Offering the people nothing, however,
they were unable to kindle the sort of enthusiasm of which they dreamed. For the moment the revolution might continue, but in reality the liberals were doomed.

===== FILE: OEBPS/xhtml/chapter12.xhtml =====
The Peninsular War

 12

 Torres Vedras

 THE DEFENCE OF PORTUGAL, JULY 1810–MARCH 1811

 The stench hung heavy in the air. In the rubbish-strewn streets nothing moved except a few emaciated dogs who snarled at one another over the corpses lying everywhere. As the British troops moved into the village, they looked at
one another in horror. Hardened veterans though they were, nothing they had seen had prepared them for this. The entire population, it seemed, had been massacred. Most of the houses had been reduced to blackened shells whilst the
few that had not contained still more bodies, many of which showed signs of torture or rape. In the churches what could not be burned had been smashed, whilst the very tombs had been flung open, and their contents strewn about or
propped up in a variety of mocking attitudes. As for food or items of value, there were none, the French having stripped the place bare. All around, meanwhile, the smoke rose from other ruined villages, whilst to add to the
horror there began to appear haggard skeletons desperate for food and shelter.