

 The reasons for this situation were simple. In the first place, the mass of the inhabitants were essentially apolitical. In the words of the commissary, Augustus Schaumann:

 One hears no more patriotic sentiments from [the populace] than joy over the liberation of their precious selves from French molestation … National freedom on a grand scale … and the desire for a national constitution … are
matters in which they are not interested. 10

 Thus they would only fight the French if their homes and families were directly threatened, whilst the existence of the ordenanças seemed to suggest that the regular army was redundant. At the same time, there was also a problem
of authority, the local magistrates knowing all too well that they had few means of either imposing conscription or staving off the anger of the inhabitants. As Wellington noted:

 The military forces stationed in the provinces enabled the civil government to carry into execution the conscription, but, under present circumstances, [it] is … removed to a distance. The civil government … can hardly be said
to exist, and … the people … are all armed, and … defy the … government. 11

 Matters might have been somewhat easier had Beresford been able to reform the army’s supply system as he wished, but in this respect he got nowhere. If it was to operate successfully the army needed a permanent corps of
transport as well as the ability to pay for its provisions on the spot. However, beyond transferring supply from the Ministry of Finance to the Ministry of War, Beresford was unable to make much progress. Lacking funds, the army
had to muddle through on the basis of wagons, pack mules and draught animals hired on a short-term basis from the local populace. As for its debts, it had to rely on bills of credit presented to the central Junta da Viveres and
generally only settled months in arrears. Because the populace in consequence preferred to sell to the British commissariat, the troops tended to go hungry and fall sick or deserted at an even faster rate than would otherwise
have been the case. For an angry denunciation of the chaos, let us turn to Beresford’s chief-of-staff, Sir Benjamin d’Urban:

 The Marshal is arranging with Lord Wellington some certain means of subsisting the Portuguese troops when their own supplies fail … This is absolutely requisite or the troops will often starve, for such is the poverty,
imbecility and total want of arrangement of the Portuguese government that any regular system of supply is not to be expected … The whole civil branch of the army is in such a state of confusion that I hold it utterly
impracticable to carry on operations with it for more than a week or two together, if even so long. 12

 Knowing that military service was liable to mean semi-starvation, the townspeople and villagers of Portugal were nudged still further in the direction of resistance. And, as if this was not enough, there was also the question of
what might happen to their families in their absence. As British writers have always stressed, Wellington from the beginning took the utmost pains to prevent his soldiers from plundering the populace. Yet all his hanging and
flogging made no difference. On the contrary, complaints abounded. For example: ‘The commander of the forces is … obliged again to complain of the conduct of the troops; not only have outrages been committed by entire corps, but
there is no description of property, of which the unfortunate inhabitants of Portugal have not been plundered by the British soldiers whom they have received into their own homes.’ 13 And again: ‘I am concerned to tell you that …
the conduct of the soldiers is infamous. They behave generally well with their regiments … but, when detached and coming up from hospitals, although invariably under the command of an officer, and always well fed and taken care
of … they commit every description of outrage.’ 14 Though still ruinous enough to the peasantry, some of this plundering was committed in a spirit of lightheartedness, as witness, for example, Schaumann’s account of robbing
beehives (an affair which ended in his being badly stung and soaked from head to foot in honey). But on other occasions scenes took place that were as least as bad as anything perpetrated by the French. Thus: