

 The night before last a most horrid murder was committed a short distance from this place. There is too much reason to suppose that the perpetrators were British. I was directed by the general … to go down there … Three bodies,
viz. a man, a woman and their daughter, a child of about eight years of age, lay on the floor, weltering in blood … A hatchet lay beside them with which the deed had evidently been completed … the heads of the deceased were
literally beat to a jelly. 15

 This, perhaps, was an exception, but for many soldiers it is all too clear that pillage was a way of life. As for the civilian population, they were habitually treated with the utmost callousness. Taking Sergeant William
Lawrence as an example, we find him by his own confession stealing a pig, a hen, a cock, the entire contents of the oven of a bake house, and a large sum of money that the owner of the house he was billeted in had concealed in
the cellar. As he himself admitted, indeed, the British ‘often committed depredations on the inhabitants almost as bad as the enemy’. 16

 Desertion, then, remained a serious problem. Yet the Portuguese army was still much better than before. What, though, of Wellington’s plans for the construction of field fortifications? Here matters proceeded relatively
smoothly. Two of the chief routes from the frontier of León across the highlands of Beira were blocked by chains of redoubts at places suitable to make a stand, whilst a third was wrecked by demolitions. That left just one more.
Seemingly neglected as an unlikely route for Masséna to take, it was along this one that the latter came, but such were the defensive positions that it offered that the oversight hardly mattered. All the more was this the case as
the Lines of Torres Vedras were well advanced. Commenced towards the end of 1809, these consisted of two lines of heavily armed forts that stretched from the Atlantic to the Tagus. Constructed along the crest of a series of rocky
hills by gangs of peasants and militiamen, these were protected by a broad belt of abattis, pits, inundations, palisades, chevaux de frise and man-made escarpments. Meanwhile, everything that might provide the French with cover
was torn down, special roads constructed to allow the defenders to rush troops from one sector to another, and a semaphore telegraph set up that could relay messages the whole length of the line in less than ten minutes.

 As Masséna was the first to recognise when he finally encountered them – and it should be noted that almost no news of their construction reached his ears – these works were simply not amenable to being stormed by an army of the
size that he possessed, and all the more so as Wellington’s entire field army was available for counter-attacks, the Lines themselves being largely manned by militiamen and ordenanças (in this case formed into regular units on
the lines of the Voluntarios Distinguidos de Cádiz – the merchant units referred to above (see here ) – Sherer describing the men involved as being ‘most handsomely clothed and appointed’ 17 ). As Wellington had always planned,
these forces were also to play an important role outside the lines. Badly trained, unreliable and ill-armed as they were, the 45,000 militia under arms in 1810 (out of a theoretical total of some 70,000) helped to man Almeida,
Elvas, Abrantes and other places and made up the bulk of the weak covering forces that Wellington had left to watch the frontiers of Galicia, Extremadura and Andalucía, whilst also being charged with the task of harassing the
enemy’s flanks and rear and preventing the French from sending out forage parties. In short, they were to act as guerrillas, in which task it was, as we have seen, expected that they would be joined by the ordenanças. With the
latter ready to be called out at a moment’s notice and the authorities carefully primed with regard to what was expected of them when it came to the implementation of a scorched-earth policy and the evacuation of the civilian
population, the invaders were in for a most unpleasant surprise.