

 If the broad band of territory running from Navarre to the northern parts of La Mancha was one zone in which guerrilla resistance was a major problem, another was to be found in the area stretching from the Basque provinces
along the Cantabrian mountains and then southwards into León. Beginning with Alava and Vizcaya, yet another semi-regular division was being formed in this area under the command of Francisco Longa. In the mountains of Santander
and Asturias the naval officer, Juan Díaz Porlier, headed another such force and was harassing the garrison of Oviedo and at times coming down to the coast and taking part in the maritime operations of which we shall read below.
And finally in León, Julián Sánchez headed a band of irregular horsemen that eventually provided the basis for two regiments of cavalry.

 Setting aside the multitude of other bands both fair and foul that swirled around these relatively well-organised and disciplined forces, Mina and his fellows were by the end of 1810 causing the French serious problems. Thus, in
León, for example, cavalry sweeps dispatched to hunt down Sánchez found themselves lunging into empty air. ‘We rode for nine days without encountering any guerrillas’, complained one officer. ‘It was not that there were none in
the region, but the local population warned them of our arrival, and … they did not allow us to catch up with them.’ 47 As Thiébault wrote, ‘The difficulty was to get at [Sánchez], and do something more against him than execute …
movements … which generally ended only in seasoning [the guerrillas] while tiring the troops.’ 48 Through various subterfuges, he eventually succeeded in inflicting a serious reverse on the guerrilla leader that cost him many
casualties, but ‘El Charro’ was undaunted, inflicting heavy losses on 400 troops who had been sent to escort a courier to Ciudad Rodrigo, and capturing a substantial supply convoy at Tamames.

 Far more important as a factor in la guerrilla even than such raiders, however, were the forces of Allied regulars that continued to be scattered around the periphery of Spain. In western Andalucía, for example, the
much-travelled division of General Ballesteros spent most of 1810 fighting Soult in the Condado de Niebla, whilst Extremadura had seen several attempts on the part of the Marqués de la Romana to march on Seville. Similarly, in
Asturias Patriot forces were clinging on to a small area in the western part of the province from where they from time to time sallied out to attack the French around Oviedo. And, last but not least, all round the coasts of Spain
considerable efforts were being made to make use of the benefits of seapower. Thus, in September 1810 Enrique O’Donnell wiped out an entire brigade of German troops at La Bisbal in a clever operation that combined a hazardous
march through the mountains of central Catalonia, with a surprise amphibious descent on the coast. Meanwhile, a month later the erstwhile leader of the insurrection in the Roncal, Mariano de Renovales, sailed eastwards with a
number of battalions of the Army of Galicia and a force of British marines and stormed the port of Gijón. At about the same time, too, a small Anglo-Spanish force was dispatched to attack the coast of Málaga, but in this instance
it was routed with some loss at Fuengirola.