

 My pen altogether fails me: I feel that no powers of description can convey … the cheerless desolation we daily witnessed on our march from the Mondego to the Lines. Wherever we moved, the mandate which enjoined the wretched
inhabitants … to forsake their homes had gone before us. The villages were deserted; the churches … were empty; the mountain cottages stood open and untenanted … The flanks of our line of march were literally covered with the
flying population of the country. In Portugal there are at no time many facilities for travelling, and these few the exigencies of the army had very greatly diminished. Rich indeed were those … who still retained … any mode of
transporting their families and property … for respectable men and delicate women … might on every side be seen walking slowly and painfully on foot, encumbered by heavy burdens of clothes, bedding and food. 35

 The plight of the refugees was harrowing. Douglas admits that he and his comrades regularly plundered them – as on the road to La Coruña straggling and drunkenness were rife – whilst, as Schaumann wrote:

 The nearer the procession came to Lisbon, the greater was the number of animals … that fell dead either from fatigue or hunger, and very soon ladies were to be seen wading in torn silk shoes … through the mud. It was a
heart-rending sight. 36

 As for the troops, they were little better off:

 We … encamped in a beautiful field of grapes, but in the course of the night it commenced to rain with a gale of wind, and we were awakened in the morning … [by] the water running over us in the trench as we lay between the
bushes. To attempt a description of our misery would be a task too hard for my old pen … All the resource we had was to stand upright and let the water run off as well as possible. 37

 With the French burning village after village, engaging in wholesale pillage, killing large numbers of the inhabitants, and executing any ordenanças who fell into their hands, Sousa and his allies continued their struggle to
halt the retreat, but nothing would induce the British commander to turn and fight, and by 10 October the whole of the Anglo-Portuguese army had fallen back within the Lines of Torres Vedras. In short, all seemed well, but in
many cases, the evacuation of the population had not taken place until the last minute, whilst some of the inhabitants had refused to leave their homes or had hidden food rather than carry it away. Rather than being forced to
withdraw within a few days, as Wellington had hoped, the French therefore gained access to sufficient supplies to blockade the Lines in the hope that something – revolt in Lisbon, for example – might turn up. Gallant as this
effort was, however, in his heart Masséna knew that he was in desperate straits. Depleted by battle casualties, sickness, desertion and the need to garrison Almeida, by early November the army was down to no more than 40,000
effectives. Food was limited, rain was falling steadily, the troops lacked adequate shelter, the Allied lines held firm, and there was no news from Spain. All around Masséna’s positions lurked bands of militia and ordenanças, and
Coimbra, which had been left in the hands of the tiniest of garrisons, was known to have been retaken by Trant with the loss of 4,000 sick or wounded soldiers who had been left there in hospital. Even ammunition was running low,
whilst many of the men were sullen and disaffected. Yet, heartened by the fact that Wellington would not move, still the French held on, the only developments being the dispatch of a column of troops headed by a trusted staff
officer named Foy to Spain in the hope of obtaining help, a retreat on the part of Masséna to a safer position at Santarem, and the arrival of 9,000 French reinforcements under General Drouet, who had been assigned a corps
improvised from twenty fresh battalions belonging to regiments that were already serving in the Peninsula.