

 For the civilian population, the consequences of the long stand-off that was the fruit of Wellington’s failure to move were terrible. For the people of Lisbon itself, life was not too bad, but for the refugees it was a different
matter:

 Thousands of the unfortunate inhabitants of the provinces through which our army had recently retreated … were endeavouring to exist between Lisbon and the Lines. There was, therefore, an immense population hemmed up in a small
space of country, hundreds of them without a house to cover them or food to eat … In the course of the winter the number of Portuguese who actually died of want was quite dreadful. It was not unusual to see hordes of these poor
wretches, old and young, male and female in rags, the very picture of death, round a miserable fire, on which was placed an earthen vessel, full of such herbs as could be gathered in the fields and hedges. Thousands contrived to
drag on a miserable existence on this vile sustenance. Their … emaciated faces were sufficient to have touched the heart of the most callous and unfeeling. 38

 For these unfortunates, little or no official provision was ever made. Some assistance was forthcoming from the Church, private charity, and the British army, but famine and exposure nevertheless took the life of many thousands,
whilst there were still plenty of soldiers who remained all too willing to terrorise the populace. As a result Sousa and his allies continued to cause trouble, whilst a few Portuguese officers became so angry that they even
deserted to the French. Despite the growing criticism, however, Wellington chose this moment to renew his quarrels with the British government, which he again accused of starving him of money. At the best of times his complaints
would have been unfair: faced by a genuine shortage of specie, possessed of only a slim majority in the House of Commons and beset by an Opposition that lost no opportunity to argue that the war in Portugal had become a question
of pouring good money after bad, the government had in fact done its utmost to support Wellington. In January 1811, however, the charges were downright maladroit: not only had growing economic difficulties produced much agitation
in favour of peace, or, at the very least, an end to the shipping restrictions that had been Britain’s answer to the Continental Blockade, but King George III had just been smitten by a terrible attack of porphyria that left him
permanently disabled. With the Prince of Wales – hitherto notorious for his friendship with the Whigs – now Prince Regent, the Cabinet could not be certain of survival. As it happened, the danger faded away – for a variety of
reasons ‘Prinny’ had fallen out with the Whigs – but not until February 1811 did the future George IV announce that he would keep the government in office. Until then it seemed that the slightest slip might lead to disaster, and
it is therefore hard not to conclude that Wellington would have been better employed attacking Masséna, and all the more so as his inactivity was straining the patience of the beleaguered Spaniards.