

 Coming, as it did, in the wake of the Côa, this was a serious blow to the Allies, for Masséna had been spared a long siege. Yet supply problems – notably, the devastation of the countryside around Almeida, and the destruction of
several convoys by Spanish guerrillas on the road from Salamanca – kept the French from pushing forward immediately, and it was only by a huge effort that the two weeks’ food supplies were amassed that Masséna regarded as the
minimum for any further advance. Even then, transport was so short that a third of the artillery’s horses had to be handed over to the supply columns, each infantry division in consequence only being accompanied by eight cannon
and howitzers instead of the usual sixteen. Good maps, too, were lacking, the efficient and conscientious Pelet having to produce a whole new set for the army’s use. And, to cap it all, the simmering discontent in the high
command erupted afresh when Masséna’s ‘dragoon’ suddenly appeared at the army’s advanced headquarters on the frontier, an increasingly concerned marshal having in the meantime come to the conclusion that he had been betrayed by
the emperor. As Pelet writes, ‘The great difficulties of the war and the inadequacy of our resources were so well known that it was thought Masséna’s expedition had been sacrificed to Napoleon’s jealousy of him.’ 28

 This was ridiculous – much more to the point is Thiébault’s suspicion that Napoleon ‘expected Masséna to work miracles’ 29 – but even so it was 15 September before the French got under way again. When they did so, however,
rather than following Wellington’s army along the main Almeida–Coimbra–Lisbon road, or striking southwards along the rougher and more circuitous route that eventually joined the former near Santarem, Masséna turned off on a
particularly bad side-road that led him many miles to the north. This is sometimes put down to poor maps, the misleading information given him by the score of afrancesado Portuguese officers who had been attached to his army and
his inability to carry out proper reconnaissance in the face of ordenanças. In fact, the decision rather rested, first, on the discovery that every other route was blocked by entrenchments, and, second, on the hope that the
districts further north might not have been ‘scorched’, for, as Marbot remarks, ‘Lord Wellington, being allowed a perfectly free hand by the government, used it to compel all the people to leave their houses, destroy all
provisions and mills, and retire with their cattle to Lisbon’. 30 As Warre wrote, ‘It was most distressing to see them abandoning their habitations and flying away … loaded with what little they could carry … crying and lamenting
[and] followed by their helpless children.’ 31 Yet the new route did not prove much better: progress was extremely slow; the troops were exhausted; and the artillery and wagons fell behind, at one point the whole siege train
almost being captured by a brigade of Portuguese militia commanded by a redoubtable British officer named Nicholas Trant. Nor did the march even gain the French anything in the way of a tactical advantage, for Wellington merely
shifted his army to a new position lying along a great north–south ridge known as the Serra do Buçaco that the French would have to cross if they were ever to reach Coimbra.