

 To the right, meanwhile, things went even worse for the French. Ney’s men moved forward in fine style, but they were much harassed by skirmishers from the Light Division, which happened to be holding the sector which they were
attacking. Waiting in hiding for them, meanwhile, were the rest of Craufurd’s men, together with the Portuguese brigade of Pack, and they therefore marched straight into an ambush:

 No sooner did [the enemy] crown the height, then he found us drawn up to receive him, and his column became exposed to a most destructive fire, both of musketry and artillery. This … was but of short duration, yet … the leading
regiments of the assailants were almost totally annihilated. A charge of bayonets followed: the whole column was routed and driven down the hill with prodigious slaughter. 33

 Junot’s corps was still intact, but to carry on was clearly pointless, and so the battle ended.

 The French had suffered a severe reverse. For the loss of only 1,252 Allied troops – a total, incidentally, split exactly between British and Portuguese – they themselves had lost almost 4,500 men. On top of this, confident
predictions that the Portuguese would disintegrate at the first shot had proved to be sadly wrong, whilst Wellington had proved once again that he was outstanding as a defensive commander and had won back much of the respect that
he had lost on the frontier. Commenting on his ‘extraordinary circumspection, calm, coolness and presence of mind’, for example, Schaumann remarked:

 His orders were communicated in a loud voice, and were short and precise. In him there is nothing of the bombastic pomp of the commander-in-chief surrounded by his glittering staff. He wears no befeathered hat, no gold lace, no
stars, no orders – simply a low plain hat, a white collar, a grey overcoat and a light sword. 34

 Masséna was now totally cut off from Spain by the militia and the ordenança, tied to one of the worst roads in the entire Peninsula, surrounded by towns and villages from which everyone had fled, and running short of food. A
lesser – or wiser – man might well have given up the whole campaign at this point (indeed, Ney and Junot pressed for just such a course), but the marshal was a determined individual possessed of an outstanding reputation as a
commander, and pride alone was therefore enough to keep him going. At all events, large cavalry patrols were soon riding out to examine the countryside, and within a matter of hours an unguarded track had been discovered that led
northwards around the Allied line. * Many miles from Buçaco, it was well out of reach of any sudden counterstroke. By the evening of 28 September, then, the Army of Portugal was pulling out from the positions that it had occupied
before the Serra de Buçaco and heading north-west, leaving Wellington with no choice but to retire on Coimbra and Lisbon.

 The retreat that followed saw morale in the Allied army plummet. Masséna had been badly beaten, and officers of less skill and foresight than Wellington believed that the French army might have been destroyed altogether. This
view was unfair, but the grumbling continued none the less, much swelled by the pathetic columns of refugees that now clogged the roads. With the autumn rain falling in torrents, it was a miserable scene: