

 All this was visited on a population ravaged by starvation, for in many villages there was literally nothing left. As Wheeler remarked, ‘Thousands must have died … and thousands more must perish, for there is no help at hand:
rich and poor are all reduced to the same state.’ 42 Time and again, the British came across the most distressing scenes. For example:

 A large house … was discovered near the line of our route. Prompted by curiosity, several men turned aside to inspect the interior, where they found a number of famished wretches crowded together … Thirty women and children had
perished for want of food, and lay dead upon the floor, while about half that number of survivors sat watching the remains of those who had fallen. The soldiers offered some refreshment to these unfortunate persons, but one man
only had sufficient strength to eat. 43

 And again:

 On the top of a hill … we found three children lying, two already dead but the other … still breathing. There were pieces of biscuit lying beside them, which our soldiers had brought, but it was too late … One of them had
expired with [a] bit in his mouth. 44

 The French, however, did not escape scot-free. Indeed, with discipline and comradeship in a state of collapse, they were by now at the last extremity:

 When men became so fatigued with marching and want of food that they could not go further, they were left to perish on the roadside. Disease raged freely in their ranks, but the men … would not even lift their comrades to the
side of a wall to die in peace, but allowed them to … be trodden to death under the feet of the baggage mules … Those French soldiers who were lying on the roads in a still sensible state soon suffered retribution at the hands of
the Portuguese peasantry. Wherever they were found … the first step was to strip the victims of all clothing and leave them in a state of nudity. Those still living were summarily dispatched by having their brains … dashed out …
or [being] stabbed, and when all else failed suffered the death of stoning … The very bodies of the dead were kicked about as if they had been footballs, and every indignity that could be heaped upon the inanimate frame was
resorted to. 45

 By now, then, the French were little more than a horde of fugitives. Wellington’s pursuit having soon been outstripped, logic dictated a retreat to Ciudad Rodrigo. The travails of the Army of Portugal were not yet over, however.
To the astonishment and consternation of his subordinates, on 22 March Masséna suddenly issued orders for a march on the Tagus valley in the hope of getting into contact with the French forces in Andalucía and again threatening
Lisbon. In the circumstances no plan could have been worse. Masséna’s desire to salvage some crumb of justification from the campaign is understandable enough, but the district into which he was proposing to march was one of the
most barren in the entire Peninsula, whilst, deeply demoralised, the troops had little food, ammunition, clothes, footwear or transport. Absolutely horrified, Ney therefore refused to obey and tried to continue the march on
Almeida and Ciudad Rodrigo, only to be removed from his command and sent to Spain in disgrace. With ‘the bravest of the brave’ gone, all resistance collapsed and the miserable columns therefore dragged themselves into the wild
mountains of the Serra da Estrella. For a few days the attempt to reach the Tagus was sustained, but very soon the plan collapsed. Food could not be found, most of the roads were impassable to wheeled transport, and the troops
were in many cases in a state of complete disbandment. At this even Masséna had to give up, and on 29 March he finally ordered the Army of Portugal to head for the frontier. This was all very well, but the Anglo-Portuguese were
now closing in again. Extraordinarily, Masséna, who now had less than 40,000 men, still did not make all speed for the shelter of Ciudad Rodrigo, but rather lingered in a defensive position strung out along the River Côa in the
faint hope that he might somehow avenge Buçaco. In this too he was to be disappointed. Attacked in a thick fog and pouring rain on the morning of 3 April 1811 by three Anglo-Portuguese divisions at Sabugal, Reynier’s corps fought
astonishingly well, launching a series of heavy counter-attacks and inflicting some casualties on the Light Division, whose first brigade got lost and ended up fighting the French almost single-handed. It was a bitter struggle: