

 Although he knew that the Serra lay ahead, Masséna apparently did not expect that it would be defended, and it was therefore with some surprise that news reached him on the evening of 25 September that a substantial force –
52,000 men with 60 guns – was concentrated in his front. For a variety of reasons the battle that followed two days later has become shrouded in controversy. Attempts, for example, have been made to claim that Wellington merely
wanted to blood the Portuguese army, gain more time for his measures of devastation, calm the population of Lisbon, still growing criticism of his tactics in the Portuguese Regency, reassure the Perceval administration in London,
or even engineer a pretext for the highly expensive Lines of Torres Vedras. For all of these arguments some shred of justification may be found: Lisbon, for example, was on the verge of panic; a faction in the Regency headed by
José Antonio Sousa Coutinho and the Bishop of Oporto was claiming that the British were out to wreck Portugal as a commercial rival; Wellington was suspicious of the Cabinet’s commitment to the struggle, and aware that some of
his officers were writing private letters that were bitterly critical of their commander; and there are oddities in his dispositions which could possibly be explained by a positive desire to see the French advance continue. In
the last resort, however, all this falls down. Battle may have become a good idea in political terms, but the British commander had always intended to turn and fight, his calculation being that this was an almost risk-free option
that might turn back the French without incurring the horrors that would certainly accompany a retreat to Torres Vedras.

 Whatever the origins of the decision to give battle, the Serra do Buçaco was certainly a good place to fight. An undulating granite ridge some nine miles long dotted with outcrops of rock, it was extremely steep and rose high
above the French positions, the ground about its foot also being cut up with woods and gullies. Troops on the summit could not be bombarded by artillery, whilst men sent against it would be certain to reach its crest in a state
of considerable disorder. Yet rather than immediately looking for a way round, the French chose to attack head on: lacking personal experience of the British, Masséna had little regard for them, whilst he was, for obvious
reasons, anxious for a victory. On the morning of 27 September, then – it had taken two days to get enough troops up to launch an assault – Ney and Reynier threw their infantry against the Allied centre-left. Despite a thick mist
that cloaked their advance, Reynier’s men were attacked on all sides at the summit and after some sharp fighting forced to retreat in disorder. For a good account we may turn to William Grattan:

 Wallace and his regiment, standing alone without orders, had to act for themselves … The colonel sent his captain of grenadiers (Dunne) to the right where the rocks were highest to ascertain how matters stood … In a few moments
Dunne returned almost breathless; he said the rocks were filling fast with Frenchmen, [and] that a heavy column was coming up the hill beyond … Wallace, with a steady but cheerful countenance turned to his men, and … said, ‘Now
Connaught Rangers … when I bring you face to face with those French rascals … don’t give the false touch, but push home to the muzzle! I have nothing more to say, and if I had it would be of no use, for in a minute there’ll be
such an infernal noise … you won’t be able to hear yourselves.’ This address went home to the hearts of us all, but there was no cheering: a steady and determined calm had taken the place of any lighter feeling … Wallace then
threw the battalion from line into column … and moved on … at a quick pace. On reaching the rocks, he … threw himself from his horse and … ran forward … into the midst of the terrible flame in his front. All was now confusion and
uproar, smoke, fire and bullets; officers and soldiers … knocked down in every direction; British, French and Portuguese mixed together; while in the midst of all was to be seen Wallace fighting … at the head of his devoted
followers and calling out to his soldiers to press forward. 32