

 However, launching his British infantry on a knoll above the crossing, Craufurd managed to hold out long enough for the cavalry, caçadores, artillery and wagons to get across and then to disengage his rearguard as well. It was,
though, a desperate affair. ‘In ascending the hill, a musket-shot grazed the left side of my head, and buried itself in the earth close by’, Leach remembered. ‘Both my subalterns, who were brothers, were severely wounded, and …
we were … the whole time exposed to such a fire … as might have satisfied the most determined fire-eater in existence.’ 25 Amongst those who fell was George Simmons:

 The enemy … kept up a terrible fire … Lieutenant Harry Smith, Lieutenant Thomas Smith and Lieutenant Pratt were wounded, and I was shot through the thigh … Captain Napier took off his neckerchief and gave it to a sergeant, who
put it round my thigh and twisted it tight with a ramrod, to stop the bleeding. The firing was so severe that the sergeant … fell with a shot in the head. Captain Napier was also about the same time wounded in the side. 26

 Foolishly, Ney then ordered several battalions to assault the bridge, but in three separate assaults they were shot to pieces, the battle eventually being ended by a heavy thunderstorm.

 Claimed by both sides as a victory, the combat of the Côa, as it became known, was essentially a draw. Though driven back, the Light Division had fought well and suffered far fewer losses than the French. Still, Masséna’s troops
were much encouraged, whilst their morale was now to be raised still further. A much better fortress than Ciudad Rodrigo, Almeida, which was strongly garrisoned, well-provisioned and built on rocky ground that made the task of
digging trenches very difficult, might have held out for a considerable time. Such were the problems that the French had in getting up their siege guns and supply trains that it was not even formally besieged until 15 August.
Still more time was then lost in scraping out the first parallel and its accompanying batteries, and it was therefore not until the early morning of 26 August that the French guns opened fire. Some thirteen hours later they were
still firing when suddenly the fortress disappeared in an almighty explosion. As Pelet wrote:

 Suddenly I felt the earth tremble strongly under my feet. I heard a vast and deep noise … My first thought was for our powder, but … an officer arrived from the trenches and announced that he had seen an awful explosion in the
middle of the fortress followed by a violent fire, and that a rain of huge stones and debris together with a small piece of artillery had fallen on our approaches. 27

 Caused by a freak shot that touched off its main powder magazine, the blast reduced every building in the place to ruins, atomised the castle in which the powder had been housed, and killed 500 of the garrison (an all-Portuguese
force composed of the Twenty-Fourth Line Infantry, and the militia regiments of Arganil, Trancoso and Viseu). The walls still stood, it is true, but the surviving troops were dazed with shock, many guns had been smashed, and all
the stores had been destroyed. The governor, a British officer named William Cox, tried hard to prolong the defence for a further couple of days in the hope that Wellington might come to his rescue, but, led by one or two
officers who had quarrelled with Beresford, his men mutinied, and the following night the fortress surrendered.