

 For week after week, however, the stalemate continued, for a combination of energy, enterprise and sheer terror had netted Masséna’s troops far more food than Wellington had hoped. By the middle of February, however, the
peasants’ hoards had been all but exhausted, whilst the army was on the brink of collapse: a large band of deserters, for example, had clubbed together in the hills near Santarem and were living as bandits under the command of an
elected ‘general’. However, what could Masséna do? An attack on the Lines was still out of the question, but, after Drouet’s arrival, the only help from Spain was a small column of drafts and convalescents brought in by Foy, who
had eventually reached the frontier by means of forced march through the desolate Tagus valley. A pontoon bridge had been made ready in an attempt to gain access to the south bank of the Tagus, but, even if the army could have
crossed the river, there was no chance that it could have entered Lisbon. Some more food could have been collected, perhaps, but in the end things would have remained much the same. In short, there was nothing for it but retreat,
and all the more so as Wellington obviously could not be depended on to remain inactive for ever.

 On 5 March 1811, then, the marshal pulled out. Delayed by supply problems, the Anglo-Portuguese forces did not come up with his men for several days, and even then were kept at bay by a series of rearguard actions that cost both
sides many casualties. To hasten their retreat still further, the French abandoned most of their baggage and by 22 March the exhausted survivors were once more in contact with Spain. Once again, the horrors of war were all too
evident. Appalling atrocities were committed by the French as they fell back. At Porto de Mos, for example, 200 of the inhabitants were burned to death in the parish church, Donaldson describing how he went in and found ‘the
half-consumed skeletons of human beings on every side; some lying, others kneeling and more of them standing upright against the walls’. 39 Similarly, of Carapeta, Simmons, who complained bitterly that it ‘is beyond everything
horrid the way these European savages have treated the unfortunate Portuguese’, wrote, ‘I saw a woman laid in the street near her own door, murdered. The ruffians had placed upon her bosom a huge piece of granite taken from the
market cross, so heavy that it took me and six men to remove it. The blood was running from her ears and mouth.’ 40 Often macabre humour added to the horror:

 Never during the whole of the war did I again see such a horrible sight … Murdered peasants lay in all directions. At one place I halted at a door to beg water of a man who was sitting on the threshold … He proved to be dead,
and had … been placed there … for a joke. The inside of the house was ghastly to behold. All its inmates had been murdered in their beds … The corpse of another … peasant had been placed in a ludicrous position in a hole in a
garden wall … to make fun of us when we came along. 41