

 Two guns opened on us and fired several discharges of round and grape. The guns were repeatedly charged, but the enemy were so strong that we were obliged to retire a little. Three columns of the enemy moved forward with drums
beating and the officers dancing like madmen with their hats frequently hoisted upon their swords. Our men kept up a terrible fire. They went back a little and we followed … Lieutenant Arbuthnot was killed, Lieutenant Haggup
wounded [and] Colonel Beckwith wounded and his horse shot. 46

 However, by midday the French were fleeing north-eastwards in considerable disorder, leaving behind them over 600 casualties.

 Sabugal being only a few miles from the Spanish frontier, the third invasion of Portugal was finally over, the only Frenchmen left in arms in the country being the garrison of Almeida. Badly battered though it was, the Army of
Portugal was still a fighting force, but even so the blow to French arms had been significant enough. At least 25,000 men were missing from the ranks, whilst the troops involved had lost almost all their baggage and many of their
guns. Particularly serious, given the difficulties that were always found in replacing such losses, was the death of almost half the Army of Portugal’s horses. On the other side, meanwhile, military casualties had been
insignificant by comparison (indeed, Wellington’s strength had been all but doubled by the knowledge that he could now trust the Portuguese army in major field operations). Yet victory cannot just be reckoned in terms of so many
soldiers killed or wounded. At least 80,000 Portuguese civilians had perished, and whole areas had been completely devastated. From this blow the Portuguese war effort never really recovered, but still worse was the fact that
Masséna’s courage had tilted the balance of forces heavily against the Allied position.

 At first sight, this seems a strange claim, and all the more so if we look at la guerrilla. In Navarre, for example, the ruthless figure of Espoz y Mina had now emerged as the commander of a semi-regular force of three
battalions of infantry and a squadron of cavalry, at the head of which he tied down thousands of French troops, fought off a number of enemy attempts to destroy him, won several small victories, and was even able to charge
customs duties on goods and animals crossing the frontier. A little further south the chaotic situation that had characterised the area of Soria and Logroño the year before had been much improved by the concentration of most of
its guerrillas into a single force under the command of the regular army officer, José Joaquín Durán y Barazábal, who, like Mina, had won a series of minor actions after turning his men into regular troops. Further south again,
the genuinely heroic El Empecinado had done much the same in the area of Guadalajara and Molina de Aragón and had even been known to appear on the very outskirts of Madrid (on one occasion, indeed, he almost captured King Joseph
himself). In and out of touch with El Empecinado to the east, meanwhile, was the flying column of regular units commanded by Pedro Villacampa which in the autumn of 1810 caused Suchet many problems in the area of Teruel.