

 With no political considerations to get in the way, operations began immediately, the first blow being struck in Extremadura, where we left Beresford marching to the relief of Badajoz with 18,000 men. A French force that had
captured the minor strongpoints of Alburquerque and Campo Mayor having been chased off, the field marshal crossed the swollen River Guadiana at Juromenha some twenty miles downstream. Badajoz could not be attacked immediately for
want of a siege train, but Olivenza was retaken and the French field forces that had remained in the region forced to withdraw across the Sierra Morena. Eventually, however, all was ready. Very considerable numbers of Spanish
forces having come up to join Beresford, there were plenty of troops, whilst the want of siege guns had been remedied by sending up twenty-three heavy cannon from Elvas. *

 There was much optimism in the Allied camp: ‘We looked forward with eager hope’, wrote Sherer, ‘to … a triumphant march over the Sierra Morena … The towers of fair Seville … seemed to ride before us, and in imagination we were
already wandering … on the banks of the far-famed Guadalquivir.’ 1 But very soon things were going wrong. When the heavy cannon finally arrived, most were found to be very old (four, indeed, dated from the first half of the
seventeenth century). Varying enormously in calibre, they had also proved difficult to supply with proper ammunition, and, this, together with their casting defects and lack of modern sights and elevating gear, suggested that
their fire would be distinctly inaccurate. Meanwhile, the walls of Badajoz had been thoroughly repaired, matters being made still worse by the fact that Beresford and Wellington settled on a faulty plan of operations. Whereas the
best chance of success was to concentrate on the southern walls – the section of the defences which had been breached by Soult – it was decided to mount no more than a secondary assault in this sector, most of the attackers’
resources rather being deployed against the detached fort of San Cristóbal. Perched on its lofty bluff across the river, this fort was crucial, for such was its command of the town that the latter could not be held without it. On
the other hand, however, it was also immensely strong and built on stony ground that was hard to work.

 When operations began on 8 May, progress was very slow: the attackers were hampered by heavy rain; the French guns outmatched those of the besiegers at every point; two-thirds of Beresford’s limited number of engineer officers
were killed or wounded in the trenches; and the governor, Armand Philippon, was a most determined opponent. Nor, it seems, did Beresford help. According to Edward Pakenham, ‘Indecision has been his bane, and want of strength in
command his misfortune. He has the cards to play that ought to have made him a peer of the realm, but still continues Sir William … and I fear … posterity will have no … ground to defend him on.’ 2 The result was much dithering.
To quote one of the British commander’s engineers, ‘The investment having been completed on the morning of the eighth … Marshal Beresford was pressed to allow us to begin … our principal attack on the next night … but it was not
until the … twelfth that [he] finally consented to our beginning.’ 3 As a result morale plummeted in the Allied camp: ‘Little has been done … and we are all in a state of complete despondency at having witnessed so much bloodshed
in vain; the blame rests somewhere, and our brigade have … been the victims of some shameful mismanagement.’ 4 Time, meanwhile, was exactly what the attackers did not have, for Soult had long since resolved to march to the relief
of Badajoz. At the head of 25,000 troops on 12 May he crossed the Sierra Morena, whereupon the largely Spanish covering forces that had been watching the passes hastily fell back to the rendezvous point that had previously been
agreed at the village of La Albuera. Knowing that he could count on the Spaniards, whose behaviour throughout had been impeccable, Beresford resolved to fight and by 15 May some 35,000 Allied troops were blocking Soult’s way.