

 The surrender of Badajoz was a strange affair. The city had plenty of provisions, whilst its garrison was still in good shape. At the time of the surrender, meanwhile, the breach was not practicable, whilst Menacho’s successor,
one José Imaz, knew not only that Wellington had dispatched three divisions to his relief under Beresford, but that the troops involved were only a few marches away. Treachery has been suggested, but the truth seems rather that
Imaz’s nerves simply gave way in the face of the pressure of events. At all events, for the French, Badajoz was a stunning victory. Though the city was to absorb large numbers of French troops and prove costly to defend, its
possession made an Anglo-Portuguese offensive south of the Tagus far more difficult than before, whilst some 20,000 Spanish troops had been put out of action. Even more irreplaceable, meanwhile, were the immense quantities of
armaments, munitions and foodstuffs that were lost with them, together with the men and money of southern Extremadura. Wellington, indeed, was dismayed. As he wrote to Liverpool:

 Although experience has taught me to place no reliance upon … Spanish troops … this recent disaster has disappointed and grieved me much. The loss of this army and its … consequence, the fall of Badajoz, have materially altered
the situation of the Allies … and it will not be an easy task to place them in the situation in which they were, much less in that in which they would have been if this misfortune had not occurred. 53

 To the physical damage done by the disaster, then, was added a further blow to Anglo-Spanish relations, Wellington complaining that the defeat ‘would certainly have been avoided had the Spaniards been anything but Spaniards’. 54

 To conclude, then, despite Wellington’s triumph in Portugal, the efforts of the guerrillas, and much use of seapower, Masséna’s dogged persistence had eroded the foundations of Spanish resistance still further. Thus, every lost
fortress and every shattered army brought the day closer when the partidas could be hunted down and exterminated (as had just happened to the last of the insurgents in Calabria, where a savage guerrilla struggle had been raging
since 1806). Wellington, indeed, was deeply concerned, as witness the consternation and anger with which he greeted the news of the defeat of Mendizábal. According to the traditional view, each fresh advance on the part of the
French only rendered them more vulnerable to defeat, but, as the next chapter will show, so long as the French remained willing to send adequate reinforcements and replacements across the Pyrenees, there was nothing inevitable
about this process. And, though British morale had been boosted, and, with it, the willingness of the Perceval administration to pour still more resources into the fight, terrible strain had been placed on the Anglo-Spanish
Alliance. Thus, the Spaniards blamed the British for their misfortunes, whilst the British had been presented with further examples of Spanish incompetence and were furious at what they perceived as a failure to use the respite
supposedly provided by the attack on Lisbon to rebuild their forces. In March 1811, in short, it was still entirely reasonable to think in terms of a French victory.