

 Coming on one behind the other, with the first in ordre mixte – a formation in which column was mixed with line in an attempt to combine impetus with firepower – and the second in a dense mass of battalion columns, and supported
by three batteries of artillery, the French ought in theory to have made short work of the Spaniards. However, we now come to the second factor that saved the Allies from disaster. Thus, Blake’s troops (those of Castaños were at
this point still in reserve) were the best in the entire Spanish army. The two divisions brought up from Cádiz – in origin the troops of Alburquerque – had remained intact since the middle of 1809 and had, with the exception of
the brief Barrosa campaign, spent the whole of the past year in training on the Isla de León. As for Ballesteros’ men, they had been intact for even longer, whilst a year of marching and counter-marching in western Andalucía had
turned them into hardened veterans. At all events, positioned on a small rise, the four Spanish battalions stood firm and opened fire on the French, who responded not by rushing in with the bayonet – a tactic that might well have
succeeded – but by slowing their advance and firing back.

 Even as the bloody duel that resulted began, help was starting to arrive. On either side of and behind the defenders, many more Spanish battalions were filing into position, whilst some way to the right rear the first brigade of
Stewart’s division had made its appearance. On the right, meanwhile, the Spanish cavalry of Loy had been joined by two regiments of British heavy dragoons. Beresford had been planning a great counter-attack involving both
Stewart’s division and the increasing numbers of cavalry that were reaching the right flank (not far behind the British heavy dragoons was the brigade of cavalry belonging to the Fifth Army commanded by Penne Villemur). However,
hot-headed and ineffectual, Stewart ruined this scheme by going straight in without waiting for the rest of his men. Speed was of the essence, true – what would have happened had Zayas’ men collapsed before the counter-attack was
ready? – but what Stewart cannot be excused for is the order in which he made his attack. Despite the fact that Girard and Gazan’s flank was protected by cavalry, the troops were sent in in line. Stewart may have expected the
Allied cavalry to protect his advance, but even so this was an extremely dangerous manoeuvre. Wheeling to their left so as to advance against the French infantry, the brigade concerned, which belonged to John Colborne,
necessarily had completely to expose its right flank, whilst matters were further complicated by the onset of a sudden thunderstorm. With their own cavalry apparently blinded by the deluge, Colborne’s men therefore suddenly found
themselves attacked by a brigade of enemy horsemen. Caught in the open, three-quarters of them were killed, wounded or taken prisoner, whilst two squadrons of British heavy dragoons that attempted to effect a rescue were
themselves charged in the flank by a unit that had been kept in reserve for just such a purpose and they were driven off in disorder. As for the cavalry, they were merciless: