

 Thus ended a terrible day. Not counting several hundreds of prisoners, the Allied armies had lost 5,380 men dead or wounded. As for Soult’s losses, they were still worse, the marshal having lost at least a quarter and possibly a
third of his 24,000 men. As Long wrote, ‘I never … saw such a scene of carnage … The field of battle was a slaughter house.’ 9 Despite the heroism of many of his soldiers, Beresford had little cause to glory in his victory.
Completely misjudging the situation at the start of the battle, he had then lost confidence in himself to such an extent that he became incapable of fighting it in an effective fashion. Badly served by some of his subordinates
though he may have been, the fact is that he was simply not suited to the role of a battlefield commander, having been given the command of the southern front only because the solid and reliable Rowland Hill – Wellington’s usual
choice when it came to appointing an independent commander for part of his army – had fallen sick. Surrounded by scenes of the utmost horror, meanwhile, Beresford seems to have experienced some sort of nervous collapse: letters
written by him after the battle suggest a man gripped by panic and shock, whilst his official dispatch had to be substantially ‘written up’ by Wellington before he could send it on to London.

 Yet whatever criticisms may be made of Beresford, the fact is that Albuera had ended any immediate hopes Badajoz may have had of relief, for Soult had to withdraw. What is more he did so amidst scenes of demoralisation and
horror. French prisoners, for example, ‘called Soult bloodthirsty and avaricious, saying that he cared not how he sacrificed his men, and that he was wholly bent on the pursuit of dignities and wealth’. 10 As for the wounded,
their sufferings were appalling:

 About two o’clock in the morning the main convoy of wounded, amounting to near 4,000 in all, was put in motion. Dreadful were the cries of these poor … wretches! Had my heart been made of adamant I must have felt for the
pitiable condition to which the ravages of war had brought them … Two or three hundred … died on the seventeenth, and between 600 and 700 more expired on the road to Seville. 11

 At the same time, the battle had at least shown that co-operation between the British and the Spaniards was possible, and, further, that Spanish troops could put up a good fight when they had to. Nor was any military harm done
by the heavy Allied losses: for reasons which shall become clear shortly, Wellington was quickly able to make good the damage and resume the siege of Badajoz. Nevertheless, the battle did little for Anglo-Spanish relations.
Wellington put the bulk of the blame for what had occurred on Blake, and was at best grudging in his praise of the Spanish infantry. Thus:

 The Spanish troops, I understand, behaved admirably. They stood like stocks, both parties at times firing upon them, but they were quite immovable, and this is the great cause of all our losses. After they had lost their
position, the natural thing to do would have been to attack it with the nearest Spanish troops, but they could not be moved. The British troops … were brought up, and must always in these cases be brought up, and they suffered
accordingly. 12