

 Faced only by French skirmishers, Abercrombie’s three battalions might have attacked the French in flank, but for reasons which are not entirely clear they did not do so. Orders are supposed to have been sent to them to this
effect, but it is possible that they never arrived, whilst their commander may also have been worried at the possibility of an attack on his rear by the French troops around La Albuera. Once having ordered them up, meanwhile,
Beresford seems simply to have forgotten them. Much shaken by the charge of the French cavalry (in which he and his staff had actually been caught up, the British general supposedly having dispatched one of the enemy horsemen
with his bare hands) and all too well aware of the large numbers of horsemen further along the ridge and in the shallow valley on its northern side, he was now engaged in the fruitless task of bringing up the infantry brigade of
Carlos de España belonging to the Fifth Army to guard Hoghton’s right (fruitless because the three battalions of which it was composed had all been at the battle of the Gebora, and in consequence refused to move). Also to hand
was Cole’s Fourth Division and three brigades of cavalry, all of which were currently echeloned to the right, but these troops Beresford left alone for fear of incurring another disaster along the lines of that which had befallen
Colborne, instead fixing on the astonishing plan of calling up more troops from his left and centre.

 With men falling thick and fast, this can only be described as quite crazy, for the troops concerned could not have arrived for some time. Luckily for Beresford, however, an exasperated staff officer rode over to Cole and urged
him to take the offensive. Having first obtained a promise of cavalry support and arrayed itself in a formation in which it would be safe from enemy horsemen, the Fourth Division therefore advanced across the valley. Flayed by
French artillery fire, it was immediately charged by four regiments of dragoons, only for the Portuguese brigade facing them to perform the extraordinary feat of repulsing them without forming square. On the ridge, meanwhile,
Soult had ordered forward the strong brigade of General Werlé to protect the left flank of Girard and Gazan, and, as Cole’s troops mounted the slope, this opened fire with considerable effect. Twice as strong as their assailants
though they were, however, Werlé’s men had come forward in three closed columns of three battalions each, and they were therefore unable either to bring many muskets to bear or to deploy with any ease, and, after a fierce fight,
they broke and fled. At about the same time, Abercrombie had finally led his troops up on to the summit of the ridge from the other side. Unable to take any more, Girard and Gazan’s divisions disintegrated in their turn, and
within minutes the whole of the French left wing was in retreat. Fighting went on for a little while longer around La Albuera itself, but, with the Allies too exhausted to pursue, to all intents and purposes the battle was over.