

===== FILE: OEBPS/xhtml/chapter13.xhtml =====
The Peninsular War

 13

 Albuera

 STALEMATE ON THE PORTUGUESE FRONTIER, MARCH–DECEMBER 1811

 A motley collection of blue and white and brown, the Spanish line was trading volley for volley with its opponents. Dead and wounded littered the ground, musketry and canister were flaying their ranks, the shallow valley beneath
them was hidden by a veritable forest of Frenchmen, and the troops were soaking wet, the sunny weather with which the day had begun having suddenly been banished by a torrential downpour. Yet, encouraged by their officers, the
Spaniards were holding their ground, and they did not flinch even when a mass of enemy cavalry, many of them armed with the long lances dreaded by all infantrymen, suddenly thundered along their rear ranks, slashing and stabbing
at anyone who got in their way, cutting down the red-coated fugitives who were fleeing before them and enveloping a group of generals and staff officers who had come up to observe the fighting at close quarters. Despite the fact
that many of his comrades were being struck down by bullets aimed at the cavalry from the rear, one unknown infantryman even snatched a guidon from its bearer, whilst the Spaniards were still unbroken when they were ordered to
retire perhaps half an hour later. It was truly the Spanish army’s finest hour.

 The terrible engagement fought out around the Extremaduran village of La Albuera on 16 May 1811 may be regarded as a metaphor for the campaigns of 1811. A bloody stalemate, indeed, was not the sort of battle that had been
expected to follow Masséna’s expulsion from Portugal. His confidence and moral authority having been much boosted by Torres Vedras, the spring of 1811 found Wellington intending to move over to the offensive, for which policy he
had received de facto authorisation from his political masters in London, where talk of major reductions in the size of the army employed in Portugal had been replaced by promises of major reinforcements. Supply difficulties,
sickness amongst the troops and want of siege artillery ensured that in the short term no great strokes of strategy could be envisaged, but it was hoped that Almeida, Ciudad Rodrigo and Badajoz might all be recaptured, thereby
opening the way for lightning strikes on such targets as Salamanca or Seville. In the event, however, success was limited, the story of the rest of 1811 essentially being one of failure and frustration.

 In March 1811, however, such a prospect would have been hard to envisage. In Cádiz, true, there had been fresh trouble in that, beguiled by serviles eager to engineer British discontent with the Regency, Henry Wellesley had been
tricked into putting forward a plan much favoured by both himself and his eldest brother, the marquess, whereby Wellington would be given the command of the Spanish army and British officers posts in its ranks, in exchange for
which Britain would grant the enormous loan which the Spaniards had for some time since seen as the only way out of their penury. In political and financial terms alike, this was utterly impractical – gaditano opinion was
hostile, whilst Lord Wellesley’s enthusiasm failed to win over his Cabinet colleagues. Only slightly less maladroit, meanwhile, was a follow-up suggestion that the provinces bordering on Portugal should be placed under British
authority, this idea, too, being rejected out of hand. However, with the French still ensconced in Almeida, Ciudad Rodrigo and Badajoz, the problems which the measures were designed to combat – essentially, a repetition of the
troubles of the Talavera campaign – remained wholly academic.