

 Part of the victorious French cavalry were Polish lancers. From the conduct of this regiment … I believe many of them to have been intoxicated, as they rode over the wounded, barbarously darting their lances into them … I was an
instance of their inhumanity: after having been most severely wounded in the head, and plundered of everything that I had about me, I was being led as a prisoner between two French … soldiers when one of these lancers rode up,
and deliberately cut me down. Not satisfied with this brutality, the wretch tried by every means in his power to make his horse trample on me. 6

 With exultant cavalrymen and desperate fugitives streaming past their rear ranks and many men felled by a volley fired at the enemy horsemen by the newly arrived brigade of General Hoghton, the Spaniards still did not break,
whilst their fire had done so much damage to their French assailants that the latter broke off their assault and tried to bring forward their second division (that of Gazan). This, however, led to chaos: with the two divisions
much too close together to allow them freedom of movement, they merged into a single confused mass. With all forward movement impossible, Soult should either have disengaged, or flung in the two infantry brigades that he had in
reserve, along with his powerful cavalry, in a last-ditch attempt to tip the balance. Such a stratagem might yet have succeeded, but, whilst Soult was in his element when it came to formulating battle plans, he was less effective
when it came actually to implementing them, let alone to reacting to changing conditions on the battlefield. Taken completely by surprise, he therefore failed to issue the fresh orders that were needed, condemning his men to a
most ill-deserved defeat.

 For the Allies, meanwhile, things were beginning to look much better. Stewart’s remaining two brigades – those of Hoghton and Abercrombie – had now been formed in line behind Blake’s troops, and the latter now filed to the rear,
Sherer remembering how ‘a very noble-looking young Spanish officer rode up to me and begged me … to explain to the English that his countrymen were ordered to retire [and] were not flying’. 7 With Hoghton’s men facing the mass of
Frenchmen on the ridge and Abercrombie’s prolonging the line downhill to the left, what remained of Stewart’s division now advanced. Disordered though they might have been, the French infantry were not cowards, whilst they could
scarcely have run even had they wanted to, and there therefore followed a terrible firefight which earned one of the regiments involved – the Fifty-Seventh Foot – its long-standing nickname of ‘The Die-Hards’. Fighting in
Abercrombie’s brigade, Sherer was an eyewitness:

 This murderous contest of musketry lasted long. We were the whole time progressively advancing upon the enemy … The slaughter was now … dreadful: every shot told … To describe … this wild scene with fidelity would be impossible.
At intervals a shriek or a groan told that men were falling around me, but it was not always that the tumult … suffered me to catch these sounds. A constant feeling [i.e.: closing in] to the centre … more truly bespoke the havoc
of death. 8