

 Nothing but the extraordinary coolness … and quickness of arrangement which General Graham showed on that day could have extricated us out of the scrape which our allies had drawn us into … Although we occupied the whole force
of the enemy … the Spanish general not only did not show a single battalion to save us, but he did not profit by the moment and get possession of the French lines, which were then deserted. He either wanted curiosity or nerves to
come himself to see how the affair was going on with us [and] he did not send any of his staff to enquire. I think myself that, if the commander-in-chief did not act in concert with the French, the chef d’état major, General
Lacy … certainly knew of and favoured their plan, which was to cut us off from the Spaniards and then either to capture or annihilate us. 51

 With Anglo-Spanish relations already strained by events in Latin America and Portugal, the whole affair was most unfortunate, and all the more so as gaditano opinion sided wholeheartedly with La Peña.

 To return to the war as a whole, la guerrilla could not disguise the fact that the French had continued to make steady progress. Setting aside the capture of the strategic Catalan town of Tortosa on 2 January 1811 after a siege
of a mere eighteen days, this was at its most spectacular in Extremadura where Soult had launched an offensive in the hope of forcing Wellington to detach troops from Lisbon. By cutting his garrisons to the bone – hence the
shortfall in Victor’s forces at Barrosa – Soult managed to put together 20,000 men, and on 31 December he duly set out from Seville. After only a few days, however, things went wrong. Setting aside drenching winter rain,
Ballesteros suddenly appeared on the invasion force’s left flank with the result that half Soult’s infantry had to be dropped off to chase him away. Though the Spaniard was eventually beaten at Villanueva de los Castillejos and
forced to take refuge in Portugal, this took some time, whilst Soult also had to capture the minor fortress of Olivenza into which the Spaniards had foolishly thrust a large garrison. Badajoz, then, was not invested until the end
of January, whilst even then Soult did not have sufficient troops to surround the city altogether (Badajoz lying on the southern bank of the broad River Guadiana, to have done so would have been to risk disaster, for the
attackers would necessarily have been split in two). For a moment the campaign hung in the balance, for on 5 February Mendizábal suddenly appeared on the north bank of the Guadiana at the head of the erstwhile Army of the Left,
which had until then been encamped at Alburquerque. * Yet, rather than falling on the overstretched and undermanned French siege lines with his 15,000 men, he simply set up camp across the Guadiana. The result was catastrophe.
Throwing a pontoon bridge across the river, on the night of 18 February Soult sent 7,000 troops against the new arrivals. Failing to detect the noise of the crossing, the Spaniards were taken completely by surprise, and ridden
down by a large body of French cavalry that had circled their position until it had reached a point where it could ride in upon Mendizábal’s open left flank. The troops posted in this sector broke and fled immediately, but to
their right Mendizábal was able to form a number of regiments into a gigantic square. It was, however, to no avail. As one Spanish infantryman remembered, the enemy’s horse being unable to break its ranks, ‘their artillery played
upon it in a most horrible fashion until it became first an oval and then an unformed mass that the cavalry were able to penetrate and take prisoner’. 52 Some 4,000 men either got across the river into Badajoz or managed to
escape to the west, but Spanish casualties numbered 8,000 men, whilst gone, too, were all the army’s guns and baggage. As for the French, they had barely lost 400 men. After this there is little to tell. The defenders for some
time continued to show much vigour, but on 4 March their courageous commander, Rafael de Menacho, was killed, and his successor surrendered the city a week later.