

 Greatest of all these raids, however, was the operation that was launched at Cádiz in February 1811. The besieging forces having been for various reasons so reduced that they were actually outnumbered by the garrison, the
Regency duly proposed a major attack on the French rear. This, indeed, was to be rather more than a mere raid: the object was to raise the siege of the city, defeat the invaders in a full-scale field battle and destroy the French
lines. At first all went well enough, the troops involved – Sir Thomas Graham’s Anglo-Portuguese division, two Spanish infantry divisions and a Spanish cavalry brigade – disembarking safely at Algeciras and Tarifa. Unfortunately
for the Allies, however, affairs thereafter were mishandled. Command of the landing force was in the hands of the Spanish general, Manuel La Peña, a man whom even Spanish sources are agreed was a man of neither courage, nor
energy, nor ability. Far from striking inland – a course which offered great success – La Peña chose rather to take a road that led directly back to Cádiz and then proceeded to fall straight into a clever trap led by Marshal
Victor. Thus, whilst one infantry division checked the Allied column just short of the Isla de León, two others fell on its flank and rear. Known variously as the battle of Chiclana or Barrosa, the battle that followed on 5 March
generated immense controversy. The chief weight of the French assault fell on Graham, whose badly outnumbered men put up a heroic resistance, as, for example, when a composite battalion of flank companies found itself taking on
an entire division single-handedly:

 All being now ready, Colonel Browne rode to the front of the battalion, and said in a voice to be heard by all, ‘Gentlemen … General Graham has done you the honour of being the first to attack those fellows. Now follow me, you
rascals!’ He pointed to the enemy, and [gave] the order to advance … As soon as we crossed the ravine close to the base of the hill … a most tremendous roar of cannon and musketry was all at once opened … Nearly 200 of our men
and more than half the officers went down by this first volley … In closing on the centre and endeavouring to form a second line, upwards of fifty more men were levelled with the earth; and … the remainder of the battalion now
scattered. The men commenced firing from behind trees, mounds or any cover which presented, and could not be got together. 49

 A variety of factors eventually sent the French scurrying from the field, but the Allied victory was not exploited. A cowardly figure – even the Spaniards knew him as Doña Manolita – La Peña had failed to send any troops to help
Graham although he had plenty to spare and knew that he himself was in no danger. Still worse, despite the fact that Victor was in complete disorder – his losses totalled two thousand men and five guns – the Spanish general
ordered his entire force to cross over on to the Isla de León by means of a pontoon bridge that had been constructed across the Sancti Petri. Bewildered and not a little relieved, Victor was therefore enabled to resume the
blockade. Back in Cádiz, meanwhile, Graham and La Peña were almost literally at daggers drawn. Graham having lost a quarter of his men, his anger was understandable enough, whilst La Peña inflamed matters still further by a
mendacious attempt to pretend that the decision to fall back on the Isla had been precipitated by the British commander. Rightly superseded by the Regency, he continued to wax righteous – ‘I have just gained a victory, and not
only am I prevented from taking advantage of it, but I am deprived of the command which gained it’ 50 – but the British stood firm and hinted openly at treachery. Thus: