

 Outnumbering Soult by almost three to two, Beresford’s army was drawn up in a strong position along the crest of a line of low hills. In the centre of the Allied position – of which the Anglo-Portuguese occupied the left and
centre and the Spaniards the right – the closely packed houses of La Albuera provided a natural defensive redoubt, whilst the ridge provided plenty of shelter for the defenders. Soult, however, was no mean general, and,
reconnoitring his own position, which was thickly covered with olive and ilex trees, he perceived that he was well placed to outflank the Allied right without Beresford realising what was happening. Accordingly, a little while
after what appeared to be a strong French thrust opened against Albuera itself, a massive column debouched from the woods facing the troops of Blake and Castaños. Swinging beyond the Spaniards’ flank, these forces – the infantry
divisions of Girard and Gazan and a brigade of cavalry – crossed the stream and began to ascend the heights on the near side with the obvious intention of rolling up Spaniards and Anglo-Portuguese alike.

 In the face of this brilliant piece of grand tactics, Beresford and Blake proved slow to react (Castaños had surrendered the command of the two brigades that were all that he had contributed to the Allied array to the latter *
). Thus, both seem to have remained convinced that a huge French force was still hidden in the woods to their front, and that Soult’s outflanking move was little more than a dramatic feint. Beyond sending over a cavalry brigade,
Beresford therefore initially left his Spanish allies to deal with the threat, and even sent troops to reinforce Albuera. As for Blake, meanwhile, he wheeled back only a single infantry brigade, supported though this was by the
1,000-strong brigade of Spanish cavalry that he posted to guard the end of his line.

 If disaster was averted, it was therefore no fault of the Allied commanders. What saved them was, first, the fact that the French strike force had to deploy from column of march into a formation more suited for field action, and
necessarily took much time in doing so. No frontal attack of the sort that Beresford and Blake feared being forthcoming – on the contrary, some of the troops who had initially threatened the Allied centre could now be seen
marching to their left – it finally dawned on them that they had been outwitted. Desperate to remedy matters, the British commander immediately ordered the Second Division of William Stewart and the Fourth Division of Lowry Cole
to follow the cavalry he had already sent to support Blake, leaving his centre and left to be held by no more than an independent King’s-German-Legion brigade that had been placed in Albuera itself, the Portuguese division of
General Hamilton, and a brigade that had been improvised from a few Portuguese regulars that had remained in the Alentejo during the blockade of Lisbon. Galloping over to the right flank, meanwhile, Beresford found Blake
frantically trying to get more of his men into line, but by then it was too late: commanded by José de Zayas, four Spanish infantry battalions and a single battery were facing the onslaught of two entire divisions.