

 All in all, then, Fuentes de Oñoro had not been a good bargain for Masséna. Large quantities of supplies had been consumed for no purpose, and it had not been possible either to reach Almeida or to inflict serious damage on
Wellington. There yet remained a consolation prize for the French, however. Although Masséna had no option but to withdraw, he first managed to smuggle a message to the garrison of Almeida ordering it to slight its defences and
try to escape. Thanks to a series of lapses on the part of the forces watching the place, this ploy proved remarkably successful: having fired the fuses of a number of mines that a few minutes later blew great holes in the walls,
on the night of 10 May the entire garrison dashed out of one of the gates. Assailed from all sides, they were almost caught at the bridge that crossed the River Azava at the village of Barba del Puerco, but their commander’s
courage and resource kept them going, and for the most part they eventually reached safety.

 Unwelcome though this may have been, Wellington could on the whole feel well satisfied. His army had succeeded in winning a clear victory, and the way was now open to him to concentrate on capturing Badajoz, which he rightly
judged to be the most valuable of the two possible objectives facing his forces (indeed, no sooner had Masséna departed, than Wellington set out for Extremadura with two infantry divisions). Moreover, although he was not to know
it, if Fuentes de Oñoro had shown that adventures in the plains of León and Old Castile were still a dubious proposition, it proved a turning point in the war, for a delighted Cabinet suddenly switched from suggesting cuts in the
size of Wellington’s army – under existing circumstances always a possibility once the safety of Portugal had been assured – to promising 8,000 fresh troops and sending out a proper siege train. On top of this munificence came
fresh instructions. No longer confined to the defence of Portugal, Wellington was henceforward to have full discretion in what he did. At no point was it specifically said that he should advance, but the implications were clear:
sooner or later, the Anglo-Portuguese army would be taking the offensive with a view to driving the French from Spain.

 To return to Extremadura, meanwhile, Wellington found that matters were on a tolerable footing. Thus, Soult could be expected to be out of the fight for some time whilst Badajoz had been hastily reinvested by Allied troops
returning from La Albuera (though not before Philippon had demolished all the Allies’ siege works). Fully recovered from his illness, General Hill had also turned up, Wellington immediately placing him in charge of the covering
force – the remains of the Second and Fourth Divisions plus some other troops – that was watching Soult. No sooner had siege operations been recommenced, however, than it became obvious that Wellington still did not have the
resources that he needed to take a major fortress. Matters were not helped by various geographical accidents, the gallantry and resourcefulness of Philippon, and faulty planning that dissipated the Allies’ scanty resources and
once again pitted them against the immensely strong San Cristobal, but the key factor was the dubious Allied siege artillery. Still composed almost entirely of museum pieces, this proved incapable of either suppressing the fire
of the defenders or blowing adequate breaches in the walls. For the troops in the trenches the siege was in consequence a miserable affair, Donaldson remembering how they ‘suffered severely from the enemy’s shot and shell, with
which they … plied us hotly’, and Wheeler how they were, ‘almost suffocated for … want of air and nearly baked by the sun’, and were ‘kept in constant motion by swarms of flies’. 26 Though some damage was eventually done, the
courage and fortitude of the defenders ensured that two assaults on 6 and 9 June were beaten off with heavy losses. A participant in both attacks, Wheeler gives a graphic description of the scene: