

 The unevenness of the ground caused the head of the columns to waver and made their weapons jingle, and this attracted the attention of our advanced outposts … We awaited their approach, and as soon as they opened the attack we
threw some hand grenades amongst them … The Spaniards lost a large number of killed, wounded and … prisoners; on our side no one had a scratch. Next day the enemy ran up the white flag … I accorded them the honours of war. The
garrison laid down their arms and remained prisoners; out of respect for their bravery the officers retained their swords. 32

 Counting losses due to sickness, some 4,000 Frenchmen died in the operations round Figueras, whilst for several months the Army of Catalonia, its ranks swelled by a fresh division sent across the border by Napoleon, was rendered
incapable of carrying out the task it had been set of conquering the Catalan interior. Yet, for all that, the gallantry of neither Catalans, nor Navarrese, nor Galicians, nor Andalusians made any difference, for the machine of
French conquest continued to grind on unchecked. In all the areas where imperial control had been shaken by the campaigns of the spring and summer of 1811, the situation was soon returned to the position in which it had stood at
the beginning of the year (the Third Army, for example, was forced to retreat after one of its divisions was defeated by Soult on 9 August at Zujar). Still worse, having made serious inroads on Spain’s limited resources – the
Sixth Army was left in a very weak condition by the campaign in León, Walker reporting that the troops were in a ‘wretched state … in want of almost everything, one third part at least without shoes, and dependent for subsistence
on the precarious collection of the day’ 33 – the fighting had not even prevented the French from seizing still more ground. Next to feel the weight of the emperor’s armies was the vital city of Tarragona. The chief reason why
the Spaniards had for so long been able to maintain a regular army of however small a size in southern and central Catalonia, Tarragona was at one and the same time a great port, a major fortress, and the key to the Levante – the
last region whose resources remained intact as far as the Patriot cause was concerned, and a very wealthy one at that. Not surprisingly, then, the emperor had deemed that it should be taken. Told off for this task was the Army of
Aragón under its commander, General Suchet, the latter being given a third of the Army of Catalonia so as to ensure that his operations could not be marred by friction with Macdonald. In consequence, Suchet now had some 43,000
men, but so many had to be left behind to provide for the defence of Aragón that he was only left with 20,000 men for his offensive. Nothing daunted, however, the French commander was soon on the march. Much aided by the fact
that Campoverde and most of his army had gone north to take part in the operations round Figueras – a curious example of guerrillas distracting Allied rather than French troops from the chief object of the moment – on 3 May he
appeared before its walls.