

 We advanced up the glacis … Not a head was to be seen above the walls, and we began to think the enemy had retired … when sudden as a flash of lightning the whole place was in a blaze. It will be impossible for me to describe to
you what followed. You can better conceive it by figuring … a deep trench or ditch filled with men who are endeavouring to mount the wall by means of ladders. The top of this wall crowded with men hurling down shells and hand
grenades on the heads of them below, and when all these are expended they each have six or seven loaded firelocks which they discharge … as quick as possible. Add to this some half a dozen cannon scouring the trench with grape …
heaps of brave fellows killed and wounded, [and] ladders shot to pieces, and falling together with the men down upon the living and the dead … But in the midst of all these difficulties … we should have taken the fort, but for an
unforeseen accident that could not be remedied … The ladders were too short … As soon as this was discovered, all hopes of gaining possession was abandoned, and the order was given to retire. 27

 Had the Anglo-Portuguese only been able to hang on, starvation alone might have been enough to defeat Philippon, but by now large forces were marching to Badajoz’s relief. Such was the strategic importance of the fortress that
Wellington had always expected that besieging it would attract the attentions of more of the enemy than even he could handle. And so it transpired. Even before Albuera had been fought, Soult had written to the Army of Portugal
warning it that Badajoz was in danger and that he might have to call on it for help. Arriving on 14 May, this letter found not the notoriously mean and selfish Masséna, but a new commander in the person of Marshal Marmont.
Younger and more personable than his predecessor, who had just received the inevitable news that Napoleon had decided to dismiss him from his post, Marmont immediately agreed to move south. Given his character, this was, perhaps,
a little surprising, for the Army of Portugal’s new commander was just as vain and self-centred as Masséna, but he was a good strategist, whilst, as the only French general with no great expanse of territory to defend, he had
nothing to lose in marching to Soult’s aid. On the contrary, indeed, doing so would win plaudits in Paris and might even secure him the credit for a remarkable success.

 For the moment there was much to do, for the Army of Portugal was in desperate need of re-equipment and fresh troops, whilst the forces of Soult and Marmont alike had been ordered to rid themselves of their old corps structure.
Possessed of great energy and enthusiasm, however, Masséna’s replacement proved more than up to the job. In a short time, the surviving soldiers had been concentrated in a smaller number of battalions and squadrons, cadres of
every infantry and cavalry regiment sent back to France to absorb fresh conscripts, and part of Drouet’s Ninth Corps dispatched to reinforce Soult. * At the same time, large stocks of clothing and shoes had been issued, and the
morale of officers and men greatly revived. Now possessed of an establishment of only 36,000 men, the army was much smaller than it had been under Masséna, whilst for the time being it could only put about half its cavalry and
artillery into the field for want of horses (of which large numbers were being dispatched from France). However, with most of its old senior officers got rid of, the increasingly vitriolic atmosphere of the last few months was at
an end, and the Army of Portugal a more cohesive and battle-worthy force than it had been for some time. As Marmont wrote, ‘A month before seemingly so disorganised, so discouraged, so incapable of taking the field, the army …
had recovered its vigour, its élan and its confidence.’ 28