

 The siege that followed was long and bitter. Reinforced by troops brought back from northern Catalonia by sea and the fire of British warships in the harbour, the garrison launched many sorties and put up a desperate defence of
Suchet’s first target, an important outwork known as Fort Olivo. At first the defence was headed by Campoverde, but after nearly a month of fighting that officer left the city to try to organise an army of relief from such troops
of the First Army as had remained outside the city together with some reinforcements which he had begged from Valencia. Great difficulty was experienced in getting together a force of reasonable size, however, whilst Campoverde
showed little enthusiasm for a battle, contenting himself instead with sending false promises of help that ended up doing more harm than good. Inside the city, meanwhile, all was far from well: with the French trenches edging
ever closer and the walls crumbling under the constant bombardment, the garrison was increasingly disheartened, whilst matters were not helped when Fort Olivo was stormed in a gallant action fought on 29 May:

 Between eight and nine in the evening … the signal was given for the assault … By a fortuitous coincidence … a column of 1,200 men coming from the town to relieve the garrison of the fort began to enter it just at the moment
when our columns of assault were debouching from the trench … The first was commanded by chef-de-bataillon Miocque, and proceeded directly towards the breach. The second under commandant Revel … turned to the right of the fort to
attack the gorge. Captain Papigny of the engineers … reached the gate at the moment of its being shut: the … 1,200 Spaniards had just entered precipitately, followed by a detachment of the First Light [Infantry], which … had
rushed in pell-mell with [them]. The sappers endeavoured to break down the gate with their axes, but … though there was some confusion within, a terrible fire was opened and several of the sappers fell … While the column was
crowding up to the gate, commandant Revel ordered some of the sappers and grenadiers to apply long ladders to that part of the scarp which was without ditch: our brave fellows on reaching the top rushed … the gate, opened it and
admitted their colleagues … At the same instant … Miocque … arrived with his column facing the point battered by our artillery, and, as the breach was neither sufficiently wide nor very practicable, he caused the ladders to be
applied to get upon the scarp … It was twenty feet in height and the ladders were only fifteen. Serjeant Meunier … placed himself on top of the longest and made the voltigeurs clamber up on to his shoulders … but this method was
too slow … Fortunately … the Spaniards had imprudently preserved … the aqueduct … at the extremity of the ditch on our left … The grenadiers … rushed forward into this narrow and dangerous passage … They penetrated into the
interior of the fort, and, proceeding along the rampart, overthrew, killed or put to flight such of the enemy as were engaged in … opposing the escalade. 34