

 There followed the most famous episode of the battle. Marching out along the slopes that led to Houston’s position, Craufurd’s men briefly drew up in line. No sooner was the Seventh Division on the move, however, than they began
to file back again. The French cavalry having now re-formed, they immediately tried to ride them down, but the same cavalry units that had already fought so well to protect Houston now again came to the rescue. What could have
been a situation of extreme danger was therefore avoided, the battalion squares into which Craufurd had formed the bulk of his men being able to retire in good order. However, even then the retreat was not without its moments of
crisis: a section of the horse artillery battery attached to the Light Division only saved itself by charging at full gallop some French cavalry that had cut it off, whilst the French also got in amongst the skirmishers covering
the main line and caused one hundred or so casualties. Yet even this minor success was dearly bought:

 General Fournier … Captain Lasalle [and] Lieutenants Labassée and Hymonet, as well as several chasseurs, were unhorsed by the enemy artillery and infantry fire, and a bullet fired at point-blank range smashed into my face and
knocked out six of my teeth. 24

 At this point it should have been clear to Masséna that the battle was lost, for the British position was once again too strong to force. Knowing that defeat meant sure disgrace, however, the marshal could not afford to back
down. Thus, as soon as his outflanking move was seen to be making progress, the French had once again charged across into the village. Since then, a desperate fight had been taking place that saw first one side gain the advantage
and then the other, as well as forcing both the contending commanders to feed more and more troops into the struggle. On at least two occasions French troops made it to the very last buildings of the village, but each time they
were hurled back. After the battle the dead offered mute testimony to the ferocity of the fighting:

 Among the dead that covered the streets … it was quite a common thing to see an English and a French soldier with their bayonets still in each other’s bodies, and their fists convulsively grasping the butt ends of their muskets,
lying on top of each other. At one spot I saw seven, and at another five, French officers killed by bayonet wounds. 25

 Unlike on 3 May the French were not expelled from Fuentes altogether – on the contrary much of the lower part of the village was still in their hands – but for Masséna this was not enough. Realising that no attack on
Wellington’s main position could succeed until the village had fallen, he seized upon Bessières’ refusal to release the division of cavalry he had brought for a final charge on Wellington’s line as a useful pretext, and called
off the action. Casualties were 1,452 for the Allies and 2,192 for the French, or, taking both days of the fighting together, 1,711 and 2,844.