

 Although much of this was unfair, there was a kernel of truth here: most Spanish troops were, quite literally, incapable of manoeuvre. Needless to say, a very different story was soon being put about: Leith-Hay, for example,
states categorically that Beresford’s difficulties were ‘occasioned in the first place by the Spanish troops giving way’. 13 As for William Lawrence, a sergeant who fought in Cole’s charge, he was even more damning:

 The Spaniards … soon gave way in great disorder, leaving the brunt of the battle to the British … It was always a bother to get them to stir forward during a battle, but retreating was what they were best at, and then it was
always in confusion. 14

 Irritation, meanwhile, was turned into fury when the dispatch that was read out in the cortes made it impossible to believe that the British had played anything but a minor role in the fighting. Some fair accounts of the battle
did appear in the Spanish press, but, as Graham complained:

 The news of the victory in Extremadura has filled the minds of the people … with the most determined belief of the superiority of the Spanish army, which now in the public opinion neither admits of nor requires improvement,
being already perfect. Without being a witness to this unfortunate national egoism … it is not to be believed, nor would anyone imagine it possible that people of all ranks should be so ready to deceive themselves and others.
Instead of a grateful and generous feeling of sympathy for the loss of the British troops at Albuera, the people here universally believe that it is purposely exaggerated … and that at all events the safety of the British and
Portuguese was entirely owing to the intrepidity of the Spanish soldiers, and the activity and judgement of their leaders. 15

 What rendered the Spaniards’ grumbling still more irritating was the fact that Wellington had just obtained an important victory on the northern front. Following Sabugal, the British commander had invested Almeida, which he
believed he could starve into surrender long before Masséna’s army could come up to the front (thoroughly exhausted, it had retreated deep into Spain and was now refitting around Salamanca and Toro). Ciudad Rodrigo, too, it was
hoped might be forced to surrender, for its reserves of food were known to have been stripped to feed Masséna’s men, but the troops concerned – the Light Division, which had for some time been in the hands of the singularly
incompetent Sir William Erskine, and the guerrillas of Julián Sánchez – failed to keep an adequate watch and thereby let a large supply convoy slip through. Realising that a long blockade would have risked a repeat of the Côa,
Wellington therefore pulled the Light Division back and concentrated on Almeida alone.

 In the event, this proved just as well. Nothing if not resourceful, Masséna succeeded in rebuilding his army far more quickly than had been expected, and by the end of April reports were coming in that the French were on the
move. Though his men lacked horses and had not been properly reclothed, Masséna was determined to make one last effort. Reinforced by a small cavalry division brought up by the commander of the Army of the North, Marshal
Bessières, on 26 April ‘the darling child of victory’ moved forward to the attack. * Ostensibly this move was aimed at allowing Almeida to be revictualled, but the French did not have the transport to bring up more than a
moderate amount of food, and could not possibly maintain themselves in the vicinity of their target for any length of time. The real object, then, was Wellington’s destruction. Would a battle have brought such a result, however?
Wellington could only field 37,000 men to Masséna’s 48,000; his newly formed Seventh Division was largely composed of raw recruits and foreign deserters; and the open nature of the border country made his marked shortage of
cavalry particularly worrying. Yet all this only begged the question of whether Wellington would fight. As Masséna knew all too well, the British commander could simply withdraw beyond the Côa and wait for hunger to force the
French to retreat, whilst if he fought at all it would be on ground that was immensely strong. Nor was the Army of Portugal in the happiest frame of mind. Thirsting for revenge for the horrors of the last eight months, the men
were willing enough: ‘Everyone’, says Parquin, ‘was eager to come to terms with the English.’ 16 Amongst the generals, however, the atmosphere was even more poisonous than it had been in 1810. Constant buccaneering had led to
incessant squabbling that almost led Generals Poinsot and Fournier to fight a duel. Unwilling to fight any more under Masséna, Drouet had just tried to take advantage of fresh orders he had received from Paris to depart for
Andalucía with most of his men. And finally, Bessières had welched on promises to bring up at least a full infantry division, and was adding insult to injury by claiming that he had ‘come, like a French cavalier, at the head of a
handful of heroes’. 17 † As Masséna remarked, ‘He would have done better to have sent me a few more thousand men … than to come examining and criticising what I am going to do.’ 18 Well might Marbot write, ‘The many annoyances
which [Marshal Masséna] had all around him did a good deal to embitter his naturally vindictive temper’. 19