

 Despite Albuera, Soult’s position was therefore by no means as desperate as it might have been. Forewarned of his plight, Marmont had begun to edge his command southwards even before he had heard the result of the bloody combat
of 16 May, and in consequence was on the march as early as 1 June. Hearing of the move, Bessières was furious, arguing – totally speciously – that his domains would now be exposed to attack from the west, that Soult (whom he
hated) could shift for himself, and that Marmont would be better employed resting his army, but Marmont ignored him. Feinting at Almeida to bluff the substantial forces left in the north by Wellington into quiescence, by 11 June
he had got the first of his troops to the Tagus at the Puente de Almáraz, the British commander in consequence deciding that he had no option but to raise the siege of Badajoz. With Hill’s covering forces in full retreat as well,
Soult moved north and on 18 June the two marshals met at Mérida.

 According to a somewhat smug Marmont, Soult was ‘little accustomed to such comradely conduct’ and was in consequence ‘overwhelmed with joy and gratitude’. 29 As for Badajoz, it was safe again, but what should the French now do?
Once they had joined forces, Soult and Marmont had 60,000 men, but Wellington had fallen back across the frontier and taken up a strong defensive position behind the River Caya between the fortresses of Elvas and Campo Mayor,
where he was soon joined by all the forces that he had left to cover Almeida. Reconnoitring this position, the French commanders decided that pushing on any further would be madness, for the Anglo-Portuguese army was clearly of a
strength not far short of their own. There followed an uncomfortable stand-off. ‘Our foreign troops, German and French, have been deserting in numbers lately’, complained the Guards officer, John Mills. ‘Fifty of the Chasseurs
Britanniques went over … a few nights ago and a night or two afterwards the same number of Germans … played the same trick.’ 30 * And the entire army suffered terribly from heat and thirst:

 Our life in this camp was by no means pleasant … All day long we were infested with snakes, blowflies and other vermin … At night we were plagued by scorpions, mosquitoes and a piercingly cold wind … All kinds of typhus and ague
began to break out … The heat was so oppressive that Captain von Müller, who was president of the officers’ mess, was obliged to find out the precise spot which at five in the afternoon happened to be shaded by two old cork
trees, so that we could at least enjoy a meal … protected from the sun. 31

 Yet, the army was safe, for no attack came. And if the French could not attack, they could not keep 60,000 men in Portugal for very long either, for, setting aside the problem of supplies, it was clear that in both León and
Andalucía the Spaniards were capable of considerable mischief (indeed, the French did not know it, but Wellington had already got Blake to march southwards in the hope that he might threaten Seville). Within a matter of days,
then, Soult was heading back to Andalucía and Marmont to León. Assisted by the arrival of the troops brought by Drouet, the former was able to leave 15,000 men to hold down Extremadura, but once again the initiative was in the
hands of the Allies.