

 In the end, however, disaster was avoided. No sooner had dawn broken on 5 May than thousands of French troops began to envelop Pozo Bello. Fighting bravely, the Allied cavalry tried to slow them down, but their best efforts were
to no avail. As William Tomkinson remembered:

 Our men rode up and began sabring, but were so outnumbered that they could do nothing and were obliged to retire … the enemy having brought up more troops at that point. Captain Belli was wounded … and taken; Sergeant Taylor …
and six men … were killed … in attempting to rescue him. 22

 With the French in overwhelming strength, the village’s garrison was quickly overwhelmed, and the main body of the Seventh Division, which had been drawn up in line of battle under its commander, General Houston, a little to the
west, was forced to retreat in search of safer ground:

 We retired through the broken ground in our rear … and were pretty safe from their cavalry, but they had brought up their guns … and were serving out the shot with a liberal hand. We continued retiring and soon came to a … rapid
stream. This we waded up to our armpits, and from the steepness of the opposite bank we found much difficulty in getting out. This caused some delay [but] the regiment waited until all had crossed, then formed line and continued
[its] retreat in quick time. Thanks to Colonel M. we came off safe … He dismounted … faced us and frequently called the time … He would now and then call out, ‘That fellow … cannot march; mark him for drill, Sergeant Major. I
tell you they cannot hurt us if you are steady; if you get out of time, you will be knocked down.’ He was leading his horse and a shot passed under the horse’s belly, which made him rear up. ‘You are a coward’, he said, ‘I will
stop your corn for three days.’ 23

 Stiffened by such gallantry, Houston’s men were able to reach a good defensive position some way further back. Here the retreat stopped, for, after several charges had been cleverly repulsed, the French horsemen found that they
could make no further progress, whilst the infantry that had followed them had swung northwards and were now heading for Wellington’s main position.

 Here, however, the crisis had already passed. Now fully aware of the danger, Wellington had ordered two of his best infantry divisions and a further brigade of Portuguese troops to form a new line angling back across the ridge
from Fuentes de Oñoro towards another little river – the Turón – that ran along the rear of his original position. This was likely to prove a hard nut to crack – aside from anything else, the ground fell away sharply in front of
the new line – and Wellington could therefore feel perfectly at ease. All that troubled him, indeed, was the situation of the Seventh Division, which was still dangerously isolated. To avoid the possibility of Masséna securing
even the partial success that would have been achieved by its destruction, the British commander therefore sent orders for it to fall back still further whilst at the same time dispatching the Light Division (now once more led by
Craufurd, who had fortuitously resumed its command only the night before) to cover its retreat.