

 What, meanwhile, had been happening in the rest of Spain? In brief, the Allies’ position in the Peninsula had been continuing to deteriorate. This is not, of course, to say that Spanish resistance was in any way diminishing.
Thus, in Navarre, Aragon, the Basque provinces, León, the two Castiles, Andalucía and Catalonia, the guerrillas continued to wreak havoc. In the Serranía de Ronda, for example, José Serrano Valdenebro’s mountaineers were now
organised into three infantry battalions, a squadron of cavalry, and a home guard called out in the event of emergency. Much strengthened as a result, these forces engaged in frequent combats, severely harassing a French column
sent to levy contributions from the district of San Roque, defeating an attempt to capture their headquarters of Gaucín and repeatedly attacking Ronda. As elsewhere, meanwhile, the irregulars were seconded by regular forces: in
June 1811 a column of Polish troops sent to reinforce Ronda was defeated at Dehesa de Gaena by a division of the Fourth Army landed from Cádiz under General Antonio Begines de los Ríos, and eastern Andalucía invaded by General
Freyre’s Third Army. Far away in the north, meanwhile, another force on the move was the Sixth Army, which had been asked by Wellington to mount an offensive in León so as to neutralise Bessières. * Able to put some 15,000 men
into the field, the Galicians moved forward on 12 June, regained Astorga, which had been hastily evacuated, and won a minor victory at Cogorderos on 23 June. After some weeks of marching and counter-marching, the Sixth Army fell
back, but by then the French had been forced to give up not only Astorga but also Asturias, whilst the concentration of much of the Army of the North against its forces had effectively given free rein to the guerrillas of Old
Castile. On 14 August, for example, Porlier stormed Santander, whilst more irregular bands blockaded Palencia and Valladolid. Indeed, all that rescued the French was the arrival from France of several divisions of reinforcements
(for at this time Napoleon was still pouring fresh troops into the Peninsula).

 The greatest coup of all pulled off by the Spaniards at this time, however, was the work of the Catalans. Thus, aided by three young clerks who were employed by the garrison, on the night of 9–10 April the erstwhile cleric,
Francisco Rovira, was able literally to let himself into the very strong fortress of Figueras at the head of 2,000 men. Because it commanded the main road from Barcelona to the frontier, its loss was not to be tolerated, and,
after confused fighting in which Rovira and his men received some rather ineffectual support from troops of the First Army brought up by its latest commander, the Conde de Campoverde, the fortress was besieged (or, to be more
precise, blockaded: reckoning that relief was unlikely, the commander of the French Army of Catalonia, who was now Marshal Macdonald, eschewed formal siege operations in favour of simply starving the defenders into surrender).
Defended largely by irregulars though it was, the fortress hung on for much longer than expected, but on 17 August, with every scrap of food gone, it was finally forced to capitulate after a desperate attempt at a break-out was
foiled. As Macdonald wrote: