

 As it happened, Wellington decided to fight it out, but from the French point of view the whole affair seems singularly pointless. With the high command in such disarray, victory was never likely, whilst the position chosen by
Wellington for this fresh battle was readily defensible. The Allied army was stationed along a line of low hills between a ruined fort and the village of Fuentes de Oñoro, whilst its centre and left were screened by a deep ravine
through which ran a stream called the Dos Casas. Encountering this position on the morning of 3 May, Masséna quickly decided that the best means of making progress was to seize the village, which, strongly garrisoned, was thrown
forward on the slopes that led down to the Dos Casas. Early in the afternoon, then, his leading infantry division charged across the river and into its warren of alleys and courtyards. For several hours there followed a bitter
fight, which cost the two sides over 900 casualties. Something of the chaos is captured by one of the defenders:

 The overwhelming force which the French now pushed forward on the village could not be withstood by the small number of troops which defended it [and] they were obliged to give way … While retreating through the town, one of our
sergeants … being pushed hard by the enemy, ran into one of the houses. They were hard on his heels and he just had time to tumble himself into a large chest … when they entered and commenced plundering the house … and they were
in the act of opening the lid of his hiding place, when the noise of our men cheering as they charged the enemy … forced them to take flight. 20

 At length the attackers were thrown out and forced to retire by a ferocious charge of the Seventy-First Foot, though the French cause was not helped by the fact that one of their units was the red-coated Légion Hanovérienne:

 The result was a cruel blunder. The [French] Sixty-Sixth Regiment, having been sent to support the Hanoverians, who were in the fighting line, mistook them in the smoke for an English battalion, and fired into them … Another
regiment, which was entering the village at that moment, seeing the red coats on their flank, supposed that the position had been turned … and the enemy cleverly took advantage of the resulting confusion to recapture Fuentes de
Oñoro. 21

 Thus baulked, Masséna spent the whole of the next day reconnoitring the Allied position, and at length concluded that the best means of defeating Wellington would be to march around his left flank and leave him the choice of
retreating or facing a pincer attack in which 20,000 men would move north against the southern end of his ridge whilst 14,000 more stormed Fuentes. Realising that something of the sort was afoot, Wellington sent out his new
Seventh Division to occupy the area of the village of Pozo Bello two miles south of the end of his line, but, like Beresford at Albuera, he had badly misjudged the situation, for, very weak in terms of both numbers and quality,
this force was unlikely to be able to stop a serious attack. Also available, true, was the whole of the Allied cavalry – four regiments of regulars and Sánchez’s guerrillas – but even so the Seventh Division could well have been
annihilated.