

 Setting aside the enormous quantities of stores and munitions that had been consumed in the siege, fully two-thirds of the First Army had been put out of action – there were 9,000 prisoners alone – and the remainder reduced to a
demoralised mob with no confidence in its commanders, for no one could understand why Campoverde had not made a greater effort to raise the siege. Over the next few weeks there was therefore a considerable increase in desertion,
whilst the somaténes, too, went to ground. Abandoning several hospitals full of wounded men, who had been evacuated from the city by boat, as well as the stores that it had amassed to throw into its magazines, the army fell back
to Cervera where Campoverde and his subordinates engaged in bitter recriminations which eventually led to the departure of the Valencians (through a rapid descent on the coast, the infantry were got away by sea, but, in what is
possibly the most extraordinary feat of the entire Peninsular War, the 900 cavalry elected to try to ride home, and eventually made it all the way to Murcia after a 600-mile odyssey through Aragón, Navarre and La Mancha).

 At this point, with the remains of the First Army having fallen back deep into its mountain fastnesses in the interior, Campoverde was replaced by Luis Lacy, but, if the latter was a better general, there was little that he
could do to improve matters. Inheriting no more than 3,000 men, he tried hard to increase his strength, but the populace were now even less disposed to serve as regular soldiers than before – an attempt to impose a quinta of
6,000 men in September 1812 produced less than one sixth of that number – whilst he himself appears to have been an unpopular character blessed with little in the way of personal charisma. As a result there was nothing he could
do to stop Suchet from following up his success by relieving Barcelona, which had once again been blockaded by the miqueletes, and driving the latter from the great massif of Monserrat, which they had made into an important base.
With Figueras also gone, had Suchet been willing to pursue operations in Catalonia any further, it is clear that he might have crushed the Catalans once and for all, but the French commander had other plans and Lacy was therefore
afforded a breathing space.

 Of this Lacy made good use, launching a series of attacks on the French that re-established a variety of somewhat precarious links with the sea, but in the grand scale of things this made little difference, Tarragona remaining a
blow from which the Catalans never recovered. Indeed, the whole affair is an excellent case study with regard to the impact of French offensives on la guerrilla. In particular, the spirit of the populace had been completely
broken:

 Let us undeceive ourselves: the fruit one expects to reap sweetens the labour … The soldier who is destitute of everything … [sees] the enemy’s well clothed and fed, and [is] … offered security and [the hope of being] restored
to his family,… deserts, [and] the army is therefore continually decreasing. 38