

 Grievous blow as this was, it was made still more dreadful by the fact that the Peninsula had altered dramatically in the course of 1811. Wellington was stronger than ever before, possessed of a powerful siege train, and all but
unbeatable on grounds of his choosing. The partidas had been reinforced by Spanish regulars and in many cases given a degree of military organisation. And, above all, the French armies were overstretched by occupying huge
expanses of territory that had still been in the hands of their opponents in January 1811. But even this is not an end to the matter, for Napoleon compounded his errors by insisting on an offensive policy. Annoyed at the
evacuation of Asturias, he directed that it should be reoccupied immediately by the Army of the North, and, whilst Oviedo and Gijón were taken with ease, the result was that the unfortunate Dorsenne had to hold down yet more
territory. Asturias, however, was a mere mouthful. Thus, for Napoleon, ‘The great affair of the moment is the capture of Valencia’. 1 No sooner, then, had Figueras fallen, than Suchet was ordered to march on the Levante
post-haste:

 Everything … induces the belief that terror reigns within the walls of Valencia, and that, after … a defeat of the enemy in the open plain, the city will surrender to our arms … Happen what may, your headquarters will be within
the territory of Valencia, and as near as possible to the gates of that city, on or about the fifteenth of September next. 2

 Any worries Suchet had, meanwhile, were swamped by a flood of reassurances. ‘Send an officer to Marshal Suchet’, the emperor told Berthier. ‘Inform him … that the very day that he thought Mina had joined El Empecinado to assist
Blake, the same Mina was in the vicinity of Mondragón, being vigorously pursued by General Bourke. Tell him that … General Decaen has left to relieve Barcelona … Advise him that the British have 18,000 sick … and are in no state
to undertake anything … and that he should therefore launch a powerful attack on Valencia.’ 3 Yet, as even Napoleon recognised, such orders had certain corollaries. In the current circumstances, each fresh advance created the
necessity for a fresh garrison, whilst it had fallen to Suchet’s lot to have to deal with some of the most determined guerrilla forces in the entire Peninsula in the form of Espoz y Mina, Durán, El Empecinado and Villacampa. So
many troops were needed to face these adversaries, to say nothing of the Catalans, that Suchet could demonstrate to his imperial master that, unless he received external support, Valencia could only be gained by losing Aragón.

 The logical conclusion here, of course, was that the French armies in Spain should maintain a defensive posture until such time as the Russians had been dealt with. For Napoleon, however, such a confession of weakness was
intolerable, and, as implied above, he therefore responded to Suchet’s pleas by forcing Dorsenne both to loan him men from Navarre and to release a division intended for the Army of Aragón which had been detained in
anti-guerrilla operations along the way. Yet if Aragón was stronger, the Basque country and Navarre were now much weaker. What, then, was going on in the imperial mind? In brief, the answer is that Napoleon was simply becoming
detached from reality. Contemptuous of the Spaniards and, more especially the guerrillas (a force whom he regarded as mere brigands), Napoleon saw no problem in either reducing the garrison of northern Spain or landing Suchet
with the problem of holding Valencia.