

 With casualities mounting, the French eventually had to fall back, there now being no option but to wait for the army’s siege train. The heavy guns not coming up till 16 October, there followed a prolonged lull in operations
which was to have a dramatic effect on the entire war.

 Thus, far away in Paris, Napoleon, from news of the check before Saguntum, jumped to the entirely erroneous conclusion that Suchet did not have enough troops to capture Valencia. Afraid of another Torres Vedras, he decided that
the Levante ought to be threatened from the west as well as the north, and therefore told Joseph to send part of his Army of the Centre towards Valencia, and Marmont to send part of the Army of Portugal to take over the districts
evacuated by Joseph. In short, the forces facing Wellington were to be significantly weakened, thereby compounding the errors already committed with the Army of the North. Once again, though, there was no danger so far as
Napoleon was concerned. Thus, despite everything, the emperor was convinced that Wellington was not a threat, the stated grounds for this argument being that, in Berthier’s words, ‘the English have 20,000 sick, and can only put
20,000 men into the field’. 6 Also operative, however, was a serious underestimation of Wellington as an opponent: the campaigns of 1809, 1810 and 1811 having painted a picture of a cautious general unlikely to take dangerous
risks, the idea that he might suddenly erupt across the border was laughed to scorn.

 In fact, it was Napoleon who was taking the risks, whilst, to make matters infinitely worse, he was not even doing so on the basis of up-to-date information. The orders issued to Marmont and Joseph went out on 18 October, but on
12 October Suchet had received his guns. With these in action, within four days the walls of Saguntum were breached, and, although another assault was beaten off, it was clear that the garrison’s days were numbered. Sitting
behind his fortifications twenty miles to the south, Blake was thereby placed in an impossible dilemma. All too obviously, relying on the guerrillas was proving a failure. Thus, the garrisons of Calatayud and Ayerbe were forced
to surrender by the partidas, that of Molina de Aragón blockaded in the castle that served as its citadel, and that of Ejea de los Caballeros forced to make a dramatic break-out, whilst 800 Italian auxiliaries were captured at
Plasencia de Gállego. * Despite these successes, however, Suchet showed no signs of retreating. All that was left, then, was to march to relieve Saguntum, and yet that would involve fighting the very battle in the open that Blake
had been striving to avoid.

 In reality, however, Blake had little choice in the matter as he knew that failure to move would lead to accusations of treason or cowardice, and possibly even his removal from the Regency (of which he was still the president).
Waiting only for the arrival of some troops he had been promised from the Third Army and the return of a division he had sent to conduct a reconnaisance in force on the frontiers of La Mancha, on 24 October he crossed the
Guadalaviar and headed for Saguntum. Battle was joined next day a few miles south of the fortress on either side of the Valencia–Tarragona highway. Blake’s plan – in brief, to pivot on his right wing so as to allow his much
stronger left and centre to roll Suchet up and drive him into the sea – was a good one, but his misgivings proved all too well-founded. To carry out their brief the Spanish centre and left had to cross a range of hills that
jutted out into the coastal plain, and the commander of the French forces opposed to them waited only for them to lose their dressing on the steep slopes before hurling his 4,300 men upon them. The result was total chaos, the
leading Spanish troops fleeing for their lives and sweeping away the troops who were coming up in their rear. Only a few men were killed, but several hundred were taken prisoner and the rest reduced to a horde of fugitives. On
the right, meanwhile, the high quality of the divisions of Zayas and Lardizábal had brought some progress (the Spanish cavalry shone for once, indeed). As Suchet later admitted: