

 Yet the autumn of 1811 saw no siege of Ciudad Rodrigo. Although a blockade was imposed as early as 11 August and the siege train sent from Britain was ordered up from Lisbon, no sooner had the French gathered together the
necessary supply convoy, than they struck again. Thus, on 22 September Marmont and Dorsenne (who had replaced Bessières as commander of the Army of the North, and had access to far more troops) swept forward with some 58,000 men.
With only 46,000 men Wellington realised that he could not stop so powerful a force, but, in the apparent belief that the French commanders intended only to revictual Ciudad Rodrigo, he neither pulled back the troops that had
been watching it as far as he might have done nor bothered to concentrate his army properly. Marmont and Dorsenne, however, had more fighting spirit than the British general had allowed for. Thus, far from quietly bivouacking
around Ciudad Rodrigo, which was relieved on 23 September, two days later all the cavalry that the French could muster suddenly moved forward, and fell on Picton’s Third Division at El Bodón. Though badly outnumbered, the troops
concerned fought bravely. Thus:

 The French cavalry charged … The Fifth Regiment were lying down … The commanding officer would not allow them to get up until the enemy was close to them. At the distance of a few yards this little regiment poured a volley into
the enemy, and, dashing on through the smoke with the bayonet, charged the … cavalry [and] drove them back. 43

 It was, however, an unpleasant affair:

 We kept our post gallantly, surrounded by about 2,000 cavalry, until at last, the French infantry being brought up, we were ordered to retreat in squares … The French cavalry, seeing us prepared for retreat, rushed furiously on,
and the various squares were now successively charged by powerful masses of their cavalry … but they halted and repulsed them with the utmost steadiness and gallantry. The French … suffered severely, having a tremendous fire
poured in on them each time … We were much annoyed by shot and shell from the heights where the French artillery were posted, some of which falling in the squares did great mischief, killing and wounding several of our men, and
blowing up our ammunition. We had about six miles to retreat in this manner before we reached the body of the army, with the French cavalry hanging on our flanks and rear. 44

 In the end all the men involved got away, but even so Wellington was in serious trouble, for initially he could get together only a mere 15,000 men. Further retreat at first being impossible for fear that the French might defeat
the army in detail, the British commander had no option but to try to bluff things out by adopting a strong defensive position at Fuenteguinaldo.

 Fortunately for the Allies, the gamble came off, for Marmont refused to move. Attacking Wellington whilst his forces were spread out over miles of countryside was one thing, but taking him on in a position of his own choosing
was quite another, the very fact that he was willing to stand and fight suggesting that he must have more troops than at first met the eye: