

 At length, Marmont and Dorsenne appeared at the head of their gorgeous staffs … Hardly, however, had these gentlemen come up than they dismounted and began to examine the English camp … ‘Yes’, said the marshal, making efforts to
see what was not there through a telescope supported on my aide-de-camp’s shoulder. ‘Yes, my information is correct; the right of the English line rests upon an impracticable escarpment.’ Thereupon I again took up my own glass …
and could discover no indication of such an escarpment. General Dorsenne was equally unable to see it, and told the marshal so. He made no answer but continued, ‘That camp is covered by revetted works.’ After exchanging one or
two … looks with me, General Dorsenne further observed that it was all he could do to see a few places where the ground had been thrown up. At length, the marshal finished his examination, adding, as though no-one else had
spoken, ‘And … those revetted works are armed with heavy guns … so there is nothing to be done.’ 45

 In consequence, the opportunity was lost. At nightfall on 26 September Wellington quietly retreated to Alfayates, where he picked up the rest of his forces before occupying another natural fastness at Aldeia Velha. This the
French reconnoitred, but, if they had been unwilling to attack at Fuenteguinaldo, they were even less willing to do so now, and the campaign therefore petered out, Marmont and Dorsenne retreating to Ciudad Rodrigo.

 If he had in the end escaped with no serious losses, the period from March to September 1811 had therefore seen Wellington receive two bloody noses on the Portuguese frontier. Twice his forces had advanced to attack the
fortresses which blocked the roads into Spain and twice they had been forced to retreat by superior concentrations of French troops. His siege train had now come up and was ready for action – stationed at Almeida, indeed, it
could be got into action against Ciudad Rodrigo in a mere two days – and yet, so long as things remained unchanged in terms of the disposition and strength of the French armies, it was clear that nothing more could be attempted.
And, if Wellington was powerless to effect any change in the situation, for all the petty victories that their forces won, how much more was this true of the Spaniards’ skeletal armies and empty pay chests? For the French,
however, matters were very different. Their forces in Spain having reached a strength of over 350,000 men in the summer of 1811, they had demonstrated all too clearly that they possessed sufficient troops to contain the
Anglo-Portuguese, keep the guerrillas under control, and launch fresh offensives against the remnant of Patriot territory that was the key to victory in Spain, and, by extension, Portugal.

 One should not, of course, exaggerate here. If Wellington was being contained on the Portuguese frontier, it was only at the cost of immense trouble and difficulty. The logistical problems involved in the concentration of large
armies in the devastated and largely infertile regions that marked the frontier of Spain and Portugal were extremely difficult to resolve, whilst more worrying still was the fact that the Caya and Fuenteguinaldo had shown that
even the French generals had lost all confidence in their ability to defeat the Anglo-Portuguese army in open battle. In consequence, the thousands of dead who littered the fields of Albuera and Fuentes de Oñoro therefore
represented something more than just another ‘butcher’s bill’, Wellington having established a clear moral superiority over his opponents, and firmly wrested the initiative from them. Gone for ever, too, was the chance that lack
of confidence in London would place Wellington in a strait-jacket, let alone produce an evacuation of the Peninsula, whilst the successes of the first part of the year had also increased the chances of Napoleon getting into
difficulties with Austria, Russia and Prussia (indeed, an increasingly unhappy Alexander I had even briefly considered going to war).