

 None of this is to say that the French were not still winning the war, but the gains of 1811 had for all that given rise to serious problems for their commanders. All too clearly, they faced a dangerous opponent in Wellington.
Thanks to their determination to eradicate Spanish resistance, meanwhile, their troops had become more and more spread out. As we shall see, indeed, with French troops marching on Valencia (see below), extension was rapidly
becoming over-extension. As yet, the situation was still under control – more than that, the French could still go on to victory – but one false move would be enough completely to destabilise the whole edifice of Napoleonic rule.
As 1811 drew to a close, then, much hung in the balance.

===== FILE: OEBPS/xhtml/chapter14.xhtml =====
The Peninsular War

 14

 Badajoz

 THE ANGLO-PORTUGUESE OFFENSIVE OF 1812

 Tumbled untidily on the steep slope, the dead and wounded were in places four deep. Some, the luckier ones, had just been shot, but others had been drowned, trampled to death, torn apart, burned alive, or impaled. Silhouetted
against the sky, a single macabre figure hung from the great cheval de frise that crowned the slope. Scattered about among the bodies lay the inevitable detritus of war – discarded cartridge boxes, broken muskets, ripped
haversacks, trampled shakos, officers’ swords, torn letters, blood-soaked testaments. In the air the stench of powder, burned flesh, urine and excrement assailed the nostrils whilst the city hidden behind the walls resounded to
shots, screams and the crackle of flames. Sitting on his horse on the lip of the ditch, Wellington was silent, and then, visibly overcome, he turned away: there was suddenly a war not just to fight but to win.

 Badajoz, then, had fallen. With Ciudad Rodrigo – the prize of a similar action some seven weeks previously – also in Allied hands, the way was clear to end the frustrating stalemate of 1811, march into Spain and reap the fruits
of victory. Yet in itself the bloody triumph gained at Badajoz was not a turning point, but rather the consequence of developments far away in which the Peninsular War played no part. In the early autumn of 1811 the French had
still been in a position to take the initiative in Spain, given that they had sufficient resources simultaneously to contain the Anglo-Portuguese, hold their own in la guerrilla, and embark on the conquest of still more Patriot
territory. This, of course, depended on the arrival of more and more troops from France. There having been no major challenge to Napoleon since 1809, for some considerable time this had been no problem, the troops already in
Spain having been kept up to strength, and many fresh units sent to join them. Implicit in this situation was the absence of any other employment that would require an overwhelming effort on the part of the emperor’s soldiers,
but in the autumn of 1811 just such a demand suddenly emerged. Ever since 1808 relations between Napoleon and Alexander I had been growing frostier by the month, and matters had now reached such a point that the former had
decided to go to war. Very soon, then, orders were going out for the grande armée to concentrate in Poland. For josefino Spain the implications were very serious. Thus, by January 1812 all troops of the Imperial Guard and units
of Polish origin serving across the Pyrenees were called back to France. These troops amounting to well over 25,000 men, a great hole was torn in the armies defending Joseph Bonaparte. Worst hit was Dorsenne who lost two full
infantry divisions and the best part of his cavalry, whilst Suchet and Soult each lost some 6,000 infantry.