

 Discouraged by Suchet’s success, the defenders did not put up much of a fight when the French stormed the city’s first line of defences on 21 June. All that was now left to the garrison was the old town which was situated on a
high bluff overlooking the harbour. A belated attempt at relief by Campoverde failing through want of will on his part, morale slumped still further when a British expeditionary force that had appeared in the harbour left without
firing a shot (sent up by Graham from Cádiz, it was under orders not to disembark unless it could guarantee its escape).

 The end came on 28 June: bombarded by twenty-two guns brought up to the closest possible range, the wall of the old city was breached, and late in the afternoon the French advanced to the assault. For a little while the
defenders fought bravely, but most of their guns had been put out of action and the attackers soon broke through. As Suchet remembered:

 At five in the afternoon … our brave men … issued from the trenches … and dashed onto the breach … The Spaniards then hurried up, lining the breach with the most valiant of their officers and men … A shower of case-shot poured
upon the head of the column. For a moment fortune seemed to waver … [but] the columns rallied [and] the mass formed anew, dashed on, reached the summit, and, like an irresistible torrent … inundated the ramparts. 35

 A resourceful and courageous soldier, however, the governor, Juan Senan de Contreras, had barricaded the streets, and fighting continued in the interior of the city for some hours. Contreras himself was captured leading a
counter-attack; many groups of soldiers found themselves trapped and fought to the death, including 300 men who were caught in the cathedral; and a considerable number of survivors were got together by a General Courten and tried
to break out of the city so as to join Campoverde, only to be ridden down by French cavalry. Inside the city, meanwhile, there were scenes of horror, the victorious French thoroughly sacking the old town and killing at least
2,000 civilians. As Suchet admitted of his men:

 Their excitement had reached the highest pitch: it was not possible … amid such a scene to moderate them by words. They were inebriated … by the noise, smoke and blood, by the recollection of danger, by the desire of victory, by
the thirst for revenge. Their uncurbed fury would listen to nothing; nay, they were almost deaf to the voice of their officers. 36

 At length the slaughter came to an end, but nothing could hide the magnitude of the disaster which had beset the Patriot cause. As the Junta of Catalonia lamented:

 Catalonia has … lost the only port which remained to her … The most … fertile part of the principality is in possession of the enemy … and the mountainous parts alone must support the burden of the war … From the loss of the
park of artillery and the very great want of ammunition in that part of the country which remains free, the army finds itself incapable of undertaking military operations, and the enemy, beholding our constrained inactivity, will
no doubt advance without the least delay, and thus very soon become master of the whole province. 37