

 Even with the aid sent him by Napoleon, Suchet could only muster 26,000 troops for the march on Valencia, but these were, without exception, experienced veterans of the highest calibre. Facing them was a distinctly mixed array
consisting of the ill-trained and generally rather demoralised Second Army (or, rather, its regular divisions: in theory, the forces of El Empecinado, Durán and Villacampa were also part of the Valencian command) and the much
better divisions of Zayas and Lardizábal, which had been sent round by sea from Cádiz. Cantoned at various places in Murcia, but available for service so long as Soult did not make a move from the direction of Andalucía, was the
Third Army, although this, too, was a force with a long record of defeat. Though at least 40,000 men were available to defend Valencia, and the whole assemblage handed over to Blake, who had also been made Captain General of both
Valencia and Murcia, British observers painted a grim picture:

 Palacio * has given himself up to … the most extreme superstition … He attends all processions and puts his baton in the hands of the Virgin. There is no use, it appears, in change: we go from bad to worse. Nothing short of a
miracle can save Valencia … The number of souls in the town … is 150,000 at present, and, if the enemy approaches, the population would be doubled. Suchet need only blockade them for a few days, and they must starve or surrender.
4

 On 15 September 1811 the campaign began. French columns coming from southern Aragón and Tortosa poured across the northern frontiers of Valencia and advanced along the coast meeting little resistance, Blake having decided to
abandon the border region without a fight in favour of concentrating his forces for the defence of Valencia itself. Here the enemy could be brought to a halt before a strong line of entrenchments that had been constructed along
the River Guadalaviar, on whose southern bank the city stood, by which time Blake hoped that far away in Aragón and Navarre, Espoz y Mina and the other guerrillas (to whom he had sent messages asking for their co-operation) would
have wrought such damage that Suchet would have no option but to turn for home. However, to win time, he also deployed a garrison in the ruins of Roman Saguntum, these occupying the top of a steep and rocky hill high above the
town of Sagunto. Patched up and adapted for artillery, on 23 September this fort was invested by the French. Eager to waste as little time as possible, Suchet resolved on an attempt simply to rush its walls, and on the night of
27–28 September columns duly approached two points in the enceinte that were particularly weak. However, the element of surprise was lost, and the attackers found themselves under heavy fire. To quote their commander:

 They placed the ladders against the walls, and … an officer of sappers and a few grenadiers … reached the summit, but they were … either killed or driven back, whilst shot and grenades filled with glass were poured in torrents
upon the body of the assailants who were hurrying to the foot of the rampart. 5