

 If the towns and villages of occupied Catalonia teemed with men on the run from the armies – in March 1813 the Ampurdán alone was estimated at hosting at least 12,000 – the somaténes also proved little help. Lacy tried to give
them new life, but the results were disappointing, the Spanish commander running into precisely the same problems that had dogged his predecessors:

 [The general] … authorised several men who enjoyed the confidence of the people to collect a certain number of soldiers and form companies called patriótas. * These parties killed a great number of Frenchmen, but, on account of
a general pardon having been granted to all deserters, and a great many of them having joined those parties in preference to the regular corps, introduced great disorder … in the different places they were stationed. To remedy
that in future, they were ordered to dress uniformly, got a regular commandant put over them, and, [having] begun to assume some regularity … were by force incorporated in the regiments of the line. This disgusted the greatest
part of them [and they] immediately deserted and filled the province with robbers instead of augmenting the army. 39

 Pushed back into the interior, meanwhile, the First Army suffered terribly. The mountainous districts around Vich and Seo de Urgel, which now constituted its only base, could supply it with neither sufficient money, nor
sufficient men, nor sufficient provisions, and it was in consequence reduced to penury. A British report of 1813 described the troops as being tough and well-armed, but suffering from ‘much deficiency of accoutrements … very bad
clothing … and … a complete want of shoes’. 40 The result was paralysis:

 In the state in which Catalonia and her army find themselves, every type of assistance is needed if the offensive is to be taken and the enemy reduced to the walls of their fortresses. With an army that scarcely amounts to 7,000
men … we have with difficulty been able to stop the French from raiding the most inaccessible parts of the region, but we have had to abandon the richest and most productive areas of the province to their mercy … As a result we
have been denied their resources and manpower alike, the French having shut them in behind a line of fortified posts protected by a field force far superior to anything that we can oppose to it. 41

 In sum, then, as a British liaison officer reported, ‘Without an additional force of 6,000 or 8,000 men, nothing offensive can be undertaken.’ 42

 As if all this was not bad enough, the Anglo-Portuguese forces’ record in the second half of 1811 was distinctly disappointing. Following the non-battle on the River Caya in the last week of June, Wellington had been left free
to do more or less as he wanted, for the French had adopted an essentially defensive posture: the much-tried Army of the North holding open communications with Ciudad Rodrigo with no more than one division; Soult leaving only a
relatively small force of troops in Extremadura; and Marmont occupying the Tagus valley, this being a position from which he could strike either north or south as required (of great importance in this respect was the bridge of
Almáraz, which, as the only good crossing of the central Tagus, the French had protected with a ring of imposing forts). Ciudad Rodrigo being a weaker fortress than Badajoz, Wellington therefore marched north once more, leaving
Hill in the Alentejo with the Second Division and some Portuguese units.