

 We perceived … the Spanish columns advancing upon the high road … with a regularity and determination which they had not yet displayed on any occasion … Our hussars were charged and driven back. Our artillery was attacked by the
enemy sword in hand, and a few pieces … fell into their hands. 7

 Despite this display of courage, Suchet had sufficient reserves to tip the balance and Blake’s whole army was soon fleeing the field in great disorder. Left behind were over 5,000 casualties, most of them prisoners.

 Given that Suchet had only 14,000 men to Blake’s 27,000, this was one of the more extraordinary battles of the Peninsular War, whilst it also sealed the fate of Saguntum, whose bitterly disappointed garrison surrendered the next
day. After this affair, too, it was clear that Valencia would be unlikely to resist for very long either. As Wellington wrote, indeed, ‘The Spaniards will owe the loss of another kingdom … to the insatiable desire of fighting
pitched battles with undisciplined troops led by inexperienced officers.’ 8 Yet news of the victory did not make Napoleon any happier, for on 21 November he sent a fresh order to Marmont instructing him to get together a force of
12,000 men to assist Suchet.

 According to Napoleon, of course, such a move was perfectly safe, the emperor being immovable in his belief that Wellington would not attack. Yet at the very time that Marmont was being given his orders, news was coming to light
that suggested a picture that was far less rosy. Thus, the two French divisions left to hold Extremadura under Drouet (who had replaced Mortier) were having to cover the whole front from the Sierra Morena to the River Tagus, the
Army of Portugal having withdrawn the division which it had for a little while kept around Trujillo. Seeing his opportunity, Hill, who was still covering Elvas with the Second Division and a variety of Portuguese troops, secured
the support of those elements of the Fifth Army which were in the vicinity, and marched to attack the northernmost of Drouet’s two divisions. ‘The rainy season had commenced’, remembered George Bell, ‘and the weather was
dreadful.’ 9 On 28 October the French were taken by surprise at the isolated village of Arroyomolinos de Montánchez, and, after a confused fight, badly beaten. Amongst the participants was Robert Blakeney:

 About dawn … favoured by a dense fog, the troops were formed … within half a mile of the enemy, who, strange to say, did not present even a single vedette … All being prepared, all suddenly moved forward … and the dense fog
clearing away, our left column were absolutely entering the town before the enemy were aware of our vicinity … The Seventy-First and Ninety-Second Regiments cheered and charged through the town, taking a few prisoners … The
enemy … formed in two columns on the plain outside … The fire from the Seventy-First … disturbed their close formation, and in the meantime the Ninety-Second … formed line on the enemy’s flank [and they] commenced a rapid
retreat … The British cavalry having at length come up … [a] brisk charge put the French cavalry to flight. Their infantry still pushed forward with uncommon rapidity, yet … as they approached the eastern horn of … the Sierra
[de] Montánchez, they were met directly in front by our right column … The enemy perceived it impossible to pass by us, and as our left column was moving up in their rear … they made a rush at the [mountain]. 10