

 What, though, of Valencia? After the battle before Saguntum, Blake had fallen back to the Guadalaviar, but for a long time Suchet made little move to pursue him, realising that any further advance was impossible unless he could
draw in more troops from Aragón. Blake, then, was given the chance to strengthen his earthworks, fill up his battered regiments with fresh conscripts, and send off a few regular troops to encourage guerrillas to fresh efforts.
However, his appeals had little effect – the various commanders were unwilling to collaborate with one another, and resentful of Blake’s interference – and by Christmas the French were ready. On the night of 25 December Suchet’s
army marched out to attack the Spanish positions along the Guadalaviar. Defended by some 23,000 men, these were heavily fortified, but far too extensive for Blake’s mediocre troops, whilst both flanks of the position had been
neglected in favour of the centre (constituted by the city of Valencia itself). Hardly surprisingly, then, Suchet sent the bulk of his troops to strike each end of Blake’s line with the aim of swinging inwards and encircling army
and city alike. In this situation, there could be little contest. Some of the defenders fought bravely enough, but Blake failed to act with the energy that was the only thing that might have saved something from the situation and
the bulk of his forces were therefore forced to withdraw inside the city. Perhaps 5,000 troops got away to join such forces of the Third Army as had not succeeded in reaching Valencia in time for the assault, but there were too
few men to launch a counter-attack and no source of reinforcements nearer than Cádiz. In short, the city was doomed, for, though well fortified, it had less than three weeks’ food in its magazines. An attempt at a mass break-out
on 29 December was foiled by bungling and irresolution, whilst on 5 January Suchet opened fire on the city. Three days later it was all over. With the population on the point of revolt, Blake capitulated, leaving Suchet to march
in and avenge the massacre of 1808: several hundred people were executed, all the city’s monks and friars deported to France, and the authorities forced to pay a fine of 200,000,000 reales.

 Even by Spanish standards Valencia was a disaster. Well over 20,000 troops had been lost in the campaign, including the best two divisions in the Spanish army, whilst Suchet had captured immense stocks of war material and
perhaps 500 guns. Politically and strategically, too, the affair was a source of real worry. As Wellington wrote:

 The greater number of grandees of Spain have estates in Valencia upon the revenues of which they have subsisted since they have lost everything elsewhere. It may be expected, therefore, that the loss of the kingdom will induce
many to … submit to the French yoke … There is also another view in which the loss of Valencia is a shattering misfortune, and that is that this conquest, unlike the others which the enemy have made in Spain, will promote the
concentration of their forces. Even if Suchet should not be able to press on further to the southward … [he] will be able to communicate with a shorter route than he had with the Army of the Centre and the Army of Portugal [and]
he will be on the back of the Empecinado, Mina and [the] others, and will cut off the supplies which they received through Valencia. If the people of Valencia should submit as soon as the military force of the kingdom will be
subdued, which, from what I hear of them, I think probable, Suchet’s force will then be disposable on the left of Soult or to support the [armies] more immediately opposed to us. 14