 On reaching the glacis we were discovered by the garrison, and instantly a tremendous fire opened. Though the carnage in our ranks was very great, we continued our advance … Owing to the darkness of the night … we came
unexpectedly upon the counter-scarp, and nearly half our party, myself among the number, were precipitated into the ditch below. Much bruised by the fall I lay a few minutes insensible, till on the arrival of the main body, the
ladders were fixed … and the descent into the ditch quickly effected. Though the formation of the troops was necessarily broken in these operations, they immediately advanced against the breaches … but such were the obstacles
prepared by the enemy that it was found impossible to surmount them … To overcome these obstacles many gallant … attempts were made by our troops, but … we were at length compelled to retire … Twenty-one officers of the regiment
were either killed or wounded, and of the ten men of our company who volunteered for the forlorn hope only myself and a man by the name of Cummings came back alive, both wounded. 29

 Fighting alongside Hamilton in the Light Division was George Simmons:

 Our columns moved on under a most dreadful fire … that mowed down our men like grass … Eight or ten officers and men innumerable fell to rise no more. Ladders were resting against the counter-scarp … Down these we hurried and …
rushed forward to the breaches, where a most frightful scene of carnage was going on. Fifty times they were stormed, and as often without effect, the French cannon sweeping the breaches with a most destructive fire. Lights were
thrown amongst us … that burned most brilliantly, and made us easier to be shot at … I had seen some fighting, but nothing like this. 30

 For two hours the fighting continued, but around midnight Wellington decided that he could not ask any more of his men and ordered them to fall back.

 The troops involved having suffered some 2,000 casualties, it looked as though the assault had failed. However, at the last minute Wellington had agreed to the idea of secondary assaults on the castle and the bastion of San
Vicente, both of which were points far removed from the breaches. At the castle the assailants suffered heavy casualties. As Donaldson recalled:

 At last the order was given, and with palpitating hearts we commenced our march … Being apprised of our intentions, they threw out fire balls in every direction … By this means they were enabled to see … our columns, and they
opened a fire of round and grape shot which raked through them, killing and wounding whole sections … We still advanced as before … and got down into the ditch. The ladders were not yet brought up, and the men were huddled on one
another in such a manner that we could not move … When we first entered the [ditch] we considered ourselves comparatively safe, thinking that we were out of range of their shot, but … they opened several guns … and poured in
grape shot upon us from each side … Our situation at this time was truly appalling … When the ladders were placed, each eager to mount, [the soldiers] crowded them in such a way that many of them broke, and the poor fellows who
had nearly reached the top were precipitated a height of thirty to forty feet and impaled on the bayonets of their comrades below. Other ladders were pushed aside by the enemy on the walls, and fell with a crash on those in the
ditch, while [men] who got to the top without accident were shot on reaching the parapet, and, tumbling headlong, brought down those beneath them. This continued for some time, until at length, a few having made a landing …
[they] enabled others to follow. 31