

 Wellington was not the only commander to feel alarmed. In another example of the way in which French conventional successes favoured the defeat of the guerrillas, Espoz y Mina later professed that he was horrified at the news:

 As well as causing me much sorrow, the loss of Valencia did me a great deal of damage. In this respect, the worst problem was the manner in which it deprived me of a point to which I could turn for munitions, and in fact these
immediately began to run short. At the same time I feared that some of the enemy troops that had taken part in the conquest of the city would … fall on the area in which I had been operating. 15

 Yet Valencia was the high tide of French conquest. As we have seen, irregular resistance continued under such leaders as the friar, Agustín Nebot. In consequence, Suchet’s troops were too overstretched to be able to advance very
much further, whilst such help as was available from outside was insufficient to allow the French to occupy the rump of Spanish territory in the Levante. Montbrun, true, advanced all the way to Alicante, only to be forced to turn
tail when the garrison refused to surrender, whilst Soult, who had also received orders to go to Suchet’s assistance, could in the end do no more than raid the city of Murcia, the Army of the South’s small field force having
spent the autumn and winter attempting to take the minor coastal fortress of Tarifa, and fighting Ballesteros, who had been transferred to the vicinity of Gibraltar. Stretched to their very limits, the French had finally shot
their bolt.

 At this moment nemesis struck. Far from being incapable of taking the field, Wellington had all along been ready to march on Ciudad Rodrigo at a moment’s notice. The British had many men sick, certainly, but in the course of
1811 they had been so heavily reinforced that they still had 45,000 men ready for duty. Eighteen months, meanwhile, of continual fighting against the French had honed the tactical skills of the infantry beyond measure, whilst
there were now twice as many cavalry as at the start of the year as well as a reasonable complement of field and horse artillery and a fine siege train. Supporting them were some 33,000 Portuguese regulars, many of whom had now
earned an excellent reputation. Financial problems abounded, true – even with the British subsidy, Portugal’s income amounted to only half what the Council of Regency needed, whilst Wellington was short of specie – but in the
last resort these were never more than an irritant and certainly not enough to frustrate the hammer blow that Wellington was about to deliver.

 Thus, no sooner had the British commander received word that the Army of Portugal was sending troops northwards and eastwards – or, to put it another way, that Napoleon had destabilised the position of the whole of the French
forces in Spain – than his troops were set in motion. Despite severe winter weather, Ciudad Rodrigo was invested on 8 January 1812 – the day that Valencia capitulated – and thereafter matters were pushed at great speed,
Wellington being well aware that sooner or later the French would concentrate their forces against him (in this, of course, he was perfectly correct, but it appears that he was unaware of just how severe the problems faced by his
opponents were in this respect). The French were quickly driven from their chief outwork and in a mere six days sufficient spade work had been completed for twenty-seven guns to be brought up and set to work to smash a breach in
the walls. Two holes having been torn in the defences, on 19 January Wellington ordered an assault. In an ideal world, there is no doubt that it would have been better to wait a little while longer before throwing the army at the
breaches. Thus, assault trenches might have been dug closer to the walls or the ditch blown in so that the troops did not have to negotiate a sheer drop before gaining access to the breaches, but such was the pressure on
Wellington that he would brook no further delay. In the early evening of 19 January, then, the assault began, the troops having first been provided with sacks of hay to break their fall when they jumped down into the ditch. At
the lesser breach, the assailants came from the Light Division. Amongst them was George Simmons: