 It was something truly inexplicable. The emperor completely ignored the real state of the question … The mission of Colonel Jardet was fruitless. Many long conversations with the emperor had the air of convincing him, but they
did not bring any change in the … orders that had been given. 22

 Stripped of their wilder aspects – supply problems alone, for example, rendered a march on Lisbon out of the question – Napoleon’s ideas were not so crazy as has sometimes been suggested, for Ciudad Rodrigo might just possibly
have been recaptured, the fortress being ill-supplied and garrisoned by troops of the poorest quality. That said, however, the plan was a highly risky one, depending, as it did, on the assumption that Wellington would value
keeping Ciudad Rodrigo more than taking Badajoz, whilst at the same time surrendering any chance of saving the latter by more direct means. Soult, Napoleon claimed, could look after his own, but, as the events of the previous
year showed, he simply did not have the strength to relieve Badajoz without outside aid. Still worse, ‘King Nicholas’ did not even know that he was on his own until much too late, Marmont having written to him in all good faith
that he would march to his assistance the moment that he was certain Wellington had moved south.

 Curiously enough, at the very time that Napoleon was wreaking such havoc in the affairs of the Army of Portugal, he had taken a step that might have done much good, for, as we have seen, on 16 March 1812 he appointed Joseph to
the post of commander-in-chief of the French armies in Spain. In many ways this was no bad thing, for the King and his chief-of-staff, Marshal Jourdan, possessed a clearer understanding of the situation in Spain than anyone
except Marmont. Recognising that the chief priority at the present moment was supporting Soult, they in consequence ordered Dorsenne, Suchet and Marmont to concentrate a relief force in the Tagus valley. Yet for Badajoz the
appointment could make no difference: even if the various commanders had been disposed to accept Joseph’s authority – which none of them were – the masse de manoeuvre he was trying to create could not possibly have been got
together in time. Nor was it any use that at the last minute Marmont was granted permission to head south, for the dispatch concerned did not reach the marshal’s headquarters until 27 March, by which time he was irrevocably
committed to a thrust into Portugal.

 In fairness to Marmont, it has to be said that, good soldier as he was, he did his best. Ciudad Rodrigo was blockaded, and Almeida investigated with a view to a possible escalade, but the latter was judged impracticable, Marmont
then marching south-westwards into the depths of Beira in the faint hope that Wellington might at least detach some forces to defend his flank and rear. Without supply trains, however, Marmont could not possibly sustain such a
movement, for, as he wrote, ‘Without means of transport, and with very little food, how could the army have successfully completed a march through a barren countryside that had been abandoned by its inhabitants?’ 23 Castelo
Branco was occupied, a brigade of Portuguese militia routed at Guarda, and some minor supply dumps overrun, but on 15 April news reached the marshal that Badajoz had fallen, the result being that he retired in some haste, all his
efforts having therefore gone for nothing.