

 By scrambling up the rocky hillside, a number of French troops managed to escape along with their commander, General Girard, but even so over 1,000 men laid down their arms.

 This little campaign should have shaken Napoleon out of his misapprehensions but it did not. In this respect it may not have helped that Arroyomolinos had witnessed the début of a somewhat farcical attempt to instil the Spanish
armies with the spirit of the ‘golden age’ of the sixteenth century. This was the brainchild of a hispanophile adventurer named John Downie, who had originally been a commissary in Wellington’s army. Securing the backing of La
Romana and Castaños, he had himself appointed as the commander of a new ‘legion’ of cavalry and infantry, of which the chief basis was a number of depleted units drawn from the Fifth Army. Some material support was also got from
London, but Wellington himself disapproved (indeed, he is reputed to have observed that Downie was Spanish down to his shirt). Sadly, his doubts were well-founded, for Downie proceeded to dress his men in sixteenth-century
costume. ‘Anything so whimsical and ridiculous as the dress of this corps,’ complained Sherer, ‘I never beheld … The turned up hat, slashed doublet and short mantle might have figured very well in the play of Pizarro … but in the
rude … bivouac they appeared absurd and ill-chosen.’ 11 And at all events Downie’s fancies served no purpose whatsoever. ‘Clothed like harlequins’, wrote Blakeney, ‘this fantastic and unruly squadron … displayed neither order nor
discipline. Intractable as swine, obstinate as mules and unmanageable as bullocks, they were cut up like rations or dispersed in all directions like a flock of scared sheep.’ 12

 Marmont, meanwhile, was just as complacent. For reasons that are not entirely clear he too believed that Wellington would remain inert. As one of his aides-de-camp told a worried Thiébault, for example, ‘The preparations of
which you speak … have no other object but to lead us into making false movements. The English army is not ready for any important operation and will undertake none before spring.’ 13 As a result, headed by General Montbrun,
three infantry divisions and a brigade of cavalry were soon moving south-eastwards, only to find that by the time they reached the frontiers of the Levante their services were no longer required (of rather more use was the small
contingent contributed by King Joseph, for, by occupying Cuenca, this did at least succeed in tying down a few troops that had been marching to help Blake). Nor was this an end to the calls on the Army of Portugal. Eager to help
Suchet, who had proved slow to follow up his victory at Saguntum, Napoleon had authorised him to draw still more troops from Aragón, these being replaced by others from the Army of the North. But with Dorsenne’s forces already
badly over-stretched by the recall of so many of his troops for the campaign in Russia, Napoleon decided that he could not leave matters there. Hitherto responsible for the whole sweep of territory from the French frontier to
Ciudad Rodrigo, the Army of the North was now charged only with Santander, Burgos, Navarre and the Basque provinces. The Army of Portugal was to be in charge of León and Asturias, and so it suddenly acquired territorial
responsibilities that far outstripped the relatively minor task of holding down the lower Tagus valley that was all that had fallen to it in 1811. Two of the divisions that had been manning the areas concerned remained where they
were and therefore joined the Army of Portugal, but Dorsenne was allowed to withdraw a third, together with some other troops, to his much reduced bailiwick further east. Very soon, then, Marmont was sending large parts of his
army north-eastwards to take over from the troops withdrawn by Dorsenne, all that was left to contain Wellington being a mere two divisions.