

 What, though, of the French? So effective were the cavalry of Julián Sánchez in isolating Ciudad Rodrigo from inquisitive French patrols that Marmont did not hear that the fortress was under attack until 14 January. By then, of
course, nothing could be done, but Marmont was not to know this, and made desperate efforts to remedy the situation by calling in troops from all sides. Hearing of the surrender two days after the fortress had fallen, he
contemplated an immediate counter-attack, but heavy rain, the absence of faraway Montbrun, and the arrival of news that the Army of the North had its hands full with Espoz y Mina, who had just defeated the governor of Navarre in
a major action at Rocaforte, all ruled this out. All that Marmont could do, then, was to put up a brave front and pray that Wellington’s next target was not Salamanca, whilst fuming at the governor of Ciudad Rodrigo, General
Barrié, whom he later described as ‘a detestable officer, without either resolution or foresight’. 20 At root, however, the fault was not Barrié’s, nor even Marmont’s, but rather Napoleon’s: ‘[The emperor] withdrew all the Young
Guard … as well as five regiments of Poles. In this manner he weakened the number of troops in the Peninsula by 15,000 men with the result that the remainder were simply insufficient to defend the immense amount of territory that
had been occupied.’ 21

 To return to Wellington, a march on Salamanca seemed pointless, for Marmont had only to fall back on Dorsenne to be safe, whilst the French might ultimately have concentrated so many troops against him that he might have been
turned out of Ciudad Rodrigo (which required some weeks’ work before it could face an attack). Far better, then, to move against Badajoz, and all the more so as the Army of Portugal would now find it far harder to help Soult.
Undeterred by a political crisis in London which removed Lord Wellesley from the government and could have reduced its commitment to Iberia, as early as 25 January Wellington issued the first orders for an attack on Badajoz. * By
late February, then, his forces were heading south, leaving Ciudad Rodrigo to be held by the Spaniards of Carlos de España. Realising what was afoot, Marmont began to make preparations for another march across the Tagus. In this,
however, he was frustrated by Napoleon who insisted that the best way of succouring Badajoz was to keep the Army of Portugal in León and Old Castile whence it could march on Ciudad Rodrigo, Almeida and Lisbon should Wellington
head south (for good measure, Marmont was also castigated for calling back the garrison of Asturias – the division of General Bonet – in the course of his attempt to save Ciudad Rodrigo, and ordered to hand over yet more troops
to Dorsenne). Frantic to get Napoleon to understand the increasingly dangerous nature of the situation, the marshal dispatched a senior aide to Paris in the hope of changing his mind, only to find that the French ruler was
utterly inflexible:

