

 Once again, in fact, Napoleon had got it wrong, though Wellington still did not have it easy. Arriving before Badajoz on 16 March, the Anglo-Portuguese army found a fortress rendered even stronger than it had been in 1811. An
officer of great courage and determination who later distinguished himself by making a daring escape from captivity in England, Philippon had done all that he possibly could to prepare for another attack. The breaches had all
been repaired; various sections of the enceinte had been reinforced; mines had been driven outwards under parts of the glacis to blow up any approach trenches dug across them; the fort of San Cristóbal had been given a new
outwork; the Pardaleras fort that protected the city on its southern side had been connected to the walls by a covered way; and a stream that ran along the eastern side of the defences had been dammed so as to produce an
impassable inundation, some of the water also having been used to fill a broad trench dug in the bottom of the main ditch. Given the extent of the perimeter, men were not over-abundant, true, but food, cannon and munitions were
all plentiful, whilst the defenders were all seasoned veterans.

 Taking Badajoz, then, was always likely to be a costly business, but at least Wellington now had the benefit of past experience. In consequence, the mistakes of 1811 were firmly avoided, the attack this time falling not on San
Cristóbal, but rather the south-eastern corner of the defences. On this side of the city, the ground was much easier to work, whilst constant rain shielded the men involved from the enemy even if it also flooded the trenches and
constantly washed away parapets and revetments: ‘We were working,’ complained Donaldson, ‘up to our knees in mud.’ 24 Meanwhile, the work was pushed with the utmost speed. On 25 March the Picurina redoubt, which had to be taken
before the attackers could implement their plans, was stormed with some loss, and five days later the bombardment of the walls began. The French fired back with great courage, and there were many losses among the troops in the
trenches. Thus:

 On the twenty-ninth poor Major Thomson was killed by my side in the eight-gun breaching battery. We had been walking together in the trenches and went down to see how far the battery was advanced … We were standing up with Major
McLean of the First Caçadores when [the enemy] fired at us and hit poor Thomson through the head … I fortunately jumped down in time and escaped, as they hit instead the sand-bag I was leaning against which did quite as well. 25

 To this fire, however, the British had an answer in the form of the crack shots of the Ninety-Fifth Rifles: ‘Three or four heavy cannon that the enemy were working were doing frightful execution amongst our artillerymen … I
selected several good shots and fired into the embrasures. In half an hour I found the guns did not go off so frequently as before.’ 26 But in fact the British guns needed little support: so heavy was the weight of fire that the
new siege train could bring to bear that the defenders were quickly overwhelmed, and no fewer than three separate breaches blown in the defences.