

 By 6 April, it was decided that all was ready for an assault. This, in fact, was questionable – as at Ciudad Rodrigo the glacis and ditches had not been blown in – but Soult was on the march, whilst it was still unknown whether
or not Marmont would join him. At the same time a series of embarrassing contretemps was giving reason to suggest that Sir Thomas Graham, who had come from Cádiz to take charge of some of the troops watching Soult, was not wholly
to be trusted. Waiting two or three more days would doubtless have made more sense, but in the circumstances the best thing seemed to be to go in straight away: better that, perhaps, than to risk another Albuera. Though it has
been often recounted, what followed was a terrible affair. The breaches had been booby-trapped with mines and combustible material, encumbered with a wide range of unpleasant devices designed to injure anyone trying to climb
them, and crowned with chevaux de frise, and the men defending them provided with hand grenades, incendiary bombs and extra muskets. Unknown to the British, meanwhile, they were also protected by the deep canal that had been cut
in the bottom of the ditch. Set to attack these grim defences at ten o’clock in the evening, the men of the Fourth and Light Divisions set to with a will, but they became hopelessly entangled with one another and quickly suffered
appalling casualties. Many men were drowned in the wet ditch, for example, and another 500 blown up when the French exploded their mines. In the lead was William Lawrence:

 I was one of the ladder party … On our arriving at … the wall … a shower of shot, canister and grape, together with fireballs, was hurled … amongst us. Poor Pig [Harding] received his death wound immediately … while I myself
received two small … shots in my left knee, and a musket shot in my side … Still, I stuck to my ladder and got into the [ditch]. Numbers had by this time fallen, but … we hastened to the breach. There, to our great …
discouragement, we found a cheval de frise had been fixed … Vain attempts were made to remove this fearful obstacle, during which my left hand was fearfully cut by one of the blades, but, finding no success in that quarter, we
were forced to retire for a time … My wounds were still bleeding, and I began to feel very weak. My comrades persuaded me to go to the rear, but this proved a task of great difficulty, for on arriving at the ladders, I found them
filled with the dead and wounded, hanging … just as they had fallen … so I crawled on my hands and knees till I got out of the reach of the enemy’s musketry. 27

 Joining Lawrence at the ladders, there came a wounded sergeant of the Forty-Third who describes how, having stumbled down the breach with the help of his musket and dragged himself through the flooded ditch, he ‘scrambled up
with extreme difficulty’, to the accompaniment of ‘bullets whistling through the rounds of the ladder’. 28 Also to the fore, meanwhile, was Sergeant Anthony Hamilton:

