

 The forlorn hope and storming parties moved on at about seven o’clock, and the head of the column followed close behind. A tremendous fire was opened upon us, and, as our column was entering the ditch, an expense magazine on the
ramparts blew up … The night was brilliantly illuminated for some moments, and everything was made visible. Then as suddenly came utter darkness, except for the flashes from cannon and muskets, which threw a momentary glare
around. 16

 Facing the other breach, meanwhile, was Joseph Donaldson:

 Some time after it was dark, we … advanced rank entire under a heavy fire … to the brink of … the ditch. After descending, we moved along towards the breach. Our orders were to remain there and protect the right brigade, but,
our colonel finding no obstacles in the way, pushed up the breach … In mounting the breach, we found great difficulty in ascending from the loose earth slipping under our feet at every step … the enemy at the same time pouring
their shot amongst us from above. 17

 Despite gallant resistance on the part of the French, who had placed cannon to sweep the breaches and booby-trapped the rubble, the walls were carried, albeit not without the loss of Robert Craufurd, who was mortally wounded by
a round of canister. Not for the last time, there followed scenes of great disorder. A town taken by storm was by tradition regarded as the legitimate prize of the men concerned, and, whilst the events that took place were by no
means as terrible as those that were to follow elsewhere, they were still distressing enough. As Swabey wrote:

 Our troops, as soon as the breach was gained, more eager for plunder than their duty, broke and ran in defiance of their officers … and committed shameful excesses disgraceful to the whole army. [There was] not a soul that was
not rifled, and the dead were scarcely cold when they were inhumanly stripped … No intentional murders were committed, though some men were so drunk that they fired promiscuously in the streets and killed many of their comrades.
18

 Even more dramatic is the version given by Grattan of the Eighty-Eighth:

 Scenes of the greatest outrage now took place, and it was pitiable to see groups of the inhabitants half-naked in the streets … while their houses were undergoing the strictest scrutiny. Some of the soldiers turned to the wine
and spirit houses, where, having drunk sufficiently, they again sallied out in quest of more plunder; others got so intoxicated that they lay in a helpless state in different parts of the town, and lost what they had previously
gained. 19

 All that can be said in mitigation of the disorder is that the soldiers were not the only culprits, being joined in their ravages by some of the poorer elements of the inhabitants. Nor was the sack prolonged: through the most
determined efforts, a semblance of order was soon restored. And, at all events, Ciudad Rodrigo was in Wellington’s hands, along with 1,300 prisoners and the whole of the Army of Portugal’s siege train.