

 By these means, the castle was taken, but even then the town might not have fallen but for the fact that there were too few men to guard the bastion of San Vicente. With the troops who had been sent to attack that sector soon
over the wall, the breaches were taken in the rear and the garrison forced to lay down its arms. Badajoz, then, belonged to Wellington’s army. Let us quote, for example, Robert Blakeney:

 There was no safety for women even in the churches, and any who interfered or offered resistance were sure to get shot. Every house presented a scene of plunder, debauchery and bloodshed committed with wanton cruelty … by our
soldiery, and in many instances I saw the savages tear the rings from the ears of beautiful women … When the savages came to a door which had been locked or barricaded, they applied … the muzzles of a dozen firelocks … against
that part of the door where the lock was fastened, and … fired [them] off together into the house and rooms, regardless of those inside … Men, women and children were shot … for no other … reason than pastime; every species of
outrage was publicly committed … and in a manner so brutal that a faithful recital would be … shocking to humanity. Not the slightest shadow of discipline was maintained … The infuriated soldiery resembled rather a pack of
hell-hounds vomited up from the infernal regions for the extirpation of mankind than … a well-organised, brave, disciplined and obedient British army. 32

 Much the same scenes are recorded by the surgeon, Henry:

 I beheld a scene of the most dreadful drunkenness, violence and confusion. Parties of intoxicated men, loosed from all discipline and restraint and impelled by their own evil passions, were roaming and reeling about, firing into
the windows, bursting open the doors … plundering, shooting any person who opposed them, violating and committing every horrid excess and sometimes destroying each other. 33

 One could continue almost ad infinitum. Grattan writes of ‘a scene of plunder and cruelty that it would be difficult to find a parallel for’; Bell of ‘scenes that were shocking … not fit to be recorded’; Gomm of ‘a plundering
scene which was a jumble of all that was horrible’; and Donaldson of ‘scenes which … are too dreadful and disgusting to relate’. 34 Many officers did their best to save Spanish civilians – one or two, indeed, were murdered in the
attempt – but the men were open in their contempt for authority, insisting that plunder was their right, and it was not until gallows were erected and many soldiers flogged that the army was restored to order.

 In the meantime, the war went on. Gathering together his battered army – in all, Badajoz had cost him 4,670 casualties of whom 3,713 had fallen in the storm – Wellington initially hoped to smash Soult’s isolated command in
southern Extremadura. However, ‘King Nicholas’ retired in great haste, having discovered not only that Ballesteros had gone on the offensive again, but also that the small force of troops belonging to the Fifth Army had, at
Wellington’s request, moved down the Portuguese frontier and launched a sudden thrust at Seville. Meanwhile, the British commander had in any case become increasingly anxious about Ciudad Rodrigo, of whose blockade he had just
learned. Losing this so soon after it had been gained would hardly be politic, and Wellington therefore left Hill to protect Badajoz with the same troops that normally made up his command, and once more set off for Ciudad
Rodrigo, which he relieved in the very nick of time on 22 April.