

 Of this, however, he was soon to be disabused. Thus, on 13 June, Wellington advanced into León with his 48,000-strong main army, the Sixth Army in the meantime sallying forth from Galicia to blockade Astorga whilst a force of
Portuguese militia tackled Zamora. No sooner had the Allies taken the field than Marmont set about concentrating all the men he could, requested help from Caffarelli and Joseph and, in flat defiance of Napoleon, called back Bonet
from Asturias. However, whilst he intended to fight, it would be some time before he got enough troops together and in consequence he fell back behind the Duero, leaving Salamanca to be defended by a small force ensconced in
three fortified convents that had been converted into an improvised citadel. Much stronger than the British at first realised, these held out bravely. As Mills wrote, for example:

 Our people are beginning to find out that these … forts are stronger than they at first gave them credit for … The fire … is incessant, but their men are so well covered it is almost impossible to hit them. We have already lost
fifty or sixty men. 35

 Beating off an attempt at a storm, the garrison only gave up on 27 June after their position was set on fire by red-hot shot.

 Amidst the firing, there was much popular excitement. According to Simmons, the inhabitants ‘expressed their joy in a most frantic fashion and praised their deliverers, as they called the English, and expressed their abhorrence
of the French’, whilst, to quote Wheeler, ‘Every afternoon the people pour out of the city by thousands to enjoy themselves with song and dance, so that our camp every evening presents one of the liveliest scenes imaginable’. 36
Yet amongst the British there was also much cynicism, many of them realising that delight at liberation did not necessarily amount to enthusiasm for the cause. Thus:

 The people, alternately in the power of friends and foes, show indifference to both. They cannot take a part without danger to themselves; they prefer consequently personal security to a display of unseasonable loyalty or
patriotism. In their hearts I believe they hate the French, but they have at the same time no great love for us. 37

 Much the same point was made by Aitchison. As he remarked, ‘I cannot say whether the people are happy at our entrance … It is all the same to the poor man whether the enemy take by force or the British lay all the provisions
under contribution for payment.’ 38 As the army advanced into León, indeed, many instances were uncovered of the local authorities attempting to insure themselves against a return of the enemy. And, as ever, the behaviour of the
soldiers did not help. In the words of a general order of 10 June 1812:

 The commander of the forces is sorry to observe that the outrages so frequently committed by the soldiers when absent from their regiments, and the disgraceful scenes which occurred upon the storming of Badajoz, have had the
effect of rendering the people of the country the enemies instead of being the friends of the army. 39