

 In Cádiz, of course, all this was accompanied by great jubilation. The news of Salamanca caused a great stir. As Henry Wellesley wrote to Wellington:

 I heartily wish you joy of your glorious victory, and I wish you could have witnessed the effect it produced here … A deputation of the cortes came to congratulate me upon the victory, and the people assembled under my windows,
hailing you as the saviour of Spain. 1

 But the greatest moment, as Alcalá Galiano recalled, was the departure of the French from the shores of the bay:

 At this time the siege of Cádiz was raised. The day this happened was one of unequalled joy. The people rushed to embark in boats to visit the abandoned French encampment … There was a great desire to walk on the earth of the
continent, to breath in fresh air … I went with the officials of the Ministry [of State] … Accompanied by a numerous crowd we went round … the batteries which had contained the mortars whose effects we had been experiencing for
such a long time. On the way back … all the boats carried a bunch of grass at their mastheads as a way of showing that they had completed a return trip that had been denied to the inhabitants … for more than thirty consecutive
months. 2

 In the space of less than two months, then, New Castile, Extremadura and Andalucía had all been cleared of the enemy with scarcely a shot being fired. As Wellington advanced on Madrid, meanwhile, it appeared to have rekindled
popular enthusiasm. At Segovia, for example, the inhabitants ‘waylaid him at the entrance to the town with a cracked trumpet, an old kettle-drum and two miserable wretches dressed in scarlet robes, [and] conveyed him nearly half
a mile to the market place, where he was obliged to stand with his hat off until they had done “viva-ing” him’. 3 It was at Madrid, however, that excitement and optimism were at their height. To quote Cocks:

 The earl made his way into this place on the twelfth … Our arrival produced a joy far beyond description … I was never kissed by so many pretty girls in a day in all my life, or ever expect to be again. If we moved on horseback,
the animals were embraced and pulled one way, and we were hauled and caressed the other. On foot it was impossible to make your way … Unless the emperor gets through the Russian war with perfect éclat, the French must no longer
think of acting south of the Ebro. 4

 For a Spanish view, we may again turn to Carnicero:

 When the bells began to announce the entrance of our troops at about ten o’clock, it was wonderful to see the people rushing to … the Portillo de San Vicente, which was the one through which they were said to be coming. A new
town council was formed, and this immediately set forth to greet … the immortal Wellington … To the accompaniment of a crescendo of bells, the people massed in ever greater numbers round the Plaza de la Villa. When a portrait of
our Don Fernando [i.e. Fernando VII] was placed in the window of the town hall, they simply went mad. The cheering was incessant; hats and caps were thrown in the air; on all sides people were giving thanks to God; and everyone
was filled with the greatest joy and happiness. Another of the incidents that made the day shine out was the behaviour of the women and children of the poorer quarters. Joseph … had made a new avenue from the palace to the Casa
de Campo [i.e. the royal hunting park] … This had been lined with fruit trees … but the crowd … fell upon them … and ripped them up … When Lord Wellington arrived, many of the people who greeted him were therefore carrying
branches and sprigs of greenery which they waved in time with their cheers and happy shouts of greeting. In this manner he was accompanied to the town hall. When he got there the cheering redoubled, and all the more so when … he
came out onto one of the balconies accompanied by El Empecinado. Amidst thunderous applause, everyone flung their arms around one another, and gave themselves over to congratulating their neighbours in the most unreserved
fashion. 5