

 To believe, then, that liberation would produce anything other than cheers and flowers was optimistic. At the same time, although Wellington was now the master of León, the campaign had not gone entirely as he had wanted it to,
for he had hoped that Marmont might have been tempted into launching a head-on attack at Salamanca. As the marshal had refused to take the bait, however, there was no option but to advance to the Duero where Wellington proceeded
to sit down to wait for the Sixth Army to appear in the rear of the enemy (the latter’s orders had been not just to besiege Astorga but to keep pace with Wellington’s army as it moved eastwards, thereby both trapping Bonet in
Asturias and threatening Marmont’s flank). Had all gone to plan, the marshal would have had to send a division or two to hold off the Spaniards, so weakening the line of the Duero that Wellington could have tried an attack. Yet
the Sixth Army failed to appear, its troops having for the most part advanced no further than Astorga, whose garrison was still holding out most stubbornly.

 In many ways, the stand-off on the Duero was to prove extremely beneficial to Wellington, for it appears to have convinced Marmont, who was, after all, possessed of the smaller army, that Wellington was on no account an
attacking general and, in consequence, an opponent with whom he could take every risk. At the time, however, the non-appearance of the Spaniards was extremely frustrating for it allowed Marmont to regain the initiative. Thus,
having at last been joined by Bonet, on 15 July the marshal suddenly sent his troops back across the river. For this he has been bitterly criticised on the grounds that, had he only waited, troops would have reached him from both
Burgos and Madrid. Thus, Caffarelli, having earlier told him that he could spare him no assistance, was sending him a cavalry brigade, whilst a deeply alarmed Joseph had decided to march to join him with virtually every soldier
he could muster (deducting a minimal garrison for Madrid, some 14,000 men). In fairness to Marmont, however, it must be said that he not only did not know that these moves were under way, but had no reason to believe that they
would ever come to pass, whilst, at 44,000 men, his forces were not very much smaller than those of Wellington.

 At first, certainly, all went well enough. Completely deceiving Wellington by some clever feinting, the marshal managed to get across the Duero unchallenged, and over the next few days forced him to retreat on Salamanca by a
series of elaborate outflanking manoeuvres designed to threaten his communications with Portugal. By 22 July the Allied army was drawn up just to the south-east of Salamanca along a line of low hills whose southern end was marked
by a pronounced butte known as the Arapil Chico. Marmont, however, had no intention of trying a frontal assault, and on the morning of 22 July, having first seized the much larger butte known as the Arapil Grande that stood a few
hundred yards due south of the Arapil Chico, he therefore began to march his entire army round its southern flank. Seeing what was going on, meanwhile, the British commander swung division after division back from their original
positions to form a new line running west from the Arapil Chico along a convenient spur that extended for about a mile to the west. Last but not least, having until now been covering the eastern approaches to the city of
Salamanca itself, the Third Division and some Portuguese cavalry were brought across the rear of the army to an altogether hidden position beyond the right flank of Wellington’s new line near the village of Aldea Tejada.