

 The spirit of our people rose … and when they reached the enemy’s solid columns, which opened a fire like a volcano upon them, there was … a general shout of exultation … The enemy wavered … till at length it was impossible to
withstand the ardour of our soldiers … and complete rout ensued. 41

 Thrown into confusion, the unfortunate French soldiers were then struck by Le Marchant and utterly broken, once again with heavy casualties. As Bragge recalled, ‘We quickly came up with the French columns and charged their rear.
Hundreds threw down their arms.’ 42 Caught up in the rout, meanwhile, was Taupin’s division, which had been marching across Maucune’s rear to fill the gap between him and Thomières at the moment of the British attack.

 In only an hour of fighting, then, Wellington had broken the entire French left – three full divisions – and taken 2,500 prisoners, 12 guns and 2 eagles. Thomières was dead and Marmont, who had been caught by a chance shell,
badly wounded. However, although the afternoon was far advanced, the battle was not yet over. Thus, shortly after Leith had advanced against Maucune, part of Fourth Division and Pack’s independent Portuguese brigade had advanced
on the divisions of Clausel and Bonet, which had held the eastern end of the ridge, and the Arapil Grande. Both forces, however, were repulsed – the French ‘did pepper them most dreadfully’, remembered Dyneley 43 – whilst Clausel
and Bonet tried to follow up their success by charging across the valley that separated them from the British ridge and trying to break the Allied centre. Brave move though this was, it was doomed to failure, for Wellington had
plenty of reserves and simply moved the fresh Sixth Division to plug the gap, the initial French onrush having been first checked by the Portuguese brigade of the Fifth Division which had attacked Clausel in flank. Urging them
on, however, Beresford was shot in the chest and forced to quit the field.

 Very soon, then, the French centre had joined the left in falling back in complete disorder, abandoning the Arapil Grande in the process. Three infantry divisions which had formed the French reserve – those of Ferey, Sarrut and
Foy – were available to cover the retreat, and they fought back bravely as the whole Allied army pressed forwards to finish the job: ordering up the hitherto unengaged Light Division, indeed, Wellington himself had a lucky escape
when a bullet struck his saddle holster and bruised his thigh. In most sectors they do not seem to have been pressed too hard, however: most of the Allied troops, after all, were exhausted after hours of marching and fighting in
blazing heat. Only Ferey, indeed, found he had a real job on his hands, being forced to face a full-scale assault by the whole of the Sixth Division. Anglo-Portuguese casualties were heavy, but in the end Ferey too gave way, the
Army of Portugal only being saved from complete destruction by the onset of darkness. Thus ended the battle of Salamanca, or, as the Spaniards called it, Los Arapiles. Known, and for good reason, as ‘Wellington’s masterpiece’, it
had cost the Army of Portugal 12,000 casualties, 2 eagles and 12 guns (Anglo-Portuguese casualties, by contrast, numbered some 5,000). These losses might have been still higher had the pursuit been pressed with any vigour, but in
the darkness and confusion, Wellington’s forces appear to have quite lost their cohesion (claims that the entire French army would have been destroyed had the Spaniards only kept a garrison in Alba de Tormes are highly
disingenuous: the garrison was withdrawn, it is true, but its presence would have made little difference). Only the next day did the pursuit get under way properly, although there still proved time to inflict yet more damage on
the French at the village of García Hernández where the King’s-German-Legion heavy dragoons distinguished themselves by achieving the near impossible feat of breaking a battalion of infantry in square.