

 Accompanying the Allied liberation of Madrid on 12 August 1812, these scenes were the culmination of a series of triumphs that had completely turned the tide of the war in Spain. Whereas the beginning of 1812 had seen the French
armies winning fresh conquests, within eight months they had been ejected from as much as half the territory that they had managed to occupy since 1808. As for the future, all seemed set for further victories and a continued thaw
in Anglo-Spanish relations. Yet, as so often before, appearances were deceptive, the next three months bringing failure and humiliation to British and Spaniards alike. In one sense, this was only to be expected: with every step
that Wellington advanced, the French had less territory to garrison, whilst they still had some 210,000 troops with the colours compared to the British commander’s 60,000. Yet in theory the Spaniards could put at least 100,000
more men into the field, whilst the liberated territories offered them the prospect of fresh resources. It being the inability of the Allies to capitalise on this additional contribution that tipped the balance, it is Spanish
affairs that must take precedence in our consideration of the autumn of 1812.

 Before looking at the issues concerned, however, we must examine the aftermath of Salamanca. As we have seen, the occupation of the Spanish capital was the result of Wellington’s decision that his troops would be more gainfully
– and less dangerously – employed moving on central Spain than attempting to destroy the remnants of the Army of Portugal. On 6 August, then, the victors of Salamanca set off for Madrid from Valladolid. Facing them were Joseph
and Jourdan, but, with only 22,000 troops, many of them juramentados of little reliability, they were in no position to defend the capital. In this a large part of the responsibility must be borne by Marshal Soult, who,
determined to hang on to his viceroyalty, had for the past two months been ignoring demands that he send a substantial force of troops to the Tagus. Covered by a screen of cavalry which succeeded in inflicting a sharp reverse on
some Portuguese dragoons at Majadahonda, on 10 August a great convoy consisting of Joseph’s troops, the royal household, 2,000 wagons and perhaps 15,000 civilian refugees set off along the highway that led through Aranjuez and
Albacete and thence to Valencia. Progress was slow; the heat terrible; the dust choking; water almost unobtainable; and the troops mutinous and undisciplined, many of those that did not desert pillaging the unfortunate civilians
they were supposed to be protecting. As for Madrid, the only French presence was now a small garrison left in the great earthwork citadel that had been built on the high ground occupied by the present-day Retiro park.

 In Andalucía, meanwhile, so bad had communications become between his Viceroyalty and central Spain that Soult did not get certain news of Salamanca until 12 August. Left with no hope but to retreat, within two or three days the
Army of the South had also started to evacuate its positions. On 25 August the siege of Cádiz was abandoned, and on 27 August Seville (with the exception of a small rearguard that was ejected the next day by a hastily improvised
Anglo-Spanish division which had been sent up from Cádiz). Falling back eastwards in the company of the same masses of refugees that encumbered Joseph in La Mancha, Soult was joined at Córdoba by the troops of Drouet from
Extremadura, and then headed for Granada, where he picked up the garrison of the eastern part of his territories and engaged in some last-minute requisitioning before finally marching for Valencia on 16 September.