

 Given the close understanding that by now existed between Wellington and the ministers that had made up the old Perceval administration, no result could have been more welcome, whilst the latter’s commitment to the strategy of
fighting the French in the Peninsula was soon to receive still further confirmation. Wellington’s problem was that for reasons that were quite beyond the control of the British government, he continued to be short of specie. The
flow of bullion from Latin America having collapsed, rising demand had driven prices ever upwards, whilst efforts to find alternative sources of supply had delivered very little. By the time that Badajoz fell, Wellington was in
genuine distress for want to funds, and this situation the new Liverpool administration now made great efforts to resolve. Various schemes for the purchase of specie on the open market having been rejected on the grounds, first,
that Britain’s revenue was insufficient to bear the cost, and, second, that buying more gold would ineluctably lead to fresh price increases, less orthodox measures had to be tried. In consequence, a near-forgotten law that
allowed the government to export guineas (which was normally prohibited) if the object was to pay British troops engaged in service abroad was used to force a reluctant Bank of England to disgorge huge sums of money, Wellington
then being secretly instructed to spend the extra money as he saw fit rather than simply on the pay of his soldiers. This was illegal, whilst the release of so much gold could easily have led to a major financial crisis. Yet in
reality there was little else to be done, and in the end the collapse of the Continental Blockade made all secure once more.

 Yet, illegal or not, it would be winter before the extra money began to appear in Wellington’s coffers. As so often before, however, there was an element of ‘crying wolf’ in the British commander’s dealings with the government.
Money was short, yes, and there were a number of ways in which the Anglo-Portuguese army was seriously inconvenienced, but Wellington was nevertheless planning fresh victories. Having resolved that it would be better to strike
Marmont rather than Soult (on the grounds that the liberation of northern and central Spain would infallibly bring with it the evacuation of Andalucía, whereas the liberation of Andalucía would in itself make no difference in the
north), towards the end of May he had begun to concentrate all his troops save those of Hill in the vicinity of Ciudad Rodrigo. Given the continued dispersion of the Army of Portugal from Asturias to the Tagus valley, initial
success of some sort was certain, but Wellington knew that with every step that he advanced the French were more able to fall upon him in overwhelming force. Since every step that he advanced also took him further from the safety
of Portugal, as many of the enemy as possible had to be neutralised.

 For this purpose, a variety of devices lay readily to hand. Though he had no official authority over the Spanish forces, Wellington now had considerable prestige in Patriot Spain, the liberation of Badajoz and Ciudad Rodrigo
having done much to wipe out the unhappy memories of 1808, 1809 and 1810. Fulsome displays of pro-British feeling therefore began to appear in the press; there were ecstatic demonstrations when the British commander returned to
Ciudad Rodrigo on 26 April; and a handful of British officers had even been allowed to embark on the reform of the army through the establishment of training depots and model divisions. * In consequence, Wellington had only to
suggest a plan for the Regency – since 21 January a new body headed by the emollient Infantado – to agree. By this means, then, Ballesteros was directed to strike at Seville; the Sixth Army to besiege Astorga; Porlier, Longa and
Espoz y Mina – now grouped together as the Seventh Army under Gabriel Mendizábal – to tie down the Army of the North, in whose command Dorsenne had just been replaced by Caffarelli; and the Second and Third Armies to tie down
Suchet. The great diversion was not just to be left to the Spaniards, however. Thus, Hill was instructed to head south should Soult press Ballesteros; the British squadron on the north coast of Spain to raid the French garrisons
dotted along the coast; and finally the governor of Sicily, Lord William Bentinck, to send a division to the coast of Catalonia.