

 Some minor hiccups aside, this scheme functioned extremely well. In Andalucía the end of May saw Ballesteros strike inland and attack a French division at Bornos. Though he was beaten and forced to retreat, this did not matter,
for Hill immediately came forward in Extremadura, with the result that Soult had to send many troops to reinforce Drouet. Whilst Hill then entangled the latter in a complex war of manoeuvre, Ballesteros sallied out again, briefly
occupied Málaga, and then led as many as 10,000 French troops a merry dance through the wilds of Granada before finally heading back to the coast. In the north, the British squadron, which was commanded by the adventurous Sir
Home Popham, sailed up and down the coast, landing naval guns and parties of marines to attack such garrisons as Lequeitio, Guetaria, Castro Urdiales and Santander in company with the guerrillas of Longa and Porlier. Not all
these operations succeeded – indeed, Popham and Mendizábal suffered a number of minor defeats – but the Army of the North was run ragged trying to keep the situation under control, Bilbao occupied for a fortnight, and the major
port of Santander left in Allied hands for good. With Mina, too, extremely active, Caffarelli was therefore, like Soult, out of the fight. In the east, by contrast, matters did not go quite so smoothly. Thanks to a combination of
foolishness on the part of Bentinck and growing political tension in Sicily, far fewer troops were sent over than had originally been expected, whilst those that did come arrived much later than planned and eventually did nothing
but collect Whittingham from Majorca and disembark at Alicante. As for the Third Army, commanded by José O’Donnell, it eventually struck north, only to be heavily defeated at Castalla in what was more a gigantic ambush than a
battle. Yet, again, the fact that the Sicilian expedition proved a damp squib and O’Donnell particularly maladroit mattered not a jot. Ringed by enemies, and unable to borrow any troops from Catalonia, where Lacy was continuing
to do his best to cause trouble (his actions at this time included a surprise attack on Lérida timed to coincide with an explosion in the city’s main powder magazine set off by Patriot sympathisers), Suchet had no chance of
sending troops to central Spain and that was all that mattered.

 This complicated web of diversion helped Wellington but it was in reality hardly necessary. To have any serious chance of blocking Wellington, the French would have had to give up part of their dominions, but Napoleon was so
obsessed by questions of prestige that he could not tolerate a repeat of the evacuation of Galicia in 1809, and had, in fact, forbidden any such move. Nor was this an end to the matter. Of the various French commanders, other
than Joseph and Jourdan, only Marmont – the very general most in need of help – ever thought in wider terms than those of his own satrapy, the rest being inclined to give their fellows only minimal assistance, if indeed they gave
them any at all. In this there was selfishness and egotism in plenty, but in the circumstances of 1812 it was also entirely understandable, for the French were so hard-pressed that reducing one garrison in favour of another was
almost certain to lead to disaster. The struggle being just as much about prestige as it was about anything else, politically the French could not afford to take such risks, whilst Figueras alone showed how inconvenient they
could be in military terms. In the last resort, then, the real issue was not the personal failings of Soult and the rest, but rather want of troops, and, beyond that, Napoleon’s belief that he could have his cake and eat it.