

 After García Hernández, however, the Army of Portugal was allowed to fall back on Valladolid and Burgos unmolested. Wellington would doubtless have liked to have done still more damage to Clausel (on whom command of the Army of
Portugal had eventually devolved), but further pursuit would simply have driven him into the arms of Caffarelli whilst yet leaving his forces intact, for the French commander would never have risked a battle. Still worse, it
would have put the Anglo-Portuguese army at great risk, for logic dictated that Soult and Suchet would send large forces to Madrid and join with Joseph in an offensive across the Sierra de Guadarrama that might easily have cut it
off from Portugal. Considering that the Army of Portugal was shattered, it made better sense to march on Madrid, whose liberation would for obvious reasons constitute a terrible humiliation for the enemy. The French might well
still join up against Wellington, but if they did he could always retreat, whilst there was also a chance that they would not march against him in sufficient strength to force him back at all. As a result, leaving a single
division at Valladolid, together with two divisions of Spaniards who had come up from Astorga, on 6 August the Anglo-Portuguese army set off for Madrid.

 As the capital’s occupation was the result of a series of events in the French camp that need to be discussed at some length, we shall deal with it in the next chapter. In any event, what mattered was the fact that the stalemate
on the Portuguese frontier had been broken. What, though, had brought about the Allied cause’s change of fortune? In answer we should turn neither to Wellington’s prowess as a general, nor to the mistakes of his opponents, nor to
the quality of his army, nor even to the resistance of the Spaniards. All these played their part, but in the end Napoleon had no one to blame but himself. Had he only left the forces in the Peninsula in the state in which they
had been in the early autumn of 1811, there is little doubt that they could have held back Wellington and the Spanish armies, whilst setting about the guerrillas in the methodical fashion known to produce success. Adopting a
defensive posture was not to Napoleon’s taste, however, and, whilst stripping his generals of vital troops, he refused to recognise reality – an early instance of a trait that was to become all too typical – and instead demanded
fresh offensives. The result was disaster, Soult and Marmont finding themselves unable to counter Wellington in an effective fashion. Whether the latter could consolidate his gains was another matter, of course, but for the time
being he was fighting a very different war.

===== FILE: OEBPS/xhtml/chapter15.xhtml =====
The Peninsular War

 15

 Burgos

 THE AUTUMN CAMPAIGN OF 1812

 Beneath a cloudless sky regiment after regiment tramped across the bridge and entered the canyon-like street leading into the heart of the city. Faded jackets, battered shakos, shapeless forage caps, and trousers of assorted
shades of grey, blue and brown proclaimed that this was no ordinary parade, but rather the arrival of an army straight from the field. Amongst the troops there rode the modestly attired but unmistakeable figure of Wellington,
several brightly uniformed Spanish generals and half-a-dozen swaggering guerrilla commanders, one of whom attracted especial attention by sporting a captured French shako whose imperal eagle had been turned upside down. In the
narrow streets progress was near impossible, however. Beneath high buildings whose every balcony was hung with drapes and tapestries, a huge crowd surged forward to greet their liberators, shouting, ‘Long live Wellington! Long
live El Empecinado and the six-farthing loaf! Long live Fernando and the return of abundance!’ Reduced over the past year to a state of semi-starvation, they fell upon the troops, flung branches, cloaks and shawls in their path,
plied them with wine and tobacco, and showered them with kisses, whilst Wellington and his fellow horsemen were almost pulled from their mounts. Lost in the throng disgusted privates angrily fended off men who were attempting to
embrace them, but otherwise it was truly an exhilarating moment – indeed, perhaps the most exhilarating moment of the entire war.