

 For the next month Wellington remained quiet on the frontiers of León, supervising the repair of Ciudad Rodrigo, resting his weary troops, and considering his next move. Setting aside the central issue of whether the British
should strike in the north or the south, one point that had become obvious was that the Puente de Almáraz possessed immense strategic importance. Carrying the only decent road across the Tagus between Madrid and the Portuguese
frontier, it was the quickest way for Marmont to move south or Soult to move north. Such French forces as had been left in Extremadura having retired to the frontiers of Andalucía, Wellington decided that Hill should attack it
with his independent corps. Taking with him the bulk of the Second Division, at six o’clock on the morning of 18 May, Hill therefore hurled himself upon the fort that guarded its southern end. Known as Fort Napoleon, this was
overwhelmed in a matter of minutes, whereupon the garrison of the forts across the river abandoned their positions and made off, leaving Hill to burn the bridge (the original masonry one having been blown by the Spaniards in
1809, it was a wooden pontoon affair) and demolish its fortifications.

 Having thus wrought incalculable damage on the French cause – with no means of repairing the bridge, the invaders could henceforth only communicate between north and south by means of a long detour via Madrid – Hill headed back
to Mérida. However, at this point the political situation in England once again took centre stage. On 11 May Perceval was mortally wounded in the Palace of Westminster by a merchant named Bellingham who had recently gone bankrupt
and blamed the government for his travails. This event came at a moment of great tension: the harvest had been very bad; parts of the north had been gripped by the movement of machine-smashing, riot and intimidation known as
Luddism; agitation against the trade restrictions imposed in response to the Continental Blockade was reaching a climax (they were, in fact, shortly to be repealed); and there was a growing peace movement. Yet, much acclaimed
though the assassination was in those parts of the country which had been hit hard by the war, Bellingham’s action did not, as was briefly feared, presage revolution. Panic-stricken rumours of secret rebel armies notwithstanding,
the government was at no point distracted from the war in the Peninsula (the claim, for example, that more troops were deployed against the Luddites than Wellington had under his command in Spain is disingenuous nonsense). As for
Bellingham, he had acted entirely alone and was absolutely lacking in political motivation. The shooting did, however, plunge politics into crisis. Chosen to take over as Prime Minister, Lord Liverpool tried to make up for losing
Perceval by recalling Canning and Wellesley, but neither of them was willing to co-operate. Without them, the Commons felt that the old administration could not carry on and therefore demanded a replacement. In so far as the war
in Spain was concerned, this move was truly frightening, for it implied bringing in either Wellesley and Canning or the Whigs. Yet Wellesley and Canning were seriously lacking in political judgement, and, in the case of the
former, notoriously lazy, whilst the Whigs, though no longer opposed to the war against Napoleon per se, were deeply pessimistic about the Peninsula, inclined to a defensive strategy and eager to cut expenditure. In the end,
however, all was well. Ever more enamoured of the military glory his sometime friends were so keen on scorning, the Prince-Regent would not back the Whigs of his own accord, whilst the latter could not muster the support they
needed in the Commons to force him to do so. As for Wellesley and Canning, neither of them proved capable of forming a government. All the alternatives having been tried and failed, there was no choice but to bring back Liverpool
and his colleagues, and on 17 June a distinctly humbled Commons confirmed them in office by a majority of 100 votes.