

 By early afternoon, then, the bulk of the Allied army was facing south (the Light Division and a few other troops had been left in their original positions just in case Marmont was trying another feint), whilst the French were
circling westwards around the two Arapiles. At this point, however, Marmont made a terrible mistake. Having mounted the Arapil Grande, he could see much of what was going on in the Allied position, but such was his conviction
that Wellington was a cautious general who much preferred the defence to the attack that he drew quite the wrong conclusion from what he saw. Thus, in his eyes, the movements were explained by preparations for a retreat to a
fresh position a few miles to the west behind the River Zurgaín, and he in consequence determined to push his vanguard even further westwards in the hope of outflanking this new position as well. Thus far, the French had not
advanced beyond his viewpoint, but some time after midday Marmont ordered four of the five infantry divisions that he had to hand to advance along a long ridge that ran westwards towards the Zurgaín, together with a division of
light cavalry under Curto.

 In acting in this fashion, Marmont was taking an awful risk, one of the most basic rules of ‘horse and musket’ warfare being never to march across the front of an opponent. Convinced that Wellington would not attack, Marmont was
blind to the danger, but in reality his men were marching straight into a trap. Not only did the move further west lead to the French becoming more and more strung out, but Wellington had for the past few hours actually been
contemplating an attack. Surveying the French through his telescope in between bites at a leg of chicken, the British commander saw his moment. Exclaiming, ‘By God, that will do!’, he tossed the half-finished chicken leg over his
shoulder, leaped on his horse, and set off at high speed for Pakenham’s Third Division with its attendant Portuguese cavalry.

 The events of the next hour or so were to prove a bitter awakening for the French. Alerted by Wellington, Pakenham led his men to the westernmost end of the ridge along which the French were advancing and then faced left and
burst over the crest to envelop the leading French division (that of Thomières). There followed a sharp clash:

 We were going up an ascent on whose crest masses of the enemy were stationed. Their fire seemed capable of sweeping all before it … Truth compells me to say … that we retired before this overwhelming fire, but … General Pakenham
approached and very good naturedly said, ‘Reform’, and in … a moment, ‘Advance … There they are my lads; just let them feel the temper of your bayonets.’ We advanced, everyone making up his mind for mischief. At last … the bugles
along the line sounded the charge. Forward we rushed … and awful was the retribution we exacted for our former repulse. 40

 A long way from its nearest fellow and supported only by Curto’s light cavalry, Thomières’ division was overwhelmed with the loss of almost half its strength, Pakenham then pursuing its remnants eastwards until he came upon the
next French division – that of Maucune – which had halted to cover the march westwards of the rest of the French infantry. Maucune, too, was in trouble, however, for, after setting Pakenham in motion, Wellington had ridden back
to his main position and ordered the troops there to attack in echelon from the right. First off were the Fifth Division of General Leith, and the cavalry brigade of General Le Marchant. Seeing the British cavalry, Maucune
ordered his men to form in squares, only for the first troops to hit home to turn out to be Leith’s infantry. Caught in the act of changing formation, the French were therefore soon vanquished: