

 Yet without stability in America, Spain was bankrupt: indeed, had the British government not agreed to supply the Regency with a subsidy of £600,000 in 1812, it is hard to see how the struggle could have been continued at all.
Even in the moment of victory, then, Cocks was writing, ‘All will depend on the power with which we shall be entrusted [to make] the Spaniards what they are capable of being made … Drilled by us and led by us and mingled with us,
no soldiers will be more formidable. Left to themselves, they will afford more proofs that … discipline is far superior to courage.’ 17 In these circumstances, it is natural to assume that conciliating London would have been the
foremost item on Spain’s political agenda in the summer of 1812, and it is in consequence highly tempting to see the offer of the command-in-chief of the Spanish army that was suddenly made Wellington by the cortes on 22
September 1812 in this light. As a delighted Henry Wellesley wrote:

 After the experience of four years there is no-one in Spain who believes that this country will be saved by the measures of this or any other government composed of Spaniards, and it is to the prevalence of this sentiment in the
cortes, as much as the increasing confidence of the nation in the British army and in its commander that we are indebted for the sacrifice of those prejudices which existed to placing a foreigner at the head of the Spanish
armies. 18

 Nothing could have been further from the truth, however. As we have already seen, ever since 1810 a traditionalist minority known as the serviles had been struggling to resist the liberales, but, until the ratification of the
Constitution in March 1812, the use of ambiguous language and medieval precedent had generally given the latter the support of enough deputies to render a successful challenge unlikely. In the autumn of 1811, indeed, merely
voicing support for the Princess of Brazil – the great hope of the serviles – had led to the arrest of the erstwhile regent, Lardizábal, and the suspension of the entire Council of State. With the Constitution out of the way,
however, the cortes could not avoid confronting major issues on which there was no possibility of compromise or obfuscation, the most notable of these being the position of the Church. At the same time, as a constituent body
only, the cortes should in theory have dissolved itself in favour of an ‘ordinary’ assembly, but the liberal leaders insisted on keeping it in being, on the grounds that the new political system had not been fully elaborated. In
consequence, passions in chamber and press became more inflamed by the day, matters finally being plunged into crisis by the disastrous Spanish defeat at Castalla on 21 July 1812, which for a variety of reasons raised the
possibility that the Regency might have to be re-modelled. * Fearing at the very least the formation of a regency of a less docile cast, if not one headed by the Princess of Brazil, the liberals decided to launch a pre-emptive
strike. For this, however, British support was essential, and to this end the Asturian deputy, Andrés Angel de la Vega, a moderate who had been one of the emissaries dispatched to Britain in 1808, paid a call on Henry Wellesley.
Informed that Vega and his friends were anxious for his opinion, the ambassador replied that he would not back any government that did not immediately appoint a commander-in-chief and give him the power necessary to turn the
Spanish army into an effective fighting force.