

 Yet the return of Spanish authority brought no help. Police regulations that differed hardly at all from those of the French were imposed on a populace that in many cases could only survive by resorting to crime, or, at least,
economic activities of a sort that the authorities were inclined to frown upon, such as peddling and prostitution. No more in 1812 than in 1808, meanwhile, were there any serious moves in the direction of greater social justice.
Thus, whilst the cortes in principle abolished feudalism, nothing was done to prevent the señores from continuing to levy their old feudal dues on the grounds that they were owed to them as rent. Nor, still less, were their
tenants given the land. Equally, as in 1808, power stayed as firmly in the hands of the same local oligarchies as ever. In areas which had always remained in Patriot hands and those which were newly liberated from the French
alike, there therefore arose a widespread movement of agrarian protest that the authorities were powerless to control. Dues went unpaid, the symbols of feudal rule were torn down, and pueblo after pueblo protested at the actions
of their señores or challenged their rights. As for the quinta, meanwhile, it was ignored: hungry and desperate, a few individuals may here and there have answered the increasingly pathetic appeals of the Regency, but to expect
anything more was out of the question.

 If any further evidence is needed of the true state of popular feeling about the war effort, one has only to look at the partidas of the liberated areas, for their behaviour in no way matched the degree of commitment to the
struggle that might have been expected had they been the patriots of legend. Indeed, the more the French receded from occupied Spain, the more la guerrilla appeared in its true colours. In northern Spain irregular resistance
reached fresh heights – having defeated one substantial French force outside Vitoria, on 19 August Mina routed another at Tiebas midway between Tafalla and Pamplona – but in the liberated territories there emerged a sorry
picture. Thus, deprived of the cloak of patriotism, many of the guerrillas were revealed as the brigands which they had always been, whilst there were few signs of a willingness either to pursue the French to fresh hunting
grounds or to enlist in the regular army. From all sides, indeed, came complaints of pillage and highway robbery, whilst, as in the years 1808–1810, the problem was again swelled by young men taking to their heels to avoid
military service. Still worse, meanwhile, even relatively well-disciplined forces such as those of El Empecinado generally spent their time, in Wellington’s words, ‘getting quietly into the large towns and amusing themselves or
collecting plunder of a better or more valuable description’. 13 As for the few units that took the field with the regular armies, such as Sánchez’s Lanceros de Castilla, they were soon shedding deserters by the dozen, whilst
they proved little use in regular military operations: ‘They are worse than useless … for they only consume the produce of the country … None of the guerrillas can act in line with regular troops.’ 14 From this there followed but
one conclusion: ‘In proportion as we advance … the guerrillas must be reduced into regular troops, or driven from the provinces as a pest and useless burden to the country.’ 15