

 Large parts of the country, then, had been to all intents and purposes reduced to anarchy. Rarely, however, could an administration have been in less of a position to assert its authority. Jefes políticos, Intendents and
‘constitutional’ town councils were appointed in the liberated territories, certainly, but all too many of the officials concerned were mere placemen who had found favour with the new authorities, relations between which were in
any case often very confused. As for the ayuntamientos, in town after town life was disrupted by constant skirmishing as various local factions jockeyed for position and hurled accusations of treason at one another.

 None of this made for efficient administration. Also extremely damaging was the manner in which cities such as Cádiz, La Coruña, Ciudad Rodrigo and Alicante had all become crammed with supernumeraries with perfectly legitimate
claims to pay and employment. As Mahy complained of this last city, ‘The immense gathering of … officers of every class that has come together in [Alicante] is absorbing all the resources [of] the territory that has not yet been
occupied by the enemy … In consequence, Your Highness must decide what should be done with all those who are not legitimately employed with the army.’ 16 Nor were matters helped by the exceptionally wasteful structure that was
given to the Spanish army in the course of 1812. Thus, to accommodate the swollen officer corps that had emerged from the war, the Captain Generalcies were kept separate from the field commands, and each regiment given only a
single battalion, each brigade only four regiments, and each division only two brigades (in the French army, by contrast, regiments had four battalions, brigades eight, and divisions sixteen).

 Economy was essential, however. Thanks to the advance of the French armies and the continued chaos in America, revenue had been falling steadily – from 407,700,000 reales in 1810 to 201,600,000 in 1811 and only 138,000,000 in
1812. Falls in the amounts dispatched from the colonies had been particularly sharp – as much as ninety-three per cent in the period 1811–12 – and, even though a measure of order had now been restored in Mexico, a variety of
factors ensured that shipments of bullion would never regain their previous levels. Notwithstanding the fact that it was the key to Spain’s situation, however, consideration of the American problem had been relegated to a
secondary level by the cortes. Repeated efforts were made by the American deputies, many of whom were anything but eager for a total rupture with metropolitan Spain, to introduce genuine measures of reform, but these either
foundered for lack of interest, or were brought down by the determination of merchants to protect their commercial interests, liberals to safeguard the principle of a unitary state, and traditionalists to defend the patrimony of
Fernando VII. Even the political equality offered by the cortes on 14 October 1810 was hedged about with qualifications that effectively rendered it null and void, whilst many of its general reforms actually exacerbated American
grievances. As gaditano opinion had also continued to block the commercial concessions being pressed for by the British, the Spanish revolution had therefore offered the colonies almost nothing.