

 Taking the castle, however, proved beyond the capacities of Wellington’s forces. The troops selected for the offensive in Old Castile were not the cream of the Anglo-Portuguese army; the Allies had very few heavy guns, no
trained sappers and only a small number of engineer officers; the governor of the castle, a General Dubreton, was another Philippon; the garrison was both very strong and composed entirely of veteran troops; and the castle, which
was amply supplied with food and munitions, occupied a dominant position on a steep hill and had been reinforced by a variety of earthworks. Put all this together, and the result was entirely predictable. Wellington’s troops
quickly stormed the fortress’ main outwork, albeit at very heavy cost. As Mills remembered:

 The redoubt was ordered to be stormed. The Forty-Second, as the strongest regiment in the division, was selected for the purpose, supported by the light companies of the Highland brigade and General Pack’s Portuguese brigade. At
eight o’clock they advanced … but the Portuguese, who thought to raise their spirits by it, began to shout … and thereby drew the enemy’s fire upon them. The Forty-Second advanced gallantly and planted their ladders which proved
to be too short, and after persisting for some time they were beat back. They returned again, and with Major Cocks and his light … companies got in … scrambling over without ladders. 24

 However, an attempt to escalade the main line of defences was beaten back. To quote the same observer again:

 Our men got the ladders up with some difficulty under a heavy fire … but were unable to get to the top. Hall of the Third Regiment [of Foot Guards] who mounted first was knocked down. Fraser tried and was shot in the knee.
During the whole of this time [the French] kept up a constant fire from the top of the wall and threw down bags of gunpowder and large stones. At last, having been twenty-five minutes in the ditch and not seeing anything of the
other parties, [our men] retired, having lost half their numbers in killed and wounded … Thus ended the attack, which was almost madness to attempt. 25

 Thanks to the inadequacy of their siege artillery – just three eighteen pounders, which, after one had a trunnion knocked off, were nicknamed Thunder, Lightning and Nelson – the Allies were then forced to try the extremely
time-consuming expedient of mining. However, the first mine was not pushed far enough under the defences with the result that its detonation caused only limited damage, the troops sent in to seize the walls in its wake making no
headway. A second mine was more successful and nightfall on 4 October therefore found British infantry ensconced in a large breach in the outer wall. After that, however, progress was minimal. Heavy rain, mounting casualties and
growing demoralisation among the troops made digging the fresh trenches that were required inside the enceinte very slow, whilst two of the only three Allied heavy guns that were of any use were badly damaged. Nor did it help
that the French launched repeated sorties that resulted in desperate fighting, particularly on 7 October. Thus: