

 For a variety of reasons, the news of the French advance in the south undoubtedly came as a great surprise to Wellington, who had assumed, first, that the autumn rains would block the roads in La Mancha, and, second, that the
expeditionary force at Alicante and the Spanish Second, Third and Fourth Armies would between them ensure that the French could only send a moderate force against Madrid. In all this he was disappointed. Though Burgos was
deluged, in central and eastern Spain the rains had been paltry by comparison. In the Levante the Allied forces were simply not strong enough to do more than ensure that Suchet did not add any forces to those of Soult and Joseph.
And in the south the Fourth Army, which had been, at Wellington’s request, ordered to cross the Sierra Morena and take up a position that would threaten the flank of any force moving from Valencia on Madrid, had failed to put in
an appearance. Between them possessed of some 60,000 men, the Armies of the Centre and the South were therefore soon heading for the capital.

 In British accounts, chief blame for this situation is usually laid at the door of the Fourth Army, but this is unfair. The force involved could bring up at best 16,000 men, and was simply too weak to do more than win the
defenders of the capital a little time. That said, however, the behaviour of its commander, General Ballesteros, is hardly worthy of praise. Recently elevated to the command of the Fourth Army from that of his old division, the
Spanish general had over the past three years gained a reputation as a fighter, certainly, but also as an officer who was bombastic, bullying and much inclined to fall out with the civilian authorities. A skilful self-publicist,
he had quickly won the adulation of the liberal press, the latter having been delighted that a man forged in the revolution should have gained such renown (in 1808 a retired infantry officer employed in the state tobacco
monopoly, Ballesteros had been promoted straight to the rank of brigadier by the Junta of Asturias). So successful was Ballesteros, indeed, that by the summer of 1812 he had become the centre of something of a personality cult.
Mobbed by cheering crowds whenever he passed through Cádiz, he was presented with a large sum raised by public subscription for the support of his army, whilst the press outdid itself in singing his praises. For example:

 Ballesteros, honour of Spain,

 Warlike bolt of lightning that terrifies the Frenchman,

 The glory of victory and the crown of green laurel follows you …

 In the annals of the history of Spain

 Your great name should be immortal,

 For you liberated Andalucía

 From the lash of the infidel French. 30

 This extravagant praise was scarcely merited, for, as one British officer who was for a while attached to his forces noted:

 Of all the unworthies produced by Spain during this war (and God knows there were plenty of them), this man was the greatest impostor and charlatan … He certainly kept a body of men together, but they proved only a curse to the
inhabitants … [and] appeared to be composed of the débris of defeated and dispersed armies, men who would not fight, yet reassembled to obtain food because they were too idle or too dissipated to work. Whenever the French
retired, the Spaniards followed, composing and reciting songs of victory, but at too respectable a distance to disquiet the enemy. If the French halted or attempted to pursue them, they soon found how vain was the undertaking …
Ballesteros fought some actions, but they were all forced upon him … and he was invariably beaten. His army never undertook the initiative in any operation that might entail contact with his adversaries. 31