

 Well aware what was being hinted at, Vega returned the very next day with the news that a motion would shortly be introduced in the cortes appointing Wellington to the command of the Spanish armies, the liberals duly forcing
this through in secret session in the face of only minimal opposition (the few objections came chiefly from Catalan deputies anxious at the threat British influence might pose to Catalonia’s cotton industry). Yet there was more
to this than meets the eye. Obsessed with the threat of military despotism suggested by the arrogance and ostentation favoured by many generals, the liberals hedged the appointment round with a series of qualifications that
prohibited Wellington from altering the structure of the army or exercising any control over the civilian authorities. Also present in the monstrously tortured language of the actual decree passed by the cortes, meanwhile, was
the strong implication that Wellington should operate at the orders of the Regency rather than acting as a free agent: no more would the British be able – from the Spanish point of view – to take flight whenever it suited them,
added weight being lent to this point by claims that the loss of Andalucía had been the result of Wellington’s refusal to lend the Junta Central military support in the autumn of 1809.

 The idea of Spanish control being one that filled Wellington with horror – the thing he was most determined to guard against, he wrote, was ‘the pretension which the Spanish government might form to direct the operations of the
war in consequence of this appointment’ 19 – this was a recipe for disaster, and all the more so as the decree failed to give him the powers that both he and Henry Wellesley were convinced were necessary if the command was to be
of any value. * A clash, in short, was inevitable, the only reason that it was postponed being that Vega was blithely promising that the cortes would readily pass any amendments that Wellington might think necessary. From
politics, however, we must now return to the battlefield, particularly as events at the front were materially to affect the chances of Wellington getting what he wanted.

 With Wellington in occupation of Salamanca, Valladolid and Madrid, and the French falling back on Burgos and Valencia, a serious problem threatened to develop. The more that the French were driven back, the more they were able
to concentrate their forces, and the more that they concentrated their forces the more they were able to outmatch those of the Anglo-Portuguese. Meanwhile, it was clear that little could be expected from the Spanish regular
armies beyond the rather limited assistance that Wellington was receiving from them as things stood, and, further, that the guerrillas could not be counted on to halt a French counter-offensive. The Anglo-Portuguese forces in the
south could now be brought up to Madrid, true, but even so Wellington would be able to field no more than 60,000 men. This figure might perhaps be increased to 70,000 through the incorporation of such Spanish troops who were
ready to take the field in central Spain, but the Armies of the Centre, Portugal and the South – all of which had now been freed from garrison duty – alone amounted to over 100,000 men, whilst there was no guarantee that further
forces might not be obtained from Suchet and Caffarelli. Splendid though Wellington’s forces were, these were not odds of a sort to be faced in the depths of central Spain, and all the more so as the French were in a position to
launch a concentric attack. Yet the British commander could hardly abandon Madrid in favour, say, of his old position at Salamanca. This dilemma was only resolved by Clausel suddenly moving west to re-occupy Valladolid with a
view to rescuing the beleaguered garrisons of Astorga, Toro and Zamora. Presented with a wonderful opportunity to lessen the odds against him before Joseph and Soult could arrange a counter-offensive in New Castile, on 31 August
Wellington therefore moved north.