

 With the British commander were just 21,000 men, the rest of his forces being left to hold Madrid where they were eventually joined by Hill’s corps, and the division which had been stationed at Cádiz, both of which were still
coming up from the south. Necessary for political reasons, this left Wellington dangerously short-handed, but it was hoped that the want might be made up by the Sixth Army, which had just forced Astorga to surrender, and was
therefore in a position to fall on Clausel from the north-west. In dividing his forces in this fashion, however, Wellington was taking a serious risk, and, what is more, one that he well knew might not come off. As he had written
to Bathurst on 18 August:

 I do not expect much from the exertions of the Spaniards … They cry ‘viva’ and are very fond of us … but they are in general the most incapable of all the nations that I have known, the most vain, and at the same time the most
ignorant … I am afraid that the utmost we can hope for is to teach them how to avoid being beat. 21

 As for the siege of Astorga, the fact that the French had been overcome could not disguise the fact that it had been a considerable embarrassment: for want of sufficient artillery, the Sixth Army had been forced to rely on
mining, but operations had gone so badly that, faced by the prospect that he might run out of food before the garrison did, a desperate Castaños had eventually written to the governor offering him any terms he cared to propose in
exchange for his surrender. In retrospect, it would therefore probably have been better to risk the censure of Cádiz and strike north with a much larger force, for it was, after all, fairly clear that Soult and Joseph would be
unlikely to be able to march on Madrid for at least a month. As it was, indeed, the scheme miscarried, for the Sixth Army was slow to appear and even then came forward with less than half its disposable strength. In consequence,
having first rescued his two surviving garrisons, Clausel was allowed to evacuate Valladolid and fall back on the Ebro without a fight. Hardly surprisingly, British fury knew no bounds. As Sydenham wrote:

 Lord Wellington declares that he has not yet met with any Spanish officer who can be made to comprehend the nature of a military operation. If the Spanish officers had knowledge and vanity like the French, or ignorance without
vanity as our allies in India, something might be done with them. But they unite the greatest ignorance with the most insolent and intractible vanity. They can therefore be neither persuaded, nor instructed, nor forced to do
their duty. 22

 To add insult to injury, meanwhile, the Spanish forces consisted of ‘about 10,000 men badly clothed and equipped and still worse in discipline’. 23

 In the circumstances, it would be wrong to be too hard on the Spaniards, for Wellington had known all along that he could not rely on them and in fact had had no need to do so And they certainly cannot be blamed for what
followed. The offensive having failed, Wellington’s best move would have been to return to Madrid in the hope that one or other of the two ‘army groups’ facing him might prove incautious and afford him the opportunity of a
crushing blow. Instead, however, he continued his advance until he came to Burgos, which was currently being pillaged unmercifully by swarms of irregulars who had rushed into the city in the wake of the retreating French. Clausel
having left a garrison in the castle overlooking the famous cathedral, Wellington then sat down to besiege the place as the only means of salvaging something from what would otherwise have been a completely wasted march.