

 Aided by the most tremendous fire which I ever saw of cannon, they succeeded in driving us out … but a small party of about thirty of our men maintained themselves behind a breastwork, the enemy being on the near-side and
stabbing at [them] with bayonets, and from their spirited conduct the work was regained … An officer on our side was wounded … and our whole loss … about 120. 26

 Only on 18 October, then, was an assault deemed feasible. Once again there was fierce fighting:

 Our party was to escalade the wall in front. Burgess ran forward with thirty men, [and] Walpole and myself followed with fifty each … A most tremendous fire opened upon us from every part which took us in front and rear. They
poured down fresh men, and ours kept falling down into the ditch, dragging and knocking down others. We were so close that they fairly put their muskets into our faces, and we pulled one of their men through an embrasure. Burgess
was killed and Walpole severely wounded. We had hardly any men left on the top, and at last we gave way. How we got over the palisades I know not … the fire was tremendous: shot, shell, grape, musketry, large stones, hand
grenades and every missile weapon were used against us. 27

 The retreat was due to too few men being employed in the attack. Such mismanagement, indeed, had been a feature throughout. As Aitchison complained, for example, ‘It appears to me that to ensure success men should have
confidence in themselves, which in all desperate cases is to be acquired by numerical superiority’, whilst, as D’Urban noted, the problem was compounded by the habit of employing small parties of men from different regiments:
‘Corps [i.e. complete units] and not detachments … should always be used for services … of more than ordinary danger. In the former there is a common feeling of honour and shame. The officers know the men, the men the officers.
In the latter the very contrary of all this is the case, and the effects correspond with the causes.’ 28

 Frustrating though the failure of this assault was, for three more days siege operations continued. Had Wellington but known it, however, he was in deadly danger, for Caffarelli had temporarily vanquished the guerrillas of the
Basque provinces and brought up a considerable field force with which to aid Clausel. In all, indeed, supported only by 11,000 men of the Sixth Army, the 24,000 Anglo-Portuguese troops at Burgos were threatened by some 50,000
Frenchmen. What finally tipped the balance, however, was the arrival on 21 October of news from Madrid to the effect that Joseph and Soult were advancing into La Mancha in overwhelming force. The game was up, and there was
clearly nothing for it but to retreat. It was, however, a distinctly sullen army that took the road. Officers and men alike were exhausted, whilst casualties in the siege had amounted to over 2,000. Not surprisingly, therefore,
there was much grumbling. ‘I have not been in the habit much of questioning the conduct of our chief’, wrote Aitchison, ‘even when it differed from what I expected, but … it appears in this instance to be extremely impolitic, not
to say most wantonly reprehensible.’ 29