

 To many British observers, of course, all this was yet another instance of Spanish laziness and incompetence, whilst the more informed amongst them were also furious at the manner in which the authorities had been ‘hurried by a
spirit of revenge into the most absurd and impolitic measures against the persons who have from necessity been compelled to accept office under the government of Joseph Bonaparte’. 10 * However, rather than seeking explanations
in some supposed national character, they would have done better to look at the general state of Patriot Spain. Taking the Infantado Regency as an example, it may have been a collection of mediocrities headed by a simpleton, but
the fact was that its powers were very limited. Since the moment that the cortes had first assembled, ever tighter controls had been placed upon the executive power’s operations by the liberals who regarded all governments as a
threat to liberty. In consequence, the Regency had been left no function beyond implementing the will of the cortes. As before, however, the assembly was uninterested in the real problems that dogged the war effort: in the autumn
of 1812 the chief subject under discussion was the abolition of the Inquisition, the provision that no deputy could hold government office depriving the Regency of any chance of giving the deputies a lead. Denied the chance to
defend itself, it also became the subject of a chorus of criticism that had the effect of both discrediting the Regency and inhibiting its actions still further. With the administration in chaos and corruption and nepotism
widespread, the work of government was all but paralysed.

 With a modicum of popular goodwill, there was nothing here that need have got in the way of the formation of a new army. But confidence in the régime was lacking: ‘If the authority of the government has not hitherto been
respected in the country’, wrote Henry Wellesley, ‘it is solely to be ascribed to the neglect of all the measures necessary to assist the exertions of the people, and to the want of public confidence in the regular armies and the
officers selected to command them.’ 11 In Madrid, Salamanca and Badajoz alike, meanwhile, there could be no certainty that the Anglo-Portuguese forces would be able to hold their ground against the French. Yet the heart of the
matter was simply that even after years of occupation military service was still anathematised. The crowds that had welcomed the Anglo-Portuguese army in Salamanca, Valladolid and Madrid had cheered, certainly, but they had been
more interested in cheap bread than marching off to war. At the same time, with the harvest of 1811 a disaster, all normal economic activity at a standstill, the populace frequently taxed by both sides simultaneously, and the
countryside stripped bare of all it contained by army after army, popular suffering had become intense (many areas, indeed, were in the grip of outright famine). As Hennell wrote of Madrid, for example:

 The poor are very numerous here, and many are most wretched objects. In the great streets you are stopped every five or six yards, and frequently by six or seven at once … I have seen children five or six years of age lying on
the pavement with scarcely one ounce of flesh on their arms and making a piteous moaning. After dark they lie down against a door doubled almost together … some sleeping, others crying. 12