

 Very quickly, however, it became apparent that victory was not, as the British had hoped, to be followed by the formation of large Spanish armies that could assist them in the expulsion of the French from the Peninsula. Thus, in
Madrid, for example, the days following the departure of the French had gone by in a whirl of celebrations. The Constitution of 1812 was proclaimed and sworn allegiance to in a series of ceremonies across the city; illuminations
and open-air dances were held every night; and there were a series of free bullfights (fox-hunting men though they were, Wellington’s officers were on the whole revolted by the spectacle). Meanwhile, the troops mingled with the
crowds, who continued to swarm around them happily, the general atmosphere of goodwill being reinforced by the food which was shared with the starving (two colonels are even supposed to have fed 200 of the city’s poor for several
days out of their own pocket). Yet, although weapons, uniforms, artillery and ammunition existed in abundance in the citadel, which had been forced to surrender after a brief fight, there was no sign of general mobilisation. On
the contrary, there seemed to be a general feeling that all and sundry could rest on their laurels. ‘Nothing has disgusted me for a long time,’ complained Sydenham, ‘so much as the juvenile exultations and absurd fanfarronade
with which all the late Cádiz papers are filled. The editors seem to think that the war is at an end, and that nothing more is to be done but to cut their jokes upon the flying and discomforted French. They talk in passing of the
ilustre Wellington, the valiente Beresford, and the sabio [i.e. wise] Silveira (what names to associate!), but they evidently attribute all the great events of the campaign to the invincible spirit and miraculous exertions of the
Spaniards.’ 6

 The British, then, were filled with gloom. As Wellington wrote, ‘Everything in which the Spaniards are concerned is going as badly as possible, and I really believe there is not a man in the country who is capable of
comprehending, much less of conducting, any great concern.’ 7 Nor were his subordinates any happier. ‘It is impossible at this moment to say what efforts will be made by the Spanish authorities in consequence of our arrival, but
there appears to be no form of direction … Nothing could be so hopeless’, complained James Willoughby Gordon, whilst in the words of Wellington’s favourite aide-de-camp, the Spaniards, ‘expect us to do everything, and have not
the least idea of their being able themselves to assist us’. 8 Such views could only be reinforced by what little was to be seen of the Spanish army. Thus, Thomas Browne noted that the Spanish troops he saw were ‘badly clothed
and equipped and … had the appearance of not being more than half fed’, George Hennell that, although he had heard that ‘great numbers’ of fresh troops were to be raised, he had seen ‘nothing like it’, and William Bragge that
their boasting ‘put one in mind of the foppish midshipman who marked his only two shirts fifty-nine and sixty’. 9