

 My plan was to bring Ballesteros upon the left flank and rear of Soult’s march … If this game had been well played, it would have answered my purpose … Had I any reason to expect that it would have been well-played? Certainly
not. I have never known the Spaniards do anything, much less do anything well. Ballesteros has sometimes drawn the attention of a division or two for a moment, but that is all. Everything else you see and read is false and
rotten. A few rascals called guerrillas attack one quarter of their numbers and sometimes succeed and sometimes not, but, as for any regular operation, I have not known of such a thing and successful in the whole course of the
war. 42

 This critique was vociferously echoed by many British observers. To quote Swabey, for example:

 The fundamental cause of our giving up Madrid I attribute … to the total abandonment by everyone of the slightest hope that the Spaniards will ever do anything to help themselves. The trial was fairly made during our possession
of Madrid. The imbecility of their government, but more than all their national vanity, blinded them to the necessity of active and efficient measures and rendered the opportunity useless. The moment of action whilst the country
was in possession of their government was lost. They were then too short-sighted to fancy anything further necessary, they failed in their engagements to Lord Wellington, and lost their independence for ever … In stating an
opinion of the regular Spanish troops already in the field, it may be said that the same causes render them collectively useless. They will not face the enemy, and, excepting at Zaragoza and Gerona, they never have done so. They
are deficient in officers, and the leading feature in those they have is presumption. So great is this national fault that it extends to all ranks … For want of co-operation with the civil authorities, a large army of Spaniards
cannot be supplied without plundering … the inhabitants: this is carried on without regard to humanity, and starvation is not the only evil accruing from it. 43

 Much of this criticism, of course, was unfair. Whatever Wellington may have seen in the liberated territories, Espoz y Mina and his fellows had elsewhere contained many troops that would otherwise have been available for
operations against his forces, whilst, for all the mediocrity of Castaños, the folly of José O’Donnell, and the rebelliousness of Ballesteros, even the Spanish regulars had played a far greater role in affairs than he was
inclined to admit. Considering, too, that Wellington himself had repeatedly stated that he did not believe that the Spanish armies could save him, it is simply absurd to blame them for the retreat from Burgos. Spanish failings
had not helped, certainly, but the Anglo-Portuguese forces simply did not possess the strength to fight the sort of armies that the French could field once they had evacuated Extremadura and Andalucía. Still worse, the one chance
of success in the autumn of 1812 was thrown away by Wellington when he got bogged down in a pointless siege for which he lacked the necessary resources. To say that Wellington should not have attacked Burgos is to miss the point,
however. Quite clearly, the Spanish regular army had somehow to be rendered fit for large-scale regular operations, for otherwise the Allies could not hope to expel the French from the Peninsula. As Wellington himself admitted,
‘It is obvious that we cannot expect to save the Peninsula by military efforts unless we can bring forward the Spaniards in some shape or other.’ 44