

 Whilst noting that the value of what we would have to give them could well be doubled were the British to have control of our armies, let us set aside for a moment … the compensation which they are certain to demand for the
greatest sacrifices of every sort which they have made for us … The British would be very foolish if they did not take advantage of the fact that, whilst still obtaining the same results, they could reduce the amount of blood
they had to shed by drawing on ours. Putting it another way, we would be the first when it came to danger and the last when it came to glory. 45

 Even though these claims were received with a storm of ridicule by other writers, the seeds of doubt had been sown: there were, for example, shouts of ‘Viva Ballesteros!’ at a parade in Córdoba, whilst the governor of Ceuta
treated him as an honoured guest.

 Muttering was soon to become mutiny: indeed, had Ballesteros acted a few weeks later, the outcome of the crisis could have been very different. Even before Wellington had arrived in Cádiz, it was made clear that what he wanted
was not just to exercise the command of the various Spanish forces scattered around the Peninsula, but also to have the power to intervene in the structure and organisation of the army itself, and, above all, ensure that the
troops were paid, supplied and kept up to strength. What all this boiled down to was on the one hand making him a generalissimo in the style of Godoy and on the other subordinating the civil authority to its military counterpart.
Utterly scornful of the Spaniards’ ability to manage their own affairs, only thus, he felt, could a force of troops be enabled to take the field that was of a strength sufficient to prevent any repetition of the setbacks of the
autumn of 1812. As he wrote:

 We must not conceal from ourselves that there is but little authority of any description whatever in the provinces which have been occupied by the enemy, and even that little depends on the exercise of military power. It is vain
to expect a gentleman called an Intendent will exercise the power to realise the resources of the country … without the assistance of a military force, which military force in the existing state of the army will destroy more than
its effects would produce … I am aware that it is wrong in principle to invest military men with civil powers, but when the country is in danger that must be adopted which will tend most directly to save it … whatever may be the
constitutional principles invaded by those measures. 46

 First outlined in a letter to the Minister of War, José María de Carvajal, on 4 December 1812, Wellington’s demands were therefore dramatic. Setting aside the obvious provision that only his headquarters should have the right to
communicate with the Spanish field armies, he asked, first, that he should have control of all promotions and appointments; second, that he should have the power to purge the officer corps; third, that he should have control of
the military budget; fourth, that the number of field armies should be greatly reduced in the interests of economy; and, fifth, that provincial and local government alike should be subordinated to the army’s Captains General. In
military terms, all this was fair enough. The uncontrolled expansion of the army in 1808 had produced an officer corps that was much too big for the number of troops that Patriot Spain was actually able to field. As for the civil
authorities, the autumn of 1812 had shown that in the current circumstances they were all but helpless when it came to enforcing conscription and taxation. Yet what to Wellington was a matter of common sense to the Spaniards was
something else altogether. The supporters of the appointment were still thinking in terms of Wellington being given no more than command of the Spanish field armies whilst in effect being subjected to the authority of the Spanish
government. Already under constant threat, the Regency now found that it was to be stripped of the control of much of its revenue, deprived of much patronage and prevented from having any say in the conduct of military
operations. When the British commander arrived in Cádiz on 24 December 1812, he was therefore confronted by determined opposition, shrouded though this was in much obsequious language. In this, moreover, the Regency received the
support of not just the rag-bag of dissidents who had rallied to Ballesteros, but even a number of leading liberals.