

 Even if this condemnation was a little exaggerated, it is clear, first, that the calls that were beginning to be heard for Ballesteros to be appointed commander-in-chief or even dictator were ridiculous, and, second, that the
confidential circular informing the commanders of the various Spanish armies of Wellington’s appointment came as a most unwelcome surprise to the Asturian general, who had been sitting on his laurels at Granada. With predictable
violence, indeed, on 24 October he dispatched an open letter to the Minister of War, Carvajal, in which he made a great show of his patriotic services, claimed that Spain did not need foreign aid, denounced Wellington’s
appointment as a national humiliation, accused Britain of attempting to subvert Spain’s independence, and threatened to resign unless the offending decree was immediately rescinded. Distributed throughout Patriot Spain, this
document was little less than a call to arms, but in thus ‘pronouncing’ against the government Ballesteros had seriously miscalculated. His fellow commanders regarding him with a mixture of jealousy and scorn, they had no desire
to follow his lead, and still less so in a cause which made such little sense. No support, then, came from the rest of the army, whilst the Asturian commander was even deserted by his own subordinates, the result being that the
Regency had no difficulty in procuring his arrest.

 In theory, the rebel general should then have been packed off to the penal colony of Ceuta, but he succeeded in delaying his departure for some weeks on the grounds of illness whilst in the process stirring up an immense press
controversy. This, however, will be examined in its proper place (cf. here ), Ballesteros’ revolt having exactly coincided with military nemesis. Split into two as they were, the Anglo-Portuguese forces had no chance of stopping
either the 50,000 men of Clausel and Caffarelli in Old Castile or the 60,000 men of Soult and Joseph in La Mancha. United in and around Madrid, Wellington’s men might just have been able to smash one of the two foes before
rushing north or south to deal with the other, but as things were the only option was flight. During the night of 21 October, then, the siege of Burgos was abandoned, the troops involved proceeding to fall back in the direction
of Valladolid amidst a series of sharp rearguard actions at such places as Venta del Pozo and Villadrigo. Initially, the plan was to make a stand on the line of the River Carrión forty miles to the north-east of Valladolid in the
hope of giving Hill’s corps time to get up from Madrid, but on 25 October the French defeated the Spanish forces holding Palencia and secured its bridge before it could be blown up, and within a few days Wellington had in
consequence lost Valladolid and been forced to retire behind the Duero. Even more might have been achieved by the French, but further difficulties were averted by elements of Mendizábal’s Seventh Army which, in the absence of so
many troops from the Army of the North, succeeded in re-capturing Bilbao. With his hold on the western parts of the Basque provinces reduced to the isolated garrisons of Santoña and Guetaria, Caffarelli was left with no option
but to turn back, whereupon Clausel called a halt.