

 Amidst torrential rain, the Allies had to retreat along roads that were, in Kincaid’s words, ‘nearly knee-deep in a stiff mud into which no man could thrust his foot with the certainty of having a shoe at the end of it when he
pulled it out again’. 37 Still worse, an administrative mistake led to most of the troops losing contact with their supply trains, whilst, thanks to a lack of dry wood, there was no means of cooking the slaughtered livestock that
was the only food to be had. The unfortunate men involved, then, had to scavenge for acorns, but even where better rations could be issued, things were little better. Typical enough were the experiences of the Connaught Rangers
on 17 November:

 Each man received his portion of the quivering flesh, but, before any fires could be relighted, the order for march arrived, and the … soldiers were obliged either to throw away the meat or put it with their biscuit into their
haversacks … In a short time the wet meat completely destroyed the bread, which became perfect paste, and the blood which oozed from the undressed beef … gave so bad a taste to the bread that many could not eat it. Those who did
were in general attacked with violent pains in their bowels, and the want of salt brought on dysentery. 38

 To the horrors of the retreat, then, was added sickness, and this, together with want of forage for the horses, produced sights that easily rivalled those found on the road to La Coruña. ‘I never saw so many dead animals in so
short a distance,’ wrote Aitchison. ‘Independent of these, however, our route was sufficiently marked by the bodies of men who had died from wounds or sickness, and others left to become prisoners … from want of means to bring
them off.’ 39

 Under these pressures, many units went to pieces, though it ought to be stressed that the Portuguese and Spanish soldiers were no better behaved than their British counterparts. To quote Wheeler, ‘It is impossible for any army
to have given themselves up to more dissipation and everything that is bad as did our army. The conduct of some men would have disgraced savages, drunkenness had prevailed to such a frightful extent that I have often wondered how
it was that a great part of our army were not cut off.’ 40 The answer to Wheeler’s question is that, conducted only by the forces of Marshal Soult, the French pursuit was none too vigorous: Wellington, indeed, had only to make a
show of resistance for his opponents to draw rein. Yet even so over 6,000 men were killed, wounded or missing. Amongst the prisoners was Sir Edward Paget, who had just come out to act as Wellington’s second-in-command and was
seized by some French horsemen in a minor skirmish on 17 November, whilst almost one third of Wellington’s British troops were sick. It was an unhappy end to an unhappy campaign.

 Except in Catalonia (where the First Army was still doing what it could to harass the occupying forces), the return of the Allied army to Ciudad Rodrigo brought field operations to an end for 1812. Most importantly, however,
Espoz y Mina and other guerrilla leaders continued to harass the French. Fresh from helping to cover the retreat to Ciudad Rodrigo, for example, on 28 December Julián Sánchez defeated a column that had been sent out to
requisition supplies at Vitigudino, whilst on 29 January El Empecinado routed a squadron of juramentado cavalry at Valdetorres de Jarama. However, by far the fiercest fighting took place in Navarre and northern Aragón. From the
month of August onwards Espoz y Mina had been drawing the noose tighter and tighter around the beleaguered French garrison of Pamplona, and the absence of so much of the Army of the North in Old Castile had allowed him to devote
more and more men to repelling the sorties of its increasingly desperate governor, whilst at the same time extending his operations into Guipúzcoa on the one hand and Aragón on the other. Thus, on 23 November troops led by Espoz
y Mina himself ambushed a French convoy near Ayerbe, the same forces going on to attack Huesca four days later. Also active in Aragón, albeit further south, were the forces of Durán and Gayán, the latter forcing the evacuation of
Calatayud and Almunia, capturing the garrison of Borja, and defeating a small enemy column at Herrera.