

 Coming back from the Duero, Caffarelli therefore found much of his command in chaos, and it was only through hard fighting that he was able to relieve his battered strongholds, clear away the guerrillas from the Basque coast and
the main road to France, and reprovision Santoña. Even this much was not achieved in Aragón, however, the French hold in this area being reduced to a series of isolated garrisons dotted along the roads which linked Zaragoza with
the French frontier, Navarre and Valencia. Indeed, throughout the Basque provinces, Navarre and Aragón the situation was bleak in the extreme. Increasingly numerous, well organised and well disciplined, the guerrillas were now
strong enough to defeat the ever weaker flying columns that were all the desperately overstretched French could send against them (Espoz y Mina alone could now field nine battalions of infantry and two regiments of cavalry) and
pen the invaders into their strongpoints. At the same time, the latter could often now be taken, for Espoz y Mina, Durán and other commanders had received a number of pieces of mountain artillery brought in by sea. Morale in the
burgeoning guerrilla forces was therefore high. Assured by a grip on the countryside that on the French frontier was so tight they could even impose customs duties, their pay and supply were in good shape. Faced by precisely the
opposite situation, the invaders, by contrast, were in despair, their garrisons therefore being reduced not just by casualties but by desertion. As Napoleon himself wrote, ‘There is not a moment to lose … Tell [the king] that …
things will turn out badly unless he puts greater activity and movement into the direction of affairs.’ 41

 Crucial as all this was, for the time being, however, we must return to the aftermath of the retreat from Burgos. Both sides now went into winter quarters. For the Anglo-Portuguese army, this meant settling down in a series of
towns and villages in eastern Beira. As for the French, meanwhile, the Army of Portugal occupied eastern León and western Old Castile, the Army of the Centre the district around Madrid, and the Army of the South northern La
Mancha. Despite Wellington’s retreat, 1812 therefore remained a good year as far as the Allies were concerned: after all, Andalucía, Extremadura and Asturias all remained in their hands. This, however, did not prevent the winter
from witnessing the outbreak of fresh disputes between Wellington and the Spaniards. Thus, according to the British commander, the failure of his operations in the autumn of 1812 had been entirely the fault of the Spaniards.
Their armies had proved of little worth; their commanders had proved either careless and dilatory, or, still worse, obstructive and rebellious; their administration had failed to deliver either fresh soldiers or adequate
supplies; and their politicians had remained obsessed by questions that seemingly had little bearing on the conduct of the war. As for the guerrillas, meanwhile, close acquaintance had suggested that in many cases they were
little more than a rabble of bandits and adventurers that were militarily useless and interested in nothing but pillage. Everything had in consequence been left to the Anglo-Portuguese army, which had ended up fighting the French
all but alone. Thus: