

 No sooner, then, had Wellington returned to the Portuguese frontier than he was informing Liverpool that he intended to travel to Cádiz to see what use could be made of his newfound command of the Spanish armies. According to
Henry Wellesley, the powers that he required would be granted him without difficulty, but such a view was extremely over-optimistic, Spanish confidence in the British having been shaken to its very foundations. Once again, the
redcoats had marched into Spain and once again they had fled before the enemy, and this time without even the saving grace of a Talavera, an Albuera or a Fuentes de Oñoro. Once again, the soldiers had behaved in an abominable
fashion. And, once again, it was the Spaniards who were abandoned and blamed for everything. Insult was added to injury, meanwhile, by the British being seemingly bent on ruining the Spanish economy. Dark mutterings, for example,
had been heard at the fact that amongst the installations blown up by the British in Madrid was its noted but hopelessly uneconomic royal porcelain factory (the fact that it had been reduced to a mere shell and pressed into
service as a powder magazine deterred no one). At the same time, the American question had also flared up again. For reasons which have already been explained, ever since the outbreak of the criollo revolutions Britain’s policy
had been to reconcile the contending parties, to which end she had eventually proposed that a joint commission should mediate between the two sides. Thanks to Spanish recalcitrance, negotiations had dragged on interminably, but
by September 1812 the British government felt that it could wait no longer. Only four days after Wellington’s appointment, Henry Wellesley had therefore written to the Spanish Secretary of State, Ignacio de la Pezuela, claiming
that the failure to make any progress was not only threatening the Allied cause with bankruptcy but throwing up the danger that the rebels might seek support from France. The key obstacle having been the refusal of the Spanish
authorities to grant the colonies full commercial freedom and allow the mediation to be extended to the whole of the empire, Wellesley made a number of concessions on these issues, but, as the Spaniards saw full well, they were
still one way or the other being expected to allow their colonies to trade freely with the British. Whether this was likely to produce peace in America was debatable, but what was certain was that Britain’s commercial interests
would be advanced and those of Spain severely damaged, the fact being that Wellesley was laying himself open to charges of blackmail and duplicity.

 With matters in this state, the Ballesteros controversy – the first news, incidentally, that public opinion had of Wellington’s appointment * – did not help in the slightest. In manifesto after manifesto, the Asturian general
claimed that he was defending the liberty of Spain against foreign domination, protested his innocence and demanded a fair hearing, whilst he was joined in his protests by a variety of pamphleteers who lauded his patriotism,
accused the British of being motivated solely by their own national interests, questioned Wellington’s integrity, denounced the decree of 22 September as damaging to the morale of army and populace alike, and even denied the need
for British aid. Even more insidious was the pamphlet entitled Vallesteros (contemporaries spelt the name as frequently with a ‘V’ as they did with a ‘B’):