

 So angry was the Minister of the Interior, García de León y Pizarro, meanwhile, that he resigned. ‘“The war! The war!” everyone cried,’ he wrote, ‘and as a result the nation’s honour was sacrificed in order to increase Britain’s
influence and glory at the cost of our own.’ 50

 Wellington, then, was in for a rough ride, whilst his powers remained extremely circumscribed: the wholesale cull that had to be undertaken in the officer corps was quite beyond his means, for example. Nor did it help that in
the course of his visit to Cádiz, news had arrived of Napoleon’s defeat in Russia, for this seemed likely only to stiffen Spanish resistance: without Spain’s example, many Spanish newspapers affirmed, Alexander I would never have
stood firm. When he left Cádiz, then, Wellington did so with a sense of deep dissatisfaction. Yet there was no option but for him to make the best of what he had been offered, for the French armies continued to dwarf his own.
Mina and the rest might do something to redress the balance, but, for all the havoc that they were wreaking in northern Spain, they could hardly be relied upon. In short, the French would be driven across the Pyrenees with the
help of a revived Spanish army, or they would not be driven across the Pyrenees at all.

===== FILE: OEBPS/xhtml/chapter16.xhtml =====
The Peninsular War

 16

 Vitoria

 THE DEFEAT OF KING JOSEPH, JANUARY–JUNE 1813

 Yelling and cheering the men fell on the van. Smashing open its doors with their musket butts, they dropped back in astonishment, for the interior was packed to the brim with church plate, bags of coin, caskets and treasure
chests. Forcing their way through the throng, two mounted officers initiated the scramble, one of them grabbing a large chalice and the other a likely looking casket. Around them, meanwhile, in the midst of a chaotic jumble of
wagons, tents and animals of every sort, the wildest scenes were taking place. One man was standing on a wagon full of shoes and throwing them out to the crowd; another covered from head to foot in flour; another standing
knee-deep in a pile of pillage and drunkenly inviting all and sundry to come and take their pick; another slaughtering a sheep with his bayonet; another running around with a shako full of Spanish dollars and offering anyone who
would listen to him the whole lot for a handful of British guineas. To complete the scene there were crowds of drunken women dressing themselves in fine court dresses; girls in mock military attire begging for protection; and
groups of soldiers fighting over the spoils, drinking themselves senseless, conducting impromptu auctions, or methodically stripping wagon after wagon. It was 21 June 1813.

 Witnessed at the end of the battle of Vitoria, these scenes marked the end of the Bonaparte kingdom of Spain. Almost captured in the rout himself, Joseph was forced to flee his domains and the military power of the French in the
Peninsula was decisively broken. It was arguably Wellington’s greatest victory, and yet in many respects Vitoria was lost by the French as much as it was won by the Allies. Certainly, the invaders had been riding for a fall. By
the end of 1812 the grande armée that had invaded Russia had ceased to exist. Unable to resist the oncoming Russians, the French also had to evacuate East Prussia and the Grand Duchy of Warsaw. With both Austria and Prussia
likely to join his opponents, Napoleon responded by withdrawing more troops from Spain. In brief, every battalion of infantry, regiment of cavalry and battery of artillery was ordered to dispatch a certain number of picked men
for the Imperial Guard, whilst in some cases these were accompanied by the cadres needed for the formation of duplicate units in France. Also taken were a few more foreign units, together with the three battalions of sailors who
had been sent to assist with the siege of Cádiz. At some 20,000 men, the numbers were not overwhelming, but even so the occupying forces were left in a very difficult position. In much of the area that was supposedly under their
control – the Basque provinces, Navarre, Aragón, Old Castile, La Mancha, the Levante and parts of Catalonia and León – their only presence was a few scattered garrisons, and even then their forces were very thinly spread. Trying
to hold a front line that stretched in a great arc from Bilbao to Valencia, they were clearly almost as vulnerable to an assault as they had been in 1812, and, with hopes of victory abandoned, the best policy would therefore have
been to have fallen back to the Ebro. But such a course of action was more than Napoleon could have stomached. If imperial prestige had always made retrenchment very difficult, in 1813 the political situation rendered it out of
the question. With dozens of German princes nervously eyeing the oncoming Russian armies and wondering whether they ought to change sides, the last thing that was needed was a confession of weakness. In consequence, all that
Napoleon would sanction was the evacuation of La Mancha and the transfer of the capital to Valladolid. This was better than nothing, especially as the defiant and unco-operative Soult was recalled to help the emperor in Germany,
but even so the French remained badly overstretched. At the same time, of course, their prestige had suffered a great blow, for on 17 March el rey intruso duly left Madrid in the company of another vast caravan of refugees.