

 Despite these concessions, Wellington remained unhappy, his chief complaint being that the civil authorities were still not totally under the control of the military. However, though convinced that the Spaniards could have gone
further – as he pointed out, in Cádiz fears for the sanctity of the Constitution had not prevented the post of jefe político from being given to the military governor – he reluctantly decided that enough had been achieved to
allow him to accept the command. The experiment had to be tried, certainly, but it is quite clear that Wellington was far from certain that there was much to be gained from it. Setting aside the enormous problems facing the army,
the protests of Flórez Estrada had soon been resumed with even greater ferocity than before. According to the Asturian journalist, indeed, the powers were not only unconstitutional, but anti-constitutional: Spain had been placed
under the tutelage of a foreign power and exposed to precisely the same sort of attack as she had suffered in 1808 and all for the sake of provisions that had no foundation in necessity, Flórez Estrada arguing that Spain’s
existing laws and procedures had only to be properly enforced for all to be well. These fulminations striking a general chord, it was not long before the entire alliance was coming under hostile scrutiny. For the Diario Redactor
de Sevilla, for example, ‘the most heroic people in the world’ had not fought the French for four years to be made ‘the slaves of Albion’, the effect of Wellington’s appointment having been ‘to subordinate Spain to the will and
caprice of a foreign general and government’. 48 Still more acerbic was the noted radical, Juan Romero Alpuente. As he wrote:

 Offering Wellington so great a dignity … overlooks the … Nation’s sons and gives preference in their despite to a foreigner, whilst extinguishing all enthusiasm, and with it the hope of victory … Opposed to justice and liberty,
it also … risks us … becoming the slaves of the enemy who is defending us … It is true that British blood has been shed in Spain, but … for every drop … that has been shed, a sea of Spanish blood has been poured out … Let us open
our eyes … and take France, our greatest enemy … as our point of comparison. Pretending to be friends, the French took over the greatest fortresses that defended our land frontiers … Pretending to be friends, the British have
taken over the greatest fortresses that defend our coasts … The French … have stripped us of all the treasure that we did not manage to hide, and … the British have stripped us of all the rest. The French have not furthered
either their agriculture, their industry, or their commerce at our expense, but the British have furthered each one … at the cost of our ruin. The French have not augmented their navy with our own, and yet our ships have either
been reduced to rotting hulks or all but absorbed into the British fleet … The French have murdered thousands of our brothers … but in the midst of our shipwreck the British have cut off the very hands by which we were clinging
to the land. 49