

 At first sight, this is a little surprising: the liberals, after all, had taken the leading role in Wellington’s appointment. Yet in fact many of them were hostile to any extension of British influence. Closely connected with
the mercantile community in Cádiz, they had no desire to see any concessions to the American rebels. Nor did it help that Wellington showed a marked propensity to associate with figures whom the liberals had some reason to
distrust: his chief Spanish confidant in the Burgos campaign, for example, was Miguel de Alava, an aristocratic officer who had originally proffered his allegiance to Joseph Bonaparte. One particular enemy was the radical
newspaper editor, Alvaro Flórez Estrada. A leading light in the rising in Asturias in 1808, Flórez Estrada had been forced to flee his native province by La Romana’s coup, only to find that Wellington and his brothers were
backing the marquess against all-comers in the furore that followed. Suspicious of both military despotism and British support for servilismo, he was therefore horrified to discover the sorts of thing that Wellington was
demanding. Very soon, then, Flórez Estrada’s Tribuno del Pueblo Español was waxing furious at ‘the monstrous and despotic union of political, civil and military authorities’ that Wellington was proposing. Thus:

 Is it credible that Lord Wellington, who was born … in a free country where such a’ union of authorities is entirely unknown … could have made such a proposal? How could a general destined to have the glory of bringing liberty
to a nation which esteems it so much … have made so absurd a mistake? How could this illustrious soldier have persuaded himself that a plan so degrading to a nation that has sacrificed itself for its liberty … could have been …
heard by the heroic Spanish people without the author of so impertinent … an idea having aroused their anger? Let us not deceive ourselves. The Spaniards have not only shed their blood so as not to suffer the yoke of Napoleon;
they have shed it so as not to suffer any yoke at all. 47

 The British commander having given much offence by the arrogance of his behaviour – the natural acerbity of his temper had not been improved by a painful attack of lumbago and the long and difficult ride to Cádiz from his
headquarters at Freneda – the Regency was encouraged by this show of defiance to dig in its heels, only to be informed that failure to comply would lead to Wellington’s immediate resignation. At this, resistance collapsed.
According to a decree of the cortes of 6 January 1813, the Regency was henceforward to be permitted to unite the Captain Generalcies with the command of the relevant field armies; the civil authorities to be subject to their
military counterparts in all matters relating to the conduct of the war; every army to have an Intendent General to which the provincial Intendents – the Treasury officials responsible for the pay and supply of the army – would
be answerable; and a fixed proportion of the revenue of each province devoted to the war effort. In addition to all this, meanwhile, the Regency agreed that all appointments were to be made at Wellington’s recommendation; that
the new commander-in-chief was to have the power to send away – though not to cashier – undesirable officers and determine the employment of the military budget; that all communication with the Spanish forces would henceforth be
through his headquarters; that the Chief of the General Staff and the Inspectors-General of infantry and cavalry should all be attached to his person; that ninety per cent of revenue should henceforth be spent on the army; and
that the Spanish armies should be reorganised more or less as Wellington wanted. *