

 Thanks to the storm of Bilbao, Wellington had been saved from immediate disaster, but the advance of Joseph and Soult meant that the Allies remained in some danger. To the south-east, Hill had been preparing to fight the French
from behind the line of the Jarama and Henares. On the very eve of battle, however, he received an order from Wellington telling him that he must retreat immediately. As a result 30 October saw his troops heading north-westwards
for the Sierra de Guadarrama. A sharp rearguard action just north of Aranjuez notwithstanding, Madrid had to be left to its fate. It was a dismal scene. Amid general panic and despair, the Allies blew up the fortifications and
magazines of the Retiro, whilst the populacho engaged in an orgy of looting. As for the British, already harassed by biting cold, they fell into despondency. As the artillery officer, Webber, remembered, ‘I never recollect on any
occasion … being more melancholy and depressed than in passing by the Puente de Toledo, and giving up Madrid to the plunder and wanton cruelty of the enemy. I would willingly have lost a limb in battle to have saved it, and I
know every man felt the same sentiments.’ 32

 Sullen, frustrated and much inclined to blame the Spaniards for their ills, the men took out their anger on the populace, one early casualty being the town of Valdemoro. ‘Here a scene of the most disgraceful character ensued,’
wrote Swabey. ‘It was at the time of year when the new wine was in open vats and there were many at this place. Numbers of men fell out of the ranks and surrounded them, and I saw with my own eyes many actually drowned in the
vats. They were bailing out the liquor with their caps to their comrades till overcome as much by the fumes of the wine as what they drank, they sank down and expired in their glory.’ 33 Drunkenness was not the only crime
committed by the soldiers, however. To quote Bell, ‘Many peasants lay dead by the roadside, murdered … The old trade was going on, killing and slaying, and capturing our daily bread.’ 34 As Long admitted, ‘All this … has made our
line of retreat as vandalic as any Frenchified Spaniards could wish, and it has distressed me not a little to witness it. The poor peasants have indeed abundant reason to be heartily sick of both friends and foes.’ 35

 Fortunately for the British, perhaps, no attempt was made to press Hill’s retreat and by 6 November his troops had pulled back so far to the west that there was no longer any danger of them being cut off from Wellington. With
Hill safe, the latter was able to resume his retreat in turn, and the entire Anglo-Portuguese army was therefore soon converging on Salamanca, where it eventually took up a strong defensive position covering the city against any
attack from the east and south-east. Wellington was now safe enough, but even so the campaign was far from over. Thus, Soult and Joseph had joined up with Clausel in their turn, and on 14 November 1812 their combined forces
struck across the River Tormes well to the south of Salamanca in a repeat of Marmont’s disastrous advance of 22 July. This time, however, there was no chance of fighting, with the result that the Allies were soon falling back in
the direction of Ciudad Rodrigo. There followed a few days that many British soldiers remembered as being amongst the most miserable in the entire war: ‘The Corunna [ sic ] retreat,’ wrote Wood, ‘from what I experienced of it …
will bear no comparison.’ 36