

 Very much in line with general liberal economic policy, all these sales were intended to restore the régime’s credit and check the growth of the soaring national debt (7,000,000,000 reales in 1808, this had risen to
12,000,000,000 reales by 1814), and yet their chief result was to pour fuel on the flames. The brunt of the cost of the war having been borne by the small tenant farmer or proprietor, there was no way that these groups could buy
any of the land. In consequence, the populace found themselves excluded from all reward, whilst at the same time seeing the commons, much of which had hitherto been let out to the peasantry in small lots, dwindle away. With rents
in the meantime generally going up as purchasers strove to gain some return on their investments, the situation of the poor therefore became grimmer than ever. It was a historic failure. Setting aside the fact that a land reform
angled towards the populace might have done much to restore order in the countryside, the curtain had been raised on a series of errors that were eventually to bring Spanish liberalism to complete and total ruin.

 What did all this mean for the war effort, however? With the new campaign season rapidly approaching, there was no sign of the Spanish armies attaining the strength and capacity with which Wellington had hoped to endow them.
Men, money and transport all remained short, whilst obstruction, procrastination and political interference were also causing problems (large numbers of units, for example, had been transferred from the field armies to Abisbal’s
new command). As Whittingham complained:

 Lord Wellington’s memorable battle of Salamanca put the Spaniards in possession of the best part of their country, and gave them the means of forming great and powerful armies. Have they taken advantage of these circumstances?
Have they done anything for their salvation? Their whole time has been occupied in the forming of a cursed constitution, and their army has been forgotten and neglected! We have not … increased our army [by] 20,000 men in the
last year, nor is there in my opinion any hope of amendment. About four months ago General Freyre, with 3,500 cavalry, was sent to Seville … to clothe, arm, equip and instruct the corps. I saw a letter … in which he states that
he had received nothing, and that he was not able to exercise his cavalry for want of money to pay for the horses’ shoes. 19

 For all that, however, the British commander had no hesitation in planning a new offensive, the situation facing him having been transformed. Much here was owed to the guerrillas, or, at least, their more organised elements.
Thus, the first months of 1813 had not witnessed the slightest improvement in the French position in the occupied territories. In the Levante the tough, violent and daring Agustín Nebot – El Fraile – had established a liberated
area centred on the isolated mountain town of Vistabella del Maestrazgo complete with tax collectors, arms depots, magazines, hospitals, clothing workshops and town councils established according to the provisions of 1812. So
many men had to be held back to watch his forces, indeed, that Suchet’s army had ground to a halt, an attempt to march on Alicante having been defeated at Castalla for want of sufficient troops. In southern Aragón Villacampa had
survived a French offensive and was threatening to cut communications between Zaragoza and Valencia. In northern Aragón, having captured the important Navarrese town of Tafalla, Espoz y Mina was attacking in the district known as
the Cinco Villas, whilst miquelete units headed by Francisco Rovira and the Barón de Eroles were closing in on the garrisons that protected the line of the River Ebro. In La Mancha El Empecinado was successfully resisting all
attempts to clear him away from the vicinity of French-held Guadalajara. In Navarre the garrison of Pamplona remained under close blockade. And in the Basque provinces not only had the border fort of Fuenterrabia been captured in
a surprise raid, but Santoña and Bilbao had once again been sealed off from the outside world.