

 Somewhat alarmed at the extent of the opposition, the liberals drew back a little. Thus, the previous year a cortes committee had been established to clarify the many ambiguities of the decree that had abolished feudalism, and,
on the recommendation of this body, on 27 March 1813 it was agreed that individual dues would only be revoked if the communities subject to them could prove that they had been levied as fees rather than as rents. Yet this move
proved counter-productive, for the net result was simply to stir up more trouble in the countryside. In any case, relations between the two sides had already reached crisis point. Published on 22 February 1813, the decree
abolishing the Inquisition was supposed to be read out on three successive Sundays in every parish church in both Spain and her empire. Needless to say, this attempt to force the whole Church publicly to back the régime’s
religious policy met with massive resistance. Secretly encouraged by the papal nuncio, Pedro Gravina, many bishops sent letters of protest, whilst a few refused point-blank to comply, in one or two cases even going so far as to
flee their dioceses or threaten their clergy with excommunication should they comply with the order. Equally mutinous, meanwhile, was the cathedral chapter in Cádiz, which not only refused to obey, but sent emissaries to Seville,
Málaga, Jaén and Córdoba to encourage revolt there as well.

 By the beginning of March 1813, then, Cádiz had been plunged into crisis. As Alcalá Galiano remembered:

 It began to be whispered that the regents were trying to make head against the cortes  … that the Duque del Infantado could count upon the Reales Guardias Españolas regiment, of which he had once been colonel … [that] the
violent and firm-willed Villavicencio was attempting to stiffen the more timid duke. Conjecture was rife. 15

 For the liberals, however, the events precipitated by the abolition of the Inquisition came more as an opportunity than as a threat. It had been clear since the previous summer that the Infantado Regency was a lost cause, and
all the more so as Abisbal had eventually been replaced by the ultraconservative, Juan Pérez Villamil. In the course of the autumn of 1812, meanwhile, it had been discovered that the Regency had been secretly funding the
extremely hostile Procurador General de la Nación y del Rey, whilst evidence was also coming to light that it had been seeking to allow some of the religious houses closed by the French to reopen.

 For a long time, then, the liberals had been hoping to free themselves of Infantado and his fellows, the Regency’s failure to smash the protests now providing them with all the ammunition that they needed. Fuel having been added
to the flames by the sudden replacement of the governor of Cádiz – an admiral known to be friendly to the liberals named Cayetano Valdés – by a noted servil, on 8 March an emergency session of the cortes duly established a new
regency consisting of the three most senior members of the Council of State, these being the Cardinal Archbishop of Toledo, Luis de Borbón, and Admirals Ciscar and Agar, both of whom had served in the old Blake Regency. With this
fresh change of personnel, the Regency was neutralised, for Borbón was a regalist much opposed to the Inquisition and Ciscar the brother of a leading liberal deputy. Just to make certain, however, the cortes also took the
opportunity to strip the Regency of the last remnants of its independent power, the government also being remodelled so as to include several noted liberals. In short, the serviles had been thoroughly trounced. Cádiz too remained
in liberal hands. Not only was Valdés restored to his position, but Abisbal was appointed to the wholly new post of Captain General of Cádiz and commissioned to form a fresh force entitled the Army of Reserve of Andalucía.