

 For Wellington, meanwhile, the chief feature of the early months of 1813 was his difficulties with the Portuguese and the Spaniards. Setting aside the frictions that were inevitably engendered by British control of the army and
the continued misbehaviour of the rougher elements among the British troops, the chief problem with the former was financial. Thanks to the devastation of much of the country in 1810–11, Portugal was producing far less food than
would normally have been the case, whilst the absence of so many men with the armed forces ensured that production was depressed still further. As Sir Augustus Frazer noted, for example:

 It is true that these three days of our march have been holidays, but I have not yet observed one soul at work … I was assured today by the commandant that a whole estate of a countess of his acquaintance … [went] untilled last
year for want of husbandmen, and that this want of men is severely felt all over the kingdom. 1

 In consequence, the Regency remained desperately short of money, not simply because tax revenue was low, but also because much revenue had to be spent on buying wheat from abroad. To cover the deficit, large quantities of paper
money had been issued, but this had lost much of its value, whilst the promissory notes used by the army’s commissaries to pay for their requisitioning were also all but worthless. In consequence, the Portuguese troops continued
to suffer terribly from want of food, pay and clothing. As for the populace, they were becoming ever more alienated from the war effort, in which respect it did not help that the propertied classes remained unwilling to go to
war, Frazer complaining that Coimbra was full of students who ‘are said to learn nothing but how to be idle and to avoid joining the army’. 2 Heavily taxed – one estimate was that peasants were paying a third of their income –
and largely destitute, the inhabitants also continued to be subject to the attacks of plundering British soldiers. The latter could sometimes be dealt with with grim efficiency: ‘The Portuguese … considered it no greater crime to
kill a British subject than one of their dogs. They generally carried a large knife concealed up the sleeve of their coat, and be assured they knew how to handle it.’ 3 But even so the inhabitants had continued to flee from their
homes with the result that the countryside was swarming with brigands. Of the district of Fronteiras, for instance, Schaumann remembered, ‘Nobody dared to go about unarmed. Not a day passed without a murder or robbery being
committed … The juiz de fora, for fear lest he should be shot in the street by one of the robbers in disguise, locked himself up in his own house, and would only take a walk if we went with him.’ 4 So bad was the situation,
indeed, that in some places the populace were in a state of near insurrection, as in the neighbourhood of São João da Pesqueira where Wellington informed Beresford that he had been forced to order General Cole ‘to employ armed
parties to protect his foragers … and to call upon the magistrates of the district … to perform their duty … in repressing the disposition of the people in that part of the country to oppose the military’. 5