

 Why do we hesitate in lifting the thick veil that hides the atrocities, outrages and insatiable rapacity of these gangs of bandits who so unjustly usurp the respectable name ‘patriot’? Because they kill Frenchmen? Could they not
do it at less cost? Woe on us if our salvation is to come from such men. Did Lord Wellington liberate Portugal with partidas? Did he defeat Marmont with them? And what have we achieved with them, but to complete our ruin, denude
our provinces of resources, retard the growth of patriotism, disorganise our armies, fill with sorrow … hundreds of families whose only crime was to have money or daughters, and throw entire pueblos into the blackest desperation.
Patriots of Cádiz … your opinion is horribly mistaken: the majority … of those you believe to be heroes are nothing more than infamous bandits who recognise neither law nor discipline nor compassion. 7

 So bad had the situation become that French successes were now applauded, as when a punitive column succeeded in surprising the partida of the notorious ‘Borbón’ at Fuentecen, the comment of one Granada newspaper being that ‘as
a result of their frequent bad behaviour in the pueblos, the death of these soldiers means almost as much as does that of the enemy’. 8 With the French gone from much of Spain, the link between irregular resistance and banditry
at last became well understood. From all sides, indeed, complaints flowed in. ‘The partidas of Príncipe and Marquínez have converted themselves into highwaymen’, raged one correspondent. ‘They respect no class of traveller and
rob and violate everyone.’ 9 Even the better units were not immune from the problem. Thus: ‘The deserters from the band of Don Julián are causing the greatest damage. Exploiting the fact that they are Spaniards, they deceive and
surprise not just individuals, but even entire pueblos, whilst their cruelty and inhumanity are such that they gouged out the eyes and cut off the buttocks of a group of soldiers whom they surprised.’ 10 As for fighting the
French, it was in many areas but a memory. As the British liaison officer, Leith-Hay, wrote of the district of Guadalupe, ‘The Médico has remained in a state of inactivity, and made no exertion whatever to prevent the small
parties which the enemy have … sent into the mountains … to forage, and which from the nature of the country might have been very severely molested.’ 11

 However, the issue was not just the Augean nature of Wellington’s task but also the impenetrable wall of obstruction and non-co-operation that he faced. Though he took care to pay lip-service to the Constitution, the arguments
of Ballesteros, Flórez Estrada and Romero Alpuente had struck a chord with the liberals, who were clearly dismayed to find that their plans had backfired in so dramatic a fashion. As for the Regency and the generalato, they, too,
could not but feel alienated and humiliated. The French defeat in Russia having inflamed feelings still further, there was therefore a strong disposition to resist Wellington’s instructions.