

 Meanwhile, a series of issues continued to suggest that the British were not to be trusted. Chief amongst these was the situation in America. In the territory now known as Venezuela, for example, January 1813 saw the
disembarkation of a rebel expedition that had assembled at Port of Spain in British-ruled Trinidad. Still worse, at the head of this band was a group of insurgents who had been rescued by a British ship from the coastal town of
La Guaira at the time of its recapture by loyalist troops. Great offence, too, was caused by the British ambassador to Brazil, who succeeded in negotiating an armistice between the Argentinians and the Brazilian forces that had
occupied Montevideo in support of Spanish rule. As Henry Wellesley complained:

 I should not so often recur to the subject of America if affairs in that quarter … did not influence the conduct of this government … in all their transactions with Great Britain. Even those who have given unequivocal proofs of
their attachment to Great Britain … consider it to be our policy to establish a commercial intercourse with the Spanish colonies, and they think that in the pursuit of this object we have given a degree of countenance to the
insurgents which by exciting jealousies here has considerably weakened our influence. 12

 Closer to home, meanwhile, chronic fears of foreign intervention were inflamed by talk of the possible arrival of a wholly imaginary Russian expeditionary force. With Henry Wellesley continuing to press for a free-trade
agreement and Wellington refusing to resume operations until the spring, the result was to fuel accusations that the British were simply prolonging the war for their own benefit. Hence the publication of such diatribes as that
which appeared in El Español Libre:

 We, whose services with respect to Great Britain are much superior to those she has received from our other allies, have been placed in a worse situation than any of them … Let us look among ourselves for the commander we need,
let us reanimate the enthusiasm of the people, and let us consolidate the throne of justice proclaimed by the wisdom of our constitution. Let us resolve to accomplish alone … the enterprise which we sustain alone, and afterwards
enter into negotiations with our allies. 13

 Hardly surprisingly, then, Wellington’s proposals for reform were ignored, whilst a variety of devices were employed to harass or impede the British. To take just one example, Alvaro Flórez Estrada was made Intendent of Seville,
and his younger brother, Antonio, jefe político of the vital port of Santander. At the same time, in defiance of its agreement with Wellington, the Regency continued to send orders of its own to the Spanish forces. In this last
respect, however, the desire to obstruct British control of the armed forces was married to other considerations. Once again we come to the ever-growing tension that was gripping Cádiz. In the course of the last few months debate
in the cortes had been dominated by the religious question. The Constitution of 1812 had declared Spain to be Catholic in perpetuity and prohibited the practice of any other faith, but that did not mean that nothing would change.
Many churchmen, including a number of those with seats in the cortes, were themselves bitterly critical of the Church as things stood, whilst the Inquisition, the religious orders, clerical jurisdiction, ecclesiastical taxation
and the lands of the Church were all natural targets of liberal reform. As Argüelles wrote, change was essential ‘if the nation was not … to be sacrificed to the ill-considered plan of upholding unchanged the temporalities of an
ecclesiastical establishment that had been remade by the insurrection, and … could not resist for much longer … the noble and generous spirit that animated all the useful and active classes’. 14