

 Last year the mules per company allowed by government were employed in carrying the heavy iron camp-kettles, and our men had no tents: though they were allowed them, they could not be carried. This year Lord Wellington had light
tin kettles made, one for every six men, for the mess, to be carried by one of the men … This plan sets the mules free, and thus three tents have been carried for every company, and … this now … contributes much to the health of
the army. 21

 This improvement had the knock-on effect of lightening the load carried by each man, for it was deemed that they could now do without their heavy greatcoats. This, perhaps, was not the best of moves – in the rain-swept Pyrenees
the soldiers again suffered dreadfully – but for the time being the men were happy enough. The bitter grumbling of the autumn had subsided, whilst faith in Wellington was general. New uniforms had been issued, and great efforts
had also been made to improve training: ‘We were very busy,’ wrote Bell, ‘with parades and drills and field days.’ 22 Not surprisingly, then, morale was very high. As Simmons wrote, ‘The army is in high health and spirits. In a
few days we shall take the field … The campaign bids fair to be most brilliant’, whilst, to quote Bell again, Wellington ‘never came near us without a cheer from the men that made the woods ring’. 23

 If the Allies’ prospects were good, it was largely the result of Napoleon’s decision to make use of the Army of Portugal in the Basque provinces, Navarre and Aragón. Originally, Wellington’s plans for an offensive had been
postulated on the use of large numbers of Spanish soldiers. These were not forthcoming, but, as division after division of the Army of Portugal headed east, it became clear that the great offensive of which he had been thinking
that would take him all the way to the Pyrenees was still a possibility. In brief, Espoz y Mina and his fellows could make up for the absence of the Spanish regulars Wellington had felt he needed in León and Old Castile.
Meanwhile, as he had always intended, Suchet would be tied down by the Anglo-Sicilian expeditionary force that had been sent to Alicante, together with whatever troops the Spaniards could get into the field in the Levante. Left
to face the Anglo-Portuguese hosts all but alone, the Armies of the Centre and the South could not hope to hold out, and, with an advance to the Ebro a near-certainty, Wellington therefore felt it safe to order the transfer of
his forward base to Santander.

 In this situation, all that could have saved the French was the rapid defeat of the northern insurrection. This, however, was impossible. A real discovery of the campaigns of 1812, the energetic, enterprising and extremely
competent General Clausel was placed in command of the Army of the North, whilst the guerrillas were hit by as many as 40,000 men. But resistance was fierce. A detachment belonging to the Army of Portugal was destroyed at Lerín
on 30 March, for example, whilst it took over a fortnight just to reduce the port of Castro Urdiales. Still worse, the partidas were no sooner threatened in one place than they simply melted away to reappear somewhere else.
Bilbao, indeed, was almost lost again, whilst such successes as were secured by the French in practice meant very little. Many villages were burned and many guerrillas caught and killed, but in the last resort the insurrection
survived, Clausel eventually being left with no option but to confess that he needed at least another 20,000 troops.