

 First of these issues to raise its head was the Inquisition. Effectively defunct since 1808, it had been unable to do anything to check the increasing tendency towards anti-clericalism that had surfaced in the gaditano press,
papers such as El Robespierre Español losing no opportunity to satirise the Church and condemn its privileges. In response angry ecclesiastics and conservatives published counterblast after counterblast of their own, whether it
was in newspapers such as El Censor General and the Procurador General de la Nación y del Rey, or in pamphlets such as those penned by the Dominican, Francisco de Alvarado. Meanwhile, moved by a particularly violent torrent of
invective written by the librarian of the cortes, in April 1812 the serviles made a determined attempt to have the Inquisition formally re-established. Referred to the committee of the cortes that dealt with matters relating to
the Constitution, the matter was effectively shelved for the next nine months, but, for all that, it remained a matter of intense public controversy, with many bishops, in particular, petitioning the deputies for its restoration.
Returning to the assembly in January 1813 with the report of the Constitutional committee, the matter was finally decided in a series of debates that were marked by some of the most violent confrontations the cortes had yet seen.
In line with the committee’s recommendation, on 22 January the Inquisition was duly abolished by ninety votes to sixty, the liberals having in effect lost two-thirds of their majority.

 The struggle, however, was far from over, the resistance of the traditionalists being reinforced by the fact that the past two years had seen a variety of measures that in one way or another tended to reduce the power of the
Church. Financial exigencies, for example, had forced the State to seek an even greater share in ecclesiastical wealth and revenue than it had before 1808, the cortes having voted to appropriate all plate not actually required
for the celebration of normal services, the income accruing to the Church from such sources as vacant benefices, and no less than thirty per cent of the tithes. Abolished altogether was the Voto de Santiago (on the grounds that
it infringed the principle of equality of taxation), whilst the religious orders were in large part forbidden from re-establishing convents and monasteries shut by the French, the property of these foundations in effect being
expropriated. Outlined, though not acted upon, meanwhile, had been moves towards wholesale desamortización, whilst the attack on feudalism threatened the Church’s income on yet another front.

 None of this represented an attempt to overthrow the Church per se. In common with the caroline reformers of the period 1759–1808, the liberals were determined to break its hold on the cultural and economic life of the country,
and coveted its land both for the State and, one suspects, themselves. Yet, with the exception of a few extremists, the liberals were all loyal Catholics (some of their leading figures, indeed, were even priests). Thus, the
decree abolishing the Inquisition retained the principle of ecclesiastical censorship, whilst there was much interest in aiding the poverty-stricken parish clergy. For traditionalists, however, much though they pretended
otherwise, the safety of the Church was not the issue. Many ecclesiastics had welcomed the cortes because they believed that revolution would enable the Church to shake off the regalism of the eighteenth century. Yet state
control had in effect been reinforced, their anger naturally throwing them together with the increasingly desperate señores (to whom they were in many cases already bound by ties of family: the prominent Carmelite traditionalist,
Manuel Traggia, for example, was the brother of the Duque del Parque, a general who had repeatedly given evidence of his hostility to the liberal system). Still further allies, meanwhile, were to be found amongst the personnel of
the administrative and judicial system ousted by the Constitution of 1812, not to mention the more fortunate elements of the Church’s tenantry, a good example of the latter being the foreros of Galicia. Wealthy local notables
enabled by various regional peculiarities to rent Church land at minimal cost and then sublet it to the peasantry at a huge profit, these men were for obvious reasons terrified of desamortización and had been using their
considerable economic power to whip their tenants into a state of near revolt. With the Archbishop of Santiago and the Bishop of Orense both deeply opposed to the cortes ’ religious policy, the result was that Galicia became a
hotbed of reaction.