

 All this, of course, was the product of the garrisons of the occupied territories having been stretched to such an extent that they were no longer equal to the task facing them. Every so often, a few thousand men might be got
together for an attack on one guerrilla stronghold or another, but their departure from their garrisons was usually the signal for the latter to be attacked, whilst they generally achieved no more success than to drive back the
troops facing them for a few days. With more troops the French might yet have remedied matters, but no such forces were available. Napoleon was not blind to the serious situation that had developed in northern Spain: not only was
the highway from the French frontier to Madrid impassable except to substantial bodies of troops, but it was by now obvious even to the emperor that the countryside was so out of control that Joseph’s administration could not pay
its way. His answer, however, was a repeat of the disastrous mistake that he had committed the previous year. Again deeming Wellington unlikely to take the offensive, Napoleon ordered Joseph to send the Army of Portugal to assist
in the suppression of Espoz y Mina and his fellows.

 The emperor’s reasons for this decision are not hard to establish. Wellington’s army had, so he thought, been badly damaged during the autumn campaign, whilst news had reached the emperor both of the dissension in the Allied
camp and of suggestions that some of Wellington’s troops, which he estimated at no more than 50,000 men, might be used to attack the French in Holland or Germany. Yet this reasoning was flawed from start to finish. Not counting
such Spaniards as might come to his aid, Wellington had 80,000 men at his disposal rather than 50,000, the losses of the Burgos campaign having been made up by substantial reinforcements. British and Spaniards might have been at
daggers drawn, but the Alliance was still intact. And, finally, the idea of an expedition to northern Europe had been firmly quashed, the Liverpool administration having decided that its forces were best employed in the
Peninsula. More than that, the army had more cavalry and artillery than ever before, whilst it was also better financed and better commanded (many of Wellington’s more unreliable subordinates had gone home, whilst one, the
drunken and half-blind Sir William Erskine, had obligingly committed suicide). Wellington being Wellington, he still found many things to complain of – above all, London’s insistence on withdrawing veteran units which had been
reduced to mere skeletons and the continued indiscipline of the soldiers – but in his more generous moments he had in consequence been heard to express the view that his forces were ready for anything. As he wrote to Lord
Bathurst, indeed, ‘I never saw the British army so healthy or so strong … We have gained in strength 25,000 men since we went into cantonments … and infinitely more in efficiency.’ 20

 Wellington’s Peninsular army was never quite the equal of the legend that it has generated. That said, however, the spring of 1813 still found it at its apogee. Keenly aware of the sufferings of his troops the previous winter,
the British commander had personally looked into the care of the wounded and taken steps greatly to improve the army’s medical services (one consequence of this was that far fewer men were sick than Napoleon had anticipated).
Aware, too, that his men had spent week after week sleeping in the open in drenching rain, and had frequently not had either the time or the facilities to cook their meat properly, he had also addressed the question of their
equipment. As Larpent recorded: