

 Portugal, then, was in much the same state as Spain, but the Regency was no more capable of restoring order than was its Spanish counterpart. The worst problems of law and order could be dealt with by the dispatch of troops, but
finance was another matter. Consideration had been given to the possibility of selling off the estates of the Crown and the Church, but, amidst loud claims of bankruptcy, the project had been abandoned in favour of simply asking
Britain for more money. According to an increasingly irate Wellington, however, the underlying problem was not shortage of resources at all. On the contrary, he argued, money was plentiful, and particularly so amongst the
mercantile community, which had supposedly gained enormously from speculation and war profiteering. What was required was therefore the eradication of corruption, economies in the machinery of government, and an end to the
propertied classes’ evasion of their responsibilities (a ten per cent levy, for example, had been imposed on all commercial profits, but this was honoured more in the breach than in any other manner). Determined to improve
matters, the first half of 1813 therefore saw him put great pressure on the Portuguese authorities. Angered by his failure to obtain a satisfactory response from Lisbon, he even appealed directly to Prince João. Thus:

 I request permission to call the attention of Your Royal Highness to the state of your troops … in consequence of the great arrear of pay which is due to them. According to the last statements which I have received, pay is due
to the army of operations from the end of last September, to the troops of the line in garrison from the end of last June, and to the militia from February … The serious consequences which may result from the backwardness of
these payments … and the uniform refusal of the governors of the kingdom to attend to any one of the measures which I have recommended either for temporary or permanent relief have at last obliged me … to express … in the most
decided manner my very ardent wish that Your Royal Highness will be pleased to return to your kingdom to take charge of its government. 6

 Wellington’s problems with the Portuguese were as nothing in comparison with his problems with the Spaniards, however. As we have seen, the key to his strategy for 1813 was the transformation of the Spanish regular army into a
force capable of playing a full part in regular operations, to which end a stream of plans and suggestions was soon flowing from his headquarters at Freneda. Given the problems faced by the army, it is in fact doubtful whether
anything would have made much difference. With desertion rife and conscription barely functioning, many units were badly under strength; large numbers of the 130,000 men theoretically serving with the colours were sick; there was
insufficient cavalry and artillery, the little that there was also being dispersed amongst the different divisions in penny packets; the troops were at best ill-supplied and at worst on the brink of actual starvation; footwear
and transport were lacking; indiscipline of all sorts was rife; and far too many officers still served no other role than to add a military air to the streets of Cádiz, La Coruña or Alicante. At the same time, many towns were
gripped by feuding between rival factions of the oligarchy, whilst the countryside was still in uproar. In so far as the latter was concerned, matters were not helped by the efforts of liberal officials to undermine the Church
and the nobility, but in fact the populace needed little in the way of egging on. In part, their discontent was expressed by revolt against the señores, as occurred at the Andalusian pueblo of El Coronil, but the most
characteristic form of dissidence continued to be banditry. In La Mancha, for example, El Empecinado was spending more of his time chasing bandits than fighting the French, whilst even the liberals – hitherto the greatest
admirers of the guerrillas – had started to call for their suppression, not to mention the formation of new gendarmeries and civic militias. Typical was an article that appeared in El Conciso: