

 This new army having been formed without the slightest reference to Wellington, the commander-in-chief was understandably furious. Privately contemptuous of the Constitution of 1812, whose failure to provide separate
representation for the interests of property inclined him to see it as the harbinger of social revolution, he was already distressed by his experience of the workings of the Spanish administration. ‘It is impossible to describe,’
he wrote, ‘the state of confusion in which affairs are at Cádiz. The cortes have formed a constitution very much on the principle that a painter paints a picture, viz. to be looked at, and I have not met … any person of any
description … who considers the constitution as the embodying of a system by which Spain is, or can be, governed.’ 16 As for the overthrow of the Infantado Regency, he saw it as inconsiderate and ungracious: ‘I have never known a
shoe-black dismissed in such a style!’ 17 – and in consequence sought, unsuccessfully, to find Infantado a command. More to the point, however, setting aside the fact that little progress was visible in the state of the army, the
agreements that had been made with him were now being flouted virtually by the day, with the result that the Spanish government was soon in receipt of a series of angry protests. As Wellington told his ally, Vega:

 I am fully alive to the importance which has been attached … to my having been entrusted with the command of the Spanish armies … But I have a character to lose, and, in proportion as expectations have been raised by my
appointment, will be the extent of the disappointment … at finding that things are no better than they were before. I confess I do not feel inclined to become the object of those disagreeable sensations … and unless some measures
can be adopted to prevail upon the government to force the Minister of War to perform the engagements of the government with me, I must … resign a situation … which I should not have accepted if these engagements had not been
entered into. 18

 The more Wellington protested, however, the more he was identified with the cause of reaction and foreign domination, matters being made still worse by the fact that London had decided that the best way out would be to shift the
capital from Cádiz to some other city. In consequence, obstruction intensified, the cortes in the meantime pressing on with a series of measures that could not but increase the chaos. One issue here was a plan to reduce the
number of convents and monasteries and, above all, restrict membership of the orders of friars, who were, as we have seen, in many parts of Spain the chief agents of evangelisation and focus of popular religiosity. Far more
important, however, was desamortización, this being inextricably linked with the desperate need to restore some measure of financial stability. Thus, whilst the immense mayorazgos of the nobility were left untouched, on 4 January
1813 the cortes had ordered the sale of half of the common lands possessed by every municipality (in a rare gesture of benevolence, the remainder were supposed to be distributed to deserving war veterans). Also put up for sale,
meanwhile, were certain Crown lands, and the estates of all those declared to be traitors, the military orders – the four orders of knighthood that had emerged in the course of the reconquista – the Inquisition and those
religious houses closed by the French.