

 The march of the Allied army from the Portuguese frontier to the Cantabrian mountains is an example of strategic brilliance that is without equal in the annals of the Peninsular War. In less than a month and with hardly any
fighting, the French had been cleared from the whole of La Mancha, León and New Castile. Meanwhile, starting from positions over 120 miles apart, 100,000 troops had marched some 200 miles in four separate columns before finally
being manoeuvred into a position from which they could fall on the enemy’s flank and rear. Much of the march had taken place in mountainous terrain that was all but devoid of inhabitants, and yet the supply system had functioned
with great efficiency, few of the troops ever going hungry (there were some exceptions: on 19 June Aitchison complained that bread was ‘very, very scarce’, whilst Wheeler maintained that by the morning of 21 June ‘we had not seen
a pound of bread these eleven days’ 28 ). And, last but not least, the army had been provided with a new base and saved from the necessity of having to drag up its cumbersome siege train all the way from Portugal.

 Only one thing marred this extraordinary performance and that was that at the last minute the French realised the danger in which they stood and in consequence fell back from their cantonments on the Ebro to a somewhat safer
position at Vitoria. Here, however, they turned at bay. Their reasons for this decision were obvious. Some of the stray units from the Army of Portugal having now been picked up, the forces available had risen to well over 60,000
men. Retreat any further, meanwhile, and Joseph looked likely to have no kingdom left, not to mention no opportunity to secure the help of the three infantry divisions of the Army of Portugal that were still missing but were
currently supposed to be coming up from the east under Clausel. And, last but not least, Vitoria seemed to offer an excellent defensive position, in that the town could only be approached from the west – the direction from which
it was presumed that Wellington would attack – by means of a long valley crossed by a series of defensive positions that seemed impossible to outflank (on the French right hand flowed the River Zadorra, whilst on their left hand
stood a line of rugged heights that were largely inaccessible to formed troops).

 Much of this thinking was perfectly reasonable, but it did presume that the army’s will to fight had not been adversely affected by the long retreat. Indeed, the French commanders admitted this problem by electing to send off
their baggage, which included vast quantities of loot, in the direction of the French frontier. Still worse, ignorant as ever of Wellington’s movements, Joseph and Jourdan had missed the crucial fact that the Allied forces were
not just approaching them from the west. Admittedly, the odds against the French had shortened: the Sixth Division having been left to cover the road to Santander, and most of the forces of the Sixth Army dispatched to threaten
Bilbao in the hope of tying down the garrison of the Basque provinces, Wellington could only deploy some 75,000 men. However, even as the forces that had been concentrated at Vitoria made ready to resist the expected attack from
the west, fully half the troops that had been brought up to fight them were swinging round their right flank and making for the Zadorra’s many fords and bridges. Given the facts, first, that for the past month the whole of
Wellington’s strategy had centred on a series of outflanking moves, and, second, that cavalry patrols had discovered that fewer troops lay to the west of them than might have been expected, it seems barely credible that Joseph
and Jourdan failed to realise the same might happen again. What threw them seems to have been the idea that the roads which crossed the mountains that lay immediately to the north of the Zadorra were impassable to large bodies of
men. If Wellington was shying away from a head-on attack, then, it followed that his troops were heading for Bilbao prior to making a fresh turning movement by way of the main road that ran south-eastwards from the city via
Durango. This, however, would take many days to execute, whilst the troops that had been fighting Mina in Navarre were at worst only forty or fifty miles away. Were the Anglo-Portuguese forces really to be heading for Bilbao, in
short, the French would soon have the strength to launch a counter-stroke on their communications.