

===== FILE: OEBPS/xhtml/chapter17.xhtml =====
The Peninsular War

 17

 Pyrenees

 THE INVASION OF FRANCE, JULY–NOVEMBER 1813

 Crouching behind the dyke and still damp from the violent storm of the night before, the troops watched the sun come up and braced themselves to cross the estuary. Across the river all was silent, but even so the ordeal that
faced them was a daunting prospect, for, low tide though it was, the further bank was more than a mile away, the fords the attackers were supposed to use largely unexplored, and the waters liable to turn with devastating speed.
When the signal was given, however, unit after unit scrambled over the lip of the dyke and began to make their way across the sands. Very soon the leading troops were wading the narrow channel that was all that was left of the
river, but, to their surprise, for a long while not a shot was fired. Only as the leading troops neared the shore, indeed, did the first enemy muskets sound, and even then it was soon apparent that the only opposition came from a
few pickets. From further inland came sounds of tougher resistance, but here at least there was no doubt that the redcoats were triumphant.

 It was a historic moment, for the river that the troops had crossed was the Bidassoa, and the ground that they occupied on the further bank was not Spain but France. Yet, curiously enough, it had been a distinctly reluctant
Wellington who ordered his men across the river on 7 October 1813. Though heartened by the news that Austria had entered the war and, further, that the Allied armies had at least succeeded in avoiding decisive defeat in a major
clash with Napoleon at Dresden the previous month, British headquarters was filled with misgivings with regard to the eastern powers. As Wellington’s brother-in-law, Edward Pakenham, wrote, ‘I should think that much must depend
upon proceedings in the north: I really begin to apprehend … that Boney may avail himself of the jealousy of the Allies to the material injury of the cause.’ 1 But the defeat or defection of Austria, Russia and Prussia was not
the only danger. It was equally by no means clear that Wellington could continue to count on Spanish support. Invasion seemed likely to be a rough ride even if Napoleon remained tied up in the east. To quote Wellington himself:

 It is a very common error among those unacquainted with military affairs to believe that there are no limits to military success. After having driven the French from the frontiers of Portugal … to the frontiers of France, it is
generally expected that we shall invade France, and some even here expect that we shall be at Paris in a month. None appear to have taken a correct view of our situation … An army which has … fought such battles as that under my
command has is necessarily much deteriorated … The equipment of the army, their ammunition, the soldiers’ shoes, etc., require renewal; the magazines for the new operations require to be collected … and many arrangements [have]
to be made without which the army could not exist a day … Then observe that this new operation is the invasion of France, in which country everybody is a soldier, where the whole population is armed and organised under persons,
not, as in other countries, inexperienced in arms, but men who … must, the majority of them at least, have served somewhere. 2