

 Initially the Allied troops north of Vitoria did not prove much of a foe, for, though they had first appeared at nine o’clock, they did not actually attack the French positions in front of them for another four hours. To the
west, however, matters were very different. Having crossed the river by an undefended bridge at Tres Puentes, part of the Light Division pressed forward, and, at some cost, distracted the attention of the French troops posted on
the extreme right of Joseph’s original front line. Present at this point was George Hennell:

 Finding the fire heavy, we moved under a bank and lay down. At that moment a shell came hopping direct for me, but it was polite enough to halt … about six yards from us … and in about one minute it burst doing no harm. In
another minute a ball struck the close column of the Seventeenth Portuguese … It killed the sergeant and took off the leg of each of the ensigns with the colours. 31

 From this predicament Hennell and his fellows were rescued by Sir Thomas Picton’s Third Division. Having emerged from the mountains north of the Zadorra, Picton had been supposed to wait for the troops on his right – the Seventh
Division of Lord Dalhousie – to attack before crossing the river himself. Dalhousie dithered, however, whereupon Picton, a fiery and impulsive man who deeply resented having to take second place to Dalhousie, took it upon himself
to advance. Shouting ‘Come on, ye rascals! Come on, ye fighting villains!’, he therefore led his men across the river, whereupon the troops holding the French front line hastily retired to a second position above the village of
Ariñez.

 Well-supplied with artillery and reinforced by fresh troops brought up from the rear, the French now made a resolute stand. However, their right flank was being assailed not just by the Third and Light Divisions, but also the
first troops of Lord Dalhousie. Supported by the Fourth Division, which had just entered the valley, the largest mass of artillery ever assembled by Wellington was at the same time pounding the unfortunate defenders. Fierce
fighting continued on the extreme left, where the Seventy-First had an unpleasant experience when it was suddenly assailed in flank by a unit which it mistook for Spaniards. But at Ariñez there was no holding the Anglo-Portuguese
attack. As Donaldson rather laconically notes, ‘After crossing the river, our division advanced in two lines on the village where their artillery was posted under a tremendous fire, and succeeded, after an obstinate resistance in
dislodging them.’ 32 Also present was Wood of the Eighty-Second:

 Our front was exposed to … a French regiment on the right of the battery, but, after politely receiving us with a few sharp volleys, which we as politely returned, they … retreated into a thicket. Towards this we advanced
firing, and drove them furiously before us till they were completely routed. 33

 The French were still not quite finished, trying, with admirable determination, to form a new line based on the villages of La Hermandad and Gomecha. But, outnumbered, badly shaken, harassed by large numbers of skirmishers, and
threatened from the south by Hill, who was now advancing along the crest of the heights, their men could take no more. In Long’s words: