

 They behaved very ill. Their position was very strong and with common … spirit their defence might have been brilliant. But their infantry did not stand as I expected they would, their cavalry could be of no use from the nature
of the ground, and when they saw themselves turned a panic seized the whole. 34

 Himself caught up in the rout, Joseph could only order a general retreat, but for many of his men there was no escape, for, as Simmons wrote, ‘they had to pass over a fine plain, which enabled us from time to time to press them
confoundedly’. 35

 In this predicament, one thing, and one thing only, saved the French from complete destruction. Had Sir Thomas Graham, who had been given command of the 20,000 troops sent to advance on Vitoria from the north, shown a modicum of
initiative, Joseph would have found himself completely cut off, for Graham had only to seize the city – a relatively easy task given his numerical advantage – to trap almost the whole French army. However, mindful of orders that
his prime objective was to cut the Madrid–Bayonne highway, which from Vitoria ran north-eastwards along the Zadorra, Graham struck east rather than south. Getting across the river at Durana, the Spanish division of Francisco
Longa duly cut the road on the enemy’s extreme right flank. In Gomm’s words, ‘His people behaved well and were of much service. He is a young man, and for one … so little used to control I thought his behaviour admirable in
falling so readily as he did into our plans.’ 36 Of Graham, however, much less was to be said, the bulk of his troops becoming bogged down around the village of Gamarra Mayor. As Douglas remembered:

 We reached the village, which we named Gomorrah as it was a scene of fire and brimstone. The enemy were driven … over the River Zadorra … The light company entered a house at the end of the bridge, from the windows of which a
very destructive fire was kept up, while as many as could pushed across and formed as they arrived close to an old chapel. Here there appeared to be some want. Had the regiments which entered the village been pushed across the
bridge … the wreck of the French would have been nearly as bad as Waterloo. [But] the enemy seemed to know the value of this spot and poured down a heavy fire on the few that got over and so obliged us to retrace our steps. 37

 Thanks to Graham, then, the French had an escape route, for a narrow road led eastwards from Vitoria in the direction of Pamplona by way of the pass of Salvatierra. Even so, things were bad enough, for the French rear was
clogged up with Joseph’s immense baggage train, every available track soon being jammed with fugitives. Fortunately for the defeated rey intruso, though, the victorious Allies’ lust for plunder proved too much for them. Whooping
with delight, many of the leading troops fell on the stranded wagons and gave themselves over to riot and debauchery. At the same time, the terrain to the east of the battlefield – a tangle of woods, vineyards, stone walls, and
little villages – was scarcely conducive to rounding up large numbers of the enemy, whilst it must also be admitted that even such troops as remained in hand appear to have been poorly directed. Riding with Anson’s brigade,
indeed, William Hay even experienced a last-minute reverse: