

 These quarrels we must leave for the next chapter. Suffice to say that for the time being the Allied cause was victorious. Despite his inability to make use of the Spanish army in the manner which he had intended, Wellington had
still been able to launch the offensive he had hoped for. Thus, the guerrillas of Navarre and the Basque provinces had proved much more effective in their operations than the campaign of 1812 had led him to expect: better armed,
better trained and more numerous than they had been in the past, they could no longer be contained by scattered garrisons and punitive columns, but required the attention of complete field armies. At the same time, Napoleon had
compounded the difficulties faced by his commanders still further by withdrawing more troops from the Peninsula, refusing to send Joseph the reinforcements that were really needed, underestimating the British threat, and making
use of forces badly needed at the front to hunt down Espoz y Mina and his fellows. So much did the situation play into Wellington’s hands, indeed, that in the end he shrugged off chaos and harassment alike. Moreover, once the
army was under way, the situation continued to favour Wellington, for Joseph and Jourdan were hampered at every step by the enormous trains that inevitably accompanied their forces, not to mention their own mediocrity as
battlefield commanders. By 1813, meanwhile, the French were also suffering from a severe imbalance in the quality of the forces available to each side: whilst such Spanish troops as actually managed to take the field were
infinitely superior to the levies of earlier years and the Anglo-Portuguese army self-confident, battle-hardened and almost impossible to defeat, Napoleon’s soldiers were increasingly exhausted and demoralised.

 That said, however, to explain Vitoria purely in terms of structural factors would be to do Wellington a disservice, for gone was the fumbling and hesitation of the autumn of 1812. Reacting quickly to changed circumstances,
Wellington had realised that he could do without the Spaniards and gone ahead without them. Outwitting the French completely and pushing his forces through terrain so rough and deserted that parts of it had never yet been fought
over, he repeatedly forced the French to retreat whilst eventually manoeuvring them into a position that could have seen the campaign culminate in a gigantic battle of encirclement. Meanwhile, in a classic example of the
offensive use of seapower, the Anglo-Portuguese army had been freed from the constant worry of having to maintain its links with Lisbon by the establishment of a new base at Santander. In the event Vitoria had not entirely gone
as planned, but the battle was still a fitting end to a great campaign, and, what is more, one that cost only 5,000 casualties.

 The war, however, was not over. For all practical purposes, the Bonaparte kingdom of Spain was dead and buried, but most of France’s troops had escaped intact, with the result that fresh armies were soon gathering beyond the
Pyrenees. By themselves, of course, such forces were unlikely to secure more than one or two local victories, but, as Wellington saw all too well, the war in central and eastern Europe that had taken so many French troops could
in no sense be taken for granted. Austria, Russia and Prussia might yet be beaten, whilst such were the divisions between the Allies that there was no guarantee that one power or another would not make a separate peace. By giving
Britain somewhat more credibility on the Continent, Vitoria had helped a little (although it is certainly not true, as is sometimes claimed, that it was news of the battle that in August brought Vienna into the war), but the
thought of Napoleon descending on the Pyrenees with the grande armée was still not one to be regarded with equanimity. Just as the period 1808–1812 had seen French success in the Peninsula rest on the defeat of Austria, Prussia
and Russia, so the period 1813–1814 was to see Allied success in the Peninsula rest on their victory.