

 Wellington, needless to say, was furious. His victory, he said, had ‘totally annihilated all order and discipline’ and left the army ‘incapable of marching in pursuit of the enemy, and … totally knocked up’. 46 Yet, for all
that, the fruits of victory remained enormous. Away from the main theatre of operations, the French had been holding their own. Much damage, for example, had been inflicted on the insurgents in the Basque country and Navarre,
whilst the garrison of Valencia had checked the advance of the Second and Third Armies in an action at Alcira on 13 June. With more energy on the Allied side things might have been different, but the forces of El Empecinado, for
example, had settled down to enjoy the fruits of victory in and around Madrid, whilst the Anglo-Sicilian expeditionary force had botched a descent on Tarragona. In the days following Vitoria, however, the Bonaparte kingdom of
Spain collapsed like a house of cards. Immediately seeing that the game was up, Suchet ordered the evacuation of the Levante and Aragón, whilst, having hastily fallen back on Zaragoza, Clausel led the two divisions that he had
got together back to France. * In the Basque provinces and Navarre, meanwhile, pursued by the Anglo-Portuguese, the French retreated to the frontier, leaving garrisons in San Sebastián, Pamplona and Santoña. All that was left, in
short, was Catalonia, where Suchet still possessed sufficient men to hold his own, though even there part of the interior continued to be held by the First Army (not that the latter was strong enough to do more than mount the
occasional raid).

 With Wellington advancing to the Pyrenees and besieging San Sebastián and assorted Spanish forces settling down to blockade the isolated garrisons dotted from Pamplona to the Mediterranean, all was also up with Joseph Bonaparte,
who on 11 July was directed to hand over the command of his forces to Marshal Soult and go into retirement. Yet for the time being there followed no invasion of France. Setting aside the fact that San Sebastián and Pamplona tied
down large numbers of troops, the war in the rest of Europe was not going well, Napoleon having inflicted such heavy defeats on the Russians and Prussians that they had agreed to Austrian mediation and a temporary armistice. As
it happened, nothing came of these developments, but Wellington rightly believed that there was a real chance of a compromise peace and in consequence decided to halt at the Pyrenees until such time as the situation was a little
clearer, the need for caution being reinforced still further by the fact that fresh quarrels had just broken out with the Spaniards, with whom Wellington remained deeply dissatisfied. As he later told Lord Stanhope:

 I had armies to co-operate with me upon whose operations I could not reckon owing to … their deficiencies of all kinds. I could not rely upon 10,000 of them doing what 500 ought to, or upon their doing anything, much less upon
their doing what 10,000 ought to do. 47