

 In this order we … soon came in sight of the French cavalry. On seeing our advance, advantage was taken of some broken ground … to halt and form for our reception. As we approached this appeared madness, as their numbers did not
exceed half ours. Our trumpet sounded the charge when … their flanks were thrown back, and there stood, formed in squares, about 3,000 infantry. These opened such a close and well-directed fire on our advance squadrons, that not
only were we brought to a standstill, but the … leading squadrons went about, and order was not restored till a troop of horse artillery arrived on our flank and … opened such a fire of grape that … I saw men fall like a pack of
cards. 38

 Still worse was the experience of the staff officer, Browne:

 As I was accompanying a squadron of the Eighteenth Hussars in pursuit of the enemy, who were flying as fast as possible, we overtook a line of carriages and baggage, which offered so much temptation to many of the soldiers …
that they could not resist falling to the work of plunder, whilst others with their officers continued in pursuit. The squadron was thus considerably weakened in number, a circumstance which was observed by the French rearguard,
near which we rapidly approached. They suddenly detached a body of cavalry from it, which, falling on the few of the Eighteenth who were in advance, killed some, wounded others, and took some prisoners. In this last lot I was
myself included, my horse having been killed, and my head cut longitudinally with a sabre so as to knock me over. 39

 Thus protected, the bulk of the army’s fighting men therefore got away to Pamplona (total French losses, including prisoners, were no more than 8,000 men). Their disarray was total, however. The apothecary, Blaze, for example,
describes a scene of chaos:

 I galloped along in the middle of a crowd of fugitives of whom the majority had flung away their arms so as to lighten their burden. None was better than the next – they had all run away rather than face the enemy – but all the
same they still quarrelled with one another, calling one another cowards and poltroons, and even exchanging blows. On all sides one saw Spanish families who were abandoning their country rather than face the persecution which
threatened them … I saw a young girl running across the fields … in satin shoes and a muslin dress; a woman bent by age supported by her daughter who was herself carrying a small child. Such distressing images appeared every
instant, but they only inspired a sterile pity: everyone was fully occupied with his own person and could not aid others in their misfortune. 40

 Gone were all but one of Joseph’s 152 guns; over 500 artillery caissons; huge quantities of supplies, clothing, footwear and equipment of all sorts; virtually all the transport that the French possessed; the personal baggage of
the king, Marshal Jourdan (both of whom had come within an ace of being captured themselves) and many other senior officers; and the whole of Joseph’s state papers and treasury, including 5,000,000 francs newly come from France.
Stranded amidst the turmoil, too, aside from a swarm of camp-followers of all sorts, were many of the afrancesado officials who had been the very heart and soul of the Bonaparte administration. Thanks to the mistakes of Sir
Thomas Graham, victory had not been total, but even so for the French there was no way back.