

 By now, however, it was May, and all was ready for Wellington’s offensive. Operations began on 22 May. Whilst the Light Division and Hill’s old corps headed for Salamanca, the bulk of the Anglo-Portuguese army marched northwards
under the command of Sir Thomas Graham. Crossing the River Duero on a pontoon bridge that had been brought up from the sea, they then turned east, bridged the River Esla with the help of Wellington’s pontoon train, and advanced
on Valladolid. Carefully planned and brilliantly executed, these orders quickly brought success. With such troops as were left in the western parts of their dominions hopelessly outnumbered and scattered widely across the
countryside, within two weeks Joseph and Jourdan had been forced to evacuate Valladolid and Madrid. Some thought was given to the idea of defending the line of the Pisuerga and Carrión rivers, but all Wellington’s forces had now
met up at Toro. Such a mass of troops being quite impossible for them to take on, the French were therefore soon falling back on Burgos.

 For the Allies, all this came as revenge for the horrors of the previous autumn. As Wood remembered:

 Our march for the first two or three hundred miles was like a party of pleasure in comparison to others we had encountered. We passed through a most delightful level country, abounding in all the verdant beauties of nature …
Everything and every countenance now wore the aspect of joy, the men singing and telling their jocose stories as they passed along hill and dale. 24

 Normally reserved and unemotional, even Wellington seems to have caught the general excitement, for, as he rode across the frontier near Ciudad Rodrigo, he is supposed to have waved his hat in the air and shouted, ‘Farewell
Portugal! I shall never see you again!’ * Practically the only sour note in the whole affair concerned the civilian population, who showed nothing like the excitement of the previous year. At the curiously named Wamba, Webber
recalled being ‘welcomed by the ringing of bells and cries of “Viva” from all the people’, whilst at Zamora there was every ‘demonstration of joy’. 25 Underlying the cheers was an atmosphere of tension, however, Hennell, for
example, suggesting that two-thirds of the population ‘would as soon give you some curses’. 26 But there was good reason for cynicism. Setting aside the bitter memories of 1812, the army was soon up to its old tricks. To quote
Kincaid:

 We were welcomed into every town or village through which we passed by the peasant girls, who were in the habit of meeting us with garlands of flowers … and it not infrequently happened that while they were so employed with one
regiment, the preceding one was diligently engaged in pulling down some of the houses for firewood. 27

 The further that Joseph and Jourdan fell back, of course, the greater the chance that they would be joined by the troops missing from the Army of Portugal or even reinforcements sent by Clausel, but Wellington remained more than
willing to seek a battle, having with him not only his own 80,000 men, but also 20,000 Spaniards of the Fourth Army, the latter being described as being in better fettle than any Spanish troops the Anglo-Portuguese army had yet
observed. At the same time, meanwhile, he had long since ordered immense convoys of ammunition and other supplies, including a powerful siege train, to be assembled at La Coruña. Transferred to Santander, these stores afforded
the Anglo-Portuguese a second base which spared them the necessity of having to maintain their line of communications with Lisbon, the army meanwhile marching in such a direction that it also acquired an alternative escape route
should the campaign go wrong. Thus, far from plodding along in the wake of the French along the direct road to Burgos, the Allies turned northwards and plunged into the rugged hills that filled the region to the north of the
French stronghold. Circling eastwards, they then threatened Joseph’s army with encirclement, with the result that, preceded by a great convoy of refugees, plunder and baggage wagons, el rey intruso had to order the destruction of
the castle of Burgos and retreat across the Ebro. Even here he was not safe, however, for Wellington’s army, which was now in easy touch with Santander, moved north-eastwards again, thereby getting across the headwaters of the
River Ebro between Polientes and Puente Arenas on 15 June. Wheeling right on a broad frontage through country that was still rougher than any which had been traversed before, the army, which had just been reinforced by 5,000 more
Spanish troops drawn from the commands of Longa and Porlier, finally swung southwards in an attempt to cut the French line of communication with the frontier.