

 As so often before, however, the glory of victory was marred by the behaviour of Wellington’s army. The captured French baggage train, as we have seen, presented an extraordinary sight. As commander of Wellington’s artillery,
Sir Augustus Frazer seems to have taken most note of the many books and papers strewn around:

 The scene … baffles all description. I picked up a map large enough to cover the side of a small room … It proved to be a large map of the … palace and gardens at Aranjuez: I gave it to Sturgeon for the Quartermaster General. I
gave him also … a beautifully bound copy of the regulations of the royal household … Joseph’s … portable library was [also] in my possession, but I threw it away, having too much employment to attend to plunder. 41

 Of much more interest to most of the army, however, were other forms of spoil. As Bell remembered, ‘Five million dollars [were] abandoned by the French and left upon the ground … There were little barrels of doubloons and
napoléons  … for the picking up, but rather heavy to put into one’s haversack.’ 42 Drink, too, was to be had by the barrel, but perhaps the most exciting feature of the scene was the women, the 500 or so prostitutes, officers’
mistresses and other ladies of easy virtue who fell, quite literally, into the hands of the victors. What followed can be exaggerated: some men were too exhausted to be interested in much more than food and firewood, whilst
others were kept firmly under control by their officers. Amidst the confusion there were also occasional acts of generosity, as in the case of the English cavalryman who picked up and cared for a lost child who turned out to be
the daughter of the French general, Gazan, or the sergeant who took pity on a wounded officer and filled his pockets with money. Nor can blame be solely levelled at the soldiery, for muleteers, wagoners, camp-followers and other
non-combatants were all well to the fore, whilst, according to Tomkinson, ‘The inhabitants of Vitoria had not done plundering the day after, and many have amply repaid themselves for the sums taken from them in contributions.’ 43
For a graphic description of the sort of thing that went on, we have only to turn to Wheeler:

 I had not proceeded far when I met one of the Sixty-Eighth Regiment with a handkerchief full of dollars. He was followed by about a dozen Portuguese soldiers. One of these fellows … cut the handkerchief and down went the
dollars. A general scramble followed. As the Portuguese were down on their hands and knees picking up the money, we paid them off in style with the sockets of our bayonets. After this fracas was over … I started off in the
direction I heard most noise [and] soon came to the place where the money was. After much difficulty I secured a small box of dollars, and was fortunate enough to get back safe to camp. 44

 And, as ever, the troops did not just steal from the enemy. The complaints, indeed, of the citizens of Vitoria were very bitter:

 It is impossible to give a clear idea of the abuses committed in this city … The peaceful citizen is harassed; property is not respected; houses, shops and government offices are burgled; and the members of the town council …
are impeded in their efforts to supply the army. Nor is this the only problem. The inhabitants … of the pueblos round about are hesitant about coming into town with the result that trade has fallen off [and] food run short. 45