

 The obvious flaw in this argument is that, having moved his main base to Santander, Wellington no longer had to worry about such a move, but this, again, Joseph and Jourdan did not know. Only at the last minute did they realise
that all was not what it seemed, and send some forces from their reserve – the two infantry divisions of the Army of Portugal present on the field, Joseph’s juramentados and royal guard, a handful of strays from the Army of the
North and most of the cavalry – to guard the city of Vitoria and the road to France against an attack from the north. Consideration, too, was given to evacuating the western end of the valley and pulling back to a position whose
left flank rested on the little village of Berostigueta, but Jourdan was feeling unwell and the necessary orders were never sent out to the troops concerned. Still worse, an entire infantry division was allowed to start out for
the frontier in company with the first of the baggage, the result being that the French were left with just 57,000 men.

 When battle was joined on 21 June Joseph and Jourdan therefore found themselves in a difficult predicament. Thus, the expected frontal assault failed to materialise, the first Allied troops to attack – Hill’s old corps – instead
clinging to the skirts of the heights that overlooked the French positions from the south whilst sending a few troops, most of them the Spaniards of Morillo’s division of the Fourth Army, to seize the crest of the ridge. As
L’Estrange remembered, ‘A sharp firing on the right gave us notice that the ball had been opened in that quarter. It was Morillo’s Spanish division that had come into contact with the most advanced part of the French army.’ 29
Although they fought well – Morillo himself was badly wounded – the Spaniards made little progress, but they were soon reinforced by British and Portuguese troops. There followed some fierce fighting:

 We were gaining ground along the side of the mountain, when we were met with a biting fire, and the battle here remained stationary for some time … Then, passing the Zadorra [on our left] we won the village of Subijana de
Alava … and maintained our ground in spite of all opposition. There was a good deal of fighting in the churchyard, and some open graves were soon filled up with double numbers … As Colonel Brown said, ‘If you don’t kill them,
boys, they’ll kill you: fire away.’ 30

 Much perturbed that Wellington might have out-guessed them and be marching on Vitoria from the south, Joseph and Jourdan responded by sending large numbers of troops to join the fight that was developing on the left flank, only
to find that in doing so they had got themselves into worse difficulties than ever. Thus, not only did the First and Fifth Divisions and some additional Portuguese and Spanish troops suddenly appear out of the mountains to the
north and threaten the troops – the single infantry division of Sarrut – that had been sent to hold the approaches to Vitoria from that direction, but the extreme right of the French front line found itself under attack from the
Third and Light Divisions, of which the first had come through the mountains, and the second made use of woods and broken ground to creep across the French front from the western end of the valley.