

 Waiting for the tide to be sufficiently low to admit men to reach the breach, it was daylight ere we moved out of the trenches, and, having to keep close to the wall to be as clear of the sea as possible, beams of timber,
shells, hand grenades and every missile that could annoy or destroy life were hurled from the ramparts on the heads of the men … Those who scrambled onto the breach found it was wide and sufficient enough at the bottom, but at
the top … from thence to the street was at least twenty feet … Some little idea may be formed of the destructive fire of the enemy when [I say that] on the beach were left by the tide more [men] than would have loaded a wagon of
fish, killed in the water by the shot of the garrison … And it not being sufficiently low at the time of the attack those who fell wounded and might have recovered were swept away by the current which runs here very rapid. Nor
was it an easy matter for any man to keep his feet as the stones were so slippery. 12

 At Allied headquarters this costly repulse came as a serious blow: ‘Lord Wellington was evidently much disappointed with the result of the attack, which I had an opportunity of ascertaining as I dined with him this day, and he
scarcely spoke to anyone at table.’ 13 All the more was this the case as news was coming in that thirty miles inland dense masses of French troops were pouring through the passes of Maya and Roncesvalles and heading straight for
Pamplona. For the origins of this great counter-offensive we must look to events in the French camp following the fall of Joseph Bonaparte. Command of both the battered survivors of the Vitoria campaign and the large reserve
forces stationed at Bayonne had been placed in the hands of Marshal Soult. In part, this was undoubtedly meant as one last snub for Joseph, who had, as we have seen, suffered much from Soult’s presumption and insubordination, but
there was, too, a measure of harsh reality: greedy and untrustworthy though he may have been, ‘King Nicholas’ was one of the very few subordinate commanders to whom Napoleon could give a command that numbered almost 85,000
fighting troops and, what is more, one on whom rested perhaps the only chance of persuading Austria, which was teetering on the brink of joining the Allies, to remain neutral. At all events, what was needed was an immediate
counter-offensive. Displaying immense energy, Soult therefore threw himself into the task of getting his men ready for combat. Serious problems remained – the troops’ morale and discipline were very brittle and transport in such
short supply that the army in the end re-crossed the frontier with a mere four days’ rations – but, by the time that operations at San Sebastián were reaching a climax, the French were on the march.

 Creditable though the marshal’s efforts were – by throwing his forces across the frontier at Maya and Roncesvalles, Soult wrong-footed Wellington, whose men were scattered across the whole district between Pamplona and the sea –
it is hard to see what they were supposed to achieve, for, even if he managed to relieve Pamplona, Soult had no means of restocking its magazines and would have been hard put to maintain his forces in the countryside around it
for any real length of time. Even had this not been the case, however, the offensive was soon in trouble. On the frontier itself, some success was obtained. Thus, despite having kept the French at bay for the entire day, the
Allied commander at Roncesvalles, Sir Lowry Cole, lost his nerve and abandoned the pass during the night, whilst at Maya savage fighting also saw the French carry the summit. Amongst the casualties was Joseph Sherer of the
Thirty-Fourth Foot: