

 In less than two hours my picket and the light companies were heavily engaged with the enemy’s advance, which was composed entirely of voltigeur companies … These fellows fought with ardour, but we disputed our ground with them
handsomely, and caused them severe loss … The enemy’s numbers now, however, increased every moment: they covered the country immediately in front of and around us … The contest now … was very unequal. I saw two thirds of my
picket … destroyed. Among other brave victims, our captain of grenadiers nobly fell, covered with wounds; our colonel [was] desperately wounded, and … [I] was myself made prisoner. I owe the preservation of a life, about which I
felt … regardless, to the interference of a French officer who beat up the muskets of his leading section … with some speech about un français sait respecter les braves. 14

 Also present was Bell of the same regiment:

 It was death to go on against such a host, but it was the order, and on we went to destruction. The colonel … was first knocked over, very badly wounded. The captain of grenadiers (Wyatt) … was shot through the head … My little
messmate, Phillips, was also killed … Seven more of the officers were wounded … Different regiments scrambled up the hill to our relief as fast as they could. The old half-hundred [i.e. the Fiftieth Foot] and [the] Thirty-Ninth
got a severe mauling … The Ninety-Second were in line, pitching into the French like blazes and tossing them over. They stood there like a stone wall, overmatched by twenty to one … When they retired their dead bodies lay as a
barrier to the advancing foe. 15

 If the actions at Roncesvalles and Maya hardly constituted a great defeat, they were nevertheless something of an embarrassment. The troops concerned had on the whole fought well – undeterred by having run out of ammunition, the
Eighty-Second, indeed, had even resorted to throwing stones at the enemy – but there had in the end been several instances of disorder: Keep, for example, says that he saw the Thirty-Fourth ‘retreating most rapidly’, and admits
that his own Twenty-Eighth was ‘forced instantly to flight’. 16 As for the retreat that followed, it quickly took on all the appearance of a rout. Thus:

 On quitting this position, the most dismal sensations took possession of our breasts. Not a voice, not a sound was heard, save the slow step and casual murmur of the dejected soldiers, intermingled with the cries and groans of
the wounded … In this state we kept moving … the whole of this sad and sorrowful night amidst the mountains, the woods and the rain, the way being so deluged with mire … that it was with difficulty we could wade through it … So
entangled were we among carts, horses … mules, baggage and artillery broken down, together with artillery and other stores that lined the roads, that we could not extricate ourselves from these impediments. 17

 Wellington was much displeased, but his army was far from broken. Pushing on into Spain, the Roncesvalles wing of Soult’s army, which was led by the marshal himself, had by 27 July got to within ten miles of Pamplona, only to
find its way blocked by a substantial Allied force that had taken post on a high ridge in between the villages of Sorauren and Zabáldica. In command was Wellington himself, who had just reached the field from his headquarters at
Lesaca (much to the delight of the troops, who, buoyed up by their faith in his leadership, greeted his sudden appearance in their midst with deafening cheers) whilst further south still more Allied forces, most of them Spanish,
waited in reserve. Forced to attack head on on 28 July without the support of the three divisions that had forced the pass of Maya (commanded by the singularly lacklustre Drouet, these forces had been delayed in their march by a
combination of bad weather and excessive caution), Soult tried hard to counter the usual Anglo-Portuguese advantage in such combats by making use of a very thick skirmish screen. For a good description of the scene we may turn to
Browne, who was riding with Wellington’s staff: