

 I see that, as usual, the newspapers on all sides are raising the public expectation and that the Allies are anxious that we should enter France, and that our government have promised that we should as soon as the enemy should
be finally expelled from Spain … I think I … will bend a little to the views of the Allies, if it can be done with safety to the army, notwithstanding that I acknowledge I should prefer to turn my attention to Catalonia, as soon
as I shall have secured this frontier. 6

 Only in one respect did the situation offer much comfort, and that was that Wellington was facing an enemy with a record of sustained defeat, for at the end of July and then again at the end of August the French had been
severely beaten in a fresh series of battles whose object had been the relief of the major border fortresses of Pamplona and San Sebastián. Of these the former had been blockaded and the latter besieged: even with the increased
resources now available to him, Wellington could only mount one formal siege at a time, whilst it was decided to plump for San Sebastián on the grounds that it was weaker, more accessible and open to resupply by sea. Yet San
Sebastián was still a tough nut to crack. Situated on a narrow promontory that jutted out into the sea between the waters of the Bay of Biscay and the broad estuary of the River Urumea, the town was hard to get at and well
fortified – it was ‘the strongest fortification I ever saw, Gibraltar excepted’, wrote William Dent 7 – whilst the governor, General Louis-Emmanuel Rey, was a coarse and foul-mouthed veteran of the Bourbon army who was very much
out to make his name. Given a garrison of 3,000 seasoned infantry and gunners, Rey had accordingly been doing all that he could to make ready for a siege and had already inflicted several sharp reverses on the Spanish forces –
erstwhile guerrillas from the Guipuzcoan hinterland now embodied as a division of the Fourth Army – who had closed in around the town on 29 June 1813.

 To compound the problem, Wellington made a serious error. Two fronts of the town could be attacked: the bastioned enceinte that blocked the neck of the peninsula on which it stood, and the old medieval wall that rose above the
Urumea on its eastern side. Of these, there was no doubt that the latter was easier to breach, and in consequence it was this that Wellington selected. If the garrison’s morale collapsed (as the British commander appears to have
expected), this was all very well, but if it stood firm, then trouble was certain. Thus, the river wall could only be approached at low tide and even then only by wading the Urumea or dashing northwards along its western shore
under deadly flanking fire from the bastions that guarded the land approach to the city. Still worse, whichever route was adopted, the nearest trenches would necessarily be over half a mile away. And, finally, despite his
behaviour at Vitoria, command of the siege was handed to the brave but otherwise singularly undistinguished Sir Thomas Graham, ‘for which reason’, wrote Aitchison, ‘I am glad that we are to have nothing more to do with it than
making gabions … for it at a distance’. 8