

 At daybreak the French columns were observed, formed in columns of attack and ready for battle. These columns were very deep and … moved steadily onwards in the most imposing masses I ever beheld … The enemy’s grenadiers in
their bear-skin caps with red feathers and blue frock coats appeared the most warlike body of troops possible. As they moved on they threw out their skirmishers, which were met by the British light troops, and thus the work of
this bloody day began … I never remember to have witnessed so tremendous an onset. 18

 There followed ferocious fighting: Wellington, indeed, called it ‘fair bludgeon work’. 19 Very much in the thick of things was Sergeant Lawrence of the Fortieth:

 Orders had been issued by our officers not to fire till we could do good work, but this soon came to pass, for the French quickly sallied up, and fired first, and we returned it … I never saw a single volley do so much execution
in all my campaigning days, almost every man of their first two ranks falling, and then we instantly charged and chased them down the mountain, doing still further and more fearful havoc. When we had done, we returned to our old
summit again, where the captain cheered and praised us for our gallantry … Our likewise brave enemy tried again two hours later to shift us … but they were again … sent down the hill. We were again praised by our commander, who
said, ‘I think they … won’t make a third attack in a hurry’, but … fours hours had not passed before they were up again. Some of our men then seemed to despair … but we reloaded and were then ready to meet them … pouring another
of our deadly volleys into their ranks and then going at them … with our bayonets like enraged bulldogs. 20

 Faced by resistance of this order, Soult could make no progress, practically his only success being the rout of two Spanish battalions that had been posted on an outlying knoll, and by the end of the day the French were back at
their starting positions.

 With food running out, perhaps 4,000 of Soult’s men laid low and more Anglo-Portuguese troops coming up to join the action, the offensive was clearly in ruins. In consequence, the marshal would have been well advised to fall
back immediately, but just at the crucial moment he heard that Drouet’s men were at last coming up in his right rear, and this persuaded him to strike north-westwards through the foothills of the Pyrenees in an attempt to cut
Wellington’s army in two and reach San Sebastián. At best a risky proposition, set in motion on the night of 29–30 July, this plan led to disaster. The only possible chance of success rested on disengaging from the battlefield of
Sorauren in secrecy, but, as was only to be expected, Wellington realised that the French forces facing him had started to edge away towards their right rear. No sooner had dawn broken on 30 July, then, than the victors of the
battle of two days before were streaming down from their positions on the heights and attacking their unfortunate opponents. Caught at a hopeless disadvantage, short of food, demoralised by defeat and deprived of the leadership
of their commander, who had ridden on ahead to join Drouet, the French were utterly routed. To quote William Wheeler: