

 To save itself from this fate, Cádiz had only to climb down with regard to Castaños and Girón, but there was no sign of such a retreat. Meanwhile, matters were not helped by the behaviour of the Anglo-Portuguese army. Away on
the frontier, the siege of San Sebastián had been resumed following the retreat of Soult’s army. With the aid of extra siege guns brought in by sea, many fresh batteries were constructed, and on 26 August the bombardment was
resumed. With the target once again the vulnerable river front, two great gaps had soon been torn in the defences, and low tide on 31 August therefore saw thousands of British and Portuguese troops hurl themselves upon the
defenders. This time there was no mistake. So as to avoid congestion, whilst one column used the route along the foreshore, a second waded across the Urumea from trenches dug on its further bank. At the same time, the assault was
distinguished by the daring use of artillery: when the French troops defending the breaches, which were by no means as practicable as they at first appeared, temporarily brought the assault troops to a halt, the siege batteries
opened fire over the heads of their assailants and swept them away. ‘The artillery in its fire on the curtain was beautifully directed’, wrote Tomkinson. ‘We looked at the point they were firing on, and … saw shot after shot
strike in the right place.’ 29 Within two hours the Anglo-Portuguese forces had therefore carried the walls, but for some little time more fighting continued to rage inside the town, Rey having barricaded many of the streets and
houses. Too few French troops were still on their feet, however, and by late afternoon – the assault had been launched at eleven in the morning – the survivors of the garrison had fallen back into the castle that crowned the
lofty northern end of the peninsula on which the town was built.

 Thus far, San Sebastián had been a tale of ingenuity and heroism: Allied losses came to 2,376, whilst Douglas provides us with a graphic picture of the horrors experienced in the breach. Thus:

 I was coming away making use of my firelock as a crutch, having received a grapeshot in the right leg … The scene before me was truly awful. Here you might observe … legs and arms sticking up, some their clothes in flames, [and]
numbers not dead, but so jammed as not to be able to extricate themselves. I never expected to reach my trench with my life, for, not content with depriving me of my limb, the fire shot away my crutch also … Contrary to my
expectations, I gained the trench which was a dreadful sight. It was literally filled … with the dead and dying. ’Twas lamentable to see the poor fellows here. One was making the best of his way minus an arm; another his face so
disfigured … as to leave no trace of the features of a human being; others creeping along with the leg dangling to a piece of skin; and, worse than all, some endeavouring to keep in the bowels. 30

 Particularly noteworthy, meanwhile, was the courage displayed by the Portuguese troops who had waded the Urumea. ‘It is impossible for troops to have behaved better’, wrote Hennell, ‘than the Portuguese did … They were up to the
middle in water, grape … and musketry mowing down full half of the first regiment that advanced, and yet they did not hurry or spread, but marched regularly to the breach … to the admiration of all spectators.’ 31