

 The siege, then, proved a grim affair. From the beginning, indeed, the French put up a desperate resistance. Operations against the city began on 7 July, but the defenders had to be cleared from an outwork they had established
in a convent outside the walls, whilst, forced to dig many of their batteries in sand dunes, the besiegers had their work cut out just to get their guns into position. ‘We tumble and cry “Viva!” twenty times before we can get a
twenty-four pounder to budge an inch’, complained the artillery commander, Frazer. 9 Frazer thought the practice of the French guns to be not very good, but for the soldiers in the trenches, it was a different story:

 We were completely deluged with shot from the half-moon battery. Lieutenant Armstrong commanded the working party, who did their utmost to dig a hole for shelter from this incessant fire but to no purpose as the earth was
battered down as soon as raised, and scarcely a man left unhurt … Those who escaped … were assembled in the shelter of the walls [of the suburb of San Martín], yet here was no safety as the shot flew through the windows and
doors, and, rebounding off the walls, hurt many, while stones and mortar falling in every direction bruised some and blinded others … We had scarcely got in shelter when a large shell dropped on the floor, rolling about, the fuse
blazing. Armstrong stood looking at it, when I laid hold of him and dragged him to the rear of a broken wall at nearly the instant it exploded. 10

 In consequence, it was not possible to start bombarding the walls for twelve days, by which time the attackers had already suffered well over three hundred casualties. By 22 July, however, all seemed ready:

 By midday yesterday the breach … was perfectly practicable, the wall being entirely levelled … The guns have each fired upwards of 300 rounds … daily between daybreak and sunset … Great part of the town is ruined by our fire.
The crashing of houses and roaring of guns make a horrible din. 11

 Had an assault been launched immediately, the city might have fallen – most of its guns, for example, had been silenced – but for a variety of reasons Graham decided to delay the storm until 25 July. Needless to say, this
allowed Rey to contrive a series of unpleasant surprises for the attackers, whilst the extra battering helped the attackers not at all, for the new breach that was its product was almost inaccessible to troops attacking along the
river bank (the scheme settled on by Graham). Add to all this the most extraordinary mismanagement in the arrangements for the assault itself, and the results were predictable. Few men even reached the breaches, whilst those that
did were for the most part quickly killed or wounded. As for the rest of the attackers, jammed together on the narrow strip of land between the defences and low-water mark, they, too, were decimated by heavy fire and eventually
forced to fall back to their starting point. As Sergeant Douglas of the Royal Scots remembered: