

 No movement was forthcoming, however, whilst the Regency chose to raise the stakes still further by completely disavowing the agreement made in Cádiz in January 1813 on the grounds that it could not consider itself bound by the
word of its predecessor. But to take this line was to play with fire, for, hitherto neutral in the struggle between the liberals and the serviles, Wellington was already hinting not only that the gaditano régime should be
overthrown, but also that Britain should withdraw from the Peninsula. As he wrote to Bathurst:

 We … are interested in the success of the war in the Peninsula, but the creatures who govern at Cádiz … feel no such interest. All that they care about is the praise of their foolish constitution. There is not one of them who
does not feel that it cannot be put into practice, but their vanity is interested in forcing it down people’s throats. Their feelings regarding the Inquisition are of the same description … The bishops and clergy in Galicia have
openly resisted this law, and … the people in that province are by no means favourably disposed to the new order of things. In Biscay the people positively refused … to accept of the constitution as being a breach of the
privileges of their province … It appears to me that as long as Spain shall be governed by the cortes along republican principles, we cannot hope for any permanent amelioration. To threaten that you would withdraw your assistance
without withdrawing if there was no amelioration would only make matters worse. You must be the best judge of whether you can … withdraw, but I acknowledge that I do not believe that Spain can be a useful ally … if the republican
system is not put down. 25

 All through the summer, then, Wellington and Henry Wellesley did what they could to get Cádiz to back down. In this they were quite genuine, for, angry though they were, they at heart wanted to save the Alliance. As Wellington
wrote, indeed, ‘These fellows are sad vagabonds, but we must have patience with them, and the state of Europe, and of the world, and of Spain in particular, requires that I should not relinquish the command of the Spanish army if
I should avoid it.’ 26 Behind the scenes, meanwhile, Wellington, Castlereagh and Bathurst debated the pros and cons of intervening in the politics of Patriot Spain. On the whole, the politicians were delighted with the idea, but
Wellington waxed hot and cold. Thus at one moment he was writing, ‘Jealousy of the interference of foreigners in their internal concerns is the characteristic of all Spaniards, and any declaration of the British government
against the liberals would give them more weight and power than they have already’; and, at another, ‘It is quite impossible that such a system can last … I wish you would let me know whether, if I should find a fair opportunity
of striking at the democracy, the government would approve of my doing it.’ 27 In the end, however, the idea of a coup was rejected – aside from anything else, on 1 October the cortes was due to be replaced by its ‘ordinary’ and,
so it was hoped, more friendly, successor – but that was not to say that all was well for the liberals. Sooner or later, Wellington believed, there would be a rebellion, and this, he continued, would ‘enable us to declare openly
likewise’. 28