

 Spain has beyond doubt saved Europe, because without her Europe would have been irretrievably lost. Russia … has struck a mortal blow against the fantastical domination of France, but it was Spain who was holding the monster …
for Russia to plunge in the dagger. Russia has defeated her armies and pursued them without let up, but it was Spain who with five years of war tore asunder the veil that had hitherto hidden the weakness of this power that
claimed to be irresistible from the eyes of the nations … Russia has through her triumphs raised Europe anew against the tyrant, but Spain had first awoken Russia through her own. Russia has shown the peoples that they do not
have to be slaves unless they chose to be so, but to prove the point it has had to hold up the example of the people of Spain. There is nothing, in short, that … has been done for the salvation of Europe in which Spain will not
be found to have given the first impulse. 23

 Even before Vitoria had been fought, the leading liberals were therefore conspiring to engineer Wellington’s resignation, in which task they had the willing support of the War Minister, General Juan O’Donoju. To get rid of
Wellington, meanwhile, it was decided to make use of General Castaños, who, still the commander of the Fourth Army, was much distrusted on account of his links with Galicia, where anti-liberal feeling had been growing worse by
the day. In consequence, on 15 June the victor of Bailén was without explanation ordered to relinquish his command and return to Cádiz to take up a place on the Council of State, several of his subordinates, including his nephew,
Pedro Agustín Girón, also being transferred or dismissed. These actions (or, to be more precise, the designation of fresh commanders without consulting Wellington) constituted a clear breach of the conditions under which he had
accepted the command-in-chief and Wellington was furious. As he wrote to Henry Wellesley:

 I shall be very much obliged to you if you will call together Argüelles, Ciscar, Vega, Toreno and any other persons who may have been concerned in nominating me to the command of the Spanish army, and … tell them that if I have
not some satisfaction for the insult offered me by these arrangements … it will be impossible for me to continue to hold the command … I judge from the measures adopted that it is intended to carry out the war against the bishops
in Galicia, * for which I conclude that Castaños and Girón are not considered fit instruments. I wish that you would take the same opportunity of pointing out to these gentlemen the danger and imprudence of such measures. It will
now rest with the Archbishop of Santiago whether or not we have a civil war in our rear. If we have, we must take leave of all our communications and our supplies of all descriptions, and we shall soon feel the consequences. To
be sure, it will be droll enough if, having commenced the war … with the clergy and the people in our favour … we should be compelled to withdraw by having the clergy and people against us. 24