

 Nor were things well with Wellington’s army. Summer in the Basque provinces and Navarre is not the season of blazing heat to be found in the rest of the Peninsula, and in 1813 the weather appears to have been particularly bad.
With the army drenched by incessant rain, the decision to strip the men of their greatcoats was looking singularly unwise. Sickness was widespread – at one point no fewer than one third of Wellington’s British troops had been
hors de combat – whilst there were also many fears as to the army’s discipline and general reliability. Straggling had on 9 July been so general that Wellington reported that fully 12,500 men were absent without leave, whilst
plundering had gone on without cease: ‘We paint the conduct of the French in this country in very … harsh colours,’ lamented Robinson, ‘but be assured we injure the people much more than they do … Wherever we move devastation
marks our steps.’ 3 And, finally, with the army established on the borders of France, desertion had become a problem. Had the units affected only been those recruited from deserters and prisoners of war, this would have been bad
enough: the nominally French Chasseurs Britanniques, for example, lost 150 men in a single night. But the problem was clearly much more general. Thus: ‘The desertion is terrible, and is quite unaccountable, particularly among the
British troops. I am not astonished that the foreigners should go … but, unless they entice away the British soldiers, there is no accounting for their going away in such numbers as they do.’ 4

 As if this was not enough, there was also the question of the Spaniards. Thus, relations with the Spanish authorities had slipped to a lower ebb than that even of 1809, whilst matters were further complicated by the continued
presence of substantial French forces in Catalonia, not to mention the fact that the onset of winter was wreaking havoc with Spain’s ragged and ill-fed soldiers, commander after commander reporting that their men were starving
and falling sick by the hundred. Also to be considered, meanwhile, were the linked questions of the conduct of the Allied armies and the danger of popular resistance likely to follow an invasion: if the behaviour of the redcoats
was likely to be bad enough, the Spaniards and Portuguese for obvious reasons were likely to fall on the populace with the utmost savagery. As Edward Buckham noted, ‘The Spaniards, elated with the prospect of entering the fine
plains of France, boast that the time has come for the French to pay la fiesta y el ajo (the feast and the garlic too).’ 5 If Wellington expressed the hope that he would not need the maps of France for which he asked the
Horseguards and stressed that he was only asking for them because it was as well to have them as otherwise, in the last resort there was little choice. Britain had to offer further guarantees of her commitment to the struggle for
fear that the emperor might otherwise once again divide and rule. And, if that were so, it was in Wellington’s eyes best done on the Pyrenean front, there being no guarantee that the British government would not otherwise
suddenly order the bulk of his forces to northern Germany or Holland in the belief that the Spanish frontier might safely be left to the Spaniards and Portuguese (in the wake of Vitoria, dispatches from London had repeatedly
floated the utterly impracticable idea of fortifying the Pyrenees in the same style as the Lines of Torres Vedras). But enthusiasm was notably absent: