

 Fifty buglers were sounding the charge, and the drums … were beating time to the music. A general rush was made by the whole brigade, accompanied by three British cheers. The concert was too powerful for the nerves of Monsieur …
and off they danced, the devil take the hindmost, down the hill to our right, the only way they had to escape. We followed them close to their heels and soon got them on a small level, [where] they soon got huddled together like
a flock of sheep. This place was well studded with thick bushes of underwood, and here and there a cork tree. As we were galling them with a sharp fire, they summed up resolution to turn on us and threatened us with a taste of
steel … Now the tug of war began … As they could only get away a few at a time … many were the skulls fractured by the butts of firelocks … The enemy was soon thinned by some getting away and by their loss in killed and wounded,
[and] the remainder we made prisoners. 21

 Here and there, fighting was fierce enough: a large force held out in Sorauren itself for two hours, for example, whilst the first battalion of the Eighty-Second Foot suffered very heavily, Wood remembering how ‘in less than ten
minutes one half my company were … knocked down and myself severely wounded by a musket ball’. 22 But by noon it was all over, the survivors of Soult’s command either taking flight for the border or retreating along the Maya road
to catch up with the marshal. Far to the north-west, Drouet’s three divisions succeeded in winning a minor victory over Hill at Lizaso, but there were no troops left in a state fit to exploit this success, and it was in
consequence clear that the only hope was flight. Cut off from their original line of communications by Allied troops that had pushed forward from Sorauren, the 35,000 men left with Soult and Drouet had no option but to retire by
bad side roads to the valley of the Bidassoa. Aided though they were by a mixture of exhaustion and confusion in the Allied camp, the French were soon hard-pressed and there followed several days of fierce fighting as Soult and
his men threaded their way through the mountains and forests that cloaked the entire region. French casualties were heavy and at one point it seemed as if the entire army might be encircled, but, despite much gallantry on the
part of British, Spaniards and Portuguese alike, in the end the invaders got away and took up a strong defensive position on the frontier.

 Thus ended the great French counter-offensive. Though Allied casualties had also been heavy, nearly 13,000 men had been killed, wounded or taken prisoner, whilst many of the survivors were scattered broadcast across the
countryside and living by pillage. Discipline and morale alike had collapsed, and the very slightest pressure must have produced a rout that could have taken Wellington deep into south-western France. An invasion was briefly
contemplated but the British commander soon abandoned the idea. It was a welcome relief, for Anglo-Spanish relations were again in the grip of serious controversy. Thanks to a combination of obstruction on the part of the Cádiz
authorities, the collapse of local government, the devastation of the countryside, the depredations of many erstwhile guerrillas and, above all, want of revenue, far fewer Spanish troops had fought in the campaign of 1813 than
Wellington had intended. However, Napoleon’s mistakes had allowed success to be obtained anyway, whilst those Spaniards who had taken the field had all performed well enough, the consequence being that Wellington had set aside
his irritation. With the French in eclipse, indeed, the way seemed clear for a general improvement in relations. Yet nothing of the sort transpired. On the contrary, the reduction of the French threat persuaded many Spaniards
that they could do without Wellington. In the words of the Diario de Gobierno de Sevilla, indeed, it seemed that Spain was now the ‘liberator of Europe’. Thus: