

 There is here, perhaps, a measure of truth, at least in so far as some of the leading inhabitants of the town are concerned. Thus, for many of the merchants and manufacturers of San Sebastián – the town had not only been an
important port but the centre of an area of considerable industrial activity – the antiguo régimen had more than anything else signified economic discrimination, for the Basque provinces’ privileged status had amongst other
things carried with it exclusion from the Spanish customs frontier. In short, goods exported from Guipúzcoa (and, for that matter, Vizcaya, Alava and Navarre) to the rest of Spain had to pay a heavy duty, which had of late been
steadily increasing as a means of putting pressure on the Basque notables. Still worse, perhaps, San Sebastián had also been specifically excluded from the decree that had opened the Spanish empire to trade with all Spain’s
ports. As if this was not enough, Guipúzcoa’s industries – primarily iron and linen – had been in the grip of severe structural problems even before the outbreak of the French Wars, and had in consequence suffered even more from
them than would otherwise have been the case. With the city the home of a strong French community that had remained undisturbed in 1808 and further alienated by the fact that the traditional provincial assembly was dominated by
elements with a strong interest in the status quo, it was therefore hardly surprising that collaboration flourished within the walls, for what San Sebastián needed was either the abolition of Basque privilege (as offered by
Joseph Bonaparte) or union with France (as offered by Napoleon).

 Yet, in the last resort, all this is irrelevant. Unlike Badajoz, San Sebastián had never been occupied by the Anglo-Portuguese forces, and it was in consequence unknown to the troops. Nor, of course, can the horrors that were
visited upon its population be excused by the pro-French attitude of its leading citizens. What took place was quite simply a disgrace – a war crime, indeed. And, in political terms, of course, it was a disaster. Thus, the jefe
político of Guipúzcoa sent an angry protest to the Regency, accusing the Anglo-Portuguese of massacre, whilst, having grown considerably in the telling, the story was taken up by a number of liberal newspapers including one known
to be edited by an employee of the Ministry of War. Amongst the claims that were floated was one to the effect that Wellington had ordered the destruction of the city in order to eliminate the threat that it posed to British
trade. To quote El Duende de los Cafées:

 Merely discussing these events is enough to plunge the imagination into a bottomless pit. At the same time, seeing that this did the British a lot of damage, we should not forget the commerce which San Sebastián was wont to
carry on with France in time of peace. Also to be remembered is the fact that San Sebastián was a coastal fortress that under a wise government could have developed into a very respectable port. 36