

 In short, the French were heavily defeated, only the onset of night saving them from a major disaster. Even so, at 4,300 men their casualties much outmatched the approximately 3,000 suffered by the Allies, whilst they also lost
59 guns.

 With the Nivelle breached, Soult had no option but to fall back once again, this time taking up a position that stretched south-eastwards from the fortress of Bayonne along the River Nive. However, for a variety of reasons there
was no pursuit. No sooner had the battle of the Nivelle been fought than winter closed in, deluging the troops with rain and turning the roads into a quagmire. Despite Napoleon’s decisive defeat at Leipzig, Wellington quite
rightly remained suspicious that there were elements in the Allied camp who were still dreaming of a compromise peace that would have left Britain and her Iberian allies open to massive retribution. Despite encouraging signs that
the people of south-western France were desperately war-weary and increasingly hostile to the imperial régime, there was no guarantee that full-scale invasion would not kindle a spirit of patriotism and defiance. Thanks to lack
of naval support – the south-eastern reaches of the Bay of Biscay were a difficult station for British warships in the depths of winter – and the daring of French and American privateers operating out of Bayonne, there were
delays in the arrival of food and coin from Britain. But, above all, there were once again problems with the Spaniards.

 Thus, no sooner had Spanish forces crossed the frontier, than they had engaged in many acts of violence against French civilians. This, of course, was anathema to Wellington, and in consequence he decided to send almost all the
Spanish troops with him back to Spain. As he wrote:

 I despair of the Spaniards. They are in so miserable a state that it is really hardly fair to expect that they will refrain from plundering a beautiful country into which they enter as conquerors, particularly adverting to the
miseries which their own country has suffered from its invaders. I cannot, therefore, venture to bring them into France … Without pay and food, they must plunder, and if they plunder they will ruin us all. 45

 To add insult to injury, meanwhile, it was ordered that the soldiers concerned should be kept permanently under arms – in other words, formed up in their units – until they were well within the Spanish frontier. An act of some
courage on the part of Wellington – he was effectively sacrificing his numerical superiority and at the same time sending back seasoned troops who had on the whole been fighting very well of late – this provoked fury among the
Spanish generals, the latter feeling that they were being publicly humiliated and treated with the greatest injustice.

 Whether these disputes would have any impact on the future of the Alliance remained to be seen – it should be noted that at this point the matter of Wellington’s resignation still had to be decided on by the cortes – but, even
if they did not, almost a quarter of the army that had crossed the Bidassoa was out of action. With the authorities in Cádiz in the meantime seemingly not making the slightest attempt to address the logistical situation and doing
all that they could to subvert Wellington’s control of the Spanish army (in particular, an attempt was made to remove the Inspectors-General of the cavalry and infantry – the officers responsible for the internal arrangements of
these two arms of the service – from the British commander’s headquarters), it also remained hard to discount the possibility of a complete rupture in relations. All the more was this the case as Wellington had resolved that the
British subsidy should henceforth only be paid to troops who were actually present with his forces in France, the Regency having in the meantime gone so far as to release Ballesteros from captivity in the expectation that he
would take over as supreme commander.