

 At San Marcial … I had placed the Spanish troops in a position known all over the country for its strength … The same evening … as I was sitting on a rock watching what was going on, a fellow came up to me – one of their
officers – and said he was desired … to tell me ’twas impossible they could hold out any longer, and requesting I would send my troops to assist them. I looked through my glass, and I observed that the French were already in
movement to retreat … ‘Well, then,’ I said, ‘had not you better keep your position a little longer and gain the honour of the day rather than give up the post to our troops?’ They did so, and now I see … that they claimed this as
one of their greatest victories. 38

 The other prong of the French offensive having been abandoned in the face of Allied demonstrations against its left flank, it might be thought that the victory at San Marcial would have done much to counter the effects of the
storm of San Sebastián. Indeed, it is hard not to suspect that its all-Spanish nature was in part contrived to smooth ruffled feathers in Cádiz. Yet San Marcial had no impact at all in Spanish counsels – in fact it was rather
overshadowed by claims that a group of grandees had offered Wellington the throne in exchange for a promise to convert to Catholicism – whilst harassment of the British on the part of the local authorities became more and more
obtrusive. At the key staging point of Bilbao, for example, the ayuntamiento restored by-laws that prohibited the movement of wagons through the town, whilst in Vitoria and other towns the British were denied the use of buildings
that they needed as billets, storehouses and hospitals. Meanwhile, at Santander British transports were searched for contraband, and the whole port – now Britain’s most important base – eventually placed in quarantine on the
pretext of a contagious fever that had supposedly broken out at a British military hospital.

 The effect of all this, needless to say, was to enrage the British camp. Meanwhile, Wellington’s irritation was further increased by the facts that such food as the Spanish armies in the north were receiving was coming from
British magazines, that no supplies had been forthcoming from the liberated territories, and that the Spanish intendence and commissariat were costing more to maintain than they produced in the way of money and foodstuffs. Yet
the misery which the Spanish armies continued to endure – in grave want of food, they were now also exposed to the sleet and rain of a Pyrenean winter – was not purely the result of gaditano machinations. Never likely to be able
to cope with the demands of the tens of thousands of troops concentrated on their territory, Vizcaya, Alava, Navarre and Guipúzcoa had now been reached by the liberal revolution. This, however, was not a pleasant experience. For
the notables who benefited most from the fueros, it represented a considerable blow to their vested interests, and for the mass of the population conscription and increased taxation (in most of the region neither the Church nor
feudalism was much of an issue). Meanwhile, insult was added to injury both by the depredations of the troops (Spanish, British and Portuguese alike) and the fact that the harvest of 1813 had been badly affected by a series of
disastrous hailstorms. And, to cap it all, the powerful Espoz y Mina found that he could be ‘king of Navarre’ no more, the Cádiz government expecting him to surrender the de facto political authority that he had hitherto enjoyed
into the hands of the new jefe político.