

 But the picture now darkens tremendously. As we have seen, cities taken by storm were universally regarded by their conquerors as legitimate prizes, whilst in San Sebastián the task of controlling the troops was rendered still
harder by the confused street fighting that had ended the action, not to mention the abnormally large number of officers that had fallen in consequence of the desperate efforts that had had to be made to get the faltering men to
enter the breaches. Notwithstanding the presence of parties of provost marshals who roamed the streets dealing out summary floggings, the result was inevitable. As Gleig wrote:

 As soon as the fighting began to wax faint, the horrors of plunder and rapine succeeded. Fortunately there were few females in the place, but of the fate of the few which were there I cannot even now think without a shudder. The
houses were everywhere ransacked, the furniture wantonly broken, the churches profaned, the images dashed to pieces; wine and spirit cellars were broken open, and the troops, heated already with angry passions, became absolutely
mad by intoxication. All good order and discipline were abandoned. The officers no longer had the slightest control over their men, who, on the contrary, controlled the officers, nor is it by any means certain that several of the
latter did not fall by the hands of the former, when they vainly attempted to bring them back to a state of subordination. 32

 As with Ciudad Rodrigo and Badajoz, it would be easy to give page after page of such accounts. Suffice to say that Vivian remarked, ‘Never did I see such an example made of a place’; Harley that ‘I cannot give an adequate
description of the horrible scenes that occurred’; and Schaumann that ‘the horrors perpetrated in Magdeburg … during the Thirty Years’ War were child’s play compared with what occurred after the fall of San Sebastián’. 33
Schaumann, at least, was exaggerating – the civilian population was not put to the sword in its entirety as he suggests – but even so murder was common, and the sufferings of the populace severe in the extreme. ‘The very few
inhabitants I saw said nothing’, wrote Frazer. ‘They were fixed in stupid horror, and seemed to gaze with indifference at all around them.’ 34 And to the horror of sack was added that of fire: thanks to a mixture of explosions
and the carelessness of drunken soldiers, a major conflagration broke out which had soon consumed the bulk of the town.

 In justification of the sack, it has often been alleged that the inhabitants of San Sebastián were pro-French, and, further, that they had collaborated with Rey in the construction of the barricades and retrenchments with which
he sought to frustrate the assault. So common was this story that even Wellington repeated it, and, so far as can be ascertained, believed what he wrote. Thus:

 In the course of the enquiry upon this subject, a fact has come out, which I acknowledge that I had not heard of before, and as little suspected … viz. that the inhabitants … co-operated with the enemy in the defence of the
town, and actually fired upon the Allies. 35