

 Much of this was simply ludicrous. Setting aside the fact that San Sebastián posed no commercial threat to Britain whatsoever, Wellington had specifically discouraged Graham from a general bombardment of the town and set his
face against the use of rockets, when this was suggested to him, on the specific grounds that they were useless for anything other than setting fire to towns. Also noteworthy were the warnings that he had sent to Graham of the
need to keep the men in hand after the storm. Yet, ludicrous or not, the charge stiffened resistance to Wellington, whilst the more the British protested, the more the Spaniards were inclined to stand upon their dignity. As one
journalist wrote, on being taken to task for his criticism:

 Enjoying freedom of speech as they do, Spaniards cannot place restrictions on this right without compromising the honour of the nation … In nothing do I believe myself to have been out of line, nor still less have I allowed
myself to be carried away by foolish hatred of the British government … All I have done is to encourage my fellow Spaniards to meet every claim of British correspondents with another of their own, so that even with pen and ink no
foreigner will ever defeat Spain. 37

 To expect the liberals and their creatures to give way over Castaños and Girón was therefore optimistic in the extreme. Indeed, the only bright spot was that the army was clearly loyal to Wellington. Thus, in Valencia and
eastern Aragón, the garrisons left behind by Suchet had been blockaded by troops of the Second and Third Armies, whilst other troops from these forces had joined the Allied corps that had been sent to the Levante from Sicily the
previous year in a renewed attack on Tarragona. A foolish mistake on the part of its new commander, Lord William Bentinck, saw him quite needlessly march the whole of the Third Army off to join Wellington, but this was in part
made up for by the fact that the First Army sallied out of its mountain fastnesses and attacked a number of isolated French units (not that this prevented Suchet from evacuating the garrison of Tarragona and inflicting a sharp
reverse on Bentinck at Ordal).

 As might be expected, however, it was on the Pyrenean front that the Spaniards had their chief opportunity to make their mark. Having done what he could to restore the morale of his battered forces in the wake of Sorauren, Soult
made one last attempt to save San Sebastián. On 31 August – the very day of the assault – one column of his troops marched directly across the River Bidassoa in the vicinity of Irun whilst another hooked inland and tried to
penetrate the Allied line at Vera. There followed two distinct actions. Near the coast the French found themselves facing the foremost elements of the forces Wellington had left to cover the siege of San Sebastián. Composed of
three divisions of the Fourth Army, these were posted on a dominant ridge overlooking the Bidassoa known as the heights of San Marcial. Undaunted by the oncoming French masses, they stood firm, and, waiting until the enemy
infantry had reached the crest of the steep slope, drove them off by firing a single volley and then mounting a bayonet charge. Two attacks were beaten off in this fashion, but a third assault secured a lodgement on the heights.
For a moment the exhausted Spaniards wavered, but in the end a fresh division threw back the equally weary French. If the victory was exclusively a Spanish one, however, the Spaniards owed this to Wellington: