

 On 31 October, however, the starving garrison of Pamplona surrendered with the result that a fresh advance could be put off no longer. On the morning of 10 November, then, whilst several divisions contained the French right,
55,000 Allied troops moved forward against the rugged hills and mountains that marked the position of Soult’s centre-left. The French had 60,000 men and had studded the line of the Nivelle with a complicated network of redoubts
and other fortifications, but Soult’s men were stretched very thin, as well as being hungry and demoralised. Within two hours the Light Division had stormed the outwork which the defenders had maintained on the commanding height
known as the Petite Rhune: ‘Some heavy cannon sounded the advance,’ wrote Simmons, ‘and in a moment everyone was in motion up the sides of this tremendous steep. Obstacles of an extraordinary nature were opposed to us, but
nothing could impede the ardour of Britain’s brave sons.’ 41 Meanwhile, midday found the troops echeloned to the mountain’s right deep inside the French positions. Here and there the fighting had been very sharp, and there had
been plenty of casualties. Amongst the fallen was Robert Blakeney, who ‘being struck by a shot which shattered both the bones of my leg … asked [Lieutenant Vincent] … to place me against a tree which stood close by … and then …
cheered on the regiment’. 42 Also down was William Wheeler. The latter having left us a wonderful picture of the common soldier’s view of a firefight, he is worth citing at some length:

 On the top of the hill, they had a reserve: these came forward and gave us a crack … As I was in the act of pulling my trigger, I received a wound in both legs. The ball … scraped the skin just above the outside ankle of the
left foot and passed through the gristle behind the ankle of the right, just missing the bone, [and] down I fell. I endeavoured to rise, but found I could not stand and that my shoe was full of blood. ‘The devil’s luck to you for
a fool’, said Ned Eagan. ‘Now can’t you be easy and lie quiet for a minute or so till we … send them in double quick over the hill?’ At this moment, Hooker came to me and said, ‘I hope … you are not much hurt. Take some of this
rum’… Hooker was employed in emptying some of the rum into my canteen … when down [Eagan] came on top of us … shot through the body. 43

 Yet reserves of the sort encountered by Wheeler were few and far between, whilst many troops found that their flanks had been turned before they had had a chance to fire a shot. For a good impression of the fighting, one has
only to turn to Donaldson of the Ninety-Fourth:

 The enemy having been driven from the redoubts in front of Sarre, we advanced … to the attack of the enemy’s main position on the heights behind it, on which a line of strong redoubts were formed with abattis in front … Colonel
Lloyd, having pushed his horse forward before the regiment, advanced cheering with the most undaunted bravery, but before he reached the summit he received a mortal wound in the breast, and was only saved from falling off his
horse by some of the men springing forward to his assistance. When this was perceived by the regiment … regardless of everything, they broke through all obstacles, and driving the enemy from their position, they … charged through
their burning huts without mercy. 44