

 To Wellington, however, all this was irrelevant. To him, indeed, all that mattered was that such Spanish troops as had reached the front were literally starving and in consequence had become more of a burden than a source of
assistance. As if this was not enough, meanwhile, the forces whom he held responsible for the chaos seemingly remained bent on frustrating his efforts to restore order, whilst at the same time doing all that they could to
postpone the evil day when they would, or so he assumed, be swept from power in the elections to the ordinary cortes (particularly noteworthy in this latter respect were the efforts of the liberal caucus to prohibit the election
of priests to the new chamber, to permit members of the original cortes to retain their seats until such time as their replacements had arrived from the provinces, and to ensure that the new parliament met in Cádiz rather than
Madrid).

 Although the liberals were not always successful in these manoeuvres – the election of priests, for example, was never banned – Wellington was still thoroughly disgusted and on 5 October he finally tendered his resignation. A
few days earlier, however, the constituent, or ‘extraordinary’, cortes that had assembled in 1810 had finally been replaced by its ‘ordinary’ successor. It had always been the hope of the British, and, for that matter, the
serviles, that the new body would be less radical than its predecessor, whose liberal complexion was widely attributed to the excessive influence of Cádiz. There was a considerable degree of miscalculation here, the liberals
having succeeded in maintaining a strong foothold in the new assembly. Nevertheless, even if the margin of victory was less than had been hoped, the change was still sufficient to overcome the forces opposed to Wellington. Thus,
the Regency’s behaviour having been condemned both by a special committee set up to look into the affair and by the Council of State, frantic liberal efforts to swing the final vote in their favour came to naught, and on the
night of 28 November 1813 the British general was therefore confirmed in his command by a majority of fifty-nine votes to fifty-four.

 By then, however, the affair of Castaños and Girón had in large part ceased to matter. As we have seen, in the autumn of 1813 the chaos that reigned in his rear and the impossibility of depending on Spanish support had been a
major factor in dissuading Wellington from undertaking offensive operations in France. In the end, however, diplomatic considerations had outweighed these concerns and on 7 October thousands of British, Portuguese and Spanish
troops crossed the frontier. Whilst the Fifth Division took the French by surprise by wading the estuary of the Bidassoa, the Light Division and powerful elements of the Fourth Army scaled the heights that overlooked the river
further inland. In the coastal sector of the front, success was immediate, for there were few French troops in the vicinity. Amongst the troops who waded the river was Ensign Gronow of the Guards, for whom it was his baptism of
fire: