

 We commenced the passage of the Bidassoa about five in the morning and in a short time infantry, cavalry and artillery found themselves upon French ground. The stream at the point we forded was nearly four feet deep, and had
Soult been aware of what we were about, we should have found the passage of the river a very arduous undertaking. Three miles above we discovered the French army and ere long found ourselves under fire. The sensation of being
made a target … is at first not particularly pleasant, but ‘in a trice, the ear becomes … less nice’… The French army, not long after we began to return their fire, was in full retreat, and after a little … fighting, in which our
division met with some loss, we took possession of the camp … of Soult’s army. We found the soldiers’ huts very comfortable: they were built of branches of trees and furze and formed … streets which had names placarded up, such
as Rue de Paris, Rue de Versailles, etc. 39

 The mountains to the east having been fortified by a chain of redoubts, there was some sharp fighting before the defenders were put to flight. Drawn from the élite Light Division, however, the attackers were not to be checked.
As Leach of the Ninety-Fifth wrote:

 The business commenced by our third battalion climbing a small mountain on which the French had a small advanced post. After a sharp conflict the enemy was driven from it … and General Kempt’s brigade was enabled, by a movement
to its right and a flank fire on their engagement, to dislodge a strong force of French infantry, who must have been made prisoners if they had not bolted like smoked foxes from their earths. During these operations Colonel
Colbourne’s brigade had a much more arduous task to perform. His opponents could not be taken in flank and he was therefore obliged to advance straight against them, entrenched up to their chins … A succession of redoubts … were
carried by the bayonet, and those who defended them were either shot, bayoneted or driven off the mountain. 40

 Only on their extreme left, where they were ensconced on the dominant peak known as La Grande Rhune, were the French able to hang on, and even here they abandoned their positions the next day on the grounds that they had become
untenable. With only 1,600 casualties, half of them Spanish, the operation had been a great success, whilst there seemed nothing to stop Wellington from pushing deep into France, for Soult’s troops were clearly both in poor heart
and far too few in number.

 Once again, however, the Allied army paused in its march, Soult being allowed to pull back to a new defensive position behind the River Nivelle. As before, the reasons were political. Although events were gradually moving
Wellington’s way in Cádiz, there was no guarantee that the battle would be won, nor, still less, that the Spanish forces that made up at least a quarter of his effective field strength could remain in action. Still worse, serious
difficulties were also being experienced with the Portuguese. With the French now far removed from their borders, the authorities had little reason to continue their incessant struggle with the populace in the matter of
conscription. At the same time the serious economic disruption consequent on the transfer of Britain’s main supply port to Santander meant that the troops were now worse supplied than ever. Finally, there was great resentment of
the British, and even some fear that Spain was bent on invasion. Through considerable effort, Beresford was able to avert a crisis, but for a time it looked as if the army’s vital Portuguese contingent might literally dwindle
away to nothing. Meanwhile, there still remained the campaign in Germany, which, for all Wellington knew, might still go either way, and Pamplona, whose blockade was tying down not just substantial Spanish forces, but also two of
Wellington’s Anglo-Portuguese divisions.