

 What all this meant was the frontier provinces became another stronghold of discontent. At Bilbao, for example, an attempt was made to resist the new political dispensation, whilst Espoz y Mina defied the new authorities and is
reputed to have had a copy of the Constitution executed by firing squad. On a more popular level, meanwhile, at Vergara there was a serious tax riot, whilst at Olite and a number of other places British marauders were attacked
and even murdered. However, if the troubles experienced by the district most directly affected by the war in the autumn of 1813 were particularly intense, the whole of Spain continued to be gripped by disorders of one sort or
another. Thus, in the Levante the retreat of the French from Valencia saw the extension northwards of the anti-feudal disturbances already common in southern parts of the region for the past two years, whilst the old señores were
also challenged, albeit more generally by legal means, in Castile and Aragón. Despite the spread of discontent, meanwhile, on 10 November 1813 the cortes ruled that, provided that they could present due title to their holdings,
the nobility should be confirmed in their territorial rights (or, in short, that the populace could bid farewell to their dreams of land redistribution). Even more important as a cause of unrest than this, however, was the cortes
’ fiscal policy. Thus, already groaning beneath the weight of conscription, the populace also had to endure a much tighter system of taxation in the form of a new contribución única that took the form of a graduated income tax.
In theory much fairer than the multitude of levies which it replaced, this was also harder to evade, whilst a series of oddities in the manner in which it was calculated produced great inequalities in its administration. Thus,
Seville’s fiscal contributions fell dramatically, whilst those of districts such as Segovia and Guadalajara quadrupled or even quintupled. To add insult to injury, meanwhile, one third of the money owed by each province for the
year 1813/14 was ordered to be paid immediately. Hardly surprisingly, the result was pandemonium: so desperate was the situation of the populace that even the liberals’ own supporters sometimes requested the suspension of the new
system, whilst by March 1814 less than 25 per cent of the 161,000,000 reales demanded on account had come in.

 Confirmed by much discussion of the need to form rural gendarmeries and a national guard recruited solely from the propertied classes, the decision of the cortes finally to come down on the side of the pudientes rather than the
pueblo at the very least did nothing to reduce the level of banditry in the countryside, and that despite harsh justice of the sort meted out to a gang of marauders put on trial in Jaén in June 1813 (four of the ringleaders were
sentenced to death, and the remainder to terms of between six and ten years’ penal servitude). Against the robbers, indeed, even patriotism was no defence, Donaldson describing an encounter with a mysterious woman who had just
been robbed who turned out to be none other than the almost sacred Agustina of Aragón. * Meanwhile, other problems that had sprung up in the course of the past year in various parts of the country also continued to make
themselves felt. Even in the frontier regions, it was proving difficult to get many of the guerrillas to move against the French, whilst in the interior their bands were in many instances at best behaving as miniature armies of
occupation. At the same time, though, even in regular units desertion and absenteeism remained very high. Yet most damaging of all were the determined attempts made by local representatives of the serviles to undermine the
authority of all those tarred with the brush of liberalism. Thus, in Santander, for example, the jefe político, Antonio Flórez Estrada, was continually harassed by the cathedral chapter and defeated in his attempts to fill the
province’s seats in the ordinary cortes with loyal placemen. Equally, in Majorca elements of the local clergy stirred up serious riots against the rule of the constitutional ayuntamiento. Not for nothing, then, had the cortes in
June issued an order banning members of the clergy from expressing any view, even in private, that could be held to denigrate, inspire opposition to, or undermine the authority of the régime. For the serviles, however, there was
more than one way of securing their goals. Particularly useful was the charge of treason. Thus, many of them having come to Cádiz from provinces occupied by the French, the liberals were often open to charges of being enemy
agents, as occurred in the case of the Intendent of Guadalajara and distinguished financial expert, José López Juana Pinilla.