

 In the face of this hostility the British commander was deeply worried. As he wrote to Bathurst, ‘Matters are becoming so serious with the Spaniards that I think it necessary to … request Your Lordship to consider what will be
the consequence of this state of affairs, supposing that any reverse were to happen.’ 46 Yet despite these troubles, Wellington could not remain where he was, for Soult’s decision to hold the line of the Nive ensured that the
Anglo-Portuguese army was trapped in an narrow salient running northwards along the coast from the Pyrenees. In these circumstances, staying put would be more dangerous than moving forward, and Wellington therefore decided to
cross the Nive, advance to the River Adour, and close up on Bayonne. In itself there was nothing wrong with this plan, but it did mean that the Anglo-Portuguese army would necessarily be split in two by a major river that was now
crossed only by a number of fords, the various bridges scattered along its length having all been destroyed by Soult’s forces. Bayonne possessing no fewer than three bridges across the Nive, Soult therefore realised that the way
was open to him to throw all his strength against one or other half of the opposing army in an attempt to defeat it in detail. And so it transpired. Somewhat to the surprise of Wellington’s forces, on 9 December the Nive was
crossed almost unopposed, the enemy troops on the far bank promptly melting away in the direction of Bayonne. Nor was any resistance experienced on the left bank of the river, where a strong force under the newly arrived Sir John
Hope marched directly on the city from the south. By the evening, then, the Anglo-Portuguese army was drawn up in a great arc stretching from the southern bank of the Adour to the sea. Pontoon bridges had been laid to connect the
two halves of the army whilst a bridge that had been destroyed by the French at Ustaritz some miles up river had been repaired and brought back into service.

 All seemed well, then, but on the morning of 10 December Hope’s forces were taken by surprise by a large force of French troops that suddenly emerged from the defences of Bayonne and crashed into their leading elements (so
certain was Hope that Soult would remain on the defensive that at the close of the previous day he had actually ordered a third of his command to return to their starting point at the port of Saint-Jean-de-Luz some ten miles down
the coast). Heavily outnumbered, the Allied troops in the path of this onslaught were driven back, and it was only with some difficulty that the French were finally brought to a halt at the Chateau of Barrouillet. Further to the
right, however, the Light Division had had little difficulty defending the Church of Arcangues. According to Bell, indeed, ‘The Light Infantry and Rifles liked the tombstones: they said they were … a steady rest for a pot shot
and a good shield.’ 47 Though indecisive fighting continued for the whole of the eleventh, and was resumed with greater force on the twelfth, when the French again almost captured the chateau, the attack had clearly lost impetus,
and the evening of this third day of combat saw Soult’s men fall back into the city.