

 I have just heard of another curious trick of the French here. They advanced towards Morillo’s Spaniards [and] the latter fired at them. They sent in to say they were very much surprised, for they understood they were at peace
with the Spaniards now as a treaty was signed. Morillo sent back for answer that he knew of no such peace, and [that], if the cortes  … had signed such a peace, still he should continue to … fire at the French. 1

 For obvious reasons, all of this came as a pleasant surprise to the British. As even Wellington admitted, the Spaniards ‘have conducted themselves remarkably well and with great candour and frankness upon this occasion’. 2
Indeed, conciliation seemed the order of the day. The hostile O’Donoju was dismissed as War Minister; attempts to charge customs duty on supplies and munitions imported for the use of the Anglo-Portuguese army were repudiated;
free trade was hinted at; and Henry Wellesley was assured not only that Spain was opposed to a separate peace with Napoleon, but also that the cortes intended to prohibit any revival of the Treaty of Alliance that had bound Spain
and France together prior to the French Revolution. All this, however, did not represent a sudden change of heart on the part of the liberals. Instead, it betokened a revival of the old strategy of turning to Britain for support
in the face of domestic counter-revolution. Of this, there now seemed a real danger, but, despite their violent language, increased strength, and continued attempts to win over Wellington and Henry Wellesley, this did not come
from the serviles. On the contrary, the first months of 1814 revealed the latter to be a paper tiger. Divided between traditionalists out to restrict royal authority and caroline bureaucrats eager to restore the situation of
1808, they completely failed to exploit the somewhat greater numbers which they enjoyed in the new cortes. Thus, clumsy tactics ensured the collapse of attempts to use the affair of Castaños and Girón to bring down the
government, whilst plans to vote in a new Regency foundered over the question of its composition. With the liberals also much better at packing the public galleries with friendly crowds, their control of affairs therefore
remained unshakeable. As a disgusted Henry Wellesley complained:

 The jacobin party has … successfully resisted the feeble efforts of their opponents … Under the circumstances … it may be considered as fortunate that I am not in any way committed with a party which with a majority of two to
one in the cortes has neither the courage, the activity nor the intelligence … to effect the object which they have in view. 3

 If the serviles were little threat, the British, too, had abandoned the fight. Unable to contemplate the loss of one of the chief props of their struggle to build a great coalition against Napoleon, the Liverpool administration
had backed away from any confrontation with the cortes. As for Wellington, gloom over Spain’s political situation was mixed with a recognition that relations with the Spaniards had indeed improved. ‘The mob of Madrid,’ he wrote,
‘will be just as bad as the mob in Cádiz … Both are set in motion by the same machine, the press, in the hands, I believe, of the same people. The mercantile class will not have quite so much influence at Madrid, although they
will not want partisans when they desire to carry a question by violence. The grandees had formerly a great deal of influence at Madrid, but they are too poor at present, and their situation is too degraded for them to be able to
do much under existing circumstances.’ 4 Yet that did not mean that he supported a change of régime: