

 Reinforced by a distrust of the executive power that was almost paranoid in its intensity – it was held that the desire to find happiness and self-fulfilment ensured that rulers and governments could not but strive for absolute
power – these views ensured that the liberals’ priorities for the armed forces were far more political than they were military. Thus, their objectives were essentially two-fold: to ensure that the struggle against Napoleonic
France should not be allowed to deteriorate into a mere cabinet war, and to neutralise the army as a factor in Spanish politics. In short, the liberals’ chief interest lay in making sure that the struggle against Napoleon was a
national war waged by the Spanish people, the obvious conclusion in the eyes of the more exalted being that the army should be got rid of in favour of a militia. Thus:

 Who does not see that a militia composed of diligent and active men made strong by the constant labours of field and workshop, that is free of the corruption … of garrison life, [and] closely linked to the rest of the people …
is more able to suffer the fatigues of war … and at least as capable of … learning the … mechanical science of a soldier? Nor can foreign invasion be avoided through the existence of a regular and permanent military … A daring …
enemy will wait for an opportune moment, and then burst in like a torrent when he is least expected, but, if he is attacking a people whose soldiers have abandoned field and workshop to take up the sword, he will be somewhat less
likely to succeed than if he were attacking multitudes of neatly lined-up mercenaries. Amongst such men, honour is … the only motive for their efforts, whereas … the militiaman is fighting for his liberty, for his laws, for the
field that shortly before he was watering with the sweat of his brow, for the beloved who waits to see him return triumphant to reward him with her loving arms. 16

 In the end more practical views prevailed, but the military continued to be seen as a natural enemy. To rectify matters it was necessary to create a new army that ‘has an incomparably greater interest in liberty than in
slavery … [and] cannot be seduced by the false glory of a warrior king or a lucky general’. 17 In short, the first priority was to end the rigid distinction that had hitherto existed between soldier and civilian. Instead of being
composed of men like criminals and foreigners who had no stake in society, the army would henceforth be recruited from free Spanish citizens serving in the greatest number and for the least time possible, it being in part for
this reason that the cortes had declared all Spaniards to be ‘soldiers of the Fatherland’ in January 1811. Inducted into the army en masse, Spain’s young men would in peacetime serve only for a few months of each year, whilst the
opportunity would also be taken to indoctrinate them with the values of liberalism. Meanwhile, the institution in which they served would be purged of all features which reflected the antiguo régimen. Hence the restrictions that
were imposed upon the fuero militar, the abolition of noble privilege in the officer corps, the creation of a more equitable system of decorations, and the numerous plans that were advanced for the reform or abolition of the
royal guard. At the same time great importance was also placed on the reform of the army’s ordenanzas. Gone, in particular, was the old emphasis on blind obedience: in future, the troops would be taught that there were limits to
the authority of their officers, that they had a positive duty to disobey orders that jeopardised the public good, ‘that the soldier is … a citizen before he is a soldier; that military law is inferior to natural law and civil
law; [and] that the army has no other object than to defend the liberty of the citizen’. 18