

===== FILE: OEBPS/xhtml/chapter18.xhtml =====
The Peninsular War

 18

 Báscara

 PEACE AND THEREAFTER

 It was 24 March 1814. Near the village of Báscara the two armies faced one another across the bridge in the noon sunshine, Spaniards on the one hand and Frenchmen on the other. Yet not a musket sounded. Amongst the Spanish
soldiers could be seen crowds of excited civilians, whilst the rival troops began to exchange cheers with one another. Alerted by a nine-gun salute, a group of Spanish officers arrayed in their brightest uniforms rode down to the
bridge. Very shortly, there came a similar movement on the other bank, and soon a number of figures were being greeted on bended knee. From the hills all around, there immediately came a storm of cheering: King Fernando VII had
returned.

 Did the king enjoy his own again, however? Almost six years to the day since his tumultuous accession to the throne, Spain had changed immeasurably. In place of the absolute monarchy and strict censorship of 1808, she now
possessed a Constitution and a flourishing press, whilst gone, too, were her feudal system, foral privileges, hereditary town councils, internal customs barriers, and archaic systems of conscription and taxation. All Spaniards
were equal before the law, and, except in matters of religion, free, although even here there had been great change, the Church having experienced an enormous reduction in its power and wealth. Not all of this was necessarily
anathema to Fernando, who secretly welcomed the manner in which certain goals that had eluded his father and grandfather for fifty years had suddenly been achieved, but at the same time it was clear that he was hardly being
restored in the full plenitude of his power. With el rey deseado a rigid and unbending defender of the royal prerogative and the Constitution a document certain to give even the most moderate of princes much offence – even some
liberals admitted that it treated the monarch as a dangerous wild beast – conflict between Fernando and the Patriot régime was inevitable. All that remained, indeed, was the question of whether or not the king would attempt to
attack the new order head-on.

 By comparison with the great political struggle that now unfolded, military affairs pale into insignificance. In France, after a considerable spell of inactivity in winter quarters, British, Portuguese and Spanish soldiers
continued to battle the enemy, but the tale of how Wellington besieged Bayonne, liberated Bourdeaux, and finally defeated Soult’s army at Toulouse is one that belongs not so much to the history of the Peninsular War as to that of
the great invasion of France that produced Napoleon’s abdication on 6 April 1814. Nor does much interest attach to such military events as took place in the Peninsula, for these boiled down to little more than a series of
ineffectual blockades that are remarkable chiefly for the evidence they provide of the miserable condition of the Spanish army and the erstwhile guerrillas’ lack of interest in prosecuting the war. The isolated French garrisons
that remained had long since been besieged by a variety of Spanish forces. Mendizábal’s division of the Fourth Army lay before Santoña and part of Mina’s before Jaca, whilst the other strongholds absorbed all the forces of the
Second Army except a single division – that of Sarsfield – that had been marched to Catalonia. To be precise, Peñíscola and Denia were guarded by the division of General Mijares; Sagunto by that of Roche; Tortosa by those of
Villacampa and El Empecinado; and Lérida, Benasque, Mequínenza and Monzón by that of Durán.