

 The danger of a military coup, then, did not arise from some predisposition to reaction on the part of the officer corps. Much more to the point was the latter’s experience of war and revolution. From the beginning the climate
in Patriot Spain had been distinctly anti-militarist. Not only had many officers perished in the uprising of May 1808, but the authority of the army had been severely reduced and the autonomy of the military estate invaded in an
unprecedented manner. Following the uprising, meanwhile, new officers and old had found themselves waging a desperate war against a powerful aggressor in the most unfavourable circumstances. Hostile to military discipline, the
troops had been prone to riot and desertion, just as the populace had done all that it could to resist the draft. Meanwhile, unscrupulous and irresponsible propagandists had created false expectations of victory, whilst equally
unscrupulous and irresponsible politicians had interfered in the conduct of military operations, failed to supply the army with the sinews of war, fomented alternative structures of military organisation that hindered the war
effort as much as they assisted it, and made general after general scapegoats for disasters which were often none of their making. Typical, perhaps, was the deluge of complaints with which Castaños and other generals were
bombarded after the disasters of November–December 1808. For example:

 General Castaños is one of the most wicked men of our times. I say this because ever since he entered Madrid garlanded in laurels which he did not merit to the repeated cheers … of the inhabitants … he has spent all his time
delaying the march of his troops, thinking up wrong-headed plans, changing his positions every other moment, discouraging his soldiers [and] opposing anyone who might frustrate his evil plans. 6

 Many of these denunciations were the fruit not so much of dissatisfaction with the officer corps per se as the scheming of such factions as the Palafoxists. Needless to say, they were also frequently very unfair. As Castaños
himself observed:

 The word ‘traitor’ no longer signifies what we have understood until now: a traitor is a general who does not attack when a private feels like it, or when it is desired by those 200 leagues from the enemy; a ‘traitor’ is a
general who retreats an army which is going to be enveloped and sacrificed without benefit or utility to the country. 7

 But the generals committed so many errors that they could not be exonerated from all blame. To quote a letter of the Junta of La Carolina written after the battle of Almonacid:

 The caprice and arbitrary behaviour of the generals have led a defeated and demoralised enemy to victory … There can be no nation in history that has made war in the way in which we have been making it. Amongst our commanders
co-ordination and intelligence are entirely unknown. 8

 From all this there stemmed a line of thought that was social and political dynamite. Denouncing all army officers as ‘libertines’, for example, one anonymous letter that was sent to the Junta Central argued that the only way to
win was by ‘making the veteran soldier a sergeant, the veteran corporal a captain, and the veteran sergeant a colonel’. 9 Even more explicit was the newspaper, El Patriota: