

 Nothing can be more satisfactory than the … conduct of the Spanish government regarding the negotiations for peace, and I entertain serious doubts whether … the British government should be in any way party to a change under the
existing circumstances. I am certain that no government would act better than they have in this most important of all concerns, and I doubt that any Regency under the existing constitution would have power to act better in other
matters more peculiarly of internal concern. 5

 As for the idea of a British-led coup, this was in Wellington’s eyes even worse, the British commander refusing point-blank to intervene on the grounds that it would be entirely counterproductive.

 Yet danger there was, for the Spanish army – the one force that had the capacity to effect a change in the régime – was becoming more and more alienated. By January 1814, indeed, the Conde del Abisbal was suggesting to
Wellington that troops should be sent to Madrid. To understand this situation, it is necessary to set aside preconceived ideas about armies as bastions of reaction, for there were many officers who owed a great deal to the
revolution. For the third of the officer corps who had not been nobles in 1808, it had in many cases brought advancement, whilst many civilians had gained access to the military estate of a sort that would have been denied them
under the Bourbons. This did not mean that the officer corps had been bourgeoisified: whilst the percentage of titled aristocrats in the generalato had declined from 23 per cent in 1808 to only 14 in 1814, of the 458 new generals
appointed during the war, at least 173 had already been officers of the rank of sargento mayor (i.e. adjutant) or above at the beginning of the conflict, whereas only 9 are definitely known to have been civilians, and only 1 a
member of the rank and file. Nevertheless, with the army an integral part of Bourbon reformism prior to 1808, even senior officers would not necessarily have sympathised with the serviles, all the more so given that many serviles
supported the Church against the claims of the Spanish monarchy. With more thoughtful officers all too well aware that war on the scale of the struggle against the French empire demanded resources far beyond anything that the
Bourbon régime could have mustered, the result was considerable support for liberalism (indeed, a number of liberal deputies and propagandists were actually army officers).

 In short, self-interest and conviction coincided to produce a nucleus of liberal support within the officer corps, one of its greatest bastions being the general staff created in 1810. Nor was this support extinct in the last
months of the war, as witness, for example, the flood of congratulatory resolutions of military origin-occasioned by the abolition of the Inquisition; the obstructive behaviour of Juan O’Donoju; and the angry response of the
local military commanders to the attempts that were made to defend the Basque fueros from destruction at the hands of the Constitution of 1812. Indeed, with a number of the guerrilla commanders absorbed into the regular army in
the last two years of the war being men who were for good reason overtly liberal, the cause may even be said to have received a certain degree of reinforcement.