

 The shameful madness … of believing that the commanders of the old army … are the men most versed in the difficult art of war has caused us … the most bitter sorrow … In a new situation everything must be new, and so no general
should be employed except those formed … in the revolution. 10

 All this was bad enough, but when the liberals came to power in 1810 the troubles of the officer corps were redoubled. At the heart of liberal ideology lay a conviction that regular armies were ‘incompatible with the liberty of
nations’. 11 Completely segregated from the rest of society, professional soldiers could have no interest in the liberty of their fellow citizens and were as likely to repress as they were to defend them. Little else could be
expected, for their ordnances were ‘truly despotic and suitable for slaves’ and designed to make them ‘the instrument of tyranny’. 12 Bound by rigid discipline and accustomed to violence and killing, soldiers automatically became
‘the natural enemies of liberty’ for they were incapable of recognising ‘any other right than that of force, any other law than the demands of their officers’. 13 As proof of this argument, the liberals argued that, in ancient
Rome, imperial Spain and revolutionary France alike, the substitution of a regular army for a citizen’s militia had led to the emergence of despotism, whilst as time went on they could also point to the arrogance and Caesarism
exhibited by many Spanish commanders. Convinced that a standing army was a threat to liberty, the liberals sought to prove that such a body was also a military liability. The essence of their claim was that the very existence of
an army guaranteed the establishment of despotism, which in its turn led to national impotence. ‘A slave people,’ it was maintained, ‘is incapable of any act of true valour because its sacrifices cannot bring it any reward.’ 14
From this it followed that military strength was proportionate to freedom. Hence the decline of all the empires of the past and the prosperity enjoyed by Great Britain: whereas the former had all succumbed to despotism, the
British had experienced a steady growth in their political freedom. Meanwhile, regular armies were no match for a free people. Regular soldiers would not fight bravely because they could not hope to improve their lot, whilst the
brutal discipline to which they were habitually subjected meant that they could not be expected to show any fervour in the defence of freedom, the latter being a concept which was beyond them. In consequence, the liberal ideal
was a citizens’ militia. Not only would such a force pose no threat to liberty, but it would be fighting for home and freedom. As for the soldiers themselves, they would be better prepared for war by a healthy life in the fields
than by the boredom, discomfort and disease of the barracks. A further barrage of historical precedent was laid down to support this conclusion, the Persian Wars, the Punic Wars, the reconquista, the Swiss revolt against the
Habsburgs, and the American War of Independence all being cited as proof of the superiority of citizen armies. As if all this was not enough, further testimony to the superiority of the Nation-in-Arms was found in the prodigies
ascribed to the Spanish guerrillas and the Voluntarios Distinguidos de Cádiz (though in fact the latter had never done anything more than perform guard duty). To reinforce their argument, meanwhile, the liberals drew a comparison
between the French and Spanish revolutions. According to their version of events, at the start of the Revolutionary Wars France had possessed a powerful regular army, but she had nevertheless been consistently beaten until she
had instigated the levée en masse. In Spain, the opposite had occurred, however, the armed people having everywhere defeated the French until they had been formed into regular armies. In the same way, defeat had allegedly been
changed into victory in the Russian campaign of 1812 when ‘the cabinet war waged by the Russians was converted into a national war by the people taking an interest in their own defence’. 15