

 The humiliation and frustration experienced by the Spanish army in these last months of the war were to have a considerable impact on the fate of the liberal régime, but before looking at this issue we must first examine the
dramatic developments that led to the release of Fernando VII at Báscara on 24 March 1814. Desired though he may have been, the young king was hardly deserving. Whilst Spain was devastated from coast to coast in his name, he had
spent the war in comfortable imprisonment in Talleyrand’s chateau at Valençay in the company of his uncle, Don Antonio, and his brother, Don Carlos, rebuffing attempts to organise his escape and penning numerous messages of
congratulation to Napoleon and Joseph Bonaparte. Yet dubious as this conduct was, it persuaded Napoleon that Fernando was a fellow cynic, and thereby sowed the seeds of the final phase of his Iberian policy. Hitherto the
interests of prestige had always precluded Napoleon from cutting his losses in the Peninsula, but there was no longer anything to lose, whilst Leipzig had dealt him such a blow that the damage that would be done by a climb down
was now far outweighed by the cost of fighting on.

 How, though, to slough off the Iberian entanglement? Herein, of course, lay the value of Fernando VII, for it seemed that there would be no difficulty in getting him to accept a deal that would place him back on the throne on
Napoleon’s terms. As to what these were, all Fernando had to do was to permit the evacuation of all the imperial forces from Spain, expel the British and Portuguese, sign a treaty of peace with France, accede to the Continental
Blockade, and pardon all those who had collaborated with Joseph Bonaparte. To make these arrangements still more attractive, Fernando was promised the hand of the elder daughter of el rey intruso, whilst a picture of events in
Spain was painted that was calculated to fill the monarch with fear and apprehension. Already concerned by what he had heard, Fernando was easy enough to win over, the monarch’s only concern being that he avoid being damned as a
mere tool of the emperor, to which end he insisted that he be allowed to consult with the Regency and cortes. Though a treaty was signed on 10 December, the Duque de San Carlos and José Palafox were therefore dispatched to Spain
to secure its ratification, their private instructions suggesting that the king intended to stick by his agreement unless Regency and cortes proved willing to back the restoration of absolutism (or, in other words, that Fernando
would happily ally himself with Napoleon to defeat the liberals).

 Fernando, however, was out of touch with the realities of Patriot Spain. Difficult though relations with Britain may have been, neither liberals nor serviles could stomach the idea of an alliance with Napoleon. Despite British
fears to the contrary, when San Carlos and Palafox arrived in Madrid – since the previous month once again capital of Spain – in January 1814, they therefore got nowhere. As soon as news arrived of Napoleon’s offer, the current
Spanish Foreign Minister, José Lujando, went to see Henry Wellesley and not only provided him with full details of the treaty, but declared that it was already a dead letter. As for the Regency, it wrote a polite note to Fernando
informing him that the cortes had long since declared that any action taken by the king whilst he was still a prisoner would be considered null and void, whilst privately telling his emissaries that Fernando must look to the
Allies for his salvation. At the same time, fearing that the king might be released from captivity anyway, on 2 February the cortes passed a decree imposing severe restrictions on Fernando should he cross the border, and issued a
manifesto accusing Napoleon of trying to stir up civil war. And, at the front too, the Spaniards remained loyal. To quote Larpent: