

 The French, it seemed, had once again been defeated, but ‘King Nicholas’ was not yet finished. On the contrary, 13 December saw him switch his troops to the right bank of the Nive and launch them against the forces of Sir
Rowland Hill. There followed a furious battle. For a while the Allies were in some danger: rain in the Pyrenees had sent a torrent of floodwater down the Nive and swept away their pontoon bridges, whilst the French made
considerable progress. As Bell wrote:

 Every point was attacked to weaken our force and keep us separate, their guns keeping up a terrific fire, knocking the dust out of Saint Pierre … ploughing up the side of the hill, thinning our ranks, and playing Old Harry,
having no regard for life or limb … ‘Dead or alive,’ said our chief, ‘we must hold our ground.’ 48

 Yet the capable Hill had not won the reputation of being Wellington’s most capable subordinate for nothing. Secure in the knowledge that reinforcements were on the way (for the bridges were hastily repaired and other troops sent
up from the rear), he gathered his forces and launched a vigorous counter-attack that eventually succeeded in driving the French troops opposed to him back to the walls of Bayonne. So severe was the French rout, indeed, that a
delighted Wellington observed, ‘I have often seen the French licked, but I have never seen them get such a hell of a licking as Hill has given them.’ 49

 Known collectively as the battle of the Nive, the fighting round Bayonne had been a bloody affair. In all, indeed, over 11,000 men had become casualties. The French losses, however, considerably outnumbered those of the Allies,
whilst the gaps in Soult’s ranks were increased by the desertion on the evening of 10 December of three battalions of German troops in response to a secret message from the Duke of Nassau – one of the many German rulers who had
switched sides following Leipzig – ordering them to go over to the Allies. In addition to the 1,400 troops who went in this fashion, Soult and Suchet also lost the services of all the rest of their German units – another 3,000
men – as it was felt that they must in consequence be disbanded. Meanwhile, the Adour’s defenders were not only much depleted, but all too clearly incapable of further offensive action. Twice, indeed, the whole of their
disposable strength had fallen on a single wing of the army opposed to them, and twice it had been repelled. All Soult could now hope for, in short, was to defend the line of the Adour. As the battles of Orthez and Toulouse were
yet to show, the armée d’Espagne was still not broken, but all chance of carrying the fight beyond the Pyrenees had gone.

 By the end of 1813, then, although the French still held northern Catalonia and a series of outposts scattered from Santoña to Peñíscola, barring a stunning change of fortune in the rest of Europe, the Peninsular War had finally
been decided in favour of the Allies. Soult was out of the fight and Suchet too weak to attempt anything, whilst the commands of both marshals were already being plundered for the cadres needed for the new armies that Napoleon
was trying to form in place of the forces destroyed at Leipzig. Even had victory been achieved in the Pyrenees, it is hard to see how the French could have continued to maintain a foothold in Navarre and the Basque provinces, let
alone reverse the verdict of Vitoria. By the autumn of 1813, indeed, their one hope on the Pyrenean front was that Britain, Spain and Portugal would fall out with one another. Herein, however, lay the rub. Inter-Allied relations
were not good, and it is possible that in time the French might have won a great deal. Yet in the event, the Alliance was not found wanting: though the British, Spaniards and Portuguese hated one another, in the end they hated
Napoleon still more.