

 As these dispositions reveal, the majority of the forces involved in these mopping-up operations consisted of troops who owed their origins to la guerrilla, whilst the proportion of erstwhile members of the partidas thus engaged
was increased still further by Wellington’s decision to confide the blockade of the minor French fortresses of Saint-Jean-Pied-du-Port and Navarrenx to troops from the divisions of Mina and Morillo (as Wellington had advanced
deeper into France, so it had become more and more difficult to refrain from making use of Spanish troops, a large part of the Third and Fourth Armies eventually returning to French territory). Yet erstwhile guerrillas were not
the troops best suited to protracted blockades and sieges. Never very happy about their subordination to military discipline in the first place, they lost what little interest they had ever possessed in the struggle, and all the
more so as they were often almost as hard pressed for supplies as their opponents. Operations in consequence in most cases became very desultory and, even where they were pursued with greater vigour, the defenders were generally
able to hold out without much difficulty. Thus, the only towns to fall were Denia and Morella, both of which were held by no more than a single company.

 Only at the beginning of 1814 did the situation show some movement. In the first place Suchet, who, apart from a short-lived attempt to evacuate Tortosa and Lérida, had been keeping quiet on the Llobregat, was in January forced
to retire to Gerona following the receipt of orders directing him to send off 10,000 men to assist in the defence of France, this leaving the Anglo-Sicilian expeditionary force (now commanded by Clinton), Sarsfield’s division of
the Second Army, and elements of the First Army free to close in on Barcelona. Still held by a substantial garrison, the city was to remain defiant until the fall of Napoleon and beyond – the last action of the war, indeed, was a
sortie launched by its governor, General Habert, on 16 April 1814 – but in early March still further territory was given up by Suchet after fresh orders stripped him of nearly half his remaining 24,000 troops, the only ground
that he still clung on to being the narrow district around Figueras.

 Accompanied, as it was, by almost no fighting, the Spanish recovery of Catalonia was all but bloodless. Equally tame was the end of the few French garrisons that fell into their hands. Reduced to a state of complete starvation,
Jaca gave up on 17 February, whilst Lérida, Mequínenza and Monzón were tricked into surrendering by a turncoat juramentado named Van Halen who succeeded in persuading their governors that Suchet had negotiated a convention for
the evacuation of Catalonia. Troops of the Fourth Army fought well enough at the battle of Toulouse on 10 April 1814, but on the whole it was a singularly inglorious end to six years of hardship and sacrifice, the dissatisfaction
of the Spanish generals being compounded by their troops’ behaviour continuing to attract the most ferocious strictures from Wellington.