

 Considerable attention was also given to the question of the army’s relation to the executive power. Initially there was much pressure for the army to be placed under the direct control of the cortes, but in the end the
Constitution of 1812 compromised on the issue by giving command of the army and control of all military patronage to the monarch, whilst handing the deputies the right to determine the size of the army and the nature of its
ordinances. Hence, too, the exclusion of all viceroys, captains general, military governors and other such figures from the exercise of civil authority and their subordination to the new jefes políticos. In case these provisions
should still not be sufficient to prevent the army from being used against the Constitution, it was also decided that a new armed force should be created that would be wholly under the command of the civil authorities (though a
further motive here was the protection of the interests of property in the face of the banditry and social unrest that gripped the countryside). Known as the national guard, this force was effectively to be a self-sufficient army
in its own right, but its members were to be part-time militiamen who as such could be relied upon to retain their links with society and remain free of the corruption of military life.

 In the event the national guard was not formally established till 15 April 1814, by which time it was far too late. As for the progress that was made with regard to the institutional liberalisation of the army, this was only
slightly less chimerical. In June 1812 the cortes had admittedly established a special committee entitled the Comisión de Constitución Militar, but the officers who made up the bulk of its membership saw their brief in terms of
restoring order, system and discipline to the army whereas the liberals saw it far more in terms of rendering the army compatible with the new political system. With the serviles and the more conservative members of the officer
corps demanding that the committee should limit itself to military affairs and liberals such as Flórez Estrada accusing it of being incapable of carrying out its duties, debate on the issue became bogged down. Anxious to make
progress, in October 1813 the liberal caucus in the new cortes succeeded in forcing the establishment of a second committee whose task it would be to elaborate a so-called ‘military constitution’ whilst the original body confined
itself to anodyne questions of organisation and tactics, but in the end nothing was achieved.

 Whether the liberals’ much vaunted reform of the army’s ordinances would have ended the danger of a military coup is a moot point, but what is certain is that their priorities were of little relevance to most military men. Even
liberal officers protested that the new regulations would be useless unless the army was properly fed. Nor was the liberal programme any more satisfactory as an analysis of the Spanish war effort. Far from the successes of 1808
having been obtained by the armed populace, for example, they had rather mostly been owed to the despised regular army. As for the role-models constituted by the Voluntarios Distinguidos de Cádiz and the guerrillas, the former
had sat out the war in safety, whilst the latter had, as we have seen, proved a double-edged sword. Indeed, popular fervour for the struggle had on the whole been sadly lacking, it having also to be admitted that the advent of
the Constitution had not made the slightest difference in this respect.