

 When San Carlos and Palafox arrived in Madrid in January 1814, they therefore found a situation that seemed to offer Fernando every hope of being able to overthrow the Constitution. Populace and army alike were deeply
disaffected, whilst servilismo was growing in virulence by the day. Equally the atmosphere really did seem to presage the advent of a Jacobin republic, as witness the ferment in the countryside, and the brutal ejection from the
chamber of a solitary servil deputy who had attempted to defend Fernando’s right to negotiate with Napoleon. In consequence, though Palafox was more cautious, San Carlos returned to France as an enthusiastic proponent of a coup.
On their arrival at Valençay, however, the two commissioners found that events had moved on. With nothing to lose, Napoleon had decided to release Fernando notwithstanding the refusal of the Patriot authorities to ratify his
terms in the hope that the king’s appearance in the Allied camp would lead to turmoil. Hence Fernando’s appearance at Báscara on 24 March.

 Fearing just such a move on the part of the emperor, the Madrid régime had taken a number of precautions, the decree of 2 February laying down not only that Fernando would not be recognised until such time as he had appeared
before the cortes and sworn the prescribed oath of loyalty to the Constitution, but also that the Regency would stipulate the route by which he should travel to Madrid. No sooner had he crossed into the Spanish lines, indeed,
than Fernando was presented with a copy of the cortes ’ decree together with an intinerary for his journey (he was to travel to Valencia via Tarragona, and then strike inland across La Mancha). Yet securing the compliance of the
king was another matter. San Carlos was not alone amongst his followers in urging a coup – in the last weeks of his captivity, Fernando had been joined by a number of figures who were violently opposed to the Constitution – but
at the time that he crossed the frontier the king was far from resolved on the course that he should adopt. Báscara, however, had provided him with much in the way of encouragement, for discreet enquiries had revealed that,
whilst the commander of the First Army, General Copons, was loyal to the Constitution, many of his subordinates, including his second-in-command, the Barón de Eroles, were ready to overthrow it. Ever cautious, the king still
would not commit himself either way, but, reinforced by the arrival of the master frondeur, Montijo, in a master-stroke of cunning the proponents of a coup succeeded in persuading him to defy the cortes and make a detour to visit
Zaragoza. As they had expected, this trip filled Fernando’s head with images of popular devotion to his person, whilst news was also beginning to come in of serious anti-liberal disturbances: as in 1808, the king remained the
‘desired one’ who would put all to rights, whilst agents of the serviles had been busying themselves circulating all sorts of alarmist rumours and hiring bands of thugs.