

 Without an army … ruin and eternal slavery are inevitable … At the end of four years’ cruel struggle … the military career has been despoiled of the few stimuli that made it attractive … What boy will take up so arduous a
profession in the future? 22

 Much of this was so much cant – the real root of the trouble was, of course, the liberals’ refusal to admit the officer corps’ pretensions – but there is no doubt that the military had genuine grievances. In the eyes of many
officers, for example, it really seemed that ‘anybody now has the right to insult us’, and that ‘we are considered mercenaries, hired servants or paid assassins’. 23 As one liberal military man warned the cortes:

 It is not enough that you sanction decrees in their benefit: it is necessary that you make their effects felt in the army with the speed of lightning … There is a large body of soldiers who … believe in good faith that you do
nothing for this class … They do not read your decrees and discussions, and do not know them except by their consequences. As they do not have any effect … they are persuaded that they are null, and in consequence break out in
imprecations which a lover of the Fatherland cannot hear without horror. 24

 Certainly, instances of provocation were numerous, as witness, for example, the constant denunciation of the forced requisitioning engaged in of necessity by many commanders; the arrogant and unhelpful manner affected by many
civilian officials in their dealings with members of the officer corps; and the numerous attempts that were made to blame the sufferings of the army on wastefulness and ostentation. Nor were matters helped by British command of
the army and, even more so, the failure of the Spanish army to achieve much in the way of glory in the campaigns of 1812 and 1813. If Wellington’s appointment as commander-in-chief had been accepted with comparatively little in
the way of overt resistance, this did not mean that it was popular. Arthur Wellesley was hardly the most emollient of leaders, whilst the campaigns of Vitoria and the Pyrenees showed that, at best, the Spanish armies could only
expect a supporting role, still further damage being done by the quarrels that erupted in the wake of the invasion of France. These humiliations were blamed on the government’s failure to meet the army’s needs and it is entirely
conceivable that, had Ballesteros launched his revolt in the autumn of 1813 rather than the autumn of 1812, he would have received much support.

 As proof of this one has only to consider the case of Enrique O’Donnell. Ennobled for his services in Catalonia as Conde del Abisbal, O’Donnell was something of a favourite with the liberals – hence his appointment to the
crucial Army of Reserve of Anadalucía. Yet by January 1814 the count was seething with resentment: not only had his forces played little part in the invasion of France, but Wellington had in the most acid tones rejected a pet
scheme that envisaged giving O’Donnell command of all the Spanish forces on the frontier. Told by Wellington that independent Spanish armies had a habit of being beaten – a point whose wounding character was inflamed still
further by a reference to the defeat of his brother, José O’Donnell, at the first battle of Castalla in 1812 – the count’s answer was to get in touch with a number of leading serviles and make preparations for a march on the
capital.