

 On the surface there is much evidence that can be cited in support of this analysis. Much more work is needed on the French home front, and all the more so as opposition to the draft actually declined between 1808 and 1812, but
anecdotal evidence suggests that service in Spain and Portugal was deeply unpopular with the troops. As for the impact of the Peninsular War outside France, it is undeniable that many German nationalists were greatly enthused by
the Iberian example, as were the leaders of the reform movement that revitalised Prussia in the wake of the humiliation of Jena and Auerstädt. Also true, of course, is the fact that Portugal in particular provided the British
with a permanent foothold on the Continent of Europe – and, by extension, theatre of operations – that would for geographical and logistical reasons have been almost impossible to maintain anywhere else (much less convincing, by
contrast, is the argument that the Peninsular War saved Britain from defeat at the hands of the Continental Blockade, for she would have been able to penetrate the vital South American market whether or not Spain and Portugal had
broken with Napoleon).

 Yet was the Peninsular War really so important a factor in the downfall of Napoleon? Let us take, for example, the question of the French army. The struggle in Spain, we are told, sapped morale, tied down hundreds of thousands
of troops and cost immense numbers of casualties (imperial losses are hard to determine, but the total number of dead may have reached a quarter of a million). These remarks, however, beg a number of questions. In the Peninsula
itself, it is clear that French commanders became less and less willing to throw their troops against Anglo-Portuguese forces arrayed on ground of their own choosing. Yet there is little firm evidence that, boosted as it was by a
military machine gifted by an extraordinary capacity for enthusing the most unwilling conscript, the rank and file’s fighting spirit witnessed the sort of decline that might have been expected. Meanwhile, even if some sort of
case to this effect can be elaborated by reference to, say, Vitoria and Sorauren, the problem cannot be said to have spread very far, the troops who marched on Moscow, fought at Leipzig and defended France in 1814 performing
prodigies of valour and endurance. What about the question of numbers though? By the end of 1813, certainly, the troops of Soult and Suchet would have been of inestimable service on the Rhine frontier, but they were not
sufficient to have had much chance of turning the tide. At the same time, it is difficult to see how such victories as they might have helped obtain could have had any meaning unless Napoleon had settled for a compromise peace.
The net effect of every victory the emperor succeeded in winning being to make him even more unyielding, maintaining that he was brought down simply by the need to defend the Pyrenees is highly disingenuous.

 But would the situation in late 1813 and early 1814 ever have been so desperate but for the Peninsular War? With 260,000 extra troops – the number then deployed in Spain – the emperor might have triumphed in Russia, and thus
short-circuited the formation of the great coalition that finally brought him down less than a year and a half after the débâcle of the retreat from Moscow. Yet none of this necessarily follows. The army that fought in Russia in
1812 was not short of numbers. Rather, what was lacking was the ability to make use of numbers, the communications, transport and supply arrangements of the grande armée all proving desperately inadequate for the needs even of
the troops that Napoleon did take with him. Extra troops, in short, would not in themselves have allowed the emperor to pack a heavier punch. What, however, of the question of quality? Largely composed of Frenchmen, would not the
troops in Spain have fought better than the Germans, Italians and others who made up so large a proportion of the invaders of Russia? Many problems are thrown up by this argument, but in fact the ‘subject’ troops who fought in
Russia seem to have performed well enough. Even were this not the case, meanwhile, we find that as the years went by so more and more regiments of cavalry and infantry that were ostensibly French in origin had to find at least a
percentage of their recruits from areas that were not part of France in any ethnic sense at all. Indeed, a few units had originally been parts of other armies altogether, the French having at one time or another simply
press-ganged them into service.