

 *   *   *

 With the restoration of Fernando VII as absolute ruler of Spain, this chronicle of events must come to an end. What, though, was the significance of the Peninsular War? In this respect, one thing is clear: the conflict was of
far greater significance in the history of Spain and Portugal than it was in the history of the Napoleonic Wars. According to the classic tradition, however, this was not so. On the contrary, to quote Napoleon himself, ‘It was
[the Spanish war] that overthrew me. All my disasters can be traced back to this fatal knot.’ 26 Broadly speaking, the argument runs as follows. By intervening in Spain and Portugal, Napoleon involved himself in a struggle that
would have been difficult to win at the best of times: so intense was the national spirit of these two countries, the French armies were confronted by a veritable people’s war. As the emperor alleged, ‘The system that I pursued
in Spain … would have eventually been for the good of that country, yet it was contrary to the opinion of the people, and therefore I failed.’ 27 With Iberian resistance reinforced by the deployment of a substantial force of
redcoats in the Peninsula, the reorganisation of the Portuguese army and the construction of the Lines of Torres Vedras, victory receded still further. Yet retreat from the Peninsula would have been a catastrophic blow to the
empire’s prestige, and thus it was that for almost six years hundreds of thousands of French troops were tied down in a savage war that sapped their discipline and morale alike. The military consequences were dire: first, because
the army that invaded Russia in 1812 would have been of infinitely higher quality had the place of its numerous foreign contingents been taken by the roughly equal number of veteran French soldiers who were fighting in Spain at
that point; and, second, because Napoleon might have stemmed the Allied onslaught in 1813 and 1814 if he had not had to keep so many troops on his south-western front. But this was not the end of the story, the Peninsular War
also proving both a political and a diplomatic disaster. Thus, inside France the dramatic increase in conscription of the period 1808–1812 – the direct effect of the struggle beyond the Pyrenees – caused growing disaffection
amongst the populace. The Peninsular War was not the only problem here – also of importance were the serious economic difficulties that gripped the empire in 1810 and 1811 and the increasing lack of confidence felt in the emperor
by the propertied classes – but, with Napoleon labelled as the ‘man of blood’, the titanic struggles of 1813 and 1814 received little support on the home front. Meanwhile, without the Peninsular War, there would probably have
been no disasters of the sort that eventually occurred in Russia and Germany, and therefore no crisis of the sort that finally shattered France’s acquiescence in Napoleon’s rule. Thus, the war was instrumental in persuading
Russia, Austria and Prussia to defy Napoleon in the first place, whether it was by convincing them of Britain’s good faith, establishing the simple fact that the emperor was not invincible, or, in Germany in particular,
encouraging the emergence of a new nationalist movement that was impossible to ignore. At the same time, the war offered the eastern powers proof that new forms of war effort that had hitherto been associated solely with the
French Revolution could be employed in the service of the old order. Thus, just as in France in 1793, so in Spain and Portugal a ‘people numerous and armed’ had confronted foreign aggression and emerged triumphant. Understanding
this, in Russia, Prussia, Austria and ultimately the turncoat states of the Confederation of the Rhine, the authorities had therefore sought to emulate the Iberian example. Whilst guerrillas harassed their rear, the imperial
forces in consequence found themselves confronted by not the old professional armies of the ancien régime, but rather masses of hastily trained conscripts and militiamen, the result being, of course, that they were overwhelmed.