

 To make matters still more complicated, the Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars had also given Spain an army that was deeply politicised: in 1808 the royal guard had overthrown Godoy; in 1809 the Marqués de la Romana had
overthrown the Junta of Asturias; in 1812 Francisco Ballesteros had revolted in protest at Wellington’s appointment as commander-in-chief; and in 1814 Elío had brought down the liberal system. At the same time, of course, the
army had also been imbued with a strong sense of mission: interests that were essentially sectional having in each case been dressed up in the guise of patriotism, it came to believe that its goals – order, political unity,
military primacy – were coterminous with those of the nation – indeed, that they were those of the nation. Certain sections of the press having meanwhile heaped praise on generals such as Palafox and Ballesteros, they were
transformed into the veritable embodiment of patriotic heroism, and thus was born the concept of the military messiah.

 Yet, as with the populacho, the army was in practice an operator that was separate from the liberals, the serviles and the enlightened absolutists. Thus, if sections of the army had risen in revolt in May 1814, they had done so
in pursuit of essentially professional concerns whose satisfaction seemed most likely under the rule of an absolutist Fernando. Whether the new monarch would retain the army’s support was doubtful, though: indeed, with much of
the officer corps now a natural constituency of liberalism and Fernando’s régime facing the task of cutting the swollen and inefficient army of the war against France down to size, it was hardly a likely prospect. Also operating
on the government, meanwhile, was a series of financial constraints that were essentially related to the military situation that it inherited in 1814. The well-being of Bourbon Spain was absolutely dependent on the wealth of the
American empire, but by 1814 four years of rebellion and civil war had ensured that the revenue derived from this source had slowed to a trickle (one could argue, indeed, that the impact of the Peninsular War was at its greatest
not in Europe but beyond the Atlantic). To restore the antiguo régimen, then, what was required was the reconquest of Spanish America, and yet to reconquer Spanish America – indeed, to secure any measure of financial stability at
all in a situation in which the national debt had doubled whilst revenue had fallen to less than half the average for the period 1798–1807 – it would clearly be necessary to adopt many of the practices of liberalism. Progress was
only gradual – the process was not complete until the 1830s – but even the most tentative moves in this direction were sufficient to anger señores faced by wholesale refusal to pay the feudal dues owing to them, not to mention a
Church whose fabric and finances had been badly shaken by years of war and occupation. Whilst trouble originally came from liberals and disaffected army officers – the years from 1814 to 1820 witnessed a series of plots and
conspiracies that culminated in the revolution of 1820–23 – sooner or later a conflict with the serviles was inevitable. With liberalism gaining in support all the time amongst the bourgeoisie and the more realistic elements of
the old order, the result was never in doubt, but no less than four civil wars had to be fought out before traditionalism would accept defeat.