

 Had the liberals’ arguments been more plausible, there might have been some chance of retaining a real degree of support in the officer corps, but it was all too clear that what drove the army’s antagonists was essentially the
sectional interest of the groups from which most of them hailed. In their drive to create a nation-in-arms and ensure that the army could never again be used as a tool of despotism, they had also addressed many of the grievances
which civilian notables had felt against the military estate prior to 1808. A satisfactory career in the officer corps was now open to all men of a reasonable degree of property and education; the military courts had been
stripped of their right to try civilians; the army had been deprived of its role in local government and the administration of justice; and, perhaps above all, army officers could no longer expect to take instant precedence over
their fellow citizens. Yet herein lay the rub. Whilst many army officers could agree with demands for the internal dynamics of the army to be placed on a more equal footing, few of them were willing to surrender their privileges,
and particularly not if they had only just been able to gain access to them. Indeed, even liberal officers found it hard to abandon the notion that the army officer was not simply one more citizen, but rather a being set apart to
whom society owed a special debt of gratitude (there is, in fact, good reason to believe that they were as much motivated by professional frustration as they were by ideological enthusiasm).

 If sectional interest drove the liberals to become exponents of anti-militarism, so the same sectional interest converted more and more officers into bed-fellows of reaction. As a result servilismo had soon penetrated far beyond
the elements that constituted its natural bastions within the officer corps (the pre-war generalato, the royal guard and the many pre-war officers who had found themselves passed over by the protégés of the juntas of 1808). By
1813, indeed, secret approaches were being made to Wellington to enlist his support for a coup, whilst a variety of officers were engaging in physical attacks on liberal journalists and publishing violent denunciations of the
cortes ’ military reforms. First of all, it was argued, the army had been neglected by the cortes. To quote La Milicia Desatendida en Tiempo de Guerra:

 If we examine with care the twenty-two volumes of the acts of the cortes  … it will be seen that the army was not the issue that merited the primary attention of that congress. Despite having sat for three years, it closed
without having elaborated the military constitution, without having established a complete and respectable army possessed of the reserves necessary to replace its continuous losses, and without having reformed the public finances
so as to ensure the troops’ subsistence and maintainance. 19

 More than that, however, with vainglory its besetting sin – Gleig remarks that, ‘full of boasting’, the officers he met in the Toulouse campaign ‘gave themselves … as many absurd airs as if their valour had delivered Spain and
dethroned Napoleon’ 20 – the liberals were felt to have humiliated the officer corps by shaming it in the eyes of the British, and stripping its members of their chief sources of reward. On one level this was simply churlish –
‘To have lavished our blood, and to have remained constant despite suffering infinite defeats: are these our crimes?’ 21 – but on another the liberals had in effect left Spain defenceless: