

 It is not, then, especially daring to conclude that the war in the Peninsula had only a limited impact on the conflict in the rest of Europe, and all the more so as the chances of Napoleon staging another 1810 – when peace with
Austria, Prussia and Russia had enabled the emperor to make much progress in Spain – could not be ruled out to the very end. By 1813 the chances of the French marching all the way to Lisbon or Cádiz were not very high, but the
fact remained that the key to victory in the Peninsula was victory in Germany. British historians in particular would have this the other way about on the grounds that the Peninsular War stimulated resistance to Napoleon amongst
the eastern powers. In practice, however, this argument does not stand up. In 1809, certainly, the Peninsular War contributed to Austria’s decision to go to war against Napoleon and led some elements in the Habsburg court to back
the organisation of a popular revolt in the recently lost Tyrol (it had been ceded to Bavaria in 1805). Yet it is abundantly clear that Vienna was moved not by heroic notions of national insurrection but the fear that the final
eradication of the Bourbons as a ruling dynasty might be followed by that of the Habsburgs. Moreover, beaten at Wagram, the Austrians then allied themselves with Napoleon. Two years later, heartened by French difficulties in
Spain, both Russia and Prussia considered going to war against Napoleon, whilst in the latter case leaders of the reform movement such as August von Gneisenau added to the pressure by painting pictures of people’s war a la
español. Yet in the end both Alexander I and Frederick William III rejected the idea of an attack, all that can truly be claimed being that the continuing war beyond the Pyrenees stiffened the tsar’s determination to resist
Napoleon should the latter actually attack him.

 This, of course, Napoleon duly did, and within eighteen months he found himself facing a coalition of a magnitude that he had never had to deal with before. Was this, then, when the Peninsular War secured its moment in history?
Again, however, the answer must be a doubtful one. In a general sense the Spanish ulcer constituted a guarantee of British good faith, but far more concrete was the reassurance provided by the immense subsidies that London
lavished on any state that came out against France. Similarly, whilst every imperial soldier fighting in Spain was an imperial soldier who could not be fighting in Germany, confidence in Allied victory remained at best an
uncertain quantity. If Russia decided to carry the war across the frontier into Germany and Poland; if Prussia and Sweden elected to throw in their lot with Russia; and if Austria finally abandoned her efforts to secure a general
peace in favour of joining Napoleon’s enemies, it was for reasons that had only the most indirect connections with the Peninsula. The hundreds of thousands of Allied troops who crushed Napoleon at Leipzig were the fruit not of
events in Spain and Portugal, then, but rather of the emperor’s refusal to accept reality and settle for a peace postulated upon the limitation of French influence. To put it another way, Napoleon fell not because the Peninsular
War had any influence on Russian, Prussian or Austrian policy, but because it failed to have any influence on French policy.