

 Ever cautious, however, Fernando wavered: the Englishman, Samuel Whittingham, indeed, claims that the king told him that he had found ‘much that is good’ in the Constitution, and, further, that ‘if the refusal of my sanction is
to cost one drop of Spanish blood, I will swear it tomorrow’. 25 Whether or not this anecdote is true, the die was not finally cast until his arrival in Valencia on 16 April. Deeply alarmed at the extent of the anti-feudal
disturbances that had been rocking the province, the local nobility flocked to the royal standard, whilst the Marqués de Dos Aguas – a leading collaborator under the occupation régime – offered 2,000,000 reales to finance a
revolt. Meanwhile, military authority in the city was in the hands of the Captain General and commander of the Second Army, Francisco Elío, who was an officer of a decidedly conservative stamp. Parading his troops before the
newly arrived monarch, he therefore publicly swore to uphold him in the plenitude of his power. Having also by now been joined by many of those who had supported him in his struggle with Godoy as well as a variety of prominent
representatives of the caroline bureaucracy, Fernando hesitated no longer, and all the more so as he had also been presented with a manifesto signed by sixty-nine servil deputies denouncing the cortes as both revolutionary and
illegitimate. * Montijo, indeed, had already been sent to Madrid to sound out opinion, and, one suspects, organise the mob, whilst the beginning of May saw forces of the Second Army, together with the independent division
commanded by Whittingham, take the road for New Castile.

 In the capital all was confusion. The liberal press had reacted to the ambiguous letters which Fernando had sent to the Regency in the weeks since he had crossed the border with alarm and dismay, whilst further disquiet had been
caused by the humiliating treatment meted out to Cardinal Borbón when he had travelled to meet the monarch in accordance with the decree of 2 February. Yet fighting the king was impossible: the few officers willing to uphold the
Constitution by force could not answer for the loyalty of their subordinates, whilst the much-vaunted National Guard existed only on paper. As for conciliation, a group of deputies sent to see the monarch was denied access to his
person, stripped of its escort, and turned loose to make its way home as best it could. On the night of 10–11 May, then, the king’s forces entered the capital without resistance. With many of the leading liberals under arrest and
all the measures taken by the cortes proclaimed to be null and void, absolutism had been restored.

 To these events there was no opposition. Delighted at the downfall of the liberals, whom they regarded as not just ingrates, but dangerous revolutionaries bent on attacking the whole of the social order, Wellington and Henry
Wellesley made no move to assist their erstwhile tormentors. In the army faint stirrings of resistance in the garrison of Cádiz and the Third and Fourth Armies came to nothing. And, from one end of Spain to the other, jefes
políticos, constitutional ayuntamientos and provincial diputacíones were ejected from power in scenes reminiscent of the rising of May 1808. Thus, in Astorga a copy of the Constitution was ceremonially burned in the presence of
an ecstatic crowd in the main square; in Málaga a portrait of Fernando VII was paraded through the streets to the sound of artillery salvos; and in Oviedo and many other cities the tablet proclaiming the main square to be the
‘Plaza de la Constitución’ – a name imposed on every plaza mayor in Spain – was torn down and broken into fragments. Greeted though they were with immense popular jubilation, for the most part these events were carefully
orchestrated – in Granada, for example, the popular revolt that swept away the city’s authorities on 17 May was organised by a cabal that included representatives of the garrison, the local clergy and nobility – and, perhaps
because of this, there were far fewer dead than in 1808. As for repression, this, too, was patchy, with the number of those arrested varying dramatically from region to region, many of those who had collaborated with the liberals
in practice encountering little difficulty in finding a niche in the new order, and formal executions few and far between. But even so things were severe enough, Fernando earning a reputation for cruelty which was to dog him for
the rest of his life and far beyond.