

 This, perhaps, is to go too far. Clearly, French embarrassment in Spain did nothing to hinder Allied coalition building in 1813, whilst the complete elimination of Joseph Bonaparte at Vitoria relieved Britain of the need to get
the Austrians, Russians and Prussians to recognise Fernando VII as king of Spain. But it is still difficult to accept the idea that events in the Peninsula had any major influence on the way in which the so-called ‘War of
Liberation’ was actually conducted. In Prussia, certainly, the declaration of war on Napoleon was accompanied by a degree of popular mobilisation that was wholly unprecedented amongst the eastern powers, whilst the defection of
most of the states of the Confederation of the Rhine to the Allied cause in the course of the autumn of 1813 was accompanied by measures of much the same sort. Thus, universal conscription and various forms of militias and home
guards were very much the order of the day, whilst use was also made of guerrilla warfare and attempts to stir up popular insurrection. To say that the Peninsular War played no part in this would be foolish – many of the
architects of the new Prussian army, in particular, had been deeply influenced by the Spanish model – but this is not the issue. Rather, what is striking is the obvious want of enthusiasm of the German rulers for such methods,
which were in effect adopted faute de mieux, and, still more, the manner in which the rest of the Allied forces were completely untouched by the new developments. Add to this the general lack of popular enthusiasm for the
struggle, and the influence of the Peninsula tends to look slight.

 Once he had been beaten in Germany in 1813, Napoleon really had only one hope of survival short of accepting the compromise peace that at this point was still on offer, and that was to mobilise France herself for total war in a
manner that had not been seen since the heroic days of 1793 in the hope that resistance might be prolonged long enough for the many fissures in the Allied camp to undermine its commitment to the common cause. In this, however,
Napoleon was foiled by a combination of massive popular resistance to the enormous levies that the policy required and the wholesale withdrawal of the co-operation of the governing classes. Only here is it clear that the
Peninsular War really did have a major influence on the situation. From 1808 until 1812 the struggle in Spain and Portugal had necessitated a very high level of conscription, but, although this was deeply resented, the régime had
proved more than capable of imposing its will, maintaining a reasonable degree of order and, by extension, retaining the loyalty of the élites. After 1812, however, the situation changed. With the aid of the wider empire, it had
proved possible both to maintain a substantial army in the Peninsula and to amass a large field force in eastern Europe without pushing the situation too far in France. Such were the demands that Napoleon made of his home base in
1813 and 1814, however, that the imperial system simply broke down, the emperor in the end being left all but alone. Yet even this does not make the Peninsular War a major factor in Napoleon’s downfall. What broke the emperor in
the end was his refusal to accept that there were limits to the capacities of his administration, his army, his subordinates and his own generalship. More simply still, victory in Spain and Portugal implied a restraint in the
rest of Europe that Napoleon was incapable of delivering.