

 To regard the Peninsular War as a key factor in the defeat of the Napoleonic empire is therefore to miss the point. What cannot be denied, however, is the massive importance of the struggle in the modern history of Spain and
Portugal. For both states the years from 1808 to 1814 constituted a truly horrible experience. Trade and industry had been ravaged, and, in the Spanish case, the vital link with America in large part broken. Towns and cities had
been repeatedly sacked and in some cases literally reduced to ruin. Famine, epidemic and massacre had stalked the land. The countryside had been pillaged unmercifully, subjected to a process of destabilising social change and
plunged into anarchy. And, to cap it all, such means as existed of palliating the situation in human terms – above all, the Church – had been stripped both of their resources and, in many cases, their very capacity to operate.
For the population of the Peninsula, the consequences were well-nigh apocalyptic. Misery was general, whilst the number of those who died in Spain alone may well have numbered more than a million. In some areas the percentage of
the population that was lost may well have been even higher than the ten per cent which this implies: round Tarragona, for example, the population of most towns and villages declined by between one quarter and one third, although
at least a part of this loss may be attributed to flight rather than mortality.

 If all this was not grim enough, in both Spain and Portugal the legacy of the conflict was almost certain to be civil war. Beginning with the former, the period 1808–14 is regarded as one of the defining moments of modern
Spanish history. Not only did the conflict with the French provide a myth that was to become a central feature of political debate, but from it there are supposed to have emerged two Spains – the one clerical, absolutist and
reactionary, and the other secular, constitutional and progressive – whose mutual incompatibility was to plunge the country into a prolonged era of confrontation and civil conflict. Such a picture is far too simplistic, however:
closer examination shows the ‘two Spains’ to have been far less well-defined than this allows. Ideologically speaking, the liberals may have more or less conformed to the conventional stereotype, but their opponents were rather
divided into different positions of which one stood for the perpetuation of eighteenth-century enlightened absolutism, and the other for a monarchy stripped of its Bourbon reformism that would only be absolute to the extent that
it allowed the Church, aristocracy, and other corporations the untrammelled enjoyment of their privileges.

 It is not enough, however, to talk even of three Spains. Caught between these forces was an increasingly radicalised populacho that identified with no goals more complicated than peace, bread and access to the land, and was as
hostile to the ‘freedom’ of the liberals as it was to the ‘chains’ of the antiguo régimen. Loyal to none of the contending tendencies, the populace were open to manipulation by all three of them, whilst at the same time pursuing
a dimly perceived agenda of their own, the popular disturbances and cheering crowds that greeted the return of Fernando VII being at one and the same time the product of bribery and coercion, a vague belief that somehow el rey
deseado would put all to rights, and a swelling mood of protest that was but little connected with the cause of absolutism.