

 But numbers were not everything. The army of 1808 suffered from numerous defects. Recruited from a mixture of foreign deserters and mercenaries, volunteers, and criminals, vagrants and unemployed labourers who had been pressed
as levas, all of whom served for eight years, the army was composed of two regiments of guard infantry, two regiments of guard cavalry, thirty-nine regiments of line infantry, six regiments of Swiss infantry, twelve regiments of
light infantry, forty-three regiments of provincial militia, twelve regiments of heavy cavalry, eight regiments of dragoons, four regiments of light cavalry, four regiments of artillery and a single regiment of sappers and
miners. To explain Spain’s repeated defeats in the war that followed, much scorn has traditionally been heaped upon the officer corps. However, rather more important were certain defects in the army’s organisation.

 First and foremost there was the question of its cavalry. Always a major strike force in Napoleonic warfare, in Spain cavalry acquired still greater importance because of the rolling plains which covered so much of the country.
In the years prior to 1808, however, a variety of problems – amongst others, the parsimony resulting from years of building up the navy at the expense of the army, and the shortage of decent horses discussed at greater length
next – had led to the cavalry being allowed to constitute a rather smaller proportion of the army than was the case elsewhere, whilst the 26 regiments that it did have were not only, like the rest of the army, short of men, but
possessed only about half the 18,000 horses that they needed. As if this was not bad enough, centuries of mule-breeding had both ruined the quality and reduced the numbers of the mounts available. No matter whether it was
classified as light or heavy cavalry, as dragoons or chasseurs, or as line or élite, Spain’s cavalry was unlikely to be able to make much of an impact on the battlefield.

 Stronger than the cavalry though they were, the artillery and infantry also had their difficulties. Thus, although it was well trained and equipped with the French Gribeauval system of howitzers and field pieces – reckoned the
best in the world – the artillery, too, was plagued by the question of animals. Except in the case of the horse artillery – which was little better off than the cavalry – the teams needed to move the guns were only recruited on
mobilisation, whilst the lack of horses ensured that they tended to be composed of mules and oxen, both of which were slow and hard to manage. There being no corps of artillery drivers, the teams had also to be conducted by
civilians who were all too prone to absconding with their beasts as soon as danger threatened. As for the infantry, it was organised on an obsolescent model that separated light from line and thereby ensured that there were
rarely adequate numbers of troops trained to fight in skirmish order at the right place at the right time. * All this admitted, however, the army of 1808 was no worse than many other forces of the period, most of its difficulties
revolving around the military and political situation that emerged when war finally broke out. How, though, did war come about? At this point we must return to the aftermath of the Dos de Mayo. Shocked and bewildered by what had
happened, scores of refugees were soon fleeing the capital for the provinces, and it was therefore not long before the story of the rising had spread throughout the country. Still more dramatically, meanwhile, a chance meeting
between two senior officials in the town of Mostóles twelve miles to the south of Madrid led to the issue of a general call to arms that was quickly transmitted throughout Extremadura and western Andalucía.