

 The Peninsular War, then, gave birth to the violence and popular antagonism that, along with military intervention in politics, were to be nineteenth-century Spain’s most pronounced characteristics. As for Portugal her position
was only marginally more favourable. Revolt having failed to spread to Brazil, there was no colonial struggle to be waged, whilst there had been no attempt at political revolution. Yet even so the absolutist state faced precisely
the same dilemmas as its Spanish counterpart, whilst in the devastated metropolis immense resentment was caused by the decision of the Regent, Prince João – from 1816 João VI – to remain in comfortable Rio de Janeiro in 1814.
With matters far from helped by continued British domination in matters military and commercial, absolutism was overthrown in 1820 and João forced to return to Lisbon, but the price was the loss of Brazil in 1822, whilst it again
cost a series of civil wars before the cause of traditionalism was destroyed.

 A side-show in terms of the Napoleonic Wars, the Peninsular War was therefore a seminal event in the history of Spain and Portugal. Economically and financially devastating, it was the direct cause of the collapse of their
American empires (at least, on the mainland, Spain holding on to Cuba and Puerto Rico until 1898) whilst in Spain’s case it shattered the last vestiges of her claim to be a great power on the European stage. Cruelly exposing the
limitations of eighteenth-century enlightened absolutism, it also dealt a heavy blow to the pretensions of the Church and the nobility. Thus, the former had suffered appalling losses in terms of its personnel – as many as one
third of the clergy may have died or been killed in the struggle – and been stripped of a considerable part of its physical presence in much of Spain, whilst desamortización, hostility to the tithes and the demands of French and
Patriots alike for money had left it denuded of resources. As for the nobility, its hold on rural society had at the very least been severely shaken, whilst the return of absolutism failed to bring with it the full restoration of
señorialismo that they had been expecting (in brief, Fernando refused to allow the return of the old manorial courts).

 In the long run, all this ensured that the war ushered in an age of liberalism whose foundation was the Constitution of 1812. At the heart of the new dispensation was a serious mismatch between rhetoric and reality, however.
Confronted by the resistance of bureaucratic absolutism on the one hand and reactionary traditionalism on the other, men such as Quintana and Flórez Estrada, who were the advocates of the new era, always argued that the people of
Spain and Portugal had fought the French out of a desire not to preserve the chains of the past, but to reclaim the liberty which they had lost through centuries of despotism. From this it followed that the people might have been
expected to secure some material benefit from their sacrifices, but this in fact was not so, the liberals offering the populacho nothing – even the abolition of señorialismo was framed in such terms that it was worth very little
– and in practice regarding them with contempt. With much of the populace already exhibiting a yearning, however vague and inchoate, for social justice, thus were sown the seeds of still more conflicts, including, most obviously,
the terrible disaster of the Spanish Civil War.