

 Much of the sting might have been taken out of the situation had civilian notables enjoyed a reasonable degree of access to the officer corps, and, in particular, its senior ranks. This, however, was not the case. Unless the
would-be entrant was prepared to serve a long and difficult apprenticeship in the rank and file in the hope of one day making the rank of sergeant and thereby gaining access to the hypothetical possibility of promotion from the
ranks, the only means of becoming an officer was to seek a position as a cadet. Prospective cadets had to demonstrate that they were of noble origin, but in itself this was no great problem, as most of those involved were
hijosdalgo (approximately five per cent of the population could claim to be nobles at the end of the eighteenth century, including many of the families who made up the heart of what was to become the Spanish bourgeoisie). Rather,
the issue was what happened after the ranks of the officer corps had been entered. Except in the artillery, where promotion was traditionally by seniority, what counted was favour, and, in particular, favour at court. Whilst it
would be wrong to imagine that all officers above a certain rank were members of the titled nobility, the result was none the less a situation of considerable disequality in which young men from favoured families could be
generals by their mid-twenties whilst others soldiered on as perpetual subalterns. Meanwhile, promotion was slowed down still further by the facts, first, that there were too many officers; second, that many officers were awarded
brevet ranks, or grados, that effectively gave them first call on such vacancies as became available; and, third, that officers were not just competing with colleagues in their own units, it being very common for officers on
their way up to be transferred from one unit to another.

 If all this was irritating to civilian notables eager to reinforce the position of their families by acquiring access to the military estate – an issue which the problems and opportunities engendered by the French Wars made
still more pressing – it was even more so to the many officers who found themselves trapped in the lower ranks of the line regiments. * Forbidden to marry until they reached the rank of captain and left to vegetate in miserable
provincial towns, they were forced to watch whilst their more fortunate fellows gravitated to comfortable postings in Madrid, or secured prolonged leaves of absence. To add insult to injury subaltern officers were both ill paid
and hard hit by the soaring inflation that Spain had been experiencing even before 1792. ‘Prices have reached such a level’, it was complained, ‘that for some time the officer has not been able to subsist on the pay which is
accorded him’. 9

 The army, then, was deeply divided, but this was not the end to the problems that beset the body politic. Setting aside the somewhat similar difficulties that beset officialdom in general, the years prior to 1808 had witnessed
the emergence of an aristocratic and ecclesiastical faction dedicated to reversing the reforms introduced over the years by the Bourbon monarchy. For this group Aranjuez had represented a great triumph and they were naturally
concerned to perpetuate their influence whilst at the same time eradicating all those who could be regarded either as allies of reform or partisans of Godoy. At the opposite end of the spectrum there existed a very different
current of opinion. A loose clique of noblemen, academics, churchmen, officials and entrepreneurs, these men looked not backwards but forwards, favouring an intensification of reform and, in particular, greater desamortización.
As yet far from being consciously revolutionary, they were nevertheless both eager to play a part in affairs and ready to steer them in a direction that fitted with their views.