

 If a variety of interest groups existed that in one way or another resented or were seeking to challenge the political order, the picture is further complicated by the fact that the arbitrary character of the Spanish
administration in general, and of the régime of Godoy in particular, ensured that the country was filled with individuals who had some real or imagined grievance against the authorities. Whether they were merchants who had gone
bankrupt or been imprisoned for fraud, churchmen denied a benefice, or young men disappointed in their search for office, all of them had every reason to leap at any chance of revenge that offered itself.

 It was precisely that chance that now emerged. To return to the authorities, the brief interim that divided the arrival of the French in Madrid from the departure of Fernando for Bayonne had, of course, been characterised by a
concerted attempt to win over Napoleon. Every effort had been made to maintain order and reassure the populace, and it was only when it finally became apparent that things were going wrong that the Junta de Gobierno became more
obstructive. By then, however, the fact that Fernando was firmly in the power of the French made it difficult for the Junta to do more than adopt delaying tactics and deliver ineffectual protests: indeed, the first message that
the new king sent it from Bayonne specifically ordered it to do nothing that might endanger his safety. Utterly bewildered, the Junta requested clearer instructions and in the meantime decreed the formation of a committee of
generals and bureaucrats that could take its place were it to be arrested, but its hesitant progress towards a breach with the French had not gone very far before Madrid erupted in revolt.

 The Dos de Mayo therefore rendered the position of the authorities quite impossible. Having hitherto done their best to maintain order – at Aranjuez the raiders had even been faced down with the aid of Spanish troops – they
appeared to have been a party not just to manoeuvres against the Bourbon monarchy, but also to what was being widely represented as premeditated massacre. With the Junta even now making strenuous efforts to ensure that the
populace kept quiet, the way had been opened for a massive settling of accounts. To understand what followed, it is important to realise that Spain was not completely occupied. On the contrary, although some 90,000 French troops
were currently in the country, these were for the most part concentrated along an axis that stretched from Toledo through Madrid, Aranda de Duero, Burgos, Victoria, Pamplona and San Sebastián to the French frontier at Irun. Thus,
the area around Madrid and Toledo was held by the Second Corps of Observation of the Gironde and the Corps of Observation of the Ocean Coast under Dupont and Moncey; the capital itself by the detachment of the Imperial Guard
attached to Murat; and Burgos, Alava, northern Navarre and Guipúzcoa by the Corps of Observation of the Western Pyrenees under Marshal Bessières. Otherwise, apart from Barcelona and Figueras, which was garrisoned by the newly
promoted Corps of Observation of the Eastern Pyrenees under General Duhesme, Spain was entirely free of occupation, and, what is more, possessed of substantial armed forces. Some of the Spanish forces were still in Portugal,
true, whilst others were stationed in areas controlled by the French or absent in Denmark under the command of La Romana, but, even so, at least 100,000 men were ready for action.