

===== FILE: OEBPS/xhtml/chapter2.xhtml =====
The Peninsular War

 2

 Madrid

 THE IBERIAN INSURRECTIONS, MAY–JUNE 1808

 The men knelt together in the mild, spring night. One, a friar, bent forward in prayer. Before them loomed the shadowy figures of the firing squad, their greatcoats faintly luminous in the moonlight. A shouted order and a dozen
muskets were levelled at the prisoners. At that moment there came a sudden movement. Straightening up, a man at the front of the group flung his arms wide, looked his killers full in the face, and opened his mouth one last time.
Too late: the volley crashed out, and the huddled victims were flung back by the impact of the musket balls. What, the officer in command wondered, had the fellow been about to shout: an accusation, a plea for mercy, a scream of
defiance? He would never know, and did not especially care either: all round the royal palace looming dark against the pre-dawn sky behind him, all along the narrow streets that led to the heart of the city, were strewn the dead
of the day’s fighting, and there were other executions to attend to yet. It was 3 May 1808.

 Immortalised by Goya, this snapshot of the executions that took place at the Montaña del Príncipe Pío on the outskirts of Madrid in the wake of the dramatic rising of the Dos de Mayo had tremendous significance. The very
ambiguity of its central figure is an arresting metaphor of the response of the Spanish people to the Napoleonic invasion, which, as we shall see, was much more complex than has generally been depicted. Nevertheless, the killings
of 2 and 3 May were to reverberate around Spain in dramatic fashion, and in the process to usher in war and revolution alike.

 The rising of the Dos de Mayo, of course, was hardly unexpected. Ever since the motín de Aranjuez Spain had been in ferment: attacks on godoyistas were frequent, whilst the failure of the French explicitly to recognise Fernando
caused much discontent and in particular gave rise to the suspicion that they intended to bring back the favourite. In consequence, it was not very long before discontent raised its head. In Vitoria, for example, an angry crowd
made a desperate attempt to prevent the king’s departure for the French frontier, whilst the publication of Carlos IV’s protest against his abdication caused a serious riot in Madrid. Meanwhile, a captain named Mottet was
murdered in the madrileño village of Carabanchel Alto on 12 April by the priest on whom he was billeted, whilst Burgos saw a veritable precursor of the Dos de Mayo:

 I was just going to make a sketch … of the beautiful bas-relief on the gate of the bridge, when I heard the cry, ‘Death to the French!’ and several musket shots. I ran as fast as I could to the guard in the Plaza Mayor, where
our troops were under arms and ready for battle … We lost a few men from cross shots, but the shots fired by the … crowd, which charged us at a run, exhausted their ammunition … whilst our repeated orderly discharges … soon swept
the place clear of our assailants. 1