

 But did the people of Spain and Portugal fight in the manner in which their self-appointed champions alleged? On few areas of the conflict is further research more necessary, but it is all too clear that patterns of popular
motivation and involvement in the struggle were, to say the least, much more complex than has generally been assumed. At certain times and in certain places, the French did find themselves facing a people’s war of the sort that
has so often been pictured, but the general picture that emerges is one of apathy and disaffection. Guerrilla warfare was a more acceptable alternative than enlistment in the regular armies, certainly, but for many of the
partidas it is clear that what this meant was essentially pillage, extortion and highway robbery. This, of course, did not mean that the French and their supporters were never attacked, but what it does mean is that in the last
resort they were often purely incidental targets – indeed, even secondary ones. Where guerrilla warfare was effective – and in much of northern Spain it was extremely effective – it therefore tended to be the work of either
forces of the much derided regular army, or bands of irregulars that had been fully militarised.

 Yet in the last resort, perhaps, the issue is irrelevant. Whether the forces that infested the countryside were gangs of bandits – as the French, in fact, always claimed – or guerrilla bands, they always had to be held down by
enormous forces of regular troops. The problem was not in abstract terms an insuperable one – by 1808 the French had considerable experience of insurrectionary warfare whilst they proved capable of making progress even in the
Peninsula – but so long as the invaders were also faced by substantial regular resistance, they could have no real hope of restoring order. In short, there is no reason to take exception with the generally accepted dictum that
the French were defeated in the Peninsula by a combination of regular and irregular warfare, although much scope exists for greater recognition of the contribution of Spain’s regular troops to this combination. What is less
clear, however, is the issue of whether or not the invaders could have ever won. Setting aside the sine qua non of peace in the rest of Europe, even had they been reduced to Cádiz and Lisbon alone, it is unclear that the Spanish
and Portuguese governments would ever have surrendered, for, as Graham wrote, ‘We never can have such allies again, bad as their conduct has often been, and … much as we have daily reason to complain of it.’ 28 Meanwhile, in
Wellington the Allies possessed a field commander of almost unequalled calibre. Thanks to his prescience, the French faced a very difficult task, as well as the constant risk that any error that they made would be ruthlessly
exploited. But even Wellington was not operating in a vacuum. As many as half his forces were drawn from the remodelled Portuguese army, whilst it is doubtful that even the Lines of Torres Vedras could have saved the Allied cause
from the consequences of the collapse of Spanish resistance or the rupture in Anglo-Spanish relations that so often seemed a possibility. Underlying everything, too, was the willingness of the politicians who made up the
Portland, Perceval and Liverpool administrations to risk their reputations on a struggle that until quite late on seemed a dubious enterprise, not to mention the loyal support they gave a commander who consistently underestimated
their problems, rarely let them into his plans and was always quick to find fault with their efforts. Victory in the Peninsula was therefore political and diplomatic as much as it was military. Hence the need for a history that
has attempted to be something other than a mere list of battles.