

 Within a matter of days, therefore, most of mainland Spain knew of the Dos de Mayo. Had what followed genuinely been the spontaneous movement beloved of the traditional account, the country should have sprung to arms straight
away, but nothing of the sort occurred. There were a number of disturbances, true, the places affected including Ciudad Rodrigo, Córdoba and Oviedo, but the populace was still interested in little more than rooting out the
supposed partisans of Godoy and providing against a surprise attack. At all events, attempts actually to raise a revolt against the French proved abortive: in Extremadura the acting Captain General, the Conde del Torre del
Fresno, and the commander of the Spanish division withdrawn by Godoy from the Alentejo, the Marqués del Socorro, called the populace to arms only to be resolutely ignored; an attempt on the part of Asturias’ medieval estates to
do the same broke down in disorder; and plans on the part of the Captain General of the Campo del Gibraltar, Francisco Javier Castaños, to declare war at the head of his 9,000 troops were abandoned after a much disillusioned
Socorro, who had taken refuge in Cádiz rather than resume his duties as Captain General of Seville, warned him to keep quiet.

 Socorro, Torre del Fresno and Castaños aside, the authorities remained supine. Shaken though they were by Bayonne and the Dos de Mayo, they were not prepared to champion a war against the French, reasoning that the only results
would be, first, a bloodbath, and, second, an intolerable threat to the social order. Though some little time was required to act upon it – hence the delay that ensued before the pot finally boiled over – for the numerous ‘out’
groups that littered Spanish society and politics, this was a godsend. In brief, all over Spain a variety of forces came together to organise a rising, though few of the conspiratorial cells that emerged were operating in
anything other than a vacuum. In every place, indeed, the plan was to ‘pronounce’ against the French and hope that the rest of the country would accept the leadership of the conspirators. Only in Valencia, Oviedo, Seville,
Zaragoza and Tenerife, however, is it possible to reconstruct the genesis of the revolt.

 Taking Valencia first of all, there emerged a conspiratorial group consisting of Vicente, Manuel and Mariano Bertrán de Lis, all of whom were leading members of a powerful merchant family with important interests in the grain
trade, several subaltern officers, a doctor and a cleric. In Oviedo, meanwhile, the lead was taken by a group that included the president of the provincial estates, two canons of the cathedral, a number of middle-ranking
officials, and several local notables who were to become leading liberals (the most important were Agustín Argüelles and the Conde de Toreno). In Seville the chief figures were a failed merchant named Nicolás Tap y Núñez who had
just been released from prison and blamed Godoy for his incarceration, a grandee named the Conde de Tilly, and two officials of the cathedral chapter. In Zaragoza we have José Palafox, a prominent local noble with a commission in
the king’s personal bodyguard and strong links with the party of aristocratic reaction, several local nobles, the respected merchant, Lorenzo Calvo de Rozas, and the officers who commanded the Zaragoza element of the resguardo (a
polyglot assembly of local security forces). And in Tenerife the leader was the Captain General’s deputy, Carlos O’Donnell, an ambitous malcontent who had acquired a deep hatred for his superior, saw revolt as the best means of
escaping accusations of godoyismo, and had no difficulty in winning over a number of officers of the garrison and local notables bent on high office.