

 Quickly becoming disgusted with the disorderly nature of his companions, the nineteen-year-old Alcalá Galiano returned to his house. It was as well for him that he did. Outside the palace, the insurgents proved no match for
Murat’s guardsmen and were quickly put to flight. The rebellion, indeed, was doomed, for columns of French troops were soon pouring into the city from all sides. For a description of the scenes that took place, we have no better
source than Blanco White:

 The main column came up the Calle Mayor, whose four- and five-storey houses afforded the inhabitants the best possible means of venting their fury on the French soldiers without exposing themselves to their arms. Those who had
muskets fired from the windows, and the rest threw down tiles, bricks and heavy pieces of furniture. 4

 Advancing along the main streets, the invaders steadily drove the crowds back towards the central square known as the Puerta del Sol. Attacked from several directions at once by both infantry and cavalry, those defenders who had
not already melted away were then overwhelmed. All that was left thereafter was a small group of soldiers and civilians who had seized control of the army’s main artillery depot under the command of two junior officers named
Daoíz and Velarde, but, after putting up a gallant fight, these diehards, too, were wiped out. By two o’clock in the afternoon, all was quiet. Some 200 Spaniards lay dead, perhaps the same number had been wounded, and 300 more,
most of them prisoners taken in the fighting, were executed during the night. As for the occupiers, their losses had been 31 dead and 114 wounded.

 Thus ended the famous revolt of the Dos de Mayo. As far as such tumults went, it had not been particularly impressive, but for all that it was to have profound effects. In the first place, the fighting was replete with images of
popular heroism and French brutality: many of the insurgents had fought with little more than their bare hands; the dead included a number of women, including, most famously, a young girl named Manuela Malasaña who was shot dead
at the artillery depot; and it was rumoured that even possessing a pair of scissors had been enough to procure a death sentence. As Foy admits, ‘Among those who were condemned were men who had not fought, and whose only crime was
that of having had about them large knives, or other sharp instruments. They were executed without the assistance of a priest … a circumstance which still more exasperated a religious people.’ 5 In the second, the story got about
that the affair had been a premeditated attempt to massacre the entire population of Madrid. And in the third, the revolt discredited much of the political apparatus of Bourbon Spain at a stroke.

 So important is this development that it must be discussed at some length. When Fernando departed for Bayonne he had left behind a structure of government headed by the Junta de Gobierno. Originally presided over by Fernando’s
uncle, the Infante Don Antonio, it was composed of the ministers who had been appointed by the new king to head the five ministries – Foreign Affairs, War, Finance, Navy, and Grace and Justice – which since the reign of Carlos
III had constituted the heart of the Spanish administration. Uncomfortably coexistent with the departments over which these five officials presided were the organs through which Spain had been governed prior to their formation,
including most notably the Councils of Castile, the Indies, War, the Admiralty, the Treasury, the Military Orders, and the Inquisition. Lower down the scale this duplication was perpetuated in that Spain was divided into both
thirty-two provinces, each headed by a Treasury official known as an Intendent, and fourteen military regions, each headed by a Viceroy, Captain General or Commandant General. * Most important towns were controlled by powerful
magistrates known as corregidores, whilst mention ought also to be made of the various regional courts of justice and councils of administration, the most important of these being the Chancellories of Granada and Valladolid and
the Audiences of Galicia, Seville, Aragón, Catalonia, Asturias and Extremadura. In the short time that Fernando had been upon the throne before he left for Bayonne, there had been little chance to make any significant changes in
the thousands of officials and army officers who staffed this system. New heads had been found for all the ministries; the Duque de Infantado appointed president of the Council of Castile; an old enemy of Godoy, the tough and
experienced Gregorio García de la Cuesta, had been made Captain General of Old Castile; and a few officials driven from their posts by popular fury. Otherwise, however, the system was entirely unchanged.