

 In the current climate the fact that the administration was still permeated by godoyismo could not but render it extremely suspect. Adding fuel to the flames were at several other problems. Foremost of these was the manner in
which the provincial administration was effectively headed by the army. Thus, the Captains General presided over the Chancellories and Audiences and played a prominent role in their discussions; responsible for its supply, the
Intendents were closely linked with the army, wore uniform and were paid the same honours as senior officers; and many corregidores were officers who were at the same time the military governors – in effect, Captains General in
miniature – of the towns to which they were appointed. With senior generals traditionally occupying many positions of state and the officer corps possessed of a large number of fiscal and legal privileges known as the fuero
militar, Spain genuinely appeared a military monarchy. Well, then, might Jacob write, ‘The power which the governor of Cádiz possessed … was so considerable that it more resembled the authority of an individual sovereign than the
delegate of a king of Spain’, or Swinburne that the Marqués de la Mina ‘governed Catalonia … more like an independent sovereign than like a subject invested with a delegated authority’. 6

 If this was the case, it was no accident: having come to the throne by force, the Bourbons were intimately linked with the army, whilst, like all eighteenth-century absolutists, they had found it exceedingly useful in their
constant struggle to undermine the independence of the privileged orders. However, in a number of ways the results were counterproductive. The Bourbon army had indeed played a significant role in subordinating the nobility and
eroding provincial privilege (for the extension of conscription to areas such as Navarre and Catalonia had been an important tool of centralisation), but the privileges heaped upon the officer corps ensured that it generated
considerable friction. Officers were able largely to escape the ordinary civil and ecclesiastical courts, impose military justice on most of those caught up in disputes with them, and generally take first place in a society
obsessed with status: aside from taking precedence at all civic and religious functions, they possessed the right to wear uniforms and swords and were generally credited with having the pick of the cortejo system. * As Townsend
wrote, ‘The principal cortejos in the great cities are the canons of the cathedrals, but where the military reside they take their choice and leave the refuse for the Church.’ 7 Given that the eighteenth century was a time of
increasing prosperity in which the American trade had brought great wealth to many families, many civilian notables had come to regard them with jealousy and desire a share in their good fortune, and all the more so as many
officers affected a most arrogant demeanour. Symbolic of this jealousy was the emergence of gentlemen’s fashions of a type that aped officers’ uniforms, ‘without which’, wrote Blanco White, ‘a well-born Spaniard is almost ashamed
to show himself’. 8 Also visible was a growing belief that a standing army was an economic burden, a danger to public morality – soldiers were regarded as drunken, diseased and brutal louts who corrupted all those with whom they
came into contact – and an endless source of provocation to the populacho. And, with official hostility to all forms of provincial particularism growing, in Asturias, Navarre and the three Basque señorios, † the army’s role in
crushing Catalan self-government in the early eighteenth century could not be forgotten.