

 A conflagration was inevitable, and all the more so in Madrid with its excitable and xenophobic gangs of majos and majas. The city’s mood was caught by the later dissident, José María Blanco y Crespo (better known by his nom
d’exil of Joseph Blanco White):

 The wildest schemes for the destruction of the French division at Madrid were canvassed almost in public and with very little reserve … Short pikes headed with a sharp cutting crescent were to be distributed to the spectators
who used to range themselves behind the cavalry. At one signal the horses were to be houghed with these instruments and the infantry attacked with poignards. To remonstrate against such absurd and visionary plans … was not only
useless but dangerous. 2

 By the beginning of May rumours were spreading through the streets that the Junta de Gobierno – the council of regency left behind by Fernando – was being pressurised into sending the last members of the royal family to Bayonne.
Serious disturbances took place at Aranjuez on 1 May, and the appearance of two carriages before the royal palace the next day was therefore enough to draw a large crowd. Whipped to a frenzy by the sight of Carlos IV’s youngest
son, Francisco de Paula, it fell upon an aide-de-camp of Marshal Murat named Auguste Lagrange who had ridden up to assess the situation. Well aware of what was going on – his headquarters was only a few hundred yards away – Murat
now took action. Mobilising the nearest available troops – a detachment of the Imperial Guard which he had been given as a personal escort – he ordered them to clear the scene. A few moments later a thunderous discharge rang out,
and ten Spaniards lay dead or wounded on the cobbles, the survivors of the crowd hastily dispersing in search of shelter.

 Within minutes of the sound of gunfire, the streets were full of confused and angry citizens. Catching up whatever weapons they could lay their hands on, they quickly fell on those Frenchmen unfortunate enough to be caught in
the city (of which there were very few, almost all Murat’s 10,000 troops being encamped in the surrounding open country). Something of the atmosphere that reigned in the city is conveyed by Antonio Alcalá Galiano:

 I was getting dressed when my mother came in looking frightened. All she said to me were the … words, ‘It has begun’. * There was no need to say what it was she was talking about … In a moment, having got dressed anyhow, I was
in the street … Scattered shots began to be heard in the distance … On all sides bands of people were beginning to come together, although they were armed in such a ridiculous fashion that they had to be crazy to think that they
could do away with French soldiers. I joined one that was led by a young lad who was some sort of artisan … and we headed for the Calle de Fuencarral. But some of them were insisting that we should go to the barracks and join the
troops, and others that we should fall upon the French straight away … In sum, it was a case of regulars versus guerrillas. 3