

 Examples of the first pattern that can be picked out from what may be described as the first wave of risings – those that took place without any knowledge of revolt elsewhere – include Cartagena and Valencia (23 May), Zaragoza
and Murcia (24 May) and León (27 May). Thus, in Cartagena red cockades – the traditional badge of the Bourbon monarchy – were handed out to the people, and the garrison brought out in support of the rising, whereupon the Captain
General (in this instance a naval officer, Cartagena being the capital of one of Spain’s three naval departments) and the military governor were arrested, and a provincial junta established under a prominent admiral. In Zaragoza,
meanwhile, where José Palafox had been hiding out at a property belonging to his family outside the city, the conspirators’ agents were easily able to steer the crowds into calling for him to lead them, whereupon a delegation was
sent to bring him back to the city, the Captain General imprisoned, and the young guards officer installed as de facto dictator. That the whole affair was got up from the start is confirmed by the tone of Palafox’s memoirs.
Written in the third person, these describe how he was meditating on what best to do, when he suddenly heard ‘a multitude of armed civilians’ coming towards his hiding-place. For a moment he believed all was lost, but ‘what was
his surprise when, surrounding the house, the crowd found out that Palafox was there, and began to fire their fowling pieces in the air at the joy of the discovery’. Very soon, all was well:

 Bathed in tears at the terrible fate of their king, the men declared their firm resolution to avenge that atrocious perfidy and … sacrifice everything they had rather than recognise the usurper. Unable to speak for the emotion,
joy and love that he felt, Palafox could not withstand these honourable patriots’ demands for him to place himself at their head and lead them in their noble attempt to … free the fatherland. 11

 In Valencia, by contrast, the conspirators faced somewhat greater difficulties. As one of their leaders wrote:

 Without any clear idea of what to do, the people roamed in great masses through every district of the city, crying, ‘Death to the traitors! Death to Napoleon! Long live Fernando VII, our religion and our fatherland!’ They moved
like the waves of the sea, without object or concert; everything was confusion and disorder; they had no leader to guide them; every person had a different rumour to relate, and nobody could come to an agreement as to what to do,
although everybody was filled with the same sentiments and working for the same goal. 12

 Apparently taken by surprise, they were only able to take control of the crowds with some difficulty, and even then only at the cost of admitting to their ranks a number of brazen adventurers. Alarmed at the threatening
demeanour of the populacho, they also had little option but to accept the assimilation of the old order with the new, the provincial junta that was eventually formed consisting not just of the conspirators, but also of the
Captain General, the Intendent, a number of senior officials of the military and financial administration, and the entire city council. Finally, in Murcia and León, where there were no conspiracies, crowds filled the main squares
baying for the blood of traitors, denouncing desamortización – a particular theme in León – and demanding the proclamation of Fernando VII. The demonstrators were no less radical than their counterparts elsewhere, but with no one
to direct them, the crowds were aimless and confused, with the result that all the authorities had to do to regain control was to proclaim their loyalty to Fernando VII and form provincial juntas that were in reality nothing more
than an agglomeration of the existing organs of political and social power. As to the spirit which motivated them, it was hardly the stuff of legend. Thus: