

 This is not, of course, to say that the situation in Patriot Spain was one of total harmony. In many juntas men who were identifiably liberal in their beliefs sat side-by-side with representatives of both Bourbon reformism and
the political and social opposition which this had provoked, whilst the rising had not put an end to longstanding personal jealousies and family rivalries. If conflict was likely within the ranks of most of the juntas, beyond
them the situation was even worse. Such cities as Zaragoza, Seville and Valencia did not necessarily command the loyalty of all the towns in their sphere of influence (to take one example, the little Aragonese town of Molina was
in theory an independent señorio and therefore rejected the rule of Zaragoza; oddly enough, it does not appear to have joined the rising at all until 18 June). In such cases, it was at least logical that the major cities should
prevail, but what was to be done in Galicia, which was divided into seven separate provinces and possessed at least two possibilities for a capital, or for that matter in New Castile and Catalonia where Madrid and Barcelona were
in the hands of the French? Also likely to cause problems was the position of the army, as in Old Castile where a combination of habit, fear of the mob and Cuesta’s sheer force of character had persuaded the local juntas to
accept his rule. And, last but not least, there also remained the question of the formation of a new central government, much though the Junta of Seville might have liked to consider the question closed in the wake of its
assumption of the title of ‘Supreme Junta of Spain and the Indies’.

 If the new patterns of authority were extremely muddled, certain things are very clear. First and foremost, whether the élites had captained revolt or merely sought to appropriate its leadership, and whether, too, they wished to
continue, intensify or reverse the process of political, social and economic reform that had gripped Spain since 1759, they were at one in recognising that the populace were in a dangerous mood. In many parts of the country,
indeed, the revolt had been accompanied by considerable violence, whilst there had been hundreds of murders. The majority of these, true, had been of French civilians – most of them merchants and their families – who had found
themselves trapped in rebel territory. * Yet many of the dead rather were Spaniards and, what is more, representatives of property, power and authority. Tarred by the brush of treason, the Bourbon authorities were easy targets
for fernandino agitators, mutinous soldiers, or simply angry crowds out to exact revenge on the antiguo régimen. Amongst the dead were several generals (Torre del Fresno in Badajoz, Socorro in Cádiz, Filanghieri in Galicia, Borja
in Cartagena, Cevallos in Valladolid); the governors of Tortosa, Castellón de la Plana, Ciudad Rodrigo and Villafranca de Panadés; the postmaster of Ciudad Rodrigo; the corregidores of Vélez Málaga, Jaén and Madrigal; the
procurador mayor of Seville; the town clerk of Tortosa; and a range of private individuals, from Godoy’s brother-in-law, Pedro Trujillo, through men who had been in one way or another connected with his policies, to prominent
local notables such one Bernabé Portillo, a landowner who had been experimenting with the introduction of cotton-growing in the Málaga area. Also murdered in one or two cases were the wives and even children of the men concerned.
Even joining the rebellion was no protection: Filanghieri and Cevallos both died after they had done so, whilst in Santa Cruz de Tenerife, despite the fact that the Captain General – the Marqués de Casa Cagigal – had declared for
Fernando VII, O’Donnell overthrew him anyway.