

 My wife stayed in Ronda for the first part of the campaign, and did not escape a fright at the hands of popular injustice … One day my house was assaulted by a crowd of vagabonds, who, in spite of her pleas, turned out
everything on the pretext that I had … a guillotine hidden there, the fruit of this patriotic visit being the theft of all my knives, swords and fowling pieces. 20

 Such vigilantism is not to be taken at face value, however. Even if some of the rioters acted in good faith, the general impression is one of agrarian revolt. As the Conde de Noroña lamented of Galicia, ‘Beneath the surface
there burns a spirit of insurrection.’ 21

 From the very beginning, then, the new authorities were faced by a major problem of public order. Impelled though they were by military necessity, their efforts to raise new armies were also intended to contain the mob. At all
events, mobilisation began immediately. All round Spain proclamations were issued calling for volunteers and ordering the conscription of large numbers of men between the ages of sixteen and forty, whilst these were coupled with
a comprehensive attempt to unite the populace behind the struggle. Multifarious in its forms – there were newspapers, poems, odes, ballads, cartoons, pamphlets, plays, posters, proclamations, patriotic addresses, lives of
Napoleon, denunciations of Godoy and even spoof French gazettes – and fuelled by the new authorities, powerful elements of the Church, and hundreds of private individuals driven by idealism or ambition, the main aspects of this
propaganda offensive were simple enough. For most of the reign of Carlos IV, it was argued, Spain had been dominated by a venal and incompetent favourite – ‘a man full of ambition, greed and ineptitude, openly given over to every
vice in the most bare-faced manner’ whose rule was characterised by ‘a badly directed war against France, an onerous peace settlement, the … discredit of the treasury, and a series of shameful misfortunes’. 22 Having brought her
to the brink of ruin and conspired to seize the throne, Godoy had finally betrayed the country to France in a vain attempt to save his skin and prevent the accession to the throne of the best of all possible kings. Meanwhile, in
France there had arisen the person of Napoleon Bonaparte, a cruel and cynical adventurer who had usurped the throne, plunged his country into endless wars of conquest, employed deceit and treachery as an integral part of policy,
enslaved half of Europe, and sought to establish himself as a veritable God upon the earth. ‘In the history of great political revolutions’, wrote Melchor Andario, ‘there is no equal of Bonaparte: he is the greatest monster ever
to have been vomited forth by the anger of heaven to inundate the world with crimes and calamities. In any review of his actions, one stumbles at one moment on the customs of Caligula, at another on the cruelties of Nero.’ 23
Still more explicit was the language of the Juicio Imparcial, Cristiano y Político sobre el Pérfido Cáracter del Emperador de los Franceses: