

 He is, like Attila, the scourge of God … the most terrible gift that … an angry deity could visit upon the earth … He is a monster who wishes to stretch out his sharp claws from east to west and from north to south and rob
everything, destroy everything, annihilate everything. 24

 Determined to eradicate the liberties of a people whose independent spirit offended his megalomania as much as its wealth stimulated his greed, the emperor had seized upon the opening offered him by Godoy’s stupidity, and was
now seeking to enslave the Spaniards as well – it was repeatedly claimed that one of Napoleon’s principal objects was to conscript Spain’s manpower for service in his unhappy legions – whilst at the same time furnishing one more
throne for his insatiable family. Spain, then, was faced by the greatest threat she had ever experienced to her liberty, her religion – much was made of the fact that Napoleon had (supposedly!) freed the Jews, legalised divorce
and publicly flirted with Islam during his stay in Egypt – and her prosperity, whilst she had also been cruelly cheated of the new golden age that would supposedly have been brought by Fernando VII.

 If Spain’s predicament was great, however, she need fear nothing. Thus, having detailed at length the iniquities of Napoleon and Godoy, not to mention the qualities of el rey deseado, the propagandists went on to ridicule the
idea that Napoleon was a military genius and pour scorn upon his armies. Miserable slaves, the latter could not stand before a nation united in enthusiasm for a just and holy cause. And that the nation was united, of course,
there was no doubt: everywhere volunteers were coming forward in their thousands and the new authorities were swamped with donations of every sort. Spain had powerful armed forces and excellent fortresses, whilst she could also
call upon the support of Great Britain – it was not long, as we shall see, before the insurgents had elicited the assistance of London – and an empire that was the source of boundless supplies of bullion. Spanish heroism might
also inspire the rest of Europe to throw off its chains in its turn. Indeed, it might even be hoped that the French would be so horrified by Napoleon’s madness in invading Spain that they would get rid of the tyrant themselves.

 As we shall discover, in the long run these exhortations fell on deaf ears. Yet for various reasons there was initially a rush of volunteers. So grim was Spain’s economic situation that the offer of pay was quite enough to
obtain considerable numbers of recruits. All the more was this the case as the uprising had fallen plumb in the middle of one of the slackest periods of the agricultural year – the long gap between planting and harvest. Landed
proprietors, merchants and master craftsmen could not only cut a patriotic figure by conjuring up large numbers of recruits, but also had many means of forcing the groups who were economically dependent upon them to take up arms.
And finally there was little concept of what was to come: fear of the French, for example, was easy to indulge when all that seemed to be required of a soldier was a few days’ guard duty on the walls of his home town (few
volunteers, let it be said, joined the regular army, most of the men who were forthcoming enlisting in new units that were not only much better paid, but seen primarily as local militias).