

 Wherever we look, then, we see the same thing. Believing that an opportunity was at hand to advance their sectional aims, avenge their wrongs, or secure greater prominence, malcontents and dissidents of all sorts came together
to plot insurrection. To achieve this goal they subverted the populace. In Seville, 10,000 reales was spent on suborning the garrison and securing the services of a gang of thugs who could act as cheerleaders for Tap and Tilly.
In Valencia, there was a paid strike force of 500 peasants recruited from the notoriously turbulent huerta that surrounded the city. In Oviedo a similar force was recruited from volunteers paid four reales per day. In Zaragoza
the conspirators made contact with Mariano Cerezo and Jorge Ibort, both of whom were labradores of considerable influence with the populace (why this should have been the case is not clear, but it is possible that they had links
with banditry or smuggling). And in Tenerife the requisite intermediaries were discovered in a disgraced Augustinian friar and a well-known bandit, whilst here, too, money was freely disbursed to hire the requisite crowd.

 From the beginning, then, the rising’s objective was not just to resist the French but also to secure material changes in the body politic. With the authorities preaching submission and the populace in a state of ferment, all
that was lacking was a suitable catalyst, and, thanks to Napoleon, this was not slow to put in an appearance. Although the emperor had succeeded in overthrowing the Bourbon dynasty, he had not yet announced his plans for the
throne. In this respect matters had been slow to develop, but the final collapse of his attempts to marry Fernando to the daughter of his estranged brother, Lucien (whose opposition he made a serious attempt to overcome), and the
motín de Aranjuez together convinced Napoleon that drastic action was essential, the result being that on 27 March he wrote to his younger brother, Louis, offering him the Crown. Knowing full well that this was designed to strip
him of his Dutch power base, the independent-minded Louis’ response was a stinging negative, however. Thus Napoleon turned instead to his youngest sibling, Jerome, but the latter had only recently been installed as King of the
new German state of Westphalia and also refused to budge. Lucien being an impossibility, there remained only his oldest brother, Joseph, and on 10 May the latter was ordered to report for duty post-haste.

 Ostensibly head of the Bonaparte clan and since 1806 King of Naples, Joseph was an easy-going figure who was both much in awe of his imperial brother and vain enough to relish the idea of being King of Spain, and on 23 May he
therefore set off from his capital. Confident of securing his agreement, meanwhile, Napoleon could finally announce Spain’s fate. Implicit in the abdication of Carlos IV and Fernando VII was the recognition that he had the right
to dispose of the throne as he wished. In consequence, Murat was ordered to get the Junta de Gobierno to ask the emperor to appoint Joseph to the throne, and nominate 150 prominent figures who could participate in a conference on
Spain’s future at Bayonne. And ten days later the emperor himself issued a grandiloquent proclamation promising to remedy the country’s ills, establish a constitution, and give it a ruler as wise and benevolent as himself.