

 There was no resistance. A terrified La Llave surrendered, and on the stroke of midnight the cathedral bells rang out to proclaim the rebellion. Rushing into the streets, the inhabitants, who had hitherto taken no part in
events, then joined the throng, but nothing can disguise the fact that what had occurred had been nothing more nor less than a coup d’état.

 As for the provincial juntas that resulted from such events, it is hardly a surprise to find that they contained many malcontents and dissidents (examples include the Conde de Tilly in Seville and the liberals, Toreno and Flórez
Estrada, in Oviedo). Not so, of course, the juntas that resulted from the third model, of which examples include those of Ronda, Segovia, Córdoba, Jaén, Lérida, Santa Cruz de Tenerife, Palma de Mallorca and Castaños’ headquarters
at San Roque, for here, unchallenged by either riot or subversion, the antiguo régimen remained wholly intact. Writing of events in his own garrison, for example, the then lieutenant-colonel, Pedro Agustín Girón, could not be
clearer as to their nature:

 The excitement that was sweeping … Andalucía having begun to be felt in Ronda, on 1 June the town council received a dispatch from the supreme junta that had been created in Seville. In an instant a junta had been created from
the regidores, the other authorities of the town, and a number of prominent citizens. 16

 As a result of this rather confused and amorphous wave of revolt, by the beginning of June 1808 large parts of Spain were in a state of open rebellion. Rebellion, however, did not mean revolution. Most towns of any size now had
emergency administrations – two exceptions were Cádiz, where the town council still held sway, and Zaragoza, which was in the sole charge of José Palafox – but the resultant juntas hardly constituted the bourgeois revolution of
Marxist legend. In Murcia, for instance, the junta consisted of the bishop, an archdeacon, two priors, seven members of the old ayuntamiento, two of the city’s magistrates, five prominent members of the local aristocracy,
including Carlos III’s chief minister, the Conde de Floridablanca, and five serving or retired army or navy officers, all of them of high rank. In Ciudad Rodrigo, meanwhile, we see nine serving officers, including the pre-war
deputy governor and the commanders of all the units that had made up the garrison; five retired officers, of whom two were brigadiers and one an erstwhile regidor perpetuo; a local nobleman possessed of a position at court; the
Intendent; two officials of the old consejos; and the bishop and seventeen other members of the local clergy. Some of the juntas, true, included men in the vanguard of Spanish liberalism, but in very few cases were such figures
in the ascendant. As for those instances where outsiders had succeeded in entering the corridors of power, they were in many cases interested in little other than the fruits of office, and very often enjoyed their triumph for no
more than a matter of days (both Tap and Rico, for example, shortly found themselves under arrest on trumped-up charges). With the populace altogether absent – the occasional ‘tribunes of the people’ that one finds were clearly
trusties of the local notables – the most that can be said was that there had been a shift in the balance of power, with the army, in particular, having lost much of its ascendancy.