

 Typical of the scenes that accompanied the killings were those witnessed in Ciudad Rodrigo:

 It was three o’clock in the afternoon when an extraordinary commotion was suddenly noted in the streets. Large numbers of people having soon gathered together, this soon became an outright tumult. Throwing aside the bounds of
subordination and decorum, the crowds began to shout, ‘Death to the governor and the other traitors!’ Prepared for this eventuality, the junta asked the bishop … to send emissaries to persuade the rioters to desist from their
atrocious project … but the confusion, the shouting and the sheer density of the crowd prevented their … counsel from being heard … All was in vain, and … by a little past four the governor, one of his adjutants, a French
merchant and the postmaster were no more. 17

 Still more graphic is the account of Robert Brindle, trapped in his seminary at Valladolid:

 The multitude … paraded the streets … with fowling pieces, pruning hooks and such other weapons as they could procure. The Captain General of the province during this time was General Cuesta. Though a true patriot and a skilful
officer, yet it was impossible for him to restrain the populace from the most grievous outrages. Don Francisco Cevallos, governor of Segovia, having been obliged to evacuate that fortress, sought refuge in Valladolid. It since
appears that the place was in the worst possible state of defence … But no sooner had he entered Valladolid than the cry of traitor was raised and in a moment the poor man was literally torn to pieces. The Captain General was a
spectator of this horrid spectacle, but so far from being able to restrain the violence of the mob [that] the cry was even raised against himself, and a gallows erected for his execution. 18

 But the trouble was not just confined to the murder of supposed traitors. On the contrary, the populacho also engaged in overt social protest, matters being further inflamed by the continuation of the same old faces in the new
organs of local government. Tenant farmers protested against high rents; agricultural labourers tried to occupy the land or demanded higher wages; and there was a widespread refusal to pay the tithe. Examples of such unrest are
widespread, but perhaps the most dramatic comes from Castellón de la Plana. Thus:

 On 19 June [1808] … a gang of malcontents assembled … in the town, and ran through the streets, disturbing the public peace and shouting ‘Long live the King, the Fatherland and the Faith! Death to the traitors!’ Having murdered
the governor, Coronel Don Pedro Lobo, and a landowner named Felix de Jiménez, they followed these execrable excesses with an attempt on the life of the commissary, Don José Ramón de Santi … In addition, the insurgents broke into
the Capuchin nunnery, and freed all the prisoners in the public gaols by force. 19

 Very often the catalyst for such riots related to the war. In Pontevedra, for example, the story was that the populace was about to be sold to the French and sent off in handcuffs, in Santiago that enemy troops were disembarking
on the coast, in Ribadeo that a French spy was in the town, and in Ronda that preparations were afoot for a French-style terror. In the words of Girón: