

 As yet the name of Joseph Bonaparte had not been publicly mentioned but by the end of May the whole of Spain was in revolt. In this respect what really mattered was the removal of Fernando VII. Held up as he had been as a
paragon of virtue, tenderness and generosity who wished only to see his people happy and prosperous, for thousands upon thousands of the populacho, el rey deseado represented their only hope of salvation. In his person there were
bound up visions of peace, justice and freedom that were as millennial as they were at odds with Fernando’s real nature and the views of those promoting his cause. Notwithstanding the Dos de Mayo, until the very last moment
popular reactions were contained by ignorance, uncertainty, bewilderment, and the hope that all might yet come right, but on 20 May the official gazette formally announced that Fernando had abdicated. This was the end: all hope
of relief had been swept away and, what is more, swept away as a result of what appeared to be treason on the part of the godoyistas who still filled the army, navy and civil administration. With wild rumours circulating that the
young men of Spain were to be conscripted en masse by the French, the conspiratorial cells that had sprung up in the wake of the Dos de Mayo were overnight provided with the genuine crowds which they needed to make their
revolution.

 Whilst the news of Fernando’s abdication provoked risings all over Spain, the details of what happened varied dramatically from place to place. Amidst the welter of different stories there were three basic models. In the first,
and probably the most common, the arrival of the gazette of 20 May, news of insurrection in other parts of Spain, or revolutionary emissaries from neighbouring cities, provoked massive popular demonstrations – the fruit of panic,
collective hysteria and inchoate social protest – that in turn brought about the formation of new organs of political authority, the role of the conspirators in these instances being essentially reactive (where they were present
at all: in a number of cases no evidence of conspiracy has been found). In the second, a rather smaller group, conspiratorial cells took the initiative themselves, precipitating a crisis, and imposing their own political
solutions. And, in the third, the legitimate authorities themselves raised the flag of revolt and co-opted other elements of the old order to help them lead it. Within these three basic patterns there is still much room for
differentiation, however. One obvious question is the extent to which the authorities of Bourbon Spain succeeded in taking control of the revolution. More immediately pertinent, though, is the extent to which the populacho were
able to satisfy the veritable lust for blood typified by events at the town of Almaraz where the alcalde mayor was told by the crowd, ‘We want to kill someone, Sir. They have killed one person in Trujillo, one or two more in
Badajoz, and someone else in Mérida, and we do not want to be left behind. Sir, we want to kill a traitor.’ 10