

 The mobilisation of the populace, meanwhile, implied the formation of a new army. In large parts of Spain – Extremadura, Aragón and Old Castile – first-line troops were few and far between, the insurgents being backed by little
more than the resguardo, various garrison units, * and a number of officers and men who had fled districts occupied by the French. Elsewhere things were better – Andalucía, Valencia and Galicia all had substantial garrisons, for
example, but even so the desire for patronage still ensured the creation of many new regiments. Full of raw recruits, however, such units had also for the most part to be officered by men who had no military experience
whatsoever, and the results were singularly unimpressive. For a good example of the spectacle provided by such troops we can do no better than turn to Girón’s description of the forces raised in Córdoba:

 Half a league from the city we saw a great crowd of horsemen coming towards us along the road, and after a short while we saw that it was General Echávarri followed by a numerous mass of poorly mounted and worse armed men that
he called his cavalry. There were more than 1200 of them, most of them on horses, and the rest on mules. They had saddles of every style – and some of them none at all – and arms of various centuries ranging from the dagger to
the rapier. Such was the confusion in which they rode that, as they went by, they left a saddled horse abandoned in the road. 25

 If the new army was defective in its organisation, there were also problems with its composition. Whereas infantrymen could be improvised relatively quickly, this was simply not possible with either cavalrymen or gunners. Not
only was much more time needed for their training, but cavalry and artillery required resources that many of the new authorities simply did not have. If cannon were sometimes available, hiring draught animals was very expensive,
whilst there was a desperate shortage of horses. A few new squadrons of horsemen did appear – the most famous were the handful of garrochistas who fought at Bailén as the Lancers of Jérez and Utrera – but the vast majority of the
new troops had perforce to be infantry. In most cases it proved possible to hand out muskets and bayonets, but uniforms were in short supply whilst it was impossible to provide more than a tiny proportion of the tents, blankets
and other equipment required for service in the field.

 Poorly organised and ill-equipped, the new levies were extremely undisciplined and much given to riot and mutiny: indeed, even attempts to school them in the rudiments of drill were frequently met with violent resistance. Nor
were they prepared to serve outside their home districts, if indeed they were prepared to serve at all (and many were not: within days many juntas were being forced to address the question of desertion). Mercifully enough,
however, 40,000 regular troops were available in Andalucía, 9,000 in the Levante, and 20,000 in Galicia, whilst the Canaries, the Balearic Islands and the African enclave of Ceuta all possessed substantial garrisons that could be
transported to the Peninsula at need. Smaller forces were available in some other areas, too, whilst many soldiers were arriving from the areas held by the enemy: in Barcelona, especially, the French let such Spanish soldiers who
wished to do so melt away in the direction of the Patriot zone, whilst there were several cases of entire regiments simply abandoning their posts and marching for the nearest Spanish army. Also involved were the Spanish forces in
Portugal. Originally 25,000 strong, the division sent to the Alentejo had already been withdrawn by Godoy, which left 9,000 men in and around Lisbon under Caraffa and another 6,000 in Oporto under Belesta. Apart from a daring few
who made a break for it and eventually reached Badajoz, Caraffa’s men were disarmed and imprisoned, but there was nobody to stop Belesta from doing exactly as he liked, and, no sooner had the news of the rising arrived, than he
marched to join the Galician forces at Lugo.