

 The same spirit of insurrection and fury has been observed amongst the inhabitants of this town [of Monforte de Lemos] as that which has already had such sad effects in other cities. More than once movements have begun against …
men who have been the target of false, vague or imaginary accusations, whose intention has been the justification of disorderly excesses … Moved by these considerations … the members of the ayuntamiento met with other sensible
citizens … to think about the best means of preventing the terrible ills to which all this could give rise. Convinced that in the current circumstances … the ordinary means of justice cannot either quieten the general
fermentation or contain disorder, they decided to … form a junta composed of … the persons of greatest confidence in the town, and to invest it with all the … powers that it could possibly be given. 13

 This pattern of spontaneous disturbances being seized upon with a greater or lesser degree of success by disaffected elements, or bamboozled and contained by the old order, was by far the most prevalent and was repeated in
Granada, Santander, Valladolid, Ciudad Rodrigo, Cádiz, La Coruña and Badajoz. Only rarely, by contrast, did the crowd have to be prodded into action by the agents of conspiracy. Thus, the only definite examples are Oviedo (25
May) and Seville (26 May), both of which rose in revolt in the course of the first wave of uprisings. Of events in the former city we have a particularly clear account from Ramón Alvarez Valdés, who witnessed them as a university
student. Thus:

 In the evening of [20 May] there met Ponte, Busto, Ballesteros, Merconchini, Lastra, Toral, Argüelles, Cifuentes, Argüelles Cabezada, and the Vizconde de Matarrosa, who had just arrived from the capital. Burning with patriotism
and indignation … they all agreed that they should … enter the lists with no greater delay than the time necessary to recruit the greatest number of inhabitants that could be mustered … the plan being that these should be paid
four reales per day … Pooling what money they had … they divided it into equal parts, and gave it to Ponte, Argüelles, Cifuentes and Merconchini, who then went off in different directions … Meanwhile, Busto *  … had already
arranged matters at the arms factory, where he had made contact with the manager, Silva, two foremen and a number of armourers. The plan was to take over the factory, arm the recruits and divide them into three columns, which
would then head by different routes for the Plaza Mayor. 14

 Three days went by without an increasingly nervous Busto having any idea as to how his confederates were getting on. Much to his relief, however, in the late afternoon of 24 May, Ponte appeared with the news that he alone had
2,000 peasants waiting in readiness outside the city, and that his three fellows were not far away. After that events moved swiftly:

 Busto and Ponte having agreed as to what should be done, the latter left to unite his forces with the other columns of peasants … and then led them very silently through the outskirts of the city in the direction of the arms
factory. Silva having been forewarned by Busto … they got in without difficulty and had very soon been armed. They were then immediately divided into three groups, of which the first was headed by Don Gregorio Piquero, the second
by Merconchini and the third by Don Ramón de Llano Ponte. The first … was to seize the Casa-Regencia, † whilst the others invaded the Plaza Mayor from different directions and massed in front of the building in support. At eleven
o’clock Piquero … placed himself at the head of his column, and placing some of the most enthusiastic at their head … took La Llave’s guards … by surprise. 15