

 For a French view of the cavalry charge, we may turn to Emile de Saint-Hilaire, who was riding in the French second line:

 We came up too late: the affair was almost over apart from over on the left where a regiment of Spanish infantry formed in square was still in good order … I thought that the shock would be terrible, but, no sooner had we
charged than all the barbes noires  … took to their heels without a shot, making dramatic signs of the cross and commending themselves to the protection of the Blessed Virgin. Sabres raised and splitting heads right and left, we
followed them to the edge of the plain, only to be brought up short by a five-foot wall masking a deep ravine that offered them a sure refuge. Only one thing restored the Spaniards a little in our eyes. Seeing that he was about
to be cut down, a young drummer-boy … stopped and waved his shako in the air, crying ‘Long live the emperor!’, in an attempt to save his life. At the sound of his shouts, an officer of his regiment who had already set his horse
at the wall … crossed back again … and ran him through, indignantly … shouting, ‘Death to all traitors!’, only to fall dead, cut to pieces. 8

 With his allies from the Army of Galicia thoroughly beaten, Cuesta was left with nothing to do but retire from the field. Blake, too, escaped, but the Spaniards had lost at least one thousand dead or wounded, twelve hundred
prisoners and thirteen guns.

 French losses had been minimal – perhaps 400 men – whilst it was still relatively early in the day. However, fortunately for the Spaniards, who might otherwise have been virtually destroyed, no pursuit was attempted, the victors
instead sacking Medina de Río Seco in an orgy of murder, rape and pillage (many of its nuns, for example, were driven to the largest church in the place and there violated by dozens of soldiers). At the same time, it was a day of
blazing heat and, with the never very impressive River Sequillo almost dried up, the French were short of water: according to Foy, indeed, the soldiers complained, ‘The Spaniards have taken the river away with them.’ 9 Each
blaming the other for the defeat, meanwhile, the Spanish generals separated at Benavente, with Blake heading back to Galicia and Cuesta aiming in the first instance for León. Followed to that city by Bessières, he then sent his
infantry to the safety of Asturias, whilst he himself rode, with the few regular cavalry who had been serving with him ever since the start of hostilities, for still unoccupied Salamanca.

 Victory, then, was incomplete. Yet Napoleon was delighted. ‘It is a very great victory,’ he wrote to Joseph. ‘The most important event in the Spanish war, it has given a decided colour to affairs.’ 10 With the Spanish threat
scattered, Joseph entered Madrid on 20 July. However, his reception did not bode well for the future. To quote a French medical officer stationed in the city:

 The garrison was placed under arms, and all the French went out to meet him. The Spanish people did not do the same: nobody was to be seen in the streets, and all the doors and windows were shut. A few curious citizens stuck
their noses out to see the royal party go by, but they immediately slipped back inside for fear of being seen by indiscreet compatriots. The houses had been ordered to be hung with draperies, but the only people to comply with
the regulations did so by hanging out dirty rags. 11