

 A particularly grim picture of the Army of Spain emerges from the writings of General Foy:

 The troops … had neither the consistency nor the vigour which are requisite for high enterprises; the matériel from which they were formed was the refuse of the great armies which remained undiminished in the presence of Europe.
The officers were of two kinds, the one torn from the depots where they were waiting to be disbanded or put on half pay … the others very young, just from school, whose inexperience stood in need of being guided by good examples.
There were few non-commissioned officers, and few subjects from which they could be made. The cavalry consisted of nothing but young soldiers and young horses. The infantry was not composed of homogeneous elements; one battalion
had only four or six companies, while another … had eight or ten. After the legions of reserve and … supplementary regiments had been created, then came ‘marching regiments’, in which were crowded together the forgotten …
detachments, the returned deserters and the men from the hospitals. No corporate spirit … vivified these aggregations, formed today to be dissolved tomorrow … Unacquainted with each other, unknown to their officers, whose names,
even, they knew not, taken little care of, badly subsisted and irregularly paid, [the soldiers’] existence was fluctuating and precarious, like that of the ephemeral corps of which they formed a part. 3

 As for the training of most of the men, this was of precisely the standard that might have been expected:

 On the fifteenth of March, we held exercises on a plain outside the town [of Valladolid], and General Malher was killed by a ramrod that a soldier had foolishly left in the barrel of his musket. An immediate inspection was
carried out to discover the … culprit: eighteen ramrods were missing from the section of the line the shot had been fired from. 4

 Just as suggestive are the generals that had been sent to Spain. Thus, of the four corps commanders, Dupont, Duhesme and Bessières had no experience of commanding anything larger than a division, whilst Moncey had a reputation
for caution. Only the second two were marshals, and both of these owed their promotion to politics rather than martial prowess (the former was a crony of Napoleon’s and the latter a Republican, who only appears to have received
his marshal’s baton in consequence of the need to conciliate the supporters of the disgraced General Moreau). All the real stars of the French high command were absent, whilst Murat had, or so he said, fallen sick, and was going
home, thereby leaving the French with no other commander-in-chief than the distant figure of Napoleon himself (there was, true, Murat’s deputy, Savary, but he was allowed little independence, and was in any case more a courtier
than a front-line soldier).

 If all this was unencouraging, the French did at least enjoy a strong position. Whilst the Spaniards were dispersed around the country in half-a-dozen separate masses, the French were grouped around Madrid, Burgos and Barcelona.
Realising his advantage, Napoleon therefore decided to attack the insurgents before they had got their forces ready for action. Thus, on the march to secure Seville and Cádiz since as early as 23 May, Dupont was directed to
conquer Andalucía with the first of his three infantry divisions, his single cavalry division, the ill-fated marins and a new brigade composed of two regiments of Swiss infantry that had been caught in Madrid. Back in the
capital, Moncey was ordered to march on Valencia with one infantry division and one cavalry brigade. Further north, meanwhile, Bessières was to strike at both Zaragoza and Santander simultaneously from his base at Burgos, whilst
in Catalonia the isolated Duhesme, who had only 13,000 men, was expected not only to hold down Barcelona and keep open his communications with France, but to send forces to subject Lérida and Tarragona and then go on to join in
the attack on Zaragoza and Valencia. *