

 So far so good, then. Severe punishment had been administered to the insurgents, whilst major towns that had fallen to the French included not just Córdoba and Segovia but also Valladolid and Santander. Yet all was not what it
seemed. As early as 6 June, indeed, the French experienced an embarrassing check in Catalonia. Thus, the force of troops mustered by Duhesme to march on Lérida and Zaragoza amounted to a mere 3,200 men, all of them Italian troops
drawn from Naples and the Kingdom of Italy. Immediately available to the Spaniards were no more than a desperately understrength regiment of line infantry and a handful of strays from Barcelona. Unlike most other parts of Spain,
however, Catalonia had other forces on which it could rely. Thus, in common with Galicia and the Basque provinces, it could count upon the services of an irregular home guard known in this particular instance as the somatén.
Organised on a parish basis and controlled by the civil authorities, this could be called out in the event of invasion and had gained much experience of fighting the French in the course of the invasion of 1794–95. No sooner had
the Lérida column set out from Barcelona than a swarm of irregulars began to gather in its path. Commanded by a General Schwartz, the Italians at first made good time along the Barcelona–Lérida highroad, but on 6 June they were
attacked at the defile of El Bruch. Convinced that he was under attack by regular troops – the somaténes were hidden amongst trees and rocks and accompanied by two young drummerboys who were later fused into the single figure of
the legendary tambor de Bruch – Schwartz decided to retreat, only for his command to become so demoralised that it eventually lost all cohesion and dissolved in a sauve qui peut. Much alarmed, Duhesme then sent word to the troops
he had sent southwards to fall back on the capital, and by 11 June his entire force was back in Barcelona.

 The travails of the Corps of Observation of the Eastern Pyrenees were not yet over. Duhesme having now resolved to concentrate on securing his communications with the French frontier, which were protected only by a single
battalion that had been left to hold the fortress of Figueras, he therefore headed for Gerona, whilst taking advantage of the opportunity to cow the somaténes by sacking many towns and villages along the way. The city, however,
was well fortified and possessed of a proper garrison of infantrymen and gunners. Attacked on 20 June, it therefore repulsed two assaults, and forced the invaders to fall back on Barcelona. The capital was found to have been
blockaded by the somaténes of the coastal districts, but these were soon driven away. More than that, though, Duhesme could not do. Recognising this, Napoleon sent a fresh division to the frontier under General Reille, but this
was able to do no more than keep the highroad open as far as Figueras, the situation for the time being therefore sliding into stalemate.

 Nor was Catalonia the only region where the French were baulked. In Aragón the commander of the 6,000-strong French force bearing down on Zaragoza, Charles Lefebvre-Desnouettes, had decided to rush the city. At first sight this
looked easy enough, for setting aside the miserable perfomance of the Aragonese levies in the Ebro valley, it was protected by no more than its old medieval wall and possessed little in the way of artillery. Indeed, even Palafox
did not think it could be held, abandoning the city to its own devices on the pretext of the need to organise a relief force outside the city. What nobody counted on, however, was the populace. Unwilling to join the regular army
and in practice not much interested in the war, the latter would nevertheless often put up a fierce fight when it came to the defence of their own homes, for not only were life and hearth at stake, but also powerful notions of
community and local pride. Meanwhile, the inhabitants of Zaragoza had been particularly radicalised by the events of the motín de Aranjuez, had a certain tradition of anti-French feeling and possessed immense faith in the city’s
Virgén del Pilar. Thanks to much braggadocio on the part of Palafox, whose mediocre talents as a general were somewhat counteracted by a genius for propaganda, they were also sure of victory. Stiffened by the usual straggle of
regulars, several thousands of the inhabitants therefore lined the walls and prepared to give a good account of themselves.