

 To lend veracity to the occasion, indeed, a crowd had to be manufactured, the same observer noting that ‘a number of porters and water carriers, veritable lazzaroni, who had been bribed and plied with drink, ran along beside
King Joseph’s triumphal carriage, crying like madmen, “God save the King!”’. 12 But all was in vain. To quote Joseph’s close friend and adviser, Comte Miot de Melito, indeed, ‘The silence and disdainful expressions of the
inhabitants of Madrid … was so striking that it would have been impossible to invest the occasion with greater solemnity.’ 13 Nor was this all: the new Spanish army that Joseph had begun to form on the basis of the prisoners from
Medina de Río Seco had for the most part deserted before they even reached the capital, whilst Joseph’s party had also been abandoned by many of the dignitaries who had rallied to him at Bayonne.

 It is here worth pointing out that, despite tales of scowling faces and muttered threats, not to mention occasional acts of defiance, the attitude of the populace of Madrid was clearly really one of indifference rather than
outright resistance. Nevertheless, el rey intruso was deeply alarmed. Even at Bayonne he had been worried, but his fears had been crushed. As Miot writes of his arrival:

 The emperor rode out to meet his brother some distance from Bayonne, and welcomed him with many marks of interest and affection. It was necessary to close his eyes to the dangers of the role which he was going to have to play,
and only to allow him to see its brilliant side. On his arrival at Bayonne, Joseph found himself surrounded by all the seductions and grandeurs of royalty. He received the homages forced from the grandees of Spain, the deputies
of the junta and the principal figures who had followed the old court … At the same time, a veil was thrown over everything that was happening in Spain: there was no certain news to be had, and those few rumours that slipped
through all the obstacles that had been erected to keep them out were stubbornly denied. 14

 All Joseph’s concerns now returned with a vengeance, but, as was to happen on many occasions in the future, he had neither the strength nor the courage to refuse his new role. Installed in his capital, he therefore began to go
through the motions of kingship. A new government composed of nine ministers appointed at Bayonne was formally installed, together with the Council of State demanded by the Constitution of Bayonne; a gazette was established; an
amnesty issued for all insurgents who would surrender their weapons and take the oath of allegiance to the new monarch; a variety of audiences and ceremonies were held in the palace; and on 25 July Joseph was formally acclaimed
King of Spain. All the time, meanwhile, every effort was made to instil a mood of celebration – public buildings were illuminated and the population treated to free bullfights and firework displays (which seem to have been well
attended). Not surprisingly, conciliation was also very much the order of the day: the agnostic Joseph attended High Mass every day, whilst doing his best to ensure that the French forces did not mistreat the populace, the king
having been genuinely shocked by the news of the sack of Medina de Río Seco.