

 When the French appeared before the city on 15 June, they were therefore walking into a hornets’ nest. Covered by a few field guns, columns charged the various gates and in several places got inside the walls, but there were
many casualties in the process and they were unable to subjugate the defenders, who, ensconced behind walls, on rooftops, or in fortress-like convents, were fighting in conditions that were near perfect. After several hours the
attackers were therefore forced to retreat in disorder. They did not go far, setting up camp in the plain to the west of the city, appealing for help to Bessières, and in the night of 23–24 June heavily defeating a rather
foolhardy effort on the part of Palafox to drive them away at Epila. However, it was hardly an auspicious start, and one, moreover, that was soon to be repeated a third time.

 Beaten off at Zaragoza and Gerona, the French still had troops marching on Valencia. However, they were lucky to reach it at all: not only were Moncey’s troops almost entirely composed of raw conscripts, but the Levante was
possessed of a reasonable garrison. In short, there was a good chance that the French might have been defeated en route, but nevertheless Moncey managed to outwit the Spanish commander, a nonentity named the Conde de Cervellón,
and reach Valencia by a route that was guarded only by the lightest of forces. Easily brushing these aside, on 26 June Moncey appeared before the city and drove in a substantial force of regulars and levies that was sent out in
an attempt to fend him off at San Onofre. However, the Spaniards escaped more or less unscathed, protected by the irrigation ditches, cactus hedges and fruit trees with which the whole area was covered. Moreover, when Moncey
tried a storm the next day he found that the defences – a wall even weaker than that of Zaragoza – had been much strengthened, that part of the approaches had been flooded and that the defenders – a mixture of levies and civilian
volunteers – were enthusiastic and determined. Once again, everything possible was done, but by nightfall Moncey had lost over a thousand of his eight thousand men, in consequence of which he was left with no option but to
retreat.

 This series of reverses did much to soften the impact of Napoleon’s initial success: already, indeed, Patriot Spain’s fecund propagandists were starting to claim that the heroic Spanish people had routed the veterans of
Austerlitz and Jena. At this particular point, nothing could have been more embarrassing for the emperor. As we have seen, having once decided to overthrow the Bourbons, Napoleon had taken steps both to legitimise his actions and
co-opt Spain’s élites by summoning a conference of forty-seven prominent figures appointed by the Junta de Gobierno, twenty parish priests appointed by the Spanish bishops, and eighty-three elected representatives of the town
councils, universities, chambers of commerce and local estates at Bayonne. However, no rules were ever established as to how the elections were actually to be carried out, whilst the uprising in any case rendered them out of the
question. Indeed, fewer than 100 deputies ever assembled at Bayonne, a considerable number of those who were invited to attend either sending excuses, absconding en route, or simply refusing to go. Amongst those who did attend,
however, were: the Archbishop of Burgos; the Inquisitor General; leading grandees such as the Príncipe del Castelfranco, the Duque de Fernán Núñez, the Duque del Infantado, the Duque del Parque and the Conde de Orgaz; the
ministers Miguel José de Azanza and Gonzalo O’Farrill; several representatives of the Council of Castile; and a variety of other statesmen, officials and men of letters including the erstwhile ministers, Mariano Luis de Urquijo
and Francisco Cabarrús.