

 From levies and regulars alike, meanwhile, a rudimentary military structure was beginning to emerge in the form of field armies based on Asturias, Galicia, Old Castile, Extremadura, Andalucía, the Levante, and, albeit somewhat
belatedly, Catalonia. Political arrangements were also gradually acquiring a more rational form: in Galicia, for example, the independent juntas that had been formed in each of the main towns quickly established a regional
government in La Coruña whilst the Juntas of León and Asturias were invited to send deputies to a supra-regional cortes del norte. At the same time, in many cities consideration was given to the establishment of a national
government. Above all, however, the juntas of, first, Asturias and then La Coruña had made contact with London, their emissaries being received with acclamation and, as we shall see, promised a variety of aid.

 All this, of course, was just as well for trouble was brewing. Lulled not only by the soothing messages which he continued to receive from Marshal Murat, but also his contempt for the Spaniards, the emperor did not regard the
rising with any particular alarm. ‘All these little events,’ he told Talleyrand on 9 June, ‘are being calmed by the direction that is being taken by the principal inhabitants … of the kingdom, whilst … the king’s arrival will
everywhere dissipate trouble, put an end to doubt and re-establish tranquillity’. 26 That said, however, he had lost none of his vigour. As he wrote to Marshal Bessières:

 Once you have made yourself master of Santander by brute force, you should impose a contribution of 2,000,000 [francs], sequester the property of the bishop, disarm the town and the countryside, and make some severe examples.
And with Santander and Zaragoza taken, you should march on León and Asturias … Retrograde movements … must never be adopted in people’s wars. 27

 Napoleon’s ardour was strengthened by the belief that the new régimes that he was implanting from one side of Europe to the other were implanted all the better for a judicious ‘whiff of grapeshot’. As early as 16 April, indeed,
he had noted in a memorandum on northern Spain, ‘Marshal Bessières … should fall on any … village that rises in revolt or mistreats any soldier or courier … In a campaign one terrible example … is sufficient.’ 28 But in Spain in
particular added zest was lent to the enterprise by the emperor’s conviction, whether real or affected, that revolt was the work of the Church; there is, for example, a certain glee in the words that he addressed to a delegation
of clerics shortly after he came to Spain in November 1808. Thus: ‘ Messieurs les moines, if you choose to meddle in our military affairs, I promise you that I shall cut off your ears.’ 29

 Within a matter of days of the outbreak of revolt, then, in Old Castile, New Castile, Aragón and Catalonia alike, French columns were striking out for the nearest insurgent forces. In the event it was the Spaniards who fired the
first shots, however. On 5 June two squadrons of French dragoons under a Captain Bouzat were attacked by insurgents at the northern entrance to the pass of Despeñaperros in the Sierra Morena and forced to retreat to the nearby
town of Almuradiel, leaving behind a number of dead. Spain was at war.