

===== FILE: OEBPS/xhtml/chapter3.xhtml =====
The Peninsular War

 3

 Bailén

 THE SUMMER CAMPAIGN OF 1808

 Apart from the groans of the wounded, the battlefield had all but fallen silent in the sun of the midsummer afternoon. Along the high road that stretched towards the Spanish positions lay scattered the bodies of the last French
reserves – a battalion of sailors * who had made a final heroic effort to break through – whilst what was left of the rest of the army huddled in the scanty shade provided by the olive groves and ilex trees that covered the
slopes of the ridge they had breasted early that morning. Utterly exhausted and tortured by heat and thirst, the troops could fight no more. Wounded in the hip while leading forward the last charge, the French commander suddenly
heard the crackle of musketry from the direction of the bridge over which his troops had marched on the way to the battlefield, and knew that the game was up. Calling a trusted aide-de-camp, he therefore dispatched him in the
direction of the Spanish lines with instructions to negotiate a truce.

 Four days later nearly 18,000 prisoners were marching into captivity in what became known as the capitulation of Bailén. Spain was overjoyed, Britain exultant, France dismayed, and Napoleon outraged. It was the greatest defeat
the Napoleonic empire had ever suffered, and, what is more, one inflicted by an opponent for whom the emperor had affected nothing but scorn. What, then, had gone wrong?

 To answer this question, we must first examine the role played by the emperor himself. At the heart of the problem was his persistent refusal to accept the possibility that he might face serious opposition in Spain. Popular
risings were expected, certainly – indeed, they were almost to be welcomed – but it had throughout remained Napoleon’s conviction that the Spanish army would either remain neutral or actively put itself at his orders. To this
end, Murat had been instructed to do everything that he could to win over its allegiance: ‘Take command of the Spanish troops: take some good sergeants and make them sub-lieutenants; have them fraternise with the French forces …
I suppose that the French ordinances and rates of pay are more generous than their Spanish counterparts: announce that from 1 June the Spanish soldiers will be treated in the same manner as the French ones.’ 1 And as late as 3
June he was writing to Marshal Bessières as if the Spanish were his to command at will: ‘A battalion of either the Spanish or the Walloon Guards ought to be coming under your command; if it does, you can tell Captain General
Cuesta that he may take it under his orders, and send it wherever its presence is necessary for the peace of the countryside.’ 2

 As a result of these delusions, the first Army of Spain was remarkably weak in numerical terms – at only 90,000 men, indeed, it was heavily outnumbered by the 114,000 regular troops available to the insurgents, let alone
anything else that they might raise – whilst it was also largely composed of second-line forces of a distinctly unimpressive character. Thus, presented with a mass of fresh conscripts by the combination of Tilsit and his decision
to call up the conscript ‘classes’ of 1808 and 1809 in advance, Napoleon had decided to use them to form either internal security units intended to hunt down deserters – the so-called ‘legions of reserve’ – or ‘provisional’
regiments of infantry and cavalry that of necessity lacked not only esprit de corps but also the hard kernel of veterans that had allowed the French armies in Germany and Poland to assimilate large numbers of conscripts without
difficulty. To hand as they were – the grande armée was still cantoned in Prussia – it was mostly these troops that were sent to Spain, though many of them were hardly better trained than the levies they were to end up fighting.
Indeed, many even of the regular units contained large numbers of raw recruits, the French infantry being in the process of a major reorganisation which saw the number of field battalions in each regiment rise from two to four.
Augmenting these forces, meanwhile, were a number of foreign units. Of these, some were drawn from the regular armies of the satellite states and were therefore relatively reliable, but over half the men concerned were
mercenaries, prisoners of war who had taken up arms under Napoleon rather than face a long spell of imprisonment, deserters on the run from their original employers, or impressed members of the defunct armed forces of such states
as Portugal. Such men being notoriously unreliable, their presence hardly suggests that war was regarded as a serious possibility. Much the same is true, if not more so, indeed, with regard to the two battalions of Paris’
municipal guard that also appeared in the French array, the most likely explanation for whose presence is that Napoleon wanted his capital to bathe in the reflected glory of what he assumed would be a mere promenade.