

 That such a plan was wildly over-confident is with hindsight obvious, but at first all seemed to go well enough. Given the disposition of the Spanish forces, the first insurgents that were encountered were necessarily for the
most part improvised levies rather than regular troops and these proved no match even for the distinctly unimpressive Army of Spain. Thus, on 6 June troops of Bessières’ corps stormed insurgent Logroño and Torquemada, whose only
defenders were a few armed civilians, whilst on 7 June it was the turn of Segovia, strengthened though the inhabitants were by the cannons and cadets of the artillery academy situated in the castle. Also on 7 June Dupont defeated
a small force of regulars supported by a mass of levies outside Córdoba, which was then sacked without mercy, whilst on 8 June troops bound for Zaragoza took the town of Tudela in the face of an attempt to defend it on the part
of the inhabitants and a number of levies sent up from Zaragoza under the command of Palafox’s brother, the Marqués de Lazan. On 12 June Cuesta was defeated at Cabezón when he attempted to defend the approaches to Valladolid, and
on 13 and 14 June Palafox was defeated at Mallén and then again at Alagón, where he was lightly wounded. Finally, slightly delayed by the fact that some of the forces involved were recalled so as to assist in the defeat of
Cuesta, on 21 June two more French columns stormed the passes of the Cantabrian mountains that led to Santander.

 In all these actions events assumed a common pattern. Excited and uncontrollable, the raw levies that formed the bulk of the Spanish forces proved incapable of manoeuvring in the face of the enemy, whilst many of them barely
knew how to use their weapons, having sometimes only been issued with muskets the day before they went into action. Happy enough to fire away at the French so long as they remained at a safe distance, the latter had usually no
more than to make an offensive move for them to flee in panic, throwing away their arms, accusing their commanders of treason and leaving the few regulars involved to fend for themselves as best they could. Having run away,
meanwhile, the levies invariably exposed themselves to the French cavalry, which were unleashed amongst them with terrible effect, sabring them unmercifully and taking hundreds of them prisoner. French casualties, meanwhile, in
no case numbered more than a few dozen. Typical enough was the experience of Girón at Alcolea:

 After having for some time subjected us to a fairly heavy bombardment … the enemy attacked the bridgehead. The small detachment that had been posted to hold the entrenchment having run out of ammunition, they had to fall back …
Though caught at a disadvantage, the battalions of grenadiers and the half-battalion of the [regiment of] Campomayor … detained the enemy for some time, but, as was to be expected from their number and quality alike, they had
soon forced the bridge, and … we had to retreat … At the bridge there appeared … neither General Echavarrí, nor any of the other figures who had made such a noise in Córdoba, whilst the battalions of armed civilians who were with
us fled at the first cannon shots. 5