

 What followed was an omen for the future. To have any hope of success, the Spaniards needed to strike fast with all their forces, but the unwilling Blake in fact moved very slowly, whilst leaving two of his four infantry
divisions behind him to cover his retreat (in fairness, he had also been directed to ensure that Galicia was left properly protected). By 13 July the two armies – for Blake had also insisted on keeping his army separate from that
of Cuesta – had therefore only advanced as far as the town of Medina de Río Seco. Still worse, with scarcely 600 cavalry between them, the Spanish commanders had little or no idea of the movements of the enemy, whom they assumed
to be concentrating in the area of Valladolid.

 Disastrously for them, however, they could not have been more wrong. Having left only a small force to protect their communications with Madrid, the French had been somewhat alarmed by the Spanish offensive. However, whilst
Marshal Bessières got together such men as he could, a detachment of the Imperial Guard was sent north from Madrid and a reserve division, and, what is more, one almost entirely composed of veteran troops, was sent to him from
the French frontier. Even once these troops had reached him, the marshal was still possessed of a total of only 13,700 men, but the French commander had few fears about taking on the much larger numbers of Spaniards that could be
fielded by Cuesta and Blake, whilst he was also well aware that his master was expecting him to end the threat to the Madrid highway (Joseph had by now not only entered Spain, but travelled as far as Burgos). Thanks to an
enterprising officer named Rigny, he was also well informed, and on 13 July he therefore set out for Medina de Río Seco. *

 At that town, meanwhile, Blake and Cuesta had drawn up their forces in defensive positions facing in the direction of Valladolid. Unfortunately for them, however, Bessières was coming not from there but from the north-east, the
French commander having elected Palencia as his point of concentration. Still worse, they did not discover their mistake until the enemy were almost on them. With Bessières heading for their left flank and rear, a change in
position was essential, but the fact that all was still in darkness ensured that the move miscarried, and the two armies ended up spread over several miles of rolling countryside in three separate fragments that were not even in
sight of one another. When battle was joined on 14 July the issue was therefore not in doubt for a moment. Taken in flank, the Vanguard and First Division of the Army of Galicia were scattered by a dramatic cavalry charge, whilst
the same force’s Fourth Division was crushed attempting to get back into touch with its fellows. For a graphic description of the scene, we can do no better than turn to the account of a Spanish staff officer named Juan Moscoso:

 The French columns slowly advanced in good order covered by an imposing screen of cavalry. Eventually they separated, one of them climbing the slopes of the heights on our left flank and the other moving towards our centre and
right wing … Many officers and men distinguished themselves, but in a moment the whole line fell into disorder … A body of enemy cavalry rode up onto the … plateau, and the conscripts panicked and swept away the veterans in the
confusion. What a spectacle! What desperation! Almost entirely abandoned by their companies, the officers ran sword in hand across the field trying to get their frightened men together, and we saw several shot dead by soldiers
who were wildly firing their muskets in the air … Within a short time, in short, everything had fallen into confusion, and, in spite of the valour … of various … officers, there was nothing that could be done … to make the men
return to their ranks. 7