

 Initially, it seems to have been intended that this body would formally petition Napoleon for the boon of Joseph Bonaparte as King of Spain, but so long did it take to get even the most skeletal body of deputies assembled at
Bayonne that the emperor eventually decided not to wait, Joseph being announced as ‘King of Spain and of the Indies’ on 6 June. That being the case, the chief task of the assembly proved rather to be the discussion of the new
constitution which Napoleon had publicly promised that Spain would enjoy. In the middle of May a draft had been sent to the Junta de Gobierno and the Council of Castile, but these bodies had jibbed at the massive changes in state
and society which Napoleon’s ideas presaged. Recognising that he could not proceed in the face of the concerted opposition of the élites, the emperor therefore drew back with good grace, elaborating a new document which went some
way towards the criticisms that had been made of the original. Gone, then, were such ideas as universal conscription, freedom of conscience and freedom of property, the new constitution rather representing a compromise between
the rival models of Napoleonic France and Bourbon Spain. Moreover, when the congress finally opened on 15 June the deputies were permitted to debate it at some length and even to put forward a number of amendments.

 Finally promulgated on 7 July, the Constitution of Bayonne showed a Napoleon prepared to compromise with the antiguo régimen in order to smooth the way for his brother. At first sight there was little difference from the model
of reform that had already been established elsewhere, as, for example, in the new German state of Westphalia. Provision, then, was made for a cabinet, modern ministries, a council of state and a bicameral cortes of very limited
power, chosen in part by royal appointment, and in part by indirect election. Also seen were the abolition of torture, the separation of the revenues of Crown and State, the removal of all internal customs barriers and the
establishment of freedom from arbitrary arrest, equality before the law – which implied, of course, an end to all privileges of birth and status – and freedom of movement, employment and occupation. But elsewhere concessions were
on offer. Both the institution of the mayorazgo and the fueros of the Basque provinces were specifically recognised, albeit with the proviso of subsequent reform. The practice of all faiths other than Catholicism was banned. And
the new cortes was given a flavour of tradition by the division of the lower chamber into three estates (clergy, nobility and people).

 Backed by such a mixture of old and new, it was hoped that Joseph might secure the loyalty of both erstwhile caroline bureaucrats and the new generation of liberals, whilst at the same time doing as little as possible to
alienate the traditionalist opposition. Before the experiment could be tried, however, the new king, who had arrived in Bayonne the day after its proclamation and had since then been charming everyone with the warmth of his
personality, had first to be got to his capital. In this respect, however, considerable problems had arisen. Thus, despite the victory of Cabezón, the French had been too thinly stretched to hang on to Valladolid for very long,
and had withdrawn further east so as to concentrate on covering the direct route from Madrid to Burgos and the French frontier. Establishing a new capital at León, Cuesta had quickly set about building a new army on the basis of
the forces that had been defeated at Cabezón, such new recruits as could be got in from the local countryside, and a single regiment of levies that was grudgingly sent him by the Junta of Asturias. Having thus provided himself
with some 9,000 men, the general began to put pressure on the Junta of Galicia to order its substantial regular army to help him strike a blow against the French. Eager to boost its reputation, the Junta proved willing enough to
oblige. The new commander of the Galician forces was Joaquín Blake, the grandson of a Scottish Jacobite who had taken service with Spain. A cautious and relatively junior officer – at the time of the uprising he had been a mere
brigadier – Blake would have much preferred not to risk his army in combat for some while yet and, having almost no cavalry, was all too well aware of the dangers of operating in the plains of Castile. However, by the end of the
first week of July the Army of Galicia was on the march.