

 As if all this was not bad enough, by this time Duhesme had also suffered fresh misfortunes. In so far as events in his area are concerned, we left a fresh division assembling on the frontier under Reille, whilst Duhesme himself
licked his wounds in Barcelona. It being quite obvious that nothing further could be attempted until Gerona had been captured, on 10 July he therefore set off for that town once again with the bulk of his forces, having first
sent a message to Reille to the effect that he should attempt to meet him there. By 24 July 13,000 French troops had therefore assembled before the town (though not without much trouble with the somaténes ), and siege operations
were soon under way. The latter, however, were not at all well-conducted, as well as being hampered by the nature of the terrain and other difficulties, whilst the garrison had been reinforced in the nick of time by a regiment
dispatched from the Balearic Islands. Progress was therefore extremely slow, whilst the absence of the bulk of Duhesme’s forces from Barcelona ensured that the Spaniards were able to embark the substantial garrison of the
Balearic Islands and send it to Tarragona, which now became the capital of the Catalan insurrection (landing on the Catalan coast with his men, the erstwhile Captain General of the Balearic Islands, Juan Miguel de Vives, at the
same time took over the command of all operations in the province). Aided by the local somaténes, these forces now closed in on the 3,500 men Duhesme had left in Barcelona, which was closely blockaded, whilst a handful of
regulars under a brigadier called the Conde de Caldagués were sent to help the populace of the district that surrounded Gerona to harass Reille and Duhesme.

 Very much a man of action, Caldagués was joined by many somaténes, whilst he had soon persuaded the defenders of Gerona to try a dramatic move. Thus, on 16 August almost all the regular troops in the garrison suddenly attacked
the works on the hills that dominated the town from the east, whilst Caldagués appeared in their rear. Completely taken by surprise, the French were routed and forced to abandon their positions. Their casualties had been
relatively few, but, even if they now managed to drive off Caldagués, their numbers were simply not sufficient to allow them both to besiege Gerona and to prevent further attempts at relief. Rather than risk disaster, their
commanders preferred to withdraw and that same night Duhesme was therefore on the march for Barcelona and Reille for Figueras. The latter got away easily enough, but the former’s route lay first through rough hill country and
then along the coast, the result being that he was harassed not just by the somaténes but also by a British frigate that was in the area. As a result retreat turned into rout, Duhesme only getting away by abandoning all his guns
and baggage and taking to mule tracks across the hills. Safety was eventually attained, certainly – Vives made no attempt to stop him getting into the city – but all that he could now hope to do was to hold out until help should
arrive.