

 As for the reinforcements that were hastily dispatched from Madrid – Dupont’s second division – they found their route repeatedly contested by bands of armed peasants, most notably at Valdepeñas, where the populace is reputed to
have barricaded the streets and defended themselves with boiling oil, fowling pieces, farm implements, knives and even cooking utensils.

 Much alarmed, Dupont was disturbed enough first to curtail his march at Córdoba, and then on 16 June to fall back as far as Andújar. Getting into touch here with the division that had been sent down from Madrid (commanded by
General Vedel, it was posted to hold the town of Bailén), he then settled down to wait on events whilst sending out a punitive expedition to sack Jaén as the nearest insurgent capital. Why Dupont delayed at Andújar is something
of a puzzle, for he had clearly abandoned all hope of subjugating Andalucía and would have been better advised to fall back on New Castile. However, a tough and experienced veteran who had won much renown in the Austerlitz
campaign, the French commander was hoping for a marshal’s baton, and therefore unwilling to make so public an admission of failure; at the same time, too, like many of Napoleon’s generals, he simply was not used to the burdens of
independent command, whilst at the same time being terrified of his master’s wrath. Yet, protected though he was by the River Guadalquivir, which ran from east to west to the south of his men’s positions, his 17,000 troops were
not only distinctly unimpressive but also threatened by an army of at least 33,000 Spaniards of whom a large majority were regulars. Undeterred by the recent French visit, moreover, irregular bands commanded by agents of the
Junta of Jaén were pressing in upon his communications. Still worse, his men were falling sick in large numbers, and spread out between Andújar and Bailén, about the only good news being that a third division was now being sent
from Madrid. Commanded by Jacques Gobert, this arrived at Bailén on 7 July and was given the task of watching the highroad from there to La Carolina, the result being that Dupont now had some 20,000 troops south of the Sierra
Morena (it is symptomatic of the rather improvised nature of the French response to the uprising that this third division came not from Dupont’s own corps, of which one division still remained in Madrid, but rather from that of
Moncey).

 Retribution was not long in coming. Under the command of General Castaños, the four-division-strong Spanish Army of Andalucía had soon moved up to a position a few miles to the south of Andújar and elaborated a plan of attack.
In brief, whilst part of the Spanish army pinned Dupont down at Andújar, two divisions would cross the river south of Bailén and descend on his rear, whilst another force composed largely of new levies worked its way around the
French forces from the west before attacking from the north. Finally, a further two thousand levies would move around Dupont’s eastern flank and attempt to block his retreat through the Sierra Morena. By all the normal rules,
this was madness. As Castaños had little idea that Dupont had received reinforcements, the Spaniards were running the risk of being defeated in detail, for Dupont could easily have united his forces and struck at the various
Spanish detachments in turn. Even if he remained as passive as the plan required, neither of the two main Spanish forces was really strong enough to defeat either Dupont on the one hand or Vedel and Gobert on the other.