

 Thus ended the first campaign of the war. Setting aside the situation in Portugal, to which we shall turn in the next chapter, Joseph, Bessières, Moncey and Verdier were huddled together around the towns of Miranda de Ebro and
Logroño; Duhesme was blockaded in Barcelona; and Reille isolated at Figueras, about the only good news being that a belated insurrection in Vizcaya had been mercilessly crushed by the dispatch of a punitive expedition. Not only
had thousands of French soldiers been killed or taken prisoner, but El Bruch, Gerona, Zaragoza, Valencia and, above all, Bailén all constituted the stuff of legend, Patriot Spain’s ever growing legion of propagandists leaping to
take advantage of them and glory in the heroism of the Spanish people. Needless to say, in the process much scorn was heaped on Napoleon, who was popularly represented as having been reduced to a state of abject terror. As for
the unfortunate Joseph, his liking for women had been quickly noted, whilst the retreat to the Ebro saw rumours that he and his staff had emptied the wine cellars of a mansion which they briefly occupied at Calahorra, and it was
therefore soon being put about that he was a drunkard – a habit particularly offensive in Spanish eyes – and a womaniser. Hence his nicknames of Tío Copas (Uncle Cups), the Rey de Copas (the King of Cups), Pepe Botella (Joe
Bottle) and, more obscurely, Pepino (an obvious play on Pepe, pepino – ‘cucumber’ – also has a certain phallic connotation).

 If Napoleon was furious, then, it was hardly surprising. Based though his Spanish policy had been on a series of errors and miscalculations, the empire had been seriously compromised. Thus, in Germany nationalists were comparing
Palafox with Arminius (the Teutonic leader who had wiped out a Roman army in AD 9); in Prussia proponents of a fresh war were claiming that there was no reason why their countrymen should not match the example of the Spaniards;
and in Austria a war party was dreaming of stirring up a Spanish-style uprising in the recently lost Tyrol. Complain though Joseph might that the war was unwinnable and that the Spaniards would never accept his rule, retribution
was therefore soon in train.

 There was little chance of the Spaniards being able to resist the hammer blow that was about to descend upon them. Despite all the bombast about the heroic Spanish people defeating the veterans of the grande armée, the French
forces had for the most part consisted of a mass of ill-organised raw recruits, and popular resistance was limited in its impact. Armed civilians had fought with great courage in the defence of beleaguered Spanish cities, but,
except where the ground they occupied was so strong as to be nearly inaccessible, in the field they had proved a complete liability. Problems occurred even when they fought as guerrillas. In Catalonia, for example, the somaténes
might have proved adept at harassing the French, but they were also unreliable and notoriously unwilling to serve outside their home districts, as well as being, as we shall see, much inclined to pillage. As for Spain’s
victories, they have all to be placed in their proper perspective: Zaragoza, Valencia and Gerona would all have fallen had the French possessed more troops; Bailén had been lost by the French rather than won by the Spaniards; and
El Bruch was a mere skirmish. Particularly instructive in this respect are Wellington’s views on Bailén: