

 As Joseph himself recognised, however, Spain would have to be conquered before it would accept him. Yet despite continued optimism on the part of Napoleon – to all his brother’s gloomy letters, the emperor replied that all would
be well – things were not going according to plan. Even as el rey intruso was entering Madrid, indeed, the arms of his imperial brother were experiencing total humiliation in Andalucía. But, before we look at events in the south,
we must first return to Aragón. On 15 June, as we have seen, Zaragoza had succeeded in beating off an attempt to storm the city. Much disconcerted, the attackers had retired a short distance to await reinforcements, whilst the
Marqués de Lazan, who had taken over from Palafox when the latter left the city, made frantic attempts to strengthen the walls and prepare for the fresh assault that he knew to be inevitable. Sure enough, a steady supply of fresh
troops and heavy artillery was soon reaching the French, and on 28 June operations against the city were resumed under a new commander named Verdier. Thus, with the defenders distracted by a catastrophic explosion in their main
powder magazine, the invaders drove the Spaniards off the heights that dominated the city from the south. With this preliminary move out of the way, on the morning of 2 July 3,000 troops attacked the walls, only to find that the
defenders, who had by now been reinforced by a regiment of line infantry from Catalonia and much encouraged by the sudden reappearance of José Palafox, stood firm and put up a desperate resistance. Despite a few moments of
crisis, moreover, the invaders were once again repelled with heavy losses, their defeat being accompanied by the emergence of one of the greatest popular icons of the Spanish struggle in the person of Agustina of Aragón – more
precisely, Agustina Zaragoza Domenech – a Catalan girl who single-handedly saved a key position from falling into the hands of the enemy by seizing a linstock from a dying gunner (reputedly her lover) and firing a cannon into the
very faces of the advancing French.

 Much discouraged, Verdier now resigned himself to engaging in conventional siege operations. Thus, an elaborate system of trenches was dug before the walls and gradually extended closer and closer to provide cover for an assault
force whilst the attackers also established a force on the north bank of the Ebro that was able considerably to restrict the reinforcements and supplies that had hitherto been able to reach the city by that route. * Despite a
series of sorties, they were also able to seize a number of the outposts the latter had continued to maintain outside the walls in such monasteries as that of the Capuchins. Inside the city, meanwhile, Palafox and his
subordinates did their best to maintain the morale of the population. Religious ceremonies abounded – on 25 July the feast of Saint James, for example, was celebrated with particular fervour – whilst printing presses continued to
churn out a mixture of bombast and defiance. Nothing, however, could disguise the fact that a new attack was certain, and on the night of 31 July the bombardment of the city began. With sixty guns in place, whole sections of the
city’s flimsy defences were swept away, and in the afternoon of 4 August the French attacked again. This time there was no mistake: protected until the last minute by their trenches, the assault columns were able to scramble
through the various breaches and establish themselves in the ruins of such buildings as the Church of Santa Engracia.