

 All this represented a serious want of judgement on the part of Vedel and all the more so as he had more than enough cavalry to discover the true situation. As it was, this now slid still further towards disaster. Having spent
the previous day resting his men behind the Guadalquivir, Reding had now been joined by a second division under Coupigny and on 18 July he recrossed the river, his intention being to take Bailén from the French troops that he
assumed were holding it. Arriving before the town, like Vedel before them, they found it empty, however, and in consequence made camp preparatory to marching to attack Dupont.

 Back at Andújar Dupont had finally come to the conclusion that something had gone seriously wrong. Castaños’ attack had still not materialised whilst it was clear that large numbers of Spanish troops were loose in his rear
(though not at Bailén: everything that Dupont knew suggested that the interlopers were not only much further east, but separated from his forces by Vedel). News having arrived that Vedel had marched on the passes, late in the
evening of 17 July he therefore finally resolved to evacuate Andújar in favour of Bailén. Getting the army moving was no easy matter, however – aside from anything else, the sack of Córdoba had left it encumbered with an immense
quantity of plunder of all sorts – and it was therefore not for another twenty-four hours that Dupont’s forces finally set off. Even then, progress was very slow, the size of the French baggage train ensuring that it was not far
short of dawn before Dupont’s vanguard had arrived in the vicinity of Bailén. Still worse, Dupont was completely unprepared for battle: indeed, believing that the only danger came from Castaños, he had placed his best troops at
the rear of the column and given the van to one of his miserable ‘Legions of Reserve’.

 Tramping through the darkness, the French advance guard crossed a tributary of the Guadalquivir known as the Rumblar, and began to make its way through a band of low hills that runs from north to south a mile to the west of
Bailén, only for the peace of the olive groves and holm-oak that covered the area to be shattered by a fusillade of shots. Although they firmly believed that Dupont was still at Andújar, Reding and Coupigny had posted a few
pickets in the hills, and the men concerned had opened fire. Taken by surprise, the Spanish pickets were quickly driven in, but the firing nevertheless alerted the Spaniards to the fact that they were under attack, and their
forces therefore rushed to take up a fighting position. At the southern end of what became the Spanish line a few troops got on to the hill known as the Haza Walona, whilst the right was posted on a projecting spur called the
Cerro Valentín, but otherwise they were stationed on level ground just to the west of Bailén. *

 Whilst the Spaniards were taking up their positions, the equally astonished French were themselves struggling to deploy. Whilst his leading infantry moved into columns of attack on the hills above the Spaniards, Dupont ordered
up his chief cavalry units, one of the brigades involved immediately proceeding to attack the Spanish centre in an attempt to win time. Driven off with some loss, the horsemen then fell back, whilst the two batteries of
four-pounder guns, which was the only artillery that the French had thus far managed to bring up, opened up on the enemy. Too few and lacking in power to be very effective, however, the French guns were overmatched by their
Spanish opponents’, which were mostly of a much heavier calibre. Throughout the battle, indeed, the Spanish guns were to make a great impression: ‘So well was our artillery served’, wrote one participant in the battle, ‘that it
almost did not waste a shot.’ 16 When the leading French infantry – the Fourth Legion of Reserve and a battalion of Napoleon’s Swiss troops – finally advanced to the attack at around seven in the morning, they therefore faced an
impossible task. Arrayed in four battalion columns with a cavalry brigade on either flank, they were shot to pieces and forced to retreat. Heavily outnumbered and desperate to break through – Reding had some 17,000 men to his own
11,000 – Dupont brought up fresh troops and tried again, only to experience renewed failure. The French cavalry drove the Spanish left off the Haza Walona and repelled a force that advanced on the other wing, but their infantry
were first shattered by artillery fire and then put to flight by a successful cavalry charge.