

 At this point the French might again have expected the city to surrender, but the defenders remained as defiant as ever. In the face of furious opposition, the attackers were therefore forced to fight their way yard by yard
towards the heart of the city. Had they been able to keep going, they might well have triumphed – by the late afternoon many of the defenders were flagging, whilst news that the French had reached the broad central thoroughfare
known as the Coso started a major panic and caused Palafox once again to abandon the city. However, the assault troops were much depleted, badly disordered, and increasingly tired and thirsty, a handful of Spaniards in
consequence being able to initiate a counter-attack that flung back the enemy vanguard. With other defenders slipping through the city’s narrow streets to attack their flanks and rear, the French could go no further, the end of
the day therefore seeing them confined to a narrow finger of territory stretching from the walls to a point not far from the Coso.

 What might have happened next is difficult to say: Verdier’s forces were in no fit state to do much more, certainly, but the Spaniards were too disorganised to do more than keep up a steady fusillade and make spasmodic rushes at
one French position or another. Across the Ebro, meanwhile, Palafox had reappeared with a convoy of reinforcements and ammunition, but it seems unlikely that his improvised troops would ever have had the capacity to evict the
French. In short – an important point to make in view of the hyperbole that to this day surrounds the defence of Zaragoza – fresh troops might yet have won the day for Verdier. For reasons that will become clear, however, no such
help was to arrive.

 We now come to the campaign of Bailén. For a variety of reasons, Dupont had not advanced beyond Córdoba. On 10 June Cádiz lost much of its immediate importance when the remnants of the French fleet defeated at Trafalgar were
forced to surrender after a brief cannonade. Meanwhile, the French commander had got wind of the concentration of the Spanish garrison, whilst he was also cut off from Madrid. No sooner had the insurrection broken out than the
population of New Castile and eastern Andalucía had flung themselves upon every Frenchman that they could find. Couriers, invalids, convoys, forage parties and even a general and his wife were attacked and murdered, sometimes in
circumstances of the most revolting cruelty. Particularly dreadful was the scene at Manzanares, where an entire hospital was massacred:

 I went down into … the gardens, whereupon my eyes were assaulted by a most shocking spectacle. Some fifty corpses … allowed us to assess the barbarity of these cowardly assassins. Some had been beaten to death, others had had
their heads smashed in by axes, and still others had been … plunged into cauldrons of boiling oil. The limbs of these unfortunates had been so shrivelled up … that a man of the height of five and one half feet appeared to possess
that of no more than three. 15