

 Why Vedel acted in this fashion has never been fully explained. However, whether he was motivated by scorn for the Spaniards, a desire not to overtire his troops, or even dislike of Dupont, the damage was done. Ignoring Spanish
protests that an armistice had been agreed, Vedel launched a vigorous attack on the few troops facing him, and succeeded in taking 1,000 prisoners. Indeed, not until a direct order reached him from Dupont ordering him to desist
would he do so, his division eventually bivouacking some way back along the highroad.

 Thus ended a day of confusion and slaughter. Some 2,000 of Dupont’s troops lay dead or wounded on the battlefield, whilst perhaps 800 more had changed sides. As for the survivors, they were bereft of food and water, utterly
demoralised, and totally lacking in cohesion, as well as being menaced by large numbers of fresh troops. Despite the arrival of Vedel, there was therefore little option but for Dupont to make the best terms he could. There
followed several days of complex negotiations, but on 23 July 17,635 men laid down their arms. Handing over his sword to Castaños, Dupont is supposed to have said, ‘You may well, General, be proud of this day; it is remarkable
because I have never lost a pitched battle until now – I who have been in more than twenty.’ Quick as a flash, however, came the reply, ‘It is the more remarkable because I was never in one before in my life.’ 18 A little later,
meanwhile, their ranks were joined by battalions that had been dropped off to protect the road to Madrid at Santa Cruz de Mudela and Manzanares. In theory, officers and men alike were to be repatriated to France by sea, whilst
the former were allowed to retain their personal baggage (a clause which gave rise to claims that Dupont had surrendered with no other object than to safeguard his plunder).

 Few of the men taken at Bailén were ever to return to France: abused and mistreated from the start, they were denied repatriation, confined on hulks in Cádiz harbour, and eventually dispatched to the barren Balearic Island of
Cabrera, where half of them starved to death. However, Dupont, Vedel and a small number of senior officers were allowed to sail for home. Needless to say, their reception was unpleasant in the extreme. Unable to conceive of how a
French army could come to grief at Spanish hands, unwilling to admit the shortcomings in his own handling of the situation, furious with his subordinates’ generalship, and convinced that the surrender had been motivated by
nothing more than a desire to retain the spoils of war, the emperor responded with a tirade of spectacular proportions. ‘In all the history of the world,’ he raged, ‘there has never been anything so stupid, so inept or so
cowardly … From the very dispatch of General Dupont, one can see perfectly that everything has been the result of the most inconceivable incompetence.’ 19 In consequence, Dupont, Vedel and various other officers were arrested
(originally, they were to have been court-martialled, but in fact the only one to suffer this fate was Dupont, and even then not until raisons d’état made it seem necessary early in 1812). All Napoleon’s fury, however, could not
undo the damage. Stunned by what had occurred, on 1 August Joseph, who had no more than 23,000 troops with him in Madrid and was labouring under the impression that thousands of vengeful Spaniards were about to fall on him,
evacuated the capital and fell back on Old Castile, whilst ordering Verdier to abandon the siege of Zaragoza and Bessières to retire from León, the entire French army ultimately taking shelter behind the Ebro.