

 I believe no-one was more surprised at the result of Bailén than Castaños himself … I knew Dupont afterwards … a very able man, but he took fright and did not understand the Spaniards. Later in the war the French would have
marched over the Spaniards instead of capitulating to them. Their general would have said, ‘Retirezvous, coquins!’. 20

 Last but not least, it is all too clear that with one or two exceptions, the brunt of the fighting had actually been done by the regular army. If Spain was to survive, she therefore had but one hope, and that was to acquire not
only substantial foreign aid but also much larger and more effective armed forces than those which she currently had at her disposal. Victory at Bailén having muffled that message, the future was bleak in the extreme.

===== FILE: OEBPS/xhtml/chapter4.xhtml =====
The Peninsular War

 4

 Vimeiro

 THE LIBERATION OF PORTUGAL, AUGUST 1808

 It was 15 June 1808. The House of Commons was crowded and in an excited mood. For the past week London had been feverishly discussing the extraordinary news from Spain that the northern province of Asturias had risen in revolt
against the Corsican ogre, and it was known that the great topic of the day was at last to be discussed at Westminster. The celebrated Whig playwright, Richard Brinsley Sheridan, planned a great speech for the occasion, but
proceedings were delayed by other business, and by the time that he rose to speak he had unfortunately got so drunk as to be incapable of coherent speech. Nevertheless, knowing that he was essentially lauding Spain’s heroism to
the skies and proposing that Britain should fly to her assistance, the Foreign Secretary, George Canning, knew full well how to respond. Promising ‘every practicable aid’, he proclaimed that the government would ‘proceed upon the
principle that any nation of Europe that starts up with a determination to oppose … the common enemy … becomes instantly our essential ally’. 1

 This exchange marks the beginning of Britain’s involvement in the Peninsular War, and, by the same token, a considerable shift in her fortunes in the struggle against Napoleon. From it would stem her engagement in a prolonged
campaign on the Continent of Europe and the end of the situation in which she could be accused, in Sheridan’s words, of doing no more than ‘filching sugar islands’. If only through happenstance, Britain could now play the part of
a great military power as well as a great naval one, and evade charges that she was acting purely in her own selfish interests and fighting to the death of the last Austrian. Both at home and abroad, meanwhile, the British
government was presented with major advantages. Their revolt’s complex origins being barely understood, it seemed that the Spanish people had rejected Napoleon and all his works. As the emperor had continued to use the rhetoric
of the French Revolution, domestic radicals and foreign ‘Jacobins’ alike had been inclined to rally to his cause, but now Britain found herself in the camp of freedom. Opposition from such sources was never wholly silenced, true,
but Britain, and with her all Napoleon’s opponents, had suddenly acquired a new moral legitimacy.