

 Seeing the French recoil in disorder, Reding ordered forward more troops on his right, and within a few minutes these had outflanked the French left. Much alarmed, Dupont ordered up a fresh infantry brigade and some of his
increasingly exhausted cavalry, and after a sharp fight the interlopers were driven off. On the other hand, a second attack on the part of the infantry that had gone forward at the beginning of the day was easily repelled, their
retreat having to be protected by yet another cavalry charge. In despair, Dupont then ordered up his last reserves – the battalion of Seamen of the Guard and the four battalions of ‘Spanish’ Swiss that had been added to his
command when he left Madrid – and, with the aid of a few other troops who were still in reasonable order, mounted one last assault against the enemy centre. Once again, however, the Spanish artillery tore great gaps in the French
ranks, whilst Dupont himself was wounded in the hip. The cavalry and seamen seem none the less to have reached the Spanish front line, but they were too few in numbers to make any impression and had eventually to fall back. As
for the Swiss, they for the most part immediately went over to their former comrades.

 With his entire command exhausted and used up, Dupont had been thoroughly beaten (though it has to be said that he was the author of his own downfall: for all the Spaniards’ numerical advantage, he might have cut his way
through, had he only brought up all his forces for a single attack). At the same time, not only was there no news of Vedel, to whose doings we must shortly return, but the Spaniards were closing in on his rear. Thus, although
Castaños had been extremely slow to discover the departure of the French from Andújar and slower still to respond, one of the two divisions that he had kept with him was at last approaching the Rumblar, whilst the flanking column
that had been sent out to circle round the French from the north had suddenly appeared in the vicinity of Dupont’s ill-protected baggage train. Left with no alternative, the French commander sent to Reding to ask for an
armistice, this being something that the latter was only too glad to grant (not only were his own troops exhausted, but he was no more aware of Vedel’s whereabouts than Dupont, and, still worse, could not be certain that he was
not about to fall on his own rear). What Reding did not have, however, was the authority to negotiate the terms of a capitulation, the result being that a mixed deputation had to be sent off in search of Castaños.

 It was now the middle of a blazing summer afternoon – ‘The heat’, remembered Girón, ‘got worse every moment; there were points when I thought I was going to suffocate’ 17 – time enough, it might have been thought, for Vedel to
have marched the sixteen miles from La Carolina. Had he done so promptly, the result of the action would have been very different, for Vedel had under his command not only his own division, but also that of the dead Gobert, the
whole making a total of some 9,000 men. At first, all went well enough: having realised the previous day that he had made a serious error, Vedel had immediately decided to return to Bailén, and at five o’clock in the morning of
19 July he had set out with his troops from La Carolina. The march, however, was not pushed with any rapidity – it took some five hours for the column to cover the first eight miles – and at Guarromán Vedel halted to allow his
men to rest and cook a meal. Not until two o’clock in the afternoon did he get moving again, and that despite the fact that the noise of the fighting could be clearly heard in the distance. By this time, of course, the cannonade
had died away, thereby dissipating what little sense of urgency Vedel displayed still further, and it was therefore another three hours before he finally came in sight of the small force Reding had posted to watch his rear.