

 But for once fortune favoured the Spaniards. Operations began on 14 July when the division of General Reding appeared on the southern bank of the Guadalquivir at the ferry of Mengíbar and attacked the French outpost that had
been stationed there. Not much came of this other than the fact that Vedel hastily rushed most of his men to support the detachment posted to watch the river, but on 15 July Castaños feinted against Andújar. Shaken by the Spanish
demonstration, Dupont therefore sent orders for Vedel to send him some assistance. In doing so, he made it quite clear that his subordinate need only send a brigade and, further, that he should continue to watch the river, but,
misled by a rather feeble show on the part of Reding, Vedel left only two battalions at the river and marched for Andújar with almost his entire division.

 Thus began a chain of misadventures. At dawn on 16 July Reding confounded Vedel’s expectations by once again moving up at Mengíbar. Sending for help, Vedel’s detachment received the support of only a few battalions of Gobert’s
division, with the result that 4,000 French troops were left to face more than 9,000 Spaniards. Taking up a defensive position behind a tributary of the Guadalquivir called the Gaudiel, they put up a brave fight, but eventually
Gobert was killed and his men routed. Believing, perhaps, that to go on would be to court defeat, Reding then fell back across the river, the fact being that by the time Dupont heard of Gobert’s defeat, all was much as it had
been when Vedel had marched to join him at Andújar.

 Dupont was not to know this, but he did now have a large part of his forces united under his direct command. In consequence, two possibilities were open to him in that he could either have attacked Castaños or marched on Reding.
Either course of action offered an excellent chance of success – Dupont outnumbered Castaños by two to one and Reding by three to two – but, not knowing how many troops were facing him, the French general was unwilling to push
south across the Guadalquivir, whilst he was equally unwilling to give up his chief Andalusian base. Rather than keeping his army together, he therefore added a few cavalry to Vedel’s division and ordered him to defeat Reding
whilst he himself continued to hold Andújar.

 There followed another bizarre mistake. On 17 July Vedel marched as ordered on Bailén, only to find that there were no Spanish troops in the vicinity. Misled by reports of Spanish forces far to the east – in fact these were the
troops not of Reding but of the column that had been sent to block the passes of the Sierra Morena – Vedel jumped to the conclusion that the victors of the Gaudiel had marched along the highroad towards the mountains, and
therefore pushed on in their supposed wake. Passing the night at Guarromán, the following day he reached La Carolina and was there relieved to pick up the forces defeated on 16 July, the latter having retreated thither rather
than falling back on Andújar.