

 We rapidly approached the field of battle, and found a difficulty at first getting within range. The hills on which the enemy were posted were high, and too perpendicular to attempt a direct ascent. Our staff officers, however,
discovered certain chasms or openings, made … by the rain, up which we were led … the enemy playing upon us all the time … Our Colonel … said, ‘Charge’; we did so, but I could go no further, having received a wound in my leg …
Captain Culley … was wounded in both legs. Serjeant Hill … was … wounded in the head. 7

 Roliça, though, was a mere overture, albeit one that gave cause for reflection. In the words of a soldier who arrived in the Peninsula some time later:

 The personal enmity to Napoleon, and the violent party prejudices in England, were so great, that the most absurd stories of the want of order and valour of his troops gained immediate credence there, and many of the English
army believed that they had but to show themselves, and the French would fly. The bravery with which their attack was met … was a matter of great surprise. 8

 Much more serious was the battle that took place at the coastal village of Vimeiro on 21 August. Wellesley had come down to the sea to pick up two brigades of reinforcements, and it was here that Junot chose to attack him in the
hope that his army could be trapped and destroyed. In this, he was to be disappointed. By the time that the French attacked, the reinforcements had already disembarked, and Wellesley had posted his troops on several hills that
encompassed Vimeiro and were in part protected by a deep ravine. It was a good position. In the words of one participant:

 The village of Vimeiro stands in a valley … at the eastern end of a high mountainous range which extends westwards to the sea. In front of the village is a hill of inferior altitude, terminating in a plateau of considerable
extent … On the left is another strong ridge of heights, stretching to the eastward, and terminating on the right in a deep ravine. 9

 By 1808, meanwhile, a British army on the defensive was no laughing matter, a series of measures having been taken that were designed to take the edge off French assaults. How the latter were delivered varied considerably, but a
common feature was their employment of a very heavy screen of skirmishers – infantrymen who fought spread out in open order, made such use as they could of cover, and took their time with regard to loading and firing. Such men
could inflict heavy losses on a defending force and spread confusion by picking off key officers, but were very difficult to deal with by traditional close-order troops. Realising this, the British had greatly increased the
number of skirmishers which they could deploy themselves. Thus, by 1808 in the guards and line infantry each battalion possessed a light company that was specifically trained for skirmish operations, and every ‘centre’ company a
number of sharpshooters. Several battalions were also armed with rifles rather than muskets and two regiments of light infantry supposedly could fight in their entirety in open order. * As yet the system was not developed
systematically or to its fullest extent, but already the basic idea had sunk in: French attacks were to be confronted with a strong force of skirmishers that could keep their light troops away from the defending line and slow
down the progress of the attack, thereby exposing the attackers to the ravages of long-range artillery fire for a longer period (not that the British were strong in this respect: for logistical reasons, until late in the war
their cannon were fewer in numbers and much lighter than those of the French).