

 An army of reasonable quality could easily be got together, then, but what was Britain fighting for? Discussion of Britain’s war aims in the French Wars has often centred on claims that are extremely partisan. On the one hand it
is claimed that she was striving to free Europe from tyranny, and on the other that she was struggling to roll back the advance of the French Revolution, and at the same time eliminate the economic challenge of a France on the
brink of her own industrial revolution. The truth, of course, is far more complex. No more altruistic than any of the other powers, Britain certainly had no intention of liberating the whole of the Continent from French control.
As for the ancien régime, she had long since abandoned any pretence that she was fighting for a Bourbon restoration. With French competition in industry and commerce, a worry that was chronic rather than acute, the fact was that,
if he would only accept certain conditions, Napoleon had little to fear from Britain. What those conditions were had been decided at the time of the Treaty of Amiens in 1802. Even on the Rhine, France might have her natural
frontiers, and that despite the fact that she would thereby retain hold of Belgium and part of Holland. Returned, too, would be most, if not all, of her colonies, whilst in principle, if Spain or any other country wished to
establish an alliance with Paris, then there was nothing to stop them from doing so. And, above all, Napoleon could continue to rule France. What was intolerable, however, was the idea that he could simply trample the principles
of legitimism and international law under foot. The agreement signed at Amiens had been thrown over, and since then state after state had been annexed to France or transformed into a Bonaparte-ruled satellite. By fighting France,
then, Britain was seeking to curb Napoleon’s power, and in Iberia she had in concrete terms no other aim than to restore the Bourbons and the Braganças to their respective thrones. This, of course, was not the whole story. From
the start it was recognised that friendship with Spain and Portugal, and, in particular, access to their American empires, carried with it the possibility of immense commercial benefit. But in the end Napoleonic intervention in
Iberia symbolised everything that Britain was fighting against: even had there been no insurrection in the Peninsula, retreat across the Pyrenees would still have figured heavily in British terms for a peace settlement.

 Where, though, should the British army be sent? Troops were not welcome in Spain, but by the end of June fresh possibilities had come to light in Portugal. Although Portugal had been occupied without resistance, the presence of
Napoleon’s forces had, as we have seen, given rise to considerable unrest. By the summer of 1808 this had been greatly inflamed by hardship, for economic activity was largely at a standstill, whilst large numbers of servants had
been thrown out of work by the flight of so many members of the propertied classes. In consequence, the Spanish revolt could not but destabilise the French position. First to move were the mountainous districts of Tras-os-Montes
and Entre Douro e Minho left ungarrisoned by the departure of the Spanish forces from Oporto on 6 June. Oporto itself did not move – although a junta was formed under the governor, Luis de Oliveira, it did no more than seek to
maintain order whilst sending secretly to Junot for assistance – but on 6 June Chaves was taken over by the people, to be followed in close succession by Braga, Vila Pouca, Bragança and Melgaço. Whether this movement amounted to
anything more than a glorified jacquerie is unclear. In towns such as Bragança and Vila Nova de Foz Coa men of property were attacked as traitors, Jews, heretics or even witches, whilst in Arcos de Val de Vez the town hall was
sacked, the archives burned, the price of basic foodstuffs fixed, the export of bread prohibited, the collection of debts suspended, and conscription, the tithes, the Church’s fees for baptisms, weddings and funerals, and the
feudal dues all ended. However, as the movement spread across the country – on 16 June it reached the Algarve, on 18 June Oporto, and on 24 June the Alentejo and Beira – the local notables were quick to seize control, their task
much assisted by there being no trouble at all in some areas. In Oporto, for example: