

 Nor was this an end to the matter. However strong, gallant and well-trained, no skirmish screen could possibly hope to hold out for ever. Sooner or later, then, the French would come within musket range of the defenders who
would invariably be arrayed in a two-deep line (despite misconceptions to the contrary, the British also sometimes used columnar formations, just as the French sometimes used line, but in the British army it was very rare for any
other formation than the line to be used on the defensive). According to the traditional account, what then happened was that the attackers would be struck down by a hail of musketry, the British infantry firing volley after
volley until the French were brought to a halt and forced to flee, but it is now thought that the preferred technique was rather to fire a single volley, cheer and then charge forward with the bayonet. Yet in the last resort the
result was the same: the British infantry had evolved a series of procedures that, when coupled with Wellesley’s habitual use of the reverse slope of hills to hide his troops till the last minute, made them an exceedingly
dangerous enemy.

 Outnumbered as he was, Junot’s only hope was probably to stake everything on a single massive assault, but he instead chose to split his forces, sending some of his troops to circle round the British position from the east
whilst himself assaulting Wellesley’s left flank, which rested on the village of Vimeiro. To reach the latter, the French had first to conquer the isolated hill in front of the village. However, covered with vineyards and pine
trees and held by some of Moore’s best troops, including all his riflemen and light infantrymen, this proved a difficult objective. In the words of one rifle officer:

 The night before the battle I belonged to a picket of about 200 riflemen … We were posted in a large pine wood … About eight o’clock in the morning … a cloud of light troops, supported by a heavy column of infantry, entered the
wood, and, assailing the pickets with great impetuosity, obliged us to fall back for support on the Ninety-Seventh Regiment. As soon as we had got clear of the front of the Ninety-Seventh … that regiment poured in such a
well-directed fire that it staggered the resolution of the hostile column, which declined to close … with them. About the same time the second battalion of the Fifty-Second, advancing through the wood, took the French in flank,
and drove them before them in confusion. On the pickets being driven in, I joined my own brigade, which was on the left of the Ninety-Seventh. Here the business was beginning to assume a serious aspect. Some heavy masses of
infantry, preceded by a swarm of light troops, were advancing with great resolution … In spite of the deadly fire which several hundred riflemen kept up on them, they continued to press forward … until the old Fiftieth Regiment
received them with a destructive volley, following it instantly with a most brilliant … charge with the bayonet, which broke … in utter dismay and confusion this column. 10