

 Portugal had not at first figured as an objective of the Portland administration. If only because of the huge interest in Asturias, Spain was undoubtedly the government’s preferred destination for its forces. Yet none of the
Spaniards were at this point asking for British troops, for Britain’s record of seizing Spanish territory made a British landing an extremely sensitive issue. With the Junta of Oporto – now renamed the Junta do Supremo Governo –
clamouring for help, and the prospect of both neutralising Senyavin’s Russian fleet and securing Lisbon’s harbour dangling before their eyes, it was not long before London had decided that the Cork division was to sail for the
Tagus, though its commander was also given leave to embark on operations in Spain should opportunity offer.

 The extraordinary discretion allowed to the British commander by his government is testimony to the faith that was placed in him, it being here, of course, that we first encounter the figure of the future Duke of Wellington, Sir
Arthur Wellesley. Born in Dublin on 1 May 1769 as the third son of a family deeply embedded in the Anglo-Irish aristocracy, Wellesley was educated at Eton and in France, and in March 1787 he had entered the British army as an
ensign. Armed with money, patronage and dedication, the young officer found advancement no difficulty: by September 1793 he was both a lieutenant-colonel and a member of the Irish parliament. Sent to fight the French in the
campaigns in Flanders and Holland in 1793–95, he was so disgusted by the mismanagement he witnessed that he briefly considered a career in civil office, but failure to obtain the necessary preferment soon made him abandon the
idea in favour of service with his regiment in India. A year after his arrival in the sub-continent, where his brother, Lord Mornington (soon Marquess Wellesley), had just become Governor-General of all Britain’s extensive
territories, war broke out with the Indian state of Mysore, and by January 1799 Wellesley was in the field as, in effect, a corps commander.

 In considerable debt, Wellesley had been eager for war. At all events India made his fortune. After playing a prominent role in the capture of Seringapatam, he was made Governor of Mysore and spent two years putting down a
variety of opponents of British rule, before being given command of the army eventually sent against the Mahratha Confederacy. Now a major-general, the autumn of 1803 saw him win major victories at Assaye and Argaon, and in the
spring of 1805 he returned to England in triumph, whereupon he was elected to the Commons. Command of a brigade in the army sent to besiege Copenhagen in 1807 followed, as did appointment as the Portland administration’s Chief
Secretary for Ireland, and by 1808 Wellington had gained the friendship and respect of both Canning and Castlereagh, whilst he had also been made a lieutenant-general. A natural choice for the expedition to Venezuela, no attempt
was made to remove him from the command when the decision was taken to switch it to the Peninsula. No sooner had Wellesley sailed from Cork on 12 July, however, than news arrived from Portugal that the French garrison there was
much larger than had originally been reported. More troops would therefore be needed and so the Cabinet resolved to reinforce its initial contingent with the troops of Spencer and Moore (it had become clear that the Spaniards had
no intention whatsoever of allowing the former to garrison Cádiz in the manner which the government had originally intended; as for the latter, relations with the Swedes having broken down, he was sailing for England in disgust).
Given that a few other troops were also available in England, the whole force would amount to some 40,000 men, but this meant that Wellesley would have to relinquish command: still very junior, he was unacceptable to the Duke of
York – the commander-in-chief – as head of an army of the size that the government was now envisaging. Probably for political reasons, the command was therefore offered to Lord Chatham, a senior general who had the post of Master
General of the Ordnance in the Portland administration. Chatham proving unable to go out to Portugal immediately, Sir Hew Dalrymple was appointed interim commander, the latter then being given the much liked, amenable, highly
experienced but not very bright Sir Harry Burrard as his deputy.