

 Two attacks were beaten off with ease in this fashion, and the French suffered heavy casualties: ‘I saw regular lanes torn through their ranks as they advanced … and we pelted away upon them like a shower of leaden hail.’ 11 At
the same time, a desperate attempt to outflank the hill was put to flight by a number of units that had been in reserve, the discomfiture of the French being completed by a sudden charge by Wellesley’s handful of dragoons
(although, in a fault typical of British cavalry throughout the war, the latter proceeded to get out of control and ride into the very midst of the French position where they were in turn crushed by Junot’s cavalry reserve).

 Whilst the defenders of Vimeiro and its hill had thus been standing firm, Wellesley had been marching most of the rest of his troops across their rear to counter Junot’s turning movement. Ascending the heights in the British
commander’s left rear at two different points, the troops concerned – a mere two brigades – therefore ran into overwhelming numbers of redcoats and were routed after a sharp fight whose most notable element was again the British
use of ‘shock’ tactics rather than firepower. Short of mounted troops, the British were unable to derive all the profit from their successes that they might have done, but even so more than two thousand Frenchmen had been killed,
wounded or taken prisoner, whilst Junot had also lost over half his cannon.

 Secured at the moderate cost of only 720 casualties, Vimeiro had been a fine achievement, which had been strongly suggestive both of Wellesley’s skills as a general and the potential of the British infantry. To Wellesley’s fury,
however, a much greater triumph was thrown away. The French were in total disarray and Junot, whose behaviour in the action had been so odd as to give rise to charges that he was either drunk or suffering from a touch of the sun,
in a state of moral collapse. Had a general advance been ordered the result must have been total disaster. But Wellesley’s period of grace had run out, for the reinforcements had been accompanied by Sir Harry Burrard. Not landing
until after the action had begun, the latter made no attempt to interfere in the repulse of Junot, but an advance was a different matter, and, despite Wellesley’s pleas, he refused to sanction the slightest forward movement,
believing, first, that Wellesley was a distinctly rash commander who had only risen to prominence because of his political connections, and, second, that the French were receiving reinforcements.

 Thanks to Burrard, Junot was allowed to get off in good order. Yet the French situation remained extremely serious: the army was badly shaken; the British were known to be expecting further reinforcements; the insurgent forces
were closing in; and the Lisbon crowd was restive and excited. Although the British still failed to move, on 22 August Junot therefore resolved to try for a capitulation on terms that would see the French returned home by sea.
Whether Junot was actually expecting to be able to brazen things out is not apparent, but the fact is that his ploy was astonishingly successful. The day after the battle, Dalrymple had also appeared. Mistrustful of Wellesley and
angry at the terms of his appointment, he was also discouraged by the army’s transport problems, inclined to downplay the effects of Vimeiro, and convinced that the French could hold their own. Thus it was that Dalrymple vetoed
the march on Lisbon proposed by Wellesley – a march which incidentally stood a good chance of trapping Junot’s beaten army – and greeted the arrival of the French emissaries with some relief (according to Madame Junot, the
general sent to open negotiations even heard him whisper to Burrard, ‘We are not in a very good situation; let us hear him’). 12 Thus it was, too, that, after a lengthy series of discussions, the main points of the French
proposals were all accepted. Junot and his men were to be embarked for a French port in British ships and allowed to depart without having to lay down their arms even in form, whilst they were permitted to take with them their
cannon, baggage and personal possessions. Their civilian supporters and collaborators – both French and Portuguese – were guaranteed life, liberty and property and permitted to take ship with Junot if they so wished. Included in
the capitulation were not just Junot’s field army and the garrison of Lisbon, but also the forces holding Almeida and Elvas. All that the French had to promise in return was to leave the fortifications they occupied intact, to
leave behind any cannons they had seized from the Portuguese army, and to free all their prisoners.