

 Some months before, the Portuguese monks and priests had faked a number of miracles to influence the spirit of the people, and it was also put about that King Sebastian, who had died three centuries earlier in Africa, would
return. Spread about by the clergy, these stupidities excited popular passions: the populace now gathered on Lisbon’s highest points so as the better to see the arrival of the messiah-king, and crowds surrounded the statue of
Joseph I, which had, it was said, turned about twice on its base. The result of this baseness was the murder of several Frenchmen. 5

 All this was not without its funny side – ‘It was at that time that a miraculous chicken laid an equally miraculous egg … embossed with the words, “Death to the French!”’ 6 – but, in Portugal as in Spain, the war was beginning
to exhibit a savagery which was to mark it out from conflict in most of the rest of Europe at this time. Why this should have been the case is easy to understand. At the simplest level the invaders were frightened by the people,
the rugged countryside, and their own crushing sense of isolation. They therefore sought security in the reign of terror that was in any case a standard tool of French occupation policy. Meanwhile, the French were convinced that
they were representatives of the highest expression of European culture and civilisation: just as France had throughout the eighteenth century been at the forefront of art, literature, architecture and political philosophy, the
Revolution had demonstrated the superior courage and intelligence of her inhabitants. Though they saw themselves as liberators, the French armies therefore affected an arrogance which only served to compound the vices –
drunkenness, vandalism, licentiousness and plunder – characteristic of every army of the period, whilst in the Peninsula matters were made still worse by the fact that the inhabitants were regarded as little more than savages.
This was in part a function of the primitive conditions typical of Spain and Portugal; in part, a function of their terrible poverty; and in part a function of the importance of the Catholic Church, the French armies being a
confirmed refuge of the anti-clericalism that had marked the Revolution. Whether it was in their superstition, their love of bullfighting, or their willingness to engage in the most bloodthirsty atrocities, the inhabitants seemed
truly beyond the pale. Given that they could also be argued to be in breach of the laws of war – civilians who engaged in armed combat forfeited all right to quarter – and were frequently in revolt against the entire social
order, they could hardly expect the most gentle of treatment, and yet every act of repression merely inflamed their anger and encouraged the perpetration of further acts of barbarity.

 Though horror crowded upon horror, the situation in Portugal remained a stalemate: whilst he dispatched sorties against the insurgents – both Leiria and Evora were sacked and their defenders massacred – Junot did not possess the
strength to crush the rebellion; by the same token, meanwhile, lacking arms, ammunition and trained troops, the insurgents could not hope to evict the French from their central redoubt (indeed, they could hardly fight them at
all: most of their pitchfork-wielding levies were unwilling to serve beyond the confines of their own districts). What tipped the balance was British intervention.