

 If the enormous nature of these advantages was not yet fully understood, the Portland administration’s enthusiasm was entirely comprehensible. Britain was experiencing considerable political and economic difficulties, whilst the
occupation of Portugal had shut off an important outlet for her trade. Meanwhile, the attack that she had launched against Spanish America had on 5 July 1807 come to an inglorious end with the capitulation of the entire British
army at Buenos Aires, whilst her chief remaining ally, Sweden, had just been attacked by Russia. The year 1807 had seen success in Denmark, but in general the picture was not one of a sort calculated to please either Canning or
the Secretary for War and the Colonies, Lord Castlereagh, both of whom were anxious to strike a real blow at the French, and increasingly concerned at the criticism to which they were being subjected in press and Parliament. Some
effort had been made to help Sweden – in April 10,000 troops had been sent to Goteborg under Sir John Moore – but the main focus of attention now became Iberia and its dominions. A 5,000-strong division under Sir Brent Spencer
had been collected at Gibraltar with orders to attack Lisbon, Ceuta or Mahón. Meanwhile, some 13,000 men were at Cork ready for a descent on the territory known today as Venezuela in the hope that this might precipitate a general
revolt.

 Spain, then, was already a major focus for the Portland administration, and all the more so as by late May news had been received from the governor of Gibraltar, Sir Hew Dalrymple, who had been in touch with Castaños, that
revolt was possible in southern Spain. In the event, however, it was from Asturias that the call first came, for no sooner had she rebelled than two emissaries – the Vizconde de Matarrosa (soon to be the Conde de Toreno) and an
academic named Andrés Angel de la Vega – took ship for England. The result was a storm of excitement. The Times and other leading newspapers pressed for immediate help for Asturias, whilst assorted men of letters went into
perfect raptures at Spain’s heroism. Meanwhile, the Asturian deputies were treated to many banquets and accorded the hospitality of some of the greatest households in the kingdom, the excitement being whipped up still further by
the publication of numerous pamphlets and caricatures. For something of the spirit of the moment one has only to turn to private letters of the period. For example:

 What a magnificent series of events is passing before us in Spain … I cannot describe to you the interest I feel in the Spanish cause. It exceeds anything except perhaps that which I felt in the first moments of the French
Revolution. May the Spaniards obtain perfect liberty, and raise the Goddess for the admiration of mankind from that abyss in which the French have left her. 2

 Doubts did exist in some sectors, true: George III, for example, was dubious and one or two ministers downright hostile. Yet inaction was unlikely: men of the most contradictory political beliefs were wildly excited by the
Asturian rising, whilst it was simply too good an opportunity to miss. As early as 2 July, then, Gijón saw the arrival of 34 guns, 12,000 swords and large quantities of ammunition, whilst about £100,000 in Spanish coin was
dispatched from England (rather less useful were the arms captured from the Spanish armada sent back in token of reconciliation from the Tower of London!). * Meanwhile, a three-man military mission was sent to Oviedo to assess
what else was needed. Nor was this the limit to the Portland administration’s enthusiasm. The Asturian delegation, which was soon joined by others from Galicia and Seville, had not asked for troops, but the dispatch of a British
army was soon under consideration. So far as this was concerned, there were fewer constraints than normal. Recent reforms in the army’s recruitment – primarily, the authorisation of embodied members of the militia to volunteer
for service in the line – offered the hope of a steady supply of fresh men; the need to provide against French invasion had been much reduced; and forces were available for immediate action in the shape of Spencer’s troops, the
division that had been assembled at Cork, and a couple of brigades that had been about to raid the invasion port of Boulogne. Just as vital, the necessary transports were also available, whilst the last few years had also seen a
process of reform that promised to improve the army’s hitherto somewhat dubious combat reputation. Although the troops mostly continued to be recruited from the ‘scum of the earth’ – the urban and rural poor and enemy deserters
and prisoners of war – in many regiments flogging was being replaced by a more humane system of discipline, whilst a system of infantry tactics was being evolved that was eventually to be the best in Europe.