

 The populace only wanted someone to appear that would invite them to rise in defiance of the present government. Such were found, and a cry of ‘Viva o Principe!’ spread like wildfire. Hundreds assembled in great confusion and
fury. The torrent directed their steps towards the depots. Lock and key were no embarrassment … and all that thought proper supplied themselves with arms … The town, as may be supposed, continued in a state of the greatest
fermentation … but at any rate such ardour is good. What is really extraordinary is that no accident has happened during these days of tumult and confusion. It was most natural to fear that some evil-disposed person might have
taken advantage of such times, and satisfied private resentment with murder. 3

 Whatever the revolt’s nature, it quickly gathered pace. Collaborators and Frenchmen were quickly rounded up, French detachments attacked (for example, at Faro and Mezao Frio), contact established with the British, and fresh
armed forces emerged on the basis of veterans of the old army, civilian volunteers, the insurgent zone’s units of provincial militia, * and the ordenança, which was an irregular home guard very much akin to the Catalan somatén.
Indeed, there was even a new national government, the junta that had been formed in Oporto under the leadership of Archbishop Antonio de Sao José de Castro quickly securing the allegiance of the rest of the country.

 The revolt, then, was not going to be overawed. As for Junot, he was in trouble. Only in Lisbon and a few other such towns – Abrantes, Almeida, Elvas, Alcoutim and Vila Real do Santo Antonio – were the French present in
reasonable force, whilst many even of these garrisons were clearly in danger of being starved into surrender. At any time, British troops might land somewhere on the coast; Lisbon was restless and excited; Junot was encumbered
with several thousand Spanish prisoners; all communications with Spain had been cut; and no help was forthcoming from the powerful Russian fleet that happened to be moored in the Tagus. * What was to be done? Some consideration
was given to the idea of marching for Spain, but Junot was unwilling to give up his dominions and fearful of what Napoleon would do if he retreated without a fight. The obvious alternative was to concentrate around Lisbon, but
reaching the commanders of the various outlying detachments proved extremely difficult as many couriers were ambushed and murdered. However, by mid-July most of the detachments concerned had reached the capital, the only troops
left behind being the garrisons of Elvas and Almeida. As the French had fallen back, they had also exacted a heavy toll of the insurgents: to the accompaniment of wholesale slaughter – General Loison, indeed, boasted that he had
killed 4,000 of the insurgents in a few days – Beja and Guarda had been sacked, and many villages burned to the ground.

 Terror solved nothing, however. Lisbon, for example, had already experienced a major panic in the course of the great Corpus Christi festivities: ‘While the procession was walking, a great tumult arose … Legs and arms were
broken. Poor ladies … with their clothes torn half off their backs were screaming for help; others fainting.’ 4 Whether this was the fruit of a plot to assassinate Junot, as the French alleged, is unclear, but far from abating,
the excitement only grew. To quote Junot’s wife, Laure: