

 Having sailed from Cork on 12 July, Wellesley outpaced the rest of his convoy and made for La Coruña to confer with the insurgent authorities. From them he gathered that his troops would be neither needed nor welcome in northern
Spain – the Junta was full of news of imaginary Spanish victories and insistent that the situation was well in hand. Receiving firm news of the revolt in northern Portugal, he in consequence decided to try his hand there instead.
The Junta of Oporto proving all too eager for British assistance – it was short of men and arms alike – by 1 August Wellesley’s division was disembarking in Mondego Bay, halfway between Oporto and Lisbon, being joined there a few
days later by the forces of Sir Brent Spencer. By this time, Wellesley had received the orders subordinating him to Dalrymple and Burrard, but until their arrival he remained in command. Faithful to his promises that he would not
act precipitately, he spent over a week readying his forces for the campaign – in particular, it was necessary to gather in large numbers of draught animals, pack mules and baggage wagons – but on 9 August he marched southwards
with over fourteen thousand men organised in six brigades. With him, however, there were only three of the five batteries of artillery available, the other two having been left behind for want of horses, together with a third of
the only cavalry regiment that had been attached to his command.

 Overcoming such logistical difficulties was to prove one of the greatest problems that Wellesley was to face in Spain and Portugal. Another such problem was his relations with the local authorities. Whilst the Junta of Oporto
and its military commander, Bernardino Freire, did provide his forces with considerable numbers of mules and carts, they also made extravagant demands for arms and supplies and allegedly seized food intended for the British. For
the time being, however, such problems were overshadowed by the question of fighting the French. With 26,000 men rather than the 18,000 estimated by the British, Junot had enough troops to take the offensive. Thus, whilst a small
division was sent out under General Delaborde to slow down the British advance, the French commander organised a powerful striking force. Many troops were left to garrison Lisbon, but even so 13,000 men had soon been gathered
together to attack the British, who were steadily advancing southwards parallel with the coast. Already, however, the first shots of the British campaign in the Peninsula had been fired: an advance guard of riflemen had clashed
with a French outpost at Obidos on 15 August, whilst Delaborde made a stand near the village of Roliça two days later. Intent on fighting a delaying action, the French general was manoeuvred out of his first position without
difficulty, but one of the columns sent against his second position attacked prematurely, the British losing nearly five hundred casualties before driving Delaborde from the field. It had been a sharp fight: