

 For all this, the government has been much criticised, but in fact it had a major problem on its hands in that the Duke of York wanted the command. Ever since the operations in Flanders in 1793–95, the duke had enjoyed the
confidence of neither Parliament nor public, and yet he could be passed over only in favour of an extremely senior general. Hence the choice of Chatham, who was also almost certainly being seriously considered as a replacement
for the elderly and ineffectual Duke of Portland. Why, however, the need for Dalrymple and Burrard? Admirers of Sir John Moore have suggested that their sole purpose was to block their hero from gaining the command. In some ways
the idea is not so implausible, for Moore was not the paragon of legend, but rather a very difficult character, scornful of politicians, impatient of the civil power, and convinced that he had been cheated of his rightful glory.
Opinionated, vain and highly strung, he was also much given to intrigue and complaint and had strong connections with the Whigs, whilst he seems to have been especially disliked by Canning. Yet in the end none of this affected
the government’s thinking. Aside from there being no reason to think ill of Chatham, Dalrymple and Burrard, Dalrymple in particular had greater first-hand knowledge of the Peninsula than anyone else in the British army, good
contacts with Castaños, and so far had managed things extremely well, whilst Burrard, too, brought some useful qualities with him, even if it was only a talent for smoothing ruffled feathers.

 What, though, of Wellesley? Only discovering his supersession some days prior to his troops’ arrival in Portugal, he was much aggrieved, but affected an icy dignity, promising that he would not precipitate action with the enemy
in the hope of winning glory for himself. However, this was precisely what he was being encouraged to do. Unable to keep him in command, Castlereagh hinted that he should press on with operations in the little time left to him
before Dalrymple or Burrard could reach Portugal, whilst the former was told in no uncertain terms that he should give Wellesley the most prominent role in operations that he could. In some ways this support is surprising, for
Wellesley was in practice little more likeable than Moore. Though he might shun ostentation and bombast, a mixture of shyness, intellectual arrogance and aristocratic hauteur had produced a demeanour that was at best curt and
distant, and at worst intolerant of human frailty and capable of great injustice. Even less attractive, meanwhile, was his habit of seeking scapegoats for his frustrations in a manner that took little account of reality, whilst
he was devoted to the noose, the lash and the punishment parade, contemptuous of notions of democracy and political progress, obsessed with the concept of order, and inclined to regard the mob – and, by extension, his soldiers –
with a mixture of fear, contempt and loathing. Yet all his faults could not also conceal the key fact that he was a military genius. As was apparent from his achievements in India, his icy manner reflected a cool detachment that
allowed him constantly to outhink the enemy, to get the best out of any ground, and to maximise the strong points of his own forces. Also helpful was a forte for logistics and an eye for detail. Liked he may not have been, but
respect and confidence he inspired in abundance.