

 Misery was guaranteed, but not all draft evaders fled their homes, for to do so carried with it many dangers and disadvantages. To take just one example, in November 1808 the Junta of Mondoñedo reported that it had arrested
‘various men who we know with reasonable certainty to have concealed their sons’. 15 In most localities, then, there existed many elements that had a direct interest in resisting the new authorities, whilst such levies as could
be raised were also much given to violent protest. Nor did it help, first, that motínes could always be camouflaged by a veneer of patriotic enthusiasm; second, that local notables who had failed to secure what they regarded as
an adequate degree of power and influence were not above making use of the mob; and, third, that the numerous place-seekers and adventurers who had fastened on the rising as a means of making their way in life had nothing to lose
in whipping up a tumult. Not surprisingly, riot was a constant danger. In Galicia sorteos were frequently disrupted by angry mobs; in Valencia several regiments of levies had to be disbanded after attempts to reduce their
excessive pay – initially more than double that of the regular army – led to mutiny; in Oviedo the newly raised Regimiento de Castropol took a leading part in rioting that broke out on 19 June; and in Madrid the liberation of the
city following the battle of Bailén was marred by brawling, pillage and murder. Thus, the commander of the forces who had entered the city, General Llamas, narrowly escaped death at the hands of his own men; the city was stripped
bare of the stores left behind by the French; and the pre-war Intendent, Luis Vigury, put to death by a mob that dragged his body through the streets.

 All too aware of just how vulnerable they were, the pudientes ’ initial response was a mixture of carrot and stick. Figures with particular influence amongst the populace were eulogised, awarded pensions or found figurehead
positions, and the populace themselves flattered and fêted. From time to time, too, money was thrown to the crowd, free bullfights organised, or the poor feasted at the public expense. But the chief thrust of the response was
repressive. The propaganda of the new authorities, for example, contained a series of more or less coded messages that spelled out the attitude that was expected of the populacho, whilst desperate attempts were made to retain the
services of even small parties of regular troops. Quick to appear, too, were a variety of rudimentary security commissions, police forces and anti-bandit patrols, not to mention a flood of ordinances that sought to regulate and
control the populace’s every move. Firearms were prohibited; householders were enjoined to make certain that their dependants did not disturb the peace; people were forbidden to gather in the streets; taverners were ordered not
to let customers linger over their drinks or engage in gaming or drunkenness; many forms of public entertainment were curtailed; travel was banned unless sanctioned by permit; tight restrictions were imposed on the letting of
rooms; and vagabonds, beggars, peddlars and prostitutes were threatened with imprisonment, forced labour or impressment. As if this was not enough there were calls for a general régime of prayer and penitence – special religious
processions, ceremonies and other services abounded – whilst the populacho were specifically instructed to respect the social hierarchy and adopt a suitably deferential attitude towards their superiors.