

 For the populace, of course, all this was a grave disappointment. Still worse, the new regulations threatened to curtail many important sources of income. As the juntas were also beginning to make use of the situation to further
the interests of the pudientes in matters social and economic – in Asturias, for example, a system of rent controls that dated from the days of Carlos III was abolished – all that efforts to coerce the populacho achieved was a
vicious circle of alienation, riot and repression. As it soon became all too obvious to the juntas that they simply did not have the means to maintain order in the face of wholesale revolt, the result was a reluctance to provoke
the populace more than could be avoided. If the quinta offered certain advantages, it just as clearly carried with it the threat of trouble, whilst educated opinion had always associated it with labour shortages, drunkenness,
sexual licence and venereal disease. Hardly surprisingly, then, in many parts of Spain attempts were made to restrict the number of conscripts sent to the army, or to ensure that the brunt of the burden fell on unpopular groups.
Around the coast many towns tried to escape by claiming that their men were permanently registered for service with the navy and therefore exempt from duty on land, whilst in Andalucía a common target was Galician migrant
labourers who could be rounded up as vagrants. Claims, too, were made that no men could be found, or that all those available were needed to defend their homes or help round up bandits and deserters.

 Militarily, then, Spain presented a depressing picture in the wake of the French retreat to the Ebro. British observers were shocked. To quote the commissary, Schaumann, for example:

 The more one sees of the Spaniards, the more discouraged one gets. Everything that has been so blatantly trumpeted in the papers about their enthusiasm, their great armies and the stampede to join them is simply lies. It often
looks as if Spain were not even willing to defend herself. In all the hamlets, villages and towns, the inhabitants … lounge about in their hundreds, completely apathetic, indifferent and gloomy, and sunk in their idleness. Is
this the daring, patriotic and impetuous race about which the press have raved so bombastically? 16

 Populous though they were, León and the two Castiles raised no more than a few thousand levies, whilst the Junta of Seville was reduced to offering free pardons to bandits, smugglers and deserters who would enlist. Meanwhile, in
Catalonia attempts to form a new volunteer army on the basis of the somaténes met with no success whatsoever, the latter in the meantime becoming notorious for pillaging friend and foe alike. By November, true, perhaps as many as
100,000 fresh troops had been scraped together, but even so the figure is hardly an impressive one by comparison, say, with the effort made by France in 1793–94.

 Had every soldier available to the Spaniards been sent in rapid pursuit of the French, something might yet have been achieved, but the shortage of soldiers and breakdown of what was at best a haphazard system of recruitment were
not the only problems faced with regard to mobilisation. The question of equipment and supply was desperate. Despite the copious assistance that had been received from the British, many troops were lacking in weapons, clothing
and footwear, whilst others were soon enduring severe hunger. Far worse, however, was the juntas’ ambition and rivalry. Not only were many of the new authorities extremely parochial in their attitude to the war, but some were
bent on petty geo-strategic ends of their own. A prime example here was the Junta of Seville. Having arrogated to itself the title of ‘Supreme Junta of Spain and the Indies’ at the beginning of the uprising and secured the
somewhat naive allegiance of Castaños, this body had embarked on an unrivalled campaign of aggrandisement. Denied the national leadership to which it aspired, it was determined at least to subjugate Andalucía and was only
narrowly prevented from dispatching troops against the Junta of Granada when the latter sought to assert its independence. Not content with this, the Junta of Seville engaged in dreams of annexing southern Portugal and tried to
keep Castaños’ army in Andalucía rather than letting it follow up the retreat of the French. Less ambitious in their scope but just as unfortunate were the activities of the commander of the forces of the Junta of Badajoz,
General José Galluzo, who for a full month refused to recognise the Convention of Sintra and lift the blockade he had imposed on French-held Elvas.