

 The action fought at the pass of Somosierra on 30 November 1808 marked the culmination of a dramatic campaign that had seen the French army more than avenge Bailén. The Spanish armies had been swept aside, whilst the emperor had
reached the very gates of Madrid. At the heart of this situation, it has often been argued, was the influence of Bailén. All over Patriot Spain men of letters, priests and office-seekers were continuing to rush into print to
legitimise the rising against Napoleon, advance their own solutions to Spain’s problems, awaken popular enthusiasm for the struggle, and obtain official favour. Whilst newspapers and broadsides carrying highly coloured accounts
of the fighting appeared on all sides, they were supplemented by hundreds of proclamations, poems and pamphlets. In all this literature the message was the same: Spanish heroism had triumphed over the ‘conquerors of the world’.
Napoleon was claimed to be in an agony of terror and remorse; victories invented where none had taken place; Spanish defeats played down or even denied altogether; and foolish rumours of all sorts given the greatest credence. In
all this, a considerable part was played by the anti-militarism that had become a commonplace feature of Spain’s intellectual milieu. As a good example here one might cite the immense attention lavished on the famous garrochistas
who had fought at Bailén. A mere handful of men, these lance-wielding cattle herders had played only a minor role in the fighting, and yet were the heroes of the hour.

 For a good account of the excited atmosphere that prevailed at this time, we have only to turn to Robert Brindle of the English College:

 Every place resounded with acclamation of victory and there was scarcely one Spaniard who did not already imagine their troops at the gates of Paris, and Bonaparte tottering on his throne. Such, indeed, was the enthusiasm that
if any feared another eruption from the French, it would have been looked upon as treason to express such fears. This state of affairs continued for two or three months during which time not one unpleasant tiding was permitted to
reach our ears … We reposed great confidence in the Spanish army and … as we heard for some time no song but the song of victory, we were unwilling to change our tune. 1

 The results were most unfortunate. Never enthusiastic about going to war, the Spaniards in effect were told that they did not have to, whilst the authorities were persuaded that they could let sleeping dogs lie rather than press
conscription too hard. Meanwhile, a climate had been created that could not but encourage a determination to exploit the rising for selfish ends. Thus, many local notables proved quite barefaced in their corruption and
maladministration. Although other instances may be found – for example, the formation of new regiments for no better reason than to provide commissions for relatives, clients and adherents of all sorts – nowhere was this more the
case than with regard to conscription. Reports of the protection of pudientes, relatives, friends, allies and dependants and of the acceptance of bribes are therefore numerous – in Granada the cost of exemption was between 300
and 400 reales – whilst rackets of all types abounded. In the words of one petition, for example, ‘In this town [Vivero] … the men of power and influence have managed to escape from a charge which should be general. Some have
gained exemption on the grounds that they are nobles [and] others on grounds that they are officials’. 2 Equally, ‘Half of those who are called up are allowed to go free, some thanks to money, others thanks to blackmail, and
still others thanks to a thousand different tricks and frauds.’ 3 And finally, ‘In many provinces the quota has still not been achieved … nor will it be achieved, because the chief inhabitants, who should have offered their sons
straight away, have had them exempted as nobles … In the province of Cuenca all the towns are full of young men, but, what with bribes and blackmail … those who do not want to go stay at home.’ 4