

 Had the Spaniards been more honest in their accounts of what was going on the situation might have been more acceptable, but it was becoming apparent that they were either living in a fool’s paradise or guilty of deliberate
deceit. Bailén, true, had been a great victory, but it had not, as we shall see, been followed up: the various Spanish authorities were bitterly at odds with one another, a new central government was only just beginning to take
shape, and there was no commander-in-chief of any sort. In consequence, the dispatches of Britain’s liaison officers made dramatic reading. To quote Phillip Roche, for example, the provincial juntas were ‘not only quarrelling
with each other about idle privileges and pre-eminences, but … occupying a large portion of their time in very futile discussions’, whilst for William Parker Carroll, the juntas were ‘solely activated by narrow-minded,
shortsighted policy, never extending their views beyond the precincts of their respective districts’. 19 Equally, from Seville William Cox complained, ‘The recent successes of their army, the ostentatious reception of the
conqueror, and the pompous celebration of their victories are circumstances which … have tended much to strengthen the idea conceived of by this junta of their supposed superiority.’ 20 Still worse:

 This junta have shown too evident signs of a wish to aggrandize themselves and a disinclination to afford those aids to other provinces which they have had it in their power to grant not to afford just grounds of suspicion that
their boasted loyalty and patriotism have at times been mixed with unworthy considerations of self-interest and personal advantage. They are every day making promotions in the army without much attention to merit, and giving away
employments … which they really have no right to dispose of. 21

 Though relying on the Spaniards would clearly be most unwise, the question still arose of what should be done with the British expeditionary force. Galicia, Asturias and the Basque provinces having from the very beginning of the
war been an object of the government’s attentions, it was only natural that they should now resurface as a possible theatre of operations, and all the more so as the Asturians were requesting the dispatch of a large force of
cavalry. This, for many reasons, was neither possible nor desirable, whilst only slightly less unrealistic was Castlereagh’s pet scheme for a rapid descent on Bilbao in an attempt to cut off the French retreat from Madrid. So
rapid was the French flight to the Ebro, however, that the Secretary of State’s scheme was out of date almost as soon as it was committed to paper, and it was eventually agreed that the army should be concentrated on the borders
of Galicia and León preparatory to assisting in the expulsion of the French from Spain. Exactly what assisting in the expulsion of the French meant was left to the discretion of its commander, however, and in this respect it was
unfortunate that the man who now occupied that post was Sir John Moore.