

 Known as the Convention of Sintra, these terms caused considerable controversy. Already smarting at the fact that the French had been granted an armistice without any reference to their own representatives, the Portuguese were
infuriated by the generosity of the terms Junot had been granted, matters being made still worse by the French interpreting ‘personal property’ as including a wide variety of loot, and in general adopting the most arrogant of
attitudes. For example:

 I proceeded to Lisbon … where I saw the French army … An extraordinary sight it was, for they had their standards displayed in the square of Belem with as much sangfroid as if they had been the victorious army, and had dictated
the agreements. 13

 Setting aside these issues, even the military aspects of the convention were questionable. No attempt was made to stipulate that Junot’s troops should not be employed again in Spain or Portugal, for example, or to insist that
they should at least be deprived of their much needed horses and draught animals.

 Sintra, in short, was a serious embarrassment: despite frantic attempts to force the French to disgorge their plunder, the Portuguese were furious, Porter, for example, writing of how they ‘stood staring at each other as if
uncertain of whether a mine or one of their old earthquakes had sprung under their feet’, and Warre that ‘the mob would have … destroyed the homes of everybody connected with the French, and even now, if a French deserter or
spy … is found, the cry of “He Frances” is enough, unless some English are near, to have him murdered’. 14 Nor was the army much better pleased: according to Morley, the convention ‘crushed every hope and withered every laurel’.
15 Yet there was little doubt that it was in principle defensible. In the wake of Dalrymple and Burrard’s blunders, indeed, sensible observers recognised that it was genuinely attractive. As Leach wrote:

 The aspect … of affairs was totally changed … when the flag of truce came in. The enemy then had possession of all the defensible positions between us and Lisbon, independent of the citadel and different forts near the capital.
This would have enabled General Junot to protract the contest for a length of time, whilst the game of the British clearly was to root out their opponents with as little delay as possible … not only on account of the lateness of
the season, but because the presence of our army would be desirable in Spain. 16

 Such, however, was not the way in which the agreement was seen in England. In the wake of Bailén, what was expected was great victories, whilst the first news that had reached the country gave the unfortunate impression that
Junot had surrendered altogether. The result was a storm of protest. From the king downwards, almost every sector of public opinion was appalled at the opportunity that appeared to have been thrown away, and on 21 September
Dalrymple was recalled to London to account for his conduct (Burrard, by contrast, was allowed for the time being to remain in Portugal as caretaker commander, though he too went home once Moore had arrived to replace him). A few
days earlier, meanwhile, an equally disgusted Wellesley had himself sailed for home on the pretext afforded by the death of his deputy in the post of Chief Secretary for Ireland.