

 One of the heroes of the traditional British version of the Peninsular War, Moore has invariably received favourable treatment at the hands of its chroniclers. As we have already seen, however, there was another side to the
story. Moore was a difficult character on extremely poor terms with the government, which he blamed for the misfortunes and indignities that he had experienced in the course of his abortive mission to Sweden. * Further angered by
a variety of other circumstances – he felt, for instance, that he had been treated very casually on his return from Sweden and resented not being given the Spanish command straight away – he was also openly scornful of
Castlereagh’s military plans, deeming them ‘plausible verbose nonsense’ and ‘a sort of gibberish’. 22 The ministry liking him no more than he liked the ministry, it is therefore somewhat surprising that he got the command at all,
but there was nothing else to be done, Chatham still not being ready to take the field.

 Although Moore’s differences with the government were to have an unfortunate influence in the subsequent campaign, the Portland administration was doing everything that it could to ensure success. Not the least of its concerns
was to unite Patriot Spain under a single political and military authority. As early as 20 August 1808 Castlereagh was urging Dalrymple to take such steps as he could to secure the appointment of a commander-in-chief, whilst the
failure of the Spaniards to make such an appointment led not only to formal protests but suggestions that the Spanish generals should be persuaded to operate in accordance with a common plan drawn up for them by the British. As
for the question of political authority, the parochialism of the provincial juntas was countered by threats of the withdrawal of support and the very same day that Dalrymple was ordered to press for a Spanish commander-in-chief,
the juntas’ representatives in London were informed that no further aid would be forthcoming until their masters had formed a new central government.

 How far British pressure was instrumental in the formation of the body – the Junta Suprema Central – that eventually supplied this want is unclear, but in one respect at least the British did succeed in making a substantial
contribution to the Spanish cause. As will be recalled, in 1807 a sizeable Spanish force had been sent to assist the grande armée. After taking part in the siege of the Swedish fortress of Stralsund, this body had been cantoned
in Denmark, which was now at war with both Britain and Sweden. Scattered through the Danish archipelago, far from home and interspersed with considerable numbers of Dutch, French and Danish troops, there had appeared little risk
that the 14,000 men involved would cause much trouble, but to make doubly certain the greatest efforts were made to encourage loyalty to the emperor and prevent them hearing of events in Spain. Thus, it was not until 24 June that
their commander, the Marqués de la Romana, was finally informed of the accession of Joseph Bonaparte. What then happened is a matter of some conjecture, but La Romana was eventually persuaded to seek the help of the British
squadron that was blockading the Belgian coast, and after much careful planning it was arranged that all the troops in the division should revolt and make for a safe refuge from which they could be evacuated. Things did not go
entirely according to plan – several units were disarmed or forced to surrender – but between 7 and 11 August 9,000 troops were concentrated on the island of Langeland. Some delay then ensued, but the Spaniards were safe enough
and on 21 August they embarked on British ships and put to sea, finally disembarking at Santander on 11 October.