

 The Junta … of Ciudad Real … is not the work of … the people … Its members are Godoys, traitors, egoists and thieves who clubbed together so that the people would … not get at their money. From Infantes, Manzanares and
Madridejos come documents that show … the injustices … that they have been perpetrating … The province is scandalized, for everybody knows that they are malignant rogues. 10

 With the French absent from most of Spain and Patriot propaganda insistent that victory was a foregone conclusion, the consequences were easy to predict. Volunteers came forward, certainly, but in smaller numbers than have
generally been represented, whilst enlistment was clearly influenced by the payment of substantial bounties, pressure on the part of masters or landlords, and the fact that early summer was a time when many day labourers could
find no work. As early as 31 May 1808 the Junta of Seville was complaining that many recruits were in practice unwilling to serve, and, further, that even the regular army was experiencing serious desertion. Meanwhile, no sooner
were the new regiments, formed in the wake of the uprising, confronted with the prospect of being marched off to fight the French than the troops began to desert in droves. Draft evasion was also common: ‘Married men being then
exempt from the contributions required to fill up the ranks’, noted the British officer, John Patterson, ‘all the youthful fellows in the neighbourhood espoused themselves in order to avoid the Junta’s levies.’ 11

 Patriot Spain therefore began to experience precisely the same problems visible in Revolutionary and Napoleonic France. Large numbers of men fled their homes for mountains, cities, neighbouring provinces or even other countries.
‘In this city’, complained the Junta of Santiago, ‘the young men who have been conscripted into the army can often be heard complaining of the large number of their fellows who have fled to … Portugal in order to avoid being
enlisted.’ 12 * Everywhere such men mingled with groups who were already living on the margins of society. Joined by many refugees from the Spanish armies, such men had little option but to turn to banditry. ‘From experience’,
wrote one anonymous Galician memorialist, ‘it has become clear … that the thieving deserters who infest the highways have become so numerous that it is impossible to go from one house to the next.’ 13 Nor was Galicia the only
area affected. From the vicinity of Cádiz one government agent reported that the whole area was swarming with ‘bad Spaniards, who, having either deserted or fled from being enlisted, have necessarily become thieves and
wrongdoers, robbing passers-by … sacking farms, and [oppressing] the [inhabitants] with more inhumanity than the … French’. 14

 A problem that was to dog the Allies throughout the war, the collapse of order in the Patriot zone, was exacerbated by economic paralysis. As fighting spread across the country, so established trade routes and centres of
industry were disrupted. For example, the flour mills around Santander which fed the colonial market could no longer rely upon a steady supply of grain from the wheatlands of Old Castile. To make matters worse the commercial
community often came under direct attack. Even Spanish merchants often found themselves under attack as suspected afrancesados, whilst, as we have seen, the substantial number of French entrepreneurs who had settled in Spain
everywhere found themselves in great danger. The Valencian massacre remains exceptional in its horror, but it was not alone: for example, serious disturbances also took place in La Coruña. Many businesses, then, were physically
eliminated, whilst the war also led to a crisis in credit as great banking families, such as the Dutari brothers of Madrid, saw their profits collapse. Nor did the war even bring much in the way of fresh opportunity: if the
British lifted their blockade, for example, they made no attempt to check the flow of contraband to South America and used their newfound friendship with Spain to make fresh inroads in the domestic market. Worth thirteen million
reales per year in 1808, the value of goods smuggled in via Gibraltar alone had by 1812 reached sixty-five million. Centred in an area controlled by the French, meanwhile, the Catalan cotton industry could neither get its goods
to America, nor obtain adequate supplies of raw materials, nor even, protected as she was by the Continental System, sell its products in France. As for the Patriots, deprived of both Catalan cotton and, to a lesser extent,
brandy, they could not hope to maintain even the pre-war supply of goods to America, transatlantic exports soon falling by some seventy-five per cent.