

 With money, indeed, it was even possible to play at being a soldier without ever having to experience the rigours of life in the field. Particularly important here were the numerous corps of ‘distinguished volunteers’ that
sprang up all over Patriot Spain. Thus, in exchange for paying the cost of their uniform and equipment, men could enlist in units whose only duties were to mount guard on city walls, inject civic life with a certain degree of
military pomp, add a degree of lustre to the new authorities, and maintain the prerogatives of the propertied classes. Hardly surprisingly, these units soon acquired an evil reputation. The Voluntarios Distinguidos de Cádiz – a
force later lauded to the skies by liberals eager to find a model for a new army – was described as ‘battalions of cupids’ composed of ‘a multitude of infamous men of evil habits who … possess neither merit, nor subordination,
nor inclination to the true object for which their arms were created’. 5 As for the Junta Central’s personal guard – the grandiloquently named Voluntarios de Honor de la Universidad de Toledo – it was written:

 If it is wished in part to put things right … these soldiers who call themselves the Estudiantes de Toledo … should be expelled from the city. Your Majesty has no idea of the … ruin that they are causing … There is not a married
woman who because of them has not fallen out with her husband, not a widow who has not emptied her house to take up with them, not a maiden who has not abandoned father and honour at their instigation … They have neither king nor
religion, and recognise no difference between day and night, both of which they spend in the tavern. 6

 Sparing of their sons, the wealthy were equally parsimonious when it came to the subject of their riches. Often giving little themselves, they rather sought to coerce donations from their dependants and social inferiors whilst
at the same time ensuring that the cost of the war was by one means or another passed on to the populace. Indeed, the juntas were widely accused of corruption: the Junta of Granada was reputed to have stolen at least 5 million
reales, whilst of the Junta of Córdoba it was written that every evening it was ‘wasting on dinners what the poor give for the army’. 7 Much of the money made by the juntas came from bribes – the secretary of the Junta of
Galicia, for example, was accused of having obtained up to 1,600,000 reales in this fashion – but there are also reports of the juntas engaging in an ad hoc programme of desamortización that saw the sale of both common lands and
the properties of the Church.

 All this could not have been more unfortunate. If the populace had taken to the streets in May 1808, it was at best with a view to protecting themselves (there was a strong belief that the Dos de Mayo had been the result of a
premeditated attempt to massacre the citizens of Madrid). Beyond that, what mattered was avenging themselves on their social superiors and, in particular, all those groups who had enriched themselves under Godoy: very soon,
warned one writer, ‘the sovereign power will have been taken over by the poor, and these will exterminate the rich and the French alike’. 8 Whilst the accession of Fernando VII had been greeted with great excitement, and his
overthrow genuine dismay, this did not mean that the people were devoted to the new monarch per se. On the contrary, as one perceptive British officer noted of the Spanish peasantry, ‘had they been permitted to live in peace, it
would have been a matter of the greatest indifference to them whether their king was Joseph, Ferdinand or the ghost of Don Quijote’. 9 With Fernando having been presented as a kind of ‘Prince Charming’ who would put all things
right and usher in a golden age of peace and prosperity, the people’s real loyalty was rather to a Spain in which they would no longer be subject to the demands of Church, State and señor. Willing enough though they were to riot
against godoyismo, they had no desire to fight the French, and all the more so as military service had always been particularly hated. Try though Patriot propaganda might to emphasise the brutality of the grande armée or
Napoleon’s greed for foreign manpower, there was, meanwhile, no disguising the fact that los de siempre were still in control, nor, for that matter, the anger of the populace. Thus: