

 Thus ended the British role in what may broadly be defined as the heroic period of the Peninsular War. Immense quantities of material and financial aid had been supplied to the Spanish and Portuguese insurgents; Portugal had
been liberated at minimal cost; the army had given substantial proof of its tactical efficiency; a reasonable plan had been reached with regard to the support that should be given to the Spanish armies in the fresh fighting that
seemed likely to ensue before the close of the year; and the bulk of La Romana’s division was rescued from Denmark. At the same time Britain had been able to act with speed and efficacy, whilst it had succeeded in securing
considerable influence in Portugal and Spain alike: had not both countries apparently acceded to British demands that they should establish new central governments, for example? In short, the British government could feel well
pleased: Sintra might have been both a disappointment and an embarrassment, but its favourite and most trusted general had emerged from the furore if not unscathed then at least not so damaged as to prevent him from being
employed in the future, whilst there seemed little doubt that the ripples that it had caused in Britain and Portugal alike would soon be smoothed away.

 In practice, however, the situation was by no means so rosy. The dispatch of so many troops to Portugal had ensured that there would be a considerable delay before operations could commence in Spain. There were also serious
problems with the Spaniards: inherent in the sudden Spanish interest in British troops, for example, lay the desire not just to receive assistance but also to obtain command over them. Equally a desire was beginning to emerge
amongst the British to further their influence in Spain or even to impose their own political solutions. With the British army in the hands of an officer who was not only highly ambitious but deeply frustrated, at odds with the
ministry, notoriously suspicious of the government’s representatives abroad, and possessed of a prickly disposition, trouble was certain, and all the more so given the thunderbolt that was in preparation across the River Ebro.

===== FILE: OEBPS/xhtml/chapter5.xhtml =====
The Peninsular War

 5

 Somosierra

 NAPOLEON’S REVENGE, NOVEMBER–DECEMBER 1808

 The line of mountains loomed dark in the mist, their summits shrouded in cloud. Ahead of the French army the highroad disappeared into a deep cleft in the hills, the precipitous slopes of which were covered with scrub and
boulders. From the defile there came the sound of heavy fighting, whilst it was apparent that the advance had been stalled. Spurring forward into the defile at the head of his staff, the emperor surveyed the scene through his
telescope. Turning to one of his aides-de-camp, he ordered that the way should be cleared by the squadron of Polish light horse that was serving as his personal bodyguard. Utterly astonished, several of the officers around the
emperor protested that the task was impossible, but Napoleon was adamant: the Poles would charge. Joined by the aide-de-camp who had carried the fatal message, in a few moments they were clattering towards the Spanish positions.
Assailed by the fire of sixteen cannon, the cavalrymen within a matter of seconds lost half their strength, and had to fall back. Rallied by General Montbrun, however, they returned to the charge and this time were successful.
The men serving the guns died to a man, the rest of the Spaniards fled, and the French were left to resume their march. With neither troops nor defensible positions left between the emperor and Madrid, the war seemed almost over.