

 In view of the furore it might have been thought that this would have been the end of Wellesley’s career. In a bitter denunciation of the convention, for example, the poet, William Wordsworth, wrote that he was ‘utterly unworthy
of the station in which he had been placed’; that ‘he magnified himself and his achievements’; and that ‘here was a man, who, having not any fellow feeling with the people he had been commissioned to aid, could not know where
their strength lay, and therefore could not turn it to account’. 17 To make matters worse, Dalrymple had done his best to imply that the convention was in large part Wellesley’s responsibility, whilst the Wellesley clan’s many
enemies were determined to exploit the situation for all it was worth. Disappointed though they were, however, Castlereagh and, rather less willingly, Canning upheld his cause, whilst he was also warmly received by George III. As
for the court of enquiry that was convened by the government, the report that it issued on 22 December could be read as exonerating him altogether. In consequence, Wellesley survived the crisis in good enough order to have hopes
of another army. Not so Dalrymple and Burrard, both of whom were damned with such faint praise as to make it clear that they could never be offered a command again, the former in addition being severely reprimanded by the
government.

 Despite the controversy, the Sintra affair posed no threat to continued British involvement in the Peninsula. In so far as the situation there was concerned, by 18 September the bulk of the French forces in Portugal had taken
ship for France, the only exception being the garrisons of Almeida and Elvas, which, blockaded by Portuguese forces on the one hand and Spanish ones on the other, had to be rescued by detachments of British troops. Also dealt
with was the Russian squadron, which surrendered on terms that saw its men sent back to Russia, and its ships impounded in Britain. Meanwhile, Lisbon had been occupied amidst scenes of general rejoicing:

 At length, when … the national flag of Portugal once again waved on the citadel … there was such a combination of vivas, sky-rockets, ringing of bells, singing, dancing, screeching, crying, laughing … embracing in the streets …
as must render every attempt at description hopeless. 18

 In control was a new regency created from three members of the original council left behind by João, two representatives of a list of possible substitutes drawn up by the prince, and two representatives of the Portuguese
resistance movement, including the Bishop of Oporto. As for the British army, it had now been swelled by the troops of Sir John Moore, who had also replaced Dalrymple (who had left for London on 3 October).

 With Portugal settled, the British could once again turn their attentions to Spain. Contact with the new Spanish government had established that a British army would now be welcome, but autumn had brought a change to British
attitudes to the Peninsula. On the one hand Sintra had shattered the political consensus of June 1808, for Whigs and radicals were naturally inclined to make use of it as a means of overthrowing the Portland administration. On
the other the government had become increasingly irritated with the Spaniards. Not least of the reasons was the ever more importunate demands of the Spanish missions to London. To these petitions the British had responded with
considerable generosity – the Asturians alone received £350,000 in specie, 9,000 shirts, 10,000 pairs of shoes, 6,000 packs, 26 cannon, 20,000 muskets, 14,000 pikes, 12,000 swords, 1,600 pistols, 1,080 barrels of powder,
2,752,155 musket cartridges, 18,600 artillery charges, and 2,500 camp kettles, whilst the total of the money sent to the various juntas amounted to £1,100,000 – but the various liaison officers and military missions which they
had dispatched to the Peninsula or otherwise succeeded in attaching to the Spanish armies had begun to send back news of a most alarming sort. If the various juntas that headed the Spanish revolt could not be faulted in their
commitment to the struggle, it was all too apparent that they tended to regard it in a most parochial fashion, their sole concern being the protection of their own provinces. Thus, such levies as they managed to raise were often
kept at home, while in many cases attempts were also made to lay hands upon such forces of the regular army as happened to be found within their borders. As for the aid supplied by the British, it, too, was being hoarded for the
use of the provinces in which it had been disembarked. To make matters worse, the juntas were experiencing considerable difficulties in organising any sort of war effort and imposing their authority.