

 The tactical inferiority of the Spanish armies was exacerbated by the poor quality of their commanders. Few generals, perhaps, could have wrested very much from forces of the sort that Patriot Spain put into the field, whilst it
is also the case that better troops might have permitted the emergence of talent that in the event lay hidden. At the same time, a few generals displayed great physical courage, won renown for the skilful defence of some fortress
or proved themselves to be competent subordinates or divisional commanders. Yet the picture still remains fairly bleak. Not helped by headquarters that were frequently filled with well-connected young noblemen who had little idea
how to fulfil their responsibilities, too often Spanish generals misread the enemy’s intentions, failed to send out adequate patrols, took up vulnerable positions, adopted impractical dispositions, failed to react to hostile
moves, or allowed their forces to be defeated in detail. So monotonous, indeed, was one scenario that it aroused comment on the part of the enemy:

 They prejudged the event of the battle by their own ardent desire to … destroy their enemies; ignorant of the art of manoeuvring … they placed themselves in long shallow lines in plains where the superiority of our tactics and
our cavalry must necessarily give us the advantage. This order of battle, bad even for well manoeuvred troops, deprived the Spaniards of the power of … concentrating themselves to resist our masses. 32

 In 1808 or any subsequent year, then, any Spanish army that took the field was likely to be defeated, but the situation was worsened still further by the fact that defeat was unlikely to be anything but very heavy. In
mountainous areas, things might not be too bad, but much of Spain was composed of rolling tableland devoid of woods, villages and enclosures. ‘My road from Astorga’, wrote one British officer travelling across Old Castile, ‘lay
through a vast open space extending from five to twenty or more miles on every side without a single accident of ground which would enable a body of infantry to check a pursuing enemy or cover its own retreat’. 33 In such terrain
an army with cavalry superiority could wreak terrible havoc on a defeated foe, the latter being likely to lose not only thousands of casualties but also all its guns and baggage. In Spain, in particular, hundreds of soldiers
could be relied upon to take advantage of a defeat to attempt to return home or fall in with some guerrilla band or bandit gang.

 Military operations, in short, were likely to be a costly business that would try Patriot resources to the limit. This was made even worse by a strategic situation that was extremely unfavourable to the Spanish cause. The first
meeting of the Junta Central’s Junta General de Guerra (a body composed of Castaños, the Conde de Montijo, the Marqués de Castelar – a senior officer of the royal guard – and an admiral named Ciscar) had confirmed the plan of
campaign that had been worked out at the conference of 5 September, and for good measure agreed a major reorganisation of the Patriot forces. The troops of Galicia, Asturias and, when they arrived, La Romana were to form the Army
of the Left; those of Castaños, Llamas, Cuesta and Galluzo the Army of the Centre; those of Palafox and Saint March and a further Valencian division under O’Neill the Army of Reserve; and the forces of Catalonia, reinforced by
one division dispatched from Zaragoza and another sent up from Granada, the Army of the Right. Most significantly in view of the presence of Montijo, who was not only a ringleader in the motín de Aranjuez but also a connection of
the Palafox family, it was agreed that all conscripts should be sent to the front via the Army of Reserve. * Yet the planned attack was the fruit not of military realities, but of the bombastic outpourings of the popular press,
the pernicious influence of Bailén and the precarious position of the Junta Central. Indeed, it was little more than madness. The Armies of the Left and Reserve were separated by a yawning gulf that was supposed to be filled up
by the still absent British and the Army of Extremadura, whilst the extension of the Spanish flanks into Vizcaya and Navarre had pulled the 80,000 troops who had reached the front into a great crescent that allowed the 65,000 men
whom the Spaniards were trying to surround to operate on interior lines. Already, indeed, a sudden French offensive had routed the erstwhile Army of Castile at Logroño and cut off part of one of Castaños’ Andalucian divisions at
Lerín. With most of the Spanish troops, at best, of mediocre quality and suffering miserably for want of food and winter clothing, a grim description of their situation is provided by Juan Manuel Sarasa, a young private in the
Zamora infantry regiment who had escaped from Denmark with the forces of La Romana: