

 Victory saddling the Junta with many enemies, this triumph was double-edged, but Patriot Spain did at least acquire a new administration. Composed of representatives of Aragón, Asturias, the Canaries, Old Castile, Catalonia,
Córdoba, Extremadura, Galicia, Granada, Jaén, León, Madrid, the Balearic Islands, Murcia, Navarre, Seville, Toledo and Valencia, the Junta Suprema Central Gubernativa del Reino was solemnly installed in the royal palace of
Aranjuez on 25 September. Having assembled, the delegates quickly appointed a council of ministers, divided themselves up into five sub-committees on the basis of one for each of the old ministries, and established both a
secretariat and a separate Junta General de Guerra, it being the task of this last body to advise the Junta on military matters and co-ordinate the movements of the armies. There was, however, little inclination to appoint a
commander-in-chief, a role that not only recalled Godoy’s position as generalísimo, but hinted at both Caesarism and the reassertion of the army’s primacy in the governance of Spain. More fundamentally still, perhaps, to the
horror of many of its progenitors, a mixture of logic and personal ambition drove the Junta to lay claim to the sovereign power and specifically reject the idea that they were mere deputies at the service of the provincial juntas.

 Aranjuez may therefore be said to have witnessed a second revolution. In what sense may this revolution be interpreted, however? According to many Spanish historians, the Junta Central was a leading instrument of a classic
bourgeois revolution in which an old feudal order was overthrown by a new middle class. This is an exaggeration: there was nothing revolutionary about the thirty-five grandees, army officers, town councillors, churchmen and
bureaucrats who at one time or another sat upon it, whilst the long manifesto that it published on 10 November was at best ambiguous, on the one hand promising reform but on the other speaking of the restoration of Spain’s
ancient constitution. Nevertheless, despite certain measures which suggest a more traditionalist agenda – it suspended the sale of clerical property, rescinded the 1767 expulsion of the Jesuits, and appointed a new Inquisitor
General – it could hardly not push on with reform. Not only were most of its leading figures – its first president, the Conde de Floridablanca; its secretary, Martín de Garay; and the Asturian writer and economist, Gaspar Melchor
de Jovellanos – all associated with the enlightened absolutism of Carlos III and Carlos IV, but it could not escape from what seemed the wholly negative record of Godoy, the ease with which Napoleon had subverted the Bourbon
state, the growing threat to the social order, and the demands of the war effort.

 Whether anything dramatic would have come from all this is another matter. The few known radicals associated with the Junta Central – most notably, the leading playwright and journalist, Manuel José Quintana – certainly
envisaged a liberal revolution in the style of that which was to be pushed through in the cortes of Cádiz after 1810. Moreover, gathering round Garay – a man of considerable capacity who appears to have been quickly won over to
their ideas – they formed a pressure group known as the junta chica and did their best to advance their plans. However, their views were not supported even by Jovellanos, who was a strong exponent of scientific education,
economic liberalism and desamortización, and had from 1800 to 1808 been imprisoned by the Inquisition for his pains. Nor were they much respected even by men of enlightened views. Lord Holland, for example, wrote that the junta
chica ‘was composed of young men of more ardour and imagination than experience or prudence, who had imbibed their notions of freedom from the encyclopedists of France, rather than … the immediate wants of their own country’. 18
Sooner or later, too, the ambiguity that characterised the manifesto of 10 November would have had to be abandoned, thereby unleashing the wrath of carolines and traditionalists alike. Given that 1809 witnessed decrees that
unified all the old councils into a single body and, in principle at least, put an end to the levies on industrial and commercial profits known as the alcabalas, cientos and milliones, it is nevertheless fair to say that the
Junta Central did not neglect reform. What is even clearer, meanwhile, is that it did not neglect the war. On the contrary, indeed, the Junta ordered a quinta sufficient to raise an army of 550,000 men, confirmed the principle of
universal conscription already introduced by many of the provincial juntas, tried to obtain large numbers of horses from Morocco, decreed the formation of what amounted to a national guard – the so-called milicias honradas –
imposed a variety of emergency ‘war contributions’ and forced loans, encouraged the production of arms and equipment, and ordered the provincial juntas to open public subscriptions for the clothing of the army.