

 With time and good fortune, perhaps, many of these defects could have been remedied but matters were compounded by the quality of the officer corps, which is generally agreed to have been very poor. Only too typical, it seems,
was one Antonio Terán. A captain of the León infantry regiment, he was accused of being ‘a coward unworthy of his epaulettes’ and reported to be living in Vigo with ‘a prostituted adulteress’ whose husband was in America. 24 From
Valencia, meanwhile, come reports of courts martial of ‘Don Mariano Usel, Colonel of the Regimiento de la Fé … for the poor organisation of the unit, embezzlement of funds and other acts … [and] against some officers of the
Regimiento de Turia … for their excesses, lack of subordination, mistreatment of local justices, and murder of several Frenchmen in Murviedro’. 25 It would be tempting to attribute the blame for this situation entirely to the
influx of new officers who had entered the army in 1808, for many of the insurgent authorities had certainly showered commissions upon friends and dependants without any regard for their suitability. When the Supreme Council of
War was charged with the task of examining Spain’s defeats the following year, for example, it concluded that this rash of appointments had had the most serious effects and proposed that every commission issued since 1808 should
be annulled. Yet this is too simplistic an explanation of the problem. Many of the men appointed to command the new regiments were actually drawn from the mass of retired and supernumerary officers that had existed before 1808,
whilst it was not just outside the army that there was a problem. To quote Francisco Javier de Cabanés, a regular officer who was perhaps the best military analyst that Spain produced in the Peninsular War, ‘In those moments of
effervescence [i.e. the uprising], alongside a number of officers … who deserved to be plucked from the ranks of the subalterns, there were promoted many whose ability was unworthy of the … positions conferred upon them.’ 26

 Reports of misconduct amongst the officer corps are in any case so common that it is impossible to believe that the problem was confined to any one group within its ranks. Aside from the question of incompetence, absenteeism was
common. Rather than enduring the miseries of active service, many officers seized any pretext to travel to such cities as Cádiz, Seville and La Coruña, in which sanctuaries, like Terán, they lived in the best style that they
could afford, the whole issue being compounded by the cavalier fashion in which many generals appointed serving officers to be their aides-de-camp. On the battlefield, many officers displayed the most abject cowardice, the
problem becoming so serious that the Junta Central was eventually driven to order all infantry officers below a certain rank to be deprived of their horses. Lack of leadership was compounded by indiscipline. Excessive numbers of
soldier-servants were employed, for example, with the result that many troops were removed from the fighting line. Fanciful non-regulation uniforms were very much de rigueur – ‘Had 100,000 men been collected from the different
European armies, the officers could not have exhibited a greater variety of dress … Everyone seems to wear … his own fancy, and deems it sufficient if it be military’ 27 – and gambling and whoring were widespread. Thus: