

 British observers were scathing on the subject of the new government. For example:

 The central junta have certainly not done and are not doing their duty. They have sacrificed the public interest to their own private views of ambition and advantage. The people think so and unless a more energetic government is
immediately formed the people will interfere. 19

 To quote the same observer again:

 The government do nothing. They are insensible to the danger and neglect the precautions required … They are more occupied with trifles and nonsense about their own rank and state than with great national measures. 20

 What was lacking was neither goodwill nor energy. Far more problematic was the question of how the Junta’s orders were to be enforced. In this respect, its chief agents were the provincial juntas, and yet these bodies had
suddenly discovered that they had created a serious threat to their authority and independence (aside from anything else, no sooner had the new government been formed than the British had switched all aid from them to the Junta
Central). At the same time, the Junta was also being sabotaged by enemies within its own ranks – above all, the supporters of José Palafox – and the continued opposition of the Council of Castile, which was effectively claiming
that the new government was illegitimate. If ‘the people’ thought anything, it was because of a whispering campaign. Barely a week after the Junta came into being, indeed, the British diplomat, Charles Vaughan, was writing:

 The central junta are sometimes … spoken of with contempt, and I know not whether to attribute it to the bad characters of some of its members, or to a jealousy of the growing influence of the people. It is something represented
as ridiculous the people exercising the power of the crown, and the slowness of their proceedings is complained of. 21

 Even had co-operation been more forthcoming, however, on a local level there still remained the problem of popular unrest or, to put it another way, the desire of the propertied classes not to push the populace too far. If the
Junta Central failed in its most pressing duty in the autumn of 1808, then, it must also be asked whether any other administration could have managed better.

 From the point of view of the Junta Central the way out was obvious. Obtain a dramatic military victory and it might secure the respect of its subordinates whilst at the same time reassuring the British and making certain of
their continued support. However, given the numerous defects of its troops such a prospect was unlikely. Gone, at least for the most part, were the disorderly crowds of armed civilians of the first weeks of the war, but gone too,
in effect, was the old Bourbon army, whose regiments had lost many veterans to desertion on the one hand, and been swamped by raw recruits on the other. Typical, perhaps, was the Valencian division of General Llamas (the troops
who had run amok in Madrid in August), which Alcalá Galiano describes as having ‘loose breeches, cloaks, long, tangled and greasy locks hanging … down their backs, and round hats with patriotic cockades, slogans, or badges of the
Virgin and the saints’, and ‘in general … mixing the ridiculous with the ferocious’. 22 On all sides, indeed, there prevailed inexperience, shortages of food, clothing and equipment, and a desperate want of cavalry and artillery.
Of the Galician forces it was written, ‘It is impossible to describe the wretched appearance of this army, in want of everything and a mixture of peasants in their different costumes’, and of the Army of Castile that it was ‘a
complete mass of miserable peasantry, without clothing, without organisation, and with few officers worthy of the name’. 23