

 What, though, was to be done? For commentators of many shades of opinion the obvious solution was the appointment of a regency, but there was no agreement as to who should exercise such a function, nor, still less, as to who
should decide on the identity of the regent or regents. Put forward by such figures as José Palafox, meanwhile, it was hard not to associate such plans with personal ambition and the pursuit of the sectional aims of Church and
aristocracy, whilst the civilian notables at the heart of the provincial juntas had little desire to see, as seemed likely, power placed in the hands of some general. Just as problematic, was the formation of a cortes that could
elect a government, for there was neither a national assembly of any sort nor any idea of how one might be assembled or how much time would be needed to implement such a scheme. Faute de mieux, there thus seemed little option but
for the various provincial authorities to establish a central council – a central junta, in fact – that could function as an interim government.

 No sooner had this suggestion been generally accepted, however, than fresh problems arose. Whilst it was quickly agreed that the new body should meet in some neutral location – after some deliberation the choice fell on Aranjuez
– and that each of the juntas or other authorities concerned should be allotted two representatives, many questions were unclear. What, for example, was the relationship that should exist between the Junta Central and the
provincial bodies from which it stemmed? What was the role of the Junta Central in the long term? For that matter, what bodies should be represented in its ranks? There being little common ground on any of these issues, almost
any solution was bound to provoke controversy. Meanwhile, any new Junta was certain to face the bitter hostility of significant elements in the Patriot camp. For the Palafoxist faction – the spearhead of all those who wished to
turn back the clock of Bourbon reform – its very formation was a defeat that was both personal and political, whilst many representatives of the old Bourbon administration were equally unhappy at the way in which the Council of
Castile had been sidelined.

 Most prominent amongst these disaffected elements was the tough and uncompromising General Cuesta who was now not only at loggerheads with Blake, but also with the civilian authorities that had emerged in his dominions, the
Junta of León having taken advantage of the fact that it had had to flee to the frontiers of Galicia following Medina de Río Seco to throw off his authority. Aided and abetted by Infantado, he had tried to persuade Castaños of
the need for a group of generals to seize power, but the victor of Bailén was too sensible (or possibly too cautious) to consider so foolhardy a notion. Nevertheless, Cuesta was still capable of making trouble. Thus, early in
September the Junta of León selected two representatives to attend the Junta Central on its behalf in the person of its erstwhile president, Antonio Valdés – an admiral and sometime Minister of Marine – and the Vizconde de
Quintanilla. To reach Madrid from their refuge of Ponferrada, however, they had to cross territory controlled by Cuesta, the latter promptly having them imprisoned in the castle of Segovia, whilst at the same time ordering the
appointment of two replacements by the Chancellory of Valladolid, which he regarded as the only legitimate source of political authority in his Captain Generalcy. In doing so, however, he merely demonstrated the limits of
military power. Castaños would not back him – on the contrary, he accused him of risking ‘a military anarchy, which, after shedding torrents of blood, will make us fall into the hands of our enemies’ 17 – and the general
therefore had no option but to surrender his prisoners, relinquish his command and travel to Aranjuez to account for his conduct.