

 Elsewhere things were not much better. If the Junta of Valencia quickly dispatched divisions to Madrid and Zaragoza under Llamas and Saint March, the Juntas of Jaén and Granada tried to recall the troops that they had sent to
Castaños’ army, whilst the Juntas of Galicia and Asturias were very reluctant to allow their troops to advance beyond their frontiers at all. Last but not least, Cuesta was determined to preserve the independence of the few
thousand levies that he had been able to assemble in the vicinity of Salamanca in the guise of the Army of Castile, and was therefore most disinclined to let them move forward for fear that their lack of numbers meant they would
inevitably be subordinated to another general.

 The consequence of such behaviour was not hard to foresee. After Bailén, Joseph Bonaparte had been terrified that the Spaniards would fall upon him from all sides, but nothing of the sort occurred. Madrid was evacuated by the
French on 1 August, but it was nearly a fortnight before any Patriot troops reached the city, and even then these consisted only of the division sent up from Valencia. Castaños did not appear until 23 August, whilst he, too, was
accompanied by only one division, the other three that made up his command having been kept back by the Junta of Seville. Bound up with all this, of course, is the issue of the concentration of authority. A central government was
yet to emerge, and until it did there was no hope of appointing a commander-in-chief. Amongst the generals, there was some talk of at least agreeing on a candidate for such a role, but such were the divisions in their ranks that
even this remained a pipe dream. Thus, Cuesta and Blake had been enemies ever since Medina de Río Seco; Palafox saw Castaños as an obstacle to his plans to complete the revolution that had been begun at Aranjuez; Castaños was
mistrustful of both Cuesta and Palafox; and the young and foolish Duque de Infantado was despised by all and sundry, not least because he had briefly rallied to the cause of Joseph Bonaparte. All that a conference held on 5
September could agree was therefore a vague plan of campaign that called for Blake to push into Vizcaya and Palafox into Navarre, the aim being to surround the French, who were commonly supposed to be starving, disease-ridden and
demoralised.

 Gradually, the obstacles in the way of a general advance were overcome, and by late September the Army of Galicia, an Asturian division under Acevedo, the Army of Castile, two divisions of the Army of Andalucía, and Saint March
and Llamas’ Valencians had all reached the Ebro, whilst successful forays had been carried out against Bilbao and Sangüesa. However, the remaining two divisions of the Army of Andalucía had been so much delayed that they were
only now reaching Madrid, whilst the Army of Extremadura had not even left its home province. Campaigning, it seemed, had taken second place to politicking, and, in particular, the formation of a new central government. The need
for some such body had been recognised from the very beginning, but it was not until the liberation of Madrid that the issue assumed a practical character, and all the more so as the Council of Castile – a body which had since
May played a leading role in collaborating with the invaders – was attempting to put itself forward as the rightful government.