

 The soldier who abandons himself like a brute to the bribed flattery of prostitutes, to excess of wine … or to the lamentable distraction of gambling can never shelter in his breast the … heroic sentiments of a … patriot.
Although our armies suffer to a greater or lesser extent from all these moral infirmities, the most general … is gambling. A large part of our officers being immersed in it, they ignore their obligations … occupy the hours that
they should spend in study in its pursuit, offer a pernicious example to the soldiery, debase themselves in the lowest fashion, and … look on everything other than winning and losing with the most stupid indifference. 28

 Essential to all and sundry were large quantities of baggage, and, in the case of senior officers, servants, barbers, cooks and valets, whilst corruption was widespread whether it involved falsifying troop returns or
commandeering much-needed transport.

 There were, of course, exceptions to the rule, but, with officers of this sort, improvement was unlikely. Desertion, for example, was encouraged, and all the more so because the men were all too frequently dressed in costumes
that resembled civilian clothing, whilst straggling was also a constant problem. Steadiness on the battlefield, too, was not much to be found. Though occasionally capable of the utmost heroism, most Spanish troops were prone to
attacks of panic that could lead to entire regiments – indeed, in one case an entire army – fleeing the field at the first shots. Why this was the case is not hard to understand:

 Crowds flocked to bear arms, but while untaught to bear them were … hazarded all at once in the field, creating confusion from the want of military knowledge of their leaders as well as their unsteadiness … Though in some
instances I have observed that the … new militia … have acted against the enemy with peculiar resolution and resistance, it has always been in … strong passes, or woods, or where knowledge of the country has peculiarly favoured
them. Almost in every instance where reliance has been placed upon the favourable results of a general action … a failure has been the consequence. 29

 Even when the Spaniards stood their ground (and they often did so, particularly when placed in strong defensive positions), the state of their drill was generally so poor that they were incapable of performing anything other
than the simplest manoeuvres. Thus, units might defend themselves or advance against the enemy with determination, but even then they generally lost their formation, whilst, asked to change their front or form square, they were
likely to fall into inextricable disorder. Once put to flight, there was almost no hope of rallying them: ‘The men all fight desperately … but, as is to be expected in such raw levies, once routed their confusion is great.’ 30

 Such were the other problems experienced by the army that these deficiencies proved fatal. Thus, even in infantry combats, the Spaniards were likely to be outmatched. The marked lack of skirmishers of the early days of the war
was gradually remedied, but want of training and confidence ensured that the French tirailleurs were invariably able to drive back their Spanish counterparts and inflict heavy losses on the immobile battle lines behind them.
Accentuating the weakness of the infantry was a shortage of artillery. Logistical factors always ensured that too few guns were brought to the battlefield, whilst those that were seem rarely to have been concentrated for maximum
effect. Worst of all, however, was the issue of the cavalry. Too small a proportion even of the old army, this could not, for obvious reasons, be expanded in the same manner as the infantry, whilst even those units that managed
to take the field were invariably both understrength and hampered by the poor quality of their horses. In a straight clash with their French counterparts, then, the Spanish cavalry were invariably overborne with the result that
they increasingly tended to just turn and run. In fleeing, however, they were certain to expose the infantry, who over and over again found themselves being ridden down by a torrent of horse that suddenly appeared in flank or
rear. As General Francisco Copons complained, ‘The arm of which the enemy make greatest use is their cavalry, and it is necessary to meet it with equal force. Thanks to the state in which we find ourselves, this is not possible,
but it is essential for us to do what we can.’ 31