

 The ability to concentrate overwhelming resources against a single sector of the enemy line and deliver blows of massive power and effect was likely to be particularly effective against an opponent as unwieldy and ill-trained as
the Spaniards, and had played an important role in earlier campaigns. However, it was not the only factor that had brought victory after victory to Napoleon. Just as vital was the great flexibility brought to the French army by
its organisation into a system of brigades, divisions and corps. By 1808, true, this was no longer the advantage that it had been even a few years before – its benefits had gradually been appreciated by other armies and its
rudiments were in use by both the British and the Spaniards – but the system was still better developed amongst Napoleon’s forces than it was anywhere else, whilst its virtues both on and off the battlefield remained undoubted.

 The efficacy of France’s military system was not just limited to the manner in which it could employ its soldiers, however. Just as impressive was Napoleon’s ability to socialise the men who fell into his clutches. Thus, in
neither France nor the rest of the Napoleonic empire was conscription any more popular or equitable than it was in Spain. Yet once the young men concerned had actually been inducted into the army, they found that they had become
part of a machine that was adept in persuading them to accept their lot. In part, of course, this was the result of necessity – hundreds of miles from home, conscripts would generally think twice before running away – but the
army also promoted both a sense of isolation from civilian society and strong bonds of comradeship and esprit de corps. A particularly important factor here was the manner in which competition between different units had been
carefully nurtured by Napoleon whilst emulation was also important in the motivation of the individual soldier. If the idea that every drummerboy had a marshal’s baton in his knapsack was a myth, the individual soldier could
still aspire to humbler forms of promotion and advancement. A transfer to one of the élite companies of a man’s own battalion, a posting to the Imperial Guard, the award of the Legion of Honour – a decoration that, almost
uniquely, was open to all ranks of the army – or a career as a junior officer were all real possibilities, whilst even the mere fact of long service earned the right to colourful stripes on the soldier’s sleeve. For all their
official prohibition, meanwhile, looting and other more serious forms of misbehaviour were also widely tolerated, whilst the soldiers were not beaten or flogged as they were in other armies. Add to this Napoleon’s ability to
remember individual soldiers and his extraordinary personal charisma, and it will be appreciated that morale was remarkably high.

 A military machine of truly awesome stature was therefore about to strike the divided, outnumbered and ill-fed Spaniards. Yet it was not without its defects. What drove its individuals was not love of country, but in the last
resort personal ambition. And, if the lowest of its soldiers could hope for loot, higher status and more pay, the higher one advances up the hierarchy, the greater one finds the stimuli to have been. The marshals who led the
French armies in Spain were soldiers of considerable talent, but as individuals they were deeply flawed. Like their imperial master, they were ultimately little more than adventurers who had no hesitation in jettisoning anything
or anyone who had become an encumbrance to them. Republicans in the early 1790s, they now served the man who had killed the Republic, just as in 1814 they were to offer their services to the Bourbons, in March 1815 to line up
behind the so-called ‘liberal empire’, and in July 1815 to become royalists again. To save themselves, in fact, they would happily lay down the life of a friend: when Ney was executed by the Bourbons in 1815, no fewer than five
other marshals signed his death warrant. Of mixed origin – some were nobles who would probably have made general even under the ancien régime, and others commoners whom it would have doomed to obscurity – all of them had made
their fortune by hitching their star to that of Napoleon. Titles, estates and pensions had been lavished upon them, and still they were greedy for more: with Murat now King of Naples, indeed, they had become insatiable. And, as
Napoleon intended, ambition bred rivalry, and greed jealousy, the marshalate being renowned for its feuds and hatreds. Whenever the emperor was in personal command of the grande armée, as, of course, he now was, the problem was
kept under control, for the desire of the marshals to please their master was generally stronger than their desire to do down their rivals. But take the emperor away, and matters would be very different. Thus far in the history
of the Napoleonic Wars, this had not happened, but Spain and Portugal were soon to see the emperor leave his commanders to it and return to Paris. Discussion of the chaos that resulted is not appropriate at this point, but if
they behaved as independent satraps, found all sorts of reasons not to co-operate with one another, laid hands on men and money meant for others, looted their dominions unmercifully, and ignored the authority of the unfortunate
Joseph, it was only to be expected.