

 We were encamped in the Berrón district for fifteen days. For the first three we received no rations of any sort until the evening of the third when some cattle arrived. So great was our hunger that we did not bother to butcher
them properly, but simply hacked off such chunks as we could. The meat we set to roast, but, absolutely overcome, we snatched it from the fires before it was barely warm. As for bread we received none at all. I bought a loaf for
100 reales … and to eat it I had to hide from my comrades. 34

 Well might the British liaison officer, Whittingham, write:

 I fear the result of this action. The French are concentrated, and we are considerably scattered. Their troops are all equal; ours, some bad and some good. They have the advantage of unity of command; we are directed by three
generals, all independent of each other. 35

 This already bad situation was now to get much worse. At the end of the first week of November the Allied centre was still only held by two divisions of the Army of Extremadura. Still worse, delay was compounded by intrigue.
Ever since Bailén, Castaños’ prominence had been a source of both anger and embarrassment to the faction centred on José Palafox, for Castaños was both a nominee of enlightened absolutism and a fierce opponent of military rule.
Removing him from his command had therefore quickly become a major objective, and the Palafoxists were well placed to do this. Setting aside the presence of Montijo, the Aragonese commander had also secured a seat in the Junta
Central for his younger brother, Francisco. The result of this was that Jackson was soon writing, ‘Castaños is at present very unpopular in Madrid, and such is the state of the public mind … that I would not answer for his life
should he prove unsuccessful.’ 36 Not long had passed, indeed, before a special commission had been dispatched to the Army of the Centre composed of Francisco Palafox, Montijo and the Marqués de Coupigny, an officer who had
commanded one of the divisions that had blocked Dupont’s way at Bailén and had ever since been bitterly jealous of his erstwhile commander.

 The results of this mission were predictable enough, but before discussing them we must first examine the French. Bailén had, as we have seen, embarrassed and enraged Napoleon. Far from ordering the evacuation of the Peninsula
as the Spaniards hoped, he resolved to go to Spain himself; made repeated attempts to halt Joseph’s retreat; directed some 130,000 men of the grande armée, including the Imperial Guard, four army corps and four divisions of heavy
cavalry, to head for Spain; sent for further reinforcements from Naples, the Kingdom of Italy and the Confederation of the Rhine; ordered fresh levies in France; offered Britain peace in exchange for the recognition of Joseph
Bonaparte; and secured his rear by sanctioning Russian annexation of Finland, Moldavia and Wallachia, and threatening Austria and Prussia with complete destruction if they stood in his way. Come what may, then, Spain was to be
secured. Indeed, it had become the very touchstone of Napoleon’s foreign policy. For it, the emperor was prepared to jeopardise domestic peace (so great were the numbers of conscripts he now needed that there was no option but to
call up 80,000 fresh men from the already plundered ‘classes’ of 1806–1809, as well as to take 60,000 from that of 1810); for it, the British were to be offered a peace that would have left them in possession of virtually all
France’s colonies in the wider world; and for it, again, Russia was to be permitted greatly to strengthen her position in the east. Yet in truth Napoleon had little option. Guided above all by questions of personal prestige, he
could not back down for fear that the spell that he had woven on Continental Europe would otherwise be broken, thereby encouraging Austria, Russia and Prussia to seek vengeance and the Rheinbund states to seek shelter elsewhere.
In judging his actions at this point, however, we should avoid hindsight. We know that the Spanish war was to cause Napoleon untold difficulties, certainly, but nothing had occurred to alter the emperor’s contempt for Spanish
capabilities, whilst the forces that the British could send to Spain were so small by his standards that there seemed little doubt they could simply be swamped. In short, what was envisaged was a lightning campaign that would see
the French sweep across the face of the entire Peninsula, leaving the emperor free to return to the task of defeating the British and overawing Europe.