

 Energetic though the emperor’s response was, October was much advanced before the first of the forces he had detached from the grande armée had crossed the Spanish frontier. Once they had done so, however, success seemed
assured. In the first place, the French forces were no longer the improvised miscellany of the first Army of Spain. Many units of this force remained, but their soldiers were now experienced campaigners, whilst the old
‘provisional regiments’ and ‘legions of reserve’ had all been reorganised into ordinary regiments of the line. As for the troops from Germany, these had been forced to absorb large numbers of fresh recruits, but were dominated by
strong cadres of veterans. With the new arrivals, too, could be expected the structures and techniques that had made the grande armée so successful elsewhere. The bulk of the French forces would be concentrated in Navarre and the
Basque provinces under the command of Napoleon himself. Organised in seven army corps, a cavalry corps and a general reserve, of which the most important component was the Imperial Guard, the army was also much better led than
before, the generals sent to Spain including Ney, Victor, Lefebvre, Mortier, Soult and Lannes. Unlike in the summer, there was also a master-plan that envisaged a massive offensive against the Spanish centre followed by a drive
on Madrid and turning movements against each of the isolated Spanish wings. Coming up behind, meanwhile, were still more troops, including the corps that had been repatriated with Junot from Portugal.

 Assured of strategic superiority, the new Army of Spain was also certain to be impressive on the battlefield. Often composed of scratch formations that had received little training, the first French troops in Spain had only
rarely been able to fight in the style that had brought so many victories elsewhere. Now, Napoleon’s forces would be able to show all their tactical virtuosity. Particularly noteworthy in this respect was their striking power.
Massed in corps and army-level reserves, heavy twelve-pounder guns would first be used to batter the target. Once the defenders had been suitably softened up, the infantry would then be sent in to open a breach in their line. In
traditional British accounts, great emphasis has been placed on the idea that dense columns of French troops preceded by a few skirmishers simply hurled themselves on the enemy in an attempt to break through by impetus alone.
However, there were clearly a wide range of variations on the theme. For example, attacks could be delivered either in line alone or in a mixture of line and column, whilst another method was to form a dense screen of skirmishers
and gradually wear the enemy down. Even when reliance was placed on shock tactics, different methods could be employed. One such, certainly, was to mass entire brigades, divisions or even corps into gigantic masses that were so
close-packed that their only hope of victory was to keep moving. More often, however, the individual battalions would be deployed in such a fashion that if checked they could shake out into line, just as their parent brigades and
divisions would be arranged in ways that allowed freedom of manoeuvre and, in particular, the use of reserves. Flexibility was the key, whilst, if things were properly managed, the infantry could rely on close support from both
artillery and cavalry. Once a breakthrough had been achieved, victory could always be consolidated by the army’s cavalry reserve – separate formations of dragoons and cuirassiers whose task it was to charge through the hole that
had been smashed in the enemy line, sweep away any remaining opposition and turn defeat into rout.