

 So ended the great French counter-offensive. Madrid, Burgos, Santander and Bilbao had been reoccupied; Barcelona relieved; Rosas taken; and important victories won at Gamonal, Espinosa, Tudela, Somosierra, Cardedeu and Molíns de
Rey. The Armies of the Left and Right had been routed, the Army of the Centre split into three (the survivors of Gamonal, Somosierra and Madrid; Castaños’ Andalucian divisions at Cuenca; and the Valencians that had taken refuge
with Palafox), and the Army of Reserve confined in Zaragoza. Meanwhile, thousands of men were dead, wounded or missing; hundreds of guns and incalculable quantities of stores in the hands of the French; and the new government a
fugitive. And, faced with disaster, the populace had shown little fight. In Valladolid, for example:

 All was now bustle and confusion. The French were said to be at the gates of the city … Men, women and children [were] wandering up and down uttering the most pitiful cries and with terror and dismay painted on their
countenances … The doors of the nunneries were thrown open by the bishop’s order, and many venerable ladies who for the space of fifty years had never trodden unhallowed ground were now obliged to leave the grave which they had
prepared for themselves. 48

 All of this was predictable. Once Napoleon had resolved on avenging Bailén, nothing could have staved off defeat. That said, such a disaster might yet have been avoided. Much has been made in this respect of the unfortunate role
supposedly played by the Patriots’ early successes in fostering a mood of over-confidence, but this is something that has been much exaggerated. Of far greater influence was, first, the disaffection of the populace; second, the
oligarchy’s fear of disorder; and, third, the machinations of such figures as Palafox. In short, what confronted Patriot Spain in the winter of 1808 was as much a political as it was a military problem, for continued resistance,
let alone recovery, would in the end only be possible if faction could be defeated and order restored. With the Spanish armies in tatters, these objectives seemed unattainable. Indeed, no sooner had Madrid fallen than French
troops had started to push south and west. For a brief while everything hung in the balance, but there was as yet one force that had not been touched by disaster. Almost unknown to the French as its presence was, the British army
was finally ready for action, and, what is more, about to strike.

===== FILE: OEBPS/xhtml/chapter6.xhtml =====
The Peninsular War

 6

 La Coruña

 THE CAMPAIGN OF SIR JOHN MOORE, DECEMBER 1808–JANUARY 1809

 The people of Portsmouth looked on in horror at the spectacle that was emerging from the harbour. The British expeditionary force had returned home, but there was no grand parade through the streets, no pomp or colour, no tale
of victory. What appeared seemed rather to be the mere wreckage of an army. Dressed in torn and faded uniforms, many of the soldiers were clearly wounded or sick, whilst all of them were filthy, haggard and exhausted. As for
horses, there were none, the cavalry marching on foot with an air of particular dejection. As was already known, meanwhile, their commander was dead, cut down in a moment of victory that was looking more dubious by the minute,
whilst dark stories were circulating of betrayal, incompetence and treachery. What had gone wrong?