

 I have now assembled 20,000 men … but I can make no movement against the enemy because I do not have any cavalry nor a greater supply of musket cartridges than forty rounds per man. I lack many arms which the troops lost in
their disorderly retreat and many units have no camp kettles in which to prepare their meals. There is not a real in the army’s coffers, and the troops have not been paid for the last month … The draught and pack mules have not
been paid for, and their owners work with the greatest ill will. 41

 Besides Blake, Napoleon’s other main target was the large concentration of Spanish troops hanging about the southern and eastern fringes of Navarre. News of the French breakthrough at Burgos should have had the Army of the
Centre and such part of the Army of Reserve as was not needed for the defence of Zaragoza falling back in the direction of Madrid, but nothing of the sort transpired. On the contrary, over a week was wasted in bitter disputes
between Castaños and Palafox, whilst the waters were further muddied by the intervention of the commission dispatched to the former’s headquarters by the Junta Central. With the French bearing down on them from the direction of
both Vitoria and Aranda, from where Napoleon had ordered Marshal Ney to march eastwards to take them in the rear, the two Spanish commanders eventually agreed to concentrate their forces along a line stretching southwards from
the Ebro at Tudela to the northern flanks of the Sierra de Moncayo at Tarrazona. However, even under the best of conditions this line would have been too long to be held by the 45,000 men who eventually came up, whilst the
defenders also failed to keep a proper watch. When the French attacked on the morning of 23 November, in fact, many of the Spaniards, above all those of the Army of Reserve, were still taking up their positions, whilst others
failed to respond at all. Concentrating the vast majority of their forces against the Spanish right, the French broke through with little or no difficulty. All that saved the Spaniards from complete disaster, indeed, was the fact
that Ney failed to make an appearance until 26 November, the distance that he had to cover simply being too great for him to have had any chance of fulfilling the emperor’s intentions. Though roughly handled – a Prussian nobleman
fighting for the French describes their line of retreat as being ‘littered with corpses’ 42 – the two divisions of the Army of Reserve that had been present on the field were therefore able to reach Zaragoza without too much
difficulty, being joined in their retreat by most of the Valencian division originally commanded by Llamas. As for the Army of the Centre’s Andalusian divisions, they eventually regrouped at Calatayud, from where, much harried by
pursuing French troops and the ravages of hunger, disease and winter weather, they retired southwards in the direction of New Castile.

 In moving southwards in this fashion, Castaños had had faint hopes of saving Madrid, but there was little chance of him getting there before the French, whilst even if he had arrived in time his 20,000 half-starved and exhausted
fugitives would have made little difference. Napoleon, however, was taking no chances: even before Tudela had been fought, 45,000 men were bearing down on the capital. Garrisoned only by 12,000 veterans of Bailén, whose
battalions had still not marched for the front, and devoid of fortifications, Madrid was an easy target. As noted at the beginning of this chapter an attempt was made to halt the invaders at the Somosierra pass, but even this was
bungled, several thousand of the defenders ending up trapped on the wrong side of the mountains and left with no option but to flee to Segovia where the 9,000 survivors of Gamonal had also found refuge. Having burst through the
pass on 30 November, the French had Madrid at their mercy, the troops who had held the pass having been ordered by their commander, San Juan, to retire on El Escorial. With the emperor at the gates, the populace took to the
streets and demanded that an attempt be made to defend the city. Terrified of the mob, the authorities gave way and established a junta of defence which handed out such arms as were available and ordered the construction of
barricades and ditches. For a brief moment all was activity: