

 We had hardly taken up our positions when the enemy attacked us with great impetus, but their arrogance came to grief in the face of the valour and serenity of our division. Letting our opponents approach to within ten paces,
with every volley we brought down an entire column. The enemy repeated their attacks with fresh troops, but each time … they were beaten back, leaving mountains of corpses in front of our lines. 38

 In the circumstances, it might have been better to have retired in the night, for the attackers had gone into action in a somewhat piecemeal fashion and had also concentrated on the section of line held by the veteran division
that had been rescued from Denmark, which was conceivably the best force in the entire Spanish army. However, fearing that a retreat in the face of the enemy could not but lead to disaster, Blake hung on in the hope of inflicting
a reverse serious enough to allow him to get away unmolested. This was not to be: when the invaders attacked again the following day, they did so in a much more circumspect and co-ordinated fashion, choosing as their target the
weak Asturian division of Acevedo and making much use of firepower rather than headlong assaults in column. For a while fighting was intense. ‘As soon as [the Spaniards] saw us’, wrote one participant, ‘they … sent out … a very
large number of skirmishers to harass our right from behind the shelter of a stone wall which flanked it. Seven small artillery pieces of a sort carried by mule-back, together with a battery stationed in front of their line, then
opened up on us with canister and wounded a number of men.’ 39 But skirmishing was very much a French speciality, and with their commander and many other officers shot down by snipers, the Asturians were soon in flight. Attacked
in both front and flank, the rest of the army soon gave way in its turn. Amongst the last to fall back were the men of La Romana:

 With the river barring our route just behind us and the enemy in possession of the only bridge … there was no option but to wade across … Once on the other side we had to climb a very steep slope … exposed to the terrible fire
which the enemy directed at us from the other bank. In this short time I was hit by seven bullets, but fortunately not one of them cost me a scratch. When I saw the state in which they had left my clothes, I raised my gaze to
heaven and gave thanks to the Almighty. 40

 By nightfall the Spaniards were streaming westwards towards Reinosa, only to find their way blocked by Marshal Soult, who, leading the corps hitherto led by Bessières northwards from Burgos to cut off Blake’s retreat, had just
captured his artillery and baggage as it was retiring westwards along the southern fringes of the Cantabrian mountains. With Victor and Lefebvre also bearing down on the tattered remnants of Blake’s army, which casualties and
desertion had now reduced to only some 12,000 men, there was only one thing to do. Thus, abandoning everything, Blake fled northwards to the sea and then doubled back south-westwards towards the city of León. Conducted in
incessant rain and snow through some of the highest mountains in Spain, however, this retreat broke the Army of the Left as a fighting force: barely half its 40,000 men reached León, whilst even those who did were penniless,
starving, disease-ridden and lacking arms and ammunition. As La Romana, who had been ordered to take over, wrote on 9 December: