

 The origins of the British army’s presence in Spain have already been explored. As we have seen, in August 1808 it had been agreed that it should be concentrated on the frontiers of Galicia and León – a remote district safe from
any possible French attack – and a plan of campaign elaborated with the Spaniards. Reasonable enough from London’s point of view; however, Moore looked at this scheme in a very different light. Having had to extract the garrisons
of Elvas and Almeida from blockade, British troops were now spread across wide expanses of central Portugal so that merely getting them to the area that had been designated for them would take a considerable time, and all the
more so as the only practicable way of doing so was to route the entire force by La Coruña (as in fact his orders, which were only sent out on 25 September, specifically laid down). Acting entirely on his own initiative, he
therefore decided to make his point of concentration not the isolated and poverty-stricken district of Ponferrada, but rather the city of Salamanca, reasoning that Sir David Baird would be able to shift his division southwards
from La Coruña in no more time than it would take him to get his troops across the border from Portugal. All of this was perfectly understandable – a landing, Moore believed, would result in ‘a corps lost’ whereas ‘a march, well
conducted, will do this army much good’ 1 – whilst the change did not overtly conflict with the spirit of the government’s instructions, and ought in ordinary circumstances to have speeded up British intervention (although even
then the British still could not have been ready for action at Salamanca before mid-November at the earliest). Yet it has to be said that Moore was also scornful of the government’s capacity for strategic thought and eager for
military glory. Still worse, he failed to win any extra time: not, indeed, until the first week of December was the army finally united. In part the delay was caused by factors beyond Moore’s control – the structural shortcomings
of the British army, the sloth displayed by Dalrymple before his departure, a desperate shortage of specie, mistakes on the part of officialdom at home, the difficulty of securing adequate transport, and the obstructive behaviour
of the Junta of Galicia. There is also, however, the complex question of the roads which the army used for its march into Spain. In brief, whilst the bulk of the infantry marched on Salamanca north-eastwards from Lisbon across
Beira, the artillery, the cavalry and some further footsoldiers were placed under the command of the capable Sir John Hope and ordered to make use of the main Lisbon–Madrid highway, which ran across the Alentejo, through
Extremadura and up the Tagus valley. This arrangement does not deserve the scorn sometimes heaped upon it: it took account of the season of the year, the condition of the various roads and the station of the various units of the
army inside Portugal. But for the British to get into action quickly, it relied on Hope finding a way across the rugged mountains that separated the Tagus valley from León: clearly, Moore could not go into action without his
horse and guns. Despite the existence of at least two roads that led in the right direction, this Hope completely failed to do. The reasons have never been explained, but the result was that his corps ended up taking a tremendous
detour. Marching up the length of the Tagus valley, it turned north just west of Madrid, picked up the main highway from the capital to the north-west, and then had to travel a considerable distance back towards the Portuguese
frontier.