

 Breathtaking in its dishonesty, this farrago of untruth is worsened still further by the fact that Moore himself had always recognised that he was taking a risk in ignoring his instructions. As he had written whilst still in
Portugal, ‘If the French are kept … a good way behind the Ebro, then all will be well, but if they … assume the offensive and are able to force back the Spaniards before we can get together, our position will not be so pleasant.’
5 If he was in a ‘terrible scrape’, then, it was largely one of his own making. Yet Moore genuinely had much to complain about. It was not just, for example, that none of the inhabitants seemed willing to serve in the army. Still
worse was the fact that they were in many cases openly hostile. In Ciudad Rodrigo, for example, ‘something like a commotion’ almost took place ‘in consequence of our soldiers having requested a little salt from the people on whom
they were billeted’, and, still worse, ‘An officer of the Seventy-Ninth unfortunately got involved in a dispute, and, while passing through one of their dark and narrow streets, was barbarously assassinated by an unknown hand.’ 6
Similarly, at Alcántara, ‘They received us … with an inhospitality they durst not have ventured had they not believed us to be friends.’ 7 The general complaint is summed up by the commissary, Augustus Schaumann:

 The people here have the cool effrontery to look upon the English troops as exotic animals who have come to engage in a private fight with the French, and now that they are here all that the fine Spanish gentlemen have to do is
to look on with their hands in their pockets. They do not regard us in the least as allies who are prepared to shed their blood for Spain; they simply look upon us as heretics. In our billets it is as much as we can do to get a
glass of water. 8

 The last straw came on 28 November when news arrived of Tudela. Arguing that he had not been sent to Spain to fight the entire French army on his own, Moore decided on retreat and readied his troops for departure whilst ordering
Baird to march on La Coruña and Hope to head directly for Portugal.

 Almost immediately, however, the situation changed, for Moore heard, first, that having been given the command of all the Spanish forces in north-western Spain, La Romana had succeeded in rallying the remains of the Army of the
Left at León, and, second, that Madrid was making a serious attempt to defend itself. With the French showing no signs of moving west, Moore decided that retreat would lead to certain disgrace, and all the more so as he once
again had an army of all arms at his disposal, Hope now being only fifteen miles away at Alba de Tormes. In consequence, on 5 December he countermanded his earlier instructions. As he wrote:

 Madrid still holds out. This is the first instance of enthusiasm shown; there is a chance that the example may be followed … Upon this chance I have … taken measures to form our junction whilst the French are wholly occupied
with Madrid. We are bound not to abandon the cause as long as there is hope … 9