

 Indeed, even with the emperor present, things could go wrong, and in this case spare the Spaniards from complete catastrophe. According to Napoleon’s grand design, the forces facing the troops which had pushed into the Basque
provinces on the one hand and Navarre on the other should have been left well alone until the French had broken through at Burgos and sent troops to surround them. On the French right flank, however, the army of General Blake,
which had taken up a strong position at the village of Amorebieta a few miles to the south-east of Bilbao, was confronted by the corps of Marshal Lefebvre. Eager for glory, the latter could not resist the temptation to act on his
own account, and on 29 October he therefore attacked. Fought in dense fog and drizzle, the battle that followed was not much of a victory for the French – ‘The First Regiment of Catalonia … received the attack with the greatest
coolness and kept up a very regular fire by platoons, maintaining their position against an enemy nearly five times their number … The most veteran troops could not possibly have displayed more soldierlike firmness or more
sangfroid in action’ 37 – but it was quite enough to discomfort Blake who proceeded to evacuate Bilbao and retire south-westwards towards the headwaters of the Ebro. Several days of confused manoeuvring followed as Lefebvre and
his neighbour, Victor, sought to trap Blake, but on the whole the Spaniards had the better of the exchange, whilst the Army of the Left ended up in a much less exposed position than had initially been the case.

 At the very outset, then, Napoleon’s plan was spoiled. Irritated though he was by Lefebvre’s impetuosity, however, the emperor had no intention of staying his hand. On 6 November, indeed, he had arrived at Vitoria, active
operations beginning four days later with an attack on the Spanish positions outside Burgos. Occupied as these were by only two divisions of the erstwhile Army of Extremadura, the result was a foregone conclusion. Arrayed in an
open plain to the east of the city at Gamonal, the Spaniards were broken almost immediately by a massive cavalry charge and fled in panic, leaving the invaders to sack Burgos at their leisure. Also lost were at least 3,000
casualties and all the Spaniards’ guns and baggage, French losses, by contrast, amounting to no more than 100 men. And with Burgos taken Napoleon was at liberty to pursue his master-plan: by 11 November substantial French forces
were heading northwards for Reinosa on the one hand and southwards for Aranda on the other.

 With disaster threatening, the Spaniards proved luckier than they deserved. To the north the Army of the Left had, on 10 November, taken up a strong defensive position at Espinosa de los Monteros where it was joined by the
infantry of the division of the Marqués de la Romana (the cavalry had been sent off to acquire new horses). Well-placed though his troops were, however, Blake was in no state to fight: many men had fled, fallen sick or been cut
off; he had no cavalry; all but six of the army’s guns had been sent to the rear; the weather was appalling; and the soldiers were suffering from a want of food, tents, blankets and greatcoats. To his immediate front was the
corps of Marshal Victor, whilst that of Marshal Lefebvre was swinging south to get round his right flank. Prudence dictated immediate retreat, but, perhaps fearing retribution if he failed to put up a fight, Blake instead stood
firm and, as a result, on 10 November was attacked by Victor. Numbers on the field were about equal – 21,000 Frenchmen to 23,000 Spaniards – and it was therefore a matter of some credit to Blake that every attack launched by
Victor’s troops was beaten back in a day of furious fighting. As one of the defenders remembered: