

 Whatever the truth of the matter, the British army ended up being for some time exposed to defeat in detail in the plains of the meseta should the French break through, as in fact they did, when they might have been safely
ensconced in the mountains of Galicia. For this, perhaps, Moore can be forgiven. Not so, alas, his behaviour during the time he spent at Salamanca following his arrival there on 13 November. As if the news of Gamonal and Espinosa
were not bad enough, it became ever more apparent that the new Spanish government had no means of enforcing its authority, that there was no one with whom Moore could elaborate a plan of campaign, that the chances of the British
army being kept supplied with adequate stocks of food were tenuous in the extreme, that enthusiasm for the war amongst the populace was totally lacking, and that it would be a considerable time before he could be joined by Baird,
whose troops were currently spread out far to the north over the best part of one hundred miles of road between Lugo and Astorga. To say that this was an awkward predicament was putting it mildly, and Moore would have been
foolish indeed had he not been deeply alarmed. As he complained:

 If I had had sooner a conception of the weakness of the Spanish armies, the defenceless state of the country, the apparent apathy of the people, and the selfish imbecility of the government, I should certainly have been in no
hurry to enter Spain, or to have approached the scene of action until the army was united … There seems to be neither an army, generals nor a government. I cannot calculate the power of a whole people determined and enthusiastic
if persons are brought forward with ability to direct it, but at present nothing of this kind appears … We are here on our own … in complete ignorance of the plans and wishes of the Spanish government. Indeed, as far as I can
learn, the Junta … are incapable of forming any plan or coming to any fixed determination. 2

 In fairness to him, Moore did resolve to hang on until such time as he could be joined by Baird and Hope, but his decision to remain at Salamanca did not mean that he was a happy man. By the last days of November he was
regularly receiving desperate appeals from both the British ambassador – a protégé of Canning’s named John Hookham Frere who shared the ministers’ general dislike of Moore and placed unbounded trust in Spanish enthusiasm – and
the Junta Central itself to do something to help the Patriot cause. Yet everything Moore knew suggested that the optimistic bombast in which Frere and the Junta were wont to cloak their appeals had no basis in fact, whilst his
capacity actually to do anything remained as limited as ever: as late as 28 November none of Baird’s troops had passed Astorga, whilst Sir John Hope was still some seventy miles to the east. Fearing disaster, he in consequence
tried to re-write history. ‘They have been buoyed up in England’, he claimed, ‘by the false information transmitted by the officers sent to the various Spanish armies, who had neither sense nor honesty to tell the truth, so that
Lord Castlereagh has very little idea of the situation in which we are here.’ 3 The result, he continued, was that ‘this army was sent infinitely too far forward’, when in fact, as he wrote to Baird, it really ought to have gone
to Andalucía: ‘I know that you should have landed at Cádiz, and [that] I should have met you at Seville, where the army could have been united and equipped, but it was ordered otherwise, and it is our business to make every
effort … to obey our orders … as far as lies in our power.’ 4