

 I saw a ruined army and troops who presented a most distressing experience. Some were entirely barefoot, others almost naked, and all disfigured … by the most ravenous hunger (there were many who had had no bread for eight
days … and many had died along the roads and in the mountains). They appeared more like corpses than men ready to defend their fatherland. 46

 As for the forces at Segovia, these had clamoured for a march on the capital, only to revolt and flee for the Tagus. Eventually got together at Talavera, along with a few troops who had escaped from Madrid and Somosierra, they
then lynched San Juan – his crime was apparently that he had been the commander of Godoy’s personal bodyguard – and were only finally got into some sort of order by Galluzo, who had just been reinstated by the Junta Central. As
for this last body, accompanied by crowds of desperate civilians – one estimate is that no fewer than 14,000 people fled Madrid – it had evacuated Aranjuez on 1 December, making first for Extremadura and finally for Seville,
which it reached on 17 December. Along the way, however, the scene had been one of the utmost chaos:

 Abandoned ammunition wagons, blown-up cannon, shots in the air and crowds of troops dressed in every colour set the scene for the full horror of a rout … A more extraordinary picture cannot be imagined. Groups of 100 or 200 or
more soldiers of every arm were coming by commanded by a sergeant or a corporal, whilst their officers turned up in groups of half a dozen accompanied by their servants, their units having ceased to exist … The uproar and
disorder were horrific and announced a terrible catastrophe. 47

 The great offensive in central Spain had not been the only disaster to assail the Spaniards. In Catalonia, too, the French had also been on the attack. As we have seen, by August 1808 the invaders had got into considerable
difficulties in that province, half their troops being blockaded in Barcelona and the remainder pinned down in the vicinity of Figueras. In planning his counter-attack in Spain, however, Napoleon had not forgotten them. On the
contrary, three new divisions were formed from various French and Italian units to assist them. In all, indeed, over 18,000 reinforcements appeared on the Catalan front, command of which was now given to the experienced and
capable Marshal Gouvion Saint-Cyr. Conscious, perhaps, of the extreme difficulty of forming a new regular army in Catalonia, where conscription was for historical reasons particularly hated, the Junta Central had resolved on the
dispatch of reinforcements of its own – one division was detached from Palafox for the purpose and another formed at Granada under Reding from a mixture of new levies and troops withdrawn from Castaños, whilst the British were
asked to send thither the Spanish troops they had freed at Lisbon – but it was some time before any of these troops could arrive. Disaster, then, was soon threatening on the Catalan front as well. Now headed by the Captain
General of the Balearic Islands, Juan Miguel de Vives, the Army of the Right remained inactive, Saint-Cyr therefore being left to take the offensive. Operations began early in November with an attack on Rosas, whose excellent
harbour made it a convenient base for ships seeking to prevent the provisioning of Barcelona by sea. Besieged on 7 November, it held out determinedly, but by 5 December the walls had been breached and the defenders forced to
surrender. Next on the list was the relief of Barcelona, and by 11 December a strong force of troops was therefore heading southwards. In marching on Barcelona Saint-Cyr was taking a risk, for the Spaniards possessed a great
superiority in numbers and could easily have surrounded him. However, in the event too many troops were left to watch Barcelona. Faced by fewer than 10,000 men, the French gained a victory at Cardedeu on 16 December, and reached
Duhesme the following day. At least 18,000 Spanish troops were still nearby, but, drawn up behind the River Llobregat around Molíns de Rey, at dawn on 21 December they were attacked, outflanked and put to flight with the loss of
all their guns and baggage.