

 What indeed? The answer is complex and many-faceted, but the situation seemed clear enough. The British army had been driven ignominiously from the Iberian Peninsula, suffering heavy casualties in the process; the Spanish forces
were in ruins; the alliance with Patriot Spain had been put in jeopardy; Portugal had been rendered vulnerable to a fresh invasion which there seemed to be little chance of stopping; the Portland administration had been
destabilised and left wide open to the attacks of an opposition that was increasingly restive; and, to cap it all, Napoleon was boasting of a great victory, accusing the British of betrayal and revelling in the imposition of a
series of reforms that allowed him to make still further claim to the title of hero and liberator. All this was all the more shocking in view of what had gone before. The Convention of Sintra, certainly, had been an
embarrassment, but nobody had ever doubted the calibre of the troops, whilst Sir John Moore’s difficult temperament and differences with the ministry were not well enough known to detract from his reputation as a bold and
enterprising officer of great promise. Such was the influence of Bailén and the constant stream of propaganda emanating from Patriot Spain that great hopes had continued to be entertained. In this respect, indeed, matters had
been made still worse by Britain’s successful rescue of La Romana’s division from Denmark, for, composed of veteran troops who had not been caught up in the turmoil of events in Spain, it had given an impression of the Spanish
army as a whole that was distinctly misleading.

 Yet catastrophe had always been a strong possibility. With the populace hostile to conscription, the authorities too weak to enforce their writ, the world of politics rent by personal jealousy, ideological difference and
provincial particularism, and the army beset by manifold difficulties, it was never likely that a counter-offensive could have been withstood. The most that Sir John Moore’s army could ever have done would therefore have been to
reduce the scale of disaster. Posted in the vicinity of Burgos – the position which the Spaniards, at least, intended that he should adopt – the British commander’s 40,000 troops would at least have had a chance of checking the
French on-rush and, in particular, preventing a Gamonal-style breakthrough, thereby affording Castaños and Blake a chance of escaping from their exposed positions in much better order. A retreat in the direction of Portugal would
certainly have followed, but so many French troops would undoubtedly have marched in pursuit of Moore that the Spaniards might just have been able to hold the line of the Sierra de Guadarrama and thereby retain Madrid. In the
long run, the city would still almost certainly have been lost, but substantial Spanish forces would probably have escaped beyond the River Tagus, whilst the panic and disintegration that marked the campaign of November and
December 1808 might have been avoided. Of course, other scenarios were also possible – so badly were the British outnumbered that they might easily have been annihilated in some climactic battle somewhere in Old Castile – but,
for all that, it is at least arguable that Moore’s failure to appear on the Ebro was a matter of some regret.