

 The capital presented a grandiose spectacle: on all sides both sexes ran … to pull up paving stones, dig up earth, carry stone … The docility and zeal shown by the populace … were amazing … The least word was enough to have them
throwing metal cooking utensils and items of wool and cotton from the balconies to help make bullets and wadding. In order to hold up the French inside the city windows were stuffed with mattresses, whilst the streets were
blocked with … furniture of every sort. 43

 Defiant though the populacho were, however, all this was so much froth. Many of the defence works were poorly planned and executed, whilst the whole enterprise was doomed by the failure adequately to secure the heights that
dominated the city. As for the would-be defenders, meanwhile, few of them were properly armed, whilst they also showed the usual propensity to disorder, lynching one of the members of the junta on the pretext that a number of the
musket cartridges they had been given had proved to be filled with sand.

 If the Junta of Defence sent out desperate appeals for help, it was therefore hardly surprising. However, the survivors of Gamonal and Somosierra were in no condition to be of much assistance, and the troops of Castaños and
Moore still too far away. Bloodshed might yet have been averted – anxious not to compromise Joseph more than absolutely necessary, Napoleon repeatedly offered the authorities reasonable terms – but such was the inhabitants’
excitement that the latter did not dare to accept them. On 3 December, therefore, the emperor ordered a demonstration against the city. The result was only too predictable. Many of those who had received arms never appeared at
the barricades, whilst most of those who did ‘cried “Death or victory!”, and fled’. 44 Only the fact that Napoleon did not press the attack beyond seizing the commanding heights of the present-day Retiro Park saved the city from
being occupied at once, whilst surrender was not postponed for more than a few hours: with the mob cowed, the Junta of Defence capitulated the very next day, though not before most of the regular troops in the city had hastily
marched for the Tagus. Many cobbles having been torn up to build defences, the inhabitants ‘gained nothing but the trouble of repaving their principal streets’. 45

 As was to be expected, the fall of Madrid produced a general collapse in the Spanish position in central Spain. What little remained of the Army of the Centre – during the retreat from Tudela it had lost fully half its men – had
on 2 December been at Guadalajara. Now commanded by Manuel La Peña – Castaños had received a dispatch ordering him to return to Aranjuez to take up his duties as president of the Junta Central’s advisory committee of generals –
its battered remnants had attempted to reach Madrid by means of a circuitous march that eventually brought them to a town a few miles south of the capital. Learning that the latter had fallen, it then fled eastwards and
eventually reached Cuenca where command was assumed by Infantado. Its sufferings, meanwhile, had been terrible. To quote its new commander: