

 Stories of the disorders witnessed during the retreat are legion. Typical of the horrors inflicted on the civilian populace is the sight seen by Gordon on 1 January 1809:

 In the afternoon we passed through a large village which had been completely gutted by fire. The wretched inhabitants were sitting amidst the trifling articles of property they had been able to seize from the flames,
contemplating the ruins of their homes in silent despair. The bodies of several Spaniards who had died of hunger and disease, or perished from the inclemency of the weather, were lying scattered around and added to the horrors of
the scene. The village had been burned by some of our infantry. 17

 Porter confirms such scenes, writing, ‘The poor cottagers were plundered, and multitudes of homeless, destitute people were continually hastening to the officers as they came up, imploring them for a redress which was out of
their power to bestow.’ 18 But worst of all, perhaps, was the fate of Bembibre. To quote Blakeney:

 Bembibre exhibited all the appearance of a place lately stormed and pillaged. Every door and window was broken, every lock and fastening forced. Rivers of wine ran through the houses and into the streets, where lay fantastic
groups of soldiers … women, children, runaway Spaniards and muleteers, all apparently inanimate … while the wine oozing from their lips and nostrils seemed the effect of gunshot wounds … The music was perfectly in character:
savage roars announcing present hilarity were mingled with groans issuing from fevered lips disgorging the wine of yesterday; obscenity was public sport. 19

 Marching in near continuous rain and snow, even those troops who remained with the colours presented a sorry sight. The Spanish muleteers deserted, wagon after wagon was abandoned, and even the headquarters’ supply of ready cash
had to be thrown into a ravine. Meanwhile, the road became littered with dead men and horses and abandoned equipment of all sorts, the many blazing supply dumps only adding to the appearance of rout. As for the soldiers, typical
enough was the experience of Stephen Morley:

 We had neither an adequate supply of food or clothing, and our feet were dreadfully hurt from want of shoes; many were actually barefooted … The poor women were deeply to be pitied. One of them … with no covering but her
tattered clothes … gave birth to a son … The road all the way was strewed with men unable to proceed … Discipline was forgotten, none commanded, none obeyed … Seeing smoke issue from a large building off the road, I crawled
rather than walked to it. It was something like a barn, and full of our men who had made a fire. I found a spare corner, and putting my pouch under my head, fell into a sound sleep … When I awoke, I was told the army … had gone
on. 20

 The French then coming up, like many such men, Morley was taken prisoner. The group that he was with put up a fierce fight, however, one of the few bright spots of the retreat being the manner in which bands of stragglers
repeatedly clubbed together in desperate ‘last stands’. Most famous of such incidents was one which took place near Betanzos in the last stages of the retreat in which a sergeant named William Newman rallied a group of about a
hundred men and fought off a group of French cavalry.