

 All this came as a great shock to many British officers. ‘What was our surprise,’ wrote Cadell, ‘to see such troops instead of the fine army we had so often heard was to join us.’ 16 That said, however, at least the Allied
armies were united and possessed of a secure line of retreat, whilst they also had access to substantial stocks of arms, ammunition, food, clothing and an excellent defensive position: the town itself was fortified and could have
been held as an outwork, whilst the main forces held the passes through which ran the main road to La Coruña immediately to the north-west. Yet no stand was attempted, both armies rather, on 30 December, getting under way for
Galicia. Why this should have been the case is a subject that has generated much controversy, whilst the whole episode plunged relations between the British and the Spaniards into crisis. Part of the problem was certainly
logistical – the Astorga position could not be supplied indefinitely – but the heart of the issue was that, on personal and political grounds alike, Moore was determined to take no more risks with his army. Coupled to all this
was the fact not only that La Romana’s troops were clearly in no state to fight, but also that discipline in the British army, too, was breaking down. The trouble had begun when the army passed through Benevente a few days
before. With bitterness at the Spaniards running high, troops billeted in the castle vandalised its magnificent interior unmercifully, whilst the soldiery and their women fell on the town’s wine cellars and engaged in the first
of what was to become a series of mass drinking bouts. Meanwhile, the confusion was increased still further by the decision to shed some of the army’s stores, in the course of which the troops got hold of yet more alcohol.

 In military terms, Moore’s decision to retreat was therefore probably sensible enough, but in other respects it was a disaster. Having first failed to appear in time to meet Napoleon’s counter-offensive and then allowed Madrid
to fall without firing a shot, the British now seemed to be abandoning Spain altogether. At all events, La Romana was furious, for many of the supplies stored at Astorga had been intended for his army, whilst Moore had initially
promised him that he would defend the town. However, there was worse to come. As the British fell back, so drunkenness, exhaustion – at one point Moore forced his men to march for thirty-six hours without a break – hunger and
discontent led to widespread straggling. Left with no other means of survival, all those concerned had no option but to turn to pillage, but whilst some men continued to stumble along in the wake of the army and did no more than
take what they needed, even they were not disposed to look especially kindly on the civilian population, whilst many others saw the situation as a glorious opportunity to indulge their worst vices. Though some battalions held
together well enough, the path of the army was therefore marked by a trail of arson, theft, rape and murder.