

 If all this was not enough, the campaign also led to turmoil in England. Inside the government, a furious Canning was nudged in a direction that was ultimately to threaten complete disaster. The war, he thought, was going very
badly, whilst things now looked likely to get even worse. Still convinced that the Iberian Peninsula held immense strategic potential, he was deeply alarmed at the manner in which the experiences of the British army had produced
widespread disillusionment with the Patriot cause amongst not just public opinion but even some of his colleagues. Even more infuriating, meanwhile, was the style in which the Opposition seized upon the campaign as a stick with
which to beat the government – Whig after Whig demanded the publication of the official correspondence, pressed for the establishment of a parliamentary committee of enquiry, or simply lambasted almost every aspect of the
government’s Spanish policy. Eventually the storm blew itself out, but Canning was deeply disgruntled by the somewhat lacklustre defence put up by his fellow ministers, much distressed at the fashion in which criticism had
focused on Frere, and left with the firm belief that something would have to be done. With a variety of other issues also conspiring to widen the rift – amongst them, a revival of pressure for political reform and Canning’s
impatient and mercurial character – by the spring of 1809 the Foreign Secretary was plotting a major Cabinet reshuffle.

 In acting in this fashion, Canning sincerely believed that he could establish a stronger ministry which would be able to capitalise on the considerable underlying support for the administration in Parliament and fight a more
effective war. Nor can he be accused of being moved by spite or personal ambition: though he did find Castlereagh cold, reserved and ineffectual, for example, Canning was not simply out to get rid of him, just as the various
schemes that he eventually put forward in no case advanced his chances of becoming prime minister. Yet, that said, his behaviour was at best misguided and at worst irresponsible: a better prime minister could possibly be found
than Portland, but only at the risk of major feud in the governing party, whilst the strategic situation was by no means as dire as Canning feared. A good case can be made for saying that far from betraying his trust, by striking
at Napoleon’s communications Moore had drawn a large part of the emperor’s forces after him into northern Spain. In doing so, it is often argued that he had thwarted the capture of Lisbon and Cádiz and thereby cost Napoleon his
only chance of a quick victory. This, perhaps, is going too far, but what is certainly true is that the battered Spanish armies had been afforded a valuable breathing space and the Junta Central given the chance to restore a
modicum of order. From its nadir in December 1808, the Patriot cause therefore recovered, and this in turn ensured that the British would not abandon Spain altogether, as might otherwise easily have proved the case.