

 With the rest of the army soon in occupation of Sahagún as well, it seemed that Soult was on the point of being dealt a crushing blow, but in the event Moore decided that his men should rest for forty-eight hours, so that it was
not until nightfall on 23 December that the army marched out to attack the French, who were waiting for them at Carrión de los Condes. No sooner had the orders for the advance been dispatched, however, than dramatic news arrived
from the south in the form of a report that masses of French troops were debouching from the Sierra de Guadarrama into the plains of Old Castile. In short, the game was up: Napoleon had finally discovered the presence of the
British army and was heading north to wipe it out. The time having come to cut and run, fresh orders were sent out and to their complete consternation the British forces found themselves being stopped and turned around.

 Though the astonished troops were not to know it, their goal was now the sea. However, before we examine the events that followed we must first look at the developments that succeeded the occupation of Madrid in the French camp.
At the time of the fall of the capital and for some time afterwards, Napoleon and his forces had remained blissfully unaware of the fact that the British army was still a player in the campaign. Thus, no French troops having
advanced west of a line stretching from Valladolid to Avila, only the vaguest impression had been obtained of the British presence in Spain, whilst it had been generally assumed that such forces as had been involved were now in
full flight for Lisbon. Troops were therefore dispatched to such towns as Talavera, Toledo, Ocaña and Tarancón, but none in the direction of Salamanca. What this presaged, of course, was a move on Portugal and Andalucía, but in
the meantime Napoleon had plenty of other matters on his mind. First and foremost amongst these was the political settlement of Spain, the emperor’s opening gambit here being to announce that he was going either to assume the
Spanish throne himself or to divide the country up into a number of military regions headed by French governors. However, all this was simply a ruse. What Napoleon really wanted, apart from a pretext for appearing magnanimous,
was a show of recognition, and this he got: invited to swear loyalty to Joseph Bonaparte on the Blessed Sacrament in ceremonies held in churches throughout the capital on 13 December, the city’s civil and ecclesiastical
dignitaries and thousands of ordinary citizens complied with the imperial will, whereupon it was duly announced that el rey intruso was to be allowed to resume his throne.

 Joseph’s restitution, however, was for the time being a matter of form alone. In the Constitution of Bayonne Napoleon considered that he had been forced to make a number of humiliating concessions to traditionalist opinion in
Spain, and he was now determined to ensure that his new vassal state would conform much more strictly with the rest of the empire. Napoleon knew, though, that, anxious to conciliate Spanish opinion and gain acceptance as monarch,
Joseph would be unlikely to go along with the changes that he wanted to make. In consequence, to the king’s intense chagrin, Joseph was confined to the suburban palace of El Pardo, whilst his imperial brother settled everything
to his own satisfaction in what became known as the Decrees of Chamartín (the village in which Napoleon had his headquarters). At a stroke these abolished monopolies, internal tariff barriers, feudal dues and rights of private
jurisdiction; dissolved two-thirds of all Spain’s religious communities; opened the way for monks and nuns to return to civil life; abolished the Inquisition; and put on sale all property belonging to the religious institutions
that had been suppressed. At the same time, despite the continued affectation of moderation, to reform was added proscription. The capitulation had guaranteed the life, freedom and property of all those who submitted to the
emperor, but, on the pretext that it had been violated by the flight of such few regular troops as had been in the city when it was attacked, the French ruler declared it null and void and proceeded to make a large number of
arrests, those affected including several members of the Junta of Defence, the president of the Council of Castile, various noblemen who had deserted Joseph after initially swearing loyalty to his cause, and the entire Council of
the Inquisition. Given that many of those involved lost their property, that many further confiscations were planned, and that all the goods involved were immediately put on sale in their turn, the scale of the assault on the
traditional social structure was therefore greatly increased.