

 With this pretty small-scale affair – total casualties amounted to less than 2,000 men – the campaign was over. Despite some long-distance artillery fire, by the end of 17 January most of the British troops had been got safely
aboard, and on the following day the whole armada sailed for home, La Coruña’s understandably demoralised governor surrendering later the same day. At first sight, then, British intervention had ended in humiliation and disaster.
At La Coruña, true, a reverse had been inflicted on the French. However, Sir John Moore was dead, over one fifth of his army were missing, and several thousand more sick or wounded, whilst the retreat had had all the appearances
of a rout; if the army had saved all its guns, it had lost much of its baggage and been forced to destroy almost all the horses that had managed to reach La Coruña. Hundreds more men, meanwhile, were lost in winter storms in the
Bay of Biscay and the Channel. Added to all this must be the loss or destruction of immense quantities of matériel, including, most spectacularly of all, 4,000 barrels of powder blown up in a great explosion on 13 January, as
well as the occupation of the most heavily populated region in the whole of Spain, and in addition such important towns as Lugo and La Coruña.

 Even worse than the physical losses suffered by the Allied cause was the immense damage that had been done to Anglo-Spanish relations. Misled by propagandistic journalists who had consistently claimed that Moore’s army was much
larger than it actually was and represented Sahagún as a great victory, Spanish opinion was genuinely shocked by the British departure, whilst fuel was added to the flames by the angry accounts of the Marqués de la Romana and
other observers, the marquess openly accusing Moore of betrayal and bad faith. If much of this criticism was unfair, the behaviour of the army had also been singularly unhelpful. The presence of British troops in Spain was always
likely to have led to a variety of cultural problems: the drunkenness habitual amongst many of the men was frowned upon, whilst Protestant hostility to popery ensured that officers and men alike were not always disposed to treat
the Catholic Church with respect. However, the excesses of the retreat went far beyond friction and disrespect, the fact being that many of the British troops had behaved as badly as the enemy.

 Needless to say, the issue cut both ways. British veterans of the campaign felt they had advanced into Spain in good faith only to find a country with neither enthusiasm for the struggle, nor competent leadership, nor adequate
armies, and a country, moreover, in which, rather than being welcomed and assisted, they had from the start been lied to, deceived and treated as interlopers. Lip-service was in some instances paid to the idea that the common
people were sound at heart, but contempt for the ruling élite was all but universal, matters not being helped by the decision of various public figures, such as the de facto head of the defence of Madrid and erstwhile governor of
Cádiz, Tomás de Morla, to go over to the enemy. With treason seemingly rife, it followed that the British army had been betrayed and that Spain – which had at best appeared to be primitive, backward and superstitious – was not
worth fighting for.