

 The apathy with which the inhabitants of this mountain country … have witnessed our misery is revolting. They were to be seen in large armed hordes far away from us in the mountains … when … they might have been very useful to
us and covered our retreat. But not only did these puffed-up patriots … give us no assistance, but they also took good care to remove all cattle and all foodstuffs out of our way … and in addition murdered and plundered our own
men who fell out left and right along the road. 23

 However, if the seeds of serious problems were being sown in Anglo-Spanish relations, at least the Allied armies survived. The Army of the Left succeeded in reaching the safety of the wild mountains that border the northern
frontier of Portugal, whilst French attempts to drive in the British rearguard at Cacabellos and Constantino were repulsed with ease. As for the enemy, not only were many troops withdrawn from the pursuit of Moore’s army, but the
emperor himself decided to return to France, having come to the conclusion that his presence was no longer needed. So much did the outlook improve, indeed, that Moore even offered battle with his whole force in an extremely
strong position outside Lugo, even if he did eventually decide to take the road again when the French declined to attack immediately. There was further chaos in the march from Lugo to La Coruña – the weather continued to be
atrocious, whilst the men were even more mutinous and exhausted than before – but, aside from two brigades that had been detached from the main column in the early stages of the march to secure Vigo, by 12 January the army had
reached the sea.

 At La Coruña, however, fresh problems confronted Moore, for it was discovered that his ships had been held up. Although the delay was fairly short – they in fact appeared on 14 January – it was none the less sufficient for the
French to approach within striking distance of the town. Amidst scenes of general destruction – La Coruña and its environs were crammed with stores and munitions of all sorts, most of which had to be burned or blown up – a start
was made on getting the troops embarked. Whilst this was going on, 15,000 infantry and a few guns were sent out to occupy the line of heights that overlooked the town and its spacious harbour from the south and south-west. In
this position on 16 January 1809 there was fought the battle of La Coruña. Despite serious problems of their own, the French, who were led by Marshal Soult, could bring up perhaps 16,000 men, including plenty of cavalry and
artillery. Perceiving what he thought was a weak spot in the British line, the French commander threw the bulk of his troops against it in an attempt to split the defenders in two and trap their centre and left against the
seashore. However, though subjected to heavy bombardment, the British threw back all the troops that reached the heights and captured the village of Elvina in a fierce counter-attack, and that despite the fact that Moore was
fatally wounded by a cannonball whilst directing the movement of some reserves (he died that evening and was buried the following day on the southern ramparts of La Coruña). With the French cavalry prevented from charging by the
stone walls, rocks and scrub that covered the whole area, the battle therefore petered out with the British still in possession of the field.