

 If this decision did not come soon enough to avert a violent confrontation between Moore and Frere (who behaved, it has to be said, with culpable stupidity), it did change the whole direction of the campaign. Thus, the British
commander had resolved to strike eastwards into Old Castile in the hope that this would compel the emperor to turn aside from Madrid. In a very short time, of course, news arrived that the capital had fallen, but even so the same
logic held good in that an attack on Old Castile would be certain to distract the French from marching on Portugal or Andalucía. Having left Salamanca on 11 December, meanwhile, Moore was reinforced in his determination by the
arrival at his headquarters of a captured dispatch from Napoleon to Soult in which the latter was informed of the whereabouts of the rest of the French army and instructed to launch an offensive westwards from his current
position on the River Carrión some forty miles east of León. One of Soult’s three infantry divisions being at Santander and his cavalry brigade in the Tagus valley, there seemed every chance that he could be overwhelmed before he
could receive any help, for the marshal was a long way from the nearest support, whilst it was clear that the French had no idea that the British were anywhere in sight. Originally the plan had been to occupy Valladolid, but
Moore therefore ordered his men to keep marching north, thereby getting into direct touch with both Baird and La Romana. In the wake of their flight from Espinosa de los Monteros, contact with the Spaniards did not prove very
encouraging, but the junction with Baird meant that by 20 December well over 25,000 British troops were concentrated at Mayorga. Though he had now both discovered the British threat and been reinforced by a full division of
cavalry from Valladolid, Soult was still very vulnerable: on 21 December, indeed, one of his cavalry brigades was attacked and beaten at Sahagún de Campos by two regiments of British hussars.

 Often criticised for ‘galloping at everything’, the British cavalry distinguished themselves at Sahagún. Covered with vines, the ground was unsuitable for cavalry, whilst the French had taken up a position behind a deep ditch.
In the words of one participant:

 As soon as the enemy’s order of battle was formed, they cheered in a very gallant manner and immediately began firing. The Fifteenth then halted, wheeled into line, huzzaed and advanced. The interval betwixt us was perhaps 400
yards, but it was so quickly passed that they had only time to fire a few shots before we came upon them … The shock was terrible: horses and men were overthrown, and a shriek of terror, intermixed with oaths, groans, and prayers
for mercy, issued from the whole extent of their front. Our men, although surprised at the depth of the ranks, pressed forward until they had cut their way quite through the column. In many places the bodies of the fallen formed
a complete mound of men and horses … It was allowed by everyone who witnessed the advance of the Fifteenth that more correct movements, both in column and in line, were never performed at a review. 10