

 Despite the fact that 80,000 men were now bearing down upon him, Moore was in fact in little danger. For one thing the French onrush was slowed by appalling weather conditions. In the Sierra de Guadarrama, for example, the
troops were struck by a terrible blizzard:

 Next day a furious snowstorm, with a fierce wind, made the passage of the mountains almost impassable. Men and horses were hurled over precipices. The leading battalions actually began to retreat, but Napoleon was resolved to
overtake the English at all costs. He … ordered that the members of each section should hold one another by the arm. The cavalry, dismounting, did the same. The staff was formed in similar fashion, the emperor between Lannes and
Duroc … and so, in spite of wind, snow and ice, we proceeded, though it took us four hours to reach the top. 11

 Further north, meanwhile, although the snow turned to rain, ‘the roads were all but impassable: we had met with no such mud anywhere else but in Poland and Champagne’. 12 All this caused the French terrible suffering. Coignet,
for example, remembers fording a freezing river and emerging with his legs ‘as red as lobsters’, whilst Chlapowski wrote, ‘Horses and men sank deep into the mud … I was told that some soldiers who could not keep up … took their
own lives for fear of falling into the hands of the Spanish guerrillas whose bands were roaming the country.’ 13

 Setting the weather aside, Moore was so far to the north that it was unlikely that a force coming from Madrid would ever have been able to cut him off. The emperor’s only chance, indeed, was that his opponent would be caught
unawares, but Moore was well aware of the danger and fled westwards as soon as he got news that Napoleon was on the march, whilst he had also long since requested that his transports should be sent round from Lisbon to La Coruña.
Vigorous action on the part of Soult, it is true, might just have slowed Moore down enough to allow Napoleon’s forces to get behind him, but the marshal elected to wait for the first of the reinforcements that were being sent up
to him from Burgos and then was slowed down by pouring rain and a series of skilful rearguard actions on the part of the British cavalry.

 By 27 December, then, the whole of Moore’s army had got to relative safety on the western bank of the River Esla between Benavente and Valencia de Don Juan, and the following day there may be said to have commenced the long
march that became known in the annals of the British army as the ‘retreat to Corunna’. Thus, covered by a rearguard of cavalry and light infantry, which managed to capture General Lefebvre Desnouettes in a fierce skirmish outside
Benavente, the main body of Moore’s forces struck out north-west for Astorga. At that town they came up with the remnants of the Army of the Left, the latter force having been forced to evacuate the positions which it had been
holding around León by the advance of Soult’s troops from the Carrión after a sharp reverse at Mansilla de los Mulos. Even if it was no fault of the Spaniards, whose only other lines of retreat were blocked by either snow or the
enemy, this encounter with his allies was not at all to Moore’s taste, the latter having for logistical reasons asked La Romana to retire not westwards towards Astorga but northwards towards Oviedo. As he had feared, indeed, the
result was chaos, the Army of the Left now being in a worse state than ever. Wrote one soldier, ‘I can conceive of no description of it … It had more the appearance of a large body of peasants driven from their homes, famished
and in want of everything, than a regular army. Sickness was making dreadful havoc amongst them.’ 14 To quote Gordon, meanwhile, ‘This Spanish force amounted to about 6,000 men in the most deplorable condition. They were all
ill-clothed; many were without shoes and without arms; a pestilential fever raged amongst them; they had been without bread for several days and were quite destitute of money.’ 15 Desperate for food they therefore fell on the
town and the British baggage trains alike and the result was a general free-for-all that had soon spread to the redcoats as well.