

 Joseph, it need hardly be said, was most unhappy at much of this. Setting aside the fact that Napoleon’s actions threatened in a variety of ways to alienate the populace, the Decrees of Chamartín had not even been issued in his
name. Feeling that his position had been undermined, he threatened to abdicate. The trouble was, however, that Joseph was not the man to act on such a threat. On the one hand he was so overawed by his younger brother that
breaking with him presented almost insuperable psychological difficulties, whilst on the other he was addicted to wealth and luxury and much in love with the idea of being a king. Excellent judge of human nature that he was,
Napoleon was well aware of this, and in consequence called Joseph’s bluff by offering him a variety of lesser positions in exchange for the Spanish throne. This producing the desired result, the emperor switched from stick to
carrot, inviting his brother to accompany him on a brief visit to the capital and flattering him with promises of understanding and support.

 For over two weeks after the fall of Madrid all seemed to go well. Yet Napoleon was living in a fool’s paradise. Whilst the populace had proved not only hostile to conscription, but also – at least for the most part – unwilling
to take up arms even in defence of their own homes, this did not mean that French occupation met with no resistance whatsoever. On the contrary, the winter of 1808 saw the real beginnings of la guerrilla – the irregular struggle
that was to plague the French zone of occupation for the rest of the war. Far more complex than at first appears, this phenomenon is best discussed in some other context. Suffice to say that the territory that the invaders had
just overrun quickly became the haunt of assorted bands of marauders. At this time for the most part little more than bandit gangs made up of a mixture of outlaws, deserters, draft evaders and destitute campesinos, these men
quickly began to cause serious problems for the French, even if their actions were in most cases driven not by patriotism but necessity. Even before the fall of Madrid, there had been trouble: sent with a dispatch from Lannes to
Napoleon in late November, Marbot found the bodies of several Frenchmen who had been murdered along the way, including a cavalry officer nailed upside down to a barn door with a fire lit beneath his head, and was twice attacked
by parties of guerrillas.

 If Moore’s operations were being conducted with a sure grasp of the positions and intentions of the enemy, it was in large part due to the guerrillas’ capture of large numbers of French couriers. Not until 15 December was Soult
informed that Moore was on the move, whilst Napoleon did not hear of the matter for another four days. Once the news had come in, however, the emperor moved with great speed and decision. Although he had resolved on an offensive
on Lisbon, to which end cavalry were already pushing westwards down the Tagus, the main body of his army still remained in the vicinity of Madrid. Instantly disposable were some 40,000 men including the Imperial Guard, King
Joseph’s royal guard (a small force of foreign deserters and prisoners of war), the corps of Marshal Ney and two stray infantry divisions belonging to the corps of Lefebvre and Victor. Further away in an arc stretching from
Talavera to Guadalajara there were the remaining troops of Victor and Lefebvre – in each case two infantry divisions and a cavalry brigade – a brigade of light cavalry detached from the corps of Marshal Soult, three divisions of
dragoons and the independent infantry division of General Desolles. These troops being more than sufficient to hold off the remnants of the Spanish armies, with the exception of Joseph’s guard the whole of the central reserve was
therefore immediately ordered to march in the direction of Valladolid in the hope that the British might be cut off from Portugal. Not only that, indeed, but messages were sent out to a division of dragoons that had been sent to
hold Avila, another that had recently arrived at Burgos and the corps of General Junot, which was strung out between that city and the French frontier, either to join the chase or to reinforce the beleaguered Soult.