

 The troops’ fighting spirit was not broken, then. Yet the retreat remains a dark chapter in the history of the British army. Let us turn, for example, to the account of the Marqués de la Romana:

 The English have seized … the mules and oxen that drew our army’s artillery, munitions and baggage train; they have insulted and mistreated … our officers … They have stolen all the mules of the … inhabitants of Benevente and
the pueblos of the Tierra de Campos, and have left a multitude of carts abandoned by the wayside, some of them broken down and others smashed up on purpose. They have without necessity killed and eaten the oxen that pulled these
carts and have not paid their value. They have killed three magistrates and various other inhabitants. After allowing anyone who wanted to to drink their fill without paying a penny, they have poured away all the wine in the
cellars. They have not paid for the carts and animals that they have used to move their women and their immense baggage trains. In some pueblos the commissaries have refused to give receipts for the supplies made available to
them by the justices, whilst in others they have arbitrarily reduced the sums that were asked of them. In a word the French themselves could not have found agents better calculated to whip up hate of the British than the army
commanded by General Sir John Moore. 21

 However, if the Spaniards gained a distinctly negative view of their allies, the reverse was also true. From the moment that the British troops had entered Spain, disillusionment had been growing at the unwillingness of the
inhabitants to enlist in the regular army, not to mention the laxity and incompetence that were perceived to be the chief characteristics of the Spanish authorities. To these doubts, meanwhile, were added stories of treason and
betrayal – there seemed, for example, to be no other explanation for the fall of Madrid – whilst the miserable condition of La Romana’s forces was hardly calculated to inspire confidence in Spain’s powers of resistance. To be
fair, indeed, the behaviour of these troops was not much better than that of the British, as witness the experience of the parish priest of the village of San Andrés del Rabanedo in the wake of the battle of Mansilla de los Mulos:

 The streets and houses … were strewn with the dead and dying. What with the stench and filth of the former and the cries and groans of the latter, a more horrible spectacle had never been seen … All this was accompanied by
robbery, insult and outrage as men besieged by hunger or accustomed to a life of crime assailed road and home alike. Seeing me come out of a privy, a group of stragglers went in and searched the excrement, believing that I must
have gone in to hide some money … It was not possible to move an inch without exposing oneself to every sort of vexation. 22

 As the retreat proceeded, too, so stories began to spread of hostility and even murder, whilst there was also much anger at the general failure of the populace to offer anything in the way of resistance. In Schaumann’s words: