

 To the misery of disease was soon added that of bombardment, for by 10 January the French had completed all their siege batteries and armed them with cannon and munitions. Duly opening fire, they had soon wrought terrible damage
on the Spanish front line, whilst at the same time succeeding in storming the vital monastery of San José, which had been converted into a detached work protecting the whole of the eastern and south-eastern faces of the city.
Digging operations and bombardment continued for another fortnight, by which time all was ready for an assault on the walls themselves, and on 27 January Marshal Lannes, who had been sent by Napoleon to take command of the
besiegers, duly ordered his men to storm the city.

 With the walls breached in many places in the sector chosen by the attackers for the assault, the defenders could at this point have been expected to surrender. Palafox, however, rejected all Lannes’ overtures, whilst his
followers were still prepared to put up a fight. In consequence, the French attack was met by desperate resistance:

 The main assault, made on 27 January, was one of the bloodiest days of the siege. Since dawn our batteries had concentrated their fire on widening the breaches. At nine o’clock those units designated for the assault moved
forward … Of all the attacks on the right only one achieved even partial success – that on the breach by the Palafox battery. The … assault on the casa González, in which I took part, failed completely. We … just managed to get
into the building, but were met by such a heavy fire … that we fell back rather quickly. Major Beyer … was seriously wounded, and the captain of my company … fell into enemy hands. 31

 Despite heavy casualties, the invaders eventually succeeded in establishing a lodgement inside the walls, but, as in the previous siege, even then the defenders would not give up. On the contrary, in a foretaste of battles far
in the future, the French had to advance into the city house by house, blowing holes in partition walls and methodically slaughtering the defenders of each room. Amidst scenes of desperate courage, the Spaniards fought back,
engaging in repeated counter-attacks and digging mines under many French positions, but, though increasingly exhausted, Lannes’ men kept inching forward. Fighting even went on underground as mine was met by counter-mine, and
rival parties of miners hacked at each other with picks and shovels. On 10 February matters rose to a fearsome climax with a French assault on the Spanish stronghold of the convent of San Francisco preceded by the explosion of a
3,000-pound mine:

 At three o’clock in the afternoon … Breuille had the charge fired and the terrible explosion flung to a great height in the air a huge portion of the convent and the cloister. Hardly had the mass of falling debris reached the
deep … crater which the explosion had opened, before the … men flung themselves into the convent and charged the retreating enemy with the bayonet … We had hoped that the Spanish would have been intimidated by the magnitude of
this disaster … but our sudden attack only increased their fury. They contested every inch of ground … We had to pursue them to the very roofs … and those of us who were below saw many fling themselves from the top … rather than
yield to their conquerors … Never in any war was there … a more terrible scene than that presented by the ruins … The … surrounding suburbs … were rendered horrible by the quantities of mutilated human remains with which they
were strewn. Not a step could be taken without stumbling over torn limbs … hands or fragments of arms. 32