

 Every day I hate these people more: they have no other God than money, and for it would sell their fatherland, their fathers, their saints and anything else that comes to hand … The whole of the much vaunted Army of Catalonia is
composed of bands of thieves who under the name of somaténes enter the towns and villages in almost the same manner as the French … the only difference being that they are rather more skilful at robbing them. 6

 In addition to preying on friend as much as foe, the somaténes were also impossible to rely on. For example, the Junta Central’s représentant en mission in the province complained that ‘they are people on whom it is impossible
to count for more than a few days’ and Charles Doyle that ‘they must be employed quickly or they will not be forthcoming’. 7 Most damning of all, however, was Joaquín Blake, who, as we shall see, was soon to acquire the Catalan
command:

 Let all the somaténes  … that Your Excellency can offer me come and welcome, but, given the fact that they will certainly increase our confusion, they should bring supplies with them so that they do not augment our misery as
well. Only a little while ago Brigadier Casamayor saw 2,000 of these armed peasants disappear the moment that the assembly was sounded … whilst a few nights back 3,000–4,000 fled from the command of Lieutenant-Colonel Juan
Clarós. Let them come and give new proofs of their constancy by all means, but I will place no trust in … these people when it comes to attacking the enemy. 8

 The full complexity of the problems involved in irregular resistance was not to become apparent until much later, and will be discussed in another place. Nor shall we here discuss the various ways in which the partidas and other
forms of irregular resistance quickly came to sap the Spanish war effort. Suffice to say that even at this early date there was clearly good reason for wanting to impose a greater degree of order. As a first step in this
direction, on 28 December 1808 the Junta therefore issued a set of instructions for the organisation of guerrilla bands which laid down very clearly that the latter were not to allow themselves to be joined by men who had fled
the regular army or were avoiding conscription, that they were not to become too big, that each band was to be commanded by a recognised leader who would automatically be given a commission as a regular officer, and that all the
guerrillas should be subjected to the authority of the local military commander. Meanwhile, in Galicia army officers were put in charge of particular districts and encouraged to form the insurgents into regular units, whilst
government commissioners were sent out to parts of Aragón and Old Castile with instructions both to stir up popular resistance and subordinate the bands to their authority.

 The trouble with efforts to restore order and boost the authority of the government, however, was that they were likely to prove counterproductive. Both provincial juntas and insurgent chieftains, for example, were deeply
resentful of the Junta Central’s efforts to clip their military and political authority and frequently essayed resistance. Of particular note here is the situation that developed in Asturias, where the chronic parochialism of the
junta combined with the reactionary proclivities of the Marqués de la Romana to produce a coup in which the marquess marched on Oviedo, overthrew its rulers and installed a new body of his own. The rights and wrongs of this coup
can be debated, but there is considerable evidence that La Romana was motivated not by military considerations, but rather by hatred of revolution: the University of Oviedo having in recent years become a centre of progressive
thought, the Junta of Asturias was dominated by such figures as the later liberal writer, Alvaro Flórez Estrada. But even if British claims that the Junta had failed to support the war effort are accepted, it is not clear that
anything was achieved by the coup. In the words of the Conde de Toreno (himself a member of the first junta), ‘Romana appointed another junta, but the arbitrary treatment of its predecessor had angered most of the inhabitants,
and unseated … order and good government in the principality.’ 9 Aware of its unpopularity, the new junta hardly met and for the rest of 1809 Asturias effectively had no government at all.