

 Galicia being an extremely hilly area covered in woods and thickets, it was generally impossible to catch those responsible before they melted away, whilst prisoners were put to death in circumstances of the most revolting
cruelty. With the French becoming more and more frustrated and infuriated, the reprisals which were their standard response to popular resistance were pursued with even more vigour than would normally have been the case, village
after village being burned to the ground and their inhabitants slaughtered. Typical enough was the fate of the coastal town of Corcubión:

 We rowed smartly up the bay, but had scarcely doubled the point … at the entrance of the harbour, when we observed … the French soldiers pouring into the wretched town from both sides of the valley. Many of the inhabitants
rushed to the fishing boats on the beach, and, leaping into them indiscriminately, pushed into the stream. As we rowed up the harbour, we met hundreds of these poor people, half-dressed, screaming, and struggling hard to get
beyond the reach of shot. Others fled along the sides of the hills towards the bay, hoping to be picked off the shore by boats or … to conceal themselves … amongst the rocks. Of these fugitives, great numbers were brought down …
by the fire of the enemy … So completely hemmed in … were these wretched people that escape was almost impossible. The horror and confusion of this frightful spectacle were increased by the conflagration of the town, in the
streets of which deeds of still greater atrocity were going on. 4

 Accompanied as they were by horrors of all sorts – at Fontaneira, for example, a woman caught in the streets had her breasts cut off – such tactics were catastrophic, on the one hand fuelling desires for revenge and on the other
leaving many men with no other means of subsistence than pillage. Still worse, even submission was no protection. As one of Marshal Ney’s aides-de-camp complained:

 This is no longer a campaign that we are conducting; it is rather a devastation by bandits in uniform. And although [we officers] lament the situation, risking our lives to contain the soldiery, we are turned into murderers …
The towns and villages half-burned, the farm animals and mules killed or stolen, all the tools and instruments of the peasantry and artisans used as fuel because … it is easier to throw them on the fire than cut down trees, all
the churches sacked and profaned; this is all that is left of this kingdom. 5

 Dramatic though the Galician insurrection was, closer consideration shows that matters were by no means as simple as at first appeared. Nowhere was this more clear than in Catalonia. To the somaténes, themselves hungry and
resentful, had rallied adventurers of dubious character and motive, deserters from the regular army, and a variety of bandits, smugglers and petty criminals. As such they did not present a pretty spectacle. To quote an officer
sent to Catalonia with the division dispatched from Andalucía in the autumn of 1808: