

 Closely linked with the question of law and order was that of popular resistance. In certain circumstances, of course, this was much to be welcomed – hence the instructions that were sent out enjoining every town and village in
Spain to loophole its houses and barricade its streets in the hope of emulating the feats of Zaragoza, and the commissions issued to many individuals who volunteered to raise guerrilla bands or popular militias. Hence, too, the
famous decree of the corso terrestre of 25 February 1809 that any money or other valuables seized from the French or their collaborators should become the property of those who had seized them. Nor was there any reason to doubt
that irregular resistance was causing the French many problems. Ever since the start of the war, the Catalan somaténes, later supplemented by somewhat more permanent militias known as miqueletes, had been harassing every movement
that the French made. In Aragón, Navarre and the Castiles, rather more ad hoc bands of irregulars were also starting to emerge. Most dramatic of all was the situation in Galicia. Throughout the summer and autumn of 1808 that
large and heavily populated region had proved difficult to mobilise, there having been both a shortage of volunteers and considerable resistance to conscription. Like Catalonia, however, Galicia possessed a rudimentary home
guard, known in this case as the alarma. With all adult males registered in this body, which also possessed its own officers and was already organised into parish companies, the arrival of the French was not long in eliciting a
reaction. The British, true, had received little support and on occasion had even been attacked, but that did not mean to say that the requisitioning, looting and general ill-treatment which accompanied French occupation was ever
likely to be tolerated. With the local clergy – a force of considerable influence given the Church’s extensive properties in Galicia – also doing everything it could to whip up support for an insurrection, the province was soon
up in arms. For a good account of the outbreak of the fighting in just one area, let us turn to the Semanario Político, Histórico y Literario de la Coruña:

 On 25 January … General Fournier entered Mondoñedo with 700 cavalry. On the following day he sent 150 of them to the town of Ribadeo. No sooner had they arrived than they demanded bread, meat, wine, eggs, hay, barley and
firewood from all the villages roundabout … These demands were backed up by all kinds of threats that were made only too credible by the robberies and other iniquities already committed in the places through which they had
passed … All this led a number of honourable and distinguished patriots to persuade the peasantry that they should refuse to supply the rations which had been demanded of them … and within twenty-four hours the parishes of
Cogela, Balboa, Sante, Villaosende, Cedofeita and Vidal had come together and elected as their chief, Don Melchor Díaz de la Rocha. On the twenty-ninth of the same month, 320 peasants armed with fowling pieces, pitchforks and
pikes presented themselves in the early morning … 200 of them being sent to occupy the heights overlooking the bridge on the road from Mondoñedo to Rivadeo [at Nuestra Señora del Puente] and the others to watch Quintalonga … On
the same day the 200 peasants blocking the road at Nuestra Señora del Puente attacked a group of Frenchmen travelling from Ribadeo to Mondoñedo. In this action five Frenchmen were killed … whereas our peasants suffered no losses
at all, being sheltered from the enemy horsemen by walls and ditches. On the thirtieth the enemy … attacked Quintalonga, only to be thrown back by the 120 peasants who held that point … As a result of these happy successes, our
countrymen took heart and their number increased considerably. 3