

 Outside the city, meanwhile, considerable partisan activity notwithstanding, a variety of improvised relief forces were easily scattered or driven away. The end came on 18 February in the form of a fresh French attack that
overran the whole of the left bank of the Ebro. With the defenders reduced to starvation rations, constantly exposed to a rain of mortar and howitzer shells, decimated by typhus, and less and less capable of holding back the
French, even Palafox, who was himself seriously ill, realised that all was lost, and, twenty-four days after the breaches had first been stormed, on 20 February the guns at last fell silent.

 Thus ended the defence of Zaragoza. Badly led and deprived of all hope of relief, the city had never stood a chance. However, for all Palafox’s blunders, the desperate resistance put up by the Army of Reserve and its civilian
allies constituted a heroic epic that did much to counter the negative effects of the previous few months, whilst again making it much harder for the British to abandon the Patriot cause. Certainly, the evidence was impressive
enough: much of the city lay in ruins, whilst only a third of the garrison remained on its feet, the 24,000 deaths that it had suffered having been augmented by those of 30,000 civilians. Defeat, then, had been heroic, but heroic
defeats do not win wars. Sir John Moore had given the Junta Central the chance to rebuild its fortunes. Whether it could successfully do so was a different matter.

===== FILE: OEBPS/xhtml/chapter7.xhtml =====
The Peninsular War

 7

 Oporto

 CONQUEST FRUSTRATED, JANUARY–JUNE 1809

 Panic gripped the steep streets leading down to the river. Carrying what they could, men, women and children rushed from their homes and made their way downhill. Mixed in with the frightened mass were equally terror-stricken
soldiers, militiamen and beasts of burden, whilst columns of fugitive cavalry rode straight into the terrified crowd, trampling many unfortunates beneath their hooves. Desperate to escape – French soldiers were even now beginning
to appear behind them – the whole mass rushed pell-mell onto the city’s only bridge, only for those at the front suddenly to realise that they faced a yawning gulf. However, their screams proved fruitless. Fired on from the rear,
those still on the quayside pushed onwards driving those ahead of them into the water. Screaming in terror, young and old were swept away, whilst behind them still more of the fugitives toppled from the bridge, were crushed to
death in the press, or were accidentally cut down by Portuguese cannon firing from the further bank.

 Witnessed at the fall of Oporto on 29 March 1809, these scenes marked the most dramatic moment in the implementation of the scheme of operations which Napoleon had drawn up for his generals on the eve of his return to Paris in
January 1809. From their positions in Galicia and around Madrid, Soult and Victor were to conquer Portugal, whilst the French forces left in the occupied territories crushed the remaining bastions of resistance in those areas.
Finally, with peace restored to the northern half of the Peninsula, Andalucía and the Levante would be invaded and the conflict brought to a close. In the emperor’s mind, there was no reason why the war should not be over by the
summer, and such was the disarray in the Patriot camp in both Spain and Portugal that it is hard to question his confidence altogether. Yet the abiding theme of the next few months is the story of how the French attempt to
conquer the Peninsula was temporarily all but brought to a standstill. Despite plenty of victories, the summer of 1809 found the invaders little further forward than they had been six months earlier. At first sight, such a
situation seems somewhat surprising, the first weeks of 1809 finding the Spaniards in what appeared to be the last extremity, the British toying with withdrawal, and the Portuguese in no fit state to face invasion. Why, then, was
nemesis postponed?