

 As the formation of any further new regiments is inconvenient at a time when the old ones are short of soldiers and full of officers drawing their pay … within the space of eight days the recruits must be sent off [from Murcia]
in batches, and details provided both of the total number of recruits got together in accordance with the quota imposed on the Kingdom of Murcia, and of the number of recruits that have been sent off to the army hitherto. 1

 In all of this a major role was played by the Junta’s advisory commission of generals, which, reconstituted in Seville, performed miracles in working through the hundreds of matters that were referred to it for consideration
(even if some of its decisions were surprising, not the least of these being its rejection of proposals to establish a formal general staff).

 Just as important, however, was the question of law and order. Thus, the countryside was swarming with draft evaders and bandits, whilst many cities had become home not just to men fleeing conscription, but also to numerous
vagrants and refugees, few of whom had any means of support. Unrest, meanwhile, continued unabated. Lérida, for example, saw a dramatic rising in which an adventurer raised an angry mob, murdered several local dignitaries and
seized the city’s citadel. Attempting to evacuate Tarragona following the battle of Molíns de Rey, the Junta of Catalonia was almost lynched. In Jérez the town was taken over by hundreds of day labourers who wanted to put an end
to conscription. In Murcia squabbles amongst the ruling élite interacted with popular anger and resentment to produce a rising in which the provincial junta was overthrown and the bishop assaulted. In Ribadeo an industrialist
named the Marqués de Sargadelos, with a long history of disputes with the local inhabitants, was murdered by angry townsfolk. And in Don Bénito there had been a wholesale agrarian rising. Thus:

 The town of Don Bénito … has been in the most deplorable condition ever since … a number of discontented porters, day labourers and artisans – men whose ignorance and immorality always inclines them to the worst – launched a
furious attack … on the … town council at the very moment when the list of those eligible to be chosen for the defence of the fatherland was being drawn up, demanding land and crying that only the people with anything to lose
should go to war. This outrage, which ended in the precipitate flight of the … council, which would otherwise have been murdered, has been followed by others which have caused respectable inhabitants the utmost consternation.
Continually insulted … by these malignants, they have had to watch them … occupying the pastures rented out by their neighbours in the most disorderly fashion … These they have ploughed and harrowed, whilst in the meantime
threatening anyone who opposed them with death. 2

 Stirred up though many of these events were by ambitious individuals or powerful local factions who had failed to secure what they regarded as their just deserts, they still demanded a clear response. In consequence, whilst
commissions were issued to a variety of petitioners who claimed that they would be able to solve the bandit problem in their particular localities through the formation of security units of one form or another, further ‘police’
regulations were introduced. At the instigation of the Junta Central’s commissioner, the Marqués de Villel, for example, in Cádiz it was ordered that all freemasons should be reported to the Inquisition; that all books and
pamphlets of an irreligious or immoral nature should be confiscated forthwith; that trade and commerce should henceforward be characterised by equity and fair dealing; that vagrants, prostitutes and drunks should be imprisoned;
that children should be kept off the streets and educated in a proper fashion; that theatres should not stage any piece that was improper, indecent or provocative; that all classes of society should abstain from luxury and
excessive adornment; that all quarrels and rivalries should be eschewed or given up; and, finally, that the whole city should engage in constant prayer and penitence. Meanwhile, the Junta Central itself took action: on 3 January
1809, for example, draconian measures were issued against desertion; on 14 January an ‘extraordinary tribunal of public security’ was established in Seville; and on 19 February fresh orders laid down that all weapons in civilian
hands should be surrendered immediately.