

 The traditional British answer to this question is a simple one. Sir John Moore, it is claimed, drew so many of the invaders after him in the campaign of December 1808–January 1809 that the French were forced to suspend
offensive operations on other fronts. Meanwhile guerrilla resistance erupted, tying down many French troops and blunting such attacks as they actually managed to make, whilst the British plied the Spaniards with aid, thereby
enabling them to rebuild their armies. This is a part of the truth, but only a part of it. Just as important were the Spanish authorities, engaging as they did in a constant struggle to rebuild the power and credibility of the
state, to render their field armies more effective and to encourage popular resistance. In striving for these goals they were not wholly successful – some of what they did, indeed, in the end proved counter-productive – but, for
all that, their story cannot be ignored.

 Forced to flee its original seat, held responsible for a series of catastrophic defeats for which the only explanation, given the bombast characteristic of Spanish propaganda, seemed to be wholesale treason, and deprived of its
president – Floridablanca was dying of bronchitis – the Junta Central was certainly in desperate straits when it settled into its new capital of Seville at the end of 1808. Still worse, the confusion was being exploited by a
variety of malcontents to pursue their own ends: the Junta of Seville, for example, had resurrected its claim to be the supreme government, whilst Montijo had made a daring bid to secure the Captain Generalcy of Andalucía. Hardly
had it reached safety than the Junta therefore issued a decree which dealt a stinging blow to the pretensions of the provincial juntas. Dressed up in flattering language though this document was, it none the less explicitly
subordinated them to the Junta Central, denied them legislative and military authority, stripped them of many of the airs they had given themselves, deprived them of much patronage, ordered them to submit regular reports of their
doings, and confined them to the administration of such matters as conscription, requisitioning, taxation and propaganda. Just to make certain that the provincial juntas were put in their place, meanwhile, twelve of the Junta’s
members and a number of other special agents were sent out to act as commissioners in the style of the représentants en mission of the French Revolution. Indeed, in the north-west, completely cut off as it was from Seville, even
the authority of the army was revived in the cause of the restoration of central control: as commander of the Army of the Left, La Romana was also given the role of viceroy of Old Castile, León, Asturias and Galicia.

 Nor was the relationship between central and provincial juntas the only item on the government’s agenda. Order had also to be restored to both the war effort and society as a whole. Correctly identifying the haphazard creation
of new regiments as one of the chief problems which had hampered the army, for example, the Junta prohibited the formation of any more until all existing units had been brought up to strength. Concerned, too, about the burgeoning
number of officers, it also ordered the investigation of the many commissions that had been granted by the new authorities and eventually ruled that many of them should be annulled. Finally, orders that it had issued the previous
autumn ending the exemption of the nobility from compulsory military service were firmly reiterated, the provincial juntas also being prohibited from engaging in the practice that had grown up in some provinces of excusing anyone
willing to hand over one or more horses and their saddles. Any recalcitrance was sharply slapped down. An example is Murcia where the local authorities had been using an outbreak of yellow fever as a pretext to keep its
conscripts as a private army: