

 In the end over 10,000 men were taken, less than one third of that number managing to escape the trap and rejoin Infantado. Amongst the survivors was Girón, who set spurs to his dying horse and galloped clear, just managing to
outdistance a party of French cavalry in the process. Left with no more than 8,000 men, the duke then fled eastwards with the French in hot pursuit. Chased by the French as far as Cuenca, they lost much of their artillery and
baggage in a skirmish at Tortola, but thereafter they were left alone, and, turning their faces to the south, made haste to gain the shelter of the Sierra Morena and, beyond it, Andalucía.

 If the punishment visited on Galluzo and Infantado was severe, it was far from being the only damage inflicted on the Patriot cause. Far away to the north-east the Army of Reserve was still massed at Zaragoza, where it had been
joined, it will be recalled, by two Valencian divisions that had originally been given to Castaños. With most of the French troops in the vicinity engaged in the pursuit of the Army of the Centre, Palafox and his men had for some
weeks been left in peace. The French had not forgotten them, however, and, whilst the Aragonese forces were kept under observation by the corps of Marshal Moncey, Napoleon sent orders for the latter to be reinforced by the corps
of Marshal Mortier, the intention being that the city should be placed under siege as soon as these reinforcements should have come up.

 In all, once the units needed to cover the attackers’ line of communications had been deducted, some forty thousand men would be available for the siege, these being supported by a train of sixty heavy guns and plentiful
munitions and engineering equipment (particularly valuable in this respect were the makings of the pontoon bridge that would be needed if Zaragoza was to be besieged with any security or hope of success). Given the events of the
previous siege, the caution that this displayed was entirely understandable, whilst it was rendered all the more necessary by the fact that the Aragonese capital was no longer an easy target. On the contrary, whilst continuing to
animate the defenders with a barrage of extravagance, exaggeration and bombast, Palafox had massed 34,000 troops in the city, not counting the unknown number of armed civilians who might also participate in the fighting. Most of
these men were new levies, but at least they had all received a modicum of training and been organised into proper regiments and could be expected to put up a much better fight behind fortications than they would in the open
field. Cannon, arms and ammunition were plentiful, too, whilst the city’s medieval defences had been hidden behind a line of earthworks and entrenchments which linked together the various convents and monasteries that lay just
outside the walls, all of these having been transformed into makeshift forts. Also better protected were Monte Torrero and the trans-ebrine suburb of San Lázaro. Inside the city, streets had been barricaded, doors and windows
blocked by barricades, walls loopholed, and houses linked by tunnels and passageways. And, last but not least, the population appeared genuinely determined to defend themselves. For example: