

 Such was the spirit of the inhabitants that upon the 27th and the 28th there was not a moment’s cessation of work during day or night and every individual of every class was at work at the batteries … The ladies had enrolled
themselves, and hundreds of women of the lower class, and formed companies in order to supply the different batteries with provisions, etc., during the siege. 27

 Given the general lack of interest in the war amongst the populace, it is difficult not to question this impression. Yet months of demagoguery, pride in Zaragoza’s ‘Virgin of the Pillar’ as a focus of veneration and pilgrimage,
religious faith, and the anti-revolutionary traditions instilled by the flight to Aragón of many French clergy in the 1790s had all had some effect. At the same time research on Britain and France has suggested that urban
populations were generally more swayed by ideas of patriotism than were their rural counterparts even when they not under direct attack. We should not go too far in this respect: there were deserters even from Zaragoza, whilst
Marbot attributes the collapse of resistance at the end of the siege to an act of generosity on the part of Marshal Lannes that convinced the defenders their lives would be spared. Nor can the constant French stories of the
wholesale use of terror to force the troops to fight be wholly ignored. Yet the second siege of Zaragoza nevertheless turned into a horrific affair. The reinforcements needed for the siege taking some little time to arrive,
operations did not begin until 21 December. After that, however, matters proceeded apace. As before, Monte Torrero was overrun on the first day of the fighting, whilst by the close of the year the city had been closely blockaded
on both banks of the river, a pontoon bridge thrown across the Ebro, and considerable progress made on the attackers’ trenches and gun emplacements. Thinly stretched by the arrival of orders directing the dispatch of a division
to protect the direct road between Zaragoza and Madrid, not to mention the ravages of sickness, the attackers might have been seriously inconvenienced had Palafox used all his surplus troops to rush one particular sector of their
front, but the plan seems never to have been considered, such sorties as did take place consisting of suicidal rushes by mere handfuls of men.

 Though he did his best to hearten the defence, the fact was that Palafox was at best a mediocre commander. Meeting him for the first time, Girón professed himself astonished at his ‘absolute nullity’. 28 Even more damning was
the officer who commanded his artillery, Luis de Villaba, who condemned his ‘conceit and nonsensical designs’ and complained that ‘all the maxims and doctrines of war that could have led us to … victory were ignored and trampled
underfoot’. 29 Indeed, he had already made a serious error. In cramming so many men into Zaragoza, he had been responding to his desire for self-aggrandisement rather than any grasp of strategic reality. As Aragón had thereby
been all but stripped of troops, the result was that there was little chance of operating against the besiegers’ flanks and rear or, still more, organising a relief force. In opposition to this, of course, it can be argued that
to leave troops outside the city was simply to expose them to a re-run of the disaster at Epila the previous summer, but this ignores the other result of Palafox’s actions. Thus, Zaragoza was forced to accommodate far more men
than were needed for its defence, whilst its already substantial population had been swollen by large numbers of refugees. With the city’s buildings insufficient to shelter such an influx, the consequence was growing pressure on
the city’s magazines, severe overcrowding and, inevitably, disease. As Marbot writes, ‘The peasants … had entered the town with their wives, their children, and even their herds and … lived mixed up with their beasts in the most
disgusting state of filth.’ 30 Very soon, indeed, the city was in the grip of a typhus epidemic so serious that within ten days it had rendered a third of the garrison hors de combat.