

 For the shattered remnants of the Army of the Centre things were still bad enough. In late December Galluzo’s Extremadurans were driven from their base on the Tagus at the Puente de Almaraz by the corps of Marshal Lefebvre, and
pursued halfway to Badajoz, the only reason why they escaped destruction being that the marshal misunderstood his orders and at the last minute fell back across the Tagus, marched through the towering Sierra de Gredos and
occupied Avila. Even then its soldiers were scattered across the countryside, Lorenzo Calvo de Rozas writing that in the Tagus valley many ‘dispersed soldiers’ were ‘molesting all the towns and villages’. 24 Meanwhile, matters of
rather greater note were taking place in La Mancha where, left alone by the French, Infantado had been reorganising the Army of the Centre’s Andalusian elements at Cuenca. By the middle of December, some 20,000 men had been got
together and Infantado resolved to try a coup de main, sending half his forces westward under General Francisco Javier Venegas to attack the French cavalry screen that had been posted south of the Tagus. For various reasons,
however, the plan miscarried, whereupon Infantado decided to bring up the rest of his troops and arranged a rendezvous with Venegas at the town of Uclés. But the duke was a sluggish commander at best, whilst he faced many
logistical problems. In consequence he was outmarched by the French, who had responded to the threat by sending as many men as they could to crush Venegas.

 On 13 January 1809 there followed the battle of Uclés. Venegas’ men had taken up defensive positions on the long west-facing ridge behind which the town is situated. Commanded by Marshal Victor, however, the French proved more
than equal to the challenge, and quickly enveloped the southern end of the Spanish line, which broke and fled. No reserves having been stationed behind Venegas’ position, there was no chance of repairing the damage, and the whole
Spanish army was soon falling back. As yet the centre and right had maintained their order, and the defenders might therefore still have made an orderly retreat, but it was not to be: Marshal Victor had led a flanking column on a
long detour around the northern flank of the position and with perfect timing now appeared in the Spanish rear. The result was disaster. To quote a French eyewitness, ‘Several thousand Spaniards were obliged to throw down their
arms. Terror seized their whole army, and the various corps which composed it precipitately fled on all sides.’ 25 Several units maintained their order and tried to break out, but they, too, as Girón recounts, were soon in
trouble:

 Having got everything ready in a few moments, I ordered the attack to be beaten throughout the column, and we marched on the enemy … The latter advanced very close to us and … opened a very lively fire on our front and flank. In
spite of my precise orders not to fire a shot, the battalion at the head of the column began to fire back. Realising that if it continued, we were lost, I immediately ran to the front … to get it to attack with the bayonet, but
it was already falling back on account of its heavy losses and getting entangled with the battalion that was following it. In the course of my attempts to get it to stand … the horse that I was riding was hit by two musket
shots … By now we were under terrible close-range fire from three directions, and the troops had got completely muddled up so that they formed a single mass. Not knowing how else to save themselves, various soldiers began to cry,
‘Quarter! Quarter!’, and to wave scarves and even shirts on their bayonets. 26