

 By the end of March, then, the most important part of Napoleon’s plans for the conquest of the Peninsula had effectively stalled. But what of the pacification of the occupied territories? In the north the first priority was the
subjugation of Galicia, but, despite Marshal Ney’s best efforts, the revolt there proved impossible to put down. With only 17,000 men, he had had from the first to abandon any hope of garrisoning the entire province and instead
chose only to hold such major towns as Villafranca, Lugo, Santiago, El Ferrol and La Coruña, whilst dividing the rest of his forces into mobile columns that kept open communications between the various bases and struck out in all
directions hunting down the alarmas, burning villages, taking hostages and inflicting terrible atrocities upon the unfortunate populace. Yet the insurgents were rarely caught by the French columns and frequently inflicted
numerous casualties on them, whilst every act of punishment or reprisal simply created fresh insurgents. Still worse, the French actually lost ground. Protected from blockade by the flying columns, the towns held by Ney’s troops
were safe enough, but, far to the south-west, the situation of Tuy and Vigo was very different. Held by invalids and other troops dropped off by Soult and completely out of touch with Ney, the two towns had quickly been
surrounded in an attempt to starve them into submission. In the end Tuy’s defenders were evacuated by troops sent up from Oporto by Soult, but on 27 March Vigo surrendered when the British landed some naval cannon and breached
the main gate.

 In view of the assumptions that tend to be made with regard to the nature of the so-called ‘little war’, it is important to note the identity of the forces that besieged Vigo. Whilst not troops of the old regular army, they were
not just crowds of armed peasants either. On the contrary, at their heart was the División del Miño, which was a force consisting of five regiments of new levies organised by regular officers acting at the behest of La Romana and
the Junta Central. Raised by conscription, dressed in uniform and trained to fight in the usual formations of the period, these men were soldiers if not, at the beginning, ones that were especially good. Nor could it be
otherwise: lacking any means of subsistence, armed civilians could not be away from their homes for more than a few days. Yet even had this not been the case, there is still room to doubt the idea of a Galician people’s war. The
French could count on opposition wherever they actually appeared, but they had only to leave a district alone for it to remain quiet for weeks. Crowds of peasants might be induced by the hope of pay to put in a few hours of drill
every week, but of fighting most of the time there was no thought. As Hall writes, for example:

 On reaching the camp … we found the patriot army exercising by divisions … When we approached a general halt was ordered, and those who had muskets presented them as well they might, while those who had none went through the
motions equally well with their pikes or staves formed out of scythes and reaping hooks … Under our auspices the peasantry continued to flock in from the adjacent country … although we could supply scarcely a twentieth part of
these patriots with arms … And that small fraction not being supplied with officers, or disciplined, or organised in any way, it was really like children playing at soldiers. 25