

 If the notables who controlled the juntas were unhappy, so were the populace, and all the more so as the various anti-bandit patrols that appeared tended to slip into crime themselves whilst providing the clients of the local
caciques with a means of avoiding military service and generally behaving in the most arbitrary fashion. To quote one of the many anonymous notes sent to the Junta Central:

 Those who have infected the pueblos with robbery and smuggling have been the very commissions that have been established for the persecution and extermination of bandits and wrongdoers. One man they imprison, whilst another they
free. One man they threaten, whilst another they favour. There is no person of sense who is not horrified by such iniquity. 10

 In consequence of all this, there were further disturbances of which the worst were probably those that took place in Cádiz on 22 February 1809. A complex affair, these troubles in part stemmed from popular resentment of both
Villel and attempts to encourage recruitment. Also important was hatred of customs officials – ‘these jacks-in-office who with no other income than their salaries succeed in enriching themselves … enjoying every kind of luxury,
and avoiding every sacrifice’ 11 – and growing economic difficulties:

 All the attention of the Junta is currently centred on the number of people living in Cádiz … It has grown a lot, whilst … depending as it does on foodstuffs brought in from outside, Cádiz is incapable of suddenly absorbing a
large increase in population … Shortages are therefore imminent, and they cannot but fall most heavily on the poor … for whom the least increase in the price of necessities is a sentence of death. 12

 Yet the heart of the problem was constituted by the city’s militia, the Voluntarios Distinguidos de Cádiz. Hearing that a battalion of foreign deserters and former prisoners of war was being moved to the city, this force
concluded that it was about to be sent to the front. In little time at all, rumours were spreading that treason was afoot, and an angry crowd, in whose ranks were to be found many of the volunteers, took over the city, murdered
the much-hated head of the customs guard, and besieged Villel in his lodgings.

 Faced with these disturbances, the Junta Central responded with a number of judicious concessions: the Voluntarios were promised that they would never have to serve outside the city, conscription in the city was suspended, and
the local police commission temporarily disbanded. At the same time, however, it was made clear that no further disorders would be tolerated. Cádiz’s alcalde mayor issued a decree prohibiting all gatherings of more than five
people, ordering the arrest of all minors found alone on the streets, and threatening women – a section of society believed to be particularly prone to unrest and disorder on account of their ‘indiscreet persuasions and want of
talent’ – who failed to behave in a decorous fashion with solitary confinement. And on 3 March the Junta Central issued a decree ordering the most draconian punishment of all those involved in acts of public disorder.