

 Our hussars … then drowned the sound of the trumpet … by a … terrible shout of joy and fury. The Spanish lancers stopped; seized with terror, they turned their horses … and overthrew their own cavalry, which was behind them …
Our hussars mingled with them indiscriminately [and] cut them down without resistance. 21

 On the other flank, too, disaster struck. As Cuesta wrote:

 The left had arrived within half a pistol shot of the first enemy battery and was advancing with the bayonet to take it, when a strong force of enemy cavalry … charged to rescue it. Our infantry did not stop, but the Almansa and
Infante line cavalry regiments, and … the Imperial Chasseurs of Toledo wavered … and, abandoning our array, fled at the gallop … I was behind … our left at the time, and seeing the flight of the three regiments, quickly rode over
to contain the disorder … The corps of grenadiers, which was still advancing on the battery … was shouting, ‘What is this? Come back! They are ours!’ But it was all in vain. The cavalry could not be rallied, and so the enemy got
into the rear of our infantry and achieved their disunion. 22

 With the division of dragoons of General Latour-Maubourg rolling up the infantry divisions of Henestrosa and Del Parque, Cuesta’s forces had within a matter of moments been reduced to a crowd of fugitives – ‘In an instant the
army that was before us disappeared like clouds driven before the wind. The Spaniards threw down their arms and fled; the cannonade ceased and the whole of our army went off in pursuit of the enemy.’ 23 Thanks to the open
terrain, the result was disastrous: the fleeing Spaniards were cut down or taken prisoner in enormous numbers, whilst they also lost twenty guns and much of their baggage. By the end of the day, indeed, 10,000 men had become
casualties, whilst many others had scattered deep into the countryside, many of them never to return. As for Cuesta himself, such is the opprobrium that has been heaped on him by British authors that a personal note is essential,
for he clearly exposed himself to great danger. One of his aides-de-camp was cut down by a cannonball at his side, and he himself was wounded in the foot. Trying to rally some fugitives, he was in the end literally knocked down.
Ridden over by friend and foe alike, he then found himself in the midst of the French, and was only saved from death by the courage of two of his nephews, who drove off his assailants and, with the aid of the British liaison
officer, Benjamin D’Urban, ‘pulled him out from under the horses’ feet bruised and nearly senseless’. 24

 Fortunately for the Spaniards, the ability to exploit Medellín proved limited. Shaken by a harder fight than anything he had expected and much concerned at reports of the formation of local militias on the model of the
somaténes, Victor decided to check his march until he had received news of Soult, of whose progress he remained entirely ignorant. More might have been achieved if Victor could have called upon further support from the Madrid
area, but this was impossible, for the troops concerned were being kept fully occupied watching the much-tried Army of the Centre. Reconstituted in the Sierra Morena under the Conde de Cartaojal, this had just been beaten at
Ciudad Real following an abortive attempt to surprise the forces guarding the southern approaches to Madrid, but it remained an army in being and in consequence could not just be ignored.