

 Even when actually called upon to fight, the alarma did not necessarily put up much of a fight:

 When the enemy’s toops reached the foot of the hill … the French infantry very coolly sat down on the grass to rest … Now was the moment … to make a rush down upon the wearied invaders, and … the patriots were ordered to advance
to the attack, but … rather to trust to the effect of the rush downhill and to … the use of the bayonet than to the fire of their musketry. There was a great cheering of ‘Viva! Viva!’ upon these orders being given, and the
Spaniards moved on to the charge in a style worthy of the days of their own Cid Campeador. But this lasted only until they came within a couple of gun-shots of the French troops, upon which … the patriots halted, and commenced a
brisk fire directed towards the enemy … I am ashamed to say … it was now observable that more than half their number had gone off to the rear … while those who remained merely … fired off their pieces in the direction of the
distant enemy … without working the smallest mischief on their foes … When the French came within musket-shot, they threw forward a few skirmishers, who commenced firing on the Spaniards. I need hardly add that the greater number
of the now sadly reduced forces of the Patriots now took to their heels. 26

 Fortunately for the Spaniards, Galicia could rely not only on raw levies and disorderly home guards, but also on the battered Army of the Left. Got together by La Romana in the vicinity of the Portuguese frontier, this force was
in a sorry state: at the beginning of February, indeed, 3,000 of its 10,000 men had no arms. But when Soult had appeared the marquess had skilfully kept out of harm’s way (albeit at the cost of earning the punning nickname of
Marqués de la Romerias – the Marquess of the Pilgrimages). Once free to attack the enemy, he had even gone over to the offensive, launching a surprise attack on the town of Villafranca del Vierzo – astonishingly enough, the only
point held by the French between Lugo and Astorga. The garrison being quickly forced to surrender, the message was obvious: Ney was losing control.

 Not until May did it prove possible for the French to do anything about the situation. Not having had any news of the province for months, Joseph ordered 7,000 troops to head across the frontier under General Kellermann. Meeting
at Lugo, Ney and Kellermann decided to ensure first that the garrison of Asturias – the largest Spanish force in the region – could not intervene in favour of the insurgents. Abandoning all offensive operations in Galicia, Ney
therefore concentrated one of his two divisions at Lugo, whilst Kellermann returned to León and sent a message to the governor of Santander, General Bonnet, asking him to co-operate as well. By the middle of May, then, three
separate forces were moving into Asturias. Taken by surprise and deployed in scattered detachments along the frontier, the Spanish forces were overwhelmed and fled in all directions, Oviedo being entered on 20 May. There was no
resistance: