

 To no Spanish government would this have been acceptable. Just along the coast from Cádiz was the perpetual source of resentment constituted by Gibraltar, whilst the British had only given up Menorca, which they had held for
much of the eighteenth century, in 1802. Nor was the retreat to La Coruña the best platform from which to launch such a demand. A spat might yet have been avoided, but the situation was complicated by events on the ground.
Convinced that Cádiz was French for the taking, an over-zealous liaison officer named Sir George Smith took it upon himself to implore Cradock to send troops to occupy the city. As Cradock complied, when Frere presented the
government’s request in early February, a British force was actually present off Cádiz, the Junta Central therefore concluding that their allies were intent on a landing with or without their permission. In the circumstances only
one answer was possible, but even so the incident strengthened British sentiment against the Spaniards still further. As one British soldier wrote:

 Who could have thought that the … Spaniards … would refuse admittance to our army into Cádiz? Such, however, has been their return for our generous conduct, and it has fallen to our lot to suffer the mortification of the
refusal. 16

 Setting these difficulties aside, there were in any case still other issues that stood in the way of increased British aid. Few British observers could be found, for example, who were not dissatisfied at the shape that had been
given to the Spanish government, the arrangements that had been made for the command of the Spanish armies, or the training, organisation and general performance of the Spanish troops. Most thorny of all was the linked issue of
British subsidies, free trade and Spanish America. Faced by ever-growing demands for aid, Canning had responded by stating that Britain’s ability to respond would be contingent upon her gaining access to both American silver and
the colonial trade, whilst at the same time suggesting the need for a reform in the relationship between metropolis and colonies. These demands were hardly altruistic – Britain stood to gain enormously – but the fact was that
more specie and fresh markets were essential to Britain’s war effort. Yet, again, no Spanish government could have submitted to such demands and certainly not the battered Junta Central, the latter knowing full well that any
concessions of this sort would provide excellent ammunition for its enemies.

 How, then, was the Junta Central to recover the British confidence that was so vital to its political, financial and military prospects? How, too, was it to face down its internal enemies, secure compliance with its decrees and
restore order to Spanish society? In these circumstances, the only hope was a mixture of wheedling and remonstrance. On 12 March 1809 the Secretary General of the Junta Central, Martín de Garay, sent Canning a long memorandum in
which he laid much emphasis on the heroism of the Spanish people and protested at the manner in which Britain had thus far failed to give all the support that it could to the Patriot cause, whilst at the same time hinting that
greater aid would bring substantial concessions. Another way forward, meanwhile, lay in moves in the direction of political reform: the American colonies were declared to be an integral part of the Spanish state and granted the
right of representation in the Junta Central, whilst on 22 May 1809 it was announced that a new cortes would assemble within a year and a general call issued for proposals for its organisation and agenda. Desperate efforts, too,
continued to be made to encourage support for the war, with the Junta sponsoring a national competition for the composition of odes to heroic Zaragoza and holding lavish ceremonies to celebrate the first anniversary of the Dos de
Mayo. But in the last resort the only effective answer was military victory, and, by extension, the adoption of an offensive strategy. *