

 By such means the crowd might be overawed, but there was still another problem that had to be faced. Many generals were vigorously opposed to the direction that the revolution had taken, either because they were deeply
legitimist – Cuesta (who had in the confusion been appointed by the Junta of Extremadura to take charge of the new army it was raising on the basis of the fugitives from Gamonal and Somosierra) and La Romana – or because they
were eager to pursue the goals of the aristocratic plot that had been shortcircuited by the overthrow of Fernando VII – Infantado, Francisco Palafox and Montijo. Also to be found was a degree of personal jealousy and ambition,
with Cuesta, for example, still smarting from the loss of his Castilian command the previous autumn and Infantado bitterly resentful of having been relieved of command of the Army of the Centre after Uclés. The result was a
variety of intrigues in which the various generals schemed both with one another and with other malcontents, including most notably the Junta of Seville, to orchestrate the downfall of the Junta Central. In the north-west, for
example, La Romana effectively declared himself independent of the Junta’s authority, whilst Montijo and Francisco Palafox even went so far as to instigate a short-lived rising in Granada in April 1809. This was crushed – ‘The
Junta [of Granada] … ordered the cavalry … to charge a small number of onlookers who had gathered in the Plaza Nueva, sent infantry … to occupy every street corner, and … raided the house of the Conde de Montijo’ 13 – but even so
the Junta could hardly feel complacent. The defects of its composition were obvious, and its new president, the Marqués de Astorga, open to ridicule. In the words of Lord Holland, ‘The … Marquis of Astorga was the least man I
ever saw in society, and smaller than many dwarfs exhibited for money. He … drove about with guards like a royal personage. They called him the rey chico. ’ 14 In consequence, ‘Their popularity is now totally lost, and it is the
universal wish that they may be removed, and an individual, or small council of regency, appointed to succeed them.’ 15

 With matters in this state, it was essential for the Junta Central to secure the support of the British, of whom it continued to entertain the most exaggerated hopes (at this time it was, for example, being reported that the
small British garrison that had remained in Lisbon under Sir John Cradock consisted of 70,000 men). In the wake of La Coruña, however, relations with London had been going from bad to worse. On 14 January 1809 Canning and the
Spanish ambassador to London, Juan Ruiz de Apódaca, had signed a definitive treaty of peace, friendship and alliance that committed Britain to aiding Spain with all the means at her disposal and prohibited her from making a
separate peace with France or recognising any other monarch than Fernando VII. But what aid to Spain meant in London was different from what it meant in Seville. What the Spaniards really wanted was men and money, but the
Portland administration had little specie to spare, whilst the events surrounding Moore’s retreat made the dispatch of another army distinctly problematic. All demands for financial aid were therefore refused, and the dispatch of
troops made conditional on the admission of a British garrison to Cádiz as a gesture of good faith.