

 Weak though Soult was, the defenders were still weaker. The populace were unenthusiastic at the prospect of military service and much given to outbreaks of unrest (there were, for example, serious riots in Lisbon in early
February); the local notables were frightened of popular vengeance; and the new authorities bitterly at odds with one another. Plans had been laid for a somewhat expanded army which would include a substantial force of light
infantry, or caçadores; such men as could be found of the old army had been mobilised and augmented by some 25,000 conscripts; and Britain had been asked to supply a commander-in-chief who could take affairs in hand. However,
although such an officer was quickly found in the person of William Beresford, a capable and experienced major-general who had served under Moore in 1808 and was known to be a friend of Wellesley, uniforms, arms, equipment,
transport, baggage animals and cavalry mounts were all in short supply. As for training, this was badly deficient, whilst most of the officers of the old army had joined Junot’s Portuguese Legion. Extremely conscious of the
inexperience of their replacements, Beresford had immediately asked for British officers, but it would be many months before this solution could make much difference.

 The result was a sorry picture. Many regiments of the regular army had still not been fully embodied, whilst the entire force was still scattered across the length and breadth of the country in its regimental recruitment
districts. There were also forty-eight regiments of militia, but these in most cases lacked arms – many had had to be given pikes – whilst they were in any case even worse trained than the regular army. Finally, one must also
mention the ordenança or home guard. Formed and armed in the style of the somaténes and alarmas, they were, like them, supposed to turn out in time of invasion. Organised into guerrilla bands, they might have been of some
service, but stop an army they could not, whilst attempts to place them under arms on a permanent basis had led to much disorder. Lisbon was securely held by 16,000 British troops under Cradock and Almeida by the Loyal Lusitanian
Legion – a tiny force of volunteers raised by the British adventurer, Sir Robert Wilson – but otherwise there was nothing. Well, then, might Harriet Slessor be despondent:

 The country people declare that they will fight … They are willing to think … that they are capable of performing wonders. But let a formidable French army present itself … [and] confusion, dismay and distraction [will] be
mingled in the probable annihilation of thousands. 17

 Soult’s forces initially faced only the 12,000 men represented by the line regiments, militia and ordenança of the province of Tras-os-Montes. Commanded by Francisco da Silveira, these forces were soon in full retreat amidst
scenes of riot and disorder, and within two days of crossing the frontier Soult had taken the border fortress of Chaves. Turning west, Soult then moved against a mass of about 25,000 ordenança commanded by General Bernardino
Freire that had been mobilised to block the best route from Chaves to Oporto at Braga. Reaching these forces proved a costly affair – the French were harassed every step of the way – but on 20 March the French attacked. The
combat was a short one. Positioned on some hills some miles east of Braga, the ordenanças had been joined by a handful of regulars and militia, and had constructed a number of redoubts armed with cannon. However, the defenders
were in hopeless disarray – on 17 March, indeed, a thoroughly demoralised Freire had been murdered by a group of armed peasants after trying to flee his command – whilst the position was far too extensive for them. The result was
inevitable: within a matter of minutes, the Portuguese were scattering in panic before Soult’s cavalry.