

 Oporto, meanwhile, was in a state of utter confusion. Nominally governed by its bishop, who had come back from Lisbon to reclaim his old fief, it was in practice in the hands of the mob. Bands of ordenanças roamed the streets
hunting down anyone whom they suspected of treason and murdering local notables associated with the pre-war régime, and there was also a terrible prison massacre. Although the northern approaches to the city had been blocked by
earthworks, ditches and palisades, there was little chance of a successful defence. Attacked on the morning of 29 March, within two hours all 30,000 of the defenders were fleeing in terror. Hence the disaster we have already
described. Built on a steep hillside running down to the River Duero, the city was a death-trap. Thousands of fugitives were cut down by the French and others were trampled or crushed to death. At the quaysides, meanwhile, boats
were swamped and men, women and children thrown into the water. However, by far the worst scenes were witnessed at the only bridge across the river. Constructed from pontoons, it was gradually swamped by the weight of the crowd,
leaving a gap in the middle into which hundreds, if not thousands, of soldiers and civilians were driven by the pressure of those behind. Temporarily attached to Marshal Soult’s headquarters, Joseph’s aide-de-camp, Bigarré, was a
horrified eyewitness:

 Imagine 12,000–15,000 souls crowded together on the bank of a river crossed by a bridge of boats, whose centre has been pushed under the water. Imagine that mass … pressing forward to cross the bridge. Imagine those unfortunates
being hurled into a gulf whose existence they only discovered at the last moment. Imagine them being exterminated by … Portuguese guns on the left bank of the Duero and the bayonets of the French at their heels. 18

 Elsewhere many defenders were massacred as they tried to give up, whilst there was also much pillage and rapine. Trapped in the bishop’s palace, 200 militia fought to the death, but by nightfall it was all over: some 8,000 men,
women and children lay dead for French losses of less than 500, whilst the booty included 200 guns, immense stocks of food and munitions, and 30 shiploads of wine.

 Great victory as this was, the French could go no further. Worn down by constant skirmishes, exposed to the most terrible reprisals and prevented from foraging effectively, the troops were exhausted, demoralised and increasingly
unruly. As for their commanders, they found that they were deprived of news and forced into courses of action – mass executions and the destruction of entire villages – that only stirred up resentment against them still further.
As for Soult, he had conquered nothing. Oporto had been taken and petty garrisons left in Braga and one or two other places, but the Portuguese had closed in around him and completely cut him off. All too clearly, nothing further
could be attempted until the forces supposed to be marching to Soult’s aid had crossed the frontier. If the people in arms had not stopped the invasion of Portugal, they had at least checked its success.