

 What though of the forces that Napoleon had ordered to assist Soult? Consisting of the corps of Marshal Victor and some extra cavalry, to be of any help these troops would either have had to beat the Spanish Army of Extremadura
and reduce the major fortresses of Badajoz and Elvas; brave the trackless wastes of the Tagus valley and capture Abrantes; or storm Ciudad Rodrigo and Almeida. It may therefore be doubted whether they would ever have got very
far, but in the event they did not even reach the frontier. An attempt to probe the northern front was abandoned after Wilson succeeded in bluffing the forces facing him into believing that they were opposed by a large army,
whilst Victor’s next plan – a march on Badajoz – was checked by the sudden appearance of Cuesta’s Army of Extremadura, which attacked the Marshal’s troops at Medellín on 29 March in accordance with both the proclivities of Cuesta
himself – he was a commander with a particularly tough and aggressive disposition – and the Junta Central’s need for a powerful counter-offensive.

 Traditionally, Cuesta has been savaged for his conduct of the battle that followed, but in fact his generalship was by no means foolish. The battlefield was an open plain, and the Spanish cavalry both outnumbered and outclassed.
The French, meanwhile, had taken up a position between the River Guadiana and a tributary called the Ortiga that flowed into it from the south, Medellín being situated at the confluence of the two. Faced by this situation, Cuesta
deployed his infantry in lines that were six men deep and therefore much more likely to be able to resist a cavalry charge. * As for the horse, it was split up in small forces on either flank and in the centre, the aim evidently
being to support them at all times with infantry, and thereby thwart its superior French counterparts. The flanks of this array were protected by the Ortiga and the Guadiana, whilst its front was covered by a thick line of
skirmishers and Cuesta’s thirty guns, the latter being dragged along with the infantry for the purposes of close support.

 To pretend that this arrangement had no faults would be futile. Thus, the Spanish line was at the outset stretched very thin by the need to rest the flanks on the two rivers, whilst the various units would have to be careful to
maintain their alignment at all times for fear that the French cavalry might otherwise seize a gap and ride down the troops on either side. Yet the problem was not an insuperable one. Outnumbered four to three, Victor was not
able to hold the Spaniards back, and, as the latter advanced, so the ever narrowing battlefield enabled them to thicken their array. For a time, then, it seemed that Cuesta might obtain a victory. ‘The Spanish infantry,’ wrote
Sir George Jackson, ‘behaved nobly. Though great numbers were without shoes and almost without clothing, they advanced with a coolness and resolution that would have done credit to veteran troops.’ 19 ‘The French artillery,
heavier, more numerous and better served was severely felt’, but, astonishingly, two regiments of dragoons which charged the Spaniards were ‘repulsed with loss’, whilst the Spanish skirmishers were ‘so numerous and so bold that
they frequently forced ours [i.e. their French counterparts] back to their ranks’. 20 But victory was not to be. Ordered to charge some French horse, the cavalry that had been attached to the Spanish right were taken by surprise
by a sudden movement on the part of a squadron of enemy hussars. What followed was all too familiar.