

 If the Junta Central was once again ready for battle, it was the result of the combination of the breathing space won for it by Moore’s campaign and the defence of Zaragoza, and the arrival of copious outside aid: by May 1809
the British had provided the Spaniards with 155 artillery pieces, at least 200,000 muskets and over 90,000 complete uniforms, whilst patriotic contributions had started to come in from America that by December of the same year
were worth 284,000,000 reales. What, though, of the French? Napoleon, as we have seen, had committed them to the conquest of Portugal and the suppression of resistance in Catalonia as the first steps in a campaign that by the end
of the summer was supposed to have liquidated all opposition in the Peninsula. In elaborating this scheme, however, the emperor had been wildly over-optimistic. As powerful forces were needed to defend the territories occupied by
the French, only a limited number of troops could be used for offensive operations. For the invasion of Portugal, the only troops available were the corps of Marshal Soult and Marshal Victor and a number of additional cavalry
formations. What Napoleon was gambling on, of course, was a complete lack of resistance: of the Spaniards and Portuguese he was as contemptuous as ever, whilst he was completely unaware that the British still had troops in
Lisbon. But there was a further flaw in his thinking. The population of most of the rest of Europe having remained quiet in the face of French conquest, there had been little need to protect lines of communication. In Spain,
however, this was not so, whilst the invaders were still ringed by regular armies. For every step that the French advanced, then, men had to be dropped off to hold down the fresh gains and protect them from counter-attack. Yet,
arguing that the Spanish armies were no threat and popular resistance a phenomenon that could be easily crushed, Napoleon actually withdrew a number of troops from the Peninsula.

 Far from the first six months of 1809 seeing an end to the war, they rather marked a period of intense frustration for the French. From the very beginning, things went wrong. In the west, Soult was supposed to be in Lisbon by 10
February. Yet by the time that he had occupied La Coruña, El Ferrol and Vigo (all of which surrendered without a fight), handed over responsibility for Galicia to the corps of Marshal Ney, which had come up from Castile in his
wake, regrouped his battered forces – his own corps and two extra cavalry divisions – and concentrated those of his men who were fit to fight on the Portuguese frontier at Tuy, it was already three days past that date. At the
frontier, however, the way was blocked, for the road south across the River Miño was commanded by the fortress of Valença, whose governor refused point blank to surrender. After an abortive attempt at an amphibious crossing, the
army had to look for another passage. This was eventually found at Orense fifty miles inland, but many men fell sick or were killed, whilst so many horses were lost that it proved necessary to send all the baggage and heavy guns
back to Tuy under heavy guard. At Orense, meanwhile, still further time was lost in attempts to gather fresh supplies, hunt down La Romana’s army, which was hiding in the hills east of the city, and put down the insurrection. Not
until 9 March 1809, then, did Soult finally cross the frontier. With him were fewer than 22,000 men, a mere 20 guns, all of them light, and only the most limited supplies of food and ammunition, the French having had to limit
themselves to what they could carry by mule train.