

 Yet the problem was not just confined to pillaging and vandalism. Also apparent was a superiority complex at least as striking as anything on display in the French army. From the very moment that they landed in Lisbon, the
British felt that they were higher beings. The Portuguese capital, indeed, caused general horror, Bell calling it ‘the most filthy town I had ever seen’, and Bragge remarking that ‘on setting your foot on land, you are almost
overcome with the stench’. 7 The effect of such sights was not unnaturally to lead to the most unfavourable comparisons. To quote Porter:

 The foul imagination of Dean Swift could not prefigure the scene that presented itself: a chaos of nastiness, poverty and wretchedness lay on every side. Rags or nakedness seemed the condition of every person who approached me …
Not an inn is to be found in which you could pass the night without undergoing the tortures of a hell … I made an attempt to lodge in one, but had I been destined to pass my nocturnal hours in the most wretched hovel in England,
or to have put up at this place, I should have preferred the former. It would be impossible to find in all Great Britain a habitation so ruinous, so ill-furnished, so filthy, and so infested with vermin, and yet this was the
chief hotel in the city. 8

 Moving up country, or, for that matter, over the frontier into Spain, made little difference. Writing of the district between Almeida and Ciudad Rodrigo, for example, Simmons complained:

 Our present quarters are truly miserable; on all sides stupendous mountains, the people wretched in the extreme, clothes hardly sufficient to cover themselves, and positively not a degree above savages … Of a morning they will
turn out of their wretched cabins and are to be seen sitting in rows upon the ground … picking lice off themselves and out of each other’s heads. 9

 ‘Positively not a degree above savages.’ From this there stemmed a multitude of evils. With such attitudes compounded by ignorance of popular customs and dissastisfaction at the record of Spaniards and Portuguese alike in 1808,
scorn was widespread. Thus, for Simmons, the Portuguese were ‘not worthy of notice’, whilst for Donaldson the Spaniards were ‘a jealous minded, vindictive and and cowardly race, grossly ignorant and superstitious’. 10 Examples of
the discourteous, rude and arbitrary treament of civilians are therefore legion. Travelling to Lisbon to recuperate after being wounded, Simmons, for example, thought nothing of forcibly impressing a Portuguese peasant to drive
his cart, and then having his servant thrash the unfortunate man when the cart jolted his wounds; Kincaid of stealing food from starving Portuguese refugees; and Lawrence of robbing Spanish peasants who had come into the camp to
sell wine. Less serious but more gratuitous is the story of an Irish soldier named Dennis, who, seeing a religious procession approaching with the Blessed Sacrament, wanted to avoid having to kneel in the dirt of a Lisbon street: