

 Setback though this was, it was as nothing compared to events elsewhere, for these suggested that the French were not just stymied, but on the retreat. In June, as we have seen, the invaders had had to evacuate their short-lived
conquests in Asturias, but by far the most dramatic developments had occurred in Portugal and Galicia. In the former the French invasion had stalled following the capture of Oporto, after which Soult had been effectively
corralled in a small pocket of territory around the city (not that this dissuaded him from indulging in dreams of a Lusitanian monarchy). Nor had much time ensued before the British once again hove into view, the Portland
administration having on 2 April decided to increase its forces in Portugal to 30,000 men and place them under the command of Sir Arthur Wellesley with orders to expel the French from the country.

 This development was the fruit of a variety of factors including Canning’s determination to maintain Britain’s commitment to the Peninsula, the Junta Central’s refusal to grant the British access to Cádiz, the determination of
Wellesley’s friends to see him restored to favour, and Wellesley’s own submission of a long and prescient memorandum in which he argued: first, that the mere presence of a British army in Portugal would prevent the French from
subduing the Spaniards; second, that Portugal could be placed in such a state of defence that the French would never be able to conquer her with a force of less than 100,000 men; and, third, that a remodelled Portuguese army
could augment Britain’s striking power sufficiently for her to think of liberating Spain. Beyond that, however, all that can be said for certain is that on 22 April 1809 Lisbon saw the arrival of a Sir Arthur Wellesley committed
to an immediate attack on Soult, an intention in which he was encouraged by news that the forces of ‘King Nicholas’, as the marshal had become known, were riven with dissatisfaction (in brief, a plot – the so-called Argenton
conspiracy – was afoot to overthrow Soult and bring his men over to the Allies).

 By the beginning of May, then, 17,000 British and 11,000 Portuguese soldiers were poised to hit Oporto under Wellesley, whilst further east Beresford was marching northwards with a flanking column charged with the task of
cutting Soult off from Spain. The result was a resounding victory. Forced to evacuate Oporto on 12 May after a surprise river crossing which saw a small party of British soldiers seize a large monastery on the town’s eastern
outskirts and beat off a series of desperate assaults, Soult ordered his men to head for León. Nor was this the end of his travails, for, reinforced by the Portuguese army that Silveira had managed to sustain east of Oporto,
Beresford had succeeded in blocking his intended line of march. Threatened by a second Bailén, the marshal abandoned his guns and baggage and fled north along a precipitous mountain track that led in the direction of Galicia.
Beset by enemies on all sides, soaked by pouring rain, and impeded by some of the roughest terrain in Portugal, he was on several occasions nearly trapped, but on 18 May he reached the frontier, having lost 4,000 men.