

 From eleven o’clock in the morning of 18 May the bells of the cathedral and all the other churches of the city were rung to sound the alarm. The Marqués de Santa Cruz toured the streets, urging the inhabitants to take up arms,
as did Canon Pedro de Nava … A few of the citizens did so, but seeing that no soldier put himself at their head, that nobody tried to organise them, that no other measures were being taken other than to ring the bells, make
speeches and deliver sermons [and] that all was confusion and disorder … they lost heart … Consternation and fear were written in the faces of the city’s inhabitants … Dazed and terrified, they fled to the towns and villages of
the surrounding district … The roads and tracks were full of old and young of both sexes, of fathers of families, of young children. Everyone was trying to save what they could and carry off anything that might sustain them in
their flight. 27

 Although Ney issued a proclamation promising the inhabitants that they would be well treated, submission spared the city nothing:

 On the pretext that a few shots had been fired at the troops as they entered the city, they were ordered to sack it … During the sack these latter-day vandals committed such excesses and cruelties that merely recounting them is
enough to scare one out of one’s wits. The cost of the damage done in almost all the buildings by the riotous soldiery in their attempts to uncover their pillage, of the fine furniture that was smashed, and of the personal
effects, money and plate that were taken away, cannot begin to be calculated. 28

 On the surface the loss of Oviedo seemed a considerable humiliation for the Spaniards: caught in the midst of his purge of the Asturian authorities, for example, La Romana had to escape in a fishing boat, whilst the city had
been the very symbol of the uprising. Yet in practice its only result was to leave the French overstretched in Galicia and Santander, both provinces now witnessing serious setbacks. In Galicia, Mahy struck north with the Army of
the Left and blockaded Lugo, whilst the Division of the Miño marched on Santiago and occupied the city after defeating its garrison in a fierce battle. Meanwhile, Santander city was also taken, having been surprised by a division
of the Asturian forces which had dodged the invaders and slipped through the mountains. Within a matter of days, then, Ney and Bonnet were racing back the way they had come, leaving Kellermann little option but to evacuate
Asturias, which by the end of June was once again in Spanish hands.

 Just as hard to subdue as Galicia and Asturias, meanwhile, was Catalonia, where the first priority was the conquest of the defiant fortress of Gerona, blocking, as this did, the main road between Barcelona and the border and
affording the somaténes of the northern half of the province a secure base and place of refuge. In consequence, in January 1809 Napoleon had ordered the forces stationed in the area of the frontier under General Reille to move
against it as soon as possible, even sending them a few German troops as reinforcements. The emperor had envisaged that the siege should begin no later than the middle of February, but Reille was not especially enthusiastic about
his assignment, whilst it also took some time to amass the supplies, siege materials and heavy guns that would be needed, the French also continuing to be harassed by incessant irregular resistance. More might have been achieved
had Saint-Cyr been able to march to Reille’s assistance from the vicinity of Barcelona, but all chance of this was for some time rendered impossible by a further Spanish offensive. The French had been too weak to follow up their
victory at Molíns de Rey, whilst Barcelona had very quickly once again been hemmed in by a cloud of somaténes. As a result, the Army of the Right, which was now commanded by Teodoro Reding, the Swiss officer who had blocked
Dupont’s escape at Bailén, had been able to recover its cohesion (to the plentiful food assured by the fact that it was positioned in one of the richest agricultural districts in the whole of Spain had been added a division of
reinforcements that had been sent up from Andalucía). Reding, it seems, would have preferred simply to keep the army in being and wear down the French with raids and skirmishes, but the local populace were loud in their demands
for action, and the Spanish general was soon being accused of cowardice and treason. By early February, then, the Army of the Right was on the move in an attempt to envelop the most advanced elements of Saint-Cyr’s forces. Always
risky, however, the plan went wrong, and a series of complex manoeuvres eventually led to Reding being cut off from his base at Tarragona by the French commander. Battle being joined north-west of Valls in the early morning of 25
February, the Spaniards tried to cut their way through. Initially only 6,000 strong, the French were steadily forced back – Doyle described Reding’s men as ‘perhaps the best troops in Spain’ 29 – and by noon were in such disarray
that the battle seemed lost. Had Reding pushed on, he would have scored a much-needed victory, but at this point he decided that his men needed a rest and fell back to some heights two miles to the west of the original
battlefield. Saint-Cyr having soon been heavily reinforced, he therefore went over to the attack. Forming his two divisions into heavy brigade-sized columns that made changes of formation very difficult, his intention was
essentially to put the Spaniards to flight by fear alone. In this he was completely successful: several volleys of musketry having had little effect on the advancing masses, the defenders turned and ran. Having already been
wounded four times and seen two of his aides-de-camp cut down by his side in hand-to-hand combat, Reding was mortally hit. Very soon, it was all over – 3,000 Spaniards had been killed, wounded or captured, whilst they had also
lost all their guns and baggage – and yet the offensive’s effect had still been to win Gerona’s defenders at least a month (not until the beginning of May, indeed, did the French close in on the city).