

 This bare account of the fighting should not be allowed to disguise the fact that the French occupation of northern Portugal had proved a grim affair. An English officer who had been billeted in Oporto in 1808, for example,
returned to the house in which he had stayed to find it in a shocking condition:

 To witness the destruction occasioned in this beautiful residence was truly pitiable … the fine balustrades [were] broken; the chandeliers and mirrors were shattered to pieces; all the portable furniture had been taken away and
the remainder either wantonly burned or otherwise destroyed; the choice pictures were defaced, and the walls more resembled a French barrack than the abode of a Portuguese fidalgo from the obscene paintings that were daubed upon
them. The beautiful garden was entirely ransacked; the charming walks and fragrant bowers torn up and demolished; the fountains broken to pieces. 1

 The same observer goes on to retail the story of a Portuguese gentleman having his brains blown out on the very eve of Soult’s retreat by a French officer ‘because he would not resign one of his daughters to gratify the
abominable lust of this detestable assassin’. 2 Nor were things any better outside Oporto:

 At midday … I passed a field where the French had bivouacked. All the furniture and even the crockery had been taken from the houses of a neighbouring village and brought into the field. The beds and the mattresses lay in rows
in the mud. The drawers from the various articles of furniture had been used as mangers. Wardrobes had been transformed into bedsteads and roofs for the huts. The chairs, staircases and window frames had been used … as fuel for
the kitchen fires … All the crosses and statues of the saints on the road had been thrown from their pedestals, and the almsboxes in front of them broken open and plundered, while all the altars and chapels had been ruined and
polluted. In the churches even the graves had not been spared, and the sanctuaries had been rifled. Altar candlesticks, arms and legs of apostles and saints, torn vestments, chalices, prayer books and the like, mixed up with
straw and filth, lay all about them. 3

 Small wonder, then, that the British came across French stragglers who had been nailed to barn doors, castrated and had their genitals stuffed in their mouths, nor that mobs of angry peasants clamoured to be allowed to murder
the many prisoners who had fallen into the hands of the British. Nor was Galicia a safe haven, but its insurgents could do little more than harass the retreating columns, whilst both the Army of the Left and the Division of the
Miño were far away attacking Santiago and Lugo. As the Anglo-Portuguese forces halted at the frontier, Soult’s battered command was therefore able to make its way northwards to Lugo (from which the Spaniards had since withdrawn).
What was to be done next, however? Soult was firmly in favour of marching on León, from where he could once again threaten Portugal, whilst at the same time re-equipping his men with the arms, clothes and shoes that they so badly
needed. By contrast, Ney wanted the French to concentrate on Galicia which he reckoned could now be crushed once and for all, the two marshals between them being able to muster about 32,000 men. Eager to secure such succour as
Ney could provide for his weary forces, Soult went along with the latter plan and made a show of marching against the Spaniards, but in his heart he never had any intention of assisting his fellow commander, and in fact proceeded
immediately to evacuate Galicia on the pretext that his men were unfit for further operations. On 7 June, meanwhile, Ney ran into the Division of the Miño and was repulsed with heavy losses. Discovering Soult’s treachery a few
days later, the ‘bravest of the brave’ understandably threw in the sponge in his turn: in less than a month, indeed, Galicia was free.