

 The elimination of Blake’s army did not put an end to Suchet’s travails, however, the French commander having had to pay a heavy cost for the victories of María and Belchite. Thus, in the absence of any enemy stronger than a few
skeleton garrisons, irregular forces raised on the eastern frontiers of Aragón by the army officers, Felipe Perena and Ramón Gayán, had blockaded Zaragoza and Jaca and cut the main road to Madrid. Also active, meanwhile, were
partidas raised in the south-west of the province by a variety of juntas that had sprung up in such isolated towns as Molina and Teruel. With major insurgent successes very much a possibility – Jaca, in particular, was held only
by a small force of unwilling national guardsmen – Suchet was therefore for months thereafter forced to abandon field campaigns in favour of a series of punitive operations in the interior of his dominions. Much success was
achieved, but even so the French forces found themselves under great pressure. In the words of Heinrich von Brandt:

 It was a real see-saw battle between the partisans and ourselves: they were everywhere we were not, they disappeared upon our approach, escaped our clutches and reappeared behind us. As most of the people of the region were on
their side, they inevitably had all the advantages. We had to be vigilant at all hours of the day or night so as not to be taken by surprise and risk a loss of either life or honour. 34

 By the early summer of 1809, then, the French had little to show for months of hard fighting but the Tagus valley, a particularly barren and poverty-stricken strip of central Extremadura and a toehold in northern Portugal. Asked
at one and the same time to hold down the territory that they held at the end of 1808, fend off the Spanish armies and conquer Portugal, they had simply been taxed beyond the limits of their resources. Only if massive
reinforcements had been sent to them from France could they possibly have achieved their goal. But with war brewing with Austria, not a single man could be spared to go to King Joseph’s assistance – indeed, it was only with the
greatest difficulty that Napoleon was persuaded not to withdraw substantial troops from the Peninsula (Mortier’s corps was, as we have seen, pulled out of its positions in Aragón for this purpose, but in the event the emperor
relented and allowed it to move to Old Castile, where its presence was the key factor in enabling the French to march on Asturias). In consequence, the great offensive envisaged by Napoleon in January 1809 effectively ground to a
halt. In Galicia, Aragón, Navarre and northern La Mancha, French columns periodically struck deep into the hills and laid waste towns and villages where insurgent juntas or guerrilla bands had established themselves, whilst in
Catalonia siege operations were just beginning at Gerona, but the fact was that the initiative had passed to the Allies.

 If the French were about to find not only that they could advance no further, but that they were badly over-extended, this did not mean that the triumphal march on Lisbon, Seville and Valencia envisaged by Napoleon was out of
the question in the long term. On the contrary, for the Patriot cause retribution had as yet only been postponed. Not only would the defeat of Austria that could all too easily be foreseen allow the emperor to send substantial
reinforcements to the Peninsula and even to return there himself, but the Junta Central’s spoiling tactics carried with them a terrible price. Militarily speaking, for Spain the best strategy to adopt would have been one based on
the defence of the substantial territories left in Patriot hands – southern and western Catalonia, the Levante, Andalucía, Extremadura, western León, southern Galicia, and Asturias. Protected by mountains and fortresses, the
Spanish forces would have been a threat that would have been costly and time-consuming to eradicate, whilst their mere existence would have prevented the French from concentrating their full force against the guerrillas.
Meanwhile, time would have been gained for the suppression of resistance to conscription, the accumulation of much larger armies, and the improvements of training and discipline. As we have seen, however, for political and
diplomatic reasons, a defensive strategy was not an option. Yet by advancing the Spaniards lost far more than they gained. As the resultant battles were fought out in the open terrain of the meseta, their armies’ glaring
inadequacies were exposed more than ever, and, still worse, exposed in a situation in which the French enjoyed a central position whilst the Spaniards were operating on exterior lines. Meanwhile, desertion was encouraged, and
losses incurred of a sort that the tatterdemalion Patriot cause simply could not sustain. Free Spain, in short, was bleeding to death.