

===== FILE: OEBPS/xhtml/chapter8.xhtml =====
The Peninsular War

 8

 Talavera

 THE FALL OF THE JUNTA CENTRAL, JULY 1809–JANUARY 1810

 The lines of British infantry lay in the blazing summer sun. Smoke from burning grass drifted into their eyes, but did little to shield them from the enemy. Indeed, in the distance eighty pieces of artillery sent cannonballs
screaming towards them to obliterate a file of defenders or bounce harmlessly overhead. A handful of defending cannon fired back, but they were too few to make any difference, and all that the troops could do was to hug the
ground in the hope that the storm would pass. It was with great relief that they suddenly realised that the enemy batteries had ceased firing, and that the dark masses of troops facing them were on the move. Across the
intervening space, indeed, could be heard the rolling drumbeats of the pas de charge. Shots cracked out from the skirmishers that lined the British front, but the men involved were soon falling back, for they were far too few in
numbers to make any impression on the array that was bearing down on them. The troops knew exactly what to do, however, a single volley fired at the last moment sweeping away whole ranks of men. Nor were the defenders finished:
lowering their bayonets, they sprang forward with a great cheer and sent the surviving enemy scrambling for safety.

 Based on the repulse of the divisions of Lapisse and Rey * at the battle of Talavera on 28 July 1809, this episode typifies an image of the Peninsular War that still remains dear to British hearts. In 1809, however, it
epitomised neither British action in the war, nor the war itself. Setting aside La Coruña, in fact, Talavera was the only occasion in 1809 when British troops had to face a full-scale French assault in a set-piece battle, whilst
victory was followed by a fresh retreat and new setbacks. What Talavera really epitomises, indeed, is failure, whether it was failure to develop effective methods of inter-allied co-operation, failure to reform the Spanish
armies, failure to consolidate the authority of the Junta Central, or failure to revolutionise popular attitudes to the war. Despite a summer and autumn of bitter fighting, hopes of Allied recovery were therefore revealed to be
illusory.

 At the time that Talavera was fought, however, it must have seemed to many observers that the Allied cause was on the rise. Only in Catalonia were the French still on the attack, and even here they had run into difficulties, for
their first goal – Gerona – was possessed of impressive defences, a large garrison of regular troops, and a governor of great professionalism, courage and resourcefulness in the person of the sixty-year-old Mariano Alvarez del
Castro. Much to the ire of Napoleon, who responded by replacing Saint-Cyr with Marshal Augereau and Reille with Palafox’s old opponent, General Verdier, for a variety of reasons operations did not even begin against the fortress
until 24 May, and when they did progress was extremely slow. Not until the beginning of July, indeed, were the French in a position to launch an assault, but their chosen objective – the great citadel that crowned the heights
overlooking the city – remained defiant, and two attempts to conquer it were therefore driven back with heavy losses.