

 Thus ended a campaign that had cost the empire both considerable embarrassment – for months the Patriot press had been full of tales of the insurgents’ heroism – and the lives of thousands of troops. Exhibited in microcosm,
meanwhile, were a number of lessons that Napoleon would have done well to bear in mind. However enthusiastic the insurgents – and there is clear evidence that at least some of the alarmas were more interested in pillage and
private vendettas than fighting the French – they could probably in the end have been defeated, but this would have both taken a great deal of time and required either abandoning attempts to advance elsewhere or a massive
injection of fresh troops into the Peninsula. As was shown even more clearly by Soult’s invasion of Portugal, every square mile of captured territory had to be given a solid garrison. At the same time the presence of enemy armies
– a vital element – created a need for still more troops. With the French set an impossible task, their willpower and morale alike were undermined. Meanwhile, growing anger and frustration encouraged atrocities of all sorts and
intensified the rigours of occupation policies that were already very brutal. Victory, then, would take far more time, money and manpower than Napoleon had ever anticipated. Also clear was that still further delays were likely
unless the emperor was prepared to adopt a rather different command structure from the one which he had bequeathed to his armies in January 1809. In theory, Joseph had been appointed the emperor’s lieutenant in Spain, but his
authority had been consistently undermined throughout Napoleon’s stay in the country, whilst he was in any case a nonentity in military terms, the French commanders therefore being all too inclined to ignore him. With remote
control from Paris no solution, the result was that the bitter rivalries which rent the marshalate often led to complete chaos. Even when the French commanders were disposed to co-operate with one another, however, they could
rarely maintain contact. From this stemmed yet another problem in that the great envelopments and encirclements characteristic of Napoleon’s campaigns were simply not possible in Spain. Even in the great counter-offensive of
November–December 1808, the emperor’s efforts in this respect had not worked perfectly, but with the subsequent growth in popular resistance such combinations became almost impossible.

 The extent to which Napoleon became aware of these problems in the wake of the evacuation of northern Portugal and Galicia is unknown. What is true, however, is that he resolved, first, that enormous reinforcements should be
sent to Spain at the earliest possible date (effectively the moment Austria was defeated), and, second, that the French armies should again concentrate on the destruction of the British, to which end Soult was given control not
just of his own corps but also those of Ney and Mortier. Yet for the time being the forces in situ were on their own, and thus it was that in southern and western Spain, at least, the strategic initiative continued to lie with
the Allies. In this respect, the latter’s situation looked most promising. In Portugal, the British had received several thousand fresh troops, and were now massing for an attack on Victor, whilst their Portuguese allies kept
watch on the frontier with León. With the Spaniards able to contribute the Army of Extremadura, which had been rebuilt to a size of some 36,000 men, and the 23,000-strong Army of the Centre, a great victory did not seem
impossible.