

 Yet success was to prove elusive. In the first place, in the middle of June lack of food caused Victor to evacuate his exposed positions south of the Tagus and pull back towards Madrid. Undaunted, Wellesley and Cuesta elaborated
a plan for a concentric advance on the capital itself. However, whilst any operation on exterior lines is absolutely dependent on cooperation, trust and co-ordination, in the summer of 1809 few qualities were more more lacking in
central Spain. Cuesta and Wellesley, for example, were both prickly individuals who were all but certain to alienate one another. The Junta Central was terrified of Cuesta and strongly suspected the British of secretly being in
league with one or more of the various groups that were plotting its downfall (in this respect it was unfortunate, first, that the prominent British liaison officer, Charles Doyle, was a noted intimate of Francisco Palafox, and,
second, that La Romana enjoyed much British approval). Cuesta, meanwhile, believed that the British were scheming to have him replaced with the much more amenable Duque de Alburquerque. Francisco Javier Venegas, the commander of
the Army of the Centre, was an enemy of Cuesta and a tool of the Junta Central. And, finally, Cuesta, Venegas and many other influential Spaniards could not but be alarmed by rumours that Wellesley was to be appointed Allied
commander-in-chief.

 Outside the senior ranks of the Allied armies, most of this probably had no impact. But rumours of power struggles at the top were little needed as a source of friction. For the Spaniards, bitter memories of rapine and pillage
were now revived. Even before the British army left Portugal, it was clear that its behaviour was but little changed. Several soldiers who had committed outrages of one sort or another were reported to have been killed by the
populace, whilst, as Wellington complained, ‘The army behave terribly ill. They are a rabble who cannot bear success any more than Sir J. Moore’s army could bear failure … They plunder in all directions.’ 4 Even more shocking
than mere robbery was the callous brutality exhibited by many of the soldiery, as witness, for example, the behaviour of a soldier named John Clapham who, searching for firewood just after the army had entered Spain, entered a
church and seized a coffin from the vault, leaving the body tipped out on the floor.

 Such behaviour was probably inevitable. Set apart from the rest of society for years at a time and exposed to endless danger and privation, the soldiers were both brutalised and encouraged to revenge themselves upon the civilian
world. ‘I have seen’, wrote Sherer, ‘common men distributed through the empty palace of a nobleman … and I have observed in their countenances a jocular eagerness to smash and destroy … But this does not arise out of cruelty. No,
in such a case a soldier feels himself lifted for a moment above his low and ordinary condition, while the banished owner of the proud mansion … appears humbled before him.’ 5 Whatever the cause, the phenomenon was certainly
troubling. To quote Thomas Browne, ‘The [common soldiers] appeared to me to become daily more ferocious and less fit for return to the duties of citizens, and I sometimes apprehended that when they should be disbanded in England
after the restoration of peace, the country would be overrun with pilferers and marauders of every description.’ 6