

 Nor was this the end of the trouble. In Aragón, too, the French were soon experiencing serious difficulties. Following the fall of Zaragoza, the two corps employed in the siege – those of Mortier and Junot * – had fanned out
eastwards and southwards, occupying town after town and advancing as far as the frontiers of Catalonia and Valencia. In the face of this advance the Spaniards were powerless – there was little, indeed, even in the way of popular
resistance – but far away in Paris Napoleon was now increasingly concerned at the situation in Germany, where it was clear that Austria was planning to attack the emperor. To the consternation of King Joseph, Mortier’s corps was
therefore ordered to evacuate its positions and head for Bayonne. Entrusted with the whole of Aragón, Junot’s corps could not cope, and all the more so as one of its infantry brigades had been sent off as escort for the long
column of Spanish prisoners that had been packed off to the frontier following Palafox’s surrender. Much encouraged, the irregular forces who had begun to appear in the more remote parts of the province took heart, and inflicted
a number of reverses on the invaders. Meanwhile, the chances of suppressing the irregulars were nullified by the appearance of yet another Spanish field army in the shape of the ‘Second Army of the Right’, a new force put
together under the politically dependable Blake on the basis of the one division of the old Army of Reserve that had not been caught up in the siege.

 Frantic efforts in Valencia and Murcia having raised the size of Blake’s forces to some 9,000 men, in mid-May they moved across the border and occupied Alcañiz. This was very bad news for the French, whose forces in Aragón were
only 10,000-strong as well as being very low in morale. In their commander they were more fortunate, for the mercurial and increasingly eccentric Junot had just been replaced by General Suchet, an impressive leader who had
hitherto led a division in the corps which he now inherited. Yet even he was hard pressed to deal with the crisis that followed. By cutting his garrisons to an absolute minimum, Suchet was able to put together 8,000 men, and with
these troops he rushed to do battle with Blake at Alcañiz on 23 May. However, the Spaniards had occupied a very strong defensive position whose chief feature was a line of rocky hills, and Suchet therefore had to waste much time
feeling out the enemy lines before committing himself to an attack. Not, then, till mid-afternoon did a heavy column of infantry emerge from the French positions and seek to storm the Spanish centre. Advancing uphill under heavy
fire, the attackers were first brought to a halt, and then forced to retire in great disorder, whereupon a much discomforted Suchet ordered his men to fall back on Zaragoza, having lost perhaps 800 men. As for their morale it was
lower than ever:

 The non-success of this attack was tantamount to an absolute defeat in the eyes of the troops, which were already prone to fear and dejection … We had already distanced the Spaniards by nearly five leagues, when the First
Division … was seized with a sudden panic. The terrified soldiers fancied that the enemy was close at their heels. The alarm rapidly spread under favour of the darkness; they fired upon each other and took to flight in the utmost
confusion. 30