

 Encouraged by this success – the first Patriot victory since Bailén – Blake waited a few days for reinforcements, and then struck westwards in an attempt to threaten Suchet’s communications and force him to fight a second battle
on unfavourable terms. No bad strategy – and one that clearly recognised the Spaniards’ best chance of winning field actions was to make the French attack them in positions that nullified their many advantages on the battlefield
– this soon produced the desired effect. On 14 June Suchet, who had spent the intervening period frantically trying to rally his troops, once more marched out of Zaragoza. Unfortunately for the Spaniards, however, Blake had
detached many men to guard his own communications (in contrast to the over-confidence that marked many Spanish generals, Blake’s besetting sin was doubt and hesitation). The battle that followed on 15 June at María was a bitter
struggle. In the words of one of Suchet’s officers:

 The Spanish were showing considerable resolution and even gained ground … By noon our ammunition was running low and indeed had almost been exhausted. A burning sun bore down on our heads and we were dying from the heat and of
thirst. I distinctly remember … one of my comrades … offering me his flask when it was hit by a ball and blown out of his hands. 31

 Yet thanks to Blake the fight was still lost. Assisted by a violent thunderstorm that blinded their opponents, the French were able to break the Spanish right and force the rest of the army to retreat.

 Having lost the chance of liberating Zaragoza, Blake would have done best to fall back and rely on the partisans to force Suchet to give up the chase. However, fearful of popular or political retribution, he instead turned to
fight a few miles south at Belchite. The result was disaster. Suchet had obtained many reinforcements, whilst the ground was by no means as strong as it had been at Alcañiz and María, but, even so, no one could have predicted
what happened next. In the words of the British liaison officer, Charles Doyle:

 The cannonading had not commenced five minutes when a grenade from the enemy fell amongst some of ours and blew them up. In one moment all was consternation and confusion, [and] the troops, panic-struck, gave way … The enemy’s
cavalry profited instantly by the alarm, and penetrating the broken line spread universal terror. The whole army dispersed and the retreat was most precipitate. General Blake with some other … officers was left literally alone
upon the field! 32

 A mortified Blake put this extraordinary affair down to a handful of ‘rotten apples’. ‘Fortune,’ he wrote, ‘could have been against us to the point that we were beaten, but I never would have expected that the troops under my
command would have fled without fighting … I do not believe this to be the place to discuss the cause of these routs, which are unfortunately so common in our armies, but I must at least say that a few individuals who give a bad
example can demoralise an army without its commander realising it.’ 33 But the truth was much less kind to him, the fact being that his men had been demoralised by defeat, bad weather and a growing lack of confidence in Blake,
who was by all accounts a colourless individual utterly devoid of charisma. And the fact remained that he had still lost his army. Though few men were killed or taken prisoner – the only troops who put up a fight were a single
battalion that made a stand in the main square of the town – the ‘Second Army of the Right’ was no more, at least half its survivors taking the opportunity to disappear for good.