

 To the accompaniment of a constant cannonade, both armies now began to deploy for battle. Moving up from the east through country covered by the same sort of scrub as had so hampered Mackenzie at the Casa de Salinas, the French
occupied a position running from a low hill called the Cerro de Cascajal southwards across the plain that extended to the Tagus. Stationed at the edge of the woods and olive groves through which the French had come, their right
and centre had an excellent field of fire and could move on the Allies over open ground, but their left was less well defined, the olives, pines, and holm-oaks covering the entire position and extending forward in a great belt
that encompassed the town of Talavera and merged with the position occupied by the Allies.

 If the terrain did not especially assist the French, it did not wholly favour the Allies either. For most of its length their position was marked by a small stream called the Portiña, but, except where it ran through a narrow
ravine between the Cascajal and a somewhat steeper and higher eminence running more or less east–west, known as the Cerro de Medellín, that formed the Allied left, this was no obstacle whatsoever. Just before it plunged into the
thickets that cloaked the southern end of the battlefield, it was overlooked by an isolated knoll known as the Pajar de Vergara, but otherwise the position was protected only by the Medellín. Some further help was derived from
the groves and enclosures that filled the space between the Pajar and the Tagus, but, if they hampered cavalry charges and artillery bombardments, they at the same time exposed their defenders to the danger of being taken by
surprise, masked their own cannon, and made it very difficult for them to manoeuvre. Meanwhile, most of the centre and left were extremely vulnerable to cannon fire: except on the rather narrow Medellín, there was no reverse
slope of the sort that Wellesley so much favoured.

 Held by the British from the Medellín to the Pajar and the Spaniards from the Pajar to the Tagus, the Allied position was really rather mediocre. Meanwhile, the Spanish army, as usual, contained too many raw troops – in a famous
incident that took place as the rival forces were drawing up their lines, indeed, four battalions took to their heels at the sound of their own muskets after letting fly a massive volley at some French cavalry that had appeared
far in the distance. Finally, the Allies were badly outgunned, Joseph, Victor and Sebastiani having between them brought eighty cannon to the battlefield and Wellesley and Cuesta only fifty-five. The French were somewhat
outnumbered, true – Wellington and Cuesta could muster 53,000 troops to their 46,000 – but the rather slight advantage that this amounted to was completely nullified by the fact that, as the attackers, they could mass the bulk of
their forces against the British or the Spaniards alone whilst containing the rest of the Allied array with a mere handful of cavalry.