

 Just as my company got into line, the captain told me to close the files to the right, and … at that moment a round shot passed through the bodies of the front and rear rank men, killing them both. I was struck with one of their
muskets on the breast and stunned for a few minutes … A sergeant who assisted me up instantly reeled and fell, and was carried about six yards to the rear. I ran to him and inquired if he thought himself mortally hit, when he
replied that the shot was in his pack. I at once examined it … and putting my hand into it brought out a twelve-pound shot. 21

 Whilst the French commanders were arguing with each other, the Portiña was witnessing scenes that were to become characteristic of the relationship between the British and the French armies in the Peninsular War. The only source
of water on a battlefield assailed by the full heat of a Spanish summer, the lull in the fighting had made it a magnet for both sides. All along its course, then, enemies found themselves scooping water from the same stagnant
pools, sharing food, wine and tobacco, and trying to talk to one another. Wrote one participant:

 The water in the stream, which in the morning was clear and sweet, was now a pool of blood, heaped over with the dead and dying. There being no alternative, we were compelled to close our eyes and drink the gory stream. The
French troops were equally ill off and … came down in thousands … to follow our example. In place of looking grimly at our enemies, we shook hands with them in the most friendly manner. 22

 It was an extraordinary scene, but also one that became increasingly commonplace as the war progressed. Revolted by Spanish and Portuguese cruelty, united by professionalism and hardship, and utterly alienated by the society in
which they found themselves, it was but natural that the British and French should be drawn to one another. As time went on, an unwritten code therefore evolved that laid down all sorts of rules and conventions. Sentries were not
to be shot at, unnecessary firing avoided, the wounded spared and succoured, prisoners treated with respect, and sources of food and water that lay in no man’s land shared with the other side. Stories of officers exchanging
letters for captured friends, asking for enemy newspapers or even dining with the other side are therefore commonplace, whilst ordinary soldiers could frequently be found scavenging for food and plunder side by side. The British
officer who got so drunk in the French lines that he had to be carried home by four enemy soldiers and the French sentry who was found doing an Englishman’s duty are probably apocryphal, but even so the phenomenon was widely
remarked, not least by the Spaniards and Portuguese, amongst whom it caused considerable offence.

 Unfortunately, the fraternisation could not last for ever. The French bombardment resumed, and by two o’clock in the afternoon all was ready. Whilst two of Victor’s three infantry divisions – those of Ruffin and Villatte –
threatened the Cerro de Medellín by moving along the long valley leading to the west that flanked its northern side, the two that Sebastiani had brought to the field – those of Leval and Rey – together with Victor’s third
division – that of Lapisse – surged forward against the Allied centre. The result was the bloody crisis of an already bloody day.