

 North of the Medellín, Wellesley was not much tested, for, anticipating the French move, he had sent most of his cavalry into the valley, where they were reinforced by a large contingent of Spanish troops sent over at his
request by Cuesta. Advancing a little way, the French perceived that one of the two British cavalry brigades that had been sent to intercept them was riding towards them and they therefore halted and formed square. Undaunted, the
cavalry – a mixture of British and German light dragoons – charged on, only to meet disaster. According to every British account, the horsemen suddenly encountered a hidden watercourse and were thrown into terrible confusion.
This may be a piece of fabrication, but there is no question that the charge failed. Reaching the French squares in a blown and disordered state, the British cavalry had no chance of breaking them and for the most part wheeled
aside, leaving a suicidal remnant to plunge on down the valley and be overcome by some French cavalry that had been waiting in reserve. Fortunately for the Allies, however, plenty of other troops had been sent to the valley,
Ruffin and Villatte therefore deciding that discretion was the better part of valour.

 Far more important was the situation in the centre, where the attack had been preceded by a further heavy bombardment. Arrayed side by side with Leval on the left, Rey in the centre and Lapisse on the right, the French moved
forward in lines of battalion columns (the first – composed of Dutch and German troops – in a single line, and the second and third with a line of supports as well). Preceded by their skirmishers, the columns moved forward, but
as they did so they were subjected to heavy artillery fire, the Pajar de Vergara having been reinforced by a number of Spanish guns. All along the front, meanwhile, the end result was the same. On the British right, the division
of General Campbell, supported by a few Spanish battalions that were also caught up in the attack, met the French with a rapid succession of volleys, brought them to a halt and then forced them to retreat with a spirited bayonet
charge which captured a battery of light artillery that was being brought up for the purposes of close support. Coming up against the crack division of General Sherbrooke, however, the divisions of Lapisse and Rey were subjected
to rather different tactics. Allowed to approach to within fifty yards, they were assailed by a single volley and immediately charged by the redcoats. Cut down by the hundred, the French turned and ran, but at this point things
again went wrong. In the words of Andrew Pearson:

 It was too much for us to lie any longer, and, leaping up, we gave the well-known British cheer and charged. This was a movement for which they were not prepared, and we soon broke their front ranks, when they immediately fell
back on the dense columns in the rear. 23

 Keyed up by long hours of lying motionless under artillery fire, Sherbrooke’s troops rushed after the fugitives, only to run straight into their supports. Disordered, outnumbered and blown, they were immediately routed, with
heavy casualties. Much encouraged, the French followed them up, but the only reserves that the British had left in the centre moved up and formed a fresh line, whilst from his vantage point on the Medellín Wellesley at the same
time rushed a single battalion down the slope to join them. Allowing Sherbrooke’s men to fall back through their ranks, these troops then confronted Lapisse and Rey and engaged them with a heavy fire that brought them to a halt.
There followed a prolonged firelight in which both sides lost heavily, but, assailed by British cavalry as well as infantry, the French could eventually take no more and fell back.