

 Not a soldier manoeuvred with anything but the greatest serenity and courage, and those men who carried the wounded to the rear hurried back to the ranks as soon as they had left their comrades at the field hospitals. The
discipline and training of the encampment of Santa Elena have produced marvellous effects, and these troops of only four or five months can now march and counter-march without a single man getting in the wrong place. 30

 Rather than retreating, he therefore fell back no further than the town of Almonacid de Toledo, where he drew up his men around two prominent hills, the northernmost of which was crowned by a medieval castle. But the position
was a very poor one: as Girón complained, ‘Our disposition was bad, or, to be more precise, nonexistent: the troops were scattered about in accordance with the will of God, and not a single measure announced the existence of a
plan, an idea or an inspiration.’ 31 When the French attacked, they could therefore hardly fail to win. All the more was this the case as they were led with ‘audacity and vigour’. 32 Sweeping around the Spanish left flank, which
was entirely ‘in the air’, they quickly ascended the southernmost of the two hills. As commander of the Spanish division most threatened by the French advance, the observer best placed to tell the story is General Girón:

 Having very quickly revealed their intention of making their main attack on our left wing, the enemy harassed it from the very first moment … One of our units was holding its own on the other side of the heights. Believing it my
duty to support it, I marched to join it at the head of the first battalion of the regiment of Spanish Guards, but, before I could get there, it retreated in the greatest disorder, and I was forced to form line to contain the
enemy. Realising that I could not hold back the force that was facing me in the plain, I retired to the heights which I had left. However, hardly had I reached them, when the troops who were fighting on my right … abandoned their
positions in disorder. Left with no option but to try to rally them … I led them back to the summit of the hill, but, unfortunately, everything was in vain. Occupying the crest, the enemy opened fire on us. I ordered the Guards
battalion and the Regiment of Ecija to fire back, but the disordered masses of the division which had broken collided with my units and disordered their formations. I therefore decided to retreat … With the heights that marked
our left in their hands, the enemy had outflanked us, and they now descended to the plain to take us in the rear. 33

 Hemmed in by the two hills, the Spaniards were unable to manoeuvre, and very soon they were in full retreat. It had been a fierce struggle – the French acknowledged over 2,000 casualties – but, for all that, Joseph could feel
well pleased.

 With this unnecessary battle, there ended the campaign of Talavera. Fortunately for the Allies, the French were unable to exploit their success. As before, they simply lacked the strength to move on Portugal (as Soult in fact
wished to do), Andalucía, Extremadura or the Levante without dangerously weakening their hold on their Castilian heartlands, which were already witnessing a considerable upsurge in guerrilla activity, whilst they were in any case
badly in need of a rest. If this was the case, it was just as well, for Anglo-Spanish relations had sunk to an all-time low. Amongst officers and men of the British army, all sorts of stories were circulating of Spanish cruelty,
hostility and indifference, matters not being helped by Cuesta’s abandonment for want of transport of a large contingent of British wounded who had been left in his care. With food even more scarce after the battle than it had
been beforehand, Mackinnon, for example, wrote: