

 Whilst either the British or the Spaniards could have been the target of the blow that followed, for a variety of reasons it fell upon the former. In this, at least, the Allies were fortunate. Far better trained than the
Spaniards and much heartened by their victories in Portugal, the British could rely upon the tactical genius of Wellesley, whilst the weeks that had passed since the Oporto campaign had seen the formation of the army into
permanent divisions and the attachment of at least a company of riflemen to every infantry brigade so as to give them a more effective skirmishing capacity. But Marshal Victor – the only one of the three French commanders on the
field at this point – had never faced the British in battle. Determined to seize the lion’s share of the glory, he did not even wait for the whole of the French forces to come up. Hardly had night fallen, then, than the division
of General Ruffin moved forward against the Medellín. Apparently positioned in the wrong place, the defenders were taken by surprise and the scrub-covered and boulder-strewn slopes of the hill soon became the scene of a confused
night action. Riding up to find out what was going on, the well-liked and jovial divisional commander, Sir Rowland Hill, was almost captured, and it was only after fierce fighting that the French were driven off.

 Troublesome though it may have been, the night attack on the Medellín had therefore been a failure. However, though the defenders had now been alerted to the danger, Victor had not finished. At five o’clock in the morning the
massed batteries of French artillery opened fire on Wellington’s troops. Under cover of this terrible cannonade, Ruffin’s troops again rolled forward across the Portiña. Arrayed in three regimental columns, they were soon moving
up the steep slope on the further bank, assailed by no more than the fire of Hill’s skirmishers (so dense was the cannon smoke that they were completely hidden from view). Waiting for them at the crest of the slope, however, were
4,000 British infantry. Thus, no sooner had Ruffin’s men emerged from the smoke than they were assailed by a crashing volley that virtually wiped out their front ranks. After a brief exchange of fire, Hill’s seven battalions
charged their shaken enemies and in a matter of moments the whole of Ruffin’s division was fleeing in disarray.

 In the French camp this repulse caused consternation. Knowing that Soult was marching on Wellington’s communications, Joseph, Sebastiani and the king’s chief adviser, Marshal Jourdan, had been opposed to an assault, but their
hands had been forced by Victor, an impetuous commander who had only become a marshal two years before and was possessed of something of an inferiority complex (an ex-ranker of no great intellect, he was the butt of many jokes).
Desperate for victory, Victor therefore continued to advocate Wellesley’s destruction. After much argument, this bravado carried the day – Joseph was frightened at the idea of what Napoleon might do if the British were allowed to
escape and had just heard that Soult would take rather longer to reach the Tagus valley than had originally been hoped – and so preparations began for another assault. Chief amongst these was a heavy bombardment that caused
serious losses. Schaumann, for example, describes how he saw a gunner ‘flung aloft and [sail] through the air with arms and legs outspread like a frog’ and Morley how a spent shot struck him on the hip at the same moment as
another smashed through the open mouth of a man named Shaw who had been lying asleep beside him. Most graphic of all are the memories of Andrew Pearson: