

 Fearful for the safety of his army, Wellesley therefore halted his advance. Also important was the question of logistics, however. Wellesley had only agreed to the offensive on condition that the Spaniards provided him with
adequate supplies and transport. This was essential – at this point the British army lacked the permanent baggage train of later years and in consequence effectively had to live off the country – but, despite genuine goodwill on
the part of the Spaniards, the Tagus valley was incapable of supplying the army’s wants. A little food was forthcoming, but carts were not to be had, and the commissaries of some units were reduced to raiding the convoys that
came up bringing food for the Spaniards. Even had Cuesta been less difficult, it is therefore clear that the British would not have advanced beyond the Alberche. As Wellesley told Castlereagh, ‘I have not been able to follow the
enemy as I would have wished on account of … my having found it impossible to procure even one mule or cart in Spain.’ 20

 Unable to shift Wellesley, Cuesta decided to press on eastwards anyway, only on 25 July suddenly to run into not just Victor, but also Sebastiani and Joseph. What, then, had gone wrong? The answer lay with Venegas, who had not
only advanced in the most dilatory fashion, but also turned aside to engage in useless demonstrations against Toledo (a town that is near-impregnable against troops coming from the south). What motivated this conduct is unclear,
one possibility being that he had decided to sabotage Cuesta’s operations out of sheer spite, another that he had been given secret instructions to hang back by the Junta Central, and still another that his hands were tied by an
absurd scheme hatched by an adventurer named Domingo Soriano to secure the arrest of King Joseph and the surrender of a large part of the French army. Whatever the explanation, the result was that Joseph and Sebastiani felt able
to join Victor. Some 46,000 men were therefore soon heading for the Allied armies. It was not just with these troops that Wellesley and Cuesta would be forced to contend, however. In León, Soult had been resting and re-equipping
his battered corps, whilst Ney had just evacuated Galicia. Also available was the corps of Marshal Mortier, which was stationed further to the south-east in Old Castile. With Wellesley in the Tagus valley, the opportunity was too
good to miss, and these troops too were soon on the march.

 Given that the handful of troops that Wellesley and Cuesta had posted to watch their flank and rear were incapable of holding the mass that was about to descend upon them, it is probably just as well that Wellesley had decided
to halt at the Alberche. However, he remained in some danger, for there was a very real possibility that Cuesta could have been overwhelmed by Joseph, Victor and Sebastiani when they moved west on 26 July. Fortunately for the
Allies, however, a combination of good fortune and French bungling allowed Cuesta to escape the trap, with the result that by the morning of 27 July the Spaniards were back in touch with the British forces. The line of the
Alberche being for a variety of reasons impossible to defend, the Allies then fell back a little further to a defensive position selected for them by Wellesley, covered by the British division of General Mackenzie. These troops,
however, were neither as alert or as well-posted as they might have been, whilst the countryside around their headquarters – a substantial farm called the Casa de Salinas – was obscured by olive groves, pines and holm-oaks. Eager
to see what was going on, Wellesley had ridden out to this building and mounted the tower that was its central feature, when suddenly a swarm of French infantry burst out of the scrub and attacked Mackenzie’s troops. In this
fight the British commander-in-chief came very close to being killed or captured – running for his life, he just got out of the main courtyard before the French burst in on the other side – whilst over 400 men became casualties,
but he succeeded in rallying the division and bringing it safely back to the main Allied line.