

 With the main Allied armies now south of the River Tagus, where they took up a position watching the Puente de Almaraz, the great hopes that the campaign had aroused were effectively at an end. In Madrid, especially, this caused
great disappointment. As José Clemente Carnicero, a resident of the city who in 1814 incorporated his memories of French occupation into one of the first Spanish attempts at a general history of the Peninsular War, remembered:

 A friend entered my room, and, seeing me in my accustomed state of calm, exclaimed, ‘What? Do you really have such phlegm? Don’t you know that the people are running through the streets full of joy … because King Joseph has
surrendered his entire army? We are Spaniards again, and our troops are coming to take possession of … the palace this very afternoon.’ ‘I am delighted to hear it,’ I replied, ‘but we … had better watch out that it isn’t a trick
to get us to reveal our true feelings so that we can be pounced on later.’ ‘Watch out all you like,’ he answered, ‘but I’m telling you that it’s the truth. Come and see for yourself.’ We went round various streets … and in all of
them we saw proof of what my friend had said. In some there were great crowds of people fraternising with unarmed Frenchmen … In others groups of men, women and children were running up and down congratulating each other at the
happy news. And in still others troops of young girls from the poorer quarters were sallying out … to greet and make much of our men. It was being said that they had already entered the city, that General Castaños was already in
the palace with a guard of halberdiers, that the British had come … In short, there was not a soul who did not appear to be convinced of the … reality of the news. 28

 False dawn though it was, at least the sight of the French wounded provided some consolation:

 Although some of the more compassionate were filled with pity, for many citizens the sight of … entire wagon trains filled with wounded entering the city every minute … was a source of the utmost satisfaction. Some had lost
limbs; some were nursing broken bones; some were being driven to utter the most lamentable screams; some were in their last agonies; and some were pleading for death … So excessive was the number of victims that even the general
hospital’s many … large and spacious rooms were not enough to take them, and it proved necessary to requisition … the women’s hospital … and … the magnificent monastery of San Francisco … and even then the carts were kept waiting
at the doors for many hours. 29

 The fighting, however, was far from over. On 8 August the strong rearguard that had been left by Cuesta at Puente del Arzobispo was driven in in a surprise attack that inflicted heavy casualties on the Spaniards and cost them
most of the guns captured on 28 July, Wellesley having handed them all over to Cuesta as being of greater use to the Spanish general than they were to him. Still worse, having spent the last two weeks doing nothing but
demonstrate against Toledo and the southern approaches to Madrid, on 11 August the Army of the Centre was soundly beaten by Joseph and Sebastiani at Almonacid. The origins of this action are shrouded in mystery, for it is clear
that Venegas could easily have got away to the Sierra Morena. Six days before the battle, however, three of his divisions were attacked in their positions at Aranjuez. This was not much of a fight – the French did no more than
probe the crossings of the Tagus – but Venegas, who was not present on the field, was misled by his subordinates into thinking that they had won a major victory. Certainly, he was well pleased: