

 At last a lucky thought struck him. He snatched the hat out of the hand of a Portuguese who was kneeling before him, kneeled down on it and went though the ceremony with great gravity … The fellow who owned the hat durst not
move until the procession had passed, and then, without giving him time to speak, Dennis clapped the hat on the owner’s head and walked off. 11

 Generally speaking, the officer corps would not act in quite so outrageous a fashion, but even so it did little to remedy matters. Thus:

 In some instances we experienced much hospitality from the people, but these occurrences were rare, for the Spaniards are naturally a lofty and distant people, and most unquestionably our officers did not endeavour by any act on
their part to do away with this reserve … This is a fatal error … If the officers of the British army were to reflect upon the effect their conduct must have on the people of a different nation … they would at once come to the
resolution of changing their tone … It is a singular fact, and I look upon it as a degrading one, that the French officers … made in the ratio of five to one more conquests than we did! How is this to be accounted for? The
British officer has the advantage of appearance; his exterior is far before that of a Frenchman; his fortune, generally speaking, is ten times as great. But what of all this if the one accommodates himself to the manners … of
those he is thrown amongst, while the other … sticks to his national habits, struts about, and not only despises, but lets it be seen that he despises, all he meets save those of his own nation? 12

 Arrogance, meanwhile, was both compounded and fuelled by anti-Catholicism. As Irishmen, many of the rank and file were Catholic, but the officers of the British army were staunchly Anglican, whilst a number of units were
experiencing an upsurge in Methodism amongst the soldiers, and, in particular, the NCOs. If Spain and Portugal were backward, Catholicism was regarded as the culprit, whilst there was universal condemnation of many aspects of
Catholic faith and practice. Statues, for example, were claimed to encourage idolatry and alms-giving laziness. Particular dislike was felt for the large numbers of clergy to be found everywhere, Patterson, for example,
describing monks as ‘living … in a state of lazy indolence … supported by the deluded multitude and supplied most plentifully with an abundance of good things’. 13 But greatest interest was aroused by the institution of the
convent. Nothing could convince the officers of the army that the ‘fair inmates’ and ‘lovely forsworns’ had not been incarcerated against their will and there was general denunciation of what Swabey called ‘the cruelty of
immuring unfortunate youth in these diabolical cells’. 14 The result was a further crop of incidents. The Twenty-Third Light Dragoons got up a mock procession, complete with a fake bishop; Kincaid describes how monks were
assaulted or pelted with snowballs; and there are numerous accounts of officers flocking round convents and attempting to strike up relationships with the nuns. Whether they were ever successful is unknown (although there are
certainly stories to this effect), but on occasion stronger measures were taken: