

 It had been, in the phrase Wellington used of Waterloo, a near run thing. The centre was exhausted. ‘A German sharpshooter’, wrote Schaumann, ‘… looking quite black in the face from the sun, the dust, the gunpowder and
perspiration … flung himself on the ground in an exhausted condition, assuring me he had fired off sixty charges. His tongue was cleaving to his palate with thirst; he was unable to fight any longer, and hardly ten of his company
were still alive.’ 24 Two brigade commanders were dead, and so many men had fallen that ‘a line of Spanish cavalry was formed in the rear … to add to our apparent force’. 25 Marching toward the battlefield, the Light Division
encountered crowds of British and Spanish fugitives who all claimed that the battle was lost, whilst the town of Talavera itself was in chaos:

 The Spaniards … dashed in masses through the town, and, mixed up with vast quantities of baggage, blocked the streets … I watched this appalling tumult and confusion from my window. Even the inhabitants were packing and taking
flight. 26

 Even now the battle was not over, for, as the remnants of Lapisse and Rey’s divisions retired, Leval was moving forward again. However, raked by artillery fire from the Pajar, the advancing troops were again brought to a halt by
the musketry of the defenders, whilst the attack was finished off altogether by Cuesta’s troops who sallied out in some number and assailed the French left flank, the high point of this exploit being a spirited cavalry charge
that not only inflicted many casualties but overran what remained of Leval’s divisional artillery. For the French, this was the end. Very little of the infantry – the only troops who could make any impression on the Allied
position – were still fresh; over seven thousand men had been killed or wounded; seventeen guns had been captured; and the entire army was badly demoralised. Desperate for victory to the last, Victor demanded that the battle be
continued, but Joseph, Sebastiani and Jourdan over-ruled him, pointing out that the Allies were still intact and that there was even a danger that they might counter-attack. In consequence, although firing continued for some
hours, by the middle of the night the entire French army was in retreat amidst shouts of ‘A Bayonne! A Bayonne!’

 Behind them they left some much-scarred opponents. Over five thousand British troops – one quarter of the force engaged – had been killed or wounded, as had several hundred Spaniards. ‘Almost all my staff are either hit or have
lost their horses,’ wrote Wellesley, ‘and how I have escaped I cannot tell. I was hit in the shoulder at the end of the action, but not hurt, and my coat shot through.’ 27 To add to the horror, many of the injured had been burnt
to death in grass-fires started by smouldering wadding. Food and water were deficient and the troops absolutely exhausted, whilst it was also necessary to devote considerable time to gathering up the surviving wounded. Yet on 29
July substantial reinforcements arrived in the shape of the first elements of what became the famous Light Division, and there seemed no reason to think that the next few days would not see the Army of the Centre force the French
to retreat. Unknown to Wellesley and Cuesta, however, the situation was about to change dramatically. At this point news arrived that a large force of French troops had cleared the passes that separated the Tagus valley from Old
Castile and León and occupied the important road junction of Plasencia some 100 miles to the west. Believing that far fewer troops were involved than was actually the case, the Allied commanders resolved that Wellesley should
attack them with his army, whilst Cuesta continued to hold Talavera. Given that 50,000 men were concentrating at Plasencia, disaster threatened, but, not for the first time the Allies were rescued by their greater ability to keep
watch on the enemy. Thus, a letter from Joseph to Soult from which it was possible to deduce the real situation was intercepted by a band of guerrillas and passed to Cuesta who immediately sent it on to Wellesley. Receiving this
document in the nick of time, the latter halted his advance and hastily made for the crossing of the Tagus at Puente del Arzobispo. At Oropesa he was joined by Cuesta, who had just as hastily abandoned Talavera and rushed to
catch him up. The Spanish general was eager to attack the French, but Wellesley insisted on retreating across the river. By dusk on 4 August, then, the British army was safely ensconced on the southern bank, where they were
rather sulkily joined a day later by the Spaniards.