

 Our doctor … got so merry he bolted off to a convent to release the nuns like a gallant knight! Many of the fair señoritas he knew there were pining for liberty, but the wily priests came to the rescue. There was a shindy, of
course [for] a few officers of the baggage guard … collected their forces and joined the medico. They … had nearly forced an entrance when the second-in-command received a wound on the head and tumbled down the stairs. The doctor
called off his troops to see after the wounded … and the holy priests made their escape, satisfied in preserving the dark-eyed maidens from the hands of such heretics. 15

 The Spaniards, then, were unlikely to find the British congenial companions. Needless to say, the latter were no better impressed. British memories of Spanish betrayal in the campaign of Sir John Moore were just as strong as
Spanish ones of British misconduct. Famously, officers and men alike were shaken at the sight of Cuesta and his army. Still suffering from the effects of being wounded and trampled underfoot at Medellín, Cuesta was described as
an ‘infirm old man, so much so that he is obliged to be lifted into his saddle’ and a ‘deformed-looking lump of pride, ignorance and treachery’. 16 As for his troops, they aroused derision:

 Falstaff’s ragged regiment would have done honour to any force compared with the men before us. They were undisciplined, badly armed, and … almost naked. I can assure the reader that it was with the greatest difficulty we could
avoid laughing right out of our faces, when officers out at elbows and knees stalked past carrying rusty old swords not worth lifting off the road. Hundreds of men with the most haughty countenances sported coats of many colours,
while their inexpressibles bore unmistakable testimony to the difficulty experienced by the wearers in keeping the rags pinned about their legs. 17

 Add to all this the effect of pure happenstance – the fact, for example, that the Tagus valley was a poor region that had already been thoroughly plundered – and it will be seen that relations were bound to be bad. And so it
transpired. In outline the Allied plan was that, whilst Venegas prevented the troops in La Mancha and Madrid – the corps originally commanded by Marshal Augereau and now led by General Sebastiani, and King Joseph’s small reserve
– from marching west, Wellesley and Cuesta would join forces in the Tagus valley and defeat Victor, whereupon Joseph and Sebastiani would have to retreat. Sebastiani and Joseph might, of course, ignore Venegas and join Victor, or
Victor ignore Wellesley and join Joseph and Sebastiani, but neither possibility was especially worrying, for both would simply expose the capital to capture whilst posing few risks to the Allies. Whatever happened, in short,
Madrid ought to fall, dealing a heavy blow to Napoleon in the process.

 In almost no respect, however, did this plan succeed. Coming up against Victor east of the town of Talavera de la Reina in a strong position behind the River Alberche, Wellesley and Cuesta agreed to attack him on 23 July, only
for the Spaniards to fail to move at the appointed time. Finding that Victor had in consequence been able to pull out safe and sound, Wellesley was furious. Why the Spanish general refused to move is not quite clear though the
most probable explanation is that he suspected that he was being led into a trap. This suspicion was unfounded, but even so there were good military reasons for believing that a frontal attack of the sort planned was unwise. As
even Wellesley recognised, ‘The chances were not much in our favour.’ 18 But that was not the issue, the central British complaint being that Cuesta had failed to inform them of his change of heart. As early as 17 June the
British commander had complained that he was ‘as obstinate as any gentleman at the head of an army need be’, but now the situation had become impossible: ‘I find,’ wrote Wellesley, ‘General Cuesta more and more impracticable
every day. It is impossible to do business with him, and very uncertain that any operation will succeed in which he has any concern.’ 19