

 In the Iberian Peninsula, then, the conciliation that had originally moulded French policy there was thrown aside, and a new model of reform pushed through that regarded difference not as a restriction but as a stimulus. Hence
anti-clerical and anti-seigneurial policies were introduced that were noticeably sharper than had generally been the case hitherto. At the same time, the new style also informed procedure elsewhere, most notably in Rome, Tuscany
and Berg, just as the constant snubs that were the lot of Joseph Bonaparte in 1808 and 1809 prefigured the manner in which Louis Bonaparte was ejected from Holland and Jerome Bonaparte stripped of half Westphalia.

 The main outlines of the Bonaparte kingdom of Spain were, as we have already noted, laid out in the Constitution of Bayonne. Spain was to be a constitutional monarchy governed by such principles as equality before the law and
equipped with a legislative apparatus that was broadly similar to that of France. These bases were never abandoned, for they were entirely consonant with the Napoleonic model. But most of the arrangements negotiated at Bayonne
failed to materialise. With the exception of such organs of government as the council of state, for example, the constitution’s political superstructure remained unbuilt, whilst its guarantees of personal liberty were simply
ignored. Many of Napoleon’s concessions therefore remained dead letters. If no legislative assembly was ever summoned, what price the nobility’s recognition as a separate estate? For the true measure of the new state, indeed, we
must rather turn to the Decrees of Chamartín, these essentially constituting an attempt to give reform a complexion that the emperor felt it was otherwise unlikely to attain. The fact was that he simply did not trust Joseph.
‘Joseph,’ he later said, ‘has intelligence … but he does not like work … He knows nothing; he loves pleasure.’ 5 According to his own account, indeed, he was openly contemptuous of him:

 ‘What a curious notion you have of yourself,’ I would say to him. ‘Why, you are not even as good as the corporal of light infantry posted at your door. If you found yourself at the head of … a hundred men in front of the enemy …
you would not know what to do. You would probably run away like a coward.’ 6

 Realising that his survival depended on retaining the support of his imperial brother, Joseph was in broad outline prepared to go along with his policies. In any case, the Decrees of Chamartín were only objectionable to him to
the extent that they had been forced upon him without consultation and introduced at what he considered to be a very bad time: seeing himself as a man of the Enlightenment, he was genuinely convinced that reform was the key to
success. According to his propaganda machine, after all, what were his opponents fighting for but the preservation of feudal and ecclesiastical privilege? Ordered by Napoleon to compile a list of monasteries that were to be
suppressed, he complied without demur, whilst his council of state promulgated a series of decrees which extended the changes still further. As can be imagined, these dealt primarily with the position of the Church and the
various matters that had been left by the Constitution of Bayonne for further deliberation. As far as the former was concerned, there was a mixture of increased spoliation and tighter control. Having been ordered to dismiss all
their novices, close their doors to any further applications, and confine themselves to their convents – a serious blow to the finances of the mendicant friars – on 18 August 1809 all the religious orders were dissolved, whilst
the next few months witnessed the disappearance of a variety of ecclesiastical levies, of which the most important was the Voto de Santiago (a levy on grain paid to the Archbishopric of Santiago de Compostela in the lands of the
Crown of Castile). For the time being the Church was allowed to retain the tithes (so long, that is, as it continued to make over to the state the many subventions it had traditionally surrendered from them), but it was stripped
of its legal privileges (most notably, the right of all members of the clergy to be tried only by the ecclesiastical courts), deprived of most of its remaining patronage, and prohibited from ordaining any more priests until it
had absorbed the large surplus of clergy that resulted from the dissolution of the orders.