

 Whatever else may be said of Joseph, he was not wrong to foresee victory. Scattered along the length of the Sierra Morena, the defenders had no chance of stopping the flood that burst upon them on 19 January 1810. In all, some
60,000 French troops – the corps of Victor, Mortier and Sebastiani together with a number of other formations – poured southwards to assault the Spanish positions. Overwhelmed at every point, Areizaga’s men fled eastwards and
southwards, leaving town after town to fall into the hands of the enemy. The result was revolution. Abandoning last-minute efforts to turn Seville into another Zaragoza, on 23 January the Junta Central decided to flee for the
safety of Cádiz. Presented with a golden opportunity for revenge, its many enemies went to work with a will. Persuaded by a variety of agitators that it was guilty of treason – for weeks, in fact, pamphlets had been circulating
accusing its members of being favourites of Godoy or agents of the French – the crowd took to the streets and released Palafox and Montijo, who then joined with the Junta of Seville in proclaiming themselves to be the government
of Spain. Also in the plot was La Romana, who had never departed for Valencia, and was now rewarded with the command of the Army of the Left.

 The new régime was shortlived, however. Only a small number of regular troops were available; the crowd hardly to be relied upon; and the city’s defences mere earthworks. Not choosing to wait for the French, it therefore fled in
its turn. Excited by numerous religious processions and acts of disorder, the crowd at first maintained an attitude of defiance, but no sooner had the French appeared before the walls on 31 January than resistance collapsed, a
delegation of local officials eventually surrendering without a fight. With Jaén, Córdoba and Granada already gone the same way, the only show of resistance came at Málaga where the people overthrew the local authorities, only
for the French to storm the town and execute the leaders of the insurrection.

 A few places in the west and south aside, there now remained only Cádiz. By a near miracle, however, it was saved. Though a number of their colleagues had been attacked and arrested en route, the rump of the Junta Central had
succeeded in reaching that city on 28 January, and the following day they handed over power to a five-man regency headed by General Castaños. At this stage the new capital was protected only by the puffed-up and
self-congratulatory Voluntarios Distinguidos de Cádiz, but in the nick of time help arrived in the shape of the Army of Extremadura. Posted on the extreme left of the Spanish line, Alburquerque had foreseen the direction that
events were likely to take, and had therefore come south with all speed. Having picked up a few stragglers en route, on 3 February he arrived at Cádiz, the result being that when the French summoned the city to surrender two days
later they received a defiant answer.

 With the initiation of what was to become the siege of Cádiz, there ended the war of the Junta Central. Battered and humiliated, that body was no more, but its record was by no means wholly discreditable, whilst in nominating
its own replacement it had finally scotched efforts to establish a régime whose chief goal would have been the restoration of the position of the privileged orders: Spain was to have a regency, true, but its members were
characterised less by aristocratic reaction than by caroline enlightenment, whilst its first president was the cautious and amenable Francisco Javier Castaños. For good or ill, with the convocation of the cortes, the way was also
now open for reform. As for the military situation, Cádiz provided resistance with a powerful bastion that the French would find hard to overcome. Yet the overall picture was grim. So many men, so much territory and so much
matériel had now been lost, that Spain’s ability actually to wage war in any formal sense had been critically impaired. There was still some way to go, but even so the Patriot cause had taken the first steps on the road that
would lead to eclipse, humiliation and the negation of the very reform programme that was now so eagerly expected.