

 Nor was this the end of the woes that afflicted the Spanish cause. Far to the north November had seen Del Parque march eastwards in an attempt to isolate from Madrid those enemy troops who still remained in the region, the
latter having fallen back behind the River Duero. Hearing at Medina del Campo of Areizaga’s misfortunes, he hastily turned round and fled westwards, only to be caught at Alba de Tormes on 28 November by the vanguard of the troops
sent to follow him. Composed entirely of cavalry, the French would not usually have been able to attack, but, encamped on either side of the River Tormes, the Spaniards had been taken unawares. Led by the notoriously ferocious
François Kellermann the invaders therefore charged home with great violence. Though this was a gamble, it paid off: the three Spanish divisions on the wrong side of the river were routed with the loss of three thousand men and
nine guns, whilst the disorderly retreat that followed saw the disappearance of immense numbers of deserters.

 By the end of November, then, Patriot Spain was in a sorry state. In Catalonia, as we have seen, Gerona was on its last legs; Spain’s two largest armies had been shattered; and the British army was preparing to leave the
Guadiana (disgusted by what he regarded as the Junta’s stupidity, Wellington was convinced that a French march on Lisbon could not be long delayed). To make matters worse, intelligence reports were received of large masses of
fresh troops crossing the frontier from France. Thus, with Austria beaten, Napoleon had immediately ordered numerous reinforcements to take the road for Spain. Consisting of Junot’s corps of the grande armée, * two divisions of
the Young Guard, a division of German infantry, a new force of mounted police that had been raised for the specific purpose of fighting the guerrillas, a handful of stray regiments that had as yet failed to find a permanent home,
and a mass of drafts and reinforcements for those units already in Spain, the whole amounted to some 138,000 men. And, as if all this was not enough, it was even rumoured that the emperor himself might again be coming to take
charge of operations.

 Distracted by his decision to take a new wife in the person of the Grand Duchess Marie-Louise of Austria, Napoleon did not appear, but, even so, time had run out for the Junta Central.

 Deprived of the last vestiges of a British military presence, its own armies were being decimated by disease and desertion. By the New Year, indeed, Del Parque was down to a mere 9,000 men, whilst all that was left to defend
Andalucía were perhaps 40,000 men in the form of the minuscule Army of Extremadura, which had managed to escape without mishap, and the remnants of the Army of the Centre. Even such men as were left could not be relied upon:

 This whole district is full of stragglers and fugitives, whilst every day the number of those who desert the front line increases … To paliate their scandalous behaviour, they claim that they are being left to die of hunger
[and] that their own officers tell them to run away … I do not believe any of this, but bands have been seen consisting of as many as ninety-three men … whilst those militiamen who have confronted them have … suffered a number of
dead. 41