

 As to what should be done next, he had no doubt. Sheltering behind the fact that his orders laid down his first priority to be the defence of Portugal, Wellesley abandoned the Spaniards and set off for Badajoz, where he hoped to
feed and rest his army in the fertile Guadiana valley.

 In this decision, he was reinforced by London’s reaction to Talavera. With Wellesley himself the Cabinet professed delight, and he was rewarded with the title of Viscount Wellington. But several factors suggested a need for
caution. The Opposition would be certain to accuse the new peer of misjudgement, whilst rumours were already circulating that Talavera had been fought for no better reason than that of obtaining a title. A series of scandals had
emerged with regard to the abuse of patronage in which the chief protagonists were none other than the Duke of York and Lord Castlereagh. And in private there was some dissatisfaction with Wellington, as we may now call him:
perceived as over-confident, he had also given much offence by a series of intemperate letters in which he berated the government for, as he saw it, failing to send him enough money. In consequence, direct co-operation with the
Spanish armies was made dependent on the establishment of a reliable system of supply, the admission of a British garrison to Cádiz, the appointment of Wellington as commander-in-chief of the Spanish armies, and the removal of
General Cuesta. It being most unlikely, as the Cabinet recognised, that the Spaniards would agree to these conditions, it followed that Wellington would henceforth be confined to Portugal.

 To return to the situation in the Peninsula, the lynchpin of the Anglo-Spanish alliance was now Wellington’s elder brother, Richard, Marquess Wellesley, who had just replaced Frere as British ambassador. The reasons for this
change are clear enough. A romantic who was deeply engaged with the Spanish cause, Frere had become a major focus of Opposition criticism, and could not be trusted to adopt the firm line that now seemed necessary. Wellesley, by
contrast, was a senior figure of much experience of whom great things were expected, an old friend of Canning’s, a keen supporter of the war in the Peninsula, and a natural partner for Wellington. But, for all his talents, his
brief was an awkward one. Whilst conveying to the Junta Central the bad news that British armies should no longer be a factor in their planning, he was also expected to encourage military, political and administrative reform,
whilst at the same time extracting a series of concessions with regard to such matters as the export of specie from the American colonies. Hardly had he arrived in Seville, meanwhile, than he found himself beset by his brother’s
retreat from the Tagus. Disappointed with Wellington even before the Talavera campaign – they felt, for example, that the British had not exerted themselves sufficiently in the pursuit of Soult after the victory at Oporto, and,
further, that, instead of being kept back by Wellington to watch the frontier of Tras-os-Montes, the Portuguese army ought to have invaded León or Galicia – the Spaniards were outraged. Fortunately for the Allied cause, however,
Wellesley realised that the British needed the Spaniards rather more than his political masters were prepared to admit. Whilst refraining from pressing the more extreme British demands, he therefore tried desperately to extract
promises from the Junta of a sort that might halt the retreat to Portugal, whilst at the same time mounting a sterling defence of his brother’s conduct.