

===== FILE: OEBPS/xhtml/chapter9.xhtml =====
The Peninsular War

 9

 Seville

 THE BONAPARTE KINGDOM OF SPAIN, 1808–1813

 From all sides church bells rang out whilst rockets streaked through the sky and guns crashed out in salute. To the accompaniment of a buzz of excitement from the vast crowd that thronged the streets, many of the city’s squares
were ringing to the music of military bands whilst blue-uniformed troops looked on indulgently. The word suddenly running around that the king was coming, every pavement, every balcony, every door and every window was lined with
expectant faces. And, even more suddenly, there he was. Gasps and exclamations of surprise filled the air: this was not the drunken, debauched and one-eyed figure of legend, but a handsome figure with a ready smile and a kindly
expression. Pleased with what they saw, the crowd responded with delight, and soon cheers of ‘Long live the King!’ were mingling with pleas for work, bread and justice. As for the object of their adulation, he waved and nodded
right and left and sat a little straighter in the saddle: never, wrote one of his supporters, had Joseph I, King of Spain, felt more certain of his throne.

 Repeated, as they were, in city after city in Andalucía in February 1810, these scenes provide us with a useful opportunity to turn aside and examine the new state that lay at the heart of the Peninsular War. Napoleon’s conquest
of Spain had been resolved upon in the context of a policy that was already well established beyond the Pyrenees. From the 1790s onwards the French had been establishing satellite states ruled by friendly régimes and
characterised by the establishment of political, social, judicial and military systems very closely modelled on the French pattern. Initially designed to harness local desires for progress or revolutionary change and encourage
those desires elsewhere, by 1808 they had increasingly become mechanisms of exploitation and control whose purpose was essentially to defend the borders of la grande France, keep the imperial armies supplied with men and money,
complement the spoils system that lay at the heart of the Napoleonic empire, and assimilate local élites in the structures of French supremacy – hence, for example, the numerous ‘family courts’ presided over by one or other of
the emperor’s numerous siblings. Exploitation, however, was coupled with reform. Powerful armies, flourishing treasuries and complicated systems of import and export control – the sine qua non of Napoleon’s Continental Blockade –
all required effective systems of administration, just as the élite participation on which the imperial régime depended had to be bought by such measures as the sale of ecclesiastical land or the establishment of the principle of
the career open to talent. Hence, generations of imperial apologists were able to hide behind the notion that Napoleon’s career was centred on an attempt to uphold the French Revolution against the cause of aristocratic and
monarchical reaction.