

 In many places the magistrates showing evident marks of hostile inclination and nowhere inclined to serve us, the people of the country have everywhere treated the unfortunate men who have sacrificed themselves to save Spain
with inhumanity and neglect … I was often obliged to use violent means to keep the men from starving. 34

 Still worse was the perception of George Simmons:

 The French army was supplied by the villagers with a number of articles, whilst our army was nearly starving … Our Spanish friends infested every road for miles and robbed the peasantry who were bringing bread and vegetables to
us for sale. 35

 The bitterness was intense. Despite the confusion witnessed by Schaumann, the Spaniards had fought well at Talavera, but this did not stop Wood from writing, ‘There were about 30,000 of our allies … in line with us, but they
were … neither attacked nor engaged during the conflict. My battalion being on the right of the line … I could plainly perceive their actions. They certainly fired, but I could not perceive what they fired at, nor did I
afterwards see many of their troops dead on the field.’ 36 Far from their efforts being recognised, indeed, the Spaniards were accused of cowardice, and of throwing away the fruits of British heroism. Many officers, indeed,
expressed complete despair. ‘No good, I am convinced, can ever be done for these people,’ complained the engineer officer, Rice Jones. ‘General Catlin Crauford has this day joined us with seven or eight new regiments, but for
what purpose it is impossible to say. We begin to suspect that Ministers are mad enough to think of continuing to support the allies that we have found in this country.’ 37

 But Rice Jones need not have worried. Of further co-operation, there was in the short term little chance. Wellesley was as furious as any of his men. First of all there was the question of food:

 Since the 22nd of last month … the troops have not received ten days bread; on some days they have received nothing, and for many days together only meat … The cavalry … have not received, in the same time, three regular
deliveries of forage … During a great part of this time … the Spanish armies received their regular rations daily … The consequence of these privations … has been the loss of many horses of the cavalry and artillery … The
sickness of the army, from the same cause, has increased considerably … Indeed, there are few … officers or soldiers of the army who … are not more or less affected by dysentery. 38

 On top of this there was the issue of the Spanish army:

 In the battle of Talavera … whole corps threw away their arms, and ran off in my presence, when they were neither attacked nor threatened with an attack, but frightened, I believe, by their own fire … When these dastardly
soldiers run away, they plunder everything they meet, and in their flight from Talavera they plundered the baggage of the British army … I have found, upon enquiry and from experience, the instances of the misbehaviour of the
Spanish troops to be so numerous, and those of their good behaviour so few, that I must conclude that they are troops by no means to be depended on. 39