

 For a little while matters hung in the balance, but in the end Wellington agreed for the time being to keep his army in the area of Badajoz. In this respect, then, Wellesley did much good, but in other ways he proved more
maladroit. Like many British observers, he had a fixed notion of the Junta Central:

 The Supreme Central Junta is neither an adequate representation of the crown, nor of the aristocracy, nor of the people, nor does it comprise any useful quality either of an executive council, or of a deliberative assembly,
while it combines many defects which tend to disturb both deliberation and action … Omitting all question respecting the disposition of the Junta, it is evident that it does not possess any spirit of energy or activity [or] any
degree of authority or strength, that it is unsupported by popular attachment or goodwill [and] that its strange and anomalous constitution unites the contradictory inconveniences of every known form of government without
possessing the advantages of any … It is not an instrument of sufficient power to accomplish the purposes for which it was formed, nor can it ever acquire sufficient force or influence to bring into action the resources of the
country and the spirit of the people with that degree of vigour and alacrity which might … repel a foreign invader. 40

 In consequence, Wellesley was soon urging a variety of reforms on the Junta. Some of these were merely platitudinous or irritating – the Junta hardly needed to be told, for example, that improvements were necessary in the state
of the Spanish army – but others either threatened to destabilise the Alliance or played straight into the hands of the Junta’s opponents. Thus, suggestions that there should be concessions to the American colonies could only
imply changes in tariff policy that would favour Britain, whilst demands for a regency naturally encouraged the ambitions of Infantado, Francisco Palafox and La Romana. Indeed, in September Palafox and Infantado contacted
Wellesley and sought his backing for a coup, Palafox having openly denounced the Junta Central and called for just such a body as Wellesley was demanding. Just as vocal were the old councils of the Bourbon state, which since July
had been amalgamated in a single body. Realising that the British still needed them, the Junta therefore gave no more ground than they absolutely had to if they were to obtain the formal treaty of subsidy which they had been
pressing for. With moves for a new cortes already under way, all that was done was to place executive power in the hands of a rotating committee of seven of its own members. For Wellesley, however, this was not enough, news of
his dissent encouraging La Romana to publish an extremely provocative manifesto in which he threatened to resign from the Junta’s ranks – he had earlier filled a vacancy for Valencia – unless it reformed itself immediately (by
which he meant that he should be declared sole regent).

 Whatever good Wellesley may have done, he had therefore also destabilised the Junta Central. On 11 November, however, he left for home, having been recalled to become Foreign Secretary (in a spectacular denouement which had seen
Canning and Castlereagh fight a duel, the former’s schemes had produced both a new Cabinet headed by the much respected Spencer Perceval and his own departure for the political wilderness). In Spain, meanwhile, political
disaffection, the need to regain British confidence, the impending fall – despite desperate resistance and some help from outside – of Gerona, and the danger that the Peninsula might soon be flooded with enemy troops released by
the defeat of Austria were forcing the Junta to prepare a new offensive.