

 Ludicrous though this idea may be, it is at least clear that by 1808 the French had a ‘blueprint’ for conquest that went far beyond mere military despotism. To argue, as some apologists have done, that Napoleon intervened in
Spain out of a quixotic desire to fight against the superstition, obscurantism and backwardness of the ‘black legend’ may be nonsense, but the régime of Joseph Bonaparte was for all that founded on a genuine belief that Europe
could be remade on the French model even if the basis of that drive was not ideological but rather political, financial and economic.

 That said, reform was not a static concept, and josefino Spain could be said actually to have witnessed an intensification of the reform process. In earlier years this had been invested with at least a degree of autonomy in that
the different states of the empire had been permitted to retain a variety of distinctive features. The Constitution of Bayonne, indeed, had conformed to this model. A relatively generous document in Napoleonic terms, it
prohibited any religious faith other than Catholicism, recognised, for the time being at least, the privileges of the Basque provinces, and extended separate political representation to the nobility.

 By the end of 1808, however, the drive for change was operating in a climate in which Napoleon was becoming dissatisfied with the satellite state as a tool of strategy. Too many of their rulers, his brothers and sisters
included, were inclined to shy away from policies that would make them unpopular with their subjects, whilst the emperor was becoming convinced that the old order had to be broken rather than conciliated. Spain and Portugal,
indeed, proved the point, for, from Napoleon downwards, the French insisted that the rising had been the work of the clergy. Berating a delegation of captured Spaniards at Vitoria in 1808, the emperor thundered, ‘It is [the
monks] who mislead and deceive you. I am as good a Catholic as they are, and I have no desire to threaten your religion.’ 1 ‘The clergy of the chief churches of Seville, Valencia, Valladolid and Zaragoza were trying to arouse the
patriotic zeal of the people,’ wrote Lejeune. 2 ‘The Spanish priests’, said Rocca, ‘hated the French from patriotism and from interest, for they well knew that the intention was to abolish their privileges, and to deprive them of
their riches and temporal power. Their opinion swayed that of the greatest part of the nation.’ 3 Most graphic of all is the testimony of General Foy, however:

 The Deity soon signified that the cause of the Spaniards was his own … In the cavern of Covadonga in Asturias, so famous for having been the asylum of Pelayo and his brave followers, attentive and devout observers saw large
drops of sweat trickle down the face of Our Lady of Battles. At Compostela a clinking of arms was heard … on the tomb of Saint James, announcing that the … glorious patron of Spain would again lead her armies to victory … The
miracles were a proof of the opinion of the clergy. 4