

 Despite Wellington refusing point blank to take part in the campaign, the late autumn therefore saw the Armies of the Left and Centre alike moving into central Spain. Heavily reinforced from Asturias on the one hand and
Extremadura on the other, and given new commanders in the persons of the Duque del Parque and Juan Carlos Areizaga, the two armies were expected to converge on Madrid. Supporting them, meanwhile, was a much reduced Army of
Extremadura under the Duque de Alburquerque (on 12 August Cuesta had been forced to relinquish his command on account of a stroke), the task of this force being to feint against the capital from the west. Operations began well
enough. In mid-October Del Parque advanced from his base at Astorga with 40,000 men and took up a strong defensive position at Tamames. Arrayed on a ridge even stronger than the position Blake’s men had occupied at Alcañiz, they
could not have been better posted. Outnumbered two to one, the nearest French troops were therefore forced to retire with heavy casualties when they attacked on 18 October, and within a few days Del Parque was in Salamanca. In
the first week of November, meanwhile, Alburquerque crossed the Tagus with his 10,000 men, whilst Areizaga advanced northwards from the Sierra Morena with another 55,000.

 Again, though, things went wrong. Decisive action might have brought Areizaga a great victory, but in the event he dithered, allowing the French to force a battle on their terms at Ocaña on 19 November. Able to deploy over
50,000 men against fewer than 34,000 of the enemy, Areizaga still possessed the advantage of superior numbers, but his position was appalling, his forces being arrayed in two lines across an open plain with their right flank
completely ‘in the air’. Wearied by incessant marching and countermarching, the troops were badly demoralised, whilst their quality was as bad as ever. Indeed, only the day before, the cavalry had been routed by a much smaller
force of their French counterparts amidst the usual scenes of panic and disorder. As a result, 19 November was a foregone conclusion. For a little while, the Spanish infantry fought well enough, checking and even driving back the
columns which the enemy – essentially the corps of Mortier and Sebastiani together with Joseph’s personal reserve and some attached cavalry – sent against them. On the Spanish right, however, their 5,000 cavalry were routed
almost in an instant by four brigades of French horse, which then proceeded to wheel right and hurl themselves on the infantry’s flank and rear. Taken by surprise, the whole army then dissolved in chaos. Entire divisions laid
down their arms, whilst the rest of the troops scattered in all directions. A few troops on the left maintained their order and conducted a gallant rearguard action, but even so Areizaga’s casualties amounted to over 18,000 men,
or fully one third of his army. Also lost were fifty of his sixty cannon and large quantities of arms, ammunition and supplies, whilst some ten thousand of the fugitives deserted rather than return to the colours (by comparison,
French losses were a mere three hundred).