

 With the exception of Badajoz, there were also no fortresses behind which the defenders could shelter. Last but not least, on 11 December Gerona, too, had fallen prey to starvation, by which time two-thirds of the garrison and
half the inhabitants lay dead (also dead, however, were some fourteen thousand of their assailants, whilst the siege had not only neutralised the French forces in Catalonia for a full six months, but also allowed the Spaniards
yet again to reduce Barcelona to a state of semi-starvation).

 Heartened by the fact that the French initially showed no signs of advancing, the Junta frantically tried to mend its fences. Orders were issued for the election of deputies to the new cortes, which it was announced would open
on 1 March 1810. A levy of a further 100,000 men was announced and all remaining exemptions from military service abolished. Fresh edicts appeared against desertion. Church plate, table silver, personal jewellery, horses and
draught animals were all made the subject of fresh requisitioning. An ‘extraordinary contribution’ that amounted to a graduated income tax was decreed. A start was made on the fortification of the passes that spanned the Sierra
Morena. And, finally, Palafox and Montijo were imprisoned, and La Romana appointed to the Captain Generalcy of Valencia in an attempt to get him out of the way.

 Mere energy was not enough, however. Whilst the goodwill of the Junta cannot be doubted, many of its measures were either poorly drafted or completely impracticable, whilst they in any case had little time to take effect. At the
same time many local notables were disaffected, whilst there were few means of enforcing the government’s decrees even if there had been more willingness to do so; so great was the problem of desertion and banditry that large
areas of the countryside were completely out of control. Meanwhile, notables and populacho alike showed little enthusiasm for patriotic self-sacrifice: very little private wealth was ever handed in, whilst in Jaén an attempt to
mobilise the home guard that had been formed in the wake of the uprising produced not a single man.

 Lack of enthusiasm was not the end of the Junta’s problems, however. On the contrary, the real cost of the offensive strategy that had been forced upon Patriot Spain now became apparent. Had the populace flocked to the colours
by the thousand, they could neither have been armed nor equipped. Denuded by the need to equip army after army more or less from scratch, Spain’s arsenals and magazines stood empty. And, as if matters were not bad enough already,
the French chose this moment to advance on Seville. Traditionally, it has been argued that this decision neglected the obvious need to eliminate Wellington’s army before doing anything else, whilst at the same time laying the
French open to an eventual British counter-attack. But to argue in this fashion is short-sighted. To defeat Wellington, the French had first to end Spanish resistance, which in turn meant defeating every last Spanish field army
and capturing every last Spanish fortress. As the immense reinforcements that were starting to flow across the Pyrenees promised to be more than sufficient to contain Wellington, a march on Seville was therefore logical, whilst
it also satisfied a number of political imperatives. More money – a constant problem for Joseph, as we shall see – would be available for his government. Laughed at and snubbed by Spaniard and Frenchman alike, Joseph would
finally be taken seriously. And finally, eager to be loved, the king looked forward to winning Spanish opinion over by a show of beneficence and magnanimity.