

 Also common were opportunism, calculation and an eye to the main chance. Particularly visible amongst the many prominent figures who rushed to join Joseph at Bayonne and then deserted him in the wake of Bailén (such as the Duque
de Infantado and Fernando’s Secretary of State, Pedro de Cevallos), such factors were also of great importance lower down the scale. Thus, the fact that the French for a long time seemed likely to win encouraged pretendientes and
adventurers to take service under King Joseph (a good example here is the man who headed French intelligence in Barcelona under Duhesme and Saint-Cyr, Joaquin Casanova, an obscure individual who would have been hard put to it to
find advancement but for the war). Equally, in the Church, in particular, there were plenty of clerics dissatisfied with their lot; hence, perhaps, the accounts that can be found of disrobed friars leading pro-French irregular
bands, of parish priests and cathedral canons taking service with the French as local officials, and, for that matter, of nuns eager to elope with French officers.

 Then, too, there was the issue of revenge and political exclusion. March 1808 had witnessed the downfall of many officers and officials associated with the régime of Godoy, and for such men there was little room in Patriot
Spain. Filled with the desire for revenge, they therefore flocked to the French administration and armed forces. A prominent and particularly vigorous example is Amorós, but others include the erstwhile Intendent of Zaragoza,
Ignacio Garciny, who had been driven from the city by an angry mob at the time of the motín de Aranjuez, and went on to become comisario regio – in effect, governor – of Soria and La Rioja, and the head of the Bourbon artillery,
General José Navarro Sangrán, who was appointed comisario regio in Old Castile.

 Whilst the factors that we have looked at thus far cannot be said to have been absent from other cases as well, there were several groups of afrancesados who were united by ideas of a more positive sort. As we have seen, in the
period leading up to 1808 a significant section of educated opinion had been won over to the cause of political and economic liberalism, and, in particular, to such key measures as the ‘nationalisation’ of the Spanish Church, the
liberation of thought from the shackles of the Inquisition, the abolition of all restrictions on economic activity, the creation of a free market in land, and an end to the privileges of the nobility. Under the influence of
Godoy, the period 1792–1808 was marked by the pursuit of many of these objectives, and yet such were Godoy’s personal failings and the depths to which Spain’s fortunes fell that the ilustrados became ever more disillusioned.
Though many were encouraged by the rising of 1808 to believe that the way was now open for reform, others were horrified, realising, perhaps, that it was as much a protest against Spanish enlightenment as it was a protest against
French aggression. In consequence, many ilustrados turned to the French in the conviction that Napoleon epitomised the cause of progress. Thanks to this belief, Joseph gained the support of a devoted band of literati which
included the noted writers, Leandro Fernández de Moratín, José Marchena, Juan Meléndez Valdés and Alberto Lista, as well as a small number of dissident clergy whose thinking had been strongly infuenced by the Enlightenment,
including the sometime official of the Inquisition, Juan Antonio Llorente, and the sevillano cathedral canon, José Isidoro Morales. Alongside these figures, meanwhile, could be found a second group of men consisting of ministers
and bureaucrats associated with the caroline reforms who had survived to see the coming of the French. The product of a rigidly élitist movement that regarded the mass of the people as mere brutes, emphasised the principle of
absolute monarchy, and sought as far as possible to civilise the conduct of war, they could not fail to be repelled by the events of 1808. Some of their representatives, true, swallowed their misgivings and rallied to the
Patriots – one thinks here of Floridablanca and Jovellanos – but for others the only option was collaboration, and all the more so as the Napoleonic régime not only shared their contempt for the people, but seemed to represent a
return to enlightened absolutism, whether it was in its religious toleration, its attack on the Church, its expropriation of ecclesiastical property, its assault upon corporate privilege, its rationalisation of government, or its
centralisation of power. In consequence, from the beginning of his reign Joseph could call on the services of not just Cabarrús, but also Mariano Luis de Urquijo, Miguel José de Azanza, and the Marqués de Caballero, all of whom
had held ministerial posts in the reformist régimes of Carlos III and Carlos IV.