

 Reform, then, cannot be analysed just from a consideration of the decrees that emanated from King Joseph’s Council of State. In the Basque señorios and Navarre, the establishment of military ‘governments’ led to a full-scale
assault on the fueros. A hard-liner with little respect for local sensibilities, the governor of the Basque provinces, General Thouvenot, immediately swept away the three señorios ’ traditional forms of self-government and gave
each of them a small appointed council modelled on that of a French département. Still worse, their fiscal privileges were also abrogated, Thouvenot immediately imposing a series of unprecedented taxes that had within eighteen
months raised 40,000,000 reales. In institutional terms, however, Navarre fared rather better – briefly abolished, her foral institutions were quickly re-established in an attempt to conciliate the local notables – but there,
too, the diputación was appointed rather than elected, and executive power placed in the hands of a new police commission. In Catalonia the role of eminence grise to the occupation authorities fell into the hands of an
afrancesado so pro-French in sympathy that he not only pressed for the introduction of the Code Napoléon in full, but advocated the introduction of conscription and complete annexation by France. Thanks to the support of the then
commander of the French garrison, Marshal Augereau, a cidevant Jacobin and common soldier much inclined to nurse delusions that the people had only to be freed from their chains to rally to the French cause, the result was a
series of measures designed to refashion Catalonia on the French model. Last but not least, it should be noted that throughout the areas subjected to direct imperial control there appeared considerable numbers of French
administrative personnel, giving the process of transformation still greater impetus.

 French personnel or no French personnel, in Spain as elsewhere the implementation of reform rested on a substantial degree of collaboration on the part of the indigenous élites, for Napoleon never had sufficient trained
administrators to supply more than a handful of the large numbers required. Matters should have been eased by the presence in the country of a sizeable French community prior to 1808, but surprisingly little assistance was
derived from this source (the most prominent example is Cabarrús, a Frenchman who had come to Spain to pursue a fortune in commerce in the 1770s), whilst Joseph was in any case very eager both to make his monarchy a genuinely
Spanish institution and to win the support of the propertied classes. In theory the josefino state was characterised by the career open to talents, but in practice there was more continuity than change. The court was filled with
leading grandees; the government and administration with Bourbon statesmen and officials; the officer corps with Bourbon army officers; and provincial and municipal government with representatives of the old local oligarchy. As
witness the creation in October 1809 of the corps of asistentes – young men taken on as interns to learn the business of administration – even Napoleonic innovation made little difference, recruitment being restricted to those
whose families could afford to pay a subvention of 24,000 reales a year.