

 As elsewhere, then, the Catholic Church suffered severely at the hands of the French empire, and all the more so when the picture is completed by such crimes as the cold-blooded murder of twelve priests and nuns at Uclés in
February 1809, the pillage experienced by many churches and cathedrals, and the use of many religious buildings as storehouses, stables, barracks or improvised fortresses. Already thoroughly radicalised by years of propaganda
that portrayed the French Revolution as the work of Satan, many Spanish churchmen were therefore inclined to claim that the French intended to destroy the Church altogether, making much of Napoleon’s emancipation of the Jews,
arrest of the Pope, and overtly cynical and indifferent attitude towards all religion. But this was unfair. The emperor may have been determined to impose the primacy of secular authority and utterly lacking in religious
convictions, but he appreciated the value of the Church as a tool of social and political control and therefore had no intention of destroying it altogether. Included in the Decrees of Chamartín, therefore, were clauses intended
to boost the financial position of the ignorant and impoverished parish clergy that fitted in closely with the desires of many reformist ecclesiastics. As for Joseph, no more pious than his brother, he was none the less careful
to preserve a show of ostentatious observance, whilst at the same time doing his best to form a working relationship with the hierarchy and strengthen the Church at parish level. Those monks and friars who had been ordained as
priests were encouraged to adopt a new parochial ministry, whilst in Seville, for example, ecclesiastical properties to the value of 300,000 reales were set aside for the upkeep of the city’s parishes, a part of this sum being
used to support 25 new curacies. In May 1809, meanwhile, Joseph had also specifically ordered that a proportion of the plate taken from religious houses that had been shut should be distributed amongst the parish churches, no
fewer than ninety of which received help from this source in the area of Madrid alone.

 Moving on to other matters, we come first to the question of Spain’s territorial organisation and governance. Though dealt with only tangentially in the Constitution of Bayonne, there could be little doubt as to the implications
of this document. Initially, Joseph contented himself with working within the apparatus that he had inherited from the antiguo régimen whilst at the same time placing responsibility for local government in many provinces in the
hands of a variety of royal commissioners. However, after much preparation and debate, on 2 July 1809 Spain was divided into thirty-eight new provinces, each of which was headed by an Intendent appointed by King Joseph, whilst on
17 April 1810 these intendencies were converted into French-style prefectures and sub-prefectures. Named after their chief towns rather than, as in France, after their dominant geographical features, the new territorial
divisions, which were all more or less equal in size, bore little relation to historic units of any sort. * To take Navarre as an example, part of it was joined with the Basque señorio of Guipúzcoa in a prefecture governed from
Pamplona, and the rest conjoined with west-central Aragón in another based at Zaragoza. If Aragón thereby gained eastern Navarre, it lost its eastern fringes to Catalan Tarragona, however, whilst the remainder was split between
Teruel and Huesca. Each prefecture, meanwhile, was to have its own district court and constitute an independent diocese, whilst the new units were grouped together in units of between two and four to form new military districts,
the result being that there would in turn have to be a massive restructuring of the judicial, ecclesiastical and military ordering of the state. In practice, little progress was made in these areas, but in much of southern and
central Spain by 1812 the prefectural system, at least, was becoming a reality.