

 The effect of such broadsides is unknown, but it cannot be denied that for many life in the Patriot zone had been hazardous and distressing. Hence, perhaps, the extraordinary scenes witnessed in the course of Joseph’s journey
round Andalucía in 1810:

 It is impossible to convey an adequate idea of the joy with which the population of Ecija, Jérez, Santa María, Ronda, Málaga, Granada and Jaén received the new king … In every town, the nobility, formed up as a guard of honour,
came to congratulate him on his happy arrival, and swore to extend to him a devotion without limits. They even embraced his feet and his knees … Following their example, the people kissed his horse and prostrated themselves on
the ground, crying, ‘Long live King Joseph!’, whilst I saw women of the lower classes … begging him to do them the honour of riding over their bodies … Men and women, young and old, everyone flocked to his lodgings to contemplate
the features of the man they called their saviour. The great lords showered him with presents and wearied him with their protestations of attachment and love, and the populace begged for a look and a blessing. Amidst general
acclamations, fireworks of a sort that had but rarely been seen in Spain were let off everywhere to add to the joy of the day. In the tableaux there appeared both insulting references to Joseph’s predecessors and allegories in
honour of the new king. 10

 Particularly amongst the lower classes, these transports of delight proved pretty ephemeral, but, even if the general disillusion was shared by the propertied classes, the latter also had to contend with the ever present fear of
social exclusion. Merely by setting up a family court, for example, Joseph confronted grandees with the uncomfortable choice of either participating in the structures of his rule or abandoning the stage to parvenu rivals.
Equally, at the level of the garrison town, the local oligarchy found that the French dominated social life. Bullfights, balls, receptions, reviews, firework displays, illuminations and even the theatre were all invested with
political significance, just as the freemasonry that had begun to make some slight impact in Spain prior to 1808 was now injected with an imperial theme (thus, the many new lodges that were now formed often took such titles as
‘La Estrella de Napoleón’ or ‘La Beneficiencia de Josefina’).

 To attend some reception hosted by a French officer or watch a bullfight thrown in honour of Napoleon’s birthday was not the same, of course, as to accept a position of responsibility under el rey intruso. But the French also
had other weapons. In Spanish society the right to wear uniform had for the past century been a coveted mark of status, hence the jealousy aroused by the officer corps, and hence too the popularity of the various corps of
‘distinguished volunteers’ and the like that had sprung up since 1808. In the wake of French occupation the only uniform to which the civilian could obtain access, however, was the dark blue coat, red facings and white breeches
of Joseph’s civic militia (see below). Also to be considered was the question of desamortización. With immense quantities of land being offered for sale at prices that were inclined to fall by the day, could any family abstain
from taking part in the process? With many French officers being charming and polished individuals who cultivated an air of dash and gallantry – British memoirs are full of complaints at the greater success enjoyed by their
enemies when it came to flirting with Spanish women – it was very difficult to avoid contact with the French altogether, and still harder to prevent contact from developing into co-operation and even recognition: oaths of
allegiance to King Joseph, for example, were required not just of all office-holders of any sort, but also of all heads of families.