

 Implicit in the Decree of 17 April 1810, there was, as can be observed, a direct threat to the foral provinces, which had hitherto been allowed to retain their traditional structures and generally treated in a lenient fashion.
Thus, if Guipúzcoa was absorbed into a rump of Navarre, Vizcaya and Alava were joined in the prefecture of Vitoria. The issue of the fueros is one to which we shall return, but for the moment let us concentrate upon the general
revolution in government of which the creation of the prefectures was a part. Beginning with the central authorities, on 18 August 1809 the bitter struggle that had for many years raged between new-fangled ministry on the one
hand and traditional council on the other was resolved in favour of the former. Thus, the Councils of War, the Indies, the Treasury and the Military Orders were abolished and the Council of Castile was restricted to the functions
of a supreme court of appeal, whilst the number of ministries was expanded from five to nine – Finance, Interior, Justice, Foreign Affairs, War, Police, Marine, Indies and Ecclesiastical Affairs. Equally, on 4 September 1809 all
Spain’s ayuntamientos were dismissed, the provincial authorities being ordered to proceed to the formation of new bodies chosen by election. Initially, the vote was restricted to property-owners noted for their enthusiasm for the
French cause, but even so the old system of hereditary tenure had been completely overthrown and the number of councillors linked to the size of the population. With the Decree of 17 April 1810, meanwhile, the French model was
introduced in full with councils at municipal, sub-prefectural and prefectural levels; mayors in every town; and very limited powers of election (as in France, only the smallest places could choose their councils themselves,
larger ones having to submit a list of candidates for approval by higher authority). As for the administration of justice, the alcaldes mayores, or local magistrates, were deprived of the seats they had generally enjoyed in the
municipalities, and, as laid down at Bayonne, integrated in a uniform system of courts. Also worth noting here is the abolition of torture and the substitution of the noose by the supposedly more humane garrotte.

 More specifically covered in the Constitution of Bayonne than the question of territorial organisation was that of legal and fiscal unification. Spain had been promised common civil, criminal and commercial codes, a unified
judiciary and a uniform system of taxation. In so far as the legal codes were concerned, the original plan had been simply to impose the models that had been introduced in France since 1799, but on this point the emperor had
given way, leaving the new régime to elaborate the documents that it needed by itself. To carry out the work required, in December 1809 a permanent sub-committee was established within the Council of State, and this eventually
produced a document based on the Code Napoléon that accepted most of its principles whilst at the same time eliminating such contentious rights as that of divorce. Pressure of business prevented the new code’s discussion,
however, with the result that it was never introduced, josefino Spain therefore having to continue to rely on the Bourbon Novísima Recopilación. In the matter of taxation, meanwhile, matters were much the same. In the course of
1809 the Minister of Finance, Francisco Cabarrús, sketched out a new scheme that would have suppressed the multitude of existing levies, many of which applied only to part of the country, in favour of three new taxes levied on
property, occupation and income, all of which would have applied to the whole of Spain. However, not until October 1810 did the first part of this scheme appear in the form of an annual impost of ten per cent of all rental
income, whilst it was another year before there appeared the patente industrial, which was essentially an annual licence that had to be paid by all those involved in any sort of craft or business. Spain also being given a single
tax and customs frontier – the Basque provinces and Navarre were effectively stripped of their immunity by a decree of 16 October 1809 – the principles of the Napoleonic empire were slowly entrenching themselves beyond the
Pyrenees.