

 With the lower classes, of course, relations were much less amicable. However, as time went on, the frenzied responses of the early days of the war died away. Particularly in towns where exposure to the French was constant,
there rather developed a spirit of live and let live:

 I do not know what may be the state of the public mind in the southern provinces of the Peninsula, but assuredly the feelings of all the provinces through which I have passed are decidedly inimical to the French and favourable
to the common cause … At the same time, I am convinced that many of the middling classes of society lean towards the French and that in all the great towns the French have active friends and partisans. Even the patriotic feelings
of the lower classes are of little use to their country. It is a passive feeling, which murmurs under the oppression and tyranny which it suffers, without exerting itself to remove or diminish what it complains of. The people pay
their contributions and deliver up their mules, grain and provisions whenever they are demanded … by the enemy. Of course they complain of these exactions and are happy to see the English … But … it does the enemy no harm nor us
any good. 14

 At particular times and in particular places, the rapprochement noted above could go even further, a good example being the spirit that prevailed in Madrid in the early months of 1809:

 The day after [his return to the capital] and for many days afterwards, [Joseph] went out, showing himself in the streets and visiting the … hospitals. He got quite a good welcome, and there were signs of a general change in the
spirit of the inhabitants … Aversion diminished, and hope and confidence appeared reborn, and it must be said that this change was the work of the king himself. His character served him marvellously in the circumstances in which
he found himself: his affability … and, above all, the manner in which he in every instance chose Spaniards rather than Frenchmen pleased the nation. At the same time inertia, the evils of the war, the departure of the British …
[and] the impossibility of resistance caused arms to be discarded and necks to be bent to a yoke that was found to be less burdensome than had been expected. 15

 Why, though, should resignation, acquiescence and personal friendship have in some instances gone as far as active collaboration? At the heart of the matter for many of those involved was clearly fear of disorder, the desire to
ensure the survival of their own privileges and social status, and the belief that resistance was futile. Discussion of individual cases is not entirely helpful, but one might begin by noting a number of senior army officers who
rallied to the French cause, including Fernando VII’s own Minister of War, General Gonzalo O’Farrill, and the erstwhile governor of Cádiz, Tomás de Morla. Thus, both generals, of whom the former had joined Joseph at Bayonne and
the latter following the surrender of Madrid, made it quite clear that they regarded war as an empty gesture that would produce only defeat and the collapse of the social order. Also worthy of note here is the support shown the
josefino régime by substantial elements of the Church. Most clerical opinion was deeply hostile both to the emperor and to a France associated with the excesses of the Revolution. With matters made still worse by atrocity and
anti-clericalism, many bishops fled their dioceses for the Patriot zone, just as many priests and friars preached holy war and on occasion took up arms against the French. Yet in Oviedo, Seville, Valencia and a variety of other
cities, driven not just by fear of disorder but the belief that the coming of Joseph Bonaparte reflected the workings of divine providence, the hierarchy maintained the most cordial relations with the occupying forces and acted
as agents of their propaganda. As Suchet acknowledged, for instance, the ‘persuasive eloquence’ of the Bishop of Zaragoza ‘instilled a peaceful and conciliatory disposition into his flock’. 16 And finally it is no surprise to
find either that the French conquest of Valencia saw the local grandees rally to the new masters of the city en masse, or that the organs of local government established by the French in the wake of their occupation of Asturias
were largely composed of men who had been prominent in the province’s old ayuntamientos and provincial assembly.