

 If great care was taken not to threaten the position of the propertied classes, just as much effort was put into ensuring that service in the bureaucracy brought with it high rewards: Councillors of State, for example, were
officially entitled to a salary of 100,000 reales a year, whilst even asistentes received 12,000. Nor were the prizes on offer solely financial: having abolished all Spain’s existing orders of nobility, on 20 October 1809 Joseph
created a new Spanish Royal Order, which was eventually awarded to over 600 churchmen, nobles, army officers and officials and carried with it a substantial pension, whilst there was even the possibility of a title (Minister of
Foreign Affairs from 1811 to 1813, for example, Miguel José de Azanza became the Duque de Santa Fé).

 Collaboration, then, offered financial gain and social advancement, whilst the French could also be relied upon to hang bandits, suppress rioters and back señores against agrarian disorder: sights such as the three gallows that
Dorsenne kept permanently filled outside Burgos were in this sense as much a reassurance as they were a menace. Meanwhile, having obtained control, the invaders were in a position to use every means at their disposal to project a
positive image of Napoleonic rule and manipulate society in their own interests. It is instructive, for example, that no sooner had the French arrived in Madrid in December 1808 than they held a grand review:

 With a view to appealing to the eyes of the populace as he had previously appealed to their reason, and hoping to dispose them to accept with pride an alliance with so rich and powerful a nation as the French, the emperor
ordered that … all the troops should appear in their most gorgeous uniforms at the review he intended to hold on the Prado. We all got ourselves up in gala array so as to be worthy of the grand occasion. 7

 Needless to say, these displays of pomp and ceremony were reinforced by a sustained offensive in the press. All over occupied Spain official gazettes appeared giving the régime’s version of events and blackening the Patriot
cause. Typical of one common theme was the Gazeta de Sevilla of 7 January 1812:

 The guerrillas commit all the robberies imaginable: nobody is free of their plundering. Spanish, French, English, all alike are victims of their wickedness. Priests, magistrates, labourers, muleteers, nobody is spared … Such are
the instruments which presently serve perfidious Albion … Not being able to conquer, by means of these men, the British oppress those whose independence they feign to protect. 8

 Typical of another is the proclamation on 25 March 1812 which described the gaditano régime as an ‘infamous and illegitimate government … composed of the very scum of Spain, dependent on the caprice of an ignorant mob, dominated
by British influence, and possessed of no more territory than the prison in which it resides … that has deceived the foolish Spaniards who submit to its tyranny by promising them an illusory liberty’. 9