

 Punished as it was by sequestration of property, escape to the Patriot zone was not a practical possibility except for, say, officials with a secure position in government service, notables with property in the Patriot zone, or
young men with a career to make and no family responsibilities. It was therefore inevitable that the French should have been able to obtain at least a measure of acquiescence amongst the propertied classes. Whilst often drawing
the line at taking service with the French, and in some instances serving as spies or couriers, they accepted the presence of the occupying forces, and on occasion even struck up friendships with them. Typical of this coexistence
is the case of Francisco de Goya, who remained in Madrid throughout the French occupation, painted Joseph’s picture and documented the war in the masterpiece of studied ambiguity known as the Desastres de la Guerra. For many
imperial officers, indeed, life could be reasonably comfortable. Let us, for example, take the case of the German, Heinrich von Brandt, who was an officer in one of Napoleon’s Polish regiments. Stationed in Aragón after the fall
of Zaragoza, he remarks that the French ‘were not as universally hated as has since been alleged’. 11 The clergy, he agrees, were hostile, as were most of the peasantry, but the propertied classes and women in general were split:

 In the middle classes older people were exclusively against us, but amongst those between twenty and thirty there were many afrancesados  … Although women, especially the mature ones, bitterly rebuked the French for their lack
of religion and for their insatiable appetites … during our wanderings we had the experience of meeting ardent francophiles, especially young brides with old husbands, or … novices whose mother superiors had set them at liberty
on the approach of the French. 12

 Whether or not this analysis is correct, Von Brandt had no difficulty striking up relationships with the people amongst whom he found himself. At Daroca, for example, he became friendly with a fugitive monk, whilst at Calatayud
he met a seventeen-year-old postulant named Ines with whom he fell deeply in love. For a matter-of-fact account of how all barriers could be broken down, we need only turn to the memoirs of the cavalry officer and beau sabreur,
Charles Parquin:

 At Salamanca my duties as adjutant obtained for me excellent quarters in the house of a beautiful Spanish noblewoman … whose husband, a colonel in the Spanish army, had died two years previously … The first week she … refused to
see me and our only contact had been when I sent my card to her. Soon afterwards I sent a note to her and I employed bribery to learn from the maid who brought me chocolate every morning that her mistress watched from behind the
curtains of her room when I mounted to leave the house … This encouraging sign made me so bold as to ask if she would allow me to spend one hour each day in her company. This favour was granted me. Later on, as one can imagine, I
did not stop there … and, in short, I was happy, very happy indeed. 13