

 In addition to proposing new systems of law and taxation, the Constitution of Bayonne also promised a reorganisation of the exhorbitant national debt that had built up under Carlos IV. Amounting to almost 6,500,000,000 reales by
1808, this was guaranteed by the new régime, but that did not mean that the latter was prepared to take it on on the terms bequeathed to it by the Bourbons. As a leading financial expert, Cabarrús was particularly eager to do
something about the problem, the result being the issue on 9 June 1809 of orders for all titles to the national debt to be surrendered in exchange for cédulas de crédito. These in turn could be used either to buy bienes
nacionales – property seized from enemies of the régime and, above all, the Church – or to generate a dividend of four per cent per annum. On the same day, meanwhile, there also appeared a decree that both authorised the sale of
the property seized by the government and laid down the rules for the manner in which this was to be carried out. Matters were complicated by the issue of fresh cédulas as rewards for those who had served the josefino régime,
but, with much of the Bourbon debt effectively cancelled and plentiful amounts of property up for sale, on the surface it looked as if matters had genuinely been put on a new footing.

 Reform of this sort was not the only activity in which the régime engaged. Joseph, for example, was eager to promote economic revival, and therefore introduced a number of measures that tied in closely with classic liberal
theory. In addition to the internal customs barriers got rid of by the decree of 16 October 1809, various monopolies were abolished, whilst the régime also rid itself of the series of industrial enterprises, none of them very
successful, that had been bequeathed to it by the étatist Bourbons. At the same time, a new stock exchange was set up in Madrid; Spain’s primitive national bank, the Banco de San Carlos, was overhauled; the cultivation of such
crops as potatoes, cotton and rice was encouraged; generous concessions were offered to all those willing to establish industrial concerns; a Conservatorio de Artes y Oficios was set up in Madrid as a repository of information
relating to machines, tools and industrial processes; and the Reales Sociedades de Amigos del País – the learned societies established by Carlos III in order to promote innovation and the spread of modern science – given every
encouragement.

 Last but not least, recognition should also be given to Joseph’s efforts to celebrate Spain’s cultural heritage, and improve the environment in which her inhabitants lived. As interested as any of its counterparts elsewhere in
the spread of education, on 6 September 1809 the régime ordered that state primary schools should be established in place of those run by teaching orders, whilst a further decree of 26 October laid down that each provincial
capital should have a French-style lycée. More generous than his brother in the matter of female education, Joseph also set up a school for 150 girls in Madrid and decreed that similar institutions should be founded in the
provinces, the administration of all these plans being placed in the hands of a new Committee of Public Instruction. Alongside this, meanwhile, there appeared an academy modelled on Napoleon’s Institut de France in the shape of
the National Institute for Arts and Sciences.