

 It is not, however, for his educational policy that Joseph Bonaparte is most remembered in the field of culture. It was Joseph who was responsible for the foundation (if not the idea) of the Museo del Prado and the first
attempts at the official preservation and investigation of the remains of such sites as Roman Italica, whilst it was also Joseph who first laid out Madrid’s botanical gardens and established Spain’s first natural history museum.
To him, too, Madrid owes a number of squares, not least the Plaza de Oriente in front of the royal palace, which were created in an attempt both to beautify the city and to provide work for the city’s poor, just as it was in his
reign that the inhabitants were for the first time given access to the palace gardens that were eventually to become the Retiro park. Implicit in these schemes, of course, was a concern for living standards that is, in the
circumstances, laughable in its sincerity. Thus, the focus of a bloody war that caused untold miseries to the populace, Joseph genuinely wished them to enjoy open spaces, clean air and better health; hence the new parks and
squares, and hence, too, the efforts that were expended on such matters as vaccination – ordered by Joseph Bonaparte in Madrid as early as July 1808 – street cleaning, waste disposal and funerals (like the Bourbons before him,
Joseph was especially keen to put an end to the practice of church burials).

 As may be observed, then, josefino Spain was characterised by a genuinely reformist impulse that was as marked as anything found in other parts of the Napoleonic empire. Indeed, further impetus was lent to the process by the
fact that in many parts of Spain the administration was for much of the time not in the hands of King Joseph. For the latter there was often good reason at the very least to make haste slowly, or even to tone down certain
measures of reform. On the ground, however, power was in the hands of Intendents, royal commissioners, and, ultimately, prefects who were often for various reasons less inclined to be circumspect than the king (a good example is
Francisco de Amorós, an army officer and friend of Godoy who responded to the overthrow of the favourite with a one-man crusade against the antiguo régimen ). At the same time, even in the early days so much influence was
possessed by the local military commanders that Joseph’s agents were able to exercise no power whatsoever, whilst consideration must also be given to the impact of territorial alienation. On 8 February 1810, growing irritation
with his brother led Napoleon to order that the Basque provinces, Navarre, Aragón and Catalonia should be turned into military ‘governments’ whose authorities would be entirely independent of those appointed by King Joseph. Two
months later, two more such units were created out of Burgos on the one hand and Valladolid, Toro, Palencia and, albeit temporarily, Avila on the other, whilst on 14 July Napoleon took the whole of Andalucía out of Joseph’s hands
and gave it to Soult, who was at the same time given the command of almost all the troops that had taken part in the offensive of January 1810. And, finally, mooted as early as October 1810 in an attempt to frighten Joseph into
greater ferocity, in February 1812 Catalonia was to all intents and purposes annexed to the French empire (the decree concerned did not actually use the term ‘annexation’, but its provisions were such as to leave no doubt as to
its implications). In all these cases, the result was the intensification of reform, the French commanders being not only convinced that the privileged orders were the motor of popular resistance, but, in the trans-ebrine regions
at least, under orders from Napoleon to prepare the way for annexation.