

 From the various police agencies established by the French – the most important was the Ministry of General Police whose formation was decreed by King Joseph on 6 February 1809 – there therefore flowed a flood of rules and
regulations of every sort. Typical of these documents, perhaps, was the Reglamento para la Entrada, Salida y Circulación de la Personas por Madrid that appeared on 17 February 1809. This consisted of a list of minute rules
concerning the movements of the populace in Madrid and, more especially, communication between the city and the outside world. Thus all outsiders who came into Madrid were expected to register with the police in exchange for a
pass which allowed them to remain in the capital for a given time (permanent residents had already been registered when they had been required to swear allegiance to Joseph in December 1808). Meanwhile, visitors of any sort had
to have their journey sanctioned by the authorities in the place from which they set out, just as nobody could leave the capital without a passport. Nor were things much better inside the city: free transit through the streets
was allowed during the day, but even then pedestrians were enjoined to keep moving and prohibited from stopping to talk on street corners; at night, meanwhile, internal passes were required and all pedestrians required to carry
torches.

 It could be argued that, like the instructions that were later issued for all inhabitants to carry pass-books, these regulations are the fruit of nothing more than an attempt to prevent espionage, subversion and insurrection,
but the question of support for the Patriot cause was generally left to specific decrees such as that issued by Soult in Seville on 7 May 1810 which threatened any pueblo that failed to resist the guerrillas, let alone
collaborated with them, with the most draconian penalties. The real significance of the regulations is rather to be found in the numerous police orders whose bearing on the issue of security is little more than tangential. There
were orders banning carters from driving too fast; orders restricting the movement of mule trains and wagons; orders concerning the tethering of horses; orders for sweeping the pavements and the removal of rubbish; orders for the
conduct of market traders and peddlars; orders for the control of lodging houses; orders for the illumination of the streets at night; orders for the proper manner of carrying corpses to the cemetery; orders prohibiting dogs from
being allowed to wander loose in the streets; orders for the confinement of all beggars in municipal hospitals or workhouses; and orders restricting the slaughter of animals to slaughterhouses or other designated places. There
were orders regulating the organisation of carnival festivities, Holy Week processions and bullfights; orders prohibiting the wearing of cloaks, masks and disguises at fiestas; orders restricting the opening hours of taverns and
gaming houses; orders enjoining the registration of prostitutes; orders prohibiting the consumption of alcohol in the streets; orders forbidding theatres to show anything that offended public decency; and orders banning the
congregation of any more than the smallest groups of people in the streets. As one pamphlet put it, ‘They will be telling us where to spit next.’ 17 With their every action watched, the populace were deeply resentful, all the
more so as the regulations were backed up by heavy fines and, as in similar cases in Patriot Spain, were the source of much inconvenience. As if it was not bad enough that the licences, permits and pass-books demanded by the
invaders all cost money – to obtain the official carta de seguridad, for example, cost one real – the marginal activities that actually sustained much of the populace were criminalised, and this at a time when normal economic
life was all but at a standstill. Also affected was virtually every type of cheap entertainment, even if it was only lounging in the sun. However much the French and their supporters might put it down to the fact that the
populacho was too savage for the new habits to appeal, hostility and resistance were only to be expected.