

 All the more is this the case if we consider the rationale of French rule. Implicit both in the patterns of the Napoleonic empire in general, and in the motivation for French intervention in Spain in particular, was
exploitation: indeed, for what reason had Napoleon placed his brother on the throne if it was not to ensure that Spain fulfilled the requirements of a reliable satellite state? As for the costs of invasion, these were, as
everywhere else, to be borne by the territories occupied by the French armies. Last but not least, there was also the question of Napoleon’s power base: loot, perhaps, was not the only factor that motivated the soldiery, but nor
was it to be forgotten as a means of maintaining their morale; as for the marshals, generals and other grand dignitaries of the empire, more lands were always needed for the donations with which the emperor had been careful to
ensure their loyalty.

 The French, then, fell on the Peninsula like wolves. Outright brigandage was not approved of, on the grounds that it was bad for discipline and liable to prove counter-productive. To quote an edict of Marshal Berthier, ‘The
emperor is unhappy with the disorders that have been committed. Pillage annihilates everything down to the very army that engages in it.’ 18 But such pious sermonising proved but little in the way of protection. As the French
swept back across Spain in the winter of 1808, town after town witnessed the most appalling scenes. Burgos, for example, suffered very badly:

 As we approached Burgos, we crossed the site of the affair of 10 November. It was still strewn with corpses, although the sad spectacle which it presented did not make as painful an impression on me as the state of that great
city at the moment of our entrance. Absolutely deserted, almost all the houses had been pillaged and their furniture smashed to pieces and thrown in the mud; part of the city was … on fire; a frenzied soldiery was forcing every
door and window, breaking down everything that stood in the way, and destroying more than they consumed; all the churches had been stripped; and the streets were encumbered with the dead and dying. In short, although it had not
been defended, the city exhibited all the horrors of an assault. 19

 Also badly hit were Lerma, Aranda de Duero and Toledo. Wherever the French went, indeed, the story was much the same. To quote Rocca:

 As soon as the main guard was posted, at a concerted signal the soldiers … precipitated themselves all together … through the city, and long after the arrival of the army shrieks were still heard, and the noise of doors broken
open with hatchets and great stones. 20

 The result was a trail of destruction. Arriving at Burgos to take up the post of governor of Old Castile, Thiébault wrote that it ‘looked like a desolate solitude – in parts a sink of filth’ where ‘famine, ruin, despair [and]
pestilence prevailed, with death as the sole remedy’. 21 Elsewhere matters were even worse:

 Continuing on our way we arrived … at Huerta [de Valdecarábanos] … without any other event than being challenged and interrogated by two parties of Frenchmen … But if these continual delays did not dampen our spirits, the
horrible spectacle that we came across at … Aranjuez … filled us with pity. On the … Cuesta de Arineros three unfortunates were hanging from trees. Of the beautiful bullring nothing was left but the main walls, the same being
true of many of the town’s principal houses … The gardens, the promenades, in short everything that made the place so rich and beautiful … had been destroyed … At the end of the Puente Larga, another four men had been strung up
with the difference that they had not only been hung, but nailed through their chests to the trees on which they had lost their lives … Husbands have seen their wives raped, fathers their daughters, sons their aged mothers, and
there have even been cases in which the main square was used as the scene of their indescribable lascivities. 22