

 So far, we have for the most part only discussed collaboration amongst the upper ranks of society. Collaboration, however, was not just a phenomenon of the prominent. Thus, in addition to staffing a full administrative and
judicial apparatus, the French were able to organise a small regular army, which at its greatest extent consisted of three guard, ten line and two light infantry regiments together with a variety of cavalry, artillery and
engineer units, whilst at the same time mobilising substantial numbers of auxiliary regiments, civic guards and even anti-guerrilla guerrillas. * Largely undocumented as this phenomenon of rank-and-file afrancesamiento is, it is
difficult to interpret. Marxian claims that it represents a positive identification on the part of the people with the Napoleonic revolution are impossible to substantiate, the reasons for collaboration probably being practical
rather than ideological. Thus, in a situation where economic life was in chaos, prices soaring and hunger never far away, service with the French could constitute a vital source of income. At the same time it was also governed by
a measure of self-interest, for the guerrillas not only brought down savage reprisals on the heads of many pueblos but were themselves much given to pillage. Local home guards of one sort or another therefore attracted a
considerable amount of support – ten battalions of civic militia were formed in Madrid alone – but even so there were limits to the phenomenon of popular afrancesamiento. Thus, Joseph’s Spanish regulars time and again melted away
like snow, the king being able to rely only on the foreigners who made up his royal guard. As for the irregular forces employed to hunt down the guerrillas, whilst there are doubtless some interesting stories to uncover – who,
for example, was the girl nicknamed La Colegiana who is supposed to have led a pro-French partida dressed as a man in 1813? – it is clear that many were in fact brigands who were simply using service with the French as a cover
for their misdeeds.

 However many Spaniards may have at one time or another taken up arms as juramentados, collaboration at the popular level remained patently insubstantial. Nor, indeed, could this be otherwise: very few aspects of the French
reform programme were of any immediate benefit to the populace, whilst most of them were actually harmful. Thus, the inclusion of the Basque provinces within the national customs frontier hit the local agricultural economy very
hard; the attack on the Church deprived the populace of both poor relief and spiritual support; and the new cemeteries continued to give rise to fears of eternal damnation. To understand the negative impact of French reform in
full, however, it is necessary to examine the interest that the French took in what was called the policing of society. We see here the idea of enlightenment as a civilising mission that would save the poor from themselves. By
nature idle, improvident, dirty and given over entirely to vice, they would be made to work, taught useful trades, instilled with a sense of social responsibility, and deprived of the opportunity for debauchery. Yet, at best,
poverty would be replaced by tyranny, for the implication was clearly that the populace would be placed under strict control, forced to conform to the norms of respectable society, injected with a sense of deference, denied any
outlet for their frustrations, and stripped of their cultural autonomy. At the heart of the whole programme, in short, was fear of the mob. There was nothing inherently Napoleonic about all this – on the contrary, such ideas had
been commonplace throughout eighteenth-century Europe – but, imbued as the French were with a sense of cultural superiority, the empire saw a particularly sustained attempt to put the theory into practice.