

 By the summer of 1810, then, Joseph had lost all control of the situation. With his income only one third of what he needed, his administration in chaos, his authority openly flouted, and Napoleon asking more and more of him –
in January 1810, for example, it had suddenly been announced that the pay of the Peninsular armies was no longer to be found in Paris but in Spain and Portugal – the king felt that he had no option but to fight back. Desperate
protests to Napoleon proving of little avail – the emperor swore that he had no money, insisted that Spain was awash with riches, and accused his brother of being too soft – Joseph became more and more angry and repeatedly
threatened to abdicate. Napoleon, however, would only agree to his terms on condition that he persuaded the Patriots to surrender, and in the spring of 1811 the king therefore made a desperate bid to restore his fortunes by
paying a surprise visit to France. Realising, perhaps, that he had gone too far, Napoleon responded with a display of charm and reassurance – justice, for example, was everywhere to be administered in the king’s name; one quarter
of all monies raised in the provinces was to be sent to Madrid; the generals were ordered to report to Joseph on a regular basis; and Joseph was to receive a subvention of 500,000 francs a month – and this proved sufficient to
get the unhappy monarch to resume his burdens. However, it soon became apparent that nothing had changed: little money was received from Soult and the rest, whilst by the end of the year only 1,000,000 francs had arrived from
France. With things soon as desperate as ever, Joseph was again forced to resort to extortion: on 23 July 1811 an extraordinary levy was imposed on grain, the city of Toledo alone being assessed at 1,500 fanegas of wheat and
another 1,500 of barley. Once more Joseph considered abdication, but again Napoleon saved the situation, sending the king 380,000 francs, appointing him to the position of commander-in-chief of all the French forces in Spain,
investing him with titular authority over the whole of Spain, and restoring Marshal Jourdan as his chief-of-staff (less flamboyant and opinionated than many of his fellows, Jourdan had become a trusted friend and confidant in the
course of the time that he had spent in the same position in 1809, but in September of that year he had been forced to return home on account of ill-health).

 Yet none of this made much difference. El rey intruso continued to be slighted and deprived of money at every turn. Meanwhile, dreams of convoking a cortes or embarking on a triumphal progress of the sort that had gone down so
well in Andalucía in 1810 came to nothing for want of funds. All that could be done was to order the formation of the prefectural councils envisaged in the decree of 17 April 1810 (typically, these had never been established) in
the hope that these might impose some restraint on the generals. But, getting harder and harder to staff the Bonapartist administration as it was, the measure had almost no effect. Further humiliated by being temporarily driven
from his capital in August 1812 (though not before he had faute de mieux demanded that it produce the immense sum of 20,000,000 reales), Joseph had by the end of the year finally been reduced to a cypher. Thus, large numbers of
functionaries, including some of his most trusted advisers, had decided that the game was up, whilst others, such as the aged Cabarrús, had now died. For a short period the court continued its daily round in a forlorn attempt at
defiance – Joseph, indeed, displayed great courage and serenity – but the civil administration had been reduced to the purest improvisation, whilst all legislative activity had come to a halt. With Napoleon pressing for Madrid to
be reduced to the status of an outlying garrison, the end could not be long delayed, and on 17 March 1813 Joseph left his capital for the last time. Until the last moment the king clung to the hope that there would be a
miraculous change in the political situation – hearing, for example, of the bitter disputes that rent the Allied camp as a result of Wellington’s appointment to the command of the Spanish armies, he seemingly entertained dreams
of wholesale defections – but no such reprieve offered itself. On the contrary, on 27 June 1813 el rey intruso found himself crossing the frontier amidst the wreckage of his beaten armies.