

 Whenever the French come here … they commit the greatest atrocities that Your Excellency can imagine. Three days ago they took 8,000–9,000 head of livestock … On the 23rd they took 714 fanegas of barley, and whilst some of them
were loading up, the rest sacked fifty houses … Today they have taken 92 fanegas of barley and sacked three more houses … If I was to mention all the atrocities which they commit in the course of their comings and goings, Your
Excellency would be astonished, for there is not a statue which they do not burn, nor a woman whom they do not molest. Indeed, at times they kill the women, as they do any man who does not give them what they demand. 23

 Fuelled by the greed of commanders such as Soult, who is believed to have stripped Andalucía of works of art worth 1,500,000 francs, such rapacity remained characteristic of French occupation until the very end – in May 1813,
for example, the last days of French rule saw Salamanca faced by a demand for 300,000 reales–whilst Joseph’s ability to do anything to remedy matters was reduced to an ever smaller compass. First had come the decrees of 8
February and 29 May 1810 which took the whole of northern Spain out of his control. And then, on 14 July 1810 not only was Andalucía given to Soult, but Joseph’s vague supervisory powers over the French forces were taken away by
grouping them into six independent armies (of the South, the Centre, Portugal, Aragón, the North and Catalonia), the king being formally reduced to the position of commander of the Army of the Centre.

 Coming as it did in the midst of his triumphant tour of Andalucía, the first of these decrees came as a major shock for Joseph – ‘I saw’, wrote Miot, ‘what a mortal blow it was for him’ 24 – but at first he did nothing. To quote
the same observer:

 The hope of getting Napoleon to revoke his orders … made him postpone a decisive resolve. Instead, he carefully hid away the news that he had received, and we once again allowed ourselves to be lulled to sleep by the cheers of
the crowds who in every town dogged our every pace. 25

 The political consequences of this situation were manifold. From the beginning Joseph had been convinced that his only hope in Spain was a policy of moderation. Unable to hold to this ideal in the matter of taxation, the king
had at least consistently acted in a clement fashion, freeing prisoners of war, reprimanding officials who had acted in too arbitrary a fashion, and restoring property that had been seized unjustly to its rightful owners. But
what happened now depended on the military authorities. The newly independent French commanders were not all mindless brutes – in eastern Spain Augereau and Suchet more or less adopted Joseph’s policies as their own and in the
latter case in particular scored some success – but the contempt which Napoleon heaped upon any talk of moderation destroyed all hope of magnanimity taking general root.

 At the heart of the problem was the deepening split between Joseph and his younger brother. Soured on the one side by outrage over the behaviour of the French armies and the Decrees of Chamartín and on the other by
dissatisfaction with the king’s incompetent generalship and milksop ways, relations between the two had temporarily been patched up. As Miot notes, however, the truce proved shortlived: