

 *  At this point Godoy was out of office, having been dismissed in September 1798 as a result both of differences over military policy and of pressure from France, which rightly suspected his intentions. Yet his influence
survived. Thus, the new ministry, which was centred on the reformers, Francisco de Saavedra, Mariano Luis de Urquijo and Gaspar Melchor de Jovellanos, was very much his creature and had been appointed at his suggestion.

 *  Of these figures, Escoíquiz was a Jansenist who had been made Fernando’s tutor, only to be dismissed after voicing imprudent criticisms of Godoy’s government and foreign policy; Infantado a grandee who had seen a valuable
estate taken from him and given to Godoy after he had been accused of exercising unlawful señorial rights in its respect; and Montijo the son of a countess persecuted by Caballero on account of her Jansenism.

 †  So-called because Godoy sent María Luisa a basket of oranges picked, under fire, from the glacis of the fortress of Elvas.

 *  Known as the sorteo, the formal system of conscription was so unpopular that, after a short-lived experiment in the 1770s, the régime had resolved never to use it except in time of war (a situation that Godoy was desperate to
change). However, the populace remained subject to the constant threat of levas – the forced impressment of vagrants and the destitute.

 *  The fact that this was Napoleon’s own fault was ignored: the original plan had been to advance into Portugal from León, but a mistaken belief that it would be quicker to march via Abrantes had led Napoleon to shift Junot to
the barren Tagus valley. Given no forewarning of this move, the Spaniards were unable to prepare for it, and so the troops went hungry.

 *  ‘Ha empezado.’

 *  The military regions were Galicia, Asturias, Navarre, Old Castile, Aragón, Catalonia, Extremadura, New Castile, Valencia and Murcia, Seville, Granada, the Campo del Gibraltar, the Balearic Islands and the Canary Islands.

 *  Space, alas, does not allow for a discussion of this fascinating custom, which can best be described as a form of institutionalised adultery in which married women selected eligible males (churchmen included) to be their
escorts-cum-companions-cum-lovers, and openly appeared with them in society.

 †  The Basque señorios were Vizcaya, Guipúzcoa and Alava. Together with Asturias and Navarre, in 1808 they still possessed medieval assemblies dominated by the local pudientes.

 *  The officer corps of the royal guard – a preserve of the titled nobility or those with connections at court – was far better off: not only was promotion faster, but in the Guardias de Corps troopers were rated as ensigns,
captains as brigadiers, and colonels as field marshals.

 *  In line with distinctions that had emerged in the latter half of the eighteenth century, all footsoldiers were defined as either ‘line’ or ‘light’ infantrymen, of which the former in theory fought in traditional
shoulder-to-shoulder ‘close-order’ formations, and the latter in spread-out ‘open-order’ ones. In Napoleon’s forces, however, all infantry battalions possessed special companies trained to fight as skirmishers.