

 To all this was added great financial pressure. As early as 18 August 1808, Joseph announced a levy of 8 per cent on the products of the year’s harvest, whilst in late October a forced loan was imposed on those territories then
occupied by the French that amounted in the case of Navarre alone to 7,300,000 reales. With the reconquest of Madrid in December 1808, the pressure increased still further, Napoleon making it quite clear to his brother that
josefino Spain could expect to be plundered rather than subsidised. In Burgos, for example, the emperor had seized large stocks of wool and quinine with the intention of auctioning them in France, whilst he had seized the estates
of the ten richest families to have been proscribed as donations and ordered Joseph to present him with fifty masterpieces for the Louvre. Aside from a loan of 25,000,000 francs that was agreed in July 1808 on the collateral of
the Spanish crown jewels, less than 7,000,000 of which seem actually to have been paid, Napoleon was reluctant to give his brother financial aid, and instead insisted that he should fund his régime from what he could obtain in
Spain. Nor would he relax France’s tight tariff laws, effectively blocking the export of Spanish wool and thereby dealing a heavy blow to Joseph’s treasury.

 All this was a source of much grief to el rey intruso: at Burgos, indeed, such was his misery that he took to his bed for two days. A humane and generous man, he genuinely wanted his subjects to be happy, whilst, as he well
knew, there was every reason not to overburden them. Ideally, then, he would have liked to rely solely on a combination of regular taxation and the exploitation of the wealth of the Church. But, not only did his officials have no
access to large parts of the country, their ability to raise money was falling even where the French were in occupation: in Aragón, for example, tax revenue declined by a factor of more than one half in the course of 1809. As for
the Church, success was limited. Much of its plate was confiscated, true, but on the whole desamortización proved a disappointment: whilst some money came in from the tithes paid to the religious foundations that had been
suppressed and the auction of their plate and fittings, the land involved was largely paid for by the new cédulas, whose value was soon depreciating as rapidly as that of their Bourbon predecessors. With much the same true of the
estates confiscated from supporters of the Patriot cause, Joseph was forced to move further and further away from the legality of which he dreamed. As early as December 1808 a forced loan was decreed of 20,000,000 francs, whilst
in September 1809 this was followed by a second of 10,000,000.

 To fiscal pressure was added the day-to-day burden of occupation. Distressing and unpleasant in itself, billeting was the source of much expense (the cost of housing a single officer, for example, was officially recognised as
between eight and ten reales per day). On top of this, French commanders were from the beginning permitted to impose enormous war contributions wherever they went. To take the neighbouring cities of León and Palencia as an
example, between December 1808 and October 1810 they were together mulcted of a total of some 2,500,000 reales. Added to this, of course, was wholesale requisitioning, whether it was of livestock, such as the 300 oxen demanded of
Navarre in August 1808, food, such as the 300,000 rations required from Toledo in August 1812, or hospital supplies, such as the 2,600 sheets, 500 bolsters, 800 palliasses and 700 blankets demanded of Palencia in January 1809.
Nor was any ceremony wasted in the imposition of such demands: