

 Napoleon had only handed power to Joseph in form: the reality remained in his hands. Very quickly the king perceived this from the conduct of the French generals and officials that had remained in Spain, and the irritation which
he felt was extreme. In his letters he complained bitterly of the independence which both groups affected in so far as he was concerned. The violence of the expressions which he used [and] the threats with which he accompanied
his complaints … inflamed the resentment of the emperor, whilst the latter could not brook the fact that the king was affecting equality with him … Very soon the exchange of letters between them had ceased … Instead, the
[emperor] sent his orders directly to the commanders of the French armies in Spain, and a host of measures that undermined Joseph’s authority as king and commander-in-chief were carried out … without his participation and
sometimes even his knowledge. 26

 With matters made worse, first, by the fact that Joseph’s chief-of-staff, Marshal Jourdan, was widely perceived as a nonentity, and, second, by the king’s determination to advance Spaniards rather than Frenchmen, the other
agents of the emperor felt free to ignore Joseph even whilst they still remained nominally subject to his authority. Typical perhaps was the attitude of General Thiébault, who in the autumn of 1809 found himself hoist with his
own petard when an attempt to drag his feet by allegations of ill-health was answered by a polite letter sympathising with his troubles and informing him that General Solignac would be arriving to take over forthwith. Thus:

 Even in the case of a D’Armagnac, * this ill-concealed dismissal would have been scandalous; in my case, no name was bad enough for it. On the part of the king it was sheer impudence, for he was misusing a power which he had no
right to claim. I had been appointed by the emperor, and could be removed only by him. But for the weakness of my condition, which did not allow me to master my temper, together with the tendency I always had to take advantage of
every opportunity of seeing my wife once more, I should have appealed to the emperor, and Solignac would have left Burgos without having time to make a mess of the authority which he so scandalously misused. 27

 Far from being characterised by benevolence, French rule therefore continued to be marked by extreme brutality and the most arbitrary conduct. Hostage-taking, executions, massacres, burnings and sackings abounded, whilst there
were many random killings, rapes and acts of plunder and humiliation. As for Joseph, he was left looking more and more ridiculous. At the very time that he was entering Seville in triumph and issuing an amnesty for all those who
would join his cause, for example, Sebastiani was sacking Málaga and extracting from it 12,000,000 reales. Still worse, even those areas which in theory remained under his authority were not safe, a raid on Avila by Marshal Ney
in February 1810 stripping it of 6,000,000 reales, 12,000 fanegas of wheat and 500 head of cattle.