

 *  The forces of Catalonia became the First Army, those of Valencia the Second, those of Murcia the Third, those of Cadiz the Fourth, those of Extremadura the Fifth, and those of Galicia the Sixth.

 *  This was a disastrous attempt at an amphibious invasion of the Low Countries.

 *  The failure adequately to block this road is puzzling. Trant’s militia had been sent to hold it, but Wellington’s correspondence makes it clear that the British commander did not believe that they could do so. The best answer
would have been to blow it up, but no one had expected Masséna to come via Buçaco. A strong force of regular troops might also have done the job, but such a move would have left Buçaco badly undermanned. In short, by doing the
unexpected, Masséna had wrong-footed Wellington, and frustrated his plan to turn back the invasion before it reached Lisbon.

 *  For the whole of 1810 the Army of the Left had been headed by the Marqués de la Romana, but the latter had been suffering from syphilis and on 23 January 1811 he died suddenly of heart failure. Meanwhile, in accordance with
the decree of 31 December 1810, his forces had been redesignated as the Fifth Army.

 *  The Spanish troops concerned were what was left of the Fifth Army, which was now commanded by Castaños, and three divisions of the Fourth, including that of Ballesteros, and two more from Cádiz, which had sailed to Ayamonte
under Blake and then marched up the Portuguese frontier.

 *  According to General Long, Castaños appeared ‘a perfect old woman, whose sole occupation is powdering his hair and patrolling about … with a suite of servants and soldiers from fifty to sixty in number, at which the common
people gaze with admiration and cry out, “¡Viva!”’. 5 But documents discovered as this book was going to press suggest a different picture, the reality being that, but for Castaño’s efforts to get him to stand and fight,
Beresford would have retreated behind the Guadiana.

5. T. McGuffie (ed.), Peninsular Cavalry General: the Correspondence of Lieutenant General Robert Ballard Long (London, 1951), p. 96.

 *  Only formed in January 1811, the Army of the North was a new force composed of the garrisons of Old Castile, Navarre and the Basque provinces.

 †  Bessières, doubtless, was influenced by jealousy, but he could only have brought up more men by allowing large parts of northern Spain to slip out of French control, whilst the extra troops would have made little difference.

 *  Composed of twenty new battalions raised for infantry regiments already serving in the Peninsula, the Ninth Corps had only ever been conceived of as a temporary formation. Caught up in Masséna’s travails, it had survived
longer than intended, but now that opportunity offered its units were sent to join their parent formations, Soult’s share amounting to eleven battalions.

 *  Wellington’s army had many foreign regiments, including not just the Chasseurs Britanniques (supposedly a unit of royalist émigrés) but also those of the King’s German Legion, a force originally recruited from the exiled
Hanoverian army. By 1811 composed almost entirely of deserters and prisoners of war, they generally fought well, but were prone to desertion.