

 *  The leader of the conspiracy, José García del Busto, who currently occupied the post of Procurador General in the Asturian estates. The arms factory referred to was one of Spain’s eight musket works.

 †  The residence of the Comandante General, one Juan Crisostomo de la Llave.

 *  In by far the worst single atrocity of its type, 330 men, women and children were massacred in Valencia by a gang of assassins headed by a friar named Baltasar Calvo who had been refused a place on the provincial junta and
seems to have hoped to terrify the new authorities into changing their mind.

 *  In addition to her front-line troops, Spain possessed numerous companies of urban militia, invalids and garrison artillery.

 *  Frequently described as marines, this unit – the Marins de la Garde – was in fact composed of boatmen, having been raised to ferry Napoleon and his staff across the Channel in the invasion of Britain that was planned in the
period 1803–1805.

 *  A word on French organisation may be useful here. The smallest units were the infantry battalion and cavalry squadron, of which the first had around 600 men and the second around 100. Four battalions or four squadrons made up
a regiment; two or three regiments a brigade; two or three brigades, together with a battery of foot or horse artillery, a division; and three or four divisions, together with some extra artillery, a corps. Each corps of the
first ‘Army of Spain’ had a cavalry division, but in the autumn of 1808 this was reduced to a single brigade, and the bulk of the cavalry massed in a reserve of six divisions.

 *  Rigny’s adventures deserve to be retold. Caught by the rising in Santander, where he had been sent to arrest a British officer reported to be in the area, he had escaped arrest by passing himself off as the very man he had
been to catch, and had then travelled back to Burgos, gathering much information and being wined and dined by the Patriot authorities in the process. As can be imagined, great was the consternation when he was finally spotted:
‘The presence of Rigny in the marshal’s suite produced a comical effect on the unfortunate Spaniards, the latter recognising in him the supposed British officer with whom they had discussed their hostile projects so freely.’ 6

 *  A sizeable city by Spanish standards, Zaragoza stood on the south bank of the River Ebro which at this spot runs in a roughly west-to-east direction. It was connected to the northern bank by a single bridge at the end of
which there stood two monasteries and a cluster of houses. Initially, however, this sector had been left unmolested, the French having enough troops to attack only the city’s southern front.

 *  Anglophone readers may note that this account of the Spanish position differs considerably from that given in Oman, who argues that the Spaniards were posted on the hills. There is, however, no evidence that this was the case.

 *  References to the financial aid sent to Spain are complicated by the wide variety of Spanish coins and the different terms used to describe them. In brief, the basic unit of account was the silver real of which there were
about 100 to the pound; 20 reales made one peso or dollar, the sum dispatched to Asturias in fact constituting 500,000 dollars.