

 *  Consisting of forty-eight regiments, the militia was, as in Spain, a force of part-time conscripts mobilised in time of war.

 *  Withdrawn from its Aegean base the previous autumn under the terms of the Treaty of Tilsit, this force had been on its way home via the Atlantic, but had put in to Lisbon for fear of British attack. Unfortunately for Junot,
however, its commander, Dmitri Senyavin, was hostile to Alexander’s alliance with France, and therefore refused to land the troops and cannon that the French general begged him for.

 *  Most British infantry regiments had one or two battalions, each of which had ten companies (one grenadier, eight centre and one light in guards and line units). As in all other armies, most men were armed with muzzle-loading,
flintlock, smoothbore muskets which were deadly en masse but notoriously inaccurate as individual weapons. Rifles, by contrast, were slower to fire, but, thanks to special loading techniques and grooved barrels, much more
accurate and possessed of a much longer range.

 *  Events in Sweden make for a complex story, but, in brief, they culminated in Moore being forced to flee Stockholm in disguise.

 *  The men concerned did not escape scot-free, however: lacking any means of support, many eventually appear to have enlisted in the volunteer units then being raised in Oporto by the British adventurer, Sir Robert Wilson (see
below).

 *  The benefit of this measure to the Palafoxists is clear. With all new recruits channelled through Palafox’s own army, it would be possible for the Aragonese commander to deny fresh men to his rivals whilst at the same time
building up his own power base.

===== FILE: OEBPS/xhtml/footnote1.xhtml =====
The Peninsular War

 *  In fairness to the Junta it should be noted that the generals were just as eager for battle as the politicians, as witness a meeting of the Junta’s advisory military commission on 4 March 1809 at which it was specifically
resolved that the chief object of Spanish strategy should be the immediate liberation of Madrid.

 *  There is some doubt here. Oman says that Cuesta’s infantry was arrayed four deep, but this is certainly an error: in all armies but the British, the basic formation was a line three deep, whilst deeper formations were always
multiples of this figure (in the pre-war Spanish army, for example, a column of companies had twelve ranks). However, such eyewitness accounts as we have do not help beyond implying that the infantry fought in line. But a line
six deep does at least make sense. It could have been formed without difficulty (by forming each company at double depth), fitted the needs of the moment, and even tallies with Oman’s four-deep claim if it is assumed that he was
working from a source that referred to lines of double depth and forgot that in the Spanish service this would have produced two more ranks than it would have done in Wellington’s army.

 *  Some clarification is needed here. Junot had returned to Spain with the corps he had led to Portugal. This force, however, had since been amalgamated with Soult’s corps, whereupon Junot had been given the corps of Marshal
Moncey, who had been sacked on account of the slow pace of operations at Zaragoza.