

 cacique

 Landowner or other local notable possessed of sufficient economic power to be able to exert political influence in his locality.

 campesino

 Literally ‘countryman’; in practice, a generic term used to describe all those sectors of the rural lower classes engaged in agriculture.

 carta de seguridad

 Identity card.

 cédula de crédito

 Credit bond issued under Joseph Bonaparte.

 chancillería

 Provincial high court and council of administration.

 chasseur

 French light cavalryman (also soldier of a centre company of a French light infantry regiment).

 cheval de frise

 Beam embedded with sword blades used in the defence of breaches.

 comisario regio

 Royal commissioner.

 consejo

 Council (usually administrative).

 contribución única

 Literally ‘the single contribution’; new system of taxation introduced by the cortes of Cádiz.

 convento

 Friary, convent, monastery.

 corregidor

 City governor-cum-chief magistrate appointed by monarch prior to 1808 (Portuguese: corregedor-mór ).

 corso terrestre

 Literally ‘land piracy’, term used to describe irregular resistance to the French.

 cortejo

 Male lover-cum-companion of a married woman.

 cortes

 Parliament.

 cortijo

 Complex of barns, granaries and living accommodation that constituted the headquarters of a large landed estate.

 costumbrismo

 Nineteenth-century Spanish literary tendency associated with political conservatism.

 criollo

 American-born inhabitant of Spanish America, of European origins.

 cruzada

 Literally ‘crusade’; generally a guerrilla band composed entirely of clerics, but occasionally a people’s militia.

 desamortización

 Expropriation and/or sale of entailed land.

 deseado, el

 Literally ‘the desired’; patriotic nickname for Fernando VII.

 diputación

 Provincial assembly or elected council.

 doceañista

 Literally ‘man of 1812’; a veteran of the cortes of Cádiz.

 electores de partido

 District electors.

 estado llano

 Commonalty; third estate.

 fanega

 Unit of measurement equivalent to fifty-five litres.

 fernandino

 Supporter of Fernando VII.

 fidalgo

 Portuguese nobleman.

 forero

 Galician rentier.

 forista

 Galician landlord.

 fuero militar

 Privileges enjoyed by Bourbon officer corps prior to 1808.

 fueros

 Traditional rights/privileges/codes of justice (adjectival form: foral ).

 gaditano

 Inhabitant of/pertaining to Cádiz.

 garrochista

 Andalusian lance-wielding cattle herder.

 generalato

 All army officers of the rank of brigadier and above.

 generalísimo

 Supreme commander; in contemporary Spanish usage the term implied control not just of the army’s operations, but also of its organisation and discipline.

 godoyista

 Client of Godoy.

 grandeza

 Aristocracy.

 guerrilla, la

 Literally ‘little war’; the guerrilla struggle against the French.

 guerrillero

 Guerrilla.

 hijodalgo ( hijosdalgo, plural)

 Literally ‘son of someone’; i.e. a member of the nobility.

 huerta

 Irrigated area devoted to fruit, market gardening, etc.