

 *  Castaños was at this time nominally commander of both the Fifth and the Sixth Army, as well as Captain General of the regions in which they were based. In practice, the Captain Generalcy of Galicia was filled by Castaños’
deputy, Mahy, who in turn delegated field operations to a General Santocildes.

 *  This is unlikely to be clear to modern readers. The units referred to were entitled companías patriótas (i.e. companies of patriots).

 *  The Marqués del Palacio, titular commander of the Second Army.

 *  As we have already seen, Napoleon employed large numbers of German, Polish and Italian forces in the Peninsular. It was the contention of some observers that reliance on such troops was one of the factors in the French
downfall, but in practice the foreign auxiliaries seem to have performed no worse than their French counterparts.

 *  As Foreign Secretary, the marquess had been a firm – even over-enthusiastic – supporter of the Peninsular War, and as such had played a key role in getting the extra support that had enabled Wellington to carry the war across
the frontier. But, if Wellington had any fears at all about this crisis, whose most notable result was the replacement of Wellesley by Castlereagh, he need not have worried: the Cabinet was strengthened in the Commons and proved
positively fawning in its efforts to retain his goodwill and assure him of its support.

 *  The most prominent examples were Charles Doyle, who had been permitted to establish a training depot on the Isla de León; Phillip Roche, who was allowed to take over a division of the Third Army; and Samuel Whittingham, who
was given an independent division that had been organised in Mallorca. As the troops of Roche and Whittingham were paid and supplied by the British, they generally proved fairly reliable.

 *  Sanctioned by a series of vengeful decrees, the witch-hunt that followed the Allied advance was grim indeed: in Madrid alone arrests numbered at least 150, whilst there were many executions. However, according to the British,
many of those concerned had been secretly helping Wellington as spies.

 *  In brief, the beaten commander was the brother of Enrique O’Donnell, who had been rewarded for his exploits in Catalonia with the title Conde del Abisbal and a place in the Infantado regency. Believed to be a supporter of
their cause, his presence had reassured the liberals, but press criticism of the battle led him to resign in outrage. Meanwhile, Villavicencio was also on the verge of quitting and Infantado thoroughly discredited.

 *  As Wellington had written earlier in the year, ‘I consider troops that are neither fed, nor paid, nor disciplined (and they cannot be disciplined … unless they are paid and fed) to be dangerous only to themselves when
collected in large bodies … I never will voluntarily command troops who cannot and will not obey, and therefore I am not desirous of having anything to say to the command of the Spanish troops till I shall see the means provided
for their food and pay, and till I shall be certain that the regular issue of these has been the effect of introducing among them a regular system of subordination and discipline.’ 20