

 *  British accounts generally refer to the latter as Sebastiani’s division. However, although originally commanded by that officer, by the time of Talavera it was led by General Rey, Sebastiani having been elevated to the
command of the corps of which it was a part.

 *  A force which is not to be confused with either Junot’s original corps, which had been split up in December 1808, or the troops now commanded by Suchet, this was a new unit that was mostly composed of fresh battalions raised
from men conscripted in the spring of 1809 for service against Austria.

 *  The decision to retain the historic names of many old provinces in this fashion was none the less a significant concession. In France the départements boasted such names as Loire Inférieure, Manche and Bouches du Rhône.

 *  It is also worth pointing out that substantial numbers of Spanish prisoners of war escaped imprisonment in France by volunteering for service with the grande armée in the specially formed Régiment du Joseph-Napoléon.

 *  A reference to Thiébault’s predecessor, Jean D’Armagnac, whom he accuses of brutality, corruption and incompetence.

 *  The Spanish word ‘guerrilla’ actually means ‘little war’ rather than ‘irregular fighter’, and it is in fact customary to use the phrase la guerrilla as a generic term for the whole of the irregular struggle. The guerrillas
themselves are more properly termed guerrilleros.

 *  Also worth noting here is the fate of Perena’s men. Active throughout 1809 and into 1810, the band disappeared following the capture of its chief base of Lérida in May of the latter year.

 *  A reference to the leader of the guerrilla war waged by the Iberians against the Roman empire.

 *  Espoz y Mina’s rank has been the subject of much confusion among anglophone historians. The literal translation of mariscal de campo is ‘marshal of the field’, but this did not equate to ‘field marshal’. In the Spanish
service the equivalent of field marshal was capitán general. Mariscal de campo ranking two steps below this, the correct translation is therefore major-general.

 *  Conservative historians have always maintained that on the very last day of its existence the Junta Central issued orders for the election of a second chamber, only for liberal elements in the administration to take advantage
of the general confusion to suppress the document. However, the fact that the assembly was unicameral did not make it democratic. At best, the vote went only to heads of families, but the decree of 1 January 1810 was so vague
that in many areas everyone was excluded except vecinos (roughly, ‘citizens’; broadly speaking, owner-occupiers who paid a certain level of taxation). Add to this the many opportunities that existed for pressure of one sort or
another, and it will be agreed that the cortes ’ democratic credentials are open to serious question.

 *  Like ‘guerrilla’, ‘liberal’ (in its political sense) is a term that entered the English language during the Peninsular War, los liberales being the nickname applied to the most progressive group in the cortes on account of
their frequent use of the words ‘free’ and ‘freedom’ ( liberar ; libertad ).