

 Turning now to my fellow labourers in the Napoleonic vineyard, as so often before, I must first pay tribute to my dear friend and esteemed colleague, Rory Muir, who, despite years of exposure to my manuscripts, has once again
lavished every possible care and attention upon the current work, whilst at the same time enlightening me on many aspects of the subject with which I am less familiar than I should be. Amongst those who have also at various times
been kind enough to provide me with encouragement and good counsel have been Neville Thompson, Alan Forrest, Jeremy Black and Michael Broers, whilst from Don Horward of Florida State University I have received, in addition, much
hospitality in the course of numerous visits to the Consortium on Revolutionary Europe and the Strozier Library at Tallahassee. Two young historians in Spain who have proved of great assistance to me are Arsenio García Fuertes
and Jorge Sánchez Fernández, but much kindness has also been shown me by Vittorio Scotti-Douglas, Paddy Griffith, John Tone, Alicia Laspra Rodríguez, Estebán Canales, Lluis Roura, Antonio Moliner Prada, Franciso Carantoña
Alvarez, Antonio Carrasco Alvarez and Herminio Lafoz Rabaza. From them all I have learned a great deal, whilst it is a source of considerable regret to me that considerations of space have made it impossible to pay adequate
tribute not only to their work, but also to that of the many other scholars whose writings have enriched this study. Needless to say, however, such errors as may have crept into its pages are the fault of no one but the author
(at all events they most certainly are not the fault of the copy-editor, Sue Dickinson, who has been the very model of efficiency, patience and dedication).

 Good to me though all my friends in the Napoleonic field have been, it is to my family that my debts are greatest. To my mother and my father, though he is now dead, I still owe more than I can say (including, not least, the
copy of Oman presented me as a graduation gift!). But, above all, my beloved wife, Alison, remains the great woman behind this not very great man, and Andrew, Helen, Maria-Isabel, and Bernadette, whose arrival enlivened the last
chapters of this work, are the dearest, best and most loving of children. To you all, un abrazo.

 Liverpool, 23 March 2001.

 NOTE ON THE TEXT

 All translations of Spanish and French sources quoted in the text are the author’s own.

===== FILE: OEBPS/xhtml/title.xhtml =====
The Peninsular War