

 Last but not least, a review of the historiography of the Peninsular War suggests that there is a strong need to pull military and political treatments of the subject together. If historians such as Oman were woefully ignorant
of the political context of battle, so historians such as Artola have been just as ignorant of the military context of reform. War and politics go hand in hand. Britain’s predominance, for example, cannot be understood without a
discussion of the nature of the uprising of 1808, the response of the Iberian peoples to the war against Napoleon, and the social and economic background against which the struggle took place. Yet, by the same token, neither the
triumph of the Spanish liberals, nor the restoration of Spanish absolutism, nor the place of the Peninsular War in the history of Iberia as a whole, can be understood without a grasp of the conflict’s battles and campaigns, or,
more broadly, the military experience which they afforded. Self-evident as all this is, the failure of generations of historians to blend the military with the civil may seem somewhat surprising. In fact, it was all but
inevitable. Deeply hostile to, and, indeed, prejudiced against, military history, the academic community has on the whole surrendered its study to writers who lack the sources, languages, institutional support and intellectual
formation necessary to see beyond the smoke and dust of battle. In recent years things have begun to change – a succession of academics have, for example, transformed our knowledge of ‘people’s war’ in France – but with regard to
Spain and Portugal the process has as yet hardly begun. Hence the need for a new general history. Whether this will be any more successful than its predecessors is, however, another matter.

 *   *   *

 A book that has been some twenty years in the making incurs far more debts of gratitude than any author can ever repay, not least to the various sources of research funding – in this case, the British Academy, the Leverhulme
Trust, the University of Southampton and the University of Liverpool – that have made it possible. At the head of the list of people, perhaps, comes Simon Winder and Ellah Allfrey at Penguin, without whom it would not have seen
the light of day, and Martin Blinkhorn at the University of Lancaster, who first pointed me in the direction of the Peninsular War. Great encouragement, too, came from Christopher Allmand, whose years as my Head of Department at
the University of Liverpool were marked by much patience and sympathy. The staff of all the libraries and archives at which I have worked have without exception been kindness and helpfulness themselves, but in this context I
should particularly like to thank Christopher Woolgar, Karen Robson, Sue Donnelly and Mary Cockerill at the University of Southampton; Ian Jackson at the University of Liverpool; Nieves Sánchez Hidalgo, Estrella
Valentín-Fernández Fernández, Inmaculada Martín Múñoz, Amalia Jiménez Morales, Ana Sanz Robles, Jesus Rodríguez Izquierdo, Maribel Baenas Pérez, Paqui Mateo Macias, and Yolanda Ruiz Estebán at the Biblioteca Nacional; and, above
all, the gracious Pilar Bravo Lledó of the Archivo Histórico Nacional, whose matchless generosity at a moment of total technological failure not only far surpassed the call of duty, but stands as the very acme of the warmth that
I have experienced at the hands of so many people in Spain. Others whom I should like to remember in this context include Leopoldo Stampa of the Ministerio de Asuntos Exteriores, Marta Requena, Concha Bocos, Rafael Agasagasti,
William and Sonia Chislett, Emilio de Castro, Dolores Schilling, Jo Klepka, Enrique Mardones, Fernando Fanjul, Antonia Rodríguez, Jesus Maroto, José María Espinosa de los Monteros, Santiago Nistal and Maribel Piqueras. Also
worthy of note here are my fellow researchers, Azucena Pédraz Marcos, Nuria Carmena Jiménez, Leonor Hernández Enviz, Grahame Harrison, Susan Lord, Mari-Cruz de Carlos (to whom I am indebted not just for much friendship and
hospitality, but for her assistance with the illustrations) and Satoko Nakajima, whose company has provided me with insight and relaxation alike. And, in the publishing world, I owe many thanks to Lionel Leventhal of Greenhill
Books, not just for his great personal generosity, but also for his sterling efforts to bring the memoir literature of the Napoleonic Age to the attention of a wider public.