

Traducción: Vicent Sanz Rozalén

## Information

Type

Research Article

Information

[International Review of Social History](https://www.cambridge.org/core/journals/international-review-of-social-history)
,
[Volume 64](https://www.cambridge.org/core/journals/international-review-of-social-history/volume/BAB566D4FAE0B0AD00089F16A9781860)
,
[Issue 3](https://www.cambridge.org/core/journals/international-review-of-social-history/issue/BD0E4E59819663E0517DADA515392F47) , December 2019 , pp. 389 - 414

DOI: [https://doi.org/10.1017/S0020859019000531 [Opens in a new window]](https://doi.org/10.1017/S0020859019000531)

Copyright

Copyright © 2019 Internationaal Instituut voor Sociale Geschiedenis

When the frigate Prompte arrived at Spithead from the Caribbean in summer 1797, its crew were unaware of the mutinies at Spithead and the Nore, which had lately paralyzed two British fleets. As usual when entering a friendly port, the sailors assembled to give three cheers for the local flagship. Before these cheers could be given, however, a lieutenant in a nearby boat shouted that “You are not to cheer at all”, as “there has been too much cheering already”.Footnote 1 The cause of this excessive cheering was the practice, shared by the mutineers at Spithead and the Nore, of starting and ending each day with three cheers as a sign that all was well. Cheering was an established naval tradition: a means of instilling loyalty and shared identity in a ship's company. Captain Bligh, of Bounty fame, for example, recorded in his log for the Director that on 6 March 1797 he “cheered ship on receiving the intelligence of Sir John Jervis’ victory over the Spaniards”.Footnote 2 The act of cheering was, therefore, associated with victory, loyalty, and duty. The Spithead and Nore mutineers deliberately appropriated this element of naval custom and repurposed it to serve as a reaffirming symbol of their own control and unity. This was just one of many examples of the conscious adaptation of well-established naval conventions to serve mutineer ends during the 1797 fleet mutinies. At the same time, the mutineers supplemented these familiar naval symbols with structures and practices of their own. The result was a hybrid system through which the mutineers combined the appropriation of symbols of naval order with the creation of their own hierarchies and structures of authority. The interface between these actions: contrasting in style but mutually supporting in practice, are the subject of this article.

While the standard work on the 1797 fleet mutinies remains Conrad Gill's 1913 book, the most recent contribution, edited by Ann Coats and Philip MacDougall, effectively challenged persistent myths of the mutinies, such as the claim that they were failed revolutions instigated by seditious groups like the London Corresponding Society (LCS) or United Irishmen (UI).Footnote 3 Coats calculated that Irish-born sailors composed, on average, approximately one quarter of the crews at Spithead, with the majority long-established naval sailors. Among the mutineer leaders, the proportion was just four Irish out of thirty-three. No correlation was found between the proportion of a crew that was Irish and revolutionary activity.Footnote 4 Instead, the chief mutineers were overwhelmingly drawn from the most skilled and experienced sailors. Of the thirty-three Spithead Delegates,Footnote 5 twenty were petty officers and thirteen were able seamen. They had been on board their ships for between two and four years. At the Nore, the mutineer leaders of the Director were seven petty officers, a skilled seaman, a marine NCO, and a marine private.Footnote 6 This suggests that, contrary to suggestions by some contemporaries and histories, newly enrolled agitators did not exercise a leading role in the mutinies.Footnote 7