

Though Spithead and the Nore are seen as a climax of the 1790s wave of mutinies, they were also the origin of their own wave of mutinies.Footnote 16 From there, mutinies spread to the Mediterranean, the Caribbean, the Cape of Good Hope, and into the Indian Ocean. Sailors in these cases often knew about the mutinies at Spithead and the Nore before their officers, highlighting the effectiveness and reach of lower-deck communication and organization networks. Though these outbreaks shared similarities, they also took on a local flavour. Nicole Ulrich has shown that the mutinies at the Cape were a combination of autonomous sailors’ traditions of resistance and the local context of disputed labour relations. Sailors began to look beyond expressions of the rights of “freeborn Englishmen” and, in turn, inspired later protests at the Cape.Footnote 17 This demonstrates the need to study sailors’ actions in a context wider than that of their own ship: a prescient point also for Spithead and the Nore. In that case, however, though the naval crews were thoroughly international, their actions and rhetoric remained closely connected to ideas of traditional rights.Footnote 18 As such, the mutinies deserve a prominent position in histories of the age of revolutions, of the revolutionary Atlantic, and of popular protest and resistance. At Spithead and the Nore terrestrial trends, such as moral economy and counter-theatre, met the global phenomenon of maritime radicalism. The result was a complex and effective structure of order that drew freely on both traditions.

Despite this growing corpus of work, important questions remain about the ways in which the mutinous seamen were able to maintain unity of purpose and action. There was not unanimity; the mutinous fleets were home to many different sentiments, some of which were, from first to last, hostile to the mutiny. Nevertheless, the presence of factions with diverse and sometimes diametrically antagonistic views makes it even more surprising that the mutineers were able to maintain cohesion to the extent and for the duration that they did. Consequently, no understanding of the fleet mutinies of 1797 can be complete without addressing the practical measures taken by the leading mutineers to encourage compliance, tacit though it might have been, and to extend the lifespan of their new regime.

Steven Pfaff, Michael Hechter, and Katie Corcoran used a quantitative sociological approach to argue that coercion was the crucial factor in explaining the duration of the Nore mutiny. Mutineer leaders controlled the spread of information, monitored opponents, and issued “credible threats” of punishment. While this study offers new perspectives on the mutiny, it is argued here that their conclusion that “sometimes ideology or the bonds of community can attain the requisite compliance, but not at the Nore” assigns too little significance to social and community factors on board Royal Navy warships.Footnote 19 Social and community factors had a significant impact on the actions of mutinous sailors and made it possible to prolong the mutinies. In particular, the leading mutineers were able to assert the legitimacy of their enterprise through the usurpation and adaptation of rituals and symbols associated with authority in combination with their own power structures. They thereby presented their cause as just and laid claim to obedience and loyalty. This is not to deny that coercive elements were present during the fleet mutinies; they undoubtedly were. Instead, it should be emphasized that these formed just one strand of a broader and more nuanced strategy to foster unity.