

The Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty, led by the First Lord, Earl Spencer, travelled to Portsmouth on 17 April to negotiate with the mutineers and quickly admitted the justice of most of their demands. They conceded higher pay, larger food rations, and pay for sick seamen. Howe also agreed that some unpopular officers would be transferred. Legislation was set in motion and a royal pardon prepared, but, while parliamentary process took its slow course, some mutineers became worried and suspicious. It was at this time, on 7 May, that the only violent incident of the Spithead mutiny took place. Four mutineers were killed on board the London when Vice Admiral Colpoys attempted to confine sailors below decks. The mutinous crew showed notable restraint and did not take retribution. On 15 May, the Spithead mutiny ended in cordial celebrations as Admiral Howe informed each ship that their demands had been met. Howe then hosted a lively banquet for the leading mutineers in the spirit of reconciliation, and no one was punished for their involvement in the mutiny.

On 12 May, shortly before the end of the mutiny at Spithead, a supporting mutiny broke out at the mouth of the Thames. The small, rag-tag Nore fleet was less important to national security than the Channel Fleet and the Admiralty assumed that news of the Spithead settlement would quickly restore order. This was not the case. In form the Nore mutiny was very similar to that at Spithead with the expulsion of officers, the continuation of daily routine, the use of red flags, and the appointment of delegates for each ship. Having just granted most of the demands of one mutinous fleet, the government and Admiralty worried that further concessions would fatally compromise their command. The just grievances of the Spithead fleet had been redressed to the benefit of all sailors. Consequently, a dim view was taken of the Nore mutiny, particularly when new demands were presented. Its figurehead, Richard Parker, did not help matters by acting disrespectfully to his superiors and styling himself “President” of the mutinous fleet.

Determined not to negotiate, and conscious that the small Nore fleet posed little threat, the Admiralty decided to wait out the crisis.Footnote 31 Slowly, the mutiny began to fall apart and several ships abandoned the mutineer cause. On 30 May, however, the bulk of the North Sea Fleet (eleven ships of the line) deserted Admiral Duncan and joined the Nore mutiny.Footnote 32 The authorities cut off supplies to the ships involved, but this backfired when the mutineers blockaded the Thames to confiscate provisions from passing ships. This action decisively turned public opinion against the mutineers and strengthened the government's hand, as expressed in newspapers across the political divide.Footnote 33 The political opposition were torn between a desire to use the mutinies to criticize the government for mismanagement, and the fear of appearing complicit in the dangerous and potentially seditious mutinies.Footnote 34 With no sign of compromise or negotiation, ships again began to defect from the mutiny on 12 June, and the last two ships surrendered three days later. Courts martial followed and approximately twenty-eight mutineer ringleaders were executed. However, on 11 October, many of the same ships and crews decisively defeated the Dutch fleet at the battle of Camperdown, which did much to restore the reputation of the navy.Footnote 35 Both mutinies displayed impressive and sustained coordination across a large population of sailors on many ships. Seeking to protect and continue their regime, it is not surprising that the mutineers turned to some of the well-known theatrical rituals that had helped to secure the rule of officers with persistent success. These they combined with traditions and innovations of their own to create a hybrid system. The legitimacy of the old order was wedded to a more egalitarian ethos consistent with maritime conventions of behaviour and resistance.