

## THE 1797 FLEET MUTINIES

The 1797 fleet mutinies at Spithead and the Nore directly involved approximately 30,000 men, immobilized the two fleets responsible for defending Britain at the height of wartime, and were played out within easy sight of the civilian population on shore.Footnote 26 The presence of the mutinous fleets in the Solent and at the mouth of the Thames struck at the twin pillars of the British “fiscal-naval state”: the naval establishment centred on Portsmouth and the maritime trade of London.Footnote 27 The fleet mutinies rank among the largest popular protests in eighteenth-century Britain. By taking control of warships, the mutineers possessed themselves of the most technologically advanced, powerful, and expensive weapons at the disposal of any eighteenth-century state. Order was generally maintained and there was little violence. Because of the inaccessibility of ships, the mutinies became perhaps the longest-sustained coherent protest in eighteenth-century Britain as each lasted for a month. As one military observer noted, even “if the whole inhabitants of Britain were soldiers […] they are unequal to the task of subduing a single ship of the line”.Footnote 28 Edmund Burke, meanwhile, believed that the mutinies rendered Britain so vulnerable that “our only hope is in a submission to the enemy […] [on] any terms”.Footnote 29

For contemporaries, the mutinies were unprecedented and terrifying, yet they ended relatively peacefully. Short of a coup d’état or defection (which they did not intend), the mutineers knew that the naval authorities would eventually regain control and life would continue much as before. They were also aware that their rhetoric and use of symbols would significantly affect the public perceptions of their cause. This likely encouraged moderation in their demands and behaviour. Correspondingly, the Admiralty appreciated the value of the mutinous men and ships, and so their own actions were shaped by the desire to return to normality with as little delay and ill-feeling as possible.

The mutinies began on 16 April 1797, when the sailors of the Channel Fleet refused to sail from Spithead. Six weeks earlier, the discontented sailors had sent petitions for redress of grievances to the veteran Admiral Howe.Footnote 30 Having received no answer, the sailors determined not to put to sea until their demands had been considered. The red flag of defiance was raised, delegates were appointed to speak for each ship, and unpopular officers were confined or sent on shore. Sixteen ships of the line, Britain's first line of defence mounting over 1,300 guns and home to over 11,000 men, refused to budge. Life nevertheless continued in an orderly fashion for four weeks. Daily routines were maintained and the orders of remaining officers were obeyed, apart from weighing anchor. Leading mutineers, such as Valentine Joyce, made it clear that they remained loyal to king and country, but would refuse to leave Spithead until their demands to higher pay, more food, and that of a higher quality, were granted. The mutineers let it be known that they would immediately sail to confront an enemy fleet if one put to sea, and they refused to allow frigates and smaller ships to join the demonstration lest trade should suffer from lack of escorts.