

In several respects, the appropriation and adaptation of symbols and rituals of naval order by the mutinous sailors was consistent with the “counter-theatre” identified by John Brewer as a common element of collective protest on shore. Counter-theatre involved the appropriation of symbols and rituals associated with one particular message or meaning, and their subversion and application to another. These acts were considered especially impudent and worthy of severe punishment.Footnote 20 Through devices like the Riot Act, the British state made some provision for legitimate protest and this was also true of the navy,Footnote 21 but mutiny and inversion of symbols of order were beyond the pale. Theoretically, a sailor who ignored a command to scrub the decks would be guilty of simple disobedience because he defied the system of order on board. If that sailor were to force an officer to scrub the decks, this would be counter-theatre because it represents a public inversion of social norms in support of a rival system of order.Footnote 22 The level of attention devoted to such inversions in courts martial and naval officers’ accounts reveals the concern of the naval authorities.Footnote 23 There were legitimate grounds to fear that the mutineer usurpation of authoritative symbols undermined the rituals on which naval officers rested their day to day rule by consent.Footnote 24

The transcripts of the courts martial that followed the Nore mutiny provide an excellent source for a detailed study of mutineer counter-theatre. The words spoken by each individual were carefully recorded, and Mr Gurney, the scribe of the House of Commons, was employed for that purpose.Footnote 25 Courts martial where men spoke with their lives in the balance provide imperfect sources, but also the best available for revealing day to day life during the mutinies, as well as a rare opportunity to read the words of ordinary sailors. Crucially, many of the best examples of mutineer appropriation of symbols of order come from the statements, questions, and defences of the mutineers themselves. The officers leading the questioning expended much court time and energy in investigations of counter-theatrical behaviour. It should be noted that, as no trials followed the Spithead mutiny, court martial records are only available for the Nore mutiny. Nevertheless, multiple other sources including personal accounts, captains’, masters’, and lieutenants’ logs allow for easy comparison of the emblematic and theatrical features present at Spithead and the Nore. Due to their notable commonalities of practice in this regard, the instances of allegorical disobedience observed at these two mutinies will be discussed together throughout this article.

The forms taken by mutineer disobedience are discussed in turn. At each stage their interaction with alternative mutineer practices and power structures will be evaluated in order to convey the complexity of the mutineer regimes, and their propensity to persuasion rather than coercion. Section one briefly describes the trajectory of the 1797 fleet mutinies. In section two, the simultaneous mutineer usurpation of the spaces and roles of officers will be examined. The complex relationship between the two provided legitimising elements of continuity which complemented the newly imposed mutineer hierarchical structures. This usurpation of space and role necessarily involved taking up the practical measures of rule: notably law, order, and administration. Consequently, section three is concerned with the ways in which mutineer rule was constituted and manifested through a hybrid approach that combined the appropriation of symbols of officers’ authority with existing sailors’ traditions and practices. This will require an analysis of mutineer use of the written word and judicial process. The article will conclude by presenting a direct comparison of the Spithead and Nore mutinies in order to reconcile their marked commonalities of counter-theatrical behaviour to their dramatically different outcomes.