

It is difficult to gauge the extent to which the mutinies influenced or inspired reformist or revolutionary societies on shore, but two points can be made. Firstly, the Spithead and Nore mutinies resulted in an increased recognition of the significance of oaths. Magistrates Graham and Williams recognized the seriousness with which the sailors obeyed their oaths long after the mutiny was over, and even suggested the introduction of an oath of loyalty for the navy.Footnote 89 Whether these oaths were inspired by illicit groups on shore, or, in turn, inspired such groups to expand their own use of oaths is unclear. Oaths were, however, an established part of the eighteenth-century military code of conduct, particularly among prisoners of war of officer rank.Footnote 90 It is possible, therefore, that the mutineer oaths represented another appropriation by sailors of a recognized practice among their superiors. What is known is that Parliament feared one or more of these possibilities sufficiently to abolish “Unlawful Oaths” soon after the mutinies.Footnote 91

Secondly, Marianne Elliott argued that the fleet mutinies awoke the UI to the possibility of infiltrating and disabling the navy. Elliott concluded that “intermittent United participation in other mutinies over the next few years suggest a continuous policy of United infiltration long after the Nore and Spithead mutinies had collapsed”.Footnote 92 The mutinies might, therefore, have inspired an opportunistic and imitative (though unsuccessful) new strategy among seditious societies on shore.

## CONCLUSION

A distinction has often been drawn between the respectable Spithead mutiny and the “more serious” or “uglier” Nore mutiny.Footnote 93 These views are substantiated by some actions of the Nore mutineers, which went far beyond those of their predecessors at Spithead, such as blockading the Thames, humiliating the officers of the Montagu, and firing upon Royal Navy ships. However, this interpretation understates the continuities of counter-theatrical behaviour across the two mutinies: the use of spaces of authority, the creation of written rules, regular cheering, and disciplinary procedures. In addition, several elements of their new regimes drew on the same sailors’ traditions of resistance, such as the committee structure and use of petitions. Apart from the fact that the Nore mutineers did not accept the Spithead settlement but held out for greater concessions, there was little to separate the beginnings of the two mutinies.

Therefore, far from being used as evidence of a greater nascent radicalism among the Nore mutineers, their increasingly drastic actions could, with equal plausibility, suggest growing desperation and frustration at the lack of progress. Whereas the Spithead mutiny fell into a cycle of negotiation and compromise, the Nore degenerated into a cycle of distrust and escalation. This interpretation would explain how the initial practical similarities between the two mutinies: their use of a hybrid system combining the usurpation of established facets of naval order and new systems of power, were taken to increasingly desperate extents at the Nore. Faced with Admiralty intransigence, the Nore mutineers exceeded the restraint of the Spithead mutiny; the committee was supplemented by a “President”, officers were not just confined but humiliated, and the Thames was blockaded in order to acquire much-needed supplies. While one must be sensitive to the distinct paths and denouements taken by the Spithead and Nore mutinies, studying the two together is justified by the desire to understand their similarities and differences.