

The social inversions achieved during the Spithead and Nore mutinies should not be mistaken for anarchy. The mutineers did not remove the images of naval order; they used them, supplemented by others of their own, in support of their new regime through the creation of unity and rule by theatre. In this way the mutineers diverged from their counterparts in the French and Dutch navies, who, reflecting their revolutionary context, were more willing to fully replace the traditional markers of naval authority. Coercion was present during the mutinies, but it was not sufficient to explain their duration.

As the mutineers used rather than subverted the symbols of naval order, the determination of the naval authorities to punish this behaviour might appear contradictory, but this is based on a false distinction. For the mutineers to use these instruments of naval authority was to subvert them, as they were not theirs to use. Though the threat of coercive violence was omnipresent, the rule of officers generally rested on ritual, ceremonial, and symbols. The realization that sailors had not only recognized these strategies but used them for their own ends, even if predominantly marked by moderation and continuity, was dangerous and discomforting. If a magician reveals his tricks, the magic is lost. When the mutineers usurped the methods of naval authority, some, with Burke, wondered if the spell of naval discipline was broken forever.

The forms of counter-theatre employed by the mutineers offer direct parallels to similar practices during crowd action on shore. Referring to protests on land in eighteenth-century Britain, Brewer argued that crowds used symbols, flags, and music (all present in mutineer parades at Sheerness) to support their cause, and that these represented a “‘belief system’ made concrete”.Footnote 94 Often, symbols of authority were repurposed to aid the protesters. It was common, for example, for crowds to “execute” effigies while observing “the proper forms and customs of a public execution”.Footnote 95 These effigies were sometimes incarcerated in the local jail overnight and then paraded to the usual place of execution in the same wagon used to convey condemned criminals. These wagons were also occasionally employed by crowds to evict unpopular local officials from a parish, thereby emphasising the public disdain for the individual concerned, and their consequent ostracism from the community.Footnote 96 The similarities are clear between these practices and the expulsion of officers from Montagu via small boat while the Rogue's March was played. The officers were conveyed away in the same craft and to the same tune as convicted criminals going to be flogged round the fleet.

At the same time, the mutineers did not simply step straight into the vacated shoes of their officers. Instead they complemented their own new power structure using several familiar theatrical representations of naval discipline. The result was a hybrid marriage of lower-deck traditions of organization to the reassuring, legitimising, and unifying continuity of established elements of naval order. This composite strategy, with mutineer counter-theatre at its heart, was instrumental to the scale and duration of the 1797 fleet mutinies, and to their overwhelming reliance on persuasion rather than coercion.