

National Maritime Museum, Greenwich, London, Royal United Service Institution Collection. Object ID: PAG8535.

Through their usurpation of spaces of authority, the mutineers of Spithead and the Nore simultaneously adopted some of the roles of officers. This can be interpreted as an attempt to encourage unity and obedience on the part of the crew by claiming legitimacy for their cause. Amidst the uncertainties of mutiny, a string of orders issued, as usual, from the quarterdeck and captain's cabin might have represented a comforting and persuasive continuity, which could bind crews together without need for coercion. This inverted continuity would have been all the more important because it was, in several respects, only superficial: a façade blurring the lines between the power structure of the officers, and that of the mutineers, which was notably different and reflected their own traditions. Stabilities of form helped to obscure disparities of substance; the result was a hybrid system that subordinated the officers’ legitimising theatre of order to mutineer ends. Mutineer power structures were very different to those of officers, but their hegemony continued to be expressed in familiar ways.

## MUTINEER EXPRESSIONS OF AUTHORITY

The orders emanating from the captains’ cabins of Queen Charlotte and Sandwich might have been normal, but the source of those orders was anything but. Whereas such orders had previously come from the captain, those of the mutineers originated with a committee of elected delegates drawn from the most skilled and experienced seamen of each ship, who could command the respect of their peers.Footnote 55 The mutineer committees of Spithead and the Nore met to draw up rules, formulate policy, conduct negotiations, and liaise between ships. As such, they were crucial to the duration of the mutinies and the maintenance of unity across the fleet. Their new-born egalitarian and discussion-based system was significantly different to the rigid hierarchy of the officers.

These mechanisms of representative democracy, and particularly the use of the term “delegate”, led some in government to fear seditious associations between the mutineers, the LCS, UI, or even the French. In response, London magistrate Aaron Graham was sent to Spithead and then, with Daniel Williams, to the Nore to find “evidence or information […] to show any connection that may have taken place between the mutinies & the London Corresponding Society” or such groups.Footnote 56 Thompson, Elliott, and Wells have claimed that the course of the mutinies was shaped by links to seditious groups and individuals, but this appears doubtful from contemporary evidence,Footnote 57 and the report by Graham and Williams concluded “that no such connexion or communication ever did exist”.Footnote 58 This suggests that we must be sensitive to other possible origins of these practices including sailors’ own autonomous tradition of resistance.

Though hierarchically divided by skill, sailors were a clearly defined occupational group with many shared interests, whose survival and success depended on cooperation and coordination. As such, it is not surprising that they repeatedly proved highly effective at organizing protests. The lower decks had hierarchies of their own based on skill and experience, but there were also egalitarian elements. For example, crews were divided into “messes” of six to eight men who cooked and ate together. In most cases, these messes were self-selecting, proud, and tight-knit communities. While sailors tended to mess with men who shared similar jobs, significantly they chose with whom to associate.Footnote 59