

It was within character, therefore, for sailors to select who would speak for them during a mutiny.Footnote 60 Furthermore, the collective responsibility inherent in a committee structure is also reminiscent of established traditions of sailors’ protest: notably the “round robin” petition. This involved a statement of grievances with the names of the crew signed in concentric rings so that it would be impossible to identify and punish ringleaders.Footnote 61 Nor does the committee system itself appear to have been without maritime precedent. In 1768, a strike by merchant sailors paralysed the port of London. A band of forty leading sailors from many ships toured the quays checking terms of service on each ship. Appointed leaders met to draft petitions and demands.Footnote 62 The climax of the strike came when a well-disciplined parade of over 10,000 sailors, with “several ringleaders with Boatswain's whistles interspersed throughout”, which “regulated the whole body”, marched on Parliament to present their petition.Footnote 63 Organization, collective responsibility, and discipline were established elements of sailors’ tradition of protest decades before the 1797 fleet mutinies.

The committee-based power structure of the mutineers was very different to the hierarchical disciplinary regime of the officers. At the Nore, however, the picture was more complicated. There, several mutineers are known to have usurped titles of rank. John Davis, for example, signed orders with the words “John Davis, Captain of the Sandwich” and exercised day-to-day control of the ship.Footnote 64 It should be noted, however, that the roles of such mutineer “captains” were complementary to the committee system, as they administered individual ships while the committee determined overall fleet policy. The legitimising device and theatrical continuity of written orders signed by a mutineer “captain” was combined with a committee-based system of rule drawn, it could be argued, from sailors’ traditions of resistance. The two were mutually supporting: the reassuring and unifying theatrical emblems of the rule of officers, and more egalitarian structures of mutineer order. Similarly, leading mutineer George Gainer appropriated the role of an officer when he was observed giving orders, but also the perks attendant on that role when, according to a proud letter home, he persuaded the crew of Sandwich “to pipe the side for me and pay me as much respect as if I was the Admiral of the Ship”.Footnote 65 Once again, familiar rituals were used to ornament a radically new regime.

The same could not be said of the adoption by Richard Parker of the title “President”.Footnote 66 Unlike the title “captain”, there could be no suggestion of continuity of naval practice here. “President” held connotations of republicanism and particularly of the United States. This might suggest elements of “Atlantic” radicalism of the kind suggested by Frykman but does not necessarily convey revolutionary intent.Footnote 67