

## USURPING THE SPACE AND ROLE OF OFFICERS

In the cramped confines of eighteenth-century warships, physical space was correlated with power. The captain inhabited his spacious “great cabin”, lit by the magnificent stern windows. Commissioned officers had cramped private cabins that opened onto their shared wardroom. They also enjoyed the right to walk the “quarterdeck”: simultaneously a physical space and a collective term for the senior men who held that privilege. The humble status of the sailors was also described in spatial terms; they were said to be “before the mast” (quartered forward of the central main mast), and collectively referred to as the “lower decks”. For the majority of the crew their only official allocation of space was fourteen inches of width in which to sling their hammock.Footnote 36 Recent work by Elin Jones, however, has done much to emphasize the power of imagined spaces and boundaries among sailors.Footnote 37 The location of many of these shipboard spaces is shown in Figure 1.

Figure 1.

This model depicts the third-rate ship of the line HMS Mars, which took part in the Spithead mutiny. Its basic layout is typical of the warships involved in the 1797 fleet mutinies. The quarterdeck is visible between the two rear masts, while the forecastle is the area forward of the ship's boats stowed in the centre of the model. The raised platform aft of the quarterdeck is the poop deck, with the captain's great cabin located directly below it, accessed from the quarterdeck.

National Maritime Museum, Greenwich, London, Royal United Service Institution Collection. Object ID: SLR0577.

During the Spithead and Nore mutinies this carefully stratified demarcation of physical space was turned on its head. The mobility of officers was restricted, while mutinous sailors gave orders from the great cabin and quarterdeck. For a sailor to walk on the quarterdeck, unless to perform an essential function, was not merely to trespass; it was to lay claim to a status and legitimate power that were far above his station. Therefore, by issuing orders from that location, the mutineer simultaneously put himself in the physical place of officers and assumed their authoritative role. These appropriations allowed for continuity of familiar social practice, but in support of a different regime. Such continuity asserted the legitimacy of the mutineer cause and involved an appeal to unity: a theatrical attempt at persuasion rather than coercion.

The association between the quarterdeck and authority was a powerful one, and this was not lost on the prosecutors at the Nore courts martial. When witness John Lapthorne was asked who had commanded Leopard during the mutiny, he responded by naming those sailors who had “walked the quarterdeck”.Footnote 38 This link between the occupation of an officer's space and pretentions to usurp his jurisdiction was directly explored during the trials. Witness Edward Dawson implicated William Vance of Monmouth for giving orders from the quarterdeck. The court interjected to clarify, “Do you mean to say that he gave those orders in the same manner as the officers were accustomed to when they had the command?”.Footnote 39 Similarly, when Joseph Borley related that Thomas Linnes had issued orders throughout the mutiny, the court asked if these had been delivered in the manner “of an officer giving orders proceeding from himself?”Footnote 40 Vance and Linnes were both sentenced to hang, not least for their temerarious presumption in usurping both the place and role of officers.