

There was little violent coercion during the Spithead mutiny. Yardropes were displayed threateningly, but reports that a sailor had been hanged by the mutineers were quickly found to be false.Footnote 73 Reports that four men had been hanged at the Nore were similarly unfounded.Footnote 74 At the Nore several sailors and petty officers were flogged or ducked in the sea for opposing the mutiny, but these were few in number.Footnote 75 Ships that deserted the mutiny were fired upon, but the fact that no fatalities and little damage resulted from this (even when Repulse ran aground during its escape and remained a sitting duck for ninety minutes), suggests that there was no fatal intent.Footnote 76 As under the officers, coercion was just one part of a broader strategy within which violence was a last resort. Familiar theatrical aspects of judicial authority were instead deployed to persuade the crews to remain obedient.

A telling example of mutineer judicial subversion occurred on the Mars at Spithead where delegates met to court martial Samuel Nelson. He was accused of spreading false rumours that the ship's company were unsatisfied with the Admiralty and should defect to France with their ship. The record of this trial shows that the mutineers who sat as judges deliberately adopted the same form and structure as official courts martial. The case for the prosecution was heard first, followed by the defence and character statements. As at official naval courts martial the “judges” were listed, notes taken, witnesses heard and cross-examined. According to regular procedure, the court was cleared while the judges deliberated. The form of the judicial proceedings by the Spithead mutineers can be seen, therefore, as a legitimizing but satirising continuity of official process. The sentence of the Mars mutineers was thoroughly ordinary; the prisoner would “receive at the gangway 24 lashes upon his bare back with a cat of nine tails and then [be] put into irons”.

The charge for which Nelson suffered, however, was surely unprecedented in naval law. His seditious utterings, tried by officers, would have earned punishment for “incitement to mutiny”. Before the mutineers, he was charged with “betraying the confidence entrusted him by his shipmates” and “breaking the oath of fidelity”.Footnote 77 Under normal circumstances, a sailor's duty was to the monarch, so his offences were against the King. In this case, the mutineers considered the legitimate source of sovereignty to rest in the collective will of the ship's company; Nelson's offence was a breach of trust and an affront to the entire crew. As such, Nelson's trial shows an incongruous but effective marriage of official naval process to a different value system. This mutineer trial was reminiscent of the improvised mock-court plays among bored pirates described by Rediker, with the crucial difference that the mutineers were in earnest and their sentence was actually carried out.Footnote 78

Similarly, one of the first acts of the mutineers at both Spithead and the Nore was to compose and circulate written rules.Footnote 79 These functioned like the articles of war, and supplemented rather than replaced those articles.Footnote 80 Before a punishment on board Montagu, prominent mutineer John Durack declared that he “wanted the articles of war for they were going to punish Jack Hanford”.Footnote 81 On the one hand, it is not surprising that the mutineers used and mimicked the familiar in seeking to shore up their regime. At the same time, the comparable form and function of the articles of war and the mutineer “laws” might suggest that the mutineers hoped to extend the legitimacy of the former to the latter. This practice contrasts with those of the revolutionary French and Batavian navies. There, the new regimes redrafted the naval legal code along more egalitarian lines, granted trial by jury, and reduced the punitive power of captains.Footnote 82 It is revealing that the British mutineers adopted and supplemented the articles of war rather than replacing them, seemingly accepting their inherent legitimacy.