

On the other hand, the fact that both “Captain” Davis and “President” Parker made use of the written word as an expression of authority suggests a syncretism of usurped naval theatre and mutineer organization. At the Nore, mutineers ordered the captain of Montagu, the Earl of Northesk, to carry a petition and list of demands to London. They issued written instructions which began “You are hereby commanded and directed […]”.Footnote 68 These were the words with which the Admiralty traditionally began their written orders to naval captains. Through their choice of words, the mutineers usurped the jurisdiction of the Admiralty by subverting, not only the medium, but the very words of Admiralty commands. Here, mutineer leaders claimed the role of the supreme naval authority by adopting legitimising cultural practices.

The security and privacy of written correspondence were denied to officers, as demonstrated when Captain Parr of Standard wrote to the Admiralty to explain events on board his ship. The mutineers insisted that he read the letter to the ship's company. The subsequent court martial heard that “Upon Captain Parr's reaching the words ‘His Majesty's Ship Standard, under my command’”, the crew laughed and said, “that he could not call the ship under his command”. Parr returned to his desk and redrafted the letter to omit “under my command”. Only then would the crew permit its postage.Footnote 69 Parr's writing was subjected to public scrutiny and censorship previously unimaginable for correspondence between a captain and his superiors at the Admiralty. By removing the privacy of that correspondence, the leading mutineers had undermined its power. Once aired in public, the captain's writing lost its force, which the mutineers appropriated to themselves.

Sailors were used to many details of their lives being regularly recorded in authoritative official documents: pay books, muster books, and punishments in captains’ logs, and Watt and Hawkins have recently shown that literacy rates on the lower decks were higher than has often been assumed.Footnote 70 It appears likely, therefore, that the mutineers were not impressed by the act of writing itself, but by an association between the written word and authority. The signature of a President on some of these orders marked this as a very different regime to its predecessor. The fact, however, that they chose established forms of expressing their command is consistent with a syncretism of traditional naval theatre and rival mutineer power structures drawn from an autonomous sailors’ written tradition epitomized by petitions and round robins.

A similar syncretism is visible in the mutineer assumption of punitive power. This was not a purely coercive measure, but also a persuasive one: representative of their new-found hegemony, but also of their responsibility, the justice of their cause, and the virtue of their intentions. The reeved yardropes (nooses) present on most ships undoubtedly exercised a coercive function.Footnote 71 The fact, however, that they were only used to hang effigies challenges their usefulness as a deterrent. While several sailors at the Nore were flogged for lack of dedication to the mutineer cause, more were punished in both mutinies for drunkenness and disrespecting officers.Footnote 72 Both represent continuity rather than change. This was no anarchy or simple coercive regime. Crucially, the new order borrowed the style and methods of the old to claim legitimacy and minimize need for punishment.