

As a meeting place, and as a centre for discussion and resistance, the forecastle fulfilled a similar function to that identified by E.P. Thompson for the marketplace. These were centres of civic pride and identity, of association and discussion. Significantly, they could accommodate large crowds. As Thompson recognized, crowds created a form of anonymity where the individual ceased to be distinguishable from the whole. Footnote 49 The same occurred during the fleet mutinies, which subsequently made life difficult for prosecutors, who struggled to identify ringleaders. Witnesses, such as Thomas Dove, often found it impossible to distinguish individuals among “the general voice” of the ship's crew.Footnote 50 The forecastle proved its worth as a traditional site of seamen's resistance and paralleled patterns of popular protest on shore.

If the forecastle acted like a market square, then the terrestrial equivalent of the quarterdeck was a court bench or church pulpit. It was from there that the captain would address his crew, perform divine service, and read the articles of war (naval law code). These two symmetrical spaces, one forward, the other aft, served different strata of naval society. When mutiny began with a congregation on the forecastle which surged aft to secure the quarterdeck, it was equivalent to a market crowd taking possession of a church, courthouse, or guildhall.

The mutineer appropriation of space extended to the inner sanctum of the captain's cabin. If there were some practical advantages to mutineers of occupying the quarterdeck, the appropriation of the captain's cabin was iconoclastic. The outrage that this inspired in officers is clear from their court testimony. Lieutenant Flatt of Sandwich recalled that mutineer committee meetings were at first held “in the starboard bay and afterwards in the great cabin”.Footnote 51 The ship's surgeon, John Snipe, described with horror his appearance before the committee “then assembled in Captain Mosse's cabin”, which Snipe considered “the most daring piece of outrage that I had ever seen in my life”.Footnote 52 Most reflective of a sense of the maritime world turned upside down was the testimony of Lieutenant Forbes. When asked if the mutineers moved between the revered places “just as they pleased”, Forbes replied “Constantly. Day after day they went from the quarterdeck down the aft ladder into the captain's cabin […] without any restriction or control”.Footnote 53 This practice was common to both the Spithead and Nore mutinies. At the former, the captain's cabin of Queen Charlotte played host to the meetings of the thirty-three delegates of the mutinous fleet, while Sandwich performed the equivalent function of ‘parliament ship’ at the Nore.Footnote 54 For a contemporary imaginary visualization of such a meeting of delegates, see Figure 2.

Figure 2.

This contemporary caricature by Isaac Cruikshank depicts the hybrid nature of the fleet mutinies, with mutinous sailors combining a usurpation of the space and role of officers with their own egalitarian committee system. The mutineers sit in the great cabin (shown by the stern windows) while a senior officer watches humbled and peripheral. The overall impression is of the naval order (along with Britannia on the rear wall) inverted. The presence of Whig politicians under the table and John Thelwall (far right) of the London Corresponding Society reflects unwarranted fears about the causes of the mutinies.