

A more carnivalesque approach to justice was evident at the Nore. Officers ejected from Montagu were subjected to a histrionic form of public humiliation. Five officers were escorted off the ship and into a rowing boat to take them on shore. On the way, however, they were brought alongside Director, where they were obliged to stand up and receive the derision of its crew while one was tarred and feathered. All the while, a drummer played “The Rogue's March”.Footnote 83 This tune was traditionally heard during punishments, such as when a sailor was flogged round the fleet.Footnote 84 It was, therefore, associated with the shame of punishment and the punitive order of officers. The application of “The Rogue's March” to humiliate officers was a social inversion that effectively tied mutinous crews together in a festival atmosphere of irreverent levity and conveyed the power of the mutineer regime. Here was an opportunity to enjoy the spectacle of their humbled superiors and revel in the reversal of authority. Simultaneously, the use of familiar elements of naval discipline conveyed an impression of continuity and legitimacy for the mutineers as they exercised their control in the same ways as the officers before them. This mimicry employed naval punitive rituals cheek by jowl with new practices; the traditional “Rogue's March” was played not over an official flogging, but a carnivalesque tarring and feathering. Dutch officers were subjected to similar forms of humiliation when the Batavian Cape Squadron surrendered to the British in 1796, but there the similarities end, as this mutiny was a violently bloody affair, unlike Spithead and the Nore.Footnote 85

The effectiveness of mutineer counter-theatre was observed with concern by naval officers. Perhaps the clearest expression of this unease was a letter sent from the senior officers who composed the panel of judges at the Nore courts martial. They asked the government legal officers if the existing articles of war adequately covered those whose main crime was “assuming the station of officers”.Footnote 86 The realization that the officers’ theatrical tools of order could prove equally effective when applied to an unlawful and potentially dangerous cause was disquieting and appeared to threaten future naval discipline. Edmund Burke, for example, commented that “as to our Navy, that has already perished with its discipline forever”.Footnote 87

Mutineer counter-theatre could be interpreted as an insulting affront to king and officers, and so represented radicalism rather than continuity. This, however, appears irreconcilable with the nature of the mutineer goals (concerned with terms of service, not demanding peace or a change of government), and the respect that was generally shown to officers throughout. Furthermore, at the Nore, the mutineers fired salutes to commemorate the Restoration of Charles II (29 May), and to mark the King's Birthday (4 June).Footnote 88 Here, the mutineers’ used traditional symbolic expressions to communicate their continued loyalty.