

At Spithead, too, it was observed that the mutineers administered the ships from the quarterdeck. On board London, for example, mutiny began with an assembly of sailors taking possession of the quarterdeck.Footnote 41 It is important to note that there were practical as well as symbolic advantages to the occupation of the quarterdeck by mutineers. Firstly, as a raised platform towards the rear of the vessel, the quarterdeck had a commanding view of the length of the ship and its environs.Footnote 42 This had obvious advantages for observation and the maintenance of order: both for officers and for the mutineer regime. The same practical advantages, however, were also true of the forecastle, which was much more strongly associated with lower deck culture.Footnote 43 Secondly, the quarterdeck was home to the ship's helm, which cemented that space's status as the centre of command and navigation. The occupation of the quarterdeck by mutineers might therefore be interpreted as a defensive move to protect their own control of the vessel. On the other hand, once involved in the Spithead and Nore mutinies, little movement of ships took place. In the context of mutinies in port, it would be much more important to guard the anchor cables located forward and below decks. These points tend, therefore, to suggest that the practical reasons for occupying the quarterdeck, while important, were not sufficient to explain mutineer behaviour. Furthermore, while there were some practical benefits to the mutineer usurpation of the quarterdeck, the same cannot be said of the captain's cabin, the appropriation of which represented a potent statement, but provided little tangible advantage. As such, the mutineer occupation of spaces of authority appears to have been motivated, at least in part, by symbolic considerations.

To dissect an example in detail, it must be recalled that the significance of the quarterdeck came, at root, from the king. The senior officers held the King's commission and it was on the quarterdeck that they exercised that commission by giving orders. The quarterdeck was exalted because it was the place where the King's appointed deputies administered ‘His Majesty's Ship’. In practice, however, social convention bred a reverence for the deck itself: a place of honour where few could tread.Footnote 44 The mutineers who gave orders from the quarterdeck did not speak with the voice or sovereignty of the king, but it seems they hoped that their commands would carry more weight thereby. Men like Lapthorne willingly accepted this. Taking possession of the quarterdeck and maintaining its function conveyed clear messages; firstly, the officers’ regime had been replaced, secondly, the new order spoke with power and legitimacy just like the old and, thirdly, it had the same expectations of loyalty and obedience.

While possessing themselves of the quarterdeck, the mutineers also maintained the autonomous maritime tradition that cast the forecastle as a rival space to the quarterdeck: a place of congregation and discussion for sailors symmetrical to that of the officers.Footnote 45 Mutiny typically began with an assembly of the crew on the forecastle “in a great body”, which then rushed aft to the quarterdeck where mutineers assumed control of the ship.Footnote 46 In some cases, forecastle guns were turned to face the quarterdeck as an added threat to the officers.Footnote 47 The forecastle thereby represented an assertion of the collective strength and identity of the ship's crew: an imperium in imperio for the humble sailors to set against its privileged counterpart. Crucially, the forecastle was a meeting place out of earshot of officers on the quarterdeck; at Spithead, when mutineer delegates arrived on board the London they “were hurried to the forecastle […] where they might be more free from the restraint the presence of their officers had hitherto imposed on them”.Footnote 48