

The military program was rounded off with the building of new fortifications. The old forts of Tabrīz, Ardabīl, and Ḵoy were modernized (Jahāngīr Mīrzā, pp. 186f.; Hedāyat, X, pp. 64f.; Morier, Second Journey, p. 305; Johnson, p. 221). A new fort based on European design was constructed at ʿAbbāsābād on the Aras, securing the crossing south of Nakhchevan; an Armenian church on the site was converted into a powder magazine (ʿAbd-al-Razzāq, pp. 417f; Brydges, Mission, p. 283; Morier, Second Journey, p. 311). The fort of Ḵorāsān Dašt, where the Qarāǰadāḡ flows into the Aras, was also intended to guard the frontier (Jahāngīr Mīrzā, p. 188). From 1819 English engineers supervised the building of Top Qaḷʿa on Lake Urmia, with its arsenal and barracks (Ker Porter, II, pp. 571-73, 580).

Administration, economic activity, building. The Russo-Persian wars swallowed up large sums of money. Since British subsidies were inadequate and the shah refused funds (because officials in Tehran considered Azarbaijan a rich province), ʿAbbās Mīrzā tried to solve his difficulties by drawing up a detailed fiscal register. The traditional intelligence service of the Islamic state was reactivated, a ruznāma-nevīs being appointed in every town to transmit information (Hedāyat,, X, pp. 65f.). The custom of allowing men to buy their way into government service was abolished (Morier, Second Journey, p. 240). Mīrzā Abu’l-Qāsem, son of Mīrzā Bozorg, concerned himself with introducing a suitable script and a simple epistolary style.

While the traditional forms were maintained in the bureaucracy and the financial sector owing to the dearth of officials suitable for effecting reforms, a handful of industrial projects (their products to supply mostly army needs) got under way with European help. Examples are arsenals, the exploration of copper deposits, a smelter near Ahar, weaving mills, and other industrial plants. In Ḵoy a woolen mill was built on a European design. An attempt to set up a paper mill failed, as did the scheme for a mine at Qaplān Kūh (Hedāyat, X, p. 65; Morier, Journey, p. 283; Johnson, pp. 213f.; Ker Porter, II, pp. 506f.; Gabriel, Erforschung, p. 144). About 1816, Armenians from Istanbul founded a printing house in Tabrīz (Browne, Lit. Hist. Persia IV, p. 155). Little was done to improve the traveler’s lot. A caravansery was established on the Ṣāyen pass between Ardabīl and Sarāb (Hedāyat, X, pp. 261, 281).

The prince’s building activity was modest. Tabrīz received a maydān surrounded by the barracks—the only presentable building in Tabrīz, according to Kinneir. About 1818-19 a modest palace (dār al-emāra) was under construction, and qanāt s were built outside the city. The prince ordered his officials to build houses. He also built two country seats, Bāḡ-e Šemāl and Bāḡ-e Ṣafā, with pavilions, avenues, and rotundas in European style. (The latter estate is described in detail in Fowler, I, pp. 77-84.) But Ker Porter commented, “The prince does not aim as much at adorning the city, as to strengthen it” (I, p. 227; cf. Hedāyat, X, p. 65; Morier, Journey, p. 279; Kinneir, p. 151; Kotzebue, p. 101). Ḵoy, where the crown prince spent his summers, became, in Ker Porter’s opinion (II, p. 500), “one of the most flourishing places in the kingdom.” On the plain of Ūǰān, southeast of Tabrīz, ʿAbbās Mīrzā had a small hunting lodge, which Kotzebue visited and described (p. 115; see Morier, Second Journey, p. 209; Johnson, pp. 208f.; Ker Porter, I, p. 258).