

Education, cultural interests. The crown prince was apparently carefully educated in the traditional manner—a process which must have been decisively influenced by Mīrzā Bozorg. The prince knew the works of the Persian historians. His favorite reading matter was Ferdawsī’s Šāhnāma (Morier, Second Journey, p. 216). He was otherwise not particularly fond of poetry, although, as fashion demanded, Tabrīz had its court poets (Ṣabūr of Kāšān, d. 1228/1813, and Forūḡ, son of the more famous Ṣabā; see Rypka, Iran. Lit., p. 312). The palaces in Tabrīz and Ūǰān were adorned with numerous pictures, including portraits of Napoleon, the czar, and Sultan Selīm III (Belanger, p. 301; Kotzebue, p. 115). The last named, a ruler favorably disposed toward Western reforms, was secretly emulated by the crown prince. Under ʿAbbās Mīrzā, thanks to its geographical position and the political situation, Tabrīz became the gateway for entry of modern influences. Western ideas entered first via Turkey and Russia, later through the French and British embassies in Azarbaijan. ʿAbbās Mīrzā seized on these eagerly and turned Tabrīz into the “focal point of the westernization of his country” (Gabriel, Erforschung, p. 144). He never tired of expanding his intellectual horizons. He was conversant with European history (Morier, Journey, p. 284), probably from the works of Turkish writers, and was very well informed about political events in Europe (Ker Porter, I, pp. 254f.). Although he could not understand English (Morier, Second Journey, p. 216; cf. Kotzebue, p. 105), he had a small library of English books, including the Encyclopaedia Britannica. A Frenchman, L’Ami, who had come to Iran with Gardane in 1807, was entrusted with setting up a modern school system (ʿAbd-al-Razzāq, pp. 321f., 373f.). After the establishment of diplomatic relations with Great Britain, the crown prince became deeply receptive to English influences. He sent young men to study in England; some items of his personal equipage, including a coach used in the summer, were of English manufacture (Ker Porter, I, p. 260; idem, II, p. 507; Kotzebue, pp. 100, 104). His map collection, however, came from Istanbul printing house (Morier, Journey, p. 283; idem, Second Journey, p. 216), another identification of his unfamiliarity with Western languages.

Military reforms. The confrontation with the Russians, whose armies had modern equipment and were organized on modern principles, rendered urgent a reform of the Persian army. Iran found itself in a predicament similar to that which had faced the Ottoman empire since the early 18th century. In 1804 ʿAbbās Mīrzā went to war in a coat of Mongolian mail from the royal treasures (Fasāʾī, p. 252; tr. Busse, p. 108)—no doubt partly for reasons of symbolism. Even then he realized that the Persian army was no match for Russian tactics and weapons, and he began to train his troops along European lines (neẓām-e ǰadīd). From Ottoman sources he gained a knowledge of Western military theory. Practical training was given, at first, by Russian deserters or prisoners of war who entered the crown prince’s service. This practice was reinforced when, in the wake of the European wars of liberation, unreliable units which had fought in France were transferred to the Caucasian front. In 1819 Russian deserters made up an entire regiment of 800 men (Ker Porter, II, pp. 582, 588). From 1807, French instructors were also engaged in Tabrīz; but, after the break with France, British officers formed the majority in the training program. Later, after the British presence in Azarbaijan had been severely reduced in deference to Russian interests, Italians (Sicilians), Poles, and others sought employment and reward in the prince’s service. Henry Lindsay (Bethune), who had built up the artillery, departed in 1821. Subsequently Fraser and Johnson criticized the poor condition of the artillery, the shortage of ammunition, and the practice of calling up troops for only short periods (Fraser, Khorasan, p. 228; Johnson, pp. 212, 214). For instruction, Ottoman, but also French and Russian (Morier, Journey, p. 283), texts were used. L’Ami directed the first military academy in Iran (Brydges, Mission, pp. 312f.); and arsenals, cannon foundries, and powder mills were set up in Tabrīz (Kotzebue, p. 100). Since ʿAbbās Mīrzā was convinced that Persian cavalry were equal to any challenge, he confined his reforms to the artillery and infantry (Kotzebue, p. 99). In 1808-09 there were 6,000 infantry trained on European principles; in 1817, 8,000; in 1831, 12,000, plus 1,200 artillerymen and one cavalry regiment—in all, ten battalions of Persians and two of Russians (Morier, Journey, p. 216; Kotzebue, p. 93; Stocqweeler, p. 164).