

The First Russo-Persian War (1804-13). The immediate objective of the Russian advance on Ganǰa was to secure the southern frontier of Georgia, a province of Russian empire since 1801. According to Persian sources, Mortażā-qolī Khan, brother and rival of Āqā Moḥammad Shah, after deserting to the Russians, persuaded them to invade territory claimed by Iran (ʿAbd-al-Razzāq, p. 186). With the appearance of the Russians in the frontier area, Iran was drawn into the crosscurrents of European power politics. Ambassadors from Great Britain, France, and Russia, having arrived in Tabrīz, faced the difficult task of adapting their own initiatives in Iran to the rapid fluctuation of policy in Europe. The tribal princes between the Aras and the Caucasus proved unreliable allies for both Iran and Russia, as were the Ottoman governors of Van. The crown prince sought repeatedly to take Erevan (with the nearby fortress of Pambak). Šošā, Ganǰa (Elizabetpol/Korovabad ), Nakhchevan, and Šīrvān. Between 1804 and 1810 he launched annual campaigns across the Aras, although the war was as good as over by 1806, for Russia had by then gained a firm hold on the land north of the Aras, with the exception of Erevan (Dahncke, p. 82). In 1810 the Russians offered Iran a peace treaty which would have restored the occupied territory to her and left her a free hand in eastern Anatolia and Mesopotamia, but these terms were rejected (ʿAbd-al-Razzāq, pp. 391f.). In 1225/1810-11 Nakhchevan was once again the crown prince’s objective. Finally, in 1813, as a result of Napoleon’s campaign in Russia and at British instigation, the peace of Golestān in Šīrvān was signed. Under its terms Iran had to cede Darband, Baku, and Šīrvān—that is, all territory north of the Ḵorāsān.

During the war ʿAbbās Mīrzā had secured the support of the Ottoman governor of Van. According to a Persian account (ʿAbd-al-Razzāq, pp. 316-34), this assistance was the reason for a Russian advance on Qars. When the Greek war of independence broke out in 1821, Moḥammad-ʿAlī Mīrzā (governor of Kermānšāh, brother and rival of the crown prince) seized the opportunity to invade Mesopotamia and reached the very walls of Baghdad. But ʿAbbās Mīrzā did not remain idle. Jealous of his brother’s success (so Fraser maintains, Caspian Sea, p. 312), he campaigned in the Kurdish territory of Bitlīs and Mūš, west of Lake Van. The war was ended by the peace of Erzerum, which restored the frontiers of 1639; again ʿAbbās Mīrzā and Iran had been denied success by the intervention of the European powers.

The Second Russo-Persian war (1826-28). The peace of Golestān had not led to any final settlement. Neither Russia nor ʿAbbās Mīrzā, however, was responsible for fomenting fresh hostilities. The ʿolamāʾ proclaimed a ǰehād against Russia, as they had done in 1810; presumably court circles in Tehran and Tabrīz had some role in this affair. The shah and the crown prince had no choice but to acquiesce. In September, 1826, ʿAbbās Mīrzā advanced toward Ganǰa via Šošā; but he suffered such a severe defeat that the outcome of the war was never thereafter in doubt. Persian military actions the following year were of little consequence. ʿAbbās Mīrzā scored minor victories at Üč Kilise (Echmiadzin) and Nakhchevan (Fasāʾī, IX, p. 273, tr. Busse, p. 181), but the Russians penetrated into Azarbaijan and captured Tabrīz on 3 Rabīʿ II 1243/24 October 1827. By the terms of the peace of Torkmāṇčāy (q.v.), a town southeast of Tabrīz, all land north of the Aras was ceded to Russia; the frontier thus determined still remains in effect. In a sequel to the war, ʿAbbās Mīrzā displayed his diplomatic skills to the full. When the Russian envoy Griboedov was assassinated in Tehran (8 February 1829), the crown prince declared a three-day period of public mourning and sent his son, Ḵosrow Mīrzā , on a mission of atonement to Russia. (It was at first planned to send the crown prince himself). He did not agree to Paskievich’s proposal that he support the Russian campaign against the Turks (see Paskievich’s letter to ʿAbbās Mīrzā in Fonton, pp. 405-08; nevertheless, court circles in Tehran regarded him with disapproval as pro-Russian (Fraser, Koordistan II, pp. 46f.).