

<<<PDFPAGE 26>>>
8 Patriots, Partisans and Land Pirates 
trouble broke out at the village of Gaon as a direct response to French 
marauding, whilst in Calabria the first major incident of the insurrection 
arose out of a fight that broke out on 22 March 1806 in the town of 
Soveria between a group of French soldiers out requisitioning horses 
and a crowd of inhabitants led by one Carmine Caliguri.'* 
What is striking about all these examples, however, is the complete 
absence of any political or military preparation. In Spain the insurrection 
of 1808 was preceded by a long period of radicalization in which the 
populace was prepared for revolt against the legitimate authorities — for 
in the absence of French troops this was what insurrection necessarily 
amounted to — by a torrent of propaganda against the hated royal 
favourite, Manuel de Godoy. Equally, in the Tyrol anno neun was the 
fruit of a plot that was hatched by a group of notables who had 
succeeded in gaining the support of elements ofthe court in Vienna. In 
Italy, however, there was no such political context: indeed, efforts to 
raise the calabresi in defence of the régime of Ferdinand IV and Maria 
Carolina as the French moved in at the beginning of 1806 had proved 
an abject failure: far from fighting for the Bourbons, the populace 
rather turned on the British, Russian and Neapolitan soldiers deployed 
in Calabria and pillaged their supply trains. On occasion, indeed, they 
even actively supported the French. In the words of Roger de Damas, 
the French émigré general who commanded the bulk of King Ferdinand’s 
army: 
The people of the country, who had always been represented to the 
prince as ready to shed their last drop of blood for their sovereigns, 
had not furnished a single man to fight for them. In the hope of saving 
themselves from pillage by giving the French a good reception they 
hid all their provisions from us...I had to occupy the town of 
Cosenza... where I was absolutely obliged to give my troops twenty- 
four hours of rest. I found it necessary to protect myself from the 
inhabitants as much as from the enemy. The principal townsfolk 
came to assure me that if I should make any attempt at resistance 
under 
their 
walls, 
the people would 
join the French 
against 
me...When I left the town...the inhabitants carried out their 
threats and formed themselves into a body of infantry to support the 
enemy’s advanced guard of cavalry in attacking my rearguard. 
It will be objected here that in 1799 Cardinal Ruffo had succeed in stir- 
ring up a great revolt in Calabria against the short-lived Parthenopaean 
Republic. But in reality this is a most problematic example. Ruffo 

<<<PDFPAGE 27>>>
Charles J. Esdaile 
9 
landed at Reggio at the very time that the French, who were being 
hard pressed in the north by the Austrians, evacuated their Neapolitan 
conquests, and the result, as Damas observed, was that ‘in all his 
peregrinations he never met a single Frenchman’.'* As the general 
continued: 
When...the gazettes reported that Cardinal Ruffo had reconquered 
the kingdom with the Calabrian masses, no sensible person, surely, 
accepted the story as anything but a newspaper tale. He began his 
expedition at a time when there was no enemy to oppose him except 
Jacobinism, the rallying word of unbridled pillage. Two poor villages 
accused a rich one of Jacobinism, whereupon the cardinal promised 
that the two should combine to pillage the third. Without seeing a 
single Frenchman he advanced from province to province till he was 
reinforced by detachments of English, Russians and Turks, who all 
landed from their ships. Thus supported, he reached Naples, whence 
the French had gone to oppose the advance of Suvorov, so he 
handed over the capital to be devastated by his acolytes.'* 
In this account there is, or so one suspects, both personal jealousy and 
the fear of the common people that was but natural in the mind of an 
aristocrat who had opposed the French Revolution from the very begin- 
ning. Nor was Damas the most perspicacious of men. The British officer, 
Henry Bunbury, describes him as ‘a man of pretension and address, but 
not of abilities; gallant and gay in the proud alcoves of royalty, but 
without resources or judgement in difficulties’.!° Yet British observers 
paint much the same picture, both Bunbury, who served as the Quarter- 
master General — effectively chief of staff — of the British army in Sicily, 
and Sir John Moore writing with repulsion of the insurgents they 
encountered on the mainland of southern Italy during the campaign of 
Maida as mere bandits who were interested only in pillage and never 
came forth except when the French were weak or in retreat. In the 
words of the latter, indeed, they were ‘mafia...a lawless banditti, 
enemies to all governments whatever... fit to plunder and murder, but 
much too dastardly to face an enemy’.'’ Not for nothing, then, did the 
Napoleonic Wars give us the word ‘ruffian’. 
If these views are stripped of their élitist language they provide us 
with another slant on popular resistance. We come here to the issue of 
social conflict. In Calabria collaboration was associated with the towns 
and the propertied classes, and resistance with the countryside and the 
poor,.much the same distinctions being visible in Spain and Portugal. 