

<<<PDFPAGE 22>>>
4 Patriots, Partisans and Land Pirates 
reforms introduced by the French made the law courts more accessible 
and more trusted (as Rowe shows), whilst the sale of the lands of the 
Church was administered in such a way as to assuage the sensibilities of 
the largely Catholic populace and allow the peasants to acquire a share 
of the spoils. At the same time, a reasonably favourable settlement was 
reached with regard to the thorny question of precisely which dues were 
still owed by the peasantry in the wake of emancipation, whilst a series 
of decrees against the Jews, including one which effectively annulled 
many of the debts owed to money lenders by the peasantry, further 
eased the financial situation. And, last but not least, the Rhineland’s 
agricultural products generally fetched high prices, and textiles and 
metallurgy developed apace, whilst even the behaviour of the soldiery 
was rendered somewhat more tolerable by the money that they paid for 
food, wine and other services. To quote Herbert Fisher, then: 
At the end of the Napoleonic period there were...complaints that 
the peasant had become over-prosperous, that he sat in the tap-room 
playing for gold stakes, and that no wine would content him but the 
best...It was not till 1813 that...an active spirit of discontent, 
mainly caused by military requisitions, manifested itself in the country. 
But the inhabitants had no burning desire to change their political 
allegiance, for upon the whole they had prospered under the rule of 
Napoleon.° 
The mere density of enemy troops, then, does not in itself necessarily 
explain away an absence of popular resistance. Whilst it may have been 
a factor, in the Rhineland, at least, other issues were also important. 
And even then it has to be accepted that the passivity depicted by both 
Fisher and Rowe can be exaggerated. In the 1790s the whole region was 
swarming with bandits, of whom the most famous was the infamous 
Johann Bickler or ‘Schinderhannes’, whilst on a number of occasions 
angry inhabitants rioted or attacked French soldiers. Given the important 
role played by banditry in Spain as a focus for la guerrilla, insurrection 
was therefore at least a possibility, and in 1799 anti-French feeling in 
the Rhineland reached such a pitch that, had the initial run of success 
enjoyed by the British, Russians and Austrians in the War of the Second 
Coalition continued, it is more than possible that the region would 
have risen in revolt: such at least is the opinion of Tim Blanning.° Yet if 
we look, as Rowe asks us to do, at examples where revolts did break out, 
we can see that the latter has a point. Let us take the case of Spain and 
Portugal. Thus, when insurrection broke out in 1808 neither country 

<<<PDFPAGE 23>>>
Charles J. Esdaile 
5 
had much more than a token French presence. The overall number of 
troops involved was quite impressive: there were 94 000 men in Spain 
and another 25 000 in Portugal. But the actual distribution of these 
forces reveals a different picture. In the former country the bulk of the 
French army — $6 000 men - was concentrated around Madrid, and apart 
from this the only substantial garrisons were to be found in Barcelona, 
Pamplona, San Sebastian, Burgos, Lerma, Vitoria and Figueras (to put 
this more graphically, the French zone of control consisted of no more 
than a long finger of territory extending from the French frontier at 
Hendaye along the line of the main road to Madrid, and a second such 
finger extending from the other end of the Pyrenees at Port-Bou to 
Barcelona). As for Portugal, meanwhile, 15 000 men held Lisbon and the 
mouth of the Tagus, whilst another 10 000 manned the border positions 
of Alcoutim, Elvas and Almeida. In large parts of the Iberian peninsula, 
then, there was literally not a Frenchman to be seen for hundreds of 
miles, whilst those French troops who had been seen were hardly such 
as to inspire much in the way of fear. Thus, the first ‘Army of Spain’ was 
very much a scratch force most of whose members were newly inducted 
conscripts who were so raw that they hardly knew how to load and fire 
their muskets. Organized in ad hoc provisional regiments and ‘legions of 
reserve’ and dressed in a motley collection of cast-off uniforms, they were 
not much of an advertisement for the Napoleonic military machine. 
Faced by even mildly difficult conditions, meanwhile, their bearing 
simply broke down under the strain: most of the troops dispatched to 
Lisbon in October 1807 fell out along the way, whilst those that 
managed to remain with the colours were reduced to such a state that 
they more resembled an army that had been thoroughly defeated than 
one that was engaged in a triumphal progress. Small wonder, then, that 
there appears to have been little awareness of what war against the 
emperor would entail, not to mention a credulous audience for patriotic 
writers whose stock-in-trade was a burlesque vision of a Napoleon 
gibbering with fear in his throne room at the thought of the heroism 
about to be unleashed on him.’ 
As in Iberia, so in the Tyrol. Taken from Austria after the battle of 
Austerlitz in 1805, this province had been given to Bavaria. French troops 
had been seen by the populace in all the campaigns of 1796-97, 1799 
and 1805, but in all of these the traditional Tyrolian militia — the landsturm 
and the somewhat better equipped schutzen — had acquitted themselves 
well against the forces who invaded the area from Italy, Switzerland and 
Bavaria (a fact that undoubtedly engendered the same sort of over- 
confidence that was on show in the Peninsula). At the end of 1805, 