

<<<PDFPAGE 14>>>
Preface 
The papers contained in this volume of essays were originally presented 
at a symposium held in the School of History in the University of 
Liverpool in September 2003. One of a series of bi-annual meetings 
of scholars working on the Napoleonic period, it was funded by the British 
Academy, the London branch of the Instituto de Cervantes and the 
University of Liverpool, and to all of these organizations I should like to 
extend my special thanks. To all the contributors, too, 
1am most grateful: 
they have been models of patience and hard work and have in a number of 
cases withstood the assaults of an all too heayy editorial hand with 
grace and good humour. If any of them are to be singled out, it should 
be my research assistant, Leonor Hernandez Enviz, whose diligence, 
efficiency and sense of responsibility is the foundation of much that is 
contained within these pages. Behind the scenes, meanwhile, there stand 
my Head of School, Professor Pauline Stafford; our devoted School 
Administrator, Val Fry; and, at Palgrave Macmillan, Luciana O’Flaherty 
and Daniel Bunyard. Last but not least, there come my family: without 
their support and love none of this would have ever happened. 
CHARLES ESDAILE 
Liverpool 

<<<PDFPAGE 15>>>
Acknowledgement 
With regard to the jacket picture, which is here published for the first time, 
special thanks are due to the owner, Ilustrisimo Senor Don Antonio GOmez 
de Olea Nevada, Marqués de Velascé, who has kindly given his permission 
for its reproduction, and to the latter’s nephew, Teniente Coronel Don José 
Pardo de Figueroa, of the Spanish army’s Escuela de Guerra, whose good 
offices have throughout been of inestimable help in this connection. As so 
often before, then, the author is deeply indebted to Spanish generosity. 
xi 

<<<PDFPAGE 16>>>
Notes on Contributors 
Martin Boycott-Brown was for many years an English teacher in 
northern Italy. In 2002 he published The Road to Rivoli: Napoleon’s First 
Campaign. 
Emilie Delivré is a doctoral student at the European University Institute 
in Florence. She is working on the subject of political catechism in the 
Age of Revolution, and has presented papers at a number of international 
conferences. 
“ 
Charles J. Esdaile is a Reader in History at the University of Liverpool. The 
author of numerous works on the Napoleonic period, including, 
most recently, The Peninsular War: a New History (2002), and Fighting 
Napoleon: Guerrillas, Bandits and Adventurers in Spain, 1808-14 (2004), 
he is currently working on an international history of Napoleonic 
Europe. 
Alan Forrest is a leading specialist on the French Revolution. He has 
a Chair in the Department of History at the University of York, and is the 
author of many works on the Revolution and its armies, including the 
seminal Napoleon’s Men: the Soldiers of the Revolution and Empire (2002). 
Janet Hartley has a personal chair in the Department of International 
History at the London School of Economics. Britain’s leading expert on 
Russia in the Napoleonic period, she is the author of Alexander I (1994). 
Leonor Hernandez Enviz is a freelance researcher living in Madrid. She 
is the author of various conference papers on the Peninsular War, and is 
at present preparing a doctoral thesis at the Universidad Complutense. 
Antonio Moliner Prada is a professor at the Universidad Autonoma de 
Barcelona. A leading specialist on Spain and, especially, Catalonia, in 
the Napoleonic period, his many publications include La Catalunya 
Resistent a la Dominaci6é Francesa, 
1808-1812: 
la Junta Superior de 
Catalunya (Edicions 62, 1989), La Guerra del Francés a Mallorca, 1808-1814 
(2000) and La Guerrilla en la Guerra de la Independencia (2004). 
xii 