

<<<PDFPAGE 24>>>
6 Patriots, Partisans and Land Pirates 
however, all of the French troops as such had been withdrawn. Eager to 
assimilate their new acquisition, the Bavarians duly sent a garrison in 
their place, but the Bavarian army was hardly the most impressive in 
Europe — French complaints of its indiscipline and lackadaisical attitude 
are legion — whilst the number of men in cornflower-blue who appeared 
was surprisingly small: Thus, in 1809 there were no more than 4500 
Bavarian troops in the area, and possibly as few as 3400. Even these, 
meanwhile, were confined to just five posts, of which the most important 
were Innsbruck and Brixen. As such, each of these boasted precisely two 
battalions of infantry, one squadron of cavalry and two field pieces, 
whilst the insurgents could by contrast count on the support of around 
10 500 Austrian regulars who were poised to cross the frontier on the 
outbreak of hostilities. Outside help, then, was at hand, and it may be 
that this was a feature in provoking revolt whose importance has hitherto 
been overlooked. After all, as Martin Boycott-Brown tells us, there was a 
general expectation in Pavia that an Austrian army was in the vicinity, 
whilst in Calabria, too, the presence of British troops in Sicily may have 
encouraged the local inhabitants to believe that they could strike at the 
French with impunity. And in the Peninsula, of course, Patriot procla- 
mations, newspapers and handbills were soon full of claims that the 
redcoats — a common enough sight in both Spain and Portugal in the 
eighteenth century — were on their way. 
What, though, was the populace to do until help arrived? In Portugal, 
Piedmont — the barbets discussed by Boycott-Brown are a force that 
antedated the Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars by many years, 
being irregular bands that were raised whenever war broke out with 
France to defend the passage of the Alps’ — the Tyrol and parts of Spain - 
Catalonia, the Basque provinces and Galicia — the answer was to be 
found in popular institutions that had survived intact for hundreds of 
years in the form of local homeguards. Irregular militias in which all 
men of military age were theoretically liable for service in time of war, 
these provided a means of organizing the populace for action against a 
foreign enemy as well as a legacy of practical experience: in such 
regions guerrilla warfare did not in any sense have to be invented, but 
was something that was a tried and tested response to invasion and 
conquest and, more to the point, a weapon that was ultimately in the 
hands of the state (though in 1809 the Tyrol was a temporary exception 
in this respect). As we have already seen in the case of the Tyrol, moreover, 
these forces had in many cases seen action against the French in the 
recent past, a further example here being the Basque and Catalan militias, 
both of which had been heavily involved in the Franco-Spanish conflict 

<<<PDFPAGE 25>>>
Charles J. Esdaile 
7 
of 1793-95. And, last but not least, the organization of the populace 
into such forces provided security in another sense, for men who were 
enrolled as ordenancas, barbetti, schutzen, landsturm, somatenes, migueletes 
or alarmas had some hope that combatants who fell into the hands of 
the enemy would not simply be executed as brigands. Also comforting 
was their association, at least on the whole, with regions that were 
extremely mountainous —- above all, the Alps and the Pyrenees — that 
offered irregular combatants some degree of shelter and protection, or, 
to put it more starkly still, the hope of survival. 
Was rebellion the fruit of rational calculation, then? By stressing issues 
such as the numerical strength of the occupying forces, the availability 
or otherwise of external help and the existence of traditional frameworks 
of organization and armament, we could easily come to such a conclusion. 
If we consider Italy, however, we can see that these arguments are not 
sufficient either. The French did not necessarily have a great many 
troops immediately to hand: in 1796 Napoleon only had 38 000 men 
with him when he invaded Piedmont, whilst ten years later the French 
officer put in charge of the occupation of Calabria, General Reynier, 
had a mere 10 000; equally, as Boycott-Brown tells us, rebellion broke 
out in Pavia after the main body of the French army had marched away. 
However, almost anywhere in Italy insurrection carried with it the 
threat of confrontation with the French troops. When the mountainous 
parts of the duchy of Piacenza rose in revolt in protest at the imposition 
of conscription towards the end of 1805, for example, they did so in the 
face of a French army of 50 000 men (though it is worth noting that the 
revolt coincided with the outbreak of the War of the Third Coalition, 
and, more particularly, the invasion of the neighbouring Kingdom of 
Italy by substantial Austrian forces headed by the renowned Archduke 
Charles).!° Indeed, resistance frequently arose directly out of confrontations 
between soldiers and civilians. Such situations were unusual in the rest 
of Europe: practically the only instance in which unarmed civilians 
who were not already in a state of war flung themselves directly on a 
French garrison that comes to mind is the rising of the Dos de Mayo in 
Madrid. Even this example, meanwhile, is subject to heavy qualification: 
the incident began as a species of panic thanks, above all, to the spread 
of rumours that the soldiers of Marshal Murat, who included a number 
of Muslim mamelukes whom Napoleon had brought back from Egypt, 
had launched an unprovoked attack on the inhabitants; meanwhile, the 
city itself again contained very few troops, the bulk of Murat’s men being 
encamped beyond its limits.'! In Italy, however, it is a different story. 
To take the example given us from the area of Rivoli by Boycott-Brown, 