

<<<PDFPAGE 28>>>
10 
Patriots, Partisans and Land Pirates 
In the Rhineland, Jews — a group who were perceived as having benefited 
both economically and politically from French conquest and furthermore 
were hated on account of their association with usury — were a favourite 
target of Biickler and his fellows. And, finally, in the Tyrol the revolt 
was very much a rural phenomenon, and one from which the burgers 
of Innsbruck and other towns suffered accordingly. Thus, when the 
capital was overrun by the rebels on 12 April 1809 it was systematically 
plundered and the more prosperous inhabitants subjected to a variety 
of indignities, other groups to suffer being officials — ‘peasant skinners’ 
in local parlance - and, once again, the Jews.'* Given the fact that in 
the Po valley opposition was closely linked to peasant risings of a sort 
that had long been familiar across Europe, from all this it would seem to 
follow that popular resistance was at root a social movement in which 
peasants and day labourers sought both to redress long-standing 
grievances and to escape from short-term pressures. After all, brigandage, 
especially, was at one and the same time a traditional response to rural 
poverty, a means of survival for would-be deserters and draft-evaders 
and a framework that could accommodate the hordes of malcontents 
generated by assimilation into the Napoleonic empire. But this view of 
popular resistance as a phenomenon linked to social protests is somewhat 
undermined by evidence from Spain, and, more specifically, the province 
of Navarre. Divided into the wet and mountainous montana, which 
borders on the Basque provinces and the Pyrenees, and the dry and 
undulating ribera, which borders on Aragon and Old Castile, this region 
is home to two very different systems of agriculture. Thus, the montaria 
is characterized by small farms worked by owner-occupiers and long- 
term tenants, and the ribera by great estates worked by day labourers. Of 
these two social groups the former was by Spanish standards reasonably 
prosperous and independent and the latter desperately poverty stricken 
and very much at the mercy of the landowners. Also very different was 
the position of the Church: in the montana the dominant institution 
was the small village parish ministered to by local men of peasant stock, 
whereas in the ribera it was rather the great monastery, the contrast 
being that support was contrasted with oppression. If social strife is the 
key to popular resistance, then the bulk of Navarre’s insurgents should 
logically have come from districts in the Ebro valley such as those of 
Tudela and Corella, but in reality the majority came from the north, the 
greatest centres of resistance being such areas as the isolated Pyrenean 
valleys of the Roncal and the Baztan.!” 
Very clearly, then, popular resistance — and in northern Navarre it 
is worth pointing out that what the French faced was not low-level 

<<<PDFPAGE 29>>>
Charles J. Esdaile 
11 
brigandage but a full scale war waged with a mixture of skill, energy and 
devotion — was not just linked to poverty. Yet, that said, the example of 
the Navarrese montafia is exceptional: one of the few areas of the Iberian 
peninsula where the rural populace may be said to have been genuinely 
contented with its lot - where it had, in short, positive reasons to fight 
for the ancien regime — it may fairly be contrasted with areas such as the 
Serrania de Ronda where there was great poverty but also high levels of 
resistance, even if the latter was combined with strong elements of jacquerie 
and hostility to the military authorities.2? Where, then, should this 
thought take us? Principally, it would seem, to the behaviour of the 
French themselves. Thus, in Navarre as much as in the Serrania de Ronda, 
in Piedmont as much as in Calabria, the catalyst that caused the French 
to come under attack from the civilian populace was the requisitioning 
and brutality engaged in by the French soldiers. To prove this point, let 
us examine it a little further. Thus, although both Spain and Naples 
were at war with Napoleon, and, in addition, engaged in an attempt to 
raise the entire populace against the invaders, in neither country did 
the authorities have much success so long as the French remained a dis- 
tant threat. If we take the region of Galicia as an example, we find that 
in 1808 active support for the war was almost non-existent: the number 
of patriotic volunteers soon dwindled to a trickle, whilst the battle to 
impose conscription proved long and difficult. In January 1809, however, 
all this changed. Determined to capture the army of Sir John Moore, 
which was retreating on the port of La Coruna at full speed, the French 
poured across the frontier from Leon and proceeded to wreak havoc in 
the towns and villages through which they passed. As a result, within a 
matter of days large parts of the province — again, for the most part, those 
areas that were not actually occupied by the enemy - rose in revolt.” 
It is worth noting here that the Galician revolt came as a response to 
occupation rather than invasion: when the French actually marched on 
Galicia, few of the inhabitants showed the slightest disposition to resist 
the oncoming enemy columns, whilst, in the same way, when the 
French moved into Andalucia in January 1810 attempts to meet them 
with an irregular levée en masse proved to be an embarrassing failure. 
Resistance, then, was to a certain extent linked to French policy. The 
business of requisitioning, for example, was certain to cause friction 
even if it was conducted with a modicum of restraint, and might even 
spark off a riot. But, to return to Boycott-Brown’s chapter, the example 
of Gaon shows that such events did not have to produce a guerrilla war. 
On the contrary, through the exercise of common sense and compromise 
the local French commander was able to avoid bloodshed and bring the 