

<<<PDFPAGE 20>>>
2 Patriots, Partisans and Land Pirates 
was an opportunity to review what we know of popular resistance and 
in the process to challenge a number of common suppositions. 
In this respect the most obvious place to begin is the idea that armed 
resistance on the part of the common people was in all parts of the 
Continent a likely response to French invasion. As the historical record 
shows, this was simply not so, or not, at least, if what is meant is anything 
more than a more-or-less isolated and short-lived riot or village insurrection. 
Guerrilla warfare was in almost every case the result of large scale popular 
insurrections against the French and their surrogates, and, with some 
exceptions (of which more below), such events did not occur in places 
where there were large concentrations of enemy troops. As Michael Rowe 
tells us, in the Rhineland enormous numbers of French troops were 
constantly in situe in the 1790s when the area was very much in the 
frontline of the Republic’s military campaigns, whilst even afterwards the 
fact that the area was the gateway to central Germany ensured that there 
was a constant to-ing and fro-ing of imperial bayonets. Thus, in 1805 it was 
a jumping off point for the campaign of Austerlitz; in 1808 large numbers 
of French troops marched back across it en route for the emperor’s revenge 
in Spain; in 1809 it was a base for the campaign against Austria; in 1811 
and 1813 it saw the passage of large contingents of conscripts bound for 
their deaths in Russia and Saxony; and in 1814 it was a bastion of 
Napoleonic resistance in the last ditch defence of France’s frontiers. There 
was, in fact, some low-level resistance in the 1790s — resistance that was in 
reality little more than brigandage — but by the time of the empire Trier, 
Mainz and the other Rhenish towns and cities were quiet postings where 
the soldiers of Napoleon could take their ease in safety. Grumbling took 
place aplenty, in which respect one might quote the memoirs of Heinrich 
von Brandt, a German officer serving with Napoleon’s auxiliary ‘Legion of 
the Vistula’. Thus, marching from Metz to Mayence in April 1812, he 
noticed ‘some unequivocal signs of discontent’; as he said, ‘People were 
growing tired of the continual passage of troops despite the money that 
was thus being spread along the way.’’ Nor is this surprising. Travelling 
the other way in 1808, the hussar officer, Rocca, remembered: 
After having passed the Elbe and the Weser, we reached the left bank 
of the Rhine and France. ..It was with deep sorrow and almost with 
tears in their eyes that our hussars quitted Germany... We traversed 
France as if it had been a land newly conquered and subjected to our 
arms... The soldiers of the grand army did not lose... the habit they 
had contracted 
in Germany of now and then maltreating the 
citizens... with whom they lodged.” 

<<<PDFPAGE 21>>>
Charles J. Esdaile 
3 
And yet, withal: 
The inhabitants of the towns and villages through which we passed 
suffered all patiently till the armed torrent was drained off. 
Why was this so? After all, the Rhineland’s forest and hills offered at 
least some potential for guerrilla operations, whilst, as Martin Boycott- 
Brown shows, the case of northern Italy suggests that the mere presence 
of large numbers of enemy troops was not in itself sufficient to guarantee 
acquiescence. For explanation, one might point to historical experience: 
in the seventeenth century the Rhineland had been repeatedly plagued, 
and sometimes physically devastated, by the visitations of occupying 
armies, and it may be that a habit of mind had been engendered that 
accepted such misfortunes as acts of God that were no more avoidable 
than bad harvests. To put the same point another way, experience may 
also have shown that armed opposition was in the end counter-productive — 
that it was literally easiest to choose the path of least resistance. Then, 
too, we come to the issue of leadership. As the AHRB-British Academy 
research project analysed in this study reveals, élite leadership was of 
great importance in the emergence of large scale popular resistance to 
the French. Indeed, this may have been even more the case than the 
figures given by the author and his colleague, Leonor Hernandez-Enviz, 
suggest: recent discussions with a direct descendant of the guerrilla 
commander, Francisco Longa - a man who has gone down in history as 
by origin a simple blacksmith - have revealed that the family papers 
show him to have been in reality the proprietor of a substantial iron 
foundry!* In the Rhineland, however, much of the élite seems to have 
been happy to go along with the French, whilst, in those cases where 
they were not, there was always the relatively easy option of emigration, as 
witness the case of Cleves. But what of the people themselves, or, to be 
more precise, the general populace? Under the empire the constant 
passage of French troops made their situation very unpleasant, whilst, 
as Rowe shows, the pressure of conscription was no more popular in, 
say, Trier than it was in Trieste. Yet there was more to Napoleonic rule 
than conscription and taxation. Much more work is needed on this 
issue, but so far as can be ascertained the Rhineland appears to have 
done slightly better out of the emperor than some other areas of the 
French imperium. Whereas in some states — the Grand Duchy of Warsaw, 
for example — the abolition of feudalism left the peasantry in many 
respects even worse off than they were before, in the four Rhenish 
departments the situation was rather different. Thus, the various judicial 