

<<<PDFPAGE 46>>>
28 
The Ubiquitous Brigand 
and the torment in which many of the most notorious brigands died, 
added an extra frisson to the public’s undoubted fascination with violent 
criminals.° 
The connection between brigandage and the soldiery was one that 
would have required no explanation to an eighteenth-century audience. 
They were used to the violence and debauchery of the armies that criss- 
crossed the continent during the long wars of the century, many of 
them foreign mercenaries, and would have had little cause to draw any 
significant distinction between those fighting for the French monarchy 
and those against whom they fought. Soldiers were reviled as being 
drunken, violent and — particularly when on foreign soil - gratuitously 
dangerous. Nor did they necessarily improve their behaviour when 
they ceased to be employed in the armed service of one or other of the 
European monarchs. The entry on ‘brigands’ in the Encyclopédie quite 
specifically makes a direct connection between soldiers and banditry. 
A brigand, it declares, is a ‘vagabond who makes use of military campaigns 
to plunder and rob travellers. The name is sometimes given to undisciplined 
soldiers who devastate the countries in which they are fighting and 
never stay around to fight the enemy’. Hence, the article continues, 
rather delicately stepping over contemporary examples in favour of the 
security of the exotic, ‘the Tartar hordes, and the gangs of Arabs who 
insult travellers in the Levant’. As for the origins of the term, there the 
encyclopaedists admit to a degree of uncertainty. It could come from 
the name of Burgand, who laid waste much of Guienne in the time of 
Nicholas I. Or again, they suggest, rising to their theme, it might stem 
from the reputation of a company of soldiers raised by the city of Paris 
back in 1356, and fitted out with brigandines to defend them against 
enemy archers. So heinous was their reputation with local people, and 
so serious the destruction that they caused, that they were referred to as 
brigands, and so, it was implied, the word had entered the language. In 
either case (and the article went on to propose other, similar explanations), 
the existence of a link between brigandage as a serious crime — ‘robbery 
openly carried out by force, such highway robbery and other such 
acts’ — a crime, moreover, that carried the death penalty in most 
European societies, and brigandage as the normal conduct of violent 
and lecherous soldiers, had been firmly established in the minds of 
their readers.’ 
That link was still understood by those who lived through the Revo- 
lutionary and Napoleonic Wars, since the huge armies that were 
recruited by all the main belligerents inevitably contained their quota 
of criminals and ne’er-do-wells, raised from among those who sought 

<<<PDFPAGE 47>>>
Alan Forrest 
29 
out army life to escape family squabbles at home, or had been given the 
option of enlistment or the gallows; this in turn fostered violence and 
produced a predictable explosion in crime. Soldiers billeted far from 
home felt few of the social constraints that helped moderate their conduct 
in their home villages, while debt, hunger, drink and sheer desperation 
all contributed to an increase in violent behaviour. There was the usual 
flurry of thefts from lonely farmhouses, stabbings in wayside bars and 
murders committed under the influence of drink, all of which were 
regarded as customary when armies passed through a rural community. 
Revolutionary and Napoleonic soldiers were no worse than those from 
previous eras; indeed, at certain times the laws against looting and pillage 
were so severe that standards of behaviour probably improved. But, 
more alarmingly for the authorities, there was an upsurge in highway 
robberies during these years, most particularly during the Directory. 
Soldiers were again turning to armed attacks and brigandage, though it 
was less a crime of serving soldiers than of those who sought to avoid 
service in the battalions, whether through desertion or by avoiding the 
draft, living a semi-clandestine existence in a demi-monde of vagrants 
and criminals. Such was the case with the infamous bande de Salembier, 
which ravaged much of the Nord and Pas-de-Calais during Years III] 
and IV, with army deserters merging into a band of ordinary criminals, 
sixty strong, complete with their women and their family groups. In the 
Sarthe eye-witnesses spoke of up to forty deserters grouped in bands 
and spreading terror through the countryside; in the Ardéche the 
government’s commissaire reported that ‘the bands of brigands who 
devastate us’ consisted principally of ‘conscripts and draftees’ who must 
be incorporated into their units without delay as a measure of public 
safety.® The link between soldiers and brigands was so clearly drawn in 
people’s minds that highway robbers around Nyons in the Drome were 
even reported to be passing themselves off as army deserters in order to 
allay public suspicion and gain a certain anonymity.” 
So-called brigands were to be found everywhere - in the Pyrenees 
ambushing French soldiers on their way to Spain, in the Alps and the 
Apennines, swarthy mountain-dwellers using their native cunning and 
their knowledge of the countryside to outwit the revolutionary forces, 
as well as in the lawless periphery of France itself, towards the delta of the 
Rhone, for instance, or in the badlands of the Dréme or the Vaucluse. 
They were, it might appear, a rather indiscriminate bunch. Some were 
simple criminals, outlaws who lived in the woods or on the edge of 
remote villages, robbing strangers and merchants on the highways or — 
particularly during the Directory — concealing their criminal intentions 