

<<<PDFPAGE 39>>>
Charles J. Esdaile 
21 
itself, as it had in the days of Frederick, by religion. As the Prussian 
infantry saw the French retreating the evening of Waterloo, the fusi- 
liers began to sing the old Lutheran hymn, ‘A mighty fortress is our 
God’... Hatred of the French expressed itself in bitter fighting and in 
the ability to rally after initial defeat.°° 
Well, perhaps. The Prussian army certainly fought very bravely in the 
campaigns of 1813-15, but the reality is that, as in the case of its Russian 
counterpart, we simply do not know enough about its mentalités to be able 
to make such a judgement. Such primary evidence as we have of enthu- 
siasm for the war amongst the rank and file comes from the writings of 
confirmed German nationalists who were convinced that they were 
indeed engaged in a befreiungskrieg and were desperate to convey the 
impression that the struggle was genuinely a people’s crusade. But all 
the evidence suggests that conscription was hated, desertion rife and 
volunteers both few in number and for the most part confined to the 
same groups that had always provided German rulers with the bulk of 
the men who had chosen to enter their service without compulsion. 
Before we can take on board the notion of a Prussian army enthused by 
a positive desire to smash the foe, a great deal more work is therefore 
necessary both on the means that were used to excite the feelings of the 
troops and the feelings of the men themselves, in which latter respect 
one can only hope that some Germanist will uncover the same sort of 
treasure trove as that revealed by Alan Forrest in his seminal Napoleon’s 
Men. Only through the examination of such bundles of private letters 
will we ever be able to test the claims put forward by Rothenberg, and 
until that task has been carried out it is probably wise to remain at least 
a little sceptical. 
With this remark, we return to our point of departure, which was to 
reassert the need for greater attention to be paid to the subject of popular 
resistance. In this respect the Liverpool symposium undoubtedly provided 
a useful forum for debate, but at the same time it revealed just how little 
we know about this issue. For many years to come, then, the patriots, 
partisans and land-pirates whom we have discussed in these pages will, 
or so it is hoped, continue to occupy the attention of the historical 
community. One might even voice the hope, indeed, that they might 
attract the attention of more of the historical community than has 
hitherto been the case. Spain has, perhaps, now been dealt with 
adequately, but Italy, the Tyrol and Portugal all offer opportunities for 
truly ground-breaking monographs that would add enormously to our 
understanding of the subject whilst at the same time testing out some 

<<<PDFPAGE 40>>>
22 
Patriots, Partisans and Land Pirates 
of the conclusions reached in this collection of essays. In brief, these are 
five-fold. In the first place the popular will to take up arms was relatively 
limited even in those areas of Europe — a clear minority - which did 
experience armed resistance on the part of the populace. In the second, 
outbreaks of armed resistance were rarely ideological: whilst the masses 
were frequently worked on by members of the establishment, they do 
not seem to have been much moved by anti-French propaganda per se, 
but rather by their experience of enemy occupation and the extent of 
their ability to feed themselves and their families and to carry on some 
semblance of normal life. In the third, except in the cases of spontaneous 
riots and revolts such as those that gripped Pavia and Gaon - instances 
of violence that were on the whole very short-lived — the organization 
of effective popular resistance in many cases clearly depended on the 
state and its collaborators rather than springing from the populace 
itself. In the fourth, in those cases where popular resistance did spring 
from below, it was generally ineffectual and in the end prone to slide 
into mere banditry. And in the fifth it is clear that the subject cannot be 
studied effectively without a readiness to grapple with traditional military 
history: as the current author has shown in these pages, the motivation 
of the Russian army in 1812 needs to be discussed with the aid of some 
knowledge of its organization and war record; equally, in Fighting Napoleon: 
Guerrillas and Bandits in Spain, 1808-1814 he has established that the 
partidas will never properly be understood if the role played in them by 
the Spanish regular army is not accorded its full weight. So where, then, 
does all this leave us? With a subject of great complexity, certainly: the 
successful historian of popular resistance must necessarily be able to 
draw on a variety of different sub-disciplines, identify and manipulate 
sources that are frequently as obscure as they are fragmentary and 
have an eye for events not just in his or her own area of study but in 
Napoleonic Europe as a whole. That said, however, it is also a subject of 
great potential: a rich orchard whose fruits await only the hands that 
should be stretched out to pluck them. Let us, then, conclude, with a 
quote from the gospel of Saint Matthew: ‘The harvest is plentiful, but 
the labourers are few; therefore, ask the Lord of the Harvest to send out 
labourers into His harvest.’*” 
Notes 
1. H. von Brandt, In the Legions of Napoleon: the Memoirs of a Polish Officer in Spain 
and Russia, 1808-1813, ed. J. North (London, 1999), p. 186. 
2. A.J.M. de Rocca, Memoirs of the War of the French in Spain (London, 1815), 
pp. 24-S. 
3. Ibid p29: 