

<<<PDFPAGE 34>>>
16 
Patriots, Partisans and Land Pirates 
a phenomenon that for the most part affected only a minority of the 
population. At the same time, it was something that was likely to take 
root only in certain very specific circumstances. Only very rarely could 
the common people be relied on to fight for the Old Order on social or 
economic grounds. Sensing this, a number of propagandists anxious to 
stir up people’s war against the French attempted to reach out to them, 
and, in particular, to air the political issues involved in the conflict in a 
style that was accessible to a mass audience. Hence the use, as outlined 
for us by Emilie Delivré, of political catechisms (though it should be 
noted that these were not the only form of propaganda to be made use 
of in this respect: in Spain, at least, we only see the employment of the 
literary style known as costumbrismo in which characters featured in 
pamphlets and manifestos were made to engage in dialogue couched in 
the language of the streets). But in the absence of the conditions that 
made revolt a reality the publication of such documents remained an 
empty gesture. There is little evidence that the efforts of Arndt, Von 
Kleist and Von Hormayr had much effect on the situation in Germany: 
only one popular insurrection — that seen in Hamburg — occurred in the 
campaign of 1813, and this not only took place after the French had 
evacuated the city; but also seems to have been the work of the ruling 
oligarchy, the chief aim of this group being to maintain order and 
ensure that their homes and businesses were not sacked by the Cossacks 
who appeared hot on the heels of the French.”” What is even more striking, 
meanwhile, is the very small number of examples of political catechism 
that Delivré has been able to uncover, not to mention the clear pref- 
erence that can be seen in the documents which she examines for 
keeping popular action under the control of the state. 
In Germany, then, it can safely be said that there was little real enthu- 
siasm for independent action on the part of the people. Nor was this 
only the case in Prussia, Austria and the states of the Confederation of 
the Rhine: In Spain, too, there was real ambivalence about the issue of 
guerrilla warfare. Here the political élites were rather more enthusiastic: 
aside from offering them a means of both preferment and self-glorification, 
the formation of partisan bands could be represented as being much 
more of a military necessity. In consequence, the Patriot authorities were 
besieged by pretendientes anxious to secure a commission as a cabecilla. 
Yet, whether implicitly or explicitly, there was constantly a sense of dicing 
with the devil: the people, might, or so it was argued, hate the French, 
but they were also brutal, ignorant, irrational and ungovernable. Even 
when formed into organized militias, in fact, the populacho - literally, 
the rabble — could not be relied upon. As Antonio Moliner shows us in 