

<<<PDFPAGE 37>>>
Charles J. Esdaile 
19 
also pre-eminent, and inseparable from the Russian soldier. This feeling 
is paramount, and in the very last hour his gaze is directed towards its 
nearest confines.’*” But, even supposing that this is so — and it should be 
noted that Wilson’s claims fit in with a long line of distinctly uncritical 
western writings on the subject of Russia that stressed the devotion of 
the common people to the ‘Little Father’ and the Motherland - the net 
result must be to suggest that what happened at such battles as 
Smolensk, Borodino, Maloyaroslavets and Polotsk was not representative 
of anything out of the ordinary. Indeed, it could even be argued that 
the Russian armed forces were actually less patriotic in 1812 than they 
had been in, say, 1762. Thus, as Hartley rightly points out, there were 
many non-Russian conscripts, most notably Ukrainians, in the army 
of Alexander II. What she neglects to say, however, is that conscription 
had only been extended beyond the frontiers of Great Russia in the 
reign of Paul I, and that a number of contemporary writers had been 
expressing fears that this would dilute the morale and fighting power of 
the soldiery.*8 
For all the determined efforts of the régime to whip up popular patriotism 
in 1812, then, there is little concrete evidence that these made much 
difference in so far as the motivation of the common soldier was 
concerned: the Russian soldier fought in much the same style as he had 
for the past century. Why, then, was he able to give the French, the 
Prussian and the Turks such a tough time? One explanation that is 
sometimes put forward is that the conscripted serfs who fought for the 
Romanovs were so brutalized, so stupid and so devoid of initiative that 
they simply did not understand the concept of running away. The 
Polish leader, Kosciuszko, said that Russian soldiers fought as fanatics 
and ignored enemy fire so long as they had officers left to lead them, 
whilst, to quote Christopher Duffy, ‘It was not enough simply to kill 
Rusians: you had to knock them down as well.’** However, this piece of 
type-casting does not work any better than that of the Russian soldier as 
the holy warrior of tsar and motherland. In the late eighteenth century, 
the Russian army had evolved a tactical doctrine that stressed initiative, 
flexibility and speed of movement, and, whilst Paul I did make some 
reforms, the fact is that he really only altered the emphasis of the 
regulations: firepower was now to be more important than the bayonet, 
but the same offensive spirit was still very much in evidence; simultan- 
eusly, meanwhile, the tsar initiated the practice of awarding medals to 
common 
soldiers. At the same time, under Alexander I there was a 
renewed move 
away from the Prussian 
models 
that had been 
favoured by Paul I and, at the time of the Seven Years’ War, the Empress 

<<<PDFPAGE 38>>>
20 
Patriots, Partisans and Land Pirates 
Elizabeth: ever more emphasis was placed on the use of skirmishers, whilst 
the infantry adopted the same mixture of line and column visible in 
other armies. At Eylau, Friedland and Borodino the Russians certainly 
fought in dense masses, but this was not the result of bovine stupidity: 
rather, the position of the army was in each case very cramped with the 
result that there was little option but to form the troops in column and 
no means for them to change their position or take shelter. From this 
it follows that the performance of the Russian army was in the end 
determined by military factors. In the first place, it was plentifully 
supplied with artillery and therefore able to inflict terrible damage on 
its opponents, who were generally less well served in this respect: at Kay 
28 000 Prussians and fifty-six guns faced 40 000 Russians and 186 guns, 
whilst at Kunersdorf 51 000 Prussians and 140 guns faced 41 000 Russians 
and 200 guns; moreover, both the organization and the armament of this 
arm of service were greatly improved under Paul I and Alexander I. The 
benefits of this situation continued to pertain in 1812 — at Borodino the 
Russian guns were both more numerous and heavier than their French 
opponents and even at the very end of the day they were still able to 
impose their superiority. Thus, according to the Russian commander, 
Kutuzov, ‘A ferocious artillery duel lasted until it was completely dark. 
Our artillery caused immense damage with its roundshot and compelled 
the enemy batteries to fall silent, after which all the French infantry 
and cavalry withdrew.’ Beyond this, meanwhile, Russian troops were 
frequently surprisingly 
well trained. 
Thus, the eighteenth-century 
reformer, Rumiantsev, the towering genius, Suvorov, and the victor of 
Borodino, Kutuzov, had all placed great emphasis on realistic battle 
drills, the fact being that the Russian army was therefore a very tough 
nut to crack. 
The issue of the extent to which patriotism became a force amongst 
the soldiers of the mass armies that eventually overthrew Napoleon is 
one that needs to be explored much further. If one has room to doubt 
the extent to which it was a factor of much importance in Russia, in the 
Prussian forces there is some evidence that there was a sea-change in 
the feelings of the soldiery. At Jena and Auerstaédt the Prussian army 
had fought adequately, but its performance had hardly been heroic. At 
Leipzig and Waterloo, by contrast, it is claimed that a very different 
vision was on show. Let us here quote Gunther Rothenberg: 
In 1806 the typical Prussian soldier had been a mercenary or a 
reluctant conscript; now he was animated both by patriotism and by 
a deep and even savage hatred of the French. The first expressed 