

<<<PDFPAGE 35>>>
Charles J. Esdaile 
17 
his paper on Catalonia, the somatens and miquelets of that province 
were always prone to riot, desertion and pillage, and could not always 
be trusted to put up much of a fight. Hence the emergence of the corpus 
of regulation analysed by Vittorio Scotti-Douglas: the formation of 
guerrilla bands and even ‘land piracy’ were to be encouraged, certainly, 
but the phenomenon was also to be kept under control and directed 
into safe channels. As was implicitly recognised, in fact, to the extent 
that it existed at all, the desire to take up arms reflected not devotion to 
the patria, but rather an attempt to find a solution to some of the prob- 
lems that beset the populace: the partidas, as we have seen, offered food, 
pay, plunder, freedom from service in the regular army and the chance 
to make an end of hated social superiors. In short, the French were 
right: apart from in certain very particular instances, left to itself, in so 
far as guerrilla warfare was concerned, genuine popular resistance — in 
other words, the action of irregular bands of armed civilians as opposed 
to that of detachments of regular troops sent into ‘the bush’ to harass 
the enemy — was brigandage, and only ceased to be brigandage to the 
extent that members of the élites or ambitious adventurers of vision 
and foresight succeeded in subjecting the phenomenon to military 
discipline. Even the worst brigands, of course, could still inflict harm 
on the enemy on occasion, but little was to be expected from such 
privateering. To quote a letter written by an officer of the Third Foot 
Guards named Wiliiam Stothert in December 1811: 
At present the only troops in Spain which carry on a successful war- 
fare against the French are the guerrillas, or armed peasants, and it 
may fairly be presumed that they are incited to attack the enemy’s 
convoys and straggling parties as much by the hope of plunder as 
from patriotism. This cannot be supposed to influence the minds of 
their gallant chiefs [a belief in which Stothert was sadly mistaken], 
but the peasant, when compelled by the ravages of war to abandon 
the scenes of peaceful industry, becomes of necessity a soldier...as 
the only means of supporting his existence... It is not surprising ... 
that such a body ...should carry terror and dismay ...into the ranks 
of the French soldiery ... But it is perfectly evident that the deliverance 
of Spain can never be achieved by the efforts of a force so rudely 
constituted, however ...successful as it has often proved against small 
parties of the enemy.*° 
In so far as possible, then, wherever we look we see that the people 
continued to be assimilated into the structures of the state. This leads 

<<<PDFPAGE 36>>>
18 
Patriots, Partisans and Land Pirates 
us on, however, to the very interesting question broached by Janet 
Hartley. Whatever the established order’s views on guerrilla warfare and 
popular revolt may have been, it cannot be denied that from Madrid to 
Moscow enemies of the French made greater use than ever before of 
language and methods that were designed to reach out to the people 
and persuade them that the overthrow of Napoleon was an enterprise 
in which they both had a stake and should sacrifice themselves and give 
their all. Did this encourage the mass armies that everywhere had 
perforce to be fielded against the French to fight harder and show greater 
willingness to accept their lot? As Hartley shows, in the case of Russia at 
least this cannot be proved: the officers were in many instances enthused 
by a new spirit that had as one of its consequences the Decemberist 
revolt of 1825, but it is difficult to argue the case one way or the other 
with regard to the common soldiers. Certainly, the Orthodox religion 
was made use of to stimulate loyalty and devotion, and certainly, too, 
at Borodino and other battles the Russian forces fought with desperate 
heroism. But had anything really changed? Russian soldiers were notorious 
for their fighting capacity and staying power: prior to the campaign of 
1812 Napoleon’s worst experience on the battlefield had come at the 
hands of General Bennigsen at the battle of Eylau, whilst in the Seven 
Years’ War Frederick the Great had repeatedly been very roughly handled 
by the green-coated soldiers of the Empress Elizabeth, gaining an 
extremely pyrrhic victory over them at Zorndorf in 1758 and going 
down to ignominious defeat at Kunersdorf in 1759. Other Russian 
victories from the same war numbered Gross-Jagersdorf and Kay, whilst 
in 1799 General Suvorov’s invasion of Switzerland had seen Russian 
troops gain a series of dramatic successes: on 1 October, for example, 
5000 troops under General Rosenberg had utterly defeated a column of 
more than twice as many Frenchmen under no less a figure than André 
Masséna, a general who is always rated as one of Napoleon’s greatest 
commanders. In all this the self-same factors generally identified as the 
mainspring of Russian patriotism in 1812 had made an appearance. 
Thus, throughout the eighteenth century commanders such as Rumiantsev 
and Suvorov had made every effort to play on the devotion of the soldiery 
to the Orthodox faith and to instill love of the tsar. In this respect it is 
the opinion of some historians that they appear to have had at least 
some success.*' Let us here quote Sir Robert Wilson’s account of the 
Russian army that fought at Eylau and Friedland in 1807: ‘The Russian, 
nurtured from earliest infancy to consider Russia as the supreme nation 
of the world, always regards himself as an important component part of 
the irresistible mass... Amidst the Russian qualities, the love of country is 