

<<<PDFPAGE 32>>>
14 
Patriots, Partisans and Land Pirates 
however, there was much resistance: many people refused to leave their 
homes and either hid supplies of grain and other foodstuffs in caves, 
cellars or abandoned houses, or buried them beneath barnyard or 
threshing floor. Confronted by the Lines of Torres Vedras, the invaders — 
some 60 000 men —- came to a dead halt, but, whilst Massena realised 
that trying to fight his way through the maze of inundations, abattis, 
escarpments and redoubts that Wellington had constructed was impossible, 
he refused to retreat, and therefore blockaded the Anglo-Portuguese forces 
in their positions in the hope that fresh troops might arrive from Spain. 
There followed one of the most dreadful episodes of the entire Napoleonic 
era. Assailed by ever growing hunger, the French 
turned 
on 
the 
inhabitants who had been left behind and set about extracting such 
food supplies as remained to them. Increasingly desperate, foraging 
parties resorted to torture and murder as a matter of course. Let us here 
quote Jean-Baptiste Lemonnier-Delafosse, an officer who was serving in 
a light-infantry regiment in the division of General Heudelet: 
The French army entered Portugal with six days’ worth of supplies in 
each soldier’s haversack, and on top of that a few wagons. It was, 
therefore, without any proper magazines, and soon it found itself 
without food of any sort. Nevertheless, it was necessary to live. Once 
the initial resources had run out...a regular system of marauding 
was organized... Woe be to the peasant who was caught by such an 
expedition! The poor unfortunate was stripped of all he had and 
often...put to death by men whom hunger...had rendered cruel 
and savage. When the troops were operating in places they did not 
know, guides were needed. If no-one came forward at their call, 
someone would be seized at random. Having got such a person, he 
would be ordered to take them to a village...and, once he had got 
there, to point out where all the food had been hidden...The poor 
devil would not know where it was any more than those who were 
searching for it, and the confusion into which he was necessarily 
thrown was taken as proof of bad faith by the soldiers. Threats were 
then quickly followed by actions: a rope would be put round his 
neck, and the unfortunate man would hear the words, ‘Up you go 
until you tell us where the grain is!’ As he could give no answer, he 
would be strung up until he began to turn blue, whereupon he would 
be taken down and given another chance to speak. Alas! Worse than 
barbarous as they were, these atrocious means sometimes succeeded, 
but this was only when fate had pitched upon an inhabitant of the 
village that was being raided. Unless that was the case, such men 

<<<PDFPAGE 33>>>
Charles J. Esdaile 
15 
could reveal nothing, and so the soldiers said to them in their ferocity, 
‘Oh, you don’t want to tell us where the grain is, do you? You are 
a brigand: hanged you were and hanged you will remain!’ 
Needless to say, the response of the population was to turn to wholesale 
resistance. In brief, there was nothing else left for them to do: it was 
literally a question of seizing food from the French or starving to death, 
and, still more bluntly, killing the invaders before they themselves were 
killed. As Lemonnier-Delafosse lamented, ‘Once an affair of civilized 
peoples, our war had become a war to the death.’”° Finding themselves 
assailed in this fashion, the French troops lost all vestige of humanity 
and engaged in a series of atrocities whose nature horrified the most 
hardened British soldiers when they reoccupied the area the following 
spring after Massena had finally given up the struggle and retreated to 
Spain. As one of Wellington’s aides de camp wrote, ‘The French have 
certainly made an inglorious campaign ...To picture the infamous way 
in which they have left the country and the inhabitants is quite impossible: 
they have burned every village and town they went through, and 
murdered every peasant they could find.’”” 
The apocalyptic scenes witnessed in central Portugal in the winter of 
1810-11 are no more typical of armed popular resistance in Napoleonic 
Europe than peasant risings and the formation of guerrilla bands are 
typical of the general response of the populace to the French imperium. 
Even in areas gripped by partisan warfare, it is fairly clear that the 
preferred option of a large part of the inhabitants was to stay out of 
harm’s way and remain aloof from the struggle. To quote the British 
diplomat, Thomas Sydenham: 
The feelings of all the provinces through which I have passed are 
decidedly inimical to the French and favourable to the common 
cause... At the same time... the patriotic feelings of the lower classes 
are of little use to their country. It is a passive feeling which murmurs 
under the oppression and tyranny which it suffers without exerting 
itself to remove or diminish what it complains of. The people pay their 
contributions and deliver up their mules, grain and provisions when- 
ever they are demanded...by the enemy. Of course they complain 
of these exactions and are happy to see the English... But...it does 
the enemy no harm nor us any good.”® 
In general, then, what we see is a situation in which, even in the 
relatively areas few areas where it was an issue, popular resistance was 