

<<<PDFPAGE 30>>>
12 
Patriots, Partisans and Land Pirates 
peasantry to accept the realities of occupation. Such prudence, however, 
was rare. As Alan Forrest has shown, the concept of brigandage was 
throughout the period 1792-1815 something that stirred strong feelings in 
the French mind. Those who engaged in acts of irregular resistance had 
ipso facto placed themselves beyond the pale of humanity not simply 
because of the savagery of which they were undoubtedly capable, but 
also because of their association with counter-revolution, or, to put it 
another way, their rejection of modern civilization. In Calabria and Spain 
alike, then, rebellion was met with a response so brutal as to destroy 
all hope of compromise, the speed and decision with which the French 
acted undoubtedly being accentuated by the Catholicism that charac- 
terized both these two parts of Europe. In the immediate wake of the 
outbreak of revolt in Calabria, for example, the town that had been the 
site of the first serious incident was sacked and, burned down, whilst a 
military tribunal established in Cosenza executed 200 suspects within a 
month. Also destroyed, meanwhile, were the villages of Savelli, Cassino, 
Gerenza and Cachari, whilst the savagery contained without let-up 
thereafter: in the memoirs of Nicolas Desvernois, a French cavalry 
officer serving in the new Neapolitan army established by Joseph 
Bonaparte who was made governor of Amalfi, there is a proud account 
of how he executed 184 men belonging to the band of one Giusipello 
and exhibited their heads along the main coast road in iron cages.”? 
And in Spain the firing squads that dealt with the insurgents who took part 
in the Dos de Mayo have been immortalized by Goya (though in fact 
the number of people they executed appears to have been no more than 
114), whilst 
a number of towns whose inhabitants were accused of firing 
on the French — most notably, Medina de Rio Seco and Chinchén - 
experienced appalling massacres.”* 
To describe this policy as genocide — a term that can certainly be 
applied in other contexts, most notably the Vendée - would be to go too 
far. Many French officers were, in fact, keenly aware that their aim had 
to be driving a wedge between the insurgents and the populace as a 
whole and struggled hard to keep their men under control, whilst further 
restraints were often exercized by the civilian officials who became 
involved in the various anti-bandit tribunals established by such rulers 
as Joseph Bonaparte. But the fact is that levels of repression were high 
and, on occasion, extreme, and that in the short term this exacerbated 
the problem. Thus, the population of entire villages might flee their 
homes and in consequence be left with no other means of survival than 
violence; equally, if some of the particular tales told in this respect are 
mere fables — among the Spanish guerrilla leaders who are falsely 

<<<PDFPAGE 31>>>
Charles J. Esdaile 
13 
claimed to have lost wives or parents to enemy atrocities are El Empecinado 
and Julian Sanchez - there were undoubtedly cases in which the French 
generated an intense desire for revenge. Nor was the situation aided by 
other aspects of occupation policy. The chief culprit here was conscription. 
Though never introduced in Spain and Portugal, fear that it was coming 
was undoubtedly an underlying factor in the Iberian insurrections, 
whilst it played a major role in radicalizing the population of the Tyrol, 
this province having traditionally enjoyed exemption from service in 
the regular army under the Habsburgs. But its impact was at its most 
severe in Calabria. Thus, by the spring of 1809 three years of a mixture 
of ferocious repression and efforts to win over the populace had done a 
great deal to reduce the strength of the insurrection. At this point, however, 
Joachim Murat, who had replaced Joseph Bonaparte as King of Naples 
when the latter had been transferred to Spain, introduced conscription. 
The result was immediate: large numbers of fresh recruits fled to the 
bands, whilst the French lost control of many villages that had hitherto 
been quiet.”4 
In this particular respect, the French were forced to back off: Calabria 
was informed that its manpower would only have to serve in the civic 
guard that had been organized in its towns and villages, whilst no 
soldiers were ever actually levied in this fashion. On occasion, too, 
compromise was reached in Spain where a pattern of tit-for-tat execu- 
tions eventually led Francisco Espoz y Mina and the French governor of 
Navarre to respect the lives of prisoners. In the midst of the most brutal 
warfare, then, there was generally sufficient flexibility on both sides to 
ensure that there was always some sort of ‘golden bridge’ that avoided 
full scale apocalypse. In rare exceptions, however, this was not the case, 
in which respect it behoves us to pay particular attention to the most 
obvious example, and all the more so as this has been regularly 
advanced as proof of the way in which the Napoleonic Wars generated 
new styles of warfare. We come here to the events that ravaged central 
Portugal between September 1810 and April 1811. In brief, faced by a 
French army of invasion commanded by Marshal Massena which he 
suspected he would not be able to check in the open field, Wellington 
fell back from his positions on the frontier of Beira in the direction of 
Lisbon, which he had protected by an impregnable zone of fortifications 
known as the Lines of Torres Vedras. As the French advanced, moreover, 
they were confronted by a scorched-earth policy that saw large numbers 
of the inhabitants driven from their homes and forced to migrate to 
ad hoc refugee camps created around the capital and such food stocks as 
could not be transported to Lisbon burned or spoiled. To these demands, 