

<<<PDFPAGE 44>>>
26 
The Ubiquitous Brigand 
The bandits of legend — those who terrorised whole provinces and 
who inspired a folklore all of their own - were on a different scale 
entirely, bands who lived en marge de la société, moving under cover of 
darkness from clearing to clearing, seeking refuge in shepherds’ huts on 
the slopes above isolated villages, robbing only those who were outsiders 
to the local community, celebrating their successes over noisy meals in 
wayside inns, and casually disarming any gendarmes sent to hunt them 
down. Some, like the notorious bande d’Orgéres in the Beauce, survived in 
this way for decades, robbing travellers on the highly lucrative turnpike 
between Paris and Orleans, and maintaining a fluctuating membership 
of men, women and children, all enjoying a degree of local protection 
while stubbornly living as outlaws, beyond the protection of civil society. 
They may have been feared by local people, and respected for their 
power and their defiance of the authorities, but there is no evidence 
that they were hated, especially since, like all the best bandit gangs, 
they served a useful and much-appreciated function in redistributing 
wealth, artificially injecting money stolen from merchants and other 
travellers into a hard-pressed local economy.” Eric Hobsbawm is surely 
tight when he presents some of the great bandits of history as men of 
the people, commemorated in folk-song and in popular prints, and 
lionized by those from whose roots they had sprung.* When they were 
finally caught and brought to trial men like Mandrin and Cartouche 
inspired awe as much as fear. They belonged to the same popular class 
as the mass of the people, yet they had turned their backs on poverty 
and cocked an almighty snook at the dual authority of Church and 
State. And in their way they were heroes to the mass of the people: even 
the more obscure among them were built into mighty figures of legend, 
their criminal exploits praised in folk-song and in luridly-coloured 
images d’Epinal. Even unexceptional robbers like Poulailler, by the time 
of the Revolution, were being featured in popular prints, distributed by 
peddlars at village fairs and in the popular quarters of Paris. Their 
crimes were talked of with awe, the danger they presented to the public 
unscrupulously exaggerated to inspire fear — there was talk of ‘the famous 
Poulailler, captain of a band of more than 500 robbers distributed 
between various provinces’.* The trials of such brigands became the 
subject of intense interest both amongst the educated public and in 
the pages of chapbooks and the bibliotheque bleue; while many of the 
thousands who turned out to watch their executions were there not to 
gloat at their downfall but to secure a last, secret glimpse of their folk- 
heroes. As Richard Cobb rightly observed, the Criminal Hero would easily 
outlast the Revolutionary Martyr. ‘Cartouche, Mandrin, Hulin remained 

<<<PDFPAGE 45>>>
Alan Forrest 
27 
far more popular, reassuring heroes than the newly established boys 
and girls who perished, holding the bridge, pierced with a thousand 
lances, or standing on burning decks’. 
The popular image of the brigand was thus tinged with a certain 
romanticism, an admiration for his daring, an empathy with his con- 
tempt for authority. Behind every bandit leader there was just a vestige 
of Robin Hood. Yet we should not be deceived. Not all bandits could aspire 
to be local heroes, just as not all had the swagger and the anarchic style 
needed to appeal to the popular imagination. The average brigand’s 
existence was generally more prosaic, his exploits born of simple des- 
peration rather than of an anarchic temperament, while his rapport 
with the local population was far from assured. Bands of outlaws were 
often formed from those with little or no stake in local society — vagabonds 
who had come into the area from elsewhere, from communes that could 
not give them sustenance, and were desperate for food and lodging, 
however they might come by it. They drew on a criminal underclass of 
men who had been released from jail after serving their sentence, gens 
sans aveu for whom no one would vouch and who had no escape from 
destitution; and deserters from the armies, their number swollen after 
each campaign, fearful of arrest and condemned to a life on the move, 
often, of course, armed, a prey to any temptation that might come along. 
Indeed, the mingling of deserters and draft dodgers with hardened 
criminals and smugglers served only to strengthen the equation that 
already existed in many people’s minds between soldiers and violent 
crime, the belief — shared by, among others, Voltaire — that the line 
armies of Europe were drawn from the dregs of society, the human 
detritus from prisons and poorhouses who, when they no longer had 
enemy armies to attack, would turn their violence and their weapons 
against peaceful civilians. It had, it seemed, always been so. Both the 
grandes compagnies of the fourteenth century and the écorcheurs who 
replaced them in the fifteenth belonged to that tradition, as did the 
Mandrins who ravaged much of rural France in the eighteenth. So, too, 
it was bands of soldiers, turning to crime when they were paid off after 
the end of the Italian Wars, who murdered and tortured their way 
across France until Francis I, in a bid to end what the whole country 
saw as a fearful scourge, turned state terror against its perpetrators, 
importing from Germany the terrible punishment of breaking on the 
wheel as a final deterrent for highway robbery. There was nothing 
romantic about this, a final act of savagery to add to the savage catalogue 
of crimes which the brigands had committed. But the popular prints 
of the day tell a slightly different story. The sheer horror of the wheel, 