

<<<PDFPAGE 52>>>
34 
The Ubiquitous Brigand 
terrain, ambushing French units and critically holding up the armies’ 
advance. Local people connived with them, sheltered them and offered 
them protection, standing lookout for them and warning them of 
any French approach. They gave them food when they refused to sell 
anything to the French. They treated them as their own, as kith and 
kin, which they probably were in many cases, though the French had 
no means of knowing and little means of distinguishing between 
fighter and protector, soldier and civilian. It was this that made the 
troops in the Peninsula so mistrustful of everyone they met, male and 
female, old and young. All were potential enemies, secretly and stealthily, 
turning their villages into armed encampments where any French 
soldier risked being treated with legendary cruelty. All might be allied 
against the invader in a war without rules, where killing was the major 
goal of soldier and civilian alike. The entire population had become 
indistinguishable, merging into one vast and incoherent viper’s nest, 
a nation of ‘brigands’ who obeyed no laws and were governed by none. 
If this was the language of official proclamations and military 
communiqués, how much more was it that of the troops themselves, 
constantly apprehensive and unwilling to trust anyone in a society they 
saw as unparalleled in its duplicity.!? Napoleonic soldiers seem to have 
shared a horror of fighting there, especially after experience of other 
theatres of war, like Germany and Central Europe. Spain and Portugal were 
widely believed to be savage and inhospitable countries where French 
soldiers were left to die by callous villagers set on vengeance, where local 
people refused to sell them foodstuffs, and where they were virtually 
prisoners in their camps because of the activity of local ‘brigands’.”° The 
Peninsula was a miserable place for a soldier; as Jean Chapuy explained 
from Valladolid in 1809, the food and the climate conspired to make 
them ill, while the local people could then be counted upon to take 
advantage of their weakened state to attack them. ‘We are in a country 
where one is in danger of falling ill’, he wrote to his parents, ‘and where 
one is also at risk of being assassinated by the peasants who are in revolt 
in every part of Spain.’?! Few of his comrades would have disagreed 
with his pithy verdict. Even in hospital beds they were not safe, since in 
Iberia public morals were such, they believed, that no form of brutality 
or deception, however contemptible, could be ruled out. Joseph Vachin, 
a soldier from Mende in the Lozére, complained that an extended spell 
in hospital had reduced him to penury, since the orderlies stole from 
their patients while they were weak or delirious.” And the course of the 
war was so terribly unpredictable, they had no idea where the danger 
would appear from next. Letters spoke of troops being stoned and 

<<<PDFPAGE 53>>>
Alan Forrest 
35 
ambushed by civilians, of prisoners being brutally massacred, even of 
soldiers being burned alive. In words carefully chosen for posterity, Jean 
Marnier recalled that in Spain French troops faced a quite different sort 
of war. One of ‘constant ambushes, murders and extermination’, it was 
not like the ones that they had become accustomed to fighting elsewhere 
in Europe: 
There were not any battles to compare with Eylau or Friedland, but 
fighting on a daily basis against invisible assailants, spread out in 
their thousands behind bushes, at the bottom of ravines, hidden at 
the corner of every wall; we never enjoyed a truce or any rest, and 
treason was a constant risk, day and night, whether at the other side 
of the road or at the head of one’s bed. Everyone was to be feared, 
even those seemingly hospitable people who took you into their 
homes.”? 
Since in Spain and Portugal the rules of civilized warfare were not 
respected, it followed that any form of retaliation was justified. The 
soldiers accepted that, since they were dealing with bandits, they could 
not afford to treat the enemy with the respect which the rules of war 
demanded. The Iberian front, the French were convinced, was one like no 
other, where no prisoners were taken and all — soldiers and civilians — 
could expect to be butchered without mercy. Any reprisals, however 
brutal, seemed justified as guerrilla warfare disintegrated into random 
tit-for-tat killings, with the French forced to accept the methods of the 
guerrillas and often tempted to ignore their own military discipline: 
Our light infantry picked up all those who had taken to flight and 
had hidden in the rocks. Not a single prisoner was taken. As thirty- 
five dragoons had been murdered by the inhabitants of this area, all 
the villages were burned and their inhabitants put to the sword. On 
the following day the same routine was repeated.”* 
All this might sound barbaric in any other context other than the 
Peninsula, where torture and massacre went unpunished and brutality 
bred brutality. The French torched the Portuguese town of Amarantes, 
for instance, after a number of men of the 17th Regiment had been seized 
and thrown on to a fire of live coals. The fire had been lit explicitly for 
the purpose, with an almost sadistic deliberation, and the soldiers had 
been quite callously left to burn painfully to death.” Like any act of 
terrorism, it was intended to infuriate the invader, to goad the French 