

<<<PDFPAGE 58>>>
40 
The Ubiquitous Brigand 
easier target for vengeance. French civilians would be less likely to shelter 
him, while revolutionary soldiers would have fewer qualms about order- 
ing him before a firing squad. It is easy to see why. Wolves and wild dogs 
pose an obvious threat to human beings, and no French peasant would 
hesitate to gun them down. Vermin must be trapped or poisoned so 
that others can enjoy good health; they have to be wiped out, eradicated 
in the interests of survival. The language that was used to revile the 
Vendeans went a long way to remove any lingering sense of the sanctity 
of human life, leaving them vulnerable to republican revenge. It is the 
language of extermination, the extermination of a corrupt community, 
an act of killing that evoked few moral qualms or repugnance, and no 
danger of fellow-feeling. Killing became a cleansing exercise, épuration 
in the fullest sense of the term. The Vendean was a wild beast, unworthy 
of life; and, like a wild beast, his continued existence would put the 
French and their republic at risk. The Revolution had moved on from 
depictions of brigandage and criminalization to portrayals of the enemy 
as an inferior species, a systematic resort to dehumanization that has 
encouraged historians of the right, like Pierre Chaunu, to talk of the 
Republic’s record in the West as genocide, and to compare it to more 
infamous genocides of the twentieth century, in Germany, Rwanda, 
Cambodia, and elsewhere.°° 
This should, I suggest, be seen as a more extreme instance of the 
same process — the use of images and propaganda to belittle and demean 
the opponents of the régime, be it Revolutionary or Napoleonic. It had 
its effect on civilian opinion, and so, as in Spain, it affected the way 
French troops fought and the light in which they regarded the enemy. 
Just as they would do in Spain, French soldiers who were sent to fight 
in the Vendée learned from the propaganda of their generals and 
refused to see the Vendeans as combatants to whom the honours of war 
were due. And that in turn changed the character of the war.*” The 
French troops expressed their horror at the atrocities they witnessed, 
their comrades betrayed and ambushed before being left hacked to 
pieces with bayonets on the highway. They expressed contempt for 
the superstitious naivety — as they saw it — of the Vendeans, and for 
the gross excesses to which this gave rise. For Savary, for instance, 
everything came down to religion, since the Vendean believed anything, 
however absurd, that was whispered to him by his priest, to the extent 
that he became ‘the instrument and the victim of the forces that set 
him in motion’.** That helped explain his ruthlessness, his wanton 
cruelty, his lack of scruples; and it also explained the eager savagery of 
the French response. Faced with a population that was fanatisée and 

<<<PDFPAGE 59>>>
Alan Forrest 
41 
with potential enemies in every village and behind every hedgerow, the 
French could not afford the luxury of clemency. As Boissé, a municipal 
officer from Bordeaux serving in the West, wrote home in 1793, ‘In 
the Vendée the idea of forgiving an enemy is unthinkable.’*? Prisoners 
were therefore butchered — after the fall of Noirmoutier they shot them 
in batches of fifteen hundred — and the priests figured in the front line of 
their imagined foes. For Jean-Charles Bouquet, the son of an ironmonger 
from Reims and a committed republican, the society of the West was 
riddled with priests, and hence with the basest treachery; he had no 
sympathy for those who fell into republican hands and delighted in 
watching them drown in the Loire: 
The priests who had dared to resist the General Will were put on 
board a boat which already held a number of refractory priests, but, 
thanks — who knows? - to the workings of the Republican genius, a 
rotten plank got loose. With water pouring in on all sides, the vessel 
sank with all its equally rotten priestly cargo.*° 
This is one take on the noyades of Nantes which caused such outrage 
in Paris after Thermidor, when every detail was pored over during the 
public show trial of Carrier as France tried to purge itself of its 
collective guilt. It is an approach that suggests a terrible cruelty on the 
part of the republican troops, a cruelty that comes close to bloodlust. 
But the soldiers were the same men who had fought in Belgium, on the 
Rhine and along the Moselle, and who in these ordinary contexts had 
never thought in such terms. They were not naturally savage or inhumane. 
Rather they had been accustomed by relentless propaganda before they left 
for the West, and subsequently by evidence of how a guerrilla war was 
fought, to regard the enemy as less than honourable, 
as ‘brigands’, 
ultimately as wild beasts of the fields and woods. They were Untermenschen, 
unworthy of the name of humanity. That propaganda should be seen as 
an essential part of the French armoury in both the Vendée and, later, 
in the Peninsula. It was part of the nation’s defence against guerrillas 
and irregular forces, against whom regular battalions experienced consid- 
erable difficulties in the field. 
Its predictable outcome was a war 
conducted with a total lack of fellow-feeling or mutual understanding, 
with no hint of considération between the warring sides. To that degree 
the war against ‘brigands’ was also a victory for political rhetoric, for 
one discourse over another, a victory by revolutionary and Napoleonic 
spinmeisters which effectively complemented that of the nation’s milit- 
ary battalions in the field. 