

<<<PDFPAGE 65>>>
Martin Boycott-Brown 
47 
in bands) whom they called barbets. To return to terminology for a 
moment, barbet was a local dialect word of obscure origins that had 
once been applied to the Waldensians, who had been persecuted by 
the Piedmontese government because of their religion, and had taken 
refuge in the mountains. The barbets of the 1790s who ambushed French 
soldiers and raided some of their positions might be called brigands or 
guerrillas, though it is difficult to say which title is more appropriate. In 
referring to them, the French seem habitually to have used the word 
barbets, rather than ‘brigands’, but this may just have been the result of 
soldiers adopting the terminology used by local people in the area 
where they were serving, as happened in Spain from 1809, when the 
English began to use the word ‘guerrilla’. We should also probably not 
read too much into the fact that there are occasional references to the 
barbets’ mode of dress marking them out. When the body of a man with 
a musket beside him was found in the mountains near a village, for 
example, the local mayor commented that ‘It is probable that this body 
is that of a barbet, to judge from the clothes’.' Yet we have no way of 
knowing if this is a reference to clothes that were suitable to a life of 
fighting, or merely to a state of raggedness indicative of living rough. 
More to the point, perhaps, it seems impossible to prove that barbets 
ambushed passing French soldiers for military reasons, rather than 
reasons of theft, which makes it impossible to state categorically that 
they were involved in warfare rather than acts of brigandage. Indeed, it 
seems probable that these bands were not formed in response to the 
French invasion, but were originally groups of robbers who preyed on 
the many travellers who used the road from Nice to Turin, which 
passed over Colle di Tenda and was one of the most important routes 
from the Mediterranean into northern Italy. The character of these 
bands no doubt changed with the French invasion of Nice. Deserters 
from both the French and Piedmontese armies would have provided 
a useful flow of recruits, who would have brought their own weapons 
with them, and would have been familiar with the military methods of 
both sides, as well as being used to a dangerous and violent life. But the 
arrival of deserters from opposing camps must surely have made it 
much less likely that the bands would engage in the kind of patriotic 
struggle in defence of an invaded homeland that is commonly associ- 
ated with guerrilla activity. 
Whatever the reasons for their activities, the French soon found the 
barbets enough of a nuisance to mount organized operations against 
them. One of the earlier descriptions of such an operation dates from 
the spring of 1793, and formed part of a letter that Barthélemy-Catherine 

<<<PDFPAGE 66>>>
48 
Guerrilla Warfare avant la lettre 
Joubert (later one of the most successful generals of the 1796 campaign) 
wrote to his father. He says: 
At the end of April [1793] I was given the mission of chasing from 
their rocks and caves some barbets who were murdering our orderly 
dragoons. With fifty grenadiers I pursued them for a day and a night, 
in the most abominable places. One could only reach their rocks by 
having risked breaking one’s neck a hundred times. Often one had to 
drag oneself on one’s belly. Many times I found myself with one or 
two grenadiers at most. We killed a barbet and took eight of them.” 
The fact that a force of fifty men had been sent to deal with this band 
suggests that their activities must have been causing some annoyance, 
though we may infer that they did not pose a serious military threat. 
Indeed, after giving us this very brief description of the barbets, the rest 
of Joubert’s letter, which is a long one, deals with a conventional 
military operation against a Piedmontese outpost in the mountains. 
This gives us some idea of the relative importance of the two types of 
operation, at least in the mind of Joubert. Nevertheless, the County of 
Nice continued to be a most dangerous area for the French, and attacks 
on them showed no sign of ceasing. Indeed, they became so serious that 
Bonaparte mentioned them at the end of one of his letters to the French 
government, written from Milan on 25 August 1796: 
The King of Sardinia having disbanded his provincial regiments, the 
barbets have increased in number. A wagon carrying silver has been 
pillaged. General Dujard, while going to Nice, has been killed. I have 
organized a mobile column with a tribunal against the barbets to 
mete out justice to them.? 
A mobile column of 4000 men under General Casabianca had been 
duly formed, and the commander of the French garrisons in Piedmont, 
General Macquart, was ordered to cooperate with his task as much 
as possible. It does not seem to have been wholly successful, and in 
September Bonaparte invited the Piedmontese government to position 
their own troops in the areas 
of Limone, Demonte, Cuneo and 
Barcelonette, to oppose the barbets and protect the French convoys.* 
In other parts of the Riviera, armed resistance was undoubtedly 
directly linked to outrages committed by the French.° According to 
Leonello Oliveri, a historian who has made a special study of the wars 
in the Val Bormida (where the French first arrived in September 1794), 