

<<<PDFPAGE 54>>>
36 
The Ubiquitous Brigand 
into losing their own discipline, and in this it undoubtedly succeeded. 
It is easy to see why the French loathed fighting in the Peninsula, and 
how deeply they came to hate Spain and Portugal and their people. 
‘The only thing that’s any good in this country [i.e. Spain]’, grumbled 
Vachin, ‘is the bread, the wine and the meat; without them it would be 
the end of the world.’”° 
For many soldiers the issue at stake was the nature of the war itself. 
They were prepared to treat other armies with decency because they 
shared the same conception of warfare, exposing themselves to the same 
dangers, admiring the same qualities of courage and military science. 
But guerrillas were different. They detested fighting against them, or 
responding to tactics which only too often were intended to goad regular 
troops into anger and outrages that would, in turn, help to unite local 
people against them. The troops found it very hard to resist turning 
their fury on the local population; they were tired, constrained by military 
discipline, and revolted by what they saw; and often their tolerance 
had been pushed beyond endurance. Chevalier cites this lurid but very 
typical instance from the war in Calabria, but it could just as easily have 
taken place in Spain or Portugal. The French had reached a little town 
called Lauria, perched on a rock over the plain, and their general had sent 
an officer to negotiate with its citizens and to ask for food to provision 
the army. Their response was abrupt: 
As soon as the officer entered the town, he was murdered by the 
inhabitants, who brutally cut his body into pieces, put them in 
a basket and got French prisoners to return them to us with the 
message: ‘This is the ration of food which the inhabitants of Lauria 
send to the French, the only one that can suit them’. Then our 
enraged soldiers scrambled up the rocks and, despite the desperate 
defence mounted by the inhabitants and a hail of bullets fired against 
them, they stormed the village. Everything was then sacrificed to 
pitiless vengeance. The old men, women and children fired on us 
from their windows or threw stones at us; it was just like Zaragoza. 
We were forced to set fire to every quarter of the town. A horrible 
scene then unfolded, as women, children and old men rushed from 
their blazing houses and threw themselves at the feet of the victors, 
only to be massacred by the enraged and furious troops.”’ 
Even the rawest conscript had little difficulty in distinguishing such 
behaviour from war. War had rules, and — as it was learned in the 
eighteenth-century regiment — it was played out according to certain 

<<<PDFPAGE 55>>>
Alan Forrest 
37 
principles of honour and chivalry. What they experienced in Spain 
could not therefore be encompassed within the normal vocabulary of 
warfare. It was unregulated barbarism which the soldiers regarded as 
criminal rather than military, base and demeaning behaviour which 
was best seen as a particularly nasty form of brigandage. 
The language of brigandage was not new to the First Empire; it had, 
indeed, been 
a favoured term during the French Revolution and 
throughout most of the eighteenth century to describe, belittle and 
demonize resistance to the authorities. Indeed, in revolutionary discourse 
about their opponents it is hard to escape references to ‘brigands’, or 
to avoid the feeling that ‘brigand’ had become by the mid-1790s a 
universally accepted term of abuse for political opponents, indeed for 
anyone who dared to reject the libertarian message that was handed 
down from Paris. And if for the Napoleonic armies the quintessential 
home of brigandage was the Iberian Peninsula, for the revolutionaries it 
was inside France itself, in a shadowy world inhabited by refractory 
priests and returned émigrés, monarchists and federalists and men 
bribed by the gold of Pitt and Albion. Most particularly, brigands were 
assumed to infest the six departments of the West that constituted the 
Vendée militaire and to stir up popular dissent amongst the peasantry. 
Local Jacobins in the cities of the West had reviled the peasant insurgents 
since the very first vestiges of revolt, long before the Convention or the 
Paris Jacobins joined in, denouncing the insurrectionists, quite predict- 
ably, as outlaws and murderers, and as ‘brigands’ who had chosen to 
betray their country and deny their membership of the French nation. 
For the authorities it was a natural term of abuse — as we shall see by 
examining the ways in which the rhetoric was used. The rebels, on the 
other hand, might adopt it with pride as a part of their collective identity, 
rather as the sans-culottes had done in Paris. Thus the more radical Patriots 
in Avignon showed little reluctance to be identified as bons brigands 
whilst they led their attack on the authorities, still glorying in the name 
after they had seized control of the Club and the National Guard in 
1791.78 Nor did the Belgian peasants in 1798 feel any embarrassment at 
adopting the language of brigandage, again the defiance of the bons, in 
their case against the iniquities of both revolution and occupation. It 
was a way of underlining their illegal status inside the French republic, 
and it was suggestive of the patriotism and the proto-nationalism they 
preached. Just as the Vendée would be remembered as a region defined 
by its politics, and by the intransigence of its opposition to the republic, 
so the peasants of 1798 would enter Belgian history as heroes — as 
‘pbrigands’ — led by national heroes like the capitaine des chauffeurs, 