

<<<PDFPAGE 48>>>
30. 
The Ubiquitous Brigand 
behind vaguely royalist names and concentrating their thieving on 
mail coaches and other property of the French state. Others appeared to 
be committed to the counter-revolutionary cause, in the Vendée, for 
instance, or among the chouans in Brittany, men and women who had 
chosen a deliberate political path and who, by so doing, had placed 
themselves beyond the protection of the law. They had made a conscious 
choice not to be citizens, and had in consequence forfeited the rights 
which citizenship bestowed. They had slipped, seemingly effortlessly, 
from their place among the generality of Frenchmen - those who lived 
within the law and who could be presumed to be good and civically- 
motivated — into that grey area inhabited by those who fell beyond the 
pale of revolutionary orthodoxy to become the victims of what Sophie 
Wahnich has termed ‘the logic of revolutionary exclusion’.!° And 
though the level of threat that they posed to the authorities was never 
again to reach the proportions of the full scale civil war that was the 
Vendée during the spring and summer of 1793, brigandage would 
achieve its greatest geographical extent during the later 1790s, in the 
years of the Directory and Consulate. 
The problem of brigandage during these years was one of public 
order, of course, and it is as such that it is generally treated in prefects’ 
reports and other administrative despatches. For the authorities it was 
a ‘social scourge’ or a ‘frightful plague’, something that could only be 
overcome through a policy of severe repression, and if the Directory 
never succeeded in stamping it out, Napoleon came rather closer to 
restoring public order by attacking the brigands with all the armed 
might of the state. But the rise in the incidence of brigandage in this 
period, especially in some of the more peripheral areas of the country — 
barbets in the Alps, for instance, and chauffeurs in the Nord — alarmed 
the authorities and posed a severe threat to the governability of these 
regions, while the targets they selected for attack and the presence in 
their ranks of large numbers of army deserters alerted the government 
to their political as well as criminal intent. They focussed their attacks 
on merchants and other outsiders so as not to alienate local people. 
Systematically, too, they attacked symbols of governmental prestige 
and authority, like mail coaches and liberty trees, while the presence in 
their ranks — in the South-east particularly — of priests and refractory 
clergy gave a clear indication to the communities where they were 
staked out of a Catholic and counter-revolutionary ideology.'! Their 
numbers were swollen by draft dodgers and by those who fell out with 
the revolutionary authorities, but — as the Directory itself recognized — the 
explosion in the scale of banditry in these years cannot be explained 

<<<PDFPAGE 49>>>
Alan Forrest 
31 
without reference to revolutionary politics. To take one example from 
just outside the hexagone, if the introduction of the conscription law 
caused the initial outburst of violence in Ghent in 1798, it cannot 
explain the so-called guerre des paysans which followed and which 
engulfed the Belgian departments: 
Conscription appears only to have been the pretext. [The revolt] was 
the result of British intrigue and of fanaticism. The motors of the 
rebellion are men attached either to the government of the erstwhile 
Belgian state or to the party of the stathouder; and the rebels them- 
selves priests, monks, vagabonds and foreigners. 
'” 
Brigandage, 
in other words, was 
a complex construction which 
blended both the anti-revolutionary and the anti-social. Some of those 
denounced 
as brigands, 
like the barbets along the Italian frontier, 
appeared to start out with rather idealistic goals and were driven by a 
political agenda, but they fell into ordinary crime to keep themselves 
alive and were, by the end of a twenty-five year campaign of violence in 
the department of Alpes-Maritimes, indistinguishable from any other 
band of thieves and bandits.'’ Others were simple criminals, who skulked 
in the outskirts of southern cities to waylay passing mail coaches, often 
using royalist or anti-republican slogans to give themselves some 
pretence of legitimacy. In either case the effect was to dislocate local 
government and to deflect the military from their true vocation. The 
brigands sapped the strength and manpower of the Republic, targeting 
the very soldiers and gendarmes who were sent out to confront them, to 
the point where, in Stephen Clay’s words, ‘the roads leading to and from 
the Army of Italy were strewn with the corpses of soldiers who had been 
ambushed by brigands’.'* Troops were tied down for months on end in 
an unsuccessful campaign to root them out, an aspect of Directorial 
policing which émigrés and counter-revolutionaries remarked upon 
with ill-concealed satisfaction, since it provided the proof they needed 
that public order had collapsed and that committed Catholics had 
been driven into clandestinity and a prolonged campaign of violence 
against the authorities. Like the various crimes on which they reported 
in France and the countries France occupied, the spread of brigandage 
was taken by the émigré press to demonstrate the social and moral 
degradation that resulted from the Revolution’s ‘new morality’."® 
But how far should the definition of ‘brigandage’ extend? Did it have 
to involve armed robbery, or could it be used in a more generic way, to 
cover all those who by their actions placed themselves outside society, 