

<<<PDFPAGE 50>>>
32 
The Ubiquitous Brigand 
unprotected by the law? For the Napoleonic régime, both inside France 
and in occupied Europe, popular resistance was customarily explained 
away as a criminal activity, as the work of bandits and outlaws who 
sheltered among the people and cowed them into silence, rather than 
of some national or popular movement that might be accorded a degree 
of legitimacy. Napoleonic officials, both civil and military, sought to 
deny their opponents any vestige of dignity, to strip them of the kind of 
honourable feelings which only soldiers could be expected to display, 
in short to reduce them to the level of common criminals who abused 
popular trust in their quest for gain and local power. They could not, 
obviously, condemn foreign armies in these terms; men who fought 
against the French in the recognized military units of their states were 
accorded the meagre respect due to enemy soldiers, while their officers 
might expect to be treated with a respect appropriate to their rank. 
Brigands were men who were not soldiers — irregulars, freedom-fighters, 
guerrillas, militiamen, all might be wrapped up in the same term of 
condescension, and be criminalized in the event of a French victory. 
They were men who did not fight cleanly and did not accept the rules 
of war, men who laid ambushes for the French, sought concealment 
amongst the local civilian population, or otherwise resorted to tactics 
unworthy of fighting men. It was not a precise term in the way that 
‘guerrilla’ was to become, and it was used, apparently randomly and 
indiscriminately, to describe those whose activity was deemed improper, 
or underhand, or otherwise shameful. Napoleon did not hesitate, for 
instance, to suggest that the men who burned Moscow to drive back his 
advancing troops were themselves ‘brigands’. Though they had acted 
under the orders of General Rostopchin, he implied that they were no 
better than common criminals, and in his bulletin from Moscow on 
17 September 1812 he would say as much. ‘On the 16th,’ he reported, 
‘three to four hundred brigands set fire to the city in five hundred 
places at once’, and, fanned by fierce winds, their fires destroyed an 
entire capital. The loss was incalculable. ‘Churches, there were 1600 of 
them; palaces, more than 1000; immense magazines; almost everything 
has been consumed.’ And who was responsible for the destruction of 
such wealth and magnificence? ‘Brigands’, according to Napoleon, 
‘felons liberated from the prisons’, the lowest of men; the sorts of men 
who were not proper combatants and who therefore — as in the Peninsula 
or the Vendee — could not expect to be treated as soldiers if they fell 
into enemy hands. When the French captured them, they briefly inter- 
rogated them to establish that they had acted under orders; then, in 
their hundreds, they were summarily shot.!° 

<<<PDFPAGE 51>>>
Alan Forrest 
33 
This use of the term ‘brigand’ had by 1812 become a commonplace of 
French imperial usage, a means of distinguishing between the proper and 
honourable French way of doing things and the underhand stratagems 
that were resorted to by their opponents. It was widely used during the 
Italian campaign to describe those who took advantage of the Alpine 
weather and of their intimate knowledge of the local topography to 
embarrass the French forces — the variously-named barbets and chasseurs 
de montagne who were such a significant fighting force in the passes and 
valleys of the pré-Alpes. Italy was the first campaign where the French 
felt they were fighting brigands rather than soldiers, and where their 
efforts were undermined both by a local population that was always 
prone to revolt and by an army of part-timers and irregulars whom they 
were unable to repress. They could never be sure whom they were fighting, 
or who their real enemy was. Each day, it seemed, villagers joined with 
escaped prisoners-of-war to attack the French; it was not like fighting an 
army, for the enemy was constantly changing and rarely identified 
itself as a military unit. Each day, as one desperate French soldier 
expressed it, ‘We hunt down those villains who are set on murdering 
us, and when we do take prisoners we have no choice but to have them 
shot on the spot.’!? Why? Because the nature of the fighting and of the 
terrain made it impossible to keep prisoners — a factor that would have 
led to a lot of shootings even in more conventional warfare — but also 
because, as armed civilians, often indistinguishable by any form of 
uniform, they were ‘brigands’, men to whom the normal rules of war 
simply did not apply. ‘In the little town where I am stationed’, wrote 
Claude Lavit to his father in 1809, ‘the troops have their work cut out. 
The brigands are causing us a lot of trouble; for we are shooting large 
numbers of them, and we are the only ones to hunt them down, day 
and night.’* The imagery here is significant. Lavit is not talking of 
fighting or armed combat, man to man, as he would when describing 
engagements with the Austrians or Prussians. Rather it is the language 
of the hunter closing in on his prey. The ‘brigands’ are playing the 
role of wild animals, skulking in their dens, dehumanized, there to be 
killed before they could sink their fangs into the flesh of the troops 
themselves. 
If the Italians were brigands, so, too, were the Spaniards and the 
Portuguese. Indeed, in the brigandage stakes, the Italian campaign faded 
into relative insignificance; the Iberian peninsula was, without doubt, 
the main feature. Here the term was almost automatically transferred to 
the villagers and guerrilla fighters who, without being incorporated into 
any regular force, demonstrated a natural genius for war on their own 