

<<<PDFPAGE 56>>>
38 
The Ubiquitous Brigand 
Moneuse.”’ In popular movements brigands had something rather heroic 
about them which radiated a more general appeal. It is no accident, as 
Xavier Rousseaux reminds us, that by the twentieth century the words 
‘Brigand’ and ‘Moneuse’ would be familiar in a rather different context, 
as widely appreciated brands of Belgian beer.*° 
The revolutionary response to the Vendée was not intended to 
evoke images of heroism, however, but to discredit any political or social 
movement that offered a different view of the world. To such people 
the Revolution could offer no quarter; they were therefore dismissed 
as Outlaws, as ‘brigands’, as common criminals who should be hunted 
down and slaughtered as such. Attempts to distinguish between leaders 
and followers were soon abandoned, since at a time when republican 
soldiers were being killed and tortured by the rebels any desire to 
distinguish between degrees of responsibility.soon faded. The entire 
population of the West was demonized as people in a state of rebellion, 
men and women led into sedition by their nobles and priests — especially 
by their priests in a countryside where all were assumed to be pawns 
of a refractory and deeply reactionary clergy. The Vendean is not just 
séditieux; he is fanatisé, deaf to reasoned argument and a dupe to the 
local clergy, his credulity and child-like faith making him putty in the 
hands of the local nobility and of British agents. He was perceived as 
the other, the epitome of all that was antipathetic to the Revolution 
and to republican France. On the battlefield he appeared to delight 
in acts of unspeakable cruelty. In Turreau’s words, ‘They are less 
concerned here with fighting than with taking us by surprise and 
massacring us. The leaders of the rebels kidnap our soldiers and make 
them die in the most indescribable torment’.*! Because, as in the 
Iberian peninsula, the French faced an enemy who elected to fight 
through ambushes and guerrilla tactics, leaning heavily on the support 
of villagers and of their womenfolk, there was little reason to count 
them as soldiers, or to treat with honour people who responded with 
cunning and savagery, the language of denunciation became stronger, 
the representation more cruelly distorting. The Vendean was condemned 
as a criminal, a bandit, an outlaw, out to undermine the republic and 
destroy public order - in short, he was a brigand. But he was also so 
much more. 
As this was a civil war in which hatreds ran much deeper, it was not 
sufficient merely to categorize the Vendean as a brigand. Brigands, after 
all, might be criminal in their use of violence against the republic, 
and might, if caught, deserve the death penalty for their crimes; but 
they remained human beings, capable of rational — if at times deeply 

<<<PDFPAGE 57>>>
Alan Forrest 
39 
flawed — choices. Of course they were not rational or enlightened human 
beings: that was 
self-evident. 
They were 
primitive peasants who 
belonged to what the revolutionaries saw as an alien and superstitious 
culture, one where men sought the blessing of their priests before battle 
and the promise that, should they have the honour of dying for Christ 
and King, they would return from the dead within three days.*? But was 
it possible that men who committed such atrocities in cold blood could 
retain even the palest remnants of human sensibility? Were they really 
men at all? In the language of urban commissaires and of deputies on 
mission to the West it is noticeable how systematically the terms of 
abuse that were heaped on the rebels sought to dehumanize them, and 
to suggest that their behaviour was akin to that of wild beasts rather 
than of men. The same language occurred again and again in reports 
and memoirs, words like ‘beasts’, ‘monsters’, ‘vermin’, or ‘ferocious 
animals who seek to devour the republic’ — words which were used with 
cold deliberation to devalue the lives of the enemy. They had, it was 
inferred, a taste for blood and a love of killing that more properly 
belong to wild animals, and, like refractory priests and émigré nobles, 
their savagery was reserved for supporters of the new political order. 
This impression was made more vivid when it was observed that they 
lived like beasts, skulking behind hedges, leaping out from bushes, 
retiring to lick their wounds in a clearing in the scrub or dragging their 
unfortunate victims back to their lairs (taniéres).*? The propaganda 
effect of this language was considerable, especially in the capital and 
the republican strongholds of the interior, and also in the army, where 
soldiers soon learned that these were not honourable opponents whom 
they should treat with respect. They obeyed no rules of war, nor had 
they any understanding of honour in the way the revolutionary soldiers 
understood it. Indeed, it was their animal instincts which best explained 
their successes in engaging the republican army. As one cavalryman 
from the Gironde wrote of his experience in the Vendée, ‘if they had 
not acted like wild beasts and sought refuge in the woods’, they would 
surely have been wiped out.** 
There was nothing haphazard about this representation. As in more 
recent wars, the government was dehumanizing its opponents and 
spreading atrocity stories with a clear awareness of the effects their 
propaganda would have in angering civilian opinion and spurring their 
soldiers to new efforts.*> This was a war in which public opinion 
mattered, and where words carried a special weight. Once dehumanized 
in this way, once stripped of those characteristics which others shared 
with him and depicted as a beast of the fields, the Vendean became an 