

<<<PDFPAGE 63>>>
> 
Guerrilla Warfare avant la lettre: 
Northern Italy, 1792-97 
Martin Boycott-Brown 
According to The Oxford English Dictionary, the term ‘guerrilla’ first 
appeared in the English language in 1809. However, it is fairly obvious 
that the concept of the guerrilla, and the type of warfare associated with 
it, are much older than that. If we look at the definition of the phenom- 
enon provided by The Shorter Oxford English Dictionary, which states 
that it is ‘an irregular war carried on by small bodies of men acting 
independently’ and that a guerrilla is ‘one engaged in such warfare’, we 
can see similarities with the type of military action that eighteenth- 
century military men often refer to as la petite guerre or klein Krieg, which 
was characterized by sporadic skirmishes, ambushes, and raids by small 
groups of lightly armed troops. However, this kind of fighting was 
normally carried out by men who were, at least technically speaking, 
soldiers. (In the case of the earliest Hungarian hussars and the first of 
the Austrian army’s Croats, there is at least some doubt whether they 
can properly be classed as ‘soldiers’.) Although the dictionary definition 
quoted above says nothing about the composition of guerrilla bands, it 
is probable that most people nowadays would not think of them as 
being made up of soldiers, but rather as consisting mostly of armed 
civilians, perhaps with a sprinkling of uniformed men. 
Such groups of armed civilians certainly existed in northern Italy in 
the 1790s, though in most cases they were not highly organized or 
long-lived, nor did they always have a truly military purpose. It should 
be noted that the dictionary definition implies that in order for a group 
of people to qualify for the name ‘guerrilla’ they have to be involved in 
war, not in some other violent activity, such as banditry, but there are 
times when it is difficult to know where one such activity ends and the 
other begins. However, arriving at a precise definition of the meaning 
45 

<<<PDFPAGE 64>>>
46 
Guerrilla Warfare avant la lettre 
of the terms ‘guerrilla’ and ‘guerrilla warfare’, and deciding whether the 
armed civilians of northern Italy were ‘proper’ guerrillas, is not what 
this chapter is about. Rather, the main intention is to look at a few spe- 
cific cases of popular resistance (in the mountains of the Riviera, in the 
Po valley, and around Rivoli), and the sometimes surprising French 
reaction to them. In other words, we will look, if only superficially, at 
the relationship between the civilians and the military, concentrating 
more on individuals than on relations at the level of leaders and institu- 
tions, and see what kinds of relations existed between them at different 
times and places. At this point it should be made clear that this chapter 
is based on published sources, so it owes a large debt to others, particu- 
larly some Italian local historians, who have found and published much 
interesting material relating to the subjects we shall be looking at. But 
as their work remains largely unknown to those who have no Italian, it 
is to be hoped that it will still add something to the debate. In passing, 
it might also be observed that this chapter touches on an aspect of 
war that is too often neglected by military historians, who rarely have 
anything to say about civilians and often write about warfare as if it 
took place in the middle of the ocean, in areas where nobody lives. Yet 
civilians suffer dreadfully from the effects of war, and every single 
campaign and battle —- with rare exceptions — takes place in somebody’s 
cornfield, in somebody’s orchard, or in somebody’s village. 
We shall begin by examining the Riviera, and, in common with the 
other areas we shall be discussing, it is important to look first at its 
geography. Put very simply, much of the area would seem to have been 
ideal terrain for brigands or guerrillas. Not only is it hilly or mountain- 
ous, but much of it is, and was, covered with fairly dense woods. There 
were few good roads, but many, many, mule tracks winding over the 
broken terrain, giving any number of escape routes, or places where 
ambushes could be made. It was also an extremely poor area, little 
suited to agriculture, and had a sparse population. Politically speaking, 
most of the coastal strip belonged to the Republic of Genoa, and was 
neutral in the War of the First Coalition, but only a few miles inland 
the territory belonged to Piedmont, which was at war with the French. 
The latter first moved into the Riviera in September 1792, when they 
captured Nice, which at that time was a Piedmontese possession. They 
then occupied various parts of the Riviera until Napoleon Bonaparte’s 
offensive of April 1796 took the main sphere of military operations 
inland to Lombardy. 
The French had not been in the Riviera long before they began to 
encounter hostile armed civilians (sometimes alone, and sometimes 