

<<<PDFPAGE 85>>>
4 
Resistance, Collaboration or Third 
Way? Responses to Napoleonic 
Rule in Germany 
Michael Rowe 
The terms ‘resistance’ and ‘collaboration’ are evocative, and are generally 
applied to Nazi-occupied Europe. The characteristics of the collaborator 
are uniformly negative: somebody motivated by cowardice, malice or 
even ideological affiliation with the invader who betrays his country 
and fellow citizens. The resister is a hero, courageous, patriotic, fighting 
against the odds. These are the popular images. Of course, theorists of 
‘collaboration’ and ‘resistance’, be they political scientists, sociologists 
or historians, are dissatisfied with such a simple dichotomy. Stephen 
Gilliatt, in his recent exploration of the dynamics of the phenomenon, 
notes that the term collaborazionistas, when it first appeared in an Italian 
dictionary in 1922 as a descriptor for socialists wanting to work with the 
bourgeois government, initially carried with it no negative connotations.’ 
However, it quickly gained these even before World War II, when its 
current emotive meaning became widespread. Works of scholarly 
detachment, in contrast, view ‘collaboration’ as a political strategy, not 
pathological behaviour: it is a possible way of managing conflicting 
interests, as indeed is resistance. Beyond that, they fail to agree on any 
definitions, but tend to recognise that both ‘collaboration’ and ‘resistance’ 
are blanket terms covering various forms of behaviour and motivation. 
Typical is the following, from Peter Davies’s recent book on wartime 
France: ‘... an act of resistance was, basically, anything that, in the mind 
of the person or group executing the act, fe/t like an act of resistance’ .” 
Such an act might range from full-scale military action to accidentally- 
on-purpose bumping into a German on the street. The act of resistance, 
or indeed, collaboration, according to such a definition, might not be 
recognizable as such by the occupying forces, the rest of the occupied 
community, 
or indeed 
the 
later 
historian. 
Conversely, 
something 
67 

<<<PDFPAGE 86>>>
68 
Resistance, Collaboration or Third Way? 
perceived as ‘resistance’ or ‘collaboration’ by the occupation authorities 
or community might well be motivated by other considerations, and 
simply represent an unintended outcome or secondary result. Some label 
this as ‘functional’ resistance or, presumably, ‘functional’ collaboration.* 
Clearly, collaboration and resistance are not as simple as they might 
first appear. 
Despite this, an attempt will be made in this chapter to apply these 
difficult concepts not to German-occupied France, but French-occupied 
Germany: more specifically, the German-speaking region to the west of 
the Rhine in the generation following the outbreak of the Revolutionary 
Wars in 1792. However, it is impossible to proceed without briefly 
considering the state of affairs in this region on the eve of occupation. 
The Rhineland lay in the far west of that loose collection of territories 
clustered within the 1000-year-old Holy Roman Empire.* It was one of 
the Reich’s most territorially fragmented regions, its 1.5-1.6 million 
inhabitants divided amongst over 100 (depending, in part, on defi- 
nition) sovereignties that recognized no higher temporal authority other 
than the Emperor. Some of these were very small indeed, representing 
no more than glorified villages with populations in the hundreds, and 
ruled over by a colourful collection of imperial counts (including the 
Metternichs), imperial knights, imperial abbesses and abbots, and 
other minor princelings.° For their subjects, rule was personal; the 
allegiance they owed was to an authority that was near, and tangible. 
The pocket states, in which a significant minority of Rhinelanders had 
resided for centuries, did not face the same challenge of ‘acculturizing’ 
their subjects as was the case in Europe’s larger territorial states. Hence 
the concepts of ‘resistance’ and ‘collaboration’, which are bound up 
with notions of legitimacy, patriotism and nationalism, hardly apply in 
these micro-states, or if so, in a form fundamentally different from 
larger territorial units. 
Most Rhinelanders, however, lived within one of the larger entities: 
under one of the three archbishop electors — Cologne, Mainz, Trier — or 
under the sceptre of a distant Hohenzollern or Wittelsbach prince, who 
governed substantial 
Rhenish 
territories 
from Berlin and Munich 
respectively. What is significant about both these categories of territory — 
the ecclesiastical electorates, and the so-called Nebenldnder ruled by the 
Hohenzollerns and Wittelsbachs — is that, through their nature, they 
failed to establish the kind of dynastic ties that existed elsewhere 
between princes and peoples. The monarchies of the ecclesiastical 
electorates could not, obviously, be hereditary; instead, their sovereigns 
were elected by the cathedral chapters. Certainly, some of them were 