

<<<PDFPAGE 71>>>
Martin Boycott-Brown 
53 
churches by individuals and groups of soldiers, there was also official - 
or apparently official - looting on a grand scale. In addition, the French 
made exorbitant demands for supplies, and began to rearrange the 
government of Lombardy. Lodi provides a fairly good example of what 
happened in the province. First it had to provide a large number of 
rations for the Austrian army as it moved through in its retreat, then it 
had to do the same for the French army when it arrived. On 10 May it 
was ordered to provide 40 000 rations of food, and the same number for 
each of the following two days.’ For a town that counted 12 000 
inhabitants, this kind of demand meant using up practically all the 
reserves of staple foods, with the result that the local population would 
not have enough to last until the next harvest. Lodi was lucky in that it 
was able to obtain extra food from Milan, but the strain on local 
resources was enormous. The next misfortune that befell Lodi concerned 
its Monte di Pieta, a credit institution of a kind that was very common 
in Italy. They were run under the auspices of the church, and their 
function was to advance small loans to less affluent people at low rates 
of interest, in exchange for items deposited as securities. They therefore 
held numerous precious articles of every sort and description, as well as 
less valuable items. The total value of the cash and objects deposited 
with the Monte in Lodi at that time came to about 235 OOO lire, which 
made it a tempting target. On 11 May its offices were visited by a 
French commissary, Collot, who sequestered all the valuables, though 
in a show of Republican egalitarianism, poor people were allowed to 
reclaim non-valuable items free of charge. The tickets attached to the 
precious objects were ripped off, so that their owners could not be iden- 
tified, after which the objects themselves quickly disappeared. What 
happened to them does not seem to be recorded, so we do not know if 
they went into the army’s coffers, or Collot’s.’® 
It was much the same story in other parts of Lombardy, which the 
French seemed to regard as a kind of gold mine to be exploited without 
restraint. On 17 May, Bonaparte wrote to the French government 
saying, ‘We shall obtain twenty millions in contributions from this 
country. It is one of the richest in the universe’ though he completely 
undermined this justification by adding, ‘but [it is] entirely exhausted 
after five years of war’.'? Further bizarre contradictions followed hard 
on the heels of this. Apparently oblivious to the irony in what he was 
saying, Bonaparte issued an order the same day stating that French 
soldiers ‘must respect and protect the inhabitants of the lands [they] 
have conquered’ on the grounds that ‘the General in Chief has too lively 
a desire to maintain the honour of the army to suffer any individual to 

<<<PDFPAGE 72>>>
54 
Guerrilla Warfare avant la lettre 
violate property’.*° He also dictated various letters that day and the next 
concerning vast sums of money and paintings to be taken from Parma, 
Modena, and Milan to be sent to Paris. Then in a proclamation to the 
people of Lombardy issued on 19 May he unveiled to them the huge 
amount of money he expected them to hand over to the army, presenting 
it as a fair price for liberation from the Austrians, and ‘a very small 
contribution for countries so fertile’.2’ Yet Pietro Verri, who was involved 
in the administration of the province, commented that the sum was 
equivalent to four years’ direct taxation, and that it would take many 
years ‘perhaps even a generation’” to recover from the effects. 
Not only had the economy been thrown out of equilibrium by the 
arrival of the French, but so had the political organization of Lombardy. 
The Austrian governor (the Archduke Ferdinand) had left hurriedly, 
consigning power to a group of local notahles. Not only was this 
arrangement rapidly dismantled by the French, but a large number of 
local revolutionaries and French sympathisers, who had previously kept 
a low profile, began to throw their weight around, secure in the protec- 
tion of the ‘liberating’ army. Trees of liberty began to be erected in town 
squares and symbols of real or supposed tyranny were destroyed by 
excited ‘Jacobins’. One particular act of this kind was to be a large con- 
tributing factor in the gravest outbreak of civilian violence against the 
French. The events provide an interesting contrast with the kind of 
resistance that had sprung up in the mountains of the Riviera, where 
the occasional ambush seems to have been the norm. On 16 May a tree 
of liberty had been put up in the town square of Pavia. Unfortunately, 
the square was also the site of an ancient equestrian statue, known as 
the Regisole, which represented 
a Roman Emperor. The local people 
were proud of it, and it was regarded as something of a symbol of the 
city — but the Jacobins who had put up the tree of liberty decided that it 
must be the statue of a tyrant, and that it should not be allowed to 
share the same space as the new symbol of the people’s freedom. They 
therefore clamoured to smash it down. The French commanders in the 
town, generals Augereau and Rusca, seem to have been reluctant to 
sanction this act of vandalism, but eventually gave way. While the 
French did not directly take a hand in destroying the statue, it was only 
the presence of squads of soldiers in the square that made it possible for 
the Jacobins to carry out their work without being lynched. 
It seems worth commenting that what had been destroyed here was 
a powerful symbol of local identity and tradition. The attack on the 
local people’s sense of identity, though not directly carried out by the 
French, can only have increased the sense of alienation and enmity felt 