

<<<PDFPAGE 81>>>
Martin Boycott-Brown 
63 
soldiers, they should defend themselves with stones, poles, and other 
similar weapons, but they should not use muskets.*° 
At first sight, the last sentence seems extraordinary, and one is moved 
to wonder how many generals might have given a group of civilians 
authority to use various weapons to defend themselves against the 
soldiery. But as well as being an honest man,*’ Rampon was clearly 
aware of the advantages that might flow from assisting the villagers, not 
to mention the dangers that attended ignoring the abuses they suffered 
at the hands of the troops. Other perceptive soldiers knew very well 
what these were, as we may gather from the memoirs of Captain 
Laugier, who had found himself surrounded by the enemy on the other 
side of Lake Garda only three weeks before, and recounts how a friendly 
approach to the locals could make a crucial difference: 
I persuaded a farmer to sell us [some food] which I paid for generously. 
The man was so pleased that he promised to go to the town on the 
morrow and find out what was happening there and bring us food. 
He did this, and reported that the enemy had committed outrages in 
the town, and that the inhabitants were so indignant that they 
seemed ready to rise up if we had the least advantage... Towards 
evening the farmer informed me of the enemy’s dispositions, that 
the main attack would be directed against the heights above us, and 
that it would take place on the morrow at the break of day, as duly 
happened. Such is the advantage that is obtained by respecting the 
inhabitants, that one is informed of everything, accurately and in 
good time.*® 
It was fortunate for both soldiers and civilians that the French army 
had its share of men like Laugier and Rampon. The latter’s conciliatory 
attitude soon had greatly beneficial effects for Alberghini and his flock, 
as the priest punctiliously set down, despite his many reservations 
about the French: 
The...general kept his promise: indeed, to remedy the disorders 
better, he had a picket of about forty soldiers with their respective 
officers detached from the camp at Preelle every day, and sent to the 
pieve of Caprino where they stayed all day. From this picket some 
patrols were sent out to go round the villages to prevent any disorder 
that might take place. Nor did the village of Caprino omit to recognize 
this service, and every morning some portions of bread were given to 

<<<PDFPAGE 82>>>
64 
Guerrilla Warfare avant la lettre 
each soldier in the picket by the parish, and the officers were also 
given a ration of wine. The soldiers appreciated such recompense, 
though small, and were ready to show their gratitude towards the 
parish and the whole town, of which they gave particular proof 
when it was necessary to give communion to a sick person, and [the 
Holy Sacrament was going to have to be carried past the place] where 
the picket was, and it was feared that some irreverence might be 
shown, as had unfortunately happened in other similar cases. One of 
the officers having been asked to make his soldiers respect the Holy 
Sacrament, he replied that everything would be as it should.°” 
Here we can see important steps being taken in the normalization of 
relations between the two sides. The local French commander institutes 
very visible and effective measures to solve the problem the villagers 
have complained about. The villagers show their gratitude in tangible 
form, and soldiery respond by showing respect towards a religious 
procession. The process continued even further: 
Every disorder having thus been remedied, and plundering and 
robbery prevented, the commissaries of the troops camped in the 
area did not, however, desist from troubling the communities with 
their arrogant demands, requesting, among other things, wood to 
bake bread. But the Councillors, made wise by experience, replied 
that they did not have wood to give them, and so, if they wanted it, 
they should go to the woods and cut it themselves. The French 
commissaries made no further resistance to this decision, but 
contenting themselves with this agreement they sent some villagers 
to cut it on Monte Gazo, where a section of woodland was assigned 
to them, and they paid the workmen every day in cash, also giving 
them a ration of bread and other things as had been agreed.” 
As we can see, once the two sides had opted for cooperation rather 
than enmity, it became possible to develop a working relationship that 
permitted them to live in relative harmony. Intransigence on one side 
would only have bred intransigence on the other, with painful con- 
sequences for both. It is a pity that the sensible behaviour of the village 
elders and the French commander was not more widely imitated. 
In conclusion, we may say that while there was a great deal of armed 
civilian resistance to the French in northern Italy between 1792 and 
1797, not much of it conformed to modern notions of guerrilla warfare. 
The outbreaks of armed resistance that had the greatest effect on French 