

<<<PDFPAGE 69>>>
Martin Boycott-Brown 
51 
groups of peasants taking up arms against isolated groups of soldiers. In 
this case there is an element of wishing to defeat an invader, but whether it 
can be called guerrilla warfare is highly debatable. As to the French 
reaction, it is somewhat surprising that the civilian sources quoted here 
make no mention of reprisals. One might have expected the heavy 
hand of repression, but Count Moretti, for example, says only that the 
French began to avail themselves of Piedmontese troops to protect their 
convoys, and gives not the slightest hint of any repressive measures 
being taken. Yet we know that when there were major insurrections in 
the Val Bormida three years later, the French shot more than a few 
insurgents when they captured them. It seems improbable that the 
French did not do their best to hunt down the armed peasants in 
the Langhe, particularly when they took such large measures against 
the barbets further west, but it would seem that they did not capture 
many. 
Let us now look at events in the Po valley, where the French were to 
spend nine months fighting the Austrians between the beginning of 
May 1796 and February 1797. As before, it is important to say something 
about the geography, which could hardly provide a greater contrast 
with the Riviera. While the latter is mountainous and forested, the Po 
valley is a wide, flat, open plain with only low hills in a few areas. The 
land has been intensively cultivated for centuries and there is almost no 
forest. Unlike the mountains of the Riviera, where a few peasants 
scratched out a living from the thin soil and there were no large towns, 
the Po valley was fertile and populous and home to wealthy cities like 
Milan. In other words, it was terrain that seemed to offer little to favour 
the guerrilla fighter. There were few, if any, natural refuges in which to 
conceal a band of men, and flat terrain makes cavalry and artillery 
both more usable and less dispensable. These are both arms in which 
guerrilla bands tend to be lacking, which puts them at a disadvantage 
against 
a conventional army in flat lands. 
It is not surprising, 
therefore, that the most serious instances of armed resistance to the French 
in the Po valley took the form of insurrections, rather than the raids and 
ambushes that characterized civilian action in the mountains. Most of 
these insurrections occurred in Lombardy (a province that had once been 
ruled by Spain and had then passed under Austrian control) and Emilia 
Romagna, which belonged to the Papal States. 
When the French launched themselves into Lombardy, it was with 
a lightning movement that gave rise to a situation that was every bit 
as confused and fluid as that which had existed during their attack 
through the mountains of the Riviera the previous month. As before, 

<<<PDFPAGE 70>>>
52. 
Guerrilla Warfare avant la lettre 
in rural areas the soldiers found opportunities to commit all sorts of 
abuses. The parish priest of Ombriano, a village not far from Crema, 
tells us that on 11 May, the day after the battle of Lodi, the French 
advance guard reached his village at about eight in the morning. It was 
a traumatic event: 
The troops... broken with fatigue, hungry, despoiled all the houses, 
the parishioners having fled to other villages and into the marshes... 
I was with Sig Francesco Donati, and was assailed by a picket of 
twelve French hussars, who robbed us of everything, with sabres and 
with muskets at our chests.4 
Terrified, the priest and his companion hid in a nearby mill, from 
which they could only watch in anguish as his house was broken into 
and his church desecrated, the soldiers taking away all the church 
vestments and sacred objects. This was not an isolated case, nor were 
the French the only culprits, as we may gather from the testimony of an 
engineer called Massari, who lived in Crema: 
We had only just entered the Ombriano Gate [of Crema] when we 
saw the country people come running panting into the town from 
the nearby villages, saying that the few Germans [i.e. Austrians] who 
were retiring had begun to steal, at first only at isolated farmhouses, 
and then in some of the villages, and the first small groups of French 
who pursued them had begun to do the same as well. At the very 
same instant that this news spread through the town, with the 
addition that the French themselves were arriving at any moment, 
you could see all the houses and shops and also even the gate of the 
town shut with precipitate speed, so that it seemed that the end of 
the world had come.!® 
According to Massari, the panicky reaction of the people of Crema was 
due to ‘the very great fear that they had of the French...a fear that had 
taken hold of almost all the inhabitants of Italy because of the great 
vendetta and tyranny that was attributed to them both by the public 
newspapers and gazettes as well as by all those who could not even hear 
speak of them, such was the hate and aversion that was generally felt 
towards the French in Italy.’'® 
Whether or not the views of most Italians were as Massari says, the 
French hardly conducted themselves in a manner that was conducive to 
good relations. Not only was there small scale pillaging of houses and 