

<<<PDFPAGE 67>>>
Martin Boycott-Brown 
49 
‘To begin with, the local population did not welcome the French troops 
badly, but rather they watched their battles with the Austrians almost 
like neutral spectators...and the greatest worries were about the 
damage to the crops.’° But the French offensive of April 1796 brought 
a different set of circumstances, when French troops were pushed to the 
limit, and soon outdistanced their meagre and inefficient supply trains, 
having to go for days without rations. Moreover, the military situation 
was fluid and confused, and the rapid movement created conditions 
that many soldiers were able to exploit by absenting themselves to look 
for loot. The locals therefore found themselves inundated by hordes of 
desperate men looking for food, or money and valuables. Their reaction 
was as violent as the treatment they had been subjected to. A fairly 
graphic description of the fate of the area around Dego in April 1796 is 
given by a local minor noble, Count Moretti. He was avowedly pro- 
Austrian and anti-French, which may lend colour to his story, but there 
seems little reason to doubt the overall outline of his account: 
Now from these two battles [of Dego] begins the painful story of 
these villages of ours, Rocchetta, Dego, Giusvalla, Piana (our house is 
the one that suffered more than any other), Brovida, Santa Giulia, 
and La Scaletta were barbarously sacked without any restraint for 
eight days together...cattle, grain, wine, everything was taken, the 
furniture was taken away or burnt, people tortured with the most 
barbarous methods to get them to give up their money...the 
women were treated with the ultimate indignities, after first stripping 
them of whatever valuables they had...I will not speak of the 
churches and sacred objects, which are things that horrify. The last 
two days, however, the villagers recovering a little from the shock, 
especially those of the nearby langhe,’ and fear having changed to 
desperation, they united in armed bands, and moving day and 
night through the nearby hills and roads, they began to kill what- 
ever enemies fell into their hands without quarter, and firing on 
those who came out to sack, blunting their pride somewhat, keeping 
them away from many villages, so that all the langa of La Rocha, 
Serole, Gorio, Olmo, Perleto and Cagna were exempt from robberies. 
The villagers also continued this practice in the days after the truce 
[the armistice of Cherasco], attacking and despoiling entire convoys 
of French.® 
Moretti was not the only eye-witness to comment on the formation 
of bands of armed civilians. Another such was a lawyer from Millesimo, 

<<<PDFPAGE 68>>>
50 
Guerrilla Warfare avant la lettre 
called Fassino, who observed that civilian resistance continued after the 
end of the war with Piedmont in April 1796, and that ‘the French army 
was split up by the various bands of armed country people, who killed 
all those who remained behind, and the small squads that were trying 
to reach their units.” 
This does not seem like mere banditry, because the bands seem to 
have been formed to take revenge on the French for their excesses, 
rather than for motives of theft, but it is perhaps too much to attribute 
a truly military intention to their activities. As Oliveri remarks, ‘Infor- 
mation relative to the Val Bormida is fragmentary and does not permit 
us to know if there was organised resistance or mere episodes that did 
not come out of an agreed plan of combat.’!° Elsewhere he is more 
definite, stating: ‘This is not a guerrilla movement according to modern 
canons, but a spontaneous armed resistance which manifests itself here 
and there. Where the peasants have to pay the price of the invasion 
they do not welcome the French troops with that enthusiasm that was 
manifested in many intellectual coteries.’'' Yet for all that he may not 
have been a guerrilla, the Piedmontese peasant, faced with the devasta- 
tion of his home and the likelihood of death from starvation, put up a 
ferocious resistance. It was a reaction that was feared by at least some 
French generals. Joubert, for one, expressed his disquiet in a letter, 
saying: 
Everything would go very well if the soldiers did not abandon them- 
selves to pillage: not a day passes without some pillagers being shot. 
Despite this severity the mania does not stop: the country people are 
arming themselves. '* 
As Bonaparte himself had written before the beginning of the campaign, 
‘The poverty [of the troops] has authorised indiscipline, and without 
discipline, [there can be] no glory.’!’ It therefore seems likely that 
several threatening orders that were issued to the troops had as much 
the intention of maintaining the cohesion of the army as that of 
protecting civilians. 
To summarize, the French came up against determined, though 
limited, resistance from armed civilians along the Riviera, but though it 
caused annoyance it never became a serious threat to military oper- 
ations. Some of this resistance may well have been put up by pre-existing 
bands of brigands who were probably more interested in loot than in 
defeating a French invader, while other instances of resistance were 
born out of a struggle for survival or a desire for revenge, and involved 