

<<<PDFPAGE 79>>>
Martin Boycott-Brown 
61 
sticks, pitchforks, and some of them even with firearms and edged 
weapons, soon assembled, drove the soldiers from the houses where 
they had begun their plundering, and routed them merely by loosing 
on them a storm of stones. Scattered here and there because of the 
need to run from the blows of the sticks and the stones that rained 
on their shoulders and courageously followed by the aforesaid 
villagers, some Frenchmen lost weapons, some their hats, and some 
even their horses (from which they had dismounted since the animals 
could not gallop due to the badness of the roads). The dismay and 
fear of the aforesaid soldiers was so great that they did not even have 
the courage to put a hand to their weapons and defend themselves 
in some way. If one of them took a weapon in his hand he was soon 
forced to put it down again on seeing a pitchfork aimed at his 
chest, or on being threatened with being knocked from his horse 
with a long pole. Only one had the daring to fire a musket shot at 
the villagers, but at that very moment a villager replied with a similar 
shot. With this solemnity the above-mentioned robbers were accom- 
panied and chased by the courageous people of Gaon as far as the 
villa at Caiar, where the villagers themselves turned back towards 
their homes.** 
We should note a few things about this assault on the soldiers. First, it 
was not an offensive act, like an ambush on stragglers or a supply train, 
but a reaction to an invasion and violation of property. Since the 
defence took place in the village itself it was very obvious who had 
been involved in it and where they came from - in other words, it was 
not a clandestine act of the kind commonly associated with guerrilla 
warfare. There were obviously considerable risks in such an overt display 
of defiance. It should also be pointed out that none of the French soldiers 
are reported as being killed or wounded, so there had evidently been 
some restraint on the part of the villagers, who had merely tried to scare 
off the marauders. It did not look as if things were going to end there, 
however, and the villagers began to take more serious measures, as 
Alberghini relates: 
But fear, which is the follower of doubtful enterprises, awoke serious 
reflections in the minds of the aforementioned people of Gaon, and 
they suspected they would have to face a bigger attack. Because of 
this, not seeing any other means of protection, they took the 
extreme decision to resist to the death. Therefore, having gathered in 
the square they decided on the best method to defend themselves, 

<<<PDFPAGE 80>>>
62 
Guerrilla Warfare avant la lettre 
and in orderly fashion divided among themselves the tasks and the 
places to be occupied. They all soon found themselves weapons, and 
moulded lead bullets in the square in public to demonstrate their 
firm willingness to defend themselves at any cost. They also readied 
great quantities of stones that were suitable for throwing by hand, in 
certain places from where it was possible to bombard the roads 
without being seen, because the latter, since they climb almost 
continuously and have many bends, can easily be guarded from a 
few high points, and defended simply by throwing stones. They also 
placed small bodies of guards and a few sentinels on certain heights 
so they might see if the French could be observed from afar while 
making their way up there. Lastly, they ordered the women and 
children, and those who were not fit for the trial, to retire to the 
crest of the mountain which stands above the said village to the 
north, and to take their animals and movable goods with them. 
The women, animated by the same resolution, were determined to 
roll great boulders at the enemy, and defend themselves if they were 
attacked. This example of daring was a spur to the nearby villages, so 
the inhabitants of these also set out to defend themselves from the 
incursions of the thieves. Indeed, many of them joined in alliance 
and gave help to each other. The resolution of the villagers soon 
made the French soldiers desist from the thieving they had started, 
and they feared a general rebellion.*®* 
The striking thing here is the remarkable level of organization and 
planning that was put into the defensive measures, even extending to 
cooperation with other villages. Affairs seemed to have reached a critical 
point, and it is not difficult to see how the violence could have 
escalated, perhaps resulting in groups of men taking to the mountains 
and the woods and engaging in guerrilla warfare against the French. 
But there must have been at least one extremely wise head among the 
villagers, and they were not blind to the dangers of their situation: 
However, the villagers themselves having thought better of their 
decision, which could have turned out to their harm and final 
destruction because of the desire imprudently to take offence with 
an army, they sent some people to General of Brigade Rampon, who 
commanded the troops camped in this area, to give him news of 
what had happened and also to beg him to use his authority to 
remedy these disorders. And he promised that he would stop them, 
adding that if the villagers were disturbed in the future by marauding 