

<<<PDFPAGE 75>>>
Martin Boycott-Brown 
57 
24 May. A courier with news of the trouble was hurriedly sent off to 
Bonaparte, who had only left the city that morning on his way to start 
the next offensive in the direction of Mantua. Before long, news of 
what was happening in Pavia and other places began to filter through, 
forcing Bonaparte to turn back with a brigade of grenadiers commanded 
by Jean Lannes, some cavalry and artillery. This force made towards 
Pavia, but was halted in the afternoon at Binasco, half-way between 
Pavia and Milan, by a large body of insurgents. This has been variously 
estimated at between 700 and 1000 men. There was a short, unequal 
fight that drove the rebels to flight, after which the French sacked the 
village, then burnt it, destroying about half the houses. 
While this had been happening the situation in Pavia had continued 
to be chaotic. Belcredi tells us that: 
On the morning of Tuesday 24...they negotiated for the surrender 
[of the castle] but did not agree on the conditions. The bold peasants 
demanded bread, wine and cheese from the Municipality...The 
peasants, not content with the food supplied to them, demanded 
contributions of food and wine from all the citizens and the monas- 
teries, which caused great worry among those who foresaw the 
consequences. After lunch, the negotiations for the surrender of 
the castle were begun again through the forced mediation of the 
captured general [Haquin], and it was concluded that at eight o’clock 
on the following morning [Wednesday] the garrison would give itself 
up as prisoners, if the citizens guaranteed that they would accompany 
the soldiers and defend them from the insults of the peasantry.” 
The last sentence suggests that the French were well aware that they 
were in greater danger from the peasants than the townspeople, whom 
they must have known had suffered less from the depredations of the 
marauders. Haquin also noted that the town officials had protected him 
when the mob had dragged him out of the safety of the Town Hall, 
‘covering me with their bodies’ and making ‘every effort to contain the 
people’. 
We may also note from Belcredi’s comments that the insurgents had 
begun to demand ‘contributions’, or rations, not unlike a real army. This 
may have been nothing more complicated than a desire to profit from 
the power that the insurgents wielded at that moment, but it may, perhaps, 
give some indication of how they viewed themselves, and of their 
over-confident mood. Further proof of the latter was the continuing 
growth of the rebel force, and according to Belcredi, ‘On Wednesday 

<<<PDFPAGE 76>>>
58 
Guerrilla Warfare avant la lettre 
25 our streets swarmed even more with armed peasants.’*’ They also 
gained a notable victory with the surrender of the castle, the garrison, 
as had been requested, being taken away under the protection of the 
townspeople and given a meal. The surrender agreement was careful to 
stipulate that the Municipality had done everything in its power to 
protect the soldiers. 
Had there been any proper military scheme or leadership among the 
insurgents they might have garrisoned the castle, but according to 
Belcredi their behaviour was anything but prudent or disciplined: 
Almost as puffed up and drunk with exultation as if they had gained 
a vast empire, and even more because of the rumour that was spread 
by some evil-doers that the Germans [Austrians] were near, even that 
there were Croats...on the road to Milan and also uhlans at Santa 
Cristina, the armed rebels caused anguish among the good citizens 
who had an interest in keeping them quiet. They ordered the bells to 
begin ringing again, and wildly toured the city drinking, requisitioning 
things from the families, and many were already heated and fuming 
because of the excess of wine they had drunk.°” 
Unfortunately for the insurgents and the townspeople of Pavia it was 
the French, not the Austrians, who were approaching. Ahead of them 
came the Archbishop of Milan and two other prelates to appeal to the 
insurgents to lay down their arms, but their pleas were in vain, the mob 
becoming even more heated at their words. Even so, Belcredi felt that if 
the clerics had been given twenty-four hours to exercise their powers of 
persuasion, the situation could have been defused. But Bonaparte was 
not prepared to wait: 
Perhaps not even two hours had passed when the French were 
already investing the city from two sides...with cannons loaded 
with ball and grape, they bombarded it fiercely... Then the populace 
dispersed like a slight cloud at the puff of a north wind...and in the 
blink of an eye those squares and streets that had earlier swarmed 
with violent armed people were deserted.** 
The French troops were given licence to sack the town for a number 
of hours, though precautions were taken to protect some of the more 
illustrious inhabitants, such as the scientist, Alessandro Volta. The town 
was expertly pillaged, and French soldiers were later seen in Lodi trying 
to sell the most varied items, including the bishop’s mitre. 