

<<<PDFPAGE 73>>>
Martin Boycott-Brown 
55 
towards them. Although there was no immediate large reaction by the 
local civilians, there were clear signs of unrest in the country around 
Pavia in the days that followed. On 17 May a local man called Fenini, 
who was going to Milan on official business, noticed groups of up to 
100 peasants armed with agricultural implements at almost every village 
along the road.” The local authorities were sufficiently worried that 
they sent Fenini and two others to a couple of villages to try and restore 
calm. A letter from the bishop of Pavia, also appealing for calm, was 
read to the parish priests. For a while at least, a major outbreak of violence 
was avoided. It was a different story when the bulk of the French army 
began to move away in the direction of Mantua, where the Austrians 
had taken refuge. On the morning of 23 May, two days after Augereau’s 
division marched off, leaving a small garrison in Pavia, people began to 
gather in the square near the tree of liberty. Fenini recognised some of 
the people, whom he described as being ‘of humble origins’** and 
names half a dozen of them. The angry crowd tore down the tree of 
liberty, then the French soldiers guarding the gates were overpowered. 
Alarm bells were rung from the town hall and the churches, which 
attracted people armed with all sorts of weapons from the nearest 
villages. As the day progressed, the multitude grew, isolated French 
soldiers were attacked and some were killed. The Marchese Belcredi, a 
local diarist, wrote an arresting description of these events, in which he 
expressed a patrician distaste for the ‘lower orders’ who were at the 
forefront of the troubles, but also made some revealing comments 
regarding the behaviour of the civilians towards the soldiery, noting 
that: ‘It is remarkable that the common townsman is always more 
respectful and generous in his attitude towards the soldiers, but not so 
the rude and ferocious peasant.’” 
This difference could no doubt be partly traced to the different treatment 
that town and country dwellers received from the soldiers. Isolated 
houses or small hamlets were easier targets for pillagers, though they 
rarely contained much of value, so country districts suffered most from 
pillaging. Conversely, there was little scope for looting in the towns 
under normal circumstances, there being too many people who could 
prevent it, but towns tended to be where pillagers sold their ill-gotten 
valuables and spent the money they made from them, which meant 
a welcome increase in business for some of the townspeople. Unfortu- 
nately this had knock-on effects, and so many soldiers were selling 
items in Lodi that the local authorities had to prohibit townspeople 
from buying anything from them, in case it encouraged further looting.”° 
Although town and country people saw soldiers differently, however, 

<<<PDFPAGE 74>>>
56 
Guerrilla Warfare avant la lettre 
Belcredi observed that: ‘They were united in thought...in hunting the 
Jacobins, who were hated equally by everybody, and as many as they 
could herd together they took away as prisoners.’”’ As things got further 
out of hand, the French garrison barricaded itself in the castle. General 
Haquin, who was on his way to join the army, happened to enter the city 
and was promptly made prisoner. Four small ornamental cannons that 
had decorated the front of the palace of Prince Alberigo in Belgioioso 
were brought to the castle where they were loaded with scrap, as there 
was no proper ammunition for them. The day closed in a stand-off 
between the insurgents and the occupiers of the castle. 
Although the demolition of the Regisole and the revenge attack on 
the symbol of French identity, the tree of liberty, seem to have sparked 
off the revolt, there were clearly other causes as well. Belcredi gave three 
apart from the demolition of the Regisole, which he called an act of 
‘mere spite...on the part of the Jacobins which greatly irritated the 
people’. These were: the edict restoring the tax on salt and tobacco 
‘which seemed tyrannical to the plebeians and the peasants’; the fact 
that ‘the small number of French soldiers left to garrison Pavia awoke 
arrogance and boldness in the rabble who, ever cowardly as they are, 
seek the opportunity to bully and avenge themselves with unequal 
numbers’; and lastly the invitation put out by the Jacobins to ‘whoever 
wishes to live as the tranquil possessor of his goods’ to join them.”® 
He might have added that the local peasantry had been subjected to 
countless acts of pillaging by the French soldiers, and like the peasants 
of the Riviera had seized the opportunity for revenge, though not in the 
manner of isolated ambushes, but in the much more risky manner of an 
insurrection and the attempted capture of a whole town. The con- 
sequences of such a strategy cannot have been understood by most of 
those who took part in the rebellion, which seems to have been spontan- 
eous and without a guiding organization. A sober analysis by the most 
ordinary military mind would have concluded that there was no chance 
of the insurgents holding out against the French army, and there was 
certainly no place that such a band of insurgents could go and hide to 
avoid the retribution that was bound to come when French senior 
commanders realised what was happening. But to judge from Belcredi’s 
account of the events of 25 May, it seems likely that the insurgents 
were encouraged by the unfounded belief that the French had suffered 
a reverse, and that they were therefore safe from reprisals. 
It was not just the people in the area of Pavia who were driven to 
revolt, however, for Como saw an insurrection at the same time, so did 
Varese, and there were serious disturbances in Milan on the morning of 