

<<<PDFPAGE 77>>>
Martin Boycott-Brown 
59 
The sad sequel to the troubles was predictable: courts martial were set 
up, various ringleaders were shot, and hostages were taken. Despite 
these reprisals, there were more insurrections in other areas within 
weeks. There was a rebellion in the Imperial fief of Arquata Scrivia on 
5 June, which was followed towards the end of the month by numerous 
revolts in Emilia Romagna. On 19 June it was the turn of Bologna, then 
Ferrara on the 23rd, Forli on the 24th, various villages around Lugo on 
the 27th, Cesena on the 29th, and finally Rimini and Lugo on the 30th. 
Yet more rebellions were to occur later, though it is noteworthy that the 
French difficulties at the end of July, when they had to abandon the 
siege of Mantua and retreat to Brescia, do not seem to have been 
accompanied by uprisings of any size or danger in Lombardy. By then, 
it would seem, the local civilians were coming to expect and fear French 
reprisals. 
It is striking that armed civilian resistance in the Po valley should 
have mostly taken the form of mass uprisings, usually focused on towns 
or villages, and leading to something that had vague similarities with 
conventional warfare (the capture of strong-points, use of artillery, 
action en masse) rather than the methodology of ambushes and raids 
favoured in the mountains of the Riviera, and it seems likely that ter- 
rain was the most important factor in this. It is also noteworthy that 
politics and religion seem to have had rather more importance than 
they had in the Riviera (at least in the examples we have looked at) and 
that the threat to a sense of local identity should also have played a part 
in driving the people to revolt. 
We now move on to the area around Rivoli. This is not only interesting 
for the battle which took place there, but also for a quite remarkable 
contemporary account of the French occupation of that area. It was 
written by a local priest called Giovanni Battista Alberghini, who was 
very roughly the same age as Napoleon, and it gives some unusual 
insights into relations between locals and soldiers. Because of this, it 
seems worth quoting long passages from it, though the good priest was 
no stylist, and his ponderous prose is not the easiest to read. The area 
described in Alberghini’s story lies right at the foot of the mountains 
that stand between Lake Garda and the River Adige. There is a marked 
contrast of terrain, with a fertile plain and low hills on one side, and 
high mountains fringed by woodland on the other. The mountains, 
which lie to the north, are quite suited to guerrilla warfare, and were 
actually used by partisans during the Second World War. The area was 
of great strategic importance in the eighteenth century, being the site of 
some of the best defensive positions on the main route from Innsbruck 

<<<PDFPAGE 78>>>
60 
Guerrilla Warfare avant la lettre 
to Mantua, the principal Austrian military base in northern Italy. For 
that reason, the French were eager to occupy Rivoli, though it belonged 
to the Republic of Venice, which was neutral. 
The French advanced into the area at the end of May 1796, and their 
arrival, not surprisingly, was accompanied by the same sort of ruthless 
plundering that had been visited on other areas, in this case mostly 
perpetrated by cavalrymen. Eventually this torment came to a stop, but 
was replaced by excessive requisitions for food. The French stayed for 
two months, after which they were forced to retreat because of an 
Austrian offensive that succeeded in relieving Mantua. The Austrian 
soldiers that passed through the area were no more angelic than the 
French, and another bout of looting and even murder resulted, all of 
which Alberghini recorded in some detail and in the most horrified 
tones. The Austrians were defeated shortly afterwards at the battle of 
Castiglione, and forced to retire, permitting the French to return to 
their old positions. With them came new disorders and sufferings for 
the villagers. Having just endured depredations at the hands the Austrians, 
they were less inclined to sit back and do nothing, as Alberghini tells us: 
The passing of the days brought no respite from the robberies and 
invasions of the houses by the soldiers, because, with the pretext of 
searching for food, there was no piece of furniture or small animal 
that was safe from their hands. Thus the villagers, tired and angry at 
seeing themselves slowly stripped of their possessions, decided to 
put up a violent defence, and having got together in their respective 
villages they put their resolute resistance to the test, even at the peril 
of their lives. The village of Gaon was the first to give signs of 
intrepid resolution, and also served as an example to the other villages, 
its inhabitants having decided to die rather than put up with slow 
and silent destruction. They gave the first proofs of their courage on 
the 18th day of August, when, some soldiers having gone there on 
horseback to steal, as they had done other times, they were put to 
flight by those few intrepid villagers. At this unexpected reception 
the soldiers shouted with anger and declared that they would 
revenge themselves and would come back with the others and knock 
down everything. Nor did they forget their promise, and two days 
after, that is to say on the 20th of the same month, about forty-eight 
of them came back, all on horseback and armed with sabres and 
firearms, with the intention of sacking the houses in revenge for the 
affront they had received. But the villagers, having been warned of 
this by the sound of the bells of their church, armed themselves with 