

<<<PDFPAGE 91>>>
Michael Rowe 
73 
hostage-taking, 
simple brutality by ill-disciplined 
soldiers 
against 
a sullenly resentful population, anti-clerical outrages including the 
desecration of churches, the looting of cultural treasures, and sporadic 
attempts to impose hated revolutionary symbols and political practices, 
such as planting liberty trees and introducing the revolutionary calendar. 
How did Rhinelanders respond? Did they collaborate or resist? Armed 
resistance was out of the question, given French military power. However, 
there were plenty of other ways of registering hostility to the French 
and their revolution. These were largely of a symbolic or religious 
nature, and included vandalising liberty trees and other revolutionary 
symbols, ostentatiously taking part in religious processions, or — and in 
many respects, this is also a contemporary ~phenomenon — wearing 
rosettes or ribbons denoting allegiance to a power hostile to France. Of 
course, a popular and often effective means of resisting occupation was 
and remains the boycott: non-participation in revolutionary festivities, 
ignoring the new revolutionary calendar by donning one’s Sunday best 
and demonstratively sweeping the porch the evening before, and so on 
and so forth; a hundred possible small individual actions denoting, 
publicly, opposition to the new order of things. At times, the French tried 
to counter such acts by, for example, inflicting collective punishment 
such as forced billeting on villages and towns whose liberty trees had 
been chopped down, or by banning public religious manifestations, or 
forbidding rosettes. However, as other authorities in a similar position 
have discovered before and since, attempting to enforce such restrictions 
is extremely costly, and ultimately futile: as soon as one form of popular 
manifestation is suppressed, 
a new method of symbolising opposition is 
discovered. 
We have considered resistance. What about collaboration? It might 
be thought that this represented an easier option for Rhinelanders, but 
arguably it was the more difficult. The Rhineland might have been 
occupied by the French in the 1790s, but in terms of international law 
it remained part of the Holy Roman Empire. Both the Empire and the 
individual princes made it clear, in a number of decrees and proclamations 
from 1792 onwards, that ideological adhesion to the French cause would 
be viewed as treason, and punishable as such. Of course, these decrees 
and proclamations did not use the word ‘collaboration’, but they were 
referring to behaviour that today would be labelled as such. The decrees 
issued by Emperor Francis I in December 1792 and April 1793 referred to 
‘persons lacking German [sic] spirit and heart... who have volunteered 
or allowed themselves to be used as tools for seducing the people’, and 
to ‘criminals against us, the German Reich and their Fatherland’.’? The 

<<<PDFPAGE 92>>>
74 
Resistance, Collaboration or Third Way? 
explicit and deliberate references to Germany, or German characteristics, 
in these proclamations, suggests that the Habsburg government at least 
felt that there did indeed exist a sense of national solidarity amongst 
the peoples of the Reich that was worth playing upon. 
What is also interesting in these proclamations is the distinction 
made by the Emperor and the individual princes between committed 
ideological adhesion to the French, which was naturally deemed 
unacceptable and treasonable, and collaboration that took the form of 
local officials simply continuing to fulfil their public responsibilities 
under occupation. Collaboration of the latter sort was not merely 
tolerated, but actually encouraged. Indeed, the Palatine government in 
Diisseldorf actually threatened to punish officials who deserted their 
posts during the French occupation.”° Typical was the reasoning of the 
elector of neighbouring Cologne: ‘It is far better [that the administration] 
should be in the hands of old established families than sansculottes.’”! 
Not surprisingly, representatives of old established families in Cologne, 
and throughout the region, agreed, and used such arguments to justify 
working with the French occupation authorities. 
Within this context, it is worth leaping ahead two decades to the 
years immediately after 1814, following Napoleon’s defeat. During this 
period (the so-called Restoration), the Prussians, to whom most of the 
Rhineland was awarded by the Congress of Vienna, produced their own 
survey on the Rhenish administration they inherited. As part of this 
survey, they drew up reports on individual officials whom they categor- 
ized according to the extent to which they had collaborated with the 
French. These reports also sought to distinguish those who had engaged 
in disinterested public service from those besmirched by ideological 
commitment. Indeed, they split all those surveyed into three classes: 
class one consisted of those who had remained ‘German’ [sic] in their 
self-perception during French rule; class two included professionally 
competent individuals who had nonetheless soiled themselves through 
acceptance of a French honour, like the Légion d’Honneur. Class three, 
finally, contained unreformed Bonapartists who were deemed ‘completely 
French’ in their outlook.” These distinctions resemble those identified 
in Gilliatt’s theoretical book, between what he calls ‘collaborators’, who 
are basically intermediaries between occupier and the occupied, and 
‘collaborationists’, defined as ideological allies who genuinely believe 
in the political agenda of the occupying power.” 
Of course, 
difficulties inevitably arise over trying to distinguish 
between disinterested, apolitical service in order to mitigate the worst 
effects of occupation and full ideological commitment. However, arguably 