

<<<PDFPAGE 87>>>
=> Michael Rowe 
69 
monopolized by particular families for decades, if not centuries — as 
was the case with the Wittelsbachs in the Electorate of Cologne for 
much of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, for example — but 
they nonetheless failed to instil in their inhabitants the same kind of 
loyalty that the Wittelsbachs, Wettins, Habsburgs or Hohenzollerns 
managed in their core provinces. This same lack of devotion to dynasty 
was also apparent in the Rhenish possessions of German princes whose 
core territories lay far to the east. As already stated, their Rhenish 
territories are often referred to as Nebenldnder — literally, lands ‘beside 
from’ or ‘apart from’ the core of the dynastic state. This term is accurate. 
Geographically, these territories were separated from the dynastic centres 
by intervening principalities. However, the detachment was not simply 
geographical. Not surprisingly, 
the Wittelsbach and Hohenzollern 
monarchies focused their reforming zeal in the eighteenth century on 
their central provinces, not on vulnerable and possibly expendable 
peripheral territories. In consequence, Rhinelanders escaped the kind of 
absolutism that much of central and eastern Europe experienced. They 
had not been ‘broken in’ by a generation or two of living under the 
likes of King Frederick William I of Prussia before the French arrived on 
the scene in the early 1790s. The crucial point here, though, is that 
their ruling dynasties, like absentee landlords in Ireland, remained 
distant, remote figures, whose own destinies were obviously not too 
much bound up with those of their Rhenish subjects. 
So, given that the vast majority of Rhinelanders lacked a dynastic 
focus, what were they loyal to? There are several candidates here, and 
none of them are mutually exclusive. There was of course the Church. For 
the majority - a million out of the 1.5-1.6 million — this meant the 
Roman Catholic Church. For the rest, the church of Calvin or Luther, or, 
for perhaps 20 000, the synagogue. 
It goes without saying that 
religion, including the religious calendar, governed the lives of the vast 
majority, and that any power disruptive of this should be viewed with 
hostility.° Apart from the church, 
there was another power with 
universalistic pretensions (at least, originally), though one of a tem- 
poral rather than spiritual nature: the Holy Roman Empire. This institution 
has undergone much rehabilitation of late, and is now viewed as an at 
times surprisingly effective conflict resolution mechanism.’ This in 
part, arguably, explains the support it received from Rhinelanders: 
ultimately, it protected their rights against princely absolutism. Beyond 
that, its military structure provided some form of mechanism that 
potentially shielded the region from French attack, as it had done in the 
days of Louis XIV.° Furthermore, the reforming zeal of Emperor Joseph II 
Za 

<<<PDFPAGE 88>>>
7U 
Kesistance, COLLADOTALION OF LITA Vays 
held out some hope for those dissatisfied simply with the preservation 
of the status quo. 
What else might ordinary Rhinelanders owe their allegiance to? The 
answer is to either their city, or what in German is referred to as Land. 
Cities in old-régime Germany can be categorized according to the degree 
of independence they enjoyed from the territorial princes. Those with 
the greatest independence, and hence those whose citizenry generally 
invested the greatest pride in them, were the imperial cities. There were 
four in the Rhineland, the largest two being Aachen and Cologne. 
Cologne, founded in the days of Rome, had an especially well-developed 
sense of its own importance, something its burghers might share in.? 
More modest home towns, with smaller populations, less exalted histories, 
and less independence, could nonetheless engender similar loyalties. 
The Rhineland was relatively urbanized in comparison with Europe’s 
other regions, but nonetheless, most of its inhabitants were rural. They 
owed their allegiance not to a city, but to their Land. This word has no 
English equivalent. Historically, a Land was more than a mere territorial 
unit or administrative sub-division. Rather, it was defined by its peculiar 
and supposedly ancient customs and laws. Importantly, the ill-defined 
boundaries of the Lander did not match those of the dynastically 
defined territories into which the Reich was divided: larger dynastic 
conglomerations, 
like the Habsburg and Hohenzollern monarchies, 
contained many Lander. In territorially fragmented regions like the 
Rhineland, in contrast, individual Lander might be divided into many 
petty sovereignties. However, what is crucial is that loyalty towards the 
Land — Landespatriotismus — was not synonymous with loyalty towards 
the dynastic state — Staatspatriotismus. Indeed, the two might very well be 
conflicting. Loyalty towards the Reich, in contrast — Reichspatriotismus — 
would in all probability be compatible with Landespatriotismus (or loyalty 
to a city, in the case of urbanites), as the rights and privileges of Lander 
(and imperial cities) survived encroachment by the dynastic states 
thanks to the protection afforded by the Empire’s legal cocoon.'° 
In addition to the list above, was there anything else that attracted 
Rhinelanders’ allegiance? In particular, was there any sense of German 
nationalism? This is a controversial area. For much of the nineteenth 
and early twentieth centuries, the Rhine represented a national bone of 
contention between the French and Germans. Many a textbook on 
nineteenth-century Germany evokes the Rhine crisis of 1840 — the crisis 
that spawned Nikolaus Becker’s immensely successful poem, Der deutsche 
Rhein — as the first spontaneous eruption of popular German nationalism." 
The disputed status of the Rhineland in the immediate aftermath of 