

<<<PDFPAGE 97>>>
Michael Rowe 
79 
make their peace with the new régime. Many went further, and sub- 
sequently accepted official positions within the new hierarchy by the 
end of the Consulate. By the time of the establishment of the Empire in 
1804, Napoleon had succeeded in making French rule acceptable, if not 
popular, for the overwhelming majority of Rhinelanders. 
There was another, more profound reason, for the successful consoli- 
dation of Napoleonic rule on the Rhine. Napoleon once sneered at the 
Habsburgs for having out-of-date ideas; but, as Blanning observes, at 
least they had some.** Arguably, the very ideological flexibility - or, 
more unkindly put, lack of principle - inherent in Bonapartism was 
a key to its success (at least in the short-to-medium term). A hallmark of 
French government in the 1790s had been its tendency to divide 
individuals into either allies, defined narrowly as those who subscribed 
to the political agenda of whatever régime happened to be in power, or 
enemies, composed of everybody else. The politics of the short-lived 
‘sister republic’ of Mainz — the first modern republic on German soil — is 
illustrative of how this kind of governing principle operated when 
exported to the occupied territories. Its inhabitants were presented with 
two registers, one of which they were compelled to sign: a red one, 
denoting support for the freedom promised by the French, and a black 
one, decorated with chains and denoting the slavery of the Old Regime. 
Proposals for moderate reform, drafted by representatives of the guilds, 
were dismissed as counter-revolutionary; indeed, their author - an 
individual who would later serve as mayor of Mainz under Napoleon - 
was expelled from the city for his efforts.°* 
Bonapartism, in contrast, was not about confronting people with 
stark ideological choices. Nor was it about deliberately provocative 
symbols that simply provided people with opportunities to register 
their opposition to the régime. The flavour of the new régime became 
apparent soon after Brumaire, when the government ordered that only 
those public festivals on which popular opinion was ‘unanimous’ 
would henceforth be celebrated. Liberty trees were quietly removed 
from those towns and villages where they had caused most offence.** 
Experience in Corsica, Italy and Egypt had taught Napoleon that the 
world was not composed solely of people occupying extreme opposite 
poles marked ‘collaborator’ or ‘resister’, but that the majority preferred to 
position themselves in the spectrum in between; and, within the system 
he constructed, all but the most extreme and dangerous opponents 
could find their place. Aristocrats who had fled in the 1790s were 
allowed to return, so long as they adopted French citizenship. Even if 
they hated the new régime, and refused all dealings with it, they were 

<<<PDFPAGE 98>>>
80 
Resistance, Collaboration or Third Way? 
left in peace to sulk in self-imposed internal exile. At the other end of 
the spectrum, enthusiastic supporters were encouraged to compete for 
Napoleon’s favour by serving the Empire in a military or civilian cap- 
acity. Their reward might include membership of the Légion d’Honneur, 
elevation into the imperial nobility, a bursary for a son to enter a lycée, 
or nomination to the Senate. 
Collaboration does not imply necessarily a relationship between 
equals. It does, however, imply that the potential collaborator possesses 
something the occupier wants. Usually, if not always, the existence of 
collaborators allows for cheaper government than can be supplied if the 
entire administrative structure and personnel need to be shipped in from 
outside. There can never have been a power in history so secure in its 
omnipotence that it has not attempted to enlist the services of collab- 
orators. As John Breuilly has observed on the subject, even the Nazis 
sought out collaborators to help run the death camps.*° At another level, 
the British, in the nineteenth century, became experts in running the 
largest empire in history on the cheap by going through local élites.°° 
Obviously, Rhinelanders were in a stronger bargaining position than 
concentration camp inmates, but how indispensable were they, and 
what was Napoleon willing to pay for their services? On what did the 
price depend? It depended in large measure on the nature of the élites 
that he confronted. The Rhineland, though a region of limited size, had 
previously contained a large number of polities, each with its own élite. 
These differed in nature, so that in microcosm the region represents in 
certain respects the kind of diversity that one might expect to encounter 
in a much larger area — even an entire continent. Research on élites 
under Napoleonic rule suggests that from the occupiers’ perspective, there 
needs to be just the right level of social cohesion amongst the élites of an 
occupied area for the administration to operate most effectively. Too little 
social cohesion 
— 
social disintegration, 
as for example, Napoleon 
encountered in Spain — is disastrous. In such areas the occupier might 
identify and even win over the élite. The trouble is, the élite is not 
attached to anything, and is thus useless. Rather than provide support, 
it itself needs military protection.*’ In extreme cases, the entire élite 
might be destroyed, or emigrate en masse. This almost appears to have 
happened in Cleves, at the northern end of the Rhineland, a former 
Hohenzollern possession, and the one area where the local élite did 
form an attachment to a dynastic state — in this case, Prussia — that 
superseded attachment to the Land. A more dramatic example of the 
élite simply emigrating confronted Napoleon when he occupied Moscow 
in 1812. 