

<<<PDFPAGE 103>>>
Michael Rowe 
85 
tendencies of the régime, as manifested in the penal code and the 
special non-jury courts.*? 
Rebmann’s background as an eminent judge gave his comments on 
Napoleonic legal institutions 
great weight. Of all the institutions 
bequeathed by Napoleon to the Rhineland, none, arguably, was more 
important than the law codes and the hierarchy of courts that enforced 
them. Defence of this legacy was something that Rhenish liberals united 
around throughout the first half of the nineteenth century, leading 
a socially broad-based coalition against attempts by the Prussian succes- 
sor régime to replace it with its more antiquated alternative. In this, they 
proved successful: the French codes remained the basis of law in the 
Rhineland until replaced by a new all-German code at the beginning of 
the twentieth century.%* 
Rhinelanders’ support for the Napoleonic code opened them up to 
accusations by later German nationalist historians like Treitschke of 
somehow being Francophile, and disloyal to the German nation.** The 
positive reception given to the codes does seem convincing evidence of 
Rhenish acceptance of French rule: surely it justifies locating the region 
securely within the inner empire.®*° Yet, there is an alterative explan- 
ation. Firstly, we need to consider what Rhinelanders liked about the 
Napoleonic legal system. This is not so difficult, thanks to a thorough 
investigation conducted by the Prussian authorities after 1815. The 
investigative commission solicited the opinion not only of Rhenish 
jurists, but of people more widely. This revealed that the French system 
was popular not so much because of the contents of the civil code or 
penal code, but rather because of the procedures of the French courts: 
the oral, public proceedings in front of juries, the principle of equality 
before the law, and the independence of the judiciary from political 
interference. Of course, what the Prussians were investigating was only 
part of the legal system established by Napoleon; they were not investi- 
gating the various special tribunals that he had established to try those 
crimes that were of peculiar interest to the state, and where juries 
might acquit. Crimes such as forgery of official documents, fraud in the 
conscription process, and smuggling, for example. These courts, which 
operated without juries and generally included military officers amongst 
those sitting in judgement, collapsed immediately upon the French 
army’s evacuation of the Rhineland in 1814. They had never been 
popular. Thanks to Napoleon’s defeat, the region had been fortuitously 
shorn of those elements of Napoleonic governance — not just the special 
courts, but also the customs men and special police commissioners, to 
name some — that had caused most public disquiet. What remained 

<<<PDFPAGE 104>>>
86 
Resistance, Collaboration or Third Way? 
intact was only a part of the Napoleonic edifice, but it was the most 
benign part that quite naturally attracted popular support.” 
Of course Prussophile German nationalists like Joseph Gorres, or 
Ernst Moritz Arndt, or indeed, the Freiherr vom Stein, tended to overlook 
such subtle distinctions in their hatred of the French, and condemned 
anything emanating from Napoleonic despotism. In their eagerness to 
de-Napoleonize, as Rebmann put it — ‘Entnapoleonisierung’ — they threatened 
to throw out the baby with the bathwater. Those, like Rebmann and many 
other Rhinelanders who supported aspects of the Napoleonic inheritance 
faced condemnation as Francophile traitors. This label, to an extent, stuck, 
being repeated by representatives of the Borussian school like Treitschke, 
writing in the hyperpatriotic (and anti-French) atmosphere that prevailed 
in the final decades of the nineteenth century, and by a later generation 
of historian, in the years after the First World War. In conclusion, 
Rhinelanders can neither be classified as collaborators nor resisters. Instead, 
they treated Napoleonic rule as an a la carte menu: they picked and 
chose, selecting those Napoleonic institutions and innovations that they 
liked best, and opposing the others. In so doing, they were motivated 
by hard-nosed self interest, not broader ideological considerations. 
Notes 
1. S. Gilliatt, An Exploration of the Dynamics of Collaboration and Non-Resistance 
(Lewiston, NY, 2000), p. 131. 
2. P. Davies, France and the Second World War. Occupation, Collaboration and 
Resistance (London, 2001), p. 49. 
3. For example, L. Taylor, Between Resistance and Collaboration. Popular Protest in 
Northern France, 
1940-45 (Basingstoke, 2000), passim. 
4. Though it should be noted, at this point, that a strand of the current German 
historiography of the Holy Roman Empire now views that entity less as an 
incoherent, loose collection of essentially sovereign territories and more as a 
‘state’ in its own right — indeed, a precursor of the German nation state. See 
especially G. Schmidt, ‘Das frihneuzeitliche Reich - komplementares Staat 
oder foéderative Nation’, Historische Zeitschrift, CCLXxIm, no. 2 (October, 2001), 
pp. 371-99; and H. Schilling, ‘Reichsstaat und friihneuzeitliche Nation der 
Deutschen oder teilmodernisiertes Reichssystem: Uberlegungen zu Charakter 
und Aktualitat des Alten Reiches’, Historische Zeitschrift, CCLXXII, no. 2 (April, 
2001), pp. 377-95. 
5. For a brief survey of the territorial order in the pre-revolutionary Rhineland, see 
M. Rowe, From Reich to State: the Rhineland in the Revolutionary Age, 1780-1830 
(Cambridge, 2003), pp. 14-15. 
6. This would become dramatically apparent when the French revolutionaries 
attempted to impose their new republican calendar and festivals on the region 
in the late 1790s. For more on this, cf. M. Rowe, ‘Forging “New-Frenchmen”: 
state propaganda in the Rhineland, 1794-1814’, in B. Taithe and T. Thornton 
(eds), Propaganda (Stroud, 1999), pp. 115-30. 