

<<<PDFPAGE 95>>>
Michael Rowe 
77 
to support a large occupation army at the expense of an exhausted 
region, which meant a continuation of the crushing burden on the 
native population. This, combined with a lack of legitimacy enjoyed 
by French rule, undermined administration in the territories. Both 
problems — the legitimacy deficit and deployment of an occupation 
army — were solved at a stroke by Napoleon’s victory in the War of the 
Second Coalition. This removed the need to station a vast army in 
the Rhineland to counter the Habsburgs, and instead allowed for the 
redeployment of forces for the ongoing struggle against the British. 
Victory also resulted in the Treaty of Lunéville (9 February 1801). This 
was of significance for the occupation, in that it legalized French rule in 
the Rhineland.** This was of no mean importance in a region whose 
political culture and traditions of conflict resolution had become 
increasingly legalistic in the eighteenth century. Indeed, respect for 
imperial law had been a key ingredient of the Reichspatriotismus that 
remained strong in the Rhineland to the bitter end. Lunéville, 
at 
a stroke, neutralized this strong alternative focus of loyalty. 
Victory alone, however, was insufficient to consolidate direct French 
rule over the new German departments. Lunéville might have removed 
the competing focus of allegiance represented by the Empire. That 
represented by the other power with universalistic pretensions, the 
Roman Catholic Church, remained. However, 
this too was largely 
resolved by the Concordat, concluded between Napoleon and Pius VII, 
and published on 18 April 1802. Certainly, problems remained on the 
religious front: the dissolution of most Rhenish monasteries that was 
rubber-stamped by the Concordat produced a large number of embittered 
and impoverished ex-regular clergy who formed a constituency opposed 
to French rule. On the plus side, the secularization of monastic and 
other church lands, and their auctioning off to wealthy Rhinelanders, 
produced another constituency with a vested interest in the preservation 
of at least this aspect of French rule.” 
Napoleon overcame other challenges in solidifying French rule. One 
was the attitude of Frenchmen themselves. The approximately 150 000 
French troops stationed in the Rhineland at any one time in the 1790s 
had not treated its inhabitants as anything other than a conquered 
people. This had not initially been so, but attitudes had hardened over 
the winter of 1792-93 when it became clear that they would not, as 
expected, be welcomed as liberators. All armies suffer from a degree 
of indiscipline, but this appears to have been especially the case with 
the revolutionary army of the 1790s.%° At least under the Terror, 
soldiers had to an extent been kept in check by the fearsome People’s 

<<<PDFPAGE 96>>>
78 Resistance, Collaboration or Third Way? 
Representatives-on-Mission. Following Thermidor, however, no effective 
civilian check existed on the field armies in the occupied territories. 
This changed under the Consulate. 
This statement might appear to go against accepted wisdom that 
Napoleonic France was highly militarized. In many respects, and 
compared to modern western democracies, it no doubt was. However, it 
is possible to interpret things slightly differently. Take, for example, the 
elegant uniforms and flamboyant ceremonial that were the hallmarks 
of the Napoleonic prefectoral administration, introduced in 1800. 
Prefects, subprefects, even humble mayors, not to mention their adjuncts 
and municipal police officers, as well as tax officials, and even, eventually, 
the presidents of consultative assemblies and electoral colleges, were 
prescribed their own unique uniform. Different colours marked out 
different branches of the administration, with the more braid indicating 
higher rank. At one level, this might be dismissed as the kind of show 
often associated with upstart régimes lacking historical legitimacy. 
It might also be interpreted as the introduction of military values 
into civilian administration. Or, and this interpretation seems to fit the 
evidence available from the Rhineland, it could be seen as one way of 
restoring the prestige of civilian officials in the eyes of the population. 
For, as some senior senators and councillors of state noted on their fact 
finding tours to the new Rhenish departments, the majority of inhabit- 
ants judged the position of an individual in the hierarchy according to 
his appearance. They would not respect a shabbily dressed mayor or 
subprefect, especially when forced aside by the passing carriage of an 
army Officer in resplendent uniform. Local notables, Napoleon recognized, 
would not collaborate by assuming official responsibilities until their 
status was visibly raised. Official etiquette might be thought of as a 
subordinate issue, but judging from the volume of paperwork devoted 
to it, it was seen as essential. The representational role of the chief civilian 
administrators in the departments, the prefects, and the struggle some 
of them waged to put the military in its place, should not be overlooked 
when assessing civil/military relations in Napoleonic France. It is a lesson 
that other occupying powers attempting to restore the primacy of civilian 
rule would be well advised to study.*! 
The establishment of peace with the other powers, the legitimization 
of French rule in international law, the Concordat, the sale of secularized 
properties, the assertion of the primacy of civilian administration, the 
restoration of the prestige of public posts including those likely to be 
occupied by natives, not to mention the restoration of law and order by 
the newly introduced gendarmerie: all this encouraged Rhinelanders to 