

<<<PDFPAGE 89>>>
SVEECTEUALE 
SNU YY 
a> & 
World War I aroused similar passions, on both sides. Given this, it is 
hardly surprising that historians from both traditions writing about the 
Napoleonic period tended to view that era through nationalist spectacles. 
Since the 1960s, however, and within the climate of Franco-German 
reconciliation, the tendency has been to deny the existence of German 
nationalism in this period. That is why the degree of popular opposition 
to French domination has often been played down, or else portrayed as 
something else, such as the hatred of ordinary people for the intrusion 
by the state into their everyday lives. 
The late eighteenth century witnessed a growing sense of German 
national consciousness, if not nationalism. In part this derived from 
a common pride, amongst Germany’s élite at least, at German achieve- 
ments on the cultural front. The proportion of books published in 
German as opposed to Latin was increasing. The public sphere, and 
especially the political newspaper press, was also expanding rapidly; 
contemporaries often complained of Lesesucht — the addiction to reading 
news 
— that extended beyond the élite to commoners, something 
boosted by the Seven Years War, the American War of Independence, 
and the French Revolution.” The victories of Frederick the Great in the 
first of these struggles were also seen by many Germans less in terms of 
a contribution to an ongoing German civil war between Austria and 
Prussia, but as specifically German victories over the Russians and 
above all the French.'’ Incongruously (given that Frederick was also at 
war with the Reich as well as with the Continental Great Powers — the 
army defeated at Rossbach was, after all, a joint Franco-Imperial force), 
the cult of Frederick the Great that transcended Prussia’s boundaries did 
not result in any diminution of Reichspatriotismus in the final decades of 
the century. The precise relationship between an early German national 
consciousness based upon culture, and a more politically orientated 
sense of affinity towards the Empire, is currently the subject of much 
scholarly debate.'* Certainly, the two cannot be assumed to be synony- 
mous: the one could be had without the other. For example, in parts of 
northern Italy where - it is not generally known —~ a residue of imperial 
rights and jurisdiction survived into the eighteenth century, a degree of 
Reichspatriotismus likewise subsisted. Yet obviously, no one here believed 
themselves part of a German Kulturnation.'° On the other hand, this is 
perhaps an obscure exception that proves the rule: the vast majority of 
the Reich’s inhabitants were German speakers; after all, the Empire’s 
full name was Heilige Romische Reich deutscher Nation. And whilst Reichs- 
patriotismus was not synonymous with a German cultural nationalism, 
it could, nonetheless, reinforce it: just as cultural nationalism could be 

<<<PDFPAGE 90>>>
72 
Resistance, Collaboration or Third Way? 
set up against French courtliness, so Reichspatriotismus might highlight 
the distinction between Bourbon despotism and German freedom. These 
ingredients, together with the aforementioned cult of Frederick the 
Great and the Francophobia based upon previous perceived injustices 
(such as Louis XIV’s devastation of the Palatinate, the centenary of 
which fortuitously coincided with the French Revolution), helped 
shape Rhenish attitudes to the Reich, to what it meant to be German, to 
the French, and to the Revolution. 
This chapter will now skip over the Revolutionary decade as quickly 
as possible, in order to focus on the Napoleonic period.'® The period 
1789 to 1799 can be split into two phases so far as the Rhineland is 
concerned. In the first phase, from 1789 to 1792 (the outbreak of the 
War of the First Coalition) Rhinelanders were spectators to events 
unfolding in France. These were viewed with «interest by a broad cross 
section of society, which avidly read the sensationalist reporting of 
atrocities and violence.’’ A minority of intellectuals were sympathetic 
in their interpretation of events. One common position, which many 
Rhinelanders held, was that revolution was required in France to over- 
throw centuries of despotism, but that it was not needed in Germany 
thanks to enlightened princes and the conflict resolution mechanisms 
provided by imperial law. 
Smug detachment turned into direct Rhenish involvement in the 
affairs of the French Revolution with the outbreak of the Revolutionary 
Wars. Due to its geographical position, the region became the major 
theatre of operations. It was occupied briefly by French forces in 1792, 
but these were pushed out by the Coalition the following year. French 
armies re-occupied the region in 1794, and this time they stayed. What 
can be said about the French military occupation? What is initially 
striking is its scale: 136 000 to 187 000 troops stationed in the region 
from 1794-97.'* This represented about one-in-ten of the population. 
This needs to be borne in mind when contrasting the relative passivity 
of Rhinelanders compared with Vendéens in the 1790s, or Spaniards 
after 1808, or Tyroleans in 1809. Would, for example, the Spanish have 
been so successful in creating trouble for Napoleon had he been able to 
deploy a force equivalent to a tenth of the population of Spain — an 
army of perhaps 1.3 million — to the Iberian peninsula? Consideration 
of why people collaborate or resist cannot lose sight of perhaps the 
most important variable: the sheer extent of the occupier’s power, and 
the concomitant chances of successful resistance. 
The presence of a massive French force in the region created great 
hardship for civilians: requisitioning on a huge scale, forced billeting, 