

<<<PDFPAGE 99>>>
Michael Rowe 
81 
At the other extreme is a case of complete social cohesion amongst 
the élite. Such was the case in the former imperial city of Cologne. It 
possessed an élite that had successfully integrated new elements over 
previous decades, that had no rivals, and that was internally cohesive 
thanks to marriage ties and a basic union of interests.** In such a situation, 
the élite was in a strong position, as the French were presented with no 
alternatives other than bringing in their own men from outside, and 
that was always expensive. A more dramatic example of such social 
cohesion might be found in the Tyrol.’ From the French point of view 
the best environment was like that found in Aachen, another imperial 
city but one that had not been especially successful in incorporating 
new elements — notably, Protestant businessmen — into its élite in the 
eighteenth century.*® Here, the French could outflank the existing 
political élite by promoting new elements into positions of authority 
who then owed their status entirely to the French — a variation of divide 
and rule. 
Napoleon recognized the importance of propaganda in encouraging 
collaboration. Jean Tulard possibly goes too far in writing that the 
French cultural imperialism, as represented by the eighteenth-century 
Enlightenment, paved the way for the military imperialism of Napoleon; 
the present consensus 
denies the exclusively French nature of the 
Enlightenment, but instead emphasizes the unique characteristics of the 
Enlightenment - or better still, ‘enlightenments’ — in Europe’s diverse 
nations and regions.*! That accepted, one can nonetheless adopt Jacque 
Ellul’s formulation that the loose set of ideas commonly associated 
with the Enlightenment that circulated in much of educated Europe 
in the decades before Napoleon represented a form of indirect or 
sociological propaganda: ‘the penetration of an ideology by means of its 
sociological context’, something that informed not simply opinion, but 
lifestyle.” This ‘sociological’ propaganda was subsequently built upon 
by direct Napoleonic propaganda, which sought to portray France as 
the sole repository of enlightened progress, and the enemies of 
France as backward or anarchic. Hence, the French authorities in the 
Rhineland went out of their way to associate themselves with agricultural 
improvement societies, statistical surveys, infrastructure projects, the 
restoration of ancient monuments such as the famous Porta Nigra in 
Trier or the cathedral in Aachen, and so on.* Certainly, some of these 
policies served directly to strengthen France, especially those related 
to attempts to achieve autarchy as a means of destroying the British. 
However, there was more to it than that. Rhinelanders ‘collaborating’ 
with the French authorities by, for example, providing some of the raw 

<<<PDFPAGE 100>>>
82 
Resistance, Collaboration or Third Way? 
data that went into the compilation of the great departmental topo- 
graphical descriptions prepared under the Consulate, could congratulate 
themselves not so much for collaborating with a foreign occupier, but 
rather for contributing to the progress of humanity as a whole. Napoleonic 
patronage of Freemasonry can also be seen in this context. Lodges were 
founded in most major Rhenish cities during the course of the eighteenth 
century, but some at least had suffered harassment by the Old-Regime 
authorities, especially in the security crackdown ordered following the 
outbreak of the French Revolution. Lodges were refounded following 
the French occupation, and integrated into the Napoleonic Masonic 
structure after Brumaire. Rhenish freemasons could view themselves as 
favoured children of the Emperor, with whom they were collaborating 
in encouraging enlightened progress.** 
It was easy enough for the élite to collaborate with the French in an 
area of mutual benefit, such as economic improvement, or small-pox 
vaccination. What about where interests diverged? This was the case in 
areas such as taxation, which had been lower under the Old Regime, mil- 
itary conscription, which had not existed before the French period, and 
over the tariff barrier the French extended to the Rhine in 1798, which 
disrupted traditional trade flows. Rhenish resistance to the tariff barrier 
in the form of smuggling and customs fraud reached epic proportions, 
as has been demonstrated 
in particular by Roger Dufraisse, 
and 
implicated a whole cross section of society, from wealthy merchants and 
bankers to humble porters and boaters, and from tavern owners to pub- 
lic officials.*° Should we categorize this as resistance to French rule? 
Napoleon certainly viewed it as a crime against the state: not only did 
customs fraud deny the treasury substantial revenue, but the smuggling 
of illegal wares threatened to undermine the strategy for defeating 
Britain. Hence, its categorization as one of those crimes to be dealt with 
by special non-jury courts, crimes that included forgery, attacks against 
purchasers of biens nationaux, and armed insurgency. Beyond that, 
smuggling, as one official wrote, was not simply a crime in itself, but 
aphenomenon that was 
so widespread and involved such a large 
proportion of the population that it undermined all forms of authority.*° 
But can we see it as a form of resistance against the French? 
We return to the definition of resistance provided by Peter Davies: 
‘...an act of resistance was, basically, anything that, in the mind of 
the person or group executing the act, felt like an act of resistance’. 
Certainly, smuggling felt like resisting the law: it was something that 
had to be conducted illicitly, under cover of darkness, not out in the 
open. But did it feel like resisting the French? Admittedly, the vast 