

<<<PDFPAGE 93>>>
Michael Rowe 
75 
this had not been the case in earlier periods, but was a result of the 
ideological divisions created by the French Revolution. During previous 
occupations in Europe - 
for example, during the Franco-Austrian 
occupation of the Prussian Rhineland during the Seven Years War — it 
was easy for public servants dispassionately to exercise their functions in 
an apolitical way: after all, no ideological gulf separated the occupying 
powers from the occupied enemy. This changed after 1789, and there 
was no escaping politics under French occupation in the 1790s. The 
first wave of revolutionaries were proselytisers, seeking to spread their 
principles across Europe. Obviously, they viewed local officials as being 
crucial in furthering their agenda through, for example, the enforcement 
of the revolutionary calendar, the erection of liberty trees, imposition of 
police restrictions on public religious practices, and so on. 
Very quickly, therefore, Rhinelanders under French occupation in the 
1790s, and especially those shouldering public responsibilities, found 
themselves in a quandary. On the one side, they faced the French 
occupation. Quite apart from treating them more like conquered subjects 
than liberated brothers, and extracting vast resources from them, these 
authorities demanded public displays of ideological adherence to the 
Revolution. On the other side, the princes, who had fled across the 
Rhine in the face of the French invasion, joined with the Holy Roman 
Emperor in issuing threats against collaboration. How did Rhinelanders 
respond to these conflicting pressures? 
With respect to the princes, who had betrayed their lack of Landes- 
patriotismus through their flight across the Rhine, many Rhinelanders 
responded in a vein similar to the inhabitants of the Channel Islands 
one-and-a-half-centuries later, when confronted with a similar challenge: 
with a great deal of bitterness and resentment to those preaching to 
them from a position of safety. In October 1794, officials in the occupied 
Electorate of Trier, responding to earlier threats against collaboration 
issued by the exiled government from across the Rhine, gave vent to 
their frustration: the officials claamed they were motivated only by love 
for their sovereign and their ‘Fatherland’ (Vaterland), that the Elector, or 
rather, his evil advisers, were placing them in the impossible position of 
having to expose themselves to either retribution from the French or 
the government-in-exile, that this was unjust, and that if they resigned 
from their public responsibilities, other less scrupulous elements would 
take over. The officials concluded their statement with the bitter, if 
disingenuous, observation that the warning against collaboration must 
have been drafted without the Elector’s knowledge, as its outrageous 
contents questioned the loyalty of officials working under French 

<<<PDFPAGE 94>>>
76 
Resistance, Collaboration or Third Way? 
occupation. The warning and threats, they continued, had arrived as 
a bolt from the blue. Whilst they were being showered by French 
bombs and howitzer shells, they had at least expected sympathy and 
moral 
support from those sheltering behind 
fortifications 
on the 
opposite bank of the Rhine!** Similar resentment existed in the other 
French-occupied territories. Johann Adolf Kopstadt of Cleves, writing 
during the Restoration, noted how the inhabitants of his city had been 
abandoned by members of the Prussian élite on the eve of the French 
occupation. These acted purely out of their own interest, and not of that 
of the city.”> Such behaviour by the old-régime rulers only reinforced the 
view that they were essentially absentee landlords whose own interests 
were not synonymous with those of the Rhenish cities and the Rhenish 
Lander. Hence they did not possess the moral authority to call for 
resistance. Rather, the interests of the Lander and cities — true patriotism — 
demanded some form of engagement with the French occupation, if 
only to prevent worse. 
Of course, there were many other motives for collaboration other 
than either the extremes of ideological commitment to the French 
Revolution or, alternatively, a patriotic desire to act in the best interests 
of the community. Some of these motives were revealed in an investiga- 
tion into collaboration conducted by the government of the Electorate 
of Mainz following the temporary expulsion of the French from Mainz 
in early 1793.*° The survey revealed that for many, ‘collaboration’ 
stemmed from pragmatic, not ideological, considerations. Fear and 
peer pressure were crucial in governing behaviour, especially amongst 
groups particularly vulnerable to pressure from the occupying forces: 
those in public employ, dependants on public relief, and unpopular 
minority groups traditionally dependent upon the authorities 
for 
protection, like the Jews. Yet others were less motivated by pressures than 
by the commercial opportunities that were presented by occupation: 
tavern owners, who displayed revolutionary symbols in order to attract 
lucrative custom from French soldiers, for example. As in other examples 
that could be drawn from other lands and eras, collaboration (and 
indeed its opposite, resistance), could be motivated by a plethora of 
considerations. 
The revolutionary decade gave way to the Napoleonic period in 
November 1799, when General Bonaparte launched the Brumairian 
coup that terminated the Directory and instituted the Consulate. The 
new French régime faced massive challenges in the occupied German 
territories when it came to power, but it is fair to say that it mastered 
most of them relatively quickly.”” These challenges included the need 