

<<<PDFPAGE 101>>>
Michael Rowe 
83 
majority of the customs men - the despised douaniers — were native 
Frenchmen; 
the special customs courts eventually established by 
Napoleon also contained a preponderance of native Frenchmen, unlike 
the ordinary courts which counted larger numbers of Rhinelanders.* 
So, on the face of it, smuggling was something that appears to have 
pitted Rhinelanders against Frenchmen. However, sources then remind 
us that smuggling involved not only Rhinelanders, but also native 
Frenchmen, including even high officials and military officers. Indeed, 
even the commander of the Gendarmerie in the Rhenish departments, 
Georgeon, was implicated, whilst on another occasion a French military 
officer involved ordered his men to fire at douaniers who were interfering 
in an operation.“ Ironically, smuggling was something that Frenchmen 
and Germans could collaborate in. In that sense, perversely, it might have 
assisted in the long-term aim of integrating the new departments into 
France. The most that can be conceded is that smuggling represented 
‘functional resistance’: it was not motivated primarily by the desire to 
undermine French rule, but by profit. 
The same conclusion can be reached with respect to opposition to 
military conscription, which manifested itself as draft evasion and 
desertion. Fortunately, we have quite good statistics on the incidence of 
both draft evasion and desertion within the entire French Empire, 
broken down by year and department.*” These statistics, provided by the 
general direction for conscription, allow us to build up a map illustrating 
where resistance to the draft was most serious. The Rhenish departments, 
though newly annexed and though they had never experienced con- 
scription before, appear amongst the most reliable departments from the 
government’s point of view. After a slow start, they quickly provided 
an above average quota of troops in relation to their population.°° It is 
estimated that in all, 80 000 Rhinelanders served in Napoleon’s armies 
at one time or another, representing about 30 per cent of the age groups 
concerned. Draft dodging was slightly above the national average, but 
desertion below. The one really worrying statistic, from the government’s 
perspective, was the tiny proportion of draft dodgers actually arrested, 
at least in the years covered by the statistics, which end in 1810: the 
average in the Rhenish departments was 6-8 per cent and 11-20 per cent 
for the Empire as a whole; and, as Alan Forrest correctly notes, draft 
dodging was less about individual choice and more about social cohesion: 
for it to succeed, it required community support.*! The statistics suggest 
this was provided in the Rhineland. 
Reference to ‘collaboration’ and ‘resistance’ suggests a relationship 
between two parties: the people, however defined, and some form of 

<<<PDFPAGE 102>>>
84 
Resistance, Collaboration or Third Way? 
authority, be it a government or occupying military power. It is recog- 
nized that the people are not homogeneous, but composed of numerous 
individuals and communities, and that these are positioned at various 
points on the spectrum between the extremes of collaboration and 
resistance. Nor, however, should we assume that governments or states 
are homogeneous. What do we mean when referring to the ‘French’, or 
‘Napoleonic state’, or ‘government’? After all, there were within the 
Napoleonic administration several, competing bureaucratic hierarchies: 
the customs administration, subordinate to the finance ministry in 
Paris; the regular administrative chain, running from mayors and 
adjuncts at the bottom, via the subprefects and prefects to the interior 
minister at the top; there was another parallel hierarchy running up to 
the police minister, and something analogous subordinate to the justice 
ministry. In many respects, the Catholic Church, with its ‘mayors in 
black’ (parish priests) and ‘prefects in purple’ (bishops) represented just 
one more Napoleonic hierarchy, subordinate to the Ministry of Cults. 
Collectively, these administrations represented the French state, but 
not individually.°? 
How do we rate Rhenish opposition to one or two of these adminis- 
trations (the customs administration and indirect tax collection agencies 
were, predictably, the least popular) coupled with support for another (and 
here the judiciary should be highlighted)? Does such a combination 
add up to resistance, or collaboration? 
This was essentially the point that one eminent Rhinelander, Georg 
Friedrich Rebmann, made when accused after 1814 by German nation- 
alists of collaborating with the French. Rebmann had served as a senior 
judge under Napoleon. Following Napoleon’s defeat, he was employed 
by the newly installed Bavarian authorities as a writer and journalist to 
counter the Prussian-backed nationalist press that attacked not only 
French rule in the Rhineland, but also those German states such as 
Bavaria that had allied themselves with Napoleon within the framework 
of the Confederation of the Rhine. In a balanced way, Rebmann listed 
the pros and cons of French rule. The former included the abolition of 
the vestiges of feudalism, the removal of fiscal privileges, state encour- 
agement of agriculture, and the civil and commercial codes. More 
generally, Rebmann argued that Napoleonic rule had been essential to 
the southern and western part of Germany, as it had allowed this area to 
modernize its antiquated structures. This was in contrast to Prussia, he 
admitted, where Napoleonic domination had resulted only in oppression 
and exploitation. Amongst the disadvantages of Napoleonic rule in 
the Rhineland listed by Rebmann were the increasingly authoritarian 