

<<<PDFPAGE 118>>>
100 
Popular Resistance in Catalonia 
great notoriety (in September 1810, for example, he joined with Rovira 
in a raid on the Cerdagne, which caused the French authorities much 
alarm not just on account of the 30 000 francs that were extracted in 
ransoms for the various hostages taken by the Catalans, but also with 
respect to the cooperation which they were afforded by many of the 
local inhabitants).°? 
Unlike many other such forces, we happen to know a considerable 
amount about Clar6s’s partida. On 3 August 1811 his ‘division’, as it was 
known, comprised a total of 279 men, of whom 203 were soldiers from 
the First Regiment of Cervera, 38 stragglers from a variety of different 
corps, and 40 peasants who had rallied to his standard. The captains 
were José Cuadros and P. Barrios, who had both been appointed by 
Clarés; the lieutenants José Moya (an officer of the Granada Regiment, 
who had been captured by the French and later escaped), Ignacio Surés 
(an officer of the Soria Regiment, who was, again, a fugitive from 
French imprisonment), Francesc Franch (a straggler from the Catalan 
Legions, who had joined Clarés), and Ramon Marcos (an officer of the 
Third Regiment of Cervera, who was another escaped prisoner); and the 
sub lieutenants, Juan Vert (an officer of the light company of the First 
Regiment of Gerona), Juan Requena, Agustin Saberres and Mariano Borras 
(all of whom were stragglers from the Volunteers of Tarragona), Miguel 
Vines (a straggler from the Almogavares battalion), José Baleta (a deserter 
from the Savoya Regiment) and Miguel Darder (a deserter from the 
Iberia Regiment).*® 
Whether this somewhat patchwork appearance was typical of the 
guerrillas, we do not know. But we have already seen that Rovira’s band 
was largely recruited from men who had fled the French zone of 
occupation, whilst this is something that also appears to have been the 
case with the partida called the company of almogovares — a term used in 
the early-modern period to decribe Spanish light horse — formed in Olot 
in January 1810 under the command of Narcis Gay, the 378 men whom 
Gay had gathered together by 31 May of the same year for the most part 
coming from the Emporda (i.e. the district around Figueres).*4 
Thus far, then, thus good. Popular resistance in Catalonia was found 
in many forms both old and and new, whilst it also appears to have 
been constant. In this respect, the praise that even the most jaundiced 
British historians have lavished on the Catalans appears to have been 
well merited. Let us take, for example, the extremely anti-Spanish 
William Napier. Thus: ‘Their patriotism was purer and their efforts more 
sustained: the somatens were brave and active in battle, the population 
of the towns firm and the juntas apparently disinterested.’*> Similar 

<<<PDFPAGE 119>>>
Antonio Moliner Prada 
101 
views were, meanwhile, entertained by many Spanish historians, as well 
as by the contemporary chronicler, Father Raimundo Ferrer.*° And at 
the time of the war itself, it was very clearly the ‘official’ line. As the 
Junta of Catalonia’s gazette put it, for example: 
There is no difference between men in Catalonia, all are soldiers, in 
the fields, on the roads, in places, in the cities occupied by the 
enemy, wherever the Catalans show profound hatred for the French, 
an inextinguishable 
zeal for the Fatherland, 
a loyalty beyond 
question... Supplies, munitions, the French convoys fall to the 
valiant patriots that cover every inch of ground, and in the towns 
and villages where they have superiority in weapons, it is the houses 
and walls that are captive, not the hearts, which constantly exalt 
their loyalty in the most energetic, most heroic demonstrations.°’ 
But there is also another side to the story. From source after source 
come details that challenge or undermine the traditional version of 
events, whilst the Catalan archives are full of evidence that suggests 
a very different guerra del francés, and it is this to which we must now 
turn our attention. 
Let us begin with the somatén. In this respect it is a little disturbing to 
find that the famous defence of El Bruc was the work not just of heroic 
armed civilians, but also of large numbers of deserters from the garrison 
of Barcelona, including a detachment of the Swiss Wimpffen regiment 
commanded by Lieutenant Francisco Krutter preparing an ambush for 
the French. Dressed though these men may have been in Catalan 
barretina caps, if it is true, as at least one source claims, that the number 
involved came to around 500, then a very different view must be 
entertained of the defence of the pass.** Reinforcing such doubts is the 
fact that service in the somatén does not appear to have been that 
popular. Thus villages along the French frontier or close to areas of French 
occupation were concerned at the idea of sending off their menfolk and 
thereby depriving themslves of their only means of defence.*” From all 
parts of Catalonia came significant number of petitions from private 
citizens requesting that their sons be declared exempt from service.*° 
And later on, as at Vacarises, draft evasion was a problem with many 
men choosing to run away to join guerrilla bands such, in this instance, 
as that commanded by José Boadas.*! Finally, the local authorities 
themselves might make difficulties, as occurred at Vizcondado de Bas 
and Sant Joan de Les Fonts where the justices protested at complete 
strangers demanding costly contributions and the raising of somatens 