

<<<PDFPAGE 110>>>
92 
Popular Resistance in Catalonia 
often overlapped with those of the guerrilla bands that also appeared 
in Catalonia.! 
At the beginning of the war against France the use of irregular forces 
was particularly prominent, this being so much the case that one of the 
chief contemporary chroniclers of the struggle, the regular army officer, 
Francisco Javier Cabanes, described the period from May to September 
1808 as the ‘somatén era’.* Nor is this surprising: most of the garrison of 
Catalonia had fallen into the hands of the French when the latter had 
occupied Barcelona, whilst it was some time before reinforcements 
reached the principality from the Balearic Islands, the latter being the 
principality’s nearest source of fresh troops. With few other means of 
protection, in fact, the insurgent authorities had no option but to turn 
to Catalonia’s own military traditions. The first Catalan somatén — in 
this context the word means irregular band ~ was therefore formed in 
early June 1808. Citizens of Igualada, Manresa and other neighbouring 
towns raised such a force in the Bruc mountains with the aim of halting 
General Schwartz’s march on Zaragoza. The skirmish, which took place 
on June 6, had the desired effect and succeeded in putting the imperial 
troops to flight. Made famous by the incident of the so-called ‘drummer 
of Bruc’, this was an important psychological victory — it was, indeed, 
the first defeat that Napoleon’s army suffered in Spain —- and was to 
become a symbol repeatedly exploited by the civil and military author- 
ities in their anti-French propaganda campaign. And, of course, it was 
a stimulus to further efforts of this type: following the Bruc battle, other 
villages that had previously not raised somatens, like Vilanova i la Geltru, 
quickly did so.° 
Very soon, then, somatens were in action in many parts of Catalonia. 
On 10 June the somatens of Vilafanca del Penedés, La Segarra and Urgell, 
attacked the French division commanded by Chabran at Vendrell, who 
in reprisal looted and set fire to the whole town. On 14 June another 
French attempt to force the pass of El Bruc was repulsed with many cas- 
ualties. On 17 June the somatens again confronted the French at Mon- 
gat, in which action 
a woman named Susana Claretona, who was the 
wife of a somatén sub lieutenant, D. Francesc Felonch, so distinguished 
herself that she was named co-commandant, along with her husband, 
of the band to which she belonged, and later helped prevent the French 
from taking Capellades. On 4 July forces under the command of Franc- 
esc Deu de Llisa and Josep Colomer y Riu attacked the French at Con- 
gost. But perhaps the somatens’ greatest glory was that which they 
attained in the successful defence of Gerona against repeated French 
assaults in the period from June to August 1808: with the city originally 

<<<PDFPAGE 111>>>
Antonio Moliner Prada 
93 
garrisoned only by a single understrength infantry battalion and a few 
artillerymen, it would undoubtedly have fallen to the French had not 
the local inhabitants stood to arms and manned the walls alongside the 
regulars.* Meanwhile, several thousand miquelets and somatens took part 
in the final relief of the city on 16 August 1808, the defence of the city 
also being notable for the involvement of a number of women, includ- 
ing Teresa Balaguer and Isabel Pi from Bagur, Esperansa Llorens from 
Cadaqués and Maria Plajas from Calonge.° 
It was not long, meanwhile, before the somatens were joined by fresh 
forces. Notwithstanding successes of the sort as that obtained at Bruc, it 
was Clear that an irregular militia that took to arms only when its own 
homes and families were in danger and at best served only for a few 
days, was hardly sufficient as a means of defence against the forces of 
Napoleon. Though some measure of relief was obtained by stipulating 
that men called up for the somatén should serve for a certain period of 
time and by forming the various local bands into larger units called 
divisiones, what was needed was clearly a permanent force that would be 
capable of carrying out special actions and of serving anywhere it was 
needed. No sooner had it assembled at Lérida, indeed, than the provin- 
cial junta that had been formed in the wake of the uprising decreed the 
formation of an army of 40 000 men. Needless to say, this was envis- 
aged in terms not of regular troops but of miquelets, of which there were 
to be 40 tercios or regiments. Each one of these units was to be based on 
a particular town or district, whilst the men were all to be volunteers 
who were expected to serve for the duration of the war. The third article 
of the orders established that, once each town had met the numbers 
assigned to it — Lérida was supposed to raise 1000 men; Cervera, 500; 
Tarragona, 1500; Tortosa, 1200; Manresa, 500; Vic 400; Vilafranca, 150 
and Igualada, 110 — the other men recruited should form a reserve and 
‘serve aS somatens whenever need be, to which end companies and 
tercios shall be formed, and drill in the use of arms’. As this suggests, 
the somatén was not forgotten, but there is nonetheless a distinct hint 
that what was envisaged was the militarization of at least some of the 
bands of militiamen springing up around the region, the decree that 
established the miquelets referring to them as an army of somatens and 
giving commissions in their ranks to a number of men who had acted 
as commandants in the latter force (examples here include a notary from 
Lérida named Joan Baget; a canon from Manresa named Montanya; and 
a lawyer from Igualada named Riera).° Yet, in general, the principle that 
the defence of Catalonia should rest in the hands of its own citizens 
was not forgotten, as witness, for example, the fact that the leadership 