

<<<PDFPAGE 114>>>
96 Popular Resistance in Catalonia 
drafted into the miquelets. But the move towards more formal methods 
of waging war was only temporary. Having first captured the petty 
fortress of Roses, on 9 December a large French force under Marshal 
St Cyr drove away the irregulars blockading Figueras and then headed 
for Barcelona, and for the next few days assorted groups of miquelets 
and somatens harassed the march of the French columns or sought to 
hold strategic positions blocking the route to the ciudad condal. Despite 
their courage, however - at one point St Cyr himself was almost captured 
whilst personally trying to find a vital goat track —- the French were 
not to be checked. Thanks in large part to Vives’ incompetence, indeed, 
a detachment of the Army of the Right was beaten at Cardedeu on 
16 December, and Barcelona relieved the next day. Nor was this all: on 
21 December St Cyr sallied out of Barcelona and routed the Spanish 
troops still lining the banks of the River Llobregat immediately to the 
south and west of Barcelona.'® 
Known as the battle of Molins de Rei, this last battle was almost fatal 
to the Army of the Right. ‘Having been responsible’, we are told, ‘for 
a thousand excesses in the towns they passed through, [the soldiers] 
reached Tarragona naked, disordered, starving and possessed by an 
inexplicable terror and panic’.'° According to Oman, meanwhile, the 
miquelets ‘mostly dispersed to their homes’.'’ Yet by the same token 
Molins de Rei also gave a new fillip to ‘people’s war’. Desperate to win 
time to reorganize his battered forces, the new Spanish commander in 
Catalonia, General Teodoro Reding, sought to revive the somatens as 
the best means of continuously harassing the enemy. With large 
swathes of the province now under enemy control, calling them up 
was by no means as easy as before but a call went out for men who had 
been serving in somatens that had been dispersed or disbanded to come 
forward to fight the French once more and this produced a small 
irregular force — in effect a guerrilla band — that was given to a regular 
brigadier named Iranzo. Under the direction of another general named 
Marti, meanwhile, a plan was drawn up to reorganize the miquelets on 
a much less costly basis and to turn the somatens into a reserve. 
Disrupted though these efforts were on 25 February 1809 by a fresh 
defeat at Valls, which saw the death of Reding, they continued unabated 
for most of the year that followed. The system of conscription already 
used for the somatens, 
it was 
agreed, should be extended 
to the 
miquelets, and both bodies were subjected to a common inspector gen- 
eral in the person of Joan Clarés. The somatens were divided into four 
divisions: the Ampurdan division, which was to operate from the fron- 
tier to the Ter; the Montseny, to cover the area between the Ter and 

<<<PDFPAGE 115>>>
Antonio Moliner Prada 
97 
the Tordera; the Vallés, from the Tordera to the Besés, and the Llobre- 
gat, to operate from the capital as far as the Penedés (the renowned 
irregular commander, Rovira, was given the first division, and the 
other three were placed under the command of the governors of Vic, 
Mataro and Vilafranca, respectively). And on a local level juntas such 
as that of Vilafranca del Penedeés tried to make service in their somatens 
more attractive by giving them the aspect more of a regular civic guard 
than a band of irregulars.!® 
Thanks to these efforts, the somatens, in particular, continued to play 
a part in the war. Led by a priest named Mas and one Otzet, peasants 
from Sallent, Moia and other villages carried out significant defensive 
actions, while Collbat6 and Capellades witnessed effective cooperation 
from bands led by Baltasar de Eixala and Josep Matheu.’? Outstanding 
in the Priorat region, meanwhile, was the somatén of Porrera. Led by 
Josep Pellicer i Fort, this participated in the campaign of Valls and later 
captured much food and ammunition from a French convoy that it 
attacked in late 1809 as well as preventing an enemy column from 
occupying Falset.”° In March and April 1809 the somatens of the Vallés 
Oriental made life uncomfortable for the enemy troops that had 
occupied Terrassa and Sabadell. Indeed, the action of the somatén of the 
latter city, commanded by Turull de Sentmenat, forced the French to 
withdraw, but they returned on Easter Wednesday, with more men and 
took full revenge: ‘Thieving, pillaging, the most horrific violence to 
women young and married filled Sabadell with wailing and conster- 
nation on a day as saintly as any celebrated by the Church.’*! In the 
villages of the Baix Camp, Alt Camp and Conca de Barbera (Albiol, 
Vimbodi, Coll de Alforja and Prades) regions of Tarragona, Jaume Palliser 
and Maria Palies led 300 men of the somatens in a series of strikes in 
March 1809 which forced the imperial troops to fall back on Montblanc.” 
And, finally, whilst the walls of the city were manned, among other 
units, by tercios of miquelets drawn from Gerona, Vic, Cervera and the 
Vall de Talarn, the third siege of Gerona (June-December 1809) saw 
large forces of somatens being employed in the various attempts that 
were made to raise the siege and get convoys of food through to the 
defenders.”* 
According to some observers, meanwhile, all this encouraged a certain 
bravado. Let us take, for example, a letter cited by the chief contemporary 
chronicler of events in Barcelona as having been written by a somatén 
commander named Fernando Chaparro. Thus, Chaparro was particularly 
impressed by the attitude adopted by the irregulars vis-a-vis the once- 
feared enemy cavalry: 