

<<<PDFPAGE 120>>>
102 
Popular Resistance in Catalonia 
‘on they knew not what authority’.*” Nor was the situation with the 
miquelets any better. Not only did recruitment fall well short of the 
mark set by the Junta of Catalonia, but there were complaints of even 
such men as had enlisted destroying their weapons so that they would 
not have to go to war.*8 
It was not just a question of obtaining recruits, however. Thus, no 
sooner had many men enlisted or been called up, than they were looking 
for opportunities to escape, this being a problem that afflicted the 
somatens and miquelets alike. As the landowner Antoni Bellsolell recalls 
in his memoirs, for men with a little money one way out was to buy 
their freedom, and this happened with some frequency.** But for many 
of the poorer combatants, there was no hope‘of availing themselves of 
this privilege with the result that they turned to desertion. A problem 
throughout Spain - taking the country as a whole it may have affected 
20 per cent of the army’s manpower at one time or other — in Catalonia 
it was even more prominent. The papers of the Junta of Barcelona 
(a somewhat fugitive body that led a chequered existence not in the 
ciudad condal but in various towns in the hinterland) contain details of 
a number of cases that occurred in 1810. Amongst the citizens of 
Barcelona who had fled were Miquel Ferreras, who was thirty-three and 
a barber; Joan Llubregat, who was nineteen and another barber; Benet 
Miravet, who was seventeen and a painter; Isidre Valba, who was 
twenty-two and a shoemaker; and Josep Sola, who was thirty-six. For 
a closer look at such a man, meanwhile, we might take the case of 
Miquel Estop, who was a soldier of the First Catalan Legion, nineteen 
years old, the son of Antoni and Serafina, five foot one in height, and 
possessed of dark brown hair, brown eyes, a broad nose, dark skin and 
a scar. Estop having deserted on 2 May 1810, the Junta’s military 
commission was ordered to arrest him: ‘It is urgent that with due zeal 
you endeavour to collect the said individual by whatever means you 
deem prudent, and if that is not possible you should imprison the 
father, mother, brother, uncle or closest relative until he is produced 
and report that you have thus done so’.*° How the commission was to 
accomplish this feat in the midst of a city filled with French troops was 
not made apparent, but that is by-the-by. What matters is simply the 
fact that flight was an ever present reality. As Rovira informed the Junta 
of Manresa in January 1810, for example, the desertion going on 
around him was so ‘continued and scandalous’ that ‘in a short time I am 
likely to be left with no men but myself’.*° Still worse, meanwhile, the 
population were all too happy to connive at this activity, the situation 
not being helped in this respect by the fact that many magistrates not 

<<<PDFPAGE 121>>>
Antonio Moliner Prada 
103 
only failed to uphold the law but even went so far as to shelter both 
their own sons and those of their wealthier neighbours.*” 
As time went on, so a refuge other than home and hearth offered 
itself to would-be deserters. Thus, in November 1811, the arrest was 
ordered of Jaume Borrull, a citizen of Sant Climent, for having recruited 
men in a number of villages in order to form a guerrilla group, on the 
promise of exemption from the draft.** In this instance, the dodge was 
foiled, but the fact is that joining one of the many extra-official partidas 
that began to spring up was a wonderful way out of trouble for many 
soldiers, especially as these bands were generally in reality nothing 
more than companias de brivalla — literally ‘rabble companies’ - living by 
theft and highway robbery whose ransacking of village after village kept 
the entire population in a state of alarm. There were frequent tussles 
between the different bands and on occasions they even joined the 
French, whilst the local authorities were often forced to beg the Junta of 
Catalonia to help them keep them in order.*? For a good example of 
such a force one might cite the gang raised by a wealthy farmer named 
Pere Rovira y Galceran, which was in theory raised to assist in the 
blockade of Barcelona in the autumn of 1808, but in practice devoted 
itself to smuggling goods into the city and running a variety of protection 
rackets.°° In theory, authorized bands — those, for example of Gay and 
Rovira — were not supposed to allow deserters to enlist with them, but 
in practice it was not easy to distinguish between men who had run 
away from their units (desertores) and men who had returned to their 
homes or been scattered across the countryside after some defeat 
(dispersos). Nor did it help, meanwhile, that men who were willing to 
rejoin the army were often offered better pay than those who had stuck 
it out through thick and thin, and that food was often far more plentiful 
in irregular units such as that of Gay than it was in the rest of the 
army.°! Indeed, it was in part for this very reason that, despite his 
protests, Gay’s command was disbanded in August 1811.°7 
Assuming the status of a guerrilla was a useful tactic and there is 
plenty of evidence from other parts of Spain to suggest that many outlaws 
and deserters made use of it at one time or another. But, of course, the 
phenomenon of banditry was anything but new. And in Catalonia, in 
particular, gangs known as parrots or brivalles had a long tradition in the 
region going back to the seventeenth century. In short, banditry already 
had a solid base in 1808, and was in consequence a natural response 
to the misery suffered by the lower classes in these years of war. Not 
surprisingly, meanwhile, the number of such malefactors grew through- 
out the guerra del francés. As for the war, many of the gangs made no 