

<<<PDFPAGE 116>>>
98 
Popular Resistance in Catalonia 
Every day the somatens provide fresh proof of their dash, and surely 
glory is deserved by these men whose occupation two months ago 
was the innocent tasks of farming, but who now know other tools 
than the mattock and the plough...and have humiliated the Saint- 
Cyrs, the Chabrans, the Lechis and other swarms of their generals? 
They now laugh at them wearing their cuirasses, which inspire about 
as much fear in them as the Easter processions, and pay them no 
attention other than to argue about who should have first dibs on 
them when it comes to taking them home to their villages. All the 
more is this the case since they have learned from experience that 
a musketball pierces the cuirass from more than 100 paces, killing 
the cuirassier and coming out of his arse. The somatens know full 
well that, once the cuirassiers have been knocked from their horses, 
they are little different from turtles, and are reduced to laughter by 
the clumsiness of men dressed up...in such junk.** 
For a French view of all this, meanwhile, we might turn to a French- 
man named Maffre-Baugé who refers in his memoirs to the trap the 
Catalan somatens prepared for him when, towards the end of 1809, a 
detachment 
of his troops was heading towards the monastery at 
Montserrat: ‘The Catalans rushed us in a mob, whilst from the top of 
the 
rocks 
they opened 
a harassing 
fire 
that 
caused 
us much 
loss... without us being able to hit back with any success.’”° 
Unlike the miquelets, which, as we shall see, were soon to disappear 
altogether, the somatens continued to operate for most of the war. Fol- 
lowing the capture of the fortress of San Fernando de Figueres by Rovira 
in April 1811, for example, a general somatén was ordered of some 
6400 men, with the target quotas being distributed as follows: Tarragona, 
1000; Montblanc, 400; Cervera, 1500; Lérida, 500; Manresa, 1500; 
Vilafranca, 1500. And when Tarragona was besieged two months later, 
the Junta attempted to call up another 12 500 men.*° At this time, 
indeed, the somatén again experienced a revival of interest in its fortunes. 
With large parts of the regular forces all set on departing for Valencia in 
the wake of the loss of the city that had been Catalonia’s temporary 
capital since 1808, Jacinto Buniva de Morera, a sub lieutenant in the 
Baza Infantry Regiment, proposed a general somatén — in effect, a national 
guard — coupled with the deployment of the available manpower into 
four divisions that would take it in turns to be ready to combat the 
enemy at a moment’s notice.”’ As for the somatens’ main successes in 
the latter part of the war, the most important was Rovira’s capture of 
the great citadel of San Fernando de Figueres. Thus, at the head of 2000 

<<<PDFPAGE 117>>>
Antonio Moliner Prada 
99 
irregulars, on the night of 9 April 1811 Rovira got into the fortress with 
the help of three young Catalans who had secured employment in its 
magazines. Having knocked out the Neapolitan troops defending the 
gate and detained the sleeping governor, the Spaniards found that 
they had taken 850 prisoners, provisions for 2000 men for four months, 
16 000 muskets, immense supplies of clothing and shoes, and 400 000 
francs. Following a four and a half month siege, in August the French 
took the fortress back but not before they had lost 4000 men to dysen- 
tery and malaria.”® 
Thus far, we have been talking about popular resistance in terms of 
Catalonia’s traditional system of militias. In the Spain of 1808-14 there 
had emerged an entirely separate phenomenon in the form of the 
independent guerrilla band. With more and more of the principality 
under enemy occupation — Gerona fell at the end of 1809, Lérida in the 
spring of 1810 and Tarragona in the summer of 1811 —- it was but logical 
that Catalonia should also have been affected by this development. As 
elsewhere, then, we see attempts to form cruzadas - literally ‘crusades’, 
though a better term would be ‘bands of crusaders’ 
—- composed of 
members of the clergy. In June 1809, for example, we find a canon of 
the collegiate church at Pons named Joan Pau Constans submitting 
a proposal for such a force to the Junta Central.”” These schemes rarely 
came to fruition, however: although his plan had the support of both 
the then Captain General of Catalonia, General Joaquin Blake and the 
Junta Central, Constans was unable to overcome the numerous obstacles 
he came up against in both the Junta of Catalonia and ecclesiastical 
circles, whilst the cruzada proposed by another priest named Joan Ferrer, 
who was chaplain of the Escuelas Pias School at Moia, met with a similar 
lack of success.*° In so far as can be ascertained, then, most of the 
guerrilla bands that were formed in Catalonia were wholly secular, 
though their leaders did sometimes come from the clergy, two examples 
that we might cite here being Josep Bertran, the parish priest of Llora, 
and Canon Francesc Rovira, who in 1811 had managed to gather 
together a band of stragglers and deserters from Manresa, Solsona, 
Cardona and Sant Llorens de Morunys at the head of which tercio de 
expatriados, as he called them, he was able to attain the rank of brigadier.*! 
If Rovira’s status as a priest was quite rare, this was less so with respect 
to the fact that he had been fighting the French since 1808. Thus, most 
of the Catalan guerrilla commanders were men who had earlier led 
troops belonging to either the juntas or the regular army and attained 
a considerable amount of promotion. As an example, we might cite the 
retired army officer, Joan Clarés, whose activities quickly gained him 