

<<<PDFPAGE 112>>>
94 Popular Resistance in Catalonia 
cadres of both the somatens and the miquelets continued to draw on 
men who could either have found no place in the old regular army, or 
had simply chosen other careers for themselves. There were, true, 
a number of retired and supernumerary officers such as Francisco Milans 
del Bosch and Joan Clarés. But commanding some somatens were 
clergymen like Francisco Campos, who reputedly carried out a number 
of exemplary actions in the region of the Emporda, and Francesc 
Rovira, who later went on to establish hiimself as one of Catalonia’s 
first guerrillas. And also prominent were the clothier, Josep Manso, the 
merchant, Antoni Franch, and the proprietor, Esteban Pascual y Casas, 
all of whom were wealthy notables with a considerable stake in society.’ 
Yet were the miquelets, in particular, really 4 people’s militia? It was 
true that there were certain differences from the old army. Setting aside 
the fact that the men were all volunteers, all officers up to the rank of 
captain were appointed by the local juntas (in theory more senior 
positions were in the gift of the Captain General, but here, too, one 
suspects that the civil authorities held the whip hand). Yet the men 
were paid wages, and, however simply, uniformed (regulations promul- 
gated in August 1808 speak of grey jackets with red facings and round 
hats bearing the national cockade; to distinguish the regiments one 
from another, meanwhile, the soldiers’ collars bore the initial of the 
towns from which they were raised). As for the officers, they were paid 
generous salaries — captains received 20 reales a day, lieutenants 16 and 
sub lieutenants 12 — whilst they were given the same rights and pre- 
rogatives as the regular army, and thereby admitted at least to the military 
estate, if not the army itself.* In the end, then, it is hard to see how the 
miquelets amounted to anything other than regular troops even if the 
regimental standards that they carried continued to mark them out as 
regular troops who were specifically Catalan and had forms and origins 
that were distinct from the rest of the Spanish infantry. 
The formation of the new force was not without its difficulties. Tortosa 
had provided 1200 men by early October 1808 and Vic another 800, 
but there were complaints that towns further from the French zone of 
control were not acting with the same speed.’ At the same time the 
response was certainly patchy: some areas, such as Manresa, Seu d’Urgell 
and Puigcerda produced rather more men than those required by the 
draft, while others fell short, like Matar6, La Marina, the Vall d’Aran 
and Camprodon. Acccording to Oman, indeed, at the beginning of 
August only 6000 men had been raised for service with the miquelets, 
whilst there were difficulties in arming and officering even such men as 
had come forward.'° Of the 40 000 men called up in the month of June, 

<<<PDFPAGE 113>>>
Antonio Moliner Prada 
95 
no more than 23 000 were actually assembled. But there is no doubt 
that many tercios de miqueletes were soon ready to take the field. Thus, 
Esdaile indicates the creation of a total of 27 tercios in 1808: two in 
Tarragona, four in Lérida, three in Gerona, one in Manresa, two in 
Cervera, one in Tortosa, two in Vic, one in Mataro, one in Seu d’Urgell, 
one in Berga, two in Talarn, one in Cerdanya, two in the Vall d’Aran, 
one in Barcelona, one in the Amporda, one in Igualada, one in Figueres 
and one in Granollers (in the case of the Barcelona and Figueres tercios, 
one assumes that what is meant is that the troops came from the towns, 
rather than actually being raised in them)." 
If the brunt of the June fighting had fallen upon the somatens, from 
July onwards their endeavours were increasingly shared by the miquelets. 
Knowledge of the terrain, particularly in the hills, enabled the two 
forces to cause the Napoleonic army heavy losses. With the aid of the 
local population, the patriots carried out a defensive war of attrition, 
accepting no real battle unless they had clear numerical superiority. The 
rest of 1808, then, was characterized by a long list of raids and skirmishes. 
For obvious reasons, it is impossible to detail all these actions here, but, 
in brief, whilst large forces of irregulars including the ‘divisions’ of 
somatens commanded by Arzt and Baget and the tercios de miquelets of 
Berga, Manresa and Igualada, blockaded Barcelona, whither Duhesme 
had retired with the bulk of his forces following his failure to capture 
Gerona, others closed in on the isolated garrison of Figueras and even 
raided the French frontier.‘ Amongst the most active leaders at this 
time was Milans del Bosch who in September 1808 alone is reported to 
have attacked the invaders at Moncada, Badalona and San Feliu de 
Guixols. 
_As the summer of 1808 wore on, however, so the war in Catalonia 
began to change. In August substantial forces of regular troops began to sy 
arrive at Tarragona from the Balearic Islands, and by October the 
Spaniards had put together a substantial army. Known as the ‘Army of 
the Right’, this was commanded by Juan Miguel de Vives. For many of 
the miqueletes, in particular, their experience of the war now began to 
change. Thus, now some 20 000 strong, many of their units were inte- 
grated into the ranks of Vives’ troops, of which the Vanguard Division 
contained the first and second tercios of Gerona, the first tercio of 
Tarragona, and the tercios of Igualada Cervera and Figueres, and the 
Fourth Division the first tercio of Lérida and the tercios of Vic, Manresa 
and Vallés.!4 Meanwhile, with the French shut up in Barcelona and 
Gerona, there was now much less need for the somatens and, to the fury 
of some of the juntas de corregimiento, many were either sent home or 