

<<<PDFPAGE 122>>>
104 
Popular Resistance in Catalonia 
pretence of having any interest in the struggle. Thus, in July 1811 we 
find Lieutenant Pedro Antonio Alvanés reporting that a detachment of 
troops that he was with had just been attacked at Arboli, in the Baix 
Camp by a group of deserters who had their stronghold in caves at 
L’Alforja. Formed up in two groups, they had swept down on the 
soldiers, seized sixteen mules loaded with flour that had just been taken 
from the French, and mercilessly killed the commander of the detachment 
as he lay wounded on the ground. As for Alvanés, he managed to save 
himself by hiding in the house of the village priest. Determined to find 
him, the bandits had then turned all the houses upside down. Frustrated 
in this object, they had then destroyed all the weapons they could find 
(so as, one presumes, to frustrate the possibility of pursuit), and finally 
left to the accompaniment of claims to the effect that they had a 
monopoly on violence in the area. To quote the leader of the ruffians, 
‘Any deserter or armed villager we find that does not join us will be 
shot.’ 
Something of the extent of the problem faced by Catalonia is con- 
veyed by the report of an officer of the Cazadores de Catalufia battalion 
named Manuel Errando who was sent out with a small detachment 
comprising a sergeant, a corporal and eight men to hunt down deserters 
and thieves in central Catalonia in the early summer of 1812: 
In the present month of April we arrested fully armed the thief, Juan 
Quincles, alias Man, on the road that goes from Vic to Manresa, and 
a fortnight later we took his two companions, Manuel and Francisco 
Serrat...In the Sierra de Collespina five deserters who we took to 
Vique. Near Vidra in a house called El Barret6 we caught three deserters 
who we also took to Vic. Between La Fontella and Vilada and the 
parish of Malafieu we took three more, one of whom was wounded 
in the thigh whilst trying to escape... This month we have arrested 
as a thief and deserter, Antonio Sala y Golobandas, alias Solé, who is 
an inhabitant of Prats de Llusanés. In Llusa we took Juan Basa, alias 
Animota, the reason being, once again, that he was a deserter and 
thief. And in Berga we happened to chance on Josef Montorno, alias 
Tatxa, an inhabitant of Prats de Llusanés.*4 
The activities of Manuel Errando’s column were very effective and gave 
the bandits no respite. Thus, in June he also managed to arrest a well- 
known thief and deserter named Casadestis at Marlés, four deserters at 
Igualada, and five more deserters at Vic, as well as killing two or three 
members of a band of 12 thieves and smugglers that was operating from 

<<<PDFPAGE 123>>>
Antonio Moliner Prada 
105 
Viladecaballs.°° Yet to the end of the war Catalonia remained overrun 
with brivalles, whilst this allowed the French to maintain that the 
somatens and guerrillas were all bandits ipso facto. On 16 June 1810, for 
example, four young men, accused of numerous acts of violent robbery 
on the highroads, were sentenced to death in Barcelona by a French 
military commission, their names being Geroni Albas, aged thirty-three, 
who was a gunsmith and resident of Olot; Jaume Fargas, twenty-four, 
a shoemaker, also from Olot; Rafael Fluxeny, twenty, a butcher from 
Molins de Rei; and Pau Smith - curiously — who originally hailed from 
Alsace, and was currently an agricultural labourer in Mongat.°° What 
‘violent robbery on the highroads’ actually meant in this instance is 
unclear, but for the French there was no doubt: a brigand was a brigand, 
and the only good brigand a dead one. Whether a brigand was also 
a freedom fighter is another matter: at first sight one is tempted simply 
to say ‘no’, but consideration of the contemporary Balkan example of 
the hajduks — the insurgent bands that long harassed the Turks in their 
European dominions and headed the Serbian revolt of 1804 — suggests 
a more cautious answer. Thus, by their very banditry, men such as Albas 
and his companions dislocated society and thereby discredited French 
rule, and in this respect it is interesting to find the French commis- 
sioner of police in Gerona complaining that the deserters who infested 
the countryside were bringing commerce to a complete standstill.>” 
But this is beside the point. The bandits took to the hills not to fight 
the French but because they were starving, and because violence was an 
easy option in the context of the guerra del francés. Meanwhile, to return 
to our discussion of the Catalan forces, a further fact that strikes the 
historian very forcibly is that there was little or no difference between 
the behaviour of the somatens, miquelets and guerrillas when they were 
in their ranks and that which they displayed when they were out of the 
control of the authorities. Of this the evidence is legion. The abbot of 
the monastery of Sant Pere de Camprodon, for example, was insulted 
and mistreated by a band of miquelets.°* The citizens of Vic were regu- 
larly subjected to extortion by miquelets passing through the town.°? 
The tradesmen of Gerona were, in the words of General Nogués, all too 
frequently robbed and abused ‘by our troops, our miquelets and their 
supporters’.©° The inhabitants of La Bisbal experienced frequent cases of 
theft, disorder and crime of all forms at the hands of soldiers denied 
what they demanded.*! The Vallés region was devastated by bands of 
soldiers roaming its territory.°* And in 1810 Narcis Gay, the man behind 
the Cuerpo de Almogavares, reported: ‘The Figueres and Expatriado 
tercios are scattered about the hills, along with some draftees and deserters 
a 