

<<<PDFPAGE 124>>>
106 
Popular Resistance in Catalonia 
that have escaped various Army corps; most of these people are pillaging» 
the countryside and murdering travellers. In order to halt as far as is 
possible so many excesses, I have seen the Rev. Rector of Llora and we have 
agreed to pursue... these people who are so pernicious for society’.°° 
If it is impossible to argue that the Catalan forces were models of 
discipline, it is also difficult to show that they were of very much value 
in military terms. In places such as the pass of El Bruc where the French 
could not deploy their cavalry the somatens were able to gain the 
occasional success, whilst they were also able to put up a good show 
behind the walls of such towns as Gerona and Roses. As sentinels and 
pickets, too, they were fine, but every time they had to confront the 
French in open battle they were swept away with heavy losses: thus, the 
action at Mongat in which Susana Claretona supposedly so distinguished 
herself was actually a run-away French victory in which the somatens 
fled after a few shots. Nor were the miquelets much better. In one 
skirmish at Sant Jeroni de Murtra in October 1808, for example, we are 
told that ‘the miquelets and their officers, far from withdrawing in good 
order...ran and scattered to the hills in shameful flight’.°* Nor is any of 
this surprising. As the contemporary military analyst, Francisco Javier 
Cabanes, explained in his Historia de las operaciones del ejército de 
Cataluria, while masses of militia might have been valuable in the War of 
Succession 100 years before, they could not adjust to the more sophisti- 
cated tactics of the Napoleonic era, and were in consequence utterly 
insufficient to Catalonia’s needs.®° For such troops, guerrilla warfare was 
more of an option, but even here there are questions that have to be 
answered, the image presented by contemporary documentary evi- 
dence being very critical of the guerrilla bands, for example, on account 
of their instability, fragility, high cost and limited effectiveness. 
Faced by this situation the military authorities were in no doubt: 
Catalan traditions and Catalan sensibilities alike would have to give way 
to the demands of the war effort. Until the end of 1809 the heroic 
defence of Gerona shielded the military and political authorities from 
the full realities of the situation, but the loss of that city brought a new 
realism, and all the more so as Catalonia possessed a new Captain 
General in the person of the energetic and ambitious Enrique O’Don- 
nell. For this officer, the way forward was quite clear. As he wrote to 
the provincial junta soon after taking over the army with respect to a 
particularly blatant case of mass desertion amongst the Castelltercol 
somaten, ‘This scandalous desertion on the part of the somatens clearly 
indicates that they cannot be counted on for the defence of the princi- 
pality, and that it is necessary to adopt other measures with which to 