

<<<PDFPAGE 138>>>
120 
The Anatomy of a Research Project 
come up with more names: it is impossible to establish exactly how 
many guerrillas took the field against French, but estimates for the total 
number in action have ranged up to 50 000, whilst a list of 22 partidas 
that was published in various Spanish newspapers in 1812 claimed that 
in October 1811 these alone amounted to 38 520 combatants.° In the 
third place, it could not but be felt that the selection of the material was 
random in the extreme: garnered in the pursuit of an entirely different 
project, it was determined not by considerations that were germane to 
itself, but by the dictates of what was required for the elaboration of 
Guerrillas, Bandits and Adventurers (for this reason it would be absurd to 
attempt to draw conclusions from it with regard to, say, the geographical 
origins of the guerrillas). In the fourth place, there were many sources 
which had of necessity been left untapped, a good example here being 
Spain’s many municipal archives. And, last but not least, studying the 
guerrillas suggested that there were many questions that might be 
illuminated by a more extensive database: one possibility, for example, 
would be to cross reference known guerrillas with the names of those 
executed for banditry after 1815, whilst a second might be to compare 
the social base of the guerrillas with that of the regular army. 
To pursue these goals, however, would clearly be quite impossible 
without the aid of dedicated research assistance, and to this end from 
the autumn of 2000 onwards, application was made to a variety of 
funding bodies in the hope of obtaining the necessary support. In May 
2002 these efforts paid off, the Arts and Humanities Research Board 
awarding the current author a grant of £51 000, of which the chief 
purpose was the employment of a Spanish research assistant. Initially, 
funding was sufficient only for one year, but a further grant of approxi- 
mately £19 000 has since been obtained from the British Academy. 
Work therefore continued until the summer of 2004, and the findings 
of the project are shortly to be made available to the academic community 
by means of the internet, all that remains to be said at this point in 
proceedings being to thank both the Arts and Humanities Research 
Board and the British Academy for their generosity, not to mention the 
many scholars in both Britain and Spain who have given ‘Guerrillas and 
Bandits’ their advice and support. 
Let us now turn to the question of ‘nuts and bolts’. The starting point 
for any database is that it should be accessible and easy to manipulate, 
in which respect matters are greatly facilitated by the widespread avail- 
ability of Access and Windows. Such is the dominance of these products 
that there was no need to consider any other system, and the bulk of the 
designers’ attention has therefore been directed more towards achieving 

<<<PDFPAGE 139>>>
Charles J. Esdaile and Leonor Hernandez Enviz 
121 
the greatest possible degree of coherence in the construction of the 
database, in which respect particular attention was paid to, first, considering 
the sort of information that might be gathered on the subject of the 
Spanish guerrillas, and, second, rationalizing the headings under which 
it would be entered. With this in mind, especial heed was also taken of 
the likely purposes for which the database might be used by future 
research projects. In the short term, meanwhile, it was agreed that the 
basic questions which the database should address were essentially 
two-fold. First of all, there was the issue of ‘quantity’. How many partidas 
existed? How many men fought in them? How frequently were they to 
be encountered? In what areas did they operate? Secondly, there was 
that of ‘content’. Who joined the guerrillas? How old were they? What 
were they? Were did they stand with regard to issues of politics? And, 
finally, there was that of ‘activity’. For how long was each partida active? In 
what actions did they fight the French? How many men could they 
muster at various moments of their existence? In addressing these ques- 
tions, however, it was obvious that many difficulties would have to be 
faced. The documentation, for example, is extremely fragmentary, whilst 
much of the information that is required is not usually recorded: indeed, 
we generally only have full details only of a small number of very 
prominent figures. Given these problems, it might have been thought 
that one solution would have been to reduce the number of questions 
to be asked in respect of each individual to a bare minimum, but this 
temptation was resisted: as research continues, there is always the hope 
that the gaps might gradually be filled as fresh information becomes 
available or fresh archives are tapped, and it was therefore be judged to 
be much better at least to create the option of adding such material 
rather than to preclude all chance of doing so right at the beginning of 
the project. It will further be noted, meanwhile, that the scope of the 
database 
is much wider than that of the primitive 
‘pilot’ model 
developed in the period 2000-02, the new model being designed so that 
it can accommodate not just armed civilians, but also the militias, 
home guards and regular troops who took part in /a guerrilla alongside 
them, the object here being first to spread the net as wide as possible in 
terms of information gathering and second to enable scholars to draw 
sociological comparisons between different aspects of resistance to the 
French. However, that said, it will further be noted that great care has 
been taken to keep the ‘true’ guerrillas separate from other combatants 
in the struggle. 
Before moving on to a discussion of material that has been entered 
into the database, it is worth highlighting two other issues that have 