

<<<PDFPAGE 135>>>
Charles J. Esdaile and Leonor Hernandez Enviz 
117 
but which are probably related to the fact that the papers of the juntas 
criminals extraordinarias — the josefino tribunals examined by Fraser — contain 
almost no details of the background of the prisoners who came before 
them, these are calculated solely in terms of the 748 ‘guerrillas’, or rather 
the 209 members of this group of whose occupation and place in society 
the author claims to have some knowledge (interestingly, the sources of 
the names concerned, nor, still less, the definition according to which they 
were compiled, are never specified, whilst we are also never provided with 
a clear numerical breakdown of the figures). However, from this we learn 
that 20.9 per cent of the individuals on the list were members of the 
privileged classes whilst another 25.6 per cent came from the populace. 
Groups involved in the former category include clergy (8.3 per cent), 
military (S.5 per cent), civil authorities (2.4 per cent), professionals (2.3 
per cent), students (1.3 per cent) and rentistas (1.1 per cent), and those 
involved in the latter peasants (12 per cent), day labourers (0.5 per cent), 
shepherds (3.4 per cent), muleteers and carters (1 per cent) artisans (4.3 per 
cent), bandits and smugglers (2.4 per cent), and others (2 per cent). If 
analysis is confined to partidas that ostensibly emerged without any official 
authorization, the percentage representing the privileged classes drops to 
18.8 per cent, whilst that representing the masses rises to 29.8 per cent 
(this begs an important question, however: we need to know far more about 
Fraser’s classification of the partidas he has looked at as many so-called 
partidas — good examples are those of Villacampa and Julian Sanchez — were 
actually units of the regular armed forces, and in consequence in no need 
of any such authorization). These figures are then contrasted with the 
contents of the only document in the twenty or so legajos in the Archivo 
General de Simancas pertaining to the juntas criminales extraordinarias that 
contains detailed information on the identities, place of residence and 
occupational backgrounds of a substantial group of guerrillas. Composed 
of 19 men - ten of them deserters from the regular army — from the bands 
of Juan Mendieta (El Capuchino) and Isidro Astorga captured in a raid near 
Valladolid in January 1810, we hear that of them one was a friar, six 
were peasants (labradores), three shepherds, one a market gardener, two 
barbers, one a butcher and one a shoemaker (the occupations of the last 
four are not recorded). To these we may add the occupations of the two 
leaders, neither of whom were captured. Thus, Mendieta, as his nick- 
name suggests, was a friar and Astorga a butcher. Though Fraser does 
not point this out specifically, an obvious difference is apparent. Thus, 
the 19 men captured from the French in very large part come from 
beyond the ranks of the élites, whereas, of the two cabecillas concerned, 
this is the case of only one of them. Nor is this surprising in view of the 