

<<<PDFPAGE 136>>>
118 
The Anatomy of a Research Project 
analysis which Fraser provides us of the 118 commanders (out of 333) 
whose occupation he has been able to establish. Indeed, the figures 
given above for the 748 guerrillas as a whole are found to be reversed, 
28.2 per cent of the cabecillas coming from the privileged classes and 
20.3 per cent coming from the masses, whilst Fraser further notes that 
the ‘men of quality’ whom he has been able to find fighting in the 
rank and file of the guerrilla movement was, by contrast, 
a much 
lower percentage of the figure than the 20.9 per cent which they consti- 
tuted of the list as a whole. In brief, then, what we get is a movement 
whose rank and file was drawn largely from the rural lower classes (in 
many instances after they had fought for a while in the regular army: 
deserters, indeed, are said to have represented between one third and 
one half the total number) but whose leadership came from the élite, 
which is a picture not dissimilar from the one sketched out for us by 
Lovett. 
To quote an English proverb, ‘Great minds think alike.’ At the very 
same time that Fraser was producing the figures that we have just looked 
at, the current author was by coincidence engaged on a very similar 
project. In the course of many years research in Spain, he had come 
across a range of primary documents that suggested that it might be 
possible to construct a sociological study of the guerrilla movement. 
Having been awarded a two-year research fellowship by the Leverhulme 
Trust in May 2000, he was able to put this to good use and elaborate 
a database that by September 2002 contained the details of no fewer 
than 1166 individuals. In amassing this figure, however, much stricter 
parameters were imposed than those that seem to have been made use 
of by Fraser. For example, whilst the same volumes of documents relating 
to the juntas criminals extraordinarias were consulted, a very careful 
selection was made of their contents, and the men tried by the French 
were only added to the data base if there was strong evidence to suggest 
that they had been members of a partida (by which was meant a military 
force that, even if it was eventually militarized and subsumed into the 
ranks of the regular army, was in its origins independent of the regular 
structures of the state). At the same time, meanwhile, great care was 
taken to exclude forces which were made up of local militias and home 
guards, such as the Catalan somatén, or units of the regular armed 
forces, including the many new volunteer and conscript units raised in 
1808, the result of this having been the omission of a great many familiar 
names. To take just one example, no mention will be found of the famous 
Leonese leader, Julian Sanchez Garcia, on the grounds that he obtained 
a commission in 1808, albeit in a new regiment, and for the whole of 

<<<PDFPAGE 137>>>
Charles J. Esdaile and Leonor Hernandez Enviz 
119 
1809 operated as part of the regular Spanish forces based on the western 
frontiers of the province of Salamanca, only becoming a ‘guerrilla’ when 
the area was occupied by the French in 1810 (and, by the same token, 
reverting to fighting as part of the local field army when it was liberated 
two years later). In so far as can be ascertained, meanwhile, the range of 
sources was much wider: amongst the papers made use of, for example, 
was the copious personal archive of General Francisco Copons y Navia; 
held in the Real Academia de Historia in Madrid, it being ascertained 
that no one had accessed these papers since the current author had 
made use of them as a young doctoral student in the summer of 1982. 
What we have, then, is a study that is both very different and entirely 
independent from that of Fraser. Yet, broadly speaking, its conclusions 
were very similar. Thus, after extensive cross-checking, it was found 
that there were 322 men whose occupation in 1808 was known with a 
reasonable degree of certainty. Of these, no fewer than 204 (63.35 per cent) 
may be said in one sense or other to have been the representatives of 
property, power and social success as students, professionals, landowners 
or wealthy tenant farmers, serving or retired army officers, or members 
of the clergy (the remaining 118 include such groups as taverners, 
butchers, stall holders, municipal employees, muleteers, peasants, day 
labourers, artisans, common soldiers, smugglers, bandits and escaped 
prisoners). Too much emphasis should not be placed on such figures, 
for members of the Church, the army or the propertied classes were far 
more likely to leave a trace in archive or written record than members 
of the populacho. However, even if every single one of the remaining 
844 names whose occupation remains a mystery were to turn out to 
have come from the populace, we would still have a situation in which 
groups representing fewer than 10 per cent of the population provided 
17 per cent of the guerrilla movement. Also significant, meanwhile, is 
the identity of men who at one time or another commanded a partida, 
for, out of the 371 such leaders identified in the study, 103 came from 
middling or upper echelons of society, and only 37 from the populacho, 
the backgrounds of the remainder being unknown.* 
Amassing these figures was, of course, an interesting exercise, whilst 
it is gratifying to learn that they have been in some measure confirmed 
. 
by the independent work of Mr Fraser. Yet their generation also gave 
rise to considerable frustration. In the first place, and most obviously, 
there was the question of all the missing information. Who were, for 
example, the 829 men of whom we had little more than a name? When, 
too, had many of the men who were listed as militares enlisted in the 
armed forces? In the second place, meanwhile, there was a need to 