

<<<PDFPAGE 127>>>
Antonio Moliner Prada 
109 
humanity are not lost sight of, nor still the respect due to all that 
profess the Holy, Roman, Catholic religion of the Apostles.”° 
What this rather confusing passage seems to add up to is, on the one 
hand, recognition that the somatens might on occasion have to live at free 
quarters — in other words to be fed and housed by the local populace — 
and could also expect from time to time to be let off the leash in respect 
of the enemy and his collaborators, and, on the other, an insistence 
that these pleasures could not be expected as of right. Whether this was 
sufficient to reassure public opinion in respect of the somatens’ behaviour 
is a moot point, but there is at least some suggestion that the traditional 
militia system continued to receive much support. Thus, in January 
1810 we find one Antonio Borras blaming most of the problem on the 
somatens’ officers, whom he regarded as corrupt and immoral; suggesting 
that such problems as were to be found amongst the men could be dealt 
with by revivalist missions and better religious instruction; and arguing 
that the somatén should actually be increased in numbers and equipped 
with cannon on the grounds that ‘a nation armed en masse is invin- 
cible’ and the guerra del francés a conflict that had begun ‘not with the 
military but with the peasants’.’” And as late as 1811 a letter to the 
Junta signed by someone styling himself ‘The Patriot of the mountains’ 
attributed all Catalonia’s ills to the inefficiency of the regular army 
which he attributed to the fact that its officers had adopted French 
forms of dress, turned their backs on religion, surrounded themselves 
by concubines, been grossly self indulgent, mistreated the populace and 
devoted all their time to playing games of chance.”® 
It was all very well to have faith in the heroism of the Catalan people 
and the efficacy of its traditional forms of military organization, how- 
ever. What observers such as Borras completely failed to tackle was the 
the failure of the inhabitants to live up to their expectations. Thus, like 
it or not, volunteers were few in number, conscription deeply unpopular 
and desertion general. But if this situation cannot be denied, can it be 
explained? In answer to this question, one needs to look at the experi- 
ences of Catalonia’s citizen soldiers and the circumstances in which the 
struggle was waged, the first point to note here being that the combatants 
were hardly well treated by the authorities. One of the claims made by 
‘The Patriot of the Mountains’ quoted above, for example, is that the 
soldiers’ pay was frequently in arrears.” And the commanders Claros 
and Manso both protested bitterly about their men having to go half- 
naked for want of uniforms for months on end.*° On top of all this 
there is also the issue of the amount of faith that could be placed in the 

<<<PDFPAGE 128>>>
110 
Popular Resistance in Catalonia 
military command. In the light of the evidence that we have from the 
rest of Spain, for instance, there seems little reason to doubt that many 
of the men who officered the Catalan forces did indeed cut a very poor 
figure, and certainly not one that was inclined to persuade militiamen, 
volunteers and conscripts to fight to the death. And, as disaster was 
heaped on disaster, so it became clear that the generals and other com- 
manders were not much better, in which respect we can do no better 
than to quote some of the popular sayings of the day. Thus, ‘The Baron 
of Eroles is a game of bowls...Gay never gets there... Milans fails to 
advance... Manso plays the goose.’*! 
Whether this is enough of an explanation is a moot point. But, 
whatever the reason may have been, the facts are clear enough. Thus, 
the revival of Catalonia’s traditional military institutions occasioned by 
the outbreak of the guerra del francés in 1808 proved short lived. On the 
one hand, the Junta of Catalonia’s hopes for the creation of an army of 
volunteer miquelets were only fulfilled in part, whilst on the other 
militia embodied by the somatens proved of only limited use in the 
struggle, the result being that the principle behind both forces had in 
the end to be abandoned: by the end of the war Catalonia’s manpower 
was subjected to the same system of conscription as that of the rest of 
Spain and forced to serve in units that were indistinguishable from 
those seen in the rest of the country (as we have seen, in 1811 the last 
remnants of the miquelet system were swept away in favour of ordinary 
units of infantry and cavalry, whilst in 1814 the somatén was absorbed 
into the national guard). It could be argued here that the Catalan military 
system never had a fair chance thanks to the lack of money and weap- 
ons that dogged the Junta of Catalonia (which was itself superceded in 
1812 by the new arrangements initiated by the cortes of Cadiz) right from 
the start. But on this the last word must probably go to Francisco Javier 
Cabanes, who, as we have seen, pointed out that in the Napoleonic era — 
and, by extension, the modern era in general — mere ‘crowd armies’ 
were of no avail. Perpetuated in the form guerrilla bands, the principles 
underlying the somatens and the miquelets may therefore at best be said 
to have kept the Patriot cause alive in Catalonia, but even here the 
waters are muddied by the links with banditry which can again be seen in 
other parts of Spain. Setting aside the issue of whether the population 
was possessed of sufficient in the way of national consciousness to be 
much interested in a war against Napoleon in 1808, the issue that 
dogged the Junta of Catalonia and its subordinate juntas de corregiment was 
therefore how to balance the demands of war with those of Catalan 
tradition. In this they failed — but then so did their successors of 1936. 