

<<<PDFPAGE 132>>>
114 
Popular Resistance in Catalonia 
77. Antonio Borras, ‘Memoria sobre somatens de la Provincia de Catalufia’, 29 
January 1810, ACA. JSC. 76. 
78. Anon. to Junta of Catalonia, n.d., ACA. JSC. 89. 
9. Ibid. 
80. J. Clarés to Junta of Catalonia, 31 May 1812, ACA. JSC. 86; J. Mansé6 to Junta 
of Catalonia, 12 July 1811, ACA. JSC. 87. 
81. A. Blanch, Historia de la Guerra de la Independencia en el Antiguo Principado 
(Barcelona, 1968), p. 475. The Catalan muns as follows: ‘Lo baro d’Eroles, es 
un joch de boles...En Gay, no hi arriba may 
...En Milans, ja no ataca com 
abans 
... En Manso, ja fa el ganso.’ 

<<<PDFPAGE 133>>>
The Anatomy of a Research Project: 
The Sociology of the Guerrilla War 
in Spain, 1808-14 
Charles J. Esdaile and Leonor Hernandez Enviz 
| 
The identity of the Spanish guerrillas of 1808-14 is not a subject that 
has ever gripped the attention of the historical community. Whilst there 
has been general agreement that popular resistance played a considerable 
role in Spain’s struggle against Napoleon, the men and women who 
, actually took up arms against the invaders have remained cloaked in 
- anonimity. Proud of the heritage of their patrias chicas, a number of local 
historians have sought to uncover the identities of the leaders of the 
guerrilla bands that operated in their own provinces, whilst the eagerness 
_ of the nineteenth-century Republican, Rodriguez Solis, to emphasise the 
_ heroism of the Spanish people encouraged him to embark on an extensive 
) catalogue of the partidas and their exploits that to this day remains an 
| important introduction to the subject.’ Other writers, meanwhile, have 
concentrated on painting a picture of individual cabecillas and in the 
_ process have afforded us a series of more or less useful introductions to 
_ 
the guerrilla in one part of Spain or another. However, this work is but a 
_ beginning. Whilst it has given us a picture of the main leaders, and here 
_ and there even provided us with the names of a few of their followers, it 
made no almost attempt to analyse such questions as age, occupation, 
social class or geographical origin (in fairness to Rodriguez Solis, he does 
provide some statistical detail on both the provinces that the men he 
uncovered operated in and the period in which they were active, but his 
data is so random, unreliable and unscientific that his figures are of 
little use). For a long time, meanwhile, there was little interest in taking 
matters further, whilst such historians who did feel the need to say 
something on the subject were reduced to making vague generalizations. 
Let us take, for example, the words of Gabriel Lovett: 
115 

<<<PDFPAGE 134>>>
116 
The Anatomy of a Research Project 
Who were the guerrillas and their leaders? A cross section of the 
whole Spanish nation, they included men from all walks of life. They 
were peasants, shepherds, students, smugglers, dispersed soldiers, or 
simply deserters who preferred to fight in groups untrammelled by 
military regulations and discipline to serving in the ranks of the 
remaining regular army units. There was an occasional nobleman 
and there were quite a few clergymen, but on the whole the bulk of 
these groups was made up of the sons of the humblest classes, espe- 
cially peasants.* 
In a general sense these remarks are probably sensible enough, but 
they are clearly based on nothing better than ‘guesstimation’. Nor, of 
course, do they offer us anything in the way of figures. Only very 
recently, indeed, has greater exploration of the immense wealth afforded 
by Spain’s national, provincial and municipal archives, together with 
the spread of information technology, prompted an interest in taking 
matters further, in which respect mention must be made of two names 
in particular. In Andalucia the present author’s esteemed friend and col- 
league Francisco Luis Diaz Torrejon has spent the past few years comb- 
ing the municipal archives of such towns as Osuna for evidence of 
irregular resistance in the provinces of Cadiz, Malaga and Seville, and 
great things are to be expected from his research, the result of which is 
due to be published in the not too distant future. And from his base in 
Valencia the distinguished British historian of the Spanish Civil War, 
Ronald Fraser, has for the past ten years been engaged in the elabora- 
tion of a social history of the Spanish War of Independence, which has 
incorporated a certain amount of work on the guerrillas. The results of 
this work having just been published in the Spanish journal, Historia 
Social, it seems appropriate to give them here for the purposes of com- 
parison. Thus, Fraser cites a total of 1091 individuals, including 748 
men whom he lists simply as guerrillas and another 343 whom he lists 
as men condemned to death as guerrillas or bandits by the special law 
courts set up by the josefino regime to try crimes relating to highway rob- 
bery and irregular resistance. As might be expected, these individuals are 
then characterized according to various headings, the first of these being 
the type of partida to which they belonged, in which respect we learn 
that 49 per cent belonged to groups which sprang up without any offi- 
cial organization, and the remainder — separate figures are not given — to 
bands set up with the sanction of the Patriot authorities, some of which 
were secular (corsarios) and others religious (cruzadas). We then move on 
to questions of occupation and social class. For reasons which are unclear, 