

<<<PDFPAGE 157>>>
Vittorio Scotti-Douglas 
139 
it began to be used in connection with another meaning, this being 
that of the armed struggle of civilians, organized in irregular bands, 
against an invading enemy and/or against a government that was 
unjust or, as in Spain, illegitimate.!? This is, of course, the modern 
understanding of the term ‘guerrilla warfare’ and it is in this sense that 
it has entered languages other than Castillian. 
How, though is all this relevant to the current chapter? In brief, the 
link is found in this very change of meaning. Thus, nearly always 
spontaneously born and headed by local leaders, throughout the 
Peninsular War the new form of partida was frequently in conflict with 
the authorities, both civilian and military. First of all we have to 
consider what happened when insurrection first broke out against the 
French in May 1808. How did the authorities react to this development? 
The general attitude was to try and soothe the people by recommending 
calm, peace, prudence and obedient submission. Let us here cite, for 
instance, General Don Gregorio Garcia de la Cuesta, Capitan General de 
Castilla la Vieja y LeOn, who on 29 May 1808 wrote to the Leonese 
authorities, explaining that, as both Carlos IV and Fernando VII had 
renounced the crown, Spaniards had been freed from any fidelity to 
them, and that obedience was now due to the provisional government — 
the Junta de Gobierno - that for the time being ruled Spain in Napoleon’s 
name, whilst at the same time stressing the need for calm and the 
uselessness of resistance.!? We may discuss the reasons and even under- 
stand the grounds on which such decisions were taken, but there is no 
doubt that such blindness broke the bonds of trust that must necessarily 
unite rulers and ruled. And, needless to say, the expectation of passivity 
on which it was based was swept aside by the success of the uprising. 
Thus, on 6 June 1808 we find the Junta of Seville publishing a document 
entitled Prevenciones, in which it was suggested that general actions 
should be avoided in favour of a strategy in which the enemy would be 
attacked by small bands that would never let them rest, but always 
hang on their flanks and rear, wearing them out, intercepting their 
convoys, destroying their stores, and cutting their communications.'* 
Although it also contains passages which seem to suggest that much 
reliance should also be placed on organized home guards that could 
leap to the defence of bridge, city wall or mountain pass at the first sign 
of the French, this document can be seen as an unequivocal invitation 
to engage in irregular warfare. To put it another way, the Junta was 
specifically encouraging the perpetuation of the popular fury that had 
in many places administered rough justice - sometimes in a barbarous 
way - to all those held responsible, whether justly or not, for the country’s 

<<<PDFPAGE 158>>>
140 
Regulating the Irregulars 
supposed betrayal to the French.’® Contained within it, meanwhile, is 
an assumption on the part of the Junta, a revolutionary reincarnation 
of an ancient and traditional institution, of the army’s near uselessness, 
a popular uprising being held to be the only way — albeit a desperate 
one — of countering the troops of the great emperor. However, after the 
unexpected victory at Bailén on 19 July 1808, the supreme Spanish 
authorities somewhat changed their minds, 
as 
is shown by the 
exaggeratedly optimistic tone of the Manifiesto a la Nacion Espanola. 
A proclamation designed to legitimize the rule of the new Spanish 
government — the Junta Suprema Central de Gobierno del Reino — this 
is one of the most celebrated works of the writer, Manuel Quintana, and 
may almost be regarded as the Spanish equivalent of the United States’ 
declaration of independence."® Setting aside its political aspect — it was 
couched in terms that were strongly liberal - the Manifiesto spoke not 
just of ‘fighting the enemy with success’, but of driving the French 
beyond the Pyrenees, and compelling them to free the king and the 
royal family, and acknowledge Spain’s freedom and independence.” 
And as for how all this was to be done, the proclamation only spoke of 
armies and regular troops, and specifically states that it is only from 
them that the people has to expect its safety. Not a word was devoted to 
the first exploits of the guerrilleros, although stories were circulating that 
in some cases — most notably, El Empecinado — they had begun to 
attack the French even before the uprising of the Dos de Mayo. And all 
the more is this strange given that other episodes had already shown the 
importance of popular participation in the struggle: led by such figures 
as E] Empecinado, the first guerrilla bands had emerged in the summer 
of 1808, whilst one should also remember the success of the Catalan 
somatenes at El] Bruch, and the heroic defence of towns and cities such 
as Valdepefias, Zaragoza, Gerona and Tarragona, not to mention the 
events of the Dos de Mayo in Madrid. 
The irrelevance of Quintana’s approach was revealed very quickly. 
Thus, the general situation had started to deteriorate even before the 
proclamation had become widely available, whilst it continued to 
worsen very quickly in November and December. The list of battles 
against the French is a sequel of defeats — Zornoza (31 October), Gamonal 
(10 November), Espinosa de los Monteros (10-11 November), Tudela 
(23 November), Somosierra (30 November) — and all this culminated in 
Madrid’s capitulation to Napoleon on 4 December. Nor was this an end 
to the story: within a month of the fall of Madrid, the British were 
forced to re-embark at La Corufia; the Spaniards led by General Vives 
compelled to raise the blockade of Barcelona; and the French allowed 