

<<<PDFPAGE 146>>>
128 
The Anatomy of a Research Project 
Appendix: fields contained in the database 
1 
3 
4 
n 
16 
17 
18 
Identity: name, surname and nickname. 
Age in 1808. 
Marital status: single, married, married with children, widowed, widowed 
with children, ecclesiastic, unknown. 
Origin: place of birth/residence. 
Professional particulars: active, retired, unknown. 
Occupation: lawyer; postal official; fiscal official; mason; mayor; archdeacon; 
muleteer; barber; chemist; canon; chaplain; butcher; carpenter; clergyman; 
merchant; coachman; smuggler; corregidor; leather worker; priest; priest with 
benefice; priest without benefice; deacon; ecclesiastic; tobacconist; student; 
baize manufacturer; corn factor; tailor’s assistant; public prosecutor; 
friar; 
Agustinian friar; Benedictine friar; Bernardine friar; Capuchin friar; Carmelite 
friar; Carthusian 
friar; Franciscan 
friar; Mercenary friar; Trinitarian 
friar; 
customs 
guard (tobacco 
administration); 
day labourer; 
peasant; 
doctor; 
messenger; innkeeper; soldier; soldier (corporal); soldier (Guardia de Corps); 
naval officer (first lieutenant); soldier (retired); soldier (captain); soldier (colonel); 
soldier (private); naval officer (second lieutenant); notary; customs official; 
gensdarme; municipal official; shepherd; teacher; rentier; gravedigger; bartender; 
weaver; military accountant; clerk in minor orders; leather worker; shoemaker. 
Professional group: agriculture; government; clergy; regular clergy; secular 
clergy; commerce; construction; smuggler; army; education; functionary; 
artisanate; navy; other occupations; free professions; rentier; transport. 
Rating: apprentice; craftsman; master. 
Social class: commoner; ecclesiastic; noble; soldier. 
Economic class: tenant; large-property owner; medium-property owner; 
small-property owner. 
Cultural characteristics: illiterate; literate; university graduate. 
Military particulars in 1808: serving soldier; retired soldier; civilian; ecclesiastic; 
unknown. 
Rank in 1808. 
Unit in 1808. 
Combat experience prior to 1808: War of the Oranges (1801); Revolu- 
tionary War (1792-95); War against Britain (1796-1808); colonial campaigns 
(America), etc. 
Month and year of first appearance in the ‘little war’. 
Reason for enlistment: commissioned by the civilian or military authorities; 
dispersed; deserted; failure of the national army; revenge; unknown; granted 
permission to form a band; granted permission to form a cruzada; home 
defence; escaped French imprisonment; escaped from justice; juramentado 
taken prisoner by the guerrillas; carried off by force; transferred to land service 
for want of naval resources and/or objectives; requested permission to form 
a band; ordered by the Patriot authorities to join the guerrillas; freed from 
prison to fight the French; personal violence. 
Initial status: commandant; second commandant; subaltern; unknown; 
civilian collaborator. 

<<<PDFPAGE 147>>>
33 
34 
Charles J. Esdaile and Leonor Hernandez Enviz 
129 
Province and region in which activities began. 
Family members serving with the guerrillas. 
Military service, 1808-14 (by month). 
Status, 1808-14: commandant; second commandant; subaltern; unknown; 
civilian collaborator. 
Category of combatant in 1808: bandit; gendarmerie (resguardo); insurgent; 
local militia (alarma); local militia (cruzada); local militia (milicia honrada); local 
militia (rising); local militia (somatén); regular army (migueletes); militar-ized 
guerrilla band; unmilitarized guerrilla band; regular army (new regiment); 
regular army (pre-1808); Royal Navy (Spanish); unknown. 
Region/s of operation (by year). 
Band/unit (by year). 
Changes in status (by year). 
Combats (by month). 
Province or provinces of operation by month. 
Strength of band/unit. 
Political preferences: absolutist; liberal. 
Career after 1814, date and place of death. 
Fate (1808-14): garrotted by junta criminal; hung by French army; amnestied; 
died in combat; died of wounds; went over to enemy; imprisoned by Patriot 
authorities; captured by the French army; sent to France as prisoner of war; 
retired to civil life; executed by other guerrillas; executed by the French 
army; executed by the Patriot authorities; exiled to Portugal; exiled to 
France; exiled to Britain; wounded in battle; band dissolved by the Patriot 
authorities for misconduct; band dispersed by the French; captured by other 
guerrillas; sentenced to death by junta criminal; sentenced to death by hanging 
by junta criminal; imprisoned by junta criminal; surrendered to the French; 
returned to the ranks of the regular army. 
Fate (post-1814): stayed on in the army; fought against the absolutism of 
Fernando VII; took part in the Carlist War; returned to civil life; emigrated 
to Britain; fought against the liberals; participated in the Navarrese uprising 
of 1814. 
Sources: primary; secondary. 
Rank 
No. 
% 
Commandant 
656 
PNETh 
Second commandant 
39 
ies) 
Subaltern 
2135 
70.6 
Collaborator 
27 
0.9 
Unknown 
167 
Bye 
Total 
3024 
100.0 
Figure 7.1 
Combatants in Ja guerrilla analyzed by status 