

<<<PDFPAGE 142>>>
124 
The Anatomy of a Research Project 
Navarre, by contrast, 
a much smaller one, the figure here being a mere 
24 (3.7 per cent).° In short, the less popular enthusiasm there was for 
the struggle, the smaller and more numerous were the guerrilla bands. 
Also evident, meanwhile, is the close connection that exists between 
this point and the extent to which militarization took hold amongst 
the guerrillas, almost all the bands that were eventually transformed 
into units of the regular army - examples include those of Espoz y 
Mina, Longa and Juan Martin Diez - coming from areas where support 
for the struggle appears to have been above the average. For all this, 
readers are referred to Figures 7.5 and 7.6. 
In so far as such questions as occupation and social class are concerned, 
as Figures 7.7 and 7.8 show, the database records the details of some 
534 individuals (as opposed to the 315 considered at an earlier date by 
the present author or the 209 analysed by Fraser). Unfortunately, differ- 
ences in the manner in which the data has been compiled and analysed 
make the elaboration of direct comparisons a slightly problematic task, 
but what stands out is the very high percentage of the men concerned 
who in some way were associated with either the Church, the Bourbon 
state or the social élite. Thus, 178 (33.3 per cent) come from the ranks 
of the Church, 122 (22.8 per cent) from those of the armed forces, 43 
(8.2 per cent) from those of the administration and the judiciary and 28 
(S.5 per cent) from commerce and the free professions. Given that 18 
(3.4 per cent) are described as rentiers and 11 (2.2 per cent) as students, 
some 400 (75.4 per cent) may be said to have come from the establishment 
or the upper echelons of society, whilst this figure may almost certainly 
be increased still further by the addition of at least some of the 59 
individuals who were involved in agriculture, the ranks of the latter 
undoubtedly including a number of prosperous tenant farmers or even 
landowners (for comparison, the corresponding figures in Fraser and 
Esdaile primitivo were 20.9 per cent and 63.35 per cent). What all this 
suggests, of course, is that participation in la guerrilla of those with 
some stake in society — something to lose, indeed — was far higher than 
that of those on its margins, this figure being strengthened still further 
by consideration of the fact that only 10.2 per cent of the individuals 
whose estate is known were definitely pecheros (Figure 7.9). 
There is, meanwhile, a further way of dissecting Ja guerrilla, and that 
it is to to look at the way in which it was composed in military terms. If 
the database is consulted with regard to the number of partidas that it 
lists, it will be discovered that there is mention of some 656. Not all of 
these units are bands of irregulars of the sort envisaged in the traditional 
historiography, however. On the contrary, the term is used rather to 

<<<PDFPAGE 143>>>
Charles J. Esdaile and Leonor Hernandez Enviz 
125 
mean simply an independent force of armed men. On occasion, this 
might be a band of armed civilians who had come together to fight the 
French, but, then again, it might not. Thus, it will be found that com- 
batants are listed under many other headings, including the volunteer 
and conscript units that were raised to supplement the regular army 
and the various local militias that were organized to help fight the 
French in Catalonia, Galicia and other areas. All this is reflected in Figure 
7.10, which shows the members of four different categories of partida 
over the course of the period 1808-12, and, more particularly, how 
generally only a minority of combatants were members of the group 
that has been defined as ‘unmilitarized partidas’ — in other words bands 
of armed civilians — at any given time (the one exception, by a short 
head, appears to be 1810). Especially noteworthy, too, is the collapse in 
support for the Catalan somatén, this being a force that has been much 
vaunted in traditional accounts of the war. This, however, is by-the-by, 
what matters at this point being rather the way in which a large part of 
la guerrilla can be seen to have depended on and been controlled by the 
Patriot authorities, rather than having been the spontaneous work of 
the armed pueblo. Moreover, many of the bands that did spring up from 
the ranks of the civilian population were themselves headed by members 
of the élite, rather than the commonalty, the fact being that figures 
such as the peasants Juan Martin Diez and Francisco Espoz y Mina were 
far less common than the legend suggests. 
It cannot be stressed strongly enough that great care must be taken 
with these figures, which are beyond doubt seriously distorted by the 
stronger footprint that property, education and social status will always 
leave in the archives. To believe, indeed, that the populace was absent 
from Ja guerrilla would be patently ridiculous. In Navarre archival evidence 
suggests that one third of the male population eventually took part in 
the struggle, whilst, even if this province is completely atypical — Navarre 
was one of the few areas in the country where many of the inhabitants 
of the countryside were reasonably prosperous — it is quite clear that the 
bulk of the rank and file were of humble stock (particularly noteworthy 
are the frequent references to the presence of large numbers of deserters 
from the regular army).’ Absence of evidence, then, is not the same as 
evidence of absence. But what is clear is that to paint a picture of the 
Spanish people rushing into the hills to take up arms in defence of dios, 
rey y patria is distinctly unwise, and all the more so given the great 
weight of evidence that exists in the archives to suggest that large numbers 
of recruits joined the partidas because they were starving, because they 
wished to clothe a life of crime with a veneer of respectability or because 