

<<<PDFPAGE 144>>>
126 
The Anatomy of a Research Project 
taking the chance of service in their ranks was preferable to being 
marched off to France as a prisoner of war, because they wished to avoid 
service in the regular army or simply because they were conscripted. Still 
more can this be seen to be the case, meanwhile, if one takes into account 
the fact that the database shows that comparatively few participants in 
la guerrilla fought in the bands of armed civilians of legend. 
To conclude, then, what do we see? First of all, it is clear that, despite 
the old saw that the Spanish guerrillas, as a popular phenomenon, left 
no trace in the archives, a considerable amount of archival information 
is available on their identity and background. Not only is it available, 
moreover, but it may be woven together to provide a surprisingly clear 
picture of popular resistance to the French. In so far as can be ascertained, 
meanwhile, that picture is inclined to confirm both the rather vague 
generalizations that have hitherto been all that the historian has had to 
go on so far as the social composition of the guerrillas is concerned, and 
the increasingly iconoclastic line that the present author has taken over 
the years with regard to the participation of armed civilians in the struggle 
against Napoleon — a line, moreover, that is pressed home still further 
in his monograph, Fighting Napoleon: Guerrillas, Bandits and Adventurers 
in Spain, 
1808-14. That said, however, to pretend that the results of the 
research project currently under review have been entirely satisfactory 
would be dishonest. Setting aside the fact that a much wider selection 
of data would be welcome, one is in the end constrained to recognize 
that many problems are suggested even by such material as has been 
generated. Setting aside the issue of whether or not the data that has 
been collected can in any sense be relied upon, the fact remains that the 
privileged classes were always certain to be over represented in the findings 
of any exercise such as the one currently under discussion. This, of course, 
may be corrected easily enough in our interpretation of the figures, but, 
if the figures are to be corrected, how far, in the end, have we advanced 
from the ‘guesstimation’ with which this chapter commenced? But this, 
perhaps, is something that is rather to be welcomed, suggesting, as it 
does, that ‘number crunching’ has its limitations, and that there can in 
the end be no substitute for painting visions of the past. 
Notes 
1. E. Rodriguez Solis, Los Guerrilleros de 1808: Historia Popular de la Guerra de la 
Independencia (Madrid, 1887). For an example of such a regional study, cf. 
R. Guirao and L. Sorando, El Alto Aragon en la Guerra de la Independencia 
(Zaragoza, 1995). 
2. G. Lovett, Napoleon and the Birth of Modern Spain (New York, 1965), p. 672. 

<<<PDFPAGE 145>>>
Charles J. Esdaile and Leonor Hernandez Enviz 
127 
. For all this, cf. R. Fraser, ‘Identidades sociales desconocidas: las Guerrillas 
Espaniolas en la Guerra de la Independencia’, Historia Social, no. 46 (2003), 
pp. 3-23. 
. For full details, cf. C. Esdaile, Fighting Napoleon: Guerrillas, Bandits and Adventurers 
in Spain, 1808-14 (Yale University Press, 2004), pp. 92-3. 
. El Redactor General, 3 November 1812, Hemerdteca Municipal de Madrid 6/3. 
. Please note that all population figures are taken from the 1797 census. This 
is notoriously unreliable, the total of 10 541 221 that it gives being at least 
a million short of the reality, which has been calculated at 11 595 343, but 
it seems more logical to rely on this rather than on the earlier census of 
1786-87. 
. For detailed discussion of the exceptional case presented by Navarre, cf. J. Tone, 
The Guerrilla War in Navarre and the Defeat of Napoleon in Spain (Chapel Hill, North 
Carolina, 1994), pp. 9-41 passim, and F. Miranda, La Guerra de la Independencia 
en Navarra: la Accion del Estado (Pamplona, 1977), pp. 119-35. 