

<<<PDFPAGE 159>>>
Vittorio Scotti-Douglas 
141 
once again to besiege Zaragoza. But whilst the nobility, bureaucracy and 
a portion of the intelligentsia did choose the French side, for different 
and sometimes honourable reasons, there were increasing number of 
' guerrillas attacking the French, at first with daggers, knives and a few 
ancient blunderbusses and fowling pieces, and then with muskets and 
bayonets taken from the enemy, whose dead were also stripped of their 
uniforms and shoes. These men were generally grouped together in 
bands known as partidas. A totally irregular formation, a partida normally 
owed its origin to the decision to fight the French of one man who, for 
a variety of reasons — personal prestige, acknowledged courage, previous 
military service honourably discharged, or more simply because of what 
today we label as charisma — was able to gather together a band of 
individuals who were ready to follow him. Of course, some bands were 
unsuccessful and soon fell apart or were overcome, but where success 
was achieved it was a different story. Thus, victory increased the 
enthusiasm of the first members of the band, brought in new recruits, 
and increased the fame of the partida, and very soon the leader would 
become known not by his own name, but by a nickname, if he did not 
have already one. 
As the bands proliferated, however, the Junta Central began to hear 
complaints and protests about their independence. These were the work 
of a variety of provincial juntas and regional military commanders. 
What does the Junta do in the face of this growing clamour? Despite 
the fact that it was in a desperate military situation, it promulgates a 
reglamento or ordinance. Issued in Seville on 28 December 1808, this 
text is of the utmost importance from the historical, political, military 
and juridical point of view.'® It has a short but important foreword, 34 
articles or rules and a final declaration. Let us begin with the foreword, 
especially as this merits quotation in full: 
Spain abounds with subjects endowed with extraordinary bravery, 
who, exploiting the great advantages provided by their knowledge of 
the country, and the implacable hatred of all the nation against the 
tyrant who wants to subdue it by the most iniquitous means, are 
able to spread terror and consternation within his armies. To make it 
easier for them to attain so noble an aim, supply them with the 
means of honourably enriching themselves with the enemy’s booty, 
and allow them to immortalize their names with heroic deeds 
deserving an undying fame, His Royal Majesty [i.e. the Junta Central] 
has deigned to create a new kind of armed force, which is to go 
under the name of partidas or cuadrillas.'° 

<<<PDFPAGE 160>>>
}
142 
Regulating the Irregulars 
The statute’s articles dictate (or rather, as we shall see, try to dictate) a 
rules organizing the band, its ranks, discipline, pay, in a word th 
bureaucratic structure of the partidas, leaving only two articles, Articles 
22 and 23 for detailing the military aspect that is the paramount aim of
its birth. Some attention is also merited by Article 29, which runs as 
follows: 
Many subjects of distinguished bravery and undauntedness having, 
for want of a means of making use of their military talents in a worthy 
manner...devoted themselves to smuggling, they shall be pardoned 
and will be employed in another kind of partida called a cuadrilla... 
in order to make them useful to the state and give them the glorious 
career offered them by the circumstances of the day.”° 
And Articles 30 and 31 give in detail the rewards for smugglers who, 
volunteering to serve in a cuadrilla, arrive armed and with a horse, 
whilst laying down that, if they still had smuggled goods, these should 
be bought ‘at a price granting them [the smugglers] a moderate profit’.”! 
Also interesting, and for that reason worth quoting in full, is the final 
statement, which openly reveals the desire to connect the partidas with 
the regular military apparatus of the state that we shall go on to see. 
Thus: 
Everybody wishing to enlist...under the above rules, must present 
himself immediately to his local provincial junta...or Captain 
General, and then proceed to the commander of whichever field 
army happens to be stationed in the area in order to be sworn in, 
assigned to a unit and given his marching orders. The existence ot 
each partida and cuadrilla having been checked out, the Intendent 
shall then issue an order for them to be granted the relevant pay in 
accordance with a monthly review instituted by the Commissary, 01 
failing him, the local magistrate.” 
The historical importance of this document is quite clear. The firs’ 
text that attempts to legitimate a combat form totally irregular by it: 
own nature, waged by civilians armed with every kind and descriptior 
of arms, including agricultural implements, which, after being used tc 
kill passing Frenchmen, are returned to their peaceful fields, is also the 
confession of a government that cannot trust its army, and tries to us¢ 
laudatory words to win the support of ‘subjects of distinguished bravery 
and undauntedness’ and even smugglers, whose crimes are explainec 