

<<<PDFPAGE 140>>>
122 
The Anatomy of a Research Project 
caused the designers much debate. The first is the obvious one of 
language. As it cannot be expected that all those who consult the database 
will have access to Spanish, it was decided that it would have to be pre- 
pared in duplicate, and, further, that in the English version all accents 
and other language marks should be suppressed. The second 
is a 
somewhat less obvious question of geography in that there have been 
repeated changes in Spain’s territorial organization since the Napoleonic 
era, and in this respect it was eventually agreed that towns, villages and 
such should be listed under their current affiliations. 
In so far as the organization of the material is concerned, 
it is 
arranged so that it may be consulted under a number of headings. A full 
list of these, together with the possible answers that may be returned in 
response to each query, is appended as an appendix to this paper. Needless 
to say, the number of permutations that enquiries may take is virtually 
infinite. It is, for example, possible to ask the database to give details of 
the number of ecclesiastics in the full list, the number of ecclesiastics 
who commanded partidas, the number of ecclesiastics who held subaltern 
rank, the number of ecclesiastics who fought as members of the rank 
and file and the number of ecclesiastics who were killed in action or 
executed by the invaders, and all this in connection with the whole war 
or some period thereof, and the whole of Spain or some part thereof. 
And, should it be wanted to go still further, the ecclesiastics could be 
broken down into their different categories — seminarians, deacons, priests, 
friars, archdeacons and so forth. 
The sources used for this study have included both primary sources 
and the published works of other historians. With regard to the former, 
considerations of time have forced the designers to concentrate on 
archival centres which contain large concentrations of material such as 
the Archivo Histérico Nacional, the Archivo General Militar, the Archivo 
General de Simancas, the Archivo de la Corona de Aragon, the Real 
Academia de Historia and the Archivo Municipal de Zaragoza. Collections 
consulted, meanwhile, include the 1007 volumes of pamphlets and 
other printed material known as the Coleccion Documental del Fraile, 
the papers of the Junta Central, the Junta Superior de Catalufia and the 
Juntas Criminales Extraordinarias, and the papers of Generals Blake, 
Castanos, Palafox and Copons y Navia. Where possible, material has 
also been incorporated into the database from English-language sources, 
the Wellington Papers and the extensive memoir material associated 
with the Peninsular army both containing many references to la guerrilla. 
With regard to secondary sources, meanwhile, the work of a wide range 
of authors has been carefully ‘trawled’ to provide as much information 

<<<PDFPAGE 141>>>
Charles J. Esdaile and Leonor Hernandez Enviz 
123 
as posible, and the results checked against the original documents 
(a process which has proved to be immensely time consuming: many 
works on /a guerrilla are, at best, intensely hagiographic). 
What, though, of the question of results? Given the huge obstacles 
posed by the nature of the material, progress in amassing the data has 
been much slower than the designers would have wished. At the time of 
writing, the number of guerrillas entered in the database stands at 
3024, of which 656 were commandants, 39 seconds-in-command, 2135 
‘subalterns’ (by which is meant all officers other than commandants 
and their seconds, all non-commmissioned officers and all members 
of the rank and file), 167 unknown and 27 civilian collaborators 
(Figure 7.1). Limited though these figures are, however, they have yet 
produced a number of interesting points. Of these, the first is clearly the 
fact that activity was not constant across the full length of the war. 
On the contrary, from 1809 onwards there was was a steady fall in the 
number of individuals active in any given year. Thus, in 1809, 628 of 
the combatants on the list were active, whereas in 1811 the number 
was 557 and in 1813 only 136 (Figure 7.2). Meanwhile, the guerrilla 
bands seem to have become fewer in number: in 1809 commandants 
constituted 42.4 per cent of the number of combatants, whereas by 1813 
this figure had fallen to 19.1 per cent (Figure 7.3). This itself is very 
interesting, confirming as it does the very considerable anecdotal 
evidence that suggests that there was a steady decline in the popularity 
of the war, and, by extension, the apathy of the civilian population. This 
is, perhaps, most graphically expressed by Figure 7.4, which shows the 
percentage of the survey known to have been in arms at any given time. 
Given that it may be interrogated with regard to both the number of 
partidas and the number of combatants operating in any given province, 
interesting details may also be obtained from the database with regard 
to the response of different regions of Spain to French occupation. In 
brief, in certain areas the response appears to have been much more 
enthusiastic than in others. Navarre, for example, accounts for 215 of 
the 3024 combatants (7.1 per cent), whereas in 1808, at 221 728, its 
population numbered only 2.1 per cent of that of Spain as a whole. Yet 
Andalucia had 1 909 422 inhabitants (18.1 per cent) and could only 
produce 290 combatants (9.6 per cent), whilst Galicia did still worse 
with 1 142 630 inhabitants (10.8 per cent) and 66 fighters (2.2 per cent). 
When it comes to the number of bands that have been traced, however, 
these figures are more or less reversed in that, at 129 (19.7 per cent) and 
38 (5.8 per cent) Andalucia and Galicia have a much larger share than 
the number of men that they turned out would seem to warrant, and 