

<<<PDFPAGE 163>>>
Vittorio Scotti-Douglas 
145 
One of the most important and noteworthy results of the Instrucci6n 
was the birth of the ‘Corso Terrestre de Navarra’, led by Martin Javier 
Mina y Larrea, better known by his nicknames of ‘El Mozo’ or ‘El Estudi- 
ante’. In this respect the document may be said to have had fundamen- 
tal results — the resistance movement which Mina founded eventually 
| became the most impressive in the whole of Spain — and it may well be 
for this development that the new measure will be chiefly remem- 
bered.”® 
» 
Whilst still on the subject of the Junta Central, a few words should 
perhaps be devoted to a third set of rules that it issued with respect to 
| the guerrillas. We come here to the question of the cruzadas, or ‘crusades’. 
| In principle, these consisted of guerrilla bands made up entirely of 
| priests, monks and friars, and the idea of such forces, which surfaced 
_ repeatedly in the course of 1809, may be regarded as an attempt at one 
_ and the same time to inject fresh energy into the guerrilla movement 
and to control its excesses.” Whatever the exact thinking behind the idea 
may have been, the Junta Central evidently felt it to be worth pursuing 
for on 30 December 1809 it issued a set of rules ‘for the creation of the 
cruzadas’.*° In theory, these bands should have been formed only of 
ecclesiastics, regular or secular, to the number of 50 to every partida. Yet 
there is no proof whatsoever of even one of these bands ever having 
been created. We know that many clerics — both regular and secular - 
did participate individually in the guerrilla bands, and that some of 
them succeeded in becoming famous leaders, the best known of whom 
is probably Jeronimo Mérino.*' But as an attempt to influence the 
development and behaviour of the guerrillas, the scheme got nowhere 
and may therefore be discounted. 
A close analysis of the Instruccion, especially if done in combination 
with the Reglamento, would offer us many interesting insights with 
respect to various other important points concerning the state of the 
Patriot Spain, good examples of such subjects being what they have to 
say with regard to desertion, the ever increasing problem of how the 
guerrillas should be supplied, and the situation of the rural and urban 
population, but these are not questions pertaining to the subject of the 
current paper. Returning to this latter issue — the attempts that were 
made to regulate the guerrilla bands — the two reglamentos of 1808-9 
were followed by a number of local decrees and codes of conduct. Of 
these, however, only a brief mention of just one example need suffice. 
For this purpose we shall look at a set of rules published by the then 
Captain General of Catalonia, General Luis Lacy on 9 September 1811. 
Entitled Reglamento para las Partidas Patrioticas, this consists of 15 articles, 

<<<PDFPAGE 164>>>
146 
Regulating the Irregulars 
and is very similar to the 1808 Reglamento.*? Thus, its contents are 
nearly all military and without anything of particular relevance, bar a 
hint about cooperation between the partidas and the somatenes — the 
Catalan home guard’ — at Article 15, and the significant contents of 
Article 14, which states that one of the main objects of the partidas 
should be ‘the pursuit and capture of deserters, robbers and wrongdoers, 
who must be brought to the nearest division’s commander’.*4 
If we accept that the Reglamento para los Cuerpos Francos o Partidas de 
Guerrilla of 28 July 1814 was clearly concerned solely with the demobil- 
ization of the guerrillas, the last important legislative provision concern- 
ing the guerrillas is the Reglamento para las Partidas de Guerrilla of 11 July 
1812.°> By the time that the former document was issued, the situation 
in Spain had changed enormously. Although 1812 was in all of Spain 
the ‘year of hunger’, from the military point of view there were increasing 
hopes of victory, thanks on the one hand to the news of Wellington’s 
successes, and on the other to the withdrawal of 30 000 French troops to 
fight in Russia. What we have in July 1812 is therefore not a desperate 
cry for popular involvement in the war effort, though it is notable that 
the text stresses the importance of propaganda and, especially, the task 
of keeping the populace informed with regard to the latest provisions of 
the authorities and the latest war news.*° Rather what we see is a well- 
considered piece of legislation that sought to repeat and improve upon 
the 1808 norms, and in particular to emphasize and develop their military 
aspects. Whilst there are no tactical or strategic innovations — the need 
to gather information, cut the enemy’s communications and engage in 
other such tasks is simply restated — there are new and more fastidious 
prescriptions on how to deal with the problem of booty when it concerns 
goods pertaining to Spaniards. ‘Good Spaniards’, of course, were not to 
be molested at all, whilst they were guaranteed the return of any goods 
taken from them. ‘Bad Spaniards’ were a different matter, but even they 
now got a better deal. Thus: ‘When they capture bad Spaniards... 
all 
the money, jewels, clothing and goods found on them shall be totally 
theirs, but they must be able to present detailed proof of their guilt.’%” 
But who should decide as to which Spaniards were ‘good’ and which 
Spaniards were ‘bad’? It is very clear from the text that the final decision 
lay with the leaders of the bands, and, that, proof or no proof, they had 
therefore acquired enormous liberties. More positively, however, much 
effort was devoted to regularizing the relationship between partida and 
pueblo, and, in particular to avoiding exactions and other kinds of 
abuses. Thus, a complicated system was established whereby guerrilla 
bands could be issued with certificates of good conduct ‘that will serve 