

<<<PDFPAGE 161>>>
Vittorio Scotti-Douglas 
143 
_ away by the fiction that they are men of natural military talent who 
_ could not find an outlet for their skills under the antiguo régimen. Just as 
| obvious, meanwhile, is its political, military and juridical importance, 
_ the point being that the independence of the guerrilla movement was 
_ being vitiated at the very moment that it was ostensibly legitimized as a 
phenomenon. Yet from the practical point of view, it was a dead letter 
from the start, the majority of historians agreeing that compliance with 
the reglamento was almost nonexistent. It is not clear if it was this failure 
that pushed the Junta into accepting a project, concocted by Vicente 
Alcala Galiano, that took the form of another set of regulations, but at 
all events on 17 April 1809 there duly appeared the Instruccién para el 
Corso Terrestre contra los Ejércitos Franceses.”? 
Here again a simple reading of the text offers us some very interesting 
points for our consideration. First of all, however, a short explanation 
is needed for the name given to the guerrillas in this document. 
This is very well clarified in the letter that was written to Martin de 
Garay, who was the Secretary of the Junta Central, by the author of 
the proposal. The brother of a naval officer who was killed fighting 
fighting heroically in the battle of Trafalgar, he seems to have been 
thinking primarily in terms of psychological warfare and even bluff. 
Thus: 
Unless I am very much mistaken, this plan ought to give even the 
emperor pause, whilst at the same time spreading fear and terror 
among his soldiers... Always inclined to set much store by the new, 
the French nation can be relied on not to look calmly at the situ- 
ation, and the troops will immediately imagine the countryside to be 
full of corsairs ready to rob and murder them the moment they relax 
their guard.”# 
As for the term itself, it stands, of course, for ‘land piracy’, the model on 
which it was based being that of naval privateering. For a definition, let 
us turn to the Shorter Oxford English Dictionary. In this we read that a 
privateer is ‘an armed vessel owned and officered by private persons, 
and holding a commission from the government, called ‘letters of 
marque’, authorizing the owners to use it against a hostile nation, 
and especially in the capture of merchant shipping’.”” Whilst still to 
all intents and purposes a pirate, the holder of the ‘letters of marque’ 
therefore became a kind of authorized and legal combatant. 
Now, then, we have a completely different situation. The call to arms 
was still universal, but the individual guerrilla was no longer an agent 

<<<PDFPAGE 162>>>
144 
Regulating the Irregulars 
of the state. On the contrary, he was now an entrepreneur who might 
benefit the state by his actions but was really acting on his own 
account. And, as the combatants were now specifically intended to 
spread terror amongst the enemy, it followed that there should be no 
restriction on their actions: no reference, in short, could be made to 
either the laws of war or the principles of common humanity. Much of 
this is clear from Article 1 of the new decree. Thus: 
Every inhabitant of the provinces occupied by the French troops 
who can arm himself, is authorized to do so...in order to attack and 
to plunder the French soldiers, when in favourable conditions, 
whether they are found alone or in groups, seizing the victuals and 
supplies meant for their maintenance, and, in short, inflicting all the 
evil and damage possible on them, with the understanding that this 
service will be considered as rendered to the Nation, and rewarded in 
proportion to its extent and results.”° 
It is easy to see, from the very beginning, that a very different spirit 
informs all the text, from the long introduction — an impassionate 
and stirring patriotic appeal, full of hatred against the French - to the 
18 short articles, with few bureaucratic rules and many promises for 
the fighting patriots. As for the author, in contrast to his predecessor, he 
comes over not as an official worried by red tape and the question of law 
and order, but as a Spaniard whose central interest is that of inflicting on 
the enemy ‘all the evil and damage possible’. This is further emphasized 
by the clarity of the general instructions contained in the introduction: 
the struggle will be longer and more costly if the Patriots do not succeed 
in making it difficult ‘for the French troops to acquire victuals and the 
other means necessary for surviving in the Country’; all communications 
must be cut or destroyed; a close eye must be kept on the enemy’s 
movements, aims and combinations; and the latter’s troops must be 
kept in a state of ‘continuous stress and alarm’. As for the Spaniards, 
meanwhile, they should at all times demonstrate ‘firmness and stead- 
fastness’, but who is the appeal directed to? In brief, the people, in 
which respect one statement is especially interesting: 
As Napoleon has succeeded with the basest and vilest arts in destroying 
and disorganizing Spain’s military force, in seizing her major fort- 
resses and taking prisoner her king, is it not very clear that it is now 
necessary for the civilian population to band together to fight her 
enemies?’ 