

<<<PDFPAGE 154>>>
136 
The Anatomy of a Research Project 
totals without reference to any further analysis. Finally, attention must 
also be paid to issues of distortion. In Figure 7.5, for example, it will be 
noted that Aragon accounts for a very large number of the combatants. 
This is by no means surprising: AragOn was under continuous French 
occupation longer than almost any province other than Navarre and 
the Basque provinces. But it also has to be recognized that Aragon is an 
area whose guerrilla is better known than almost any other, and the 
authors would here wish to pay particular tribute to the work of the 
Spanish historian, Ram6n Guirao, whose monograph Guerrilleros y Patriotas 
en el Alto Aragon (Huesca, 2000) contains the names of literally hundreds 
of men who enlisted to fight the French in the Huesca area. 

<<<PDFPAGE 155>>>
/ 
Regulating the Irregulars: 
Spanish Legislation on la guerrilla 
during the Peninsular War 
Vittorio Scotti-Douglas* 
Whether irregular warfare holds — together with prostitution — the dubious 
merit of being the most ancient form of human activity is something 
that can never be known for certain. However, all that need concern us 
here is that it is a very old and well-established way of fighting, usually 
employed against overwhelming odds. Tracing its long history is not 
the purpose of this chapter, and all the more so as the current author 
has written on this subject elsewhere.’ But talking about the concept of 
guerrilla does require at least a short philological introduction that will 
give us some insight into the origin and the meaning of this word. 
As is well known, guerrilla is a word that comes to us from Castillian. 
In this language, it is very old, whilst it is obviously derived as a 
diminutive from guerra (‘war’). We encounter it recorded for the first 
time in the famous Tesoro de la Lengua Castellana, 
o Espatiola by 
Sebastian de Covarrubias Orozco, published in Madrid in 1611. Found 
under the heading for guerra, it is defined as ‘a quarrel between private 
citizens that... causes them to split into rival bands and in consequence 
to incur severe punishment at the hands of the ruler of the state’.” Note, 
then, that guerrilla is at this stage is a private conflict, and, being a 
breach of the peace, something that worries rulers, who thus punish it. 
Slightly more than a century later, in the first edition of the Real 
Academia’s dictionary, we find some change, albeit a minor one: ‘Small 
armed conflict, or difference in opinions of little importance.’* There is 
also another definition of guerrilla relating to a carefully described game 
of cards, but this has no military connection other than the fact that, 
*I would like to thank my good friend, Dr Charles Esdaile, for his splendid work 
in editing this chapter; he has respected my thoughts absolutely whilst giving 
the chapter an accessible English form. 
137 

<<<PDFPAGE 156>>>
138 
Regulating the Irregulars 
judging from similar games played in other countries, it was probably 
first played by soldiers.* 
We can read the same things in the editions of the dictionary published 
in 1780, 1783 and 1791. But in the meantime, in 1780 there appeared 
the first Spanish translation of a treatise on the art of war that was, in 
its time, a real European ‘bestseller’. Entitled La Petite Guerre, ou Traité 
du Service des Troupes Légéres en Campagne, this had been written by 
a Frenchman, 
Augustin Thomas 
de Grandmaison, 
and _ originally 
published in 1756. In this work one could find explained the origins, 
development theory and practice of a particular way of waging war 
that, as the title suggests, the author defined as petite guerre — in other 
words ‘small’, ‘petty’ or ‘little’ war. As is well known petite guerre was the 
answer adopted by military theorists 
- and most especially French 
theorists° — to the problems caused for regular armies by the irregular 
forces met in a variety of campaigns from the Thirty Years War 
onwards. In so far as France was concerned, particularly important here 
was the War of the Austrian Succession of 1741-48, in which French 
troops suffered heavy losses at the hands of Maria Theresa’s Croat 
irregulars, but it should be noted that most armies faced such problems 
whilst they were not confined to Europe, as witness the problems faced 
by the British in North America in the Seven Years’ War (1756-63) and 
the American War of Independence (1775-83). Grandmaison’s treatise 
was neither the best, nor, still less, the only one on the subject, but it 
nevertheless proved an incredible success.° As noted above, the first 
Spanish translation was published in 1780, whilst its title was La Guerrilla, 
6 Tratado del Servicio de las Tropas Ligeras en Campania.’ The logical 
consequence of this was to establish an equivalence between guerrilla 
and petite guerre, whilst the expression partidas de guerrilla was used to 
designate the small detachments and cavalry employed in surprise 
attacks, intelligence gathering or advanced reconnaissance. In addition, 
meanwhile, the term might be applied to troops deployed in skirmish 
order on the battlefield, such men being described as being deployed 
en guerrilla.® 
Coming back to our own period, we find that the terms guerrilla and 
partida were employed throughout the Peninsular War. We find them, 
for instance, in General Castafios’ bulletin after the battle of Bailén,’ in 
a biography of the Empecinado published in 1814,!° and in memoirs 
written at the time but not published till long afterwards.'! In the course 
of the struggle, however, their meaning changed. At the beginning of 
hostilities, the word guerrilla referred specifically to regular soldiers, 
and this meaning continued in use for some time. But at the same time 