

<<<PDFPAGE 171>>>
Vittorio Scotti-Douglas 
153 
perpetuated by Espoz y Mina after he emerged as the new leader of 
Navarrese resistance in the wake of the capture of ‘El Mozo’ in March 
1810, as witness the fact that any other partida that entered the province 
from beyond its frontiers was either disarmed by him or integrated into 
his own forces. 
This does not mean that the Navarrese leaders were provincialists, at 
least not in the strict sense of the word. Francisco Espoz y Mina was not 
shy of fighting outside Navarre, as is shown by the action that he 
launched in western Aragon in 1811 in order to lure Suchet away from 
the attack he was planning on Valencia. Meanwhile, he also exploited a 
commission issued by the Junta of Aragon as a means of consolidating 
his authority in Navarre in the early days of his command.°! Yet, for all 
that, provincialism was certainly present, it being this force that was the 
underlying reason for perhaps the most well-known conflict that took 
place between a guerrilla leader and a junta in the course of the war. We 
come here to the clash between Juan Martin ‘El Empecinado’ and the 
Junta of Guadalajara. On the surface this was motivated by issues of 
competence, and, in particular, the question of who should have the 
command of military operations in the district, but beneath this was 
the issue of patria chica versus patria.°* To put this still more simply, 
which should take preference: Guadalajara or Spain? In so far as the 
Junta was concerned, there was no question here as to what the answer 
should be, and it therefore did everything that it could to obstruct any 
moves on the part of El Empecinado that were not exclusively devoted 
to the protection of the province and its rulers. For this, the justifica- 
tion was quite simple. So far as the Junta was concerned, as it had raised 
many of the famous guerrilla commander’s men, it ought also to have 
the exclusive use of them, and all the more so, or so it claimed, as it was 
forced to rely entirely on its own resources. Thus: 
Although intended for the defence of the province that supplies, 
arms, uniforms and pays it, this small division has not always 
operated within 
its boundaries...but 
the frank and generous 
conduct which this exemplifies has never received its just reward: no 
matter what the dangers have been in which it has found itself, it 
has never been supported by the different corps of the neighbouring 
provinces.°? 
Juan Martin’s answer was very sharp. The Junta’s attitude, he thundered, 
contradicted all the principles of good government, all the maxims of 
the ancients, and all the lessons of Spain’s current misfortunes. And at 

<<<PDFPAGE 172>>>
154 
Regulating the Irregulars 
the same time it was spreading ‘the spirit of provincialism’ and could 
persuade the soldiers to look ‘with indifference and even contempt on 
the troubles of other provinces, and cause them to become unwilling to 
obey the orders of a general, who wisely and at the right moment calls 
them somewhere else’.>4 
This difference of opinion is very striking. Contrary to what one might 
have initially suspected, it is the uneducated peasant, the individual with 
an experience of life limited more or less to the boundaries of his district, 
who rejects the idea that the province is the key to the life of the 
nation, and who understands that victory depends on the union of every 
community in the country, and, by extension, the extirpation of every 
localism. By contrast, it is the members of the Junta, men who stem 
from the dominant élites and who, as traditional holders of public 
offices in such institutions as the Ministry of Finance and the Post 
Office may be considered to be representatives of the state, defend at 
all cost a localist spirit that is detrimental to the war effort. In the 
end the Consejo de Regencia was to come down in favour of El 
Empecinado in this dispute, and therefore to make a stand for a 
national concept of the war, but the incident brings us to a very import- 
ant point that might serve as the conclusion for this chapter. Thus, 
the idea of Spain as a nation, interpreted according to the bourgeois 
construction of the term, cannot be associated with all the élites. 
In the same way it is not possible to exclude the idea that the 
populace possessed a certain political flair, at least in some of their 
representatives.°> Obviously this sophistication did not extend to all the 
guerrilleros, nor the peasants from which they sprang. On the contrary, 
the majority of the documents suggest that most of the common 
people identified primarily with their home districts and had a strong 
preference for staying there, and that these preferences were not over- 
come by serving in the partidas or the regular armies. At this point in 
Spanish history, then, the chief emotional bond was with the local 
community, just as the chief instinct of the populace was to protect 
the economic activities which permitted not just their survival but 
that of their families. In this respect, El Empecinado therefore stands out 
as an even more remarkable individual: 
a man who truly transcended 
his background. And, to return to the question of regulating the irregulars, 
it can be seen that the process should not just be interpreted in terms 
of the reconstruction of the state or the expansion of its power. In 
reality, moves to control the guerrillas could just as easily be the work 
of local oligarchies who were frantic to safeguard their own interests, 
in which respect it is interesting to note that, as the nineteenth century 