

<<<PDFPAGE 169>>>
Vittorio Scotti-Douglas 
151 
version of events that was offered by the Junta of Logrono. If it is to be 
believed, what Barriolucio was doing was in effect engaging in a 
species of coup d’état in order to secure a series of rights — and, beyond 
them, the cooperation of the local populace — to which he could have 
obtained access in no other way. In a word, indeed, he was bidding for 
control of the area. 
In this case the guerrillas played an important role in a conflict 
between two corporate powers, whose prerogatives, very vaguely defined, 
overlapped in the same space. Such overlapping appears very clearly in 
a petition presented to the Junta Central in Seville by the representatives 
of Logrono: 
Five contiguous Juntas can 
be observed 
to be operational 
in 
[Logronio]: that of Soto de Cameros [NB: the Junta of Logrofio itself], 
that of Barriolucio in Navarre, that of Arnedo, that of Menciso and 
that of Covaleda. Each is operating in the towns and villages that 
recognize them, so that there are continuous conflicts between them, 
and this obviously produces ...such confusion and disillusionment 
that the interests of not just the whole province but also the entire 
nation are severely affected. This evil has spread to the partidas... 
and, to our great shame and distress, the important services that they 
have been performing... may have sometimes been...undermined 
because of the dissension and conflict which they have experienced, 
this having sometimes reached such a pitch that the stronger bands 
have disarmed their weaker fellows.*® 
Because of this competition, guerrilla warfare acquired a new dimension. 
In brief, the guerrilla band can be seen to have become not just a means 
of fighting the French, but also a tool in the power struggle that raged 
between the different factions born from the political chaos of 1808. 
And in this fashion the partidas — at least those big enough to achieve a 
measure of influence and independence - joined with the generals, the 
central government, the juntas and, in the end, the cortes of Cadiz in 
helping to shape the future of Spain. 
With matters in this state the partidas made hay. Feeding on the political 
struggles between diverse local power lites, they started to entertain an 
extravagant idea of their own importance, acting outside any principle 
of operational unity and without any concerted plan. For a very lucid 
and pitiless diagnosis of this phenomenon, we might turn to a letter 
written to the Junta Central by the Junta of Najera — a local committee of 
government established by the Marqués de Barriolucio in La Rioja that 

<<<PDFPAGE 170>>>
152 
Regulating the Irregulars 
should probably be added to the five authorities listed above, though it 
is just possible that it is the otherwise rather mysterious Navarrese body 
mentioned in connection with the marquess — as part of his attempt to 
take over the area. Thus: 
The main cause of all of this, Sefior, is undoubtedly the fact that all 
these troops do not recognize a central authority, or rather, perhaps, 
that no authority has the strength to get them under control. All 
of them want to be independent leaders; all dispose of the property 
of the nation, the pueblos and the citizenry alike as if they were 
sovereigns. And, still worse, with unbelievable impudence, they 
frequently make use of the infamous word ‘traitor’ to satisfy their 
greed at the cost of the honour and survival of many unfortunates, 
who find themselves despoiled and stripped of everything, before 
being heard and judged.” 
A further issue that needs to be touched on here is that of provincialism. 
This is a feature common to all states lacking a strong central power, whilst 
it is likely to be especially pronounced in time of war, and especially, 
invasion. In Spain, certainly, between 1808 and 1813 every province 
thought of itself as the key to the entire war and the central bastion of 
Spanish resistance. The guerrilla bands, obviously, could not escape this 
problem, even if their answer was never going to be homogeneous. 
Both Martin Javier Mina y Larrea and his distant relative, Francisco 
Espoz y Mina, for instance, had a strong sense of territoriality, and 
would not allow any kind of meddling in Navarre. Already in November 
of 1809 we have a proof of this in a letter written by José Antonio 
Colmenares, an agent of the Junta Central who established himself in 
the area of Molina de Arag6n and from there sought to exercise general 
authority over a broad region embracing the modern provinces of Soria, 
Guadalajara, Cuenca, Logrono and Teruel. Although Mina was not yet 
famous and his band still very small, he was evidently still a force to be 
reckoned with. Thus, in an attempt to extend his authority into southern 
Navarre, Colmenares dispatched an army officer named Juan Garcés 
de los Fayos to Viana. No sooner had he got there, however, than his 
mission came to an abrupt end, Colmenares complaining that ‘in that 
town [he] was captured by a guerrilla commander... called Don Francisco 
Mina [sic: in reality this must be a reference to ‘El Mozo’: at this time 
Espoz y Mina was not an independent commander, whilst he did not 
adopt the name ‘Mina’ until the following year] who took away from 
him his commission, papers and baggage’.°° This habit, meanwhile, was 