

<<<PDFPAGE 178>>>
160 
Regulating the Irregulars 
miren con indiferencia, y acaso con desprecio las desgracias de otras provincias, 
y se hagan sordos a la voz de un general, que sabia y oportunamente les 
llama a otra parte.’ 
SS. For the details of the Council of Regency’s ruling, cf. Concejo de Regencia to 
Estado Mayor del Segundo Ejército, 7 April 1811, ICHM. CDB. 36/40/78. 

<<<PDFPAGE 179>>>
8 
The Pen and the Sword: 
Political Catechisms and 
Resistance to Napoleon 
Emilie Delivré 
Research on the important topic of the impact of Napoleon outside 
France is expanding, but not yet fully developed. In particular, our 
knowledge regarding the influence of resistance to Napoleon in Europe 
as a whole is still rather limited. For example, what factors could explain 
the diversity of European national reactions to the Napoleonic imperium? 
Does the answer lie in differences between the strategies that were adopted 
by the nations of Europe, or differences in the projects of Napoleon 
himself? Or is does it lie in pre-existing and deeply-rooted differences 
between the various national histories of Europe? And, if this last is the 
case, what importance should be attributed to such factors as revolution 
(or its absence), the Enlightenment, the dominant religious confession 
and national unity (or, again, its absence)? Can we expect to find a 
similar reaction to Napoleon in the cases of Germany, which was divided 
in terms of both politics and religion, Italy, which was divided in terms 
of politics but united in terms of religion, and Spain, which was united 
in terms of politics and religion alike? 
In order to advance a tentative answer to these questions, this chapter 
focuses on a specific aspect of the reaction to Napoleonic rule in the 
form of the political catechism. Political catechisms appeared in various 
countries, and most of them both encouraged and expressed resistance 
to the emperor. They are extremely significant because they form part 
of an attempt to build national strategies: short texts that essentially 
consisted of questions and answers, they point to the desire of the élite 
to reach the people by means that were likely to be both familiar and 
accessible to them. By focusing on this aspect of resistance, this chapter 
will try to show the possible relevance of political catechisms as literary 
sources for a historical interpretation of the Napoleonic Wars. 
161 

<<<PDFPAGE 180>>>
162 
The Pen and the Sword 
The analysis of catechism as a genre is relevant for two reasons. Firstly, 
although the origins of the phenomenon are religious, in most European 
countries it gradually developed a more political form. At the same 
time, by the beginning of the nineteenth century catechism had 
become so widespread as a means of expression that it may be said to 
have become a pan-European phenomenon. Secondly, despite their rigid 
form and religious origins, political catechisms vary greatly. They embodied 
and communicated the ideals of opposing political parties, and they 
played a variety of different (albeit usually quite important) roles in the 
great upheavals of the period under investigation. And, thirdly, political 
catechism was thus a form of expression which both reflected the nuances 
of, and was adapted to the cultural reality of, diverse European entities. 
Studying this genre during the Napoleonic Wars is therefore a valuable 
lens for the investigation of different nations’ modes of expressing their 
origins, their religion, and their hatred for their enemies. 
Meanwhile, by studying political catechism on a European scale, and 
by cross-referencing such texts from different countries, we should be 
able to pose interesting questions that go beyond the fundamental 
question of identity. For example, given that the period under investi- 
gation is characterized by a growing desire on behalf of the élite to 
educate the common people, should catechisms be understood as a means 
of education rather than a tool of persuasion? And, if they were indeed 
means of education, what criteria were employed to decide on the limits 
that were to be placed on giving the uneducated masses access to 
knowledge? Other interesting questions relate to the image of the 
enemy. We should ask not only how the enemy is portrayed — often 
‘manicheistically’ and as a caricature — but also how that image affects 
personal and collective memories. What became of distinctive national 
characteristics, given that catechisms were often legitimated by a religious 
origin that was held to be universal and timeless? Next we should 
enquire as to the identity of these texts? Were they part of the official 
apparatus of state propaganda? Were they journalists, or priests, or 
independent, and even marginal authors? What, too, of the question of 
readership? Were the texts widely circulated amongst thousands of 
commoners who were ready, in theory at least, for partisan war, or were 
they never really known outside a very limited group of intellectuals? And, 
finally, was the art of political catechism born in the context of a 
specific ideology and a specific enemy, and thereby condemned to remain 
a phenomenon of one specific moment in time, or was it rather a device 
of wider origins and applications that was in consequence promised 
a greater future? 