

<<<PDFPAGE 173>>>
Vittorio Scotti-Douglas 
155 
wore on, the guerrilla was to be associated not with the liberal state, 
but rather the Carlism that was its antithesis. 
Notes 
1 . Cf. V. Scotti-Douglas, ‘Spagna 1808: la genesi della guerriglia moderna (1): 
guerra irregolare, petite guerre, guerrilla’, Spagna Contemporanea, no. 18 (Autumn, 
2000), pp. 9-31. 
. S$. de Covarrubias Orozco, Tesoro de la Lengua Castellana, o Espafiola, F. 
Maldonado 
(ed.) (Madrid, 1995), p. 613. Lit. ‘Cuando entre particulares hay pendencia y 
enemistad formada, que acuden unos a una parte y otros a otra; pero éstas 
castigan los principes de las republicas severamente.’ 
. Real Academia Espafiola, Diccionario de la lengua Castellana en que se explica el 
verdadero sentido de las voces, su naturaleza y calidad, con las phrases 0 modos de 
hablar, los proverbios 0 refranes y otras cosas convenientes al uso de la lengua 
(Madrid, 1726-39), Iv, p. 93. Lit. ‘Encuentro ligéro de armas, 6 contrariedad de 
dictamenes de poca entidad.’ 
. Ibid. The game was played according to a version of the well-known ‘Beat Jack 
out of Doors’, and it may be that there are some subconscious echoes of the 
realities of the civilian population’s experience of war in the ‘horse and musket’ 
period here: the game is a species of ‘beggar thy neighbour’ in which two players 
compete for all the cards in the pack and the inference is that soldiers — ‘jacks’ 
in common parlance — quartered on the populace had to be ‘beaten outside 
doors’ before they ate them out of house and home. Curiously enough, then, 
we can even see links with popular resistance to the military. 1 owe this 
insight to my friend and colleague, Dr Charles Esdaile, of the University of 
Liverpool. 
. Setting aside Grandmaison, a short list of French treatises on petite guerre 
includes J. de Jeney, Le partisan ou l’art de faire la petite guerre (Den Haag, 1749); 
J. de la Croix, Traité de la petite guerre pour les compagnies franches, dans lequel on 
voit leur utilité, la difference de leur service d’avec celui des autres corps, la maniére 
la plus avantageuse de les conduire, de les équiper, de les commander et de les dis- 
cipliner, et les ruses de guerre qui leur sont propres (Paris, 1752); and J.L. Lecointe, 
La science des postes militaires, ou traité de fortifications de campagne (Paris, 
WS): 
. After the first French edition in 1756, the book was translated into German in 
1758 and into Spanish in 1780, whilst it appeared in both languages in a variety 
of different editions. 
. Published in Valencia, the book was translated by Captain Victor Caballero, 
who added to it many personal observations on the use of light troops in war: 
cf. M. Garcia Hurtado, Traduciendo la guerra: influencias extranjeras y recepcion 
de las obras militares francesas en la Espana del siglo XVIII (La Coruna, 1999), 
pp. 103-4. For a general discussion of the assimilation of French military thought 
in Spain, cf. V. Scotti-Douglas, ‘La guerra “alla francese” nel XVIII secolo e la sua 
fortuna in Spagna’, Spagna Contemporanea, no. 17 (Spring, 2000), pp. 161-3. 
. Further information about the history and evolution of the term ‘partisan’ 
may be found in the article cited in n. 1. 
. Cf. J. G6mez de Arteche, Guerra de la Independencia: historia militar de Espania de 
1808 a 1814 (Madrid, 1866-1903), II, pp. 692-6. 