

<<<PDFPAGE 165>>>
Vittorio Scotti-Douglas 
147 
as recommendation for the commanders, always provided that the 
justices of the same pueblos have not at a different time made separate 
complaints against them’.** 
This was, therefore, the corpus of legislation that, at least theoretically, 
ruled the guerrillas and governed their legal status (there are four other 
provisions that in some way or other deal with the issue, of which three 
were issued in 1809 by the Junta Central and the fourth in 1811 by the 
Regencia, but they do not change the sense of this chapter’). But what, 
in fact, actually happened? What were the relationships between the 
partidas and the civilian and military authorities? It is this scarcely 
charted and difficult territory that we must now explore. The task, 
however, is not an easy one, not the least of the problems being that the 
civilian authorities were all too often divided amongst themselves, and, 
even more so, at odds with their military counterparts. Before going any 
further, indeed, we must look at these problems. Let us begin with the 
civil power. The disappearance of a strong central authority in the first 
days of the insurrection led, as is well known, to the creation of local 
governments which under the name of ‘juntas’ took over the civilian 
power in their respective regions. This produced a reaction, and when 
the Junta Central was formed in September 1808, it was seen in some 
quarters as a solution to the atomization of political power. However, 
the reality was very different, as the Junta Central generally lacked any 
effective means of enforcing its authority, even in those areas that were 
not occupied by the French. Even if the theory was that all the district 
and provincial Juntas should submit to the new central government, 
this therefore in the end depended on the local authorities’ good will. 
But it was not just the central power that was weak. Thus, the dis- 
integration of authority had snowballed to such an extent that the 
provincial Juntas found it difficult to control their provinces and the 
district juntas difficult to control their districts. Especially in the case of 
communities rich in historical privileges or traditions of self-government, 
what mattered was therefore the pueblo, and it was often only at this 
level that questions of defence were considered.*? Moving on now to 
the issue of civil-military relations, we find that these were even more 
troubled. In this respect the fierce quarrel between the Marquess of La 
Romana and the Junta of Asturias is especially well known. However, it 
is not the only instance, and in this respect it is worth pointing out that 
the guerrillas were in fact one of the chief bones of contention when it 
came to clashes between army officers and the juntas. Thus, particularly 
if they had helped arm and recruit them, many juntas were inclined 
to regard guerrilla bands operating in the vicinity as de facto private 

<<<PDFPAGE 166>>>
148 
Regulating the Irregulars 
armies, and were therefore extremely unwilling to see them receive 
orders from the general in command of the district or even act on their 
own initiative. Meanwhile, such interference carried on even when 
partidas had been militarized (ie. organised into regular units and 
granted the status of troops of the line). On top of this there was the 
issue of the formation of new partidas. By 1810 many army officers were 
deeply suspicious of the value of the ‘classic’ guerrilla band and were 
actively opposing the formation of fresh partidas. Yet for the civilian 
authorities the issue was seen quite differently. On the one hand there 
was less awareness of the military problems thrown up by the irregulars, 
whilst on the other the creation of fresh partidas strengthened the 
hands of local and provincial juntas with regard to patronage and at the 
same time reinforced their power and influence. And here, of course, 
lay the basis for a very deep split with army officers accusing the juntas 
of selfishness and egotism, and juntas accusing army officers of lack of 
faith and vision.*! 
Yet, whilst they might look with favour on the guerrillas, this did not 
mean that the civil authorities were blind to the problems which they 
threw up. On the contrary, there was also a more or less clear fear that 
the partidas could become nests of bandits and robbers, and, in a word, 
a menace to the civilian authorities, the maintenance of peace and the 
social order. Such fear is absolutely obvious in the parliamentary debate 
held on the subject in the cortes on 9-10 of August 1811, even if the 
discussion concluded with the unanimous rejection of the new set of 
rules for guerrillas proposed by the Minister of War. One sees here the 
ambivalence that characterized the view of the guerrillas entertained by 
the leaders of civilian society in Patriot Spain: more centralised and 
militarized, the new rules bid fair to address the question of law and 
order, and yet they also challenged liberal notions of popular spontaneity 
and the nation in arms.** Hence, of course, the opposition in the cortes. 
But the problem would not go away, and thus we see provincial juntas 
from time to time themselves attempting to tackle the issue, a good 
example in this respect being the ordinance issued for the control of the 
guerrillas by the Junta of Asturias in 1810.% 
Curiously, the attempt to control the guerrillas was not all one-way. 
As the war went on, so some of the leaders of the more stable guerrilla 
bands realized the advantages of coming to some accommodation with 
civilian society, and in consequence set out to try to develop a normative 
framework for the guerrilla bands, which they both adopted for their 
own forces and sought to impose on others. By acting in this fashion 
they achieved a double purpose: on the one hand they obtained 