

<<<PDFPAGE 181>>>
Emilie Delivré 
163 
In what follows, we shall first briefly review the literature on political 
catechism, discuss the history of this phenomenon and define the texts 
that are available for study in so far as the Napoleonic period is con- 
cerned. Moving on, we shall then examine the specific case of German 
political catechisms dating from the Napoleonic Wars in order to 
present and analyse the content of a sub-group of these writings that 
are particularly important and quite distinct, but have until now 
remained relatively unknown. And, last but not least, we shall towards 
the end examine the raison d’étre of political catechism during the 
Napoleonic Wars, and its relation with the concept of resistance. What, 
though, of the literature? Unfortunately, there is no historical research 
that deals with the overall question of political catechism. Nevertheless, 
there are a number of interesting articles that deal with the subject in 
the context of specific countries and specific periods. Most of these 
concern the French and Italian catechisms dating from the 1790s, 
but some works may also be found concerning the Spanish ‘war of inde- 
pendence’.' In the Spanish context, one might also cite the comprehensive 
work of Manuel Morales Munoz although this deals with the whole of 
the Spanish nineteenth century.* Beyond these monographs and articles, 
there is a limited body of comparative or semi-comparative works on 
the phenomenon of political catechisms whose chief protagonists 
are the Frenchman, Jean-René Aymes, the Italian, Luciano Guerci, the 
Mexican, Tancke de Estrada and the German, Michel (whose contribution 
is short but particularly engaging and influential).’ In consequence, 
then, it is much to be hoped that this chapter will form a significant 
addition to the existing literature, and all the more so as it will bring 
in the German case, which has hitherto not been discussed in any 
great detail, and thereby develop a more generalizable interpretation of 
political catechism. 
Initially little more than mere syntheses of prayers, catechisms first 
became prominent in the sixteenth century. This can be attributed to a 
number of reasons, including, not least, the use made of catechism by 
Reformation and Counter-Reformation in the sixteenth century. First, 
the term ‘catechism’ was redefined to dramatic effect by Martin Luther 
whose pioneering works —- the so-called ‘little’ and ‘big’ catechisms — 
helped form the identity of the territorial protestant churches in the 
Holy Roman Empire. And then, in the wake of the Council of Trent, 
Catholicism, too, began to generate new catechisms. Nor is this surprising: 
due to their reliance on short question-and-answer couplets, catechisms 
allowed the reader to memorize simple versions of fundamental concepts 
very quickly. At the same time, because of their format, catechisms 

<<<PDFPAGE 182>>>
164 
The Pen and the Sword 
could be produced in the form of little books that were ideal for children 
or those unused to handling heavy tomes. Once established in the literary 
canon, meanwhile, catechisms proved too useful to be allowed to fade 
into the background and were instead made use of by successive gener- 
ations and adapted to their own purposes. Thus, during the eighteenth 
century, in particular, catechisms began to be made use of for purposes 
other than religious ones. In both Protestant and Catholic countries 
(though more so in the former, thanks to the influence of Luther), for 
example, they increasingly became a means of practical instruction - a 
kind of taught course in practical ethics. Authors made use of examples 
drawn from religion — one of the few common denominators of society — 
to reach a non-sophisticated public.* Meanwhile, in Protestant countries, 
much more than in Catholic ones, catechism soon became a method to 
teach any matter, from agriculture to the art of midwives (during the 
eighteenth century, one finds numerous such textbooks). And at the same 
time catechism also acquired a political dimension. First of all, we see the 
philosophers of the French Enlightenment making use of catechisms in 
an attempt to popularize their rationalism and modern science. Given 
that they believed that they were preaching a message that was comparable 
in its dimensions with that of Christianity, such a move was all too 
logical, and all the more so as some of the more bitterly anti-clerical 
philosophes realised that the use of traditional Christian forms offered 
more means by which they could satirize and discredit the Catholic 
Church: hence the frequent appearance of catechisms in the work of 
Voltaire.’ And, as with the Enlightenment, so with the Revolution, the 
leaders of the new France attempting to use catechisms to spread the 
ideas of liberty, equality and fraternity. In this sense, despite the new 
social and political elements, catechisms remained unchanged in that 
they usually aspired to timelessness and universality. However, as we 
shall see, from now on that aspiration was to become decreasingly 
frequent and all the more so given the new genre of political catechism 
that now began to appear in Europe. 
Again, the new trend seems to have originated from France (note a 
few exceptions, such as seventeenth-century England, where one finds 
many political catechisms). As witness the work of Jean Hébrard, the 
Revolution saw the publication of numerous revolutionary catechisms 
at the hands of Mirabeau and other writers, all of which were designed 
to educate ‘the people’ with regard to their new rights and the means 
that had been adopted to protect them.° However, it is important to 
note that the phenomenon was not limited to France. In Italy, too, 
a wave of republican catechisms appeared, which Luciano Guerci has 