

<<<PDFPAGE 183>>>
Emilie Delivré 
165 
studied in ‘Les catéchismes républicains en Italie, 1796-1799’.’ And one 
isolated example may even be found in Germany where a revolutionary 
sympathizer named Hofman published 
a similar tract entitled 
Aristokratenkatechismus.® Of different national origins to their 
French predecessors, they yet mirrored them most strikingly, these 
catechisms once again being marked by their desire to cement the loyalty 
of populace to the new constitutions that they had been given. As time 
went on, however, so the Italian ‘Jacobins’ who had initially welcomed the 
French were in some instances alienated by what they perceived as 
Napoleon’s betrayal of the ideals of the Revolution. In consequence, 
the Italian catechism split as a political phenomenon: whilst some 
remained slavishly loyal to France, others were at least implicitly anti- 
Napoleonic whilst yet remaining heavily influenced by French models 
and political ideas. 
Thus far, then, we are talking about a phenomenon that was clearly 
directed against the ancien regime (in this respect it should be noted that 
the Italian Jacobins who opposed Napoleon can clearly still be regarded 
as revolutionaries). However, catechism could also be made use in a 
context that was clearly counter-revolutionary or, at least, anti-French. 
This was first revealed south of the Pyrenees. Thrown into confusion by 
the motin de Aranjuez, the ambuscade of Bayonne and the Dos de Mayo, 
Spain rose in revolt against Napoleon in 1808, and no sooner had she done 
so than a series of catechisms appeared that mirrored the pre-occupations 
of the period. Clearly visible, then, are anger against Napoleon, Murat 
and Godoy; calls to take up arms and engage in guerrilla warfare; 
veneration of Ferdinand VII; loyalty to the church; and the depiction of 
an idealized nation. Still notorious today, these catechisms have been 
discussed by many different works. As examples we might mention, 
Jean-René Aymes’ article, ‘Du catéchisme religieux au catéchisme 
politique’;’? Alfonso Capitan Diaz’s Catecismos politicos en Espana, 
1808-1822" and ‘Catecismos politicos en los inicios del siglo XIX 
espafiol’.'! Note also the article by José Murioz Pérez entitled ‘Los catecismos 
politicos: de la ilustracion al primer liberalismo espafiol’,’” and finally Manuel 
Morales Muiioz’s ‘Las ensefianzas de la virtud : reglas civico-morales en los cat- 
ecismos del siglo XIX, Catecismos y la instrucci6n popular en la Espafia 
del siglo XIX’, and the fundamental Catecismos en la Espafia del siglo 
XIX.'3 As an example of the sort of work commented on by these 
authors, meanwhile, we might cite the passionate Catecismo civil y breve 
compendio de las obligaciones del espanol, conocimiento (practico) de su libertad, 
y explicacion de su enemigo, muy util en las actuales circunstancias para la 
ensefianza de los nifios ambos sexos, puesto en forma de didlogo, the Junta 

<<<PDFPAGE 184>>>
166 
The Pen and the Sword 
Central’s own Catecismo civil de Espafia en preguntas y respuestas, and, 
finally, the overtly clerical Catecismo catélico-politico, que con motivo de 
las actuales novedades de la Espafia, dirige y dedica a sus conciudadanos un 
sacerdote amante de la Religién, afecto a su patria y amigo de los hombres de 
1808, all of which date from the year 1808." 
These texts were all written to galvanize Spanish opinion, of course, 
but they also had a considerable impact on Germany. Thus, the blend 
of religious and civil ideas which they represented fell on fertile soil east 
of the Rhine. Thus, surrounded by large numbers of French troops as 
they were, many German intellectuals had been inspired by the Spanish 
example to call for a German insurrection against Napoleon. As such, 
they could not but be enthused by the manner in which the Spanish 
texts described the duties of the citizen vis a vis the nation and called 
him to take up arms against invasion. Along with proclamations calling for 
a German uprising, then, translated versions of the Spanish catechisms 
began to appear in print. For example, Joseph von Hormayr collected a few 
Spanish texts, some of which were catechisms, and had them translated 
and published 
in Vienna 
in the journal Germanien. 
Entitled 
the 
Sammlung der Aktenstiicke tiber die spanische Thronveranderung, these were 
read by the poet Heinrich von Kleist. Particularly influenced by the 
catecismo civil mentioned above, in 1809 Kleist wrote his own Katechismus 
der Deutschen, abgefasst nach dem Spanischen, zum Gebrauch fiir Kinder 
und Alte. Intended, as the title suggests, for both children and adults, 
Kleist’s work respected the standard question-and-answer form and 
consisted of a fictitious dialogue between a father and his young son, 
the latter answering the questions of the former. The dialogue was 
divided into seventeen chapters (the end of the tenth, the beginning of 
the eleventh and the whole of the twelth chapters have been lost). 
Written towards the end of April and the beginning of May 1809 in 
Dresden, this particular catechism was never published during the life 
of its author. The reason for this was quite simple. Kleist’s language was 
violent in the extreme - so much s0, in fact, that when it appeared in 
1862, even the notorious ‘ultra’, Heinrich von Treitschke, professed to 
be shocked by its tone - and there was simply no chance that such a 
document could have been permitted to circulate in the Germany of 
1809. Thus, the ‘Catechism of the Germans’ glorified the notion of 
fatherland’s 
love, celebrated German identity and national unity, 
demonized Napoleon and called on the author’s fellow Germans to take 
up arms against the French, Von Kleist having been much impressed by 
the example of the Spanish guerrillas. What Von Kleist hoped, indeed, 
was to encourage the Germans who ‘collaborated’ with Napoleon to 