

<<<PDFPAGE 191>>>
Emilie Delivré 
173 
evolution, creating the need for a familiar form of expression that 
could adapt itself to the exigencies of the situation and save the day in 
the emergency that now threatened. 
The question of whether or not catechism could be made use of for 
political purposes, or, to put it another way, this process of adaption, 
was soon placed at the centre of theological debate in even (and perhaps 
mostly) the most religious of countries. For some members of the clergy, 
catechisms were first and foremost sacral texts from which it followed 
that they should never be drawn into the temporal sphere. Yet for others 
catechisms were transferable objects that could on occasion be made 
use of for other purposes, one such being moments when the Church 
needed a means of answering practical, every-day questions that were 
relevant to the faithful at a time of great difficulty. To the extent that 
the Napoleonic invasions represented such times, for such men it fol- 
lowed that it was necessary to guide the masses in precisely this fashion. 
Not surprisingly, such divisions were particularly noticeable in Spain, 
where the use of catechism by the French ‘constitutional’ Church to 
justify its position in the 1790s had caused particular offence, and 
where many of the clergy continued to oppose the politicization of 
catechism under any circumstances. However, the case of Germany, 
where the tradition of practical catechism was longer, differs. Here the 
debate was dominated not by the clergy but rather by the intelligentsia 
and, in particular, its Romantic elements. In respect to these elements, 
it was earlier asked whether there was less nationalist fervour in Germany 
than in other European states. Setting aside the masses - an entirely 
separate question — we see that this was not so: in the university world, 
in particular, anti-French feeling was widespread and the discussion of 
nationalist ideas commonplace. But that did not in itself mean that the 
concept of katechismus automatically came to the fore. On the contrary, 
for many German intellectuals, the experience of the Enlightenment — a 
period that was already identified with French cultural imperialism — made 
catechism the weapon of the enemy, of Napoleon - the false roman 
emperor — and of the proponents of cold reason. For more conservative 
figures, meanwhile, the use of such texts had also been one of the 
factors which transformed the revolution into a bloody terror. Many 
nationalist writers therefore refused to see in the new unity of religion, 
ethics and politics, in their organic conception of society, any place for 
the teaching method of catechism. In this, of course, Arndt and Von Kleist 
differed from their fellows, but it would not be going too far to suggest 
that this prejudice may well be a key to the relative absence of catechism 
from the armoury of German intellectual resistance to Napoleon. Indeed, 

<<<PDFPAGE 192>>>
174 
The Pen and the Sword 
in his own catechism even Von Kleist referred to the empty philosophical 
verbalism of the enemy, and apologized for his own use of the catechetical 
genre. As his hypothetical father says to his equally hypothetical child, 
‘Don’t you find that, by offering you a catechism, your father errs in the 
same way as that which you are describing?’!” Nor were matters aided 
by the fact that the most prominent pedagogues of the time (such as 
Pestalozzi) were strongly against the teaching method of catechism, which 
seemed to them archaic. At the same time, Fichte, who proclaimed the 
necessity of teaching the nation, also disliked catechism. And, last but 
not least, the sort of revolutionary message propounded by German 
nationalists may well simply have sounded incongruous in the context 
of the Lutheran forms so closely associated with dynasties such as those 
of Prussia and Saxony. In consequence, only Arndt and Von Kleist 
chose this genre, whilst we should here again note the former’s efforts 
to conciliate his message with that of Lutheran tradition. Arndt’s second 
catechism thus adopted strong religious tones, even though religion 
was obviously instrumentalized for the benefit of the nationalist cause, 
in which respect it differed from Spanish political catechisms with religious 
tones, where the opposite was invariably true (i.e. political concepts were 
made use of to advance the cause of organized religion rather than the 
other way about). This may have been much against his will: Arndt 
himself acknowledged that he preferred the unity of the nation to the 
supremacy of any particular confession, and avowed that he had only 
given his catechism a religious aspect as a means of injecting it with a 
mystical accent capable of impressing the simple soldier. But all the 
evidence suggests that without such a change there was simply no means 
of proceeding with the tactic: Von Kleist, after all, had not managed to 
get his work off the ground at all. 
The weakness of anti-Napoleonic catechism is Germany is an interesting 
point that provokes further reflection. Despite frequent use by thinkers 
of the Enlightenment and the French Revolution of the genre of 
catechism as a means of spreading new universal religions based on the 
laws of ‘nature’ or the rights of man, this means of propaganda was at 
its most comfortable as an instrument of reaction, and, above all, Catholic 
reaction, and that despite the disputes outlined above. Unlike Lutheranism, 
for centuries the Catholic Church had been evangelizing new groups of 
potential converts, which also naturally meant adapting itself to new 
civilizations. For a living model of this, we have only to turn to the 
Jesuit missionaries of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. As Carlo 
Ginzburg writes, ‘In order to spread the faith of Christ they consciously 
decided to accommodate themselves to all kinds of customs, from the 