

<<<PDFPAGE 195>>>
Emilie Delivré 
177 
of Arndt’s Christian warrior get in the way of the business of pillage and 
rapine. 
In reality, then, in so far as it was used as a weapon against Napoleon, 
catechism was a failure. It was not used very often, whilst its impact 
seems to have been very limited. To reinforce this point, it has only to 
be observed that its future lay not with the cause of reaction but that of 
revolution. Isolated though they were, one cannot fail to notice the fact 
that the three German anti-napoleonic catechisms we have discussed 
announced the evolution of German thinking and mentality: from this 
point onwards the genre of political catechism gradually became insti- 
tutionalized, the production of these works reaching its climax in the 
revolution of 1848. In the same way, in Spain the development of 
catechisms that sought to defend the constitution of 1812 was proved 
to be a phenomenon that was repeated many times over in the trienio 
liberal of 1820-23. Nor is this surprising: apart from anything else the 
first half of the nineteenth century was an age in which the concepts of 
religion were losing their grip and becoming increasingly secularized. 
With hindsight, it is possible to argue that political catechism could 
never really succeed as a tactic of resistance. In trying to overcome the 
enemy, the resistance unconsciously incorporated in its argumentation 
some of the ideas that that same enemy stands for and therefore imper- 
ceptibly propagated some aspects of the new modernity. Also, for thinkers 
associated with the ancien regime, catechism was a double-edged sword 
in that it both called the people to arms but urged them to think for 
themselves and, in certain circumstances, act accordingly. But for men 
of the new age, there could be no such doubts, for getting the people to 
take up arms on their own account was the very heart of what they 
were about. At the same time, meanwhile, the concept of political 
catechism had originated amongst progressive thinkers. Amongst such 
groups, then, political catechism was perpetuated: indeed, the final authors 
of such texts would be socialists and communists - men who were the 
prophets of a new religion and the carriers of another kind of resistance.”° 
Notes 
1. For the period of the French Revolution, 
cf. B. Durruty, ‘Les auteurs de 
catéchismes révolutionnaires (1789-1799)', Annales Historiques de la Révolution 
francaise, no. 283 January, 1991), pp. 1-18; J. Hébrard, ‘La Révolution expliquee 
aux enfants : les catéchismes de 1!’an II’, in M.F. Levy (ed.) L’Enfant, la Famille 
et la Révolution Francaise (Paris, 1990), pp. 171-92; J. Hébrard, ‘Les catéchismes 
de la premiére Révolution et répertoire bibliographique des catéchismes révo- 
lutionnaires’ in L. Andriés (ed.), Colporter la Révolution : Lumiéres et Almanachs 
Populaires (Montreuil, 1989), pp. 53-81; R. Texier, ‘Les catéchismes du citoyen 
a la Révolution’, Impacts, nos. 1-2 (June 1990), pp. 35-S2. For the Spanish 