

<<<PDFPAGE 189>>>
Emilie Delivré 
171 
we have seen, fairly numerous. In the case of Spain, for example, 
Manuel Morales Mufioz has shown that one quarter of the eighty Spanish 
political catechisms written in the nineteenth century belonged to the 
years 1808-1814." In Italy and France, too, there is a similar accumulation 
of such texts. Yet in so far as Germany is concerned, the vast majority of 
the political catechisms that appeared in the nineteenth century 
appeared in the context of the revolution of 1848, rather than the 
Napoleonic period. Indeed, throughout the period 1799-1815 the only 
catechisms to be found are the three mentioned above, whilst the 
example offered by the earlier tract of 1793 is even more isolated. We 
are, then, immediately faced by the task of trying to decide on the 
reasons for this great difference. On top of that, meanwhile, there is the 
issue of the link between levels of resistance and the publication of 
political catechisms though it is obvious that in this last respect a direct 
causal relationship between the one and the other should immediately 
be set aside (in the ‘War of Liberation’ of 1813-14, it seems certain that 
a far higher proportion of the German population was conscripted, or 
otherwise induced, to take up arms than was ever the case in the Peninsular 
War). In the rest of this chapter, we shall examine these issues, and in the 
process open up the debate to some additional questions, on the basis 
of some initial findings of a much broader research project on political 
catechisms. 
As a general rule, in terms of their form the political catechisms that 
we have examined are not very different from one another. Thus, they 
all propagate a corpus of ideas, whilst at the same time explaining their 
meaning; they all enjoin action (if only intellectual); and they all 
employ dialogue to get over their message. Their content, of course, 
is another matter — to repeat the obvious, some catechisms are clearly 
reactionary, while others, inspired by enlightened and/or liberal doctrines, 
endeavour to transmit to the less educated masses new concepts and 
definitions — but the French or Spanish catechism was not distinct 
enough from the German catechism to suggest that we shall find the 
answer to the questions that we have posed in this sort of area. In so far 
as Germany is concerned, then, the following questions arise. Does the 
low number of German catechisms during the Napoleonic wars signify 
less political effervescence and lower levels of resistance than in Spain 
or Italy, or is it rather the fruit of a less religious society in which 
religious catechisms had ceased to have much relevance? Is it simply 
that German society was less open to the traditional form of question 
and answer? And what do we mean by Germany? Can we also find 
variations between different German states (the result, for example, of 

<<<PDFPAGE 190>>>
172 The Pom amd Shee Saeed 
different confessional influences, or different degrees af Napokkonic 
influence)? And. lastly, coukd it be that, in divided Germany, the 
phenomenon of political catechism was unlikely to aOQQaIE MUch 
Promumence Simply Decause the very concept af a sagt catechins 
seemed to presuppose national unity? 
. 
None of these altemmative hypotheses seemy totally BWVVERY, However 
Ther Sem ft be NO general theory that Is Doth walled for most cases and 
capadle of explaining the presence (ar absence) af political catechion 
— 
amd the ditierences in Hy nature, Yet one or two general poiats do stand 
Out, Thus, the emergence of specific forms of catechins (PROKTENIVE QT 
reactionary) may de Aki to depend, Hist on the specific relationship 
between religion and politics in a particular country, and, second, the 
extent t which that relationship was affected Dy the experience af the 
Napoleonic Wary, Variables affecting the rehtionahip between religion 
and politics Include confessional Kdentity, historical experience (in 
particular, the presence or otherwise af revolution, entightonment and 
industrialization), socal development (we here chink particulany of the 
emergence af 2 Hourgenis social as) and geographical location twa 
be noted here that both Gemany and Spain Ry on the dander af | 
France). Hence, at least, some of the differences between Spain and 
Germany: in the former, political catechion emerged in the light afa 
powerful Catholic Church directly threatened Dy — as it aw it TeVORUtIOR, 
whereas in Protestant Germany — the zone of the Country that produced 
both Amdt and Von Rieist - religion was both weaker in institutional 
terms and less threatened by changes in govermmen®t with the result 
that the production of catechisms was more influenced by important 
intellectual debates about, for example, peckgogy, 
One way of investigating the key relation between religion and the 
Sate ls by Studying the standand fom af religious catechiom at the end 
of the eighteenth century, and the Changes that the Napaleanic experience 
drought. The farm of religious catechiams before the war often reflected 
the tension between hderal and reactionary forces both inside and 
outaide the dominant Church about the educational value of catechism, 
and the role of the dominant confessions in the education af the mas 8 
Meanwhile, the way in which both the Substantive content and the 
Speaific pedagogical form of such texts was pereived in a given country, 
or by @ Specific coniessian, directly influenced the development af 
political catechism. It seems that some evolutions af the genre (as the 
Comsaquence af the relation between religion and the state) permitted 
the ‘secularisation’ of catechisms, and others not. And in same countries, 
the Napoleonic Warn were an important factor that favoured this 