

<<<PDFPAGE 185>>>
Emilie Delivré 
167 
choose instead the cause of action and fight alongside the rest of the 
nation for the return of the Holy Roman Empire. And, when he saw 
that no such crusade was forthcoming — even the ‘War of Liberation of 
1813’ was not the affair of the people of patriotic German legend — he 
slid into a depression that, complicated by serious personal problems, 
led him to commit suicide in 1814, and thereby to miss out on the fall 
of his great enemy, Napoleon.'® 
Nor was Kleist alone, his fellow patriot, Ernst Moritz Arndt, writing 
two further anti-Napoleonic catechisms.'° These emerged in the context 
of the War of 1812. Having fled to Russia and taken service with Tsar 
Alexander I, the erstwhile leader of the Prussian reform movement, Freiherr 
vom Stein, decided to launch an attack on Napoleon’s rear. The obvious 
theatre of operations for this strategy was Germany, this being the 
emperor’s chief base for the attack on Russia, but Stein was not just 
motivated by military considerations: 
a convinced German nationalist, 
he also hoped to liberate the German states for their own sake and 
awaken the peoples of Germany to a sense of their identity. To this end, 
Stein sent for Ernst Moritz Arndt, a nationalist writer who was already 
very popular in literary circles. Obligingly, Arndt went to Russia, where 
he stayed for more than eighteen months as Stein’s secretary, whilst in 
the process boosting his reputation as a writer to fresh heights (in Russia, 
of course, he was free of Napoleon’s censors and possessed of resources 
and channels of distribution that far surpassed anything he had enjoyed in 
Germany). And, amongst many other things, Arndt published two cate- 
chisms. First to appear was the Kurzer Katechismus fiir deutsche Soldaten 
[Short catechism for German soldiers] which was published anonymously 
in Saint Petersburg at the end of October 1812. It was composed of fifteen 
chapters of equal length and was designed to be the bible of the so-called 
‘Russo-German Legion’, which was a force created in Russia in the wake 
of the French invasion on the basis of German deserters and prisoners 
of war who could be induced to fight Napoleon (it should be noted that 
less than half the grande armée of 1812 was even notionally French). 
Conceived as a protypical army of the Geman nation - as, indeed, a 
precursor of the people’s army that Von Kleist, Arndt and their fellows 
dreamed of as one day liberating Germany from the French yoke - it 
was supposed to be the bearer of ‘national hope’, and was originally 
officered by a number of Prussian officers who had refused to cooperate 
with the alliance between the German states, including, not least, Prussia, 
and Napoleon, and had in consequence emigrated to Russia. 
The Kurzer Katechismus disappeared for a century and was rediscovered 
in 1905 by the historian, Max Lehmann. Nor is this long period of 

<<<PDFPAGE 186>>>
168 
The Pen and the Sword 
oblivion surprising. On the one hand, the Russo-German Legion proved 
a most disappointing failure. Recruited from men driven not by nation- 
alist fervour but the desire to escape Russian imprisonment, it never 
became the nucleus of a new German army, nor, still less, 
a German 
people’s war, and was eventually absorbed into the Prussian forces as an 
ordinary infantry regiment, and one, moreover, that — strange symbol 
of national unity! — was arrayed not in Prussian dark blue but in Russian 
green. On the other, as in the case of Kleist’s efforts, there were practical 
difficulties that stood in the way of the Kurzer Katechismus becoming 
anything other than a piece of ephemera. Thus, Arndt’s original catechism 
was anti-absolutist and promoted the same reformist ideas about the army 
as those of the Prussian reformers, such as Clausewitz, Scharnhorst or 
Gneisenau. In particular, Arndt proposed norms for German soldiers 
that moved away from the traditional scheme of an army dominated by 
the nobility. Still worse, by advocating a national army, Arndt parted 
with centuries of feudalism, whilst, like Kleist, he strongly criticized those 
German princes who had entered into alliances with Napoleon. In so far as 
those German soldiers who continued to fight in the ranks of the grande 
armée were concerned, the message was clear, what Arndt advocated 
being a mass rejection of military discipline and traditional loyalty. But 
even this was not an end to it: even if they came out against Napoleon, 
the German princes were 
still potentially anti-patriotic. Thus, as a 
nationalist, Arndt rejected dynasty-related notions of legitimacy and 
proclaimed the absolute supremacy of the nation: what was divine was not 
the prince, but the Fatherland. Hence, of course, the document’s de facto 
suppression after 1814, Arndt’s message being completely unacceptable in 
the context of the Germany created by the Congress of Vienna. 
With Arndt convinced that the German nation should be united and 
not divided by the princes, the Kurzer Katechismus posed plenty of problems 
even before 1814. Thus, calling for desertion, mutiny and a German 
insurrection was all very well whilst the princes continued to support 
Napoleon as it was a good means of persuading them to think of changing 
sides, but once they had started to come over to the Allies then Arndt’s 
rhetoric became redundant and even dangerous. New print-runs of his 
catechism were therefore blocked, and he was formally invited to show 
more respect towards royalty. Left with little choice in the matter, 
Arndt therefore decided to rephrase and reformulate his catechism 
under the name of Katechismus fiir den deustchen Kriegs- und Wehrmann, 
worin gelehrt wird, wie ein christlicher Wehrmann sein und mit Gott in den 
Streit gehen soll [Catechism for the German soldier, in which it is taught 
how Christian soldiers should behave and fight, with the help of God]. 