

<<<PDFPAGE 187>>>
Emilie Delivré 
169 
This second catechism appeared in August 1813 in Silesia. The fierce 
reaction of the authorities to the first version was due to the content of 
the first seven chapters, these being the parts in which Arndt invited the 
soldiers to disobey the orders of their ‘traitor’ princes, and condemned 
the officers who refused to believe in a united Germany. In consequence, 
Arndt had to eliminate those parts. This self-imposed silence, however, 
was less unbearable than it would have been before: in March 1813 
Prussia had joined the war against Napoleon with an army reorganized 
along the lines advocated by the reformers, whilst it was possible to 
believe that an unstoppable national revolt had begun; in consequence, 
the necessity for extreme nationalist rhetoric was not as pressing as 
before. Thus, in the new catechism, the language used by Arndt was much 
more composed and restrained. In place of the ‘dissident’ sections 
mentioned above, there now appeared a long historical prologue and 
several new chapters, all this material being much more politically neutral 
than before, whilst even those chapters that were retained from the 
original version were heavily edited. As for the catechism, it now became 
less of a text for German soldiers than a text for soldiers in general, and, 
for that matter, less an exposition of a patriotic ethic than an exposition 
of a Christian one. Indeed, in line with the tradition of the north German 
states of Prussia and Mecklenburg — then the only German states fighting 
for the Allies — Lutheran influences became much more evident, especially 
in the annex, which was composed of patriotic songs that were mostly 
based on religious melodies. Not surprisingly, then, this second catechism 
met with more approval, and, by extension, success. So acceptable was 
it to the German princes, indeed, that when Napoleon returned to France 
in 1815 a third version appeared that was slightly different from its 
predecessor of 1813 but possessed of the same title. 
Finally, to return to the case of Spain, by the time that Arndt was 
penning his soldiers’ texts, the wheel had come full circle. In France 
and, later, Italy, the period from 1789 to 1799 had seen catechisms used 
to promote the cause of revolution. Thereafter in Spain, Austria and 
Germany they had been used as the cause of counter-revolution or, at 
least, resistance to France. In the German case this had at least potentially 
threatened political upheaval, but in Spain we are now presented with a 
mirror image of the situation in France in the years of the Revolution. 
Thus, in 1810 the Spanish uprising against Napoleon had become 
something very different. Seizing the opportunity afforded them by the 
convocation of a national assembly in Cadiz, a progressive faction 
known as the ‘liberals’ had seized power and forced through the famous 
constitution of 1812. To defend and enshrine their new creation, they 

<<<PDFPAGE 188>>>
170 
The Pen and the Sword 
found no better means than the catechism, and thus it is that the 
period 1812-14 saw the publication of many catecismos expounding the 
work of the cortes of Cadiz. 
Political catechisms, then, appeared in large numbers in Revolutionary 
and Napoleonic Europe, but they did so in the context of different 
societies, different cultures and different political situations, and therefore 
assumed many different forms. As a genre, indeed, they can be highly 
contradictory. But in so far as the subject of resistance to Napoleon is 
concerned, this is all to the good as it enriches our understanding of the 
subject and provides us with an alternative approach to its study. Above 
all, it helps us to understand that, to the extent that there was a European 
anti-Napoleonic rebellion at all, one should not overlook its diversity. 
Not only did insurgent movements take very different forms, but they 
were also expressed in different ways, and, significantly, appeared for quite 
different reasons. For example, in Italy anti-Napoleonic catechisms 
appeared on the surface to accept the canons of Napoleonic rule — there 
does not, in fact, seem to have been a single case that was directly critical 
of the emperor - and rather expressed their resistance by continuing to 
evince support for the principles of 1789, whereas in Germany the 
opposition’s catechisms were both anti-Napoleonic and anti-French. 
Meanwhile, intranational differences are also quite telling. For example, 
the Spanish constitutional catechisms of 1812 were the products of a 
violent resistance movement against Napoleon, but they were as much 
concerned with building a new Spain as with fighting the emperor and are 
in fact only rarely explicitly directed against him, whereas their forebears 
of 1808-1809 essentially look to the defence of an old Spain and fill 
their pages with his demonization. And, last but not least, it is clear that 
the resistance espoused in the catechisms was by no means necessarily 
the same as the resistance espoused by the established order: in Germany, 
as we have seen, Von Kleist never secured official sponsorship at all, 
whilst Arndt was only able to retain it by dint of bending quite 
dramatically to the pressure placed on him by his political superiors; 
meanwhile, in Austria if Hormayr was permitted in 1809 to publish 
German translations of Spanish catechisms that could be read in the 
German context as putting duty to the nation before duty to the sovereign, 
it was only because the new war that was impending with France gave 
Vienna a strong interest in destabilizing such French satellities as Baden 
and Bavaria. 
To return to the question of the catechisms themselves, however, the 
German case in particular invites a series of additional questions. In those 
other areas of Europe where these publications appeared, they were as 