

<<<PDFPAGE 193>>>
Emilie Delivré 
175 
caste system in India to the cult of ancestors in China.’”° In the words of 
a Jesuit missionary quoted by the same author, ‘One must be barbarous 
with the barbarians and polished with civilized people...In this way 
the uniform and unchanging gospel will be more easily insinuated into 
the spirits’.*’ In consequence, the principle of adapting the principle of 
catechism to a particular circumstance was well understood. In the 
crisis represented by the Revolutionary and Napoleonic era, meanwhile, 
catechisms presented unique advantages as a form of discourse. Inherent 
in the very concept of ‘resistance’ is that of an enemy, or, to put it 
another way, an ‘other’. And how better to define this concept than 
through catechism? Thus, on the one hand this could be used systemat- 
ically to set out the rival position, and on the other it could be used just 
as systematically to rubbish it. In this fashion, the old technique of 
sequencing questions and answers acquired a new relevance and 
efficacy, for it provided a means of, first, neutralizing the words of the 
enemy by placing them within the meaning of one’s own ideology, 
and, second, proving the opposite of what the enemy claimed. The enemy 
was thus disqualifying himself by the mere fact of speaking. 
Yet even here there were problems. For example, in Catholic Italy only 
one example of an anti-Napoleonic catechism specifically related to the 
cause of armed resistance to the French has ever been discovered (as 
opposed to catechisms that are secretly anti-Napoleonic, but which are 
yet ‘jacobinical’ in their outlook).”* In the Catholic parts of Germany 
there was no use of catechism to stimulate resistance. And in Spain, as 
Aymes shows, with one exception no counter-revolutionary catechism 
appeared until 1808.”* For much of the period in question this need not 
surprise us: the Spanish government was from 1795 to 1808 allied to 
France, whilst internal political debate was dominated by the hated 
figure of the royal favourite, Manuel de Godoy, from whose supposed 
clutches it came generally to be hoped that Napoleon would actually 
rescue Spain. Yet this leaves us with the issue of the period 1789-92. In 
these early days of the Revolutionary era, the regime of Carlos IV was 
deeply frightened by events in Paris and might therefore have been 
expected to welcome any means that could be devised of persuading 
the Spanish people to steer clear of the ideas that reigned across the 
Pyrenees. At the same time, too, the Spanish Church was ever more 
aware of the travails of its French cousin: aside from anything else, 
many non-juring clergy fled to Spain and took refuge in such provinces 
as Navarre and Catalonia. Yet counter-revolutionary catechisms came 
there none, and the inference is quite clearly that for Catholics there 
were deep inhibitions in this respect —- that the Catholic Church, in 

<<<PDFPAGE 194>>>
176 
The Pen and the Sword 
short, was clearly opposed to an instrumentalization of catechism. As 
Cabarrus noted in the early 1790s, indeed, ‘Political catechism has yet 
to appear among us.’** What, then, broke the log-jam? In brief, the 
answer is the coming of war, there being no coincidence in the discovery 
that the one exception to the rule - the catechism of the future liberal 
cortes deputy, Joaquin Lorenzo Villanueva — appeared at precisely the 
moment when armed conflict finally broke out between Bourbon Spain 
and Revolutionary France.” 
From all this we may make a general point. Such were the difficulties 
involved in the secularization of catechism as a tool of counter-revolution 
- that with the one unpublished exception of Von Kleist, it was only 
made use of when war against Napoleon had already broken out. In Spain, 
then, it appeared in 1793, and then did not ‘surface again until 1808, 
whilst Arndt did not put pen to paper until Napoleon had gone to war 
against Russia in 1812. The distinction is a little blurred — the original 
version of Arndt’s catechism called for both widespread desertion amongst 
the armies of the German states and revolution in the Fatherland, 
whilst the Spanish catecismos sought to stimulate resistance to the French 
throughout Spain rather than just in the areas that remained under the 
control of the Patriots — but it is therefore clear that on the whole cat- 
echisms were seen as a means of facilitating wars not of the people but 
of the state. To put it another way, the people were to take up arms 
more in accordance with norms and instructions received from above 
than in accordance with their own practices, experiences and instincts. 
And in this it must be said that they were a failure. Despite the long 
tradition accepting without question that Napoleon was faced by a 
great popular crusade in Spain and Portugal, the most recent research 
has shown that this was all but a myth. As Charles Esdaile has shown in 
a variety of works, voluntary enlistment was limited, conscription deeply 
unpopular and even the Spanish guerrillas an extremely complex phe- 
nomenon that defies many of the assumptions that have commonly 
been made about them. Nor, meanwhile, was the situation much better 
in Germany. Just as the Russo-German Legion was composed not of 
enthusiastic patriots, but men who had joined its ranks rather than 
starve to death in some Russian prison camp, so the German people did 
not rush to answer the cause in 1813. Prussia, true, hastily raised a mass 
army in March 1813, whilst her example was copied by many of the 
others states after they had changed sides in the course of the following 
autumn, but in the end the populace had to be forced to take up arms 
onwards, served but unwillingly and all too often did not let the figure 