

<<<PDFPAGE 199>>>
9 
The Patriotism of the Russian Army 
in the ‘Patriotic’ or ‘Fatherland’ 
War of 1812 
Janet Hartley 
In general, it is probably fair to say that the term ‘popular resistance’ 
conjures up visions of the reaction of populaces to invasion and 
occupation. But in the Napoleonic Wars - a period, after all, of mass 
armies — the peoples of Europe were conscripted for military service in 
immense numbers, thereby providing us with an alternative focus for 
the study of popular resistance. What justification is there for the study 
of the Russian army as opposed to the Russian people in 1812? The 
military performance of the Russian army in 1812 has been examined 
extensively but the ‘mood’, if you can call it that, of the army has not 
been the subject of the same level of investigation. Scholarship has 
focused on the so-called ‘people’s war’ (in Russian, the narodnaia voina); 
that is, the resistance by ordinary people, by which is meant essentially 
the peasants, or, in fact, the serfs, to the invaders and the contribution 
that this made to the defeat of the Napoleonic forces.'! The extent to 
which this popular resistance can be seen as ‘patriotic’ or ‘nationalistic’ 
has been the subject of extensive debate.” On the whole, Western histor- 
ians have dated the emergence of modern forms of Russian nationalism 
to the later nineteenth century and have characterized peasant resistance 
during the Napoleonic invasion as ‘xenophobic’ rather than ‘nationalistic’ 
but, nevertheless, the events of 1812 are regarded as an important stage 
in this development. 
The trauma and consequences of the invasion of 1812 have, inevitably, 
been a source of fascination to Russian scholars, and not only to Russian 
scholars 
of course. The Russian scholarly journals of the second half of 
the nineteenth century include a large number of memoirs, contemporary 
accounts and correspondence relating to the invasion. Tolstoi’s War 
181 

<<<PDFPAGE 200>>>
182 
The Patriotism of the Russian Army in 1812 
and Peace, published in 1866-69, reinforced the fascination with the 
participation of individuals in the great events of history. But the greatest 
stimulus to Russian scholarship on 1812 came one hundred years later, 
with the jubilee publications of 1912. These include the seven volumes 
entitled The Fatherland War and Russian Society, which brought together 
many of the most distinguished prerevolutionary Russian historians, 
including, just to mention two, Semevskii, whose two-volume study of 
peasants in the reign of Catherine II remains the great classic work on 
the subject, and Tugan-Baronovskii, who wrote an influential, if rather 
provocative, account of the development of the factory in Russia.’ Local 
historical journals and archives were very active in publications of 
contemporary materials in the jubilee year and have provided the basis 
for much of my own study of 1812. It has to remembered that the tsarist 
regime was vulnerable in 1912, almost as vulnerable as Alexander I had 
been in 1812. The defeat in the Russo-Japanese War in 1905-06 and the 
uneasy constitutional arrangements after 1906 had damaged the reputation 
of the tsar, and it is hardly surprising that the jubilee of a heroic Russian 
victory (followed by the 300-year celebration of the foundation of the 
Romanov dynasty in 1913) was welcomed as an opportunity to demon- 
strate how one hundred years earlier all members of society had pulled 
together, under the leadership of the tsar, and had triumphed together. 
This probably explains the publication in this year of such simplistic 
and nationalistic books as The Fatherland War of 1812 and Russian Jews 
and Heroic Women in 1812.° 
The prospect and then reality of a German invasion of Russia after 
1939 revived an interest in popular and patriotic resistance in 1812. 
A study was published in 1940 of the ‘people’s war’ in Smolensk, which 
made much of peasant resistance, although the unfortunate timing of 
the publication meant that the author was unable, as later authors, to 
equate the Russian military retreat in 1812 with the identical and skilful 
tactics of Stalin.° That book provided invaluable local material on events 
in 1812, but was marred by a crude interpretation. It took another jubilee, 
however, to provoke a further outpouring of scholarship on 1812 — this 
time in 1962, on the occasion of the 150th anniversary of the 1812 
invasion. This year saw a similar pattern to that of 1912 in that eminent 
Soviet scholars produced both individual and collective works. on the 
invasion, and further collections of documents.’ The emphasis, in this 
rather crude period of Cold War history, changed so that the role of the 
‘feudal élites’ (nobles and clergy) was diminished while that of the 
‘people’ was elevated to such an extent that they were now depicted as 
the only and the true ‘patriots’. The ‘people’s war’ was now also seen as 