

<<<PDFPAGE 212>>>
194 
The Patriotism of the Russian Army in 1812 
Church in 1806 and was popularly regarded as the anti-Christ. Priests in 
the provinces through which the Napoleonic armies passed deliberately 
whipped up popular feeling against the ‘Godless’ invader,*® and there is 
no reason to think that ordinary Russian soldiers were immune from 
this. But even this religious patriotism has to be treated with caution. 
A sizeable proportion of the Russian army was neither Orthodox nor 
Christian, and there 
is no evidence that Lutheran 
Balts, Catholic 
Lithuanians or Muslim Kalmyks fought less bravely than Orthodox 
soldiers. Ferocious attacks on enemy soldiers, and at times civilians, 
were not just confined to Muslim opponents. Russian troops had acted 
with great ferocity in the attack on Warsaw in 1794; over 100 000 Poles 
entered Russia with the Napoleonic armies and there is some evidence 
to suggest that traditional hostility to these neighbours was more 
evident than against the ‘Godless’ French.°? 
The patriotism of the officer corps, in contrast, has been more clearly 
documented. Russian and Soviet histories and contemporary documents 
cite nobles entering, or re-entering, military service, and the donations 
of noble assemblies as evidence of patriotism.®? Pushkin was 13 and 
a schoolboy in 1812 but recalled later in poetry his envy of boys who 
were slightly older and who had enlisted: 
You'll recollect: the wars soon swept us by, 
We bade farewell to all our elder brothers. 
And went back to our desks with all the others, 
In envy of all those who had gone to die 
Without us. 
Both Soviet and non-Soviet historians have, however, struggled with 
the patriotism of the Russian officer corps. The reason for that, it seems 
to me, lies not so much with the activities of the officers in 1812 but 
with events in 1825, when army officers, many of whom had served 
during the period 1812-14, led their men in an abortive rising known 
as the Decembrist Revolt in an attempt to force a constitution on 
Russia in the interregnum between the death of Alexander I and the 
accession of his brother, Nicholas I. This rebellion sits uneasily with the 
historiography of 1812. To the Russian historians of 1912, it must have 
been potentially embarrassing to acknowledge that some of the ‘heroes’ 
of 1812 (and a significant number of the Decembrists fought at the 
battle of Borodino and were rewarded for bravery at this or other battles) 
later became rebels and traitors. This was particularly the case in 1912 
as Nicholas II’s difficult relationship with the recently formed state 

<<<PDFPAGE 213>>>
Janet Hartley 
195 
duma made reference to an earlier, unsuccessful, armed attempt to 
introduce a constitution potentially provocative. The problem for Soviet 
historians was rather different. The Decembrists were portrayed favourably, 
albeit as rather romantic and confused individuals, not only because 
they physically opposed the tsar, and by extension the feudal order, but 
also because some of the political and social ideas of the more radical 
Southern Society could be directly related to Bolshevism. The result is 
that the Soviet period led to extensive scholarship on the Decembrists, 
including the publication of many of the papers of the investigating 
commission of 1826 and many memoirs, all of which provide invaluable 
source material for the historian. But the Decembrist movement has 
been treated by Soviet scholars quite separately from the studies of 1812 
and the links between the two have not been explored. 
There is no doubt, in fact, about the patriotism of the Decembrists. 
Nikita Murav’ev ended his studies at Moscow university in 1812 aged 16 
and enlisted as he ‘had no thought other than ardent love for the 
fatherland’. The experience of 1812 was a formative one. Baron Andrei 
Rozen (a Baltic German and not an Orthodox Russian) commented that 
‘the extraordinary events of 1812 had also brought about a powerful 
feeling of the people’s strength, and a sense of patriotism of which no 
one had before a conception.’ M.I. Murav’ev-Apostol’ recalled in 1826 
that his ‘love for the fatherland which we saved from the Napoleonic 
yoke inspired me’.™ S.P. Trubestskoi stated that: 
The invasion of Russia by Napoleon in the year 1812 aroused in 
Russians a love for the Fatherland in the highest degree; the happy 
conclusion to this war found all Russians proud of their names and 
everyone was happy to have participated in these sublime deeds 
which attested that each of them was useful to their Fatherland.” 
The difficulty for the Russian government was that this form of patriot- 
ism was potentially dangerous, not only to the régime but also to the 
whole political and social order. Officers, and soldiers, had seen how 
people lived outside Russia: ‘By comparison, the question naturally arose, 
why isn’t it like that here?’ asked Aleksandr Bestuzhev.” Patriotic officers 
now demanded that Russians should have at least as much as the 
European peoples who they saved (made more galling by the fact that the 
defeated powers of France and Poland had been granted constitutions, 
the former with Alexander’s agreement and the latter by his expressed 
desire). ‘The Poles received a constitution’ noted A.M. Murav’ev bitterly, 
while ‘Russians as a reward for their heroic exertions in the year 1812 