

<<<PDFPAGE 210>>>
192 
The Patriotism of the Russian Army in 1812 
which took place at the time of the levée en masse in France where 
recruits were reminded of their patriotic and civic duty to the nation. 
The departure of Russian conscripts, in contrast, was like the departure 
from life of a loved one. The songs accompanying the conscripts were 
laments rather than assertions of patriotic fervour. Robert Lyall, a British 
traveller in early nineteenth-century Russia described the scene in terms 
which could equally apply to a funeral: 
I have seen recruits upon télegas and sledges, drawn at a solemn pace, 
and surrounded by their relations and friends who bewailed their 
fate in the most lamentable manner; while they, dejected and absorbed 
in grief, sat like statues, or lay extended like corpses.” 
The recruit was typically the man (not always young and not always 
unmarried) who was the least valued member of the community — often 
a drunkard, idle or a trouble maker - or 
a member of an impoverished 
family that was unable to afford to buy a substitute to go in his place 
(and substitutes became far more expensive in 1812).°° Service in the 
Russian army, far from being a patriotic duty, was universally seen as 
the worst fate that could befall an individual. 
Does this mean that it is impossible to give any indication of the mentalité 
of the Russian soldier? Contemporary commentators — French as well as 
Russian — commented on the bravery and stoicism of Russian troops 
under fire. But this might arise from fear of their commanders, not to 
mention the practice of training canon on the backsides of the infantry. 
There is no evidence that Russian soldiers fought any less bravely outside 
Russia where the ‘fatherland’ was less directly in danger. Russian rates 
of desertion on campaign may have been lower than for some other 
European armies, although the statistics are not accurate enough to be 
certain. This may anyway have been not so much due to ‘patriotism’ as to 
the fact that the Russian passport system and mechanisms of social control 
made it almost impossible for a recruit to merge unnoticed into urban 
society and thereby forced deserters into a life of brigandage on the edges of 
society. It could also have been partly due to the ferocious punishments 
inflicted on deserters who were caught. Despite these disincentives, 
desertion rates of new recruits between the village and the recruiting 
post were extremely high, and this suggests that when the opportunity 
arose the Russian soldier was as at least as eager to abandon his military 
duty as his fellow soldiers in other European armies of the time.*! 
There are soldiers’ songs and folk songs which commemorate heroic 
victories against the enemy, brave Russian commanders and the defence of 

<<<PDFPAGE 211>>>
Janet Hartley 
193 
the country. This is, however, difficult evidence to use. It is not clear 
who wrote the songs, and when they were written; many were collected 
as folk songs by ethnographers in the late nineteenth century. Nor do we 
know how popular these songs were, the extent to which they genuinely 
reflected soldiers’ sentiments, or indeed if they were sung more by peasants 
than soldiers. But there are nevertheless a few popular songs which 
celebrate Russian victories over the French with words that are clearly 
contemporary. For example: 
Remember, remember, Russians... 
The French fled from Moscow; 
Russian soldiers saw them off. 
Or again: 
In the year eighteen twelve 
The French declared war 
On mother Moscow made of stone, 
On the whole of our Russia.°” 
The themes of saving Russia, and of ‘stone Moscow’ recur in other 
contemporary songs.’ Ordinary soldiers were depicted sympathetically 
in Russian dramas, as loyal, honest but simple folk, but their attitude 
towards their country was not explored or considered in this medium.** 
After the end of war, monuments were raised to the heroic defenders of 
the country, but soldiers were rarely depicted realistically and were 
more often portrayed in classical style or as Russian medieval knights.°° 
A modern sense of patriotism cannot, therefore, be proved for the 
ordinary Russian soldier. There some, rather tentative evidence, however, 
the Russia soldiers did have a religious identity and that defence of 
Orthodoxy could become equated with defence of Russia (which may 
perhaps explain the reluctance of Soviet historians to explore the question 
of soldiers’ loyalties). The association of Orthodoxy, or Christianity, 
with the defence of the fatherland had roots not in the French Revolu- 
tionary Wars, but in the conflicts between Russia and the Ottoman 
Empire in the second half of the eighteenth century, and was deliberately 
fostered in Russian celebratory odes and in state ceremonials marking 
victory over the infidel.°° Russian soldiers took holy icons into battle up 
to the First World War;*’ whilst troops were blessed by priests before 
battle. The religious element was of particular significance in the 
Napoleonic Wars as Napoleon had been anathematized by the Orthodox 