

<<<PDFPAGE 203>>>
Janet Hartley 
185 
The issue of patriotism is, however, relevant to the composition and 
leadership of the partisan groups. In 1912 the Russian publications 
stressed the heroism and bravery of individual partisan leaders such as 
Lieutenant-Colonel (later General) D.V. Davydov, Captain A.S. Figner 
and Captain A.N. Seslavin, all, of course, officers in the regular army. 
The Soviet historian Kochetkov criticized so-called ‘gentry’ historians 
for emphasizing the role of nobles in the organization of the ‘people’s 
war’.!> This is symptomatic of the Soviet approach to the whole question 
of popular resistance in 1812 where partisan warfare is inextricably linked 
to other aspects of the ‘people’s war’ and to the attacks by peasants on 
the feudal order to the extent that distinctions between these various 
forms of activity are blurred, making it almost impossible to establish 
the composition of specifically partisan groups, as opposed, for example, 
to peasant bands armed with pitchforks and axes who were simply 
defending their homes against soldiers. As part of the deliberate attempt 
to downplay the role of the élites in the defeat of Napoleon, Soviet 
analyses stressed the role of ‘non-nobles’ in organizing armed groups of 
peasants, including retired soldiers and members of the lower urban 
classes. Russian historians, in contrast, emphasized the role played by 
local nobles and officials in forming partisan groups (although the role 
of a certain V.G. Ragozin, a sexton, that is, a member of the lower clergy, 
was particularly commended by Kniaz’khov)." 
Peasant participation in partisan groups is particularly commended 
by Soviet historians. To Kochetkov, volunteering was a sign of patriotism 
(although he could offer no concrete evidence for this), albeit ‘not the 
patriotism called for in tsarist manifestos’ as ‘the struggle with the 
invaders did not extinguish the struggle against serfdom’.’* Kniaz’khov 
also praised the ‘unknown heroes’ including peasant partisan volunteers, 
and noted that Davydov promised Bagration that he would attract peasant 
volunteers by going into villages and asserting that the partisans would 
defend their priests and churches, this being a tactic that suggested 
a direct appeal to the most basic Russian national feeling (one sees here, 
of course, the symbiosis of Russian indentity with the Orthodox faith, 
to which matter I shall return later).'° Our problem, of course, is that 
these peasants were precisely ‘unknown heroes’ and left no record of their 
reasons for joining the partisans. All the evidence that I have found of 
the ‘people’s war’ suggests that peasants fought to defend their land, 
goods and families from the invader and that broader motives may be 
found in a gut, xenophobic, reaction against the ‘Godless’ and foreign 
invader. Beyond this, however, it is hard to go, and this is particularly 
true of the issue of a broader anti-feudal protest, all that can be said in 

