<<<PDFPAGE 204>>>
186 
The Patriotism of the Russian Army in 1812 
this respect being that disorder in the countryside, which had been 
made more acute in western Russia by the virtual disappearance of law 
and order in the wake of the invasion, gave additional opportunities for 
violence. '” 
A further complication in the interpretation of the partisans as ‘patriotic’ 
is the leading role of Cossacks in these armed detachments. Cossacks 
had traditionally been used by the imperial army for skirmishes and 
irregular activities. They were particularly suited to this role as they 
were primarily horsemen rather than footsoldiers. The renowned ferocity 
and bravery of the Cossacks, coupled with their reputation for indiscipline, 
also accounted for their use in this way. But the characterization of this 
activity as specifically Russian ‘patriotism’ is problematic. Cossacks are 
not a separate ethnic group (although they were designated as such in 
the Soviet period); they comprise mainly Russian and Ukrainian peasants 
and fugitives who had fled to the southern borderlands. They nevertheless 
regarded themselves as a separate group within the Russian empire, 
with a separate institutional and social structure, who owed a loyalty to 
their Cossack host as well as to the Russian tsar. The eighteenth and the 
early nineteenth century saw the transformation of Cossack communities 
from active resistors to central tsarist authority to loyal servitors of the 
state,'* but this did not mean that they had lost their sense of separate 
identity or their distrust of Russians officials and grandees. Cossacks 
were Orthodox Christians, but many were Old Believers (that is, they 
rejected the reforms made to the Orthodox Church by the state in the 
mid-seventeenth century). Nor did the local population of western Russia 
always treat Cossacks as fellow ‘patriots’. Indeed, peasant resistance to 
Cossack marauders could be just as fierce as resistance to Napoleonic 
troops; one contemporary account notes that Cossacks were regarded 
by peasants as ‘worse than the enemy’.'” 
The final word on partisan activity should lie with Tolstoi’s account 
in War and Peace. It sees the young Petia, an eager and excited schoolboy 
‘with rosy cheeks and bright eyes’, accompanying the Cossack A.K. Denisov, 
leader of a partisan group comprising men of the regular army, Cossacks 
and hussars, but guided by an elderly peasant, against some French 
stragglers who were holding some Russian prisoners (including Pierre, 
one of the leading characters in the novel): 
Petia went closer, and his eyes fell on the pale face of a terrified 
Frenchmen, clinging with both hands to the shaft of a lance that was 
pointed at his breast. ‘Hurrah boys!’ shouted Petia, spurring his 
foaming horse, and riding up the street. ... By the time Petia rode up, 

<<<PDFPAGE 205>>>
Janet Hartley 
187 
he was overmastered. ‘Too late again!’ thought Petia. He made his 
way to where the fighting was briskest... A volley hit the air, the 
bullets whistled round. Petia was still tearing round the courtyard; 
but instead of holding the bridle, he was waving both arms wildly in 
the air, and leaning heavily over on one side. His horse... stopped 
short and Petia fell heavily. For a moment his hands and feet moved, 
his head was rigid. A bullet had entered his brain....‘Done for!’ 
repeated Dologhow, as if he found a particular pleasure in using 
those words; and he went back to the prisoners who were crowding 
round the Cossacks. ...[Denissov] lifted Petia’s head with trembling 
hands, and was looking at the poor, bloody and mud-stained face. 
‘I am fond of sweet things — these are capital raisins — take them 
all...’ The words [spoken by Petia to an imprisoned French drummer 
boy the day before] irresistably recurred in his mind; and the Cossacks 
looked on in amazement as they heard the short, hard breathing, 
almost like a dog’s bark, that broke from Denissov’s oppressed chest. He 
suddenly turned away and clutched convulsively at the railings.”° 
Thus Tolstoi depicted the ‘heroism’ of partisan warfare. 
The clearest links which have been drawn between ‘patriotism’ and 
the army, by both Russian and Soviet historians, but from very different 
perspectives, are the temporary militias that were established in 1812. 
Much has been written on the militias, but, as with the partisans, much 
of what has been written serves to obscure more than it does to clarify 
the composition and role of the militias. To non-Communist Russian 
historians, and especially those of the Tsarist era, the militias are particu- 
larly indicative of the patriotism of the nobles, who volunteered to form 
the officer corps of the militias, and who donated foodstuffs. But to 
Soviet historians, the true patriotism was shown by the peasants, many of 
whom wished to join the militias, whereas nobles were sometimes con- 
demned as ‘anti-patriotic’. 
Militias were not unique to the year 1812, and had been levied in 
1806 during the war of 1805-07. In 1812 a special levy for the temporary 
militia was made (in addition to the regular levies of that year) which 
raised over 200 000 men in Russia and over 74 000 in the Ukraine.” They 
were intended to be temporary units, and indeed they were disbanded 
at the end of the campaign in 1814. The ‘temporary nature’ of the militias 
was marked symbolically by the fact that soldiers in the militia retained 
their beards, unlike ordinary conscripts who were shaved once they had 
been accepted as recruits, as a sign that they now left the peasant estate 
and had become soldiers. When rumours reached him that militia 