

<<<PDFPAGE 208>>>
190 
The Patriotism of the Russian Army in 1812 
for them to get commissions in this period.** Minor officials also 
enlisted; Karl Hoffman, a collegiate registrar, requested a testimonial to 
join the Novgorod militia.°” 
Some volunteers, then, may have been hoping to get commissions as 
officers in the militias, though it should be noted that two of the groups 
with the greatest interest in securing this goal — seminarists and sacris- 
tans — were in theory only allowed to join the ranks.*° Soviet writers, 
however, lay special emphasis on volunteers from non-privileged members 
of society who enlisted as ordinary soldiers in the militias. According 
to the Soviet historian, Babkin, 
it was peasants and the ordinary 
(unprivileged) townspeople who were ‘patriotic’. He cited a peasant 
who enlisted his three sons, addressing them with the words, ‘We shall 
not let the miscreants drink our Orthodox blood; we will leave only 
bones; let the insatiable foe gnaw them’.* He also noted volunteers 
who were house serfs, peasants on crown land, coachmen (who are in 
effect state peasants in this period), and townspeople. Babkin goes as far 
as to claim that the ‘patriotic spirit’ of the peasants was such that they 
disguised serious illnesses and injuries so that they could enlist in the 
militias, one Nikifor Evstefeev even trying to hide the fact that his left 
leg was incapacitated by an old wound!*” 
There are problems, however, with Babkin’s assertions, not least in 
the fact that it is not always clear from the records what social estate some 
of his ‘volunteers’ came from. One of his main examples of patriotism, 
for example, is an elderly woman who brought her two grandsons to be 
enlisted with the words: ‘Only return to me when there is no enemy left 
on Russian soil’, which is all very well until one realizes that it is not 
clear from his source whether or not she was a peasant.** There is indeed 
an archival record of 13 coachmen in Moscow province volunteering 
out of ‘zeal and love of the fatherland’,** but this request had to be 
approved by Governor Rostopchin himself, which suggests that it was 
rather unusual. Serfs, of course, could not volunteer without permission 
from their masters, whilst state peasants (which includes coachmen) 
could not do so without permission from the state.** Babkin, inevitably, 
castigated the nobility for not allowing their serfs to volunteer for the 
army and claimed that serfs fled their estates in order to enlist (‘thus the 
serf régime mocked true patriots’).*° But in fact there is little evidence 
that serfs or peasants wished to join the army, whether on a permanent 
or a temporary basis. Sergeant Bourgogne recounted meeting some 
Polish peasants who ‘made us understand that they had to go to Minsk 
to join the Russian army, as they belonged to the militia; they had been 
forced to march against us by blows from the knout, and the Cossacks 

<<<PDFPAGE 209>>>
Janet Hartley 
191 
were stationed in the villages to drive them out’.*” Military service, as 
we shall see, was an obligation and not a privilege for these poor unfor- 
tunates. 
While Russian and Soviet historians have lauded the patriotism of 
peasants and other ‘non-privileged’ volunteers for the militias and partisan 
groups, they have made little attempt to penetrate the mind of the ordinary 
soldier, conscripted from the same social groups. One simple reason for 
this is simply the dearth of material on the subject, although it has to 
be said that lack of concrete evidence has not deterred these historians 
from asserting that feelings of patriotism and anti-feudalism motivated 
members of the militias and partisan groups. The vast majority of 
Russian soldiers were illiterate. There are no letters home from soldiers, 
whilst there is only one memoir by a ordinary soldier of which I am 
aware, and this gives no indication of patriotism or even the mindset of 
an ordinary soldier.** We have no evidence of the common soldier’s 
experience of battle. There are no accounts of the attitude of Russian 
soldiers towards the lands and peoples through which they passed in 
1813-14 or of their experience as an army of occupation in France from 
1815 to 1818. We simply do not know what the Russian soldier thought. 
The Russian army was, of course, a very different force from that of 
French Revolutionary of Napoleonic armies. This was a premodern army, 
and had more in common with the armies of the Austrian empire than 
with those of France, or with Prussia after the military reforms. The Russian 
army was a conscript army, and the mechanism of recruitment had not 
changed fundamentally from the time of Peter I. It was theoretically 
possible for peasants to volunteer to enlist if they had the permission of 
their noble landowners or the state peasant commune, but this was rare 
(although I suspect about as rare as peasants volunteering to join the 
militia). Furthermore, service in the Russian army was not a temporary 
obligation, as it was in France or Prussia. Peter had established that service 
was for life; this was later reduced to 25 years in 1793 but in most cases 
this in effect meant for life. Once a soldier was conscripted, he was in 
practice — as symbolised by the loss of his beard — separated forever from 
village, family and peasant society, and, in effect, regarded as dead. 
Most Russian veterans ended up in garrison regiments or were cared for 
by monasteries, as an obligation imposed on them by the state. The few 
who returned to their village were generally old, sick or maimed, and 
found themselves outcasts, who were unwanted, unwelcomed and unable 
to contribute to the economic life of the village. 
The dispatch of recruits from the villages demonstrates the true nature 
of the Russian army. There was no place here for the type of ceremonies 