

<<<PDFPAGE 201>>>
Janet Hartley 
183 
an integral part of the class struggle against the feudal system. Nationalism 
was, of course, assumed to be part of the superstructure, an artificial 
creation of the bourgeois state intended deliberately to distract the 
proletariat from forming their natural class bonds across the boundaries 
of the nation state. But the Soviet state did not want to dismiss the 
significance of the role patriotism played in victory in the war of 
1941-45, a struggle which is always referred to as the ‘Great Patriotic 
War’. The patriotic support was interpreted as support for the Soviet 
régime and then was translated backwards to 1812, as, indeed, it was in 
other states, although with different ideological overtones.*® 
The fall of the Soviet Union has led to a revival of interest in 1812. 
The new popular historical journals which have emerged recount heroic 
events of 1812, whilst there is an interest in restoring tsarist monuments to 
1812 and groups which re-enact battle scenes of that year. Much of this 
activity is not very scholarly, but, to the extent that there is an underlying 
theme, it is more a return to the all-encompassing view of the patriotism 
and heroism of Russian society portrayed in 1912 than to the divisions 
in society highlighted by Soviet scholars. 
The emphasis by Russian and Soviet scholarship on the significance 
of popular resistance, has centred very firmly on the ‘people’s war’. This 
does not mean that the army has been totally neglected, but the treatment 
of this subject has been coloured by its association with the ‘people’s 
war’. I will start by discussing two aspects of the army which have been 
analysed in terms of patriotism, namely ‘partisan’ warfare and militias. 
I will then look at two areas which have been less studied, that is the 
extent to which a sense of patriotism can be detected in the mentalités 
of ordinary soldiers and of the officer corps in 1812. 
‘Partisan warfare’ (partizanskaia voina) was seen by both contemporaries 
and Tsarist and Soviet historians as an important feature of the struggle 
against Napoleon’s forces. I am not concerned here with primarily the 
effectiveness of partisans in the harassment of small groups of men 
which had become detached from the main body of the French troops. 
It is clear that General Kutuzov and General Bagration did have some 
doubts about the military effectiveness of partisan warfare and limited 
the number of regular troops released to perform this activity.” Napoleon 
was seemingly contemptuous at the time about the effectiveness of 
Russian, or Cossack, partisan units (as he was at the time about Spanish 
guerrillas). Both Russian and Soviet historians have described the success 
of Russian forces in the provinces of western Russia and have given 
accounts of encounters.where numbers of Napoleonic troops were killed 
or taken prisoner. 

<<<PDFPAGE 202>>>
184 
The Patriotism of the Russian Army in 1812 
My interest in partisans is not in their military activities per se but in 
the extent to which they can be portrayed as ‘patriotic’. Part of the issue 
here is semantics. The word partizan was used in Russian in 1812 to 
describe the use of small detachments of troops to attack French strag- 
glers, and which were released by the regular army for this purpose; it is 
the Russian word for ‘guerrilla’ and partizanskaia voina is translated as 
‘guerrilla war’ or ‘little war’. Many historians date the emergence of 
guerrilla warfare from the campaign in Spain in 1808, even though 
irregular fighting had occurred in other parts of the world before this 
time.!° The significance of the Napoleonic period is that ‘guerrilla war’, 
in Spain, Russia or the Tyrol, was conducted not simply by detachments 
of regular troops but also involved the ‘people’ rising against the 
invader, with or without regular military support. Contemporary theorists, 
such as Clausewitz, who had analysed warfare in both Spain and Russia, 
stressed the role and significance of regular army units in this warfare. 
Denis Davydov, the prominent leader of partisan detachments in 1812, 
also contributed to the military theories of partisan warfare from the 
perspective of an army officer. It is within this tradition, we shall see, 
that Russian historians discussed the role of partisans in their publications 
of 1912. 
Soviet historians received minimal guidance in this matter from the 
writings of Marx and Engels as these figures gave relatively little attention 
to guerrilla warfare and were generally sceptical about its potential 
effectiveness, at least in Europe. It was the experience of World War II 
that elevated the role of the partisan in Soviet eyes and led to the equating 
of partisan warfare with ‘the people’s war’ in 1812. The definition of 
‘partisan war in 1812’ in the Soviet Historical Encyclopedia makes it clear 
which element is perceived to be the most important: ‘Warfare waged 
by the people of Russia, especially the peasantry [my emphasis], and 
by detachments of the Russian army in the rear and along lines of 
communication of the Napoleonic army in Russia in 1812.’" But the 
twentieth-century understanding of the word also has other implications 
which were not necessarily present in 1812, namely that partisans operate 
in occupied territory (and it is hard to call the French presence in western 
Russia a formal occupation), that this includes acts of sabotage against 
the invader (not really relevant in 1812), and that the partisans are local 
armed inhabitants, who may or may not include members of the regular 
army. In 1812, peasants were armed by the regular army. Kochetkov, 
writing in 1962 and on whose analysis I have drawn for the Soviet view 
of partisans, stated that for this reason it would be a mistake to make 
the analogy between partisan activity in 1812 and 1941.!2 