

<<<PDFPAGE 206>>>
188 
The Patriotism of the Russian Army in 1812 
conscripts were in fact being integrated with regular units of the army, 
Alexander I decreed that this was not to be allowed.”* Militias were raised 
in sixteen provinces, including the provinces closest to the invasion 
route. That seems to imply that the primary task of militias would be 
confined to local defence, although in fact militia units fought at the 
battle of Borodino and some fought outside the borders of the country 
in the campaigns of 1813 and 1814. A record of the officers rewarded 
for their service noted 13 officers from the Nizhnii Novgorod militia 
and ten from the Kazan’ militia who fought at the battle of Dresden.” 
The most problematic aspect of the militias, and the one which has 
most exercised Russian scholars of all shades of opinion is their com- 
position, and, in particular, the extent to which they comprised volunteers. 
The manifesto calling for the raising of militias in 1812 was directed to 
nobles with the intention that nobles should volunteer to serve as 
officers. As nobles had been freed from compulsory service to the state 
in 1762, they could not, of course, be forced to serve, and there is 
evidence both that young nobles volunteered and that older nobles 
left retirement to join the militias. Later a veteran of the Decembrist 
uprising, V.I. Shteingel’, for example, had retired from active naval 
service in 1810 because of ill health, but re-enlisted in 1812 and served 
in the St Petersburg and Novgorod militias from 1812 to 1814.”° Nobles 
also supplied the militias at their own expense and gave their serfs as 
conscripts.”° 
Some nobles may indeed have been motivated by patriotic feelings. 
Others, however, may have seen enlistment in the militias as a career 
opportunity that would otherwise be denied to them, a factor which 
has been ignored by both Russian and Soviet historians. To most young 
nobles, service in the army was far more desirable than in the civil 
service, and in particular service in local government institutions, but 
many lacked the social connections to gain a commission in a regiment. 
Once accepted in a local militia, however, it seems that it was easier for 
these nobles to transfer to a regular regiment. M.M. Spiridov, for example, 
who had been educated at home rather than at a prestigious cadet 
corps or noble boarding school in Moscow or St Petersburg, joined the 
Vladimir militia in 1812, aged probably sixteen, and then moved to a 
grenadier regiment in the following year.”” More striking is the case 
of A.A. Kriukov, who originally entered service in 1805 as an actuary. 
He joined the Nizhnii Novgorod militia in 1812 as a cornet, and then 
transferred to a more prestigious hussar regiment in 1815.78 
Soviet historians have not examined the various reasons why nobles 
enlisted in the militias; rather they have castigated nobles for being 

<<<PDFPAGE 207>>>
Janet Hartley 
189 
‘unpatriotic’ as they were reluctant to serve in the militias and put 
forward, in the words of one historian, ‘every excuse to avoid service’.”” 
This was indeed true of particular individuals, and was acknowledged at 
the time and by Russian historians. In Moscow, Governor Fedor Rostopchin 
noted that several nobles opposed the formation of the militia.*° Nobles, of 
course, were being asked to do more than voiunteer their own services; 
they were also being asked to supply their ‘human capital’, serfs, in 
order to serve in the militias, and also to supply the soldiers with arms, 
uniforms, horses and provisions. It is hardly surprising, then, that it 
proved impossible to supply the militias in full. In Smolensk province 
the shortfall was in the region of 7000 men and in Kaluga province it 
was almost 5000 men, but these provinces were in the path of the 
Napoleonic armies; other provinces, including Moscow, eventually 
conscripted more men than had been requested.*' Militias suffered 
from shortages of clothing, provisions and arms.** The Nizhnii Novgorod 
militia ‘had not a single doctor’ in October 1812. In March of the 
following year, the militia was still short of uniform and supplies.*? 
A recent, post-Soviet, study stated that the Khar’kov militia apparently 
never formed properly and challenges Soviet figures for the militia of 
that province.** It is difficult, however, to portray these shortages as 
‘anti-patriotic’. The majority of nobles in Russia were not wealthy, and 
in consequence they were simply unable to provide the human and 
material resources required. It was estimated in the 1760s that 32 per cent 
of nobles owned fewer than ten serfs; in 1797, 83.5 per cent owned 
fewer than 100 serfs.*° Russian regiments were also regularly under 
strength as the full complement of recruits rarely reached the recruiting 
station without losses through death, disease and desertion and regular 
regiments also suffered shortages of supplies. 
The militias aiso included non-noble volunteers. Kabanov mentions 
volunteers for the militia who were teachers at national schools, university 
students and seminarists.°° One student in Khar’kov seemingly accom- 
panied his request for enlistment in the militia with the words ‘I am a 
son of Russia and also love my fatherland’.*” But while some of these 
may have been motivated by patriotism as Kabanov suggests, they, even 
more than nobles, may well have also seen the militia an opportunity. 
Sons of clerics (Orthodox parish clergy had to marry) were obliged to 
attend seminaries and the most able sought careers elsewhere. Teachers 
in national schools were usually the sons of clerics; salaries were poor 
and irregularly paid and many young and physically able teachers 
would welcome the opportunity to escape their posts. Universities lost 
many of their students during the Napoleonic Wars as it became easier 