

<<<PDFPAGE 231>>>
Charles J. Esdaile 
213 
given up the fight. It is not an exaggeration to say that these 
bands...made history. They carried on the war against Napoleon 
when there were few regular Spanish forces left to continue the 
struggle, and through their perseverance and the damage they inflicted 
on the enemy, 
as well as the incalculable help they rendered 
Wellington’s... forces, they must be given a large, perhaps decisive 
share of the credit for the emperor’s failure in the Peninsula.’”*° 
In his detailed account of the ‘little war’ in Aragon — a study rendered 
the more valuable by the fact that it rests on detailed research in the 
French archives — Alexander argues that the ‘combination of conventional 
resistance, galvanised by Wellington’s army, and the irregular opposition 
of the partidas proved irresistible’; that ‘the partidas could probably have 
sustained resistance indefinitely’; and even that ‘the partisan leaders 
were able to forge from the spirit of opposition an army that managed 
to exploit French military difficulties and liberate Arag6n’.*’ And, finally, 
for John Tone, whose study of the guerrillas of Navarre is by far the 
most detailed work that the English language boasts on the subject: 
Armed peasants made chaos of French communications and per- 
formed other tasks of value to both English and Spanish regular forces. 
Partisans scoured the countryside of French spies and sympathizers 
and brought a continuous stream of information to the Allies. The 
guerrillas also effected a kind of psychological warfare in which the 
French had to be constantly on the alert, while the Allied armies 
could rest securely in the midst of a vigilant peasantry. The guerrilla 
war was a long and demoralizing nightmare for France. In the 
regions of insurgency, where each peasant was a potential guerrilla, 
there could be no campaigning season, no safe havens, no truces. 
Everywhere and always there existed the possibility of a hostile 
encounter...In guerrilla country, the French governed only where they 
could actually have troops in place. When these troops were with- 
drawn, the territory reverted to the guerrillas, becoming valueless to 
the French, if not a positive drain on their resources. War in Spain 
did not pay Napoleon as it had in other parts of Europe. On the 
contrary, guerrilla action made the occupation of Spain a constant 
burden and made the Spanish war unwinnable.*® 
As has already been intimated, however, this chorus of praise (which is, 
albeit for different reasons, replicated in both the French and the Spanish 
sources) does not rest on secure foundations. Too much stress has been 

<<<PDFPAGE 232>>>
214 
Popular Resistance in Napoleonic Europe 
placed, for example, on the activities of a small number of ‘heroic’ 
individuals who are in reality quite unrepresentative of the guerrilla 
movement as a whole, whilst the quite exceptional case of northern 
Navarre — probably the only region in the whole of Spain where the rural 
populace was reasonably satisfied with social and economic conditions — 
has over and over again been cited as if it were representative of the 
Spanish struggle as a whole. On top of that there has been a general 
failure to engage with the Spanish archives: many of the authors whom 
we have cited have not done so at all, whilst those of which this is not 
true have only done so in a partial and selective fashion, and the result 
has been that the more reflective amongst them have found themselves 
confronting a series of contradictions that they have had considerable 
difficulty in laying to rest. Such problems as desertion, resistance to 
conscription and overtly unpatriotic behaviour — an example is the refusal 
of many guerrilla bands to serve outside their home regions despite the 
fact that their services were needed elsewhere — are therefore explained 
in terms of such half-reasons as ‘localism’ rather than occasioning the 
fundamental rethinking that they actually require.*” As for the even 
thornier issue of banditry this is generally elided or shrugged off. To 
quote Gabriel Lovett, for example, ‘There were undoubtedly rogue 
guerrillas preying on their countrymen almost as much as on their 
enemy... Yet the bad had to be accepted with the good, because the 
positive accomplishments of the irregulars... overwhelmingly outweighed 
the negative aspects of the guerrilla war.’*° 
This, however, is not good enough. If all elements of Ja guerrilla are 
taken into account, all well and good. But, if the word ‘guerrilla’ is taken 
to mean an irregular combatant fighting outside the apparatus of the 
state (which is in fact the definition that the writers whom we have 
cited invariably adopt), the number of ‘rogue guerrillas’ becomes so 
large that the positive accomplishments of the irregulars are not so 
much outweighed as totally eclipsed. On too many occasions, meanwhile, 
such awkward matters are not raised at all: Lovett, for example, at all 
times simply takes the fact of a great people’s crusade against Napoleon 
as read, and that despite the fact that he has worked in archives which 
are literally bursting at the seams with evidence of a picture that is in 
reality much less flattering. About the only excuse that one can come 
up with for all this is that the Spanish historiography is not much 
better. Thanks in part to the experience of the Franco régime, military 
history in Spain is regarded with even greater prejudice than it is in Britain 
with the result that the guerrilla struggle has not received the attention 
that it merits. Astonishingly enough, until almost the very moment 
that this work was going to press there was no monograph on the subject 