

<<<PDFPAGE 235>>>
Charles J. Esdaile 
217 
guerrillas to Napoleon’s defeat in the Iberian Peninsula, whilst at the same 
time attributing their actions to a combination of greed, ignorance, 
fanaticism and the machinations of the clergy. These arguments, how- 
ever, he was inclined to discount as the fruit of Napoleonic propaganda. 
And, whilst working on the Wellington Papers in Southampton in 
1985, he came across a remarkable document that is so important that 
it is worth quoting from it at some length. Thus: 
It is very difficult to know what to say about the guerrillas. That 
some of them have been of eminent use during the progress of the 
war cannot be denied. They obliged the French to fortify them- 
selves in every village and town in the country; they harassed the 
parties who were spread through the provinces either to subsist 
themselves or to procure supplies for the enemy’s magazines; they 
murdered 
all stragglers and sometimes intercepted convoys of 
provisions and stores; they rendered the communications of the 
enemy very difficult and hazardous, and often cut them off for 
weeks together; and, finally, they assisted in keeping alive the spirit of 
resistance against the invaders. On the other hand, they doubled the 
calamities inflicted by the French. The inhabitants were compelled 
to feed the enemy with one hand and the guerrillas with the other. 
They plundered many towns with as little mercy as the French; and 
where the French preceded them they generally carried off all 
which the French left. Many of them under the pretence of patriotism 
and of serving against the enemy became regular freebooters and 
subsisted on the pillage of the country. It will probably become 
necessary one of these days to establish a new Santa Hermandad to 
clear Spain of these bands of robbers. They prevented the recruiting 
of the regular armies, for every Spanish peasant would naturally 
prefer rioting and plunder and living in free quarters with the 
guerrillas to being drilled and starved in the regular army. While 
some of them kept alive the spirit of resistance and the feeling of 
hatred against the French, others compelled the inhabitants to look 
to the French for protection, for the inhabitants would at length 
prefer the systematized pillage and regulated contributions of the 
enemy to the wasteful, capricious, uncertain and merciless plundering 
of their own countrymen. On the whole, therefore, it may be said 
that that the guerrillas did as much mischief to the country as they 
did to the French, but inasmuch as they certainly did considerable 
damage to the enemy, they were on the whole useful to the common 
cause.>! 

<<<PDFPAGE 236>>>
218 
Popular Resistance in Napoleonic Europe 
At the time that he first read these words, the current author was working 
on a study of Anglo-Spanish relations in the Peninsular War. Here, 
though, seemed to lie the basis of a whole new field of research, and 
over the years that followed a series of articles and conference papers 
were written that sought to examine the contradictions outlined in this 
document in the light of the ever-growing quantity of archival material 
that seemed to confirm the need for a revisionist approach.*” Finally, in 
2004 under the imprint of Yale University Press, there appeared Fighting 
Napoleon: Guerrillas, Bandits and Adventurers in Spain, 1808-1814, this 
being a full-scale monograph in which the problem is discussed at 
length. 
The fruit of a substantial programme of archival research funded by 
the University of Liverpool and the Leverhulme Trust (whose generosity 
is in both cases gratefully acknowledged), this work poses the starkest of 
challenges to traditional views of popular resistance. Thus, what we see 
is a picture that is far removed from the normal image of a great 
‘people’s crusade’. Indeed, almost every point of the usual canon is 
overthrown. The uprising of 1808, then, is seen not as an attack on the 
French invaders but rather an explosion of pent up social unrest that had 
strong echoes of the grand peur of 1789. Moving on, it is demonstrated 
that there was little popular interest in the war against Napoleon, and 
that the usual response to the conscription that was inevitably imposed 
once voluntary enlistment fell off, as it very quickly did, was draft 
evasion, riot and desertion. With desertion, however, came an increase 
in banditry and this was stimulated still further by the collapse in the 
economic life of the country brought about by the outbreak of war. 
Very soon, then, swarms of armed men were stalking the countryside of 
both the area occupied by the French and that which remained in the 
hands of their opponents - in the parlance of the day the Patriots — 
whilst they everywhere commingled with the bandits that had been so 
marked a feature of Spanish life for hundreds of years and were now 
once again in the ascendant on account of the economic misery that 
had gripped Spain in the reign of Carlos IV (1788-1808). From this milieu 
there emerged a variety of gangs — the original partidas — and these 
preyed on all and sundry: French, British, Portuguese and Spaniards; 
Patriots and afrancesados; soldiers and civilians; all suffered alike. Whilst 
continuing on occasion to kill the odd French courier, pounce on the 
odd French convoy, and sell the odd packet of dispatches to the Allied 
authorities, not to mention to assume the guise of guerrilleros when it 
suited them, many of these bands remained mere bandits: once the tide 
of French conquest receded in 1812-1813 leaders such as the Castillian 