

<<<PDFPAGE 223>>>
Charles J. Esdaile 
205 
rather more exposition of his views in this respect than he is prepared 
to give them. Moving on from Broers, we come to Stuart Woolf’s seminal 
Napoleon’s Integration of Europe. In this case, from the very beginning 
we are confronted by the perception - entirely correct, be it said — that 
armed insurrection was the exception rather than the norm. Thus: ‘In 
practice, outbreaks of collective political opposition were rare and 
local... Apart from Spain, only two 
revolts 
seriously challenged 
French authority; the endemic war in Calabria and the Tyrol rising.’!’ 
Beyond that, however, discussion remains vague: Woolf tries hard to 
establish the conditions that produced revolt rather than other forms of 
resistance — for him the key factors appear to be Catholicism, rough 
terrain and the availability. of outside aid - and makes a series of inter- 
esting connections, most notably with banditry, desertion, seasonal 
migration and the organization of agriculture, but all this is compressed 
into a mere gee PaeS, and the general effect is to pose more questions 
than it answers.'* And, lest it appear that the author of the current 
paper is inclined to exempt himself from criticism, it should be noted that 
his own Wars of Napoleon suffers from exactly the same deficiencies: 
there is an attempt to explain the incidence of revolt - in addition to 
the factors noted by Woolf, attention is drawn to the importance of 
popular radicalization in response to reformist absolutisms in the period 
immediately preceding the coming of the French — not to mention a 
considerable amount of material on the various revolts, but at no 
point can it be said that the subject is ever addressed from the inside. 
Support for some of his arguments may be found in Broers’ Europe 
under Napoleon, in that its author points out that resistance was likely 
to be fiercest in areas where enlightened absolutism had either made 
no progress whatsoever, or alternatively had only recently begun to 
make inroads on traditional society, but, some ten years on from 
when the passages in question were first written, the impression is one of 
flaccidity — even of superficiality. Perhaps this is over-harsh, for The Wars 
of Napoleon does adopt a genuinely critical approach to the subject. 
Thus: ‘Though Europe experienced great suffering on account of the 
Napoleonic empire, only in certain areas did passive resentment and 
low-level unrest explode into active revolt. Where it did, moreover, it was 
fuelled by factors that were by no means always directly connected to 
French rule... As for the efficacy of popular resistance, it is all too 
clear that in itself it presented little threat to French domination.’ 
But assertion is one thing, and argument quite another: the case put 
forward by the author may well be plausible, but in the end it was not 
backed up by the necessary weight of evidence. 

<<<PDFPAGE 224>>>
206 
Popular Resistance in Napoleonic Europe 
The reasons why the general historiography of the Napoleonic Wars 
is so lacking when it comes to the analysis of guerrilla warfare is not 
hard to establish. Such is the romantic appeal of the subject that many 
traditionalist and, perhaps more to the point, populist accounts do not 
delve beneath the surface at all but are rather absolutely unquestioning 
in their acceptance of the heroic version of events. Typical of this 
tendency is the British author, Corelli Barnett, whose account of the 
emperor’s career can only be described as orthodox. For example: 
There was nothing novel about the Spanish uprising in itself. On 
previous occasions, after all, Bonaparte had barged into deeply 
traditional societies and set about reconstructing them on the model of 
Bonapartian France... And on those occasions, too, outraged peoples 
had taken up arms against him, with the result that the deceptively 
easy shortcut of conquest had proved to lead him only into a morass 
of political and social complication. The novelty about the Spanish 
revolt... consisted in its order of magnitude."* 
For academic historians interested primarily in political and social 
history, by contrast, the issue is not lack of critical thinking. That said, 
however, with the greatest respect it might be suggested that they wear 
blinkers of their own. Uninterested in military history — indeed, in some 
instances overtly hostile to it — it is difficult to suspect that they have 
not seized upon the relative paucity of armed popular resistance, not to 
mention the obvious questions that may be asked of its efficacy, as an 
excuse for skimming it with the lightest of brushes. Even for those 
historians who have wished to examine the subject in the context of a 
general study of Napoleonic Europe, there has been the problem of 
language and access to the archives: in the case of the present author, 
for example, his command of Spanish, French, Portuguese and Catalan 
is not matched by a similar command of German, Italian and Russian, 
just as the relatively generous research budget he has enjoyed in recent 
years has been barely sufficient to cover the costs of working in one 
country, let alone half a dozen. Ask interesting questions though they 
might, then, historians in the end cannot but be superficial once they 
stray beyond the frontiers of their own specialisms. And finally there is 
the issue of the immense complexity which compounds the problems 
facing the would-be historian of irregular warfare in the Napoleonic 
period. To quote Geoffrey Best, ‘The main stream of military historical 
writing has understandably neglected [the guerrillas]...because they 
are in fact difficult to categorise and assess.’!5 