

<<<PDFPAGE 227>>>
Charles J. Esdaile 
209 
And, in the second, it also provided a roundabout means of legitimizing 
France’s cause. When they were not motivated by a desire for plunder, 
the guerrillas, we are told, were the creation of a reactionary and super- 
stitious clergy desperate to protect the power, privileges and possessions 
of the Catholic Church, whilst every French veteran was also keen to 
stress the appalling atrocities committed by their irregular opponents. 
And, if they were faced by reaction, supersitition and savagery, it followed 
that they themselves were apostles of enlightenment and civilization, 
and the emperor himself the liberator that he had always claimed to be 
(it will be recalled in this respect that on St. Helena he always attributed 
his defeat in the Peninsula not to force of arms, but rather to the fact that 
the inhabitants of Spain and Portugal were too backward, too primitive 
and too put upon to appreciate the benefits of his rule).”* Typical, perhaps, 
are the remarks of the apothecary, Blaze. Thus: 
An enlightened government that would have overthrown the religious 
houses and rendered the enormous mass of priests and monks... 
who were making their fatherland groan beneath the weight of their 
tyranny ...useful to state and society would never have suited [the 
clergy]. To avoid this danger they harnessed their own interests to 
those of Heaven. Through their efforts the struggle became a war of 
religion sullied by all the horrors that religious fanaticism could 
inspire...The clergy skillfully employed the influence which they 
still enjoyed over Spanish credulity...to inflame the populace...In 
this fashion they encouraged a naturally cruel and barbarous people 
to commit the most revolting crimes with a clear conscience. They 
accused us of being Jews, heretics, sorcerers... As a result, just to be 
a Frenchman became a crime in the eyes of the country.” 
In this respect, of course, it did not help that Spain was in their eyes 
hopelessly backward. Let us here quote the hussar officer, Rocca: 
With regard to knowledge and the progress of social habits, Spain 
was at least a century behind the other nations of the continent. 
The...insular situation of the country and the severity of its reli- 
gious institutions had prevented the Spaniards from taking part in 
the disputes and controversies which had agitated and enlightened 
Europe.” 
When they were not being gulled by their priests, meanwhile, the 
common people were driven by greed. For the German officer, Von 

<<<PDFPAGE 228>>>
210 
Popular Resistance in Napoleonic Europe 
Brandt, for example, their chief motivation was the ‘hope of plunder’, 
whilst for Joseph Bonaparte’s aide-de-camp, Bigarré, ‘Appetite for gain and 
not love of glory was the chief desire that inspired them.’*° Meanwhile, 
according to the Frenchman, Fée: 
At that time one had to travel in Spain in the same way as one did in 
Arabia: woe be to he who strayed from the caravan. The Spaniards, in 
whose veins were still to be found some drops of African blood, 
became veritable Bedouins: motivated more by love of pillage than 
patriotic duty, they stalked their prey, threw themselves upon it, 
seized what they wanted and disappeared amongst the rocks to split 
up their booty and torture their prisoners.”’ 
The distortion that we see with regard to Portugal is therefore mirrored 
in the case of Spain. Thus, from the beginning the most exaggerated 
accounts of the guerrilla war were circulating in British, French and 
Spanish accounts alike, and these have ever since been given the most 
widespread and general credence. Of this a good example is the famous 
claim by Bigarré. Thus: 
The guerrillas did much more harm to the French troops than the 
regular armies in the course of the Spanish war. It is recognized that 
they killed at least 100 men per day. In the space of five years, they 
therefore killed 180 000 Frenchmen without having lost more than 
25 000 themselves.”® 
In other places, meanwhile, even more dramatic claims surfaced amongst 
French veterans of the Peninsular campaigns, the military theorist Jean 
le Miére de Corvey going so far, for example, as to put the death toll 
they inflicted at 80 000 men a year.” Whilst thousands of men may 
well have perished in minor combats rather than major battles and 
sieges, the constant repetition of such figures takes no account of the 
fact that many of the Allied participants in the ‘little war’ were not 
irregulars 
at all, but rather regular soldiers, and sometimes 
even 
members of either the British Royal Navy or even the Anglo-Portuguese 
army of the Duke of Wellington.*° Notwithstanding such problems, 
however, author after author has been quite uncritical in their treat- 
ment of the subject. Let us begin, for example, with Sir Charles Oman, an 
author who is hardly noted for his generous treatment of the Spaniards. 
For example: 