

<<<PDFPAGE 229>>>
Charles J. Esdaile 
211 
Old Castile, Navarre and the lands of the upper Ebro were kept in a 
constant turmoil by a score of guerrilla chiefs, of whom the elder 
Mina was the leading figure...On the whole, there were probably 
never more than 20 000 guerrilleros in arms at once in the whole 
region between the Sierra de Guadarrama and the... Bay of Biscay. 
They never succeeded in. beating any French force more than two or 
three battalions strong, and were being continually hunted from 
corner to corner. Yet despite their weakness in the open field...they 
rendered good service... by pinning down... twice their own numbers 
of...French troops. Anyone who has read the dispatches of the 
commandants of Napoleon’s ‘military governments’ ... will recognize 
a remarkable likeness between the situation of affairs in northern 
Spain during 1810 and 1811 and that in South Africa during 1900 and 
1901. Lightly moving guerrilla bands, unhampered by a base to defend 
or a train to weight them down, and well-served as to intelligence by 
the residents of the countryside, can paralyze the action of an infinitely 
larger number of regular troops.*! 
In so far as the world 
of the Anglo-Saxon historiography was 
concerned, Oman’s magisterial conclusions set the seal of approval on 
the guerrillas, the eighty years that have passed since the publication of 
the last volume of his work having been accompanied by a veritable 
chorus of praise. On all sides the many populists who chose to write 
about the Peninsular War leapt to acknowledge the exploits of the 
guerrillas. To quote Longford, for example: 
Spain was to be saved... not by grape-shot, greybeards and grandees, 
but by hardy guerrillas and the sudden flash of the knife. These peasants 
spontaneously organized themselves into small do-or-die bands... 
headed by folk-heroes, Juan Martin Diaz called ‘El Empecinado’... 
Julian Sanchez...the Minas, elder and younger..:One chieftain 
called Moreno killed or wounded nine Frenchmen with a single 
discharge from his enormous blunderbuss...Even the basic force of 
200 000 veterans which Napoleon was compelled to keep, year after 
year, in Spain would never be safe from the noon-day ambush and 
things that went bump in the night.*” 
So enthusiastic were these writers that they were soon seeing the entire 
Spanish was effort in terms of the guerrillas, as witness the extraordinary 
account of the battle of Bailén - a wholly conventional field action 

<<<PDFPAGE 230>>>
212 
Popular Resistance in Napoleonic Europe 
fought entirely by regular troops of the old Bourbon army — that we 
must now quote from Richard Humble: 
As soon as Dupont put his demoralized troops on the march out of 
Andujar the Spaniards closed in and harried them. A running fight 
escalated into a full-scale engagement at Bailen... against an enemy 
who did not bother to attack them when they formed square, but 
only when they were least ready.** 
It was not just the writers of popular history who echoed the general 
refrain, however. Amongst historians of greater pretension Oman’s 
theories have also been accepted without question and even pushed to 
fresh lengths. ‘It was above all’, wrote David Chandler, ‘the interaction 
of Wellington’s operations with those of the guerrilla bands that... 
made the French problem wholly intractible...Even with 320 000 men 
the marshals could not both contain the diffuse... “war of the flea” and at 
the same time... meet Wellington’s latest foray deep into their territory.’** 
So enthusiastic, indeed, is Chandler that he sometimes makes it appear 
as if the guerrillas were among Wellington’s first concerns. Thus: 
As for Wellington, he appreciated that he had to preserve England’s 
only field army and at the same time give maximum possible assist- 
ance to Portuguese and Spanish resistance — especially the popular 
kind. Having established a safe base at Lisbon... he conducted forays 
into enemy-held territory to divert French attention and thus ease 
the pressures on the guerrillas and partisans; then, in 1812...he 
began a systematic reconquest of Spain by conventional means.*» 
Nor have British historians been the only ones to pick up on the 
theme of the guerrillas. Since the 1960s, for example, a succession of 
American and Canadian historians have produced work that lays great 
stress on their contribution to the struggle. 
‘The War of Independence did not produce on the Spanish side great 
generals... Nor did the conflict produce truly great political leaders... 
The true giants ...must be sought elsewhere. They could be found... 
in the craggy mountains, among the barren hills, in the forbidding 
gorges... They were the leaders of those intrepid bands that almost 
from the very beginning made the war in Spain a nightmare for 
the Napoleonic armies. Swooping down from their mountainous 
hideouts...they never let the invaders forget...that Spain had not 