

<<<PDFPAGE 221>>>
Charles J. Esdaile 
203 
element had crept into the situation: the protesting voices of the European 
peoples themselves.’ 
In saying all this, of course, we must not go too far. It is, for example, 
important to note that popular resistance was not the only factor that 
defined the extent to which areas were ‘napoleonized’. Where areas 
were only taken under French control after 1810, there was simply not 
the time to transform reformist principles into administrative and juridical 
realities. 
Also important were the attitudes 
of the satellite 
rulers 
appointed to rule the wider empire: placed on their thrones by French 
bayonets, Napoleon’s siblings were frequently none too willing to 
restrict themselves to the role of marionettes, and in the case of both 
Joseph and Louis they sought very hard to mediate between Paris on 
the one hand and the local élites on the other. At the same time even 
collaboration might wear an independent hue: in Naples, for example, 
notables who were quite prepared to go along with some aspects of 
French policy proved extremely reluctant to go along with others. 
Moving on from this, we must also be careful what we mean by ‘popular 
resistance’. In Calabria, the Tyrol, Spain and Portugal, there were bloody 
popular revolts against the French (or, at least, their surrogates), whilst 
there was also certainly a limited amount of popular involvement in 
the campaigns of 1812 and 1813 in Russia and Germany. But these 
examples are exceptions rather than the rule: whilst popular resistance 
of various sorts was widespread, it on the whole took forms that did not 
involve resort to the force of arms. At the head of the list probably 
comes draft evasion, but also important were such areas as smuggling 
and simple non-compliance, most notably with respect to French- 
approved forms of religious observance. And, last but not least, neither 
popular revolt nor guerrilla warfare was a new phenomenon in European 
history. Spain, for example, had seen the Catalans rise in rebellion in 
the 1640s; Britain had experienced the Monmouth rising of 1685 and 
the Jacobite risings of 1689, 1715 and 1745-46; and Genoa had to cope 
with an insurrection in Corsica that began in 1729 and was only 
brought to an end by cession of the island to France in 1768. As for 
guerrilla warfare, not only was it a feature of several of these revolts, but 
the War of the Spanish Succession had seen the appearance of numerous 
bands of irregulars in Spain; at the same time, wherever armies waged 
war in the course of the eighteenth century, desperate peasants fought 
to defend their homes against marauding bands of soldiers, or took 
their revenge for the numerous injuries done to them by murdering 
stragglers from the armies or attacking supply columns or convoys of 
wounded. To drive home the point still further, meanwhile, it is also 

<<<PDFPAGE 222>>>
204 
Popular Resistance in Napoleonic Europe 
worth pointing out that even in the Napoleonic period guerrilla warfare 
was not a phenomenon that was solely linked to French occupation: in 
Finland, for example, the Russian invasion of 1808-09 sparked off a 
bitter partisan struggle that foreshadowed the ‘winter war’ of 1939-40, 
whilst in Serbia the national insurrection in opposition to Turkish rule 
that exploded in 1804 was headed by irregular bands known as hajduks. 
In the end, however, all that is by-the-by, for it is difficult to find a 
commentator on the Napoleonic Wars who has not underlined either 
the significance of the armed people in the struggle or the supposedly 
ubiquitous nature of the phenomenon. This, for example, is the opinion 
of Geoffrey Best: ‘Most peoples whom the French dominated. 
.. sooner 
or later offered armed resistance in one mode or another.’° In much the 
same vein, we have the views of Jeremy Black, ‘Uprisings were not new, 
but they were more important in the period, in part because the French 
destroyed or took over existing power structures, leaving rebellion as 
the only way to express discontent.’” And lastly, if only to show that 
the idea is well established, we might cite Herbert Fisher: ‘The Spanish 
rising was the first example of a long series of popular and national 
movements which ultimately shattered the Napoleonic empire.’® 
There is, then, a general assumption that popular resistance was an 
important issue in so far as Napoleonic Europe is concerned. From this 
it might be expected that the subject ought to have generated a sub- 
stantial historiography, but, with respect to the English language at 
least, this is simply not the case. No general study exists of the role 
played by the people-in-arms in the Napoleonic Wars, and it is significant 
that not one of the speakers at a recent conference that was based on 
the theme of responses to the experience of Napoleonic rule chose to 
concentrate on guerrilla warfare.’ Also interesting here is the treatment 
accorded to popular resistance in several recent monographs on the 
Napoleonic empire. Let us take, for example, Broers’ excellent Europe 
under Napoleon. In this we have a long section — twenty-four pages, 
no less — headed ‘resistance’, whilst the subject also figures in other 
places, such as the author’s separate discussion of the Peninsular War. 
Yet throughout the focus is overwhelmingly political and cultural 
rather than military, and the reader is left with little clue as to who 
joined the guerrillas or, except in the most general terms, the forces 
that produced their enlistment. At the same time, too, the general 
impression created is that, even in the context of Spain and Portugal, 
in the end guerrilla warfare was not very important in a military 
sense.'° This is all very well - Broers’ views are not only entirely plausible, 
but backed up by the sources — but the fact is that the reader is entitled to 