

<<<PDFPAGE 233>>>
Charles J. Esdaile 
215 
as a whole, and but one article, even this being very general and written 
from first principles rather than based on archival research.*! In so far as 
the author is aware, meanwhile, only two pieces of postgraduate work 
have appeared on the subject since the 1960s (if not before), and of these 
both are regional studies, whilst only one has resulted in publication.*” 
Beyond this one can only turn to the various academic studies that have 
appeared of the experiences of one province or another in the Peninsular 
War, but these never have the subject as a their main theme and are 
frequently deficient in what they do say (as an example here one might 
cite not one but two recent studies of Huelva that failed to make any 
_use of the very extensive papers of the Spanish general who headed the 
Patriot cause in the area following the appearance of the French in 
1810).** Such as it is then, the historiography is dominated by the work 
of amateur historians who lack the formation necessary to produce 
anything other than more or less hagiographic biographies of one or 
other of the main guerrilla commanders or, alternatively, regional or 
thematic monographs that are generally as confused in their organization 
as they are antiquarian in their approach.** About the best that can be 
said about it, indeed, is that at least the subject does have a historiography: 
to return to Portugal for a moment, not a single Lusitanian historian 
appears ever to have investigated the issue of ‘people’s war’ at all. 
All this, of course, makes for a rather depressing story. However, with 
regard to two areas of Europe in particular, there are signs both of 
greater interest and the emergence of a more critical approach. Of these, 
the first is Italy. Here, too, the historiography was originally not very 
good. Aside from one very brief contribution to an early meeting of the 
annual conference known as the Consortium on Revolutionary Europe, 
for example, there is no general introduction to the subject.** Whilst it 
might be thought that the obvious focus for historians interested in 
popular resistance is Calabria, the material that this region has generated 
has, on the whole, been rather disappointing. Thus, practically the only 
works that we have on the subject in English are those of Milton Finley, 
an American military historian whose writing is not only resolutely 
narrative, but seemingly bereft of any knowledge of the Italian sources.*° 
Working primarily from the memoirs and correspondence of French 
officers who served in Calabria, he is at the same time all too prone to 
falling prey to generalizations that could have flowed smoothly from 
the pen of any of Napoleon’s generals. For example: 
Underlying the revolt was the religious fanaticism of the area... One of 
the most effective guerrillas in the early stages of the war (Papasodero) 
was a priest. Anti-French uprisings in Strongoli, Nicastro and 

<<<PDFPAGE 234>>>
216 
Popular Resistance in Napoleonic Europe 
Castrovillari 
were 
led by local clergy. 
It was the priests who 
exhorted...Amantea not to surrender even when no hope was 
left...The many monasteries of Calabria offered guerrillas bases 
from which food and supplies could be obtained.*” 
In fairness, Finley does stress the importance of factors other than 
ideology in the causation of the revolt. Amongst the other issues that 
he mentions, indeed, are poverty, local traditions of brigandage, French 
pillaging and long-standing social and economic unrest, but this serves 
only to promote fresh neo-Napoleonic generalizations. Thus; ‘The 
Calabrian guerrillas much preferred the short-term goal of loot to any 
thought of long-term reform.’*® For an example of the way forward we 
must therefore turn to the works of Finley’s fellow American, Alexander 
Grab. A specialist on the Kingdom of Italy, Grab has over the years 
produced with a series of articles and conference papers in which he has 
dissected popular resistance in his region of specialization and presented 
us with an archivally-based picture of affairs that can be regarded as 
being so close to reality as makes no difference. Thus, what we see is not 
a nationalist or even religious phenomenon but rather the expression of 
concrete social and economic grievances combined with the survival of 
pre-Napoleonic patterns of rural crime (or, to put it another way, 
responses to poverty). Popular resistance, then, was primarily a social 
phenomenon rather than an ideological one, and, what is more, one 
that was not called forth by Napoleon but rather only exacerbated by 
him. That there was a political dimension is undeniable, but in the end 
the watchword is ambiguity. ‘Brigandage’, writes Grab, ‘constituted a 
violent response by the poor to their increasing destitution. Moreover, 
brigandage was also the most extreme reform of resistance of the Italian 
countryside to the growing power of the Napoleonic state, its increasing 
intrusiveness and mounting pressure, particularly in the realms of 
taxation and conscription.” And war of liberation there was none: 
guerrilla warfare as such was absent from the Kingdom of Italy, whilst 
the brigands were indiscriminate in their depredations, plundering all and 
sundry without regard for nationality, social class or political persuasion; 
as for the peasant risings of 1809, these were essentially timeless in their 
form, the fact being that, give or take a few Habsburg flags, they could 
just as easily have taken place in 1509, 1609 or 1709.°° 
What makes Grab’s work all the more interesting is that it ties in very 
neatly with the work of the current author. A specialist in the Peninsular 
War throughout his career, the latter was naturally well aware of the 
tendency of French authors to seek to maximize the contribution of the 