

<<<PDFPAGE 225>>>
Charles J. Esdaile 
207 
As Best continues, we therefore have no ‘adequate typology’ of the 
guerrillas. All the more is the case given the deficiencies in the English- 
language historiography pertaining to the individual areas affected by 
armed resistance. Let us take, for example, the question of the Tyrol. 
Thus, the only modern works available in English on the war of 1809 
consist of one book and one conference paper, and both of these are 
only ‘modern’ in terms of their year of publication, the dates concerned 
being 1986 and 1989. Largely composed of military narrative, they have 
little to tell us with regard to either the identities or the mentalities of 
the insurgents and are inclined to see the rebellions almost wholly in 
terms of loyalty to the Habsburgs, adumbrated though this may have 
been in terms of a desire to defend a favourable regional settlement that 
was threatened by foreign annexation. And, still more alarmingly, they 
in neither case seem to have made much use of the series of German- 
language works on the Tyrol that appeared in the early 1980s.'° The 
level of analysis on which they rest, meanwhile, is exemplified by the 
following passage from Eyck: 
The Tyrolean uprising of 1809 - anno neun as some of it native 
chroniclers proudly and reverently have called it...took place in 
some of the most scenic mountain areas of Europe. The men...who 
took part in the rising struggled for their ancient and cherished 
liberties. They fought in their colourful costumes representing the 
various districts populated by a free, proud and conservative peasantry. 
Their war was directed at one and the same time against foreign 
occupiers...and toward reassociation with their beloved Habsburg 
dynasty.’” 
If the Tyrol is bad, meanwhile, Portugal is even worse, for there is no 
discreet study of her insurrection and guerrilla movement at all, the 
only information that we have coming from British accounts of the 
Peninsular War. Yet these are in reality all but useless: written by historians 
interested only in the doings of Wellington’s army, their treatment of 
the subject is at best superficial. To take Oman, for example, all he does 
in this respect is to copy out various passages from the memoirs of 
French soldiers who fought in the successive invasion armies of Junot, 
Soult and Massena.’® Depressingly enough, there is little more to be got 
from modern English-language histories of Portugal — the two most 
recent, indeed, do not discuss the matter at all — whilst even accounts of 
the campaigns of some pretension do little more than claim that in 
1809 the French were ‘constantly harassed by guerrillas’ or that ‘the 

<<<PDFPAGE 226>>>
208 
Popular Resistance in Napoleonic Europe 
partisan war ceaselessly sapped the strength of [Soult’s] field army’. 
Similarly, there is Jan Read, who tells us that in 1810 the ‘stranglehold’ 
exercised by the irregulars was ‘so complete...that from 18 September 
to 15 November the garrisons at Almeida and Ciudad Rodrigo received no 
single message from Masséna...and Napoleon himself was dependent 
on what he read in the English newspapers’.”° This, however, is not 
good enough. Setting aside the fact that we do not in any sense ‘get 
inside’ the resistance, relying on French memoirs as a source for the 
Portuguese insurrection is a risky step. Many of the works consulted — 
Pelet, Lemonnier-Delafosse, Barrés, Marbot — say little or nothing on the 
subject in the evident hope of glossing matters over, whilst those that 
do tell us little more than that a prominent part in events was played by 
the clergy. Let us take, for example, Maximilien Foy, an officer who 
served in the French army that first occupied Portugal in 1807: 
The inhabitants of Torre de Moncorvo... hung on the enemy’s rear. 
Father José Joachim de |’Assomption [sic], 
a monk of the order of 
Black Friars, marched at the head of this multitude with his gown 
tucked up, firing a musket like the rest. Another monk, Father José 
Bernardo de Azevedo, went to Coimbra with...a crowd of peasants 
to slaughter some French soldiers who were in the hospital of that 
city... The priests perambulated the towns and hamlets, preaching 
the French crusade.*! 
Similar remarks, meanwhile, can be made with respect to Spain. Here, 
too, the memoirs of French veterans are not to be relied upon, or, at least, 
taken at face value. Thus, in the first place, emphasising the guerrilla war 
was a convenient way of explaining away French defeat in Iberia: the 
victors of Austerlitz, Jena and Friedland had only been worsted because 
they were confronted by an enemy who did not fight fair. To quote 
Joseph Bonaparte’s close friend and confidant, Miot de Melito: 
By that time [i.e. the summer of 1809] the formidable guerrilla system 
had been adopted by the Junta. Spread throughout every corner of 
Spanish territory...the guerrillas did us more harm than its regular 
armies, intercepting all our communications and forcing us neither 
to send out a dispatch without an escort, nor to allow soldiers to 
travel the roads on their own...This petty war undermined us most 
gravely. We only possessed the ground actually occupied by our 
armies, and our power never extended any further. All administration 
ceased, and there was neither order, nor justice, nor finance.” 