

<<<PDFPAGE 218>>>
200 
The Patriotism of the Russian Army in 1812 
66. V.I. Semevskii, Politicheskiia i obshchestvennyia idei Dekabristov (St Petersburg, 
1909), p. 207. 
67. V.A. Fedorov, Memuary Dekabristov: severnoe obshchestvo (Moscow, 1981), 
p. 124. 
68. A.G. Mazour, The First Russian Revolution, 1825 (Stanford, 1961), [os Pil. 
69. Pavlova, Dekabristy, p. 94. 
70. I. de Madariaga, ‘Spain and the Decembrists’, European Studies Review, Ul, no. 
2 (April, 1973), p. 149. 
71. Hartley, Social History, pp. 10, 15. 

<<<PDFPAGE 219>>>
10 
Popular Resistance in Napoleonic 
Europe: Issues and Perspectives 
Charles J. Esdaile 
Popular resistance is a subject that must inevitably lie at the heart of 
any discussion of the Napoleonic empire. In the first place, as the 
French themselves recognized, it was inevitable. As Napoleon told his 
brother, Joseph, in 1806, ‘Two weeks earlier or later you will have an 
uprising. It always happens in a conquered country.’! On one level the 
reason was obvious, for occupation by the imperial armies was generally 
an experience that was as ruinous as it was unpleasant. But in addition 
to this there was also the issue of reform. To quote Michael Broers, ‘The 
consolidation of Napoleonic rule was a turbulent process, and the initial 
response it met with among the vast majority of people was resistance.’” 
Resistance, then, was something that was always there, and, furthermore, 
something that the French themselves had every expectation of having 
to deal with as soon as they made a new conquest. That said, however, 
it was not just part of the general backdrop to the history of Napoleon’s 
Europe. Thus, its extent was one of the chief factors that determined 
whether a given state or region should be considered part of — in Broers’ 
parlance - the ‘inner’ or the ‘outer’ empires, and, by the same token, of 
the extent to which the reforms associated with Napoleonic rule took 
root. At the simplest level collaboration was - on one reading of the 
situation, at least — less likely in areas where the local élites on whom 
the French and their allies inevitably depended for the implantation of 
their policies were likely to find themselves the victims of murder or 
mutilation. And at the same time the very policies of Napoleonic rule 
could not take effect against a background of violence that precluded 
the rule of law and drained away resources that might have funded, say, 
new systems of state education. End that violence, however, and it was 
a different matter. To quote Broers again, ‘Perhaps an essential defining 
characteristic of the lands which became the “inner empire” . 
.. was that 
201 

<<<PDFPAGE 220>>>
202 
Popular Resistance in Napoleonic Europe 
the balance slowly — and usually grudgingly — tipped away from resist- 
ance towards collaboration.” 
Beyond all this, there is also the issue of the role of guerrilla warfare 
in the fall of the Napoleonic empire. On the surface popular insurgency 
made the takeover of various parts of Europe a costly affair, and 
plunged the French into protracted military campaigns that in a variety 
of ways seriously destabilized the imperial war machine. Up until 
1808, it is said, the emperor’s conquests paid for themselves, whereas 
the Spanish guerrillas thereafter ensured that war was a drain on the 
treasury. By the same token, French casualties up until 1808 could be 
made up without pushing the French people further than they would 
stand on the conscription front, whereas after 1808 the daily blood- 
letting that was the cost of the war in Spain.ensured that the army’s 
demands for manpower rose steeply. Grumbling on the home front at 
the steady rise in taxation and conscription, meanwhile, was matched 
by grumbling in the army. Faced in Calabria and Spain by seemingly 
endless struggles that entailed a great deal of danger but precious little 
glory, the once loyal soldiers of the emperor grew cynical and resentful, 
with the result that their willingness to sacrifice their lives fell off 
dramatically. Still worse, perhaps, frightened, harassed and frustrated, 
the troops became increasingly undisciplined and engaged in acts of 
revenge or casual brutality that served only to augment the numbers of 
their opponents and discredit the cause of collaboration. Also problematic 
in this respect was an increase in desertion that provided the Allies with 
an important source of manpower whilst simultaneously augmenting 
the need for new conscripts: by 1813, for example, the Duke of 
Wellington had no fewer than three regiments of cavalry and seven 
battalions of infantry that were recruited in whole or in part from 
foreign deserters, whilst substantial numbers of deserters also appear 
to have been serving with the famous guerrilla commander, Francisco 
Espoz y Mina.* 
Well might, then, Napoleon have referred to the Peninsular War as 
his Spanish ulcer. And this is not even the end of the story. Other 
instances of popular insurrection were less far-reaching in their effects, 
but they are nevertheless not to be discounted. In 1809, for example, 
the Tyrolean revolt and the amorphous series of peasant risings that 
gripped the Kingdom of Italy seriously hampered operations against 
Austria, whilst in 1812 and 1813 partisan bands - in part inspired by 
the Spanish example - considerably increased the scale of French defeat 
in both Russia and Germany. Not for nothing, then, did the Napoleonic 
Wars give us the very word ‘guerrilla’. To quote George Rudé, ‘A new 