

<<<PDFPAGE 237>>>
Charles J. Esdaile 
219 
cabecillas, Principe and Saornil, were revealed in all their criminality, 
for, rather than following up the retreating enemy they battened upon 
the civilian population and lived, as Sydenham put it, ‘at free quarters’. 
From amongst these men, however, there emerged a number of more 
notable figures. Of relatively humble background, at heart they were 
mere adventurers — prospective bandits even — but they also possessed 
sufficient vision and common sense to realize that their survival and 
future prosperity depended on raising themselves above the common 
herd. In many cases genuinely exceptional individuals, they specifically 
associated themselves with the Patriot cause and struggled hard to turn 
their motley followers into disciplined and effective fighting forces. 
Acquiring military ranks, by the end of the war a number of them — the 
most prominent were Juan Martin (i.e. El Empecinado) and Francisco 
Espoz y Mina — were generals in the regular army, whilst their partidas 
had become brigades and divisions. From 1808 onwards, these men 
dedicated themselves to fighting the French, and in this they were joined 
by a large number of other cabecillas who had secured commissions 
from the civilian authorities, found themselves at the head of a partida 
by sheer accident, or been asked to take charge of specific guerrilla bands. 
Though they too contained their share of unscrupulous adventurers 
who aimed only at cutting a dash, feathering their own nests and 
ingratiating themselves with the authorities, this latter group were 
clearly of greater number and on the whole of greater repute, if at the 
same time generally of lesser calibre and enterprise: amongst their 
number were to be found students, government officials, army officers, 
ecclesiastics, and wealthy landowners, merchants and other proprietors. 
As such they had a stake in the system that provided them with a 
motive to fight the French that equalled the enlightened self-interest of 
self-made leaders such as El Empecinado - in some instances they may 
even genuinely deserve the term ‘patriot’ — whilst their exploits were on 
occasion no less impressive. But leaders are one thing, and rank and file 
quite another. Only in the very few areas of Spain where economic and 
conditions were such as to promote a genuine sense of contentment 
and well-being — the most obvious are the Basque provinces and northern 
Navarre — was la guerrilla genuinely a popular phenomenon in which 
men flocked to join the partidas out of a specific desire to fight the 
invaders. Whilst isolated cases can be found in the archives of men who 
came forward, or at least so they said, out of patriotism or a desire for 
revenge, beyond these areas such volunteers as the bands received seem 
to have_come in. as a result of desperation - one key to success was 
invariably the ability to pay a steady wage -— of a desire to escape service 

<<<PDFPAGE 238>>>
220 
Popular Resistance in Napoleonic Europe 
in the regular army, or because for one reason or another they had no 
option: a favourite target of Espoz y Mina, for example, were the long 
columns of Spanish prisoners that regularly made their way from’~ 
Madrid to the French frontier, whilst, as we have seen, many bands 
became a refuge for men who had had enough of fighting Napoleon’s 
wars and could find no other means of survival (likewise bandits who 
found themselves in a tight spot and needed to find some way of escaping 
the noose). Nor is this surprising: in both the Tyrol and Calabria fears of 
conscription to the Bavarian and Neapolitan armies and, by extension, 
of being marched away to die in Napoleon’s wars, played a major role in 
producing men for the fight, but in Spain King Joseph did not introduce 
compulsory military service. Meanwhile, an unknown number of the 
rank and file were men who were to all intents and purposes conscripts: 
in~ 
a number of cases, ploughboys and shepherds and the like seem literally 
~ 
to have been plucked from the fields, whilst in others guerrilla bands 
simply descended on one pueblo or another and rounded up all the men — 
of military age at the point of a gun. Facing the point of a gun, too, 
were the many bandits and enemy prisoners who were given the choice 
of enlistment or execution. Still another form of compulsion was that 
based on economic dependence: where men 
of substance formed 
partidas, their first recruits seem often to have come from the ranks of 
their servants, journeymen, tenants or day labourers. Also made use of 
was deception: some men were brought in by simple trickery and others 
by false rumours that the French were indeed about..to bring in 
conscription. Far from being a genuinely popular movement enthused 
by the determination to fight for God, king and fatherland, the guerrillas 
appear as a much more conventional phenomenon:men_ were not 
inspired to fight by the new force of patriotism, but rather driven.to__ 
fight by the old ones of poverty, hunger, despair and the voice of _ 
authority. 
" 
From this motley crew were in some cases fashioned powerful fighting 
forces that were able to cause the French serious problems — one again 
thinks here of the bands of El Empecinado and Espoz y Mina, although 
there were other instances, such as men led in Cantabria and Asturias 
by Juan Diaz Porlier and those commanded in Soria by José Joaquin 
Duran. But even the most disciplined and militarized of the guerrillas 
could never free themselves of the fact that at root they were not a 
patriotic phenomenon. For reasons that ranged from a genuine sense of 
patriotism through an association with systems of privilege threatened 
by the French invasion to an opportunistic determination to make the 
most of a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity, many of their commanders were 