

<<<PDFPAGE 239>>>
Charles J. Esdaile 
221 
sincerely 
ly committed to the struggle against the French. However, for the 
rank 
and file it was a different matter. In so far as can be ascertained, 
few of the men who actually made up the partidas had any conscious 
interest in the struggle and it is clear that they deeply resented attempts 
to transform them into regular troops, whilst at the same time often 
being quite capable of either slipping off to become bandits on their 
own account or at the very least seizing upon such opportunities as 
they_could to engage in looting and a variety of other excesses. Given 
the fact that, for all that they still killed many Frenchmen and their 
collaborators, large numbers of bands never rose above the level of 
banditry, it is in consequence clear that the French of the term ‘brigands’ 
for their irregular opponents is not so very inappropriate. 
The task facing the historical community is therefore very clear. What 
is sauce for the Italian or Iberian goose is in all probability equally sauce 
for the Tyrolean gander, from which it follows that anno neun almost 
certainly needs to be revisited in the same manner (as, for that matter, 
Calabria). But beyond that stands a wider issue. In brief, we have a 
subject of great complexity that, for all its undoubted importance, has 
never been adequately studied in the context of the empire as a whole. 
If this is the case, meanwhile, it is in part because studies of the same 
subject on a national level have for the most part been inadequate. 
What is required therefore is more scholars who are prepared to set 
aside foolish prejudices, take the issue of popular resistance seriously 
and immerse themselves in the archives, both national and local, of 
Portugal, Spain, Italy, Germany and Austria. That said, however, the 
challenge is a difficult one. As the present author knows to his cost, a 
whole series of challenges await such historians. Not the least of these is 
the question of definition - who exactly are we referring to when we 
use the term ‘guerrillas’? — but there are also serious problems of inter- 
pretation, whilst the sources are both extremely diffuse and extremely 
fragmentary. In the end what has emerged, at least in the case of the 
author’s own work, is an artificial construct — a mosaic in which thousands 
of pieces of information have been pieced together to paint a picture of 
popular resistance that is highly revisionist. Inevitably, such a picture 
cannot but be open to challenge, but in this respect its creator would 
say three things. Thus, in the first place, it ties in very well with such 
serious research as has been done on popular resistance in other parts of 
Europe; in the second, it takes much better account of the numerous 
problems that are thrown up by the Spanish struggle than does the 
traditional version of events; and, in the third, it is no more artificial than 
the idea that the populace was motivated chiefly by issues of ideology. 