

    It is not possible to paint a full picture of the debt which the nation owes to
    these valiant partidas. Although they cannot decide its fate with a single blow,
    they keep up its hopes and... inspire those who are afraid or in despair
    ... with strength, constancy and patience. At the same time, they never cease
    to fatigue the enemy, destroying him little by little in petty combats and
    reducing his domination to the ground which he physically occupies. Who
    can number the dead, wounded and prisoners that they have inflicted in the
    short time that has gone by since their . . . organization?’

   Such an impression was commonplace. Let us take as a further example the
anonymous Historia de la Revolucién Espanola, published in Valladolid during
the brief period when it was occupied by the Allies in the summer and autumn
of 1812. Thus:

    In the year 1809 there began to appear the famous guerrillas, the units of
    mounted and dismounted volunteers who, aided by their perfect knowledge
    of the terrain, have made themselves so feared by the enemy on account of
    their valour and indefatigable activity. Amongst the large number who have
    seen action, the most important have been those of El] Empecinado in the
    vicinity of Madrid... Mina in Navarra... Longa in Alava... the Mar-
    quesito in Asturias, Don Julian Sanchez in the province of Salamanca . .
    Starting with only a handful of men, many of these commanders in less than
    a year managed to raise divisions of between 2,000 and 4,000 men...
    Attacking small detachments and weak garrisons and intercepting convoys
    ... and dispatches, they have so troubled the French that for a long time they
    have not dared to travel even main roads except in caravans escorted by at
    least 1,000 men.®

   The impact of this hero worship was beyond doubt very great, a good
example being the attention that was heaped upon the famous Juan Martin
Diez. To quote Salmon, for example:

    To the astonishment of some and the dread of others, the name of El
    Empecinado began to resound in every province of the Peninsula and even
    in Paris and London. So much was this the case, in fact, that in both London
    and Cadiz subscriptions were opened to provide this valiant leader with uni-
    forms, saddles and armament, whilst many English ladies made a point of
    adorning their . . bosoms with his image.”
                                                   The Guerrilla in History   &

If El Empecinado became the centre of a major personality cult, it is hardly
surprising. Typical of the effusions of which he was the subject was the fol-
lowing ode that appeared in the Cadiz newspaper E/ Conciso:

            Who is this who rides so proudly by,
            Bathed in the blood of Spain’s enemies. . .
            Armed with pistol, blunderbuss and knife. . .
            And ready to kill Frenchman, Saxon, Italian, Bavarian
            . . Swiss, Russian, Pole or Spanish renegade?
          - Is it... another Duke of Alba?
            Not a bit of it: it is someone quite different,
            The immortal and most worthy El Empecinado."°
As early as 1811, meanwhile, there appeared a life of El Empecinado of whose
tenor the following is an excellent example: