

however, there was also a strong political purpose. Bitterly hostile to the maxims
of the French Revolution, he also wanted to prove, first, that the Spanish people
were unanimous in their rejection of liberty, equality and fraternity; second,
that they had thrown themselves into the struggle against the French absolutely
wholeheartedly; and third, that they had throughout remained loyal to the
established political and social order. The result was a picture of the guerrillas
that is wholly positive. The product of action on the part of the Spanish state
— in this respect great importance was accorded to the various decrees issued
by successive governments with respect to the formation of guerrilla bands —
the guerrillas had, it was claimed, ‘truly kept up the enthusiasm of the nation,
whilst doing more damage to the enemy than... large armies’.? As Salmon
continued:
  They were... true defenders of their fatherland . . . who had been autho-
  rised by their government to harass the common enemy subject to the captain
  or commandant-general of the province in which they resided . . . partidas
  that religiously .. . respected the humblest peasant, constantly persecuted
  ...all those who strayed from the path of right... spared no means to
  avenge the... orphans and widows who wept for the fathers and husbands
  torn from their sight by the insatiable ambition of the most inhuman
  hangman ...and ravaged the enemies of humanity, making head against
  them... in such terms that no convoy, dispatch rider or senior officer could
  move a step without an escort of hundreds or even thousands of soldiers.*

In this conflict, moreover, many thousands of Spaniards took part, Salmon
talking of the participation of ‘immense multitudes’ of heroes ‘from every
corner of the... peninsula’.* As for the commanders of the individual bands,
he could not be more complimentary:

   In every history of the world the name of El Empecinado will be famous.
   An obscure man with... no more knowledge than the sort to be expected
   of a poor artisan, he . . . kept the whole of the enemy’s Army of the Centre
   in constant movement and did not allow it a moment’s rest by day or night.
   What glories will not be told... of the imperturbable Espoz y Mina, that
   other military genius . . . who overnight abandoned the plough for the bat-
   tlefield? Is there any praise of which the sometime sergeant Brigadier Julian
   Sanchez is not worthy? Is there any honour which the doctor of Villaluenga,
   Don Juan Palarea, does not merit?”
   From all this it followed that to call the guerrillas bandits was unjust in the
extreme, and all the more so as they had proved to be a great help when it came
to upholding law and order. As Salmon wrote, indeed, ‘They clean the roads
and countryside of the vile rabble . . . that infest them with more energy and
4       Fighting Napoleon


success than do the French themselves, and ensure that they pay with their lives
for their robberies and other excesses.” Needless to say, meanwhile, their con-
tribution to the war effort had been enormous: