


than the campaigns of the Duke of Wellington, they have frequently been either
unfamiliar with Castilian or unable to travel to Spain. Restricted to British
and French sources alone (and very often only published ones at that), they
found that the only aspect of the wider conflict on which they had plenty
of material was the guerrilla war, and in consequence persuaded themselves
that the gaps in their account could be filled in by this alone. This attitude,
meanwhile, was reinforced by a certain unwillingness to delve beneath
the service of the Spanish war effort: even Oman,.it may fairly safely be said,
confined his researches in this respect to such obvious secondary sources as the
Conde de Toreno and José Gémez de Arteche. For the Spaniards themselves,
of course, the position was somewhat different, but even so, particularly
for academic historians unwilling to get to grips with the nuts and bolts of
military history, emphasising the importance of the guerrillas was an attractive
option that got them off a variety of ‘hooks’ and fitted in with changing
historical perceptions (it was, for example, easy to ally the guerrillas’ role
with the strongly Marxist currents of thought prevalent by the 1960s).
   The ability of modern Spanish historians to reconcile traditional views of
the guerrillas with Marxian theories of history is most ironic, for the insur-
gents’ appeal is in fact deeply bound up with images of Spain that are strongly
romantic — that are, in fact, the work of Romanticism. Thus, /a guerrilla of
legend is the Spain of the bandit, the bullfighter and the flamenco dancer at
war, just as its protagonist is the Spaniard as untameable individual and natural
anarchist. Visually, too, the guerrilla that we know is a Romantic creation, as
witness, for example, such French paintings as Lejeune’s depiction of Espoz y
Mina’s victory at the Puerto de Arlaban in 1811. Amidst a mythologised land-
scape of soaring peaks and shady groves the Spaniards are rushing forward clad
in shirts and breeches, with scarves tied round their heads and brandishing
daggers and blunderbusses, when sober reality would have had them fighting
in lines and columns, dressed in army-style uniforms and armed with muskets
and bayonets.’
    In short, the traditional view of /a guerrilla is a creation that is deeply arti-
ficial, if not wholly spurious. In fairness to the Romantics, however, it must be
said that they did little but embellish the propaganda characteristic of the war
itself. In innumerable pamphlets, newspapers and works of commentary and
analysis the guerrillas were established as heroes of the struggle against the
French. Typical, perhaps, were the efforts of an Augustinian friar named
Salmon, who between 1812 and 1814 produced what may be regarded as the
very first general history of the Peninsular War. Thus, angered by French
efforts to decry the guerrillas as bandits, Salmon was determined to show that
they were, rather, legitimate combatants who had the right to be treated as sol-
diers should they be taken prisoner by the enemy. Underpinning his work,
                                                    The Guerrilla in History     3