




In both Britain and Spain the most well-known aspect of the Peninsular War
— the great struggle that convulsed the Iberian Peninsula between 1808 and
1814 following its invasion by Napoleon Bonaparte — is beyond doubt the par-
ticipation in the fighting of large numbers of irregular bands of armed civil-
ians. Renowned for having given the English language the word ‘guerrilla’, these
forces are generally agreed to have inflicted huge damage on the invaders, and
it has often been argued that their activities rendered the conquest of the Penin-
sula a task that was beyond the capacities even of Napoleon. Yet in neither
England nor Spain (nor, indeed, anywhere else) has any attempt ever been made
to write a detailed analysis of the guerrilla war. Nor, meanwhile, has any sys-
tematic attempt ever been made to make use of the wealth of material that exists
on the subject in the Spanish archives (indeed, it has rather been assumed that
the ‘people’s war’ cannot have left a footprint in the documents in an age when
the vast majority of the populace was illiterate). In brief, this work seeks to
remedy both wants, and at the same time to take account of the growing body
of scholarship that has led the academic community to question traditional
arguments in respect of popular responses to war, occupation and mobilisation
in other parts of Napoleonic Europe. As such, it may certainly be deemed an
exercise in revisionism: for too long has treatment of the subject been domi-
nated by myth and propaganda. That said, it is only a beginning: extraordinary
riches remain untapped in the Spanish archives (not to mention those of France
and Portugal), whilst there is clearly much scope for regional studies of the
sort that Jorge Sanchez Fernandez has so admirably pioneered in respect of
Valladolid. Whatever else may be said of it, then, let us hope that this work is
never called the last word on the subject.

As usual, the acknowledgements are by far the nicest lines that I have to write.
At the top of the list, of course, come the various sources of research funding
x     Preface


on which I have drawn — in this case, the Leverhulme Trust, from whom I was
lucky enough to obtain a two-year research fellowship for the period 2000-2,
and the University of Liverpool, which provided me with considerable assis-
tance from its Research Development Fund. In this context, however, I should
also like to mention two institutions in Spain in the form of the Universidad
Auténoma de Barcelona, whose kindness in inviting me to present a staff
seminar funded a productive visit to the Catalan archives, and, above all, the
Real Colegio de San Albano in Valladolid, whose boundless hospitality enabled
me to make full use of the vital materials housed in the Archivo General
de Simancas. At the head of the list of people, perhaps, comes Christopher
Allmand, whose wise counsel and gentle prompting during his years as my
Head of Department at the University of Liverpool constitute the spark that
gave life to this work. At A.M. Heath Literary Agents, Bill Hamilton has been
a loyal friend who has worked tirelessly to ensure its appearance on the market,
whilst at Yale University Press I should like to thank Robert Baldock. The staff
of all the libraries and archives at which I have worked have without exception
been kindness and helpfulness themselves, but in this context I should partic-
ularly like to thank Christopher Woolgar, Karen Robson, Sue Donnelly and
Mary Cockerill at the University of Southampton; Ian Jackson at the
University of Liverpool; Nieves Sanchez Hidalgo, Estrella Valentin-Fernandez
Fernandez, Inmaculada Martin Mufioz, Amalia Jiménez Morales, Ana Sanz
Robles, Jess Rodriguez Izquierdo, Maribel Baenas Perez, Paqui Mateo Macias
and Yolanda Ruiz Esteban at the Biblioteca Nacional; and Pilar Bravo Lledo of
the Archivo Historico Nacional. Also pivotal was the generosity of a number
of people who helped me stretch my limited resources by receiving me into
their homes, amongst whom I should especially like to mention Esther and
Mari-Cruz de Carlos, and Francisco Varo and Araceli Mufioz. Other good
 friends have included, as before, Leopoldo Stampa of the Ministerio de Asuntos
 Exteriores, Concha Bocos, Rafael Agasagasti, William and Sonia Chislett,
 Emilio de Castro, Dolores Schilling, Jo Klepka, Enrique Mardones, Fernando
 Fanjul, Antonia Rodriguez, Jesus Maroto, Jose Maria Espinosa de los Mon-
 teros, Santiago Nistal and Maribel Piqueras. My fellow researchers David
 Alonso, Azucena Pédraz Marcos, Leonor Hernandez Enviz, Grahame Harri-
 son, Susan Lord, Marta Ruiz Jiménez and Satoko Nakajima have provided me
 with insight and relaxation alike. And, finally, amongst my fellow peninsulares
 and Napoleonists, I should like to thank Rory Muir, Arsenio Garcia Fuertes,
Jorge Sanchez Fernandez, Vittorio Scotti-Douglas, John Tone, Alicia Laspra
 Rodriguez, Esteban Canales, Lluis Roura, Antonio Moliner Prada, Franciso
 Carantofia Alvarez, Antonio Carrasco Alvarez, Javier Maestrojuan, Herminio
 Lafoz Rabaza, Mike Broers and Alan Forrest, all of whom have at one time or
 another offered me help and encouragement. Of these good people, I should
                                                                   Preface     XL