

  His memorable actions inspired the French with such fear that they ceased
  to hope for any success whatsoever unless they managed to capture this
  gallant leader. Yet El Empecinado mocked their efforts, and punished their
  foolhardiness every time they tried to surprise him: though all the resorts of
  their perfidy were set in motion, they were facing a brave Spaniard who did
  not know how to turn his back on a fight and wrecked the miserable schemes
  dreamed up by their treachery . . . The rapidity of his marches and counter-
  marches never ceased to amaze the legions of the tyrant. Over and over again
  they would think that the troops of El Empecinado were far away, only to
  find that they were suddenly set upon and destroyed. Nothing, indeed, got
  in the way of his daring."
Thanks to such efforts, there were by 1812 parts of Spain in which all the guer-
rillas were referred to as empecinados.
    Another leader who became a living legend, meanwhile, was Francisco Espoz
y Mina. About him, too, bad poetry was soon being written, whilst his native
cunning enabled him to exploit the enthusiasm of the liberals who dominated
the cortes of Cadiz and win much support for his demands for greater govern-
ment recognition.” For a good example of how he was seen we have only to
turn to the work of José Clemente Carnicero, a resident of Madrid who
recorded his experiences of the war in a three-volume chronicle published in
1814. Writing, for instance, of the reports from the battlefronts that reached
Madrid in the course of 1811, he remarked that ‘those which had most impact
_. . were the ones that spoke of the famous Mina’, and remembered that he and
his friends were particularly impressed with the manner in which, having cap-
tured a large French convoy near Vitoria, Espoz y Mina contrived to march all
6       Fighting Napoleon


his prisoners to the sea through the very midst of the enemy armies and load
them aboard British ships."
    Amongst British observers, too, there was much excitement about the guer-
rillas. As a somewhat unusual example, we might cite Robert Brindle, a young
seminarian who was caught by the events of 1808 at the English College in
Valladolid, and the following year escaped on foot to Portugal with the aid of
El Empecinado. Thus:
    An insurrection... sudden and universal baffled every stratagem of the
    French. Even their vast armies were found insufficient to restore quiet. If
    small parties were detached, they were infallibly cut to pieces by the Spanish
    peasantry. If large bodies marched out, they found no enemy to encounter.
    The lawless conduct of the French had frequently excited the just anger of
    the Spaniards, and before the quarrel became national, hundreds had fallen
    in the perpetration of the most enormous crimes, victims to the stiletto. But
    when something like a pretence for violence was offered, they gave full scope
    to their wantonness and brutality, and the activity of the stiletto increased in
    proportion. The Spaniards, at length aware of the treachery and base designs
    of the French, thought no mode of extermination unlawful. A French com-
    missary general declared that they lost 500 men every week by private
    assassination, exclusive of those who fell in the field or were kidnapped by
    the guerrillas. Hence we may form some estimate of the enormous waste
    of French troops in Spain, which according to the most exact calculation
    amounted during the whole war to at least 700,000 men."
Particular testimony to the influence of Espoz y Mina, meanwhile, may be
found in the memoirs of the cavalry officer William Bragge: