

     The French were no sooner masters of the field than they found themselves
     engaged in a wearing, wasting contest wherein discipline was of no avail, and,
     by which, in a country of such extent and natural strength, any military
     power, however great, must ultimately be consumed ... They were never
     safe except when in large bodies or in some fortified place. Every day some
     of their posts were surprised, some escort or convoy cut off, some detach-
     ment put to death. Dispatches were intercepted, plunder was recovered,
     and, what excited the Spaniards more than... all other considerations,
     vengeance was taken by a most vindictive people for insupportable wrongs
     ... There was nothing in their dress to distinguish them from the peasantry;
     everyone was ready to give them intelligence or shelter; they knew the
     country perfectly; each man shifted for himself in time of need; and when
     they reassembled at the appointed rallying place, so far were they from being
     dispirited by the dispersion that the ease with which they had eluded the
     enemy became a new source of confidence.*”

Beyond this, of course, the guerrillas served also to restrict collaboration.
Southey reported several cases where prominent afrancesados were seized and
executed or where the populace was threatened with the most savage punish-
ment if they obeyed any orders issued by the French authorities.*®
   In order to give substance to all this, recourse is chiefly had to the story of
Espoz y Mina, whose exploits are regaled at great length and whose leadership
iS praised to the skies.” Curiously enough, however, little attempt is made to
draw a direct link between the operations of the guerrillas and Wellington’s
victory at Vitoria, and it was left to William Napier and, above all, Sir Charles
                                                    The Guerrilla in History   i

Oman, to make the connection. An officer of Wellington’s army who had fought
in the famous Light Division, between 1828 and 1840 Napier published a six-
volume history of the Peninsular War whose chief characteristic was rooted
hostility to the Spaniards. As we shall see, this work was extremely sceptical
about the early history of the guerrillas, but, viewing the activities of Espoz y
Mina in particular, even Napier could not deny that by 1813 some of the par-
tidas had become a major force in the struggle. As he wrote of the French sit-
uation at the end of 1812:

  The French troops were... only relieved from the crushing pressure of
  Wellington’s operations to struggle in the meshes of guerrilla and insurrec-
  tional warfare. Nor was its importance now to be measured by former efforts.
  The chiefs... possessed fortified posts and harbours, their bands were
  swelling to the size of armies, their military knowledge of the country and
  of the French system of invasion were more matured, their depots better
  hidden, and they could at times bear the shock of battle on nearly equal terms
  ... The [French] contributions could no longer be collected, the magazines
  could not be filled, the fortresses were endangered, the armies had no base
  of operations, the . . . troops, sorely pressed for provisions, were widely dis-
  seminated and everywhere occupied, and each general was averse to con-
  centrate his own forces or aid his neighbour. In fine, the problem was become
  extremely complicated.”
   Although it is impossible not to draw the appropriate conclusions from his
account, to the end Napier remained unwilling overtly to admit the contribu-
tion made by Espoz y Mina and the other guerrillas of northern Spain to
Wellington’s victories. To establish their importance, we therefore have to turn
to Oman. Writing his History of the Peninsular War, as he did, over a period of
nearly thirty years, Oman was naturally influenced by the changing circum-
stances of his times. A military historian, he could not have been unaware of
the theories of the ‘indirect approach’ that were circulating in the wake of the
First World War. By the 1920s — the period when he was writing the volumes
of his history that cover the later years of the Peninsular conflict — he may
therefore have been predisposed to stress the importance of the guerrillas."' At
all events, in his sixth volume, published in 1922, Oman waxes lyrical about
what he called ‘the northern insurrection’, and makes it the very sine qua non
of Wellington’s victory at Vitoria (whereby the French forces were evicted from
the whole of Spain with the exception of part of Catalonia and a few scattered
fortresses in the Basque provinces, Navarre and the Levant), arguing that so
many troops had to be pulled back from the Portuguese frontier that not enough
were left to hold back the Anglo-Portuguese army.” Yet even in earlier volumes
Oman is much kinder in his judgements than Napier. Time and again the guer-
rillas are given credit for starving the French of information, hampering them
14       Fighting Napoleon