

irregulars had no other purpose than to fight for the fatherland, in which capac-
ity they proved to have no equal. In short:

    The guerrillas were the nation in arms. They fought in the morning and
    worked in the afternoon. They were both soldiers and citizens. . . . The guer-
    rillas were the champions of our independence for seven years of incessant
    struggle ... Though beaten from time to time, they were never tamed...
    They had no other roof than the heavens, no other bed than the ground.
    They did not... tire; they did not sleep. They were the eternal shadow of
    the invader, his constant nightmare, an ever-present menace. They aban-
    doned family and home and gave their lives for the fatherland with . . . joy
    in their hearts. They left their homes with the loving kisses... of their
    beloved wives still warm on their lips... to die a few hours later on some
    lonely road, all that they asked of their fatherland . . . being a tender memory,
    a patch of earth and a simple cross.”
    In Britain no less than in Spain historians were inclined to laud the guer-
rillas. First in the field was Robert Southey, whose account of the Peninsular
War is larded with visions of popular resistance. Beginning with his account of
the uprising, this stresses the role of the people and is adamant that they acted
spontaneously, without direction, and with no other idea than to fight for their
king, their independence, their religion and their ancient traditions. For them-
selves, by contrast, they wanted nothing. Angered by the submissive attitude
of most of their superiors, the populace, it was true, turned on them, and the
result was a short period of ‘dreadful anarchy’ in which ‘the unreasonable
people were sometimes hurried into excesses by their own blind zeal, some-
times seduced into them by wretches who were actuated by the desire of
plunder or of private revenge’.”! Yet what occurred was no revolution. Thus:

    The people had no desire to break loose from the laws and the habits of sub-
    ordination; the only desire which possessed them was to take vengeance for
    their murdered countrymen, and to deliver their country from the violent
    usurpation which was attempted. If any obstruction was offered to this gen-
    erous feeling, they became impatient and ungovernable: otherwise, having
    always been wont to look to their rulers . . . their very zeal displayed itself in
    the form of obedience; they were eager to obey any who would undertake to
    guide them, and no person thought of stepping beyond his rank to assume
    the direction.”

   So much, then, for the general character of the Spanish insurrection. With
the populace united in its detestation of the French, it followed that there was
immense enthusiasm for the war. Large numbers of recruits came forward for
the new armies being formed by the assortment of provincial authorities that
                                                    The Guerrilla in History     9