

now ruled Spain; the new levies clamoured to be led against the French; the
inhabitants of Gerona, Zaragoza and Valencia stood to arms and repelled a
series of assaults on their walls; and, above all, the first stirrings began to be
witnessed of guerrilla warfare. Particularly important in Catalonia, where the
existence prior to 1808of the local home guard known as the somatén facili-
tated the emergence of this phenomenon, it was also witnessed in La Mancha
and Andalucia. As Southey wrote of the march of the two divisions dispatched
to reinforce the column of troops that had been marching on Cadiz when the
uprising broke out:

  In passing through La Mancha they found that the sick, whom Dupont had
  left at Manzanares, had been killed. .. . When the advanced guard attempted
  to pass the Sierra Morena, they found an irregular force well posted and
  entrenched in the tremendous defiles of that great line of mountains, and
  they were compelled to fall back upon the main body. Notwithstanding this
  warning, the French entered upon the pass without precaution. . . . The first
  brigade and the cavalry were allowed to pass an ambush, which was laid
  among the trees and rocks in advance of the entrenchment; a fire was then
  opened upon the second; and the French suffered three discharges before
  they were ready to act in return.”
   Faced with the problem of explaining the dichotomy between the supposed
enthusiasm of the first days of the war and the apathy that characterised the
period that separated the Spanish triumph at Bailén and the onset of the great
French counter-offensive in November, Southey attributed the situation to the
misguided tactic of boosting the confidence of the populace by minimising the
threat posed by the enemy.” Examples of popular resistance at the moment of
occupation, meanwhile, were cited as evidence that the people were in fact as
staunch as ever, whether it was the inhabitants of Villacafias fighting off the
forage parties that had descended on them for five days or those of El
Escorial going down bravely in a desperate struggle outside the gates of the
town.”> Not until he comes to his account of the second siege of Zaragoza
and the Galician insurrection, however, is Southey able finally to rid himself of
the problem. Thus, with regard to the former much is made of the continued
patriotism of the inhabitants, who are claimed to have refused to leave the city,
to have been utterly convinced that the Virgin of the Pillar would grant them
victory over the enemy, and to have fought with the utmost gallantry (it is
claimed, indeed, that no fewer than 600 women and children died fighting the
French).”° Of more importance for our purposes, however, is the account that
Southey gives of events in Galicia. Invaded by the French as they followed up
the retreat of the army of Sir John Moore, the Galicians had initially, as
Southey admits, remained quiet. However, in the weeks that followed the arrival
10       Fighting Napoleon