


of the imperial forces, moved by ‘true feelings of loyalty and patriotism .. .
honest, enthusiastic ardour [and] cool and determined courage’, the country-
side erupted in revolt.”” There followed a bloody conflict:

     Into whatever town or village [the French] entered, not a living soul was to
     be found, except those who from infirmity were unable to follow their coun-
     trymen. They who had arms had gone to join the army; the others, with the
     women and children, had taken refuge in the wild parts of that wild region
     and were on the watch for every opportunity of weakening their invaders by
     putting a straggler to death.... That sort of war was kept up which...
     tended to the sure destruction of the invaders. The Spaniards never exposed
     themselves, and never lost an opportunity of harassing the enemy. They
     availed themselves of their perfect knowledge of the country to profit by
     every spot that afforded cover to their marksmen; and, leaving their fields to
     be ravaged, their property to be plundered, and their houses to be destroyed,
     they applied themselves with a brave recklessness of everything except their
     duty to the great object of ridding the country of its invaders. ...The
     utmost efforts of the French were ineffectual against the spirit which had
     now been raised in Galicia . . Accustomed as the invaders were to the work
     of destruction, they were baffled by a people who dispersed before a supe-
     rior force could reach them, and reunited as easily as they had separated.”
And, it is implied, thanks to this war, Galicia was evacuated, it being claimed
that the French became ‘eager to get out of a province where the people were
able and determined to take such vengeance as their invaders had provoked’.”
Important though events in Galicia were, Southey is careful to show that they
were in no sense isolated or out of the ordinary. The inhabitants of the moun-
tainous Valles district of Catalonia, for example, are singled out for the courage
which they displayed in bidding defiance to the French, whilst those of the
Sefiorio de Molina, we are told, ‘took arms, trusting in themselves and the
strength of the country: for want of better weapons some of them used slings
... and they made wooden artillery, so light that a single man could carry one
of these pieces up the heights and yet strong enough to bear from fifteen to
twenty rounds’. Most weight of all, however, is placed on events in Navarre,
where Mariano Renovales, one of the erstwhile defenders of Zaragoza, is
described as having effected his escape from French captivity and, in the
company of a group of fellow fugitives, raised the inhabitants of the Roncal
valley in revolt and beat off two attempts to suppress his insurrection. Even-
tually overwhelmed though he was, he nevertheless put up a fierce fight that
supposedly cost the French over 1,000 casualties and at the same time won
much renown by the suitably defiant answers that he returned to the attempts
of the French authorities to get him to change sides.*!
                                                     The Guerrilla in History    II