

in their operations or diverting forces that might otherwise have been used
against Wellington or the regular Spanish armies. The praise showered upon
the guerrillas, indeed, is anything but sparing. For example:

     Old Castile, Navarre and the lands of the upper Ebro were kept in a con-
     stant turmoil by a score of guerrilla chiefs ...On the whole, there were
     probably never more than 20,000 guerrilleros in arms at once in the whole
     region between the Sierra de Guadarrama and the . . . Bay of Biscay. They
     never succeeded in beating any French force more than two or three bat-
     talions strong, and were being continually hunted from corner to corner. Yet
     despite their weakness in the open field . . . they rendered good service...
     by pinning down . . . twice their own numbers of . . . French troops.*

   In so far as the Anglo-Saxon historiography was concerned, Oman’s magis-
terial conclusions set the seal of approval on the guerrillas. On all sides the
many populists who chose to write about the Peninsular War leapt to acknowl-
edge the exploits of the guerrillas. To quote Longford, for example:

     Spain was to be saved .. . not by grape-shot, greybeards and grandees, but
     by hardy guerrillas and the sudden flash of the knife. These peasants spon-
     taneously organised themselves into small do-or-die bands... headed by
     folk-heroes . . . Even the basic force of 200,000 veterans which Napoleon was
     compelled to keep, year after year, in Spain would never be safe from the
     noon-day ambush and things that went bump in the night.*

So enthusiastic were these writers that they were soon seeing the entire Spanish
war effort in terms of the guerrillas, as witness the extraordinary account of
the battle of Bailén — a wholly conventional field action fought entirely by
regular troops of the old Bourbon army — that we must now quote from Richard
Humble:

     As soon as Dupont put his demoralised troops on the march out of Andtjar
     the Spaniards closed in and harried them. A running fight escalated into a
     full-scale engagement at Bailén...Dupont’s soldiers had been all right
     during the march on Cordoba, but now they were on the receiving end
     against an enemy who did not bother to attack them when they formed
     square, but only when they were least ready.»
Curiously, this refusal to believe that Bailén could be the work of regular troops
resurfaced in the course of the Spanish Civil War. To quote the Austrian jour-
nalist Borkenau:

     The French general Dupont . . . was stopped on his way to Andalusia, forced
     to retreat, and finally surrounded and forced to capitulate by the peasants at
                                                     The Guerrilla in History    15

  Bailén. The Spanish general Castafios claimed the glory of the day. But, in
  reality, one look at the battlefield, a large open plain of olive groves, is con-
  vincing as to the real situation. It was impossible to surround the French
  there with a small army. Only a rising of all the villages could and did bar
  the way.”