

     Armed peasants made chaos of French communications and performed
     other tasks of value to both English and Spanish regular forces. Partisans
     scoured the countryside for French spies and sympathisers and brought a
     continuous stream of information to the Allies. The guerrillas also effected
     a kind of psychological warfare in which the French had to be constantly on
     the alert, while the Allied armies could rest securely in the midst of a vigi-
     lant peasantry. The guerrilla war was a long and demoralising nightmare for
     France. In the regions of insurgency, where each peasant was a potential
     guerrilla, there could be no campaigning season, no safe havens, no truces.
     Everywhere and always there existed the possibility of a hostile encounter
     ... In guerrilla country, the French governed only where they could actu-
     ally have troops in place. When these troops were withdrawn, the territory
     reverted to the guerrillas, becoming valueless to the French, if not a positive
     drain on their resources. War in Spain did not pay Napoleon as it had in
     other parts of Europe. On the contrary, guerrilla action made the occupation
     of Spain a constant burden and made the Spanish war unwinnable.”!
    Less inclined towards military history in their treatment of the subject
though they have been, Spanish and French historians have been no less appre-
ciative. For Miguel Artola, for example, ‘An analysis of the war which attempts
to give more weight to the death and destruction inflicted on the enemy than
to the description of field battles cannot but suggest very strongly that the guer-
rillas were more important than the regular armies of either Britain or Spain.”
Equally, for Manuel Espadas Burgos:

     The guerrilla war was an undoubted success. It did not have the momentary
     brilliance of a great victory in the open field like . . . Bailén, but its constant
     action kept up year after year without a moment’s rest, without a moment’s
     dismay, ended up by grinding down the morale of the French army. For all
     of Europe the guerrilla was an unbeatable lesson in resistance.*

As representatives of modern French historiography, meanwhile, we may cite
Jean-René Aymes, Gérard Dufour and Richard Hocquellet. ‘The more the mass
                                                   The Guerrilla in History   17

of the population was alienated from political affairs, the more it participated
in the war against the invader, its concrete enemy’, wrote Aymes. ‘The regular
army being a matter for nobles and professional soldiers, through their inde-
pendent instincts and ignorance of the traditions of the art of war the people
invented a genuine form of struggle: /a guerrilla.” For Dufour, too, the ‘little
war’ was crucial:

  The many French soldiers who wrote their memoirs after the conflict all
  coincided in underlining the decisive role of /a guerrilla, whilst Napoleon
  himself .. . confessed that he had been beaten in Spain by the people rather
  than by the army . . Its first characteristic was that it was... a war fought
  by the people and with its complicity: those who did not fight . . . assisted
  the combatants when they had to flee pursuit.”
Last but not least, we have Hocquellet: