

   For Southey, however, 1809 was chiefly important as the moment when ‘that
system of warfare began which soon extended throughout Spain, and occa-
sioned greater losses to the French than they suffered in all their pitched
battles’.*” Amongst the first leaders to be noted are Juan Diaz Porlier and El
Empecinado, but the most successful and effective as far as Southey was con-
cerned was clearly Martin Javier Mina, of whom he remarked, ‘It was in vain
that the French made repeated efforts to crush this enterprising enemy; if his
troops dispersed upon the appearance of a formidable detachment, it was only
to reunite, and, by striking a blow in some weak point or distant quarter, render
themselves more formidable than before’.* If guerrilla warfare spread, mean-
while, it was because it touched a chord in the popular psyche. Thus:

  Frustrated as [the people’s] expectations of immediate deliverance had been,
  their confidence was not shaken; the national temper led them to think lightly
  of every disaster, but to exaggerate every trifling success; and the defeats at
  Arzobispo and Almonacid were less felt or thought of by the body of the
  people than the successful exploits of those predatory bands who, under the
  name of guerrillas, were now in action everywhere. The government partook
  of this disposition, and... the official . . . journals published every adven-
  ture of this kind more fully and circumstantially than some of those actions
  wherein their armies had disappeared. The example which Mina and the
  Empecinado had set was followed with alacrity and tempting success, rich
  opportunities being offered by the requisition of plate from churches
  and from individuals which the intrusive government was at this time
  enforcing.**

    In the face of this offensive the French are portrayed as being helpless.
Efforts to form bands of counter-guerrillas proved a universal failure, whilst
reprisals of the sort that General Marchand threatened in Leon in the face of
the raids of Julian Sanchez — another commander whom Southey singles out
for early mention — merely provoked indignant letters of defiance. As for the
wholesale executions in which the French engaged, they were utterly ineffec-
tual: the victims went to the garrote, scaffold or firing squad with a mixture of
pride and indifference. Nor were the invaders’ periodic battues any more suc-
cessful, since these were frustrated both by dispersion and the guerrillas’ keen
knowledge of the countryside and of their enemies’ movements.” As we shall
see, Southey was by no means unaware of the problems thrown up by the guer-
rillas. However, all such nuances are lost in his overall assessment of the subject.
As an example, we might quote his assessment of their motivation:

   Many were influenced by the deepest feelings and strongest passions which
   act upon the heart of man: love of their country which their faith had
I2       Fighting Napoleon


     elevated and strengthened; and hope which that love and that faith had ren-
     dered inextinguishable; and burning hatred, seeking revenge for the most
     wanton... injuries that can be inflicted on humanity . . . [And] the greater
     number were men who, if circumstances had permitted, would have passed
     their life usefully and contentedly in the humble stations to which they were
     born; labourers, whom there were none now to employ; retainers who
     partook of the ruin of the great families to which they and their ancestors
     had been attached; owners or occupiers of land; whose fields had been laid
     waste, and whose olive yards were destroyed; and the whole class of provin-
     cial tradesmen, whose means of subsistence were cut off, happy if they had
     only their own ruin and their country’s quarrel to revenge, and not those
     deeper injuries of which dreadful cases were continually occurring wherever
     the enemy were masters. Monks, also, and friars, frocked and unfrocked,
     were among them: wherever the convents wre suppressed ... which was
     done in all the provinces that the French overran, the young took arms.*°
As for the importance of the guerrillas, of this too he had no doubt: