

   It was not just the writers of popular history who echoed the general refrain,
however. Amongst British historians Oman’s theories have been accepted
without question and even pushed to fresh lengths. ‘It was above all’, wrote
David Chandler, ‘the interaction of Wellington’s operations with those of the
guerrilla bands that . . . made the French problem wholly intractable . . . Even
with 320,000 men the marshals could not both contain the diffuse . . . “war of
the flea” and... meet Wellington’s latest foray deep into their territory.” So
enthusiastic, indeed, is Chandler that he sometimes makes it appear as if the
guerrillas were among Wellington’s first concerns. Thus:

  As for Wellington, he appreciated that he had to preserve England’s only
  field army and at the same time give maximum possible assistance to
  Portuguese and Spanish resistance — especially the popular kind. Having
  established a safe base at Lisbon... he conducted forays into enemy-held
  territory to divert French attention and thus ease the pressures on the...
  partisans; then, in 1812... he began a systematic reconquest of Spain by
  conventional means.

   Nor have British historians been the only ones to underline the guerrillas.
Since the 1960s, for example, a succession of American and Canadian histo-
rians have laid great stress on their contribution to the struggle. For Gabriel
Lovett

   The War of Independence did not produce on the Spanish side great gen-
   erals... The true giants . . . must be sought elsewhere. They could be found
   _. .in the craggy mountains, among the barren hills, in the forbidding gorges
   _.. They were the leaders of those intrepid bands that almost from the very
   beginning made the war in Spain a nightmare for the Napoleonic armies.
   Swooping down from their mountainous hideouts .. . they never let the
   invaders forget . . . that Spain had not given up the fight. It is not an exag-
   geration to say that these bands . . . made history. They carried on the war
   _.. when there were few regular Spanish forces left to continue the strug-
   gle, and... . must be given a large . . . share of the credit for the emperor’s
   failure in the Peninsula.”

In his detailed account of the ‘little war’ in Aragon —a study rendered the more
                                                                                —
valuable by the fact that it rests on detailed research in the French archives
16        Fighting Napoleon


Alexander argues that the ‘combination of conventional resistance, galvanised
by Wellington’s army, and the irregular opposition of the partidas proved
irresistible’; that ‘the partidas could probably have sustained resistance indefi-
nitely’; and even that ‘the partisan leaders were able to forge from the spirit of
opposition an army that managed to exploit French military difficulties and lib-
erate Aragon’.”’ And, finally, for John Tone, whose study of the guerrillas of
Navarre is by far the most detailed work that the English language boasts on
the subject:                                      ‘