

    Navarre is a most delightful province and... certainly the most loyal and
    patriotic in Spain. Their great leader is [Espoz y] Mina, who is a wonderful
    man. About three years since this man (who was then a farmer) adopted his
    nephew’s name, took the command of a battalion which he had raised and
    by a continual succession of bold, skilful and daring enterprises has worsted
    the French . . . increased his own force to a legion of 10,000 or 12,000, who
    are all volunteers, and the best-organised troops in Spain, well-paid, fed and
    clothed.’

And lastly one might cite the words of Edward Cocks, an intelligence officer
who spent much of the war on missions that took him deep into occupied Spain:
‘The Spanish guerrillas have annoyed the enemy very much; they are very
useful because they oblige the enemy to form so many detachments in order to
secure his communication and command in some measure the resources of the
country.’”°
                                                     The Guerrilla in History     T,


   By 1814, then, a very positive image of the guerrillas had been created
in Britain and Spain alike, and in both countries it was this current that came
to dominate the historiography. In Spain, for example, their cause was given
solid support by the Conde de Toreno, a leading liberal who played a major
part in the cortes of Cadiz and went on to serve as prime minister in 1835.
Founded as his Historia de Levantamiento, Guerra y Revolucion de Espata was
on a determination to justify the gaditano revolution and identify it with
the cause of the Spanish people, it was only natural that the guerrillas should
have played a major part in his story. Indeed, Toreno himself remarked on
the amount of time that he had given to the myriad skirmishes of such
figures as El Empecinado and Espoz y Mina. For this, however, he made no
apology:

  These actions will to some people seem as boring as they are unimportant.
  It is quite true that, viewed in isolation, they at first sight look trivial, but
  ...taken in the round they in large part produced the marvellous...
  defence of Spain’s independence that will forever serve as a guide for all those
  peoples that wish to conserve their own freedom.””
   Somewhat later in the nineteenth century, meanwhile, the only history of the
War of Independence that has ever been written with the guerrillas as its main
theme struck an even more positive note. Thus the message of Enrique
Rodriguez Solis’ Los Guerrilleros de 1808: Historia Popular de la Guerra de la
Independencia is absolutely unequivocal. Napoleon, Solis claimed, had lost some
500,000 men in Spain, of which only some 200,000 could be accounted for by
the war’s formal battles and sieges; the 300,000 that were left had, by implica-
tion, fallen to the guerrillas. Looked at in this fashion, he maintained, it could
be argued that these ‘popular heroes of eternal memory’ had actually won the
war, whilst it was certainly true that the decisive factor in the conflict had been
the absolute refusal of the Spanish people to abandon the struggle. And, if they
had refused to surrender, it was because they were inspired by dreams not just
of independence but of political regeneration — a point that allowed Rodriguez
Solis to claim for the guerrillas the revolutionary politics which he himself
espoused (the son of a radical who had been banished for his part in the rising
of 1848, Rodriguez Solis was active both in the overthrow of Isabel II in 1868
and in the establishment of the First Republic in 1873).'* But if the guerrillas
were a revolutionary phenomenon, they were also a Spanish one, and Rodriguez
Solis went so far as to maintain that ‘it is no exaggeration to affirm that with
the Spaniard there was born the guerrilla’, and, further, that much of Spain’s
military history had in fact been centred on guerrilla warfare (thus we learn
that even Rodrigo Diaz de Vivar, better known as El Cid, had to all intents
and purposes been a guerrilla!).'? Entirely spontaneous in their origins, the
&       Fighting Napoleon