


between the host of minor campaigns engaged in by the regular army and, say,
the attacks of Espoz y Mina in Navarre. Indeed, as far as he is concerned, such
disturbances as the revolt of the Serrania de Ronda were clearly of far less
import than the operations of, say, General Ballesteros, whose division of
regular troops was currently harassing the French in the more remote parts of
the present-day province of Huelva.”
   Not content with redefining /a guerrilla so as to reduce its popular content,
Arteche also drew strong links between irregular ?esistance and the breakdown
of law and order. The guerrillas, he stressed, had played a very important part
in the defeat of the French. As he remarked:

     The genuine representatives of people’s war for the most part belonged
     to the classes who, for want of education, were those that were most hostile
     to the ideas of order and military discipline, and, at the same time, those
     whom the strength acquired through work in the fields had made most fitted
     to endure hunger, fatigue, bad weather and the horrors of war. To look to
     such people for harmony and subordination is the purest chimera: when they
     do not have an enemy to fight, they quarrel amongst themselves . . . whilst
     their patriotism is manifested chiefly through the pursuit of vengeance.”
   This, of course, is not quite the same as saying that all those guerrillas who
were not regular soldiers, or who did not at least adopt military forms, were
brigands. Indeed, great emphasis is placed on the efforts that were made by
such commanders as Espoz y Mina to put down any band that overstepped the
bounds of discipline.” But for Arteche evil was never far away. The provoca-
tion, true, was great but, even so, popular resistance had ‘a savage character’
that was ‘truly extraordinary and on every count lamentable’. And, as he was
not slow to suggest, efforts to impose discipline were not always entirely suc-
cessful, since many of the bands that had to be suppressed by Espoz y Mina
and the rest were composed of guerrillas who had-run away rather than submit
to the imposition of military discipline.*!
   At the heart of all this was Arteche’s belief that the guerrillas reflected the
individualism that he saw as being central to the supposed Spanish national
character. Content to fight the French, Spaniards wanted to do so alone, or, at
least, as masters of their own fate.*’ In doing so, moreover, they naturally grav-
itated to environments and procedures which they understood. As the general
remarked: “The better to execute this individualistic strategy, patriots took the
hills as their favourite haunt, rocks and scrub as their best shelter, the roads as
their battleground, and shepherds’ huts as . . . their headquarters.’*’ But from
this there flowed a number of alarming consequences, as the lowliest Spaniard
had been presented with a model of resistance that he could twist to his
own purposes. The most obvious beneficiary of this development being the
Carlist movement, it followed that /a guerrilla had done much to precipitate the
                                                    The Guerrilla in History   23