


accepted unreservedly the idea that the Spanish people flung themselves into
the struggle against Napoleon, and have interpreted all moves to regulate or
control the partidas as attempts to protect the social order. Inherent in this view
is the issue of the ‘primitive rebel’, the armed peasant who sought redress for
the grievances of both himself and his neighbours through forms of violence
traditional in rural society. With Spain the home of anarchism — the earliest
movement of organised agrarian protest in European history — there is clearly
a strong desire to identify the guerrillas with socialrevolt. To quote the Marxist
J.S. Pérez Garzon, for example, the guerrillas were ‘disinherited peasants .. .
plunged by a disamortizing bourgeoisie into an implacable process of proletar-
ianization’.’! Such views, meanwhile, have been echoed by the equally Marxian
Eric Hobsbawm, whose Age of Revolution observes that ‘the spontaneous
movements of popular resistance against French conquest cannot be denied
their social-revolutionary component, even when the peasants who waged them
expressed it in terms of militant church-and-king conservatism’.””
    Since no archival evidence has ever been presented to support these claims,
yet another area of the subject presents itself for exploration and debate. Given
 the obvious tensions that mark the historiography of /a guerrilla, the conclu-
 sion is obvious: in the absence of any up-to-date analysis of popular resistance
 in Napoleonic Spain, a new study is needed that will re-examine the issues
 raised in this chapter in the light of the contents of the Spanish archives.
 Yet the prospect is a daunting one. As we shall see, when Thomas Sydenham
 remarked that it was very difficult to know what to say about the guerrillas, he
 never wrote a truer word, the difficulties that face the historian being such as
 to give the expression ‘the Spanish mousetrap’ a whole new meaning.
                                          2

                       The Guerrillas at War




The military history of /a guerrilla is not a subject for the faint-hearted. For
some five years those parts of Spain that were in the hands of the French wit-
nessed an incessant series of marches, counter-marches, raids and skirmishes
that are almost impossible to document in their entirety.
    Even were it possible to chronicle all the operations of the guerrilla, the result
would be less than satisfying for, wherever one looks, the picture is more or less
the same: whether it was in Castile or Catalonia, Aragon or Andalucia, the guer-
rillas — according to the traditional version, at least — spent their time ambush-
ing French couriers, convoys and foraging parties, attacking French posts and
encampments, and pouncing upon, dodging or fighting off the French columns
sent to hunt them down. Given the see-saw nature of events, indeed, the general
effect would be to confuse the reader, and obscure the main outlines of the
subject. Recognising this problem, all previous writers who have sought to go
beyond broad generalisations have attempted to resolve matters by focusing on
the narratives of the most prominent guerrilla commanders. Yet this approach
does not help either. Setting aside the risk of hagiography arising from the
myth-making and self-aggrandisement typical of many memoirs and contem-
porary accounts, the result must inevitably be to reinforce a variety of stereo-
types and undermine both context and perspective.
    Elaborating an alternative treatment of the conflict will not be an easy task,
but it is one that cannot be shrunk from, for it is only by subjecting the mili-
tary history of the ‘little war’ to close analysis that the way can be cleared for
fresh thinking. Putting the issue at its most simple, it is impossible to dodge
the fact that the French faced an abnormal situation in Spain. In the campaigns
of 1805-7 French armies had swept across Germany, Austria, Bohemia and
Poland with scarcely a thought for the safety of their couriers, foraging parties
and lines of supply, whereas in Spain Napoleon’s troops had to garrison every
28     Fighting Napoleon