

  their goods . . . bandits fleeing some robbery . . . or guerrillas defeated in a
  skirmish . . . Who are these men? Guerrillas, smugglers or bandits? Nobody
  knows, and they do not stop to provide us with the answer.”

   For all Avesty’s whimsy, the fact that the guerrillas are shrouded in ambigu-
ity cannot be denied. Generally portrayed as either villains or heroes, they were
in reality an extremely complex phenomenon. Thus, bandits who preyed on the
French and their supporters might legitimately assume the status of freedom
fighters, just.as the most patriotic guerrilla leaders might find themselves at the
head of men who aspired only to pillage and highway robbery. As Goya cap-
tioned the engraving in his ‘Desastres de la Guerra’ showing the execution of
eight malhechores by the garrotte, ‘One cannot find out the reason.’
   Even working out who the guerrillas actually were is a problem: not only was
the guerrilla, as we shall see, a phenomenon that embraced forces that ranged
from entire divisions of the regular army to handfuls of armed civilians, but
the very nomenclature of the period often makes it very hard to pin down
exactly what is being referred to in any given document. The word guerrilla,
for example, can refer to a guerrilla band or to irregular operations, but it
can also mean a picket of regular troops or be used to describe the use of skir-
mishers on the battlefield; by the same token, the word partida can stand not
just for a guerrilla band but also for a detachment of soldiers.”
   To add to the problem, the guerrillas — or, to be more precise, the phenom-
enon of the Spanish people in arms — were recorded far more from outside their
ranks than they were from within. Many of the better-known leaders left much
evidence of their activities in the archives (it is therefore incorrect to speak of
la guerrilla as an episode beyond the reach of empiricism). But it is the case
that, beyond those elements of the movement that were both literate and pos-
sessed of links with the Patriot authorities, there was a much wider circle of
individuals whose activities were only recorded by the representatives of prop-
erty and order, whether French or Spanish. The consequence, of course, is that
the archives tell a story that is weighted by a whole series of prejudices and
value judgements. On the whole this may be assumed to have worked against
the guerrillas, but, against this, we have the boasting and exaggeration engaged
in by those cabecillas who did document their own activities. In short, no source
is entirely to be trusted: we can no more, say, accept the words of Francisco
Espoz y Mina as gospel than we can those of his opponents Reille and Abbe.
   The difficulties thrown up by the skewed nature of the documentation relat-
ing to the guerrillas lead us on to another question. On the whole, those who
have expressed doubts with regard to the ‘official’ version of /a guerrilla have
been historians of a progressive bent whose strong desire it is to re-insert the
people into the historical process. Eager to extol popular heroism, they have
26     Fighting Napoleon