

civil wars of the nineteenth century, but there was also the question of social
revolution. In the mid-nineteenth century republican partidas occasionally
appeared, whilst lurking beneath the surface of the general’s thoughts was also
undoubtedly the rise of the anarchism that was to prove so powerful a strand
of the Spanish labour movement: hence his denunciation of the guerrillas’
encouragement of personalismo and resistance to authority, and his veiled crit-
icisms of the way in which the war against the French had raised certain leaders
above their station in life and fuelled their personal ambition.
   Explicit in the historiography of /a guerrilla, then, is an important debate
that was perplexing observers even at the time of the conflict. As the British
diplomat Thomas Sydenham put it:

  It is very difficult to know what to say about the guerrillas. That some of
  them have been of eminent use during the progress of the war cannot be
  denied. They obliged the French to fortify themselves in every village and
  town in the country; they harassed the parties who were spread through the
  provinces either to subsist themselves, or to procure supplies for the enemy’s
  magazines; they murdered all stragglers and sometimes intercepted convoys
  of prisoners and stores; they rendered the communications of the enemy
  very difficult and hazardous, and often cut them off for weeks together and
  finally they assisted in keeping alive the spirit of resistance against the
  invaders. On the other hand they doubled the calamities inflicted by the
  French. The inhabitants were compelled to feed the enemy with one hand
  and the guerrillas with the other. They plundered many towns with as little
  mercy as the French, and where the French preceded them, they generally
  carried off all which the French left. Many of them under the pretence of
  patriotism and of serving against the enemy became regular freebooters and
  subsisted on the pillage of the country. It will probably become necessary
  one of these days to establish a new Santa Hermandad to clear Spain of these
  bands of robbers. They prevented the recruiting of the regular armies, for
  every Spanish peasant would naturally prefer rioting and plunder and living
  in free quarters with the guerrillas to being drilled and starved in the regular
  army. While some of them kept alive the spirit of resistance . . . others com-
  pelled the inhabitants to look to the French for protection, for the inhabi-
  tants would at length prefer the systematised pillage . . . of the enemy to the
  wasteful, capricious, uncertain and merciless plundering of their own coun-
  trymen. On the whole, therefore, it may be said that the guerrillas did as
  much mischief to the country as they did to the French, but, in as much as
  they certainly did considerable damage to the enemy, they were on the whole
  useful to the common cause.*

   Lengthy as this quotation is, it admirably sums up the problem faced by the
historian. Were the guerrillas heroes who fought their country’s enemies and
24      Fighting Napoleon