


played a major part in expelling them from the Peninsula, or were they, by con-
trast, bandits whose real interest lay in personal gain, and who merely used the
struggle as a cover for their depredations? To put this another way, was their
motivation ideological or was it economic? That the question is an important
one, there is no doubt, as witness the extensive literature that has emerged with
regard to brigandage and rebellion in France in the same period.*° With regard
to the comparable Spanish example no such literature exists, however: what is
striking, indeed, is the extent to which the whole issue has been allowed to fall
by the wayside. Analytical articles by Artola and Aymes that might have been
looked to as a launch pad for debate are disappointing: the former confines itself
to theory, whilst the latter’s interesting discussion of the efforts of the Patriot
authorities to subject the guerrillas to their control is spoiled by its failure fully
to examine the problems that gave rise to the regulations that resulted, not
to mention its stubborn refusal to abandon the notion of a popular crusade
against the French.*’ As for the questions raised by the current author in
several attempts to address the issue, they have largely gone unanswered —
Hocquellet’s recent book, for example, claims to be about resistance and revo-
lution in Napoleonic Spain but, in fact, spends the bulk of its time looking at
such issues as the composition of the provincial juntas, the concept of /a patria
and the establishment of the cortes of Cadiz. By contrast, all that Hocquellet
can spare for the armed struggle that might have been expected to constitute
the heart of his work is a mere eight pages.*®
    Hardly discussed as yet, the revisionist view still awaits its day: indeed, the
prominence of authors writing a century or more ago in this discussion is itself
suggestive of the failure of the academic community to address the issues raised
by the guerrillas. However, the penetrating analysis offered by Sydenham
quoted above is quite enough to suggest that the doubts of writers such as
Napier, Mufioz Maldonado and Arteche cannot be ignored. The fruit of posi-
tions that were clearly parti pris, they nevertheless were — as will be seen —
founded on a reality for which there is abundant evidence in the archives. At
the very least further debate is wanted, whilst there is clearly a need to address
many of the gaps in the existing literature. Who, for example, were the guer-
rillas? Why, too, were they fighting? And was the image of a Spanish crusade
against Napoleon reflected in the grim realities of recruitment and mobilisa-
tion? All these questions remain to be answered, as do many others, but it is
 not to be expected that finding a satisfactory response will be easy. As Avesty
has written:

     The eagle . . . is perplexed. The peace of the high mountains has been shat-
     tered. ... Some men have come and startled her from her nest. Who are
     these men? None of the animals knows. . . . Are they smugglers trying to save
                                                     The Guerrilla in History   25