

     For, as in times of pestilence and earthquake, wretches are found obdurate
     enough in wickedness to... enrich themselves by plunder, so now, in the
     anarchy of Spain, they whose evil disposition had been restrained... in
     some degree by the influence of settled society, abandoned themselves . . . to
     the impulses of their own evil hearts.”
   Some of the worst offenders are named by Southey. There was, for example,
José Pedrazuela, a sometime actor from Madrid, who embarked on a reign
of terror in Extremadura; Echevarria, whose band was largely composed of
German deserters; and Martina, a woman of whom no other details are given,
who led a gang of bandits on the frontiers of Vizcaya and Alava.® Southey was
                                                     The Guerrilla in History    19

in no doubt that the consequences for Spanish society in the long term could
not but be dreadful:

  The restraints... which the soldier is compelled to learn. . . counteract
  the demoralizing tendencies of a military life, and compensate for its heart-
  hardening ones. The good soldier becomes a good citizen when his occupa-
  tion is over, but the guerrillas were never likely to forego the wild and lawless
  course in which they were engaged, and, therefore, essential as their services
  now were, thoughtful men looked with the gloomiest forebodings to what
  must be the consequence of their multiplication whenever this dreadful
  struggle should be ended.”

   Despite these doubts, Southey in the end refused to let them colour his
judgement of the guerrillas. Other writers, however, have been less charitable.
A great admirer of Napoleon, for example, Napier was uncritical in his accep-
tance of the imperial line. The guerrilla bands, he wrote, ‘were many, because
every robber who feared a gaol or could break from one... was to be found
either as chief or associate in a partida’, whilst, not satisfied with this, he saw
one of the chief reasons for their initial emergence as ‘the hope of intercepting
the public and private plate which under a decree of Joseph was being brought
to Madrid’.” Napier being profoundly prejudiced against all things Spanish,
his views are only to be expected, but doubts were also entertained by Spanish
historians. We come here to the views of the nineteenth-century writers José
Mufioz Maldonado and José Gomez de Arteche. Beginning with the former’s
Historia Politica y Militar de la Guerra de la Independencia contra Napoleon
Bonaparte desde 1808 a 1814, we find much praise for the guerrillas. For
example:

  Nothing was safe from the activity, audacity and perseverance of . . . the par-
  tidas, and .. . they harassed the French armies so incessantly that the latter
  were forced . . . to be always on the look-out. Even if it could not bring deci-
  sive results, implemented with constancy and, above all valour, this form of
  warfare ended up by weakening the enemy very considerably.”
   Mufioz Maldonado, however, was by no means the uncritical observer that
these words suggest. At various points, for example, he was keen to stress the
importance of regular troops in /a guerrilla: the partisan operations that so
harassed the unfortunate Dupont in the campaign of Bailén are ascribed to
the flying columns of Murgeon and Valdecafias, both of which were composed
of troops who were, if not regulars, then at least men who had been formally
embodied under the command of regular officers.” Just as interesting is the
fact that Mufioz Maldonado mentions a number of incidents in which guer-
rilla bands resisted the imposition of a greater degree of militarisation, as, for
20     Fighting Napoleon