

  As a result of their diffuse character, the guerrillas never engaged the impe-
  rial columns. No decisive battles can be attributed to them, but the state of
  permanent insecurity with which they imbued the Napoleonic armies had
  such an impact on morale that the high command was forced to take them
  very seriously. The memoirs of soldiers of the empire who served in Spain
  all insist on the constant air of menace: they could never be certain of their
  surroundings.”
   Such, then, is the traditional version of events. From the very beginning,
however, there was another side to the story. Whilst the French and their sup-
porters were quite prepared to acknowledge the impact that the ‘little war’ had
had on their operations and activities, they attempted to assuage their bitter-
ness by denigrating the partisans as cowards, savages and murderers.’ Linked
to this was an insistence that the central problem had been one of brigandage.
‘Brigand’, indeed, was a term habitually used by the invaders to describe
bandits and guerrillas alike — a habit that greatly complicates the task of the
historian — whilst they generally insisted that the bands either stemmed from
the swarms of bandits and smugglers with which the Iberian Peninsula was
so afflicted prior to 1808, or were made up of deserters from the armies of the
French and their opponents. Hatred of the invaders was recognised by some
writers as a motive for resistance, whilst others believed that the cruelty and
greed that they held to be inherent in the Spanish character had been inflamed
by a clergy desperate to forestall the religious reforms certain to be imposed in
the wake of French conquest; but the possibility that the guerrillas might be
inspired by genuine political or ideological motives was in almost every case
denied. As for the propaganda of the jose/fino state, it never ceased to ram home
18        Fighting Napoleon

the message that the partidas were the enemies of not just property and the
social order, but also of life and limb. To quote the Gazeta de Sevilla, for
example:

     The guerrillas commit all the robberies imaginable: nobody is free of their
     plundering. Spanish, French, English, all alike are victims of their wicked-
     ness; priests, mayors, labourers, muleteers, nobody is spared . . . Such are the
     instruments that presently serve perfidious Albion... Not being able to
     conquer, by means of these men [the British] oppress those whose indepen-
     dence they feign to protect.”
   This sort of thing is exactly what one would expect from observers
favourable to Napoleon: the emperor, after all, always maintained that his
rule stood for the defence of landed property, and, further, that he was the
champion of a civilising mission whose central aim was to eradicate the
violence, ignorance and superstition of the masses. Yet this line has still
proved remarkably influential. For one thing it was impossible to deny that the
subject threw up serious difficulties. Writing of the aftermath of the French
evacuation of Galicia, for example, Southey remarked, ‘Men who had done
their part in driving out the enemy, having now no means of providing for them-
selves, roamed about in armed parties, so that the condition of the helpless
inhabitants was little better than when they were under the French yoke.”
Equally, he admitted that attempts to regulate the guerrillas were only observed
‘where the government had sufficient authority to enforce them, which was only
where they had armies on foot’.” And, if this was so, it was in part because
‘some were mere ruffians, who if the country had been at peace would have
lived in defiance of the laws, as they now defied the force of the intrusive
government’, and others men ‘attracted by the wildness and continual excite-
ment attendant upon a life of outlawry and adventure, to which in the present
circumstances .. . honour, instead of obloquy, was attached’.® As he wrote,
indeed: