

example, when the followers of Juan Diaz Porlier mutinied rather than allow
their commander to march them to Galicia for a period of intensive training.”
As he also provides an-account of the uprising in Galicia that is devoid of all
mention of the a/armas and speaks of popular participation only in connection
with occasions when the people-in-arms could clearly be shown to have been
acting under the command of the army, it is clear that Mufioz Maldonado too,
was driven by an agenda that dictated a cautious approach with regard to the
guerrilla.”                                         ‘
   None of this is at all surprising. A staunch supporter of Fernando VII who
was possessed of close links with the court, Mufioz Maldonado was writing at
a time when the monarch and his administration were increasingly being chal-
lenged by the so-called apostélicos. Soon to become known as Carlism, this ultra-
traditionalist movement drew its rank-and-file support from an agricultural
populace that was in many areas ever more disaffected and mutinous. In 1826,
indeed, there had already been a serious insurrection in Catalonia known as the
guerra de los agraviados. With many of the likely leaders of revolt men who had
led guerrilla bands, to draw attention to the populace’s ability to organise itself
was hardly politic, and it is notable that in his account of the emergence of
the guerrillas Mufioz Maldonado laid much stress on the role played by the
Junta Central and its agents in bringing the phenomenon to fruition. Nor was
the darker side of Ja guerrilla forgotten: guerrilla warfare, the populace was
reminded, was likely to involve them in terrible sufferings, especially as the par-
tidas were a force that might all too easily turn on its own progenitors. A graphic
description, therefore, is provided of the manner in which Burgos was pillaged
by undisciplined irregulars in September 1812, and it is specifically pointed out
that at the end of the war many guerrilla bands had to be hunted down and
tried as bandits.”
   José Gomez de Arteche, meanwhile, was even more hostile. A general
regarded as the leading military writer of Restoration Spain, Arteche’s view of
the Peninsular War was at the very least ambiguous. However much he praised
Spanish heroism — the fourteen-volume history of the conflict that he penned
between 1868 and 1903 is very much the story of how Spain won the war with
some incidental help from the British and Portuguese — Arteche the soldier
could not forget that in reality the Peninsular War had been something of a
calvary for his forebears. From the very beginning the army had come under
attack from civilian society, and its operations had constantly been impeded by
a whole range of factors, not the least of which had been the guerrillas. These
had challenged the army’s monopoly of armed force, undermined its strength
and provided the anti-militarism that was a powerful element in the politics
of Patriot Spain with much useful ammunition. In consequence, Arteche put
forward a view of the war that stressed the military’s political priorities
                                                    The Guerrilla in History    21