

(maintenance of order and national unity, and the defence of the army’s pres-
tige) emphasised the role of regular soldiers in the defeat of Napoleon and
downplayed the contribution of armed civilians. In part, such a stance was rein-
forced by the political context. Like most of the senior officers of his day,
Arteche was deeply enmeshed in the highly conservative political order that
had grown up in Spain since the 1840s. Centred on the protection of property,
this could not but look askance at the disorder that had been such a feature of
the uprising, not to mention the manner in which contemporary radicals found
inspiration in the struggle against Napoleon. For Arteche as for many others,
then, the Peninsular War was a deus ex machina that had injected Spain with
‘discord’ (by which was meant a threat to the ruling classes).
   The result of all this was a strong prejudice against the guerrillas. Much
praise is heaped on the popular heroism of the first days of the war, and con-
siderable detail provided on the achievements of the partidas. Yet from an early
point Arteche appears anxious to point out that the picture was not quite as
flattering as his extravagant language might have suggested. Thus, his praise
for the somatenes involved in the famous French defeat at El Bruch (in which
a column marching on Lérida was ambushed on a mountain pass and forced to
retreat) was qualified by allegations that much more might have been achieved
if only they had combined their operations and been prepared to operate
outside the immediate vicinity of their home villages.” Driven, one suspects,
by deep suspicions of the Catalan nationalism that had begun to emerge in the
late nineteenth century, Arteche returned to the issue of the somatenes’ relia-
bility again and again.”* His disapproval, however, was not directed just at the
Catalans; and in his treatment of the revolt that took place in the Serrania de
Ronda following the invasion of Andalucia in January 1810, the various cabecil-
las of the district are portrayed as having fallen out not only with one another,
but also with the army officers sent from Cadiz to organise the inhabitants and
the junta that had been established at Jimena. Serious though the difficulties
posed by the revolt remained, the result was that the Serrania remained ‘unable
to realise the results that might have been expected from the enthusiasm of its
inhabitants and the difficulties imposed on the enemy . . . by their inability to
take Cadiz and their need to guard their flanks and rear against the armies of
La Romana and Blake’.””
   Mention of the regular armies brings us to another theme in Arteche’s work,
in that it is clear that for him much of the ‘little war’ was not to be attributed
to civilians at all, but rather to Spain’s much maligned soldiers. As he pointed
out, many of the so-called guerrilla leaders were regular officers and their bands
organised commands of regular troops, with the result that they could not really
be regarded as guerrillas at all, if ‘guerrilla’ was taken to mean only a fighter
sprung from the people.” Still more, for Arteche there was no difference
22       Fighting Napoleon