


square inch of the territory they conquered and even then could not sleep
safe in their beds. Unless this issue is addressed, there is no room for revision,
for any challenge to the image of the guerrillas as the heroic defenders of dios,
rey y patria (‘God, king and fatherland’) would have an obvious riposte.
Find an answer to this question, by contrast, and the picture changes dramat-
ically. Hence the need for a chapter that is unashamedly military in its
preoccupations.
    Before proceeding with our analysis of Ja guerrilla, let us first devote a little
time to thinking about the geo-strategic problems faced by the French in the
conquest of the Iberian Peninsula. As is constantly restated, both Spain and
Portugal are countries ideally suited to guerrilla warfare. Not only are there
wide regions that are extremely rugged, if not downright mountainous — one
thinks especially here of Galicia, Leon, Navarre, Catalonia, the Maestrazgo,
south-eastern Andalucia and Beira — but chains of mountains such as the Sierra
Morena, the Montes de Toledo and the Sierra de Guadarrama criss-cross Spain
in particular, thereby ensuring that time after time even main roads are forced
to cross precipitous mountain passes or to run through lengthy gorges of the
most terrifying nature. Perhaps the most well-known of these defiles, and one
of the ones most feared by the French, was that of Pancorbo, between Burgos
and Miranda de Ebro, where the main road from Madrid to the French fron-
tier wound its way between towering saw-toothed peaks, but similar spots were
to be found in many parts of the Peninsula. Indeed, many mountain pueblos can
only be reached via defiles that are miles long, walled in by sheer cliffs and only
a few feet wide. Competing with such places as potential bases, meanwhile, were
the many monasteries perched on towering crags in the sierras, of which a prime
example was the Catalan fastness of Nuestra Sefiora de Monserrat. It is not
just a matter of mountains, however. Even where the country is not particu-
larly elevated, it is in many areas covered with the dense scrub known as mator-
ral, or thickly dotted with pines and holm oaks. And, last but not least, in many
parts of the country human settlement is relatively infrequent, with the result
that it is difficult to establish an adequate network of garrisons and police posts.
    Staying with notions that have already been widely publicised, we next come
to the condition and habits of the populace. Nineteenth-century writers, of
course, were all too ready to see the origins of the guerrilla in some invented
 Spanish national character. Thus, for French observers, Spaniards were cruel,
savage and xenophobic, just as for Spanish ones they were proud, noble and
heroic, the point being that, whichever the case, they were likely to hurl them-
selves upon an invader with the utmost ferocity. From the twentieth-century
 point of view this is so much dross, but there are still strong grounds for arguing
 that there were environmental factors that gave the idea of partisan activity a
 peculiar resonance. Thus, large parts of the populace were either habituated to
                                                       The Guerrillas at War     29