

where the escort of a convoy of biscuit was put to flight after losing a third of
its strength, and La Carolina, where the French general René was taken, along
with his wife and secretary. Very soon, indeed, the whole district between
Cordoba and the Sierra Morena was swarming with guerrilla bands led by such
figures as the priest Ramon Argote. Indeed, sent down from Madrid to assist
Dupont, the divisions of Vedel and Jacques-Nicholas Gobert only got through
the Sierra Morena, as we have seen, by dint of some hard fighting. And every-
where murder was commonplace, French soldiers being pushed down wells,
poisoned or knifed in their beds.’
   According to all accounts, the attacks were accompanied by scenes of the
utmost cruelty. Doubtless the tales grew in the telling, but it is clear that a
number of those who fell into the hands of the insurgents met a horrible end.
Perhaps the most often repeated of these stories concerns René, who was
stabbed to death by a mob at Las Correderas after being taken prisoner some
days earlier, but there are also reports of men being stoned to death, boiled in
oil, sawn in half or buried up to their necks in the ground and left to die of
thirst.* Nor was La Mancha the only setting for irregular resistance. In Cat-
alonia the somatenes routed an enemy column sent to occupy Lérida at the pass
of El Bruch (as we have seen), seriously molested the operations of other
French forces and blockaded Barcelona, whilst the Junta of Gerona took into
its service a friar named Francisco Rovira, who had formed a number of peas-
ants armed with fowling pieces and pitchforks into a guerrilla band.’ Near
Aranda an obscure peasant named Juan Martin Diez led his three brothers and
a number of other men in a series of attacks on French couriers and distin-
guished himself by capturing the wife of Marshal Moncey at the village of
Carabias, whilst the road from Toledo to Madrid became the beat of a young
doctor from Villaluenga de la Sierra named Juan Palarea.° In the vicinity of
Madrid itself, a resident of Carabanchel named Pedro Serrano formed a partida
and attacked a number of couriers.’ In Aragon a wealthy clothier from Illueca
named Fidel Mallén established a roo-strong band that harassed the French
rear during the first siege of Zaragoza.* And finally, in Navarre still more par-
tidas were raised by Andrés Eguaguirre, the lawyer Luis Gil and the priest
Andrés Galdiroz.’
   By the summer of 1808, then, guerrilla warfare was firmly established as a
feature of the Peninsular War. With much of Spain evacuated in the wake of
the battle of Bailén and the remaining pockets of French occupation crammed
with troops who had been pulled back from Madrid, Burgos and Zaragoza,
there was for the time being little scope for partidas to operate. However, in
Catalonia such irregulars as Rovira, José Mans6 and Francisco Milans del
Bosch continued to play an important part in events, with insurgents blockad-
ing Figueras, harassing the imperial forces sent to take the defiant fortress of
32     Fighting Napoleon