


Gerona and even raiding the French frontier. Typical were the activities of
Milans del Bosch, who in September alone attacked the French at the Coll de
Moncada, Badalona and San Felid.'° Nor was it long before /a guerrilla was back
in the limelight. Furious at the setbacks suffered by his troops, Napoleon
poured heavy reinforcements into Spain, and in a whirlwind campaign defeated
most of the Spanish armies and recaptured Madrid. Yet his very success meant
that the French were once again vulnerable to guerrilla warfare. All around
them, indeed, there swarmed bands of fugitive Spafish soldiers, not to mention
angry civilians who had seen their homes plundered and destroyed and their
families murdered, the French counter-attack having been marked by conduct
of the utmost brutality. To quote just one example, from December onwards a
time-expired soldier from Pozal de Gallinas named Jeronimo Saornil launched
a number of successful attacks at such places as Madrigal de las Torres and
Fuentesatico.'! Also active at this time, meanwhile, was a guerrilla band that
had been established in the Tagus valley under Pablo Morillo, an erstwhile
sergeant of the regular army who had been commissioned as a sub-lieutenant
in a new regiment entitled the Voluntarios de Llerena.””
   In memoir after memoir, indeed, we find evidence that isolated Frenchmen
were even at this early stage going in fear of their lives, whilst there were stories
that men who fell by the wayside out of exhaustion were shooting themselves
rather than take the risk of falling into the hands of the Spaniards.’ For a good
example of the nightmares that plagued the invaders we have only to turn to
the experiences of the aide-de-camp Marbot. Carrying the dispatches from
Tudela to Madrid in December 1808 via the present-day province of Soria,
with a small escort, he first encountered a French cavalry officer who had been
nailed head downwards to a barn door and left to roast over a slow fire, and was
then attacked by a party of armed civilians. These were driven off without dif-
ficulty, but a further attack was launched on Marbot and his men by five sol-
diers, and the Frenchmen were only saved by the providential arrival of a rescue
party. Wounded and exhausted, a chastened Marbot later recalled the affair as
‘one of the most terrible experiences of my military career’.'*
   If things were bad in 1808, in 1809 they got still worse. Faced once again
with enemy troops, such early partidas as those of El] Empecinado emerged from
the shadows in which they had spent the summer and autumn of 1808, whilst
many new bands also began to appear. In alliance with that of El Empecinado,
for example, there came that of Jeronimo Merino, the semi-literate parish priest
of the tiny village of Villoviado, near Lerma, who was soon attacking French
couriers and convoys travelling between Madrid and Burgos, and making life
uncomfortable for the garrison of Lerma.’ Also active in Old Castile, mean-
while, were Bartolomé Amor, an erstwhile private in the Burgos provincial
militia regiment, and the friars Lucas Rafael and Julian Délica.’° Joining them
                                                     The Guerrillas at War    33