


Portugal, she was hard to penetrate, for the main routes across the frontier were
all covered by imposing fortresses. All round the northern, western and south-
ern periphery of the country, then, there would be the potential for small forces
of regular troops to sally out and attack the French. At the same time, of course,
the deeper the French advanced into the Peninsula, the more vulnerable they
became to such attacks, whilst even breaking through to the coast did not
resolve the problem, in that there was always the chance of raiding forces being
landed from the sea.                                  ss
    Viewed in detail, the matter appears even more complex. Thus, a French
invasion based on the Hendaye road would be unlikely even to overrun the
whole of the interior of the country. With the two Castiles and the capital would
almost certainly go much of Aragon, for there was little to stop Napoleon’s
armies pouring down the valley of the Ebro and overrunning the steppes that
surrounded Zaragoza. Separating Old Castile and La Mancha from central
Aragon, however, is a broad strip of hills and mountains that all but runs from
the Bay of Biscay to the Mediterranean. At its northern end its proximity to
the French frontier and the fact that it was pierced by the Madrid—Hendaye
road meant that it could be kept under some semblance of control, but to the
south and east it was a different matter. There being little likelihood that it
would be penetrated straight away, Spanish forces would therefore be able to
maintain themselves deep inside the hinterland of the country. The problem
was not insuperable — if the invaders could take Tarragona and Valencia, the
region might ultimately be isolated and overcome — but it nevertheless made
an already difficult situation still worse.’
    All this was, as we shall see, to become a matter of some importance in /a
guerrilla: above all, in fact, the scene was being set for a scenario in which the
French would be harassed not just by bands of guerrillas but also by substan-
tial forces of regular troops. At the beginning of the war, however, it was seem-
ingly the stereotype that ruled. Thanks to the divisions in the Spanish court
and Napoleon’s own astuteness, the French did not have to fight for Madrid
and Barcelona: rather, they were let in unopposed, still other forces being
 allowed to march all the way to Lisbon. No fighting was expected — it was
 assumed that the armed forces would rally to the Napoleonic takeover — but in
 case of British raids a division was sent to occupy Cadiz under General Dupont.
 At this point, however, revolt broke out all round the country, and Dupont’s
 division found itself cut off from Madrid by parties of insurgents who fell upon
 the convoys, detachments of soldiers and hospitals it had left scattered in its
 wake. All the inmates of a makeshift hospital at Manzanares were massacred,
 for example, whilst a band of peasants led by the alcalde of Montoro, Juan de
 la Torre, overpowered the seventy-strong guard that Dupont had left to hold
 the Puente de Alcolea. Other attacks took place at Santa Cruz de la Mudela,
                                                      The Guerrillas at War   jl