

   Things did not get any better for the French in1810. In the first place, it
seemed that they were powerless to make any headway against the guerrillas.
Here and there one cabecilla or another was picked off and his band scattered:
examples include Délica in Old Castile, Francisco Sanchez in La Mancha and
Mina in Navarre. But no sooner had one leader been dealt with than another
sprang up to take his place: Mina, for instance, was replaced by his distant
kinsman Francisco Espoz Ilundain, and Sanchez by his neighbour Manuel
Hernandez. Equally, by dint of very great efforts, it sometimes proved possi-
ble to force back the partidas, and all but clear them from a province. By the
end of 1809, for example, the French commander in Aragon, Louis Suchet,
had succeeded in defeating many of the bands that had been threatening his
dominions. But unless action was co-ordinated with the garrison of neigh-
bouring provinces victory was never final, for there was nothing to stop the
guerrilla leaders from slipping across the frontier in search of both a quieter
life and fresh targets. And it was useless simply to mount great sweeps against
the insurgents: territory had to be cleared, certainly, but it also had to be thor-
oughly garrisoned, and this the French rarely had the troops to manage.
Ordered to launch an offensive against such strongholds as Lérida and Tortosa
in an attempt to pave the way for the conquest of Valencia, for example, Suchet
saw the bulk of his Aragonese conquests overrun by the partidas once more.”
    For the French, then, campaigning against the guerrillas was as exhausting
as it was frustrating, as witness, for example, Bigarré’s account of his experi-
ences as temporary governor of Aranjuez in 1811:

     The guerrilla leaders Morales and El Abuelo [i-e., Manuel Hernandez] were
     constantly making incursions in the vicinity . .. One extremely hot day the
     sentries stationed at the Ocafia gate were taken by surprise, and these two
     chieftains . . . galloped down the street that led to the main square . . . shout-
     ing, ‘Long live Fernando VIL!’, followed by 500 of their men. Warned of
     what was going on by one of the sentries, I jumped on my horse, and charged
     them with such impetuosity that they took flight ...and dispersed in the
     countryside . . . Seeing that [El Abuelo] was only a short distance ahead of
     me, I rode out to get him followed by my aides-de-camp and about twenty
     chasseurs ... With my horse going at top speed, I suddenly found myself
                                                         The Guerrillas at War    27

  faced by a canal eighteen feet wide. This I attempted to leap, but my horse
  was not good enough to make such a jump, and I was thrown right into the
  middle, along with my aides-de-camp and four of the light horsemen... I
  felt the effects of the fall for some months, but I was not going to let El
  Abuelo . . . get away with it... .On 6 June I heard . . . that El Abuelo and his
  guerrillas were going to spend the night of the 7th at Uclés... Ata quarter
  to ten, 400 infantry .. . and twenty-five light horse . . . arrived outside the
  town... Charging into the town, they met no resistance . . Having been
  shown the house where El Abuelo stayed whenever he spent the night at
  Ucles, I ordered it to be surrounded. Several shots were fired at us... but
  in the same instant the doors were forced by some voltigeurs .. . Rushing
  inside, they killed four guerrillas ... but El Abuelo, who had been in bed
  with his wife, saved himself by scrambling out of an attic window in his
  nightshirt and jumping down into the garden. Although more than twenty
  shots were fired at him, he then managed to gain the safety of the open
  country.”
   Nor was it just that fighting was incessant. If anything, the problem was
inclined to get worse rather than better. Every French advance, for example,
created fresh guerrillas. Thus, the arrival of the French in Andalucia in 1810
sparked off a new wave of resistance. None of the leaders is as well known as
those that had appeared in the previous two years in the north and centre of
Spain, but they were nonetheless extremely numerous. In the province of
Seville the men involved included Pedro Zaldivar, Miguel Lopez, Antonio Veas,
Salvador Sierra and two anonymous cabecillas known only as Palmetin and El
Mantequero. In Cordoba we find Lorenzo Diaz, Juan Antonio Marmol, Juan
Lorenzo Rey and Mariano Rodriguez. And in Jaén prominent names were
Antonio Calvache, Jerénimo Moreno, Pedro Alcalde and Mateo Gomez. In the
same way, when Suchet finally conquered Valencia in 1812, he was challenged
by such figures as the peasant Gregorio Martinez, the well-known bandit Jaime
Alfonso and the Franciscan friar Agustin Nebot.”
   As the war went on, then, the number of guerrillas may be said to have mul-
tiplied dramatically. But it was not just that there were more opponents for the
French to face; the fact is that there was also a steady intensification of the chal-
lenge. Thus, in the beginning most partidas consisted of no more than a handful
of men, whilst their members were equipped with whatever weapons they could
improvise or capture from the enemy, dressed in civilian costume and entirely
ignorant of the art of war. The free and easy spirit of the first days is captured
extremely well by Francisco Espoz y Mina: