

this defeat, the Navarrese leader, who only escaped death or capture on account
of an earlier bullet wound in the leg, which had forced him to abandon his
command for the safety of his native hills, responded not, as Tone claims, by
limiting himself to guerrilla-style operations but by demanding that his men
should learn to fight as regular troops. As he says, ‘This was the moment when
the regiments began to receive military instruction... From then on the
greater part of their time .. . was spent doing drill.’ And, once the decision
to fight in a regular style had been taken, there was no space for a specific tactica
guerrillera. Espoz y Mina had already learned that sniping at the French from
the hillsides was to be avoided in favour of charging home, and his troops were
now schooled in methods of fighting similar to those of Wellington’s army.
When three of his infantry regiments were attacked at Aibar in December 1810,
for example, they were ordered to give the enemy a single volley at close range
and then launch a bayonet charge.**
   It was not just the pressures of operating against the French that drove the
larger partidas to adopt military forms, however. For commanders with neither
military training nor formal education it was a vital means of legitimising
themselves in the eyes of hostile generals of the regular army, whilst for all
cabecillas it was a way of cementing their own positions by invoking the prin-
ciples of hierarchy and giving themselves access to important sources of
patronage, not to mention fresh recruits. This could result in recognition from
the government and that brought with it shipments of arms and supplies, the
prospect of regular pay, access to the privileges of the military estate and
the possibility of further promotion. As members of the armed forces, they
could free themselves of the political interference sometimes engaged in
by such provincial juntas as managed to maintain themselves in the occupied
territories. And, last but not least, possession of a regular commission or mem-
bership of a regular-style unit offered some protection, for captured soldiers
were granted prisoner-of-war status rather than simply being executed out of
hand.®
   Many bands went through this process of development. As early as the end
of 1809, for example, Porlier’s partida had been organised into the Primer
Cantabro and Castilla infantry regiments and the Husares de Cantabria cavalry
(also under command was the Laredo infantry regiment, but this was in fact a
unit of the pre-war army that had been assigned to Porlier to bolster his forces).
Other northern guerrilla bands transformed in this fashion eventually included
those of Longa, with the First, Second, Third and Fourth Iberia infantry regi-
ments, and the Husares de Iberia cavalry; and Jauregui with the First, Second
and Third Guipuzcoa infantry regiments. As witness the record of Duran’s
‘Division de Soria’, these forces often developed into powerful opponents. Thus
on 28 May 1812 Duran stormed Tudela and pillaged a large convoy that had
4o      Fighting Napoleon