

  In the beginning, and for some time afterwards, the guerrillas of Navarre
  .. . operated as they wished . . . The only tactic was to go wherever enemies
38       Fighting Napoleon


     were to be found that could be attacked with some hope of success . . . and
     these expeditions were captained by the wisest and most valiant.”

   In many bands this situation remained unchanged throughout the war, but
from fairly early on there was a tendency for at least some partidas to grow in
size. In part this was the result of a process of concentration: not only were the
more ambitious cabecillas eager to take over the forces of rival commanders, but
it was soon found that a multiplicity of small partidas was a recipe for chaos.
Thus in 1810, for example, most of the guerrillas in the province of Soria were
united under the command of a colonel of the regular army named José Joaquin
Duran y Barazabal, who had escaped imprisonment at the hands of the
French.’ But, in part, too, it was also simply that success bred success, for the
more dynamic the band the more recruits it got, and the less likely it was to
suffer from desertion. And, by the same token, the more recruits a band got,
the more likely it was to be successful.
    More men, however, meant that for both logistical and operational reasons
it became necessary to adopt structures that reflected the new situation. Bat-
talions of infantry and squadrons of cavalry therefore began to supplant the
partida, and these in time multiplied and allowed commanders who had started
out with a handful of followers to lay claim to the command of brigades and
even divisions. And, very soon, the picturesque style of the early days was being
abandoned. Uniforms — generally brown breeches and jackets topped off with
round black hats — took the place of peasant dress; muskets and bayonets
replaced knives and blunderbusses; and lines and columns supplanted the
crowd of individuals fighting as the fancy took them. Let us quote, for example,
the account of Espoz y Mina’s forces given by a prisoner of war rescued by
them in 1811:

     His cavalry are chosen men and... are dressed as hussars in blue... His
     infantry . .. wear rope-soled sandals, half-gaiters, breeches and jackets; their
     muskets . . . fire well, whilst their bayonets are kept very sharp . . . The sol-
     diers receive one rea/ per day, together with an abundant ration of bread,
     meat and wine . . . Their tactics are confined to firing on the enemy and then
     charging home in various combinations of line or column.”!

   Underlying this transformation was in part the combination of the military
superiority of the French and the sheer efficacy of conventional models of
tactics and organization. Thus, as partidas grew bigger and more permanent,
they presented the French with an easier target, and, what is more, one on
which it was easy to inflict terrible damage. Caught in the open at Belorado in
La Rioja in November 1810, for example, Espoz y Mina’s infantry were over-
whelmed by a force of 7,000 Frenchmen and all but destroyed.*” Shocked by
                                                         The Guerrillas at War    39