


financial backing from the improvised provincial junta that had been established
at Ujué under the leadership of its parish priest, Casimir-Javier de Miguel
e Irujo).”!
   All this was the source of much trouble to the French. On 25 June 1809
Délica scored a considerable coup by capturing the French general Franceschi
in an ambush, whilst on 28 June Merino massacred the guard of a French
convoy at Quintana del Puente. On 6 July Miguel Sarasa attacked a French
force at Fuentes de Sarsa; on 19 July the same commander attacked Sanguesa,
and on 28 July Ignacio Alonso and Juan Lopez Campillo wiped out a French
detachment at Santo Domingo de la Calzada. On 6 August Logrofio was tem-
porarily occupied by the partidas; on 8 August Haro was raided and a foraging
party destroyed at Maella by Santiago Pérez; on 14 August a large party of
Spanish troops who had been taken prisoner the day before at the battle of
Almonacid was liberated by Isidoro Mir and Ventura Jiménez; on 18 August a
column of 150 Frenchmen that was marching from El Burgo de Osma to Soria
was ambushed at Villar del Ciervo with the loss of a third of its strength; on
20 August Pérez beat 600 Frenchmen betweeen Alcafiiz and Caspe; on 23
August Sarasa fell on another force heading from Zaragoza for Navarre; and on
24 August Porlier demonstrated against the walls of Palencia, inflicting a
number of casualties on a party of French troops sent out to chase him off. On
5 September Toribio Bustamente and Mariano Ricafort swept into Torrejon-
cillo in a surprise attack that cost the French garrison fifteen dead and twenty-
six prisoners; on 6 September Rovira routed a French column near Montaut;
and on 16 September El Empecinado beat another one at Fontanar. Striking
again at Casar de Talamar on the penultimate day of the month, the same com-
mander killed seventy of the enemy, and was driven off only when the sur-
vivors opened fire with a cannon and badly wounded his second-in-command,
Saturnino Abuin. On 5 October Francisco Sanchez overwhelmed a party of
eighty Frenchmen at La Guardia, and Merino overcame a small French force
at Santa Maria del Campo six days later; still other columns were attacked by
Sarasa at Lasiero on the 17th and Abecia at Marquina on the 28th. On 5
November Sarasa infiltrated the walled town of Sos under cover of the fact that
it was market day and, in a sudden coup de main, drove out the garrison and
seized a large quantity of plate, grain and livestock. On the 7th Merino won
another victory at Quintana de la Puente; and on the 8th Mina attacked Tafalla.
On 12 November El Empecinado raided Guadalajara and retired with a large
 quantity of woollen cloth; on 13 November Domingo Sabiron seized 400 goats
 from their French guards near Carifiena; and on 15 November José Velasco took
 prisoner a party that had been sent to reconnoitre the mines of Almadén. On
 18 November Mina gained what, for the guerrillas, was a major success at
 Sansol; on 26 November Abecia captured a French courier at Armifion; and on
                                                      The Guerrillas at War    35