

violence or long familiar with notions of irregular resistance. Across wide
regions of the country the intense poverty of the rural masses ensured that ban-
ditry was commonplace, whilst the many internal customs barriers and state
monopolies encouraged the emergence of powerful bands of smugglers. To deal
with this problem, the Bourbon authorities had raised a variety of local secu-
rity forces, which were known collectively as the resguardo, and the result was
that many provinces witnessed incessant skirmishes which schooled both sides
in the techniques of raid and ambush. As if this was not enough, meanwhile,
certain parts of the country — above all, Galicia, the Basque provinces and
Catalonia — possessed home guards consisting of all the male inhabitants, who
were supposed to turn out in the case of invasion under the leadership of local
notables (in Galicia officers involved in the War of Independence included
senores such as Juan Bernardo Quiroga, Diego Nufiez de Millaroso and Joaquin
Tenreiro, magistrates such as Ignacio Herbon and Manuel Cordido, and local
officials such as Cayetano Limia and Joaquin José Marquez). Known in Galicia
as alarmas, in the Basque provinces as migueletes and in Catalonia as somatenes,
in the last two instances they had even seen much service against the French
in the course of the Revolutionary War of 1793-95. Of this conflict there were
bitter memories in most border districts, but throughout the country its effect
had been to confirm views of the French as ‘the other’ that were strengthened
by the inflammatory language used in sermon and pamphlet during the war
against the Convention.!
    A country that was both physically suited to guerrilla warfare and accus-
tomed to its concepts, Spain was therefore conditioned to hate the French. Also
important was the pattern that military operations in the Peninsula were certain
to take. Thus, thanks to the Pyrenees, there were only two roads across the
French frontier that were practicable for large armies, of which the first entered
Spain at Hendaye on the Bay of Biscay and the other at Port Bou on the
Mediterranean. Of these, however, the second was of only limited utility, for
it in practice led only to Barcelona (there were, of course, roads from Barcelona
to the rest of the country, but they were for many reasons not very convenient).
In consequence, the main axis of conquest was always likely to be the Hendaye
road, especially as Bayonne was a much better depot than Perpignan. Yet from
this followed certain consequences. As this highway led to Madrid, in all like-
lihood the French would find themselves having to conquer the Peninsula from,
so to speak, the inside out. With the Spanish army unlikely to be able to stop
them at the frontier or on the Ebro, the French would in effect be sucked deep
into the interior. Madrid would fall soon enough, doubtless, and with it the
plains of Old and New Castile, but the invaders would be denied immediate
control of the coast. Strike out for it in all directions they certainly would, but
for most of its length it was protected by high chains of mountains. As for
30     Fighting Napoleon