

29 November     Mina   raided   Tudela   in company   with Alonso     and Lopez
Campillo.”
   “This small-scale warfare’, wrote Joseph Bonaparte’s friend and confidant
Miot de Melito, ‘quietly undermined us. We only possessed the ground actu-
ally occupied by our armies, and our power did not extend beyond it. The busi-
ness of administration ceased, and there was neither order, nor justice, nor
taxation.” For the invaders actually caught up in the fighting, meanwhile, the
impressions left by the insurrection were still stronger. Among the garrison of
Aragon, for example, was the Prussian officer Heinrich von Brandt, who was
serving in the French-organised Polish force entitled the ‘Legion of the
Vistula’, and who later recorded his impressions in one of the first serious
attempts at an analysis of /a guerrilla. Thus:

  Local causes, added to hatred, revenge and other passions . . . brought the
  mountaineers together . . . From corps thus formed . . . the boldest and most
  determined stepped forward as leaders . . . As long as the guerrillas were thus
  constituted, they made no appearance as a body, but were nevertheless
  extremely dangerous to the French. They formed the basis of an actual arma-
  ment of the people, and were soon upon every road and path . . . and eagerly
  seeking for plunder... They rushed with the utmost rapidity upon their
  booty, or placed themselves in order of battle according to the nature of the
  undertaking . . . As soon as the enterprise was completed everyone went his
  own way, and armed men were scattered in all directions . . . Thus the com-
  munication on all roads was closed. Thousands of enemies were on the spot,
  though not a single one could be discovered; no courier could be dispatched
  without being taken; no supplies could set off without being attacked... At
  the same time, there existed no means of striking out against a combination
  of this kind. The French were obliged to be constantly on their guard against
  an enemy who, while continually flying, always reappeared, and who, without
  actually being seen, was everywhere. It was neither battles nor engagements
  which exhausted their forces, but the incessant molestations of an invisible
  enemy who, if pursued, became lost among the people, out of which he reap-
  peared immediately afterwards with renewed strength. The lion in the fable,
  tormented to death by a gnat, gives us a true picture of the army at that
  period.”

Serving with the Second Hussars, meanwhile, was Albert de Rocca:

  In these mountainous provinces in the north of the Peninsula the French,
  although always conquerors where the . . . Spaniards showed themselves in
  battle, were not . . . the less assailed by clouds of armed mountaineers, who,
  never coming near to fight in closed ranks, or body to body, retreated from
36       Fighting Napoleon


     position to position, from rock to rock, on heights, without ceasing to fire
     even in flying. It sometimes required entire battalions to carry an order...
     to another distant one; The soldiers wounded, sick or fatigued who remained
     behind the French columns, were immediately murdered. Every victory pro-
     duced only a new conflict. Victories had become useless by the persevering
     and invincible character of the Spaniards, and the French armies were con-
     suming themselves . . . in continual fatigues . . . and anxieties.”°