


whole the phenomenon was quite different, the combatants remaining close to
their villages and dispersing to their homes after every combat. As Southey
noted, their efforts were ‘more properly a national than a guerrilla warfare, the
work of destruction being carried on less by roving parties than by the settled
inhabitants who watched for every opportunity of revenge’.”’
   To illustrate what Southey means, we can do no better than turn to the
account of the French cavalryman Rocca, whose unit was part of the garrison
of Ronda:                                            :

     The most popular pastime among the labourers of Ronda was to sit on the
     rocks among the olive groves . . . and smoke cigars while they fired upon our
     vedettes. In the morning they would go out of the town with their tools as
     if they were going out to work in the fields, but there or at the farmhouses
     they found their guns, and returning them at night they would come back to
     the town and sleep in the midst of us. It not infrequently happened that our
     hussars recognised their hosts among their enemies . . . The women, the old
     men and even the children were against us, and served as spies for the
     enemy.”
It will be noted that there is no mention of any guerrilla band here. This is not
to say, of course, that there were no partidas in the region. The first opposition
the French met in the district of Casares, for example, came from a group of
goatherds who armed themselves with fowling pieces and attacked a party of
thirty-six Frenchmen who had come looking for horses, whilst the serrania in
general became the haunt of such cabecillas as Vicente Moreno, José Fajardo,
José Ruiz Falcon, José Aguilar and José Villalobos.” But the model described
by Rocca was very different, what we see rather being an ad hoc home guard
tied to its own pueblos. As he implies, there was at first no organisation, but as
time went on, so the men of each village were grouped into loose companies,
and these in turn were eventually organised into four infantry battalions known
as the cazadores patriotas of Casares, Jurique, Gaucin and Cortés.’ Called out,
as these were, only in times of danger, what we see is rather a reliance not on
guerrilla bands but on people’s militias in the style of the a/arma and the
somaten.
   The value placed on this model of military organisation is evident from
events in various parts of Spain. Thus, threatened by the forces of Marshal
Victor, on 21 March 1809 the Junta of Extremadura ordered the enlistment in
a militia of every man between the ages of seventeen and fifty, the intention
being that this force should engage in guerrilla operations against the French.
However, as was only to be expected given its long traditions of self-defence,
it was Catalonia that proved to be the chief exponent of this home-guard model.
As witness the events of the autumn and winter of 1809, the guerrilla was at
                                                       The Guerrillas at War    45