

they were reconstituted with the aid of a small force of regular troops dis-
patched from Galicia under a Lieutenant-Colonel Luis Diaz. With Bonnet soon
in exactly the same straits as before, by the middle of March the way seemed
open for a counter-offensive. Some 5,000 troops were therefore placed in
motion for Oviedo, and on 19 March the latter’s outnumbered garrison was
defeated in a sharp action at the Puente de Pefiaflor, with the result that Bonnet
once again abandoned the capital and retreated, this time, to Cangas de Onis.
   Barely a week had passed before he was back again, however. Having received
reinforcements from Santander, he retraced his steps and attacked the
Spaniards, who had re-entered Oviedo. Largely composed of raw troops, badly
armed and lacking in cohesion — one of the battalions sent from Galicia was a
provisional unit composed of fragments of no fewer than four different regi-
ments — the defenders fled with little resistance, leaving the French to enter
Oviedo for the third time in two months. Yet this profited them not at all.
Bonnet lacked the troops to force the line of the River Naloén, to which the
Spaniards had once again withdrawn, and from the safe base that this afforded
them detachments of partisans and regular troops were soon sallying out to
harass the French. Not, indeed, till the fall of Astorga permitted the dispatch
of substantial reinforcements to Bonnet in late April was the stalemate broken.
Only then were the French able to cross the Nalon and occupy much of the
west of the province.”
   Yet the French offensive of 1810 did not bring the fighting in Asturias to an
end. Whereas it had previously been used merely as a base for guerrilla warfare,
the principality now became a theatre for its operations. Once again, however,
we see that the partidas were not alone in the struggle. Porlier, it is true, for
some months held out in the mountains in the south of the province, whilst
other irregulars continued to raid Bonnet’s lines of communication with Leon
and Santander, but other elements also played their part. Amongst these
were the alarma, who took part, for example, in Porlier’s raid on Santofia in
July 1810 (see below). But from the summer onwards naval power played
an increasingly important part in the equation. Thus, the month of July saw
Porlier come down to the coast, take ship with the British squadron stationed
in the Bay of Biscay and seize the town of Santofia in the neighbouring province
of Santander. Forced to abandon this conquest in the face of overwhelming
numbers, he then spent some time cruising up and down the coast harassing
the French and picking up recruits for his command. Returning to Asturias, on
17 October he attacked Gijon, where he was joined by a brigade of regular
troops that had been dispatched from La Corufia under Mariano Renovales
along with 800 British marines. The French troops in the vicinity being heavily
outnumbered, Oviedo was quickly retaken in addition to Gij6n, but it was not
to be held, for a vengeful Bonnet was soon bearing down on the city with every
50    Fighting Napoleon