

   Events after the fall of Gerona on 11 December 1809 demonstrate still more
clearly the vital role played by the regular army in the ‘little war’ in Catalonia.
With the siege out of the way, Marshal Augereau’s next objective was the relief
of Barcelona, which had been closely blockaded by Catalan forces (both regular
and irregular) and was facing starvation. Moving on the capital via the roads
that ran through Vich and Hostalrich, the French troops that had been con-
centrated around Gerona found that their every movement was harassed by
clouds of sharpshooters, that passes such as that of El Grao could only be
cleared by heavy fighting and, further, that Rovira and other commanders con-
tinued to be active in their rear: at the Arroyo de Masanet, for example, General
Verdier, who was responsible for the district between Gerona and the frontier,
lost some 400 men in an ambush.
   Worse was to come, however. The Army of the Right had just been placed
under the command of the energetic O’Donnell, who proceeded to launch a
series of attacks on the French. On 12 January 1810 a French reconnaissance
was routed at the pass of Collsuspina, just north of Centellas. Reinforcements
having been called up, O’Donnell hastily fell back on Manresa, only to re-
appear suddenly ten days later and fall upon a French brigade stationed around
Granollers. Taken completely by surprise, the invaders lost 1,000 men, and,
whilst the survivors, who had barricaded themselves in a convent, were rescued
by a relief column led by Augereau himself, the Catalan troops got clear away.
There followed a brief lull in the fighting, but on 19 February O'Donnell
appeared yet again, this time attacking the French division that had been left
to hold Vich and badly wounding its commander.” Thanks to the superiority
of the French cavalry, the Spaniards were in the end defeated at Vich, but
O’Donnell was undaunted. The Spanish general first thwarted an attempt on
the part of Marshal Augereau to capture Tarragona by attacking the garrisons
that had been dropped off at Villafranca and Manresa to keep open communi-
cations with Barcelona (both were all but destroyed); and then joined with the
local somatenes in harassing the would-be besiegers’ retreat on the capital. Much
aided by Augereau, who to Napoleon’s fury decided to pull most of his troops
back to Gerona on the grounds that the population of Barcelona could not be
fed at the same time as a large field army, O’Donnell then marched west to assist
Lérida, which had in April been besieged by troops dispatched from Aragon
under Suchet. In this he failed — over-confidence and want of caution led him
to march into a clever trap at Margalef that cost him several thousand casual-
ties — but the French were too preoccupied with the siege of Lérida (and, after
that of Mequinenza and Tortosa), not to mention the perennial task of getting
convoys of food into Barcelona, to follow up their success. As a result, the
Spanish general was accorded a breathing space, which he used to rebuild his
battered army, whose divisions were deployed in a great horseshoe in the
                                                       The Guerrillas at War    47