


man that he could muster. Whilst Porlier headed for the hills once more,
Renovales therefore re-embarked and sailed for Santander; further mischief
was put a stop to only when a violent storm wrecked the expedition, sinking
many of the Allied ships and resulting in the death of some 800 troops.”
   By the end of 1810, then, the fighting in Asturias had settled into a pattern
that blended regular and irregular warfare. Nor did 1811 bring much change,
the importance of the guerrillas being, if anything, inclined to decline. An
attempt on the part of Mariano Renoyales to establish a force at Potes on the
lines of that commanded by Porlier in the hope of raising the Basque provinces
in revolt went badly wrong, whilst the first part of the year saw the latter com-
mander experience not only repeated defeats, but also a major mutiny amongst
his men.” August, it is true, saw Porlier redeem himself by making a forced
mach on Santander, which enabled him to raid the city and take most of the
garrison prisoner; but, if Asturias was evacuated in June, it was not because of
the guerrillas, but rather because the Spanish forces in Galicia essayed a cau-
tious offensive that secured a minor victory at Cogorderos and forced all the
French troops in north-west Spain to march against them. This in turn gave
renewed life to the partidas of Old Castile and Leon — it was at this time, for
example, that one Lorenzo Aguilar de Toro, an escaped prisoner of war who
had got back to his home territory of Zamora, is supposed to have killed no
fewer than seventy-one Frenchmen in just four days — but again it is clear that
the regular army was as much a combatant in /a guerrilla as the partidas.”
   If this was true of the north of Spain, it was also true of Andalucia. As we
have seen, when the French moved south in January 1810 they soon encoun-
tered much irregular resistance. To quote an anonymous intelligence report
sent to the Patriot government from Seville, for example: ‘In a word, the
ferment is spreading to every pueblo: war is following the French like a fury,
and death and destruction are mounting by the day.’”’ On occasion this
resistance reached considerable heights: an ill-judged raid on Murcia that
required the use of most of the troops used to garrison the kingdom of Granada
allowed the ‘mountain flies’, as the French called them, to threaten many minor
posts and even temporarily to occupy Malaga. The serious nature of the
problem is suggested by the draconian decree issued by Marshal Soult (the
head of the French forces that had invaded southern Spain) on 8 May 1810.
According to this, pueblos that failed either to establish a civic guard to defend
themselves as the French had ordered, or to put up a fight in the event of the
arrival of a partida, were made liable to heavy fines, and it was further
announced that all those taken in arms would be shot out of hand.” Mean-
while, Algodonales and Grazalema were singled out as particularly troublesome
centres of resistance and, having been occupied by punitive columns, subjected
                                                      The Guerrillas at War   51