

least as vigorous in Catalonia as it was in other parts of Spain: on 16 October
Juan Clarés attacked a French convoy at Monroig; on 26 November José Mans6
chased the French from San Boy; and on 18 December 1809 no less a person
than the commander of the French forces in the region, Marshal Augereau, was
attacked near Figueras whilst returning to his headquarters following a
brief visit to France.** Whilst there were, as we have seen, a number of Catalan
partidas, in all of these operations most of the irregular element of the Patriot
forces was provided by the somatén, for which each community was expected
to raise and maintain a certain number of its inhabitants.
    The somatenes remained in action throughout the war. In the summer of
 1811, for example, large numbers of them were used to harass the forces besieg-
ing Tarragona.” But not all the Catalan forces, and still less those which were
engaged in guerrilla-style operations, were composed of irregulars. Even in
1808 many of the most active resistance fighters had in fact been soldiers from
the garrison of Barcelona who had fled the city after it was taken over by the
French: the first recruits of Juan Claros, for example, included men from both
the Spanish and Walloon guards and the Extremadura line infantry regiment.”
In 1809 much of the south and west of Catalonia was still in the hands of the
Spanish Army of the Right, commanded by General Blake, and it was in fact
troops from this force that bore the brunt of the fighting in the operations we
have mentioned. Many of them, it is true, were little more than irregulars in
appearance and attitude, especially in the case of the forty regiments of
migueletes that the Junta of Catalonia had raised as a gesture to local feeling in
preference to imposing conscription to the regular army. In brief, these units
were enlisted wholly from volunteers, paid a substantial bounty, allowed to elect
their own officers and guaranteed their liberty at the end of the war.* Promi-
nent among them were such supposed guerrillas as Juan Clarés, Juan Baget,
José Mansé and Francisco Milans del Bosch but, despite the fact that they had
all been civilians in 1808, to none of them can the term really be applied. Their
troops may have been of poor quality — at the beginning, indeed, arms were in
such short supply that many of the men had to be armed with pikes — but they
fought alongside and in the same style as the regulars, and cannot be separated
from them. And, in the same way, the regulars cannot be separated from the
guerrilla. For example, a particularly prominent role in the incessant raids and
skirmishes that took place around the besieged city of Gerona was played by
Enrique O’Donnell, a brigade commander who in 1808 had been an officer of
the Ultonia infantry regiment. Thus, having broken into the city with a supply
convoy on 1 September, twelve days later he broke out again in spectacular
fashion, storming the sleeping camp of General Souham, running off all his
horses and baggage animals and forcing the officer concerned to take flight
dressed in his nightgown.”
46     Fighting Napoleon