


stopped in the town for the night, whilst on 14 June he launched a surprise
attack on Aranda de Duero that saw his forces scale the walls and force the
defenders to take shelter in the bishop’s palace. Having been equipped with a
number of 12-pounder guns by Wellington, meanwhile, in the autumn of 1812
Duran and his men twice beat the French at Fuenmayor, besieged Calatayud
and, deprived of victory by a French relief force that evacuated the garrison in
the nick of time, vented their spleen on the castle of Borja, which was quickly
bombarded into surrender.”                           .
   However, the powerful force-multiplier that the combination of increased
strength and militarisation represented is best studied through the medium of
Francisco Espoz y Mina’s ‘Divisi6n de Navarra’. Thus, in 1810 the then
Francisco Espoz Ilundain was a volunteer serving in the partida of his kinsman
Martin Javier Mina. After escaping from the disaster that saw the capture of
his commander on 31 March 1810 — an episode to which we shall return — he
set up as a cabecilla himself, and, though initially supported by only a handful
of companions, succeeded in uniting many of his old comrades under his
leadership, in part because of his crafty assumption of the name Espoz y Mina.
A series of minor successes brought in many fresh recruits, whilst the new com-
mander was careful to give his forces a sound logistical base by levying customs
duties on all goods crossing the French frontier and, later on, securing control
of the administration of the properties expropriated as bienes nacionales by
order of the cortes of Cadiz. In this manner the need to live off the civilian
population was reduced to a minimum, whilst Espoz y Mina earned further
plaudits by suppressing many bandits. Establishing a monopoly of armed force
— any partida that resisted his authority was crushed without mercy — he was
able not only to establish an efficient civil administration but also to create an
effective army that was able to offer the civilian population at least some
measure of protection.*’ All this brought growing military success, most notably
at the Puerto de Arlaban on 25 May 1811. Thus, a large French convoy that
had just left Vitoria en route for France was wending its way through the pass
when it was attacked from both sides by Espoz y Mina’s men. As one contem-
porary account had it:

     The battle began between five and six o’clock in the morning, and Espoz y
     Mina’s troops loaded and fired with such skill that two or three volleys threw
     the French into consternation... The fruit of this brilliant action . . . has
     been the death of 300 Frenchmen . .. the capture of 700 or 800 more and
     the release of some 800 . . . Spanish prisoners who armed themselves there
     and then with the muskets of their oppressors . .. The booty also included
     more than 4,000,000 reales.**
   Such successes were often exaggerated: in his own report Espoz y Mina more
than doubled the size of the escort, for example. But, skilfully publicised, such
                                                     The Guerrillas at War   41