


mountains of central Catalonia in positions that allowed them to keep up the
blockade of the capital, harass convoys moving along the high road from
Gerona to Barcelona and impede Suchet’s attempts to move on Tortosa and
Tarragona from the west.°' At the same time, meanwhile, the somatenes were
called to make a major effort. Thus:
  All the inhabitants of the districts of Tarragona, Tortosa and Lerida capable
  of doing so should leap to arms. Having elected experienced commanders of
  proven courage and patriotism, they should mass at Falset and Tibisa.. .
  and intércept the enemy’s communications. And let no pueblo provide our
  perfidious foe with aid of any sort: any that does so will be treated as an
  enemy by its own brothers.”

   There followed a further spate of minor actions, with small forces of regular
troops attacking the enemy at such places as Tibisa and Balaguer, the guerrilla
bands of Narciso Gay and Francisco Rovira operating along the main roads and
raiding such garrisons as that of Besali, and the migueletes of Clarés, Manso
and other commanders skirmishing with the French around Barcelona and
Gerona and even striking across the border into France.” In September,
meanwhile, O’Donnell attempted his most daring operation yet: picking up his
northernmost division from its base of Cardona, he struck eastwards towards
the sea, and fell on a German brigade whose task it was to watch the coast in
the vicinity of Gerona. Aided both by further troops that had been sent up
from Tarragona by sea and a number of irregulars, the Spanish commander
gained a complete victory: taken by surprise, the Germans were overwhelmed
and taken prisoner.
    As the war went on, meanwhile, the tendency of the Catalan forces to engage
in small-scale operations increased still further, particularly in the wake of the
fall of Tarragona in June 1811. The defenders of Catalonia, now known as the
First Army, had suffered terrible casualties, been cut off from the sea and driven
back into the poor and thinly populated hinterland of the province. In this sit-
uation all that could be done was to launch the occasional raid, a good example
of which was the attack launched by the First Army’s new commander, General
Luis Lacy, on a large French convoy that was travelling from Gerona to
Barcelona near Igualada on 7 October 1810. The details of this affair are of
some interest, for they are little different from those of, say, Espoz y Mina’s
attacks on similar convoys travelling along the main road from Madrid to the
French frontier. Thus, it was decided that a strong force of troops under
the Baron de Eroles should attack the column from the front whilst Lacy cut
the road in its rear and, further, that the attack should go in at night whilst the
French were in camp. The Spaniards having spent the previous day holed up
at Manresa, the first the French knew of the attack was when some 300 enemy
48     Fighting Napoleon


cavalry charged into their encampment at three o’clock in the morning. Many
French soldiers were killed or wounded in the first rush, but the remainder fled
into a nearby convent, where they held out stoutly. Unable to take this redoubt
for want of artillery, Lacy eventually had to retreat, but it had still been a very
successful raid: at least seventy Frenchmen lay dead, whilst the Spaniards’
booty included 150 mules loaded with flour and 700 head of cattle.”
   The Catalan example has been discussed at some length because it shows not
just how local militias could be just as important in /a yuerrilla as partisan bands,
but also how the regular army played an integral part in its operations. Indeed,
this was a feature of the fighting in a number of provinces. In Galicia, for
instance, the uprising of the first months of 1809 was lent added bite by the
presence of the Marqués de la Romana’s Army of the Left, which, though
much battered after the campaigns of the autumn and winter of 1808, remained
in being and in March 18009 sallied out to capture the French strongpoint of
Villafranca del Bierzo.
   For an even better example, however, we might turn to Asturias. Isolated
behind its mountains, that province had been stripped of most of its regular
troops in the summer of 1809, and in early 1810 seemed ripe for invasion. On
31 January, then, the division of General Bonnet occupied Oviedo. The mere
occupation of the capital did not put an end to resistance, however. Most of the
garrison had fallen back to positions in the west of the province, and from there
a number of officers sallied out to raise the populace, who had previously been
organised into an alarma modelled on that of Galicia. At the same time, mean-
while, the forces of Juan Diaz Porlier, which by this time consisted of a flying
column of regular troops, moved into a position from which they could threaten
Bonnet’s communications with Leon. There followed a series of minor actions:
Porlier, for example, attacked a French detachment near Infiesto and captured
many prisoners; Barcena, the regular commander, defeated another small force
at Puente de Soto; and various small groups of irregulars closed in on the
capital. With his communications completely cut — many of his dispatches fell
into the hands of the Spaniards — on 12 February Bonnet was constrained to
evacuate the capital and start to fall back on Santander.
    At this point, however, the Spaniards behaved in such a manner that the
French general was afforded the chance of a counter-stroke. Unable to resist
the temptation of staging a triumphal entry into the city, Porlier and Llano
Ponte (the commander of the division that had originally held the eastern part
of the province) descended on Oviedo, along with large numbers of irregulars,
and settled down to enjoy the fruits of victory. Realising that he was not being
pursued, Bonnet turned back and, taking advantage of snow and thick fog,
inflicted a shattering defeat on the Spaniards two days later. With Oviedo once
more occupied, the Asturian forces again fell back on the River Nalon, where
                                                       The Guerrillas at War    49