

pivots built into fortress parapets) in covered wagons in the style of the famous
‘Qships’ of the First World War.*° Along some main roads, too, the French
built chains of blockhouses in which squads of soldiers and gendarmes could be
housed and victims of guerrilla attacks take refuge.’ But above all the issue was
one of manpower. For reasons that will become clear, the large garrisons that
the French had to maintain in all the provinces which they occupied were not
there solely to maintain law and order. That said, however, if the situation was
not to get completely out of hand, thousands of soldiers had to be dispersed
across the country in ‘penny packets’. Still worse, meanwhile, many units found
themselves deprived of reinforcements: sent across the frontier from Bayonne
and Perpignan in temporary detachments known as bataillons du marche, thou-
sands of conscripts found themselves seized upon as garrisons and convoy
guards by the overstretched governors of such towns as Pamplona and
Figueras. To deal with the situation, Napoleon created a large force of gen-
darmes, and encouraged the formation of civic guards and anti-guerrilla units
of various sorts. As early as April 1809, meanwhile, the comisario regio respon-
sible for the Basque provinces ordered the formation of no fewer than seven
companies of coast guards to prevent raids on the coast of Guipuzcoa. But there
were never enough of the gendarmes d’Espagne to go round — though the initial
establishment alone consisted of twenty squadrons — whilst the various jura-
mentados were by no means wholly reliable. And of course the programme
added greatly to the costs of occupation, thereby increasing the pressure on the
populace and propelling them further in the direction of resistance.*
   There is, then, no smoke without fire: there was a popular guerrilla move-
ment that fought the French in Spain between 1808 and 1814; not only that,
meanwhile, but it also secured much success, and developed tactics that were
very effective. But this is not the whole story of /a guerrilla. Even popular resis-
tance to French occupation is not to be measured solely by reference to par-
tidas. There were many spontaneous acts of individual resistance, such as that
which took place in Yepes on 30 December 1809, when a juramentado who had
had too much to drink and started boasting about the money he was getting
from the French was shot in the back in the main square.” And in Vizcaya in
August 1808, Galicia in February—June 1809, the Navarrese valley of Roncal
in March—August 1809 and the Serrania de Ronda in March—August 1810
resistance rather took the form of peasant revolt. In each case the pattern was
the same, improvised local militias taking up arms under a variety of leaders —
in Galicia and Vizcaya local notables, in the Roncal escaped prisoners of war,
and in Ronda a mixture of local notables and agents dispatched by the central
authorities — and harassing the French columns sent against them. Some of the
tactics used by the insurgents were reminiscent of those of guerrilla warfare —
the Roncal even witnessed the formation of a number of partidas — but on the
44       Fighting Napoleon