

victories secured recognition in Cadiz, and with it further authority, with the
consequence that Espoz y Mina was able to form still more units, of which
many were recruited from beyond the borders of Navarre. By 1813, indeed, his
 forces had grown to nine regiments of infantry and one of cavalry. Repeated
French attacks proved unavailing, and eventually the situation got quite out of
hand. With the garrison of Navarre and Aragon stretched unmercifully by the
need to make up for the losses of the Russian campaign, and Espoz y Mina
armed with artillery landed by the British from the sea, the French position
became impossible. Strongpoint after strongpoint was taken by the guerrillas;
the forces of two or three thousand men that were all that the harassed French
commanders could scrape together to take on the guerrillas in the open field
 were repeatedly beaten; and those few garrisons that remained too strong to be
attacked were blockaded and threatened with the spectre of starvation (for a
more detailed account of these operations, see pp. 135-6). To say that Espoz y
Mina liberated Navarre on his own would be to go too far: had the French been
able to concentrate all their forces against the Navarrese commander, there is
little doubt that they would in the end have overcome his troops. Yet the fact
remains that militarisation and dictatorship had between them created a situa-
tion that had no equal.”
    By the end of the war forces such as those of Duran and Espoz y Mina
had obviously come a long way from the tiny groups in which they had
their origin. Yet on the surface the guerrillas remained a popular phenomenon.
Even when they could lay claim to the status of army officers, for example,
most of the chieftains affected nicknames that at first sight both perpetuated
and asserted their civilian status. Thus Espoz y Mina was ‘Uncle Frank’ (Tio
Francisco) or the ‘King of Navarre’ (Rey de Navarra); Mina was ‘the lad’ (El
Mozo); Merino ‘the priest’ (El Cura); Alegre ‘the potter’ (El Cantarero); Délica
‘the Capuchin’ (El Capuchino); Porlier ‘the little marquess’ (El Marquesito);
Palarea ‘the doctor’ (El Médico); Juan Martin ‘Stick-in-the-Mud’ (El Empeci-
nado); Rodriguez Valdés ‘the cook’ (El Cocinero); Orué ‘the little lawyer’ (E]
Abogadillo); Abad ‘Jerkin’ (Chaleco); Abuin ‘One-Hand’ (El Manco); Alonso
‘Caves’ (Cuevillas); Principe ‘Bourbon’ (Borbon); Bustos ‘the brigand’ (El
Brigante); Fernandez “Two Hairs’ (Dos Pelos); Gaston “Titch’ (El Chiquito);
Jauregui ‘the shepherd’ (El Pastor); Marafion ‘the Trappist’ (El Trapense);
Manuel Hernandez ‘the grandfather’ (E1 Abuelo); Francisco Sanchez ‘Frankie’
(Francisquete); and Santos Gonzalez ‘the black’ (El Negro).”
   With nicknames common in popular parlance — even today Spanish foot-
ballers and bullfighters often use such apodos — no statement could be clearer:
the guerrillas were, quite literally, the people in arms. If anything more was
needed to make the point, meanwhile, it is the image that they frequently
affected. As Robert Brindle wrote of his meeting with El] Empecinado in the
summer of 1809, for instance:
42       Fighting Napoleon