


     Though elevated at this time to the rank of colonel, [El Empecinado] had
     not cast aside the dress of the peasant. His hat was the same as that worn in
     many places by the peasants, with a small crown and broad brim, and was
     fastened under his chin by an old ribbon . . . A carbine was fastened to his
     side by a silk handkerchief and he had a sword on the opposite side [and] a
     brace of pistols . . . and a large knife in a sash tied round his middle.*!

   A year and a half later, meanwhile, it seems that his persona was but little
changed: all his letters were signed ‘El Empecinado’, whilst an archdeacon who
met him in Cuenca in February 1811 compared him to the proverbial ‘rough
diamond’.” Such an image, meanwhile, is very much that conveyed by Dennis
Dighton’s 1813 painting of ‘the brigand Croza’, one of the very few contem-
porary pictures of a cabecilla drawn from the life that has come down to us. It
shows a ferociously moustachioed figure with a sinister face, clad in peasant
costume, complete with broad-brimmed hat and rope-soled sandals, who is
pointing out some unseen enemy to two equally grim-looking followers with a
dagger.”
   And, beyond doubt, even the unmilitarised bands gave the French much
trouble. Patrols and forage parties were likely to be set upon, and stragglers to
be murdered out of hand. To get through to their destinations, couriers had to
be escorted by hundreds of troops, whilst, by the same token, the transport of
supplies had to be undertaken through the medium of convoys that were as
large as they were well protected. And even the strongest parties could expe-
rience serious difficulties, for many cabecillas evolved ways of fighting that were
suited to the capacities of their men. It was, for example, Espoz y Mina’s boast
that, to make up for their lack of training, ammunition and proper firearms, he
encouraged his men to fire a single volley and then to charge home immedi-
ately."* Most of the Navarrese guerrillas fought on foot, but on horseback the
irregulars were even worse. To quote an aide-de-camp of General Hugo:

     They appear... at the gallop, disorder our columns with their murderous
     blunderbusses, and then take advantage of the confusion to ride in and cut
     down the men. If they see that our forces are too strong for them, they fire
     a single volley . . . and then ride to the rear whilst they load their arms, which
     they can effect with great speed even on the move. If we follow them, they
     turn back and fire at us again, causing us still more casualties . . . and in this
     fashion they make their escape, whilst laughing all the while at our efforts to
     catch them.”

    As a result of all this, immense resources had to be devoted to dealing with
 the problem. Amongst the more ingenious strategies adopted was to hide small
 cannon (in fact, probably over-sized muskets designed to be fired from special
                                                        The Guerrillas at War    43