


was minimal, although as yet their work has largely been confined to regional
analyses. What is lacking is a study on a national scale, and it is this that the
following chapter will seek to provide.
   In embarking on a critical reassessment of the Spanish war effort, the histo-
rian is immediately faced with a major problem in that the struggle began with
a series of episodes that appear to confirm the idea that the populace rushed
into battle against Napoleon. In La Mancha, for example, the invaders found
themselves assailed on all sides by bands of angry peasants who committed the
most appalling atrocities against any Frenchmen unlucky enough to fall into
their hands. In Catalonia the popular militias known as the somatenes flocked to
arms and inflicted an embarrassing reverse on the French at the pass of El
Bruch. And, above all, at Zaragoza the armed citizenry manned the walls, beat
back a major assault and refused to give in even when the French finally
penetrated their defences.’ Images of heroism, then, were to be found in abun-
dance, but, whilst the problem cannot just be ducked, it would be wrong to
allow these episodes to stand in the way of attempts at revision. Particularly
helpful here is what Raymond Carr called ‘a political great fear’.°
   The origins of this phenomenon may be traced to the revolt of 2 May 1808
in Madrid. In this affair it was the Spaniards who struck the first blows, but
this was not the story that reached the rest of the country. Carried by terrified
fugitives seeking shelter with friends and family in the provinces, the tale grew
in the telling until it was believed that the French had not only slaughtered
thousands of innocent civilians, but also that they had deliberately set out to
massacre the populace. For an example of the spirit in which the news was
received, one might cite the city of Zaragoza, whose experience of the first three
decades of the nineteenth century was chronicled in great detail by one
Faustino Casamayor. Thus for 5 May 1808 his journal read as follows:

     Today’s post brought the disagreeable news of the misfortunes suffered by
     the gallant inhabitants of Madrid on account of the inhuman fury of the
     French commander, Murat... No sooner had it arrived than there was
     an extraordinary meeting of the town council, at which it was decided to
     warn the public of what had taken place and in addition to take precautions
     against the chance of anything of the sort happening at Zaragoza. All this
     plunged the populace into great fear, and whipped up great anger against
     ... the French.°

With many people already unsettled by the absence of the royal family (in
whose protection the humbler elements of the population reposed much faith),
taking up arms seemed an immediate necessity. Typical, perhaps, was the
response of Ciudad Rodrigo, where news of the Dos de Mayo led the populace
to man the walls in panic in expectation of an immediate attack. When nothing
                                                    The Guerrillas in Context   63