

to sack and massacre — so thorough was the destruction of the former, indeed,
that Joseph’s comisario regio in Seville boasted that it would forever after be a
desert.”
   Yet the real threat to the invaders came not from the efforts of the serranos
but rather from the regular forces that continued to be scattered around the
periphery of the region. Of the forces that had been defeated in the Sierra
Morena when the French had burst through the passes there was little enough
to be feared (though a few fugitive units ended up in the serrania and supported
the insurrection there). However, a division of veteran Asturian troops had been
sent down from the headquarters of the Army of the Left at Badajoz into the
present-day province of Huelva and, under the enterprising leadership of its
commander, General Ballesteros, it was soon causing major problems for the
French. Thus, defeating columns under Beauregard and Gazan at Ronquillo
and Valverde, Ballesteros moved to attack the French forces who had occupied
the Condado de Niebla. Furthermore, although he was himself defeated at
Zalamea la Real on 15 April, he got away without any great difficulty and estab-
lished himself in the wilds of the Sierra de Aracena, from whence for many
months he was to continue to harass the French. Nor were his men alone. A
7oo-strong detachment of troops consisting of fragments of half a dozen dif-
ferent units that had managed to escape capture when the French took Seville
had succeeded in reaching Ayamonte, where it was taken over by General Fran-
cisco Copons y Navia, who had been sent round from Cadiz. Aided by some
hastily organised local militias, these men embarked on a series of raids and
skirmishes in the Condado de Niebla. And, having again landed from the sea,
a full division under General Luis Lacy first struck into the Serrania de Ronda
from San Roque, and then re-embarked and sailed round to Huelva, where it
drove off the French garrison and advanced some way inland before returning
to Cadiz.”
   All these troops were regulars: Lacy’s division, for example, consisted of the
line infantry regiments of Murcia and Canarias, the light infantry regiments of
Valencia and Campo Mayor, the Ciudad Real regiment of provincial militia and
a composite battalion drawn from the Spanish and Walloon Guards.” Yet it is
clear that their activities belonged entirely to the realm of Ja guerrilla: the
Spanish attack at Valverde, for example, had been launched at midnight. As
Salmon wrote of Copons’ activities in the Condado de Niebla:

  There were... no pitched battles between full-scale armies because such
  forces did not exist, but raids and skirmishes were to be found in abundance.
  Fiercely contested and very bloody, they showed the French that the spirit
  and valour that has always characterised Spaniards were not dead . . . As for
52       Fighting Napoleon


     taking control of the district, the enemy could never do so, there being no
     point within its bounds where they could post themselves without being
     immediately set upon, harassed and overcome.”