


employed in raids that took them deep into the hinterland of Spain. The first
of these was the surprise of Arroyomolinos de Montanchez of 28 October 1811.
Hearing that a reinforced French division commanded by General Girard had
advanced to the Extremaduran town of Caceres, and thus placed itself far
beyond the reach of any possible support, the British General Hill, who was
guarding the southern frontier of Portugal with a much larger force, resolved
to take the enemy napping. Supported by a few troops from the Spanish Fifth
Army, he therefore led 8,000 British and Portuguese regulars across the fron-
tier in a forced march on Girard’s communications. In the event the French
commander escaped being surrounded, as Hill had hoped, for, discovering that
Allied troops were in the area, he withdrew from Caceres in the nick of time.
However, the invaders’ retreat was not quick enough, and in the early morning
of 28 October they were attacked in camp at the village of Arroyomolinos de
Montanchez. Taken completely by surprise, the French were routed with the
loss of many prisoners and all their baggage.** Meanwhile, it was Hill, too, who
was the chief protagonist of the Anglo-Portuguese army’s other great raid: it
was he who, in May 1812, led a powerful striking force to destroy the vital
bridge across the River Tagus at Almaraz, an operation that he accomplished
with consummate skill.*°
   In one way or another, then, considerable forces of both Spanish and Anglo-
Portuguese troops were drawn into /a guerrilla. In most instances this was on a
purely temporary basis: Hill’s corps, for example, had by the autumn of 1812
once more adopted a role that was purely conventional. But amongst the
Spaniards in particular, circumstances led a number of regular soldiers to
acquire a place amongst the ranks of the guerrillas that was all but permanent.
   We must here in the first instance turn once again to the division of General
Ballesteros. This force we last met fighting a long series of actions in the moun-
tains of western Andalucia in the first months of 1810, and it in fact contin-
ued to engage the French in this district for the next year: early in 1811, for
example, Ballesteros seriously embarrassed Marshal Soult by suddenly appear-
ing on his flank and rear just as he was marching northwards from Seville to
attack Badajoz. Large forces were detached by the French commander to hunt
him down, but the Spanish general — in 1808 a mere officer of the customs
guard — skilfully evaded them and drew his pursuers nearly as far as the Por-
tuguese frontier before finally stopping to fight at Villafranca de los Castillejos.
The action that followed was no disgrace to the Spaniards, and they then
slipped away to Alcoutim, leaving their weary opponents no choice but to
retrace their steps in search of Soult, whose attack on Badajoz had in the mean-
time been much delayed. No sooner had they gone than Ballesteros reappeared,
this time defeating the small French garrison left in the Condado de Niebla and
briefly threatening Seville.
                                                       The Guerrillas at War    5G,