


Ruses, dawn attacks, surprises, night marches, petty combats, ambushes and the
use of rough terrain allfigured in his campaigns, and it is also very much the
case that he fought only when he enjoyed the advantage of superior numbers.
It is, indeed, almost impossible to count the number of times he fell back into
Portugal or retired on Gibraltar rather than risk battle with a stronger enemy.
Although the soldiers Ballesteros commanded were all regulars, his operations
therefore occupy a definite place in the history of the ‘little war’. Lowly customs
guard as he was, he also had far more in common with many guerrilla com-
manders than with most of his fellow generals. Indeed, in Juan Lopez Campillo,
a fellow resguardo officer from the neighbouring province of Santander, he pos-
sessed almost an exact counterpart in their ranks, whilst his own elevation to
the ranks of the generalato was entirely owing to the prodigality with which the
Junta of Asturias had showered commissions on its adherents in 1808. And,
last but not least, both the general and his men shared many of the proclivities
that we shall come to associate with their more irregular counterparts. To quote
a British liaison officer who served with Ballesteros’ division:

     Of all the unworthies produced by Spain during this war (and God knows
     there were plenty of them), this man was the greatest impostor and
     charlatan . . . He certainly kept a body of men together, but they proved only
     a curse to the inhabitants . . . [and] appeared to be composed of the debris
     of defeated and dispersed armies, men who would not fight, yet reassembled
     to obtain food because they were too idle or too dissipated to work. When-
     ever the French retired, the Spaniards followed, composing and reciting
     songs of victory, but at too respectable a distance to disquiet the enemy. If
     the French . . . attempted to pursue them, they soon found how vain was the
     undertaking.”

   To separate Ballesteros from the ‘little war’ is therefore impossible, but, for
all that, neither he nor his men can really be described as guerrillas: regular sol-
diers, they had simply been detached from their normal duties for a while and,
with the French gone from Andalucia, they were soon to return to more con-
ventional operations. And even in the course of their normal duties, soldiers
might easily become involved in guerrilla warfare. In a few instances, such as
the case of Juan Diaz Porlier, who received the assistance of the old Laredo
provincial militia regiment, regular units were formally assigned to the com-
mand of guerrilla commanders in an attempt to boost their potential.
    But let us look at the far more common experiences of the sort encapsulated
by the skirmishes that took place in the district of Extremadura known as the
Tierra de Barros in May 1810. On g May a detachment of soldiers drawn from
the garrison of the town of Feria ambushed a French force that had been sent
to pick up a consignment of supplies from the town of Fuente del Maestre.
Caught unawares and attacked from both sides, the Frenchmen beat a hasty
                                                      The Guerrillas at War    a4