

   For a good example of the sort of action to which Salmon was referring, one
might cite the attack launched by Brigadier Miguel de Alzega at the pueblo
of Castillo de las Guardas on 21 August 1810. The commander of the light
infantry regiment known as the Cazadores de Barbastro, Alzega marched his
men through the night and fell upon the French at dawn. Bursting into the
streets, the Spaniards chased the garrison into the castle, but the defenders
showed no signs of giving in and so Alzega ordered a withdrawal, having lost
one man killed and another four wounded.”
   The situation in Andalucia in 1810 is especially interesting because it again
raises the question of the limits that can be set to /a guerrilla. On the frontiers
of Galicia we have already seen the deployment of an entire Spanish army in
a role that is at the very least closely related to the guerrilla war. And, as for
Galicia, so for Andalucia. Around Badajoz there remained in being the Spanish
Army of the Left under the Marqués de la Romana. Renamed the Fifth Army
in the course of 1810, it engaged in frequent skirmishes with the French troops
facing it and in August and September twice struck southwards in the direc-
tion of Seville, only to be beaten in minor combats at Villagarcia and Fuente
de Cantos. Similar demonstrations, meanwhile, were engaged in by the Spanish
forces — the Third Army — that had gathered around Murcia under Blake, at
first with rather greater caution, but eventually with an over-confidence and
carelessness that produced a substantial defeat at Baza on 4 November.’”* Such
petty campaigns are hardly to be equated with the great strategic movements
of the war, but they are intimately related to the doings of the partidas, the
marches and counter-marches of the Third Army once again affording great
freedom of action to the insurgents of the Serrania de Ronda and the Alpu-
jarras. Thus, in the absence of the large numbers of troops who had to be
sent to deal with Blake, the serranos captured Almunécar and Motril, thereby
opening fresh communications with the sea, and even went so far as to attack
the city of Granada. More typical of their activities, however, were those
engaged in by the followers of José Ruiz Falcon, José Aguilar and José Villalo-
bos: on 3 September Falcon captured a small convoy on the road to Malaga;
on 21 October Aguilar defeated a French force outside Ronda; and on 30
October Villalobos wiped out an outpost of forty Polish troops at Alameda de
Baza.”
   To make matters even more complicated, at this point British troops also
became involved in /a guerrilla. At the suggestion of the prominent Spanish
general and nobleman the Duque del Infantado, a number of British officers
                                                       The Guerrillas at War   53

had already been sent into the interior in an attempt to produce a greater degree
of organisation among the peasantry. But now the governor of Gibraltar,
General Campbell, agreed to a request from the Spanish government to provide
troops for an expedition to the coast of Malaga. Along with a Spanish regiment
from Ceuta, one and a half battalions of redcoats of the Gibraltar garrison were
therefore embarked, together with a provisional battalion of foreign deserters,
the plan being for them to land at the little port of Fuengirola and then to seize
Malaga. Commanding the whole was Lord Blayney. With a little imagination
and foresight on Blayney’s part much might have been achieved, but he allowed
himself to get bogged down in the siege of Fuengirola’s insignificant castle. To
make matters worse, rather than hastening to take ship again as soon as the
large force of troops that the French sent to relieve the garrison hove into view,
he stood and fought, despite the fact that his only complete British battalion
had still not landed. With the enemy consisting of some 3,000 men, not to
mention the garrison of the castle, which also joined in the fight by means of
a violent sally, the result was never in doubt: outnumbered and outfought,
Blayney and 200 of his men were captured.”
   Disastrous though it was, the Fuengirola expedition was the harbinger of
many other British raids on stretches of coast occupied by the French. Of par-
ticular note in this respect was the naval component of the campaign of
Salamanca in the summer of 1812. Whilst aware of the actions of the Spanish
guerrillas, Wellington was not inclined solely to trust to their assistance when
it came to reducing the considerable numerical superiority that the armies to
which he was opposed always possessed in relation to his own forces. To tie
down the French Army of the North, he therefore took up the suggestion of
the British naval officer Sir Home Popham, that a seaborne guerrilla should be
waged against the enemy garrisons that dotted the coast of Santander and the
Basque provinces. On 17 June 1812, then, a squadron of warships put out from
La Corufia under Popham with two battalions of marines. Aided by the forces
of the Spanish Seventh Army — the name that had been given to the irregulars
of the region — for the next two months Popham launched attack after attack
on the French. Lequeitio, Guetaria, Castro-Urdiales, Portugalete, Santander
and Bilbao were all assaulted, and in most cases taken, whilst the enemy troops
in the region were exhausted by endless marches and counter-marches, for
Popham could easily appear before one stronghold, bombard it for a few days
and then take ship for another as soon as a relief force hove into view. Despite
the occasional defeat, meanwhile, Allied casualties were minimal and, in a
development vital for the campaign of 1813, Santander was retained as a per-
manent base.”
   Nor were amphibious raids of this sort the only occasions when British forces
fought in the ‘little war’. In the period 1811—12, indeed, entire divisions were
54    Fighting Napoleon