


of brigadier. At the same time, the independent role of earlier years vanished:
although outpost duty and reconnaisance remained the roles in which his troops
were most commonly employed, Sanchez’s brigade fought with Wellington in
the Salamanca campaign and ended the war as part of the garrison of Ciudad
Rodrigo.”
   If the forces of El Charro constitute the best-known example, various other
partidas also turn out in reality to have been composed of troops belonging
to the regular army. For two further examples we have only to turn to Aragon.
Set up in the summer of 1809, for example, the band of Pedro Villacampa
is at first sight hard to distinguish from, say, those of El Empecinado or
Espoz y Mina. Typical of its actions, for example, was its attack on Teruel on
8 March 1810, together with the fighting that followed. Suddenly appearing
outside the town, Villacampa drove the garrison back into the complex of
fortified convents that it had converted into a makeshift citadel. Leaving some
of his men to pin down the defenders, he then turned north and annihilated
a small relief column that he encountered at Caudé, before finally pouncing
on the garrison of Alventosa.”° Villacampa even referred to himself as a
guerrilla, as witness, for example, a call for volunteers that he issued in the
spring of 1810.” Yet in reality he was a regular officer who had been taken
prisoner in the siege of Zaragoza. After managing to escape, he had been sent
out by the local Spanish commander, General Blake, to foment popular resis-
tance in Aragon. His forces consisted of the regiment of which he was himself
colonel, the remnants of the line regiments of Soria and La Princesa, which
had escaped a Spanish defeat at Santander and made an epic march across
occupied Spain in search of safety, and a unit of new levies raised by the Junta
of Molina.”
   Even more dubious, meanwhile, is the case of another Aragonese com-
mander, Felipe Perena. Villacampa might just qualify as a guerrilla — he was
sent out specifically to conduct irregular operations — but the same cannot be
said of Perena. Perena was a regular officer who had in 1808 been chasing
bandits, and had been appointed by José Palafox to be the governor of Huesca.
Although he joined Ja guerrilla in the wake of the fall of Zaragoza, it was for
want of strength to do anything else. In the raids and skirmishes that followed
he showed some talent — true, it was forces under his command that in May
1809 succeeded in capturing 600 French troops who had become trapped on
the wrong side of the River Cinca by a sudden flood — but his “band” turns out
to have been none other than a regiment of volunteers raised in 1808. Indeed,
it was as regular troops that his men met their end: caught up in the French
offensive against Lérida in 1810, they were overwhelmed at Balaguer, and the
few men who remained in the ranks after this defeat were marched into
captivity when the fortress finally surrendered.”
60     Fighting Napoleon