

   The distinction between the regular and irregular elements of /a guerrilla is
often blurred. For example, regular units involved in the struggle might very
easily pick up recruits from the same sources as the partidas. This was particu-
larly true of units that disappeared into the hills for long periods. As a senior
official in the Ministry of State wrote to his chief, Bardaji, ‘A great part of
Zayas’ deserters are with the insurgent Ballesteros.’ Yet such points of con-
gruence should not be exaggerated. By 1812 Ballesteros’ division may have
come to resemble that, say, of Espoz y Mina, but in essence they remained dif-
ferent phenomena. On the other hand, however, they were also engaged in the
same struggle. Nor is this surprising, for by 1811 the regular army had been so
ground down that, as one British officer put it, it was ‘unfit for anything more
than mere guerrilla warfare’.'”’ From this point — the realisation that /a guer-
rilla was the work not just of bands of armed civilians, but of a wide range of
forces that included elements of the regular armies of Britain, Spain and Por-
tugal alike — it follows that it is possible to reassess the popular struggle against
the French without being constantly tripped up by arguments that the guer-
rillas played a vital role in the defeat of the Napoleonic invaders. Favoured by
factors of strategy and geography that rendered the French zone of occupa-
tion uniquely vulnerable to attack, the ‘little war’ per se may well have played
such a role, but proof.of the involvement of many different forces in the
struggle means that it is no longer necessary to pay unreserved homage to all
its different participants. No longer can it be taboo to suggest that Espoz y
Mina, El Empecinado and the rest were anything but pillars of Spain’s inde-
pendence. And, by the same token, no longer can admirers of the guerrillas
bolster their arguments by reference to actions for which in reality their heroes
can take no credit. If room has thereby been created for a reassessment of the
guerrillas, the doubts, concerns and divisions of opinion that have already been
revealed in our survey of the historiography suggest that that reassessment
cannot come too soon. Add to these the many contradictions in the Spanish
struggle against Napoleon that will be revealed in the next chapter, and the
need for such a reassessment will come to seem still greater.
                                         3
                    The Guerrillas in Context




   Patriotism . . . resounds from the high Pyrenees to the coasts of Andalucia
   ... Thousands of combatants are coming forward... greed and egotism
   have been silenced, and a thousand sacrifices are providing riches for the
   needs of the state.!

These words encapsulate one of the abiding images of the history of modern
Spain: the idea that when Napoleon overthrew the Bourbon dynasty in 1808,
he found himself confronted by the resistance of the proverbial people numer-
ous and armed, and, what is more, a people numerous and armed that threw
itself into battle with a ferocity and determination that have rarely been sur-
passed. To quote Gabriel Lovett, ‘All the energies of unoccupied Spain were
directed toward one objective, beating back the invaders.” So often has this idea
been repeated, indeed, that it is impossible to find a work on either Napoleon,
the Peninsular War or the history of modern Spain that does not simply take
it as read. At the same time, it is, of course, the very foundation of the ‘heroic’
view of the guerrillas, for, without total popular support for the struggle, the
partidas would neither have come into being nor survived for very long. And,
by the same token, like the operational history of the ‘little war’, it is a theme
that must clearly be opened up for discussion if the guerrillas are to be prop-
erly reassessed: if the Spanish people really were panting for war and revenge,
it would clearly be difficult to bring into question the patriotism of the par-
tidas. Yet it would be surprising if the traditional view were to prove convincing.
Indeed, in line with developments in the treatment of other areas of Europe,
the historiography of Napoleonic Spain has begun to undergo something of a
revolution. Thus, a new generation of writers has already begun to generate a
picture of the struggle against Napoleon that is very different from its tradi-
tional predecessor.’ According to such authors, popular enthusiasm for the war
62      Fighting Napoleon