

went on the offensive in October, Sanchez and his lancers were called in to
assist with reconnaissance and outpost duty. Badly beaten at Alba de Tormes,
Del Parque then went into winter quarters on the borders of Leon and
Extremadura, and Sanchez in the meantime busied himself with such tasks as
rounding up deserters, gathering in supplies and skirmishing with the French
forces based at Salamanca. In the spring, though, Del Parque was replaced by
La Romana, who took the army south to Badajoz. Left behind, Sanchez and
his men were formally attached to the garrison of Ciudad Rodrigo, in which
capacity they fought a series of actions with the enemy troops now closing in
on the city. Here and there minor successes were obtained, but no amount of
skirmishing could prevent the French from commencing siege operations.
As cavalry were of only limited use in this situation, the governor, Andrés
Pérez de Herrasti, ordered Sanchez to break out of the city, which he did
by means of a sudden charge launched at one o’clock in the morning on 23
June 1810.”!
   The army to which he had belonged having completely left the area, Sanchez
was effectively a law unto himself for most of the next year, and as such it might
be thought that he now had to all intents and purposes become a guerrilla. He
took part in no regular campaigns, but rather confined himself to harassing the
communications of the French army that had invaded Portugal under Marshal
Massena following the fall of Ciudad Rodrigo. To quote an anonymous staff
officer attached to the headquarters of the Spanish Fifth Army in the spring
of 1811, for example: ‘The bands that are at the orders of Don Julian Sanchez
in Castile have made . . . a continuous massacre of the unfortunate Frenchmen
who have been trying to escape from Portugal.”” Raids and ambushes were very
much the order of the day, whilst the troops whom the Anglo-Portuguese army
encountered when they arrived back on the frontier in March 1811 had all the
appearances of being an irregular force. ‘A more verminous-looking set of
fellows you never beheld’, wrote William Bragge; whilst Charles Boutflower
remarked, ‘A Spaniard well-known by the name of Don Julian was here yes-
terday . . . His followers sometimes amount to 1,000; at others he cannot muster
fifty. They make a great deal by plunder, and absent themselves for the purpose
of spending their money, which having done they again join his standard.”
Such, too, is very much the impression that is obtained from French accounts.
Marbot, for example, describes his men as ‘irregular bands . .. who were quite
unfit to resist troops of the line’.”* But the reality was rather different. Whilst
Sanchez’s style was certainly that of an irregular — nicknamed El Charro, he
affected a French shako with the imperial eagle worn upside down — he
throughout remained both an officer of the regular army and an agent of La
Romana, who in fact ordered him to raise a second regiment of cavalry, pro-
vided him with a troop of horse artillery and eventually secured him the rank
                                                     The Guerrillas at War    59