


   May 1811 saw a brief return to full-scale campaigning when Ballesteros took
part in the bloody battle of Albuera, but his presence there was purely for-
tuitous, its only reason being that a French force under General Maransin had
driven the Spanish general far to the north and forced him to take refuge with
the Allied army that had come up to retake Badajoz (Soult’s attack had been
successful and the fortress had surrendered on 10 March). Returning to
Andalucia with the rest of the Spanish forces that had fought at Albuera, Balles-
teros then sailed from Ayamonte to Algeciras, where he plunged into the
Serrania de Ronda and embarked on a fresh series of raids and skirmishes.
Large numbers of French troops being sent against him, he then took shelter
at Gibraltar, only to sally out again as soon as the danger was past and pounce
on one of the retreating French columns at Bornos, forcing the surrender of
an entire battalion of juramentados in the process.
   After wintering on the coast, having been reinforced by two extra divisions,
in April Ballesteros struck north again and again headed for Seville, only to fall
back in great haste at what turned out to be a false report of superior French
forces heading his way. Self-respect having been restored by the destruction of
a small French column at Alhaurin on 14 April, he then again returned to
Gibraltar, this time with the enemy very much in hot pursuit. Within weeks,
however, he was on the march again: as the French had fallen back for want of
provisions, he first engaged in some skirmishes around Ronda and then
marched north-west to Bornos, where he fell on the reserves of the troops
engaged in the fruitless blockade of Cadiz and gave them a very considerable
fright before finally being driven off with some loss. Falling back on his usual
refuge of Gibraltar, he licked his wounds for a while, and then set out on a long
march through the mountains to Malaga, whose garrison he took completely
by surprise and drove into the castle. Tarrying for just long enough to strip the
town of such recruits, money and supplies as it could offer, he then tried to get
back to the shelter of Gibraltar, only to find that the way was blocked by a large
force of French troops. With more enemies coming up in the rear, there was
only one hope and that was to head west towards the valley of the Guadalquivir,
which move he turned to his advantage by launching a surprise attack on the
garrison of Osuna. Having secured yet more plunder, he then marched for the
sea again and, getting round the flank of the troops sent to cut him off, by 1
August he was back in touch with Gibraltar.”
   As Andalucia was evacuated by the French very soon afterwards, the rest of
Ballesteros’ military career need not concern us. But his operations in the
period 1810-12 have been discussed in some detail because they are in reality
almost impossible to distinguish from the operations, say, of the division of
Espoz y Mina in Navarre. Ballesteros rarely commanded more than 5,000 men,
after all, and his tactics throughout were those associated with guerrilla warfare.
56       Fighting Napoleon