

retreat, leaving the road strewn with their dead and wounded.® In response the
French drove the Spaniards from Feria, but the commander of the garrison,
Pablo Morillo, immediately counter-attacked, forcing the enemy troops to with-
draw into the castle and burning such of their supplies as he could not carry
away, before finally beating a hasty retreat in the direction of Jerez de los
Caballeros.*’ With the French making no effort to pursue him, a week later he
attacked again with much the same result.** A month later Morillo was back in
action again, this time at Burguillos, where he attacked a French column
advancing from Zafra and succeeded in forcing it to retreat.*” And finally, after
a long night march in pouring rain, at dawn on 7 September Morillo attacked
Fuente Ovejuna at the head of two battalions of line infantry. The details of
this fight are worth recording as they show the similarity between the modus
operandi of the guerrillas and that of the regulars. Morillo and his men charged
into the town to discover that the French garrison of 108 men were barricaded
inside a large house and the town’s granary. Unable to storm the buildings,
Morillo piled numerous barrels of wet straw against them and ordered them to
be set on fire. Driven out by the choking smoke, the French then made a dash
for the parish church and managed to get inside, only for the latter to be fired
as well, whereupon they surrendered, having lost fourteen dead and sixteen
wounded.”
    At least Morillo did at one point early in the war command a band of irregu-
lars. Many other figures who are generally represented as having been guerril-
las, however, never merited the description at all. Pride of place here must
probably go to the Leonese leader, Julian Sanchez Garcia: in frequent contact
with Wellington’s army, he is inevitably the cabecilla who figures most promi-
nently in British memoirs. A peasant from the pueblo of Mufioz on the road
from Ciudad Rodrigo to Salamanca, Sanchez was thirty-four in 1808 and had
served from 1793 to 1801 as a soldier in the Mallorca line infantry regiment.
For reasons of which we know nothing, on 15 August 1808 he enlisted in the
militia that had been raised to defend Ciudad Rodrigo in the aftermath of the
uprising. Soon promoted to the rank of sergeant, he was given command of a
small picket of cavalry. The arrival of French troops in the vicinity of the
fortress early in 1809 therefore involved him in a series of minor skirmishes
that brought him a commission as an alférez. By the summer he was in
command of a full squadron of cavalry — the genesis of what was to become
the First Regiment of Lancers of Castile — and at the head of these men on 21
June he defeated a much stronger party of French dragoons at Almeida de
Sayago. Many other such raids followed, with Sanchez, who was now a brevet
captain, undoubtedly enjoying a great deal of independence.
   Range far and wide though he and his men did, however, there was never
any question as to Sanchez’s dependence on the army that was now based at
Ciudad Rodrigo under the Duque del Parque: indeed, when Del Parque
58     Fighting Napoleon