

     We want to kill someone, Sir. They have killed one person in Trujillo, one
     or two more in Badajoz and someone else in Mérida, and we do not want to
     be left behind. Sir, we want to kill a traitor.'®

   With feelings so inflamed, we do not need to look very far to explain the des-
perate resistance that the French encountered when they first appeared before
the walls of certain towns (caution is needed with regard to such stories,
though: the heroic attempt to defend Zamora in January 1809 mentioned by
both Gomez de Arteche and Oman was in 1913 shown by a conscientious local
historian to have been a fabrication got up by the aywntamiento to ingratiate
itself with Fernando VII'’). Thus, the populace genuinely thought that their
                                                    The Guerrillas in Context    65


last hour had come, whilst the defence of their own homes was a cause that was
easy to understand and identify with.
   It is worth pointing out, however, that such acts of mass resistance were often
carefully choreographed: in Zaragoza — by far the most dramatic case — as
dictator of the city José Palafox from the start adopted a demagogic manner
that became ever more accentuated, whilst he was careful to surround himself
with popular heroes such as Jorge Ibort, Santiago Sas and Agustina Zaragoza
Domenech. At the same time mention might be made of the persistent stories
that were in circulation concerning the use of terror to keep the defenders at
their posts. In addition, the scenes witnessed in Zaragoza became increasingly
rare as the war wore on, for the terror that the French evoked in the first months
of the war proved short-lived. Despite desperate efforts on the part of the Junta
Central to organise every pueblo for house-to-house defence in the style of
Zaragoza, when the French stormed across the Sierra Morena in January 1810
the response was almost everywhere one of apathy. A call for volunteers to
defend the town of Huelva, for example, produced just thirty-six men, whilst
in Jaén a similar appeal failed to secure a single man."
   Even when there existed a willingness to defend hearth and home, this was
not the same as identification with the war. There was some voluntary enlist-
ment in the ranks of the army and the new regiments being established by many
of the provincial juntas, but neither patriotism nor fear seems to have played
much part in bringing in recruits. The only exception to the rule were students:
in Santiago de Compostela, for example, the entire university presented itself
to the town’s newly formed junta and asked to join up, whilst other cities pro-
vided many individual recruits (examples include a young Galician studying in
Madrid named José Salgado, a doctor’s son from Lecifiena named Matias Calvo,
the future Carlist leader Tomas de Zumalacarregui and, most famously, the
guerrilla commander Martin Javier Mina y Larrea).'” But most of the men who
came forward did so for reasons that had nothing to do with the political
situation.
   One factor was clearly compulsion on the part of the amo. On 21 July 1808,
for example, the Junta of Vigo reported that it had issued a call for volunteers
that had secured 147 young men, of whom many were dependants of leading
citizens of the town.”” Also important was poverty. Spain, as we shall see, was
in desperate straits in 1808, whilst the rising had occurred at a point in the agri-
cultural year when most day-labourers were out of work. Nor did it help that
in March and April unseasonably heavy rain had reduced the work available in
the fields and done much damage to the crops. Military service was therefore
a welcome opportunity to earn a few days’ pay, especially as the money on offer
was frequently extremely generous. As Sir Brent Spencer observed of Seville,
for example, ‘The pay allowed these new levies . . . is perhaps imprudently
66       Fighting Napoleon