


       Governed by a number of young men... at the say-so of those elements
       who can play the role of caciques, the town has been reduced to the most
       dreadful chaos... Your Majesty must understand that the original sin of
       such places consists of three points: who is going to rule, who is going to rob
       the most, and who is going to pay the least.”
Had the caciques proved willing to sacrifice themselves for the patria, then, some
of the edge might have been taken off the situation, but this was not the case.
On the contrary, in many pueblos, such as Socuéllamos, there were complaints
of ‘the bad example that has been set by the . . . poderosos, who . . . are living
...a      life of leisure and . . . impropriety’. By all accounts, indeed, abuses of
power were widespread. The commonalty could, for example, be blackmailed:
one officer involved in the recruitment process was arrested for demanding 64
reales from one of the inhabitants of Osuna, on pain of conscription.’ There
were many instances of corruption: at Leon the father of a fugitive Guardia de
Corps sold his son’s horse — the property of the Spanish state — to the local
provincial junta for 2,000 reales; at Molina de Aragon the local junta was
accused of embezzlement; at La Corufia the secretary of the Junta of Galicia
was supposed to have obtained up to 1,600,000 reales from the sale of public
offices by October 1808 alone; and from Alhaurin el Grande it was reported
that the deputy corregidor was skimming off public funds, engaging in whole-
sale extortion, selling off the grain reserves kept for years of dearth, making
huge profits from fraudulent public works contracts, appropriating intestate
property that should have passed to the state, imposing illicit levies on the
populace and extracting sexual favours from pretty girls whose husbands,
brothers or sweethearts had been conscripted. And, at least as far as those
who could pay were concerned, place-seekers had a field day: on offer were
hundreds of commissions in the new regiments being formed by many of
the Patriot authorities and thousands of administrative posts and special
commissions of all sorts, the men concerned often giving cause for great
scandal. To quote one complaint that was sent to the Junta Central from Cadiz,
for instance:

       A change in the senior personnel of the Customs House . . . would save the
       state many millions... The officials concerned . . . get rich with no other
       source of income than their salaries, have balconies at the playhouse . . . keep
       fine tables . . . and enjoy every sort of luxury . . . How can there not be some
       sort of malversation going on?”

Not surprisingly, then, the most colourful language was soon being used in con-
nection with the juntas. Let us take as an example, the following description of
the Junta of Badajoz:
                                                   The Guerrillas in Context   73


  It being clear that the spark that . . . lit the flame of patriotism throughout
  the kingdom was the work of divine providence, all good Spaniards accepted
  the juntas that were formed in all the provincial capitals... But that
  of Badajoz has been abusing its powers... Many of its members are vain,
  ignorant and vicious egotists, and from this there stems. ..a multitude
  of excesses. It is very frequent to find military ranks and enormous salaries
  heaped on the unworthiest of people, and all to accommodate relatives and
  clients. Sometimes the motive is money, but sometimes even darker forces
  are at work: it is said that ranks have even been given to prostitutes in
  exchange for members of the junta being allowed to enjoy their favours.”