

large. I understand they have daily . . . four reales, which is more than double
what the old regular troops receive.” Nor was this an end to the largesse avail-
able, for recruits were also sometimes paid a substantial bounty. As Casamayor
noted in his journal on 14 November 1808, “Today saw the publication of an
order issued by the new Duke of Hijar in which he promised the sum of two
reales to any of his vassals who would take up arms.””
   But taking up arms was clearly an activity embarked upon only with
certain provisos. Service was envisaged in the first place as being only a short-
term commitment, in the second as something that would very much be
restricted to hearth and home, and in the third as an experience that would not
put the recruit on the same level as the despised and hated soldiery of the
Bourbon army. There was, indeed, a sense of play-acting about the whole busi-
ness. Let us quote, for example, the comandante de armas of Marin, Eugenio
Iglesias:

     On the morning of the 4th the post arrived with the news... that on all
     sides volunteers were coming forward ... to fight in the war that had just
     been declared against France. At about ten o’clock a group of inhabitants
     appeared in front of my house with a drum and a flag bearing the arms of
     Spain, and obliged me to accompany them to the fort of San Fernando, where
     they raised the flag with due ceremony . . . Leaving it flying there, they then
     marched out . . . to the sound of the drum amidst repeated cheers for Fer-
     nando VII, having told me that they would come back at four o’clock . . . Just
     as they had said, they came back in the afternoon armed with muskets,
     fowling pieces and blunderbusses, and, taking the flag, asked me to place
     myself at their head, after which we marched through the streets to the
     church of the Virgen del Pilar, where the flag was laid upon the altar and the
     rosary recited by all those present with the greatest devotion.”

   All too soon, however, the excitement began to wear off. To the horror of
the volunteers, indeed, they discovered that fighting the French meant some-
thing other than drawing their pay, parading through the streets of their home
towns and hunting down spies and traitors — that, in short, the unspoken
assumptions concerning their enlistment would not be honoured. In conse-
quence, the war had hardly started before desertion became an issue.”* In any
case, there were never enough volunteers, particularly in provinces such as
Galicia, where military service was habitually identified with local home guards
(in June 1808, for example, the a/arma of Orense alone amounted to 15,680
men organised into 147 companies; by contrast, so few recruits came forward
for the army that it was only possible to raise two new regiments”). As a result,
the new authorities who had emerged from the uprising were very quickly
forced to move to conscription. Broadly speaking, all men between sixteen and
                                                   The Guerrillas in Context   67