

wealth, privilege and authority. ‘Very soon’, warned one observer, ‘the poor will
be sovereign, and eliminate rich and French alike.’** Indeed, the panic that
marked the first days of the war was often a cover for, or at least intimately con-
nected with, something else altogether. Arrested as a traitor after the battle of
Bailén on the specious allegation that he had plotted with one of Castafios’ divi-
sional commanders to effect the escape of the French, the alcalde mayor of
Mengibar was found by an official enquiry to have been persecuted on account
of ‘an excess of the... temerity and pride [typical] of a man of wealth and
prominence’.* And in Galicia the ayuntamiento of El Ferrol complained, ‘On
the pretext of a variety of rumours, both real and invented, [the mob] has
reached the extreme of attacking and insulting the chief authorities, and com-
mitting robberies, murders and other lamentable actions of the sort that are
always produced by any outbreak of tumult.’ In the words of the Junta of
Santiago de Compostela, meanwhile:

     On a number of occasions when rumours have gone round that the French
     were about to attack us... . the people have rioted. We have no doubt that a
     number of these stories, all of which have been both silly and unfounded,
     had their origin in Spaniards who are French at heart and by these means
     wanted to frighten the populace and spread disorder.”

   Such stories of French agents deluding simple countryfolk might have com-
forted some of the more vapid members of the juntas, but they hardly reflected
the truth. In fact, the populace was on the move. Examples of unrest are wide-
spread, but perhaps the most dramatic comes from Castellon de la Plana:

     On 19 June [1808] . . . a gang of malcontents assembled . . . in the town, and
     ran through the streets, shouting, ‘Long live the King, the Fatherland and
     the Faith! Death to the traitors!’, and disturbing the public peace. Having
     murdered the governor, Coronel Don Pedro Lobo, and a landowner named
     Félix de Jiménez, they followed these execrable excesses with an attempt on
     the life of the commissary, Don José Ramon de Santi. . . In addition, the
     insurgents broke into the Capuchin nunnery, and freed all the prisoners in
     the public gaols by force.**

Nor did the troubles subside. To take just two examples, in Oviedo and Don
Benito the autumn saw fully fledged agrarian risings. Of events in the latter
pueblo we have a particularly interesting description:

     The town of Don Benito . . . has been in the most deplorable condition ever
     since ...a number of discontented porters, day-labourers and artisans —
     men whose ignorance and immorality always incline them to the worst —
     launched a furious attack. ..on the... town council at the very moment
                                                   The Guerrillas in Context   69


  when the list of those eligible to be chosen for the defence of the fatherland
  was being drawn up, demanding land and crying that only the people with
  anything to lose should go to war. This outrage, which ended in the precip-
  itate flight of the . . . council, which would otherwise have been murdered,
  has been followed by others which have caused respectable inhabitants the
  utmost consternation. Continually insulted ...by these malignants, they
  have had to watch them . . . occupying the pastures rented out by their neigh-
  bours in the most disorderly fashion ...These they have ploughed and
  harrowed; whilst in the meantime threatening anyone who opposed them
  with death.”