


tactics often worked: conscripted into the army in the autumn of 1808, a
prosperous inhabitant of Turienso named Francisco Castellanos suddenly
reappeared in his native village claiming that he had been released from the
ranks.”” ‘Half of those who are called up are allowed to go free,’ wrote one
observer, ‘some thanks to money, others thanks to blackmail, and still others
thanks to a thousand different tricks and frauds.”
   As examples of the sort of thing that went on, let us cite a few individual
cases. To return to Alhaurin el Grande, great anger was caused by the case of
one Eusebio Guerrero. The nephew of the corrupt deputy corregidor whose
crimes have already been outlined, Guerrero was beyond doubt liable for con-
scription. Yet, although conscripted in the sorteos of both 1808 and 1809, on
each occasion he escaped, the first time by submitting a totally false statement
of his circumstances, and the second by deserting. Still worse, despite the fact
that he was known to have taken refuge with his parents, no attempt was made
to round him up and send him back to his regiment.” In Cumbres de en Medio
(a village situated in the north of the present-day province of Huelva), mean-
while, the two alcaldes, Juan Dominguez and Juan de Barajar, had managed to
save their three sons from the guinta by pretending that one was already serving
in the army, having the second one claim that he could not bite open cartridges
because of problems with his teeth, and hastily arranging for the third one to
get married.”
   With money, indeed, it was even possible to play at being a soldier without
ever having to experience the rigours of life in the field. One variant on this
theme was the formation of ‘guerrilla bands’ in areas that were hundreds of
miles from the nearest Frenchmen, a good example being the ‘company of
mounted smugglers’ extolled by the Junta of Ayamonte as being ‘the terror
of the French’ in August 1809.” Another was the numerous corps of “distin-
guished volunteers’ that sprang up all over Patriot Spain. Thus, in exchange
for paying the cost of their uniform and equipment, men could enlist in units
whose only duties were to mount guard on city walls, inject civic life with a
certain degree of military pomp, add a degree of lustre to the new authorities
and maintain the prerogatives of the propertied classes. Hardly surprisingly,
these units soon acquired an evil reputation. The Voluntarios Distinguidos de
Cadiz — a force later lauded to the skies by liberals eager to find a model for a
new army — was described as ‘battalions of cupids’ composed of ‘a multitude
of infamous men of evil habits who . . . possess neither merit, nor subordina-
tion, nor inclination to the true object for which their arms were created’.”
As for the Junta Central’s personal guard — the grandiloquently                 named
Voluntarios de Honor de la Universidad de Toledo — it was written:

   If it is wished to put things right . . . these soldiers . . . should be expelled
                                                                                 has
   from the city... There is not a married woman who because of them
76       Fighting Napoleon