


to be near by at the time of the uprising.* And finally, the Junta Central not
only ordered the formation of a nationwide milicia honrada that was recruited
from the propertied classes, placed under the control of the local authorities
and charged with the task of patrolling the countryside, guarding the streets
and repressing outbreaks of disorder, but issued the most draconian orders with
respect to the treatment of rioters.”
   Whilst trying to overawe the populace, the new authorities at the same time
made great efforts to force it to accept its station in life. Nowhere is this more
visible than in Cadiz, where one observer decribed ‘the lower class of the
people’ as ‘layabouts who are lacking in industry and... much inclined to
disturb the peace’. Thus, in a proclamation of 16 January 1809, whilst
enjoining the population to be assiduous in the practice of its religion and the
education of its children and moral in its lifestyle, the junta announced that
‘habitués of prohibited games... layabouts... women of no pride... blas-
phemers, malcontents, drunks, and those who constantly engage in indecent
talk’ would be fined, imprisoned or sent to penal colonies.”' Following serious
riots in February 1809 (see below, p. 76), meanwhile, the ecclesiastical author-
ities were instructed to enlighten ‘the common people of this town, which is
... governed on the one hand by agitators and on the other by drunkenness,
robbery and other detestable disorders’.*” Some days earlier, meanwhile, the
alcalde mayor had issued an order stating, first, that all minors of either sex who
were found alone on the streets on whatever pretext, begging included, were
to be arrested, and with them their parents, and, second, that any woman who
was involved in any sort of disorderly gathering was to be placed in solitary
confinement, the very fact that she had seen fit to be present clearly showing
that she could not be ‘a lady worthy of appreciation and respect’.* And, last
but not least, we have a very similar proclamation that appeared in July of the
same year that ordered the immediate arrest of not just all ‘idlers, layabouts,
vagrants ... women of no repute, and suspicious persons’, but also ‘all those
who try to hide their vagrancy by pretending to be peddlars or hawkers’. As
if all this was not enough, meanwhile, blasphemy, indecency, seditious talk,
gaming and the possession of knives and pistols were all strictly prohibited; the
strictest regulations imposed on such activities as letting rooms, and taverners
enjoined not to let their customers sit around for too long.**
   In a country where many regions were characterised by chronic under-
employment, and where normal economic life had all but broken down, this
programme was at the very least dangerously provocative: to attack pedlars and
vagrants, for example, was to attack some of the few means by which the poor
could hope to make a living. But, as if all this was not bad enough, fuel was
added to the flames by the use that the pudientes made of their power. Perhaps
typical was isolated Paymogo, of which a commissioner sent by the Junta
Central wrote:
72         Fighting Napoleon