

   All this caused immense offence. Of all the abuses of the juntas, however, by
far the most serious were those relating to the recruitment of the army. Before
going any further, we ought first to consider the system of conscription that
was in use in Spain. Known as the sorteo or quinta, it had been introduced in
1770 with the intention that it should be imposed on an annual basis. Such was
the hostility with which it was regarded, however, that in 1777 it had been
decided to use it only in emergency. Since then, indeed, it had only been
employed in 1793 and 1795, and the army had instead relied on voluntary enlist-
ment and the impressment of criminals and the destitute. In theory, the sorteo
worked by setting an overall target for the country as a whole, whereupon each
pueblo was assigned a quota in accordance with its population. This having been
done, a list of eligible recruits was then drawn up, and the men required selected
by ballot (recruits were to be aged from sixteen to thirty-six, unmarried, in good
physical health and with a minimum height of 5 feet). So far so good, but the
whole system was in fact shot through with unfairness. The nobility and clergy
were exempt, together with the inhabitants of various regions with special priv-
ileges, such as the Basque provinces, students, professionals of all sorts, uni-
versity graduates, town councillors, magistrates, alcaldes, officials and couriers
of the postal service, clerks in government offices and men engaged in a wide
range of specialised activities (examples include sailors, gunsmiths, stock-
breeders and skilled workers in most aspects of industry and agriculture). Not
all the exemptions were quite so privileged in character — a real attempt was
made, for example, to protect sole breadwinners — but the general effect was to
ensure that the brunt of the burden fell on the poorest sections of society and,
in particular, the agricultural labourer. The inherent injustice to which all this
gave rise was reinforced by the numerous possibilities that existed for men
with money and influence to subvert the system and buy themselves out of
trouble.”
   In theory, 1808 brought radical change. Whilst the existing regulations were
retained in so far as the actual administration of conscription was concerned,
74     Fighting Napoleon


the provincial juntas suppressed all grounds for exemption other than those
designed to protect sole breadwinners, whilst generally extending the upper
limit of the age range to forty or even forty-five. Accepted and codified by the
Junta Central, these reforms gave Spain a system of universal military service.
In theory, this was both fair and humane, but in practice the reality was very
different, since the pudientes were quite shameless in their determination to
avoid having to go to war. The ayuntamiento of Murcia, for example, requested
that its members be exempted even from service in the milicias honradas, whilst
one proposal for the introduction of the principle of substitution maintained
that herederos made very cowardly soldiers on account of the fact that, unlike
the poor, they had something to lose.”
   Let us here look at some concrete examples of the sort of fraud in which the
propertied classes and their allies engaged. The first priority, of course, was to
ensure that they and their sons were never entered in the draw. As the Junta
Central put it, ‘There have repeatedly been very serious complaints... on
account of the many men who have been escaping service in the army by
claiming that they are exempt.’ Thus, in Cordoba it was noted that there were
many men falsely passing themselves off as the only support of aged parents,
whilst in Vivero and Cuenca others got off on grounds of nobility.°* Such
dodges implied the use of bribery — in Granada the cost appears to have been
between 300 and 400 reales — though it may be that blackmail was also
employed.” Just as illicit, meanwhile, was the common practice of openly
buying exemption by means of patriotic donations (in 1808-9 the going rate
was a fully accoutred horse and a minimum of 4,000 reales, whilst by 1811
it had risen to 20,000 reales). And finally, there was a rush to obtain bolt-holes
of one sort or other. In Valencia, for example, there was an increase in admis-
sions to the university, whilst the rush for public office was partly explained
by a desire to ‘avoid going off to fight’.
    Most of the time such devices were enough to get the pudientes out of trouble
but, on the rare occasions that they failed, all was not lost: at Sallent, for
example, there were allegations that the presiding tribunal had refused a request
from the men who had been declared liable for service, to check that the names
of all the potential conscripts had actually been put in the urn. The point of
such complaints is revealed when we discover that at Puebla de Guzman several
men had been omitted who had no exemption whatsoever.” And should things
still go wrong, there were always grounds for appeal: named as somatenes, José
Viladerau appealed for exemption on the grounds that he had already given
generously to the cause and sent two of his employees to join up; Francisco
Feliu claimed that he was nearly blind in his right eye and had only been put
on the list ‘in consequence of the intrigue and enmity that characterise small
towns’; and Francisco de Paula Aragonés argued that service in the field was
incompatible with his job.” And, lamentably, when combined with bribery, such
                                                    The Guerrillas in Context      75