


forty were declared to be eligible for military service, regardless of status (an
important concession since, as we shall see, the existing conscription regula-
tions exempted all Spain’s million-strong nobility). However, it was promised,
first, that married men would not be taken until the supply of bachelors and
widowers without children had been exhausted; and second, that any volun-
teers produced by a pueblo would be set against its quota.”° As for the number
of men that were needed, as one example we might take Galicia, where 4 June
1808 saw the announcement of a quinta of 40,000 men.”’ Nor was relief to be
sought from the new central government formed at Aranjuez, known as the
Junta Central, for in October it announced the call-up of an unprecedented
400,000 men.”®
   These measures place the massive propaganda campaign that accompanied
the war against Napoleon in a new light. Thus, the populace was not just being
energised to fight the French, but also conditioned to accept measures that the
Bourbons would not even have dreamed of. As Godoy wrote of the war against
France of 1793-95, for example, “The idea of a general levy of troops was not
adopted and could never have entered a rational mind, first, because no civilised
nation had set such an example and, second, because the encumberance and
enormous expense of such a multitude set in motion would have at one and the
same time paralysed them and endangered their efficiency.” Recognising the
extreme nature of their demands, the Patriot authorities therefore did every-
thing that they could to encourage support for the struggle. Their propaganda
was often tailored, however crudely, to a popular audience — one might cite here
the use of the style known as costumbrismo, and the constant stress that was
placed on the idea that Napoleon’s chief intention was to conscript all Spain’s
young men into his armies — whilst events of public importance called forth
large-scale celebrations that included comic operas, bullfights and firework
displays. On occasion, such was the largesse displayed by the authorities that
it amounted to almost open bribery: on receipt of the news of the victory of
Talavera, for example, the governor of Ayamonte ordered the distribution of
20 reales to every prisoner in the town’s gaol, threw a dinner for twelve beggars,
had his staff give 4 reales to every member of the town’s poor and threw money
from his balcony to the crowd.”
    According to the official line, all was well: the people were lined up behind
the struggle and incapable of riot and disorder.” But, in fact, the authorities
were living a nightmare. As Salmon put it, ‘When the populace is out of control,
there are no reins that can control it, the contagion of licence and disorder
spreading with such speed that the common people come to be the sole dicta-
tor. What ills did we not suffer as a result of this upset!” Thus, in many regions
the rising was accompanied by outbreaks of rioting that, whilst ostensibly the
result of hatred of the French, were redolent of a more general attack on
68       Fighting Napoleon