


happened, the excitement subsided, but even so, the junta formed in the wake
of the uprising had no difficulty in becoming a new militia consisting of five
battalions of infantry, three companies of artillery and a regiment of cavalry.’
   This Spanish ‘great fear’ was reinforced by a number of other factors. Not
the least of these was the influence of religion, the atmosphere of crisis pro-
ducing outbreaks of veritable hysteria. Thus, in the Asturian shrine of
Covadonga large drops of sweat were seen to trickle down the face of Our Lady
of Battles, whilst at Santiago de Compostela the shrine of Saint James was
heard to ring with the clash of arms.* It is, however, Zaragoza that provides us
with the most direct evidence of the phenomenon:

  At about twelve o’clock [on 17 May]...a number of people began to say
  that they could see a palm tree surmounted by a crown in the sky above the
  dome of the shrine of Nuestra Sefiora del Pilar . . . At this stupendous news
  everyone began to invoke Our Lady and cry, ‘A miracle! A miracle!’, whilst
  at the same time it was claimed that a similar sight had been seen inside the
  shrine itself. At this the excitement grew even greater, and the santa capilla
  was soon resounding to the cry of people imploring the powerful assistance
  of the Virgin.”
   As the days passed so the hysteria grew, reaching its climax in the wake of
the national revolt provoked by the news that Fernando VII had been dethroned
by Napoleon. Fear of massacre was not the only cause, however. In Manresa,
for instance, the rising was precipitated by fears that ‘we were going . . . to end
up not only stripped of Church and King but serving [Napoleon] God knows
where’.!° Also instrumental was the Spanish Church, much of which was
bitterly opposed to Revolution and emperor alike. As the French apothecary
Sebastian Blaze remembered:

  The monks skilfully employed the influence which they still enjoyed over
  Spanish credulity . . . to inflame the populace and exacerbate the implacable
  hatred with which they already regarded us . . . In this fashion they encour-
  aged a naturally cruel and barbarous people to commit the most revolting
  crimes with a clear conscience. They accused us of being Jews, heretics,
  sorcerers .. . As a result, just to be a Frenchman became a crime in the eyes
  of the country."
   Although the sermon was probably mightier than the pen when it came to
lambasting the French, mention should also be made here of the blizzard of
pamphlets, letters, poems, odes, manifestos, exhortations, proclamations and
calls to arms that was called forth by the insurrection. The themes of this cam-
paign — hymns to Spanish heroism, panegyrics on Fernando VII, denunciations
of Napoleon and the hated royal favourite Manuel de Godoy, mockery of
64       Fighting Napoleon

Joseph Bonaparte, promises of rapid victory and stories of French atrocities —
are so well known that to detail them here seems pointless. But, in brief, there
was plenty to stir the fear of the populace, Napoleon being portrayed as a new
Attila the Hun, the French army as a bloodthirsty rabble and the Dos de Mayo
as the acme of massacre. The mamelukes of the Imperial Guard who formed
Murat’s personal bodyguard, for example, were supposed to have stripped
eleven prisoners naked, thrown them in a pit and then hacked them to pieces.”
   Not surprisingly, then, by the end of May the streets and squares had been
gripped by panic. At Ronda the house of the nephew of the victor of Bailén,
General Castafios, was stormed on the pretext that a guillotine had been hidden
there; at the Galician town of Villalba, 8 June saw rumours suddenly surface
to the effect that 8,ooo Frenchmen were marching on the town, burning and
killing everything they came across, with the result that the entire population
stood to arms with whatever weapons they could muster; at La Corufia news
that the French were landing from the sea brought an attempt to lynch some
prisoners incarcerated in the town’s gaol on the grounds that they were trai-
tors; and at Ribadeo stories that 6,000 enemy troops had sacked nearby
Castroverde produced threats that the mob would burn down the homes of the
local junta unless it was allowed to kill a solitary French aide-de-camp who had
just arrived in the town.'? Spy mania, too, was common: an unfortunate Italian
mercenary was thrown in prison for no better reason than the fact that he had
served the French as an interpreter. Meanwhile, one officer, sent to raise the
upper Pisuerga valley in revolt, only saved himself from being lynched by the
mob by climbing on to the roof of the inn in which he was staying, from which
predicament he was somewhat ignominiously rescued by the fortuitous arrival
of a French cavalry patrol.'t Enemy citizens, too, were put to death, as, for
example, in Malaga, where the French consul was killed on 20 June 1808, and
Valencia, where an ambitious friar named Baltasar Calvo instigated the murder
of no fewer than 380 French merchants and their families.'* Most revealing of
all, though, are the demands that confronted the alcalde mayor of Almaraz: