


     not fallen out with her husband, not a widow who has not emptied her house
     to take up with them, not a maiden who has not abandoned .. . honour at
     their instigation . . . They have neither king nor religion, and spend day and
     night alike in the tavern.”

   Even service in the privileged conditions that these units offered, it seemed,
was too much trouble. There is much evidence that many of the men involved
tried to avoid such commitments, paid substitutes to do their duties for them
or quickly tired of the whole business altogether.” If the milicia honrada failed
to get off the ground in most provinces, then, we need hardly be surprised.”
As for fighting, as one cynic remarked, “These caciques are only brave... in
the main squares of their home towns.”” Indeed, fearing that they might be
sent to the front, in February 1809 the Voluntarios Distinguidos de Cadiz even
instigated an insurrection whose main goal was to extract a promise that they
would never have to serve beyond the walls of the city.*° And, of course, the
Patriot authorities themselves were most unwilling to see the departure of their
protéges and bodyguards, as witness the bitter protests provoked by the arrival
of orders stripping Catalonia’s local juntas of the special companies of
migueletes that they had kept back to quell the mob.*!
   The impact of the pudientes’ behaviour on the structure of the Patriot army
was all too predictable. In theory universal, liability to military service in prac-
tice fell on precisely the same groups as before. Thus, if we look at the 152 men
called up in Manresa in 1810, we find that 141 of them are listed as being either
of littie fortune or of none at all, and that of the remaining eleven, only four
are deemed as being wealthy: and, equally, observing a column of prisoners
taken by the French when they defeated Joaquin Blake at Baza in November
1811, the captured British general Lord Blayney observed that ‘one third of the
privates were... half-starved boys from fourteen to sixteen; another third
infirm old men, just able to crawl; [and] the last third .. . men of a tolerable
appearance, [who] could alone have opposed . . . the French’.®? And when, later
in the war, desperate efforts were made to find fresh troops by combing out
the lists of those who had earlier been exempted, in Santa Coloma de Queralt,
at least, the only men taken were five artisans of various sorts and twelve
peasants.”
   In the Spain of the early nineteenth century nothing could have been more
unfortunate than the perception of injustice that all this produced. To quote a
retired army captain who dispatched an angry protest to the Junta Central:

     It is obvious that nothing can be more damaging to our sacred cause than
     ... angering the people by extending undue favours and privileges. . .
     on account of family relationships, clientage or bribery . . . The mass of the
     populace is convinced of the need to fight for its freedom, but when it sees
                                                   The Guerrillas in Context   Wi}