

     The Junta... of Ciudad Real... is not the work of... the people... Its
     members are Godoys, traitors, egoists and thieves who clubbed together so
     that the people would . . . not get at their money . . . The province is scan-
     dalized, for everybody knows that they are malignant rogues.”
Also well to the fore were complaints on the subject of conscription. One cor-
respondent from Guadix demanded the formation of a cuerpo preferente (liter-
ally, ‘regiment of the privileged’) that would bring together all those who had
managed to have themselves exempted on fraudulent grounds, together with
all public employees under the age of fifty, and a number of letters may also be
found calling for the immediate conscription of all members of the clergy apart
from those who were absolutely indispensable for the celebration of the sacra-
ments.” Typical enough is the following example from Galicia:
     Is there any reason why every single noble . . . should not be sent off to war
     in the space of three days? Is there any reason why they should not be fol-
     lowed by all priests, friars and clerks in minor orders under the age of forty
     ... by all tax officials of whatever rank . . . by all writers of whatever sort?!”

   For most families, however, the action to be taken was more practical. Patriot
Spain therefore began to experience precisely the same problems visible in
Revolutionary and Napoleonic France. All over the country men tried desper-
ately to avoid being subjected to the sorteo. There were, for example, hundreds
of petitions for exemption.'* Meanwhile, as the British officer John Patterson
noted, ‘Married men being . . . exempt from the contributions required to fill
up the ranks, all the youthful fellows in the neighbourhood espoused them-
selves in order to avoid the Junta’s levies’ (in one pueblo in Cordoba it was
reported that there were nineteen marriages in a single day).'® In the coastal
districts of Catalonia a frequent dodge was to obtain false papers stating that
the holder was enrolled in the navy’s list of sailors, and therefore in ordinary
circumstances exempt from conscription to the army.'’° Another favourite
choice was to flee or go into hiding. ‘In this city’, complained the Junta of
Santiago, ‘the young men who have been conscripted into the army can often
be heard complaining of the large number of their fellows who have fled to
. . Portugal in order to avoid being enlisted.’"”’ Even more interesting, mean-
while, is the situation in Ecija, where flight from conscription clearly meshed
with agrarian discontent. Thus: ‘A considerable number of the young men who
are eligible for service have fled into the countryside, where they have pillaged
many properties and estates without their owners being able to do a thing about
                                                     The Guerrillas in Context   SI


it.”'°’ And, last but not least, it was always possible to fake illness or physical
handicap: the village of Paymogo saw eleven men redeem themselves in this
fashion in the period 1808—9.'” For most of those who took this way out, the
basis of their claims lay in childhood accidents or illnesses that had supposedly
left them unfit to fight, but the really desperate might pull their front teeth out,
chop their trigger fingers off so as to make it impossible for them to fire a
musket, or, still worse, simulate the effects of syphilis by applying caustic
substances to their genitals.'”°
    The impact of such tactics was immense. In many parts of Spain the preva-
lence of migrant labour meant that for much of the year the number of poten-
tial conscripts in any given district was much smaller than was theoretically the
case. Ordered to find sixty men for the somatén in December 1809, for example,
the chief magistrate of the mountainous district of Tosas reported that most
of the young men in the area who had not already been called up were absent
working at jobs in the fertile coastal plain.''’ This phenomenon was bad enough,
but in some areas so many men were exempted from service that the burden
on the remainder became quite intolerable. Of this a good example may be
found in the Catalan district of Arens de Mar, which in June 1811 was ordered
to find 450 fresh conscripts. At first all seemed well, as there were reported to
be 2,780 men of military age in the area, but of these 1,939 were either married
men or widowers with children, 324 medically unfit and 390 disqualified from
serving on account of having been declared to be sole breadwinners. ‘This left
just 126 men out of the 841 bachelors and widowers without children who
formed the first category of the call-up. In some of the district’s pueblos, indeed,
the situation was even worse. Overall, something less than one man in every
seven of those theoretically available for service would have to take his chances
in the sorteo, but of Malgrat’s sixty candidates just one was left in the draw, of
Palafolls’ twenty-nine just one, and of Arens de Mar’s thirty-four just four.'"*
Hardly is it surprising, then, to find that the Junta Central as early as May 1809
agreed to reduce the minimum height required of a soldier from the already
diminutive 5 feet to the still more tiny 4 feet ro inches.'"
   Such problems, of course, served only to stiffen the resistance of the popu-
lace. As a miguelete officer sent to Arens de Mar to get things moving com-
plained, ‘Without armed men, it is impossible to obtain a single recruit . . . The
only means of making oneself obeyed is to use force.’''* The populace, however,
was undaunted. As in Don Benito, the ballot that actually determined who
should serve in the army might be disrupted by riot or mutiny: on 8 June 1808
proceedings at the Galician town of Mesia had to be abandoned when a shout
went up that the French were coming; on the very same day three miles east of
El Ferrol an angry crowd stormed the courthouse at Neda at the very moment
that the ballot was taking place, before going on to force the arrest of a number
82       Fighting Napoleon