

of alleged spies, ransack the tax offices and pillage the homes of various local
notables; and in October 1811 Arens de Mar’s conscripts refused to leave for
the army unless they were accompanied by one Miguel Buch, who they claimed
was being protected by relatives with positions on the Junta of Gerona (which
was at that point based at Arens).''? Meanwhile, there were also periodic
attempts to coerce the authorities. In La Mancha, for example, the mayor of
Miguelturra was murdered. In Catalonia the first day of 1809 witnessed a
violerit revolt in Lérida whose victims numbered the commander of one of the
tercios de miqueletes which the Catalan authorities were currently trying to form
as a substitute for recruitment to the regular army. In Jerez de la Frontera on
27 February 1809 a large crowd gathered on the main square to protest at the
way in which many men were being unfairly exempted from the quinta. And,
finally, in Murcia the provincial junta’s efforts to round up deserters provoked
a major rising that was used by its enemies to bring about its overthrow.'"®
   Nor did resistance cease once men had been drafted into the armed forces.
Given the reverential treatment that has customarily been accorded to the resis-
tance put up by Catalonia even by British historians, the evidence that we have
from that province is particularly interesting. Far from being the heroes of
legend, the somatenes and migueletes proved to be extremely reluctant to do their
duty. It is particularly indicative that in March 1809 the Junta of Granollers
was forced to reissue the orders alerting the local somatén to be ready for action
and laying down the procedure under which they were to be called out.!!” From
all sides, indeed, there came complaints of every sort. The somatenes, wrote
Enrique O’Donnell, ‘impede the army’s recruitment and get in the way of its
operations’, whilst the Marqués de Portazgo blamed the fall of Olot on the
failure of the garrison’s many men of this sort to put up a fight.''® Rather than
face battle, many men ‘break their muskets . . . whilst others throw them away
... or sell them’.'”” And still others simply went home. On 19 January 1810,
for example, Francisco Rovira reported that it was useless sending him groups
of somatenes as they disappeared as soon as they arrived, whilst much the same
sentiment had been expressed some months earlier by Joaquin Blake:

     Only a little while ago General Casamayor saw 2,000 of these armed peas-
     ants disappear the moment that the assembly was sounded . . . whilst a few
     nights back 3-4,000 fled from the command of Lieutenant-Colonel Juan
     Clarés. Let them come and give new proofs of their constancy by all means,
     but, when it comes to attacking the enemy, I will place no trust in such
     people.'”
   As if this was not enough, the Catalan militias also took out their wrath on
the homes of the more prosperous inhabitants. To quote one petition sent to
the Junta of Catalonia:
                                                   The Guerrillas in Context   83