

put it another way, deserters were patriots whose only crime was to decide that
they could serve the patria more effectively as guerrillas than as regular sol-
diers. This, however, is dangerously disingenuous. That there were deserters in
the ranks of the guerrillas is obvious — out of 1,166 men identified as having
served in their ranks thus far, forty were either certainly or almost certainly
deserters — but at only 3 per cent the number uncovered is surprisingly small,
whilst several of the men concerned only joined the partidas in which they
served some time after they deserted and as a result of either poverty or force
majeure. Most deserters, then, may rather be assumed to have fled their posts
in order to go home or, alternatively, to have found some means of subsistence
that was more profitable and less burdensome than the army (an intention, as
we shall see, that was by no means incompatible with a decision to join some
band of insurgents). All the more was this the case, meanwhile, given the ter-
rible conditions endured by many soldiers, the army being notoriously ill-paid,
ill-clothed and ill-fed.'*
   And, as in Catalonia, hand in hand with the question of resistance to the war
effort went that of law and order. Thus, from the vicinity of Cadiz one comi-
stonado reported that the whole area was swarming with ‘bad Spaniards, who,
having either deserted or fled from the draft, have necessarily become thieves
and wrongdoers, robbing passers-by . . . sacking farms, and [oppressing] the
[inhabitants] with more inhumanity than the... French’, whilst the military
governor of Santiago complained of ‘a plague of deserters who march from
crime to crime’.!*° Even when they returned to their native pueblos, indeed,
many deserters had no option but to resort to extortion: from La Carolina, for
example, came complaints that a group of soldiers from the area were hiding
in the hills outside the town and bombarding the ayuntamiento with demands
for food and clothing.'*°
   In the face of all this violence even the more responsible local authorities felt
completely helpless. To quote the Junta of Villafranca:

  Given .. . the general scorn with which our measures are looked upon, not
  to mention the fact that the town has neither garrison, nor governor,
  nor commandant . .. we do not know . . . what to do. Despised, surrounded
  by wrongdoers . . . [and] continually threatened with fresh incursions on
  the part of the enemy... we can neither fulfil our own obligations, nor
  make anybody else fulfil theirs: our authority is neither respected nor
  feared.'*’

Confronted with a populace that was armed and mutinous, and with roving
bands of outlaws who were not only wreaking havoc on all sides but capable of
taking the most savage revenge on anyone who crossed them, many juntas were
understandably prepared to let sleeping dogs lie. As the bishop of Ciudad
Rodrigo complained:
&6       Fighting Napoleon


     We are in what approaches a state of anarchy here . . . because the junta and
     its president are obsessed with fear of the people, and do not dare to dis-
     pense justice with regard to either delinquents or deserters... In eight
     months of horrible events we have not seen a single punishment . . . and as
     a result . . . it is the people who are in command.'*