


  With the greatest regret, the justices of the Valles district cannot avoid
  informing Your Excellency of the many disturbances, robberies, assaults and
  other crimes that the migueletes are committing in the homes of the /abradores
  ...the number of their crimes being as numerous as that of the houses
  which they come across. As for the owners, they can do nothing to stop this
  execrable behaviour, for... the men... threaten to shoot them unless they
  are allowed to have their way.'”!
Such complaints were widespread. On 16 September 1809 Blake told the Junta
Central that the only reason the somatenes came together was ‘to devastate the
province’; and on 31 December of the same year one José Roset wrote from
‘Tarrasa:

  The somatenes think they have the right to engage in insubordination and lib-
  ertinage, whilst at the same time having first call on the precious resources
  that could save us from the slavery that threatens us. Enormous gangs of men
  ... pass though this town all the time. Most of them are armed, and the
  majority with muskets at that. What they are up to, I do not know, but I
  fear that putting such weapons into the hands of the mob is tantamount
  to turning each one of them into an enemy who is far worse than any
  Frenchman.!”

But most scathing of all was a young Andalusian officer named Francisco de
Paula Guervos, who had been sent to Catalonia with a division of reinforce-
ments. Thus:

  Every day I hate these people more: they have no God but money, and for it
  would sell their fatherland, their families, their saints and anything else that
  comes to hand... Much vaunted though it is, the Army of Catalonia is
  nothing but a collection of bands of thieves who under the name of somatenes
  enter the towns and villages in almost the same manner as the French. . .
  the only difference being that they are rather more skilful when it comes to
  robbing them.'”

    As we have seen, resistance to the war effort in Catalonia may have been
intensified by a variety of factors that were peculiar to the province. Yet there
is no reason to believe that things were much better anywhere else. In Jaca,
Santander and Oviedo officers who attempted to bring their troops to order and
subject them to the rigours of drill found that they were accused of trying to
stifle their patriotic spirit.'** And throughout Spain soldiers engaged in various
forms of evasion. As in other conflicts, one means of escape was the self-
inflicted wound, but by far the most popular was desertion.'” As early as 31
May 1808 the Junta of Seville was complaining that many of its alistados were
34     Fighting Napoleon

seemingly unwilling to serve even as local militiamen, let alone regular soldiers,
and further that the substantial regular army that it had been able to amass was
experiencing serious desertion, whilst on 24 June the Junta of Zamora had to
give orders for the conscripts of the pueblo of Argusino to be placed in the
charge of an armed guard.’”° Moving on, in January 1809 it was reported that
there were many deserters in the district of Rubia in Galicia; in March that
over 100 men had deserted in a single night from one Galician regiment; in
April that infinitos dispersos were hiding in the rough country that lined the
south bank of the River Tagus; in May that no fewer than forty-eight
deserters had been picked up in the city of Malaga alone in the course of the
past three months, and that in Galicia many men were hiding in their homes;
and in June that the district of Socuéllamos was full of deserters who ignored
every attempt to appeal to their better feelings and had to be dragged back to
the army by force.'’” Losses often peaked when regiments were marched away
from their home provinces, but such issues were merely incidental: even when
in their own part of Spain the men kept running away. Catalonia, for example,
saw at least one third of its soldiers desert, despite the fact that Catalan regi-
ments rarely served beyond the boundaries of the principality.’** Rounded up
by detachments of loyal troops sent out for the purpose, most dispersos — the
crowds of fugitives and stragglers who escaped from the ranks after every battle
— simply absconded again as soon as their captors’ backs were turned.’”? And,
still more extraordinarily, there were cases of men who had been captured by
the French refusing to effect their escape when they were offered the chance
of doing so, on the grounds that they would rather be prisoners of war than go
on facing life in the army.'*”
    That desertion was so prominent a phenomenon is hardly surprising. Above
all, it was an easy option. The lack of marching discipline off the battlefield
and the frequent routs upon it made it simple for a soldier to slip away from
the ranks. Runaways could pass unnoticed because clothing shortages meant
that many units were dressed in a style little different from that of the civilian
population.’ A proclamation of 3 January 1809 had laid down the most savage
penalties for deserters and all those who helped them, but there was a marked
reluctance to shoot men who had gone absent for no other reason than the fact
that they were starving.'*’ And there was always somewhere to run to: just as
town councils and justices in the Patriot zone were often prepared to turn a
blind eye to the presence of deserters, so the French were quite content to
let men whose pued/os lay in areas that they happened to control live quietly in
their homes, always providing, of course, that they had no truck with the
insurgents.*
   In traditional accounts of the war the act of desertion has often been por-
trayed as having stemmed from a desire to perpetuate the struggle by means
that were more efficacious than those being employed by the regular army. To
                                                     The Guerrillas in Context    SS