

scheme aimed, first, at securing him a substantial salary; second, at allowing
him to escape front-line service; and, third, at giving him the power of patron-
age (service in such anti-bandit patrols was for obvious reasons very popular).”°
   The evidence of violent hostility to authority is overwhelming. In the words
of one of the numerous comisionados sent out by the Junta Central to whip up
patriotic feeling, round up deserters and draft-dodgers, and accelerate the
quinta, for example:
                                                        ~


     When I arrived at Paymogo I found the most horrible picture that I could
     possibly outline to Your Majesty. I did not dare to do so from there, because
     my letter would inevitably have been intercepted, thereby putting me at risk
     of falling victim to the . . . violence of a populace that has never known either
     subordination or respect for authority. All my fiery spirit had to be exchanged
     for humility, sweetness and generosity . .. The whole area presents the most
     lamentable sight. It is a confused anarchy in which the entire body politic is
     undone. On every side one sees ferment, disorder, intrigue and the spirit of
     faction.”!

In Asturias, meanwhile, General Ballesteros was complaining of the ‘disobedi-
ence of the . . . inhabitants of this territory, unaccustomed as they are to being
punished for their crimes’, whilst from Malaga a despairing official told the
Junta Central’s secretary-general, Martin de Garay, that the ‘insubordination
... Of these pueblos has left me so frustrated that I have no option but to
trouble Your Excellency in the hope that your intervention might reduce them
to submission and respect’.”
   There were, doubtless, other factors in the equation, not least among them
the outrage and despair that were felt at the inability of the Spanish army to
hold back the French in the campaign of the winter of 1808, and, prior to that,
the false hopes engendered by the boasting and vainglory that had filled the
Patriot press following the battle of Bailén.” Nor did it help that lack of fore-
sight in the expansion of the army in 1808 had given rise to many supernu-
merary officers." Left with nothing to do, such men naturally gravitated to
cities such as Seville and La Corufia, where they were joined by still other men
who had simply abandoned their regiments, and, as one British officer put it,
together they ‘served only to make a military appearance in the streets and
gaming houses’.”” Even when they were with their units, meanwhile, Spanish
officers had an evil reputation. The Duke of Wellington remarked, for example,
that ‘Subordination and habits of obedience ... can be acquired by soldiers
only in proportion as they have confidence in their officers, and they cannot
have confidence in officers who have no knowledge of their profession . . . have
no subordination among themselves, and never obey an order.’”°
                                                    The Guerrillas in Context   79