


   All this, of course, only served to swell the mood of social unrest, not least
because many of the more exalted liberals fanned the flames by trumpeting
demands for a renewal of the officer corps on the basis of ‘new’ men made in
the revolution. How far such radicalism awoke a popular echo, it is hard to say,
but there is no doubt that it reflected feelings in the pueblo. In the words of one
anonymous letter sent to the Junta Central:

  With the exception of a few of the better commanders, all the officers of our
  armies are loud-mouthed braggarts . . . If we are to win, we must make our
  privates into sergeants, our corporals into captains, and our sergeants into
  colonels.”

In certain parts of Spain, too, even among the common people there may have
been traces of an incipient regionalism. For a variety of reasons — not least folk
memories of armed revolt — this was particularly strong in Catalonia. As the
Marqués de Lazan warned General Blake, for example:

   Garrisoning Lérida . . . with the Catalan legions that are being formed would
   be very dangerous. It is not for me to meddle with your . . . plans, nor still
   less change them . . . But, even so, I know the Catalans, and, for all its walls
   and towers, I would not answer for Lérida if it was held by Catalan troops
   ... The people of the area are most barbarous, and the soldiers would
   certainly take their side if there was any sort of riot.”

   As the years went by, growing anti-British feeling amongst men of letters
and the civil and military authorities may also have rubbed off on the people.
Following the abortive campaign of Barosa, for example, quarrels in Cadiz
between the British commander, Sir Thomas Graham, and his Spanish coun-
terparts produced rumours that the British had seized Cadiz and decapitated
Generals Zayas and La Pefia, whilst there were many stories to the effect that
the British intended either to commandeer the Spanish army for their own pur-
poses or to force the populace to enlist under Wellington.” But the central issue
remained conscription. Throughout the eighteenth century this had always
been hated and feared by all concerned. Few young men relished being torn
away from the bosom of the families to an uncertain fate, and few families could
contemplate the loss of their labour with any equanimity. Meanwhile, military
service was associated with vice and ultimately beggary, since those men who
eventually returned to their homes generally did so as drunken misfits. The
Patriot régime having utterly failed to awaken an echo among the populace,
there was no chance that these feelings would be swept away by the events of
1808, and, by the same token, every chance that the populace would seek to
defend itself.'””                      ;
So       Fighting Napoleon

   In this situation resistance took many forms. Crudely written, poorly spelt
and very often anonymous, denunciations of the local authorities were soon
being received by the Junta Central by the sackload. For example: