

  In this province there is positively nothing: one squadron of cavalry is
  forming, and one battalion of foreign infantry is doing duty in the town, but
  beyond that there is not a soldier, no depot of recruits, no provision of any
  sort for keeping up the armies at their present force, or in any way carrying
  on the war. All seems at rest. The hordes of deserters that are known to
  be about are not meddled with, and indeed the encouragement given
  to deserters by that means is so great that... numbers of families are
  sending for their sons from the armies, assuring them that they will not be
  punished.”
For the troops of the Duke of Wellington and Sir John Moore, all this came as
a great shock. To quote the commissary Augustus Schaumann, for example:

  The more one sees of the Spaniards, the more discouraged one gets. Every-
  thing that has been so blatantly trumpeted in the papers about their enthu-
  siasm, their great armies and the stampede to join them is simply lies. It often
  looks as if Spain were not even willing to defend herself. In all the hamlets,
  villages and towns, the inhabitants . . . lounge about in their hundreds, com-
  pletely apathetic, indifferent and gloomy, and sunk in their idleness. Is this
  the daring, patriotic and impetuous race about which the press have raved so
  bombastically?!*”
   What the solution to the problem was few could envisage. It is all too easy
to state the obvious: that the people of Spain had to be given something tan-
gible to fight for, or, to put it another way, that the millenarian hopes that had
been awoken by the accession to the throne of Fernando VII should be trans-
lated into reality. Reform of the sort that was needed, however, was something
that was far beyond the imagination of most of the leaders of Patriot Spain,
and, in the case of the liberals — the force that dominated its politics between
1810 and 1814 — directly contrary to their ideology. Anxious to drive through
&8    Fighting Napoleon

their agenda, the liberals did repeatedly make use of the argument that the
enthusiasm of 1808 had been squandered by the failure of the Junta Central to
consolidate the revolution of that year.'** However, with the exception of a few
far-sighted individuals, they did not interpret reform in terms of the interests
of the populace, and persuaded themselves that their own private objectives
were consonant with those interests. Indeed, even the cortes of Cadiz’s much-
vaunted abolition of feudalism proved a bitter disappointment, as the peasants
had in many cases to go on paying the dues that they had owed to their old
senores in the form of rent. Only very rarely, then, do we find a recognition of
the truth. One such instance comes from General Abadia, who, sent to the
Campo de Gibraltar in 1810, decided that the only way to put an end to the
agrarian discontent that was rocking the area would be to parcel out plots of
uncultivated land and distribute them amongst the local yunteros, and another
from José O’Donnell, who as commander of the Spanish forces in Valencia and
Murcia in March 1812 issued stringent orders against grain speculation.'”
However, even such initiatives as these did not make very much difference to
the overall picture, for, whilst liberal support for disamortisation ensured that
much land changed hands in the course of the War of Independence, very little
ended up in the hands of the rural lower classes (in theory, half the lands of
the municipalities were set aside for distribution to veterans of the war, but the
principle was not acted upon). Amazingly, meanwhile, not until the very end
of the war did the cortes think to make any provision for men who had been
incapacitated in the fighting, and even then its thinking on the subject was
hardly generous: all that was done was to order the establishment of a depdsito
de inutilizados in each province and to lay down that the men concerned should
be assigned the same pay as they had been receiving at the time that they were
wounded.'”°
    It may, then, be taken as read not only that the bulk of the population had
little interest in the war, but also that such littlé interest as it possessed was
squandered by the corruption and short-sightedness of a local élite that had
maintained its position intact in the face of the so-called Spanish revolution.
Inspired by a mixture of panic, millenarian excitement and black propaganda,
the populace was initially prepared to lend itself to acts of mass resistance, and
particularly so when the élites flattered its vanity and reached out to it through
the use of interlocutors capable of speaking the language of the streets. But,
for all that, all is not what it seems. Despite a massive propaganda effort that
has to this day created the impression that the Spanish struggle against
Napoleon was a new people’s crusade, the populace on the whole wanted
nothing to do with the war. Far from rushing to the colours, indeed, they had
rather to be forced to take up arms, and even then did so with the utmost unwill-
ingness. At the same time, terrified by popular violence, the authorities them-
                                                   The Guerrillas in Context   &9