


  the multitude of conscripts who, on account of private favour, are released,
  allowed to remain in their homes, or posted to positions that could be filled
  by men who have been exempted from service, the danger that it must suffer
  ... becomes repugnant to it, and it loses its enthusiasm.

   To understand why feelings of patriotism could not hope to overcome such
resentment, we need to turn to some recent works on the growth of national
consciousness. In Spain, as we have seen, the Patriot authorities made great
efforts to swing the populace behind the struggle against Napoleon. But, as
Linda Colley has shown in her seminal work Britons, modern nationalism
depends on the completion of a series of social processes, including historical
acculturalisation, urbanisation, the collapse of rural insularity and the spread
of popular literacy.* As Broers has pointed out, meanwhile, in their absence
the demands of modern war were certain to be faced with massive resistance.*°
Spain, however, was very much a ‘backward’ state, on which the impact of
enlightened absolutism and the processes analysed by Colley had alike been
minimal, whilst, even in the narrow confines of the intellectual élite, the idea
that a Spanish nation even existed had hardly ever been mooted.” In conse-
quence, it would always have been hard to persuade the pueblo to make the
gigantic efforts called for by the war against Napoleon. Thanks to the pudientes,
however, the task was all but impossible. Always likely to be hostile, Spanish
society reacted with immense violence, and matters were made worse still not
only by the fact that the authorities’ efforts to keep control, hunt down
bandits, round up deserters and render the quinta effective were often exploited
as a means of escaping military service, but also by the fact that the special
forces raised to achieve these goals became ever more oppressive and
burdensome.™
  Given the problems caused by these improvised security forces, they are
worth considering in more detail. Of particular interest in this respect is
the situation that pertained in Malaga. Since the countryside was overrun by
deserters and bandits, the authorities eventually sanctioned a proposal that,
in effect, a thief be set to catch a thief, and allowed its author to go round the
local gaols picking out repentant bandits to act as the nucleus of a force of
poachers turned gamekeepers. Only later, however, did somebody notice that
the enterprising pretendiente whom they had just taken on was none other than
a renowned local chieftain named Matias Hispano, and, still worse, that the men
he had selected were all members of his old gang who had been caught by the
local justices.’ This, perhaps, was an extreme case, but even so the general
reputation enjoyed by these forces was very poor. From Llerena, for example,
came complaints that the security patrol Manuel Mufioz Vaca had been per-
mitted to establish by the Junta of Badajoz had proved to be little more than a
78       Fighting Napoleon