


   Unlike, say, on the great estates of Andalucia, the populace therefore had
something to fight for, but at the same time they also had something to fight
against. Hard up against the Pyrenees, they could not but entertain notions of
the French as ‘the other’, whilst they had also bitter memories of the war of
1793-95, in which the armies of the Convention had stormed across the
province. Close to their clergy, they were in addition more likely to be influ-
enced than many other Spaniards by pamphlets and sermons excoriating the
French as the spawn of the devil (it may also be of significance that many of
the French priests and religious who had fled to Spain had settled in the
frontier provinces). And, on top of all this, they also had a tradition of taking
up arms in their own defence, having always been required to form irregular
militias in time of war and invasion (farming techniques and practices in the
hillier parts of Navarre were such that young men could be spared for part-
time military service with relative ease).'
   With these conditions mirrored only in the Basque provinces, if at all, there
is no way that the example of Navarre can be regarded as a model for the whole
of Spain. Indeed, even in Navarre they did not hold good for the entire region:
in contrast to the montana of the north, the ribera of the south —a land of rolling
steppes, clerical dominance, great estates and densely populated ‘agro-towns’
such as Corella and Tudela — was marked by the poverty, feudalism and deep-
rooted social division characteristic of a region in which the majority of the
populace were either day-labourers or tenant farmers burdened by high rents
and constant insecurity. So great were the problems experienced by the ribera
that the residual benefits conveyed by the fueros could do little to offset them
— there were, indeed, arguments that they were an obstacle to its prosperity —
and it is in consequence no surprise to find that recruitment to Espoz y Mina’s
forces was far less successful there: of 3,477 men listed in a census of the vol-
unteers who joined his forces commissioned by the provincial authorities after
the return of Fernando VII in 1814 only one quarter hailed from the ribera.?
From such areas, too, come reports that make it clear that the guerrilla com-
mander’s relations with the civilian population were not always as smooth as
was the case in the north of Navarre. ‘The guerrillas’, wrote Heinrich von
Brandt, ‘cared even less about their compatriots than we did and certain chiefs
held sway over the countryside by terror alone. When they intercepted requi-
sitioned cattle, it was in order to confiscate them for their own profit. When
they themselves requisitioned something, it was usually upon pain of death.”
Elsewhere, meanwhile, Von Brandt was even more scathing, writing, ‘The
country was made to suffer dreadfully to satisfy this man’s absolute will and
selfish ambition.”
   The question of Espoz y Mina is one to which we shall return. Much more
important for the time being is the identification of positive engagement in the
                                                  The Origins of the Guerrillas   93