


struggle with a satisfaction with pre-war society suggested by the case of the
Navarrese montana. The claim that enthusiasm for the guerrillas was strength-
ened by possession of a reasonable degree of security and status is reinforced
by reference to the social composition of the guerrillas. Extensive work in
primary and secondary sources has produced a list of some 322 members of
guerrilla bands whose occupation in 1808 is known. Of these, no fewer than
204 may be said in one sense or other to have been the representatives of
property, power and social success as students, professionals, landowners or
wealthy tenant farmers, serving or retired army officers, or members of the
clergy (the remaining 118 include taverners, butchers, stall-holders, municipal
employees, muleteers, peasants, day-labourers, artisans, common soldiers,
smugglers, bandits and deserters from the imperial army).
   Too much emphasis should not be placed on such figures, for members of
the Church, the army or the propertied classes were far more likely to leave a
trace in archive or written record than members of the populacho but the figure
is still an arresting one. In all, 1,166 individual guerrillas were identified in the
research that produced this work, and, even if every single one of the 844 names
whose occupation remains a mystery were to turn out to be peasants, day-
labourers, servants and the like, we would still have a situation in which groups
representing fewer than 10 per cent of the population provided 17 per cent
of the guerrilla movement. Also significant, meanwhile, is the identity of men
who at one time or another commanded a partida, for, out of the 371 such
leaders who have been identified, 103 came from the middling or upper
echelons of society, and only 37 from the populacho (the remaining 222 were
unknown).”
   We therefore have a movement that appears to have had strong support
amongst groups that were in one way or another beneficiaries of the antiguo
régimen. At the same time, when hacendados such as the Marqués de
Barriolucio or Esteban Pascual y Casas took the field, there seems little reason
to doubt that they did so to uphold the old order.° That said, however, the mere
fact that 137 members of the clergy have been identified amongst the 322 guer-
rillas whose occupations we know is in itself meaningless, and certainly not
enough to sustain the traditional French charge that /a guerrilla was the work
of a Church intent on blocking enlightened reform. If the famous Jeronimo
Merino — in 1808 parish priest of the tiny village of Villoviado, near Lerma —
was to become a convinced defender of absolutism and, in his latter days, a
Carlist, the Valencian leader Agustin Nebot was a rebel who began his career
by running away from his convent and was to fight just as determinedly for the
liberals. And what, too, is one to make of cases such as those of the friar Julian
                                                                               fol-
Crespo, who fought under Espoz y Mina as a corporal, was imprisoned
                                                                                 of
lowing the rising of 1814, sought secularisation under the liberal regime
94     Fighting Napoleon