

     ... You will be called defenders of the fatherland, and as such seen as men
     of honour. You will be able to enter without fear not just small places, but
     also towns and cities, whilst you will be able to... demand all the food you
     could eat and all the money you could possibly desire... And if anyone
     resists you, you will be able to deal with them . . . Indeed, you will be able
     to flog the very justices who once persecuted you without anyone daring to
     say a word for fear of being. . . punished as a traitor... At the beginning
     Bonaparte was no more than a lowly [junior] officer . . . and yet now he is an
     emperor who is . . . troubling the entire world. All I ask for is obedience: for
     the rest you may rely on me.”
   What this says about the nature of Espoz y Mina’s forces is something that
is best left to another moment. The important point here is simply to note that
we cannot trust most stories about why individual guerrilla commanders took
up arms. For another example, let us look at the issue of revenge as personi-
fied by the unknown combatant who figures in the memoirs of the British
officer Joseph Sherer:

     In a village about three leagues from Pamplona . . . Imet with . . . a guerrilla
     ... L asked him where he lived and under whom he served. ‘Sefior,’ said he,
     ‘I have no home, no relations, nothing save my country and my sword. My
     father was led out and shot in the market place of my native village; our
     cottage was burned; my mother died of grief; and my wife, who had been
     violated by the enemy, fled to me, then a volunteer with Palafox, and died in
     my arms in a hospital in Zaragoza. I serve under no particular chief: I. . .
     feel too revengeful to support the restraint of discipline and the delay of
     manoeuvre . . . But I have sworn never to dress a vine or to plough a field till
     the enemy is driven out of Spain.”

   All this seems plausible enough, especially as British, French and Spanish
observers are agreed that the appalling behaviour engaged in by the invaders
played a major role in stirring up popular resistance. As a British general cap-
tured in an unsuccessful raid on Fuengirola wrote of an incident that occurred
whilst he was passing through Jaén, for example:

     The fact .. . is that at the commencement the Spaniards were lukewarm in
     their own cause, and would probably still have remained so had not the
     cruelties and excesses of the French roused them to resistance and revenge.
     ... While at dinner I learned that Major Ropach had been sent with a
     detachment to destroy a village about twelve miles distant where some
     French soldiers had been murdered the preceding night, for it is a general
     order that the inhabitants of the place where such a crime is committed are
     put to the sword, without exception of age or sex, and their habitations
                                                  The Origins of the Guerrillas   99