

  burned to the ground... By this system of terror and extermination the
  French have created the bands that they name brigands, for the inhabitants
  of a village who are fortunate enough to escape from these military execu-
  tions, having no place of refuge, join the first armed party they meet, and,
  urged by revenge and desperation, commit the greatest cruelties on the
  enemies who fall into their hands.”

To back up this observer, meanwhile, we might cite the Frenchman Captain
Elzéar Blaze and the Spaniard Salmon. Referring to the plunder of Spain’s
churches, for example, the former wrote, ‘Had some of our amateurs of fine
art... been picked out and shot, the war would not have become national . . .
These dilapidations were the cause of the war to the death that the Spaniards
waged against us.””° And finally, it was Salm6n’s view that the ‘cruelty and ter-
rorism that the French saw as the most effective means of limiting the growth
of the partidas served only to multiply their numbers and give them greater
vigour’.””
   To substantiate these arguments, case after case may be cited of cabecillas
who are supposed to have joined the struggle against the French after the latter
had injured them in some way or another. One such was Francisco Abad
Moreno (Chaleco), a shepherd from Valdepefias whose mother and brother
were killed when the French sacked his home town in June 1808. This case is
well documented, and there seems little doubt that Abad was genuinely com-
mitted to the struggle: thanks to the patronage of General Castafios, at the end
of the war he was a colonel, whilst he also earned the praise even of men who
were normally sceptical of the guerrilla popular.*
   In other instances, however, there is room for doubt. Thus, revenge was sup-
posedly the motivation of the Franciscan friar Lucas Rafael, the prosperous
labrador Camilo Gomez, the post-rider Toribio Bustamente and the wealthy
nobleman Ventura Jiménez (in brief, it is claimed that Rafael’s father was exe-
cuted by the French for refusing to swear loyalty to Joseph Bonaparte; that
Gémez’s wife and daughters were violated by French troops who had sacked
his home and seized his livestock; that Bustamente’s wife and son were mur-
dered when the French sacked his home town of Medina de Rio Seco in July
1808; and that Jiménez’s wife was raped by soldiers quartered in his home). Yet
how far can we trust these stories? The fact that Jiménez’s own version of events
makes no mention of his wife’s violation is not encouraging: he rather says that
he had to flee his home after acting as a guide for some passing Spanish troops.”
Equally, the only evidence for the story relating to the murder of Rafael’s father
                                                                                 is
comes from a pamphlet that is couched in such exaggerated language that it
hard to take anything that it says at face value.” In at least two further instances,
meanwhile, they can be shown to be nonsense, the first of these being that of
roo ~—-Fighting Napoleon