

selves backed away from the idea of employing the nation-in-arms against
Napoleon. For the reasons why all this was so we must turn to the ‘want of
patriotism’ so complained of by British observers. Patriotism in the modern
sense did not exist in Spain, and, what is more, could not exist, for the country
had not gone through the processes that were the sine qua non of such feelings.
But if this is the case, then, we must also seek alternative explanations for the
decision of many men of humble origins to take up arms against the French.
Partidas there may have been, but in the light of the conditions that we have
discussed in the present chapter it would be absurd to argue that they were acti-
vated solely by love of dios, rey y patria. Having established, however, that /a
guerrilla was a phenomenon that rested on a far broader spectrum of forces than
just the people in arms, this presents us with few difficulties: if bands of armed
civilians were only a small part of the ‘little war’, there is obviously room for
an alternative agenda of the sort that will now be opened up for discussion.
                                       4
                The Origins of the Guerrillas
                                                   ~




From what has gone before it is quite clear that the way is open for a complete
re-evaluation of the guerrillas. Many of the men we know by this name, it turns
out, were not armed civilians at all, but rather regular soldiers who were either
detailed to carry out irregular operations or forced by circumstances to make
them their modus vivendi. As for the populace, though hardly enamoured of the
French, it was at best uninterested in the war effort and deeply hostile to the
caciques who everywhere had a monopoly of political power. There were areas
of Spain, clearly, where the arrival of the invaders or the experience of French
occupation proved sufficiently traumatic to overcome this initial ambivalence.
At the same time, fighting in a guerrilla band close to home and family was not
the same as being marched off to the other end of the country as a conscript,
just as fighting to defend home and family was a concept that carried more
weight than fighting to defend the fatherland, the Church or the rights of
Ferdinand VII. Yet, for all that, it is no longer possible simply to accept the
bald claim that /a guerrilla was a popular crusade. That some men — many men,
even — took up arms is certain, but the reasons why they did so are open to
question. Just as interesting, meanwhile, are the issues of identity, organisa-
tion and leadership. Who, we may ask, were the guerrillas? How did the
phenomenon of guerrilla warfare actually emerge? And, finally, how far did
the cabecillas who headed the individual guerrilla bands genuinely spring from
the Spanish people?
   The importance of these questions is reinforced by the manner in which they
have often been answered by reference to examples of dubious value. Let us
take, for instance, the case of Navarre. Well documented and superficially
attractive, the figures of Martin Javier Mina y Larrea and Francisco Espoz y
Mina seem the very epitome of popular caudillos. As for the resistance move-
ment they headed, on the surface it was both very strong and deeply ideologi-
                                                  The Origins of the Guerrillas   gI