


the new capital of Cadiz, and, on the strength of having been of some assis-
tance to Mina at the time he had been organising his band, secured the grandly
named position of ‘commander-in-chief of the guerrillas of Navarre’.”” And
before all this there is the question of just how Espoz y Mina came to take
command of the band originally commanded by Mina. Well before the end of
the war rumours were circulating that the latter had been betrayed, and, whilst
nothing can be proved against him, the account that Espoz y Mina gives of the
affair is at the very least deeply suspicious. Thus:

  Hardly had we arrived in Labiano when a column of 3,000 enemy troops
  appeared in the vicinity. Seeing what was going on, I rode out with a few
  horsemen to take a look at them, whilst my nephew [sic: see below, note 21]
  had a rest. Seeing that they were heading straight for the village, I sent a
  message warning everybody who was there to get clear, and tried to slow
  down the enemy by having my men fire at them with their carbines, only gal-
  loping clear when the French had got within pistol-shot of us. Believing that
  [Mina] had by now got clear away, I then retired . . . only to find that . . . he
  had either believed that the danger was not as immediate as was actually the
  case, or wanted to give an example of courage, and been betrayed by his own
  daring. When he finally mounted his horse, the French had already entered
  the village . . . Shooting his mount, they quickly surrounded him, and took
   him prisoner.”

   Reading between the lines of this account, it is impossible not to suspect that
Espoz y Mina either deliberately provoked the French into attacking Mina at
a moment when he knew that the latter could be taken unawares, or simply
betrayed him outright.” Whatever the truth of the matter, there is little doubt
as to what happened next. As Espoz y Mina himself provides few details as to
how he persuaded the survivors of Mina’s forces to accept his command, let us
quote the harangue cited by the anonymous author of the pamphlet cited above:

   Well, lads, if you are not careful, you will find that the French will have left
   you no option but to get an honest job, for, what with requisitioning, looting
   and imposing fines, they will soon have grabbed all the swag. . . . All the gold,
   all the silver, all the jewellery, in fact all the good things in life, will end up
   in their hands if you do not . . . resist them to the death. Do not be afraid: I
   will be your leader, and if you obey me you will . . . cover yourselves in glory.
   Unable to show your face in any town, until now you have had to work by
   night and make do with lonely roads and isolated houses as your targets.
   Lacking a legitimate reason to live off. . . other people’s property, mean-
   while, you have been persecuted by all and sundry. But from now on you will
   be respectable. As the French are the enemy, if you kill them you will be able
   to enrich yourselves not just with their money, but also with everybody else’s
98       Fighting Napoleon