


cal. Over and over again, then, we find Navarre used as an epitome for the
guerrilla in the whole of Spain. Yet, in fact, Navarre is a very special instance
that has little relevance to the rest of the country. In Francisco Espoz y
Mina, in particular, it had a military commander of some talent. Able to win
battles against the French, he at the same time possessed both the utmost ruth-
lessness and considerable political acumen: whilst he stopped at nothing
to eliminate all his rivals in the province and unite the resistance movement
under his leadership, he also strove hard not just to live off the backs of
the inhabitants. Aided by the numerous mistakes made by the occupying forces,
the growing numbers of recruits brought in by his successes, the social struc-
ture of the Navarrese montana and the rugged terrain by which he was
 surrounded, he was also able to offer the people a greater measure of protec-
 tion against enemy reprisals and requisitioning than was generally the case
 elsewhere. But, above all, the socio-economic situation was all but unique.
 Unlike in most of the rest of Spain, in northern and central Navarre — the areas
 that provided both Mina and Espoz y Mina with the bulk of their support —
 the populace were reasonably satisfied with their lot. Homes were generally
 owned rather than rented, whilst the substantial farmhouses that characterised
 the region were positively palatial when compared with the miserable cabins
 and tenements that were the usual lot of campesinos. With land easy to obtain,
 smallholdings were large enough to keep a family and were either owned out-
 right or held on reasonable terms (rents, indeed, were extremely low, and had
 generally not been raised for generations). Farming was mixed and labour-
 intensive, thereby ensuring employment throughout the year, whilst good rain-
 fall and rich soil kept yields high and food prices low. Social divisions were
 limited, and feudalism all but non-existent thanks to the fact that up to 80
 per cent of the population could claim noble status. As for the Church, it was
 no burden. Given the relative absence of great religious houses in the moun-
 tains of Navarre, the clergy owned few estates and had almost no feudal fiefs.
 The parishes were small and their priests recruited from amongst the villagers
 whom they served, and such land as the Church did possess was rented out to
 the peasantry for sums that were for the most part purely nominal. Thanks to
 the province’s traditional fueros, too, taxation was low, whilst customs of village
 democracy ensured that it was imposed on a reasonably equitable basis.
 And, last but not least, the fweros — an immediate target, be it said, for French
 reform — were also economically beneficial to the peasantry, enshrining
                                                                                 that
 traditions of paternalism, protecting the common lands and ensuring
                                                                                  was
 there was no obstacle to the export to France of wool and hides that
 an important part of the montana ’s economy and         offering many  possibilities
                                                                          from the
 for smuggling (the key factor here was Navarre’s exclusion
Spanish customs frontier).
92     Fighting Napoleon