

If he threw himself into liberal politics after 1814, it was not just out of con-
viction but because there was no other way for him to make his way in the
world, and the impression of opportunism that one is left with after consider-
ing his career is strengthened still further by the fact that his captivity in France
at one point actually saw him offer his services to Joseph Bonaparte. For such
men the guerrilla bands offered a golden opportunity, and it is worth turning
aside to consider two of them in more detail.’”
   Of these, the first is the fascinating figure of Mariano Renovales. A junior
officer in-the colonial militia, he had just returned to Spain after many years in
America when the war broke out. After joining Palafox at Zaragoza, he had
quickly secured a commission as a brigadier, and gained some repute in the
defence of first Zaragoza and then the Valle del Roncal, to which he managed
to escape whilst he was being sent to France as a prisoner of war. After travel-
ling to Cadiz in 1810, he had then succeeded in persuading the government of
the virtues of a wild scheme to raise the inhabitants of the Basque provinces
in revolt. As he wrote to the captain-general of Galicia, Nicolas Mahy:

   My command . . . extends to the Basque provinces, La Rioja and Santander,
   and in so far as these points are concerned, I have already sent orders to the
   soldiers and guerrillas stationed in them... to molest the enemy without
   risking a general action... Colonel Miguel Eraso is in the province of
   Burgos with 1,500 men; there are 2,000 Navarrese in the area of Vitoria
   under the command of their chiefs . . Gast6n and Hosca; the commandant,
   Miguel Horno, is near Bilbao with another thousand men; and there are
   strong partidas lurking in the vicinity of . . . Santander.'°
When this scheme proved so much hot air, Renovales soon fell out of favour
with the commanders of the Spanish forces of Galicia and Asturias, whilst the
cadre of professional officers attached to his command became so disgruntled
at his posturing and incapacity that they eventually placed him under arrest.'*
Thoroughly disgraced, Renovales then took no part in the war until Allied
forces threatened the French hold on Biscay in 1812, whereupon he rushed to
claim his satrapy, only to fall by sheer ill luck into the hands of the enemy (a
fate that he turned to good account by striking an attitude of such defiance that
he was eventually confined in the fortress of Joux — the Napoleonic equivalent
of being sent to the Second World War German ‘bad boys’ camp’ of Castle
Colditz). After going into exile in 1814 rather than return to the Spain of
Fernando VII, he drifted into liberal politics in London and, as we have seen,
                                                                               to
became involved in a scheme to raise a revolt in Mexico. Supposed
                                                      betrayed  the whole scheme
be its leader, he lost heart at the last minute and
                                                                            so as
to the authorities, at whose behest he agreed to turn agent provocateur
to ensure a clean sweep of the conspirators."”
96     Fighting Napoleon