


1820-23 and, when this was denied, ran away from his convent to join an absol-
utist partida? Then there was Nicolas Uriz, a Navarrese friar whose chequered
career under first El Empecinado and then Espoz y Mina culminated in his
going over to the French rather than face charges of corruption, and the parish
priest of Fuentespina, Bernardo Mayor, who formed a partida of fifty men but
behaved in so oppressive a fashion that he was arrested by Empecinado, only
to escape from custody and go over to the French. And, finally, we might here
also cite Antonio Temprano, a friar of the Order of Mercy who early in 1809
joined a band commanded by one José Armengol, only to abscond and set up
his own band, at the head of which he committed numerous misdeeds (these
he later tried to excuse with the engaging remark that the time had arrived
‘when one can do whatever one likes’).’ Notable here, too, are complaints of the
drunkenness and disorderly conduct of young ecclesiastics who had been given
permission to join guerrilla bands, whilst, even when ideological motives were
seemingly paramount, closer observation frequently suggests a different story.
Merino started killing Frenchmen not because he feared what Napoleon might
do to the Spanish Church, but rather in revenge for being pressed into service
as a porter by some French soldiers in January 1809; furthermore, he might not
have become a cabecilla at all but for the fact that he was a harsh and unbend-
ing character who was unlikely to suffer insults lightly, and a keen huntsman
who was used to life in the open air and knew the local countryside like the
back of his hand.* Indeed, would any of the many monks and friars to be found
amongst the irregulars have taken up arms but for the fact that the closure of
their convents by the French had left them homeless and without support? For
a pattern here we might take the figure of Antonio Jiménez. A monk from
Medina Sidonia who headed a partida in the Condado de Niebla in 1810,
Jiménez makes it quite clear that he fled to Cadiz and sought a career in the
employ of the government only because of the eosin of the community of
which he had been a member.’
    Similar problems are to be found with regard to most of the other explana-
tions that have been put forward with regard to the motivation of the guerril-
las. Many cabecillas, we are told, took up arms out of sheer disgust at the events
of the Dos de Mayo and the overthrow of Fernando VII: examples of such men
include Juan Palarea and Juan José de Abecia, a student at the University of
Zaragoza who fought in the defence of the city in 1808 and 1809 and then
returned to his home town of Marquina to form a partida."° And such at least
was the reason put forward by many of the men involved themselves"!
However, a desire to defend the fatherland might easily mask other interests.
Thus Martin Javier Mina may or may not have been a sincere patriot, but he
was certainly the very archetype of the nineteenth-century pretendiente — the
young man anxious to secure patronage and preferment in government service.
                                                   The Origins of the Guerrillas   95