

clear that a life of crime was central to the decision to become a cabecilla. Let
us take, for example, the case of Antonio Valdivielso Morguecho. A member of
the so-called “Compania de Contrabandistas de Ayamonte’, in September 1810
he suddenly went absent without leave and turned up in Cadiz with a highly
dubious story to the effect that he was dissatisfied with his current unit on
account of the fact that it was not doing enough to fight the French. Needless
to say, he wanted to be allowed to form his own partida, having chosen for his
area of operations the environs of Seville, where he claimed to have ‘a great
number ‘of friends’, whilst for good measure he also wanted to take as many
men from his old band with him as could be persuaded to come along.”
Whether all this was the attempt to rebuild some pre-war cuadrilla that it looks
like we shall probably never know, but in Old Castile in particular we have a
number of cases where banditry was certainly the mainspring in the formation
of particular partidas. Of these the most prominent cases are those of Principe
and Saornil.
   Known as ‘Borbén’ on account of his service with the cavalry regiment of
that name, Tomas Principe was in 1808 a deserter on the run from the law who
had already had to turn to crime to make his living, whilst Jeronimo Saornil
had actually been awaiting trial for banditry, but had been saved by the upris-
ing of May 1808. With crime their only means of support, both men had soon
gathered together bands that were in reality, exactly as the French claimed,
nothing more than gangs of highway robbers. Little better, meanwhile, were
the various deserters who became cabecillas, such as José Fombella, a cavalry-
man who fled his unit and, in the words of a Patriot army officer, ‘set himself
up as the captain of a gang, composed in part of men of his regiment whom
he had incited to desert and in part of a variety of other thieves and ne’er-do-
wells, at the head of which he has sacked many villages and committed the
greatest atrocities’.
   Conscious of the need to camouflage their real aims, many self-appointed
leaders were careful to obtain the sanction of the authorities: the murder of a
French courier in December 1808, for example, was used by Saornil as a pretext
to ask for a commission to form a guerrilla band, a ploy rewarded with confir-
mation of his command and the rank of a/férez.” Even more enterprisingly, an
infantry captain named Vicente Moreno who abandoned his regiment to strike
out on his own as a cabecilla in the Serrania de Ronda appears to have forged
orders from the Marqués de la Romana (then far away in Extremadura) to form
a partida from the dispersos of the district, and then made use of these papers
to secure genuine documents from the general who had been appointed as
nominal head of the insurrection.”
   But these stratagems should not fool us. Indeed, stripping bare the claims
of the horde of petitioners who requested a command is often an interesting
104    Fighting Napoleon