


the famous Juan Martin Diez. According to Rodriguez Solis, El Empecinado
went to war to avenge the death at the hands of French troops of the son of a
local cacique, who had shown him much favour, whilst the English seminarian
Brindle has a still more dramatic story:

   On the eruption of the French, the town of Aranda de Duero suffered in
   common with the other places visited by the enemy, but the family of John
   Martin [ssc] had a more than equal share of those sufferings. His wife was
   killed before his own eyes; his daughters were treated in the most brutal and
   shocking manner, his property was plundered and destroyed, and from a state
   of affluence he was reduced to the greatest want without wife or child to
   console him in his misfortunes.”!

All this, alas, is invention pure and simple (aside from anything else, El
Empecinado’s wife survived the war). To get a plausible story we must there-
fore turn rather to El Empecinado’s twentieth-century biographers, who are
agreed that he killed a French soldier over a girl and had in consequence to take
flight. Perhaps this is the truth, and, then again, perhaps it is not. Why, though,
was the Frenchman killed? Was El Empecinado trying to protect the girl’s
honour, as his admirers suggest, or did he quarrel with the enemy soldier in a
fit of jealousy? We shall, of course, never know, but it is impossible not to
suspect that what actually happened is very different from the stuff of legend.”
    Very different from the stuff of legend, too, is the real story of how Martin
Javier Mina became a cabecilla. The son of a landowner with a seat in the
provincial estates, according to Southey, Mina had been a student in Pamplona
when the war broke out. Struck down by illness, he was forced to retire to his
father’s estates, and there he might well have remained but for the fact that one
night his home was plundered by French troops. Having armed himself with
a musket, he went to the nearest village and invited anyone who cared do so to
join him in taking to the hills. Twelve men answered the call, and together they
ambushed a small party of French artillerymen who were marching from
Zaragoza to Pamplona. Yet this tale, too, is a fabrication, for Mina had been a
student at Zaragoza rather than Pamplona, and is suggested to have spent the
first year of the war working for a Navarrese general named Areizaga, who had
supposedly been given the task of whipping up resistance in his home province
by the Junta Central and eventually commissioned him to raise a partida. Even
this may not be the whole story: according to some French sources, Mina was
actually expelled from university for misconduct, after which he took up with
a gang of bandits. We shall never know the truth, doubtless, but it does at least
seem clear that the traditional version of events is not to be trusted.*
   The question of official involvement in the formation of the guerrilla bands
is one to which we shall return in due course, and all that needs to be noted for
                                                  The Origins of the Guerrillas   — ror