

new volunteers every day, men coming forward in no small numbers in the hope
of sharing the privations and glories of the soldiers who were fighting for the
honour and glory of the Fatherland at my orders.’ At the same time a well-
known list of some twenty-two guerrilla bands put together in 1812 claims that
these alone numbered some 38,520 men.” This is all very well, but, whilst the
fact of considerable popular involvement in the guerrilla is impossible to deny,
the vision that is thereby conjured up clearly flies in the face of the lack of
interest in the war that was so evident in the unoccupied parts of the country.
Why, then, did so many Spaniards enlist with the guerrillas? On the surface,
the French had to do no more than appear in a district for attitudes to the war
to be transformed, but, as we shall see, this was not in fact the case. Setting
aside the exception of parts of Navarre and the Basque provinces, where a set
of absolutely unique circumstances did produce a reaction that more or less
corresponded to the traditional stereotype, we must therefore look for fresh
models of popular involvement.
   For those addicted to the idea of an anti-French crusade, the suggestion that
the populace showed no willingness to join the guerrillas may be a shocking
one, but it is nevertheless one that cannot be gainsaid. Let us take, for example,
the case of the thousands of dispersos to be found throughout the occupied
provinces. Men who had run away or become separated from their regiments
and fled to their homes, they were, it was generally observed, impervious to
every effort to get them to return to their duty. As two commissioners sent out
by the Junta of Catalonia observed to General Lacy in 1811:
  Given the critical nature of the situation, we have no option but to inform
  Your Excellency . . . that the province is in a state of semi-anarchy and the
  people dominated by ideas of a most sinister character. Catalonia is lost
  unless we change our maxims. Eroles, Milans, Manso and all the other agents
  who have been sent out to collect the dispersos will not bring in even a tenth
  part of them by the military means which they have adopted. They have been
  working at the task for more than a month, and, for all the good that they
  have achieved, they might as well not have bothered. Terror is all very well,
  but ...in this respect it has produced the very opposite effect to the one
  desired.”

    With a great deal of effort some men were got in, such as the eighty-eight
stragglers, fugitives, convalescents and deserters assembled by a Valencian
captain named Reig sent out by Francisco Copons from his headquarters in
Alicante in the spring of 1812.” But the populace as a whole generally showed
little enthusiasm for the struggle. Let us take, for example, the Cantabrian dis-
trict of the Liebana, which Mariano Renovales spent the winter of 1810-11
trying to galvanise in favour of his projected guerrilla army. As Renovales’
replacement, José Aburruza, wrote to General Mahy after the former’s arrest:
                                                 The Origins of the Guerrillas   109