


the time being is the extent to which the origins of the partidas have become
shrouded in myth. In reality, like Espoz y Mina, El Mozo, as he became known,
was little more than an adventurer, whilst in case after case what emerges is a
picture in which patriotism plays little part. Thus, in the Condado de Niebla,
Juan Santana Bolafios appears as a mere hireling taken on by the local caciques
Vicente Letofia and Atanasio Rodriguez when the latter decided to finance and
equip a partida in the hope of insuring themselves against charges of collabo-
ration.’ In other cases economic necessity was replaced by happenstance, with
the cabecillas including a number of men who seem to have become guerrilla
commanders more by accident than by design. One such was an erstwhile
Guardia de Corps named Ramon de Murillo, who was dispatched to the
province of Soria in the aftermath of the Spanish defeat at Gamonal in Novem-
ber 1808 to round up fugitives from the battle, only to find himself issued with
a commission by an insurgent junta that had been established at Najera.** Still
another was the well-known manchego leader, Manuel Hernandez (El Abuelo),
who only took up arms when a delegation of his neighbours requested that he
fill the place left vacant when Francisquete — in 1808 a fellow inhabitant of the
town of Madridejos — was killed in action in 1810.*° And a third was Juan Diaz
Porlier, who became a guerrilla when he was cut off at Gamonal and found
himself isolated in the mountains with a handful of fugitives.*”
   In still other instances, as with Mina and Espoz y Mina, the dominant impres-
sion that one is left with is one of opportunism. Few commanders, perhaps, were
quite as blatant in their motives as a resguardo officer in the service of the French
from Sanlicar de Barrameda named Julian Fernandez, who turned up in the
Patriot zone asking for a commission as a cabecilla for no better reason than that
he had not been paid for months.** But even so, self-interest was often buried
only a short way beneath the surface, a case in point being that of the Aragonese
cabecilla Fidel Mallén. Having placed himself under the orders of the newly
arrived Pedro Villacampa, in November 1809 he asked if he could recruit a new
partida from the many deserters sitting out the war in those parts of Aragon
occupied by the French. So far, so good, but then came the sting in the tail:
claiming that the Junta Central’s guerrilla ordinances (see below, pp. 105-7)
were ruining his plans, weakening his forces and limiting his powers of inde-
pendent action, he demanded that they be waived. In justification of this
demand he pointed out that he had seen his house destroyed, his goods con-
fiscated and his business ruined, all of which entitled him, or so he argued, to
some consideration. But in doing so, of course, he simply gave the game away:
underlying the whole proposal was nothing more than a desire for plunder.”
   What use Mallén made of the independence that he claimed we unfortu-
nately do not know, but one figure whose misdeeds are all too well chronicled
is Antonio Piloti. Of Italian origin, in 1808 Piloti was a gunsmith in Madrid.
102.   ~—-Fighting Napoleon