


knowledge of both the inhabitants and the lands of the two Castiles, to get
together a guerrilla band composed of anyone capable of carrying out the sort
of actions necessary to harass the enemy .. . in the domains in which he has
intruded’. And, finally, towards the close of the year, a chaplain of the
monastery of Santo Domingo de Silos named Policarpio Romeo petitioned the
government to be allowed to form ‘a 400-strong corps entitled the Legion of
Extermination whose purpose would be to act as light troops throughout the
Sierra de Alcafiiz’.*” And, when they were not willing to fight themselves, there
were plenty of individuals who were anxious to promote the virtues of organ-
ising partidas, or to make use of them as a means of publicising their patrio-
tism. Thus, in February 1809 one Luis Valero sent a memorandum on guerrilla
warfare to the Junta Central, in which he wrote, “The more the guerrillas
multiply, the easier it will be to kill a lot of the enemy at little cost, and the
more will they become exhausted and demoralised.’* And in January 1810 the
Marqués de Villafranca y los Vélez issued a proclamation in Murcia calling for
volunteers for a new partida entitled ‘La Cruzada Murciana’, which was to
consist of sixty priests and religious aged between eighteen and forty-five whom
he promised to equip in splendid uniforms consisting of helmets, brown jackets
with scarlet collars and cuffs and light blue piping, white breeches and riding
boots.”
   We may, then, say that the partidas owed a large part of their existence to
individual action — that they had, in fact, a life outside the state. But the for-
mation of the guerrilla bands was never left solely to the ambition, energy and
initiative of men such as Juan Martin Diez or Francisco Espoz y Mina. From
the very beginning, indeed, the Patriot authorities took it upon themselves to
organise partidas that could harass the enemy. Thus, the irregulars that so
troubled Dupont in the weeks that preceded the battle of Bailén were in many
instances in the pay of the Junta of Jaén, whilst in Old Castile General Cuesta
—a commander who made himself odious to many admirers of the guerrillas
by having El Empecinado arrested as a bandit in the summer of 1808 — had no
sooner declared against the French than he had dispatched one of his officers
to encourage guerrilla resistance amongst the inhabitants of the districts that
lay between his headquarters in Valladolid and French-occupied Burgos.” As
the French regained the upper hand in the struggle in the winter of 1808-9
following the set-back that they had suffered after Bailén, so interest in the
subject gained fresh impetus. On 21 January 1809, for example, we find the
Conde de Tilly, one of Seville’s two representatives to the Junta Central,
suggesting the revival of the Moros Mogataces de Oran, a unit of Moorish
irregular cavalry that had until the 1790s been attached to the garrison of the
African outpost of Oran. As he wrote:
106 ~—s-Fighting Napoleon