


  Your Excellency writes that I should stay on here to foment and support the
  insurrection . . . but for the sake of truth I have no option but to tell you that
  everyone is living quietly at home, and that I do not believe that there will
  be any insurrection at all until the enemy actually appears. In so far as I can
  see, at no time since we arrived here has anyone done anything but work in
  the fields.”

   As confirmation of this indifference to the war amongst the peasantry of the
Cantabrian mountains, we might take a proclamation issued by the Junta of
Asturias in September 1810, which accused the inhabitants of the province of
having been taken in by the efforts of the French ‘to establish a ruinous indif-
ference . . . by means of hypocrisy and feigned benevolence’.” Also suggestive
is the fact that, at about the same time, Porlier was complaining bitterly that he
could not get the inhabitants of Asturias to carry letters for him, let alone
provide him with information on the movements              of the French.” And
the problem was the same elsewhere. Appointed commandant of the district
known as the Tierra de Barros in Extremadura in April 1810, Morillo found
that his attempts to form a home guard amongst the populace were stymied
by highly implausible claims of a want of arms." From La Mancha it was
claimed in March 1812 that there were sufficient dispersos in the provinces of
Cuenca, Guadalajara, Molina de Aragon, Soria and Aragon — the very heart-
land of the war of Duran, El Empecinado and Villacampa — to form an army
of 30,000 men.*' From Catalonia it was being reported by 1811 that the
populace was not only in a state of complete apathy, but refusing to fight in the
somatén.” And at about the same time a government spy in French-occupied
Seville wrote, ‘In this city and its surroundings there are many dispersos. Much
rigour is needed to deal with the problem... The parents of the men
concerned should be held responsible, and a number of examples made
amongst them.”
   One could continue in this vein ad infinitum, but rather than simply listing
example after example, let us take the case of the modern-day province of
Huelva. Penetrated by the French for the first time in February 1810, the area
had never been in any sense a hub of the Spanish war effort. Conscription had
languished, and the only sign of military activity had been the formation of a
so-called ‘company of guerrillas’ which was largely formed of deserters and
seems in practice to have been little more than the private army of the Junta of
Ayamonte (alongside this there was an even more dubious force consisting of a
collection of bandits and smugglers who had been hired as a kind of Frezkorps).
Enthusiasm for the struggle, meanwhile, was notable only by its absence,
particularly as the local authorities appear to have been particularly corrupt in
the administration of the guinta. On arriving in the province to take command
of the handful of troops who had escaped thither from the fall of Seville,
110 ~—-Fighting Napoleon