


Claiming to have handed out many weapons to the populace at the time of both
the Dos de Mayo and Napoleon’s assault on the capital in December 1808, in
June 1809 he wrote to the Junta Central asking permission to implement a
scheme that he had evolved for the establishment of bands of sharpshooters in
La Mancha, Old Castile and Vizcaya with the help of a number of other gun-
smiths.*” Permission was immmediately granted, and by the late summer he
had acquired a small group of followers and travelled to the vicinity of the town
of Cuenca, where, on 22 September, the Junta of Aragon announced that, at
the head of a band 4oo-strong, he had just taken prisoner a small French
detachment at Perales de Tajufia.* Yet the reality was very different. In fact,
Piloti never possessed more than seventeen men, of whom most seem to have
been runaway friars, whilst he terrorised the countryside, showered commis-
sions and appointments on all sides and engaged in suspicious contacts with
the French. These the gunsmith tried to pass off as attempts to encourage
desertion amongst the enemy, but it was to no avail: despite an abortive attempt
on the part of his men to defend him, on 22 September he was arrested by the
governor of Cuenca, the Marqués de las Atalayuelas.” Nothing if not resource-
ful, Piloti tried to talk his way out of trouble — ‘My services on behalf of the
Spanish nation are as patent as they are obvious... The desertion of the
greater part of the garrison of the capital was very close, all that was needed
being for me to get to Alcala [de Henares] and give the word’® — and, fortu-
nately for him secured the backing of the Duque del Infantado, a singularly
vapid individual who had been one of his original sponsors.** What happened
next is unknown, but at all events Piloti escaped punishment, for in November
1810 he turned up at El Empecinado’s headquarters in Sigiienza. The reason
for his visit was clear to all and sundry — that he was out to enveigle Martin
into giving him some troops, and rumours immediately spread that Piloti was
going to be given the command of the Tiradores de Sigiienza, one of the regi-
ments that by now made up the latter’s command. Convinced that he was about
to be demoted, the unit’s commander, one Nicolas Maria de Isidro, accosted El
Empecinado in the street and shouted that he had formed the regiment himself
and was not going to let anyone take it away from him. After fleeing to his quar-
ters, the famous guerrilla was besieged by a mob of angry soldiers, whilst the
erstwhile gunsmith decided to leave town in a hurry.” There follows another
gap in the record, but in 1813 Piloti resurfaces again, this time being arrested
in an inn in Ciudad Rodrigo on two charges of banditry. Even then he was not
finished — there followed two dramatic gaolbreaks — but in January 1815 he
finally commenced a ten-year prison sentence.”
   Whether Piloti actually set out to become a bandit is another matter — it is,
in fact, more likely that he was rather a would-be Espoz y Mina whose ambi-
tions came to naught — but there are a number of instances where it is quite
                                                The Origins of the Guerrillas   103