

  It is clear that their style of fighting is most appropriate for guerrilla warfare
      . whilst it would certainly be very damaging to the French: the speed of
  their horses, their ability to fire their muskets at the gallop, and the courage
  with which they face danger make them terrible opponents.”

   If this idea was hardly practical, the Junta Central more than saw the point.
Thus, on 28 December 1808 a decree appeared authorising the formation of
bands of irregulars up to 100-strong under the leadership of cabecillas respon-
sible to the military authorities, whilst on 25 February 1809 a second order —
the so-called decree of the corso terrestre — stipulated that any money and other
valuables seized from the French and their supporters would automatically
become the property of the men who had taken it.” Alongside this legitimisa-
tion of highway robbery, there also appeared general calls for revolt along the
lines, say, of that addressed to the population of Old and New Castile on 28
April 1809:

  Castilians! Now or never! If we all unite, then we shall all be saved. The
  enemy... are few in number, and if we all fall on them at once, they will
  without doubt succumb ... What do you have to lose? Risk your lives for
  liberty like good men and true!

These decrees and proclamations, meanwhile, were backed by measures of a
more practical sort. Thus, in May 1809 a captain of the Cazadores de Zafra
infantry regiment named José Crivell was given thirty men and sent off to raise
a company of tiradores in the Montes de Toledo, whilst the following month
saw the erstwhile second-in-command of the resguardo of Navarre, Manuel
Loynaz, ordered to travel to his home province and whip up popular resistance
there.“ And in both Old Castile and Aragon special commissioners were
appointed whose brief included the ae otpee:fresh partidas and galvanis-
ing those that were already in existence.°
   Government action, meanwhile, was mirrored in a series of local initiatives.
Threatened by French attack, in December 1808 the Junta of Badajoz formed
a number of partidas in an effort to stave off the French, of which one was
commanded by Pablo Morillo, a sergeant in the Regimiento de Infanteria de
Marina and veteran of the battle of Trafalgar who had in June 1808 obtained
a commission in one of the new regiments formed by the Junta of
Extremadura.” Appointed in the same month to head the provinces of Galicia,
Leon and Asturias, the Marqués de la Romana inaugurated his command by
ordering the entire male populace to be formed into large numbers of partidas
on the grounds that, until the Spanish armies were ready to undertake major
operations, the only thing to be done was ‘to harass the enemy without cease
and defeat him in detail’ (so strong was La Romana’s interest in the subject,
                                                  The Origins of the Guerrillas   107


indeed, that one of his staff officers produced a pamphlet that set out to instruct
the populace in how they might take on the French, whilst the newspaper pub-
lished by his army’s headquarters consistently urged the Junta Central to hold
back its troops in the shelter of the chains of mountains that ringed the areas
then held by the French whilst relying on the guerrillas to contain and wear
down the invaders).” In the Levant the summer of 1809 saw the captain-general
of Valencia, José Caro, transform the urban militias that had been formed
throughout the region into ready-made guerrilla bands that would be ready to
take the field as soon as the French made an appearance (interestingly, whilst
the propertied classes were expected to serve for nothing, the peasantry were
promised an allowance of 5 reales per day). Not satisfied with the response,
meanwhile, in March 1810 he ordered the immediate enlistment with the guer-
rilla bands of the interior of the large number of peasants and day-labourers
who had flocked to the city of Valencia in search of work, food and shelter.®
Similar efforts to set up guerrilla bands in readiness for a French invasion were
made in the province of Murcia in 1809 by a commissioner dispatched there
by the Junta Central named Antonio Saenz de Vizmanos.” And, finally, a
succession of generals proved more than willing either to confirm existing
cabecillas in their commands or to appoint fresh chieftains. Thus, setting aside
the case of Mina (which we have already examined), in September 1809 the
Conde de Cartaojal — then commander of the Army of the Centre — appointed
an inhabitant of Algecilla named Manuel de la Calzada to head a new partida
in the district known as the Alcarria, whilst in May 1810 Nicolas Mahy took
Francisco Longa, who had until then been operating under the orders of the
Marqués de Barriolucio, under the wing of the Army of the Left.” And, last
but not least, in May 1812 the new comandante general of the province of
Valencia, Francisco Copons, authorised a friar named Luis Rovira to raise a
force of irregulars under the name of the Division de ‘Tiradores Honrados.”!
   So much, then, for the leadership of the guerrillas. As we have seen, driven
by a variety of motives, a large number of individuals either formed partidas
on their own initiative without involving the authorities at all, or offered them-
selves to the latter as prospective cabecillas. As for the Spanish juntas and
generals, threatened with complete disaster, they gladly availed themselves of
partisan warfare as a means of staving off the French and weakening their
forces. What, though, was the popular response to these efforts? In the eyes of
tradition, of course, moved by hatred of the French and love of e/ rey deseado,
                                                                                  for
the populace rushed to join the partidas. According to Rodriguez Solis,
example, sixty men had joined Merino      within  days  of his taking   to the hills,
whilst Palarea had only to announce his intention of forming a band for ‘all the
sons of the province [of La Mancha] to believe themselves obliged to second
                                                                                   by
him’.” And, if we are to believe Espoz y Mina, ‘My little army was swelled
108   ~~ Fighting Napoleon