


experience: one José Gonzalez Cobos, for example, turns out to have been a
deserter who had just been ejected from the ‘Compania de Guerrilla de Aya-
monte’ for misconduct.’ In a letter that he dispatched to General Castafios,
meanwhile, Pablo Morillo was quite explicit as to what had been going on:

  You say, Your Excellency, that you are doubtful whether much benefit is to
  be obtained from the guerrillas. For my part, I would either assimilate them
  into the army or suppress them altogether. If you will pardon me for saying
  so, you have been too trusting and ingenuous: the men you have appointed
  to command them have included too many unknown adventurers who have
  got round you with a mixture of lies and false promises. One such is Félix
  Salmeiro, an inhabitant of Caceres of the most irregular conduct to whom
  you awarded ... all the trappings of an officer, only for him since to have
  attracted much censure. And, even if we set Salmeiro aside, the fact is that
  many of the men who came to you did so with no other aim than the
  devastation of this province... It is all very well to place one’s trust in
  individuals of some repute such as...the doctor, Juan Peralta [i.e.,
  Palarea], but giving credit to men whose criminal conduct has horrified the
  whole of... Extremadura has so increased the number of bandits that
  it will take a century to get rid of them.”

   Yet in a sense such doubts are irrelevant. Whatever may have been the moti-
vation of their commanders, one cannot deny that plenty of partidas sprang up
without any intervention on the part of the authorities, nor wish away the
numerous petitions from men eager to set themselves up as cabecillas. Suffi-
cient space has already been devoted to the former phenomenon, but of the
latter let us take a few examples from 1809. On 30 April Juan del Castillo, a
supernumerary cavalry officer who until then had been employed rounding up
deserters, approached the Junta Central with a proposal for the formation of a
unit of cavalry, at the head of which he proposed to raise the whole of
Catalonia in revolt. On 1 June Francisco Javier de Segura, an official in the
administration of the state’s tobacco monopoly from Tafalla who had fought as
a voluntario distinguido at the siege of Gibraltar in 1782, asked for a commis-
sion to return to Navarre ‘with the sole aim of exciting the spirits of the inhab-
itants and . . . getting them to take up arms... against the enemy’. On 30
September Manuel Jiménez Guazo, an official of the Ministry of Grace and
Justice, who claimed (without much plausibility) to have distinguished himself
in the first siege of Zaragoza, sought permission to form a partida.* On 27
October an inhabitant of Miraflores de la Sierra named          Francisco Aznar
Moreno, who claimed to have lost his father in the Dos de Mayo, asked for ‘the
title of comandante . . . and the power of being allowed, through my particular
                                                The Origins of the Guerrillas   105