


Francisco Copons therefore encountered a depressing picture. As the chroni-
cler of his operations wrote:

  All energy and patriotism were gone. The egoism of many landowners. . .
  the fear and ignorance of the mass of the people and the sagacity of the
  enemy, who had been both buying the hearts of the rich and. . . terrifying
  the spirits of the poor, ensured that many pueblos submitted to the yoke of
  the rey intruso. As for those places that remained free, they suffered from the
  same egotism, their justices acting in an arbitrary manner that recognised
  ... no other law than that of their caprice .. . From this it followed that in
  every pueblo many stragglers and deserters were hidden without either the
  justices or, much less, their parents... making any attempt to get them to
  return to their regiments.™*

   As for Copons himself, he was close to despair. No sooner had he arrived at
Ayamonte than he was complaining, ‘The pueblos of the Condado de Niebla
lack the patriotic ardour that once moved them. Although they sigh for their
liberty and cry out for the enemy to be defeated, nobody is doing anything.’®
Nor did the situation improve. Notwithstanding frequent incursions on the part
of the French, there were few signs of resistance.*° Exhorted by the Junta of
Cadiz to carry the war to the French, a frustrated Copons could only stamp his
feet in rage: ‘Whip up revolt! Nothing is more impossible! Time goes by and
yet in every pueblo there are men who... . exhort their fellows to remain quiet
so as not to attract the ire of the enemy.”*” Recruitment meanwhile fell into a
state of complete stagnation. To quote a report sent by Copons to the Regency
in September 1810:

  Thus far . . . the only men who have left this county to defend the cause of
  Your Majesty have been the first class of recruits, and even then it is only
  the poorest that have had to go . . . Protected by their less fortunate fellows,
  thousands of men continue to live quietly at home, and they are seemingly
  quite happy to see the country lost. The second class of recruits is the one
  that embodies most vices: the possession of a property worth a few reales is
  quite enough to give the householders who form its backbone a way out.
  Their homes are valued at a price which they do not merit, and because of
  this whole multitudes have been exempted. Amongst them are to be found
  men with five sons who have managed to buy out the lot. Yet, whilst their
  boys sit at home, their poorest neighbours go out to fight, including many
  lads who have had to leave behind widowed mothers living in a state of indi-
  gence. Another problem group, meanwhile, are the many clerks in minor
  orders ... who have also been exempted. Amongst them are to be found
  many men who are barely able to read. Many marriages have also been faked,
                                                 The Origins of the Guerrillas   = 111


  and the fact is that the whole time for most people the aim is to find a shield
  that will protect them from the draft. And the result of all this is, first, that
  ... Your Majesty is not getting the men that have been called upon to assist
  in the explusion of the enemy . . . and, second, that amongst the populace
  ... nothing is heard but laments, not to mention complaints that only the
  needy have to serve Your Majesty.