


January 1810, but succeeded in escaping and eventually making his way
back to his home town of Calatayud, where he fell in with the forces of
E] Empecinado and enlisted in their ranks, and another was Justo Prieto, a
volunteer from Villaluenga de la Sagra who fled to the band of Juan Palarea
after being taken prisoner at the battle of Ocafia in November 1809. Also
captives of the French were the future Carlist leader Zumalcarregui and Espoz
y Mina’s trusted subordinate Gregorio Cruchaga, both of whom were taken by
the French at Zaragoza only to slip away and enlist in the first instance in the
ranks of the insurgents of the valley of the Roncal.'°’ How many recruits were
obtained in this fashion it is impossible to say, but the number certainly ran into
many hundreds, if not thousands. Thus, in the two famous attacks that he
launched on French convoys at Arlaban in May 1811 and April 1812 alone,
Espoz y Mina rescued over a thousand Spanish prisoners, almost all of whom
ended up in the ranks of his forces.'** Meanwhile, actions such as that of
Arlaban also tapped into a fresh source of recruits in the form of soldiers taken
prisoner from the enemy. For such men joining the guerrillas was often the only
chance of saving their lives - General Hugo, in fact, specifically says that many
prisoners were offered the choice of enlistment or the firing squad — and this
applied with still more force to Spanish soldiers who had chosen to fight for
the French, such as for example, one Pedro Crespo, a sometime member of
Joseph’s ‘Regimiento Real Irlandés’, who was taken prisoner fighting with a
guerrilla band in the summer of 1811.!%°
   Joining the guerrillas to escape a fate that was even worse was clearly very
common. Particularly if it involved French soldiers, brawling was likely to incur
the harshest of penalties: hence the presence in the ranks of the partidas of both
an ex-soldier from Lerma named Julian de Pablos, who joined Merino after a
drunken spree ended in a fight with the local constables, and Espoz y Mina’s
henchman Félix Sarasa, who had to flee to the perians after he came to blows
with some French soldiers in Pamplona.
   Also out to escape were a variety of men who had fallen foul of the law.
Amongst the men who served with Moreno in Andalucia, for example, was
Francisco Herrera, a young man from Vélez Malaga who had been in gaol
awaiting trial for murder when the French arrived in January 1810. Still incar-
cerated seven months later, on 13 July he was released when Moreno raided the
town, and, naturally enough, decided to join his liberators.!” Little better off,
meanwhile, was Prospero Marco, a 24-year-old graduate who had had to flee
his home in Lerma early in 1808 after a fight over a girl and for a while lived
as a bandit before eventually ending up in the partida of Jeronimo Merino,!
Draft evasion, too, was common: in October 1810, for example, a band appeared
at Alajar under one Andrés Charlan that quickly attracted large numbers of
mozos faced with the prospect of service in the Spanish army.'”
                                                The Origins of the Guerrillas   115