


  annual exports were valued at half a million sterling ...Such have been
  the desolating effects of the unprovoked and unjustifiable invasion of the
  French."

In Zaragoza, too, life was grim in the extreme. As Faustino Casamayor wrote
in his journal on 31 January 1812:
  This month the weather has been a continuous round of cold and ice...
  whilst foodstuffs have been so scarce and expensive that there is no one who
  can remember the like . . . Bread has cost just as much as it did last month,
  and the contributions demanded by the French have been so excessive . . .
  that they are not to be borne... . As for the misery of the common people,
  it has been so great that in the streets one sees nothing but beggars."*
But for sheer horror, there was nothing to beat Madrid. Let us here quote the
account of Clemente Carnicero:
  There were so many unfortunates in the streets . . . that it was impossible to
  walk them without the stoniest heart being wrung and saddened . . . Some
  people could be heard complaining that it was three o’clock in the afternoon
  and they had still not broken their fast; others had death clearly written in
  their faces; others were fainting from want; and still others had just breathed
  their last . . At one spot one saw a group of abandoned children crying out
  for bread; at another a number of tearful widows surrounded by their little
  ones; and at still a third some young girls assuring passers-by that they were
  begging so as not to prostitute themselves. On the first corner there would
  be a cluster of priests humbly asking for alms, and on the second persons
  of the highest character... doing exactly the same. So many were the
  poor . . . that however much they wandered the streets . . . they could not get
  enough to get them through the day . . . Going back to their homes . . . they
  therefore quietly . . . lay down to die.'”
With the city’s troubles worsened by a terrible gambling epidemic that drained
away money that many families desperately needed to buy food, deaths from
starvation in the winter of 1811-12 alone amounted to a minimum of 20,000,
and the British entered the city in August of the latter year to find the most
affecting scenes. To quote George Hennell:

   The poor are very numerous here, and many are most wretched objects. In
   the great streets you are stopped every five or six yards, and frequently by
   six or seven at once . . . I have seen children five or six years of age lying on
   the pavement with scarcely one ounce of flesh on their bones and making a
   piteous moaning. After dark they lie down against a door doubled almost
   together . . . some sleeping, others crying.
120.   ~=—-Fighting Napoleon


   The consequences of all this are scarcely difficult to foresee. Writing from
the Extremaduran district of La Serena, a josefino official named Juan Maria
Ponce de Leén informed his superiors that the area’s aspect was such as ‘to
move the most unfeeling man to compassion’ and, further, that the local inhab-
itants had been reduced to such a state of ‘miserable nakedness’ that many were
leaving their homes. As he went on to remark: