


Germans that he was thinking of organising them into entire companies.'” So
numerous were the foreign components of some bands, indeed, that they at
times outnumbered the Spaniards: in July 1810 no fewer than fifty-eight of the
eighty-three followers of the erstwhile smuggler Ignacio Alonso were Germans
or Italians.'”* Indeed, there even seem to have been bands composed of nothing
but foreign deserters: travelling from Segovia to Valladolid, the convoy of which
Andrew Blayney was a part was attacked by ‘brigands commanded by a German
captain who had deserted with his company from Santa Maria de Nava, of
which he had been commandant’.'”
   But by far the most important positive reason for enlistment was the hope
of gain. For example, even Gomez de Arteche admits that, if El] Empecinado
was quickly able to gather a band of men around him, it was not so much
because of his charisma as because he was able to offer both a wage and the
chance of booty, whilst Tone, too, is prepared to admit that it was the solid
funding enjoyed by Mina that allowed him to build up his partida so quickly.”
And, if it was Von Brandt’s opinion that the chief reason for enlistment was
‘the hope of plunder’, the British observers Sydenham and Larpent saw the
bands as ‘regular freebooters [who] subsisted on the pillage of the country’ and
‘a sort of banditti’.’*° Let us quote, too, Luis de Villaba, an artillery officer who
served in the siege of Zaragoza:

   The guerrillas who go by the name of Patriots should be exterminated: they
   are gangs of thieves with carte blanche to rob on the roads and in the villages.
   If some of them have brought benefits, the damage that others have wrought
   is one thousand times greater ... Those who believe these bands . . . to be
   very useful are many, but if they meditate on the desertion from the enemy
   that has not occurred for fear of being murdered . . . the burnings and other
   disasters suffered by the villages... the many highwaymen and bandits
   who carry out their crimes under this pretext, and finally the manner in
   which their disorder and independence have caused all kinds of evil, they
   will understand how far the disdvantages outweigh the benefits.'”
    To quote a famous catch-phrase of the time, then, ‘Long live Ferdinand and
let’s go robbing!’!”* What rendered the lure of gain all the stronger was the des-
perate situation into which Spain had been plunged by the war. The country,
as we have seen, had always been characterised by great poverty and social
inequality, and matters were not improved by the inflation, wars, natural dis-
asters and harvest failures of the period 1796-1808. But with the French there
came absolute ruin. Not only was the burden of French requisitioning and
                                                                                  to
taxation extremely heavy, but the propertied classes proved only too eager
                                                                          example,
save themselves at the expense of the poor (French levies were, for
                                         taxes on basic  foodstuffs) . As a further
frequently funded by imposing extra
118 ~~Fighting Napoleon