

   All those who can get together a little money are crossing the River
   Guadiana into Portugal, leaving all those who cannot to wander about . .
   and try to feed and clothe themselves from what they can take from those
   bold enough to travel the roads of this ruined country.'™*
For another example let us look at Valladolid. The province was hit by both
particularly oppressive French requisitioning and an ‘extraordinary contribu-
tion’ of 1,000,000 reales, and by the summer of 1812 even the propertied classes
had been reduced to ruin, which, as one official warned the governor, meant
not just penury for all those who depended on them but also wholesale flight
and with it ‘more recruits for the cuadrillas’.'*
   Nothing, then, could be clearer. At the roots of /a guerrilla popular lay not
heroism but hunger, not daring but despair. But joining a partida was not the
only remedy for want of food. Thus, in one respect the coming of the French
had made little difference to Spanish society. Beset by chronic poverty many
regions of the country had long been the haunt of bandits. In Galicia, for
example, the first years of the nineteenth century were marked by the activities
of such gangs as those of Manuel Carvajal, Juan Manuel Varela, Ignacio Cobas,
Manuel Ventura Dominguez and José Rodriguez de Requeija, whilst in
Andalucia important chieftains had included Francisco Mateos Ponton, Diego
Corrientes, Pablo de Reina and Bartolomé Gutiérrez.'*° According to legend,
for such men the French had only to appear for them to turn patriot. ‘Never
had the roads been so safe’, enthused one writer. ‘In echo of the clarion call to
defend the fatherland, even wrongdoers and professional criminals had become
men of good will.’'*’ This version of events, however, is quite untrue. Bandits
such as the Valencian Jaime Alfonso (El Barbudo) or the vallesoletano leader
Vitoriano Diez (Chagarito) were happy to turn their attentions on the invaders:
after all, French saddle bags contained just as much money as Spanish ones,
whilst there was often much profit to be had from collaborating with the British
or Spanish military authorities (in order to speed up the recruitment of enemy
deserters, for instance, bounties were offered for every imperial soldier who was
safely handed over to the Allied armies).
   Nor were afrancesados likely to be spared for, generally being prominent local
notables, they offered rich pickings. As a result activity that might be seen
as ‘anti-French’ was commonplace. On the night of 7 June 1811, for example,
                                                 The Origins of the Guerrillas   121

four bandits named Manuel Camacho, Francisco Pérez, Juan de la Haza and
Antonio del Arahel attacked a farm that had been acquired by an officer of the
garrison of Seville named Deschamps, mistreated those of his employees who
had the misfortune to be present and made off with seventy-two horses.'** From
Guadalajara, meanwhile, came complaints of bandits selling the guerrillas
information or killing isolated couriers and selling the dispatches that they were
carrying.'*’ From Vizcaya it was reported that the older brother of one of the
members of the Junta Criminal Extraordinaria had been dragged from his home
at Balzola-at the end of a rope by a twice-pardoned bandit named Pedro de
Amorrostu, stabbed to death and then cut up with an axe.'*” From both Madrid
and Vizcaya come reports of bandits murdering isolated imperial soldiers.
And, finally, eager for booty or unwilling to be taken without a fight, bandit
gangs might even be found joining regular troops or guerrilla bands in raids
against the French or defending themselves against columns of enemy troops
who had managed to corner them.'”
   But to think that patriotism played any part in these men’s motivation would
be naive in the extreme. As Blaze wrote of Chagarito, for example, “This chief
... after making war upon the French, turned his arms against the Spaniards
in his leisure moments to keep his hand in. He... struck such terror into
Castile that the Spaniards . . . joined the French to endeavour to take him.’
Such men, indeed, were as likely to be found fighting for the French as against
them: shot as ‘infamous and sacrilegious thieves and traitors’ were Pablo
Albenagorta, Juan Ruiz and Ignacio Donato, all three of whom were malhechores
who had been taken fighting with the French at Cuenca in October 1811, whilst
one of the leading josefino counter-guerrillas was a Catalan bandit named José
Pujol, who placed his band at the service of the invaders and was allowed to
use it as the basis of a unit entitled the Cazadores Distinguidos de Catalufia."*
And, even when bandits did not actually fight alongside the invaders, they were
still not averse to preying on forces associated with the Patriot cause: in October
1810 a five-man patrol of Spanish cavalry was surprised and robbed at Lepe;
in March 1813 a courier travelling from Wellington to Espoz y Mina was
attacked by men under the command of the cabecilla Marquinez, and in June
1813 the great Aragonese heroine Agustina Zaragoza Domenech was set upon
by bandits whilst riding to join the Spanish forces fighting with Wellington’s
army in the Vitoria campaign.'”
   Before his very eyes, then, every starving Spaniard had an alternative model
of salvation. In brief, why join a force committed to fighting a war in which he
had no interest, and, still worse, tolerate the pretensions of some would-be
general, when it was possible to seek the same rewards in conditions of greater
                                                                               the
freedom and at little greater risk? Nor was obtaining arms a problem, for
                                         that had been seized  in the uprising  of
countryside was awash with weapons
122        ~+Fighting Napoleon