


men sought out the partidas. One of these is a sense of adventure. Such, at least,
is the tradition associated with Juan Fermin Leguia, a sergeant in Espoz y
Mina’s forces who on 13 March 1813 scaled the walls of the castle of
Fuenterrabia at the head of a small party of men, overpowered the garrison,
spiked its guns and threw all its powder and ammunition into the River Bidasoa:
a peasant from Vera, we are told that, being of a somewhat wayward disposi-
tion, he simply became bored with life in his parents’ caserio and ran off to join
Espoz y Mina’s men.” This, perhaps, is just a pious tale, but some credibility
is lent to it by an incident in Madrid in August 1810 in which a scandalised
father complained that his son and two other boys, all three of them aged
about thirteen, had been seduced into setting off to join the forces of
El Empecinado.'”
    Given the hatred that attached to military service, however, the number of
children eager for some desperate glory cannot have been very great. Despite
all the tales of patriotism, boyish enthusiasm and hatred of the French, it is
clear that, outside Navarre, a decision to volunteer for the guerrillas was the
product of more mundane factors. Let us take, for example, the case of the
various bands that stemmed from the motley collection of gendarmes and
customs guards known as the resguardo that had had the responsibility of fight-
ing banditry and smuggling in Bourbon Spain. Accustomed to life in the wild
and chasing malhechores of all sorts across the length and breadth of the country,
 the various components of this force were an obvious source of recruits for the
 guerrillas. Indeed, some bands seem to have come straight from its ranks, such
 as that commanded by Alejandro Fernandez in La Mancha in 1810: in 1808
 Fernandez had been a police corporal, and his initial followers consisted of six
 of his men.!°' Once again, however, the reasons why such men fled are open to
 doubt. We do not know why Fernandez becamme a cabecilla, but many of his
 fellows were initially quite happy to serve the josefino régime. As time went by,
 however, e/ rey intruso found it harder and harder to pay his followers, and thus
 it was that gaps began to appear in the ranks of the resguardo and, with them,
 new recruits for the partidas. Setting aside the case of Julian Fernandez noted
 above, as one afrancesado official wrote from Zafra, ‘Some members of the...
 resguardo of this town have fled to the partidas that have been infesting the
region on the pretext that they have nothing to live on?
   If lack of pay was one incentive for joining the guerrillas, another was the
                                                                                   as
prospect of captivity in France, or, still worse, of being shot by the wayside
                                                                       starving  and
a result of being unable to keep up with the long columns of
                                                                           the wake
disease-ridden prisoners that slowly made their way to the border in
                                               of war were therefore  an  importan t
of every Spanish defeat. Escaped prisoners
                                                                  a  soldier  of  the
source of recruits. One such was Pascual Ralla y Miravete,
                                                                                   in
Regimiento de Fieles Zaragozanos, who was taken prisoner in Catalonia
114.   ~Fighting Napoleon