


   And, last but not least, still other men left their homes for fear of conscrip-
tion to the French forces. In contrast to many other parts of the empire, this
was never imposed in Spain, but even so concerns of this sort were never far
away (hence, indeed, the prominence of the issue in the great propaganda
campaign that had accompanied the uprising of 1808). In consequence, even
the most limited measures caused panic. Thus, when the de facto French viceroy
of Andalucia, Marshal Soult, issued orders in May 1810 for all those dispersos
who had been serving soldiers in 1808 to report to his headquarters in Seville
on the grounds that, as members of the Spanish armed forces, they in theory
owed allegiance to e/ rey intruso, the results were dramatic:

  Hearing that Marshal Victor [sic] was out to enlist them, the young men of
  Jerez and the other pueblos of the district abandoned their homes. . . and,
  rounding up as many horses as they could from farm and pasture, joined
   together and took up arms against their oppressors.'”°
Needless to say, such fears were ruthlessly exploited by the Patriots, a good
example being events in the Serrania de Ronda, where the rising against the
French appears in part to have been the work of agents who spread rumours
that occupation would be followed by the conscription of the entire male
populace and put it about that the invaders had brought with them whole
wagon-loads of manacles for this purpose."
   Many of the guerrillas, then, were in essence runaways, an impression
reinforced still further if we consider the linked questions of draft evasion
and desertion. As the British diplomat Thomas Sydenham put it, by their very
existence the partidas ‘prevented the recruiting of the regular armies, for every
Spanish peasant would naturally prefer rioting and plunder and living in free
quarters to being drilled and starved with the regular army’.'” As we have seen,
meanwhile, not only did soldiers desert from the army in large numbers, but
many of those concerned ended up with the partidas (albeit faute de mieux:
maay, it seems, would have been content to stay at home had they not been
picked up by one or other of the parties of regular troops sent out to round
them up and forced to make a break for it).''’ Whatever the motives of such
recruits, plenty of partidas were composed almost entirely of men of this sort:
                                                                     example,
when Vicente Moreno was captured by the French in August 1810, for
                                                                          regi-
his thirty-three men included eighteen soldiers from the Reina infantry
 ment, ten from that of Vélez Malaga and two from the Walloon Guards.'"
                                                                           to con-
    On occasion there may have been, as tradition claims, a determination
                                                                    regular  army.
 tinue the struggle by other means than fighting and dying in the
                                                                     r 1810 two
 Thus, after the Spanish defeat at Alba de Tormes in Novembe
                                                    who   had  been  cut off from
 officers of the Toro provincial militia regiment
                                                                           of Manuel
 their unit gathered together a group of fugitives and joined the band
116 ~~ Fighting Napoleon