

   It was not just Copons who noted the dichotomy that almost everywhere
opened between hatred of the invaders and a willingness actually to join the
struggle against them. Similar comments may also be noted in British sources.
To quote a diplomat who travelled with Wellington’s army across northern
Spain in the autumn of 1812, for example:

  The feelings of all the provinces through which I have passed are decidedly
  inimical to the French and favourable to the common cause. . . At the same
  time... the patriotic feelings of the lower classes are of little use to their
  country. It is a passive feeling which murmurs under the oppression and
  tyranny which it suffers without exerting itself to remove or diminish what
  it complains of. The people pay their contributions and deliver up their
  mules, grain and provisions whenever they are demanded . . . by the enemy.
  Of course they complain of these exactions and are happy to see the English
     But... it does the enemy no harm nor us any good.”
Much the same point, meanwhile, was made by the British general Robert
Long. Thus:

  The people, alternately in the power of friends and foes, show indifference
  to both. They cannot take a part without danger to themselves; they prefer
  consequently personal security to a display of unseasonable loyalty or
  patriotism. In their hearts I believe they hate the French, but they have at
  the same time no great love for us.”
And finally, when Lord Blayney landed at Fuengirola in 1810, hopes that his
handful of troops would be supported by the inhabitants of the neighbouring
Serrania de Ronda proved unfounded, despite the fact that the whole area had
seemingly taken arms against the French. Thus:

   Previous to marching I had some conversation with Captain Miller of the
   Ninety-Fifth Regiment, who, with several other officers, had been latterly
   employed in organising the Spanish peasants. He informed me that a con-
   siderable quantity of arms and ammunition had been distributed amongst
   them, and consequently that I might expect a number to join me immedi-
   ately. In this, however, I was entirely disappointed, not more than ten or
   twelve making their appearance.”
112         ~Fighting Napoleon


   The civilian population was not entirely indifferent to the war. When three
members of Mina’s band appeared in Pamplona to hand over a group of French
prisoners who were being exchanged for two of his followers who had fallen
into French hands, for example, they were mobbed by a cheering crowd and
plied with food and drink.” And there were wild celebrations in both Madrid
and parts of La Mancha in late July 1809, when exaggerated reports of the
French defeat at Talavera set off rumours that Joseph Bonaparte had been
captured with his entire army.’’ For a few of the mén who followed the cabecil-
las it is even possible that traditional stereotypes hold good. Setting aside the
inhabitants of Espoz y Mina’s heartlands, this is especially true of the various
priests and other religious who fought with the partidas. ‘They were already
our implacable enemies’, wrote Sebastian Blaze. ‘Forced back into the world,
they became even more dangerous. Those who were young and active hung up
their habits and became . . . brigands, it being to them that we owe the forma-
tion of those bands that became most famous for their cruelty.’* Yet how
numerous these holy warriors were it is impossible to say: although one or two
bands seem to have had quite a number of clerics, the general impression
one is left with is that their numbers have been exaggerated.” And such was
the strength of popular aversion to the struggle that it is impossible to
place much weight on the importance of patriotism or ideology as factors in
the motivation of most recruits. The most obvious alternative is revenge. Like
the leaders of the partidas, the rank and file of the guerrillas have often been
painted as men driven by such feelings. Thus, Saturnino Abuin — an early
subordinate of El Empecinado who earned the sobriquet El Manco when he
lost a hand in combat — and his two brothers are supposed to have joined the
struggle after their home was burned down during the sack of Tordesillas by
the French in December 1808.” Then there is the case of one Juan Gomez, a
blacksmith from Bahabon de Esgueva, who reputedly joined the partida of
Cura Merino after strangling a French soldier whom he caught molesting his
daughter.” But there is much to mistrust here. Abuin, for example, may have
been from Tordesillas, but that is about all that is true in the story that we have
just retailed: in reality he was a bandit whom the uprising found in prison await-
ing trial for murder, and who, like many other men on the wrong side of the
law, only became a guerrillero because it was the safest means of reverting to his
old ways. Hence his eventual decision to abandon El Empecinado and join the
French as a counter-guerrilla, Juan Martin’s determination to discipline his
forces obviously constituting a major obstacle to Abuin’s dreams of a reign of
terror.”®
   Whilst noting the possibility that some of the rank and file may have been
motivated by hatred of the French (whether ideological or personal), it is there-
fore probably better to look for other factors when it comes to explaining why
                                                 The Origins of the Guerrillas   113