


means of raising money, meanwhile, many municipalities sold off considerable
amounts of common land, thereby depriving many of the humbler elements of
the community of firewood, pasturage, food and raw materials (chestnuts and
wild asparagus came from the commons, as did the esparto grass used in such
activities as basket-weaving). As most municipalities had also rented out parts
of the common lands in small parcels at reasonable rents, there also disappeared
many vital tenancies. In such places as the Navarrese montana, where the land
was sold off in minifundia, this policy was softened in its effects, but all too
often it went in large units for which the peasants could not compete, with the
result that the oligarchy consolidated its control of the local economy still
further. A good example is Guiptizcoa, where a study of nine pueblos has shown
that 14 per cent of the 1,458 purchasers got 71 per cent of the arable land
(and, still worse, that a mere twelve purchasers took almost one fifth of the
properties involved). Thanks to the requisition of so many draft animals
and carts by the contending armies, in many areas agriculture seems virtually
to have come to a standstill, whilst nature was no more kind to Spain in the
period 1808-14 than she had been in the years before the war. The harvest
of 1811 was particularly disastrous and wheat prices shot up dramatically (in
Burgos, for example, wheat rose from 80 reales a fanega in June 1811 to 244
reales by the close of the'year). Yet the populace were in no condition to respond
to the crisis. With the French imposing strict limits on movement and clamp-
ing down on many traditional aspects of street life, opportunities to find alter-
native sources of employment were limited — it was, for example, impossible
for the inhabitants of poverty-stricken mountain districts such as the Serrania
de Ronda to migrate in search of the seasonal work that had once been their
salvation — especially as industry was at a standstill, and many sefores unable to
pay their existing retainers and domestic servants, let alone take on fresh hands.
On the roads, meanwhile, little could move, whilst the French had generally
only to arrive in a port for its trade to collapse. In short, hunger and despair
reigned on all sides.!”
   As every account of life in the French zone makes clear, the common people
were tried beyond all endurance. Thus, passing through Malaga as a prisoner
of the French, Andrew Blayney found a scene of misery:

  Though    [Malaga]      still retains some   external   appearance   of its former
  prosperity, it is but the insubstantial shadow of departed reality. The total
  cessation of commerce and the losses consequent on the war have produced
  innumerable bankruptcies and universal distress; the port... has lost all
  appearance of commercial life, some fishing boats alone being seen in move-
  ment, while a few . . . feluccas and other smaller vessels are laid up rotting.
  What a contrast with the former flourishing commerce of this city, whose
                                                 The Origins of the Guerrillas   119