


Echavarria.''* Equally, Bartolomé Amor, a sergeant in the Burgos provincial
militia regiment who escaped from the battlefield of Gamonal with Juan Diaz
Porlier, seems to have been a dedicated soldier who merited the command that
he eventually earned of the cavalry regiment known as the Dragones de Soria."
But all too often the real motive for desertion was very different. We shall never
know precisely why Nicolas Maria de Isidro, a common soldier in one of the
regiments that had been sent to Denmark under the Marqués de la Romana
and a native of the province of Guadalajara, had no sooner got back to Spain
than he fled to join the forces of El Empecinado.''’ But Manuel Sarasa, a veteran
infantryman from Navarre who also escaped from Denmark but fought on in
the ranks until he was captured at the battle of the River Gebora in March
1811, has much to say on the subject:

   Had I...copied the misconduct of the many men who fled the army,
   returned to their home provinces and joined the guerrillas, I would surely
   have obtained promotion and suffered a lot less. As is well known, it is much
   harder to distinguish oneself in a field army than it is in a guerrilla band,
   just as the privations suffered in the former are never experienced in the
   latter.''®

Even more explicit was a report sent by an anonymous staff officer attached to
the headquarters of the Fifth Army to the Chief of the General Staff in Cadiz
in June 1811: ‘Given that the guerrillas are always dressed in the greatest
comfort and never lack fistfuls of doubloons with which to treat themselves,
one really has to be the greatest of patriots to serve in the army.’ As this sug-
gests, the pious tales that have come down to us of men coming to the conclu-
sion that they could fight the invaders more effectively as irregulars than they
could in the ranks of the regular army should be regarded with the utmost sus-
picion. Much more to the point is the story of Vicente Hernandez, a soldier of
the Voluntarios Imperiales de Toledo who deserted early in 1810, and fought
on-and-off with the partidas of Isidoro Mir, Ventura Jiménez and Camilo
Gomez before eventually setting up as a bandit and ending up on a French
scaffold.'?”
   And it was not just Spanish soldiers who deserted, for the partidas were also
joined by many refugees from the French forces. How many such men came
over to the guerrillas in this fashion it is impossible to say, but they were by no
means infrequent. Large numbers certainly fought with the Navarrese insur-
gents: wounded in action under Espoz y Mina at Sangiiesa on 5 February 1812
was a Prussian named Jochiim Flich, whilst ‘the King of Navarre’ was joined
by a steady trickle of deserters from the garrison of Pamplona, and, on one
occasion, no less than half a battalion of Italians.'2! Nor was this an isolated
instance. In July 1811 El Empecinado was reported to have recruited so many
                                                  The Origins of the Guerrillas   117