

1808, seized from isolated Frenchmen, thrown away in the confusion of battle
or sold by starving Spanish soldiers.'** For cover, meanwhile, there was always
the war against the French: time and again we hear of gangs of marauders,
and sometimes even isolated individuals, entering unsuspecting pueblos and
demanding money, horses or rations on the pretext that that they were agents
dispatched by some local general or cabecilla, whilst many supposed guerrilla
raids turn out to have been nothing more than attempts to spring captured
bandits from French captivity, the first action of any partida that occupied a
town or village generally being to empty the local gaol.'*’ In short, as the Junta
Criminal Extraordinaria de Jaén proclaimed, “The so-called guerrilla bands are
in reality no more than highwaymen who pillage the towns and villages and
murder their fellow countrymen, the only reason that they have adopted the
garb of freedom fighters having been to disguise their crimes and give them-
selves greater scope for their activities.’
   The result of all this was that the areas occupied by the French were soon
swarming not just with guerrillas but with fresh bandits. As the Junta Crimi-
nal of Guadalajara complained to Joseph’s Minister of Justice in January 1812:

      The Junta... has no option but to inform you of the... fatal state of this
      province, inundated on all sides, as it is, by thieves who keep up a constant
      assault on the highways and are so confident of their strength that they
      are not afraid of falling on town and village as well. For some time hardly
      a day has gone by on which this tribunal has not received the report of some
      robbery or other: indeed, moved by the hope that we might finish with
      this plague, the local justices rush to report them. The public interest
      demands the erection of a scaffold that will contain these excesses: unless
      the malefactors responsible for them are checked by the use of the most
      exemplary punishment, the security of the entire province will be put at
      risk.'”

Lest it be thought that this is nothing but the fruit of afrancesamiento, let us
quote the following lines taken from a letter written by the Patriot comisionado,
Rafael Gutiérrez:

      An enormous number of partidas are ranging across La Mancha. . . . They
      do so under the name of guerrillas, but in fact many are simply gangs of
      thieves and deserters given over to every type of crime. Armed with docu-
      ments that have been forged or stolen... they infest the countryside,
      pillaging everything in sight and holding up every wayfarer that they
      encounter.”
In one or two instances the cuadrillas concerned attained a measure of both size
and notoriety — the most notorious was the band known as the ‘Siete Nifios de
                                                The Origins of the Guerrillas   123


Ecija’’' — but the most common pattern was for them to be few in member-
ship and ephemeral in existence. That said, however, they were all-pervasive,
and the number of men involved must have run into many thousands. Some-
thing of the extent of the problem may be judged from the number of bandits
executed by the French. Of Granada, for example, Blayney wrote: