


army any man who did not volunteer to fight with him.'” And finally,
deserters too could with some reason expect to be pressed into service: amongst
the men captured by the French with the Valencian leader Romeu in 1812 were
two dispersos who saved their lives by proving that they had been compelled to
serve by force, whilst on 14 June 1810 the partida of Pedro Alcalde entered
Alcala la Real and demanded a list of all the dispersos in the town.'”’ Examples
of the recruits gained by such methods are legion. From Almagro, for example,
we hear of the case of one Justo Barba, a conscript who had fled back home
only to be snapped up by a partida that also arrested his father.'’* From Morata
we learn that in August 1811 fifty men in uniform descended on the town and
seized one Miguel Gomez as a deserter and, in addition, the father of another
man named Lucio Tominaya, whom they could not locate.'” And from
Zaragoza there is the case of Ram6n Galindo, a disperso obliged to enlist in one
of the regiments of José Joaquin Duran following the city’s liberation from the
French in July 1813.'”
   At least such men as Barba, G6émez and Galindo were liable to the quinta,
and generally guilty of desertion to boot. But usually there was little in the way
of either ceremony or pretext. Descending on a town, chieftains would simply
round up every man that they could find and force them to enlist: having
occupied Cabezon de la Sal in June 1809, for example, Porlier ordered the
immediate enlistment of all males between seventeen and forty-five, whilst
much the same tactics were employed by Merino when he entered Lerma in
June 1809.” Accompanying such tactics was often the utmost brutality —
attempts at resistance or flight were met by hostage-taking, floggings and even
executions — and matters were made still worse by the fact that pueblos were
frequently visited by several bands in succession, all of whom would behave in
exactly the same fashion.'”® Nor was anyone spared: amongst those taken were
licenciados — soldiers of the regular army who had served out their terms of
enlistment — the medically unfit and even men in government service.'”
   It is probable that the bulk of the guerrillas’ Spanish conscripts were
acquired in this fashion. A single foray into Aragon in 1812, for example, was
reported to have gained El Empecinado several hundred men.'*’ However, when
all else failed, there was always the weapon of kidnap. Thus, large numbers of
men appear to have been simply seized at random as they were working in the
fields or travelling from one pueblo to another. Press-ganged in the town of Veo,
for example, were the peasants José Peris, F rancisco Ballester, Vicente Bo and
                                                                               El
Bautista Marti, whilst between January and May 1812 forces belonging to
Empecinado kidnapped men at Barajas, Torrejon de Ardoz and Cubillo."*' And,
to the fury of many Spanish generals, commanders such as Porlier were not
                                                                         to
averse to forcing small detachments of regular troops that they happened
come across to take service with them as well.’
128   ~~‘Fighting Napoleon