

nor in their composition do the partidas conform to the stereotype, in fact. In
so far as they were directed against the French at all, they were the work either
of representatives of the state and its allies, or, still worse, of opportunists and
adventurers who saw the crisis of 1808 as a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity that
was to be seized with both hands. As for the rank and file, with certain excep-
tions they were but little interested in the defence of dios, rey y patria. Refugees
from military service, poverty, noose or prison camp, mercenary hirelings, or
unwilling conscripts who had been pressed into the ranks of some partida or
other, their interest lay in survival and personal gain, and these were goals that
could be pursued just as easily in company with the bandits who covered the
face of the Peninsula as they could in company with the guerrillas. Given the
choice, then, many men headed not for the guerrilla but the cuadrilla, whilst,
disillusioned with a cause that offered them nothing, many others sought only
to live quietly at home, hoping that the great turmoil would pass them by. To
talk of some great people’s crusade is therefore absurd. How, then, could
Copons write of Valencia, ‘Every pueblo, or at least the vast majority, is in a
state of insurrection’?! There is, however, no difficulty here. What seemed at
first sight to be resistance to the French was rather a state of general turmoil
occasioned by a mixture of resentment, poverty and despair as the rural popu-
 lace at one and the same time sought to protect itself against the demands of
 friends and enemies alike, pursued long-standing hatreds and struggled des-
 perately to survive. In the process some few Frenchmen were killed, doubtless,
 but then so were marauders from the British, Portuguese and even Spanish
 armies. Equally, if some of the sefiores who were the enemies of the people per-
 ished, so did many of the bandits whom Marxist romantics have seen as their
 friends. And, all this being the case, it follows that we should not be surprised
 if the contribution of the partidas to the defeat of the French proves to be rather
 less dramatic than has often been made out to be the case.
                             5
                The Reality of the Guerrillas
                                                     ~




The image of the guerrillas that has emerged thus far is one that could not be
more contradictory. On the one hand, we see the bands of heroic freedom
fighters lauded in the traditional historiography as having sustained the fight
against the French through thick and thin, causing them heavy casualties
and paving the way for the eventual triumph of the Anglo-Portuguese army of
the Duke of Wellington, whilst on the other we see the gangs of adventurers,
malhechores and deserters suggested by a revisionist reading of the Spanish
sources. Which of these two images is the more accurate still awaits verifica-
tion, but it is quite clear that it is the latter that enjoys the greater degree of
plausibility. Does this matter, however? The motivation of the partidas may not
have been that of the patriotic legend, but they still preyed on the French: after
all, money was on offer for bringing in captured dispatches and enemy prison-
ers, whilst the invaders’ packs and saddle-bags were often bulging with plunder.
Is there, in short, room to conciliate the old historiography with the new?
    To answer this question, it is necessary to review the capacity and achieve-
ments of the guerrillas in military terms and, in addition, to say something
more about the behaviour of the partidas. For as long as traditional images of
the invaders — being constantly harassed by an enemy that was at once every-
where and nowhere, and supported by a populace whose only wish it was to
serve their every desire — go unchallenged, the process of revision that is so
sorely needed will be able to make little progress.
   Let us begin, however, by examining the verdict of military theory. Shaken
by their failure in the Peninsula, a number of Napoleonic veterans who pro-
duced treatises on the art of war in the years after Waterloo placed great weight
on the contribution made by the guerrillas. Not the least of these was the Swiss
staff officer Henri de Jomini, who, having served under Marshal Ney in Spain
and Russia and later gone over to the Russians, was to dominate military
                                                 The Reality of the Guerrillas   131