


    Had Von Brandt been present in Aragon and Navarre in 1812 and 1813,
rather than, as was actually the case, being recalled with his regiment for service
in the Russian campaign, he might have been less sanguine, for the latter years
of the conflict saw guerrilla commanders such as Espoz y Mina and Duran
repeatedly defeat substantial French columns. But for these defeats he had, as
suggested by the last few words of the quotation we have just cited, a ready-
made explanation, and, what is more, one that was entirely plausible. Having a
few months earlier committed his armies to an offensive strategy designed to
bring about the conquest of Valencia, at the end of 1811 Napoleon simultane-
ously withdrew well over 25,000 men from Spain, whilst at the same time effec-
tively cutting off the constant stream of replacements and reinforcements that
had hitherto sustained the march of French conquest in the Peninsula. Stripped
to the bone, the garrisons of Navarre and Aragon found themselves quite
unable to hold their own against Espoz y Mina and his fellows, especially as the
latter were by now equipped with a number of artillery pieces that had been
landed by the British on the coast of the Basque provinces and laboriously
transported into the heartlands of Ja guerrilla.
     For the French the result was that life became quite impossible. The guer-
rillas were now able to muster thousands of men — in this respect it greatly
 helped that the advance of the Anglo-Portuguese army on Burgos following the
 fall of Madrid in August 1812 had forced the French to concentrate most of
 their forces in northern Spain against Wellington, thereby allowing Espoz y
 Mina much greater opportunities to recruit his forces — and use conventional
 tactics on the battlefield. In consequence, no force could venture out to gather
 in supplies or relieve beleaguered garrisons that was not itself powerful enough
 to fight a divisional-level action. Nor, meanwhile, could garrisons that were
 attacked by the guerrillas trust to their walls to protect them as they always had
 in the past, for the partidas could now bring up their guns and blast holes in
the defences.
   There followed, then, a dramatic series of successes. Communications with
France were badly disrupted, whilst in February 1813 Espoz y Mina forced the
surrender of the French garrison of Tafalla, having first defeated a column of
over 3,000 troops that had been sent to relieve it. An attack on the town of Sos
was beaten off, but the French nevertheless decided to evacuate the garrison
and almost suffered the destruction of the column sent to its relief when Espoz
y Mina attacked it at Castiliscar. In response to this activity the French Army
                                                                                   its
of the North launched a powerful counter-offensive. To ensure its success,
                                                         of   Portugal  (which    had
commander was authorised to draw upon the Army
been watching Wellington’s army in Leon), and five of this force’s six infantry
                                                                            were not
divisions were eventually sucked into the struggle. Yet the guerrillas
destroyed. Communications with France were placed       on  a  more  secure  footing,
136 ~=—-Fighting Napoleon