

  [Serrano] Valdenebro arrived today. He is very gloomy about the state of
  affairs in the Sierra, and foresees all sorts of difficulties about assembling the
  peasants. In a word . . . the serranos do not want to leave their villages, and
  are not doing anything of any use.”
                                                The Origins of the Guerrillas   125


As La Cuadra observed, then, ‘We cannot count on any aid from the Sierra,
whether in terms of men, mules or anything else.’ The inhabitants would
defend their villages from French foraging parties and punitive expeditions,
and fall upon unprotected parties of civilians, but they would not take part in
formal military operations. But this was not the end of the problem. As the
Spanish general continued, “The state of anarchy that prevails amongst the
inhabitants ought to alarm us rather than give us hope.”'® As to what he meant,
this is best approached through the experiences of Albert de Rocca, a young
French hussar officer who formed part of the garrison of Ronda. Particularly
suggestive is his account of the events that transpired when the French briefly
gave up the town only a month after it had been occupied:

  The very day .. . we left Ronda, the mountaineers entered it . . . shouting
  with joy and discharging their pieces exultingly in the streets. The inhab-
  itants of each village arrived together marching without order, and...
  loaded their asses with whatever they found... till the poor beasts were
  ready to sink under the weight of the booty . . . The prisons were forced, and
  the . . . criminals they contained ran instantly to take revenge on their judges
  and accusers. Debtors obtained receipts from their creditors by forcible
  means, and all the public papers were burned in order to annul the mort-
  gages that the inhabitants of the town had upon the mountaineers.'”
Nor is any of this surprising. To quote an afrancesado official who fell into the
hands of a gang of about sixty insurgents near Antequera in May 1810, ‘As I
afterwards discovered, all of them were given over to dissolution, whilst many
had previously been given gaol sentences.”'®
   Setting aside immediate self-defence — a factor that was as likely to lead to
violence against Allied marauders as it was to violence against French ones!™
— such genuine popular involvement in the war as may be found was therefore
closely linked with agrarian unrest. Yet it would be wrong to take this argu-
ment too far, and especially to pursue the mirage of the ‘social bandit’. Whilst
more work is certainly needed on the question of banditry in Spain in the early
nineteenth century, the very few archivally based works to have been published
on the subject so far do not hold out much hope in this respect. Thus, if we
turn to Lopez Moran’s Bandolerismo Gallego en la Primera M itad del Siglo XIX,
we find that the Galician bandits of which the author writes neither stood up
for the people, nor were admired by the people, nor concentrated their attacks
on enemies of the people. Universally feared and loathed, indeed, they seem to
have been interested in nothing more than staying alive and can never once be
found to have divided up their spoils Robin-Hood fashion with the poor.'® On
occasion, indeed, an outraged populace turned on malhechores with the sort of
ferocity that the legend reserves for the French. Thus, at Medina de Rio Seco
on 16 March 1811 a group of men who had been drinking in a tavern fell upon
126   ~—-Fighting Napoleon