


with and they withdrew into the castle, leaving Duran free to demolish much of
the outer defences and plunder the garrison’s stores. But without artillery the
castle was impregnable, whilst the week that it took for a relief force to appear
was not sufficient to exhaust the defenders’ supply of food and water, and
the Division de Soria therefore had no option but to withdraw.’ And if the
forces involved were not properly speaking guerrillas, but rather the regular
troops of Pedro Villacampa’s ‘Division de la Izquierda de Aragon’, much
the same experience was had by the Spaniards when they attacked Teruel in
May 1810. As Villacampa ruefully remarked, the seminary that constituted the
French citadel could not be bombarded for want of artillery, blown up for want
of engineers or set alight for want of combustibles. The garrison’s only weak-
ness was that it lacked its own well, but even when the attackers cut the aquaduct
that supplied water to the part of the city in which it was situated, a relief force
once again arrived before the citadel was seriously inconvenienced."
   For a more general view of the case, let us turn to the experienced and
thoughtful Heinrich von Brandt. Thus:

  As long as the guerrillas . . . constituted [an actual armament of the people],
  they ... were...extremely dangerous to the French... But even in the
  first year of the rise of these bands, they lost this character and absurdly aped
  the regularity ...of the military profession. They lost, in particular, the
  activity which they had shown in the earlier part of their formation and gave
  to their enemies...a thousand opportunities of combating them with
  success. hey ceased to become the concern of whole districts, and fell into
  the hands of a few leaders who made such use of them as was most suitable
  to their own views. . . . Rendered incapable by their great numbers to conceal
  themselves from the observation of a vigilant enemy and suddenly to disap-
  pear from him without giving battle as they had formerly done, they were
  now frequently overtaken, surprised, defeated and dispersed, and disabled
  for a time from offering further molestation . . . One great advantage to the
  French was the assembling of the enemy’s troops in detached parts of the
  country: whole districts were entirely freed from them, the communication
  of supplies was interrupted, and even couriers travelled without escorts.
  Provisions and other necessaries were regularly supplied, whilst good order
  prevailed in the army. Wherever the enemy was seen concentrating his
  troops, the French advanced on them and dispersed them, by which means
  ... movements on both sides became more decisive, but not to the advan-
  tage of Spain since the tactics of the French always procured them the
  victory. Even the most hazardous engagements terminated in the French
  becoming masters of the field, provided no infinite superiority of numbers ren-
  dered this honour a matter of doubt."
                                                  The Reality of the Guerrillas   135