


    As we have seen, such methods could not but undermine the partidas’ claims
to be a popular movement. On the contrary, rather than serve with the guer-
rillas, many men fled their homes and headed for parts of Spain still in the
hands of the Patriots: from both Ciudad Rodrigo and La Corufia, for example,
it was reported that large numbers of mozos were arriving from districts in the
French zone.'*’ Sometimes, too, there were riots: at Navahermosa the Junta
Central’s agent, Crivell, found himself the target of an angry mob.'™ But most
common of all was probably the response of the Castilian peasant Gregorio
Gonzalez Arranz, who, fearing that he would be seized by the forces of
Jeronimo Merino and desiring only to be left to cultivate his smallholding, took
a wife, and in addition scraped together enough money for his family to be able
to buy him out of trouble should the partidas snap him up nonetheless (as they
eventually did).'®
   But the issue was not just that of military service. Conceived in the tradi-
tional historiography as a force that lived amongst the people — indeed, in
symbiosis with the people — in fact the guerrillas came more and more to lead
a separate existence from the populace, and, in general, to live off the sweat of
their brow: as we shall see, their requisitioning was just as ruthless as that of
the French. Far from offering the civilian population any protection, mean-
while, they rather increased their danger, since a succession of French decrees
threatened any pueblo that assisted the partidas, allowed itself to be plundered
of men or supplies without putting up any resistance, or was found to have men
serving with the guerrillas with the most dire punishment.'** These orders per-
mitted a variety of measures — generally speaking, heavy fines of one sort or
another — but in addition French commanders often resorted to outright ter-
rorism: in Navarre, for example, we find General Reille shooting large numbers
of hostages chosen from amongst the families of the guerrillas, and the goy-
ernor of Tudela threatening literally to decimate the male populace unless he
received information as to the identity of the killer of a single French sentry.'*”
It was, of course, Espoz y Mina’s boast that this brutality had no effect what-
soever other than to increase the number of men who came forward to join his
forces, but no less plausible are French claims that the reverse was true. As
Marshal Suchet wrote, for example:

  The Aragonese . . . felt a growing affection for the... troops . . . ‘Los nue-
  stros’ they always said when speaking of us . . . They considered our steady
  and regular occupation as a means of escaping the frequent inroads of [Espoz
  y] Mina and Villacampa, which, from the very circumstances of their being
  transitory, were attended with disorder and only left evil consequences
  behind them without being productive of any salutary result.'*
  This, perhaps, is to go too far but, for all that, the traditional image of the
Spanish guerrillas can be seen to be very hard to sustain. Neither in their origins
                                                 The Origins of the Guerrillas   129