

thought right up until the Franco-Prussian War of 1870-71. Let us quote his
most famous work, The Art of War:

  An invasion against an exasperated people . . . is a dangerous enterprise, as
  was well proved by the war in Spain .. . Each armed inhabitant knows the
  smallest paths . . . he finds everywhere a relative or friend who aids him. The
  commanders also know the country, and, learning immediately the slightest
  movement on the part of the invader, can adopt the best movements to defeat
  his projects, while the latter... is like a blind man: his combinations are
  failures, and when, after the most . . . rapid and fatiguing marches, he thinks
  he is about to. . . deal a terrible blow, he finds no sign of the enemy . . . so
  that while, like Don Quijote, he is attacking windmills, his adversary is on
  his line of communications ...and carries on a war so disastrous for the
  invader that he must inevitably yield after a time.’

Jomini did not quite go so far as to imply that the whole reason for Napoleon’s
defeat in Spain lay with the guerrillas — on the contrary, he also laid much stress
on Allied control of the sea, the geography of the theatre of operations, the
existence of regular armies (both Spanish and Anglo-Portuguese) that could
help and sustain the insurgents, and the failure of the French to commit suffi-
cient troops to the Peninsula — but there were other observers who threw
caution to the winds in this respect. One such was Jean Le Miére de Corvey,
an officer who had fought not just in Spain but also against the Vendean insur-
rection of 1793, and therefore felt himself peculiarly qualified to write a study
of guerrilla warfare. Published in 1823 as Des Partisans et des Corps Trreguliers,
this was absolutely unequivocal in its admiration. Thus:

   One hundred and fifty guerrilla bands scattered all over Spain had sworn to
   kill thirty or forty Frenchmen a month each: that made six to eight thousand
   men a month for all the guerrilla bands together... As there are twelve
   months in the year, we were losing about 80,000 men a year, without [count-
   ing] any pitched battles. The war in Spain lasted seven years [sic], so over
   500,000 men were killed.’
   Such opinions were, it would seem, widely shared.’ How far are the claims
advanced by those who sought to make the guerrillas a central pillar of the
Allied war effort justified, however? Even amongst those who had fought the
irregulars opinion was mixed. Let us take, first of all, the swarms of irregular
bands of no great size that are seen by many observers as the very acme of /a
                                                                                 a
guerrilla. Small groups of men lacking training and discipline, armed with
                                                                   to knives and
variety of different weapons ranging from muskets and bayonets
fowling pieces, they could pick off the odd straggler, courier or foraging party,
but they could not hope to withstand considerable parties of enemy troops,
132     ~+Fighting Napoleon