

attack well-protected convoys or force the surrender of enemy garrisons.
Indeed, even such attacks as they were able to launch were not always very effec-
tive. To quote Marbot, for example:

   I went on my way without incident as far as . . . Briviesca, but between that
   place and Burgos we saw twenty mounted Spaniards appear suddenly around
   a low hill. They fired several shots at us without effect; then my escort [six
   gendarmes], my servant and I drew our swords> and went forward without
   deigning to reply to the enemy, who, judging from our resolute attitude that
   we were the kind of people to defend ourselves vigorously went off in
   another direction . . . Between Palencia and Duefias I fell in with an officer
   and twenty-five men of the Young Guard escorting a chest of money for
   the garrison at Valladolid. The . . . guerrilleros of the neighbourhood were
   just attacking the detachment. On seeing my escort galloping up... they
   stopped short . .. But one of them. . . called out that no French troops were
   in sight, whereupon the brigands advanced boldly towards the tempting trea-
   sure wagon. I naturally took command and bade the officer of the guard not
   to fire until I gave the word. Most of the enemy had dismounted . . . and
   ... many had only pistols. I had placed my infantry behind the wagon, and
   as soon as the Spaniards were within twenty paces I made them come out
   and gave them the order to fire. This was obeyed with terrible precision: the
   leader and a dozen of his men dropped. The rest bolted at full speed towards
   their horses.*

Marbot is anything but a reliable witness. Yet such views are confirmed by the
supposed leader of the insurrection in the Serrania de Ronda, José Serrano
Valdenebro. Already deeply perturbed by the wayward nature of his followers,
he was not much reassured by their fighting abilities. Thus:
  Although war is being waged in these mountains in the style of Viriato,
  flattering results cannot be expected ... The peasants are little more than
  unmanageable. There is little union or regularity... in their movements.
  This is not to be surprised at: amongst troops who have not been fashioned
  by the strictest discipline they cannot be achieved . . . Valiant in skirmishing,
  they do not understand that shock action is the chief weapon on the battle-
  field . . . So long as troops do not realise that battles are won by the sword
  and bayonet, all is lost. Fire is only a chimera. .. . Advancing on the enemy
  with union and bravery . . . is what brings victory.°
  And, of course, if mere gangs of armed civilians were of limited use when
the French were in the open, in other circumstances they were still more help-
less. If it was not already protected by medieval walls or Vauban-style fortifi-
cations, or if, as in, say, Seville, the perimeter of the existing defences was too
                                                 The Reality of the Guerrillas   133


extensive to be held by the normal garrison, every town and city that was occu-
pied by the French was given an improvised citadel into which the garrison
could retire to fight off attack or await relief. In Madrid, for example, this func-
tion was fulfilled by a large earthwork fort built around the royal porcelain
factory situated on the heights occupied by the present-day Parque del Retiro;
in Seville by the monastery of La Cartuja; in Teruel by the same complex of
churches and convents in the centre of the city that defied the Republican forces
in the Spanish Civil War; in Tudela, Burgos, Zaragoza and Jaen by convenient
medieval castles; and in Salamanca by three convents that stood on the bluffs
overlooking the bridge across the River Tormes. Though the various buildings
concerned were all strengthened by earthworks and ditches and, where neces-
sary, as in Salamanca, afforded a clear field of fire by the demolition of whole
swathes of buildings, they were in no case strong enough to withstand a regular
siege (the castle of Burgos did, in fact, succeed in defying Wellington in
October 1812, but this was only because he tried to take it without a proper
siege train). But against them the more irregular bands stood no chance even
had they had any interest in attacking them, which they did not. As a British
naval officer who fought in northern Spain observed, indeed, ‘When acting
offensively, they never can follow up their success as the enemy invariably
retreat to and entrench themselves in the nearest village from whence they
cannot be dislodged by musketry.”°
   Yet, it would seem that the larger forces that coalesced around such figures
as Juan Martin Diez, José Joaquin Duran and Francisco Espoz y Mina also had
their deficiencies. Until 1813, for example, they generally had no more chance
of storming the French citadels than, say, Francisquete or El Abuelo. On occa-
sion success was achieved by the use of desperate expedients, as at Aguilar del
Campéo in June 1809, when Porlier succeeded in forcing the surrender of the
garrison by occupying a belfry that overlooked the convent in which it had taken
refuge, heaving enormous rocks up the stairs and then dropping them through
the roof of the enemy strongpoint.’ And there was, too, scope for daring com-
mando-style raids of the sort that in March 1813 saw a handful of Espoz y
Mina’s men scale the walls of the castle of Fuenterrabia, overcome the
garrison and throw all the cannons and powder in the place into the River
Bidasoa.® But in the ordinary course of events the only hope was to attempt to
undermine the walls or to mount a blockade in the hope that the defenders would
run out of food. Both tactics were tried from time to time, but they obviously
required many days to be successful, and in consequence generally proved
abortive, the French almost always being able to scrape together a relief force
before too long. For a good example here, we might cite the attack mounted by
Duran on the city of Soria in March 1812. A surprise attack on the walls
launched from four directions at once proved too much for the defenders to cope
134    Fighting Napoleon