

  In the centre of the [Plaza del Triunfo] is a large gallows, with a staircase to
  ascend by, and on the right a garrote, the mode of execution by which
  deserves notice. On a platform are placed a number of stools with a perpen-
  dicular post behind each; the criminal being seated on the stool, an iron collar
  is placed round his neck, and the executioner by the turn of a screw puts an
  end to his existence in a moment... Scarce a day passes without several
  similar executions.!”

Scarce a day, indeed. Work on the issue is still in its infancy, but 178 bandits
have thus far been revealed as having been executed by the French and their
allies in the period 1809-12 alone. These figures, however, are but the tip of
the iceberg, for not all those who came before the courts perished, whilst others
were never caught at all. Much better, then, to quote the fact that in April
1812 the prison of Segovia contained no fewer than thirty-two prisoners
awaiting trial on charges of banditry, or that between the rith and 23rd of
the same month the chief prison in Madrid saw the admission of forty-two men
in relation to the same offence.’ And, as need hardly be said, many of these
malhechores were deserters. To quote a correspondent of the Junta of
Catalonia:

  I cannot refrain from pointing out to Your Excellency the enormous numbers
  of deserters who have come together in large bands, and... have been
  robbing, killing and committing the most dreadful cruelties. There is neither
  traveller, muleteer, peasant, country house or hamlet that is safe, for they rob
   and maltreat everything alike.’”
   The populace, then, possessed interests other than the fight against the
French. That this was the case is suggested very strongly by the fact that there
was a constant haemorrhage of men away from the guerrilla bands. This was
precipitated by a variety of factors — Toribio Bustamente, for example, found
that his men began to slip away whenever he ran short of the money needed
for their pay! — but the important point to note is that it was almost invari-
                                                                            or
ably linked with moves in the direction either of banditry pure and simple,
of service with the juramentados. Of the former tendency there is much evi-
dence. Setting aside the case of Vicente Hernandez that we have already noted,
the district of Villarejo de Salvanés saw four soldiers from E] Empecinado’s
                                                                      his men
forces commit many robberies, whilst in June 1811 several more of
124    Fighting Napoleon


were apprehended by the cabecilla Juan Abril near Torrelodones after they stole
500,000 reales from a courier travelling from Salamanca to Madrid; in July 1811
an amnestied partisan from Usillos named José Delgado who had turned to
banditry was sentenced to five years’ imprisonment by the Junta Criminal
Extraordinaria of Valladolid; on 2 October 1811 two deserters from the partida
of Ugarte were sent before a firing squad after a reign of terror in which they
and a number of other ma/lhechores had committed numerous murders, rapes
and other excesses around the town of Olabarrieta; on 29 December 1811 three
of Manuel Hernandez’s men stole 95,000 reales from a resident of Chinchon
named Gregorio Montero; and amongst the men executed by the French in
Navarre in 1811 for banditry were two deserters from the troops of Espoz y
Mina.’ For service with the French we might recall the already cited case of
Abuin, but there is in fact no need to do so: in November 1810 the second-in-
command of the ‘Compania de Guerrilla de Ayamonte’ deserted to the French
after having first helped himself to the entire contents of the unit’s pay-chest;
in July 1811 one Nicolas Garcia deserted from El Empecinado’s forces and was
rewarded with a commission in King Joseph’s army; in September 1811 a
Patriot spy reported that several bands of irregulars had gone over to the
French at Cordoba; in March 1812 two madrilenos named Tiburcio Ballesteros
and Diego Yebenes fled the forces of Palarea and tried to enlist in a special anti-
bandit force that was then being raised in the capital; and on 19 April 1812 two
members of the partida headed by Luis Gutiérrez appeared in Madrid and
enlisted in King Joseph’s cavalry.'””
   An interesting question here is whether this attempt, however inchoate, to
pursue a separate agenda on the part of the populace possessed a conscious
social content @ /a Hobsbawm. This, however, seems unlikely. Some areas of
Spain, it is true, seem to have been more in the grip of a jacquerie than of a
guerrilla insurrection. Nowhere is this more true than the Serrania de Ronda.
The disturbances that broke out in the area after it was occupied in February
1810 aroused much hope amongst the Patriot authorities. ‘The uprising of the
Serrania de Ronda is a glorious affair’, wrote General Castafios. ‘Put on the
right footing, it could be of major help to future operations.’* However, sent
to get the serranos together in order to use them to assist the operations of a
division that was to be disembarked from the sea under Luis Lacy, Ambrosio
de la Cuadra found that ‘the right footing’ was not something that was to be
attained with any ease. In the first place an interview with the supposed leader
of the rebels proved a depressing experience: