

to protect his independence that he threatened the life of the local representa-
tive of the government and seized the saddle-bags of his dispatch riders.” It
was not just on the frontiers of Old Castile, La Mancha and Aragon that such
issues were a problem, however, for bad news also reached Gutiérrez from the
region of Burgos, where Longa and Merino were reported to be in dispute with
the commander of the Spanish Seventh Army, General Gabriel de Mendizabal
(even if it should in fairness be noted that British observers claimed that
Mendizabal, who was at best lacklustre, had ‘entirely lost the confidence of
everybody’). And from Asturias, Moscoso complained:

  This place is a tangle of confusions . . . No one is trying to wage war on the
  enemy except in accordance with his own particular hopes and aspirations
  ... You can see for yourself . . . that nobody has the force that he claims he
  does, and that it is impossible to count on anybody or anything . . . Every-
  body goes about things in their own way... and thinks of nothing but his
  own interest and convenience. In short, Asturias will only ever be recovered
  by an army from beyond its frontiers.”

   It was not just operational efficiency that was damaged by the endless squab-
bling. A further casualty was enthusiasm for the war. Let us here quote a gov-
ernment agent in the province of Guadalajara named Antonio de Capetillo:

  I am afraid to say that there is disunion amongst the authorities, discord
  amongst the generals . . . vice amongst the soldiery, and egotism in one and
  all, not to mention an unbridled greed for ranks and honours that are quite
  unmerited. Still worse, the disillusion with our forces that has stemmed from
  the quarrels of the commanders is spreading a decadent apathy amongst the
  populace. Look at Villacampa, for example. Once the terror of the enemy
  ... he has completely changed, and has not won a victory [for months] with
  the result that his splendid division of 5,000 gallant soldiers has been reduced
  in strength by more than half and is now wandering from one village of this
  province to the next, having completely abandoned Aragén to the enemy.
  As for El] Empecinado’s division, its commander and his officers are clearly
  very discontented at having been placed under the command of General
  Bassecourt, whilst civil war is raging in its ranks with all sorts of
  calumnies and accusations flying about... All this the inhabitants regard
  with great displeasure, whilst they are also fed up both with the requisition-
  ing to which they are subjected and the commanders’ lack of skill . . The
  quinta that should have been carried out two years ago is therefore still
  pending . . . whilst there has been no attempt to implement the one that the
  Commandant-General ordered to be carried out in Cuenca some months
  ago.”
                                                The Reality of the Guerrillas   145


Just as telling are the complaints voiced by an anonymous Aragonese. Thus: