

  The arguments became so fierce that shots were exchanged . . . Being greater
  in number, Cuevilla’s band chased that of Mina all the way to Corella, in
  which pueblo a number of men were killed and various others stripped of
  everything they had and taken prisoner. With things in this state of anarchy,
  a shout went up that the French were coming, whereupon . . . 500 enemy
  troops appeared and put the whole lot to flight.”
   Nor were things much better when Porlier succeeded in briefly re-
occupying Oviedo in February 1810. Opinions of Porlier amongst those who
had dealings with him were less than flattering — he was variously described as
‘a mere boy who is . . . ambitious and easy to deceive’ and ‘at the best but chief
of a band of robbers who can by no means be said to be under his command’*
— and on this occasion he appears to have behaved with great foolishness.
Thus, apparently entertaining dreams that he might be nominated to command
all the Spanish forces in Asturias, he failed to march in pursuit of the F rench,
but rather prolonged his stay in Oviedo, getting up grateful deputations
from amongst the citizenry and picking quarrels with the other Spanish
                                                The Reality of the Guerrillas   139


commanders.” Hence in part the successful French counter-attack that we have
already detailed. Yet Porlier, it seems, did not learn his lesson. A month after
this affair we therefore find the Spanish staff officer Juan Moscoso writing:

  I advise you to proceed cautiously with regard to Porlier. He still has not
  either responded to the captain-general’s dispatch or given an account of his
  [most recent] operations... A very sharp order has just arrived from the
  Regency with regard to the ranks which he has conceded . . . This should
  give him a better idea of his duty [but]. . . it is still necessary for you to
  impose your authority. He is badly advised, and surrounded by people who
  maintain his followers in liberty and disorder.”

Nor, it seems, did Porlier relish having his authority challenged. On 8 April,
for example, an open quarrel between the guerrilla commander and Moscoso
almost led to armed conflict, whilst the very next day the regular commander,
Pedro de la Barcena, had to beg him to restrain himself and set aside his swollen
ego: ‘It is necessary . . . to keep calm . . . and work against the common enemy.
In these circumstances personal quarrels damage us; for the moment Spaniards
should have no enemies other than the French.” As for limiting the bounds of
his operations to a reasonable compass, this, too, was too much to expect: for
example, the autumn of 1809 saw forces that owed him their allegiance appear
in southern Logrofio demanding food and clothing from the insurgent junta
that had been established in Soto en Cameros before going on to take part in
the attack on Tudela that we have just detailed.”
   As was inevitable when there were such figures as Porlier in the field, there
were endless disputes and jealousies between the different chieftains. ‘We found
them’, wrote Captain Christian, ‘irritable, very jealous of each other, and it
required some management to prevail upon one chief to afford us any assis-
tance in the execution of... orders that did not relate immediately to
himself.2? One such area of friction was that which existed between the
manchego leader Martinez de San Martin and El Empecinado. Thus, according
to the government agent Rafael Gutiérrez, the former sought to engineer the
                                                                               had
latter’s defeat in an action at Checa by failing to appear with his men as he
promised, and then deliberately snubbed El Empecinad       o when   he brought  his
                                                                              As  a
troops to Cuenca to join forces with Martinez’s much smaller band.
bystander wrote to Gutiérrez:
                                                                                ,
   I have always taken San Martin for a boor and a boastful good-for-nothing
                                                                      eous.  The
   but I never thought that he could be so underhanded and discourt
                                                                         cobblers
   fault belongs to those who neither choose horses for courses nor tell
                                         we  try, we shall never be able  achieve
   to stick to their lasts: however hard
   anything with such people.”
140    Fighting Napoleon