


and many of the depots that Espoz y Mina had established in the shelter of the
Pyrenees laid waste, but the bulk of the Spanish forces got away into Aragon
and even managed to inflict considerable damage in the process, two French
battalions being annihilated at Lerin. Still worse, whereas the garrison of
Aragon had hitherto been holding its own, Espoz y Mina’s arrival coincided
with the dispatch of some of the troops stationed there to Valencia in response
to fears of a fresh Allied offensive in that direction. The result was still more
mayhem, with attacks both on the town of Huesca and on various convoys
travelling to and from Zaragoza.”
    All this constituted a vital contribution to Allied victory in the Peninsular
War for, by pulling so many troops away from Leon, Espoz y Mina opened the
way for Wellington to advance once more into the hinterland of Spain. What
is more, this time there was no mistake: whereas in 1812 Wellington had wasted
both time and troops on Madrid, in 1813 he kept his army together and con-
centrated on the decisive victory on the battlefield duly obtained at Vitoria on
21 June. Yet it cannot be stressed too strongly that the situation in Arag6n and
Navarre was wholly exceptional and, furthermore, that it stemmed not from
any special virtue of the guerrillas but rather from Napoleon’s decision to
invade Russia, and thereby to destabilise the position of his forces in northern
Spain. Indeed, if anything, the fighting that took place in Navarre in the first
five months of 1813 illustrated the vulnerability of the guerrillas, for the French
had only to concentrate superior forces against them for the realm of the ‘King
of Navarre’ (as Espoz y Mina was now sometimes known) to be overrun. Many
more men were needed to consolidate the French triumph than even the com-
bined Armies of the North and Portugal could deploy, but the fact is that in
its very heartlands the strongest and most enthusiastically backed partida in the
whole of Spain had been vanquished. As Wellington wrote, indeed:

  Independent small bodies operating upon the enemy may be extremely
  useful when these operations are connected and carried on in concert with
  those of a large body of troops which . . . occupy the whole of the enemy’s
  attention . . . but when the enemy is relieved from the pressure of the larger
  body, the smaller body must discontinue its operations or be destroyed."
    For much of the time, in fact, the more militarised partidas seem to have been
little more of a threat than their wholly irregular counterparts. Let us here again
quote Heinrich von Brandt:

  One circumstance that greatly operated to the disadvantage of the guerrillas
  was that the cultivation of their talents did not keep pace with the increase
  of their strength. During the whole war, and under all circumstances, their
  tactics remained unaltered . . An ambush, placed with great caution for the
                                                  The Reality of the Guerrillas   137