

of the two Castiles and Aragon, traversed as this was by the regular troops of
Pedro Villacampa, the partidas of Duran and El Empecinado and a variety of
smaller bands under such men as Martinez de San Martin. To quote
Gutiérrez, for example, ‘Unless something is done, things are going to go very
ill. The division of Villacampa and the forces of San Martin and El
Empecinado together make up almost 9,000 men, and yet. . . the rivalry that
exists between them has meant that they have done no more than devastate the
countryside and then go their own way.”"' Nor was this the only problem. Thus:

  Although each commander has no more than 500 men, they do not like
  joining forces with anyone of higher rank, and yet they cannot achieve any-
  thing by themselves for want of numbers. The result is that their men do
  nothing. Bored with inaction, they loaf about, fall prey to vice and run away.”

These issues proved all but intractable. Though a variety of measures were
taken to improve the situation, a full year later the same observer could write:

  I enclose a letter I have just received from General Bassecourt. It will inform
  Your Excellency of the lack of union, system and order that reigns among
  the various commanders . . . to be found in this region . . . Given that they
  have 10,000 men, many of them cavalry, it is very sad that the divisions of
  Bassecourt, Montijo, Villacampa, José Duran and Juan Martin have achieved
  so little. Indeed, far from fighting side by side, they deliberately avoid
  combat, all that they have done being to lay waste the countryside . . . whilst
  at the same time letting the enemy come and go as he will.”
   Why all this was so is clear enough. Let us quote, for example, the Duque
del Parque. As he wrote to the Minister of War in the course of his command
of the Spanish forces in Old Castile in the summer and autumn of 1809:

  From the enclosed papers Your Excellency will learn of the dissension that
  reigns amongst the guerrillas of this province, not to mention the lack of
  respect which they have for their superiors . . . I have let them have all the
  rewards ordered by His Majesty in accordance with the services that they
  have rendered, and have even gone a little further than the arrangements that
  have been laid down for them, but they have not listened to reason and must
  be prevented from carrying out any more of the robberies and other outrages
  that they have perpetrated in our pueblos. Every member of the rank and file
  wants a band of his own, and if the Junta Suprema Gubernativa del Reino
  . . does not punish those men who with this end in mind abandon the com-
  manders who have been appointed to head the bands, all these people will in
  the end turn into gangs of bandits with whom it will be necessary to come
  to blows before they can be brought to heel.
                                                  The Reality of the Guerrillas   143

For an even more explicit view, meanwhile, we can turn to the Prussian exile
Schepeler. As he wrote of the chaos that continued to bedevil Aragon:
  If Duran, Espoz y Mina and El Empecinado . . . had possessed the highest
  patriotic virtue — the ability to sacrifice their own ambition to the interests
  of the Fatherland — Arag6én would have been delivered by their united forces
  ... But none of the three wanted to obey an outsider, let alone one of his
  rivals.”
    For a good example of the sort of thing to which this ambition and self-love
led, we have only to turn to the events that took place in La Mancha and south-
ern Aragon in the winter of 1811-12. Desperate to get the guerrillas to co-
operate with one another, as commander of the Spanish Second Army — the
force to which Villacampa, Duran and El Empecinado all in theory belonged —
Joaquin Blake had appointed Bassecourt to act as commandant-general of all
the forces in the region, and had in addition dispatched a small division under
the Conde de Montijo to bolster resistance to the French. In doing so, however,
he had not taken account of the pride of Villacampa, Duran and El Empeci-
nado, none of whom was disposed either to co-operate with the others or to
work with Montijo with the result, as Gutiérrez complained, that ‘the coun-
tryside is being devastated by a small enemy army that is able to make a mockery
of the substantial forces that are opposed to it, and could do a great deal if only
their commanders would set aside their ideas of de tanto soy yo’.*° Yet this they
would not do. Thus, Montijo tried to get Duran and El] Empecinado to co-
operate with him in an attack on Soria, but neither cabecilla showed up at the
appointed rendezvous, with the result that Montijo was defeated with the loss
of 300 casualties and forced to retreat into Aragon.” What makes this incident
 significant, however, is its context. In the autumn of 1811 the French had
 launched a great offensive against Valencia, and it had soon become clear to
 Blake — the commander responsible for its defence — that the only hope of
 saving the city was to use the partidas to stir up trouble in the French rear. Some
 damage was done, certainly, but not enough to check the French onset, and thus
 it was that on 8 January 1812 Valencia fell into the hands of the invaders in
 what was to prove one of the most costly Spanish disasters of the entire war.
    The guerrillas, though, were blind to the big picture. In the remote hills of
 Aragon, the main cabecillas continued to refuse to recognise the need to work
 together, with the result that the French continued to win the occasional victory
 even as late as the dark days of the winter of 1812—13. ‘Thus on 25 December
 1812 the Italians of General Phillippe Severoli caught Villacampa and certain
 elements of the division of Duran at La Almunia and inflicted heavy casualties
                                                                              far from
 upon them after they had failed to co-ordinate their operations. And,
                                                                                   do
 accepting the principle of outside control, so determined was El Empecina
144    Fighting Napoleon