

  Free from the control of any army, [the guerrillas]... range across the
  province in a disorderly fashion, seizing large numbers of mules, demand-
  ing such rations as they feel like and extorting pay at a rate of 10 reales per
  day for each cavalryman and 6 reales per day for each foot soldier. In addi-
  tion to all this, further payments have been extracted wherever they have not
  been given bales of cloth for the fabrication of uniforms.”

Also interesting in this respect is the report of the resguardo officer sent
to Navarre by the Junta Central in the summer of 1809 to foment popular
resistance:

  Who would believe that, in addition to the continual vexations that they
  experience at the hands of the French, these loyal... vassals of Your
  Majesty are experiencing others just as bad at the hands of .. . the so-called
  guerrilla bands that have been infesting this unfortunate kingdom, along with
  the neighbouring districts of Castile? The disorder which these men commit
  is such that it is impossible to portray it without feeling a sense of horror.
  The least they do is to demand exhorbitant rations . . . They all ride about
  on the horses that they have stolen from unfortunate peasants who need them
  for their labours. As I myself have experienced, no respectable citizen can
  ride from one pueblo to another without being robbed . . . Almost all the
  leaders... are men long known for their misconduct . . . and the conse-
  quence is that they wage war on the richest pockets.”
148       Fighting Napoleon


   As in the Levant and Navarre, so in other parts of Spain. From the frontiers
of Galicia and Old Castile, then, comes the case of Manuel Maria Vazquez de
la Torre. Known as Salamanquino, his speciality appears to have been round-
ing up deserters and then charging exhorbitant ransoms for their release. As an
inhabitant of Orense wrote to General Mahy, ‘His sole pretension is . . . to suck
the lifeblood from every town and village . .. Every pueblo that knows what he
is like is very angry, and such is the inhabitants’ desire for revenge that they are
capable of almost anything.” From Asturias we learn of ‘Francisco Collar, alias
Burracan, .. . [who] has been taking pains to make his conduct more repre-
hensible by the day, robbing, sacking, bullying and even killing in all the pueblos
that he enters’. From Catalonia we hear of one Felii Rovira y Galceran, a
peasant who used the small band of irregulars that he raised to fight the French
in 1808 to establish a protection racket whereby he levied tolls on convoys
heading for French-occupied Barcelona.” And, last but not least, there was the
rather more engaging case of Francisco Salazar, it supposedly being the custom
of this worthy to billet himself in the house of the prettiest woman in town
and then send out her husband to spy on the French.”
     Lest it be thought that these remarks applied only to the less militarised guer-
 rilla bands, it is quite clear that the problem was much more generalised. In
 fairness to the leaders of the guerrilla bands, many of them did attempt to
 maintain some sort of order amongst their followers and, in addition, to sup-
 press cuadrillas that could be considered to be mere gangs of bandits. Thus,
 there are cases of guerrilla commanders handing over their own men to the
josefino authorities for trial and execution, whilst Espoz y Mina, in particular,
 makes much of the ruthless manner in which he dealt with such bands as those
 of Echevarria, the latter being executed by firing squad at Estella on 9 July 1810
 after his men had been taken by surprise and disarmed.” But it is impossible
 not to suspect that such actions were the fruit of ambition rather than
 altruism. The better commanders realised that looting was both bad for dis-
 cipline and likely to land them in trouble with the authorities, whilst every
 cabecilla had an obvious interest in establishing a monopoly of force in his own
 locality. There were, however, repeated complaints with regard to the conduct
 of bands that are normally regarded with some respect, a particularly good
 example here being that of the northern leader Francisco Longa. In the words
 of one petitioner: