


  purpose of surprising the advanced guard, opened the day. Generally, after
  the first attack, these enfants perdus . . . fell back upon the main body, which
  as soon as it was perceived by our troops, raised a dreadful cry and usually
  commenced a sharp fire without paying any regard to the distance which
  might separate it from us... When the ground favoured the operation, the
  French always made an impetuous charge upon their opponents, who gen-
  erally retreated after a feeble resistance.'*
This is a little exaggerated, perhaps, but even so it is clear that even the larger
partidas were not to be relied upon in combat. The troops of which they were
composed often had only a sketchy grasp of battlefield tactics and lacked the
solidity of veteran soldiers, whilst their commanders were little more than ama-
teurs: ‘El Empecinado’, wrote one observer, ‘is possessed of more valour and
energy than I can possibly express... but he needs instruction in how to
manage his forces.”!> Particularly if caught in the open or attacked by superior
numbers, they could therefore be broken without too much difficulty.
    In this respect mention has already been made of the serious reverse inflicted
on Espoz y Mina’s forces at Belorado in November 1810, when the Division
de Navarra was caught in the open on its way back to the montana from an
unsuccessful foray against the French stronghold of Tarrazona and suffered
 the loss of one third of its men. But this was not the only disaster suffered by
 Espoz y Mina, for in July 1811 most of his men were again caught by the French
 in the open, this time in the plains of southern Navarre at Lerin. Outnum-
 bered, exhausted after a long night march, short of ammunition on account of
 a torrential summer storm that had soaked their cartridges and, be it said, aban-
 doned by their commander, who clearly saw which way the wind was blowing
 and made off with a few companions before the battle began, the guerrillas had
 no chance and lost 600 casualties.'° Nor was Espoz y Mina the only comman-
 der who experienced disaster: in an action at Torralva in January 1811 Duran
 and Merino were heavily defeated after the latter’s cavalry broke in panic.'’ To
quote Juan Diaz Porlier, then:

   We will continue... to find it hard to obtain any result from the troops
   unless they are organised as they ought to be... I say this on account of
   what happened in the last action: I would have lost half my men, had not the
   cavalry saved everyone. It was impossible to contain the infantry’s disorder
   _.   or remedy their confusion and fear."*

   None of this is especially surprising, for the partidas were rarely made up of
good troops. General Walker, for example, described the troops of Renovales
as ‘a wretched rabble . . . attended by numerous corps of officers equally igno-
rant of military duty as the men, who were all raw recruits not exercised above
138    Fighting Napoleon


eight days and the greater part not even knowing how to load and fire’.!? Nor
was it just a matter of training. To quote Walker’s aide-de-camp, ‘What these
chiefs mostly complain of is the great want of clothing and shoes, their troops
being in general very ragged and barefooted.’ Having been defeated, more-
over, the guerrillas were as prone to scattering over the countryside as the con-
scripts of the regular army: many of the troops who survived the débdcle at
Lerin appear to have deserted, whilst, defeated at Villaconejos in August 1811,
El Empecinado had to send out officers in all directions with proclamations
pardoning all those who had run away and calling them back to their ranks.”
   Things were not much better when matters went well for the guerrillas.
When El Empecinado occupied Cuenca in May 1812, for example, the
garrison and their afrancesado supporters were allowed to take refuge in
the castle virtually unmolested, whilst their assailants ‘spent more time engag-
ing in sack and robbery than they did in the use of their weapons’.” Given that
there was little that the guerrillas could have achieved against the defenders
in this instance, in military terms the results of this day’s work were not too
bad, but this was not the case when Tudela was attacked by a combined
force consisting of the partidas of Lopez Campillo, Alonso and Mina on 29
November 1809. Caught by surprise, the French garrison was quickly driven
into the castle, whereupon the guerrillas fell to sacking the town. With
their lust for plunder satisfied, by midday the attackers were on the road for
Corella, but on the way the three bands fell to squabbling over the spoils. The
unedifying scenes that ensued were chronicled by an official report supplied
to the Junta Central: