

  For none of the comisionados . . . have I either respect or love. I have written
  to the government about some of them to see if I can get rid of them, whilst
  I have placed others under arrest . . . The vices of such men are all too clear
  ... The evil is widespread, having its origins, as it does, in. . . the utter cor-
  ruption of our customs produced by twenty years of the vices of Godoy. At
  the present time one needs a powerful telescope to find a single honest man.”

But the fault did not lie with just a few corrupt officials. On the contrary, the
partidas were extremely burdensome to the populace. Little more than gangs
of bandits, many oppressed the populace quite unmercifully, supporting them-
selves by pillage and rapine. Complaints on this score were numerous, there
being reports of such cases from all over occupied Spain. Let us take, for
example, the Levant. Here the autumn of 1812 saw groups of guerrillas led
by Manuel Aparici and a priest named Manchon troubling the districts
of Villajoyosa and Crevillente.” In May, meanwhile, General Copons had
complained, ‘Since my arrival in this province, I have received an infinity of
complaints about the guerrilla bands. Their excesses are incessant: they only
occupy themselves in robbery and never attack the enemy.” Particularly blatant
in this respect were the events that had taken place in the pueblo of San Juan
in the present-day province of Alicante, where a partida headed by one Pascual
Gil had frightened the populace into taking flight with tales that a large French
column was heading straight for the village, and then settled down to pillaging
its deserted homes.”
   Just as telling is the situation of Navarre in the two years that passed before
it was taken over by Espoz y Mina. Determined to emphasise his own impor-
tance, e/ tio Francisco did all that he could to stress the chaos that reigned in
the province before he established a monopoly of force within its frontiers.
Thus:

  It is simply not possible to paint an adequate picture of the horrifying want
  of morals that had come to characterise . . . the guerrilla bands. The only
                                               The Reality of the Guerrillas   147


  exception was that of my nephew [sic] Mina, which was a little more regular
  ...In the other bands all the outsiders in the province had found protec-
  tion. There were men who had fled to Navarre to avoid some problem
  at home, to escape from justice, or to... give themselves over to a life of
  libertinage in a place where they were not known. There were French, Swiss,
  Polish, Italian and German deserters... And on top of them were to be
  found many Navarrese who had either escaped from prison... or were
  known in their home villages for their evil way of life.”

As to what these guerrillas achieved, the picture that Espoz y Mina draws is
not an encouraging one. Describing them as ‘gangs of thieves and malcontents
who under the guise of patriots sacrificed everything they came across to their
vices’, he claimed that they were typified by the band commanded by a butcher
from Corella named Pascual Echeverria: later suppressed by Espoz y Mina, this
force ‘did nothing but wander about the province, committing a thousand
disorders’.
   All this was very convenient for Espoz y Mina, of course, but for once the
Navarrese leader was not exaggerating. Let us take, for example, the view of
Navarre’s representatives in the Patriot government: