


not put a stop to the violence, and finding out that some of his men had deserted
to join the forces which it was establishing, Jeronimo Merino — an ally of Bar-
riolucio who seems to have provided him with most of his armed strength —
threatened to come and get them by force.*”
   But nothing that these incessant skirmishes produced was the equal of the
extraordinary events that took place at Medina de Pomar on 6 July 1810. In
brief, what appears to have occurred is that Francisco Longa decided to rid
himself of a rival band headed by the erstwhile smuggler Ignacio Alonso. For
this there was a perfect pretext — like many other cabecillas, Alonso could be
accused of banditry — but the real reason was revenge: in December 1809 Longa
and his men had been seized by Alonso and forced to join his forces, the
Vizcayan leader being beaten and publicly humiliated when he tried to escape.
Eventually turned loose with a few followers who had remained loyal to him,
Longa was then almost immediately attacked by French forces he believed to
have been tipped off by Alonso as to his movements, losing seventeen men
killed, wounded or taken prisoner and only narrowly escaping death or capture
himself.** By now chief of far more men than he had had before, Longa was
therefore delighted to encounter Alonso with fewer than roo followers at
Medina de Pomar on 2 July 1810. Having invited Alonso and his officers to a
meal, he duly surrounded them with armed men and placed them under arrest.
Four days later, however, there turned up another partida under Juan Lopez
Campillo, who had been sent by Porlier to rescue Alonso on the grounds that
he had been acting at his orders. Unaware of what this new force wanted, Longa
agreed to a meeting with Campillo, at which the latter maintained that all he
asked was the surrender of the booty that Alonso and his men had amassed.
To this Longa agreed, and even had Alonso brought out to certify that the
 goods being handed over were correct. Whilst this had been happening
 Campillo’s men had managed to release Alonso’s men without anyone raising
 the alarm, but at length a fight broke out between Campillo’s adjutant and a
 sentry, whereupon Campillo drew a pistol and bundled Alonso out of the house.
 The two men left the town on horseback, but Longa’s men sallied out in
 pursuit, and a fierce fight followed in which a number of men were killed and
 wounded and most of Alonso’s men recaptured.” But this was not an end to
 the matter: hearing of what had gone on, a furious Porlier sent a further detach-
                                                                                  to
 ment of troops under the commander of his cavalry, Juan José de la Riba,
                                                                 the two  sides  did
 deal with Longa, and it seems clear that the only reason that
 not engage in a full-scale conflict was that the commander of the Spanish forces
                                                                                him
 in northern Spain, General Mahy, sent an angry letter to La Riba ordering
to desist from his activities at once.”
                                                                              y
   The net result of such quarrels, of course, was that operational efficienc
                                                                      borders
was greatly reduced, particularly in the region that encompassed the
142    Fighting Napoleon