

  Everyone wants to command and none to obey. Even the soldiery and the
  common people have got wind of this. Nor is this surprising. All that they
  have to go on are the events that surround them, and these have consisted of
  little else but devastation, disobedience and a complete want of respect for
  property and authority alike . . Hence the disorder, desertion and disaffec-
  tion that we have witnessed.”

   Mired in the petty disputes and rivalries of their home provinces as they
were, the guerrillas could also not be counted on when it came to elaborating
wider strategic combinations. Indeed, attempts to call upon the services of
guerrilla formations outside the districts in which they were accustomed to
operate generally ended in failure. In part this was because of the attitude of
the local political authorities, in that they frequently regarded troops raised in
their localities as having been raised for the purposes of home defence only, and
in consequence struggled hard to ensure that they remained in the vicinity of
their strongholds. But the real cause lay with the guerrillas themselves. More
often than not the political problem could be overcome: E] Empecinado, for
example, had no difficulty in shrugging off the tutelage of the Junta of
Guadalajara. What could not be thrown off so easily was the general opposi-
tion to marching off to some other part of Spain, for this entailed all sorts of
dangers. Important sources of income might be lost; unfamiliar terrain meant
greater vulnerability; and there was nothing to say that the end-result would
not be assimilation into the regular army. Attempts to involve guerrilla forces
in wider strategic combinations could therefore lead to great tension. In April
 1811, for example, a short-lived French march on Valencia caused panic in the
city and led to orders being sent to E] Empecinado to march his forces down
to the coast. This message drove the Castilian commander to fury — ‘What the
devil have the Valencians been doing all this time?’, he is supposed to have
shouted, ‘Where are all the thousands and thousands of men who have been
doing nothing but laze about and eat their rations?’ — and he responded in the
most niggardly fashion possible, taking with him a mere 300 men.” In the event
he was not needed, and the order was cancelled, but on 11 July a second
summons was received. There being no reprieve on this occasion, the result
was disaster. As a government agent reported:

   The division of El Empecinado has almost entirely disintegrated. An order
   from General O’Donnell for it to march on Valencia threw it into confusion.
   It split up into rival parties in the vicinity of the pueblo of Torralba, shots
   were exchanged and it finally dispersed, all that its commander has left being
   some 200 men who are now with him in Cuenca . . . This is a very bad affair,
146    Fighting Napoleon


  for the division was over 4,500 strong, whilst it was much feared by the
  French.”
   But this was not the end of the story. In the midst of the chaos a large force
of French troops turned up, and took at least 600 men prisoner at the village
of Alcocer, such few troops as remained with the colours being forced to take
refuge at Sigiienza.”*
    Implicit in these troubles is another problem that was inherent in the guer-
rillas. El Empecinado himself blamed the general lack of enthusiasm on the
corruption typical of many Patriot officials. As he wrote of the commissaries
whom he employed to feed his troops: