


   Elsewhere, meanwhile, matters were even worse. In Soria and Logrofio, for
example, 1809 was marked by a furious dispute between forces loyal to the
Marqués de Barrioiucio and José Antonio Colmenares, of whom the former
had been appointed to take charge of the guerrillas of Old Castile and the latter
of those of southern Aragon. The details of this dispute are as complicated as
they are tedious, but, in brief, carelessness in the drafting of their instructions
had left it very unclear as to where the authority of one leader ended and that
of the other began. Matters were not helped by the fact that the local notables
to whom Barriolucio and Colmenares turned to consolidate their position were
greedy for influence and prestige. As a petition sent to the Junta Central from
Logrofio put it, “The various juntas that control the province all regarding
themselves as being equal, they act as they see fit without agreeing any plan or
system and in consequence frequently fall foul of one another.”*' The result was
chaos. Thus, with both commanders blatant empire-builders bent on estab-
lishing themselves as all-powerful provincial satraps —- Colmenares, for example,
appears to have exploited the confusion prevalent in the Junta Central’s capital
of Seville to obtain powers far greater than it had ever been intended he should
be given” — bands of guerrillas loyal to Barriolucio and Colmenares regularly
clashed with one another, arrested local officials loyal to their opponents,
poached the loyalty of rival cabecillas or sequestered men and resources claimed
by the other side.” Particularly serious were the scenes witnessed in the city of
Logrofo itself, whose temporary evacuation by the French in November 1809
was followed by violent bickering as the two guerrilla armies jockeyed for posi-
tion and sought to monopolise the resources of the inhabitants.**
   Both sides, meanwhile, traded insults and accusations thick and fast.
Colmenares’ men, we learn, had spent so much time enjoying the fleshpots of
the provincial capital that they had earned the nickname of the ‘Regimiento
Fijo de Logrofio’ (Fixed Regiment of Logrofio), whilst those of Barriolucio
‘do not think of anything but. . . seizing resources that ought to belong to
the whole of the nation . . . requisitioning whatever quantity of rations takes
their fancy, and hanging around places far from the enemy in great crowds,
oppressing the inhabitants and in many cases committing repeated disorders’.>
To make matters still more complicated, meanwhile, on the one hand some of
Colmenares’ men who had penetrated the southernmost parts of Navarre found
themselves challenged by Mina, whilst on the other Barriolucio arrested a
group of riders sent out by Francisco Longa to seize the proceeds of the salt
monopoly in the district of Miranda de Ebro.” Tired of the blizzard of paper
that all this generated, the Junta Central eventually reprimanded both Bar-
riolucio and Colmenares and ordered that the affairs of Soria and Logrofio
should be handled by a new junta made up of one representative of each of
various local bodies set up by the two warring commissioners. Yet even this did
                                                 The Reality of the Guerrillas   141