

   There are points where it is of infinite consequence . . . that there should be
   armies, for, useful and important as the guerrillas are, that is not enough, let
   them be ever so spread out over the face of the country. They can never stop
   the march of a considerable body of the enemy.”

   This, alas, was all too true. Guerrillas or no guerrillas, between 1810 and
1812, with Wellington pinned down in Portugal, the French continued to
expand their territories. In January 1810 the whole of Andalucia was occupied,
and thereafter, one by one, Lérida, Oviedo, Astorga, Ciudad Rodrigo, Tortosa,
Badajoz, Tarragona and Valencia all fell into the hands of the enemy. Spanish
casualties were very heavy, and, in the end, the Patriot armies were left fit for
nothing but glorified guerrilla warfare. And, so far as the guerrillas were con-
cerned, their best efforts had proved unavailing to stop the rot. As a pamphlet
that was published in Cadiz in 1810 remarked:

   As a method of waging war, popular insurrection is almost always... far
   more costly than the use of regular forces. When protected by a regular army,
   at the right moment the former can reinforce the latter, but otherwise the
   only result is momentary success avenged later with great sacrifice .. . Is it
154    Fighting Napoleon

  still doubted that the kingdom is lost if we do not raise large armies? Let us
  suppose that Spain becomes the tomb of 20,000 soldiers every year...
  Napoleon has to subjugate Spain or lose his reputation . . . and, now that
  [Austria] is quiet . . . it is not difficult for him to send 100,000 .. . It is held
  that our arms cannot match those of the enemy when both sides are fight-
  ing in large forces. From here stems the foolish idea that, instead of increas-
  ing our armies, we should rely solely on the use of partidas and the defence
  of towns [by their inhabitants] when the war that we are waging on the con-
  trary demands large armies that are capable of imposing themselves on the
  enemy . . . It is true that Madrid was defended heroically by its own people,
  that La Mancha has devoured many Frenchmen without the aid of many
  troops, and that the enemy was expelled from Galicia by the peasantry alone.
  Nevertheless, Madrid is occupied by the enemy and La Mancha in reality
  controlled by them, whilst Galicia would also fall into their hands if there
  was not a large army to protect it. Little by little the French extend their
  dominions whilst we celebrate a riot in some village or an attack by some
  guerrilla band.”

   What made all this doubly serious, of course, was that the guerrillas were
one of the chief factors in the erosion of the regular armies that were, as
Graham noted, the only hope of holding back the French. And, if the guer-
rillas could not stop the march of the French armies, they could do even less
to push them back. Unable, as we have seen, to make headway against the
fortresses and strong points that studded the French dominions, they were,
until the last year of the war, for the most part incapable of beating even the
smallest French forces in the open field. To quote Serrano Valdenebro: