




                                                                      A base of the ‘gendarmerie
7. Bacler d’Albe, Block-house on the road between Hernani and Tolosa.
                                                                          had to put into keeping open
d’Espagne’, this imposing structure typifies the effort which the French
their communications in Spain.
(a a    8. Felix Phillippoteaux, General
  i    Franceschi-Delonne captured by
        ‘El Capuchino’s’ gang. The work
       of a well-known French
       illustrator born in 1815, this
       engraving depicts the capture of
       a French cavalry general by the
       band of El Capuchino in 1810
       and is typical of traditional
       views of the guerrillas. Note the
       romanticised appearance of the
       Spaniards, who look as if they
       have stepped straight from the
       stage of Carmen.


        g. Francisco de Goya, Nobody
        knows the reason. Resident in
        Madrid during the Peninsular
        War, Goya probably witnessed
        such a sight many times in the
        period 1808 to 1813. Kept in the
       building that is today occupied
       by the Spanish Foreign
       Ministry, malefactors such as
       these were led the short
       distance to the Plaza de la
       Puerta Cerrada and garrotted
       at the spot now marked by the
       Cruz de los Caidos. Death was
       instantaneous but the corpses
       were left exposed for the rest
       of the day with an account of
       their crimes and the weapons
       they had used hung round
       their necks. As the title
       implies, however, it was —
       and remains — very difficult
       to judge whether the victims
       were heroes or villains.




       10. Francisco de Goya, The
       same. The rather obscure title
       of this engraving refers to the
       caption given to the preceding
       scene in The Disasters of War
       which is With reason or
       without? In short, who were
       the combatants, and why were
       they fighting?
                                                The Reality of the Guerrillas   149


  law courts. The least of their members swill down between four and six
  cuartillos of wine a day, whilst they also get one and a half pounds of bread
  and two pounds of meat.”
Nor, it seems, did Longa mend his ways. Something over two years later the
Regency that now ruled Spain received an anonymous representation from a
group of ‘loyal Castilians’ making further accusations of pillage and arbitrary
conduct. Thus:

  From the beginning of 1810, many men deserted from the various partidas
  that had been formed in Castile after the battle of Espinosa de los Monteros
  so as to enlist in the one led by Longa in the belief that it offered them more
  freedom and less exertion. Never more than 500 strong, this band has ever
  since monopolised the revenues of the saltworks of Poza and Rosio. . . and
  the tercios reales payable on the estates of both the Archbishop [of Burgos]
  and the religious houses . . . All this ought to have been enough to . . . equip
  an army of 10,000 men, and yet the partida has still found it necessary to live
  off the inhabitants, whom it has treated with the greatest despotism . . . that
  it is possible to imagine. There has been no order: libertinage has reigned
  unchecked; every soldier has behaved as if he was free to demand whatever
  he liked; and everyone who has tried to protest . . . or failed to accede to the
  guerrillas’ demands has been sorely punished.”
   Not all commanders tolerated such excesses, of course, but it was not just
the commanders who have to be taken into consideration. As Espoz y Mina
supposedly remarked to a priest who came to plead for the life of a man who
had been condemned to death for some act of violence: