

  A band of patriots situated in mountains that are almost inaccessible will
  hold off the bravest soldiers. However, should the latter fall back to more
  accessible terrain, the picture changes... The peasant wages a petty war
  . . How can this man fight in a terrain where infantry can press upon him
  or cavalry ride him down?”

    How indeed? Yet this is precisely what the view that the heroic Spanish
people liberated themselves from the French yoke by means of the adoption of
guerrilla warfare requires us to believe. Few observers would go so far, of
course, but what about the view that the Allied victory in the Peninsular War
was the product of the combination of regular and irregular warfare, or, to put
it another way, that Wellington made the guerrillas an integral part of his plans
for the defeat of the French? Here, too, there is every reason to doubt the tra-
ditional version of events. When he advanced into Spain in both 1812 and 1813
Wellington made use of diversionary tactics to prevent the French from con-
                                                 The Reality of the Guerrillas   = 155


centrating against him in overwhelming force, and it is often implied that the
key factor in his plans was the guerrillas. This is, however, at best a half-truth.
In 1812, in particular, considerable prominence was given to Gabriel de
Mendizabal’s Seventh Army, which consisted of such more or less militarised
partidas as those of Porlier and Longa, but even in that year chief reliance was
placed on regular formations of one sort or another. In 1813, meanwhile, even
less trust was reposed in the guerrillas. Wellington, in fact, had never been a
fan of the partidas. As he wrote to Lord Castlereagh as early as 5 September
 1808, it was his view that, although ‘very formidable and efficient in their own
country’, the Spanish insurgents could neither operate nor be ‘reckoned upon’
outside their home provinces, and were in want of ‘arms, ammunition, money,
clothing and military equipment of every description’; above all, however, ‘no
officer could calculate a great operation upon such a body’, let alone ‘estimate
the effect of their efforts’.”” As time passed, so he admittedly became more
aware of the partidas as a factor in the war, but his planning for his first inva-
sion of Spain — the Talavera campaign of July 1809 — took no account of the
contribution that they might make to the fighting. On the contrary, despite the
 favourable reports that had begun to arrive of the guerrillas, his thinking was
 centred on conventional operations. As he wrote to the British ambassador, ‘I
 am convinced that the French will be in serious danger in Spain only when a
great force shall be assembled which will oblige them to collect their troops.”"”
The events of the campaign did nothing to change this belief for, guerrillas or
no guerrillas, the French were able to concentrate against Wellington’s troops
in overwhelming numbers. In the long and gloomy exchange of views that fol-
lowed the retreat of the British army, the partidas were therefore ignored:
warning against any plans for further offensives in Spain, on I September 1809
Wellington informed his brother, Lord Wellesley, “he enemy has it in his
power to collect his whole force in Castile and Extremadura at any point north
of the Tagus and can dispose of the parts of it . . . as he thinks proper."
   Clearly, then, there is no sense here that the guerrillas could distract the
French from turning upon Wellington’s army, and in fact the British com-
mander seems to have been bent on decrying the concept of people’s war
altogether. As he wrote to Lord Castlereagh, ‘People are very apt to believe that
enthusiasm carried the French through their revolution and was the parent of
those exertions which have nearly conquered the world; but if the subject is
nicely examined, it will be found that enthusiasm was the name only . . . [and]
that force was the instrument which brought those great resources which first
stopped the allies.””’ The conclusion was obvious: ‘I only beg that those who
                                                                           of
have to contend with the French will not be diverted from the business
raising, arming, equipping and training regular bodies by any notion that the
people, when armed and arrayed, will be . . . of much use to them.”
156    Fighting Napoleon