


turn and fight.** Much the same, meanwhile, appears to be true of the manchego
leader José Gonzalez de la Torre, whose copious reports submitted to the gov-
ernment contained hardly a mention of fighting the French. As for Camilo
Gomez, he spent most of the summer of 1809 enjoying the fleshpots of Seville
and eventually had to be ordered to leave the city immediately.*° This was an
extreme case, perhaps, but the fact is that raids and ambushes did not figure at
all highly on the agenda of many bands. What mattered was the comparatively
peaceful business of requisitioning: after suddenly making an appearance in
some unoccupied pueblo, a partida would strip it of such food, manpower,
money and horses as it could extract from the inhabitants and then move on in
search of fresh victims.*” Also common, meanwhile, were acts that constituted
little more than extortion and highway robbery: in August 1809 fifteen inhab-
itants of Mansilla de las Mulas were sequestered and held to ransom by Porlier,
whilst in March 1810 a deputation that had been sent by the ayuntamiento of
Alcaudete to congratulate Joseph Bonaparte on his conquest of Andalucia was
held up by a group of guerrillas near Alcala la Real and stripped of its horses.
   We have, then, a picture that is profoundly negative. This impression, mean-
while, is confirmed by the course of the war. For the Allies the key to victory
in the Peninsular War was the survival of the Patriot cause in Spain: were Spain
ever to have been conquered, it would have been hard for Wellington to hold
out in Portugal, let alone carry the war across the frontier and win a decisive
battle in the style of the one that actually took place at Vitoria on 21 June 1813.
But, if the Spanish cause was to survive, it was essential that the Patriot gov-
ernment should hold on to a substantial area of territory, for only then could
it hope to secure the men and money that it needed to keep the war alive. This
was especially true after 1810, moreover, for in that year the outbreak of revo-
lution in Spanish America slashed Spain’s colonial revenues to the bone, whilst
at the same time presenting the Patriot government with a ‘second front’ that
it could ill afford to neglect. It will here be claimed, of course, that the guer-
rillas were sufficient in themselves to keep the war going in Spain or, to put it
another way, that every French advance in Spain was irrelevant. Spanish armies
might topple like ninepins, and Spanish fortresses be snapped up by the dozen,
but the Spanish people would keep fighting and the ‘Spanish mousetrap’
remain as intractable as ever. This, however, is little more than nonsense. The
concept of a Spanish ‘people’s war’ is impossible to sustain, and, besides, the
guerrillas could not have survived without a network of strategic bases. From
these bases, too, there could operate forces of regular troops of the sort com-
manded by Ballesteros and Copons that could disrupt operations against the
guerrillas by taking the offensive themselves (one returns here to Wellington’s
views on the need to support the operations of guerrilla bands with formations
of regular troops).
152    Fighting Napoleon