

for the Anglo-Portuguese army. The guerrillas had played their part, certainly,
but Wellington was able to get far less use out of the Spanish regular army than
he had planned: out of a total of some 167,000 Spaniards under arms, only
some 23,000 were present at Vitoria. Still worse, meanwhile, when the Allied
armies actually invaded France in October 1813 most of the Spanish forces had
to be sent back across the frontier in disgrace.''* Intensely humiliating as all this
was for the Spanish officer corps, the result was, first, that the military coup
that restored Fernando VII to the throne as absolute ruler of Spain was a
resounding success and, second, that the army was given a considerable nudge
in the direction of the sustained propensity towards political intervention that
was ultimately to lead to the terrible civil war of 1936—39.'"°
   To hold up the guerrillas as the only villains in this situation would be mani-
festly absurd (the doctrinaire anti-militarism of the liberals who dominated the
cortes of Cadiz was at least as important, for example). But there is no doubt
that the partidas did accelerate the estrangement of the regular army from the
political system that was established in Patriot Spain. Setting aside the manner
in which idealised guerrilla folk heroes could be set up in contradistinction to
the generals of the regular army, and the guerrillas themselves eulogised as the
model for a new form of military organisation, at the heart of all the army’s
problems in the campaign of 1813 was the question of logistics. Spain was a
ruined land, and in consequence quite unable to equip its armies with the basic
necessities that it needed to take the field. Once again, the general devastation
could hardly be laid entirely at the door of the guerrillas, but the fact was that
they had demonstrably made things far worse than might otherwise have been
the case: in Old Castile, for example, they drained the countryside of what little
remained of its labour.''’ And, of course, there was the question of desertion
since it was widely recognised that the guerillas continued by their very exis-
tence to encourage men to flee the army,!"®
   Even when the French were driven out, meanwhile, the guerrillas made it
very difficult to realise the resources of the liberated territories. What made the
problem still worse, however, was the complete anarchy into which the partidas
had plunged large parts of the country. For a good example we have only to
look at Aragon. Following the fall of Zaragoza in February 1809 a provincial
junta had been established at Teruel, but this had been forced to lead an
extremely peripatetic existence, whilst its authority had in any case been chal-
lenged by rival bodies based at Sigiienza and Molina de Aragon. At the same
time, military authority in the province had been even more bitterly contested,
things having eventually reached the point at which no fewer than eight inde-
pendent commanders were squabbling over the region’s resources whilst at the
same time generally behaving as if the Aragonese were inhabitants of an enemy
province. This was a low point, true — authority in the province was eventually
                                                 The Reality of the Guerrillas   159