

  You do not know the sort of people that I have under my command: I find
  myself, indeed, in the sad situation of having to count my existence by
  moments, and when I am alone am beset by the image of a dagger striking
  for my heart.”
   Except when they were under the direct control of their officers, then, the
rank and file simply could not be trusted. Sent out in small parties to gather
supplies and recruits, they frequently ran amok and had to be hunted down by
regular troops, as was the case with some of the detachments sent out by
Renovales from his base at Potes in the winter of 1810-11.” In response to
attempts to discipline them, meanwhile, they were quite capable of attempting
to overthrow their cabecillas, or simply of running away: the Andalusian leader
Jiménez found himself flung into prison on charges of treason after arresting
his second-in-command on ‘charges of robbery, falsification . . . lack of subor-
dination and other excesses’, whilst many of Duran’s men deserted to ‘various
bands in which there was more freedom . . . better rations and less work’.”®
150    ~+=~Fighting Napoleon


   To counter this spate of accusations, apologists for the guerrillas can make
use of a number of arguments. There were, doubtless, many afrancesados and
members of the propertied classes who possessed good reason to claim that the
guerrillas were nothing more than bandits. As El Empecinado complained, for
example:

  The parish priests . . . paint the activities of the soldiers who are sent out to
  collect the tercios reales . . . in the worst colours. This is not the case with all
  of the clergy, but you know perfectly well that selfishness is deeply engrained
  amongst them. Amongst the magistrates and the wealthier inhabitants, too,
  there are many who are quick to spot the motes in the eyes of other people,
  and not the beams in their own. Self-preservation leads them to give the
  French all they need, but love of the fatherland gets nothing out of anybody.”
It might, too, be objected that, operating deep inside the French zone of occu-
pation, the guerrillas had no option but to live off the country. As Porlier put
it in a letter written to General Mahy in March 1810, ‘My division has very
little of the resources that it needs to survive. It has not received any money
for some time.’”* Furthermore, if they behaved badly, they were no worse than
the soldiers of the regular army: in the dark days of December 1808 and January
1809 the fleeing Spanish armies pillaged many towns and villages, whilst in
January 1811 the commander of the Spanish forces in Asturias accused his sub-
ordinate, Francisco Gonzalez de Castejon, of allowing his men to engage in a
regime of pillage and rapine.”
   But there is a problem here. Plenty of instances may be cited of even the
most undisciplined guerrilla bands attacking the French. Bandit though he
was, then, on 2 May 1809 Saornil led his men in an attack on a detachment of
fifty French soldiers at Fuentesatico that ended in the death of sixteen of them
and the capture of thirty-four others.*’ Equally, though regarded by the mili-
tary as a bandit, on 1 June 1811 the Andalucian’ cabecilla Saldivar rode into
Sanlucar de Barrameda and killed eleven Frenchmen along with a wealthy
afrancesado who had been decorated by King Joseph for the help he had given
the invaders."' And finally, from Ciudad Real we learn that on 15 February 1809
a party of French troops was attacked and put to flight by a gang of smugglers
at Madridejos.”
   Yet such attacks were actually rather fewer than might at first have been
thought. It is, for example, significant that an ordinance issued in Asturias in
May 1810 specifically laid down that each partida should attack the enemy at
least once every four days.** There is, too, the fact that Porlier and his men
clashed with the invaders on no more than half a dozen occasions between
March 1809 and January 1810, a number of even these skirmishes only coming
to pass because the guerrillas were caught by French columns and forced to
                                                The Reality of the Guerrillas   151