


   As operations of the guerrillas gathered pace in the course of the winter of
1809-10, Wellington was forced to modify his views. Thus: ‘The accounts
which I receive from all quarters mention the great activity of the parties of
guerrillas throughout the country. Some of these accounts are certainly exag-
gerated, but I have no doubt that there is some foundation for them.’ Equally:
‘I have no doubt that the spirit of resistance . . . is general throughout all the
provinces [of Spain], that it breaks out into open acts of violence whenever
opportunity offers, that instances of its existence have been frequent lately, and
that the confidence of the Spaniards . . . in the final success of these exertions
has lately become greater than it had been.’!™
   When the opportunity arose for a fresh advance into Spain in 1812,
Wellington was therefore well aware of the partidas as a factor in operations
in the Peninsula. Indeed, at first sight he was positively enthusiastic. As he
wrote to Lord Liverpool:

  These parties continue to increase, and their operations become every day
  more important. Saornil has lately interrupted the communications of the
  army in Portugal in upper Castile near Medina del Campo. He took about
  100 prisoners in that town, and the party of Cuesta attacked a body of French
  infantry which crossed the Tietar and obliged them to retire with consider-
  able loss.'”°
Yet trust the guerrillas he could not. In 1810 all the activity of the partidas had
not prevented the French from massing a large army against Portugal.'’” And
there was, too, still the issue of what the partidas could actually achieve:

  I am apprehensive that I can place no reliance on the effect to be produced
  by these troops. The guerrillas, although active and willing, and although
  their operations in general occasion the utmost annoyance to the enemy, are
  so little disciplined that they can do nothing against the French troops unless
  the latter are very inferior in numbers, and if the French take post in house
  or church of which they only barricade the entrance, both regular troops and
  guerrillas are so ill-equipped . . . that the French can remain in security till
  relieved by a larger body.'™
   In this context the events of the summer and autumn of 1812 were a
disaster. As his own forces had advanced into Old Castile following the battle
of Salamanca on 22 July, Wellington discovered that, viewed in close-up, the
guerrillas were not as active as he had been led to expect. As the government
agent Rafael Gutiérrez complained the day before Wellington entered Madrid,
for example, ‘Don José Duran was in Calahorra on the sixth whilst on the ninth
Don Pedro Villacampa was in Molina and Don Juan Martin between Tarancon
and Cuenca, but none of them has done anything to incommode the enemy.”!
                                                The Reality of the Guerrillas   157

Eager to share in the glory of entering the capital, El] Empecinado at the last
minute rode for its gates, and actually managed to enter the city ahead of the
Anglo-Portuguese army. But of pursuit of the enemy there was litle sign, and
the British commander actually complained that the guerrillas were spending
their time ‘getting quietly into the large towns and amusing themselves or col-
lecting plunder’.' Still worse, when the Allied troops reached Burgos in
October a horde of irregulars rushed into the city and, in the words of one
British officer, ‘destroyed almost everything’.'! Small wonder, then, that, by
the time he had once again retired to the frontiers of Portugal in November,
Wellington was writing scathingly of ‘a few rascals called guerrillas [who] attack
one quarter of their numbers and sometimes succeed and sometimes not’.'””
And small wonder, too, that his plans for the campaign of 1813 made
almost no mention of the guerrillas. On the contrary, with Wellington now
commander-in-chief of the Spanish armies, the plan was rather to rely entirely
on such regular troops as the Patriot forces could field (in brief, the Spanish
armies in Andalucia and the Levant would move on the French from the south,
whilst their counterparts in Galicia and Le6n advanced in company with
Wellington’s own Anglo-Portuguese troops to envelop the enemy’s right flank
and rear). Most strikingly, indeed, no attempt seems to have been made to get
in touch with Espoz y Mina until the very eve of the battle of Vitoria. The
general impression that one is left with therefore is that, whilst any help
rendered by the guerrillas would be gratefully received, there was no intention
whatsoever of trusting to their efforts. In the event, matters did not work out
quite as Wellington planned, for Espoz y Mina was able to make a far greater
contribution to events than the British commander ever expected, whilst the
British commander found himself quite unable to make use of the Spanish
armies in the manner that he had desired. But that is no justification for ex post
facto rationalisation: by 1813 there were clearly few observers on the Allied side
who had time for notions of /a guerrilla as people’s crusade.'"*
   This is not to say that the guerrillas played no part in the liberation of Spain
in 1813. On the contrary, setting aside the vital role played by the forces of
Duran and Espoz y Mina in the French rear in the spring and early summer,
Longa made up for his earlier misdeeds by distinguishing himself at the battle
of Vitoria. Indeed, quite remarkably for Spanish troops, his men even suc-
ceeded in impressing some British observers with their bearing. To quote
Larpent, ‘I saw Longa in the streets, a stoutish man, well dressed in a sort of
hussar uniform, and looking civilised enough . . . The party of cavalry were all
regularly dressed, and seemed to be more regular than most of the Spanish
regulars; they wore scarlet jackets and were not unlike some of our yeomanry
cavalry, but they had an air of consequence that was amazing.”''* But there is
still one more problem to address. The victory of 1813 was above all a triumph
158    Fighting Napoleon