


   The validity of these views can be upheld by reference to a number of
episodes in the Peninsular War. As we have already seen, in the spring and early
summer of 1813 Espoz y Mina was almost crushed by a massive French offen-
sive from whose effects he was only saved by the advance of Wellington’s army.
The previous year, meanwhile, he had been seriously inconvenienced by the fall
of Valencia. Indeed, as the Navarrese commander makes clear, this was a dis-
aster for his forces:

  The loss of Valencia did me a great deal of damage. In this respect the worst
  problem was the manner in which it deprived me of a point to which I could
  turn for munitions, and in fact these immediately began to run short. At
  the same time I feared that some of the enemy troops that had taken part in
  the conquest of the city would... fall on the area in which I had been
  operating.”
Traditionally, it has been supposed that the guerrillas could always look to the
Anglo-Portuguese army for salvation, but this, in fact, was not the case. Indeed,
the fact that Wellington happened to save Espoz y Mina’s forces from disaster
in 1813 should not be taken to mean that such operations were a primary objec-
tive of British strategy. As the British commander himself said, for example,
‘I cannot adopt plans to forward the operations of such a corps as that of
Ballesteros or even that of Galicia.”
   Much, then, depended on the operations of such forces as those of
Ballesteros and Copons. In Andalucia the Allies’ possession of a string of
coastal towns and fortresses including Cadiz, Ayamonte, Tarifa and Gibraltar
allowed these commanders to operate with some degree of safety. But let us
look at the contrasting case of Catalonia. Here, the fall of Tarragona in June
1811 reduced the Patriot cause to a state of near paralysis. No sooner had the
fortress been taken, indeed, than the Junta of Catalonia was exuding despair:
  Catalonia has .. . lost the only port that remained to her... The most...
  fertile part of the principality is in possession of the enemy... and the
  mountainous parts alone must support the burden of the war .. . Thanks to
  the loss of its artillery and the very great want of ammunition in that part
  of the country which remains free, the army is incapable of undertaking
  military operations. As for the enemy . . . they will no doubt advance without
  the least delay, and very soon become masters of the whole province.”!

If the Junta’s worst fears were never realised — thanks to Napoleon’s invasion
of Russia, the French never had enough troops to overrun the whole of
Catalonia — the Catalan war effort never recovered from the loss of Tarragona.
Driven back into the interior of the province, the First Army suffered terribly:
a British report of March 1813 remarked on ‘much deficiency of accoutrements
                                                 The Reality of the Guerrillas   153


... very bad clothing... and...a complete want of shoes’, whilst in May of
the same year the Lérida infantry regiment had only 220 men fit for service out
of 490 present with the colours, and of these it was written that their only
uniform was ‘misery and nakedness combined with a complete want of clean-
liness’.”” Desertion, then, was very high, particularly as the French made a point
of allowing deserters to remain quietly in their homes.” Had the Spaniards been
capable of raiding the French zone, the situation in this respect might not have
been quite so serious, but partisan activity was all but at an end, whilst, hard
pressed to man the defensive positions behind which it sheltered, the army itself
was too weak to spare the parties of troops needed to round up its fugitives.
Indeed, it was too weak to attempt anything at all: reduced by the spring of
1813 to a force of 7,000 men, it lacked the transport it needed to take the field,
whilst the soldiers were ill-armed, lacking in the most basic items of equipment
and incapable of fighting in a regular fashion.” But from this there stemmed
a vicious circle: the First Army could not attack without obtaining more
resources, and yet it could not obtain more resources without attacking. In sum,
then, as a British liaison officer reported, ‘Without an additional force of 6,000
or 8,000 men, nothing offensive can be undertaken.”
   The predicament in which the First Army found itself by the beginning of
1813 is symptomatic of the relationship that existed between the guerrillas and
the Spanish war effort as a whole. In this respect, the basic point at issue was
made by Sir Thomas Graham: