

      We beg Your Excellency to come and console these aflicted pueblos, which
      you will find in the hands of the partida of Longa .. . Should you do so, you
      would find that these so-called soldiers degrade the military profession in
      the most horrible fashion, seeing in it no other object but the satisfaction of
      their sordid passions. They ride roughshod over justice, outrage humanity,
      act like tyrants and seize all the rights that should belong to our august
1. Louis Francois Lejeune, The skirmish at Guisando, in the ‘col d’Avis’ mountain passage of the Guadarama in
Castille on 11 April 1811. In this picture, the partida of Juan Palarea strip and massacre the survivors of a French
column. A few of the Spaniards appear in hussar-style busbies: as a veteran of the Peninsular War, Lejeune
would have been aware of the militarisation of the partidas, though his treatment of the subject suggests that he
was unwilling to let this get in the way of his desire to project a romantic image of the guerrillas.




2. Louis Francois Lejeune, The attack by General Mina’s guerrillas in France on the convoy carrying the
ladies of King Foseph’s court near Salinas, 25 May 1811. Though based on a real incident, this work by
                                                                                                        men,
Lejeune is inaccurate in almost every detail. At bottom left, Espoz y Mina is seen urging on his
                                                       freed  by the  Spaniards.  Interestingly, with a  gesture
whilst on the right some British prisoners are being
of great disgust, one of them  appears  to be refusing the  weapon   he  is being offered.
3. Denis Dighton, Spanish army.
General Officer of Cavalry with
Guerrillas and Lancers, 1815.
Drawn from the flesh by such
figures were to be found in many
of the more militarised bands.




4. Denis Dighton, The Brigand
Crosa, Guerrilla Chiefof
Catalonia, 1813. The archetypal
guerrilla of legend, this figure
typifies the ambiguity which
characterises many leaders of the
‘little war’.
                                                      5. Bacler d’Albe, Scenes of action against the
                                                      guerrillas in the Aoiz valley. Head of the French
                                                      army’s topographical service under Napoleon,
                                                      Louis Albert Bacler d’Albe accompanied
                                                      Napoleon to Spain in 1808. It is not clear,
                                                      however, whether the incident depicted here is
                                                      anything other than the fruit of his imagination.




6. Bacler d’Albe, Scenes of action against the
guerrillas in the Aoiz valley. Trapped at the edge
of a cliff, French troops hurl themselves to their
deaths rather than let themselves be taken by the
guerrillas. Although this incident may be
imaginary, there are documented examples of
cornered imperial soldiers shooting themselves
when faced by capture.