


formally divided between Espoz y Mina and Duran — but even so the result
was that Aragon had been reduced to little more than a wasteland.'”
   To conclude, then, the impact of the Spanish guerrillas was much less
impressive than has generally been thought to be the case. If by ‘guerrillas’, we
mean the irregular forces that emerged from outside the ranks of the regular
army and its auxiliaries — the new regiments formed in the course of the upris-
ing in 1808 and such local militias as the Catalan somatenes — we find that in the
case of the smaller and less militarised bands contact with the invaders was
infrequent and, further, that the military capacities of such forces were very
limited. Nor is this surprising: it is not going too far to suggest that the primary
objective of men such as Principe and Saornil was not war at all, but rather
robbery, pillage and extortion. Rather more effective, and certainly more dedi-
cated to the struggle, were the larger and more organised partidas that emerged
under the command of such figures as Juan Martin Diez, Francisco Espoz y
Mina, José Joaquin Duran y Barazabal and Juan Diaz Porlier. But even here
there are many problems: the rank and file frequently did not share the prior-
ities of their leaders, whilst the latter were often as much adventurers as they
were patriots, and in consequence allowed themselves to be distracted by
their own private interests. On top of all this, even the most developed of the
irregular forces had only a limited amount to offer in a military sense: always
vulnerable to defeat in the field, they also acquired only the most limited offen-
sive capacity. If this seems to fly in the face of the genuine achievements of the
guerrillas — and, in particular, their de facto liberation of much of Navarre and
Aragon — it should be pointed out that they were not operating in a vacuum.
To put it another way, if Espoz y Mina triumphed, he did so because Napoleon
invaded Russia. At the same time, the guerrillas were quite incapable of pre-
venting either the conquest by the French of fresh territory or the concentra-
tion of overwhelming forces against the Anglo-Portuguese army of the Duke
of Wellington. If anything, indeed, the irregulars appear rather as a negative
influence in the Allied war effort: consuming disproportionate quantities of
food, revenue and other resources, they sapped the strength of the Spanish
regulars whilst increasing the discontent and alienation of the populace. To say
that the partidas accomplished nothing would be to go to far, but even so we
therefore have a picture that clearly differs vary radically from the traditional
historiography.
                                          6
                    The End of the Guerrillas




Having reassessed both the nature and motivation of Ja guerrilla popular and its
contribution to the Spanish war effort, we now need to examine the relation-
ship that existed between the partidas and the Spanish state. From everything
that has gone before it will be appreciated that this was extremely ambivalent.
On the one hand the civil and military authorities were anxious to foment
popular resistance as an adjunct to the operations of the regular army, but on
the other they were determined to ensure that it did not threaten the estab-
lished social and political order or interfere with the conduct of the war. From
the very beginning, then, attempts to encourage the formation of fresh partidas
were to be inextricably entangled with attempts to regulate their conduct, and,
still more so, to subordinate the cabecillas to the control of the generals and
juntas that formally headed the resistance in the Spanish provinces. Opposed
as this process was to the interests and outlook of most of the insurgent leaders,
relations between the Patriot cause and its more irregular supporters were
always likely to be troubled, and it is not difficult to foresee that in the end those
groups that did not allow themselves to be fully assimilated with the military
estate would be cast out from the fold altogether. Yet, just as the guerrillas did
not operate in a military vacuum, nor did they do so in a political one. Thus,
seemingly a personification of the principle of the nation-in-arms that was as
effective as it was dramatic, the guerrillas were for a time able to benefit from
the patronage of powerful interests within the Patriot body politic. Yet in the
end, killed off by the guerrillas’ own misdeeds and the changing circumstances
of the war, this support fell away, whilst the partidas in any case soon found
themselves exposed to the infinitely more hostile climate represented by the
restoration of absolutism. For some fortunate individuals this was not the end,
but for most of the guerrillas the choice facing them in 1814 was to be bleak
indeed.
                                                    The End of the Guerrillas   161