


hardened. To cure the problem of men deserting from established guerrilla
bands and then approaching some general or junta with a proposal to form a
partida of their own, in September 1809 the Junta Central ordered that hence-
forward no authority was to entertain any approach from individual partisans
unless they had the sanction of their commanders.’ And, as the Duque del
Parque wrote in November 1809, ‘I neither recognise, nor will I recognise Don
Juan Diaz Porlier, nor any of these independent chiefs who have not subordi-
nated themselves to me.”’
    The anger of generals such as Del Parque was not directed just at the guer-
rillas. Also in the firing line were their sponsors. For a good instance of this
development we might turn to Asturias, where the officer appointed to
command the regular forces in the province in 1810, Francisco Javier Losada,
was soon locked in battle with its ruling junta. As he complained to his supe-
rior, General Mahy:

  I have already informed you of the letter that the Junta [of Asturias] sent me
  when I tried to publish the proclamation concerning the collection of strag-
  glers and deserters . . . If we tolerate these ridiculous pretensions . . . it will
  be impossible to discipline the soldiery, maintain a half-decent army, or put
  an end to the troops’ habit of running away every other moment, nor still
  less to prevent the guerrillas from indulging their habit of constantly chang-
  ing partidas so as to avoid punishment for the . . . scandalous excesses for
  which they are responsible . . . In entertaining them, the Junta has clearly
  had other objects than the national interest . . . In June last year it published
  an ordinance regulating the guerrilla bands, and yet for whatever reason it
  has consistently chosen commandants who afterwards have almost all turned
  out to merit the accusations of banditry with which the French have sought
  to ridicule the partidas. Having with the greatest indiscretion . . . conferred
  ranks and appointments of all sorts on every type of person .. . it has also
  made its interest in defending them very clear. When the incessant protests
  and complaints of the suffering populace forced me to arrest the partidario
  Francisco Collar, it wrote to me praising his supposed heroism . . . with such
  vigour that I was left with no option but to suspend my proceedings against
  him... But there are issues with regard to which the Junta has been even
  more remiss . . . If Your Excellency had not already been in this province, I
  would here have spent some time outlining not only the lack of order ..’.
  that I found to prevail among these troops, but also their . . . want of every-
  thing that they need. The latter is the fault of the Junta, for it distributes
  _.. clothing, footwear and armament in accordance with nothing more than
  its own whims .. . The first in the queue are always the most bare-faced of
  the cabecillas, and especially those which are known to have links with
164    Fighting Napoleon