

in that the inspectors appointed by the generals were given the power to inves-
tigate the past conduct of each band and to strip them of any men who ought
to be serving in the regular army.”’ Yet even without this decree in many parts
of Spain the military had already begun to take action. Arriving in Algeciras,
for example, General Ballesteros gave short shrift to the inhabitants of the
Serrania de Ronda:
  The .. . guerrilla bands that infested the region were one of the objects that
  called for my consideration. Not only had questions been raised as to the
  services that they had rendered, but the pueblos of the district were loudly
  complaining of their excesses . . . | examined the truth of these representa-
  tions in person . . . Convinced that the partidas existing in the district under
  my command were both militarily useless and prejudicial to the nation, I
  immediately ordered their disbandment.”
   At about the same time that Ballesteros was acting in this fashion, a slightly
different tack had been adopted in Leon, where Julian Sanchez had formed a
second regiment of his Lanceros de Castilla by pressing a number of minor
bands that had been active in the area.”’? Similar measures, meanwhile, had
already been carried out in Old Castile and Extremadura by Juan Diaz Porlier
and Pablo Morillo. Thus, in a move sanctioned by his superior, General Mahy,
in September 1810 Porlier ordered the commander of his cavalry, José de la
Riba, to incorporate all the independent partidas that he could in his Husares
de Cantabria, whilst in May 1811 Morillo, who now commanded a division
of the Spanish Fifth Army, arrested a guerrilla band led by one Manuel
Cardenas, consisting entirely of deserters, on the grounds that it had been
making extortionate demands for rations.’ And in the Ronda area, too, they
were nothing new: sent to support the insurrection with 3,000 men in 1810,
Luis Lacy had eventually expelled the insurgents from his camp and arrested
most of their chiefs, whilst he would doubtless have approved of the solution
adopted by Ballesteros, which was to form the serranos into the formal home
guard that we have already noted.”!
   But by far the best evidence we have for this process comes from the south-
ern part of the province of Valencia. The French having had too few troops to
occupy the area following the occupation of the capital in January 1812, it had
become home to swarms of partidas. Based in Alicante, however, were the
Spanish generals José O’Donnell and (albeit from May 1812 only) Francisco
Copons, neither of whom had a good word to say for his neighbours.
Bombarded with appeals for help from the local populace, the two commanders
therefore launched a sustained offensive against the guerrillas. First to move
was O’Donnell, who was at the head of the Spanish forces who had escaped
                                                                             he
Valencia when the city fell in January 1812. Thus, on 18 March 1812
172 ~~ ~Fighting Napoleon