

   In the face of such rhetoric, the proponents of control were helpless, and the
assembly in the end voted unanimously to reject the ordinance. Yet the issue
did not go away. Even the most enthusiastic supporters of the guerrillas had
agreed that a more appropriate document should be elaborated in place of the
one rejected by the cortes. At the same time, such was the situation on the
ground that the loyalties even of elements whom the partisans might have
regarded as their natural supporters were soon under considerable strain.
Indeed, within months of the debate of August 1811 the Semanario Patriotico
was admitting that, even though the harm wrought by the partidas was out-
weighed by the damage that they had done to the enemy, it would still be a good
170 ~—-Fighting Napoleon


idea to place them under some form of inspectorate and, for good measure, to
form units of cazadores rurales that could suppress those who refused to toe the
line.”* Just as critical, meanwhile, was the renegade cleric José Blanco White.
Thus:

  In so far as the... guerrillas are concerned, I have always believed them
  to be most useful, but also most dangerous. When the bands become small
  divisions headed by accredited commanders such as Mina, El Empecinado
  and Sanchez, the advantages they bring cannot be numbered . . . but the ones
  that have remained mere handfuls of men headed by captains who show
  neither subordination nor... responsibility and generally act like bandit
  chiefs need very great reform. Because they have killed twenty or thirty
  Frenchmen one day, they think they have the right to burn a Spanish village
  and commit 1,000 disorders the next.”
   Yet another voice raised in protest, meanwhile, was that of Luis Baccigalupi,
a priest of strongly liberal views, who had fought with the somatenes in Catalo-
nia and published a pamphlet that, if it did not deny the partidas a separate
identity, still called for them to be given a regular military organisation on a
nationwide scale. In brief, the bands were to be grouped into ‘flying legions’
consisting of a general staff, four battalions of infantry, a regiment of lancers
and a company apiece of engineers and scouts. However, Baccigalupi envisaged
that most of the time the ‘mixed brigades’ that his plan called for would fight
split up into smaller units, the essence of his thinking being an attempt to retain
the flexibility and high mobility associated with the guerrillas with the disci-
pline and reliability supposed to characterise regular troops.”°
   With Blanco White going so far as to argue that those partidas that refused
either to militarise themselves or to enlist in the ranks of one of the ‘regular’
bands should be suppressed as bandits, the new guerrilla ordinance finally came
into force on 11 July 1812. Less drastic than it had-been in its original form,
this nonetheless made it quite clear that the days of freedom and tolerance were
at an end. In brief, all guerrilla bands were henceforth to be subordinate to the
army commander responsible for the district in which they were operating,
whilst the generals concerned were each to appoint an inspector whose task it
would be to keep a check on their activities, sanction all promotions within their
ranks, punish individual wrongdoers, suppress those partidas whose behaviour
did not come up to scratch, and look into all proposals for the establishment of
fresh bands. No new bands would be permitted without the sanction of the
authorities; prospective cabecillas would henceforth be expected to give proofs
of their patriotism and good conduct; the recruitment of deserters and men
liable to conscription was forbidden; and the guerrillas were to be subjected to
military discipline. And, on top of all this, the decree was to be retrospective,
                                                   The End of the Guerrillas   171