

  The shameful madness . . . of believing that only the old generals have . .
  the knowledge needed to command armies has done us the most terrible
  damage . . . In a new situation, everything must be new, and in consequence
  the only commanders we should employ are men who are formed — indeed,
  almost born — in the revolution. Obviously, I would not place myself wholly
  on the side of the new commanders, for there are men among them who are
  just as wretched . . . as their predecessors, but, if we take the commanders
  of the revolt in Catalonia, when did many of them embark on their military
  careers? And in what military school . . . did the immortal [Espoz y] Mina
  learn .. . how to maintain himself for three years in the midst of the enemy
  _. . almost without communication with the government? Could any of the
  generals of the old army have achieved as much?”

   Not surprisingly, then, the result was a lively debate in the cortes when the
matter was brought before the assembly on g August 1811, with deputy after
deputy rising to warn the government that the new ordinance would be certain
to ruin the guerrillas, and even that it hid a deliberate attempt to destroy them
altogether. There was, true, a general willingness to accept that any band proved
to have used the war as a cover for a career of banditry should be exterminated
and, further, that no deserters should be allowed to serve with the guerrillas,
but beyond that most of the deputies would not go, despite a staunch defence
of the ordinance by the Conde de Toreno, a leading liberal who had been a
member of the committee that had actually framed the document.
168 — Fighting Napoleon


   Whilst the arguments raised against the decree were many and varied, they
basically fell into two groups. On the one hand there was the claim that any
attempt to regulate the partidas would necessarily discourage the populace. And
on the other there was the pretence that such a move would undermine the
irregulars’ efficacy. In this latter respect, particular emphasis was placed on the
manner in which the bands were to be subordinated to the control of the regular
army (many of the partidas were henceforth to be commanded by regular offi-
cers, whilst they were to be placed under the command of the generals respon-
sible for the provinces in which they were operating and subjected to regular
inspection by special officers appointed for the task). It was argued, first, that
regular officers would be less likely to know the country than cabecillas raised
in the district; second, that regular officers would be hamstrung in their oper-
ations by inappropriate notions of honour that might, for example, lead them
to fight a superior enemy who ought rather to have been avoided; and, third,
that subjecting the bands to interference on the part of distant generals and
their representatives might easily cause them to miss some opportunity for
striking a blow against the invaders. Also objected to in this context were the
ordinance’s demands that the guerrillas should surrender any horses in their
possession that could be used by the regular cavalry. There was, in general, a
tendency to minimise the extent of the irregulars’ depredations and to pretend
that the men and resources which they absorbed could never have reached the
army on account of the occupation of the districts from which they stemmed
by the French. Typical of the rhetoric employed was that of Joaquin Capmany: