


appointed Colonel Francisco Samper ‘Interim Commandant General of the
Patriotic Guerrilla Bands of the Kingdom of Valencia’, and gave him the task
of ‘consolidating the establishment of the guerrillas whilst at the same time
giving them a form that will both ensure the success of their enterprises and
prevent them from becoming prejudicial to the common cause’. Samper’s
instructions were copious: amongst other things he was to ensure that no
deserters enlisted in the partidas, that no cabecillas were allowed to operate
unless they had first received authorisation from the commandant-general of
the province, that all the bands were to base themselves in territory occupied
by the French, that any deserters or draft dodgers who had already joined
the guerrillas should be surrendered forthwith, that all disorders were to be
punished with the utmost severity, and that the various chieftains should submit
weekly reports and maintain a minimum strength of fifty men.*’ And finally a
captain of the First Regiment of Cazadores de Valencia named Fernando Reig
was sent out with a handful of sergeants to round up such deserters as he could
find, his task in the meantime being made somewhat easier by the fact that he
was allowed to promise prospective recruits that they would be retained in the
province as a security force rather than being returned to their units.**
   On arriving in Alicante at the beginning of May, however, Copons found that
matters had not much improved. As O’Donnell complained, indeed:

  Ever since I placed the... partidas under the command of . . . Samper, I
  have been hearing of the disorders that they have been committing, and I
  have in consequence never ceased to press your predecessor as commandant-
  general of Valencia . . . on the need to put these bands in order and subject
  them to the sort of discipline needed to secure the punishment of any com-
  mander who acts in an arbitrary fashion, or is responsible for disorders of
  any sort.*

Already angry at what he had seen as commandant-general of the Condado
de Niebla, Copons set to work with a will. Promising O’Donnell his fullest
support, he immediately ordered Samper to withdraw the commissions of a
number of cabecillas who had been accused of banditry, appointed a Lieutenant-
Colonel Juan Barrera to act as inspector of guerrillas and authorised a priest
named Rovira to establish a special partida whose task it would be to hunt down
deserters.” As to his intentions, he made these very clear:

  A retired lieutenant-colonel who says that he is the second-in-command of
  a guerrilla band has just presented himself to me. However, I did not need
  what he had to say to inform myself of the disorder that reigns among the
  partidas. Their wretched commanders, the sort of men from which they are
  recruited and the little use which they are to the fatherland in comparison
                                                   The End of the Guerrillas   173

  with the harm that they inflict . . . on the inhabitants of this kingdom are all
  well known to me. Great evils necessitate dramatic remedies. The combina-
  tion of the powers that you have been given... make me confident that
  within a matter of hours my desires will be realised. As to what these are,
  they are that all the commandants should be men of proven probity; that
  there should not be a single deserter in any of the bands; that any which are
  found should be sent to this city [i.e., Alicante], along with any criminals who
  have been released from gaol or men of ill-repute; that... the partidas
  should only be made up of men who are exempt from conscription; and that
  any horses that the guerrillas have to which they have no right . . . should be
  collected up and. . . sent to me here.*”