

  This ordinance tends towards the complete destruction of the guerrillas, for
  it threatens to annihilate the useful partidas with the same rules that are
  intended to destroy the harmful ones . . . At the same time, it will in effect
  place all the guerrilla bands in a state of tutelage as if they were mere novices
  in the art of war, when they have in reality stopped being children: they are
  now adults, and, what is more, adults who are much too grown up to have
  any need for leading reins. We are speaking, after all, of the guerrillas: men
  who are as honourable as they are valiant; men who have grown in number
  in proportion with the opportunity that they have had to fight the enemy;
  and men who continue every moment to pursue their heroic resolution to
  harass the invaders. The fluid war that they maintain in the midst of the
  enemy has been called disorderly, but it has to be disorderly if it is to have
  any chance of success . . . Subjecting these intrepid defenders of the father-
  land to controls of so rigorous and narrow a nature would be to bind them
  hands and feet.”!

Perhaps inevitably — he was the greatest speaker in house — the ‘divine’ Agustin
Arguelles was also a vocal participant in the debate:
                                                   The End of the Guerrillas   169


  The bands which have been the seed corn of the insurrection in the midst
  of the enemy — the sort of bands that conduct their operations in accordance
  with the circumstances of the moment without any sort of planning or prepa-
  ration, are composed of . .. men completely removed from the military pro-
  fession, and commanded by civilians who are driven solely by patriotism and
  good will — should never in my opinion by subjected to an ordinance of a
  type that must destroy the partidas that are already in existence and prevent
  the formation of fresh groups... The class of service which they perform
  is very important, but it is not one of a sort that can be regulated by a formal
  military code ... We should not let ourselves be deluded into thinking that
  it is possible to obtain a perfection which is compatible with neither the
  nature of these forces nor their mode of operation.”

These arguments were augmented by the liberal army officer Evaristo Pérez de
Castro. Thus:

  The good guerrillas . . . are of the greatest importance, for they are the pecu-
  liar weapon of our insurrection, and cannot be copied or counterfeited by
  the enemy, whose energy and martial skills will always come to grief when
  confronted by this singular and most original product of national sentiment
  ... Such a weapon does not need much in the way of regulation. Multiply
  the partidas in such a manner that the enemy .. . finds himself constantly
  distracted and harassed in front, flank and rear by small groups that make
  surprise attacks, appear and disappear as if by magic, and that pick his men
  off one by one day and night . . . and Spain will in a few months become the
  tomb of the invader . . . In consequence, terror of the enemy as it is, let us
  look after this special weapon most carefully; let us attempt, indeed, to make
  the guerrillas as numerous as grains of sand on a beach. And, to ensure that
  we achieve this, let us elaborate fewer ordinances of a sort that can only
  quench the fires of patriotism and leave us reliant on the much slower and
  more difficult remedy offered by the organisation . . . of mass armies.”