

ness to collaborate with the Spanish generals operating in his locality on 4 April
1809 brought him the rank of lieutenant.*
   Hardly surprisingly, it was not long before the principles stuck to by the civil
and military authorities found official enunciation. Thus, the decree of 28
December 1808 — the first attempt on the part of the Patriot government to
give form to the guerrilla movement — was not just a measure aimed at encour-
aging the populace to take up arms against the French. Rewards of various sorts
were certainly offered to anyone who was prepared either to form a guerrilla
band or to enlist as a follower of one cabecilla or another. Thus, volunteers were
promised generous wages (6 reales per day for a foot soldier, and ro for a
mounted one), the value of any horses that they brought with them when they
joined up, a fair share in any booty that they took from the enemy and posts in
government service (as doormen and the like) should they be permanently dis-
abled as a result of action against the enemy. As for the cabecillas, the decree
guaranteed them the rank of cornet, implied that they would have the right to
appoint their own subordinates and contained a firm assurance that, providing
all went well, they could in due course expect promotion. But this was not an
end to the story. The object of the decree being stated as the creation of ‘a new
type of militia’, it was clear that the aim was to assimilate irregular resistance
with the rest of the armed forces, especially so as great care was taken to specify
the organisation that was to be given to each partida (there was to be a com-
mandant with the rank of cornet and a second commandant with the rank of
first sergeant, and two sections of fifty men apiece, the one mounted and the
other dismounted, each of which was to be led by a sergeant and a corporal).
And, above all, whilst pious references were made to the need to allow the par-
tidas as much freedom as possible, certain facts of life were made very clear:

  In so far as the relationship of one rank to another is concerned, the same
  rules will be observed as in the regular army, any misdemeanours in this
  respect being punishable in accordance with the terms of the Royal Ordi-
  nances. .. . In order to avoid disorders and facilitate operations against the
  enemy, every partida will be attached to a division of one of the field armies
  under the command of the corresponding general, each of whom will
  appoint an officer of the appropriate rank and disposition to take charge of
  the partidas assigned to his command.°
  As early as the end of 1808, then, the pretensions of the Patriot authorities
had been laid bare. This, moreover, was well before the dimensions of the prob-
lems thrown up by the issue of irregular resistance had become fully apparent:
at the time that the decree was issued the number of cabecillas engaged in oper-
ations against the French was still relatively small, and they often commanded
no more than a handful of men. Not surprisingly, as time went on, opinion
                                                    The End of the Guerrillas   163