


army, the second deprived of their autonomy and the third wiped out as
enemies of society.'°
    To the liberals who had come to dominate the cortes of Cadiz such a docu-
ment was anathema. This is not the place to discuss their views and ideology
in any detail but, in so far as the conduct of the war was concerned, they were
committed to doctrines that could not but place great emphasis on the guer-
rillas. At the same time, it had already shown much indignation at the Regency’s
reluctance to confirm the commissions issued by Espoz y Mina. To quote the
deputy Gonzalez:

  I am afraid that it seems to me as if from the beginning of our holy revolu-
  tion, instead of fomenting patriotism, we have rather sought to quench it.
  Sadly, those who have worked hardest for our cause have been the people
  who have been most persecuted, or who have at least received fewest thanks.
  ... Many have come here from Madrid after swearing allegiance to King
  Pepe...and have still received promotions, appointments, salaries... .
  Others have from the beginning spent the war dodging the bullets, and yet
  they have been decorated and given . . . higher rank than the men who have
  been shedding their blood for us.”

   Not all the deputies were quite so critical — there was, for example, some
recognition that commissions could not just be handed out to all and sundry —
and it is noteworthy that in the end what carried the day was the argument that
Espoz y Mina’s forces had already been recognised as part of the regular army.
That said, however, for the liberals it was axiomatic that Spain was fighting a
people’s war. In 1808, they argued, the Spanish people had risen not just to
fight the French but to throw off centuries of despotism, and it was this process
that they now claimed to be espousing. As justification for their efforts, mean-
while, they could cite the partidas’ supposed heroism, the only possible expla-
nation for this phenomenon in their view being the continued yearning for
liberty. But the guerrillas were not just living proof of the liberals’ theory of
revolution. At the same time they were also the harbinger of an entirely new
form of military organisation. Convinced that regular armies were of necessity
the enemies of freedom, the liberals believed that Spain should in consequence
rely on a national militia, or, to put it another way, on the people-in-arms.'®
And what were the guerrillas if not the Spanish people-in-arms and, still more
so, an answer to those who claimed that only regular armies could save the
country? As Alvaro Florez Estrada proclaimed:

  The people swore to avenge the outrages that it had suffered from a perfid-
  ious invader; it formed a government and charged it with the formation of
  powerful armies. But did the latter make it desist from its first endeavour?
                                                    The End of the Guerrillas   167

  Woe on us had this been the case. No: it is not the armies that have destroyed
  the barbarous legions of our enemies; it is not the armies that have discon-
  certed and upset the plans of the tyrant. It is the people. They and only they
  have been the . . . authors of these prodigies . . . If the pueblos remained tran-
  quil, if their inhabitants resolved to accept the law of conquest, what would
  become of the Nation? Our war would be a cabinet war. As for our armies,
  they are as a general rule unable to match the consistency and vigour of their
  opponents. In consequence, they would sooner or later be destroyed, in
  which case who would replace them?”
    But this was not the end of the fascination the guerrillas held for the liber-
als. Just as the partidas as a whole proclaimed to the world the ability of the
armed people to defend the fatherland, so figures such as Juan Martin Diez and
Francisco Espoz y Mina showed that birth was not a prerequisite of military
prowess or leadership in society, thereby short-circuiting the desperate efforts
of the forces of reaction to uphold the privileges of the nobility. For the most
radical thinkers, indeed, they even provided grounds for dreams of social
revolution. To quote £/ Patriota: