


   The first point to make in connection with this chapter is that at no time
were the partidas ever envisaged as an independent force. Even in the very first
days of the fighting this principle was already well enunciated. Thus, the for-
mation of guerrilla bands was seen as the prerogative of the civil and military
authorities. Supernumerary army officers, prominent local notables or men who
had by one means or another managed to ingratiate themselves with the new
organs of government were issued with commissions to raise groups of armed
men, and held responsible for their actions. In short, they were regarded as
agents of.a state that in the end remained keen to enforce its monopoly of vio-
lence. By the same token, meanwhile, men who acted on their own initiative
were likely to find themselves the object of at the very least great suspicion:
hence the arrest of El Empecinado in the wake of the battle of Bailén by the
infamous General Gregorio Garcia de la Cuesta.' And it is notable, too, that in
the beginning the authorities were keen to inform the populace that they were
not to move against the French except via the medium of bodies that they them-
selves had sanctioned. On 28 May 1808, for example, the captain-general of
Andalucia issued a proclamation instructing the inhabitants of Cadiz on no
account to leave the city in search of Frenchmen that they might kill, but rather
to remain in their homes and enlist in the units that would be established for
this purpose under the command of officers appointed by the city’s authori-
ties.? And in June of the same year, if the Junta of Seville called for ‘a war of
partidas in which the enemy armies will constantly be embarrassed by the denial
of supplies’, it proclaimed its faith in the populace embracing this enterprise
not only with ardour, but also ‘guided in due form’.°
    As we have seen, this attempt to keep the formation of guerrilla bands within
the purview of the élites soon foundered. For one thing, the formation of par-
tidas was, for whatever reason, a popular way of engaging with the war effort;
for a second, the successes of the somatenes, in particular, provided the leaders
of the Patriot cause with valuable propaganda material; and, for a third, the
rapid deterioration of the military situation in the autumn and winter of 1808
encouraged a willingness both to contemplate unorthodox means of waging war
and to accept the help of anyone who was prepared to take up arms in favour
of the common cause. But this does not mean that the ideal of political and
military control of the partidas was surrendered. On the contrary, nothing could
be further from the truth. Thus, men who wished to take on the role of cabecil-
las were encouraged to apply to the new authorities for authorisation to do so
by means of the generous exercise of patronage, whilst men who had estab-
lished guerrilla bands on their own initiative had only to proffer their allegiance
to the Patriot hierarchy to be confirmed in their positions and rewarded with
regular commissions (in the first instance generally as cornets of cavalry). Asa
prime example of this process, we might cite El Empecinado, whose willing-
162 ~~ -Fighting Napoleon