


  members of the Junta. . . and they carry off the lot, whilst the men actually
  fighting the enemy end up with nothing. From the day I arrived here I have
  struggled to put an end to this scandal... but the Junta... has gone on
  exactly as before, and has even ordered supplies to be distributed to . . . par-
  tidas that I have specifically told them ought to be disbanded and forced to
  join the army on account of the fact that they are entirely made up of desert-
  ers... And by issuing supplies without any regard for whether they were
  actually needed and without any requirement for them to be accounted for
  to men of neither birth nor reputation . . . the Junta has left the army in the
  same state of want and nakedness as ever whilst at the same time surround-
  ing themselves with a crowd of rogues who not only make a living but even
  enrich themselves from this species of robbery. Of the little there is, not a
  tenth part reaches the army, and the result is that it cannot fight and is in
  the worst state imaginable.®
   All sorts of interesting questions are raised here with regard to the relation-
ship that existed between the partidas and the local notables. What Losada
appears to be suggesting, indeed, is that — as certainly occurred later on in the
nineteenth century — banditry could sometimes enjoy the patronage and pro-
tection of prominent caciques, who in turn received a share of its profits. Such
things, however, are difficult to pin down. In consequence, let us here confine
ourselves to noting that the demand that some sort of control ought to be
imposed on the guerrillas was not just limited to government ministers and
army commanders. On the contrary, criticism of the partidas was a regular
feature of the Patriot press. In April 1811, for example, an anonymous article
in the strongly liberal Semanario Patridtico stated:

  The concentration of the partidas is an important objective. As they have by
  divers means acquired a multitude of fine horses, subjected to proper disci-
  pline and given good officers, they could be transformed into excellent hussar
  regiments. Whilst serving the cause in the same way, such units would not
  be prone to the evils that have so greatly diminished the utility of the guer-
  rilla bands.’

A year later, meanwhile, the official mouthpiece of the newly created general
staff was writing:

  The patriotic guerrilla bands are without doubt of great use, many illustri-
  ous Spaniards having covered themselves in glory in their ranks. However, it
  is unfortunately true that some partidarios have deviated from this noble path
  and augmented the ills of the fatherland. It is therefore necessary to reward
  ... some bands and reform others, whilst placing them all under a unified
  system."
                                                   The End of the Guerrillas   165

   Not surprisingly, the growing concern soon produced legislative action,
whilst there were also other signs that the guerrillas no longer enjoyed the over-
whelming official favour of 1808. Thus, on 22 April 1810 an investigation into
the affairs of Porlier, who had just formed a number of partidas into the Husares
de Cantabria regiment, led the newly installed regency of General Castafios to
order that henceforth no mounted unit organised by the guerrillas was to
consist of more than a single squadron. The point of this was to protect their
manoeuvrability and at the same time prevent the accumulation of the large
numbers. of non-combatants associated with the proliferation of regimental
headquarters.'! Just over a month later, meanwhile, the Junta of Asturias issued
a long and detailed set of regulations in which it attempted to address the worst
evils of the partidas (it was in fact this document that Losada accused the Junta
of exploiting for its own purposes). In brief, no one could assume the role of
commandant without first securing the sanction of the junta; no band could
stop in a settlement without officially informing the local authorities of its
presence, giving them proof that it was there on official business and provid-
ing evidence of its strength; no band could leave a settlement without securing
a good-conduct certificate; no commandant was to have fewer than thirty men
or more than 100; bands had to attack the enemy at least once every four days;
regular returns of strength were to be sent in to the local military commander;
and no band was to accept deserters, draft evaders or men already serving in
another partida.”” Also in the north, Mariano Renovales issued a proclamation
threatening to treat any villagers that gave food to ‘the disorderly gangs that
wander in our territory’ as collaborators, and promising to punish the families
of any men found to be absent with such groups.” And finally in Cadiz it is
noticeable that the Regency proved extremely reluctant to sanction the com-
missions that Espoz y Mina had issued to many of his subordinates, the matter
having eventually to be raised in the cortes."*
   But far more important than all this was the new ordinance that the Regency
brought before the cortes in August 1811. Curiously enough, in view of what
was to follow, this was originally an initiative of the liberal deputy José Mejia,
who on 6 October 1810 had proposed that the standing committee of the cortes
that oversaw the work of the Ministry of War should elaborate a document that
would encourage the formation of fresh partidas by laying down the precise
framework under which they should operate.’ What emerged, however, was
certainly not the sort of code that Mejia had envisaged, the draft ordinance that
resulted actually bidding fair to outlaw much of the guerrilla movement alto-
gether. Thus, dividing its members into three categories — larger forces such as
that of El Empecinado, small bands with a proven record of fighting the French
(such as that of Juan Palarea) and small bands who were clearly no more than
criminals — it suggested that the first category should be assimilated into the
166   ~~‘Fighting Napoleon