

   If it is true that we have a constitution, if... there exists a government
   charged with its execution, if the rights of man in society are not a chimera
   _.. why do we hesitate in casting aside the thick veil that has until now
   covered the atrocities, outrages and insatiable rapacity of these gangs of
   bandits who so unjustly usurp the respectable name of ‘patriot’? And what
   is the fatherland? Is it composed only of the soil on which we tread? Perhaps
   so, for nothing else is respected by those who call themselves its defenders.
   The law, the government, the honour, life and property of their fellow citi-
   zens are for them mere playthings which they insult with the most insolent
178 ~~ Fighting Napoleon


  daring ... Disabuse yourself, Mr Editor: all these things are incompatible
  with the existence of these bands, and we must therefore annihilate them or
  renounce our rights. There is always great indignation in Cadiz at infrac-
  tions of the constitution, and yet ears are closed to the complaints made
  against the guerrillas. Why so? Because they kill Frenchmen? Could they not
  do this at less cost? For how long must we remain blind? Woe on us if our
  salvation must come from such a source. Did Lord Wellington liberate
  Portugal with the aid of partidas? Did he defeat'Marmont with them? And
  what have we achieved with them but to complete our ruin, strip the
  provinces of their resources, set back public spirit, disorganise our armies,
  fill hundreds of families whose only crime was to have money or pretty
  daughters with shame and sorrow, and plunge entire pueblos into the black-
  est desperation. Patriots of Cadiz, to you are directed the pitiful cries of the
  patriots of Old Castile. Your opinion is horribly mistaken: the majority . . .
  of those you believe to be heroes are no more than infamous bandits without
  law, discipline or feeling . .. Uniting your voice with theirs, demand . . . the
  extermination of these executioners of our compatriots, of these bands that
   ... are the shame of the nation and the scourge of humanity.”

   According to the Marxist Pérez Garzon, all this was to be explained solely
in terms of the rankest cynicism: the guerrillas had served their purpose and,
as a threat to property and the social order, were now to be suppressed. But,
although partly true, this misses the point. The guerrillas did not represent a
threat just to law and order, but also to the very authority of the state. Thanks
in large part to their activities, large parts of the liberated territories were com-
pletely beyond the control of the government, whilst the need to put an end to
this situation had led Wellington to insist on the imposition of rule by the army
at the local level, and thus to threaten many of the principles that the liberals
held most sacred. British commander As the wrote:

  We must not conceal from ourselves that there is but little authority of any
  description whatever in the provinces which have been occupied by the
  enemy, and [that] even that little depends on the exercise of military power.
  It is vain to expect that a gentleman called an intendant will exercise the
  power to realise the resources of the country... without the assistance
  of a military force... I am aware that it is wrong in principle to invest
  military men with civil powers, but when the country is in danger that
  must be adopted which will tend most directly to save it... whatever
  may be the constitutional principles which may be invaded by those
  measures.”