


the increasingly beleaguered imperial forces, the guerrillas of these provinces
might have shown beyond all doubt that they were motivated by hatred of the
invaders and the desire to fight for dios, rey y patria, but the opportunity was
never grasped. In New Castile, E] Empecinado seems to have spent all his time
chasing the bands of such rival leaders as ‘Puchas’ and ‘Borbon’, whilst of Juan
Palarea we hear that he ‘has remained in a state of inactivity, and, despite the
favourable nature of the country, made no exertion whatever to harass the small
foraging parties which the enemy have... sent into the mountains’.” In the
north, bent on personal aggrandisement, Porlier had eschewed taking any part
in the fighting since the fall of Santander in August 1812, the bulk of his ener-
gies having rather been directed towards attempting to wrest control of the
province from the commander of the Seventh Army, General Mendizabal.”
And on the frontiers of Portugal the forces of Julian Sanchez were in a state
of considerable disorder, large numbers of his lancers having deserted rather
than accept the fact that they had become regular troops.” As Schaumann
complained, meanwhile, the behaviour of those who remained was quite
insufferable:
   They were very much feared . . . Let me give just one example of this. One
   of my muleteers had a young and extraordinarily pretty girl with him
   (whether she was his wife or not I do not know)... One afternoon...a
   guerrilla dashing past suddenly halted and scrutinised the group with some
   attention; then, calling the girl to him, he peremptorily commanded her to
   jump up behind him on the horse’s back, and galloped away with her. The
   parted couple did not dare to protest against this treatment by uttering even
   one syllable of complaint!”

   Nor did things get very much better in the months that followed. Palarea
presented himself to a Spanish divisional commander and requested Bead
sion to transform his 300 horsemen into a regiment of regular cavalry.** Mean-
while, Longa accepted assimilation into the ranks of the newly renumbered
Spanish Fourth Army and, as we have seen, fought alongside the Anglo-
Portuguese army in the campaign of Vitoria. But most of the guerrillas effec-
tively withdrew from the struggle, and finally showed themselves in their true
colours. As Wellington’s forces advanced into Spain, for example, their rear ele-
ments were preyed upon incessantly which caused William Keep to complain
of constantly coming across ‘dead bodies . . . where misfortunes had happened
or deeds of rapine by the native robbers committed on stray travellers (particu-
larly officers’ servants with baggage), and this even in the paths of so numer-
ous a body of men’.® At the same time, meanwhile, thanks to the guerrillas,
who had eaten up everything that had not been taken by the French, they
discovered that food could only be gleaned from the countryside with great
176 ~~Fighting Napoleon


difficulty.*° And finally, Allied couriers were waylaid and killed in a manner
no different from the fate that had overtaken so many of their French
counterparts.”
    But it is not just British sources that tell the story. From all over Spain,
indeed, came complaints of pillage and rapine. A band of renegades from
Sanchez’s forces terrorised the inhabitants of the villages between Salamanca
and Avila; the partidas of Principe and Marquina ravaged the district between
Salamanca and Ciudad Rodrigo; and the district’ around Guadalajara was
plagued by hundreds of men who had fled the troops of El Empecinado.” As
one of Wellington’s correspondents put it, in short, ‘Every day the guerrillas
do less good and cause more damage.’ Given what has been revealed in the
course of this study, there is nothing surprising about this statement: the par-
tidas, indeed, were behaving exactly as everything that we know about their
composition and motivation would lead us to expect. But the point is nonethe-
less an important one. According to apologists for the guerrillas, the failure to
follow up the invaders was the product of a pronounced parochialism or, to put
it another way, of a tendency to see the struggle solely in terms of the defence
of hearth and home. To quote John Tone’s discussion of the aftermath of the
French evacuation of Galicia in the summer of 1809:
   Instead of following Ney and Soult as they retreated into Leon... the
   Galicians disbanded. The truth is that in Galicia, as in . . . every other centre
   of guerrilla warfare, people were not terribly committed to liberating Spain.
   The objective... was... to prevent requisitions, tax collections and vio-
   lence by French soldiery . . . The cause likely to arouse Galicians for a fight
   was... Galicia, not Spain. . . Galicians could be made to fight only for
   Galicia... Spanish guerrillas did not fight for their nation, but for their
   homes, valleys, districts and, at best, provinces.”