

   This month has been very vexatious for the inhabitants on account of . . . the
   fear and terror imposed by the soldiers of the Fifth Regiment of Navarre,
   who, being in garrison, every night robbed everyone they could lay their
   hands on and beat up anyone who resisted or proved to have no money. So
   bad have things become that nobody dares to go out except on the most
   urgent business. People have complained to the justices, but nothing has been
   done to contain them, and they carry on robbing just the same.”
   Nor did the attitude adopted by Espoz y Mina himself make matters any
easier. In the face of the protests sent him by the ayuntamiento he maintained
an air of the most studied innocence, pretending that the only reason that his
men were lingering in the city was that he had not received any orders for their
removal, and maintaining — with tongue firmly in cheek — that the troops still
in Zaragoza were habitually well behaved and under the strictest orders to cause
no trouble.*
   On 1 November some relief was obtained when, having been confirmed in
his position by Wellington, Gayan returned to the city as governor, and ordered
                                                     The End of the Guerrillas   183

all those men belonging to Espoz y Mina’s division to leave the city immedi-
ately.** Most complied apart from the garrison of the castle, which first hung
on for a few more days and then deliberately fired the building and all its con-
tents. This, however, was the parting shot of the ‘Division de Navarra’: on 14
November Espoz y Mina’s troops finally left the Arabal and departed for the
Pyrenees, where they were to spend the rest of the war blockading the petty
fortress of St Jean-Pied-de-Port. In the meantime the general’s political control
of his dominions was weakened still further by the appointment — much to his
disgust — of jefes politicos in both Navarre and Aragon. Deprived of the chance
to lord it over Pamplona, which finally fell to the Allies after a prolonged block-
ade at the end of October, Espoz y Mina was left angry and frustrated: hence
the famous incident in which he had a copy of the Constitution of 1812 exe-
cuted by firing squad.*° As for Navarre and northern Aragon, they remained in
a state of chaos. As Espoz y Mina admitted:

  With the Allied armies gathering for the invasion of France, Napoleon
  ordered a levy of 500,000 men; the war, it seemed, was to go on forever. When
  this news reached the ears of our soldiers, desertion began to affect all the
  units of the army, including those of my division . . . for the men were weary
  of constant labour. To collect up the deserters and stragglers that resulted,
  it was necessary to order very severe measures to be taken, whilst the gov-
  ernment made matters worse by ordering the conscription of all single men
  aged between seventeen and forty. Believing that the retreat of the French
  meant that the war was over, the inhabitants refused to give up the fugitives,
  and the officers that I had commissioned for the task were in a number of
  cases forced to proceed against certain local magistrates who failed to co-
   operate with some vigour.”