

   For all Copons’ good intentions, however, it was difficult to make progress.
Samper, for example, was found to be at best a man of little energy, and at worst
an accomplice of the partidas, whilst many of the cabecillas refused to recog-
nise Barrera’s authority and the latter complained that without an escort of
armed men he would be able to achieve little.“* Nor, meanwhile, did it help that
Copons’ counterpart in La Mancha, General Bassecourt, arrested Reig as a
bandit when he travelled to Almansa to arrest the cabecilla Aparici.” At the
same time, no sooner was the heat turned on one band or another than its
members melted away: as Reig complained, it was sometimes impossible to find
any guerrillas at all.” All the same, the campaign for the restoration of order
was not without its successes. Various partidas were suppressed, whilst the par-
ticularly violent chieftain José Puchau was arrested after he had murdered a
rival cabecilla." This latter affair illustrated all too well the difficulties the
authorities were up against: Puchau had essayed defiance — at one point, indeed,
it appeared that he was about to attack Barrera — and had thrown himself on
the mercy of the Aragonese commander Pedro Villacampa, who allowed
himself to be enveigled into riding to his support with a detachment of troops
in return for the promise of the allegiance of the Valencian cabecilla. In the end,
Villacampa decided to back off and Puchau was duly arrested, but as he was
being taken to Alicante his brother attempted to rescue him with the aid of
thirty of his followers.”
   As it happened, Puchau was very shortly recaptured and imprisoned, but the
reality of dealing with the guerrillas at close quarters had not been such as to
lessen the concerns of the military authorities. As Barrera wrote to Copons,
indeed, ‘In God’s name I beg you not to allow any civilian to command a partida
unless you are very sure of him. The cabecillas are the worst thieves that I have
ever come across. I swear that they are driving me mad.’ There was, it seemed,
no way forward unless they were got rid of altogether: as soon as a group
of stragglers and deserters were got together, for example, they would be
174     ~+Fighting Napoleon


encouraged to take flight once again by emissaries of such leaders as Agustin
Nebot (who certainly does not seem to have deserved the admiring coverage
that he received in the liberal press). To quote Barrera again:

   So long as there are . . . guerrilla bands commanded by men of neither scru-
   ples nor instruction with no links with the rest of society, there will be no
   progress with regard to the restoration of order. At the same time, public
   opinion will continue to be cast down, whilst wrongdoers who wish to avoid
   joining the army or give full rein to their passions will always find a refuge.
   And how can this be otherwise when the partidas are either commanded
   by men such as El Fraile and his subalterns or unworthy sergeants and
   corporals who have fled their colours and are the scandal of our military
   system?*
   Pressing though such concerns were, annihilation was not the only policy
pursued by the authorities with regard to the partidas. In La Mancha, for
example, E] Empecinado was very keen for the large number of minor bands
that were swirling around his forces to be placed under his command.** This
was in part blatant empire building, but it was also a solution favoured by other
observers. Amongst the latter was the government’s chief agent in the area,
Rafael Gutiérrez, who suggested that the cuadrillas might be bribed into offer-
ing E] Empecinado their allegiance.” As time went by, however, Gutiérrez, who
had come to realise that the famous guerrilla leader was not quite the hero of
legend, switched his support to the alternative plan of having a new comman-
der sent in from outside. “The state of these provinces’, he wrote, ‘would be
flourishing . . . if only the government would send them the firm, wise and
incorruptible officer who could give them the impulse that is needed, and, in
particular, get into action the . . . thousands of men who have become disgusted
at the quarrels of their leaders and used them as a pretext to return to their
homes.”* For still other correspondents the way forward was simply to ensure
that all the bands were militarised in terms of their organisation and
discipline.”
   But in a sense such nuances are irrelevant. By the end of 1812 the writing
was on the wall. Unless the guerrillas surrendered their autonomy, accepted
full militarisation and submitted to the norms imposed on them by the Patriot
state, they could expect to be treated as outlaws. As yet, there was still some
hope that those who behaved with due docility might find a permanent place
in the armed forces. In the course of 1813 even those hopes were killed,
however. Thanks to the campaigns of 1812 the French had been permanently
ejected from Andalucia, New Castile, Extremadura and Asturias. If ever the
guerrillas were to prove their devotion to the national cause, then this was the
moment for them to do so. By abandoning their old haunts and closing in on
                                                   The End of the Guerrillas   175