

   In Navarre, in particular, conditions were rendered still worse by the impact
on the already war-torn province of the arrival of the Allied armies. “The beau-
tiful valleys begin to look dull’, wrote the British light infantry officer George
Hennell. He continued:

   All the corn is gone; the apple trees [were] stripped long ago. The walnuts
   were scarce ripe before all were gone and the chestnuts are going fast. You
   can have no idea what destruction and waste an army carries with it. We are
   like locusts: every place we halt at . . . bears marks of it, and, although orders
   and punishments abound, it is impossible to prevent pillage. If a soldier
   wants a piece of wood to boil his kettle, and there is beautiful peach or apple
   by the side of a chestnut or oak, I do not believe he would go a yard to choose.
   I have seen fellows knock down a peck of unripe plums for the sake of five
   or six.®®
184    Fighting Napoleon

But nowhere were conditions very different, the fact being that the whole of
Spain was in turmoil. As the Duke of Wellington wrote to the Minister of War,
General O’Donoju, in a repeat of a lament that he had first penned a year
earlier:
  The wants of the troops and the state in which the army is are to be attrib-
  uted to the deficiency of public authority in the provinces . . . The fact is,
  Sir, that the intendants of the provinces are unable or unwilling to perform
  their duty. All authority has been annihilated in Spain, and at the moment
  the greatest exertions are required to form and maintain armies to save the
  state: there is no authority in existence capable of enforcing the most simple
  order of the government. That is the truth, and, till a remedy is applied, the
  evil will become worse.”

One might here, too, cite a petition that reached the cortes from Avila in January
1814, painting a dismal picture of the situation that had prevailed in the wake
of the province’s liberation:

  By the time that the French were driven from Avila, public morality had been
  reduced by the occupation to a most deplorable condition. Authority was
  looked upon with indifference and disobeyed with impunity; there was no
  respect for parish priests or the heads of religious houses; crops and farm
  animals were constantly being stolen . . . and there were constant infractions
  of both our laws and our social customs. On top of all this robbery, pillage
  and even murder were all common on every road, much to the suffering of
  the populace and the general scandal of one and all.””

   Faced by these increasingly gloomy reports, even the most die-hard liberals
accepted that action had to be taken to restore order. By no means all the more
regular elements of the guerrillas had proved as unruly as the forces of Espoz
y Mina — when troops from El Empecinado’s division entered Madrid in June
in the wake of the retreating French, for example, they behaved with the utmost
decorum”! — but it was clear that they were not be trusted. As for the rest of
the partidas, meanwhile, they had now put themselves beyond the pale. In fact,
efforts to restore order had been intensifying since at least midsummer. Such
bandits as could be apprehended were shown no mercy: on ro June, for instance,
Rafael Pidilla, Antonio Toral, Francisco Martinez and Francisco del Rio were
shot by firing squad in Jaén as ‘thieves, deserters, murderers and members of
the criminal gang that has been infesting the . . . paths and roads around the
pueblos of Quesada, Pozo Alcon, Cazorla, Hinojares and Belerda’ (in this respect
it helped enormously that on ro August Wellington used his authority as
commander-in-chief of the Spanish armies to order the immediate dissolution
of all those bands that had not been formally incorporated into the armed
                                                     The End of the Guerrillas   185