

Little more encouraging, meanwhile, is the account of Espoz y Mina given by
Augustus Schaumann, a German commissary attached to Wellington’s army
who had dealings with him after the battle of Vitoria. Thus:

  One day the famous General Francisco Espoz y Mina passed the town [Olite]
  ... The whole town went out to meet him, and the people kissed his hands,
  the hem of his garment and his sword. Very much inflated with his pride at
  all these attentions, his behaviour all too frequently betrayed his lowly origin
  and his total ignorance of decent manners and decorum. Once I sent one of
  my convoy leaders to him with a respectful and courteous letter begging him
  to send one of his commissaries to see me. This man had overrun the whole
  country and had been guilty of many acts of violence ... and I wished to
  come to an understanding with him concerning the boundaries of the dis-
  tricts in which we should have the right to forage. In this way I hoped to put
  an end to all strife. Not only, however, did the general not answer this letter,
  but he dismissed my convoy leader, a Spaniard, with the threat that, if he
  ever dared to come again with such a letter, even if it were written by Lord
  Wellington himself, he would lay him across a bundle of straw and have him
  soundly thrashed by two corporals.””

   This story, perhaps, is exaggerated, but Espoz y Mina was certainly not pre-
pared to tolerate the presence of rivals in his patch. Nor should any of this sur-
prise us, for relations between the Navarrese leader and the Regency had for
some time suggested that the former envisaged himself as an independent
satrap. In the summer of 1812, for example, he had refused to allow the gov-
ernment to send an officer to his division to act as its chief-of-staff: though
common practice in the army since the creation of the General Staff in 1810,
such an appointment would clearly have threatened Espoz y Mina’s indepen-
dence.” At the same time he had also been deeply angered when the Regency
had appointed an intendant for the whole of Aragon early in 1813, thereby once
again challenging his autonomy (in September 1812 he had been given
command of that part of the province north of the River Ebro).”
182.   Fighting Napoleon

   To return to Zaragoza, the behaviour of Espoz y Mina’s troops proved to be
appalling. In his memoirs the Navarrese commander tried hard to maintain that
the trouble stemmed not from his own men but from those he had inherited
from Duran, not to mention the swarms of deserters and bandits who con-
tinued to range the countryside. In this he had a point: it was apparently troops
from Gayan’s Regimiento de Carifiena who staged a riot in the city’s theatre on
g October in the course of which they pelted the actors with stones and other
missiles and defied the representatives of the civil authorities.” But there is
clear evidence from Sos del Rey Catolico that the town had been mercilessly
sacked when the ‘Division de Navarra’ attacked it in March 1813, and as early
as 29 July there had been complaints that Espoz y Mina’s men were molesting
women in the street.*’ Furthermore, many of the bandits of which Espoz y
Mina complained were deserters from his own regiments, as witness the captain
of the ‘Husares de Navarra’ captured at the head of a gang of fifty armed men
at Herrera in late November.*' As for what followed, it was little short of a reign
of terror. For a month Espoz y Mina’s forces robbed innumerable passers-by,
breaking into many houses and levying tolls on anyone who attempted to intro-
duce goods into the city from the north bank of the Ebro (they had established
their chief headquarters in the transpontine suburb known as the Arabal).
Despite the fact that Espoz y Mina had recently been explicitly stripped of the
power that he had hitherto exercised over the dienes nacionales in his domains,
meanwhile, his representatives brazenly sold off the properties of the Arabal’s
Carthusian monastery at public auction. As Casamayor recorded in his journal
at the end of October: