


allowed to strip the Division de Soria of several of its best units. In late
September, however, he heard that the Regency was planning to make the
commander of one of the regiments concerned, Ramon Gayan, governor of the
city. The results were spectacular, to say the least. In the words of Casamayor:

  28 September: at the orders of General Don Francisco Espoz y Mina, the
  commander of the Carifiena infantry regiment, Don Ramon Gayan, who had
  been acting as interim governor of the city, was taken under arrest to the
  town of Egea de los Caballeros. For this purpose there came a captain...
  and 400 cavalry, the first thing that they did being to disarm such soldiers as
  Gayan could muster, and then take them to the castle. At the same time they
  occupied his house and let no one approach, let alone go inside. Sentries were
  posted at every street corner along the Coso, parties of cavalry were sent out
  to patrol the city, and the whole of the Fifth Regiment of Navarre was placed
  under arms. It was just as if we were under attack. Round about one o’clock
  in the afternoon, Gayan came out in a sedan chair escorted by an armed
  guard, and was taken out of the city on the Zuera road. The whole affair
  caused much talk among the people and gave rise to a great sensation.”
   Extraordinary as it was, this coup was very much in keeping with Espoz y
Mina’s administration of his Aragonese domains. There were stories — angrily
denied by the general, of course — that he had sold the effects he had captured
in the castle of the Aljaferia for his own benefit.” Complaints of his arbitrary
behaviour and failure to respect the constitution of 1812, which was proclaimed
in few of the towns he liberated, were numerous, and one example was a pam-
phlet penned by an inhabitant of the town of Barbastro. According to this
observer, Espoz y Mina’s accession to the command of Alto Aragon had at first
been welcomed, for until then the region’s only defenders had been

  Sartos, Domper, Pesoduro . . . Baella, El Malcarado, commanders who... ©
  were unequal to the grand task of reconquering the country and yet laid
  down the law as if they were sovereigns . . . fugitives who . . . abusing our
  credulity and imprudent simplicity, entered even fair-sized towns with a
  handful of men to seize those unfortunates they supposed to be rich, and
  then led them to desolate wildernesses, where they sacrificed anyone who
  could not pay the immense sums they demanded in exchange for their lives
  and liberty to their heathen greed.”

Espoz y Mina, then, had appeared as ‘a Moses sent to liberate us from a slavery
that was worse than Egyptian’, but all was far from well:

  If the sublime code of the constitution was published in Barbastro, the events
  that followed have proved to us that this supposedly sacred ceremony had
                                                   The End of the Guerrillas   181

  little other object than a military parade. Who would have thought that . . .
  at the very time that . . . the liberty of the Spanish nation was being estab-
  lished . . . the north of Aragon would be groaning under the harshest oppres-
  sion, the Aragonese threatened with prison, confiscation and even death at
  the merest whim of military commandants... priests and magistrates
  arrested on frivolous pretexts and detained for long and arbitrary periods,
  and the respectable discharge of neither sacred ministry nor public respon-
  sibility any defence against . . . being flung in a cell or strung up from an
  olive tree.”