

But this flies in the face of reality. Setting aside the very real questions that
exist as to whether most Spaniards actually fought the French at all, 1813 clearly
shows the defenders of hearth and home ravaging the very hearths and homes
that they are supposed to have defended.
   Let us not return, however, to the issue of what the Spanish ‘people’s war’
was about. What is clear is that the liberals were finally shaken out of their com-
placency. As late as February 1813 figures such as Agustin Nebot were contin-
uing to receive enthusiastic coverage in the liberal press. On 15 January, for
example, E/ Conciso described how he had raised a force of 3,000 men,
established a liberated area ruled by its own local junta and set up a number of
workshops to fabricate uniforms and mend weapons and equipment, whilst
remitting the revenues of his district to the government and inflicting a number
of important reverses on the enemy.”' Similarly, on 11 February the Diario de
                                                   The End of the Guerrillas   177


Gobierno de Sevilla reported that Nebot had put down a number of bandits who
had pretended to be operating under his command.” Thereafter, however,
support for the partidas was limited to only the most radical elements in the
Patriot camp. For a good example we might turn to the mouthpiece of the
leading radical Alvaro Florez Estrada. Thus:

  The partisan warfare that is typical of our character kept up the enthusiasm
  of the populace at a time when neither the Spanish government, nor /a
  Carlota,” nor the august offshoots of her family could reach them, and when
  misfortune had banished all hope of liberty. In the midst of French domi-
  nation, love of fatherland, noble ambition and inherited valour gave birth to
  the partidas and armed them with the very arms of the enemy, whilst pre-
  serving hopes of vengeance, tying down considerable forces of the tyrant and
  contributing most effectively to the success of the holy cause for which we
  are fighting. As for the evils attributed to the cwerpos francos, these are to a
  certain extent inevitable given the sort of war that they have been fighting,
  whilst they are of little moment when set alongside the benefits they have
  conveyed. Without them, indeed, we would have had to surrender to the
  usurper. Let us not forget that the greater part of the partidas harass the
  enemy in the areas that he occupies, and this reflection alone ought to be
  enough to dispel the opposing arguments.”

   But Florez Estrada was now very much a lone voice. In the session of 5
October a motion had already been passed enjoining the Regency to take steps
to ensure that the ayuntamientos fulfilled the duty imposed on them by the con-
stitution to maintain order. The pressure was now redoubled, however. The
liberal press applauded vigorously when Principe was surprised by the French
at Fuentecén with the loss of a number of prisoners, with one Granada news-
paper remarking that ‘the death of these soldiers means almost as much to us
as does that of the troops of the enemy’.” On 1 April, meanwhile, an extremely
forthright article printed in the radical E/ Conciso condemned the guerrillas out
of hand: