

   In fairness, the problem was not just the fault of the the guerrillas: across
large parts of the liberated territories the rural populace was in a state of
                                                    The End of the Guerrillas   179


ferment over the question of feudalism. Incensed at the failure of the cortes
either to rescue them from the clutches of the seviores or to address the ques-
tion of land reform, many peasants, indeed, were on the brink of revolution.
Meanwhile, the regime’s problems were complicated still further by its efforts
first, to raise money through the sale of the common lands and, second, to
impose a new system of taxation that, whilst ostensibly much fairer, in practice
led to a huge increase in the amount of money that had to be found by many
provinces. And, on top of all this, liberation meant a return to conscription,
which in turn produced a fresh wave of flight and desertion. Last but not least,
in a number of regions such as Galicia and the Basque provinces the interests
of many local notables had been seriously affected by particular aspects of gov-
ernment policy, the result being that they joined reactionary elements of the
Church in whipping up resistance to the jefes politicos and intendants appointed
by Cadiz.”
    In the context of all this the cabecillas were very worrying figures, especially
when they proved willing to defy the writ of the regime. For a very good
example of the sort of chaos that this development could inflict we have only
to turn to Aragon, and in particular Zaragoza. With no regular Spanish forces
 in the vicinity, the only troops available to occupy the city as the armies of King
Joseph fell back in the wake of the battle of Vitoria were those of Espoz y Mina
 and Duran. For a brief moment the garrison of General Paris looked as if it
 might try to hold on to the city, but a day of fierce fighting which saw elements
 of the two guerrilla commanders’ men advance to its very gates led the gover-
 nor to think again. In consequence, the night of 8/9 July saw the bulk of Paris’
 men file out over the bridge across the Ebro. A small force stayed behind in the
 Aljaferia castle, which the French had turned into a citadel, to slow down the
 pursuit, but otherwise the city was the Spaniards’ for the taking: at dawn,
 indeed, a delegation of the town council presented itself at Duran’s outposts
 in token of surrender. From the beginning, however, things did not go well.
 Commander of only the northern half of Aragon, Espoz y Mina had at first
 been unwilling to send any troops to re-occupy Zaragoza for, positioned as it
 was on the southern bank of the Ebro, the city lay in the domain of Duran,
 who was comandante militar of the southern half of the province. It may have
 been that the Navarrese caudillo was hoping that his much weaker rival’s men
 would be repulsed, leaving him to pick up the pieces and acquire all the bene-
 fits of re-taking it for himself. His hand forced by the French collapse, Espoz
 y Mina had in the end had no choice but to appear before the city, but he was
 sullen and unco-operative, giving Duran no help with the siege of the Aljaferia
 and taking the bulk of his men off in pursuit of Paris.’ And there was worse
 to come. Shortly after Zaragoza was occupied, Duran was sent off to join the
 Spanish Second Army in its pursuit of the F’rench forces that were retreating
 from Valencia, Espoz y Mina being given control of the whole of Aragon and
180   —-Fighting Napoleon