


heroes had emerged as threats to the constitutional order rather than bastions
of its defence. As a result, except in the case of those units that had been assim-
ilated with the rest of the armed forces, by the end of 1813 Patriot Spain was
effectively at war with the guerrillas. All over the country bands were being dis-
banded and their members executed, and the return of Fernando VII ended
the last vestiges of their existence. With many of the units that had made up
the commands of the guerrilla generals also gone thanks to cuts in the size of
the army, and relations with the state worsened still further by the decision of
some few cabecillas to back the liberals in their struggle with Fernando VII —a
decision that for the most part smacks still further of opportunism and frus-
trated ambition — the guerrillas were no more.
                                Conclusion




Let us recapitulate. This work has presented a highly revisionist picture of the
participation of the Spanish people in the Peninsular War of 1808-14. At the
same time it has shed fresh light on the popular guerrillas that remain the most
famous aspect of Spain’s war effort. As a starting-point in this process, the his-
toriography relating to the guerrillas was shown to have contained many ambi-
guities. On the whole it is favourable to them — so much so, indeed, that it verges
on the hagiographic — but a succession of writers nonetheless expressed con-
cerns that were suggestive of an alternative approach to the question. However,
the pursuit of this alternative approach was immediately confronted by serious
problems. Thus, the idea that the defeat of the French in Spain was the product
of a combination of regular and irregular warfare has remained a constant that
remains alive to this day.’ At the same time, like it or not, the French were never
able to conquer the Peninsula despite the application of overwhelming numbers
of troops, and they themselves paid tribute to the importance of the Spanish
guerrillas in their defeat. How, then, was it possible to take views seriously that
argued, in effect, that the ‘people’s war’ had been a phenomenon whose impor-
tance had been greatly overestimated and, further, that the guerrillas had in
many respects been damaging to the Spanish war effort?
   The answer was to approach the question as one of definition. “Little war’ —
the ambushes, raids, skirmishes and minor operations of all sorts known in the
eighteenth century as the guerre des postes — had clearly been of immense impor-
tance in the defeat of the French, but to what extent had its achievements in
fact been the work of bands of armed civilians? Not very much, it seems. In
most cases, the key figure was rather the regular soldier. Much aided by the
geography of the Iberian Peninsula, in Catalonia, Asturias, Galicia and
Andalucia, Spanish troops were able to cling on in the face of French conquest
and mount a series of damaging coups de main. In Aragon and Leon units of
194    Fighting Napoleon