

and judical organs that he had established to govern his domains — were to be
denied him, whilst a particularly unfortunate episode saw him publically
snubbed by Fernando VII when he visited the court to try to press his claim.
Why he should have been treated in this fashion is unclear, but it is probable
that the king had simply been put off by his general air of bombast, come to
see him as dangerously self-serving or been influenced against him by the
chaotic situation in Navarre, where the local élites were protesting bitterly at
his constant demands for food and money and his troops more or less running
wild. Desperate to save his position, Espoz y Mina rushed back to Navarre and
sought to mobilise what remained of his forces for a coup. There was no support
for the general, however. Few men rallied to his cause, and when he finally
attempted to seize the citadel of Pamplona on the night of 25 September 1814
the result was a fiasco that within a few hours had him fleeing for the frontier.'"”
As to what Espoz y Mina was trying to achieve, no attempt was made to pro-
claim the constitution of 1814, and it is probable that the affair’s only goal was
a show of force designed to persuade the king to recognise his claims. At all
events there followed years of exile, punctuated by a fresh period of govern-
ment service in the trienio liberal of 1820-23. In the fighting of 1822—23 the
Navarrese commander showed something of his old ferocity but, for all that,
his liberalism was never more than skin-deep, and his conduct in the exile com-
munity in London was marked by a repellent mixture of egotism and duplic-
ity, and there were even fears among his fellow refugees that he was aiming at
a revolutionary dictatorship.'"
   Moving on to Juan Diaz Porlier, El Marquesito was at least arrested by
Fernando VII in 1814. But the fact that he was in prison does not make him
a liberal: Porlier had, like Espoz y Mina, been out of favour with the liberal
authorities, and his arrest seems to have been motivated by nothing more than
the fact that he had married the sister of the leading liberal politician the Conde
de Toreno. Nor did he give full support to the regime of the war years when
he broke out of gaol and rose in revolt in 1815: the need for a cortes was pro-
claimed, certainly, but it was specifically stated that the new assembly should
have the right to amend the constitution of 1812 as it thought fit.''? And what,
meanwhile, of El Empecinado? !n April 1814 he had willingly rallied to the
absolutist standard, whilst in October of the same year Fernando VII had
rewarded his loyalty by promoting him to the rank of mariscal de campo. Two
years later there followed decoration with the Cruz Laureada de San Fernando,
and two years later again the grant of noble status for himself, his brothers (who
had all fought under him) and his descendants. Although he did not have an
appointment at this time, it is therefore clear that he was well thought of by
the regime and he seems to have had nothing to do with the cause of revolt (a
long manifesto that he is supposed to have sent to Fernando in September 1815
                                                   The End of the Guerrillas   191