

in protest at the king’s policies is now generally reckoned to have been a forgery
made up by his hagiographers). This, however, did not stop him from joining
the rebellion of 1820, or being rewarded with the post of military governor of
Zamora. But even an E] Empecinado was helpless in the face of the calamities
that assailed the liberal regime as a French army stormed across the frontier to
assist the rebels who had already sprung up to fight for the absolutist cause in
the interior. Captured at Olmos in the last stage of the fighting, the erstwhile
partisan had therefore backed the wrong horse, and it was not long before he
was, aS we have seen, on trial for his life at the hands of a vengeful Fernando
Vila”
   To conclude, then, the guerrillas ended, much as they had begun, in ban-
ditry and opportunism. Always primarily the product of the poverty and social
disruption brought about by the impact of war, invasion and economic collapse
on a society whose resources were at the best of times very sparse, the partidas
were motivated by what contemporary observers called ‘greed’ as much as they
were by a desire to fight the French. To put it another way, the men who flocked
to their ranks saw this action as the only means of getting bread for themselves
and their families, and loyalty to Fernando VII, love of the Catholic religion
and even hatred of the French counted for very little when it came to per-
suading them to take up arms. As for their leaders, much the same applies,
except that in their case there was also a measure of ambition, such men as
Francisco Espoz y Mina, Juan Martin and Juan Diaz Porlier being adventurers
who appreciated that their best interests lay in forcing the bands that they had
established to adopt military forms and take an active part in the struggle
against the French. So long as much of Spain was under enemy occupation,
these problems were camouflaged by the facts, first, that, whether they were
called guerrillas or bandits, the mere existence of bands of armed civilians was
enough to cause tremendous problems to the invaders, and second, that even
the most nefarious of actions could easily be presented as a blow in favour of
the Patriot cause. From 1812 onwards, however, the situation began to change.
As province after province fell into the hands of the Allies, so it became more
and more apparent that the real order of the day was not resistance and heroism
but pillage and self-aggrandisement. Every step that the French retreated
stripped away a little more of the glamour that had bedazzled so many observers
for so long, whilst the chaos that characterised the liberated areas intensified
the process of repression and control that had gradually been reducing the
freedom of operation enjoyed by the partidas since the beginning of the war.
For some time this process was resisted by liberal ideologues anxious to promote
the concept of a people’s war and alarmed at the threat of military despotism,
but by 1812 so great was the weight of evidence against the guerrilla popular
that the bulk of its allies had fallen away, especially as many of the liberals’
192    ~=Fighting Napoleon