

guerrilla commanders were drawn ineluctably into support for the cause of
liberalism after 1814. To quote Pablo Casado, for example, ‘Having reached
high ranks in the army thanks to their spectacular actions and the powers which
the cortes had given them, the guerrillas were with rare exceptions opposed to
the absolutist regime, in which respect we might take Espoz y Mina, Diaz
Porlier or Palarea as their exemplars.’"” Much the same idea was expressed by
Gabriel Lovett: ‘It has not been proven that officers with a guerrilla background
who... harboured liberal sympathies were more numerous than those with
absolutist ideas, but this is more than likely since these men had risen to high
rank thanks to their deeds and not to their family background or wealth.’'”
   The exceptions to which Casado refers, however, were more numerous than
he admits: setting aside the obvious example of Merino, who, as we have already
seen, in later life fought as a Carlist, we might here cite Francisco Longa, who
in 1814 was appointed by Fernando VII as governor of Bilbao, before going on
to fight against the liberals in the civil war of 1822—3. Also on a much humbler
level, out of nineteen Valencian cabecillas identified by Ardit, five fought for the
absolutists and only two for the liberals.''' Indeed, one might go much further
here. Many of the most famous guerrilla leaders certainly sided with the liberal
cause after 1814: Espoz y Mina was the first military commander to ‘pronounce’
against Fernando; Porlier staged a revolt in La Corufia in 1815 and died before
a firing squad; Mina and Renovales both became mixed up in revolutionary pol-
itics in Latin America (like Porlier, indeed, the former was eventually executed);
having been taken prisoner by the absolutists in 1823, El Empecinado was hung
in Roa on 19 August 1824, though not before he had made a last-minute bid to
escape from the very foot of the scaffold; and finally, having first been impli-
cated in the plots of 1814-20 and having then fought for the liberals in 1822-3,
Francisco Abad Moreno (Chaleco) went to the scaffold in Granada in Septem-
ber 1827. Unfortunately, however, these post-war heroics have been accorded
more dignity than they deserve, for they can be explained by thwarted ambi-
tion as much as by political idealism. In this respect we might quote Stanley
Payne: ‘Only a few months were needed .. . to show that ex-guerrilla chiefs
were viewed by the court circle as upstarts . . . Having virtually held the power
of life and death in their districts for years, these young commanders would
inevitably feel snubbed.’!”
    In short, we return to the issue of self-interest. Payne, however, does not go
far enough. Implied in his words is an assumption that there was no place at
all for the guerrillas in the Spanish military establishment after 1814, or, to put
it another way, that Fernando VII was unwilling to offer them adequate rec-
ompense for their sacrifices, just as the generals of the regular army were
unwilling to accept them as their equals. But this is at best only partly true.
The regiments that had made up the forces of commanders such as Longa,
                                                   The End of the Guerrillas   189