


also necessary to dispense with one’s most cherished possessions.” As an
admirer of the guerrillas, Gabriel Lovett tells this story with great approval,
but he seems blind to the fact that it can be read in quite another sense. Under
the cover of such demands, Tapia and the rest of the cabecillas could milk the
populace unmercifully without anyone being any the wiser. And certainly for-
tunes were made. To quote General Castafios, ‘As I have not been a guerrilla,
I do not have any money, but rather only debts.” Also described by Lovett,
meanwhile, is an incident in Malaga in which a wealthy landowner organised a
banquet for a number of enemy generals after the French arrived in 1810, only
to find a little while afterwards that his country estate had been attacked and
much of his crops ruined.'® Was this the work of a guerrilla band? If so, was it
a political act — the just and fitting punishment of a collaborator — or an expres-
sion of social unrest? Or was it again simply the fruit of the coincidental visi-
tation of some gang of bandits? And, if it was, indeed, the work of bandits,
 were they motivated by nothing more than love of pillage or were they really
 ‘primitive rebels’ out to avenge the ills of rural society? On these matters and
 others like them, historians have not been slow to offer their opinions.
 ‘Guerrilla warfare... was a rural phenomenon, like Carlism an aspect of
 peasant hatred for urban civilization . . . It had undertones of social war’, wrote
Raymond Carr.'! For Burdiel, too, ‘The guerrilla phenomenon was not driven
solely by anti-French phobia and the pressure of ecclesiastical ideology . .
There were guerrilla bands... who... mixed guerrilla activity with the tra-
ditional conflict against the owners of the land.’!” More sceptical, at least on
the question of banditry, is Geoffrey Best: ‘Spain, in fact, was not rich in the
“Robin Hood” type social bandits who became national resistance leaders in
the Balkans and southern Italy. It is significant that, of the enduringly famous
[guerrilla] leaders, none had begun as a bandit.’’® Well, perhaps. But we cannot
be certain, and in the end can do no more than speculate.
   This is a problem, of course, that has not been lost on historians. Yet it has
not prevented even the most honest amongst them from offering the most pos-
itive assessments of the guerrillas. Let us take Aymes (who, for what it is worth,
rejects the argument that the guerrillas were motivated by the struggle against
the propertied classes with precisely the same vigour as Carr and Burdiel put
it forward). Contained in his Guerra de la Independencia is a more or less tra-
ditional hymn of praise to these forces. ‘Thus:

   The further removed the mass of the population was from political affairs,
   the more fully it participated in the struggle against the invaders . . . Unlike
   the French, who concentrated on dominating the cities, the guerrillas ranged
   rapidly across the countryside and launched surprise attacks on the French
                                                                                 the
   _.. The guerrillas also unleashed a war of attrition that ground down
198     Fighting Napoleon