


   But all this serves to deepen the difficulty. For one thing, any identification
of the guerrilla bands with brigandage cannot but echo and, in a sense, sub-
stantiate the constant Napoleonic claim that the Spanish partidas were in the
end nothing but bandits motivated solely by their lust for plunder. And, for
another, if the guerrillas were indeed bandits, then great doubts must surface
with regard to their contribution to the struggle. And what, too, are the impli-
cations for those such as Jean-Réné Aymes, who have tended to see the guer-
rilla bands as a force that consciously stood outside the norms of state and
army? For example, ‘The chieftains known by their real names... are less
numerous than those referred to by their nicknames . . . Whilst placing com-
manders and soldiers on the same level, these nicknames . . . do not in any sense
imply an absence of respect, what they stand for being rather the formal rejec-
tion of the traditional military hierarchy.”
    In many ways, then, pressure has been mounting for a reassessment of the
guerrillas. Who, though, do we mean when we use this term? Certainly not
regular soldiers or militiamen who found themselves temporarily fighting in the
‘little war’. By ‘guerrilla’, then, we have here meant civilians who took up arms
and became members — and sometimes leaders — of semi-permanent groups of
combatants that, whilst sometimes adopting military forms and being assimi-
lated into the ranks of the regular army, had their origins outside the forces of
the Spanish state, whether regular or auxiliary. Such a definition may well be
deemed rather narrow, but it is the only way to make a reassessment of the guer-
rilla popular a practical possibility. And it is certainly one that coincides with
popular practice. To quote Gabriel Lovett:

  When we think of the Spanish guerrillas of 1808-1813, we have in mind
  mainly those bands of men that arose in several areas of Spain almost from
  the start of the conflict under the leadership of fearless civilians who...
  settled accounts with Napoleon’s armies in their own manner.°

   The need to strip away ‘false’ guerrillas is not the only difficulty, however.
The combatants we are talking about were, in the majority at least, very far
from being an élite group, and it is probable that most of them came from small
towns and villages rather than cities such as Madrid, Barcelona, Seville or
Zaragoza. From this it follows that they were on the whole illiterate: in 1808
no more than 20 per cent of the population were even marginally lettered.
Even amongst literate Spaniards, meanwhile, there seems to have been little of
the impulse to record their experiences of the war against Napoleon that pro-
duced the vast numbers of journals, memoirs and collections of letters that
eventually came to chronicle the Anglo-French picture of the struggle. In con-
sequence, we therefore simply do not have the wonderful sources that have
196   ~~‘Fighting Napoleon

recently allowed Alan Forrest to produce a detailed study of motivation and
morale in the French army.’
    From this there arises the question of bias. Setting aside a mere handful of
memoirs, most of which date from long after the fighting had become a thing
both of distant memory and great romanticisation, and the often problematic
correspondence of the guerrilla commanders themselves, we are therefore
forced back on documents that originated outside the ranks of the partidas. But
this, too, presents us with many problems. For many members of the Church
and the propertied classes and, by extension, many of the political and military
leaders of Patriot Spain, the idea that the populace might take up arms inde-
pendently of the authorities was a nightmare that carried with it the spectre of
wholesale anarchy. Though not opposed to popular resistance per se, it is there-
fore arguable that they were only too ready to ‘talk up’ stories of pillage and
rapine in the hope that this would push the regime into acting against the par-
tidas and reasserting the state’s monopoly of force. In the case of generals and
other regular officers, meanwhile, there was also both a certain degree of jeal-
ousy and a natural desire to camouflage the inadequacies of the Spanish army.
As for British and French observers of the guerrillas, neither could view irreg-
ular combatants who scorned the normal rules of warfare without a measure
of repulsion, whilst for the French it was also necessary both to explain away
their defeat and to back the accepted nostrums of the Napoleonic empire (of
which one, as we have seen, was to portray any civilian who fought the emperor
as a bandit, and another was to attribute all popular resistance to the supersti-
tion and fanaticism of the Catholic Church).
    To return to the question of our knowledge of the guerrillas themselves,
when it comes to the question of identities, it has to be admitted that our infor-
mation is fragmentary in the extreme. With the exception of a few well-known
cabecillas, most of the guerrillas whose personal details we know something
about are encountered in no more than a single document. Even then, details
are often scanty: trial reports, for example, generally provide brief accounts of
the crimes with which the men concerned had been charged, but often tell us
little more than the names of the accused. Building up a coherent picture of
the partidas is therefore hardly an easy task. Also worth pointing out, mean-
while, is the fact that even when information is more plentiful, it is by no means
always reliable, as witness, for example, the numerous myths, legends and
downright inventions that have crept into the stories of men such as Martin
Javier Mina and El Empecinado.
    And finally there is the question of ambiguity. On 31 December 1809, we
are told, the guerrilla leader Juan Tapia sent the government a copy of a procla-
mation he had just issued in the town of Alcaraz in La Mancha. ‘It is not enough
to say, “I am a good Spaniard” to save Spain’, the handbill announced. ‘It is
                                                                  Conclusion    197