


Duran, El Empecinado and Espoz y Mina were certainly reduced in number,
but they were not wiped out. Taking infantry units alone, listed in the official
almanac for 1815 are the Primer de Iberia, Segundo de Iberia, Tercero de Iberia
and Cuarto de Iberia regiments from Longa’s command; the Voluntarios de
Rioja, Voluntarios Numantinos and Carifiena regiments from Duran’s
command; the Tiradores de Sigtienza, Voluntarios de Madrid, Cazadores de
Cuenca and Voluntarios de Guadalajara regiments from El Empecinado’s
command; and the Primero Cantabro, Primero Tiradores de Cantabria,
Segundo Tiradores de Cantabria and Tercero Tiradores de Cantabria regi-
ments from Porlier’s command.''’ And the guerrillas were not the only part of
the armed forces to suffer since their fate was shared by the vast majority of
the new regiments that had been created in the course of the war.'’* As for the
guerrillas’ commanders, all was far from lost. As the example of Longa shows,
space for them could sometimes be found even in the straitened financial cir-
cumstances that characterised Spain’s situation in the immediate post-war
period (and although they are not strictly speaking guerrillas, other cases that
come to mind here are those of the ex-sergeant Pablo Morillo, who commanded
the expeditionary force sent to Venezuela in 1814, and Julian Sanchez, who was
showered with decorations and appointed president of the ‘permanent council
of war’). Indeed, even more minor figures could secure generous settlements
of one sort or another: the Miguel Sarasa who in 1809 raised a partida from his
tenants and household servants was in 1817 appointed to the command of a
light infantry regiment, whilst junior officers such as Manuel Alegre (the
brother of the Aragonese leader E] Cantarero) were given posts in the resguardo,
the tax administration or the tobacco monopoly.'” In short, there was no
vendetta against the guerrillas as such, but rather a financial squeeze that could
not but produce a number of casualties, added to a political climate that was
unlikely to be favourable to anyone who could be tarred with the brush of
liberalism.''°
   What follows from this is that opposition to Fernando VII amongst the guer-
rillas was at least as much the product of circumstance as it was that of con-
viction. Let us take as examples the cases of Espoz y Mina, Porlier and El
Empecinado. In 1814, as we have seen, Espoz y Mina led the first of a series of
military revolts against the absolutist regime that was in the end to bring about
the restoration of the liberals in the revolution of 1820. But this was not for
love of the constitution of 1812. On the contrary, the Navarrese commander
had for some time been deeply at odds with the political leadership of Patriot
Spain, and initially rallied to Fernando VII with enthusiasm. One by one,
however, he found that his goals — nomination to the viceroyalty of Navarre,
the survival of his division as an independent command and the perpetuation
of both his powers of patronage and, by extension, the various administrative
190    Fighting Napoleon