

anti-bandit mandate, and it is therefore no coincidence that, after months of
inaction, the cortes now moved to accelerate its formation).”* In a debate held
in November 1812 the cortes had in fact specifically rejected a proposal put
forward by the Regency for the creation of three companies of celadores
(‘watchmen’) in each province, on the grounds that such a force would both
represent a breach of the constitution and tend to usurp the role of the national
militia.” But the idea would not go away: not only did various individuals
request commissions in such companies, should they be formed, but the idea
was resurrected in a number of petitions received by the cortes.'”
   When finally established on 15 April 1814, the national militia was certainly
put forward as an answer to banditry, the royal decree that set it up specifically
stating that its duties would include hunting down deserters and other wrong-
doers.’ At this stage, however, this force could make no difference. Less
than three weeks later Fernando VII was back in Madrid as absolute ruler of
Spain, and it is not in fact clear that any units of the militia were ever actually
embodied, nor, still less, that they caught even a single bandit. Though it
might be pointed out that liberal policies with regard to the restoration of
order were never fairly tested, the chief weight of the problem therefore fell
upon the shoulders of the bureaucratic absolutism represented by the regime
of Fernando VII. Faced as it was by a problem of enormous dimensions, it was
never likely that this would act with anything other than cold ferocity. The end
of the guerrillas, indeed, was not long in coming. On 26 July 1814 there duly
appeared a royal decree on the subject, which was characterised by a mixture
of fear, contempt and lack of generosity. In brief, any officer of the partidas who
could prove his right to the commission that he held would be assimilated into
the milicias urbanas — companies of town guards maintained by the old Bourbon
army and now restored by Fernando VII — and it was also agreed that any
member of the bands who had been wounded would be accorded the pay and
status of members of the army’s corps of invalids: Beyond that, however, the
news was very bad: the highest rank available to any officer was that of cornet
of cavalry, whilst all priests and religious were ordered to return to their normal
vocations and all deserters to rejoin their regiments. In short, the partidas were
to be broken up forthwith, and given almost nothing in the way of credit for
their efforts. As for the consequences of resistance, they were at best grim: any
band that tried to stay together or maintain itself in arms would be treated as
a gang of bandits and put to the sword.'” Notably absent from the provisions
of the decree, however, were the ‘Division de Navarra’, the ‘Division de Soria’
and the other militarised partidas. As Best says:

      Whether they were still guerrillas or not may well be questioned. The gov-
      ernment of their country had succeeded in their cases in doing what all gov-
                                                    The End of the Guerrillas   187