

regular troops — the supposed partidas of Julian Sanchez, Felipe Perena and
Pedro Villacampa — actually operated as guerrilla bands. Along the Portuguese
frontier troops of the Anglo-Portuguese army of the Duke of Wellington reg-
ularly sallied forth to attack isolated detachments of French soldiers or elimi-
nate important strongpoints. And from the ports of Cadiz and La Corufia
bodies of troops that ranged in size from a few hundred men to entire divisions
were embarked on ships and sent along the coast to disembark behind enemy
lines and generally cause fear and confusion in their ranks. Supplementing these
troops in some parts of Spain, meanwhile, were a variety of militias and home
guards that might on occasion engage in guerrilla-style operations but must yet
be regarded as part of the armed forces of the state. This is not to say, of course,
that traditional guerrilla bands — defined in this respect as independent groups
of armed civilians — did not exist. On the contrary, in Navarre, Aragon, the
Basque country, Asturias, the two Castiles, Extremadura, Andalucia and the
Levant they at the very least enjoyed a high profile. But it does mean that it is
possible to address the subject in a different light, and, in particular, to reassess
the doings of the partidas.
   That this is a necessary exercise we need be in no doubt, for the traditional
view of a great crusade in favour of dios, rey y patria has become ever harder
to sustain. In the first place, the picture that has emerged of Bourbon Spain in
the years leading up to the Peninsular War — a society that was desperately poor,
riven by social and economic unrest and shattered by the impact of war — is
difficuit to reconcile with a vision of an urban and rural poor eager to immo-
late itself in defence of the antiguo régimen. In the second, there is substantial
evidence to suggest that the populace were, in fact, deeply hostile to the war
against the French. And in the third, a growing weight of historical writing has
made it clear that popular resistance is a subject that is open to general reassess-
ment. ‘Thus, taking an example from outside Europe, Harry Ward has shown
that in the American War of Independence many of the partisans who fought
for each side were roving bands of robbers who ravaged the civilian populace
without mercy.” Meanwhile, if we look at Napoleonic Italy, the American
authors Grab and Finley have shown that banditry was central to the ‘people’s
war’ intermittently faced by the French. Thus, for Grab, in the domains of the
Milan-based Kingdom of Italy, banditry and opposition to the Napoleonic
ruler were one and the same: ‘Brigandage constituted . . . the most extreme
form of resistance of the Italian countryside to the growing power of the
Napoleonic state, its increasing intrusiveness and mounting pressure, partic-
ularly in the realms of taxation and conscription. Indeed, many of the brigands
were deserters who were afraid to go home and survived by robbing and
smuggling.” Equally, for Finley, ‘The Calabrian guerrillas... were simply
brigands.”*
                                                                 Conclusion   195