


  ernments must wish to do, and all professional military men wished to do. It
  had brought society’s violence-potential under its own control.’

   Needless to say, this decree was honoured more in the breach than in the
observance. With agriculture, trade and industry in ruins, their homes in many
cases burned-out shells, many provinces wracked by terrible epidemics of
yellow fever and other diseases and the regime likely to impose conscription to
raise the men it needed to fight the rebellions that had broken out in Mexico
and South America in 1810, there was little incentive for the partidas to lay
down their arms and fade away. In consequence, banditry remained a massive
problem which the regime combated without mercy, setting up many special
tribunals and making use of large number of regular troops (at one stage 4,000
men were said to be pursuing the so-called ‘seven boys of Ecija’ alone).'* But
there is again no way that the upsurge in banditry that followed the end of the
war can be regarded as in any sense a consciously political phenomenon. Indeed,
the most well-known of the popular leaders to have followed this course after
1814 — the Valencian Jaime Alfonso — fought for the absolutists in the guerrilla
insurrection that assailed the liberals when they once again seized power in the
revolution of 1820.'°° Poverty and despair bred bandits, certainly, but, as before,
la vida a salto de mata remained at best a survival strategy whose victims were
as likely to be the poor as they were the pudientes. In Galicia, the only province
of which we have much knowledge, the proportion of the victims of banditry
represented by the clergy actually seems to have fallen slightly between 1814
and 1820, whilst the populace as a whole continued to loathe the cuadrillas,
denouncing many of their members to the authorities and on occasion hurling
themselves upon gangs who appeared in their midst with whatever weapons
that came to hand.! And, as before, though the rich were targeted, it was
simply because they were rich rather than because they were the enemies of the
people: when an Italian deserter who was the chief of a small gang that oper-
ated in the vicinity of Barbastro kidnapped a wealthy local proprietor and
informed his family that they would be sent a piece of his body every day until
they paid a ransom of 30,000 francs, he was acting in the manner not of Robin
Hood but of Al Capone.'”” Nor, meanwhile, is there any real evidence of ‘social
banditry’ in Extremadura, where the ‘boys of Santibafiez’ were joined after
1814 by the much feared ‘gang of Melchor and Merino’.
   What little we know of the fate of the wilder fringes of /a guerrilla popular
after 1814 tends to confirm a sceptical view of the insurgents’ motivation in the
struggle against the French. And if this is so of the more obscure elements of
the movement, it is certainly the case with their leaders. For many years it was
almost an article of faith in works on nineteenth-century Spain that, having
fought for national independence in the struggle against Napoleon, the
188   — Fighting Napoleon