


epidemic proportions. How far, however, was it connected with resistance to
the invaders? This is another question that is almost impossible to answer, but
it is clear that, although the complete identification of the guerrilla with the
bandit that is one of the major themes of the French memoir literature is
unfounded, the two were nonetheless very closely linked. Many cuadrillas con-
tinued to ply their trade regardless of the French invasion, but in the process
they saw no reason not to attack isolated Frenchmen or churchmen, officials
and proprietors connected with the occupation authorities, and in that sense
became a part of the guerrilla struggle. At the same time a variety of men who
had been imprisoned or on the run in 1808 found refuge with the guerrillas or
even established guerrilla bands of their own. Despite romantic claims that in
 1808 Spain’s bandits turned Patriots overnight, this course of action meant
nothing other than that /a vida a salto de mata was henceforth to be coated with
a veneer of respectability and, what is more, a veneer of respectability that was
 tested to destruction as soon as the wave of French conquest receded. And,
 turning to the partidas, we find that there were also links working in the oppo-
 site direction, in that many of their recruits clearly only joined them in the
 expectation that by doing so they would be guaranteed easy opportunities for
 plunder. Nor was their commitment to the cause anything other than condi-
 tional, meanwhile: should their hopes in any sense be betrayed, whether
 through the sudden imposition of military discipline or the failure of their
 leaders to provide adequate booty, they were quick to join bands that had no
 pretensions to be anything other than bandits or simply to set up as bandits on
their own account.
   None of this is to say that no irregular ever pulled a trigger against a French-
men. Although there is considerable evidence that many bands saw action on
only a very infrequent basis, it cannot be denied that, taking such groups as a
whole, they took part in many fights and skirmishes. Indeed, the more com-
mitted leaders — the men who saw that their long-term advancement depended
on carving out a name for themselves as successful soldiers — waged war on the
French with unremitting ferocity. Yet the lack of motivation evident amongst
much of the movement, not to mention the poor armament, insufficient
                                                                                      its
training and want of solidity of many of its adherents, could not but reduce
                                                                                       to
impact. Setting aside the many bands that were mere parasites that appear
have existed solely to feed themselves at the expence      of  the  populace,   all  the
                                                                              halt the
efforts of those partidas that were willing to fight the French could not
                                                                                    was
march of Napoleonic conquest, still less roll it back. When success
                                          was only  thanks  to  mistakes  on  the   part
achieved, as it was in 1812 and 1813, it
                                                                                all the
of Napoleon — in particular, his foolhardy invasion of Russia — whilst
                                                                               on the
evidence suggests that the Duke of Wellington relied far less heavily
200    ~=Fighting Napoleon