


    And last but not least, it must be noted that the guerrillas or, more broadly,
popular resistance to Napoleon, ushered in a new age. The experiences of
 1808-14 did not in themselves politicise the people of Spain, any more than
they imbued them with an inherent urge to take to the hills. In this respect,
Burdiel’s claims that the conflict was ‘a powerful mechanism of political
apprenticeship for the population as a whole, the lessons of which were not
easily forgotten’ are in the short term nonsense.” But they did establish them
as a political presence, and to return to Aymes’ remarks, ‘ennoble’ them. This
latter concept should not be interpreted in any literal sense: as we have seen,
the guerrilla struggle was a murky affair characterised by as much vice as virtue.
However, no longer could the populace simply be swept aside as the populacho
or the canalla vil. In contrast, whatever politicians and generals might think of
them in private, they were now a force to which it was necessary to pay lip-
service and to whom competing political movements could appeal for legiti-
macy. Even before the war had ended, the liberals had set themselves up as
veritable tribunes of the people, whilst after 1814 it was a key part of the abso-
lutist case that their enemies had usurped the people’s sovereignty and gov-
erned in despite of the popular will rather than in accordance with its dictates.
‘In effect’, proclaimed one diatribe, ‘from the moment that the ordinary cortes
was established [the liberals] made a complete mock of the people, whom they
called sovereign, and obliged them to obey their orders, however much they
were contrary to the will of the greater part of the nation.’ This is hardly to
say, of course, that Spain was in any sense democratised by the war. But for lib-
erals and absolutists, as later for conservatives and progressives, there was a
strong sense that the ‘real’ people of Spain had spoken, and that, given the
appropriate formula, they could be brought to speak once more.
   So much for the legacy of partisan warfare. Let us, however, return to the
central point at issue. We have here a new analysis of the Spanish guerrillas.
Rather than the freedom-fighters of legend, they appear rather as a highly
complex phenomenon whose military impact has been greatly exaggerated by
a combination of muddled thinking, political bias and failure to make use of
the full range of primary sources that is available to the historian. Nor have
matters been helped by an over-concentration on the highly atypical example
of Navarre at the expense of the far more helpful examples constituted by such
provinces as Aragon and La Mancha. To claim that this work is the last word
on the subject would be foolish — a great wealth of material remains to be tapped
in municipal archives all over Spain — but it is at least the product of a sub-
stantial programme of research. Whilst it will certainly be challenged, the issues
that it has raised will not go away. The debate, then, will go on, but it will most
assuredly not go backwards.
                     — Abbreviations