


guerrillas’ ability to distract the French than has often been claimed. No one
would claim that the irregulars caused the French no difficulties at all: one
might here place particular emphasis on the supply difficulties in which they
involved the invaders, not to mention the growing demoralisation and fear
visible amongst the officers and men sent to the Peninsula. Yet the general
impression is highly negative. In brief, the guerrillas can be seen to have under-
mined the Spanish army whilst putting nothing in its place. At the same time,
it is even possible to question the role of the guerrillas in keeping up the spirit
of resistance that was supposedly so important to the struggle. Far from living
amongst the populace, the guerrillas lived off it, terrorising it mercilessly and
bringing down endless woes on its head.
    In fact, few scholars would now give the same weight to the guerrillas in
analyses of the struggle as was once the case. It is agreed that the guerrillas
were important, certainly, but there is at least now a clear recognition that in
the last resort they were a secondary factor in the Allied triumph. ‘The liber-
ation of Spain’, writes Rothenberg, ‘was the result of Wellington’s victory, one
to which they had contributed much.’”” In some quarters, indeed, there is a
willingness to go even further:
  In the Tyrol and Calabria .. . popular revolts had in time been smothered
  through the application of overwhelming military power. By 1812 the impe-
  rial forces had come very close to achieving this in Spain, too; despite heavy
  losses in their attritional contest with the partisans, they had made consid-
  erable headway, and the Spaniards were palpably feeling the strain."
Let us here cite, too, Stuart Woolf:
  Spanish historiography has long interpreted this dramatic episode in the
  country’s history as a nationalist war; for conservative writers, it is usually
  also regarded as a Catholic crusade for Church and altar... . But the evi-
  dence of this prolonged struggle... argues against any identity of view
  between the guerrillas . . . and either the constitutionalists or the Church . . .
  As the considerable number of . . . peasants and fishermen who habitually
  practised contraband were joined by soldiers from the former Spanish armies
  ... deserters from the French armies . . . outlaws of all types, the blurring
  of the distinction between collective resistance and brigandage upheld by the
  French became ever more realistic. Indiscipline, desertions and highly per-
  sonal motivations were intrinsic to the . . . bands, whose presence was often
  far from welcome to local villagers.’
   The conclusion that we have reached, then, is not one that is out of line with
current historical writing on the Napoleonic period. That said, however,
honesty dictates the admission of a number of serious problems. We return
here, above all, to the question of ambiguity. As has already been pointed out,
                                                                    Conclusion    201