


 of the guerrillas that seeks to mould itself to this reality rather than airily pro-
 claiming its faith in a people’s crusade which never existed. Needless to say, it
 is precisely this need that the current work attempts to address.
    To conclude, what impact did the guerrillas have on the future of Spain? In
 so far as this subject is concerned, there has been a general willingness to draw
 a direct line from the events of 1808-14 to the terrible civil wars that ravaged
 Spain between 1822 and 1876 and then again between 1936 and 1939. To quote
 Lovett, for example, ‘The... Spanish people acquired the habit of . . . taking
 to the hills, a habit that was to become an ingrained national characteristic.
 Henceforward a favourite reaction to an unwelcome political situation would
 be . . . echarse al monte [take to the hills].””' This, however, is too facile an extra-
 polation, for, as Jeremy Black has shown, the irregular band was nothing new
 in Spain, partidas of armed civilians having taken an active role in the War of
 the Spanish Succession of 1701-14.” The most that can be said in this respect
 is that rebel forces — and by this one means primarily the Carlists — unable to
 establish control of sufficient territory to wage regular campaigns against the
 government, were provided with an alternative model of military organisation
 that allowed them at least to keep their cause alive. In this they were aided in
 the wars of 1822-3, 1827 and 1833-9 by the presence of many combatants who
 had actually fought with the guerrillas either as cabecillas — Jeronimo Merino,
Jaime Alfonso — or as members of the rank and file — Tomas de Zumalacar-
regui (in reply to which it could be said that the liberals had their own
War-of-Independence weapon in the form of the national militia). But
Carlist strategy was always in essence a regular one based on the formation of
field armies, whilst there is little evidence that the legacy of the partidas was
of much importance in stirring up popular revolt amongst the Carlist rank
and file.
    More work is needed here, but it is not clear that popular movements on the
left looked back to the struggle against the French for their inspiration when
it came to asserting themselves against the establishment either. In this respect,
one would have to disagree with Alexander Grab, who has argued that in Italy
the peasant unrest of the late nineteenth century, and ultimately the rural wing
of the Italian labour movement, was the direct descendant of the brigandage
of the Napoleonic Wars.” Very occasionally, radical or even republican partidas
may be encountered in histories of Spanish revolutionary movements in the
nineteenth century, but the guerrilla band was not to become a tool of the left
until the aftermath of the Spanish Civil War. For radicals, in fact, the tradi-
tional weapon was rather the urban rising and, above all, the barricade (which
is not to say that the war against the French was not devoid of symbols that
could be made use of by the progressive camp: one thinks here of the Dos de
Mayo and the sieges of Zaragoza). Nor, indeed, did the guerrillas ever consti-
tute anything more than an escape route for the most desperate so far as the
                                                                       Conclusion     203