


populace was concerned. As we have seen, there was little identification
between partida and pueblo, whilst out-and-out bandits were often fallen upon
by lynch mobs or denounced to the authorities: one returns here to the belief
of Best and Lopez Moran that the bandoleros were anything but the champions
of the commonalty dreamed of by romantic Marxists such as Hobsbawm. If
the Spanish War of Independence has any links at all with the future Spanish
left, then, it is rather in the revolt against feudalism of 1813-14, when hun-
dreds of villages either physically attacked their sevtores or sought to challenge
their privileges in the courts.”* Also important here was the resistance to the
sale of the common lands ordered by the cortes as a means of paying for the
war: in November 1813, for example, the ayuntamiento of Cartaya complained
that its disamortisation of the lands concerned was being challenged by two of
the peasants who had formally rented them out.”
   If some of the more obvious ways in which the guerrillas could have made
their mark on the later development of Spanish history can therefore be ruled
out, this is not to say that they are of no relevance whatsoever to later develop-
ments. On the contrary, to the extent to which the guerrilla struggle greatly
fuelled banditry — between 1800 and 1810 there were 153 cases of banditry in
Galicia, whereas between 1810 and 1820 there were 305”° — the insurgents are
of immense importance. By plunging the countryside into anarchy, they set
Spain on the road to the creation in 1844 of the militarised police force known
as the Guardia Civil, which was be one of the chief factors in the polarisation
of society that ultimately led to the civil war of 1936-39: modelled on the
Napoleonic Gendarmerie d’Espagne, the Guardia Civil was originally even uni-
formed in the style of its imperial predecessor.” At the same time and, in some
ways, still worse, the guerrillas also intensified the army’s tendency to inter-
vene in politics. In this they were not the only factor — there were in fact many
ways in which the War of Independence encouraged the officer corps to con-
flate the national interest with its own desires and aspirations — but the partidas
constituted a particularly painful memory. Thus, not only had their much
vaunted triumphs, many of them exaggerated or even non-existent, humiliated
                                                                                       had
the military estate and provided ammunition for its enemies, but they
sapped the army of men, horses and money and thereby directly contributed
                                                                                         of
to its prostration. With these sins compounded by the later identification
                                                                    became     fixated   by
guerrilla warfare with the Carlists, the army in consequence
                                                                                 of social
the need to maintain law and order and deeply opposed to all forms
                                                                           factor in this
unrest in the countryside. Again the guerrillas were not the only
                                             said to  have  played  an   important     role
process, but in this respect they may be
                                                                   so   strong    was   the
in conquering the army for social conservatism. Indeed,
                                                                    it is not going     too
military’s hatred for the concept of the people in arms that
                                            squads   of  1936  were   in some respects
far to say that the victims of the firing
paying for the sins of the partidas of 1808-14.”
204    Fighting Napoleon