

   enemy’s economic potential... Aside from a few greedy or ambitious
   cabecillas, the civilian guerrillas did not seek to enrich themselves, their reli-
   gious sentiment serving to moderate their actions.'*

As with all such descriptions of the guerrillas, one cannot say that this view is
either right or wrong, and this is not in fact something that preoccupies the
author in question. As he continues: ‘In reality it does not matter how far the
guerrillas corresponded to this warm description. What matters is that, thanks
to the guerrillas, the War of Independence ennobled the name of the people.’
    This, however, is not good enough. The material on the guerrillas available
 in the archives may be skewed, inadequate and ambiguous, but it cannot just
 be ignored, particularly as it is extremely copious. And, however uncomfort-
 able his findings may be, it is the job of the historian to produce a view of the
 subject that takes it into account. What has emerged in the pages of this work
 is obviously a vision of the partidas that is diametrically opposed to the one that
 has been put forward by Aymes and the tradition in whose footsteps he has fol-
 lowed. Indeed, it is one that will be virtually unrecognisable to many observers.
 Far from appearing as the fruit of a great popular upsurge against the French,
 the guerrillas are seen rather to have been an artificial creation. In part this was
 the work of agents of the state (or at least the ruling authorities), supplemented
by that of a variety of individuals whose sectional interests were bound up with
the defence of the antiguo régimen. But in part, too, it was the work of oppor-
tunistic, ambitious and unscrupulous adventurers whose only redeeming
feature was the recognition by some of their number that their goals were best
served by adopting the approach of the regular soldier and, in short, becom-
ing professionals themselves. As for the rank and file, voluntary enlistment was
limited to deserters, draft evaders and men who had been rescued from French
captivity or were in trouble with the authorities, not to mention the hungry and
desperate. Patriotism, meanwhile, is notable only by its absence: the bulk of
those who served with the partidas, indeed, were almost certainly forced to
enlist at gunpoint, and the only areas where this was not so were parts of
Navarre and the Basque provinces, where peculiar local conditions had created
a contented rural populace whose economic interests were clearly threatened
by French rule. And even these exceptions must be questioned: critical work
on the response of Navarre to absolutist military mobilisation in the post-war
period has suggested the devotion to the old order highlighted by Tone and
other historians has been exagerrated.°
    Co-existing with the guerrillas was the phenomenon of banditry. Already on
the increase in 1808 thanks to the economic disruption of the pre-war years,
this problem was converted by the arrival of the French into a phenomenon of
                                                                      Conclusion    199