


much of the evidence that has been put forward in support of traditional dis-
cussions of the guerrillas is susceptible to interpretations that are diametrically
opposed to those in whose cause they are advanced. Nor, clearly, can much
reliance be placed on many of the documents and memoirs on which they are
based. René Chartrand, for example, describes the memoirs of Espoz y Mina
as ‘a primary document in the study of the Spanish guerrillas which established
[Espoz y] Mina’s claims to have pinned down tens of thousands of troops which
would otherwise have been deployed against Wellington,’ when it is clear that
they are at best partial and at worst a tissue of lies.”” But the very same objec-
tions can be made to the evidence put forward in support of the revisionist view.
To every document found in the archives complaining of sons conscripted by
roving guerrilla bands, it may rightly be objected that submitting such a doc-
ument was an obvious way of staving off retribution on the part of the author-
ities, whether French or Spanish. By the same token, every complaint of pillage
and rapine on the part of some partida may just as plausibly be answered by
 the argument that such protests are not to be trusted on account of the fact
 that they were the equally obvious resort of afrancesados punished for their
 treason or army officers anxious to defend the prerogatives of the military.
 There is, too, the issue of libel: whilst ferocious attacks on Espoz y Mina may
 have been uncovered in the archives in Zaragoza, say, there is nothing to show
 that they were not the fruit of personal vendettas. And finally, if Espoz y Mina
 ruthlessly suppressed a number of rival cabecillas, why should we immediately
 assume that his objective was self-aggrandisement rather than accepting
 his claims that all he was trying to do was to save the populace from the threat
of banditry?
   To these arguments there is no real answer, no way that the evidence can be
made to stick in favour of either side. In consequence, the thesis advanced in
this book must be recognised to be as artificial in its construction as the argu-
ments that it has been put forward to challenge. That said, however, it does
seem that there are issues which the traditional view of the guerrillas simply
does not address. Most prominent here is the question of popular engagement
with the struggle. Whilst there are many matters about which we cannot be
certain, the one issue on which there can be no doubt at all is the refusal of the
Spanish people to rally to the war against Napoleon. Thus, after the very special
circumstances of the summer of 1808, on all sides there was nothing to be seen
but draft evasion, desertion and anti-conscription riots. Amply recorded in both
                                                                                    no
British and Spanish sources, this simply cannot be wished away, and it is
good trying to explain the problem in terms of the localism talked of         by ‘Tone
                                                                               Catalan
and others since precisely the same problem is visible with regard to the
                                             were never  required   to  serve  beyond
migueletes and somatenes, even though they
the frontiers of their home province. What is needed, then,      is  an   explanation
202.    ~=Fighting Napoleon