

1  Corres.  de  Napoleon,  6208,  Letter  to  Decres,  25th  July  1802. 


ch.  i         HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  5 

fully   fulfil   his  instructions,  may   perhaps    be   able  1803. 
to  put  you  in  a  position  to  gain  the  great  glory 
which  prolongs  the  memory  of  men  beyond  the  lapse 
of  centuries." 

The  date  of  these  secret  instructions  was  the  1 5  th 
of  January  1803,  and  in  them  occurs  the  expression, 
"  unless  war  breaks  out  before  the  end  of  September 
1804,"  which,  elucidated  by  parallel  passages  in 
Napoleon's  correspondence,  shows  that  he  was  reckon- 
ing upon  that  time,  and  no  earlier,  for  the  renewal  of 
hostilities.  Evidently  he  counted  upon  choosing  his 
own  moment  for  aggression,  with  such  a  man  as 
Addington  in  charge  of  England  ;  but  even  if  he  had 
reckoned  truly  herein,  which,  as  events  were  to  prove, 
he  did  not,  he  overlooked  the  presence  in  India  of 
Lord  Wellesley  and  his  brother  Arthur.  The  de- 
struction of  Tippoo  Sahib's  power  in  Mysore  had  at 
last  brought  the  British  and  the  Mahrattas  face  to  face ; 
and  no  man  of  any  foresight  could  doubt  that  before 
long  there  would  be  a  desperate  struggle  between  them 
for  the  mastery  of  India.  The  refusal  of  the  Mahrattas 
to  take  their  share  in  the  partition  of  Mysore  had 
sufficiently  shown  their  jealousy  and  unfriendly  feeling 
over  the  British  successes  in  that  province ;  and, 
divided  though  they  were  among  themselves,  they 
had  begun  to  realise  generally  that  their  chances  of 
supremacy  were  lost  unless  they  could  drive  the  British 
from  the  country.  But  this  was  not  all.  The  French 
officer,  Perron,  though  nominally  no  more  than  a 
commander  in  Scindia's  service,  was  actually  his  vice- 
gerent in  the  north,  and,  while  holding  the  deposed 
Emperor  Shah  Alum  in  durance,  used  the  imperial 
name  to  dignify  and  strengthen  his  own  authority.  So 
great  was  his  power  and  so  wide  its  range  that  he  had 
already  seen  visions  of  an  independent  sovereignty,  and 
he  was  known  to  have  corresponded  with  the  French 
Directory  with  the  object  of  obtaining  the  support  of 
the  Republic.  Thus  Wellesley  was  threatened  with  a 
resurrection  of  French  rivalry  in  India,  and  that  not 


{ 


6 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY    book  xii 


1803.  under  the  feeble  direction  of  Bourbon  kings,  but  under 
the  active  and  indefatigable  impulse  of  Bonaparte.  To 
the  British  Viceroy,  therefore,  the  power  of  the  Mahrattas 
signified  the  power  of  France.  Apart  from  France  he 
was  willing  to  live  at  peace  with  them,  if  by  any  chance 
a  central  authority  could  be  established  strong  enough  to 
bind  the  entire  Mahratta  Confederacy  to  fulfil  a  friendly 
treaty.  Then  the  British  dominions  would  be  delivered 
from  continual  anarchy  upon  their  frontiers.  But  while 
Perron  and  his  compatriots  remained  in  Scindia's  service, 
there  could  be  no  trust  and  no  security. 