

July,  middle  of  July  Arthur  Wellesley's  patience  gave  way. 
Collins  was  still  pressing  Scindia  to  withdraw  his  army 
to  Hindostan  ;  but  Scindia  showed  not  a  sign  of  yielding. 
"  We  ought,' '  wrote  the  General,  in  effect,  "  to  have 
insisted  on  his  retiring  in  May.  Since  that  time  six 
valuable  weeks  have  elapsed.  We  have  gained  nothing  ; 
on  the  contrary,  we  have  consumed  our  resources. 
Holkar  is  still  north  of  the  Taptee  and,  even  if  his 
intentions  be  hostile  to  us,  cannot  join  Scindia  for  some 
time.  The  swelling  of  the  rivers  still  protects  our 
frontier  and  exposes  that  of  the  enemy.  Every  day's 
delay  deprives  us  of  this  advantage,  and  therefore  no 
time  should  be  lost."  An  amusingly  insolent  rejoinder 
of  the  Mahratta  chiefs  to  a  reiterated  request  for  the 
withdrawal  of  their  armies  at  last  brought  matters  to  a 
crisis.  On  the  3rd  of  August  Collins  quitted  Scindia's 
1  Wellington  Desp.  ii.  10,  27,  36,  39,  40,  47,  97. 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY 


camp,  and  the  fate  of  the   Mahratta  Empire  was  1803. 
committed  to  the  hazard  of  war.  Au2-  3- 

The  Viceroy's  plans  for  the  campaign  had  for  some 
time  been  matured,  and  he  had  resolved  to  carry  the 
war  into  every  part  of  the  enemy's  dominions.  The 
principal  forces  to  be  faced  were  the  joint  armies  of 
Scindia  and  of  the  Rajah  of  Berar  in  the  Deccan,  and 
the  main  army  of  Scindia  commanded  by  Perron  in  the 
north.  The  former,  which  still  lay  about  the  Ajunta 
Ghaut,  numbered  in  all  about  fifty  thousand  men 
with  one  hundred  and  ninety  guns  :  of  this  force  thirty- 
eight  thousand  were  cavalry,  ten  thousand  five  hundred 
regular  infantry,  and  a  thousand  rocket-men  and  match- 
lock-men. In  the  north  Perron,  who  had  fixed  his 
headquarters  at  Coel,  about  fifty  miles  north  of  Agra, 
was  at  the  head  of  about  thirty-five  thousand  men, 
including  from  sixteen  to  twenty  thousand  horse,  with 
a  very  large  and  well-appointed  train  of  artillery. 

To  oppose  these  hosts  there  were  formed  two 
principal  armies  :  the  northern  under  General  Gerard 
Lake,  the  hero  of  Linselles  in  1793  an<^  tne  obedient 
tool  of  Dublin  Castle  in  1798  ;  the  southern  under 
Arthur  Wellesley.  Lake's  headquarters  were  at  Cawn- 
pore,  and  the  troops  under  his  immediate  command 
numbered  ten  thousand  five  hundred  men,  including 
three  regiments  of  British  cavalry  and  one  battalion  of 
British  infantry.  In  addition  to  this  force,  between 
three  and  four  thousand  men  were  assembled  near 
Allahabad  for  the  invasion  of  Bundelcund  ;  about  two 
thousand  more  were  collected  at  Mirzapore  to  cover  the 
city  and  province  of  Benares,  while  other  detachments 
guarded  the  frontier  from  Mirzapore  over  three  hundred 
miles  eastward  and  southward  to  Midnapore. 