

morning  of  the  19th,  and  though  delayed  for  six  hours  April  19. 
by  the  difficulty  of  getting  his  light  guns  through  the 
Little  Bhore  Ghaut,  rode  into  the  Peishwa's  capital  on 
the  morning  of  the  20th,  having  traversed  sixty  miles  April  20. 
in  thirty-two  hours.    Amrut  Rao  withdrew  in  haste  at 
the  news  of  his  approach  ;  the  inhabitants,  who  had 
been  driven  from  their  homes  by  Holkar,  hurried  back 
to  welcome  the  British  General ;  the  British  infantry 
arrived  to  increase   their   confidence  on  the  22nd  ;  April  22. 
and  on  the  13th  of  May  Baji  Rao  was  escorted  into  May  13. 
the  city  and  reseated  with  great  ceremony  upon  the 
throne.1 

So  far  all  had  gone  well.  The  Peishwa  had  been 
reinstated,  but  it  remained  to  be  seen  whether  his 
authority  could  be  re-established ;  and  various  symptoms 
indicated  that  the  prospect  was  not  altogether  promising. 
In  the  first  place,  Perron  had  not  left  India,  as  had  been 
expected  ;  and  in  the  second,  Wellesley,  on  the  30th  May  30. 
of  May,  had  received  despatches  from  the  British 
Government  forbidding  him  to  restore  the  French 
and  Dutch  possessions  in  India  until  further  orders, 
all  stipulations  of  the  Treaty  of  Amiens  notwith- 
1  Wellington  Desp.  i.  457,  493,  505. 


io  HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY    book  xiii 


i8o3-  standing.1  This  pointed  to  the  near  prospect  of  a  re- 
newal of  hostilities  with  France,  an  event  which  was  not 
likely  to  foster  a  pacific  disposition  in  Scindia.  Never- 
theless, despite  the  untowardness  of  the  outlook,  the 
Viceroy  did  not  seek  to  precipitate  a  war  before  the 
French  could  take  part  in  it.  Long  and  dreary 
negotiations  followed  for  week  upon  week  after  the 
occupation  of  Poona.  Scindia  had  admitted  that  the 
Treaty  of  Bassein  was  not  injurious  to  him,  nor  to 
any  of  the  Mahratta  feudatory  chieftains  ;  but  he  none 
the  less  insisted  that  Ragogee  Bhonsla,  the  Rajah  of 
Berar,  should  join  him  to  discuss  the  question.  The 
place  of  meeting  was  to  be  on  the  frontier  of  the 
Nizam's  dominions  ;  and  as  the  Rajah  was  to  bring 
with  him  as  escort  the  whole  of  his  army,  the  pretended 
consultation  became  in  reality  a  serious  menace  to  a 
faithful  ally  of  the  British.  Scindia,  in  fact,  told  Colonel 
Collins,  the  British  resident,  that  upon  the  Rajah's 
arrival  he  would  inform  him  whether  the  issue  was 
to  be  peace  or  war  ;  but  still  Lord  Wellesley  forbore 
to  take  offence.  The  armies  of  the  two  chieftains 
duly  effected  their  junction  near  the  Ajunta  Ghaut,  on 
the  Nizam's  north-western  boundary^  on  the  3rd  of 
June;  but  several  days  passed,  and  still  no  decision 
June  12.  was  announced  to  Collins.  On  the  12th  of  June  he 
demanded  his  dismissal,  but  consented  to  stay  upon 
being  pressed  by  Scindia ; 2  and  after  this  the  Mahratta 
chiefs  continued  to  play  the  game  of  procrastination 
for  two  whole  months,  Collins  frequently  threatening 
to  take  his  leave,  and  as  frequently  postponing  his 
departure.  The  time  thus  gained  was  employed  by  them 
in  endeavouring  to  persuade  Holkar  to  join  them  in 
war  against  the  British  ;  and  their  motive  was  so  trans- 
parent as  to  be  secret  to  no  one.  Arthur  Wellesley 
in  wrath  wrote  repeated  letters  to  Collins  to  cut 
the  negotiations  short,  but  without  effect.  Reiterated 
representations  were  made  to  Scindia  and  his  ally  to 
withdraw  their  troops,  but  were  utterly  thrown  away 
1  Wellesley  Desp.  Hi.  84.  2  Wellington  Desp.  H.  28. 