

Nevertheless  Wellesley's  first  essay  was  towards 
curbing  the  unruly  Mahratta  chiefs  by  restoring  the 
authority  of  the  Peishwa.  Since  1798  internal  dis- 
sensions had  brought  the  whole  Confederacy  into 
confusion.  In  that  year  a  family  dispute  had  driven 
Scindia  into  collision  with  the  Rajah  of  Kolapore,  who 
was  already  at  war  with  the  Peishwa,  Baji  Rao  ;  where- 
upon Scindia's  rival,  Jeswunt  Rao  Holkar,  seized  the 
opportunity  to  ravage  his  territory.  Perron  was  fully 
engaged  with  the  menace  of  an  Afghan  invasion  in  the 
north,  so  was  unable  to  help  his  master  ;  and  Scindia 
and  the  Peishwa  together  had  much^ado  to  check  the 
advance  of  the  Rajah  of  Kolapore  upon  Poona.  In 
the  midst  of  the  troubles,  however,  Scindia  fell  at 
variance  with  the  Peishwa,  first  over  the  property  of 
the  latter's  chief  minister,  Nana  Farnavese,  who  died 
in  March  1800;  and  secondly,  over  the  permission 
granted  by  Baji  Rao  for  British  troops  to  follow 
Doondia  Wao  into  Mahratta  Territory.  Meanwhile 
Holkar's  depredations  became  so  serious  that  Scindia 
found  himself  obliged  to  repair  to  Malwa  to  check 
them.  In  July  1801  Holkar  won  two  decided  suc- 
cesses, and,  though  completely  defeated  at  Indore  in 
October,  soon  recovered  himself  and  advanced  upon 
Poona.  The  combined  armies  of  Scindia  and  the 
Peishwa  strove  to  repel  him,  but  were  utterly  routed 
before  the  city  itself  on  the  25  th  of  October  1802. 
Baji  Rao  thereupon,  fled  to  the  coast,  taking  refuge  in 


Jch.  i         HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  7 

la  British  ship,  which  conveyed  him  to  Bassein  ;  and  1803. 

I  there  on  the  31st  of  December  he  signed  a  treaty 
whereby  he  threw  himself  upon  the  protection  of  the 
British  Government,  and  concluded  with  it  an  offensive 
and  defensive  alliance.    Scindia  likewise  invoked  British 

i  help  to  save  the  Mahratta  Confederacy  from  entire 

\  dissolution  ;  and  hence  Wellesley  found  himself  virtually 
the  arbiter  of  the  fortunes  of  the  descendants  of 
Sivajee.  But,  as  he  himself  said,  a  principal  object  of 
the  treaty  was  to  prevent  the  sovereign  power  of 
the  Mahratta  States,  or  the  power  of  any  great  branch 

j  of  the  Mahratta  Empire,  from  passing  into  the  hands 
of  France.1 

The  treaty  of  Bassein  was  accepted  by  the  Peishwa 
in  all  sincerity,  for  the  unhappy  man  felt  a  genuine 
liking  for  the  British,  and  was  as  loth  to  be  a  tool  of 
Scindia  as  of  Holkar.  Wellesley,  therefore,  lost  no 
time  in  assembling  a  powerful  force  at  Hurryhur  on 
the  northern  border  of  Mysore,  with  the  double  object 
of  parrying  any  invasion  by  hostile  Mahrattas  and  of 
escorting  the  Peishwa  to  his  capital  at  Poona.  In  Feb. 
taking  this  step  he  desired  and  expected  a  peaceful 
solution  of  all  difficulties.2  Scindia  was  the  chief  whose 
views  were  most  likely  to  be  adverse  to  the  treaty,  and 
whose  hostility  was  most  to  be  apprehended  ;  and  when 
in  March  Perron  asked  leave  to  pass  through  British 
territory  to  Calcutta  in  order  to  embark  for  Europe, 
Wellesley  heaved  a  sigh  of  relief.  For  it  seemed  as 
though  at  least  one  dangerous  element  of  strife,  inter- 
ested alike  in  Scindia's  and  Bonaparte's  ascendancy, 
might  be  quietly  eliminated. 