


xxiii 


BOOK  XIII 


VOL.  V 


CHAPTER  I 


ln  Europe  the  Treaty  of  Amiens  brought  at  least  a  1802. 
truce ;  but  east  and  west,  in  India  and  the  Antilles,  it 
wrought  not  peace  but  the  sword.    The  First  Consul 
tad  gained  what  he  sought — a  short  breathing-space 
ipon  honourable  terms.     The  boundaries  of  France 
Lad  been  enlarged  eastward  to  the  Rhine,  and  north- 
ward to  the  Dutch  frontier.    Holland  itself,  under  the 
Lame  of  the  Batavian  Republic,  was  subservient  to  her  ; 
md  the  greater  part  of  Northern  Italy  was  either 
tctually  French  territory  or  dominated   by  French 
influence.    The  French  Republic  within  her  new  limits 
now  counted  a  population  of  forty  million  souls  ;  and 
with  all  these  vast  acquisitions  in  Europe  she  still 
retained  the  Colonial  Empire  of  the  Monarchy.  Her 
East  Indian  settlements  were,  under  the  Treaty,  to 
be  restored  ;    in  the  West   Indies   Martinique  and 
Tobago  were  to  be  again  hers,  as  also  was  St.  Domingo 
if  she  could  obtain  possession  of  it.    Finally,  at  her 
head  was  the  man  who,  after  twice  raising  her  from 
deep  depression  to  dazzling  glory,  had  restored  law 
and  order,  confidence  and  credit,  and,  still  insatiable  in 
energy  and  ambition,  was  maturing  his  designs  for  the 
conquest  of  a  great  empire  over  sea. 

The  conquest  of  his  dreams  was  that  of  India,  and, 
as  a  means  to  that  end,  of  Egypt.  Nelson  had  turned 
his  first  expedition  to  the  valley  of  the  Nile  into  a 
disaster,  and  Sidney  Smith  and  Abercromby  had 
deepened  the  disaster  into  a  humiliation.  His  vaunt- 
ing letter  to  Tippoo  from  Cairo  had  also  received  a 


4 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY    book  xiii 


1802.  crushing  answer  in  the  storming  of  Seringapatam  and 
the  overthrow  of  Hyder  Ali's  dynasty  in  Mysore.  But 
still  the  man  clung  to  his  vision  of  the  tricolour  flying 
supreme  in  the  Mediterranean,  and  of  French  domina- 
tion substituted  for  English  in  India.  Thus  it  was  in 
September  1802  he  sent  General  Sebastiani  to  Algiers, 
Egypt,  Syria,  and  the  Ionian  Islands  with  orders  to  take 
note  of  every  military  detail,  and  to  sound  the  disposition 

1803.  of  the  natives.  In  January  1803  Sebastiani  returned 
with  a  bombastic  report  that  the  capture  of  Egypt 
would  be  child's  play,  and  that  the  Ionian  Islands  were 
only  waiting  for  an  opportunity  to  declare  themselves 
French.  Meanwhile,  to  undermine  still  further  British 
power  in  the  East,  Bonaparte  had  appointed  in  June 
1802  two  even  more  formidable  agents.  The  first  was 
Cavaignac,  an  old  member  of  the  Convention,  who  was 
charged  with  a  mission  to  the  Imaum  of  Muscat.  The 
second  was  General  Decaen,  who  bitterly  hated  the 
English,  and  thirsted  for  the  chance  of  meeting  them 
in  the  field.  In  title  Decaen  was  merely  Commander- 
in-Chief  of  the  small  French  force  in  the  East  Indies, 
entrusted  with  the  special  duty  of  receiving  back  the 
captured  French  settlements  from  the  British  ;  and  the 
troops  that  were  to  accompany  him  wfre  no  more  than 
a  garrison  for  those  settlements,  little  exceeding  one 
thousand  men.1  But  the  Consul's  secret  instructions 
showed  designs  of  far  wider  extent.  While  acting 
always  with  carefully  simulated  gentleness  and  simplicity, 
Decaen  was  to  inquire  as  to  the  strength  and  disposition 
of  the  British  forces,  and  as  to  the  natives  that  were 
most  impatient  of  British  rule.  He  was  to  think 
out  in  every  detail  the  best  method  of  carrying  on 
a  war  of  several  campaigns  in  India,  even  without 
command  of  the  sea  ;  and,  above  all,  he  was  to  find  a 
suitable  base,  with  a  port  which  could  be  defended 
against  a  hostile  fleet.  "Your  mission"  (so  ended  the 
document)  "  is,  for  military  and  political  purposes,  one 
of  observation  .  .  .  but  the  First  Consul,  if  you  faith- 