

Nor  was  the  promise  of  a  peaceful  end  to  all  troubles 
belied  upon  the  march  of  the  army  from  Hurryhur. 
Arthur  Wellesley  had  wisely  been  appointed  to  com- 
mand it,  and  the  fame  of  his  recent  campaign  against 
Doondia  Wao  was  sufficient  to  ensure  him  at  least  a 
fearful  deference.  But  the  young  General  knew  already 
that  if  deference  was  to  be  turned  to  friendship  in  an 
1  Wellesley  Desp.  iii.  109.  2  Ibid.  iii.  29,  49. 


8 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY    book  xiii 


1803.  alien  territory,  his  force  must  never  be  a  burden  upon 
the  inhabitants.  There  must  be  no  excesses,  no  plunder, 
no  marauding,  but  strict  discipline  and,  as  a  first  means 
to  that  end,  an  efficient  system  of  supply.  It  was  this 
last  which  occupied  his  attention  from  the  first  moment 
when  he  was  ordered  to  move  to  Hurryhur.  "  The  only 
mode,"  he  wrote,  "  by  which  we  can  inspire  either  our 
allies  or  our  enemies  with  respect  for  our  operations 
will  be  to  show  them  that  the  army  can  move  with  ease 
and  celerity  at  all  times  and  in  all  situations."  His 
letters  of  this  period  teem  with  calculations  as  to 
supplies  and  the  cattle  that  are  to  draw  them  ;  and  the 
famous  draft-bullocks  of  Mysore,  which  had  been  taken 
after  Tippoo's  death  into  the  Company's  service,  figure 
prominently  as  one  of  the  chief  factors  in  his  army's 
efficiency.  There  was  every  prospect  of  difficulty,  for 
the  rainfall  in  the  country  adjoining  the  Western 
Ghauts  had  been  scanty  during  the  previous  season. 
Forage  was  hardly  obtainable  ;  the  crops  had  failed  ; 
the  stricken  districts  were  face  to  face  with  famine  ; 
even  water  was  wanting  in  many  tanks  and  streams 
where  generally  it  had  been  abundant.  Yet  all  these 
obstacles  were  overcome  by  his  unflagging  industry. 
All  superfluous  baggage  was  ruthlessly" cut  off",  and  the 
march  from  Seringapatam  to  Hurryhur  was  accomplished 
without  injury  or  fatigue  to  the  cattle  ;  whereas  the 
bullocks  of  other  detachments,  under  commanders  of 
higher  rank,  fell  down  in  hundreds.  Finally,  when 
on  the  1 2th  of  March  he  crossed  the  Toombuddra 
into  Mahratta  territory,  he  was  received  as  a  friend 
and  a  deliverer,  and  joined  by  all  the  local  chieftains 
on  his  march  to  Poona.1 

Jeswunt  Rao  Holkar,  who  was  still  in  possession  of  the 
Mahratta  capital,  retired  upon  the  news  of  his  advance  ; 
but  Arthur  Wellesley  continued  to  move  steadily 
northward,  and  by  the  1st  of  April  had  crossed  the 
Kistna  at  Erroor,  with  his  cattle  still  in  perfect  condition 

1  Wellington  Desp.  i.  374,  407  ;   Supplementary  Despatches,  iv. 
1-10,  17-22,  26-32,  41-43. 


ch.  i         HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  9 

despite  the  length  of  his  march.  At  the  same  time  1803. 
Colonel  Stevenson  with  the  subsidiary  forces  of  the 
Nizam  was  marching  westward  from  Hyderabad  to 
join  him;  and  on  the  15th  of  April  the  two  forces  April  15, 
opened  communication  with  each  other  at  Ecklaus  on 
the  Neera  River,  some  eighty  miles  east  and  south  of 
their  destination.  By  that  time  Holkar  had  reached 
Chandore,  nearly  twice  that  distance  to  north  of  Poona, 
leaving  only  Amrut  Rao,  a  pretender  to  the  Mahratta 
throne,  with  fifteen  hundred  men  to  hold  the  city  ; 
and  Wellesley,  judging  it  unnecessary  to  lead  a  large 
force  against  so  paltry  an  enemy,  decided  to  extend 
Stevenson's  troops  over  a  wider  front  for  convenience 
of  forage.  Three  days  later  came  intelligence  that 
s  Amrut  Rao  was  preparing  to  burn  and  plunder  Poona, 
t   whereupon  Wellesley  started  with  his  cavalry  on  the 