


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY 


upon  them  ;  and  the  negotiations  dragged  on  and  on  1803. 
through  June  and  July,  as  though  they  would  have  no 
ending. 

Throughout  this  period  of  suspense  Arthur  Wellesley 
waited  with  almost  feverish  impatience.  He  had  laid 
all  his  plans  with  the  express  object  of  fighting  the 
Mahrattas  during  the  rainy  season,  when  the  rivers 
would  be  high ;  and  he  had  many  months  before 
ordered  the  preparation  of  boats  and  pontoons,  which 
would  enable  him  to  pass  these  rivers  at  any  time  and 
place,  whereas  his  enemies  would  be  dependent  on  fords 
which,  in  time  of  flood,  would  be  impracticable.  With 
this  advantage  and  with  his  transport  efficiently 
organised,  he  felt  confident  of  success.  Scindia 
might  fight  pitched  battles  and  Holkar  might  pur- 
sue the  more  dangerous  guerilla  warfare  which  was 
traditional  with  the  Mahrattas,  but  the  young  General 
was  prepared  to  cope  with  either.  British  infantry 
would  be  too  much  even  for  Perron's  best  battalions  ; 
and  the  Mysore  bullocks  would  enable  him  to  follow 
Holkar  so  swiftly  that,  even  though  he  were  not  over- 
taken, that  wily  chieftain  would  find  little  time  for 
mischief,  and  would  see  his  following  dwindle  daily 
from  sheer  lack  of  plunder. 

Two  circumstances,  for  a  time,  reconciled  Arthur 
Wellesley  to  some  delay  in  June,  namely  the  loss  of  a 
great  number  of  bullocks  from  bad  forage  and  exposure,1 
and  the  failure  of  the  authorities  at  Bombay  to  produce 
the  boats  for  which  he  had  asked.  This  latter  was,  in 
fact,  the  beginning  of  a  long  series  of  differences  with 
the  Governor  of  Bombay,  Mr.  Duncan,  who  for  some 
reason  was  singularly  obstructive  to  the  whole  of  the 
General's  arrangements.  Recognising  the  difficulty 
of  acting  from  a  base  five  hundred  miles  distant  at 
Seringapatam,  Arthur  Wellesley  had,  as  early  as  January, 
procured  the  formation  of  a  large  depot  on  the  coast, 
which  should  be  at  once  within  easy  reach  of  Bombay 
by  water  and  close  to  the  mouth  of  the  Ghaut  that 
1  Wellington  Desp.  ii.  15,  18,  38. 


12 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY    book  xiii 


l8o3-  leads  to  Poona  ;  but  he  could  obtain  no  cattle  to  draw 
the  supplies  from  the  dep6t  to  his  camp,  and  the  army 
was  in  great  straits  for  food.  Duncan  had  promised 
him  a  number  of  bullocks  by  the  end  of  May  ;  but  not 
one  of  them  had  arrived.  He  had  undertaken  to  send 
up  pontoons,  but  contrived  to  despatch  them  in  weather 
which  broke  down  all  the  carriages  after  one  march. 
Very  early  Wellesley,  giving  up  the  Governor  of 
Bombay  in  despair,  sought  for  an  advanced  base  of 
his  own  making.  His  eye  fell  upon  the  fortress  of 
Ahmednuggur,  just  twenty  miles  north  of  his  camp  ; 
and  inquiry  soon  showed  that  he  had  seen  aright.  "  It 
is  full  of  everything  we  want "  ;  he  wrote  on  the  16th 
of  June,  "  the  property  of  this  country  is  lodged  there. 
The  capture  of  that  place  will  retrieve  our  immediate 
distresses  and  will  give  everybody  spirits."  From  that 
day  forward  information  as  to  Ahmednuggur  was 
eagerly  gathered  ;  and  the  General  fully  decided  that 
the  capture  of  the  fort  must  be  the  first  operation  of 
the  war,  if  war  there  should  be.1  But  the  favourable 
months  kept  slipping  away  without  the  slightest 
apparent  approach  to  a  decision,  and  at  last  in  the 