

Arthur  Wellesley's  charge  was  the  greater  and  more 
onerous.  First,  on  the  eastern  coast  a  force  of  close 
upon  five  thousand  men,  including  about  six  hundred 
European  troops,  was  assembled  at  Ganjam  under 
Lieutenant-colonel  Harcourt  to  invade  the  province  of 
Cuttack  and  the  possessions  of  the  Rajah  of  Berar. 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY    book  xiii 


l8o3»This  column  was  to  act  independently.  Secondly,  on 
the  west  there  were  in  Guzerat  and  Surat  nearly  three 
thousand  British  and  nearly  four  thousand  native 
infantry,  affording,  after  all  garrisons  had  been  provided 
for,  a  field-force  of  rather  more  than  four  thousand 
men.1  This  was  parted  into  two  divisions,  each  about 
two  thousand  strong,  the  first  being  posted  north  of 
the  Nerbudda  at  Baroda,  and  the  second  south  of  the 
Taptee  between  Surat  and  Songhur.  Arthur  Wellesley 
had  particularly  insisted  upon  the  importance  of 
Songhur  itself,  which  lies  fifty  miles  to  eastward  of 
Surat  and  commands  a  Ghaut  which  leads  down  to  that 
city.2  Both  divisions  were  designed  to  operate  east- 
ward against  Holkar,  if  he  should  declare  war,  and 
in  any  case  to  capture  Baroach  and  the  possessions 
of  Scindia  in  their  vicinity.  Both  were  placed,  at 
Arthur  Wellesley's  request,  under  the  command  of 
Colonel  John  Murray,  and  he  had  reason  to  regret  his 
choice  both  then  and  later.  For  this  was  the  Murray 
who,  having  done  good  service  as  Baird's  Quartermaster- 
general  in  Egypt,  was  destined  in  the  Peninsula  to 
wreck  Wellesley's  plans  at  the  passage  of  the  Douro, 
and  to  bring  himself  to  disgrace  at  Tarragona. 

Thirdly,  there  was  the  army  under  Jtrthur  Wellesley' s 
personal  command,  just  over  eleven  thousand  strong, 
including  over  sixteen  hundred  Europeans,  but  exclusive 
of  some  five  thousand  Mysore  and  Mahratta  horse. 
In  addition  to  this  force,  and  forming  almost  a  part 
of  it,  was  the  Hyderabad  contingent  under  Colonel 
Stevenson,  numbering  over  nine  thousand  men,  of 
whom  nine  hundred  were  Europeans.  Wellesley's 
headquarters  at  the  outbreak  of  the  war  were  at 
Walkee,  eight  miles  south  of  Ahmednuggur,3  towards 
which  fortress  he  had  for  some  days  past  been  slowly 

1  H.M.  65th,  86th,  and  Royal  Artillery        .       .        .  1677 
Two  battalions  each  of  the  1st  and  6th  Bombay  N.I.  .  2604 

2  Wellington  Desp.  ii.  156-159. 

3  Six  miles  is  the  distance  named  by  himself  {Well.  Desp.  ii. 
173).  Grant  Duff,  Hist,  of  the  Mahrattas,  iii.  168,  gives  the  figure 
at  eight  miles,  which  seems  more  correct. 


ch.  i  HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  15 

advancing,  as  the  sands  of  the  long  negotiation  gradually  l8o3' 
ran  out.  Stevenson  was  still  guarding  the  various 
passes  on  the  northern  frontier  of  the  Nizam's  dominions 
about  Aurungabad.  As  a  reserve  for  Arthur  Wellesley 
a  force  of  over  eight  thousand  men,  together  with  large 
quantities  of  supplies,  had  been  assembled  at  Moodgul, 
a  little  to  the  south  of  the  River  Kistna,  under  General 
Stuart  ;  but  the  arrival  of  new  garrisons  for  the  French 
settlements  had  caused  Stuart  himself  to  return  to 
Madras,  and  a  part  of  his  troops  to  be  sent  down  to 
the  Carnatic.  The  reserve  was  thus  reduced  to  about 
four  thousand  men,  of  whom  over  twelve  hundred  were 
Europeans,  and  the  remainder  natives.  In  all,  the 
British  force  assembled  in  India  numbered,  including 
the  garrisons  at  Poona  and  Hyderabad,  nearly  fifty 
thousand  men.1 