

Sept.  3-4.  the  3rd  and  4th  to  await  the  arrival  of  some  of  Scindia's 
regular  infantry.    Wellesley  and  Stevenson  likewise 

Sept.  5-6.  remained  stationary  on  those  days  ;  but  on  the  5th  and 

1  Well.  Desp.  ii.  235,  245. 


CH.  I 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY 


21 


iicl  6th  Wellesley,  finding  that  the  Godavery  was  by  a  most  1803. 
::I  unusual  accident  fordable,  made  two  marches  eastward 
es SI  so  as  to  start  level  with  the  Mahrattas  in  case  of  a  race 
m  to  Hyderabad.    At  the  same  time,  being  satisfied  that 
utl  nothing  could  save  the  Nizam's  territory  from  a  raid 
till  except  a  counter-raid  of  the  British  upon  Berar,  he 
ie|  determined  at  all  risks  to  send  Stevenson  north-eastward 
ie|  by  way  of  Ellichpoor  to  attack  the  Rajah's  fort  of 
[?|  Gawilghur,  and  if  possible  to  plunder  Nagpoor.    As  to 
:;|  himself  he  felt  confident  enough,  for  his  transport  was 
111  now  in  such  perfect  order  and  his  cattle  and  horses  in 
ic  such  excellent  condition,  that  a  march  of  twenty-three 
it  miles  in  a  day  was  an  easy  matter.1 
.e       Scindia  and  Ragogee,  however,  by  no  means  en- 
joyed the  vicinity  of  Arthur  Wellesley  on  the  Godavery. 
r   "  They  appear  to  be  very  much  afraid  of  this  division, 
it  and   very  little  so  of  Colonel   Stevenson's,"  wrote 
J  Wellesley  ;  and  accordingly  on  the  night  of  the  6th  Sept.  6. 
ft  they  broke  up  their  camp  and  returned  to  the  Ajunta 
Ghaut.    Stevenson  had  unfortunately  moved  westward 
on  the  5th  from  Jalnapore,  which  would  have  been 
an  ideal  position  from  which  to  intercept  them  ;  and 
though  on  the  6th  and  again  on  the  9th  he  surprised  Sept.  9. 
and  dispersed  two  parties  of  the  enemy's  horse,  yet  he 
did  them  little  real  harm.    In  fact  he  was  still  nervous, 
and  wrote  letters  to  Wellesley  alleging  doubts  as  to  the 
sufficiency  of  his  army  for  the  raid  into  Berar,  which 
brought  upon  him  at  least  one  very  unpleasant  reply. 
During  the  ensuing  days  both  Generals  were  tied  fast 
to  their  stations  by  the  need  for  keeping   open  a 
j  passage  for  their  convoys  and  supplies  ;  but  Wellesley 
comforted  himself  by  the  thoughts  that  Scindia,  by 
bringing  up  his  infantry  and  artillery,  would  be  less 
difficult  to  overtake  and  more  easily  brought  to  action. 
The  infantry  duly  joined  the  Mahratta  army  at  Ajunta 
to  the  number  of  sixteen  battalions,  and  on  the  21st  Sept.  21. 
the  entire  force  of  the  enemy  was  assembled  between 
Bokerdun  and  Jafferabad.    Meanwhile  on  the  16th 
1  Well  Desp.  ii.  273-277. 


22  HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY    book  xiii 

1803.  Wellesley  moved  eastward  up  the  Godavery  to  meet 
Sept.  20.  his  convoy,  and  turning  northward  on  the  20th  met 
Stevenson  in  consultation  at  Budnapore,  a  little  to  the 
west  of  Jalnapore,  on  the  21st.  They  then  arranged  c 
to  march  upon  the  enemy,  Stevenson  taking  the  western 
route  and  Wellesley  the  eastern  round  the  hills  between 
Budnapore  and  Jalnapore,  and  on  the  evening  of  the 
24th  to  attack  him  with  their  united  forces.1 