

1  I  venture  to  differ  at  this  point  from  Colonel  Biddulph,  who 
makes  this  movement  to  the  Juah  occur  in  the  middle  of  the  action. 
I  base  my  opinion  on  Notes  relative  to  the  late  Transactions,  pp. 
61-62,  Wellington's  memorandum  on  the  battle  {Desp.  ii.  323), 
read  in  conjunction  with  the  map  in  the  Notes,  and  on  the  account 
given  in  Wellington  Suppl.  Desp.  iv.  185-190,  note.  But  I  confess 
that  it  is  with  diffidence  that  I  dissent  from  the  view  of  so  high 
an  authority.    The  subject  is  strangely  difficult  and  obscure. 


28 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY    book  xiii 


i8o3-  were  going  forward.  In  a  very  short  time  the  fire  of 
Sept.  23.  Manratta  guns  became  so  terrible  that  no  troops 
could  long  endure  it ;  and  Wellesley  gave  the  word  to 
advance,  ordering  the  battalions  of  the  second  line  to 
fall  into  their  appointed  places  during  the  movement. 
Even  then  the  picquets  were  slow  in  moving  off,  and 
Wellesley  sent  an  impatient  message  to  ask  the  cause. 
Orrock's  reply  was  that  his  battalion-guns  were  disabled. 
"  Then  tell  him  to  get  on  without  them,"  rejoined  the 
General ;  and  presently  the  advance  began. 

Thereupon  the  enemy 's  cannonade  redoubled  in 
violence.  Within  a  front  of  less  than  a  mile  one 
hundred  pieces,  admirably  trained  and  very  rapidly 
served,  poured  a  tempest  of  shot  upon  the  British  ranks. 
The  storm  was  severest  in  the  centre,  where  the  Sepoy 
battalions,  unable  to  face  it,  swerved  to  their  left  and 
crowded  in  upon  the  Seventy-eighth.  However,  the 
greater  part  of  them  advanced  rapidly  and  in  good 
order  under  Wellesley's  personal  leadership  upon  the 
enemy's  right  wing,  and,  without  pausing  to  fire,  forced 
it  back  without  difficulty  ;  for  the  Mahratta  infantry 
stood  only  so  long  as  their  artillery  continued  to  play, 
whereas  the  gunners  stuck  to  their  guns  most  gallantly 
to  the  last,  and  were  actually  bayoneted  in  the  act  of 
loading  their  pieces.  But  even  so  this  infantry  was 
thrust  back  rather  than  beaten  off ;  and  the  enemy's 
centre,  being  still  untouched,  presently  closed  in  towards 
the  Juah,  while  one  compact  division,  six  thousand 
strong,  under  the  command  of  Pohlmann,1  retired  in  fair 
order  direct  to  its  rear,  that  is  to  say  westward,  for 
some  distance,  when  it  halted  and  faced  about.  So  far, 
therefore,  all  that  had  been  accomplished  was  the 
capture  of  the  guns  on  the  right  wing  of  the 
Mahrattas. 

And  meanwhile  at  the  other  extremity  of  Wellesley's 
line  matters  had  gone  disastrously  wrong.  Colonel 
Orrock,  at  the  head  of  the  picquets,  for  some  reason, 

1  I  suspect  Pohlmann's  brigade  to  have  formed  part  of  a  second 
line  immediately  in  rear  of  the  troops  which  faced  Wellesley. 