

Still  fully  persuaded  that  he  was  sure  of  falling  on 
the  Mahrattas'  flank,  he  drew  up  his  force  in  three 
lines.  The  first  line  from  right  to  left  consisted  of  the 
picquets,  two  native  battalions,  and  the  Seventy-eighth  ; 
the  second  line,  of  the  Seventy-fourtti  and  two  native 
battalions,  and  the  third  of  the  cavalry,  which  played 
the  part  of  a  reserve.  These  dispositions  had  been 
nearly,  if  not  quite,  completed  behind  a  slight  ridge 
which  concealed  them  from  the  enemy,  when  the 
staff-officer  came  galloping  back  with  the  news  that  the 
Mahrattas  were  changing  position  to  their  left,  a 
manoeuvre  of  which  Wellesley  had  believed  them  to 
be  incapable.  The  information  was,  however,  correct  ; 
and  the  evolution,  though  performed  unscientifically, 
went  forward  with  perfect  order  and  precision.  The 
Mahratta  regiments  did  not  break  into  column,  but 
each  battalion  moved  off  in  line  to  the  new  alignment  ; 
so  that  while  in  motion  they  presented  the  appearance 
of  an  echelon  of  battalions  with  the  left  in  advance.  It 
was,  however,  but  half  of  the  hostile  infantry  which 


I  cH.  i         HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  27 

I  moved  in  this  direction,  the  second  Mahratta  line  180 
a  retiring  to  the  Juah,  and  there  taking  up  a  position  Sep 
1  parallel  to  the  river,  with  its  left  resting  upon  the 
[  village  of  Assaye.1 

Wellesley,  of  course,  was  little  concerned  as  yet 
I  with  this  second  line  ;  but  on  hearing  of  the  enemy's 
■;  change  of  position,  and  perceiving  that  the  space 
i  between  the  two  rivers  became  wider  immediately 
5  before  him,  he  at  once,  and  rightly,  became  anxious 
■  for  his  flanks,  and  prepared  to  extend  his  own  front. 
'I  With  this  object  he  ordered   the   picquets,  which 
:  formed  the  right  of  his  first  line,  to  take  ground  to 
the  right,  so  as  to  make  room  for  the  two  native 
s  battalions  of  his  second  line  on  their  left.    At  the  same 
:  time  he  commanded  the  Seventy-fourth  to  incline  to  its 
i  right  hand,  and  to  form  on  the  right  of  the  picquets,  and 
directed  the  cavalry  to  file  up  to  the  Juah  for  the  purpose 
I  of  protecting  his  right  flank.    Strict  injunctions  were 
given  to  Colonel  Orrock,  the  officer  in  command  of  the 
picquets,  that  he  was  on  no  account  to  advance  upon  the 
village  of  Assaye  nor  to  approach  too  closely  to  it. 

The  troops  were  about  to  enter  upon  this  movement 
when  the  Mahratta  line  brought  forward  guns  and 
opened  a  most  destructive  fire.  The  native  bullock- 
drivers  with  the  British  artillery  at  once  became 
unsteady  ;  not  a  few  teams  were  severely  maltreated, 
and  several  cannon  which  had  been  advanced  to  answer 
I  the  enemy's  fire  were  disabled.  Moreover,  since  the 
enemy's  echelon  had  advanced  from  its  left,  the  first  of 
its  battalions  to  come  into  action  were,  of  course,  those 
opposed  to  the  British  right,  which  was  precisely  the 
quarter  where   the  alterations  in  the  line  of  battle 