


I  ch.  i  HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  17 

i  Seventy  -  fourth    and    another   battalion    of  Sepoys,1  1803. 

under  Lieutenant-colonel  Wallace.    The  left  column, 

"1  commanded  by  Colonel  Harness,  reached  the  walls  first, 

J-  planted  its  ladders,  and  strove  with  the  utmost  gallantry 

Id  to  force  its  way  into  the  town  ;  but  the  men  were 

n  hurled  down  as  fast  as  they  ascended,  and  after  ten 

le  minutes  abandoned  the  attempt,  the  Seventy -eighth 

r<  having  lost  six  officers  killed  and  some  fifty  men  killed 

7  and  wounded.     Vesey's   men  were  delayed  by  an 

is  elephant  from  the  artillery  train,  which  took  fright 

d  and  ran  down  through  the  middle  of  them,  scattering 

y  them  in  all  directions.    They  soon  reformed,  however, 

n  and  planted  their  two  ladders  at  a  re-entering  angle 

0  formed  by  one  of  the  bastions,  when  there  was  such  a 
n  rush  to  be  foremost  that  one  of  the  ladders  was  broken 
d  down.  The  men,  however,  swarmed  up  the  other,  and 
h  the  flank-companies  of  the  Seventy-fourth,  with  about 
e  two  hundred  more,  had  surmounted  the  wall  when  the 
ir  only  remaining  ladder  was  smashed  by  a  cannon-shot, 
d  and  Vesey  was  left  alone  with  three  hundred  men. 
e  Without  hesitation  his  party  swept  the  enemy  out  of 
jf  the  streets  adjoining  the  wall,  until  they  reached  a  gate 

which  had  been  marked  out  as  the  point  of  assault  for 

s  the  central  column.     Heavy  firing  announced  that 

e  Wallace  had  already  begun  his  attack ;  the  gate  was 

e  opened  to  admit  his  troops ;   and  the   two  parties 

1  uniting  soon  drove  the  whole  garrison  out  of  the  town 
t  with  very  heavy  loss.  Few  of  the  enemy  reached  the 
1  fort,  the  bulk  of  them  flying  in  other  directions  ;  and 
f  by  three  o'clock  in  the  afternoon  the  British  were  in 
,  comfortable  possession  of  Ahmednuggur  at  a  cost  of 
-  about  one  hundred  and  twenty  killed  and  wounded. 

e  The  effect  of  this  attack  was  great.    "  These  English 

i  are  a  strange  people  and  their  General  a  wonderful 

f  man,"  wrote  a  Mahratta  chief  from  Wellesley's  camp 

1  after  the  action.     "  They  came  here  in  the  morning, 

e  looked  at  the  pettah-wall,  walked  over  it,  killed  all  the 

1  garrison,  and  returned  to  breakfast."    On  the  following  Aug.  9. 
1  i/8th  Madras  N.I. 
VOL.  V  C 


1 8  HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY    book  xiii 

1803.  day  the  General  reconnoitred  the  fort;  and  on  the 
same  evening  seized  a  favourable  spot,  on  which  during 
the  night  he  constructed  a  battery  of  four  eighteen- 

Aug.  10.  pounders.  At  daylight  of  the  10th  these  opened  fire 
with  great  effect,  breaching  two  contiguous  bastions, 
insomuch  that  the  native  commandant  presently  begged 
for  a  cessation  that  he  might  arrange  terms  of  surrender. 
Wellesley  answered  that  he  should  continue  to  fire 
until  he  should  have  taken  the  fort  or  received  its 
submission,  and  proceeded  to  batter  the  walls  until  on 
the  evening  of  the  nth  the  enemy's  hostages  for  the 