

I  will  either  cut  them  up  or  drive  them  off.  ...  A  long 
if  defensive  war  will  ruin  us.  .  .  .  By  any  other  plan 
ej  than  that  above  proposed  we  shall  lose  our  supplies, 
.e|  do  what  we  will."  Poor  Stevenson  endeavoured  to 
it  mend  his  ways,  but  still  could  not  refrain  from  a  slight 
e  movement  rearward  which  brought  his  young  chief's 
!  hand  down  upon  him  once  more.  "  Depend  upon  it 
"I  that  no  straggling  horse  will  venture  to  your  rear  so 
h  long  as  you  can  keep  the  enemy  in  check  and  your 
d  detachment  well  in  advance.  Dash  at  the  first  fellows 
it  that  make  their  appearance,  and  the  campaign  will  be 
)t  our  own."  2  The  chase  of  Doondia  Wao  had  not  been 
:e  thrown  away  upon  Arthur  Wellesley. 

is  Meanwhile  by  the  17th  of  August  his  cavalry  had  Aug.  1 
d  reached  the  Godavery  ;  and  on  the  following  day  he 

1  The  foregoing  account  is  based  on  Well.  Desp.  ii.  193,  204, 
rs   313,  and  Welsh's  Military  Reminiscences  in  the  East  Indies,  ii. 

'  155-165. 

2  Well.  Desp.  ii.  208,  210,  21 9. 


20 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY    book  xii 


1803.  was  on  march  with  his  infantry  to  join  them.  The 
river,  being  swollen  by  the  rains,  was  very  wide,  and 
the  troops  crossed  in  wicker  boats  made  by  themselves 
in  the  jungle,  and  covered  with  bullock-skins.    On  the 

Aug.  24.  24th  Wellesley's  headquarters  were  at  Toka,  about 

Aug.  29.  fifty  miles  north  of  Ahmednuggur,  and  on  the  29th 
he  reached  Aurungabad.  The  difficulties  of  the 
campaign  seemed  to  increase  with  every  step.  The 
country  through  which  he  passed  was  completely 
exhausted  and  depopulated  ;  vast  numbers  of  bullocks 
had  died  of  starvation  and  exposure ;  and  though 
there  were  supplies  enough  for  the  troops,  and  the 
army  itself  was,  as  Wellesley  said,  "  in  excellent 
marching  trim,"  yet  the  provision  of  food  for  the 
followers  appeared  to  be  impossible.1 

Meanwhile  Scindia  and  the  Rajah  of  Berar,  after 
drawing  Stevenson  as  far  east  as  Jafferabad  by  a  feint 
in  that  direction,  doubled  back  to  westward,  entered 
Aug.  the  Nizam's  territory  by  the  pass  of  Ajunta  with 
23~24-  their  cavalry  only,  and  seemed  to  be  pushing  forward 
rapidly  towards  the  Godavery.  Though  Arthur 
Wellesley  had  matured  all  arrangements  for  repel- 
ling them  if  they  should  succeed  in  crossing  that  river, 

Aug.  30.  he  immediately  made  one  march  to  the  eastward  from 
Aurungabad,  and  then  turned  southward,  so  as  to 
cover  at  once  the  advance  of  his  supplies  from 
Hyderabad  and  the  Kistna,  and  to  press  closely 
upon  the  enemy  if  they  should  continue  their  advance. 
Sept.  2.  By  the  2nd  of  September  he  had  reached  Rackisbaum 
on  the  Godavery  ;  and  on  the  same  day  Stevenson, 
who  had  hurried  back  to  westward,  assaulted  and  took 
the  fort  of  Jalnapore,  an  isolated  possession  of  Scindia 
some  sixty  miles  east  of  Aurungabad.  The  enemy  by 
that  time  had  reached  Partoor,  about  forty  miles  east 
and  north  of  Rackisbaum,  where  they  halted  during 