


The  bulk  of  the  2nd  N.I.  (750)  reinforced  the  baggage-guard. 


IcH.  i         HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  25 

^IMahrattas  at  once  near  the  junction  of  the  Kaitna  1803. 
^land  the  Juah,  their  straitened  position  would  forbid  SePt*  2 3* 
Cithern  to  take  advantage  of  their  enormous  preponder- 
ance in  numbers,  and  he  could  use  the  two  streams  for 
^Bthe  protection  of  his  flanks.  Of  course  the  defeat  of 
10|his  own  force  in  such  a  narrow  tongue  of  land  would 
le|mean  its  certain  annihilation. 

-|  That  risk  he  was  prepared  to  take  ;  but  there 
'gjremained  still  the  difficulty  that  the  only  ford  known  to 
--■his  guides  was  commanded  by  the  Mahratta  artillery,  and 
[e  Ithat  consequently  the  forcing  of  the  passage  would  be 
n  extremely  hazardous.  Sweeping  the  line  of  the  banks 
e  with  his  glass,  he  noticed  at  some  distance  to  his  right 
i)  the  two  villages  of  Peepulgaon  and  Waroor  close 

1  together  on  opposite  sides  of  the  Kaitna,  and,  in  spite 
s  of  the  denial  of  his  guides,  concluded  that  there  must 

2  be  a  ford  between  them.  A  staff-officer  was  despatched 
:  to  ascertain  the  truth ;  and  during  this  delay  the 
I  Mahrattas  struck  their  tents  and  formed  a  single  line  of 
1  battle  behind  the  Kaitna,  with  the  cavalry  on  their  right 

and  the  infantry  on  their  left.  Moreover,  two  large  bodies 
of  horse  actually  crossed  the  river  to  make  closer 
observation,  but  kept  at  a  safe  distance  when  they 
found  Wellesley's  twelve  hundred  sabres  ready  to 
meet  them.  In  due  time  the  staff-officer  came 
galloping  back  with  the  news  that  the  General  was 
I  correct  in  his  conjecture  about  the  ford  ;  and  orders 
were  sent  to  the  infantry,  which  had  been  carefully 
kept  out  of  the  enemy's  sight,  to  diverge  to  their  right 
and  march  upon  Peepulgaon.  The  regular  cavalry 
covered  the  rear  of  the  battalions  during  the  move- 
ment, and  formed  behind  them  for  the  passage  of  the 
river.  Wellesley  left  his  irregular  horse,  part  of  it 
Mysorean  and  part  of  it  from  the  Peishwa's  army,  to 
keep  in  check  the  enemy  on  the  south  of  the  Kaitna. 
He  was  told,  just  at  this  critical  moment,  that  the 
Peishwa's  troops  intended  to  turn  against  him  ;  but  he 
took  no  notice,  rightly  judging  that  they  would  await 
the  issue  of  the  action  before  they  changed  sides. 


26  HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  bookxiii 

1803.  As  the  British  infantry  drew  near  to  the  river 
Sept.  23.  enemy's  guns  opened  fire,  but  with  little  effect. 
Strange  to  say,  no  attempt  was  made  to  dispute  the 
passage  of  the  ford  ;  but  the  crossing  took  some  time, 
for  there  were  difficulties  in  dragging  the  guns  through 
the  water  ;  and  the  Mahrattas  used  the  opportunity 
to  bring  down  a  battery  close  to  the  bank  on  their  own 
side  of  the  river.  As  the  head  of  the  British  column 
began  to  ascend  from  the  ford  to  the  peninsula  this 
battery  immediately  poured  upon  it  a  heavy  and  con- 
tinuous fire,  which  caused  great  loss.  The  head  of 
Wellesley's  orderly  dragoon  was  carried  away  by  a 
cannon-shot ;  the  dead  body  remained  in  the  saddle  ; 
and  the  whole  of  the  staff  was  scattered  by  the 
plunging  of  the  terrified  horse  until  at  length  the 
ghastly  burden  fell  to  the  ground.  However,  the 
column  filed  on,  and  Wellesley,  leaving  one  of  his 
staff-officers  to  watch  the  enemy's  movements,  busied 
himself  with  the  formation  of  his  order  of  battle. 