

Aug.  1 2.  capitulation  arrived.  On  the  morning  of  the  12th  the 
commandant  marched  out  with  his  private  property  and 
his  garrison  of  fourteen  hundred  men  ;  and  Arthur 
Wellesley  had  gained  what  he  needed.  The  capture 
of  Ahmednuggur  gave  him  a  fortress  which  covered 
Poona  and  the  Nizam's  western  frontier,  which  cut 
Scindia  off  from  the  southern  chiefs  and  controlled  all 
his  territory  south  of  the  Godavery,  and  which,  most 
important  of  all,  provided  him  with  a  good  advanced 
base  with  abundance  of  supplies  and  stores  from  which 
to  pursue  his  campaign. 

This,  though  now  forgotten,  was  a  remarkable  feat  of 
arms,  the  fall  of  the  fort  being  undoubtedly  due  to  the 
moral  effect  produced  by  the  escalade  of  the  town.  The 
fort  was  pronounced,  not  only  by  Wellesley  himself  but 
by  his  officers  also,  to  be  nearly,  if  not  quite  the 
strongest,  that  they  had  ever  seen  in  the  plains  of  India.1 
It  was  nearly  circular  in  form,  well  built  of  solid  stone, 
with  bastions  sixty  feet  high  at  short  intervals,  each 
mounting  three  or  four  guns,  and  the  whole  surrounded 
by  a  wide  dry  ditch.  The  glacis  was  so  high  that  it 
covered  about  thirty  feet  of  the  walls,  but,  being  of  abrupt 
slope,  enabled  besiegers  to  find  shelter  close  to  the  place 
when  once  the  guns  had  been  dismounted.  This  was] 
the  defect  of  the  stronghold  ;  but  none  the  less  it  had 

1  It  must,  however,  be  remarked  that  one  of  his  engineer  officers 
describes  it  as  a  place  of  no  great  strength.  Twelve  Years'  Military 
Adventure,  p.  133. 


I  ch.  i  HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  19 

lt|  proved  too  formidable  even  for  Holkar  at  the  zenith  of  1803. 
§1  his  power.    Wellesley  mastered  both  fort  and  pettah 
'"I  in  three  days  at  a  cost  of  seventy-nine  Europeans  and 

e  sixty-two  natives  killed  and  wounded.1 

i  The  General  halted  four  days  at  Ahmednuggur  to 

d  arrange  the  details  for  the  protection  and  administration 

r-  of  the  captured  territory.    Meanwhile  a  report  came 

e  that  Holkar  was  on  the  march  to  join  Scindia  ;  and,  as 

ts  though  to  confirm  it,  a  party  of  irregular  horse  passed 

1  the  Ajunta  hills,  apparently  to  make  a  raid  upon  the 

e  Nizam's  dominions.     Stevenson,  as  is  not  uncommon 

e  with  a  general  who  has  a  wide  front  to  watch,  became 

I  uneasy  and  irresolute,  being  anxious  for  his  convoys  and 
it  communications.  First  he  moved  back,  then  he  moved 
e  forward,  forming  elaborate  plans  for  shielding  from 
d  attack  the  supplies  that  were  on  their  way  to  him. 
it  Wellesley  could  hardly  suppress  his  impatience.    "  Keep 

II  your  infantry  in  a  central  situation  and  let  your  supplies 
>t  collect  on  them,"  he  wrote  ;  "  move  forward  yourself 
d  with  the  cavalry  and  one  battalion,  and  dash  at  the 
h  first  enemy  that  comes  into  your  neighbourhood.  You 