


ch.  i         HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  29 

forgot  alike  the  object  of  his  oblique  movement  to  the  1803. 
right  and  Wellesley's  explicit  order  to  keep  clear  of  SePt-  2 
Assaye.  Possibly  he  was  afraid  that  his  men  might 
give  way  if  he  attempted  to  alter  the  direction,  for  they 
had  lost  a  third  of  their  numbers  before  they  fired  a 
shot  ;  or  possibly  he  was  himself  so  dazed  by  the  fire 
that  he  could  do  nothing  but  lead  on  in  the  same 
direction  that  he  had  originally  taken.  But,  be  that 
as  it  may,  it  is  certain  that  he  continued  to  edge  away 
to  his  right,  widening  the  gap  already  made  in 
Wellesley's  centre  by  the  swerving  of  the  Sepoys  already 
described,  and  that  the  hapless  Seventy-fourth,  trying 
in  vain  to  take  its  appointed  place  upon  his  right, 
followed  inevitably  in  his  wake.  Advancing  straight 
upon  Assaye,  the  two  unfortunate  corps  were  exposed 
to  a  terrific  fire  of  musketry  and  artillery  ;  and,  though 
the  Seventy-fourth  carried  the  picquets  forward  for 
some  way,  yet  at  length  the  trial  was  too  severe  for  the 
native  troops.  The  picquets  broke  and  ran  back 
with  confusion  on  to  the  Seventy-fourth,  which 
happened  at  the  time  to  be  in  difficult  ground  among 
cactus  hedges  ;  and  while  the  British  regiment  stood 
alone,  exposed  to  the  concentrated  fire  of  the  enemy's  left 
wing,  a  body  of  Mahratta  horse  came  galloping  round 
the  village  of  Assaye  and  swooped  upon  its  right 
flank,  cutting  the  white  soldiers  down  as  only  Eastern 
horsemen  can  cut,  with  all  the  terror  and  havoc  of  the 
sword. 

Yet  still  this  glorious  band,  though  reduced  from  a 
battalion  to  one  strong  company,  "  clung  round  its 
colours,  undaunted  and  unbroken  "  ;  and  it  was  not 
destined  to  be  utterly  swept  away.  Colonel  Maxwell, 
who  commanded  the  brigade  of  cavalry,  was  watching 
for  the  moment  to  act,  and  ordered  the  Nineteenth 
Light  Dragoons  and  the  Fourth  Native  Cavalry  to 
advance.  The  two  regiments,  therefore,  galloped 
forward  amid  the  cheers  of  the  wounded  men  of  the 
Seventy-fourth,  swept  the  Mahratta  cavalry  before 
them,  and  bore  down  swiftly  upon  the  left  of  the 


30  HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY    book  xiii 

i8o3- enemy's  first  line  of  infantry.    These  stood  firm  for 
Sept.  23.  a  t'me  an(j  receivec[  the  British  cavalry  with  a  storm  of 
grape-shot ;  but  the  Nineteenth,  totally  heedless  of  the 
fire,  leaped  straight  into  the  midst  of  them,  when  the 
whole  broke  and  fled  across  the  river  in  their  rear. 

Meanwhile  Wellesley  had  wheeled  up  his  own  left 
wing  to  the  right,  in  order  to  attack  the  enemy's  reserve 
by  the  Juah  ;  but  thereby  he  necessarily  exposed  its 
left  flank  to  the  hostile  cavalry  and  his  right  to  the  fire 
of  the  enemy's  centre,  which  had  faced  about  to  con- 
front him.  Maxwell's  charge,  however,  delivered  him 
from  the  danger  on  his  right ;  and  Wellesley's  battalions, 
breaking  into  double  quick  time,  charged  the  reserve  and 
drove  it  across  the  river.  The  Sepoys  began  to  disperse 
in  pursuit,  but  the  Seventy-eighth  fortunately  stood  firm 
and  daunted  any  attempt  of  the  Mahratta  horse  upon 
their  flank  ;  while  Maxwell's  cavalry,  finding  a  second 
stream  of  fugitives  added  to  that  already  before  them, 
dashed  over  the  water,  hewing  mercilessly  among  them, 
and  for  a  time  disappeared  from  the  field  of  battle. 