

Beyond  all  question  this  division  of  the  army  was  a 
most  dangerous  manoeuvre,  for  it  left  the  Mahratta 
leaders  free  by  a  small  lateral  movement  to  throw  the 
whole  of  their  force  upon  either  moiety  of  the  British. 
Wellesley,  indeed,  was  so  keenly  alive  to  its  faultiness 
after  the  event  that  he  was  careful  to  defend  it, 
before  it  was  attacked,  when  reporting  it  to  a  friend 
who  was  also  a  military  critic.  His  excuse  then  was 
that  he  thought  it  necessary  thus  to  separate  his  force 
into  two  parts,  first  to  avoid  delay  in  passing  through 
defiles,  and  secondly  to  ensure  that  while  he  was  ad- 
vancing northward  by  one  road,  the  enemy  should  not 
slip  past  him  by  the  other.  The  real  truth  probably 
was  that,  knowing  Scindia  to  be  afraid  of  him,  he  did 
not  hesitate  to  take  even  the  most  perilous  liberties. 
Sept.  23.  On  the  23rd  Wellesley,  on  reaching  Naulniah,  some 
twenty  miles  north  of  Jalnapore,  learned  that  the 
Mahratta  chiefs  had  moved  off  in  the  morning  with 
their  cavalry,  but  that  the  infantry  had  not  yet  marched, 
and  was  still  lying  within  six  miles  of  his  proposed 
encampment.  Thereupon,  though  Stevenson  was  still 
out  of  reach,  he  sent  word  to  him  that  he  meant  to 
attack  at  once  ;  and  having  secured  his  baggage  at 
Naulniah,  marched  forward  without  further  delay. 
Riding  on  with  his  staff  and  the  cavalry  only,  he  came, 
at  about  one  o'clock  of  the  afternoon,  in  sight  not  of 
the  infantry  alone  but  of  the  entire  army  of  Scindia  and 
Ragogee,  encamped  upon  a  peninsula  formed  by  the 
rivers  Kaitna  in  their  front,  and  Juah  in  their  rear. 
The  Kaitna  was  impassable  except  by  certain  fords  ;  the 
1  Well.  Desp.  ii.  284,  289,  295. 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY 


23 


Juah  was  of  smaller  volume,  but  had  very  steep  banks  ;  l8o3- 
and  the  ground  along  both  rivers  was  much  broken  by  Sept' 
ravines.  The  enemy  was  in  great  force,  for  the  whole 
of  the  peninsula  was  swarming  with  men.  The 
cavalry,  numbering  twenty  or  thirty  thousand,  formed 
the  right  of  the  hostile  army  about  the  village  of 
Bokerdun  ;  and  their  encampment  extended  to  eastward 
till  it  met  that  of  the  infantry,  which  prolonged  the 
line  to  the  village  of  Assaye.  Among  these  last,  as 
Wellesley  knew,  were  sixteen  regular  battalions,  amount- 
ing in  all  to  more  than  ten  thousand  men  ;  namely,  the 
brigade  of  Pohlmann,  a  German,  six  thousand  men  ;  that 
of  Dupont,  two  thousand  five  hundred  men  ;  and  four 
auxiliary  battalions  of  the  Begum  Somroo,1  numbering 
yet  two  thousand  more.  With  them  was  a  certain  pro- 
portion of  European  officers,  though  many,  especially 
the  English,  had  been  enticed  away  by  a  proclamation 
which  had  been  issued  by  the  Viceroy  at  the  beginning 
of  the  war,  offering  to  all  Europeans  and  British  subjects 
the  same  pay  as  they  received  from  Scindia.  Besides 
these  regular  troops  there  was  a  mob  of  irregular 
infantry  belonging  to  both  of  the  Mahratta  chiefs,  and 
a  good  force  of  regular  artillerymen  with  over  one 
hundred  guns.  Altogether  the  host  must  have  counted 
from  forty  to  fifty  thousand  men. 