

The  road  followed  by  Wellesley's  division  of  infantry  < 
entered  this  plain  by  the  village  of  Sirsoni  ;  and  it  was  t 
the  General's  direction  that  the  column  should  leave  1 
this  village  on  its  right  and,  having  cleared  it,  should 
wheel  to  the  left  and  form  line.     The  Mahrattas, 
knowing  that  Sirsoni  marked  the  only  access  to  the  J 
open  ground,  had  trained  their  guns  upon  it,  and,  as 
Wellesley's  leading  battalion  emerged  from  it,  they 
opened  a  fire  at  long  range  from  more  than  fifty  cannon.  I 
The  native  troops  of  the  advanced  guard,  who  had  J 
with  them  a  few  field-pieces  drawn  by  bullocks,  were  $ 
thrown  into  disorder ;  the  bullock-drivers  lost  their  1 
heads  ;  and  the  cattle,  turning  round,  carried  confusion  : 
into  the  ranks  behind  them.    Next  to  the  advanced  ii 
guard  were  two  native  battalions  which  had  behaved 
heroically  at  Assaye  ;  but,  dismayed  by  the  backward 
rush  and  galled  by  the  cannonade,  they  were  now  seized ! 


ch.  i         HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  39 

I  with  panic,  broke,  and  ran.  Happily  Wellesley  was  1803. 
close  by,  or  the  day  would  have  been  lost.  At  the  Nov. 
first  opening  of  the  cannonade  he  rode  towards  the 
enemy's  line  with  some  uneasiness,  but  presently 
observed  to  his  secretary,  "  We  shall  have  time  to  take 
those  guns  before  night."  Then,  finding  that  the 
fugitive  battalions  would  not  rally  to  him  when  he 
stepped  out  in  front,  he  rode  quietly  up  to  them  and 
bade  their  officers  guide  them  to  the  rear  of  the  village, 
and  reform  them  under  cover  of  it.  When  this  was 
done,  he  led  them  as  quietly  once  more  to  the  front 
and  halted  them  in  their  appointed  place,  while  the 
rear  battalions,  which  had  been  checked  and  delayed  by 
this  mishap,  came  up  and  deployed  in  succession.  Guns 
were  brought  into  action  on  each  side  of  the  village  to 
cover  the  deployment,  so  far  as  was  possible,  against  an 
overwhelming  superiority  of  artillery ;  and  each  battalion, 
after  taking  up  its  position,  lay  down. 

The  infantry  was  drawn  up  in  a  single  line,  standing 
from  right  to  left  in  the  following  order  :  the  advanced 
guard  or  picquets,  two  native  battalions,  the  Seventy- 
eighth,  the  Seventy-fourth,  four  more  native  battalions 
of  Wellesley 's  army,  and  then  the  Scots  Brigade 1  and 
the  six  native  battalions  of  Stevenson's  force.  The 
regular  cavalry,  consisting  of  the  Nineteenth  and  five 
native  regiments,  was  drawn  up  in  second  line  in  rear 
of  the  right,  and  the  irregular  horse  occupied  the  same 
position  on  the  left.  The  entire  force  probably 
numbered  from  ten  to  eleven  thousand  men. 

The  Mahrattas  were  formed  in  more  primitive 
fashion.  The  centre  and  left  were  composed  of 
Ragogee's  infantry,  artillery,  and  cavalry  ;  the  right  con- 
sisted of  Scindia's  cavalry  with  a  number  of  Pindarries 
or  predatory  horse.  The  regular  infantry,  about  ten 
thousand  strong,  was  drawn  up,  together  with  its  guns, 
in  one  line,  with  a  small  body  of  foot  in  rear.  Scindia's 
cavalry  was  massed  in  two  huge  bands,  one  slightly  in 
advance,  and  the  other  in  rear  of  the  right  of  the  first 