


36 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  book  xiii 


1803.  Wellesley  on  the  16th  marched  rapidly  northward  and 
foiled  his  enemy's  plans  for  the  second  time.  The  fall 
of  Burhanpore  and  Asseerghur,  however,  signified  that 
the  last  of  Scindia's  possessions  in  the  Deccan  had  been 
wrested  from  him  ;  and  the  surrender  of  sixteen  of  his 
European  officers,  upon  the  terms  offered  by  the  Indian 
Government,  greatly  diminished  his  power  for  mischief. 
Wellesley  therefore  decided  that  the  Rajah  of  Berar  also 
must  now  feel  the  weight  of  his  hand,  and  instructed 
Stevenson  to  equip  himself  for  the  siege  of  Gawilghur, 
the  chief  stronghold  of  Ragogee's  government  and  the 
storehouse  of  his  most  precious  possessions. 

Hardly  had  he  done  so  when  the  news  was  brought 
to  him  that  the  Rajah  had  separated  his  force  from  that 
of  Scindia  and  moved  to  Chandore  ;  whereupon, 
directing  Stevenson  to  keep  a  sharp  eye  upon  Scindia, 

Oct.  24,  he  reascended  the  Ajunta  Ghaut  on  the  24th,  and 
was  again  ready  to  prevent  any  inroad  to  the  south. 
Marching  southward  he  reached  Aurungabad  on  the 

Oct.  29.  29th,  when  he  turned  south-eastward,  making  Ragogee's 
army  shift  its  position  five  times  in  two  days  by  repeated 

Oct.  31.  menaces,  and  at  last  on  the  3 1st  came  in  sight  of  his  camp 
full  twenty  miles  away.  On  that  day  one  of  the  Rajah's 
detachments  made  an  attempt  upon  a  British  convoy  on 
the  Godavery,  but  was  beaten  ofT ;  and  Ragogee  then 
hurried  eastward  down  the  river,  having  no  mind  to  let 
Wellesley  approach  him  too  closely.    Wellesley  followed 

Nov.  10.  him  as  far  as  Patree,  which  lies  about  one  hundred  miles 
east  of  Ahmednuggur,  when  he  turned  northward, 
hoping  by  an  invasion  of  Berar  to  recall  the  Rajah  from 
his  raid  to  the  defence  of  his  own  territories. 

Immediately  afterwards  two  events  of  some  import- 
Nov.  1 1.  ance  occurred.    On  the  1  ith  there  arrived  in  Wellesley's 
camp  a  message  from  Scindia  to  sue  for  peace  ;  and  on 

Nov.  12.  the  1 2th  Amrut  Rao,  Holkar's  favoured  candidate  for 
the  throne  of  Poona,  joined  the  General  as  an  ally  of 
the  British,  with  three  or  four  thousand  irregular  troops. 
The  negotiations  were  carried  on  during  the  movement 
of  the  army  northward,  which  was  slow  owing  to  the 


ch.  i         HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  37 

tardiness   of  the   Nizam's    government   in   sending  1803. 
garrisons  to  occupy  the  country  taken  by  the  British. 
On  the  20th  of  November  Wellesley  reached  Wakud,  Nov.  20 
about  sixty  miles  north  of  Patree,  when  he  turned  north- 
westward to  Rajoora  ;  and  there  on  the  22  nd  he  agreed  Nov.  22 
to  a  suspension  of  hostilities  with  Scindia. 