

1  This,  while  it  endured,  was  numbered  94th  of  the  Line. 


4o 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  book  xiii 


1803.  line;  and  the  Rajah  of  Berar's  cavalry  likewise  took 
Nov.  29.  post  somewhat  in  rear  of  the  left  flank.    In  all  the  host 
numbered,  probably,  from  thirty  to  forty  thousand  men 
of  one  description  or  another,  and  covered  a  front  of  I 
considerable  extent. 

After  several  minutes'  continuance  of  the  fire  of  the  1 
Mahratta   artillery,  the   deployment  of  Stevenson's  1 
battalions  completed  Wellesley's  line,  and  at  half-past  I 
four  he  gave  the  order  to  advance.    The  whole  then  1 
strode  forward  as  if  on  parade,  while  Wellesley  in  1 
person  led  the  cavalry  on  to  within  six  hundred  yards  \ 
of  the  enemy,  and  left  it  with  orders  to  play  upon  them  1 
with  their  galloping  guns  and  to  charge  as  soon  as  the  1 
fire  produced  any  effect.    In  the  advance  of  the  infantry  1 
the  centre  for  some  reason  gradually  outpaced  the  rest 
until,  at  the  moment  of  attack,  the  Seventy-fourth,  1 
Seventy-eighth,  and  the  native  battalions  on  their  left  1 
were  some  distance  ahead  of  the  remainder  of  the  line.  | 
As  the  two  European  battalions  arrived  within  sixty  j 
yards  of  the  Mahratta  array   the  enemy's   gunners  1 
fired  a  final  discharge  of  grape  into  them,  and  a  large  ] 
body  of  Arabs,  with  much  shouting,  boldly  charged  them  j 
with  sword  and  buckler.    A  short  but  sharp  struggle  ( 
followed,  in  which  the  Arabs  were  beaten  back  with  t 
the  loss  of  some  six  hundred  killed  and  wounded  ;  and 
the  rest  of  the  Mahrattas  gave  way  almost  immediately.  ] 
Two  feeble  attacks  of  the  cavalry  upon  the  extremities  f 
of  Wellesley's  line  were  easily  repulsed,  and  then  the  i 
whole  mass  of  the  enemy  turned  and  ran,  leaving  t 
thirty-eight  guns  behind  them.    Wellesley  instantly 
launched  his  cavalry  after  the  fugitives  ;  and  Colonel 
St.  Leger,  who  had  succeeded  Maxwell  as  Brigadier, 
pressed  the  pursuit  relentlessly  by  moonlight,  cutting 
down  some  three  thousand  of  the  enemy  and  capturing 
elephants  and  camels  and  huge  quantities  of  baggage. 
It  was  midnight  before  the  British  troops  finally  lay 
down  to  rest,  having  been  under  arms  for  eighteen 
hours. 

Their  casualties  in  the  action  were  inconsiderable, 


•  ch.  i         HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  41 

^jnot  exceeding  one  hundred  and  sixty-two  Europeans  1803. 
^  l  and  two  hundred  natives  killed,  wounded,  and  missing.1  Nov.  29. 
31 1  But  the  proportion  of  Europeans  that  fell  was  unduly 
°f  [large,  partly,  no  doubt,  because  the  enemy  took  care  to 
[concentrate  their  artillery-fire  upon  them.  Thus  the 
le  I  small  remnant  of  the  Seventy-fourth  lost  fifty-two  men, 
l8|the  Seventy- eighth  lost  forty-seven,  and  the  Scots 
st  J  brigade  forty-one.  However,  even  so,  the  cost  of  a 
great  success  was  trifling,  especially  after  the  mishap  to 
111 1  the  leading  native  battalions  at  the  opening  of  the 
«| action.  "I  am  convinced,"  wrote  Wellesley,  referring 
m|to  these  last,  "  that  if  I  had  not  been  near  them  to  rally 
^ I  them  and  restore  the  battle,  we  should  have  lost  the 
•ylday."2 