

Wellesley's  army  bivouacked  on  the  field  after  the 
action,  in  a  state  of  utter  exhaustion  after  so  severe  a  , 
contest  following  upon  a  march  of  twenty-four  miles. 
The  cavalry  was  sent  back  to  bring  on  the  baggage  and  { 
camp-equipage,  but  did  not  return  until  next  morning.  , 
And  meanwhile  the  dead  were  ungathered,  the  hurt  in  , 
many  cases  un tended,  and  the  living 4ay  down  among  2 
them  as  they  could.     Wellesley,  overcome  by  the  \ 
reaction  after  intense  strain  of  mind  and  body,  sank  j 
down  with  the  rest  upon  the  ground.    Close  to  him  on  j 
one  side  lay  an  officer  whose  leg  had  been  shot  off;  ^ 
close  to  him  on  the  other  was  a  second  officer,  dead  ; 
but  the  General  sat  motionless  with  his  head  bent  low 
between  his  knees,  and  spoke  no  word  to  any  man.1  T 
Sept.  24.  When  morning  came  it  was  hoped  that  Stevenson  would  . 
arrive,  bringing  his  medical  staff"  to  help  the  overworked  C 
surgeons  of  Wellesley  ;  but  it  was  evening  before  he 
appeared.    Like  a  good  soldier  he  had  moved  at  once 
towards  the  sound  of  the  cannon,  but  being  misled  by  j 
his  guides  had  entangled  his  troops  in  a  defile,  so  that 

1  Biddulph,  p.  145,  quoting  from  a  MS.  in  the  India  Office  B 
Library. 


I  ch.  i         HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  35 

they  were  wearied  out  with  marching.    All  through  the  1803. 
25th  he  waited  in  order  that  his  surgeons  might  give 
assistance ;  though  even  thus  it  was  a  week  before  the 
wounds  of  all  the  injured  could  be  dressed.  Then 
on  the  26th,  leaving  Wellesley  still  encamped  near  the  Sept.  26. 
battlefield,  he  set  out  in  pursuit  of  the  enemy. 

The  Mahrattas  had  passed  the  night  of  the  23rd 
within  twelve  miles  of  Assaye,  but,  hearing  of  Stevenson's 
approach,  made  off  on  the  morning  of  the  24th,  and 
never  stopped  until  on  the  same  night  they  reached 
!  the  foot  of  the  Ajunta  Ghaut.     As  they  fled,  they 
abandoned  or  hid  several  more  of  their  guns,  four  of 
which  fell  into  Stevenson's  hands.    Their  force  then 
parted  into  two  divisious,  the  regular  infantry  retiring 
across  the  Nerbudda,  towards  which  river  Stevenson 
followed  them  ;  while  Scindia  and  Ragogee,  after  taking 
some  guns  from  the  fort  of  Burhanpore,  moved  west- 
ward along  the  Taptee,  with  the  intention,  as  was 
supposed,    of  marching  ultimately  southward  upon 
Poona.    Wellesley  until  the  8th  of  October  was  still  Oct,  8. 
occupied  in  moving  his  wounded  to  the  fort  of  Ajunta, 
and  in  the  more  welcome  task  of  attracting  grain- 
merchants  with  thousands  of  bullocks  from  Scindia's 
army  to  his  own.    Upon  hearing  of  the  Mahrattas' 
movements  he  decided  that  he  could  not  advance  to 
northward  without  risk  to  Poona  or  to  the  Nizam's 
dominions.    He  therefore  ordered  Stevenson  to  take 
possession  if  possible  of  the  forts  of  Burhanpore  and 
Asseerghur,  upon  the  north  bank  of  the  Taptee,  and 
himself  made  a  rapid  movement  from  Ajunta  south- 
ward towards  Aurungabad,  halting  within  one  march  of 
that  town  for  the  best  part  of  a  week.    On  the  night  of 
the  15th  of  October  he  learned  that  Scindia,  finding  Oct.  1 5. 
his  way  to  Poona  barred,  had  turned  again  northward. 
Stevenson  was  at  that  moment  on  the  point  of  reaching 
Burhanpore,  which  indeed  he  occupied  without  resist- 
anceonthe  1 6th,  afterwards  continuing  his  advance  north-  Oct.  16. 
eastward  upon  Asseerghur.     Divining  that  Scindia's 
sudden  change  of  direction  boded  no  good  for  Stevenson, 