


32  HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY    bookxiii  c 

1803.  o'clock,  therefore,  the  engagement  closed,  leaving  Arthur  t 

Wellesley  victorious  in  his  first  general  action.1  C 

Success  was  only  gained  by  the  most  extraordinary  1< 

exertions  on  the  part  of  every  man  in  the  field.    Had  t 

Pohlmann  done  his  duty  he  might  at  least  have  em-  t 

barrassed    Wellesley    greatly  ;  and    if  the    Mahratta  s 

cavalry  had  behaved  with  even  a  show  of  spirit,  the  issue  t 

would  have  been  certainly  doubtful,  and  most  probably  g 

disastrous   to   the   British   arms.    Colonel   Orrock's  fc 

unfortunate  error  in  misleading  the  right  of  the  line  was  \ 

responsible  for  the  extreme  hazard  incurred  in  the  fight ;  n 

but  Wellesley,  in  consideration  of  the  terrible  fire  which  n 

he  faced  at  the  head  of  the  picquets,  forgave  him  for  the  t( 

blunder.    For  the  rest,  though  every  man,  British  or  b 

native,  played  his  part  with  superlative  gallantry,  Assaye  h 

presents  a  roll  of  valiant  deeds  which  is  unsurpassed  in  v 

our  military  history.    First  and  foremost,  Wellesley  0 

himself  was  throughout,  in  the  hottest  of  the  fray,  calm,  ti 

cool,  and  collected  as  if  at  a  field-day.    He  escaped  g 

untouched,  though,  as  has  been  told,  two  horses  were  k 
killed  under  him ;  but  of  his  staff"  eight  out  of  ten  sustained 

wounds  to  themselves  or  their  horses.    His  brigadiers,  t( 

Harness  and  Waller,  together  with  most  of  the  members  e: 

of  their  staff*  and  the  mounted  officer9»of  infantry,  also  si 

had  their  horses  shot  under  them.    Regimental  and  ti 

staff-officers  vied  with  each  other  in  heroism.    Lieutenant  k 

Nathan  Wilson  of  the  Nineteenth  Hussars  had  his  arm  k 

shattered  by  a  grape-shot  early  in  the  action,  but  charged  v 

on  with  the  useless  limb  dangling  by  his  side.    With  0 

1  The  best  account  of  Assaye  known  to  me  is  in  Twelve  Years*  P 

Military   Adventure,    i.   154   seq.,  which    should   be    read  with  % 

Wellington  Desp.  ii.  323-329,  338,  349  ;  Suppl.  Desp.  iv.  185-190  ;  a 
Notes   on   the   late   Transactions,   etc.,   p.    59;   Welsh's  Military 
Reminiscences,  i.  171  seq.  ;  Grant  Duff's  History  of  the  Mahrattas,  I 
iii.  169  seq.  ;  Wilson's  History  of  the  Madras  Army,  iii.  104  seq.  ; 
Thorn's  Memoir  of  the  War  in  India ;  and  Colebrooke's  Life  of 
Mountstuart  Elphinstone,  i.  63  seq.   All  of  these  have  been  admirably 
worked  up,  with  some  original  matter,  in  The  Nineteenth  and  their 
Times,  by  Colonel  Biddulph,  who  has  most  kindly  furnished  me 
with  notes  taken  by  him  in  the  India  Office,  and  other  valuable 
material  collected  by  him  from  private  sources. 


1  ch.  i         HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  33 