

^Ithe  Nineteenth  in  the  same  charge  rode  a  staff-officer,  1803. 

]  Captain  A.  B.  Campbell  of  the  Seventy-fourth.  He  had 
ar:|  lost  one  arm  in  the  Polygar  war  ;  he  had  since  broken 
^  I  the  other  at  the  wrist  by  a  fall  when  hunting  ;  but  he 
:n>|  took  his  bridle  in  his  teeth  and  fought  fiercely  with  his 
M  sword  in  his  mutilated  hand.  Captain  George  Sale  of 
sue  the  Nineteenth  galloped  so  impetuously  at  a  Mahratta 
gunner,  who  was  in  the  act  of  firing  his  gun,  that  his 
horse  stuck  fast  between  the  cannon  and  the  wheel, 
val  His  covering  sergeant,  Strange  by  name,  came  to  his 
rescue,  and  though  pierced  through  the  lungs  by  a  pike, 
not  only  saved  his  officer,  but  rode  on  with  his  regiment 
to  the  end  of  the  day.  The  Sepoys  showed  not  less 
bravery  ;  and  Wellesley  confessed  that  they  astonished 
him.  In  the  first  battalion  of  the  Eighth  Native  Infantry, 
which  called  itself  "  Wellesley's  Own,"  five  native 
officers  and  non-commissioned  officers  of  a  single  dis- 
tinguished family  were  killed.  They  were  buried  in  one 
grave,  and  their  comrades  refused  to  mourn  over  men 
who  had  died  in  the  performance  of  their  duty. 

But  the  loss  of  the  British  was  very  severe,  amounting 
to  nearly  six  hundred  and  fifty  Europeans  and  over 
eight  hundred  natives  killed,  wounded,  and  missing  ;  and 
since  most  of  the  wounded  were  struck  by  cannon-shot, 
their  hurts  were  very  severe.1  The  Seventy-fourth  alone 
lost  eleven  officers  and  one  hundred  and  thirteen  men 
killed,  six  officers  and  two  hundred  and  seventy-one  men 
wounded.  Wellesley  never  forgot  their  gallant  service 
on  this  day,  and  six  months  later  interposed  to  save  from 
the  gallows  a  murderer  of  infamous  character,  who  was 
also  a  soldier  of  the  Seventy-fourth,  rather  than  punish 
a  member  of  such  a  regiment  with  death.2    Of  the  two 


Killed.  Wounded.  Missing. 
1  European  Officers       .       23  30 

European  Soldiers       .175  412  4 

Natives      .       .       .230  696  14 


Totals  .      428  1 138  18  =  1584 


2  Wellington  Suppl.  Desp.  iv.  341, 
VOL.  V 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  book  xiii 


1803.  Sepoy  battalions  on  the  right  of  the  first  line,  one  had 
one  hundred  and  seventy-four  and  the  other  two  hundred 
and  twenty -eight  casualties.  The  cavalry  brigade, 
besides  nearly  two  hundred  men  killed  and  wounded, 
lost  three  hundred  and  fifteen  horses  killed  and  over 
four  hundred  wounded.  Indeed  there  have  been  few 
actions  in  which  horses  have  suffered  so  heavily  in  pro- 
portion to  their  numbers.  The  enemy  left  twelve 
hundred  dead  on  the  field  ;  their  wounded  were  estimated 
at  four  times  as  many  ;  and  they  abandoned  also  to  the 
British  ninety-eight  guns.  They  were  hardly  treated, 
for  their  infantry  fought  well  and  stubbornly,  being  by 
Arthur  Wellesley's  testimony  the  best  troops  in  India 
next  to  our  own  Sepoys.  But  Ragogee  Bhonsla  fled 
at  the  beginning  of  the  action,  and  Scindia  followed  him 
soon  after  ;  and  with  such  leaders  it  was  impossible  for 
the  men  to  do  themselves  justice. 