

Dec  6.  the  6th  of  December  detachments  were  sent  out  to 
drive  away  the  hostile  troops  which  were  encamped  to 
south  of  the  walls,  and  to  seize  the  fortified  village  of 
Damergaum,  which  covered  the  access  to  Labada  at  the  i 

Dec.  7.  entrance  to  the  mountains.  On  the  7th  both  armies 
marched  from  Ellichpoor,  Stevenson's  upon  Damergaum, 
and  Wellesley's  on  Deogaum,  towards  the  south  front 
of  Gawilghur. 


ch.  i         HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY 


43 


For  four  long  days  Stevenson's  men  struggled  with  1803. 
extraordinary  difficulties  in  dragging  the  heavy  guns 
to  their  appointed  place.  First  they  had  to  make  roads 
[over  the  ruggedest  of  mountains  and  ravines,  and  then 
to  haul  their  cannon  and  stores  with  frightful  fatigue  to 
I  the  desired  spot.  The  work,  however,  was  cheerfully 
[done  ;  and  on  the  night  of  the  12th  Stevenson  erected  Dec. 
two  batteries,  the  one  of  five,  the  other  of  four  guns, 
against  the  northern  front  of  the  outer  fort.  Wellesley 
1  on  his  side  also  threw  up  a  battery  of  four  guns,  though 
with  little  hope  of  success,  over  against  the  gate  of  the 
south  front  of  the  citadel.  All  three  of  these  opened 
fire  on  the  13th,  Stevenson's  playing  with  great  effect,  Dec. 
while  the  shot  from  Wellesley's  battery  simply  re- 
bounded from  the  solid  wall  and  rolled  down  the  hill 
back  to  the  very  muzzles  of  the  guns.  By  the  night 
of  the  14th  the  breaches  in  the  wall  of  the  outer  fort  Dec. 
upon  Stevenson's  side  were  practicable,  and  at  ten 
o'clock  of  the  following  morning  the  assault  was  Dec. 
delivered  by  the  flank  companies  of  Stevenson's 
division,  supported  by  the  Scots  Brigade.  Simultane- 
ously Wellesley  launched  two  columns,  consisting  of 
the  Seventy-fourth  and  Seventy-eighth  regiments  and 
one  battalion  of  Sepoys,  as  a  diversion,  against  the 
the  southern  and  north-western  gates.  Stevenson's  men 
soon  forced  their  way  into  the  outer  fort,  and  the 
enemy,  striving  to  escape  from  their  bayonets  by  the 
north-western  gate,  were  met  by  one  of  Wellesley's 
columns,  which  forced  them  back,  and,  entering  the 
gate  with  them,  soon  mastered  the  outer  fort. 

Then  to  their  astonishment  the  British  for  the  first 
time  discovered  that  the  citadel  stood  on  a  separate 
hill  on  the  other  side  of  a  deep  gorge,  beyond  which 
appeared  the  intermediate  wall  and  its  gate.  However, 
Colonel  Kenny,  almost  by  himself,  found  a  track  which 
crossed  the  gorge  towards  the  gate,  and  the  Ninety- 
fourth,  presently  finding  it  also,  crowded  after  him  to 
the  intermediate  wall.  This  rose  out  of  a  steep  pitch 
of  ground,  and  the  men  could  only  climb  it  slowly  and 


44  HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  book  xiii 