

Wellesley  then  reformed  his  infantry  on  the  bank  of 
the  Juah,  and  found  that  there  was  a  second  engagement 
before  him.  The  enemy's  cavalry  still  hovered  round 
him  on  the  west,  with  Pohlmann's  brigade  looming  in 
more  solid  menace  behind  them  ;  the  unbroken  infantry 
of  their  centre  and  a  mass  of  rallied  infantry  had  formed 
themselves  into  a  huge  half-moon  with  their  right 
resting  on  Assaye  and  their  left  on  the  Juah  ;  and  finally, 
scattered  parties  of  Mahratta  troops,  some  of  which 
had  feigned  death  during  Wellesley's  advance,  had 
seized  the  deserted  guns  in  all  parts  of  the  field  and 
were  playing  upon  the  British  rear.  Wellesley  detached 
first  one  native  battalion  and  later  a  second  against  the 
mass  of  men  round  Assaye,  but  both  were  beaten  back, 
having  accomplished  nothing.  Now,  however,  the 
cavalry  reappeared  on  the  scene,  for  Maxwell,  rallying 
his  men  from  the  pursuit,  had  led  them  down  the  bank 
of  the  Juah  to  a  ford  by  the  village  of  Borekerry,  and 
by  that  passage  had  regained  the  army.    The  General 


ch.i         HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  31 

or  then  ordered  the  Seventy-eighth  and  the  Seventh  Native  l8o3- 
Cavalry  to  head  a  fresh  attack  upon  Assaye,  and  was  Sept'  23 
actually  drawing  up  the  former  regiment  in  line  when 
his  horse  was  shot  under  him.  The  enemy,  however, 
did  not  await  the  onslaught  of  the  white  infantry, 
but  retired  across  the  Juah  and  made  good  their 
retreat. 

There  remained  Pohlmann's  brigade,  and  the  scattered 
gunners  dispersed  over  the  ground  formerly  occupied 
by  the  enemy's  first  line ;  and  Wellesley,  leaving 
Maxwell  to  deal  with  Pohlmann,  led  the  infantry  to 
secure  the  Mahratta  guns.  This  last  was  not  ac- 
complished without  sharp  fighting,  in  the  course  of 
which  the  General  had  another  horse  badly  injured 
under  him  by  the  pikes  of  Scindia's  brave  gunners. 
Meanwhile  Maxwell  led  his  brigade  against  Pohlmann's 
column,  though  its  ranks  were  by  this  time  greatly 
thinned  and  both  men  and  horses  were  exhausted  by  their 
previous  efforts.  Pohlmann  awaited  the  attack  in  line, 
and  Maxwell  led  the  charge  obliquely  against  his  left. 
At  the  moment  of  contact  Maxwell  was  struck  dead  by 
a  grape-shot.  By  a  convulsive  movement  he  threw  up 
his  sword  and  checked  his  horse  before  he  fell.  The 
squadrons  behind  him  swerved  at  the  movement;  and 
the  whole  body  of  horsemen,  who  had  acquitted  them- 
selves so  nobly  an  hour  earlier,  edged  with  increasing 
speed  down  the  whole  length  of  Pohlmann's  bayonets, 
crying,  "  Halt,  halt,"  and  finally  galloped  away.  The 
brigade  was  soon  rallied,  and  retired  at  a  walk  ;  and 
Pohlmann,  whose  conduct  throughout  the  day  bears 
strong  marks  of  treachery  to  his  master,  seized  the  op- 
portunity to  retreat.  The  Mahratta  horse,  which  by  a 
little  energy  and  boldness  could  have  ensured  the  victory 
to  Scindia  while  Maxwell  was  on  the  other  side  of  the 
Juah,  lost  heart  and  rode  sullenly  off.  The  British 
troops,  having  marched  twenty-four  miles  before  the 
battle  began,  were  in  no  condition  to  pursue  ;  and  the 
irregular  cavalry  of  the  Peishwa  and  of  Mysore  had  not 
mettle  sufficient  to  attack  an  unbroken  enemy.    At  six 