

st  On  the  day  following  the  action  Stevenson's  division  Nov.  30. 
\  marched  in  pursuit  of  the  enemy,  though  Stevenson 
ft  himself  was  so  ill  that  he  was  hardly  fit  to  do  duty  ; 
e.  and,  Wellesley  following  him  a  day  later,  the  two 
y  divisions  met  once  more  at  Ellichpoor,  about  forty 
s  miles  east  and  north  of  Argaum,  on  the  5  th  of  December.  Dec.  5. 
;e  Halting  there  for  a  day  to  establish  a  hospital  for  the 
n  wounded,  Wellesley  pushed  on  with  his  whole  force  to 
le  Gawilghur,  where  the  defeated  infantry  of  Argaum  had 
h  taken  refuge.  The  fort  itself  was  situated  on  a  lofty 
d  mountain  in  a  range  of  hills  between  the  sources  of  the 
Poorna  and  the  Taptee  ;  and  by  the  natural  con- 
s  figuration  of  the  ground  the  stronghold  was  divided 
e  into  two  distinct  parts,  a  main  fort  or  citadel  fronting 
I  to  the  south,  and  an  outer  or  lesser 3  fort  which  covered 
y  the  approach  to  the  inner  on  the  north.    Between  the 

Killed.  Wounded.  Missing. 

1  Europeans  15  145  2 
7           Natives                      31  163  5 

1         One  European  officer  was  killed,  and  ten  wounded. 

2  Well.  Desp.  ii.  565.  Welsh's  Military  Reminiscences  and 
jf  Twelve  Tears'  Military  Adventure  are  the  best  authorities  to  read 
]    with  the  despatches, 

3  Perhaps    this    should    be    more    correctly    described   as  a 
fortified  pettan,  being  in  this  case  smaller  instead  of,  as  usual,  larger 

>    than  the  fort  proper. 


42  HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  book  xiii  c 

i8o3-  two  forts  was  a  deep  gorge,  on  the  inner  side  of  which 
was  an  intermediate  wall,  shielding  the  access  to  the  e 
walls  of  the  citadel  from  the  north.  One  and  all  of  t< 
these  defences  were  well  built  of  stone,  with  ramparts  o 
and  towers  but  without  a  ditch.  The  roads  which  led  t< 
to  the  fort  were  three.  The  first  reached  the  citadel  tl 
from  the  south,  and  was  not  only  very  long  and  steep,  d 
but  so  narrow  as  to  be  impracticable  for  cattle.  The 
second  started  from  the  outer  fort  on  the  north-west  % 
side,  circled  round  the  western  face  of  the  main  fort  o 
within  range  of  its  guns  for  a  long  distance,  and  finally  * 
formed  the  main  communication  with  the  country  to  * 
southward.  But  it  was  too  narrow  to  be  used  as  a  H 
regular  approach,  besides  which  the  rock  on  each  side  * 
of  the  gate  had  been  scarped.  There  remained  a  third  b 
road  on  the  north  side,  leading  to  the  outer  fort  b 
directly  from  the  village  of  Labada  ;  and  here  the  o: 
ground  was  level  with  the  works.  But  on  the  other  i 
hand  the  road  to  Labada  from  Ellichpoor  wound  for  o 
thirty  miles  through  mountains  and  jungle,  offering  d 
terrible  obstacles  to  the  transport  of  guns  and  stores,  A 
together  with  some  uncertainty  as  to  the  supply  of  water  f 
on  the  way.  In  fact,  as  Wellesley  said,  the  great  diffi-  ti 
culty  in  attacking  Gawilghur  was  to  approach  it  at  all.  os 
However,  he  decided  to  make  his  attempt  from  the  K 
north  by  Labada  ;  and,  since  Stevenson  had  equipped  i 
his  force  for  a  siege,  the  principal  attack  was  entrusted 
to  him,  while  Wellesley  himself  undertook  to  cover 
the  operation  with  his  own  infantry  and  the  cavalry  of 
both  armies,  and  to  make  such  diversions  as  he  could 
on  the  south  and  west  of  the  fort.    Accordingly  on 