

The  considerations  which  chiefly  moved  him  to  this 
arrangement  were  that  he  could  do  no  more  harm  to 
Scindia,  having  already  captured  the  whole  of  his  terri- 
tory in  the  Deccan  ;  whereas  Scindia's  horse  could  do 
a  good  deal  of  harm  to  him  by  impeding  his  operations 
against  Berar  in  general  and  Gawilghur  in  particular. 
The  only  condition,  therefore,  upon  which  he  insisted 
was  that  Scindia  should  retire  to  some  position  at  least 
fifty  miles  east  of  Ellichpoor,  and  should  preserve  the 
same  distance  from  any  British  troops.  In  return  he 
engaged  that  the  advance  of  the  British  in  Guzerat  should 
be  kept  within  certain  limits.  This  done,  he  turned 
eastward  from  Rajoora,  and  entering  Berar  on  the  25th,  Nov.  25 
reached  Akolah  on  the  27th,  from  which  two  days' 
march  due  north  to  Parterly1  united  his  army  on  the 
29th  with  that  of  Colonel  Stevenson.  Nov.  29 

Meanwhile,  as  might  have  been  expected,  Scindia 
had  made  no  attempt  to  fulfil  his  part  of  the  armistice 
by  retiring  to  east  of  Ellichpoor,  but  had  simply 
drawn  his  cavalry  nearer  to  a  large  force  of  Ragogee's 
regular  infantry,  which  was  encamped  within  sight 
of  Parterly  under  the  Rajah's  brother,  Manu  Bapu. 
Stevenson  therefore  had  followed  Scindia,  but  judiciously 
halted  for  a  day  so  as  to  allow  Wellesley  to  join  him  in 
the  attack.  On  the  morning  of  the  29th  a  messenger 
from  the  Rajah  of  Berar  came  to  Wellesley  to  tell  him 
that  his  master's  army  was  only  ten  miles  distant,  and 
to  entreat  him  to  halt.  The  General's  only  answer  was 
that  if  he  overtook  the  army  he  would  certainly  attack 
it,  and  that  the  messenger  had  better  remain  with  the 
baggage  under  protection  of  the  rear-guard.  Ascend- 
ing a  tower  at  Parterly  immediately  upon  his  arrival, 
1  Or,  as  some  spell  it,  Pautoorla. 


■ 

38  HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  book  xiii 

1803.  Wellesley  perceived  a  confused  moving  mass  some  five 
Nov.  29.  miles  distant,  but  having  made  a  long  march  on  a  hot 
day  was  disinclined  to  weary  his  troops  with  a  pursuit, 
However,  bodies  of  Mahratta  horse  at  once  appeared  in 
his  front ;  and  when  these  were  chased  away,  in  order 
to  clear  the  ground  on  which  he  intended  to  encamp, 
he  plainly  descried  the  whole  army  of  the  enemy  drawn 
up  in  order  of  battle  about  five  miles  off  on  the  plains 
before  the  village  of  Argaum.  This  was  enough. 
Though  the  troops  had  marched  at  six  in  the  morning 
and  it  was  then  three  o'clock  in  the  afternoon,  he 
resolved  immediately  to  attack.  The  army  accordingly 
marched  off  in  three  columns  in  a  direction  nearly 
parallel  to  the  enemy's  position,  the  irregular  cavalry 
covering  the  left  flank  and  rear.  The  country  was 
covered  with  high  grain,  and  for  three  miles  those  in 
the  ranks  could  see  nothing.  Near  the  village  of 
Sirsoni,  however,  the  ground  opened  out  slightly,  and  1 
on  the  other  side  of  it  the  cultivated  land  gave  place  to 
an  open  plain,  perfectly  flat  though  cut  with  water- 
courses, where  the  enemy's  host  came  into  full  view 
about  a  thousand  yards  away. 