

Wellesley's  right  astray,  the  battle  of  Assaye  would  G 

have  been  such  another  as  Delhi.    But  with  all  his  V, 

good  fortune,  Lake's  losses  were  in  one  respect  serious,  a 

The  total  number  of  killed,  wounded,  and  missing  was  2: 

four  hundred  and  seventy-eight ;    and  of  these  one  p: 

hundred    and    thirty-seven,    including    one    officer,  c 

belonged  to  the  Seventy-sixth.    The  native  regiment  S; 

which  stood  next  to  it  lost  ninety-one  of  all  ranks  Y 

killed  and  wounded ;  and  the  casualties  among  the  I 

horses  of  the  cavalry  brigade  amounted  to  one  hundred  I 

and  seventy.    In  truth  it  was  no  child's  play  to  face  the  I 

fire  of  the  Mahratta  artillery,  though,  when  once  it  had  h 

been  silenced  by  the  charge  of  the  infantry,  the  action  f 

in  every  case  came  to  an  abrupt  end.    The  Mahrattas  b 

on  this  occasion  were  estimated  to  have  lost  three  b 

thousand  men,   and  they  left  sixty-eight  pieces  of  a; 

cannon,  all  admirably  made  after  a  French  design,  as  I 
the  trophies  of  the  victors. 

Halting  for  three  days,  Lake  crossed  to  the  western  ti 

Sept.  14.  bank  of  the  Jumna  on  the  14th,  and  on  the  same  day  0 

received  the  surrender  of  Bourquain  and  of  four  more  I 

French  officers,  who  were  presently  sent  down  to  | 

Calcutta.  This  gave  a  mortal  stroke  to  the  French  I 
Sept.  1 6.  power  built  up  by  Perron  ;  and  on  the  1 6th  Lake 
was  welcomed  by  the  emperor,  Shah  Alum,  to  the 
capital  of  the  Mogul  empire.  It  was  the  last  of  many 
vicissitudes  which  the  unhappy  potentate  was  to  experi- 
ence. Old,  blind,  and  broken  down  by  harsh  treatment, 
he  found  himself,  though  still  a  puppet,  yet  again  by 
title  an  emperor,  and  entertained  as  such  with  honour. 
Three  years  later  he  died  at  the  age  of  eighty-six, 
having  lived  to  see  the  occupants  of  a  few  small 
factories  become  the  masters  of  India. 


Jch.  ii        HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  57 

w 

the  After  a  week's  halt  in  Delhi,  Lake  marched  on  the  1803. 
toil  24th  upon  Agra,  his  heavy  guns  and  stores  being  Sept.  24. 
conveyed  in  boats  down  the  Jumna,  while  the  army 
followed  the  banks.  On  the  25  th  messengers  arrived 
from  the  Rajah  of  Bhurtpore,  a  powerful  chief  of  the 
Jats,  to  beg  the  friendship  and  protection  of  the  British 
Government,  which  proposal,  being  readily  entertained 
by  Lake,  was  on  the  9th  of  October  formulated  into 
a  treaty  of  offensive  and  defensive  alliance.  On  the 
2nd  of  October  the  army  reached  Muttra,  Perron's  Oct.  2. 
principal  arsenal,  where  Lake  was  rejoined  by  the 
cavalry  and  other  troops  that  had  been  detached  to 
Shekoabad  and  other  quarters,1  and  was  further  greeted 
by  four  more  of  Scindia's  French  officers  who  had 
come  in  to  surrender.  Two  days  later  he  encamped  Oct.  4.  1 
on  the  south  side  of  Agra,  when  he  at  once  summoned 
the  garrison  to  surrender  ;  but  the  troops  in  the  city 
had  risen  against  their  European  officers  ;  all  was  in 
confusion  ;  and  no  answer  was  returned.  Seven 
battalions  of  regular  infantry  with  several  guns  were, 
however,  encamped  upon  the  glacis,  occupying  the  town 
and  the  ravines  which  surrounded  the  south  and  south- 
west faces  of  the  fort  ;  and  Lake  realised  that  until 
these  were  dislodged  it  would  be  impossible  to  conduct 
the  operations  of  a  siege.  Shifting  his  camp,  therefore, 
on  the  7th  and  8th  so  as  to  encircle  the  place  as  far  Oct.  7,  8. 
as  possible,  he  on  the  10th  made  two  separate  attacks,  Oct.  10. 
each  with  three  battalions  of  Sepoys,  upon  the  town 
and  the  ravines,  and  drove  the  enemy  off  with  a  loss 
of  six  hundred  men  and  twenty-six  guns.  The  action, 
however,  was  severe,  since  the  troops  were  exposed 
to  the  guns  of  the  fort  ;  and  the  object  was  not  attained 
without  the  loss  of  two  hundred  and  twenty-eight 
killed  and  wounded,  including  nine  British  officers. 
Two  days  later,  however,  the  remainder  of  the  seven  Oct.  12. 
battalions,  two  thousand  five  hundred  strong,  sur- 
rendered;   and  on  the  morrow,  before  Lake  could  Oct.  13. 