

1  The  actual  position  of  the  various  corps  was  as  follows,  fron 
right  to  left:  76th,  2/i2th  N.I.,  2/ijth  N.I.,  2/2nd  N.I.,  i/Htl 
N.I.,  i/2nd  N.I. 


tor 


ch.  ii        HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  55 

(four  guns,  was  thrown  forward  obliquely  with  its  right  1803 
wing  resting  on  a  village,  in  order  to  cover  the  left.  ^P*- 
These  dispositions  completed,  Lake  placed  himself  at 
the  head  of  the  Seventy-sixth,  and  ordered  the  whole 
line  to  advance. 

The  Mahrattas  promptly  opened  a  tremendous  fire 
of  round,  grape,  and  chain  shot ;  but  the  battalions 
strode  on  unheeding.  The  Seventy-sixth  kept  their 
muskets  at  the  shoulder,  despite  the  concentration  of 
the  Mahratta  guns  upon  them,  until  they  came 
within  range  of  one  hundred  yards,  when  Lake  gave 
the  order  to  fire  a  volley  and  charge.  The  effect  was 
as  crushing  as  at  Quebec.  The  British  dashed  forward, 
and  the  Mahrattas  broke  and  fled  in  all  directions. 
The  troops  were  no  sooner  halted  after  the  charge 
than  Lake  ordered  the  battalions  to  form  column  of 
companies  ;  and  the  cavalry,  galloping  through  the 
intervals,  fell  upon  the  unhappy  fugitives  and  hunted 
them  to  the  Jumna,  where  the  galloping  guns  made 
terrible  havoc  among  the  flying  masses.  But,  while 
the  cavalry  was  thus  engaged  on  the  front  and  right, 
a  part  of  the  Mahrattas  had  retired  to  the  left ;  where- 
fore Lake  wheeled  the  line  of  infantry  also  to  the  left, 
and,  pursuing  them  among  the  broken  ground  and 
ravines  adjoining  the  Jumna,  completely  routed  them 
and  captured  all  their  guns  and  stores.  The  action 
came  to  an  end  at  seven  in  the  evening,  by  which  time 
the  troops  had  been  on  foot  for  sixteen  hours,  for  the 
most  part  under  a  burning  sun.  The  army  then 
encamped  on  the  bank  of  the  river  over  against  the 
city  of  Delhi. 

It  is  instructive  to  compare  this  action  with  that  of 
Assay e,  which  was  fought  only  a  fortnight  later.  In 
both  cases  the  British  commanders  found  their  enemy 
very  strongly  posted  with  very  powerful  and  efficient 
artillery,  and  in  both  cases  they  manoeuvred  to  make 
him  change  position  and  then  attacked.  Both,  also, 
resolved  to  endure  the  punishment  of  the  enemy's 
cannon  for  a  time,  feeling  sure  that  he  could  not  stand 


! 

56  HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  book  xiii  c 

1803.  the  ordeal  of  meeting  their  infantry.    But  here  the 

Sept.  10.  resemblance  ends.    In  Lake's  action  everything  went  2. 

right,  and  the  cavalry  was  fresh   for   pursuit ;   in  c 

Wellesley's  everything  went  wrong,  and  the  result  was  K 

a  narrow  escape  from  disaster.    It  may  therefore  be  h 

concluded  that  but  for  the  unfortunate  error  which  led  }i 