

1803.  with  difficulty,  one  by  one,  under  a  heavy  fire  from 
Dec.  15.  the  walls  of  the  citadel.  Meanwhile  the  British  supports  & 
came  hurrying  up,  and,  halting  on  the  edge  of  the  outer 
fort,  poured  in  an  answering  fire  of  musketry  while  the  £ 
Ninety-fourth  were  clambering  over  the  wall.  Beyond  ir 
this  obstacle  was  a  narrow  rocky  road  leading  to  yet  ® 
another  wall  and  gate — those  of  the  main  fort — which  or 
seemed  to  be  inaccessible.  However,  after  some  H 
trouble  a  place  was  found  where  this  last  wall  could  be  & 
escaladed  ;  and  the  light  company  of  the  Scots  Brigade,  4£ 
fixing  their  ladders,  forced  their  way  into  the  strong-  K 
hold  and  opened  the  gate  to  admit  the  storming  party.  & 
These  rushed  in,  and  in  a  very  short  time  the  British  * 
were  in  possession  of  Gawilghur.  The  total  loss  during  w 
the  siege  was  fourteen  killed  and  one  hundred  and  B: 
twelve  wounded,  the  European  share  of  the  casualties  *4 
being  sixty-seven  ;  so  that  the  resistance  was  evidently  £ 
ill-organised.  The  garrison  was  some  four  thousand  ?- 
strong,  being  composed  chiefly  of  regular  infantry  which  P" 
had  fled  from  Argaum  ;  and,  the  British  troops  being  fc 
savage,  the  slaughter  among  the  enemy  was  fearful,  f 
It  should  seem  that  the  greater  number  of  them  was  & 
killed  with  the  bayonet  or  driven  over  the  walls  and  - 
dashed  to  pieces.  On  a  smaller  scate,  the  assault  of 
Gawilghur  appears  to  have  been  as  bloody  as  that  of  " 
Seringapatam.1 

Meanwhile  the  expedition  against  Cuttack  had  met  ■ 
with  complete  success.  The  total  force  allotted  for  k 
the  operations  numbered  close  upon  five  thousand  men,  k 
of  which  three  thousand2  were  assembled  at  Ganjam  t 

I: 

1  Wellington  Desp.  ii.  583,  599  ;  Wilson's  Madras  Army,  iii.  L 
1 1 8 - 1 22  ;  Welsh,  Military  Reminiscences,  i.  195-197;  Twelve  [ 
Tears'  Military  Adventure,  pp.  218-219. 

2  Europeans.    2  companies,  22nd  Foot  ....      200  t 

102nd  Foot  ....      300  |t 

Artillery,  etc  73 

Natives.       20th  Bengal  N.I.,  i/9th  M.N.I.,  i/i9th 

M.N.I.,  Cavalry  and  Artillery       .        .  2468 

Total       .       .  3041 

1 


;  |h.  i         HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  45 

■or.  Binder   the   command,    first,    of   Lieutenant  -  colonel  1803. 
)rt>  jfcampbell  of  the  Seventy-fourth,  and,  upon  his  serious 
ite- Illness,  of  Colonel  Harcourt  of  the  Twelfth  Foot, 
tklrhe  rest  of  the  troops  were  stationed  in  detachments 
)ne|it    Jelasore,    Balasore,    and    Midnapore.  Harcourt 
ve: Inarched  from  Ganjam  on  the  8th  of  September,  and  Sept.  8. 
idjpn  the  18th  occupied  Juggernaut  without  opposition. 
melHeavy  rain  then  detained  him  until  the  24th,  when  he  Sept.  24. 
beinoved  upon  Cuttack,  and,  after  some  skirmishing  on 
cJ:he  march,  took  possession  of  it,  unresisted,  on  the 
ig-  10th  of  October.    The  fort  of  Barabutty,  about  a  mile  Oct.  10. 
distant  from  Cuttack,  made  some  show  of  resistance, 
being  surrounded  by  a  wide  ditch  containing  thirty  feet 
of  water,  which  could  be  crossed  only  by  a  single  bridge. 
But  after  a  short  cannonade  a  storming  party,  on  the 
14th,  boldly  crossed  the  bridge  and,  with  some  difficulty  Oct.  14. 
and  delay,  succeeded  in  blowing  open  the  wicket  of  the 
gate.    Through  this  the  men  passed  singly,  and  were 
presently  masters  of  the  place,  with  a  loss  of  little  more 
than  fifty  killed  and  wounded.    After  this  miserably 
feeble  struggle  the  greater  part  of  the  province  sub- 
mitted, and  the  operations  practically  came  to  an  end, 
most  disastrously  for  the  Rajah  of  Berar. 