

This  was  a  fine  feat  of  arms  ;  and  Lake  confessed 
that  he  had  never  spent  a  more  anxious  time  than 
during  the  long  hour  consumed  in  the  attack.  Nor 
were  the  losses  trifling.  The  four  companies  of  the 
Seventy-sixth  lost  five  officers  and  nineteen  men  killed, 
four  officers  and  sixty-two  men  wounded  ;  the  Fourth 
Native  Infantry  lost  fewer  officers  but  rather  more 
men  ;  and  altogether  the  casualties  amounted  to  fifty- 
five  killed  and  two  hundred  and  five  wounded  of  all 
ranks. 

The  fortress  had  not  been  many  hours  in  Lake's  hands 
when  news  came  that  a  large  body  of  predatory  horse, 
under  the  command  of  a  Frenchman,  Fleury,  had 
attacked  the  cantonment  of  Shekoabad,  some  thirty-five 
miles  east  of  Agra.  Macan's  brigade  of  cavalry  was 
Sept.  5.  sent  off  at  two  o'clock  on  the  morning  of  the  5th  to 
rescue  the  five  companies  of  native  infantry  quartered 
in  the  place,  but  arrived  too  late.  The  Sepoys,  under 
command  of  Colonel  Coningham,  had  feced  five  thousand 
cavalry  in  the  open  plain  for  two  consecutive  hours 
and  had  finally  driven  them  off.  But  the  attack 
had  been  renewed  on  the  following  day,  and  after  a 
further  resistance  of  some  hours  the  British  commander, 
who  was  himself  wounded,  was  obliged  to  engage  that 
his  troops  should  serve  against  Scindia  no  more  during 
the  war  ;  upon  which  condition  he  led  them  away  with 
all  their  arms  and  their  one  battalion-gun.  Five  British 
officers  and  over  sixty  men  were  killed  and  wounded 
in  this  affair.  Macan,  burning  to  take  vengeance, 
pursued  Fleury  by  forced  marches  as  far  as  Ferozabad, 
about  twenty-four  miles  east  of  Agra,  which  he  reached 
on  the  8  th.  There,  finding  that  the  enemy  had  crossed 
the  Jumna,  he  gave  up  the  pursuit,  but  continued  roving 
Sept.  17.  until  the  17th,  when  he  marched  to  rejoin  the  main  army. 


ch.  ii        HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  53 

Lake,  meanwhile,  having  strengthened  the  defences  1803. 
of  Aligarh  and  left  a  native  battalion  in  it  for  garrison, 
marched  on  the  7th  towards  Delhi,  having  intelligence  Sept.  7 
that  Louis  Bourquain,  one  of  Scindia's  French  officers, 
was  employing  the  name  and  prestige  of  the  Mogul 
Emperor  to  the  utmost  in  order  to  strengthen  his 
position  among  the  native  chiefs.  On  the  evening  of 
the  same  day  the  General  received  a  letter  from  Perron 
reporting  that  he  had  quitted  Scindia's  service,  and 
asking  for  a  safe-conduct  to  Lucknow.  An  escort 
was  willingly  granted,  and  Perron,  with  Fleury  and 
another  officer,  after  a  few  months'  stay  at  Lucknow, 
removed  to  Chandernagore.  Lake,  not  ill-pleased  thus 
to  be  rid  of  a  formidable  enemy,  pursued  his  march, 
and  on  the  8th  had  the  satisfaction  to  find  the  strong  Sept.  8 
fort  of  Koorjah  evacuated  at  his  approach,  the  garrison 
having  no  mind  to  repeat  the  experience  of  Aligarh. 
On  the  10th  a  march  of  eighteen  miles  brought  him  Sept.  1 
within  six  miles  of  Delhi  on  the  eastern  side  ;  and  on 
the  road  intelligence  arrived  that  Louis  Bourquain  had 
crossed  the  Jumna  in  the  night  with  sixteen  battalions 
of  regular  infantry,  six  thousand  horse,  and  several 
guns,  with  the  expressed  intention  of  attacking  him. 