

1  8th  and  29th  L.D.,  two  regiments  of  native  cavalry,  and 
three  and  a  half  Sepoy  battalions. 


58  HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  book  xiii 

8o3-  make  any  great  progress  with  his  batteries,  the  two 
English  officers,  Hessing  and  Sutherland,  who  com- 
manded within  the  city,  wrote  to  ask  for  terms,  stating 
that  they  had  persuaded  the  troops  to  offer  no  further 
resistance.  Lake  replied  that  he  would  grant  pro- 
tection to  themselves  and  their  private  property,  and 
continued  to  work  at  his  batteries,  one  of  which  opened 

•  ^fire  with  such  effect  on  the  17  th  that  the  conditions 
were  promptly  accepted.  On  the  18th  the  British 
were  in  possession  of  Agra.1 

The  capture  of  this  great  fortress,  the  key  of 
Hindostan,  produced  a  profound  impression  upon  the 
native  mind  ;  and  Lake,  when  he  saw  from  within  how 
formidable  was  its  strength  and  calculated  the  loss  that 
must  have  ensued  upon  a  storm,  felt  devoutly  thankful 
for  his  good  fortune.2  All  was  now  going  well. 
Enormous  quantities  of  stores  were  taken  in  Agra, 
which  pleased  the  General ;  a  very  large  sum  in  the 
treasury  was  adjudged  to  be  prize-money,  which  pleased 
the  officers  and  men  ;  and  finally  two  thousand  five 
hundred  of  Scindia's  infantry  had  taken  service  with 
the  British,  while  the  Rajah  of  Bhurtpore  had  brought 
to  Lake  a  contingent  of  five  thousand  horse.  Scindia's 
regular  infantry,  however,  was  not"  yet  entirely  ex- 
tinguished. That  chieftain  before  the  battle  of  Assaye 
had  detached  fifteen  battalions  from  the  Deccan  to 
Hindostan,  and  these,  added  to  two  of  Bourquain's 
which  had  escaped  at  Delhi,  made  up  a  force  of  about 
nine  thousand  men.3  They  were  excellently  equipped 
with  artillery  ;  they  were  further  accompanied  by  four 
or  five  thousand  horse,  not  all  of  inferior  quality ;  they 
had  a  good  leader  in  a  Mahratta  named  Abaji ;  and 

1  Thorn,  Wellesley  Desp.  iii.  393-396,  407. 

2  Welles  ley  Desp.  iii.  415. 

3  Grant  Duff,  Hist,  of  the  Mahrattas,  iii.  179,  gives  the  number 
of  detached  battalions  as  seven,  and  adds  to  them  three  more  of 
Bourquain's  besides  the  fugitives.  Lake,  however  {Wellesley  Desp, 
iii.  450)  speaks  of  seventeen  battalions.  All  authorities  agree  thai 
the  number  of  men,  whatever  the  number  of  battalions,  was  nine 
thousand. 


ch.  ii        HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  59 

Lake  was  not  disposed  to  allow  them  to  wander  at 180  3- 
large  about  Hindostan.    On  the  27th  of  October,  Oct.  27 
therefore,  he  marched  westward,  and  after  a  day's  halt 
at  Karowly,  due  to  a  very  heavy  fall  of  rain,  pushed 
forward  on  the  29th  nearly  to  Futtehpoor,  where  the  Oct.  29 
sound  of  the  enemy's  guns,  bombarding  a  neighbouring 
town,  roused  him  to  renewed  exertion.    The  heavy 
guns  and  baggage  were  left  at  Futtehpoor  with  an 
escort  of  two  battalions ;   and  two  forced  marches 
north-westward  brought  him  on  the  31st  to  the  ground  Oct.  31 
where    the    enemy    had    encamped    on    the  same 
morning. 