

The  troops  had  come  into  camp  at  eleven  in  the 
forenoon,  much  fatigued  ;  but  hardly  had  the  tents 
been  pitched,  when  the  enemy  appeared  in  such  force 
as  to  oblige  the  grand  guard  and  picquets  to  turn  out. 
More  and  more  bodies  of  the  Mahratta  army  appeared, 
and  presently  Lake  mounted  his  horse,  and,  taking 
three  regiments  of  cavalry,1  which  were  all  that  re- 
peated detachments  had  left  to  him  at  the  moment, 
rode  off  to  reconnoitre  them  in  person.  He  found 
the  entire  array  drawn  up  on  rising  ground,  with  the 
Jumna  in  its  rear.  The  infantry  formed  the  first  line, 
and  was  posted  very  strongly  behind  entrenchments, 
each  flank  covered  by  a  swamp  and  the  whole  length  of 
the  front  bristling  with  guns.  Behind  the  foot  stood  the 
cavalry  in  second  line.  High  grass  and  jungle  in  some 
1  H.M.  27th  L.D.,  2nd  and  3rd  Bengal  N.C. 


54 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  book  xiii 


1803.  measure  concealed  the  enemy's  dispositions,  and,  as  Lake 
Sept.  io.  proionged  his 

reconnaissance,  the  Mahratta  guns  opened  I 
fire  upon  his  escort.  Having  satisfied  himself,  however, 
the  General  lost  no  time  in  sending  orders  to  his 
infantry  to  move  to  the  front  at  once.  Detachments 
for  various  services  had  deprived  him  of  two  complete 
brigades  of  cavalry  and  five  battalions  of  infantry, 
leaving  him  with  three  regiments  of  cavalry  and  eight 
and  a  half  battalions  of  infantry  only.  Allowing  half  a 
battalion  and  the  picquets  for  a  baggage-guard,  he  could 
reckon  on  about  four  thousand  five  hundred  men  for 
the  coming  action  ;  and  with  these  he  prepared  to  assail 
the  nineteen  thousand  under  Louis  Bourquain. 

It  was  a  full  hour  before  the  infantry  could  come 
up;  and  meanwhile  the  cavalry  suffered  heavily  from 
the  fire  of  the  enemy's  artillery.  Lake's  horse  was 
shot  under  him,  and  he  was  obliged  to  take  that 
of  his  son,  who  in  his  turn  took  that  of  a  dead 
trooper.  At  length,  seeing  that  the  battalions  were 
approaching,  Lake  gave  the  order  for  the  cavalry 
to  fall  back,  hoping  thus  to  lure  the  enemy  from  their 
position.  He  was  not  deceived.  The  entire  Mahratta 
line  advanced  with  its  artillery,  shouting  loudly  as  the 
cavalry  retired.  The  regiments  continued  the  retro- 
grade movement  in  line,  always  masking  the  advance 
of  the  infantry,  until  they  reached  their  comrades; 
when  upon  a  sudden  word  they  wheeled  right  and  left 
into  column  of  troops  and  galloped  away  to  both 
flanks,  revealing  the  line  of  battalions  perfectly  formed, 
with  the  Seventy-sixth  on  the  right  and  the  Sepoys  in 
succession  upon  its  left.1  In  a  few  minutes  the  cavalrj 
was  again  massed  in  rear  of  the  right  wing  ;  and  then 
since  the  enemy's  Sikh  horsemen  were  advancing  tc 
threaten  his  right  flank  and  rear,  Lake  threw  out  twc 
or  three  squadrons  with  two  galloping  guns  to  check 
them.    At  the  same  time  the  left  flank  battalion,  witl 