

iere 
tited 
Lents 
two 


ink 


2nd, 


ch.  ii        HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  49 

lines  for  the  attack,  leaving  the  infantry  to  follow  in  1803 
support.  Some  annoyance  was  caused  during  the  Aug. 
advance  by  a  skirmishing  fire  of  matchlock-men,  and 
by  a  fusillade  from  the  village,  until  the  houses  were 
presently  cleared  by  a  native  battalion  ;  and  the  enemy's 
horse  retiring  steadily,  not  without  punishment  from  the 
guns  of  the  British  cavalry,  finally  abandoned  the  field 
without  an  attempt  to  come  to  close  quarters.  Perron 
with  his  bodyguard  then  withdrew  to  Agra,  leaving  a 
Colonel  Pedron  in  the  fort,  with  orders  to  defend  it  to 
the  last  extremity  ;  and  Lake,  disappointed  at  his  failure 
to  force  a  general  action,  was  fain  to  occupy  Coel  and 
to  encamp.  His  men  had  been  marching  from  five 
in  the  morning  until  two  in  the  afternoon  on  a  day 
of  intense  heat. 

Meanwhile  he  summoned  Pedron  to  surrender,  with 
the  result  that  six  of  Scindia's  European  officers  at  once 
quitted  the  Mahratta  service  and  came  over  to  the 
British  camp.  Pedron  answered  with  a  somewhat 
hesitating  defiance  in  order  to  gain  time  to  improve 
his  defences  ;  and  Lake,  hoping  to  obtain  the  fort 
by  bribery,  took  no  further  step  until  the  3rd  of  Sept. 
September.  Finding  then  that  his  hopes  were  baseless, 
he  resolved  to  assault  at  once  rather  than  lose  a  precious 
month  in  a  tedious  siege.  The  decision  was  a  bold  one, 
for  the  fortress  was  deemed  impregnable  ;  and  indeed 
in  the  rainy  season  the  swampy  ground  about  it  was  so 
deeply  inundated  as  to  render  it  inaccessible.  Aligarh 
consisted  of  an  inner  and  an  outer  fort,  with  circular 
towers  at  short  intervals,  the  configuration  of  the  outer 
being  exactly  repeated  on  the  inner  lines  ;  while  an 
immense  wet  ditch,  "  in  which  a  seventy-four  might 
sail,"  1  surrounded  the  whole,  and  detached  works  of 
great  strength  and  remarkable  intricacy  defended  the 
gate.  The  fortress  mounted  in  all  seventy-three  guns 
of  various  calibres,  with  plenty  more  in  the  arsenal  to 
make  good  casualties.  Since  the  only  possible  means 
of  passing  the  ditch  was  by  the  gateway,  Lake  decided 
1  Lake  to  Wellesley,  Welles  ley  Desp.  iii.  293. 
VOL.  V  E 


5° 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  book  xiii  ( 


I8o3.  that  the  assault  should  be  delivered  at  that  point.  Two  j 
SePt-  3-  batteries  were  thrown  up  on  the  night  of  the  3rd,  so  as  j 
to  bring  a  cross-fire  to  bear  on  the  outworks  of  the  [ 
gate  ;  and  a  storming  party  was  selected  of  four  s 
companies  of  the  Seventy-sixth  and  as  many  of  a  native  j 
battalion,  with  a  second  Sepoy  battalion  in  support.1  \ 
Colonel  Monson  was  appointed  to  lead  the  attack,  his  c 
guide  being  Mr.  Lucas,  a  British  officer  who  had  lately  r 
deserted  Scindia's  service. 
Sept.  4.  At  three  in  the  morning  the  forlorn  hope  moved  t 
off  towards  the  gateway,  and  halted  within  four  hundred  c 
yards  of  it  until  dawn.  A  small  party  of  the  enemy  I 
being  visible  sitting  round  a  fire,  a  few  men  of  the  , 
Seventy-sixth  were  sent  to  surprise  them,  in  the  hope  ( 
that  they  might  enter  the  gate  on  the  backs  of  the 
fugitives  and  hold  it  until  supported.  The  British  s 
soldiers,  however,  defeated  their  own  object  by  de-  T 
spatching  every  man  of  the  enemy  ;  but,  though  the  | 
alarm  was  raised,  it  was  fortunately  not  taken  up  f 
seriously  by  the  garrison.  The  men  of  the  Seventy-  2 
sixth  then  retired  unperceived  ;  and  the  sentries  on  the 
ramparts,  after  firing  a  few  shots,  relapsed  into  calmness  t 
and  security.  At  dawn  the  morning  gun  sounded  from  L 
Lake's  camp  ;  and  upon  this  signal  tie  storming  party,  [ 
covered  by  a  heavy  fire  from  the  two  batteries,  rushed  e 
at  the  gate.  A  hundred  yards  in  advance  of  it  was  c 
a  newly  erected  traverse  mounting  three  guns,  but  [ 
the  British  were  in  possession  of  this  work  before  a  shot  c 
had  been  fired  ;  and  Monson,  pressing  on  with  two  ^ 
companies  of  the  Seventy -sixth,  hoped  to  enter  the  \ 
fort  with  the  flying  garrison.  He  was  disappointed,  j, 
The  traverse  had  been  abandoned  ;  the  gate  was  shut ;  j 
and  from  three  different  sides  the  guns  of  the  batteries  j, 
and  outworks  plied  the  little  party  with  a  most  de-  \ 
structive  fire. 