

The  grenadiers  of  the  Seventy-sixth  planted  two  E 
ladders  by  the  walls  and  attempted  an  escalade,  but  L 
found  the  attempt  hopeless  in  the  face  of  a  forest  of  j 
,  1  Four  companies  17th  N.I.,  zj^th.  N.I. 


ch.  ii        HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY 


51 


pikes.  A  six-pounder  was  hurried  up  to  force  the  1803. 
gate,  without  success.  A  twelve -pounder  was  then  SePt- 
brought  forward,  but  owing  to  peculiarities  in  the 
structure  of  the  gateway  it  was  not  easily  placed  in 
position,  and  four  or  five  rounds  were  fired  before  any 
impression  was  produced.  Twenty  minutes  were  thus 
consumed,  during  which  time  the  storming  party 
remained  helpless  under  a  deadly  converging  fire  of 
grape  and  musketry,  while  the  enemy,  gallantly  leaving 
the  ramparts,  swarmed  down  the  scaling  ladders  to 
close  with  their  assailants.  Monson  was  hurt  by  a 
thrust  from  a  pike,  several  more  officers  were  wounded 
with  him  ;  and  the  adjutant  and  every  officer  of  the 
Grenadiers  of  the  Seventy-sixth  were  killed  outright. 

Nevertheless  the  first  gate  gave  way  at  last,  and  the 
stormers  pursued  their  way  along  a  circular  road,  from 
within  which  a  circular  tower  filled  with  matchlock-men 
poured  a  deadly  fire  of  musketry  upon  them,  while 
from  without  a  neighbouring  bastion  plied  them  with 
a  tempest  of  grape.  At  the  further  end  of  the  circular 
road  was  a  second  gate,  which  was  easily  forced  ;  and 
the  British  now  hurried  along  the  causeway  which 
connected  the  outwork  with  the  main  fortress,  caught  the 
flying  enemy  crowded  at  a  third  gate,  which  lay  at  the 
end  of  the  causeway,  and  seized  it  before  it  could  be 
closed  against  them.  Thus,  always  under  a  heavy  fire 
from  all  quarters,  they  entered  the  passage  between  the 
outer  and  inner  forts,  only  to  be  stopped  by  a  fourth 
gate.  The  twelve -pounder  was  again  brought  up, 
for  Captain  Shipton  of  the  Artillery,  though  wounded, 
had  refused  to  quit  his  gun  ;  but  the  gate  was  battered 
to  no  purpose,  for  it  was  too  strongly  secured  to  be 
broken  down.  At  length,  however,  Major  M'Leod 
of  the  Seventy-sixth  succeeded  in  passing  the  wicket 
and  ascending  the  ramparts  ;  and  then  resistance  gave 
way  to  despair.  The  garrison,  seeing  the  inner  fort 
entered,  thought  of  nothing  but  escape,  and  jumped  by 
hundreds  into  the  ditch.  Great  numbers  were  drowned ; 
others  swam  over  to  the  plain  beyond,  only  to  find  a 


52 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  book  xiii 


l8o3-picquet  of  dragoons  in  wait  for  them,  and,  refusing  to 
ePt-  4-  surrender,  were  cut  down.    In  all  over  two  thousand 
of  them  perished  by  the  bayonet  or  the  water  ;  and 
after  an  hour's  hard  fighting  the  fort  of  Aligarh  was 
won. 