

It  is  not  surprising,  therefore,  that  the  final  stroke 
of  Gawilghur,  over  and  above  all  previous  losses  and 
disgraces,  should  have  crushed  the  spirit  of  the  un- 
fortunate Ragogee.  On  the  very  day  after  Wellesley's  Dec.  16. 
successful  assault  messengers  came  to  sue  for  peace  ; 
and  on  the  17th  a  treaty  was  signed,  whereby  the  Dec.  17. 
province  of  Cuttack  was  ceded  to  the  East  India 
Company,  and  sundry  other  territories  to  its  friends 
and  allies.  Thus  one  member  of  the  Mahratta  Con- 
federacy was  crushed,  and  it  was  not  long  before  another 
30  was  to  share  his  fate  ;  but  first  it  must  be  told  how 
00  Scindia  fared  at  the  hands  of  General  Lake  in  Hindostan. 


CHAPTER  II 


t; 

t 
wi: 


On  turning  from  the  south  to  the  north  of  India,  from 
the  correspondence  of  Arthur  Wellesley  to  that  of  his 
brother  the  Viceroy,  one  is  struck  by  the  advantage 
which  Arthur  Wellesley  enjoyed  through  his  greater 
remoteness  from  Government  House.  The  order  to 
prepare  for  war  was  issued  to  him  at  the  same  time  as 
to  General  Lake  ;  but  Lake  was  required  to  furnish 
an  elaborate  plan  of  campaign,  against  each  paragraph 
of  which  the  Viceroy  penned  pompous  comments  of 
approval  with  as  much  solemnity  as  if  he  had  been 
Frederick  the  Great.  This  was  an  entirely  harmless 
amusement,  for  Lord  Wellesley,  despite  an  enormous 
share  of  vanity,  was  on  most  affectionate  terms  with 
Lake,  and  far  too  able  a  man  to  attempt  to  set  him 
right  upon  military  matters.  The  essence  of  Lake's 
plan  was  summed  up  in  a  single  sentence,  the  defeat  of 
Perron's  army  in  the  field.  That  army  once  destroyed, 
the  success  of  any  subsequent  operations  would  be 
assured  as  a  matter  of  course.  But  Perron's  influence 
as  vicegerent  of  the  puppet-emperor,  Shah  Alum,  was 
wide,  and  his  power  as  leader  of  a  large  body  of  trained 
infantry  was  formidable  ;  and  it  was  therefore  of  the 
first  importance  to  isolate  him  completely  before  giving 
him  battle.  Only  thus  was  it  possible  to  hold  the  allies 
of  the  Mahrattas  in  check  until  a  successful  action 
against  Perron  should  induce  them  to  change  sides  ;  and 
only  thus  could  Scindia  be  prevented  from  returning 
suddenly  from  the  south  with  his  cavalry,  and  perhaps 

46 


ch.  ii        HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  47 

converting  a  pitched  battle  into  a  British  defeat,  as  he  1803. 
might  have  done  at  Assaye. 

The  main  army  for  the  field  was  therefore  fixed  at 
the  strength  of  one  British  and  eleven  native  battalions, 
three  British  and  three  native  regiments  of  cavalry, 
with  forty-nine  guns.  Four  native  battalions  and  one 
regiment  of  native  cavalry  were  stationed  at  Allahabad 
for  the  invasion  of  Bundelcund,  in  order  to  divert 
cavalry  from  joining  Perron  from  that  quarter.  Three 
battalions  and  a  few  horse  were  ordered  to  Rohilcund 
to  cover  Rampore  and  overawe  the  Sikhs  and  other 
troublesome  neighbours.  A  detachment  of  the  same 
strength  was  designed  to  cover  Benares  and  bar  the 
passes  to  southward  of  it.1  Lake  had  fixed  his  head- 
quarters at  Cawnpore  in  July  ;  but  marching  from 
that  place  with  the  garrison  on  the  7th  of  August,  Aug.  7. 
moved  up  the  Ganges  to  Kanoge,  near  which  place  his 
force  gradually  assembled.  The  camp  was  luxurious. 
The  officers  were  allowed  to  keep  their  wives  and 
families  with  them,  and,  the  nights  being  cold,  many  of 
them  fitted  up  their  tents  with  glass  doors  and  brick 
chimneys.  There  was  plenty  of  game  in  the  neighbour- 
hood ;  and  there  was  at  least  one  officer  who  was 
adventurous  enough  to  spear  a  tiger,  and  would 
probably  have  paid  for  it  with  his  life,  had  not  Lake 
himself  shot  the  beast  with  a  pistol  in  the  nick  of  time. 
Lastly,  there  was  plenty  of  good  wine,  and  there  was  a 
ballroom  ;  from  all  of  which  it  may  be  concluded  that 
life  was  merry  in  that  camp  on  the  Ganges. 