

Holkar  then  took  up  his  station  about  Ajmeer,  and 
proceeded  to  murder  three  British  officers  who  were  1804. 
in  his  service  because,  in  obedience  to  the  Viceroy's 
proclamation,  they  had  expressed  their  intention  of 
resigning  their  commissions.  Nevertheless  Lord 
Wellesley  was  averse  from  taking  strong  measures,  and 
instructed  Lake  to  assure  the  Mahratta  chief  that  the 
Government  harboured  the  most  amicable  feelings 
towards  him,  though  it  could  not  permit  him  to  injure 
the  allies  of  the  British.  The  General  for  his  part 
feared  that  permanent  peace  could  not  be  hoped  for 
until  Holkar's  power  was  annihilated,  but  promised  to 
avoid  hostilities  if  possible.  Meanwhile  he  advanced 
westward  to  Dowsa,  about  thirty  miles  east  of  Jeypore, 
so  as  to  be  ready  to  check  any  hostile  movement ;  where- 
upon Holkar  renewed  so  fervently  his  professions  of 
1  Wellington  Desp.Sx.  518-519. 


72  HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  book  xiii 


1804.  extreme  solicitude  to  maintain  friendship  and  to  abstain 
from  further  aggression,  that  Lord  Wellesley  actually 
began  to  think  of  breaking  up  the  army.  Lake  was 
not  so  sanguine.  He  had  noticed  that  Holkar  barely 
kept  within  the  letter  of  the  law,  and,  knowing  that  he 
would  turn  to  mischief  directly  the  British  force  was 
withdrawn,  begged  the  Viceroy  not  to  hasten  disarma- 
ment. "  I  never  was  so  plagued  as  I  am  with  this 
devil/'  he  wrote  ;  "  if  he  does  not  come  in  to  see  me, 
which  I  do  not  suppose  he  will,  I  cannot  move  on 
towards  him,  as,  the  moment  I  advance  and  leave  an 
opening  for  him,  he  will  give  me  the  slip,  get  into  our 
territories  with  his  horse,  and  burn  and  destroy  every- 
thing he  comes  near."  But  for  all  his  impatience  Lake 
was  loyal.  "  Don't,  my  dear  Lord,  from  this  language 
imagine  that  I  shall  commence  hostilities  with  Holkar 
or  lead  you  into  another  war,  unless  he  comes  or  till  I  j 
hear  from  you."  1 

Such  a  situation  could  not  last  long.  The  British 
Government  could  not  be  at  the  expense  of  keeping  a 
large  army  in  the  field  to  watch  a  chief  who  refused  to 
retire,  and  waited  only  for  its  withdrawal  to  plunder 
and  ravage.  Matters  were  brought  nearer  to  a  crisis 
by  the  interception  of  several  letters"which  had  passed 
between  Holkar  and  certain  chiefs  of  the  Rohillas  and 
Sikhs,  wherein  a  detailed  plan  was  set  forth  for  the 
overrunning  of  all  the  British  territory  eastward  of 
Benares.  But  Lake,  while  apprising  Jeswunt  Rao  that  \ 
this  correspondence  was  in  his  hands,  still  gave  him  the 

Feb.  20.  chance  to  go  in  peace.  Meanwhile,  on  the  20th  of 
February  1804  ne  nad  moved  eastward  to  Hindoun  to 
cover  the  principal  roads  leading  into  British  territory  ; 