

There  was  now  a  pause.    The  Mahratta  guns  were 


1  "Nothing  is  so  trying  for  troops  as  to  stand  exposed  to  a 
heavy  fire  from  guns  out  of  point-blank  range  ;  for  it  cannot  be 
expected  that  ordinary  flesh  and  blood  will  stand  and  see  a  shot  hit 
it  without  attempting  to  get  out  of  the  way.  I  would  observe  for 
the  benefit  of  my  young  military  readers  that  they  must  not  suppose 
when  they  see  a  round  shot  going  leisurely  along  the  ground  that  it 
is  then  quite  innocuous,  particularly  if  it  has  a  spinning  motion  ; 
for  if  when  in  that  state  it  meets  with  a  stone  or  any  irregularity 
which  raises  it  from  the  ground,  it  will  fly  off  apparently  with 
renewed  force,  but  really  with  the  force  which  it  was  before  ex- 
pending in  its  rotatory  motion.  I  knew  a  person  whose  leg  was 
shattered  to  pieces  from  his  having  thought  to  stop  a  ball  in  this 
situation  by  putting  his  foot  upon  it."  —  Twelve  Tears'  Military 
Adventure,  p.  201. 


64  HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  book  xiii 

1803.  silent,  the  gunners  seeming  to  bide  their  time  to 
ov-  1  •  annihilate  their  assailants.  On  the  British  side  there 
had  occurred  an  incident  which  braced  the  troops  for  a 
supreme  effort.  Lake,  at  the  head  of  the  Seventy- 
sixth,  had  his  charger  shot  under  him.  His  son,  who 
was  on  his  staff,  dismounted  and  offered  his  own  horse, 
which  the  General  at  first  refused,  but  after  some 
entreaty  consented  to  mount.  The  younger  Lake 
then  took  a  trooper's  horse,  and  had  just  swung  him- 
self into  the  saddle  when  he  was  struck  by  a  cannon 
shot,  and  fell  very  severely  wounded  before  his  father's 
eyes.  For  a  fleeting  moment  Lake  forgot  everything 
in  the  agony  of  seeing  his  son,  as  he  thought,  killed  ; 
then,  instantly  mounting  the  horse,  he  was  again 
directing  the  battle.  The  trumpet  of  the  Twenty- 
ninth  dragoons  sounded  the  charge,  and  was  answered 
forthwith  by  the  roar  of  every  Mahratta  gun  ;  but 
the  troopers,  galloping  through  a  tempest  of  grape-shot 
and  a  general  volley  of  musketry,  rode  straight  into  11 
the  line  of  guns,  scattering  the  gunners  ;  then  crashed  1 
into  the  first  line  of  infantry  and  broke  it  up  ;  then  ' 
pressed  on  against  the  second  line  of  infantry  and  C 
swept  away  its  right ;  and  finally,  wheeling  to  the  Jl 
left,  fell  again  upon  the  Mahratta  ftorse  and  routed  tl 
them  completely.  Lake  meanwhile  followed  hard  at  t 
their  heels  with  the  infantry,  which  by  this  time  had 
been  increased  by  a  battalion  and  a  half  of  Sepoys, 
secured  the  guns,  and  drove  the  enemy's  right  wing 
in  confusion  before  him.  The  remainder  of  his 
infantry  now  came  up  ;  when,  advancing  with  the 
whole  of  them,  he  attacked  Abaji's  second  line,  which 
resisted  most  bravely,  contesting  every  inch  of  ground. 
But  at  length  it  was  forced  back  from  the  village 
into  the  plain,  where  the  indefatigable  Twenty-ninth, 
returning  from  the  pursuit  of  the  cavalry,  swept  down 
upon  it  and  cut  it  to  pieces. 