

Meanwhile  the  stipulated  hour  expired  without  a 
sign  of  the  fulfilment  of  Lake's  conditions  ;  and 
accordingly  his  infantry  advanced  along  the  bank  of 
the  stream,  under  shelter  of  high  grass  and  broken 
ground,  which  for  some  time  concealed  their  movement. 
After  a  time,  however,  their  march  was  detected,  and 
Abaji,  divining  its  purport,  threw  back  his  right  wing, 
covering  the  manoeuvre  by  a  heavy  and  destructive 
cannonade  upon  the  head  of  the  British  column.  The 
result  of  this  evolution  was  that  the  Mahratta  array 
now  assumed  somewhat  the  form  of  the  letter  L,  but 
with  an  obtuse  instead  of  a  right  angle  at  the  junction 
of  the  two  lines,  and  that  the  British  column,  far  from 
taking  it  in  flank,  was  itself  exposed  to  a  flanking  fire. 
The  artillery  which  had  accompanied  the  British 
infantry  unlimbered  and  played  upoif  the  new  front  of 
the  enemy's  right  wing,  while  the  three  batteries  with 
the  cavalry  advanced  and  did  the  like  upon  their  left 
wing  ;  but  the  British  guns  were  overmatched  both  in 
numbers  and  weight  of  metal  by  those  of  the  Mahrattas ; 
and  matters  began  to  look  serious.  The  Seventy 
sixth,  which  headed  the  column,  had  reached  its 
appointed  station,  as  also  had  a  battalion  and  a  half  of 
Sepoys  which  followed  immediately  after  it ;  and  they 
had  accordingly  wheeled  into  line.  But  the  remainder 
of  the  column  had  been  delayed  by  unexpected  impedi 
ments  ;  and  the  three  leading  corps  were  compelled  tc 
await  its  coming  inactive,  under  a  furious  and  very 
well-directed  fire.  Lake,  seeing  that  no  troops  could 
endure  such  a  trial  for  long,  ordered  the  Seventy-sixth  an 
its  companions  to  advance  forthwith.    They  did  so  wi 


ch.  ii        HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  63 

alacrity  ;  but  the  enemy,  with  great  coolness  allowing  1803. 
them  to  approach  within  range  of  canister  shot,  saluted  Nov*  1  - 
them  with  a  murderous  salvo  from  every  gun  in  their 
front,  while  at  the  same  time  a  body  of  cavalry  bore 
down  upon  their  left  flank.  Fortunately  the  Seventy- 
Jsixth  was  on  the  left  of  the  line,  and  in  spite  of  terrible 
to  I  losses,  retained  such  steadiness  and  order  as  to  repulse 
this  dangerous  attack  ;  but  the  Mahratta  horse  soon 
rallied  and  showed  unmistakable  signs  of  delivering  a 
second  charge.  Foreseeing  some  such  trouble,  Lake 
had  ordered  the  Twenty-ninth  Dragoons  to  be  at  hand 
to  support  the  advancing  infantry.  These  had  been 
halted  in  a  hollow  behind  the  British  guns  by  the 
stream,  where  they  were  partially  screened  from  the 
enemy's  view,  but  none  the  less  exposed  to  rolling  and 
ricochet  shot,1  which  killed  the  commanding  officer  and 
wrought  much  mischief  among  both  men  and  horses. 
This  regiment,  to  its  great  relief,  was  now  ordered  to 
advance.  The  outlet  from  the  depression  in  which 
they  were  posted  was  too  strait  to  admit  a  broad 
front ;  and  it  was  in  narrow  file  that  they  galloped 
forward  and  formed  on  the  left  flank  of  the  hard- 
pressed  Seventy- sixth.  The  gallant  infantry  hailed 
them  with  loud  cheers,  which  were  echoed  by  the 
dragoons  ;  and  the  Mahratta  horse,  which  was  advanc- 
ing to  the  charge,  beat  a  very  hasty  retreat. 