

Attacked  and  despoiled  on  all  sides,  Scindia  and 
Ragogee  Rao  were  fain  to  sue  for  peace.  A  treaty 
with  the  latter  was  concluded  on  the  17th  of  December,  Dec.  1; 
three  days  after  the  fall  of  Gawilghur  ;  and  a  second 
treaty  on  the  30th  brought  to  an  end  the  war  with  Dec.  3c 
Scindia.  Ragogee  ceded  Cuttack,  and  all  his  territories 
west  of  the  Wurda.  Scindia  yielded  all  his  country 
in  the  Doab  between  the  Jumna  and  the  Ganges,  all 
that  between  the  Ajunta  Hills  and  the  Godavery,  and 
the  forts  and  districts  of  Ahmednuggur  and  Baroach. 
Both  engaged  themselves  never  to  employ  any  subject 
of  any  power  that  should  be  at  war  with  England  ; 
and  the  first  phase  of  the  contest  with  the  Mahrattas 
was  over. 


CHAPTER  III 

1803.  While  Lake  was  lying  in  camp  near  Agra  at  the  end  tc 
of  December,  letters  came  to  him  from  Jeswunt  Rao 
Holkar,  the  only  important  Mahratta  chief  who  now 
remained  unconquered  or  unconciliated,  in  terms  which 
the  General  described  as  arrogant  and  improper, 
After  the  tremendous  punishment  administered  to  his 
peers  by  the  British  army  it  was  reasonable  to  suppose 
that  Holkar  would  at  least  have  taken  up  a  respectful, 
if  not  a  cordial  attitude,  and  would  have  made  his 
friendly  overtures  in  a  less  patronising  tone.  The 
Government  at  Calcutta,  though  willing  and  even 
desirous  to  come  to  a  definite  understanding  with  him, 
saw  no  particular  necessity  for  including  him  in  the 
treaties  contracted  with  Ragogee  ana1  Scindia,  much 
less  for  entering  into  a  separate  alliance  with  him.  If  he 
would  remain  quiet  and  leave  the  British  and  their 
allies  alone,  Lord  Wellesley  was  not  disposed  to  disturb 
him  ;  and  the  probability  was  that,  after  all  that  had 
happened,  Holkar  would  give  no  trouble,  at  any  rate  for 
the  present.  He  had  played  false  towards  his  brethren 
of  Gwalior  and  Berar  by  neglecting  to  come  to  their 
assistance  until  it  was  too  late ;  and  it  was  hardly 
likely  that  he  would  have  now  the  temerity  to 
encounter  the  British  single-handed. 

But  Holkar  was  an  ambitious  man,  who  could  think 
for  himself ;  and  it  is  possible  that  his  reflections  had 
led  him  to  the  same  conclusion  as  had  recently  been 
formed  by  the  most  sagacious  of  his  enemies.  Arthur 
Wellesley,  when  summing  up  the  position  in  November, 

70 


ch.  in       HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY 


7i 


averred  that  the  Mahrattas  had  made  a  mistake  in  1803. 
fighting  the  British  with  regular  infantry  and  artillery, 
that  their  military  spirit  had  been  impaired  by  the 
importation  of  European  officers  to  train  them  accord- 
ing to  European  ideas,  and  that  they  would  have  been 
far  more  formidable  if  they  had  stuck  to  their 
traditional  military  policy  and  fought  a  predatory  war 
with  cavalry  only.1  Be  this  as  it  may,  Holkar  did  not 
give  up  the  game  for  lost  ;  and  while  still  expressing  a 
friendly  disposition  towards  the  British,  he  proceeded 
to  levy  contributions  on  Rajpootana,  pretending  to  be 
unaware  that  it  had  passed  under  British  protection, 
and  actually  to  threaten  the  territory  of  Jeypore. 
This  was  carrying  impudence  rather  too  far.  On  the 
23rd  of  December  Lake  broke  up  his  camp  near  Agra,  Dec.  23. 
and  moving  some  fifty  miles  west  and  south,  took  up  his 
station  with  the  main  army  at  Biana,  by  the  pass  which 
commands  the  entrance  to  the  dominions  of  the  Rajah 
of  Jeypore.  Thence  he  addressed  a  letter  to  Holkar 
disclaiming  any  hostile  intentions,  but  bidding  him 
desist  from  his  depredations  and,  in  pledge  of  his  good 
faith,  to  withdraw  to  his  own  estates. 