

March  8.  and  marching  thence  northward  on  the  8  th  of  March, 
halted  on  the  10th  at  Ramghar.  Here  again  Holkar's 
messengers  visited  him  and  made  extravagant  demands  ; 
and  shortly  afterwards  the  chief  threw  aside  all  reserve, 
sent  an  emissary  to  Scindia  to  ask  his  assistance  in  anj 
immediate  attack  on  the  British,  and  openly  plundered 
1  Wellesley  Desp.  iv.  3-9,  19-20,  45-48. 


2H.  in       HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  73 

the  territories  of  the   Rajah  of  Jeypore.    On  the  1804. 
1 6th  of  April  Wellesley  ordered  Lake  to  commence  April  i< 
hostilities. 

As  in  the  case  of  Scindia,  the  Viceroy  hoped  to  press 
upon  his  new  enemy  from  all  sides  simultaneously. 
was  Arthur  Wellesley,  since  the  peace  with  Scindia,  had 
retired  to  southward  and  encamped  about  Ahmednuggur, 
moving  from  time  to  time  to  break  up  bands  of  free- 
booters which  hung  by  tens  of  thousands  about  the 
Nizam's  frontier.  These  little  expeditions  incidentally 
led  him  to  make  the  most  remarkable  march  of  his 
whole  career.  On  one  occasion  he  started  at  six 
o'clock  on  the  morning  of  the  4th  of  February  with  Feb.  4. 
the  Nineteenth  Light  Dragoons,  the  native  cavalry  that 
had  been  with  him  at  Assaye,  the  Seventy-fourth,  a 
native  battalion,  five  hundred  Sepoys  from  different 
regiments,  and  four  guns.  Having  travelled  by  noon 
twenty  miles,  he  gave  his  men  a  halt  of  ten  hours  ; 
at  ten  o'clock  at  night  he  marched  again,  and  by  nine 
the  next  morning,  in  spite  of  bad  roads  and  darkness,  Feb.  5. 
reached  his  destination,  only  to  find  that  the  enemy 
had  received  warning  of  his  coming  and  decamped. 
Following  them  up  immediately,  he  overtook  their  rear, 
cut  down  many,  captured  all  their  baggage  and  guns, 
and  by  noon  had  dispersed  them  completely.  Within 
thirty  hours  he  reckoned  that  he  had  marched  sixty 
miles,  and  the  infantry  arrived  at  the  point  of  attack  as 
soon  as  the  cavalry.  His  own  comment  on  this  feat, 
of  which  he  was  justifiably  proud,  was  apt  and  pithy. 
"  I  think  we  now  begin  to  beat  the  Mahrattas  in  the 
celerity  of  our  movements."  1 

With  an  army  in  such  condition,  it  might  be 
hoped  that  Holkar,  even  if  he  pursued  the  traditional 
Mahratta  tactics,  would  quickly  be  brought  to  reason  ; 
and  it  is  somewhat  noteworthy  that  this  chief  wrote  on 
the  1st  of  February  to  Arthur  Wellesley,  speaking  of 
him  personally  with  great  civility  and  respect,  while  using 
very  different  language  of  Lake.  But  since  Holkar's 
1  Wellington  Desp.  iii.  43-45,  48. 


74  HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  book  xiii 

i  804.  possessions,  with  the  exception  of  Chandore,  lay  outside 
the  Deccan,  it  was  obvious  that  the  operations  would 
be  confined  to  Guzerat  and  the  frontiers  of  Hindostan, 
unless,  as  Arthur  Wellesley  early  foresaw,  the  Mahratta 
chief  should  establish  himself  among  the  Sikhs  and 
Afghans  in  the  Punjaub.  Moreover,  as  Wellesley  said,  if 
his  troops  went  far  to  the  north,  fifty  Holkars  would 
certainly  start  up  in  the  territories  of  the  Peishwa  and 
the  Nizam  ;  for,  in  spite  of  the  many  hard  lessons  which 
he  had  taught  to  freebooters,  these  pests  still  flourished 
and  increased  in  all  the  territories  of  the  native 
princes.  Also,  owing  to  the  famine  that  raged  in  the 
Deccan,  the  subsistence  of  any  army  north  of  Poona 
would  be  impossible.  Wellesley  therefore  decided, 
upon  the  first  alarm  of  a  war  with  Holkar,  to  reinforce 
Guzerat  with  three  of  his  native  battalions  in  anticipation 
of  any  orders  that  he  should  receive  from  the  Viceroy. 
Feb.  27.  On  the  27th  of  February  a  subsidiary  treaty  of  defensive 
alliance  had  been  concluded  with  Scindia  ;  and  with 
Scindia's  forces  and  the  augmented  force  in  Guzerat  he 
reckoned  that  Colonel  Murray  should  be  able  to 
penetrate  from  that  city  to  Indore.  Upon  this  plan,  as 
he  wrote  to  Murray,  "  we  ought  to  be  hanged  if  we  do 
not  get  the  better  of  Holkar  in  a  shoft  time."  1 