

Even  now,  however,  the  first  line  of  the  enemy's 
left  wing  before  Mohaulpore,  scorning  to  break  andli: 
fly,  strove  still  to  retreat  in  good  order.    But  by  thisle 


iicH.  ii         HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  65 

toitime  Lake  could  turn  nearly  the  whole  of  his  force  1803. 
erejupon  them.  The  Twenty-seventh  dragoons  and  Sixth  Nov.  1, 
n  Native  Cavalry  cut  off  their  retreat,  and  at  length 
tv-  breaking  into  the  column,  after  a  long,  stubborn,  and 
fiolmost  gallant  resistance,  cut  them  down  by  hundreds. 
:se,|A  bare  two  thousand  were  left  at  last,  and  these 
melbecame  prisoners.  The  rest  of  the  Mahratta  host  was 
ilce|slain  or  utterly  swept  away. 

So  ended  the  long  agony  of  this  most  fateful  and 
bloody  fray,  as  fierce  a  fight  as  ever  was  fought  by 
mortal  men.  It  marked  the  fall  of  the  proud 
Mahratta  empire  ;  and,  as  on  the  death-day  of  Hyder 
Ali's  dynasty,  nothing  was  wanting  to  mark  the  horror 
of  the  crash.  The  seventeen  battalions  which  De 
Boigne  had  trained,  and  which  until  this  dawn  had 
been  known  as  the  Deccan  Invincibles,  were  reduced 
to  two  thousand  disarmed  and  captured,  though  always 
valiant  men.  The  remainder  were  lying  on  the  plain 
in  thousands,  dying  or  dead,  and  with  them  most  of 
their  comrades  of  the  horse.  The  fortified  village  of 
Mohaulpore  was  sinking  into  a  smoking  heap  of  ashes. 
Of  the  Mahratta  guns,  some  stood  in  lines  as  during  the 
action,  with  the  gunners  bayonetted  and  dead  beneath 
them  ;  others,  which  the  drivers  had  striven  to  carry 
away,  lay  scattered  and  overturned.  The  tumbrils  and 
ammunition-waggons,  in  which  they  had  kindled  slow 
matches,  exploded  from  time  to  time  with  a  sullen 
roar,  and  veiled  the  sky  with  an  ever-thickening 
canopy  of  sulphurous  smoke.  Beneath  the  canopy 
the  British  troops  moved  wearily  or  lay  still,  utterly 
exhausted  by  hard  marching  and  hard  fighting.  Above 
it  there  advanced  with  startling  rapidity  a  dense  bank  of 
clouds,  which  burst  after  sundown  in  a  furious  thunder- 
storm, lighting  up  the  ghastly  field  with  frightful  vivid- 
ness at  every  flash,  and  printing  deep  upon  every  mind 
an  awful  memory  of  the  night  after  Laswaree. 

The  loss  of  the  British  was  thirteen  officers  and 
one  hundred  and  fifty-nine  men  killed  ;  twenty-nine 
officers   and    six   hundred    and   twenty -three  men 
vol.  v  F 


66 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  book  xiii 


1803.  wounded  ;  making  a  total  of  eight  hundred  and 
Nov.  1 .  twenty-four  casualties.  Among  the  killed  the  British 
numbered  eighty-two,  and  among  the  wounded  two 
hundred  and  forty-eight.  The  chief  sufferers,  as  usual, 
were  the  Seventy-sixth,  with  a  loss  among  all  ranks  of 
forty-three  killed  and  one  hundred  and  forty-nine 
wounded.  This  raised  their  casualties  in  the  three 
actions  of  the  4th  and  nth  of  September  and  the 
1st  of  November  to  eighteen  officers  and  four  hundred 
and  twenty-eight  men.  Next  to  the  Seventy-sixth 
came  two  Sepoy  battalions,  the  one  with  one  hundred 
casualties,  the  other  with  eighty-seven  ;  but  relatively 
the  three  white  cavalry  regiments  suffered  more  than 
they.  The  Eighth  Light  Dragoons  lost  fifty-four  of 
all  ranks,  and  one  hundred  and  sixteen  horses  ;  the 
Twenty-seventh,  forty-eight  of  all  ranks  and  eighty- 
six  horses  ;  the  Twenty-ninth,  sixty-two  of  all  ranks, 
and  one  hundred  and  twelve  horses.  In  all,  the  cavalry 
lost  no  fewer  than  four  hundred  and  fifty-three  horses 
killed,  wounded,  and  missing. 