

Intent  upon  overtaking  them,  Lake  started  on  the 
same  night  at  eleven  o'clock  with  the  whole  of  his 
cavalry,1  hoping  to  keep  them  engaged  with  the 
mounted  troops  until  the  infantry  should  come  up. 
In  six  hours  he  traversed  twenty- five  miles,  and  at 
dawn  of  the  1st  of  November  came  up  with  a  confused  Nov.  1. 
mass  of  men,  evidently  in  hasty  retreat.  Marking 
their  disorder,  Lake  determined  to  attack  at  once  ;  but 
the  enemy  contrived  to  gain  time  by  cutting  the  em- 
bankment of  a  large  reservoir  of  water,  which  made  the 
road  very  difficult  for  the  passage  of  cavalry.  Turning 
this  respite  to  good  account,  the  Mahratta  leaders 
pushed  on  for  a  short  distance,  and  took  up  a  strong 
position  between  the  villages  of  Laswaree  and  Mohaul- 
pore,  the  latter  of  which  was  fortified.  Immediately  in 
rear  of  Laswaree  flowed  a  small  stream,  with  banks  so 
steep  as  to  be  barely  accessible  ;  and  from  its  front  a 
ravine  ran  diagonally  through  the  right  wing  of  the 
Mahratta  line  of  battle.  Along  the  whole  length  of 
that  line  extended  a  broad  strip  of  high  grass,  which 
concealed  their  array  and  their  seventy-two  guns  com- 
pletely from  the  view  of  their  pursuers.  The  dense 
clouds  of  dust  raised  by  the  enemy's  movements  contri- 
buted also  to  obscure  alike  their  intentions  and  their 

1  1st  brigade,  Col.  T.  P.  Vandeleur,  8th  L.D.,  1st  N.C.,  3rd  N.C. 
2nd  brigade   ....    27th  L.D.,  6th  N.C,  2nd  N.C. 
3rd     „      Col.  Macan  .       .    29th  L.D.,  4th  N.C. 


6o  HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  book  xiii  < 

1803.  dispositions,  making  it  almost  impossible  for  Lake  to  s 

ov.  1.  divine  what  they  were  actually  doing. 

None  the  less,  having  overtaken  them  only  by  un-  1 
common  exertions,  he  was  determined  not  to  let  them  c 
escape.  He  therefore  ordered  the  advanced  guard  and  1 
the  first  brigade  of  cavalry  to  move  upon  the  point  where  1 
the  enemy  had  last  been  seen  in  motion,  which,  as  a  r' 
matter  of  fact,  proved  to  be  the  left  of  their  new  0 
position.  The  two  remaining  brigades  were  to  maintain  0 
the  attack,  as  quickly  as  they  could  be  formed  after  J1 
passing  the  stream  which  separated  them  from  the 
field  of  action. 

The  first  brigade  accordingly  crossed  the  water,  and,  1 
riding  from  end  to  end  of  the  enemy's  front,  charged  ^ 
the  left  of  their  line  by  Mohaulpore,  broke  through  it, 
drove  the  Mahratta  gunners  from  their  guns,  and 
penetrated  into  the  village.  But  they  were  unable  to 
silence  the  galling  fire  of  musketry  and  artillery  which  c 
still  played  upon  them.  Their  brigadier,  Vandeleur, 
an  excellent  officer,  was  mortally  wounded  ;  and  Lake, 
seeing  that  they  could  do  no  more,  was  fain  to  withdraw 
the  squadrons,  and  to  allow  the  guns  which  they  had 
captured  but  had  been  unable  to  remove,  to  relapse  into 
the  enemy's  possession.  In  other  quarters  the  second 
and  third  brigades  delivered  their  attack  as  gallantly 
and  with  as  little  permanent  effect.  Macan,  who  was 
directed  upon  the  Mahratta  right,  crossed  the  ravine 
with  his  two  regiments  under  a  heavy  cannonade, 
wheeled  into  line  in  the  face  of  a  still  heavier  fire,  and 
galloped  down  upon  the  guns  as  if  he  had  been  at  a 
review.  Nothing  could  be  seen  through  the  long  grass  ; 
and  the  Mahratta  gunners,  holding  their  fire  until  the 
horses  were  within  twenty  yards,  poured  upon  them 
a  storm  of  grape  and  chain  shot.  Yet  still  the 
squadrons  galloped  on,  passed  through  the  batteries, 
although  the  cannon  were  fastened  by  chains  from 
axle-tree  to  axle-tree,  and  rallied  on  the  other  side.  But 
already  the  Mahratta  gunners,  who  had  crept  under 
their  guns  when  the  cavalry  came  upon  them,  were 