

But  perhaps  the  General's  staff  was  the  most 
heavily  punished  of  all.  The  Quartermaster's  deputy 
and  one  aide-de-camp  were  killed  ;  and  the  Adjutant- 
general,  Secretary,  Political  Agent  and  commander  of 
the  escort  were  wounded.  Lake  himself  had  his  coat 
burned  by  a  matchlock  fired  at  close  range,  though 
the  bullet  by  a  happy  chance  missed  him  ;  and  two 
horses  were  killed  under  him,  one  of  them  a  favourite 
charger  named  "  Old  Port,"  which  was  regretted  even 
by  the  Viceroy.1  Always  in  the  thickest  of  the  fire, 
it  seemed  to  those  with  him  miraculous  that  he  escaped 
injury,  but  in  truth  his  presence  alone  probably  saved 
the  fight.  The  enemy  fought,  as  he  said,  "like  devils.! 
or  rather  like  heroes  .  .  .  and  if  they  had  been  com- 
manded by  French  officers  the  event  would  have 
been,  I  fear,  extremely  doubtful.  I  never  was  in  scl 
severe  a  business  in  my  life  or  anything  like  it,  and 


1  "  I  grieve  for  the  loss  of  my  poor  friend  1  Old  Port.' ' 
Wellesley  Desp.  Hi.  458.    Wellesley  had  given  this  horse  to  Lake. 


ch.  ii        HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  67 

pray  to  God  I  never  may  be  in  such  a  situation  again."  1803. 
In  truth  in  his  eagerness  to  overtake  and  destroy  the  Nov.  1. 
battalions  trained  by  De  Boigne,  Lake  ran  a  more 
dangerous  risk  than  he  had  expected.  His  first  onslaught 
with  his  cavalry  only  was,  as  it  fell  out,  a  simple  waste 
of  men  and  horses  ;  but  being  unable  to  see  anything 
when  the  attack  was  delivered,  he  was  reasonable  in 
conjecturing  that  an  enemy  which  had  fled  from  him 
precipitately  for  some  days,  would  be  more  likely  to 
continue  its  flight  than  to  turn  to  bay.  Probably,  too, 
in  both  phases  of  the  action  he  underrated  his  enemy's 
power  of  manoeuvre,  and,  like  Wellington,  was  some- 
what taken  aback  to  see  Scindia's  battalions  change 
position  with  order  and  regularity  when  menaced  by 
an  attack  in  flank.  It  is  impossible,  indeed,  not 
to  conjecture  that  Abaji  may  have  secretly  nursed  a 
vague  scheme  of  turning  upon  his  pursuers  when  they 
were  exhausted  by  a  long  chase.  His  army  was  better 
appointed  than  Lake's,  as  the  General  confessed.  He 
had  thrice  as  many  men  to  each  gun  as  the  British  ; 
he  had  greatly  superior  bullocks  ;  and  he  had  camels  to 
carry  the  knapsacks  of  his  infantry,  which  enabled 
them  to  make  long  marches  with  little  fatigue.  All 
this,  however,  availed  him  nothing.  His  brave  army 
was  cut  to  pieces  ;  his  guns,  seventy-one  in  number, 
were  captured,  together  with  sixty-four  tumbrils  laden 
with  ammunition,  forty-four  stand  of  colours,  five 
thousand  stand  of  arms,  and  the  whole  of  a  large  train 
of  baggage.  He  had  the  bad  luck  to  meet  very  fine 
troops,  flushed  with  victory  and  led  by  a  General 
whom  they  trusted,  and  rightly  trusted,  to  handle  them 
to  the  best  advantage  in  a  battle  ;  and  he  was  beaten. 
But  in  spite  of  his  failure  he  fought  a  splendid  action, 
and  his  men  covered  themselves  with  glory.  As  to 
the  British  troops,  the  conduct  of  the  Seventy-sixth 
ranks  with  the  very  highest  that  has  ever  been  recorded 
of  any  corps  in  the  British  Army.1 