

1  The  authorities  known  to  me  respecting  the  battle  of 
Laswaree  are  not  many.    There  are  the  accounts  in  Thorn,  p. 


68 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  book  xiii 


l%°3-      Embarrassed  by  the  number  of  his  wounded,  and 
other  cares,  Lake  did  not  quit  the  battlefield  until  the 
Nov.  8.  8th,  when  retracing  his  steps  by  leisurely  marches  he 

Nov.  13.  halted  close  to  Agra  on  the  13th,  sending  his  sick  and 
his  captured  guns  into  the  fortress.  From  all  sides 
the  neighbouring  chieftains  and  Rajahs  swarmed  in 
to  pay  their  court,  and  to  conclude  defensive  alliances 
with  the  victor.  Among  them  came  Runjeet  Singh, 
the  Rajah  of  Bhurtpore,  an  elderly  little  man,  very 
plain  in  his  attire,  who,  having  concluded  his  visit  of 
ceremony,  retired  to  his  capital,  doubtless  thinking 
deeply  of  the  future.  Lake  was  joined  by  a  few 
reinforcements,  but  everything  pointed  to  the  prob- 
ability that  they  would  not  be  required.  The 
occupation  of  Bundelcund  was  the  only  one  of  the 
tasks  set  to  him  which  he  had  not  fulfilled  ;  but  the 
work  had  been  progressing  ever  since  September,  and 
though  obstructed  by  a  rebellious  chief,  was  going 
forward  rapidly  under  the  bayonets  of  a  small  force 
of  native  infantry.  With  the  exception,  therefore,  of 
sending  a  small  detachment  to  hasten  the  capture  of 
Gwalior,  there  was  seemingly  nothing  more  for  Lake  , 
to  do  ;  and  he  and  his  army  indulged  in  a  well- 
earned  rest.  ■ 

By  this  time  Scindia  was  almost  at  the  last  gasp. 
He  had  been  utterly  defeated  in  the  Deccan,  in 
Hindostan,  and  in  Cuttack,  but  even  so  the  cup  of  his 
affliction  had  not  been  filled.  In  spite  of  all  the 
apathy  and  obstruction  of  the  Government  at  Bombay, 
an  expedition  against  Baroach  had  been  duly  organised 

Aug.  21.  in  the  months  of  July  and  August ;  and  on  the  21st  of 
the  latter  month  a  force  of  about  a  thousand  men,  one 
half  of  them  being  of  the  Sixty-first  and  Eighty-sixth, 
and  the  remainder  of  Native  Infantry,  under  Lieutenant- 
colonel  Woodington,  marched  from  Baroda,  and  sat 
down  unresisted  on  the  24th  before  the  fortress.  On 

210  seq.,  in  Notes  of  the  Principal  Transactions,  p.  93,  and  Lake's' 
letters  in  Wellesley  Desp.  iii.  439-447,  449.  These  are  wellj 
summarised  by  Captain  May,  From  Cromwell  to  Wellington. 


ch.  ii        HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  69 

the  26th  Woodington  opened  fire  from  a  single  battery  1803. 
of  two  guns ;  and  on  the  29th,  the  breach  being  practic-  Aug.  29 
able,  Baroach  was  stormed  after  a  short  resistance 
which  cost  the  assailants  sixty-nine  of  all  ranks  killed 
and  wounded.  Thereupon  the  British  took  possession 
of  the  entire  district  of  the  same  name,  a  rich  and 
populous  territory  which  afforded  a  large  annual 
revenue. 