

! 


[Jch.  ii        HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  61 

observing  them  again;   while  the  infantry,  entrenched  1803, 
jbehind   their  waggons  and  carts,  showered   on  the Nov- 
Jassembling   squadrons  a   hail  of  bullets.  Nothing 
Jdaunted,  Macan  charged  back  through  the  line  with 
dkhe  same  irresistible  gallantry  and  the  same  result  ; 
e  (repeated  the  charge  a  third  time,  and  was  about  to 
a  Irene  w  it  for  the  fourth  when  he  was  recalled  by  Lake's 
wfcrder,  and  withdrawn  with  the  rest  of  the  cavalry  out 
in  of  range.     The  troopers  had  suffered  heavily,  and, 
er  though  they  had  taken  many  guns,  yet,  for  want  of 
nfantry  to  secure  them,  had  been  unable  to  retain  more 
than  two.    The  whole  attack  indeed  was  unnecessary, 
and  would  hardly  have  been  delivered  had  not  Lake 
Deen  under  the  impression  that  the  enemy  was  still 
retreating.    When  once  he  had  found  out  his  mistake 
le  recalled  all  three  brigades,  resolving  simply  to  hold 
the    enemy   with    them   until    his    infantry  should 
ome  up. 

At  about  eleven  o'clock  the  infantry  appeared, 
namely  the  Seventy- sixth  and  four  native  battalions. 
They  had  been  marching  since  three  o'clock  in  the 
morning,  and,  having  traversed  twenty-five  miles  under 
a  blazing  sun,  were  much  fatigued.  Lake  therefore 
gave  them  an  hour's  halt  for  breakfast ;  and  in  the 
interval  Abaji,  awed  by  the  arrival  of  the  victorious 
British  infantry,  sent  a  message  to  the  General  that, 
if  certain  terms  were  granted  to  him,  he  was  willing  to 
surrender  his  guns.  Lake  returned  an  answer  accept- 
ing the  proposal,  and  granting  him  an  hour  to  make  up 
his  mind  ;  not  omitting,  however,  to  make  his  dis- 
8.  positions  for  a  fresh  attack.  Abaji  meanwhile  shifted 
ne  his  ground,  throwing  back  his  right,  and  took  up  a 
new  position.  His  infantry  was  formed  in  two  lines, 
he  the  first  covering  the  front  or  east,  and  the  second  in 
the  rear  or  west  of  Mohaulpore,  while  the  cavalry  ex- 
tended beyond  it  almost  to  the  stream,  with  its  right 
flank  in  the  air.  Lake  therefore  formed  his  battalions 
[er  En  two  columns  along  the  brink  of  the  stream  ;  the  first, 
under  Major-general  Ware,  being  designed  toadvance  and 


62 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  book  xiii 


1803.  turn  Abaji's  right  flank,  and  the  second,  under  Major- 
Nov.  1.  general  St.  John,  to  support  Ware.  Macan's  brigade 
of  cavalry  also  was  to  sustain  the  infantry,  while  the 
first  and  second  brigades  were  extended  widely  across 
the  plain  on  the  British  right,  with  the  galloping  guns 
and  a  few  field -pieces  pushed  well  forward  in  two 
groups,  each  with  a  squadron  for  escort,  so  as  to 
menace  and  contain  the  Mahratta  front. 