

Halting  until  midnight,  he  marched  again  at  one 
o'clock  on  the  morning  of  the  28th,  to  be  overtaken  at  Aug.  28 
daylight  as  usual  by  the  enemy's  horse.    Bolder  than 


88  HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  book  xiii 

i  804.  Was  their  wont,  the  Mahratta  cavalry  made  a  desperate 
Aug.  28.  charge  m  three  bodies  up  to  the  very  bayonets  of  the 
Sepoys,  but  being  beaten  off  with  heavy  loss,  kept  at 
a  respectful  distance  for  the  rest  of  the  day.  Sunset 
brought  Monson  to  the  Biana  Pass,  at  the  entrance  of 
which  he  halted,  hoping  to  give  a  little  rest  to  his  worn 
and  weary  troops  ;  but  the  Mahrattas,  bringing  their 
guns  up  on  all  sides,  forced  him  to  move  on.  At  nine 
o'clock  he  entered  the  city  of  Biana  in  pitchy  darkness, 
the  baggage  being  mixed  up  with  the  troops  in  the 
greatest  confusion;  and,  all  attempts  to  restore  order 
being  fruitless,  the  various  corps  made  their  way  to  Agra 
Aug.  31.  as  best  they  could.  By  dawn  of  the  31st  all  the  sur- 
vivors had  arrived  ;  and  then  the  reckoning  of  the 
disaster  was  taken.  Twelve  British  officers  had  been 
killed,  two  more  had  been  drowned,  two  more  were 
missing,  and  five  others  had  been  wounded  ;  while  of 
five  and  a  half  fine  battalions  little  more  than  one  half 
were  left,  through  the  sword,  fatigue,  and  desertion.  It 
was  the  heaviest  blow  that  had  fallen  on  the  British 
in  India  since  the  destruction  of  Baillie's  detachment. 

There  was  less  recrimination  than  usually  follows 
upon  such  occurrences.  Monson  blame"d  Murray  for  his 
retreat  as  the  cause  of  all  the  trouble  ;  and  Murray 
retorted  that  his  retreat  was  due  to  Monson's  own 
retrograde  movement.  Arthur  Wellesley,  as  a  friend  i 
of  all  parties,  drew  out  a  searching  analysis  of  the  entire 
expedition,  which  is  among  the  most  remarkable  of  his 
papers.  He  criticised  Monson  for  not  attacking 
Holkar  on  three  different  occasions,  first  before  he 
began  his  first  retreat,  secondly  before  he  retired  from 
Rampoora,  and  thirdly  before  he  crossed  the  Banas. 
He  blamed  him  also  for  halting  unduly  long  at  the 
Mokundra  Pass  and,  even  more,  at  Rampoora,  where 
his  delay,  as  Lake  said,  was  fatal.  But  Wellesley's 
final  conclusion  was  that  the  detachment  was  doomed 
to  destruction,  even  if  Holkar  had  not  attacked  them 
with  infantry  and  artillery ;  or,  to  put  the  truth 
into  words  which  he  carefully  avoided  setting  down, 


ch.  in       HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY 


89 


the  ultimate  fault  lay  with  Lake,  the  Commander-in-  1804. 
chief. 

The  operation  assigned  to  Monson  was  in  fact  most 
hazardous.  He  was  ordered  vaguely  to  march  far 
away  at  the  beginning  of  the  rainy  season,  into  a 
country  everywhere  seamed  with  deep  water-courses 
and  rivers,  without  any  regular  system  of  supplies  or 
any  organised  provision  for  crossing  the  waters.  Nothing 
could  better  have  played  into  the  hands  of  the  Mahrattas, 
whose  practice  in  warfare  had  for  years  been  the  same. 
By  means  of  their  cavalry  they  ravaged  the  country 
until  want  of  provisions  compelled  their  enemy  to 
retreat,  followed  him  up  with  that  same  cavalry  while 
in  motion,  and  surrounded  him  with  infantry  and 
artillery  when  he  halted.  The  way  to  foil  these  tactics 
was  that  adopted  by  Wellesley  ;  namely,  for  a  com- 
mander to  amass  supplies  enough  to  make  himself 
independent  of  the  country,  to  organise  the  transport- 
service  to  the  utmost  perfection  in  order  to  carry  those 
supplies,  and  finally  always  to  possess  the  means  of 
passing  rivers.  Attention  has  already  been  called  to 
the  fact  that  Wellesley  made  the  acquisition  of  a 
pontoon-train  his  first  object  upon  the  menace  of  a 
Mahratta  war.  Failing  to  obtain  it,  he  fell  back  on 
wicker-boats,  made  by  his  own  troops  and  covered 
with  hides  ;  but  in  addition  to  this  he  had  established 
a  regular  post  with  boats  upon  every  unfordable  river 
from  Seringapatam  to  Poona.  Thus  it  was  that  he 
was  able  to  carry  on  his  campaign  during  a  famine, 
and  chose,  as  a  preferable  time  for  a  Mahratta  war,  the 
opening  of  the  rainy  season.  In  brief,  by  leaving 
nothing  to  chance,  but  thinking  out  every  detail 
beforehand,  he  was  able  to  organise  victory. 