

May  22.  two  hours  later  native  messengers  hurried  in  with 
intelligence  that  Meer  Khan  himself  with  fifteen  or 
twenty  thousand  followers  was  within  three  miles  of  the 
camp.  The  troops  were  at  once  turned  out,  and 
Fawcett  despatched  an  order  to  Smith  to  return  to 
camp  immediately.  To  this  Smith  replied  that  he  had 
occupied  a  village  under  the  fort  against  which  he  had 
been  sent,  that  he  could  not  draw  off  the  men  quartered 
in  it  without  much  loss,  and  that  he  hoped  to  return  to 
camp  directly  after  dark.  The  truth  of  the  matter  was 
that  he  had  stationed  the  guns  with  fifty  European 


ch.  in       HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY 


79 


artillery-men  and  two  companies  of  infantry  in  the  1804. 
village  to  attack  the  fort,  and  kept  the  remaining  five 
companies  half  a  mile  apart  from  them,  being  apparently 
possessed  by  the  idea  that,  when  sent  with  a  few  hundred 
men  to  reduce  a  petty  stronghold,  he  must  divide  them 
into  besieging  army  and  covering  army. 

The  predatory  bands  had  no  taste  for  an  attack  on 
the  camp  at  Koonch  ;  but  they  speedily  discovered  the 
two  isolated  companies,  fell  upon  them  in  overwhelming 
numbers  by  surprise,  cut  them  to  pieces  to  a  man,  and 
carried  off  the  guns.  Fawcett,  growing  anxious  as  the 
morning  wore  on,  marched  out  at  two  o'clock  in  the 
afternoon  with  his  whole  force  to  rescue  Smith,  and 
presently  came  upon  him  with  his  five  companies,  his 
troop  of  horse  and  one  galloping  gun  intact,  having 
made  his  way  through  his  contemptible  enemy  without 
the  slightest  difficulty.  Smith  had  retreated  directly 
after  hearing  from  a  fugitive  of  the  fate  of  his  two 
companies,  but  apparently  had  made  no  effort  to  rescue 
them  when  firing  had  been  first  heard  in  the  village  ; 
and  to  this  negligence  the  whole  of  the  detachment, 
including  five  European  officers  and  five  guns,  had 
been  sacrificed.1 

But  this  was  not  the  worst  of  the  misconduct  in  this 
affair.  It  was  presently  discovered  that  the  leader  of 
the  raid  was  not  Meer  Khan,  but  an  ordinary  robber  of 
no  great  fame  or  station,  and  that  his  force  did  not 
exceed  the  strength  of  five  thousand  men.  Emboldened 
by  his  success,  this  ruffian  pursued  his  way  to  Kalpee, 
marking  his  path  by  cruelty,  plunder,  and  devastation, 
attacked  the  town  and  attempted  to  cross  the  Jumna. 
But,  being  beaten  back  by  two  companies  of  Sepoys,  he 
returned  by  a  fresh  route  to  Koonch,  where  on  the  30th  May 
of  May  he  was  met  and  very  roughly  handled  by  a 
small  party  of  irregular  levies  lately  taken  into  service 
by  the  British  from  a  native  chieftain.  Yet  it  was  from 
this  rabble  that  Fawcett  allowed  himself  to  receive  a 
very  forcible  and  unpleasant  blow,  and  that  without 
1  Wellesley  Desp.  iv.  71  seq. 