


76  HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  book  xiii 

i  804.  later  he  reported  the  dearth  of  food  and  forage  to  be 
such  that  it  was  impossible  for  him  to  move,  and  on 
the  8th  he  applied  for  leave  to  return  home.    By  the 

June  24.  24th  he  had  broken  up  his  army,  having  no  use  for  it 
in  the  field  ;  and  his  force  therefore  disappears  for  the 
present  from  the  sphere  of  active  operations. 

Meanwhile  Lake,  on  receiving  his  orders  to  commence 

April  18.  hostilities,  had  moved  on  the  18th  of  April  towards 
Jeypore,  to  which  town  he  had  already  pushed  forward 
three  battalions  under  Colonel  Monson.  Upon  the 
appearance  of  this  detachment  Holkar  retired  pre- 
cipitately to  the  southward  ;  and  Lake,  still  advancing, 

April  28.  encamped  on  the  28th  at  Tonga,  about  fifteen  miles 
south-west  of  Jeypore.  Holkar,  meanwhile,  continued 
his  flight  to  the  south,  followed  by  Lake's  irregular 
cavalry,  which  reported  his  condition  to  be  miserable. 
But  he  completely  distanced  Monson's  detachment, 
which  moved  in  advance  of  the  main  body,  and  of 
course  left  Lake's  principal  army  far  in  rear.  After  a 
week's  halt  at  Tonga,  Lake  again  moved  southward 
and,  after  much  delay  through  violent  storms  and  rain, 
May  8.  on  the  8th  of  May  reached  Nowai,  about  forty  miles 

May  1  o.  south  of  Jeypore.  From  hence  on  the  1  oth  he  detached 
Lieutenant -colonel  Don  with  two^epoy  battalions, 
a  regiment  of  native  cavalry  and  guns  to  attack 
Rampoora,  a  fortified  town  rather  over  thirty  miles 
to  south-eastward,  which  was  Holkar's  only  strong- 
hold to  north  of  the  Chumbul.  Arrived  before  the 
town,  Don,  to  disarm  suspicion,  encamped  in  an  opposite 
direction  to  the  principal  gate,  and  at  two  o'clock  on 
May  1 5.  the  morning  of  the  15th  sallied  forth  to  the  attack. 
Under  his  personal  command  he  took  eight  companies, 
together  with  one  twelve-pounder  to  blow  up  the  gates. 
To  protect  his  rear  against  a  body  of  hostile  troops 
which  had  moved  up  from  Tonk,  and  to  keep  down 
any  fire  from  the  ramparts,  he  employed  three  more 
companies  and  four  guns  ;  his  cavalry  he  reserved  to 
pursue  the  garrison  in  the  event  of  its  flight.  So 
incautious  was  the  enemy  that  the  column  was  within 


Ich.  in       HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  77 
I 

lone  hundred  yards  of  the  walls  before  a  shot  was  fired  1804. 
Jfrom  the  town.  The  gates  were  then  promptly  blown 
J  up,  and  the  garrison  driven  out  into  the  plain,  where 
■great  numbers  were  cut  down  by  the  cavalry.  The 
■base  with  which  this  success  was  gained  seems  to  point 
J  to  extremely  able  management  on  the  part  of  the 
Icommander. 

Deprived  thus  of  his  one  fortress  in  the  district, 
I  Holkar,  who  had  for  the  moment  turned  northward, 
Jrecrossed  the  Chumbul  ;  and  Lake,  whose  troops  were 
Bsuffering  greatly  from  the  heat,  decided  to  abandon  the 
[further  pursuit  of  him.  He  therefore  left  two  parties 
jof  irregulars  under  Captain  Gardiner  and  Lieutenant 
jiLucan  to  watch  his  movements,  and  committed  the 
lultimate  destruction  of  him  to  Murray,  with  his  troops 
Jfrom  Guzerat,  and  to  Colonel  Monson.  Since  Monson's 
Sthree  battalions  were  supplemented  by  auxiliaries  of 
jthe  Rajah  of  Jeypore,  he  reckoned  that  each  of  these 
Jofficers  would  be  strong  enough  to  deal  with  Holkar 
■independently  in  case  of  an  action. 