

July  17.  within  twenty-four  hours  by  the  Chambalee,  in  itself  a 
mere  rivulet,  but  now  swollen  to  an  unfordable  torrent. 


ch.  in       HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY 


85 


Matters  were  fast  becoming  desperate.  The  1804. 
European  artillery-men  were  sent  through  the  flood 
on  elephants,  but  the  rest  of  the  army  was  detained, 
and  only  with  great  difficulty  contrived  to  collect 
grain  for  two  days  from  neighbouring  villages.  The 
halt  enabled  Holkar's  cavalry  to  come  up,  though  the 
advance  of  his  guns  also  had  been  much  delayed  by  the 
rains.  Monson,  however,  proved  that  he  had  not 
served  with  Lake  to  no  purpose,  for  he  promptly 
attacked  the  nearest  Mahratta  camp,  took  several  of 
their  animals,  and  thus  secured  for  himself  respect.  At 
length,  on  the  23rd  his  force  was  able  to  begin  the  July  2 
passage  of  the  flooded  stream  in  rafts,  while  two 
battalions  were  detached  under  Colonel  Don  to  find  a 
ford.  Even  so  two  entire  days  were  consumed  in  the 
crossing,  though  the  enemy's  cavalry  made  no  serious 
attack  and  was  easily  beaten  off  with  considerable  loss. 
Finally,  on  the  27  th  Monson's  battalions  arrived  at  July  2 
Rampoora  and  were  able  to  send  supplies  to  Don's 
detachment,  which  came  in  safely  on  the  29th.  All  July  2 
were  alike  utterly  exhausted,  having  consumed  their 
last  provisions  even  before  the  crossing  of  the 
Chambalee. 

At  Rampoora  Monson  found  two  battalions  of  Sepoys 
with  their  guns,  a  body  of  Hindostani  cavalry  under  a 
British  officer,  Major  Frith,  and  a  certain  quantity  of 
grain  ;  all  which  had  been  sent  from  Agra  by  Lake 
immediately  upon  his  hearing  of  the  retreat.  But  here 
again  there  had  been  neglect.  Rampoora  was  held  as 
a  post  for  the  purpose  of  checking  Holkar's  movements, 
or,  in  other  words,  as  an  advanced  base  of  operations  ; 
yet  no  effort  had  been  made  to  convert  it  in  reality 
into  such  a  base  by  filling  it  up  with  abundance  of 
supplies.  Monson  set  himself  to  collect  provisions, 
but  with  no  great  success,  for  up  to  the  20th  of  August  Aug.  2 
he  had  succeeded  in  gathering  only  twelve  days'  supply 
for  his  own  force.  Meanwhile  Holkar,  though  much 
delayed  by  floods,  had  continued  his  advance  ;  and  by 
that  same  day  had  approached  within  twelve  or  fifteen 


86 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  book  xiii 


i  804.  miles  of  Rampoora.  At  this  Monson  became  anxious. 
It  is  not  easy  to  explain  why,  looking  to  the  difficulties 
which  he  had  found  in  obtaining  victuals,  he  did 
not  earlier  continue  his  retreat ;  it  is  still  less  easy 
to  explain  why  he  did  not  march  out  boldly  and  attack. 
His  mind  appears  to  have  been  made  up  for  him  by 
Lake,  from  whom  on  this  same  day  he  received  a  letter, 
desiring  him  to  retire  to  Jeypore  if  he  thought  that  he 
might  be  again  in  distress  for  his  supplies.  Accordingly, 
leaving  a  garrison  in  Rampoora,  he  marched  on  the  j 