

On  the  morning  of  the  8th  he  began  his  retrograde  July  8. 
movement  towards  the  Mokundra  Pass,  sending  off 
his  baggage  and  stores  at  four  in  the  morning,  but 
remaining  with  the  main  body  in  line  of  battle  until 
half-past  nine.  As  the  enemy  made  no  appearance,  he 
then  led  the  retreat  with  the  infantry,  leaving  the 
cavalry  to  form  the  rear-guard,  which  was  exactly  the 
reverse  of  Wellesley's  practice  in  similar  circumstances. 
He  had  not  traversed  more  than  twelve  miles  when 
he  received  intelligence  that  the  rear-guard  was  attacked 
by  the  whole  of  Holkar's  cavalry  ;  and  soon  after- 
wards Bappojee  Scindia  galloped  up  with  the  news  that 
his  men  and  Lucan's  had  been  totally  defeated,  and 


84  HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  book  xiii 

1804.  that  Lucan  himself,  an  excellent  and  gallant  officer,  was 
July  8.  wounded  and  taken  prisoner.    There  was  therefore 
nothing  to  be  done  but  to  continue  the  retreat  to  the 
Mokundra  Pass,  which  was  safely  reached  without  any 
July  9.  molestation  at  noon  of  the  following  day. 

Here  Monson  halted  with  some  idea  of  turning  the 
strength  of  the  position  to  account,  though  he  was  still 
troubled  by  uncertainty  about  his  supplies.    At  noon  of 

July  10.  the  morrow  Holkar  appeared  with  his  cavalry  in  great 
force,  and  after  summoning  the  British  to  surrender, 
attacked  them  at  three  different  points  in  front  and 
flanks,  but  was  beaten  off  at  all.  He  then  fell  back  a 
few  miles  to  await  the  coming  of  his  infantry  and 
artillery ;  and  Monson,  fearing  to  be  cut  off  from 
Kotah  and  starved,  marched  again  on  the  following 

July  11.  morning.  Heavy  and  incessant  rain  had  set  in  on  the 
10th,  and  the  troops  suffered  much  from  the  weary 
tramp  through  the  deep  black  cotton  soil.    They  did 

July  12.  not  reach  Kotah  until  the  12th,  when  the  Rajah  was  un- 
able to  supply  them  with  provisions  ;  and  Monson  was 
fain  to  drag  on  his  men  for  seven  weary  miles  further 
before  he  could  obtain  food  for  them.  Fortunately  he 
was  able  to  cross  the  Chumbul  in  tfte  Rajah's  boats, 
which  he  sank  after  using  them,  and  so  reached  his 

July  13.  destination  on  the  morning  of  the  13th.  There  he 
halted  for  two  days,  first  because  his  way  was  barred 
by  a  flooded  stream,  and  secondly  because  of  the 
imperative  need  for  collecting  a  small  quantity  of 
victuals ;  the  natural  consequences  of  attempting  a 
campaign   without   pontoons,  transport,  or  supplies. 

July  15.  On  the  15th  the  march  was  resumed,  but  was  presently 
stopped  by  the  state  of  the  roads  ;  and  on  the  following 

July  16.  day,  the  provisions  being  absolutely  exhausted  and  the 
guns  sunk  too  deeply  in  the  mud  to  be  recoverable, 
Monson  abandoned  his  artillery  and  destroyed  the 
ammunition.  He  then  proceeded  on  his  way  through  a 
country  completely  under  water,  only  to  be  stopped  again 