

VOL.  V  G 


82  HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  book  xiii 

i  804.  cantonments,  and  that  he  had  halted  his  own  detach- 
ment at  the  Mokundra  Pass,  pending  further  orders  2 
from  the  Commander-in-chief.  At  the  same  time  in-  t 
telligence  reached  Murray  that  Holkar  was  bringing  his  1 
whole  force  forward  to  attack  him  ;  whereupon,  dis-  f 
liking  his  situation  at  Badnawar,  he  turned  about,  and  t 
on  the  following  day  retreated  towards  the  Myhee,  f 
intending  to  take  up  a  strong  position  in  rear  of  the  I 
river. 

If  this  decision  be  reviewed  from  a  strictly  theoretic  1 
standpoint,  it  seems  difficult  to  quarrel  with  it,  more  t 
especially  since  Murray  reported  that  the  heat  and  1 
fatigue  of  the  march  had  already  cost  him  three  I  1 
thousand  men — a  loss  which  Arthur  Wellesley  found  r 
it  difficult,  except  upon  very  unflattering  hypotheses,  to  t 
account  for.  But  it  is  certain  that  Lake  blamed  him  I 
very  much  for  his  retreat ;  and  the  taking  up  of  a  I 
defensive  position  against  a  Mahratta  force  was  the  t 
thing  of  all  others  against  which  Wellesley  had  warned  I 
him.  Beyond  all  doubt  Lake  or  Wellesley  himself,  in  2 
2l  like  situation,  would  have  marched  straight  against  t 
Holkar  and  attacked  him  ;  but  such  boldness  was  not  j 
to  be  found  in  Murray.  He  had  tlo  confidence  in  1 
himself,  and,  as  he  was  to  prove  far  too  often  before  he  i 
was  finally  laid  aside,  he  was  both  incapable  and  1 
unenterprising.     He   retreated  accordingly  for  four  I 

JulY  5-  days  until  on  the  5th  of  July  he  heard  that  Holkar 
had  moved  eastward  ;  whereupon  he  faced  about,  and 
finding  nothing  to  impede  his  march,  arrived  on  the 
8th  at  Ujjein.1 

But  meanwhile  Monson  also  had  begun  to  retreat. 

July  7.  On  the  7th  he  received  intelligence  that  Holkar  was 
crossing  the  Chumbul  with  his  whole  army  and  every 
gun  that  he  possessed  ;  and  his  first  instinct  was  to 
march  at  once  to  the  spot  and  attack  him.  He 
remembered,  however,  on  reflection  that  he  had  but 
two  days'  grain  in  his  camp,  that  part  of  his  force  had 
been  detached  to  bring  up  more  grain,  that  one  of  his 
1  Wellington  Desp.  iii.  439  ;  Wellesley  Desp.  iv.  374-375. 


ch.  in       HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  83 

battalions  was  on  march  to  join  him  from  Hinglaisgurh,  1804. 
and  that  he  was  expecting  a  convoy  with  treasure  for 
the  troops.  In  fact,  shortly  after  he  began  his 
movement  he  heard  of  Murray's  retreat,  and  could 
find  any  number  of  reasons  for  not  attacking,  because, 
though  a  brave  man,  he  was  afraid  to  attack.  His 
force  was  not  weak,  for,  over  and  above  the  five 
battalions  already  with  him,  he  had  been  joined  not 
only  by  Gardiner's  irregulars  under  Lieutenant  Lucan, 
but  also  by  Scindia's  contingent  of  horse  which  ought 
to  have  joined  Murray,  under  the  leadership  of  a 
native  chief,  Bappojee  Scindia.  This  gave  him  in 
all  nearly  three  thousand  cavalry ;  but  he  had 
no  European  troops,  and  like  Murray  he  had  not 
the  nerve  of  Wellesley  and  Lake.  Moreover,  he  had 
been  unwise  in  trusting  to  the  Rajah  of  Kotah  to 
furnish  him  with  supplies,  a  duty  which  native  chief- 
tains were  always  ready  to  undertake  but  could  never 
be  trusted  to  perform  ;  and  lastly,  he  had  certainly 
advanced  further  than  was  consistent  with  safety  in 
order  to  ;apture  a  petty  fort,  which  gave  him  no 
accession  of  strength  or  resources,  but  rather  weakened 
him  by  the  amount  of  a  small  garrison  which  he  could 
ill  spare.  These,  though  serious,  might  be  deemed 
venial  mistakes,  easily  to  be  redeemed  by  a  bold  attack  ; 
but  instead  of  attack  Monson  chose  retreat. 