

Great,  therefore,  was  his  surprise  on  learning,  about 
the  middle  of  April,  that  Lake  depended  upon  Wellesley 's 
own  troops  in  the  south  to  defeat  Holkar  in  case  of  a 
war,  while  the  Commander-in-chief  himself  should 
look  to  the  safety  of  Hindostan.    The  difficulty  of  the  it 
situation  was  further  complicated  by  the  fact  that  for 
some  time  past  not  a  word  of  instruction  had  been 
received  from  the  Viceroy.   In  utter  perplexity,  Arthur 
Wellesley  wrote  to  Lake  that  his  plan  was  out  of  the  a! 
question  unless  hostilities  could  be  delayed  until  August,! 
that  he  doubted  whether  the  prevailing  famine  would 
permit  him  even  to  advance  to  Chandore,  much  less  to 
traverse  the  six  hundred  miles  from  Poona,  where  hi 
army  was  concentrated,  to  Indore.     Even  at  Poona 
1  Wellington  Desp.  iii.  164-165,  171,  196. 


J 


Lh.  hi       HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  75 

the  horses  of  his  own  cavalry  were  living  on  rice  ; 
^uJd  further  afield  his  Mysore  Cavalry  had  lost  one  hundred 
horses  in  a  single  day  from  starvation.  He  could  only 
recommend  that  Murray's  force  should  operate  from 
Guzerat,  and  Scindia's  army  from  some  position  north 
of  Ujjein,  so  as  to  attack  Holkar  in  rear,  while  the 
)uld  Commander-in-chief  attacked  him  in  front.  Privately 
and  he  stated  his  opinion  that,  if  Lake  pressed  Holkar 
i:ch 


vigorously,  he  could  end  the  war  in  a  fortnight ;  but 
that  if  he  stood  upon  the  defensive  merely  with  a  view 
to  foiling  his  enemy's  raids  and  depredations,  there  was 
no  saying  where  the  contest  would  end.1 

A  fortnight  later,  on  the  7th  of  May,  Arthur  M 
Wellesley  received  at  last  official  intimation  that 
hostilities  had  been  declared  on  the  16th  of  April, 
whereupon  he  wrote  careful  instructions  to  Murray  to 
take  the  field  at  once  with  his  troops  at  Guzerat. 
During  the  war  with  Scindia  Murray's  part  had, 
through  no  fault  of  his  own,  been  obscure  ;  for  the 
insurrection  of  a  rebel  who  aspired  to  the  place  of  the 
Gaekwar  had  prevented  him  from  invading  Scindia's 
territory,  and  limited  his  exertions  to  the  keeping  of 
the  peace  in  his  own  district.  The  task  now  assigned 
to  him  was  more  honourable.  He  had  under  his  com- 
mand at  least  two  European  and  four  native  battalions, 
besides  the  native  cavalry  of  the  Gaekwar  ;  and  since 
Arthur  Wellesley  could  only  guess  at  Holkar's  probable 
movements,  he  left  Murray  a  free  hand,  simply  bidding 
him  to  march  immediately,  move  rapidly,  and  attack 
Holkar  whenever  he  could  find  an  opportunity.  Welles- 
ley's  information  did  not  allow  him  to  state  positively 
the  point  upon  which  it  would  be  best  to  march,  but  he 
divined  it  to  be  Ujjein.  As  for  himself,  in  obedience  to 
the  wishes  of  the  Viceroy,  he  prepared  to  march  north- 
ward. By  the  1st  of  June  rain  enough  had  fallen  to  Ju 
ensure  a  supply  of  water,  and  he  announced  his  intention 
of  sending  forward  at  any  rate  his  train  of  battering 
cannon  for  the  siege  of  Chandore.  But  three  days 
1  Wellington  Desp.  iii.  231  seq.,  235  seq. 