

Aug.  21.  2 1st  with  five  and  a  half  battalions  and  two  howitzers 
north-eastward  upon  Kooshalghur. 

The  first  march  brought  him  to  the  river  Banas, 
which,  as  might  have  been  foreseen,  was  in  flood  and 
unfordable.  Three  boats,  however,  were  found,  and  in 
these  the  treasure  was  sent  forward  under  escort  of  six 
companies  with  orders  to  proceed  at  once  to  Kooshalghur, 
some  twenty  miles  away  as  the  crow  flies.  The  rest  of 
the  force  perforce  halted ;  and  early  next  morning 
Holkar's  cavalry  appeared,  and  encamped  four  miles 

Aug.  24.  away.  On  the  24th  the  river  became  fordable  ;  and  by 
eight  o'clock  in  the  morning  Monson Jiad  thrown  across 
it  the  whole  of  his  baggage,  with  one  battalion  for 
escort.  The  enemy  meanwhile  had  occupied  a  village 
on  his  right,  from  which  he  promptly  dislodged  them 
with  little  loss  to  himself ;  but,  as  the  river  fell  lower, 
the  Mahratta  cavalry  began  to  pass  it  in  great  numbers 
upon  both  flanks,  and  Monson  therefore  sent  over  three 
more  battalions  and  a  howitzer  for  the  better  protection 
of  his  baggage.  He  was  now  left  on  the  south  bank  of 
the  river  with  his  picquets  and  a  single  battalion  to 
support  them,  and  he  could  see  that  any  attempt  to 
withdraw  these  before  dark  must  lead  to  their  inevitable 
destruction.  Unfortunately  the  darkness  did  not  come 
soon  enough  for  him.  At  four  o'clock  Holkar's  infantry 
and  guns  appeared,  and  his  batteries  presently  opened 
a  heavy  cannonade  upon  Monson's  little  party.  The 
Colonel  at  once  retorted  by  charging  the  guns  with  his 
infantry  and  capturing  one  line  of  them  ;  but  Holkar 


ch.  in       HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  87 

met  this  attack  by  a  destructive  fire  from  a  second  line  1804. 
of  cannon,  while  his  infantry  and  cavalry  came  up  on  all 
sides  of  the  unhappy  detachment.  The  Sepoys  having 
suffered  heavy  loss,  gave  way,  and  Monson  ordered  a 
retreat  to  the  river  ;  but  the  enemy's  horse  pressed  hard 
upon  him,  and  the  retreat  soon  became  a  panic  rush  for 
the  ford.  The  Mahrattas  plunged  in  after  the  fugitives, 
and  were  bidding  fair  to  annihilate  the  whole  of  them, 
when  one  of  the  British  battalions  on  the  north  side  of 
the  river  came  down  to  the  bank  ;  whereupon  the 
pursuit  instantly  ceased  and  the  enemy  retired. 

This  respite  enabled  Monson  and  a  few  men  to  Aug.  24 
escape,  but  it  was  of  short  duration  ;  for  Holkar's  guns 
presently  unlimbered  before  the  ford,  and  under  cover 
of  their  fire  his  cavalry  began  to  cross   the  river. 
Monson  meanwhile  lost  no  time,  but  forming  his 
troops  into  a  hollow  square,  and  letting  the  baggage 
take  its  chance,  he  pressed  on  to  Kooshalghur,  with 
the  enemy's  cavalry  clinging  to  his  rear  all  the  way, 
and  arrived  there  in  safety  on  the  evening  of  the 
25  th.    Here  he  found  the  treasure  with  its  escort,  Aug.  25 
but  not,  as  he  had  hoped,  a  large  reinforcement  of 
infantry  and  cavalry  from  the  Rajah  of  Jeypore.  On 
the  morning  of  the  26th  Holkar's  cavalry  overtook  and  Aug.  26 
encamped  all  round  him  ;  and  now  came  the  most 
terrible  moment  of  all.    The  native  officers  of  two  of 
his  battalions,  Sepoys  of  the  British  service,  were  found 
to  be  in  correspondence  with  Holkar  ;  two  companies 
actually  deserted,  and  half  of  Frith 's  irregulars  went  off 
at  the  same  time.    Happily  the  two  remaining  battalions 
remained  faithful,  and  at  seven  o'clock  on  the  evening 
of  the  26th  Monson  renewed  his  march.    Constantly  Aug.  26 
harassed  by  the  enemy's  cavalry  and  horse-artillery,  he 
reached  Hindoun  on  the  evening  of  the  27th,  with  the  Aug.  27 
greater  part  of  his  baggage  lost  and  the  troops  in  the 
last  stage  of  exhaustion. 