


80  HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  book  xiii  , 

1804.  attempting  to  return  it;  for  after  much  aimless  : 
marching  to  and  fro,  which  cost  the  lives  of  many  men  ] 
from  heat  and  exhaustion,  he  retired  to  Kalpee,  having  \ 
done  his  best  to  spread  consternation  from  end  to  end  ( 
of  Bundelcund. 

Lake,  much  annoyed,  superseded  him  instantly,  and  1 
placed  Captain  Smith  under  arrest.  Lord  Wellesley,  j 
still  more  angry,  ordered  Fawcett  to  be  tried  at  once 
by  court-martial  ;  but  the  mischief  was  done,  and  there  f 
was  no  saying  how  far  it  might  extend.  Happily  one  ] 
officer,  Captain  Baillie,  though  in  command  of  no  more  ; 
than  fifteen  hundred  native  levies,  refused  to  share  in  j 
the  panic  ;  and,  from  his  station  at  Banda,  he  by  his  ; 
firmness  and  courage  maintained  confidence  and  tran-  , 
quillity  to  south  of  the  Betwa.1 

Meanwhile  Holkar  had  continued  his  retreat  south-  ( 
ward  almost  to  Ujjein,  still  followed  by  Gardiner,  who  j 
May  30.  on  the  30th  of  May  had  made  a  successful  attack  upon  - 
one  of  Holkar's  underlings,  forcing  two  thousand  men  j 
to  surrender  and  capturing  all  their  baggage.  Monson,  < 
also,  having  been  reinforced  by  Don  to  a  total  j 
strength  of  five  and  a  half  regular  native  battalions,  j 

June,  moved   southward,  and   at  the   beginning  of  June  | 
reached  Kotah,  about  sixty  miles  south  of  Rampoora.  , 
Here  he  was  joined  by  a  contingent  of  troops  in  the  , 
service  of  the  Rajah  of  Kotah,  after  which  he  continued  ; 
his  movement  for  about  thirty  miles  south-eastward  to  j 
the  Pass  of  Mokundra.    After  a  short  halt  to  collect  ( 
supplies  he  resumed  his  march  on  the  28th  of  June, 
July  1.  and  on  the  1st  of  July  arrived  near  the  fortress  of 
Hinglaisgurh,  an  ancient  and  much-valued  possession 
of  Holkar's  family.    Here  he  ascertained  that  Holkar 
was  encamped  with  his  whole  force  between  forty  and 
fifty  miles  to  south-westward  on  the  other  bank  of  the 
Chumbul.    He  determined,  therefore,  to  attack  the 
fort  at  once,  and  accordingly  carried  it  by  assault 
July  2.  on  the  following  day  with  little  trouble   but  con- 
siderable loss.    This  done,  he  again  moved  forward,  and 

1  Wellesley  Desp.  iv.  84,  127-129. 


ch.  in       HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY 


81 


finally  took  up  a  position  about  fifty  miles  south  of  the  1804. 
Mokundra  pass,  where  he  was  informed  that  he  would 
be  able  to  secure  supplies.  He  was  expecting  also  to 
open  communications  with  Murray,  who,  as  he  knew, 
had  received  orders  to  march  upon  Ujjein  ;  and  Ujjein 
was,  as  the  crow  flies,  not ,  above  seventy  miles  distant 
from  his  encampment. 

Now  Murray  had  received  instructions,  advice,  and 
encouragement  from  Arthur  Wellesley  which  would 
have  stirred  the  spirit  of  almost  any  other  man  to 
abnormal  energy  and  enterprise.  "  You  have  a  great 
game  in  your  hands,"  the  General  had  written  on  the 
22nd  of  May  ;  and  the  unerring  instinct  with  which, 
weeks  before  and  with  no  information,  Arthur  Wellesley 
had  selected  Ujjein  as  Murray's  destination,  should  have 
convinced  that  officer  that  by  following  his  instructions 
he  could  not  go  far  wrong.  But  instead  of  being  full  of 
ardour,  Murray  was  full  of  complaints.  He  bewailed 
his  lack  of  cavalry,  which  was  indeed  serious,  for  both 
Scindia  and  the  Gaekwar  had  evaded  the  duty  of 
providing  it ;  he  bewailed  his  weakness  in  numbers, 
though  on  the  1st  of  June  he  had  five  thousand  eight 
hundred  men  fit  for  duty ;  finally  he  bewailed  his 
want  of  European  troops,  though  his  army  included 
more  than  had  fought  either  with  Lake  or  Wellesley 
in  the  previous  campaign.  Arthur  Wellesley  wrote  to 
him  in  terms  which  showed  his  disapprobation  of  this 
querulous  spirit;  and  accordingly,  at  the  beginning  of  June. 
June,  Murray  began  his  march  from  Baroda.  He  was 
much  hampered  by  the  difficulty  of  obtaining  transport, 
supplies,  and  forage,  though  indeed  his  troubles  in  this 
way  were  no  greater  than  those  that  had  been  overcome 
by  Wellesley  in  the  campaign  of  1803.  By  the  middle 
of  June  he  arrived  at  Dohad,  about  eighty  miles  north- 
east of  Baroda,  where  it  had  been  arranged  that  he 
should  deposit  his  heavy  ordnance  and  stores  ;  and  on 
the  30th  of  June  he  reached  Badnawar,  forty  miles  west  June  30, 
of  Ujjein.  Here  he  received  a  letter  from  Monson, 
reporting  that  the  main  body  of  the  army  had  gone  into 