

Lake  therefore  retired  eastward,  and  on  the  27th  May  27. 
■regained  his  old  camping-ground  at  Hindoun.  During 
jthe  last  four  days  of  his  march  he  buried  some  fifty  Euro- 
pean soldiers  who  had  succumbed  to  the  sun,  the  thermo- 
meter marking  one  hundred  and  thirty  degrees  Fahrenheit 
in  the  shade.  The  mortality  was  greatly  increased  by 
the  scarcity  of  water  ;  and  on  resuming  his  march  he 
separated  his  force  into  two  columns  so  as  to  move  the 
more  quickly.  Still,  however,  the  men  continued  to  fall 
down,  the  Sepoys  and  the  camp-followers  almost  as  fast 
as  the  Europeans  ;  and  a  single  march  of  eighteen  miles 
cost  the  army  the  loss  of  over  two  hundred  and  fifty 
natives  and  about  thirty  British  soldiers.  Ultimately 
the  main  body,  after  dispersing  several  corps  to  various 
stations  on  the  way,  marched  into  Cawnpore  on  the 
20th  of  June.  Possibly  its  losses  would  hardly  have  June  20. 
been  greater  if  it  had  followed  up  Holkar  and  left  him 
no  rest,  as  had  been  the  desire  of  Arthur  Wellesley. 
Thus  the  principal  army  was  withdrawn  into  canton- 


78  HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  book  xiii 

1804.  men ts,  and  the  prosecution  of  the  war  was  left  to 
detachments,  scattered  in  various  directions  for  the 
purpose  rather  of  preventing  Holkar  from  doing 
mischief  than  of  ending  his  career  for  ever  by  hunting 
him  until  he  had  not  a  man  left.  And  now  came  a 
series  of  mishaps.  The  operations  undertaken  by 
Colonel  Powell  for  the  reduction  of  Bundelcund  had 
met  with  so  little  resistance  as  to  be  unworthy  of 
detailed  notice  ;  and  though  the  province  always  lay 
open  to  predatory  raids  from  Holkar's  partisans  and 
other  freebooters,  of  whom  one,  Meer  Khan,  was  the 
most  notable,  the  seven  thousand  troops  which  had  been 
allotted  to  the  service  were  amply  sufficient  to  beat  any 
number  of  banditti.  It  so  happened,  however,  that 
Colonel  Powell  and  the  officer  next  senior  to  him  died  ; 
and  that  the  command  passed  into  the  hands  of  a 
certain  Colonel  Fawcett,  who,  to  judge  by  Lake's 
language,  was  an  officer  of  unique  incapacity.  However 
that  may  be,  Fawcett,  whose  headquarters  were  at 
Koonch,  to  west  and  south  of  Kalpee,  must  needs  on  the 

May  21.  2 1  st  of  May  send  out  seven  native  companies,  a  troop 
of  horse  and  five  guns,  under  a  certain  Captain  Smith,  to 
reduce  a  small  fort  within  a  few  miles  of  his  camp. 
The  ostensible  purpose  of  this  operation  was  to  obtain 
forage,  there  being  none  left  in  the  district  except  in 
the  villages  of  chieftains  who  refused  to  acknowledge 
the  British  authority.  At  midnight  came  reports  that 
five  thousand  predatory  horse  were  in  the  vicinity  ;  and 