

This  was  a  fine  and  gallant  action,  which  Lake 
declared  to  have  surpassed  anything  hitherto  done  in 
India.  He  added,  however,  the  significant  remark  : 
"  I  have  reason  to  believe  that  the  action  of  the  13  th 
inst.  was  a  very  near  business.  The  personal  courage 
of  Monson  alone  saved  it."  In  any  case  the  native 
infantry  appears  to  have  done  its  duty  gallantly,  though 
the  casualty  list  shows  that,  as  usual,  the  British  bore 
the  brunt  of  a  very  severe  fight.     Six  European 


io4  HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY   book  xiii  ; 

1 804.  officers,  including  General  Fraser,  were  killed  or  died  ::. 
Nov.  1 3.  0f  their  hurts,  and  seventeen  were  wounded.  Sixty- 
three  European  soldiers  were  killed,  and  one  hundred 
and  eighty-one  wounded  ;  and  among  them  forty-two 
of  the  killed  and  one  hundred  and  twenty  of  the 
wounded  belonged  to  the  Seventy-sixth.    Of  the  natives  a 
of  all  ranks  ninety-nine  were  killed,  and  two  hundred  c 
and  seventy-four  wounded  ;  and  it  is  significant  that  in 
not  one  of  these  belonged  to  the  two  regiments  of  r 
Native  Cavalry.    The  fact  that  the  Mahratta  horse 
was  able  to  pass  them  by  and  recapture  the  guns,  added 
to  the  further  fact  that  the  infantry  of  the  baggage-  L 
guard  was  brought  up  to  support  them,  tends  to  show 
that  they  needed  a  squadron  or  two  of  British  dragoons 
to  hearten  them  ;  and  it  was  presumably  owing  to  their 
failure  that  the  action  at  one  moment  evidently  bore 
an  extremely  ugly  aspect.    However,  the  bravery  of 
Monson  and  his  officers  saved  the  day,  and  all  was 
well.    The  loss  of  the  Mahrattas  was  reckoned  at  two 
thousand  killed,  including  those  who  perished  in  the 
swamp.    The  trophies  of  the  day  were  eighty-seven 
guns,  thirteen  of  them  being  those  which  Monson  had 
lost  on  his  retreat  from  Malwa,  ani  which  he  now 
most  honourably  recovered.1 

It  is  an  extraordinary  fact  that,  though  he  had  thus 
brilliantly  redeemed  his  fame,  Monson  decided  im- 
mediately after  the  action  to  fall  back  to  Agra.  Lake 
was  in  despair.  Most  of  Holkar's  defeated  infantry 
had  taken  refuge  in  the  fortress  of  Deig  ;  and  there 
was  every  chance  that  Monson's  retirement  would 
allow  them  to  escape  and  that,  his  movement  being 
construed  as  a  retreat,  the  whole  country  would  rally 
to  support  the  Rajah  of  Bhurtpore.  Monson's 
ostensible  motive  was  that  he  must  go  back  to  Muttra  | 
for  provisions.    "  There  are  sufficient  supplies  there  for  1 

1  The  authorities  for  the  battle  of  Deig  are  meagre.    I  know  j 
of  none  but  the  account  in  Thorn's  Memoir  of  the  War  in  India,  eked 
out  by  Monson's  report  and  Lake's  comments  in  Wellesley  Desp. 
iv.  233,  245,  251. 