

1  Cavalry.    Colonel  Macan,  H.E.I.C.S. 

1st   Brigade.     Lt.-Col.  Vandeleur,  H.M.  8th  L.D.,  2nd,  3rd, 
6th  Bengal  N.C. 

znd  Brigade.    Lt.-Col.  T.  Browne,  H.M.  27th  and  29th  L.D., 

1st  and  4th  Bengal  N.C. 
European  Horse  Artillery. 

Infantry.    Major-General  Fraser,  H.M.S. 

1st  Brigade.  Lt.-Col.  Monson,  H.M.  76th,  1  /2nd,  1  /4th  Bengal  N.I. 
znd  Brigade.    Lt.-Col.  G.  S.  Browne,  i  and  2/1 5  th,  i/2ist  Bengal 
N.I. 

yd  Brigade.    Lt.-Col.  Ball,  i/8th,  2/2  2nd  Bengal  N.I. 

Reserve.    Lt.-Col.  Don,  Flank  cos.  H.M.  22nd,  1   and  2/1 2th, 

2/2lSt  N.I. 


94 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  book  xiii 


1804.  On  the  morning  of  the  2nd  large  bodies  of  hostile 
Oct.  2.  horse  were  encountered,  but  showed  no  disposition  to 
Oct.  3.  stand  and  were  easily  dispersed.  On  the  3rd  the  enemy 
succeeded  in  capturing  some  baggage  as  well  as  a  small 
convoy  which  was  on  its  way  to  Lake  from  Agra ;  and  on 
that  same  evening  the  General  reoccupied  Muttra.  Here 
he  was  detained  for  some  days  by  lack  of  victuals  ;  but  on 
Oct.  7.  the  7th,  learning  that  Holkar  had  assembled  the  whole  of 
his  cavalry  about  four  miles  away,  he  moved  out  before 
dawn  to  attack  him.  But  the  alarm  had  been  given 
before  Lake  reached  the  camp  ;  and  the  Mahrattas 
instantly  fled  with  such  precipitation  that  only  the 
galloping  guns  of  the  cavalry  could  come  into  action 
and  knock  down  a  few  horses  and  men.  The 
General,  therefore,  returned  to  Muttra  ;  and  Holkar 
promptly  moved  back  to  his  former  camp.    On  the 

Oct.  10.  10th  Lake  made  a  second  attempt  upon  him,  leading 
the  infantry  only  against  his  front  and  sending  the 
cavalry  round  by  a  wide  circuit  to  cut  off  his  retreat ; 
but  the  Mahrattas  were  too  wary  to  be  caught,  and  fled 
as  before,  though  they  returned,  according  to  their 
wont,  directly  the  British  faced  about  to  retire,  and 
hung  about  their  flanks  and  rear. 

Oct.  12.  At  length  on  the  12th  Lake  was  able  to  pursue  his 
march  to  the  relief  of  Delhi,  which  he  now  knew  to  be 
besieged.  The  enemy  still  clung  round  him  ;  and  two 
fortified  towns  on  the  road,  having  been  provided  with 
guns  by  Holkar,  threatened  resistance ;   but  Lake 

Oct.  18.  passed  them  by,  and  on  the  18th  came  up  to  Delhi, 
from  which  the  Mahratta  infantry  and  artillery  had 
already  beaten  a  hasty  retreat.    Lake  started  to  pursue 

Oct.  19.  them  on  the  19th,  hoping  to  capture  their  guns  ;  but 
once  again  he  was  detained  by  disappointment  in  the 
matter  of  supplies,  and  the  opportunity  was  lost. 
Delhi,  meanwhile,  had  made  a  creditable  defence, 
though  its  fortifications  were  in  ruins.  The  resident, 
Colonel  Ochterlony,  had  early  divined  from  the  direction 
of  Holkar's  march  that  he  would  attempt  the  capture 
of  the  place,  and  had  promptly  called  in  a  battalion  and 