

5  At  nine  o'clock  therefore  on  the  same  evening  Lake's 
f|:avalry  and  horse-artillery  were  ready  to  move,  without 
>aggage  or  encumbrance  of  any  kind.  Just  before  he 
tarted  there  reached  him  the  news  of  a  great  success  at 
)eig  ;  and,  with  this  to  excite  them  to  rivalry,  the 
roopers  rode  off  under  a  radiant  moon  into  the  soft 
si/arm  air  of  the  night.  Messenger  after  messenger 
1  vol.  v  H 


98 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY   book  xiii 


804.  joined  the  squadrons  as  they  pursued  their  way,  confirm- 
ing former  intelligence  as  to  Holkar's  position  ;  and  his 
encampment  was  not  far  distant,  when  the  whole  column 
was  startled  by  a  sudden  terrific  roar.    By  some  unhappy 
accident  a  tumbril  of  the  artillery  had  exploded  ;  and 
there  was  at  least  one  man  among  the  sleeping  Mahratta 
host  who  heard  it  and   took  fright.    Holkar  had 
received  bad  news  from  Deig  on  the  previous  evening 
and  had  retired,  without  repeating  it  to  a  soul,  to  pass 
a  sleepless  night.    The  dull  boom  of  the  explosion 
roused  him  to  alarm  ;  but  his  attendants  reassured  him.  1 
It  was  only  the  usual  morning-gun  at  Futtehgarh,  1 
they  said  ;  and  the  chief  lay  down  again,  while  his  men,  1 
rolled  up  in  their  blankets,  slumbered  comfortably  on 
beside  their  horses.     But  ten  minutes  later  the  true 
morning-gun  at  Futtehgarh  was  fired  ;  and  some  at 
least  of  the  Mahrattas  rose  uneasily,  though  many  t 
thousands  remained  buried  in  sleep.1 

.  1 7.  The  dawn  was  just  breaking  when  the  head  of  Lake's  I 
column,  having  doubtless  quickened  its  pace  after  the  0 
accident,  reached  the  skirts  of  the  camp  ;  and  the  guns  b 
actually  approached  within  range  of  grape-shot  without 
giving  the  alarm.  Then  they  opChed  fire  into  the  ti 
thickest  of  the  crowded  mass,  and  Holkar's  lieutenants  h 
ran  to  tell  him  that  General  Lake  and  the  British  were  k 
upon  him.  He  refused  at  first  to  believe  them,  ei 
knowing  that  his  enemy  had  been  thirty-six  miles  away  th 
at  night-fall ;  but,  being  soon  convinced,  he  mounted  si: 
his  horse  and  galloped  off  with  such  men  as  were  aboul  ye 
him  south-westward  towards  Mainpooree  ;  nor  did  h(  ac 
draw  rein  till  he  had  passed  the  Kali  eighteen  miles  away  fc 
Meanwhile  his  unhappy  men  were  left  surprised,  panic-  so; 
stricken,  and  leaderless.  The  Eighth  Light  Dragoons  an 
presently  came  spurring  their  jaded  horses  among  them  ch: 
the  remaining  regiments  followed  close  behind ;  and  ther  k 

k 

1  Memoirs  of  John  Shipp  :  edition  of  1 843,  p.  69.    "  Had  it  no  it 
been  for  the  blowing  up  of  a  tumbril  yesterday  morning,  I  thinl 
we  must  have  had  Holkar."    Lake  to  Wellesley,  Nov.  18,  1804 
We  lie  sky  Desp.  iv.  241. 