

Lake  had  given  no  such  forethought  to  his  projects 
when  he  ordered  Monson's  detachment  to  pursue 
Holkar  to  Ujjein.  It  seems,  too,  that  the  numbers  of 
Holkar's  infantry  and  artillery — for  he  was  reported  to 
have  one  hundred  and  seventy-five  guns — came  as  a 
surprise  to  every  one  ;  for  all  previous  intelligence, 


9o  HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  book  xiii 


i  804.  during  his  retreat  before  Lake,  showed  his  force  to  be 
an  undisciplined  rabble  upon  the  verge  of  starvation, 
whereas  in  fact  he  had  fallen  back  upon  his  main  body 
of  infantry  and  guns.  On  the  other  hand,  both  Lord 
Wellesley  and  Lake  had  counted  upon  a  respectable 
contingent  of  troops,  to  be  furnished  according  to  treaty 
by  Dowlut  Rao  Scindia  ;  but  that  chief  had  steadily 
evaded  the  discharge  of  his  obligation.  Nevertheless,  in  * 
Monson's  place  Lake  would  by  a  happy  instinct  most 
probably  have  avoided  Monson's  blunders,  and  carried 
the  expedition  to  a  victorious  issue.  Indeed  it  was  one 
of  Lake's  failings  that  he  gave  every  commander  credit 
for  possessing  that  instinct,  and  could  not  understand  how 
any  man  could  possibly  lack  it.  Arthur  Wellesley,  on 
the  other  hand,  reasoned  matters  out,  and  ensured  that, 
if  the  instinct  were  wanting,  sound  and  logical  instruc- 
tions should  in  some  measure  take  its  place.  Lake 
expected  a  man  to  fight  his  way  out  of  any  difficulty 
that  might  arise  out  of  want  of  provisions,  wished  him 
good  luck,  and  sent  him  on  his  way  ;  and  it  is  probable 
that  he  himself,  having  a  real  genius  for  a  pitched 
battle,  could  have  acted  successfully  upon  his  own 
precepts.  Arthur  Wellesley,  on  the  Other  hand,  told  a 
commander  that  if  he  made  sure  of  his  supplies  in  the 
first  instance,  he  could  not  fail  of  success.  Lake's 
system  might  suffice  for  one  man  ;  Wellesley's  gave  a 
chance  of  success  to  any  man. 

Yet,  to  do  the  Chiefs  justice,  they  did  not  turn  upon 
Monson.  Lord  Wellesley  had  expected  the  ruin  of  his 
force  from  the  first  hour  of  its  retreat,  and  was  relieved 
to  find  that  any  part  of  it  had  escaped  ;  "  but,"  he 
added,  "  whatever  the  result  of  his  misfortunes  to  my 
own  fame,  I  will  endeavour  to  shield  his  character  from 
obloquy,  nor  will  I  attempt  the  mean  purpose  of 
sacrificing  his  reputation  to  save  mine."  Lake's  answer 
was  not  less  worthy  and  honourable.  "  My  dear 
lord  ...  all  blame  ought  to  fall  upon  me  for  detaching 
the  force  in  the  first  instance  ...  all  censure  for  that 
measure  must  be  attributed  to  me  and  to  me  alone,  and 


ch.  in       HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  91 

if  called  upon  I  am  ready  to  answer  for  it  before  the  1804. 
House  of  Commons  ...  I  stand  perfectly  at  ease  on 
that  score,  unless  it  may  be  said  that  I  left  too  much  to 
the  discretion  of  Colonel  Monson."  Misfortunes  were 
not  likely  to  be  irretrievable  with  two  such  men  in 
command  in  India.1 