

Nov.  3.  until  relieved  by  Lake's  advance  on  the  3rd  of  |?j 
November.  By  that  time  his  Hindoo  Sepoys  had 
been  for  some  days  without  food,  their  caste  not  per- 
mitting them  to  share  the  flesh  of  draught-bullocks  with 
the  Mohammedans.  The  inhabitants  ^f  Shamlee  having 
joined  with  the  Mahratta  matchlock-men  in  shooting 
at  Burn's  men,  their  town  was  given  up  to  be  plundered 
as  a  warning  to  others  ;  and  after  one  day's  halt  Lake, 

Nov.  5.  on  the  5  th  of  November,  resumed  his  pursuit  of 
Holkar. 

From  Shamlee  he  turned  eastward  for  fourteen  miles, 
when  he  had  the  satisfaction  of  learning  that  an  adjacent 
town,  dreading  the  fate  of  its  unhappy  neighbour,  had 
fired  upon  Jeswunt  Rao's  horsemen  rather  than  admit 
them.  Thus  early  was  verified  Arthur  Wellesley's 
prediction,  when  he  wrote  to  Lake  that  he  had  only 
to  press  Holkar  hard  to  make  every  inhabitant  turn 
Nov.  6.  against  him.  On  the  6th  of  November  a  march  of 
twenty-four  miles  brought  Lake  to  the  residence  of  the 
Begum  Somroo,  who,  having  succeeded  to  the  command 
of  the  troops  raised  by  her  husband,  Reinhardt,  was 


- 


ch.  iv        HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  97 

now  called  by  his  native  name  with  the  prefix  of  a  native  1 
title.     She  was  a  very  capable  person,  and  a  power 
in  the  land  ;  for  which  reason  Holkar  was  conjectured 
to  have  pressed  her  to  join  her  force  to  his  own.  Lake, 
however,  followed  so  closely  upon  the  Mahratta  host 
as  to  remove  all  weight  from  its  chief's  representations  ; 
and  at  noon  of  the  7th  the  British  at  last  caught  sight  N 
of  the  enemy  in  full  flight  towards  Meerut.    On  arriving 
there  the  next  day  Lake  found  that  this  town  also  had 
shut  its  gates  upon  Holkar  and  compelled  him  to  double 
Dack  twenty  miles  southward  to  Haper.    Having  left 
:wo  Sepoy  battalions  and  some  irregular  troops  at 
Meerut,  Lake  followed  him  up,  always  from  twenty 
:o  thirty  miles  behind,  but  close  enough  to  hearten 
ivery  place  to  resist  him  and  to  leave  him  little  time 
:o  plunder  any  but  unwalled  towns.    So  the  chase 
:ontinued  at  the  rate  of  twenty  miles  a  day,  through 
:lusters  of  mischievous  little  forts  and  luckless  burning 
tillages,  south  and  eastward  from  Meerut  to  Malagur 
md  Shikarpoor,  thence  across  the  Kali  river,  some 
ifteen  miles  north-west  of  Aligarh,  to  Coriagunge, 
vhich  lies  twelve  miles  to  south-east  of  that  fortress  ; 
md  thence,  moving  always  south-eastward,  by  Klas- 
junge  and  Sirpoora  to  Aligunge,  where  Lake  arrived 
)n  the  1 6th.    The  village  was  still  burning  as  he  N 
narched  by  it,  for  Holkar's  banditti,  having  been 
listurbed  at  the  work  of  plunder,  had  solaced  them- 
ielves  by  destruction  ;  but  then  came  the  welcome 
1  lews  that   Holkar   was   certainly   at  Furruckabad, 
hirty-six  miles  to  eastward,  a  distance  so  great  that 
le  would  assuredly  judge  himself  safe  against  any 
t  arly  attack. 