

1  The  authorities  for  the  account  of  Monson's  retreat  are  : — 
Wellesky  Desp.  iv.  197  seq.,  204,  213-217  ;  Wellington  Desp.  iii. 
438,  443,  455-463  ;  Thorn,  Memoir  of  the  Late  War  in  India,  pp. 
357-367. 


CHAPTER  IV 

1804.  The  consequences  of  the  disaster  to  Monson's  detach- 
ment were  not  slow  to  show  themselves.  Bappoo  Scindia 
deserted  to  Holkar  ;  the  Jats,  lately  our  allies,  turned 
against  us  and  threatened  to  seize  our  newly-acquired 
territory  in  Hindostan  ;  and  the  conduct  of  Dowlut 
Rao  Scindia  became  more  and  more  suspicious.  Most 
dangerous  of  all  was  a  fact  revealed  by  a  correspond- 
ence which  had  been  intercepted  by  Monson  during  his 
stay  at  Rampoora,  namely,  that  the  Rajah  of  Bhurtpore, 
though  bound  to  the  British  by  recent  treaty,  was 
conspiring  with  Holkar  to  drive  them  from  India. 
Indeed  the  political  consequences  of  the  disaster  seemed 
likely  to  be  far-reaching  beyond  all  calculation  ;  but 
fortunately  the  chiefs  of  every  department  were  not 
men  who  shrank  from  danger  or  exertion.  The 
Viceroy,  even  before  Monson  marched  from  Rampoora, 
had  decided  that  the  Commander-in-chief  must  take 
the  field  again  in  person  with  his  army  ;  and  Lake, 
eager  to  meet  his  wishes  and  to  crush  the  power  of 
Holkar,  gave  orders  for  the  troops  at  once  to  march 
from  their  cantonments  and  assemble  at  Agra.  Arthur 
Wellesley,  though  still  resolved  to  go  home,  made 
active  preparations  for  the  forced  march  to  Chandore 
of  a  column  under  Colonel  Wallace,  drew  up  a  scheme 
for  Wallace's  operations,  wrote  to  Murray  an  admirable 
letter  as  to  the  best  means  of  carrying  out  the  operations 
entrusted  to  him,  and,  by  no  means  the  worst  of  his 
measures,  recommended  that  Murray  himself  should  be 
superseded  as  soon  as  possible.1 

1  Wellesley  Desp.  iv.  189,  197  ;  Wellington  Desp.  iii.  447  seq.,  453, 
463  seq.,  468. 

92 


ch.  iv       HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  93 

Meanwhile  Holkar  pursued  his  victorious  march,  1804. 
and  after  some  delay  in  the  Biana  Pass,  arrived  before 
Muttra  with  the  whole  of  his  cavalry ;  while  his 
infantry  and  artillery,  far  in  the  rear,  toiled  forward  to- 
wards Delhi.  The  garrison  of  Muttra,  which  counted 
five  battalions  of  Sepoys,  two  regiments  of  native  cavalry, 
and  a  proportion  of  artillery,  evacuated  the  place  on  the 
15th  of  September,  apparently  in  some  haste,  for  it  left  Sept.  15 
behind  not  only  much  baggage  but  a  large  quantity 
of  grain,  which  must  have  been  very  welcome  to 
Holkar's  hungry  horsemen.  However,  the  Jumna, 
being  in  heavy  flood,  forbade  the  invasion  of  the  Doab 
by  any  but  small  parties  of  the  enemy,  which  were  easily 
driven  out ;  and  thus  less  harm  was  done  than  might 
have  been  apprehended.  Meanwhile  Lake's  regiments 
had  marched  from  Cawnpore  on  the  3rd  of  September,  Sept.  3. 
at  the  very  height  of  the  rains,  crossed  to  the  south 
bank  of  the  Jumna  on  the  22nd,  and  reached  the  Sept  .22 
rendezvous  at  Secundra,  about  six  miles  outside  Agra, 
a  few  days  later.  The  force  consisted  of  the  Eighth, 
'Twenty-seventh,  and  Twenty-ninth  Light  Dragoons, 
with  five  regiments  of  native  cavalry,  the  Seventy- 
sixth  Foot,  the  flank  companies  of  the  Twenty- 
second,  and  ten  battalions  of  native  infantry.  A 
week  was  lost  through  the  necessity  of  awaiting 
supplies  ;  and  on  the  1st  of  October  Lake  advanced  Oct.  1. 
upon  Muttra.1 