

1  A  tank  is  of  course  simply  a  pond  ;  the  earlier  form  of  the 
word,  stank,  being  indeed  identical  with  the  French  estang,  etang* 
Why  this  archaism  should  have  been  preserved  in  India  is  a  curious 
question. 

2  Then  the  First  Bengal  European  Regiment. 

8  2nd  and  3rd  Bengal  N.C.  i/2nd,  i/4-th,  6  cos.  8th,  1  &  2/i5th, 
2/22nd  N.I. 

4  The  official  returns  on  the  23rd  of  November  were  (including 
all  sick,  etc.)  : — 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY 


IOI 


Leaving  a  battalion  and  eight  companies,  together  1804. 
with  his  irregular  horse,  to  guard  the  baggage,  Fraser 
marched  to  the  attack  at  three  o'clock  on  the  morning 
of  the  13th.  He  had  to  fetch  a  wide  compass  south-  Nov.  13. 
ward  to  turn  the  morass,  but  on  arriving  at  the 
fortified  hill  which  covered  the  enemy's  right,  he 
wheeled  his  column  to  northward  in  two  lines  ;  the 
first  consisting  of  the  Seventy-sixth,  and  the  second  of 
the  Hundred-and-First,  each  forming  the  centre  to 
two  battalions  of  native  infantry.1  In  this  order  he 
advanced  upon  the  village,  where  the  enemy's  sharp- 
shooters, firing  from  loopholes,  caused  his  troops  much 
annoyance.  This  petty  stronghold  was,  however, 
speedily  carried,  when  the  Mahratta  dispositions  be- 
came clearer,  and  as  usual  were  found  to  be  skilful 
enough.  Their  first  line  with  several  guns  barred  the 
front  of  the  inlet  between  the  pond  and  the  morass  ; 
a  large  body  of  infantry  and  artillery  being  drawn  up 
with  particular  cunning  on  their  left,  and  another  on  the 
right  so  as  to  enfilade  the  British  advance  on  both 
flanks.  In  rear  of  this  was  a  second  line,  equally 
powerful  in  artillery ;  and  beyond  this  again  was  a 
succession  of  batteries  stationed  at  such  an  angle  to 
each  other  as  to  ensure  a  cross-fire.    On  their  right,  in 


Cavalry        .......  677 

76th  626 

ioist  .       .       .       .       .  .       .  281 

6  batts.  Sepoys     .        .        .        .        .  .4176 


Total  ....  5760 


1  First  Line.    Monson's  Brigade.     1/2  N.I.  (on  left);  I /4th 
N.I.    76th  (on  right). 
Second  Line.  Browne's  Brigade,     ioist  (on  left),  2/ 1 5th  N.I. 
1/1 5th  N.I.  (on  right). 
Such  is  the  order  shewn  in  the  large  plan  attached  to  vol.  iv.  of 
Wellesley  Despatches  ;  but  for  reasons  which  will  presently  appear, 
I  believe  the  order  to  have  been,  from  left  to  right  : — 

Monson's  Brigade.    i/4th  N.I.,  76th,  i/2nd  N.I. 
Browne's  Brigade.    1/1 5th  N.L,  ioist,  2/1 5th  N.T. 
It  was  the  old  rule  that  the  white  regiment  should  be  in  the  centre 
between  the  two  Sepoy  battalions. 


102 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY   book  xnr 


1804.  the  open  ground  outside  the  tank,  their  cavalry 
Nov.  13.  hovered  about  in  large  masses,  ready  to  pursue  if  not 
ready  to  fight.  Their  position,  in  fact,  resembled  that 
of  the  French  at  Malplaquet,  with  this  further  access 
of  strength,  that  at  the  end  of  the  strait  between  pond 
and  morass  stood  the  fortress  and  guns  of  Deig. 