

Fraser,  however,  never  hesitated  for  a  moment. 
Ordering  his  two  regiments  of  native  cavalry  to  check 
the  Mahratta  horse,  he  placed  himself  at  the  head  of 
the  Seventy-sixth,  and  with  that  regiment  alone  charged 
down  the  hill  to  his  left  upon  the  nearest  line  of  guns, 
under  a  tremendous  cross-fire  of  grape,  chain,  and  round 
shot.  The  enemy  gave  way  as  soon  as  the  British  came 
near  them,  and  falling  back  to  their  second  line,  con- 
tinued to  ply  them  with  a  murderous  cannonade. 
Fraser  quietly  reformed  his  troops,  and  was  advancing 
against  the  second  line  when  a  cannon-shot  carried 
away  one  of  his  legs,  and  compelled  him  to  relinquish 
the  command  to  Monson,  the  officer  next  senior  to  him. 
Monson,  however,  knew  Fraser's  plans,  and,  being  a 
man  of  extraordinary  bravery,  was  well  fitted  to  execute 
them.  The  British  second  line  having  reached  the 
village,  two  native  battalions,1  taken  from  both  lines, 
faced  half  right  and  moved  forward  with  their  battalion- 
guns  under  command  of  Major  Hammond,  to  check 
the  outflanking  corps  of  the  enemy  at  the  southern  end 
of  the  morass  ;  while  the  Hundred -and -First,  seeing 
the  Seventy -sixth  engaged  far  ahead  of  them,  ran 
forward  to  support  their  comrades,  followed  by  the  two 
remaining  battalions  of  Sepoys.  Monson  meanwhile 
had  without  hesitation  led  the  Seventy-sixth  forward 
against  the  second  line  of  the  enemy  ;  and  from  thence 
this  intrepid  band  pressed  on  for  two  full  miles, 
capturing  battery  after  battery,  till  they  fairly  drove 
the  mass  of  fugitives  against  the  walls  of  the  fortress, 
where  hundreds  perished  in  the  swamp  which  adjoined 
the  south-east  angle  and  many  were  even  drowned  in 

1  These  were  the  i/ind  and  the  2/1 5th  N.I. ;  the  right-hand 
battalions,  if  my  order  of  battle  be  accepted. 


ch.iv        HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  103 

the  ditch.    Had  not  our  nominal  allies  in  the  fort  1 
opened   fire   upon   the   British,    the  pursuit   would N 
probably  have  been  still  more  destructive. 

Thus  the  front  was  swept  clear,  but  there  still 
remained  the  powerful  body  at  the  southern  end  of  the 
morass  which  Major  Hammond  with  his  Sepoys  was 
gallantly  holding  back,  though  his  three  little  six- 
pounders  were  utterly  overmatched  by  the  far  heavier 
and  more  numerous  artillery  of  the  Mahrattas.  More- 
over, a  party  of  horse  belonging  either  to  the  enemy  or 
to  the  Rajah  of  Bhurtpore's  troops  which  were  serving 
with  our  own  army,  had  stolen  round  the  cavalry  that 
opposed  them,  and  recapturing  the  first  line  of  guns  had 
turned  them  against  the  British.  Captain  Norford  of 
the  Seventy-sixth  with  twenty-eight  men  (who  pre- 
sumably had  been  left  to  guard  them)  at  once  charged 
this  hostile  body  and  drove  it  off ;  but  he  fell  himself 
in  the  attack,  and  his  little  party  remained  in  great  peril. 
Monson,  therefore,  reformed  his  troops,  and  marching 
back  to  Hammond,  first  reinforced  him  with  some  of 
his  battalion-guns,  and  then  led  his  infantry  round  to 
the  left  flank  of  the  party  of  Mahrattas  that  opposed 
him.  These  did  not  await  the  attack,  but  at  once 
gave  way  and  fled.  Many  ran  back  into  the  morass 
and  were  lost ;  the  rest  were  scattered  in  all  directions. 
The  cavalry  then  moved  down  to  assist  in  protecting 
the  wounded  and  the  captured  guns,  and  the  escort  of 
the  baggage  arriving  at  the  same  time,  soon  put  an  end 
to  further  resistance.  The  British  encamped  upon  the 
field  of  battle. 