


ch.  iv        HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  99 

followed  such  a  slaughter  as  is  never  seen  except  when  1804. 
troops  are  thoroughly  savage.  Holkar  had  mutilated  Nov-  l7- 
the  prisoners  taken  from  Monson  and  sent  them  back 
to  Agra  with  right  hands  and  noses  cut  off,  so  that 
there  was  some  excuse  for  vengeance.  Such  of  the 
Mahrattas  as  had  horses  rode  for  their  lives,  and  were 
pursued  for  ten  miles.  Those  whose  steeds  had 
foundered  under  the  stress  of  the  chase  were  cut  down 
in  all  directions,  or,  climbing  trees  to  conceal  themselves, 
were  discovered  and  shot  by  the  pistols  of  the  dragoons.1 
A  body  of  infantry  which  formed  part  of  Holkar's 
force  was  totally  destroyed  by  the  Eighth  Light 
Dragoons.  In  all  it  seems  that  literally  three  thousand 
of  the  enemy  were  killed  ;  and  many  more  poor 
wretches  were  wounded,  who  crowded  into  all  the 
villages  around  for  shelter,  or  perished  miserably  on 
the  plains  too  much  exhausted  to  reach  any  refuge. 
The  loss  of  the  British  was  twenty- eight  men  and 
seventy-five  horses  killed  and  wounded,  of  which  the 
only  two  men  killed,  besides  thirteen  of  the  wounded, 
belonged  to  the  Eighth  Light  Dragoons. 

This  was  rather  a  massacre  than  a  fight,  but  none 
the  less  was  it  a  great  feat  of  arms.    The  British  column 
had   traversed   three   hundred  and  fifty  miles  in  a 
fortnight  before  it  was  called  upon  to  make  its  crowning 
effort,  and  had  actually  covered  twenty-two  miles  on 
the  15  th  when  it  started  for  its  night  march  of  thirty- 
six  more  to  Furruckabad.    The  pursuit  led  the  cavalry 
it  yet  ten  miles  further  afield,  so  that  the  total  distance 
ic  accomplished  in  the  twenty -four  hours,  before  the 
force  finally  encamped,  exceeded  seventy  miles.  And 
something  more  was  achieved  even  than  the  total  defeat 
is  and  dispersion  of  Holkar's  army.    For  the  Mahratta 
;  chief  had  already  burned  the  outer  cantonment  of 
s  Furruckabad  ;  and  though  the  Europeans,  who  were 
mostly  civilians,  had  taken  refuge  in  the  fort  and 
°j  defended  themselves  bravely,  they  would  probably  have 

H      1  This  is  the  only  instance  which  I  have  ever  encountered  of 
pistols  being  of  the  slightest  use  to  dragoons. 


IOO 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY   book  xiii 


1804.  succumbed  to  an  assault  on  the  17th  but  for  Lake's 
swift  march  and  most  opportune  arrival. 

Here  therefore  was  Holkar's  cavalry  shattered  to 
pieces  ;  and  meanwhile  his  infantry  had  already  under- 
gone the  like  fate.  A  few  days  after  the  departure  of 
Lake,  General  Fraser,  who  had  been  detained  at  Delhi 
by  want  of  supplies,  was  able  to  march  due  south 
Nov.  1 1.  towards  Deig.  On  the  nth  of  November  he  reached 
Goverdun,  a  short  distance  from  that  fortress,  and 
discovering  the  enemy  to  be  close  at  hand,  encamped 
there  for  the  night.  The  Mahrattas  had  taken  post  in 
a  narrow  space  running  to  southward  from  the  south- 
east angle  of  the  walls,  and  confined  between  a  large 
deep  tank1  on  one  side  and  a  still  more  extensive 
morass  on  the  other.  They  had  secured  their  flanks 
by  resting  their  right  on  an  eminence  crowned  by  a 
fortified  village,  and  their  left  on  the  fortress  itself  which, 
though  it  belonged  to  the  Rajah  of  Bhurtpore,  was  in 
perfect  understanding  with  the  commanders  of  Holkar. 
Their  strength,  so  far  as  could  be  ascertained,  was 
twenty -four  battalions,  or  at  a  moderate  estimate 
fourteen  thousand  infantry  with  one  hundred  and  sixty 
guns,  besides  a  considerable  body  *of  horse.  Fraser 
had  two  British  regiments,  the  Seventy-sixth  and  the 
Hundred-and-First,2  the  latter  of  which  had  recently 
joined  the  army,  besides  a  detachment  of  recovered 
European  invalids,  six  battalions  of  Sepoys,  two 
regiments  of  native  cavalry 3  and  artillery.  These  may 
be  taken  at  about  one  thousand  British  infantry,  four 
thousand  native  infantry  and  seven  hundred  sabres,  or 
about  six  thousand  bayonets  and  sabres  altogether.4 