


ch.  iv       HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  95 

a  half  of  Sepoys  which  were  within  reach,  supplementing  1804. 
them  further  with  twelve  hundred  local  levies.  On 
arriving  before  the  walls  on  the  7th  of  October  the  Oct.  7. 
enemy  lost  no  time  in  erecting  batteries  against  the 
south-west  angle  of  the  city,  whereby  in  a  few  days 
the  parapet  was   demolished  and  the  walls  greatly 
damaged.    A  sortie  was  therefore  made  upon  these 
batteries,  which  were  stormed  with  great  success,  the 
British  Sepoys  spiking  every  gun  and  inflicting  heavy 
loss  at  small  cost  to  themselves.    The  enemy  then 
shifted  their  guns  to  the  southern  face,  where  a  breach 
was  made,  but  was  speedily  rendered  useless  by  retrench- 
ments ;  and  on  the  14th  they  attempted  an  assault  on  Oct.  14. 
the  Lahore  gate,  from  which  they  were  beaten  back  with 
considerable  loss.    Finally,  on  the  15th  they  raised  the  Oct.  15. 
siege  and  retired,  knowing  that  Lake  was  in  full  march 
upon  them  and  having  no  taste  for  an  encounter  with 
his  cavalry.    It  was  a  creditable  feat  that  with  so  few 
men  Ochterlony  should  for  nine  days  have  held  a  city 
ten  miles  in  circumference. 

Having  failed  at  Delhi,  Holkar  sent  back  his  infantry 
by  a  circuitous  route  through  the  hills  towards  Deig, 
a  strong  fortress  belonging  to  the  Rajah  of  Bhurtpore, 
about  twenty-five  miles  west  and  south  of  Muttra ;  but 
while  moving  with  his  cavalry  up  the  Jumna  to  Paniput, 
he  himself  crossed  the  river  with  the  object  of  giving 
the  Doab  a  taste  of  the  old  Mahratta  tactics.  As  soon 
as  Lake  was  apprised  of  these  movements,  he  determined 
to  divide  his  force,  giving  the  bulk  of  the  infantry,  the 
field-artillery,  and  two  regiments  of  native  cavalry  to 
Major-general  Fraser  to  watch  the  force  at  Deig,  while 
he  himself  should  pursue  Holkar  across  the  Jumna  with 
the  rest  of  the  cavalry,  the  horse-artillery,  the  two 
companies  of  the  Twenty-second,  and  three  battalions 
of  Sepoys. 

He  was  unable  to  march  until  the  31st  of  October,  Oct.  31. 
when  he  proceeded  in  the  lightest  order.    The  usual 
number  of  tents  was  reduced  by  one  half ;  private 
wheeled  carriages  were  absolutely  forbidden  ;  and  every 

3 


96  HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  book  xiii 

1 804.  fighting  man  carried  six  pounds  of  flour,  which  was 
to  last  him  six  days.  The  first  day's  march,  including 
the  passage  of  the  Jumna,  was  of  ten  miles  ;  the  second 
covered  fifteen  miles  ;  and  the  third,  in  consequence 
of  bad  news,  was  extended  to  thirty  miles.  The  single 
battalion  which  formed  the  garrison  of  Saranpoor  had 
been  withdrawn  for  the  defence  of  Delhi  ;  and  the 
Sikhs,  who  were  inclined  to  throw  in  their  lot  with 
Holkar,  had  seized  the  opportunity  to  blockade  the 
British  resident  in  the  place.  Worse  than  this,  the 
battalion  itself,  while  marching  to  relieve  Saranpoor, 
had  been  surrounded  at  Shamlee,  between  fifty  and 
sixty  miles  due  north  of  Delhi,  by  Holkar's  horse,  ft 
and  was  known  to  be  in  great  straits.  Happily  the  to 
commander,  Colonel  Burn,  being  a  capable  soldier, 
had  thrown  himself  into  a  ruined  fort  about  a  hundred 
yards  square,  where,  though  suffering  heavily  from  the  L0 
enemy's  sharp-shooters,  he  was  able  to  hold  his  own 