


ch.iv        HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  105 

the  whole  army  for  two  months,"  wrote  Lake,  "and  1804. 
from  thence  he  ought  to  have  drawn  them.  He  might 
have  spared  a  battalion  or  two  to  have  fetched  them.  .  . 
It  is  somewhat  extraordinary  that  a  man  brave  as  a 
lion  should  have  no  judgement  or  reflection.  ...  It 
really  grieves  me  to  see  a  man  I  esteem,  after  gaining 
credit  in  this  way,  throw  it  away  in  such  a  manner 
immediately."  However,  the  only  remedy  for  the 
mischief  was  that  the  Commander-in-chief  should 
hasten  to  Deig  himself,  which  he  resolved  forthwith  to 
do  ;  and  meanwhile  he  comforted  himself  with  the 
news  that  Colonel  Wallace  of  the  Nineteenth  Light 
Dragoons  had,  towards  the  end  of  September,  captured 
the  fortress  of  Chandore  with  little  trouble  or  loss. 

On  the  20th  of  November  Lake's  cavalry  marched  Nov.  20. 
from  Furruckabad,  leaving  the  infantry  to  follow,  and 
pursued  its  way  on  the  track  of  Holkar,  first  south- 
westward   upon   Mainpooree,  thence  north-westward  Nov.  22. 
upon  Etah,  and  thence  westward  by  Assan  to  Muttra.  Nov.  26. 
There  on  the  28th  Lake  crossed  the  Jumna  and  rejoined 
Monson,  who  had  fortunately  halted  at  Muttra  when 
apprised  of  the  Commander-in-chieFs  approach.  After 
a  stay  of  two  days,  Lake  advanced  towards  Deig  on 
the  1st  of  December.     The  treachery,  of  the  Rajah  Dec.  1. 
of  Bhurtpore  had,  since  the  battle  of  Deig,  been  so 
obvious,  that  hostilities  against  him  were  inevitable  ;  and 
these  were  to  be  opened  by  the  siege  of  the  fortress. 
On  the  2nd  Lake  encamped  within  sight  of  the  strong-  Dec.  2. 
hold  ;  and,  since  the  heavy  artillery  had  not  yet  arrived 
from  Agra,  the  next  nine  days  were  spent  in  recon- 
naissance and  in  skirmishes  with  the  Mahratta  horse 
under  Holkar 's  personal  command.    At  length,  on  the 
10th,  the  siege-cannon  came  up  under  the  escort  of  Dec.  10. 
Colonel  Don  ;  and  on  the  1 1  th  the  entire  force  moved 
forward,  formed  in  a  huge  hollow  square,  with  the 
transport   and  followers,  amounting   to   some  sixty 
thousand  human  beings  and  over  a  hundred  thousand 
animals,  in  the  centre.    Finally,  on  the  13th  the  army  Dec.  13. 
encamped  on  the  western  side  of  the  fortress. 


106  HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY   book  xm 

1804.  Being  almost  surrounded  by  marshes  and  lakes, 
Deig  was  during  the  greater  part  of  the  year  nearly 
inaccessible  to  an  enemy.  The  town,  of  considerable 
size,  was  defended  by  a  strong  mud  wall  with  the 
usual  round  bastions,  and  by  a  deep  ditch  which 
surrounded  it  on  every  side  except  at  the  south-west 
angle,  where  the  works  were  prolonged  to  a  high  rocky 
eminence  called  the  Shah  Bourj.  Before  this  eminence 
stood  what  was  practically  a  distinct  fortress,  consisting 
of  a  square  enclosure  with  four  commanding  circular 
bastions  at  the  four  cardinal  points,  and  a  smaller 
bastion  midway  between  the  northern  and  western  of 
them  ;  while  the  northern  bastion  and  north  side  of  the 
western  were  further  covered  by  external  entrenchments 
of  the  pointed  form  used  by  European  engineers.  A 
few  hundred  yards  to  south  of  these  was  an  old  detached 
mud  fort,  named  Gopalghur,  which  was  filled  with 
matchlock-men  and  sharp-shooters.  Within  the  town 
and  about  a  mile  to  north-east  of  the  Shah  Bourj  stood 
the  citadel,  of  quadrate  form,  with  circular  bastions,  and  ( 
surrounded  by  a  deep  ditch  faced  with  masonry.  The  ; 
ramparts  were  high  and  thick  ;  the  approaches  were  , 
guarded  by  massive  gateways  and  lowers ;  and  the 
whole  was  in  excellent  preservation  and  repair. 