

1  Journal  of  Lord  Lake's  Siege  of  Bhurtpore  (apparently  by  ar 
officer  of  Engineers),  appended  to  Creighton's  Siege  of  Bhurtpore. 


ch.iv        HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  119 

the  Eighth,  Twenty-seventh,  and  Twenty-ninth  Light  1805. 
Dragoons,  and  three  regiments  of  native  cavalry  to  hunt 
him  down.  This  detachment  marched  on  the  8th,  Feb.  8. 
crossed  the  Jumna  by  the  bridge  of  boats  at  Muttra 
on  the  9th,  and  at  once  took  up  the  chase.  Reaching 
Aligarh  on  the  1  ith,  Smith  was  there  reinforced  by  two  Feb.  11. 
regular  battalions  of  Sepoys,  some  irregular  infantry, 
and  Skinner's  Horse.  Proceeding  north-westward,  the 
column,  after  meting  out  some  punishment  to  predatory 
chieftains  on  its  way,  dropped  the  infantry  and  part  of 
Skinner's  Horse  at  Arropshehar,  and  on  the  14th  en-  Feb.  14. 
camped  on  the  bank  of  the  Ganges.  There  intelligence 
was  received  that  Meer  Khan  had  failed  in  an  attempt 
to  traverse  the  river  and  had  followed  it  upwards  in 
the  hope  of  finding  a  suitable  crossing-place.  Smith  at 
once  pursued  him  to  a  point  due  east  of  Meerut,  where, 
finding  that  his  quarry  had  succeeded  in  passing  the 
stream,  he  at  once  led  his  troops  into  the  water,  a  mile 
broad  at  that  place,  and  reached  the  eastern  bank  in 
safety  with  the  loss  of  a  few  followers  and  baggage- 
animals. 

Thence  the  chase  lay  due  east  by  Moradabad  to 
Rampoor,  which  was  reached  on  the  20th,  and  from  Feb.  20. 
thence  south-eastward  to  Sheergur,  where  Smith  halted, 
having  driven  Meer  Khan  to  the  foot  of  the  bleak  hills 
to  northward  where  he  could  work  little  mischief,  while 
he  himself  held  a  good  central  position  for  the  defence 
of  Pillibeer,  Rampoor,  and  Bareilly.  Moving  between 
these  places  for  some  days,  Smith  on  the  27th  turned  Feb.  27. 
northward  from  Moradabad,  and  on  the  2nd  of  March  Mar.  2. 
received  the  welcome  intelligence  that  Meer  Khan  with 
the  whole  of  his  force  was  but  nine  miles  distant  at 
Afzulghur.  Marching  at  once  to  that  spot,  he  found 
the  chief's  forces  drawn  up  in  order  of  battle  behind 
a  ravine  ;  and  at  once  attacking,  cut  the  whole  of  his 
infantry  to  pieces,  killed  three  of  Meer  Khan's  principal 
officers,  and  dispersed  his  cavalry  with  heavy  loss  in  all 
directions.  Smith's  casualties  in  the  action  did  not 
exceed  forty  killed  and  wounded. 


120  HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  book  xiii 

1805.  Deserted  by  many  of  his  followers,  Meer  Khan  fled 
by  a  circuitous  route  to  Moradabad  ;  and  after  another 
week  of  defeat  in  sundry  attacks,  being  hustled  in 
every  direction  by  columns  detached  from  the  British 
garrisons  in  the  country,  he  recrossed  the  Ganges  on 

Mar.  11.  the  nth,  having  lost  alike  his  baggage,  his  following, 
and  his  reputation.    Smith  also  crossed  the  Ganges, 