


io8  HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY   book  xiii 


1804.  good  their  footing  in  spite  of  every  kind  of  missile, 

Dec-  2 3-  and  ran  down  into  the  fort.    Here  again  they  were  : 

met  by  guns  at  the  corner  of  every  street  and  by  a  I 

galling  fire  of  musketry  from  the  buildings  ;  while  some  1 
of  the  enemy  rallied  under  cover  of  the  darkness  and 

tried  to  recover  their  captured  ordnance.    But  at  half-  < 

past  twelve  the  moon  rose,  and,  with  its  light  to  help  ] 

them,  Macrae's  men  were  able  to  work  more  freely  1 

without  fear  of  firing  on  one  another.    The  columns  to  c 

right  and  left  had  been  equally  successful  in  carrying  t 

the  detached  batteries  and  entrenchments  ;  and  by  two  | 

o'clock  the  Shah  Bourj,  with  the  whole  of  its  outworks,  i 

was  in  Lake's  possession.    The  flanking  columns  then  1 

rejoined  Macrae  and  attacked  the  main  walls  of  the  t 

town,  which  were  speedily  carried.    Preparations  were  f 

made  for  the  battering  and  assault  of  the  citadel,  but  t 

Dec.  24.  the  enemy  evacuated  it  during  the  ensuing  night,  and  t 

Dec.  25.  on  Christmas  morning  of  1804  the  town  and  fort  of  1  1 

Deig,  with  most  of  the  artillery  that  still  remained  to  c 

Holkar,  besides  a  large  quantity  of  grain  and  two  lacs  c 

of  rupees  in  specie,  were  surrendered  into  the  hands  of  c 
the  British. 

The  losses  of  the  assailants  were  Stight  considering  0 

the  difficulties  of  the  assault.    Forty-three,  including  $ 

two  British  officers,  were  killed,  and  one  hundred  and  p 

eighty-four,  of  whom  thirteen  were  British  officers,  ii 

were  wounded.  Of  the  two  companies  of  the  Twenty-  t 
second  no  fewer  than  four  officers  were  wounded, 

among  them  being  Captain  Lindsay  who,  though  twice  k 

severely  hurt  by  a  pike-thrust  and  a  sabre-cut  before  c 

he  reached  the  breach,  yet  led  his  men  on  into  the  ii 

Shah   Bourj.     Lieutenant   Forrest  of  the   Pioneers  d 

received  over  twenty  wounds  and  was  left  for  dead,  $« 

but  recovered  with  the  loss  of  one  arm.    Considering  c 

that  the  issue  of  all  these  desperate  actions  hung  upon  \ 
a  handful  of  British  officers,  it  is  marvellous  that  any 
of  them  should  have  survived. 

Having  repaired  the  defences  of  Deig  so  as  to  make  j  j 
Dec.  28.  it  again  secure,    Lake,  on   the  28th  of  December, 


ch.iv       HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  109 

marched  south-eastward,  picked  up  a  convoy  of  stores,  1805. 
together  with  the  Seventy-fifth  regiment,  which  had 
formed  its  escort,  and  on  the  2nd  of  January  1805  Jan.  2. 
encamped  before  the  maiden  fortress  of  Bhurtpore. 

There  appears  to  be  no  detailed  description  of  this 
stronghold  before  its  capture  by  Lord  Combermere  in 
1826,  when  it  had  been  much  enlarged  since  1804. 
But  even  when  Lake  came  before  it,  it  was  a  place 
of  great  extent,  the  circumference  of  the  fort  and  town 
being  upwards  of  eight  miles.  The  whole  of  this  vast 
perimeter  was  surrounded  by  a  mud  wall  of  great 
height  and  enormous  thickness,  with  round  bastions, 
mounting  innumerable  guns,  at  short  intervals,  and 
by  a  very  wide  and  deep  ditch.  The  fort,  of  quadrate 
figure,  was  situated  at  the  eastern  extremity  of  the 
town,  upon  elevated  ground,  with  three  sides  within 
the  town  and  the  fourth  overlooking  the  country.  Its 
walls  were  higher  than  those  of  the  town,  and  its 
ditch  wider  and  deeper.  The  whole  lay  within  a  belt 
of  jungle  and  swamp,  the  water  of  which  could  be 
drained  off  to  fill  the  ditch.  Indeed  upon  the  arrival 
of  Lake's  army  a  large  expanse  of  water  on  the 
north-west  side  suddenly  disappeared  ;  and  not  for 
some  time  was  it  discovered  that  the  whole  of  it  had 
passed  into  the  ditch,  insomuch  that  in  this  case  also 
it  was  said  that  "  a  seventy-four  could  have  floated 
there." 