

However,  this  unpleasant  lesson  was  not  neglected. 
^  second  and  much  larger  convoy  of  fifty  thousand 
Dullocks  laden  with  grain,  and  about  eight  hundred 
:art-loads  of  stores,  ammunition,  and  treasure  was  on 
ts  way  from  Agra  ;  and  it  was  of  vital  importance  to 
>ring  it  in  safely,  for  there  was  not  seven  days'  grain 
eft  in  the  camp.  Accordingly  on  the  24th  Lake  sent  Jan.  24. 
Zolonel  Don  to  that  place  with  the  Twenty-ninth 
Jght  Dragoons,  two  corps  of  native  cavalry,  and  three 
>attalions  of  Sepoys.    Arriving  there  on  the  26th,  Don 


n8  HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  book  xi 


1805.  marched  with  the  convoy  on  the  28th,  and  on  the  29th, 
Jan.  29.  at  a  distance  of  about  sixteen  miles  from  Bhurtpore, 
fell  in  with  the  united  forces  of  the  Rajah  of  Bhurtpore, 
Holkar,  Meer  Khan,  and  Bappoo  Scindia,  all  of  them 
intent  on  securing  so  rich  a  prize.  Lake  instantly- 
marched  with  the  rest  of  the  cavalry  and  two  battalions 
of  Sepoys  to  reinforce  him  ;  and  such  was  the  terror  of 
his  name,  that  no  attack  was  attempted  in  his  presence. 
His  whole  camp  was  surrounded  by  the  enemy  that 
Jan.  30.  night ;  but  on  the  morrow  he  marched  in  a  huge 
hollow  square,  and  brought  in  the  convoy  safely  with- 
out the  loss  of  a  man  or  bullock  ;  while  his  cavalry  and 
horse-artillery  succeeded  in  inflicting  some  damage  upon 
the  hordes  of  the  enemy.  "  Nothing,"  said  a  critical  ob- 
server, who  was  not  always  friendly  to  Lake,  "  could  have 
been  better  planned  or  more  steadily  and  coolly  executed 
than  the  protection  of  the  convoy  upon  this  occasion. "  1 
A  little  respite  was  thus  gained  ;  and  the  preparations 
for  the  renewal  of  the  siege,  which  had  gone  forward 
somewhat  languidly  owing  to  lack  of  supplies  and  stores, 
Feb.  5.  received  new  life.  On  the  5th  of  February  a  new 
parallel  was  opened  towards  the  Neejjidar  gate,  on  the 
southern  front  of  the  fortress  ;  and  on  the  following 
day  the  whole  camp  was  shifted  to  a  new  position  in 
rear  of  it.  Now,  however,  Meer  Khan  essayed  a  fresh 
kind  of  diversion.  His  recent  failure  to  capture  the 
great  convoy  had  caused  complaint  among  the  chiefs 
subordinate  to  him  ;  and  the  quarrels  between  them 
became  so  hot  that  he  determined  to  separate  from 
his  friends,  and  try  his  fortune  in  his  native  country  ol 
Feb.  7.  Rohilcund.  Accordingly  on  the  7th  of  February  he 
crossed  the  Jumna  with  the  whole  of  his  own  body 
of  horse  and  as  many  banditti  as  would  join  him 
concluding  that  Lake  could  detach  no  force  in  pursuil 
of  him  without  raising  the  siege  of  Bhurtpore. 

No  sooner,  however,  was  Lake  informed  of  hi$ 
departure  than  he  despatched  Major-general  Smith  witt 