

The  complete  investment  of  so  great  an  enclosure 
was  beyond  the  strength  of  Lake's  army,  but  this 
consideration  had  never  weighed  with  British  generals 
in  the  siege  of  an  Indian  fortress  ;  and  accordingly  he 
concentrated   the   whole   of  his  force  opposite  the 
selected  point  of  attack  at  the  south-west  angle  of  the 
city.    On  the  4th  of  January  a  grove  in  advance  of  Jan.  4. 
his  camp  was  first  cleared  of  the  enemy  to  facilitate 
the  opening  of  the  trenches  ;  and  on  the  night  of  the 
5th  a  breaching  battery  of  six  eighteen-pounders  was  Jan.  5. 
erected,  which  opened  fire  on  the  7th.    By  noon  of  Jan.  7. 
the  same  day  a  second  battery  of  eight  mortars  was 


no  HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY   book  xm 

1805.  completed  ;  and  both  plied  the  town  with  a  heavy 
cannonade,  which  was  answered  as  vigorously  from  the 
Jan.  9.  walls.  On  the  afternoon  of  the  9th  a  breach  was 
reported  to  be  practicable,  and  it  was  resolved  that 
the  storm  should  take  place  on  the  same  evening, 
before  the  enemy  should  have  time  to  pursue  their 
usual  practice  of  covering  the  breach  with  a  stockade. 

The  assault  was  to  be  delivered  in  three  columns. 
Of  these  the  left  was  composed  of  one  hundred  and 
fifty  men  of  the  Hundred-and-First  and  a  battalion  of 
Sepoys  under  Lieutenant-colonel  Ryan,  his  orders  being 
to  attempt  to  enter  a  gateway  on  the  left  of  our 
batteries.  The  right  column,  led  by  Major  Hawkes, 
was  made  up  of  two  companies  of  the  Seventy-fifth 
and  a  battalion  of  Sepoys,  and  was  designed  to  capture 
the  advanced  guns  of  the  enemy  outside  the  walls  and 
to  the  right  of  our  batteries.  It  was  hoped  that  one 
or  both  of  these  parties  might  make  their  way  into 
the  town  upon  the  backs  of  the  fugitives  ;  but  if  they 
failed  in  this,  they  had  orders  to  turn  and  support  the 
central  column.  This  last  counted  a  strength  of  five 
hundred  Europeans,  consisting  of  the  flank  companies 
of  the  Twenty-second,  Seventy-fifth,  Seventy-sixth,  and 
Hundred-and-First,  besides  a  battalion  of  Sepoys,  the 
whole  being  under  command  of  Lieutenant  -  colonel 
Maitland  of  the  Seventy-fifth. 

At  seven  o'clock  these  three  bodies  moved  off  to 
the  trenches  ;  and  upon  the  firing  of  the  evening  gun 
at  eight  o'clock  they  advanced  to  the  assault.  Ryan 
and  Hawkes  to  right  and  left  succeeded  in  their  task 
of  carrying  the  outer  entrenchments  and  spiking  the 
guns,  but  failed  to  enter  the  town  with  the  fugitives. 
The  central  column  advanced  unperceived  to  within 
fifty  yards  of  the  breach,  when  a  tremendous  fire  of 
musketry  and  cannon  was  opened  upon  them.  Hurry- 
ing forward,  the  leaders  of  the  column  found  themselves 
arrested  by  a  deep  trench  about  twenty  yards  wide  and 
full  of  water,  which  branched  off  from  the  main  ditch 
and  enclosed  a  small  island,  on  which  stood  a  strong 