

The  loss  of  the  British  amounted  to  twenty-eight 
officers  and  five  hundred  and  seventy -three  men, 
European  and  native,  killed  and  wounded.  The  flank 
companies  of  the  Twenty-second  lost  sixty- five  of  all 
ranks  killed  and  wounded,  and  the  small  party  of  the 


n6  HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  book  xm 


1805.  Seventy-fifth,  one  hundred  ;  so  that  there  was  no  lack  of 
Jan.  21.  daring  and  devotion.  Yet  no  advantage  whatever  was  \ 
gained,  and  the  troops  were  much  shaken  and  dis- 
heartened. Lake  issued  a  consolatory  general  order, 
and  distributed  a  reward  of  money  to  every  corps,  with 
assurances  that  success  was  ultimately  certain.  It  was  t  \ 
all  that  he  could  do,  and  his  outward  firmness  no  doubt  1 
made  some  impression  upon  the  enemy  ;  but  in  truth  ;  1 
he  had  throughout  the  day  been  overmatched.  During  t 
the  assault  the  cavalry  had  been  engaged  with  the  con-  I  j 
federate  force  of  Holkar  and  Meer  Khan  which,  though  ! 
successfully  prevented  from  doing  any  mischief,  refused  a 
to  be  brought  to  close  action,  and  at  sunset  followed  a 
the  retiring  squadrons  of  the  British  almost  up  to  the  I  d 
camp,  being  kept  at  bay  only  by  a  battery  of  horse-  0 
artillery  in  the  rear-guard.  tl 
Jan.  22.  On  the  following  day  the  enemy  worked  busily  to  v 
repair  the  breach,  unmolested  by  any  fire  from  the  ji 
British  cannon  ;  and  the  engineers  sought  for  a  more  1  ii 
promising  site  for  their  batteries  to  the  eastward  of  n 
the  existing  trenches.  But  meanwhile  a  new  difficulty,  at 
which  might  have  been  foreseen,  aros^  to  distract  the  w 
British  commander.  A  large  convoy  of  twelve  thousand  B 
bullock-loads  of  grain  was  on  its  way  to  the  camp  at  or 
Muttra  by  way  of  Deig,  and  on  the  22  nd  a  regiment  re 
of  native  cavalry  and  a  battalion  of  Sepoys  under  ar 
Captain  Welsh  were  sent  to  bring  it  in.  The  escort  ■  1 
duly  joined  the  convoy,  and  encamping  with  it  at  a'M 
distance  of  twelve  miles  from  Bhurtpore,  marched  again  n 
Jan.  23.  with  it  early  on  the  morning  of  the  23rd.    All  went  well 

until  they  reached  Combir,  half-way  between  Deig  and  A 
Bhurtpore,  where  the  convoy  was  attacked  by  the  entire  k 
force  of  Meer  Khan,  numbering  some  eight  thousand  ca: 
horse  and  foot  with  four  guns.  The  four  hundred  its 
troopers  being  too  few  to  protect  such  a  multitude  lr 
of  bullocks,  Welsh  took  post  in  the  village  with  his  escort  b: 
and  such  of  the  animals  as  he  could  gather  round  him.  Co. 
Here,  though  beset  on  all  sides,  he  held  his  own  Lio 
gallantly,  beating  off  attack  after  attack  until,  two  of  t 


ch.iv        HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  117 

his  guns  being  disabled,  the  enemy  by  a  desperate  effort  1805. 
succeeded  in  capturing  a  part  of  his  position.   The  firing,  Jan.  23. 
however,  had  been  heard  at  Bhurtpore,  and  at  half- 
past  eight  the  Twenty-seventh  Light  Dragoons  and  a 
regiment  of  native  cavalry  under  Colonel  Need  rode 
(hastily  out  of  camp  to  the  rescue.    The  dust  raised  by 
[the  column  was  soon  perceived  by  Welsh's  Sepoys  who, 
Smaking  sure  that  Lake  himself  was  on  his  way  to 
them,  raised  loud  cheers,  and  dashing  at  the  enemy's 
|guns,  captured  the  whole  of  them  at  the  bayonet's  point. 
|Need  came  up  in  time  to  scatter  the  enemy's  cavalry  in 
all  directions,  and  catching  the  fugitives  of  the  infantry 
las  they  fled  from  their  cannon,  cut  them  down  without 
■mercy.    Six  hundred  of  Meer  Khan's  men  were  killed 
ion  the  spot,  and  the  chief  himself  only  escaped  by 
(throwing  off  his  clothes  and  arms,  and  running  away 
(with  the  press  of  his  followers.    Altogether  the  affair 
(Was  highly  creditable  to  the  troops  engaged,  whose  loss 
fin  killed  and  wounded  did  not  amount  to  fifty  of  all 
|-anks  ;  and  inasmuch  as  the  enemy  left  forty  standards 
and  four  guns  in  the  hands  of  the  British,  the  story 
|$vas  capable  of  being  expanded  into  a  lively  despatch. 
(But  the  fact  remains  that  of  twelve  thousand  bullocks 
jpnly  eighteen  hundred  came  into  the  British  camp,  the 
[remainder  with  their  loads  going  to  feed  Holkar's 
[army.    How  it  came  about  that  only  fourteen  hundred 
[pen  were  sent  to  escort  twelve  thousand  bullocks,  when 
■Meer  Khan  was  known  to  be  in  the  neighbourhood 
[with  a  large  force,  is  a  matter  that  was  left  unexplained. 