

On  the  very  night  of  his  arrival  Lake  broke  ground  \ 
in  a  grove  over  against  the  western  front  of  Gopalghur  ; 

Dec.  14.  and  by  the  next  dawn  a  mortar-battery,  besides  another 
for  two  field-guns,  was  completed.  On  the  evening  of 
the  14th,  volunteers  from  the  British  regiments  of 
dragoons  began  the  construction  of  a  breaching  battery  B 
seven  hundred  and  fifty  yards  to  south-west  of  the' 
Shah  Bourj.  The  workmen,  despite  much  annoyance! 
from  the  sharp-shooters  in  Gopalghur,  completed  their  B 

Dec.  17.  task  by  the  night  of  the  16th  ;  and  on  the  morrow  a 
fire  was  opened  from  ten  heavy  guns  and  four  mortars.  : 
The  result  was  disappointing  ;  and  the  enemy  mean-  .. 
while  brought  guns  out  into  the  plain,  where,  utilising 
the  inequalities  of  the  ground  with  great  skill,  they  f 
sheltered  their  artillery  from  all  possibility  of  damage 


ch.iv        HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY 


by  the  British  batteries,  while  pouring  upon  them  in  1804. 
their  turn  a  destructive  enfilading  fire.  Fresh  cannon 
were  therefore  disposed  by  Lake  to  keep  these  in  check, 
and  on  the  20th  a  new  battery  of  heavy  guns  was  Dec. 
erected  farther  to  the  north  and  closer  to  the  Shah 
Bourj.  These  measures  proved  effective.  Many  of 
the  enemy's  guns  were  silenced  ;  a  practicable  breach 
was  made  in  the  Shah  Bourj  ;  and  the  assault  was  fixed 
for  the  night  of  the  23rd  December. 

The  attacking  parties  were  divided  into  three  Dec. 
columns.  The  right  column,  consisting  of  four 
battalion -companies  of  the  Hundred -and-First  and 
five  of  Sepoys,  was  led  by  Captain  Kelly,  and  was 
ordered  to  carry  the  enemy's  batteries  and  trenches  on 
the  high  ground  to  south  of  the  Shah  Bourj.  The 
left  column  was  in  charge  of  Major  RadclifFe  who, 
with  four  more  companies  of  the  Hundred-and-First 
and  five  companies  of  Sepoys,  was  appointed  to  capture 
the  hostile  works  to  north  of  the  Shah  Bourj.  The 
central  column  was  commanded  by  Colonel  Macrae. 
This  last,  being  the  storming  party  proper  and  entrusted 
with  the  assault  of  the  breach,  was  composed  of  the 
flank  companies  of  the  Twenty-second,  Seventy-sixth, 
and  Hundred-and-First,  supported  by  a  battalion  of 
Native  Infantry. 

The  whole,  under  the  supreme  direction  of  Macrae, 
moved  off  at  about  half-past  eleven,  the  enemy  firing 
an  occasional  gun  and  burning  blue  lights  to  show  that 
they  were  on  the  alert.  The  two  flanking  parties 
came  first  into  action,  drove  the  enemy  from  the  out- 
works and  spiked  the  guns.  The  storming  companies, 
however,  were  much  hampered  by  broken  and  difficult 
ground,  and  were  met  by  a  cross-fire  from  a  strong 
entrenchment  which  lay  between  them  and  the  breach. 
Fortunately  the  cannon  were  mostly  trained  too  high, 
for  the  artillery-men  stuck  most  gallantly  to  their 
guns  and  were  actually  bayonetted  where  they  stood. 
Thus  this  outer  defence  was  carried,  and  the  British 
rushing  at  the  breach,  after  a  desperate  fight  made 