


ch.iv       HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  in 

force  of  the  enemy  with  two  guns.  These  at  once  i 
opened  a  destructive  fire ;  and  the  storming  party,  J 
finding  that  the  obstacle  was  too  deep  to  be  filled  by 
the  fascines  and  gabions  which  they  carried,  plunged 
waist-deep  into  the  water  and  dashed  straight  at 
the  enemy.  The  companies  of  the  Twenty-second 
and  part  of  the  Seventy-fifth,  who  were  at  the  head 
of  the  column,  followed  hard  after  the  forlorn  hope 
and  quickly  cleared  the  island  ;  but  the  companies  in 
the  rear  broke  off  to  the  left  in  the  darkness,  leaving 
the  leaders  in  isolation.  The  little  band  in  front, 
however,  pressed  on  over  the  ditch,  but  on  reaching 
the  breach  found  nothing  but  a  perpendicular  curtain 
descending  sheer  down  to  the  water,  with  no  footing 
but  stones  and  logs  that  had  fallen  down  from  above 
under  the  fire  of  the  guns.  No  more  than  three  men 
abreast  could  ascend  it  ;  but  none  the  less,  Sergeant 
John  Shipp  of  the  Twenty-second,  Colonel  Maitland, 
and  Major  Archibald  Campbell  of  the  Seventy-fifth 
made  their  way  to  the  top,  supported  by  such  few  of 
their  men  as  had  not  fallen.  Here  they  found  their 
way  barred  by  a  stockade  of  stakes,  stones,  bushes,  and 
pointed  bamboo,  through  the  crevices  of  which  a  forest 
of  moving  spears  made  continual  thrusts  at  them  ; 
while  a  shower  of  stones,  stink-pots,  and  bundles  of 
lighted  straw  fell  on  them  from  above.  Staggering 
on  the  loose  and  treacherous  rubbish  up  which  he  had 
climbed,  Shipp  drove  one  of  his  feet  through  it,  and 
through  the  hole  thus  made  caught  sight  of  the 
interior  of  the  fort  swarming  with  men.  His  foot 
was  instantly  seized,  nor  could  he  withdraw  it  except 
at  the  sacrifice  of  his  boot.  Meanwhile  the  enemy 
in  the  bastion  to  the  right  of  the  stormers  set  fire  to 
some  dead  underwood  which  they  had  hung  from  the 
wall  for  the  purpose,  and,  being  thus  lighted  to  their 
work,  trained  a  gun  upon  the  little  party  in  the 
breach.  At  the  first  discharge  Maitland,  Campbell, 
Shipp,  and  most  of  the  few  with  them  fell  dead  or 
wounded,    and    the    remainder    were    ordered  by 


ii2  HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY   book  xiii 

1 805.  Lieutenant  Mauser  to  sit  down  at  the  foot  of  the 
Jan.  9.  breach  while  he  went  in  search  of  the  rest  of  the 
column.  But  the  whole  of  the  supports  had  gone 
astray,  being  stopped  by  the  ditch.  Some  of  them  had 
halted  by  it,  while  others  had  turned  either  to  right 
or  left  until  they  joined  the  columns  of  Hawkes  and 
Ryan,  the  former  of  which,  pursuant  to  its  orders,  was 
returning  towards  the  breach  after  doing  its  work  on  the 
right.  But  meanwhile  the  little  party  at  the  breach's 
foot,  finding  itself  unsupported  and  success  hopeless,  had 
retired  ;  and  the  order  was  given  to  retreat.  The  enemy 
jubilantly  redoubled  their  fire  ;  and  the  troops  suffered 
far  more  during  this  retrograde  movement  than  during 
the  advance.  In  all,  five  officers  and  sixty-four  men 
were  killed,  twenty-three  officers  and  three  hundred  and 
sixty-four  men  wounded.  The  flank  companies  of 
the  Twenty-second,  in  particular,  were  terribly  cut  up  ; 
while  those  of  the  Seventy-fifth  lost  not  only  their 
colonel,  Maitland,  killed,  but  seven  other  officers 
severely  hurt.  "Worst  of  all,  some  of  the  killed  were 
men  who  had  been  left  badly  wounded  near  the  breach, 
and  had  been  murdered  in  cold  blood  by  the  enemy. 