

1  Memoirs  of  John  Shipp,  chap.  vii.  I  should  attach  little 
j  importance  to  this  observation  of  a  private  soldier  were  it  not  con- 
firmed in  its  main  features  by  the  journal  of  the  siege  in  Creighton's 
Siege  of  Bhurtpore,  p.  154. 

VOL.  V  I 


ii4  HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  book  xm  c 

1805.  serious  ;  and  the  deficiency  of  stores  was  such  that  the  r 
two  twenty-four  pounders  were  withdrawn  from  their  tl 

Jan.  20.  battery  on  the  night  of  the  20th,  the  supply  of  their  n 
shot  being  exhausted.  tl 
However,  on  that  same  day  the  breach  which  had  ti 
been  made  was  declared  to  be  practicable.  During  the  * 
afternoon  three  brave  troopers  of  the  Native  Cavalry  1 
contrived  by  an  ingenious  stratagem  to  ascertain  the  si 
width  and  depth  of  the  ditch  over  against  it ;  and  on  1 

Jan.  21.  the  following  morning  the  troops  were  marched  down  d 
to  the  trenches  on  the  right,  in  order  to  assault  shortly  0: 
after  noon.    A  bridge  lightly  constructed  of  bamboos,  « 
and  made  buoyant  by  inflated  skins,  had  been  devised  I 
to  facilitate  the  passing  of  the  ditch  ;  and  picked  men  w 
had  been  trained  to  bring  it  forward  and  handle  it.    It  I 
remained  therefore  only  to  choose  the  storming  party,  tl 
which  was  made  up  of  the  surviving  men  of  the  Twenty-  ai 
second's  flank-companies,  one  hundred  and  twenty  of  tc 
the  Seventy-fifth,  one  hundred  and  sixty  of  the  Seventy-  1 
sixth,  and  one  hundred  of  the  Hundred-and-first.  As 
soon  as  these  should  have  forced  an  entrance,  the  remain- 
ing men  of  the  same  four  regiments,  together  with  three  Si 
battalions  of  Sepoys,  were  to  support  them.  The  Twenty-  re 
second  was  to  lead  the  way,  and  the  foremost  among  5 
them,  with  eleven  volunteers,  was  Sergeant  John  Shipp,  « 
who  had  held  the  same  place  in  the  assault  of  the  9th 
and,  over  and  above  many  smaller  wounds,  had  been 
struck  in  the  shoulder  by  a  grape-shot.  Immediately 
behind  him  was  Captain  Lindsay  of  the  same  regiment 
who,  owing  to  previous  hurts,  had  only  on  that  very 
day  thrown  aside  his  crutches,  and  still  carried  his  left  j 
arm  in  a  sling.    A  second  column  under  Colonel  Simpson 
was  also  appointed  to  make  an  attempt  to  force  the 
Anah  gate,  to  the  right  or  east  of  the  storming  party. 

The  British  batteries  played  upon  the  breach  through- 
out the  morning,  and  at  three  o'clock  in  the  after- 
noon opened  fire  again  to  cover  the  advance  of  the 
stormers.  A  shell  from  a  howitzer  was  the  signal  to 
move,  and  this  bursting  in  the  muzzle  of  the  gun  killed 


ch.  iv       HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  1 1 5 

two  British  grenadiers.  However,  Shipp's  little  party  led  1 805. 
the  way,  followed  by  the  bridge,  which  was  carried  on  jan.  2 1 . 
men's  shoulders  ;  and  the  enemy  at  once  poured  on 
them  a  tremendous  fire  of  musketry  and  artillery.  At 
the  edge  of  the  ditch  Shipp  and  Lindsay  fell,  severely 
wounded,  the  former  in  the  head,  the  latter  in  the  knee  ; 
and  the  bridge  on  being  launched  was  found  to  be  too 
short  by  one-third,  the  enemy  having  dammed  up  the 
water  and  thereby  immensely  increased  its  width  and 
depth.  A  hurried  effort  to  lengthen  the  bridge  by  means 
of  scaling  ladders  had  no  further  effect  than  to  overset  it ; 
when  it  floated  away  uselessly  down  the  ditch.  There- 
upon Lieutenant  Morris  of  the  Hundred-and-first, 
with  Lieutenant  Brown  and  twelve  men  of  the  same 
regiment,  swam  the  ditch  and  mounted  the  breach  ;  but 
they  were  too  few  to  effect  an  entrance  by  themselves, 
and  the  rest  of  the  column  remained  halted  under  a 
terrible  fire.  At  length  Colonel  Macrae,  who  com- 
manded the  storming  party,  seeing  no  hope  of  success, 
gave  the  word  to  retreat ;  and  then  it  seems  that  there 
was  a  general  rush  back  to  the  shelter  of  the  trenches. 
Simpson's  column,  however,  now  came  up  in  Macrae's 
rear,  on  the  way  to  the  Anah  gate;  whereupon  the 
storming  party  rallied  and  again  advanced,  though  to 
no  purpose.  After  a  time  Simpson  returned,  finding  the 
entrance  by  the  Anah  gate  impracticable ;  and  the  whole 
presently  retired  in  good  order,  though  leaving  many  of 
the  wounded  behind.  Morris,  finding  himself  unsup- 
ported in  the  breach,  where  he  had  already  been  wounded, 
swam  back  over  the  ditch  and,  though  struck  by  a  bullet 
in  the  neck,  was  brought  safely  into  camp.  The  enemy 
then  swarmed  out  in  triumph  to  murder  the  wounded 
and  mutilate  the  dead  ;  and  thus  disastrously  ended  the 
second  assault  of  Bhurtpore. 