

The  failure  of  the  assault  was  doubtless  due  to  in- 
sufficient means,  and  consequently  to  insufficient  pre- 
paration and  excessive  haste.  No  adequate  facilities  had 
been  devised  for  crossing  the  ditch  ;  and  if  the  ditch 
had  been  easier,  the  so-called  breach  was  really  no  breach 
at  all.  The  troops  were  not  discouraged  ;  but  it  was 
ominous  that  on  the  following  day  the  enemy's  working 
parties  repaired  the  breach  in  broad  daylight,  Lake's 
four  battering-guns  being  unable  to  fire  until  repaired. 
Other  materials  too  were  so  scanty  that  during  the  three 
days  following  the  attack  there  were  not  sufficient  for 
more  than  the  repair  of  the  batteries  already  erected. 
However,  the  engineers  now  decided  to  batter  the  wall 
a  little  further  to  the  right,  or  south  ;  and  accordingly 
an  additional  breaching  battery  mounting  four  eighteen- 
pounders  and  two  twenty-four  pounders  was  erected 
immediately  to  the  right  of  the  old  one,  while  other 


ch.  iv       HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  113 

batteries  of  twelve-pounders  were  thrown  up  wide  on  1 
both  flanks  so  as  to  divert  the  fire  of  the  fortress.  On 
the  1 6th  the  newly  mounted  cannon  opened  upon  the  J 
wall  in  the  appointed  place,  but  with  disappointing 
results.  The  mud  wall  crumbled  down  before  the  shot 
and  disappeared  into  the  ditch,  which  had  been  deepened 
by  the  enemy,  leaving  no  foundation  for  the  slope  of 
a  practicable  breach,  but  merely  a  pile  of  light  dust  in 
which  a  man  would  sink  waist-deep.1  Moreover,  as 
fast  as  a  breach  was  made,  it  was  forthwith  stockaded 
by  the  Rajah's  working  parties,  so  that  each  morning 
saw  the  previous  day's  work  undone. 

No  effort,  however,  was  made  to  bring  the  batteries 
within  nearer  range  of  the  wall  so  as  to  ensure  greater 
and  more  thorough  destruction.  The  truth  was  that 
the  number  of  the  troops  was  insufficient  for  the  work. 
On  the  1 8th  there  arrived  from  Agra  a  reinforce- J 
ment  under  Major-general  Smith,  but  this  was  not 
enough  to  supplement  the  losses  arising  from  the  un- 
successful assault,  and  from  the  daily  and  insidious 
attacks  of  sickness  and  fatigue.  At  this  time  also  the 
freebooter,  Meer  Khan,  threatened  to  appear  upon  the 
scene  with  a  huge  body  of  horse,  having  been  hired  by 
the  Rajah  with  six  lacs  of  rupees.  Lake's  cavalry  had 
already  been  fully  employed  in  keeping  Holkar's 
plundering  horsemen  at  a  distance,  and  the  arrival  of 
fresh  predatory  bands  promised  to  tax  their  vigilance 
to  the  utmost.  This  necessarily  threw  the  task  of 
protecting  the  camp  more  heavily  upon  the  infantry, 
which,  besides  severe  duty  in  the  trenches,  was  required 
to  take  a  share  in  all  foraging  parties  and  escorts  for 
convoys.  Hence  the  horse  was  harassed  by  constant 
troublesome  service,  the  foot  was  overtasked,  and  the 
artillery  and  pioneers,  being  very  few  in  number,  were 
simply  worked  to  death.    Scarcity  of  forage  was  already 