

Mar.  23.  and  on  the  23rd,  after  a  month  of  excessive  exertion 
and  fatigue  during  a  chase  of  seven  hundred  miles, 
rejoined  the  army  before  Bhurtpore. 

There,  unfortunately,  matters  had  not  prospered  since 
the  departure  of  the  cavalry.    In  itself  the  detachment 
of  so  many  troops  was  an  embarrassment  to  Lake, 
which  was  not  lessened  by  his  losses  in  the  two  un- 
successful assaults.    It  was  imperative  that  he  should 
obtain  reinforcements  from  some  quarter  ;  and  finally  it  1 
had  been  decided  to  call  up  from  Malwa  a  part  of  the  i 
Bombay   contingent   commanded  by  Murray.    That  i 
officer,  indeed,  had  played  a  singularly  inconspicuous  1 
part  in  the  operations.    As  far  back  as  September  1804,  ( 
Arthur  Wellesley  had  recommended  that  he  should  2 
be  superseded  by  Major-general  Jones.    This  was  not  I 
immediately  done  ;  and  Murray  accordingly  remained  1 
inactive  at  Ujjein,  until  in  November  Wellesley  advised  J 
that  he  should  be  recalled  towards  Guzerat,  where  his  r 
force  might  be  re-equipped  with  facility  and  would  I 
ensure  the  safety  of  that  district.    Lake,  however,  at  { 
this  same  time  bade  him  move  northward  from  Ujjein,  I 
apparently  with  the  view  of  using  his  column  to  head  a 
back  Holkar  if  he  should  again  turn  towards  the  south,  i 
The  defeat  of  Holkar  at  Deig  and  Furruckabad  made  c 
these  orders  useless  ;  but  Murray,  to  Arthur  Wellesley's  c 
consternation,  marched  northward  to  Kota,  leaving  1 
Holkar's  forts  of  Partabghur  and  Hinglaisghur  untaken  t( 
in  his  rear,  and  sacrificing  his  communications  with  I 
Guzerat.    In  December  1804,  explicit  directions  came  1 
from  Lake  that  he  should  join  him  on  the  Jumna,  which  fi 
seemed  to  justify  his  movements  ;  though  Wellesley  did 
not  conceal  his  apprehensions  lest  Murray  should  share  [ 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY 


121 


the  fate  of  Monson  in  Malwa.  However,  in  due  time  1805. 
General  Jones  reached  the  army  and  took  command  ; 
when  it  was  discovered  that  Lake's  orders  for  the  force 
to  move  northward,  far  from  being  due  to  carelessness 
and  imprudence  on  the  part  of  the  Commander-in- 
chief,  had  actually  been  suggested  by  Murray  himself. 
Yet  this  was  the  same  officer  who  in  the  previous  year 
had  been  so  nervous  about  his  supplies  and  communica- 
tions that  he  would  hardly  move.  The  truth  seems 
to  be  that  when  Murray  learned  that  he  was  to  be 
superseded  he  was  prepared  to  march  anywhere  at  any 
risk,  so  long  as  he  could  prevent  his  successor  from 
joining  the  army.1 

However,  on  the  nth  of  February  Jones  arrived  Feb.  n. 
before  Bhurtpore  with  eight  companies  of  the  Sixty- 
fifth,  the  Eighty-sixth,  five  battalions  of  Bombay  Sepoys, 
a  troop  of  Bombay  cavalry,  and  a  few  irregular  horse, 
in  all  about  seven  hundred  Europeans  and  twenty-four 
hundred  natives.  By  that  time  a  new  breaching  battery 
of  four  eighteen-pounders  had  just  been  completed,  and 
a  second  battery  to  left  of  it  had  been  begun,  both  of 
them  within  four  hundred  yards  of  the  wall.  A  new 
breach  was  made  by  these  guns  ;  but  the  enemy  built 
a  mud  wall  in  rear  of  it  and  kept  stockading  it  and 
restockading  it  as  fast  as  the  palisades  were  shot  away. 
However,  something  more  of  science  was  shown  in  the 
general  prosecution  of  the  siege.  Trenches  of  approach 
were  carried  forward  so  as  to  shelter  a  storming  party 
almost  to  the  edge  of  the  ditch  ;  a  mine  was  begun  at 
the  end  of  them  with  the  idea  of  blowing  up  the 
counterscarp  ;  powerful  mortar-batteries  were  erected 
on  each  flank  of  the  breaching  battery  ;  and  outlying 
works  of  sandbags  were  thrown  up  for  lighter  ordnance 
to  keep  down  the  fire  of  the  defence.  On  the  other 
hand,  the  enemy  erected  batteries  and  threw  up  trenches 
outside  the  walls  of  the  fortress  so  as  to  enfilade  the 
British  guns.    Nor  did  the  besieged  lack  enterprise  in 