

1  1st  Brigade — H.M.  24th  (late  27th),  25th  (late  29th)  L.D.,  two 
regiments  of  native  cavalry. 
2nd  Brigade — H.M.  8th  L.D.,  one  regiment  native  cavalry. 
Infantry — H.M.  22nd,  101st  (E.I.C.  Regt.),  two  native  battalions. 


134  HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY   book  xm 

1805.  But  the  treaty  was  such  that  the  General  would 
never  have  agreed  to  it  except  under  instructions. 
After  Cornwallis's  death  Sir  George  Barlow  succeeded 
to  the  Government  as  Senior  Member  of  Council  ;  and 
he  pushed  his  predecessor's  views  to  extremes.  A  treaty 
was  negotiated  with  Scindia  by  which  Gwalior  and 
Gohud  were  ceded  to  him  as  a  matter  of  grace,  though 
not  of  right  ;  and  to  Holkar  there  was  restored  the 
whole  of  his  dominions  intact.  This  would  have  been 
comparatively  a  small  matter,  had  not  Barlow  renounced 
also  all  treaties  whereby  British  protection  was  granted 
to  native  princes.  This  abandonment  of  men,  who  had 
given  the  British  invaluable  aid  at  critical  times,  to  the 
mercy  of  a  ruffianly  robber  like  Holkar,  was  a  bitter 
grief  to  Lake,  who  pleaded  earnestly  on  behalf,  at  least, 
of  the  Rajahs  of  Jeypore  and  Boondy.  But  Barlow  was 
inflexible,  and  even  went  so  far  as  to  order  that  the 
treaty  of  protection  with  the  Rajah  of  Bhurtpore  should 
also  be  abrogated.  But  here  Lake  refused  to  give  way, 
and  drew  such  a  picture  of  the  confusion  which  must 
inevitably  follow,  as  to  frighten  the  acting  Viceroy  into 
compliance,  at  any  rate  for  the  present,  with  his  will. 

The  war  therefore  ended,  as  have^so  many  British 
wars,  with  the  concession  of  all  that  had  been  gained  by 
great  expenditure  of  blood  and  treasure,  in  order  that 
more  blood  and  treasure  might  be  expended  in  fighting 
another  war  for  the  same  object  in  the  near  future. 
British  Governments — perhaps  it  would  hardly  be  fair 
to  say  the  British  nation — are  seized  from  time  to  time 
with  these  revulsions  of  feeling,  which  they  call  remorse 
and  ascribe  to  conscience,  but  which  should  be  called 
weariness  and  ascribed  to  timidity.  The  sufferers  on 
such  occasions  are  not  the  British  themselves,  but  the 
unhappy  allies  whom  they  have  drawn  to  their  side  in 
the  course  of  the  contest,  and  whom  they  desert  at  the 
hour  of  trial ;  and  it  is  from  them,  and  not  from 
formidable  rivals,  that  Britain  has  truly  earned  the  title 
of  perfidious  Albion.  The  work,  which  had  been  left 
unfinished,  needed  of  course  to  be  done  anew.  The 


ch.iv       HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  135 

power  of  the  Mahrattas  was  in  great  measure  broken  ;  1805. 
but  two  more  wars,  and  the  victories  of  Maheidpore 
and  of  Maharajpore  and  Punniar,  were  necessary  in  1 8 1 7 
and  1839,  before  the  descendants  of  Sevajee  would 
accept  the  fact  that  the  British  and  not  they  were  to  be 
final  masters  of  India. 