


ch.iv        HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  125 

of  wood,  fire-pots,  and  missiles  of  every  description.  1805 
Meanwhile  the  European  regiments,  observing  the  Feb. 
attack  on  the  tower,  imagined  that  the  place  was  taken  ; 
and  a  small  party  of  them  left  the  trenches  and  pushed  on 
after  the  Sepoys.  Two  of  these  soldiers  actually  reached 
the  summit  of  the  tower,  where  one  was  blown  to 
pieces  by  a  gun,  but  the  rest  joined  the  Sepoys  at  its 
foot,  where  they  endured  the  enemy's  fire  for  an 
hour  and  a  half.  At  length  they  were  ordered  to 
retire,  when  the  whole  suddenly  took  to  their  heels  and 
rushed  back  in  panic  to  their  trenches.  Taylor's 
column,  meanwhile,  having  lost  its  scaling-ladders  and 
had  one  of  its  guns  dismounted,  had  found  the  forcing 
of  the  Beem  Narain  gate  absolutely  impracticable,  and 
had  already  retired.  Thus  the  third  assault,  like  its 
fellows,  issued  in  a  disastrous  repulse. 

Twenty-eight  British  officers  were  killed  or  wounded 
in  this  affair  ;  and  the  total  loss  amounted  to  forty-nine 
Europeans  and  one  hundred  and  thirteen  natives  killed, 
seventy-six  Europeans  and  five  hundred  and  fifty-six 
natives  wounded,  making  in  all  little  short  of  nine 
hundred  casualties.  Nevertheless  on  the  same  night 
it  was  reported  to  Lake  that  if  the  tower  which  had 
been  assaulted  by  the  storming  party  were  battered 
for  half  a  day  it  might  easily  be  stormed,  and  accord- 
ingly the  whole  of  the  guns  in  the  new  breaching 
battery  were  turned  upon  it.  In  the  morning  Lake  Feb. 
came  on  parade  and,  addressing  the  European  regiments 
rather  in  sorrow  than  anger,  expressed  his  regret  that 
they  had  not  followed  their  officers  and  so  had  failed 
of  success,  but  added  that  he  would  give  them  an 
opportunity  of  retrieving  their  reputation.  He  then 
called  for  volunteers  ;  and  the  whole  stepped  forward  as 
one  man.  Two  hundred  were  selected,  to  each  of  whom 
a  reward  of  one  hundred,  rupees  was  promised  if  the 
fortress  were  taken.  Lieutenant  Templeton  offered  to 
lead  the  storming  party,  and  Sergeant  John  Shipp, 
though  still  disabled  by  wounds,  insisted  for  the  third 
time  on  leading  the  forlorn  hope.    Lake  therefore 


126 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY   book  xiii 


1805.  decided  to  assault  once  more  in  the  afternoon,  his 
Feb.  21.  supplies  and  stores  having  fallen  so  low  that  unless  he 
captured  the  city  he  had  no  alternative  but  to  raise  the 
siege. 

The  guns  therefore  played  upon  the  tower  with  such 
ammunition  as  was  left,  and  beat  so  large  a  gap  about 
its  base  as  to  raise  hopes  that  the  upper  portion  would 
fall  by  its  own  weight.  This  expectation  was,  however, 
disappointed  ;  and  Lake  was  duly  informed  that  the 
higher  part  of  the  tower  was  still  steep.  It  was 
thought,  even  so,  that  it  might  by  some  means  be 
surmounted  ;  and,  since  it  was  reported  that  the  breach 
was  still  unrepaired,  Lake  decided  to  make  the  attempt. 
The  shattered  remains  of  the  Seventy-sixth  and  of  the 
flank  companies  of  the  Twenty-second,  the  Sixty-fifth, 
Eighty-sixth,  the  flank  companies  of  the  Hundred-and- 
first,  two  battalions  of  Bengal  Sepoys,  and  one  of 
Bombay  Native  Infantry  formed  the  storming  party,  the 
whole  being  under  the  command  of  Monson.  Before 
four  o'clock  the  signal  was  given,  and  the  detachment, 
cheering  loudly  as  they  passed  the  General,  marched 
forward  to  the  assault.  m 