

These  successes  were  not  without  effect  on  the  Rajah 
of  Bhurtpore  ;  and  Lake  presently  accelerated  the  nego-  April  8. 
tiations  with  him  by  marching  back  to  his  old  encamp- 
ment at  the  south-east  angle  of  the  city.    On  the  10th 
of  April  accordingly  the  Rajah  signed  the  preliminaries  April  10. 
of  peace  ;  and  a  few  days  later  he  bound  himself  by 
I  treaty  to  hold  no  correspondence  with  the  enemies  of 
Great  Britain,  to  leave  Deig  in  the  hands  of  the  British 
t  Government  until  it  should  be  assured  of  his  fidelity, 
\  and  to  pay  an  indemnity  of  two  hundred  thousand 
e  pounds.    Thereupon,  on  the  21st,  the  army  broke  up  April  21. 
0  from  before   Bhurtpore   and   moved  south-eastward 
jj  upon  the  Chumbul. 

e      There  was  indeed  more  than  enough  to  require  its 
>r  presence  there.    Ever  since  the  first  reverses  of  the 
British    Scindia    had    waxed    warlike    or  unwarlike 
1 ;  according  to  the  prospect  of  their  failure  or  success  in 

VOL.  V  K 


130  HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  book  xm 

1805.  the  field  ;  and  as  disaster  followed  disaster  at  Bhurtpore, 
he  became  more  and  more  forgetful  of  former  lessons. 
His  ostensible  ground  of  complaint  against  the  Viceroy 
was  that  the  fort  of  Gwalior  and  the  territory  of  Gohud 
had,  under  the  recent  treaty,  been  wrongfully  withheld 
from  him.  Moreover,  it  seems  that  Lake,  Arthur 
Wellesley,  and  in  fact  every  one  except  the  Viceroy, 
thought  that  he  had  a  just  claim  to  Gwalior.1  But 
other  of  his  grievances  were  simply  impudent ;  and  in 
the  autumn  of  1 804  he  had  gone  so  far  as  to  march 
towards  Bundelcund,  attacking  the  allies  of  the  British 
in  violation  of  the  treaty,  and  openly  communicating 
with  Meer  Khan  and  with  other  followers  of  Holkar. 
After  repeated  protests,  the   British  resident  at  his 

Jan.  23.  court  quitted  his  camp  on  the  23rd  of  January  1805, 
but  was  at  once  brought  back  by  force  and  virtually 
detained  as  a  prisoner,  with  every  circumstance  of 
humiliation.  Lord  Wellesley,  seeing  that  Lake's 
strength  was  already  overtaxed,  contented  himself  with 

April  23.  mild  remonstrances  ;  and  Scindia,  on  the  23rd  of  April, 
intimated  to  the  resident  his  intention  of  marching  to 
Bhurtpore  to  mediate  between  the  Rajah  and  the 
British.  The  consequences  of  this  thovement  would 
undoubtedly  have  been  serious ;  but  they  were  averted 
by  Lake's  treaty  with  the  Rajah,  which  came  both  to 
Scindia  and  to  Holkar  as  a  staggering  surprise.  None 
the  less,  the  two  last  remained  in  open  communication, 
and  at  last  both  Holkar  and  Meer  Khan  joined  their 
forces  to  Scindia's,  the  whole  virtually  forming  one 
united  camp. 

April  30.  Lake  crossed  the  Chumbul  near  Dholpore  on  the 
30th  of  April ;  and  Scindia,  thinking  better  of  his  big 
words,  withdrew  up  the  river  to  Kotah,  though  he  still 
refused  to  liberate  the  British  resident,  even  when  Lake 
threatened  a  renewal  of  hostilities.  The  Viceroy, 
however,  was  determined  not  to  precipitate  matters ;  and 
the  desertion  of  a  part  of  Scindia's  army  to  the  British 
gave  that  chief  warning  that  he  must  be  careful.  Lake 
1  Wellington,  Suppl.  Desp.  iv.  386. 