

Arriving  by  no  means  the  better  for  his  long  and 
tedious  voyage,  Cornwallis  was  dismayed  to  hear  that 
hostilities  with  Holkar  were  not  yet  ended,  and  that 
even  with  Scindia  they  were  likely  to  be  renewed. 
Within  twenty-four  hours  he  decided  that  no  further 
military  success  could  be  of  any  profit,  but  that  the 
contest  must  be  terminated  forthwith  by  negotiation ;  and 
he  at  once  set  out  on  a  journey  to  the  Upper  Provinces. 
Examination  of  the  Company's  finances,  which  were 
certainly  in  a  deplorable  condition,  confirmed  him  in  his 
opinion  ;  and  he  made  up  his  mind  at  once  to  restore 
to  Scindia  both  Gwalior  and  Gohud,  to  withdraw 
Wellesley's  demand  for  the  liberation  of  the  resident, 
to  reinstate  Holkar  in  the  whole  of  his  dominions, 
and  to  renounce  the  connexions  made  by  Lake  with 
the  native  princes  on  the  Jumna.  By  happy  chance 
Lake  was  able,  before  Cornwallis's  instructions  reached 
him,  to  insist  that  Scindia  should  set  free  the  resident ; 
and  indeed,  when  apprised  of  their  purport,  he  took 
upon  himself  to  keep  back  the  Viceroy's  letter  to 
Scindia  and  wrote  a  strong  remonstrance  against  such 
proceedings.  But  Cornwallis  was  past  all  work  before 
Lake's  letter  reached  him.  For  a  month  he  lingered  in 
a  state  of  weakness  which  allowed  him  to  transact  little 
Oct.  5.  business,  and  on  the  5th  of  October  he  died  at  Ghazipore. 


ch.iv       HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  133 

Meanwhile  Holkar  who,  with  such  troops  as  remained  1805. 
to  him,  had  again  betaken  himself  to  Ajmeer,  marched 
northward  at  the  beginning  of  September,  announcing  Sept. 
that  he  expected  assistance  from  the  Sikhs  and  even 
from  the  Ameer  of  Cabul.    Lake,  being  determined 
to  allow  no  mischief  of  this  kind,  thereupon  ordered  the 
troops  at  Agra  and  Secundra  to  move  to  Muttra  on  the 
10th  of  October,  sent  a  detachment  to  Saharanpoor  for 
the  protection  of  the  Doab,  and  himself  marched  on 
the  28th  of  October  with  two  brigades  of  cavalry,  one  Oct.  28. 
of  infantry  and  sufficient  artillery,1  to  pursue  Holkar  in 
person.    On  the  7th  of  November  he  arrived  at  Delhi,  Nov.  7. 
whence  moving  northward  by  easy  marches  he  reached 
Paniput  on  the  17  th,  and  entered  Sikh  territory  by  way 
of  Kurnah.    On  the  24th  he  was  at  Pattiala,  where  Nov.  24. 
the  Rajah  reported  that  Holkar  had  endeavoured  to 
attract  the  Sikhs  in  those  parts  to  his  standard,  but 
without  effect.    On  the  29th  Lake  was  reinforced  by  Nov.  29. 
three  battalions  of  Sepoys  and  two  bodies  of  irregular 
horse  ;  and  still  moving  north-westward,  he  reached 
Ludhiana  on  the  2nd  of  December.    Here  he  crossed  Dec  2. 
the  Sutlej,  being  received  everywhere  in  friendly  fashion, 
and  marched  on  in  the  hope  of  coming  up  with  Holkar, 
who  had  failed  to  cross  the  Beyah  still  further  to  north- 
west.   He  was  disappointed,  however,  for  his  advanced 
guard  arrived  at  the  Beyah  just  in  time  to  see  Holkar 's 
rear-guard  cross  it  before  their  eyes  ;  and  by  the  time 
Lake's  main  body  reached  the  river,  Holkar  was  at 
Amritsar.    Lake  continued  his  advance  to  Jallundar  ;  Dec.  9. 
where,  under  the  terror  of  his  name,  the  chiefs  of  the 
Sikhs  declined  to  give  aid  to  Holkar,  sending  an 
emissary  to  welcome  the  British  and  to  offer  their 
mediation.     On   the    20th   of  December  Holkar's 
messengers  arrived  ;  and  on  the  24th  a  treaty  dictated  Dec  24. 
by  Lake  brought  the  long  contest  to  a  close. 