

The  advance  was  made  with  the  greatest  boldness  and  2 
regularity,  and  the  men  showed  all  their  old  bravery  in  ? 
attempting  to  scale  the  tower.    The  gap  in  its  base  gave  t 
shelter  to  a  few,  but  the  breach  was  still  too  steep  to 
be  climbed.    Determined  to  carry  the  fortress  if  it 
were  humanly  possible,  some  of  the  stormers  drove  their 
bayonets  into  the  rampart,  one  above  another,  to  make  t 
a  ladder  ;  while  others  tried  to  scale  the  ascent  by  the  0 
holes  made  by  the  British  guns  ;  but  only  two  men  : 
abreast  could  advance  in  that  way,  and  numbers  so  r 
small  were  easily  overpowered.     The  enemy  heaped  i 
missiles  upon  them,  logs  of  wood,  pots  of  gunpowder,  i 
flaming  packs  of  cotton  dipped  in  oil,  heavy  shot,  all  k 
that  came  to  hand  ;  while  the  guns  of  the  adjoining  n 
bastion  poured  in  a  sweeping  and  most  destructive  fire,  i 
For  two  hours  the  men  wrestled  with  the  impossible, 
striving  to  ascend  the  curtain  at  any  point  which  i 


ch.iv       HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  127 

promised  the  least  semblance  of  success.  Templeton  1805. 
was  killed  just  as  he  had  planted  the  colours  near  the  Feb.  21 
summit.  Major  Menzies,  Lake's  aide-de-camp,  begged 
leave  to  join  in  the  assault,  and  was  slain  at  the  head 
of  the  old  breach.  All  was  in  vain.  Monson  at  length 
gave  the  order  to  retire,  and  the  survivors  rushed  back 
under  a  furious  fire  to  their  batteries.  Four  hundred 
and  seventy-nine  Europeans,  thirty-four  of  them  officers, 
and  five  hundred  and  eight  natives  had  fallen  ;  making 
in  all  nine  hundred  and  eighty -seven  killed  and 
wounded.  The  various  attacks  had  cost  over  three 
thousand  men,  and  the  fortress  was  as  defiant  as  ever. 

There  was  no  doubt  now  as  to  what  must  be  done. 
On  the  night  between  the  22nd  and  23rd  the  troops  Feb.  23 
were  withdrawn  from  the  trenches,  and  the  ordnance 
from  the  batteries.  The  guns  were  unfit  for  service, 
the  vents  being  so  much  worn  that  most  of  them  would 
hold  four  fingers,  and  had  only  been  stopped,  in  the 
later  days  of  the  siege,  by  bags  of  sand.  This,  in  fact, 
was  one  cause  of  Lake's  failure  ;  six  iron  guns  of  no 
great  calibre  and  eight  brass  mortars  comprehended 
the  whole  of  his  siege-train,  which  was  far  too  small 
and  too  weak  for  his  purpose.  His  force  of  men  also 
was  inadequate,  for  he  began  the  siege  with  little  more 
than  six  thousand  effective  infantry  and  two  thousand 
cavalry,  the  latter  of  which  was  constantly  absent  in 
chase  of  predatory  horse  of  one  description  or  another. 
Lord  Combermere,  when  he  sat  down  before  Bhurtpore 
in  1826,  had  with  him  eighteen  battalions,  eight  regi- 
ments of  cavalry,  six  troops  of  horse  artillery,  one 
hundred  and  twelve  siege-pieces,  and  fifty  light  field- 
guns.  The  historian  of  Combermere's  siege,  with 
these  figures  before  him,  most  generously  strives  to 
vindicate  Lake  against  all  hostile  criticism  ;  but  it 
cannot  be  gainsaid  that  the  main  cause  of  his  failure 
was  his  own  impatience.  "  They  must  have  blundered 
that  siege  terribly,"  wrote  Arthur  Wellesley  from  St. 
Helena,  when  he  heard  the  news  ;  <c  for  it  is  certain  that 
with  adequate  means  every  place  can  be  taken  ;  and, 