


128 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  book  xiii 


1805.  Lord  Lake  having  been  so  long  before  the  place, 
adequate  means  must  have  been  provided  or  in  his 
power.  The  fault  lies  therefore  in  the  inapplication 
of  them  or,  most  probably,  in  the  omission  to  employ- 
all  those  which  were  necessary  to  accomplish  the  object 
in  view,  either  through  the  ignorance  of  the  engineers, 
or  the  impetuosity  of  Lord  Lake's  temper,  which 
would  brook  no  delay."  Even  the  Viceroy,  greatly 
as  he  esteemed  and  admired  Lake,  begged  him,  upon 
the  report  of  the  last  assault,  not  to  accelerate  operations 
at  Bhurtpore,  if  he  resumed  the  siege,  but  to  await  the 
arrival  of  a  sufficient  battering-train  rather  than  risk 
another  failure.  Lord  Wellesley 's  confidence  must  have 
been  greatly  impaired  before  he  would  write  in  such 
terms  to  his  beloved  General.1 

Lake,  however,  was  still  resolute  and  unshaken. 

Feb.  24.  On  the  24th  he  drew  off  his  army  six  miles  to  north- 
eastward of  the  fortress  and  encamped  so  as  to  cover 
the  roads  to  his  magazines  at  Agra,  Muttra,  and  Deig ; 
the  enemy's  horse  making  the  movement  both  difficult 
and  hazardous  owing  to  the  absence  of  the  cavalry 
under  General  Smith,  which  had  not  y>et  returned  from 
the  chase  of  Meer  Khan.  The  troops  were  then 
employed  in  making  fascines  and  in  bringing  in  large 
convoys  of  supplies  and  stores,  including  the  battering 
train  which  ought  to  have  been  summoned  earlier.  The 

Mar.  10.  Rajah  began  to  lose  heart,  and  on  the  10th  of  March, 
two  days  after  Lake  had  received  the  news  that  he  had 
been  raised  to  the  peerage,  his  emissaries  were  admitted 
to  headquarters  to  negotiate  for  peace.  Holkar, 
meanwhile,  with  what  remained  of  his  force,  lay  about 
eight  miles  westward  from  Bhurtpore  in  ease  and 
comfort,  since  Lake  had  no  cavalry  with  him.    On  the 

Mar.  23.  23rd,  however,  Smith  returned  with  his  regiments  to 

Mar.  29.  camp  ;  and  at  one  o'clock  on  the  morning  of  the  29th 
Lake  led  them  out  to  surprise  Holkar's  camp,  he 
himself  intending  to  attack  its  right,  while  another 

1  Wellington   Suppl.   Desp.  v.   511  ;    Wellesley  Desp.  iv.   301  ; 
Creighton's  Siege  of  Bhurtpore,  xx.  seq. 


ch.iv        HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  129 

column  moved  round  its  left.  But  the  enemy  were  1805. 
warned  of  the  movement  and  were  so  far  prepared  for 
flight  when  he  came  upon  them  that,  after  a  long 
pursuit,  he  succeeded  only  in  making  an  end  of  about 
two  hundred  men  and  taking  a  few  animals.  Holkar, 
therefore,  took  up  a  fresh  camp  some  way  to  the  south- 
west of  Bhurtpore,  where  he  thought  himself  more 
secure;  but  at  daybreak  of  the  2nd  of  April  Lake  April  2 
came  upon  him  with  his  cavalry  and  horse-artillery, 
and  pursuing  him  for  eight  miles,  made  large  captures, 
besides  working  great  havoc  among  the  men.  Numbers 
of  Holkar's  followers  deserted  him  ;  and  he  was  forced 
to  cross  the  Chumbul  with  a  mere  remnant  of  eight 
thousand  horse,  half  as  many  foot,  and  twenty  or 
thirty  guns.  A  week  earlier  a  detachment  of  his 
infantry  with  three  guns  had  been  routed  and  dispersed  Mar.  26. 
near  Ahmednuggur  by  a  small  column  of  Sepoys  and  „ 
irregulars,  which  weakened  him  still  further.  The 
Mahratta  chief  was  now  little  more  than  a  wanderer 
and  an  outcast,  having  lost  all  his  strong  places,  nearly 
all  his  artillery,  and  the  great  bulk  of  his  once-powerful 
army. 