

1  Wellington  Desp.  iii.  468,  547,  556,  570,  592,  599,  597,  631, 
642. 


122 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY   book  xiii 


1805.  other  respects,  for  on  the  morning  of  the  19th  they 
Feb.  19.  attacked  an  unfinished  work  which  was  erecting  within 
seventy  yards  of  one  of  their  towers,  drove  out  the 
Sepoys  within  it,  emptied  the  sandbags  and  carried 
them  off.  Lake,  however,  was  satisfied  with  what  had 
been  done  by  his  engineers,  and  determined  to  storm 
the  breach  as  soon  as  the  batteries  should  have  swept 
away  the  stockade. 

Three  columns  in  all  were  formed.  The  left  was 
made  up  of  most  of  the  European  soldiers  of  Lake's 
own  army,  supported  by  three  battalions  of  Sepoys,  and 
was  placed  under  command  of  Colonel  Don  for  the 
assault  of  the  breach.  The  centre  column  was  com- 
mitted to  Captain  Grant  of  the  Bombay  forces  who, 
with  two  hundred  of  the  Eighty-sixth  and  a  battalion 
of  Bengal  Sepoys,  was  to  carry  the  enemy's  guns  and 
trenches  outside  the  town.  The  right  column,  com- 
posed of  three  hundred  of  the  Sixty-fifth  and  two 
battalions  of  Bombay  Sepoys  under  Colonel  Taylor, 
was  to  attack  the  Beem  Narain  gate  at  the  south-eastern 
angle  of  the  fort,  which  was  reported  to  be  accessible 
to  guns,  and  therefore  capable  of  being  broken  in. 

During  the  night  of  the  19th  some  parties  of  the 
enemy  made  a  sally  and  crept  into  the  nearest  approach 
unperceived,  the  British  troops  being  for  some  reason 
always  withdrawn  before  the  relief  arrived  to  take  their 
place.  Here  they  remained  for  some  time  unmolested, 
demolishing  the  preparations  that  had  been  made  for  a 
Feb.  20.  mining  chamber,  and  carrying  off  the  tools.  At  day- 
break the  British  storming  party  arrived,  whereupon 
the  enemy  at  once  rushed  out  with  pikes  and  swords 
along  the  top  of  the  trench,  thrusting  and  slashing  at 
the  men  below,  and  occasionally  jumping  down  and 
closing  with  them.  Every  man  of  these  aggressors  was 
intoxicated,  and  their  onslaught  was  most  furious. 
The  trench  being  very  deep  and  narrow,  without 
banquette-steps  to  enable  the  men  to  ascend  it  or  to 
fire  over  it,  the  British  were  caught  at  a  disadvantage 
and  were  thrice  driven  back,  until  the  remnant  of  the 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  123 

flank  companies  of  the  Twenty-second  came  up  and  1805 
swept  the  savage  assailants  out.  The  British  guns  were  Feb. 
then  turned  upon  them,  as  well  as  the  guns  of  the 
fortress,  which  throughout  had  played  indiscriminately 
upon  all  parties  ;  and  few  of  this  desperate  band  escaped 
alive.  But  the  loss  of  the  British  also  had  been  severe  ; 
the  wounded  and  dying  were  left  where  they  lay, 
exposed  to  the  enemy's  fire ;  and  their  miserable 
groans  and  writhings  threw  gloom  and  discouragement 
over  the  storming  party. 