

At  three  o'clock  the  three  native  battalions  of  Don's 
column  marched  into  the  trenches  ;  and  a  little  later 
Grant's  detachment  sprang  forward  and  dashed  at  the 
entrenchments  and  batteries  without  the  walls  on  the 
right  of  the  British  guns.  The  enemy  was  at  once 
driven  out;  eleven  guns  mounted  in  the  batteries  were 
captured  ;  and  Grant's  men  following  close  upon  the 
fugitives,  pursued  them  to  the  walls  and  on  to  the  Anah 
gate,  which  was  barely  closed  in  time  to  shut  out  the 
foremost  of  the  British.  Having  no  guns,  Grant  was 
powerless  to  blow  in  the  gate  ;  and  he  therefore  estab- 
lished himself  under  the  bank  of  a  dry  pond  immedi- 
ately outside  it,  having  only  narrowly  missed  forcing 
his  way  into  the  fortress. 

Grant's  attack  was  the  signal  for  the  storming  party 
to  move  forward,  and  accordingly  Don  gave  the  word 
to  assault.  The  orders  were  that  the  Europeans  at  the 
head  of  the  column  should  advance  from  the  left  of 
the  breaching  battery,  and  that  the  Sepoys  should  follow 
them  to  the  breach.  Fifty  men  with  fascines  were  to 
take  the  lead,  throw  their  fascines  into  the  ditch,  and 
then  wheeling  outwards  spread  themselves  along  the 
glacis  to  keep  up  a  fire  upon  the  breach  while  the 
forlorn  hope  rushed  on.  But  the  men,  though  they 
were  the  remnant  of  the  Seventy-fifth,  Seventy-sixth, 
and  Hundred-and-first  regiments,  which  had  covered 
themselves  with  glory  during  the  past  weeks,  refused  to 
move  out.  They  were  depressed  by  past  failures  before 
Bhurtpore  ;  they  were  dismayed  by  the  ghastly  agony 


i24  HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  book  xm 


1805.  of  the  wounded  men  all  round  them;  they  were 
Feb.  20.  discouraged  by  the  success  of  the  hostile  sally  in  the 
morning.  They  had  only  too  readily  caught  up  an  idea 
that  the  enemy  had  established  a  mine  in  the  unfinished 
gallery  of  their  own  engineers  ;  they  found  their  task 
made  doubly  difficult  and  perilous  by  the  faulty  con- 
struction of  the  parallels  and  the  enfilading  fire  which 
consequently  swept  the  approaches ;  and  in  fact  they 
had  come  to  the  conclusion  that  the  operations  before 
the  fortress  had  been  and  still  were  mismanaged,  and 
had  lost  confidence  in  their  leaders.  In  vain  their 
officers  exhorted  them  by  words,  gestures,  and  example  : 
they  would  not  advance  ;  and,  until  they  moved,  the 
native  troops  in  their  rear  could  not  pass  to  the  front. 
Some  of  the  flankers  of  the  Twenty -second  alone 
responded  to  the  appeals  of  their  officers,  but,  finding 
themselves  unsupported  by  their  comrades,  presently 
retired. 

In  desperation  Don  at  last  led  two  battalions  of 
native  infantry  to  the  right  of  the  breaching  battery, 
and  from  thence  to  the  ditch.  The  Sepoys  followed 
him  most  gallantly ;  but  the  ditch  opposite  to  the 
breach  was  found  impassable,  and  the  column  swerved 
to  its  right  to  the  nearest  point  which  had  suffered 
damage  from  the  besieging  cannon,  namely  a  bastion 
known  to  the  British  as  the  Tower  bastion.  Here  the 
ditch  was  found  to  have  little  water  in  it ;  and  the  men 
began  to  climb  up  the  bastion  by  clinging  to  the  shrubs 
that  grew  on  its  face.  On  reaching  the  slope  of  the 
tower  most  of  the  party  stopped,  though  a  few  of  the 
bravest  clambered  on  and  even  planted  their  colours 
close  to  the  summit ;  but  there  was  no  chance  for  the 
ascent  of  a  number  sufficient  to  maintain  a  footing 
united  at  the  top.  Those  that  would  not  face  the  peril 
of  the  final  climb,  hung  in  crowds  round  the  foot  of 
the  tower  ;  but  no  order  nor  entreaty  could  induce  them 
to  move  round  it  or  to  push  on  to  the  breach  in 
the  curtain.  There  they  remained  huddled  together, 
while  the  enemy  from  above  showered  on  them  logs 