


ch.  iv       HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  131 

detached  a  force  to  watch  him,  and  meanwhile  employed  1805. 
himself  in  negotiating  a  treaty  with  the  ruler  of  Gohud, 
whereby  the  latter  pledged  himself,  by  what  was  called 
1  a  subsidiary  treaty,  to  take  three  battalions  of  the  East 
India  Company's  Sepoys  into  his  pay.  This  done,  the 
army  broke  up  in  the  third  week  of  May ;  the  May. 
Bundelcund  detachment  marching  to  Gwalior  and  the 
Bombay  force  to  Tonk.  Lake  with  his  head- 
quarters at  Muttra  threw  his  army  into  cantonments 
there,  at  Agra,  at  Secundra,  and  at  Futtehpore  ;  the 
whole  being  kept  ready  to  march  and  to  concentrate 
at  a  moment's  warning. 

On  the  25th  of  July  Lord  Wellesley,  weary  withjuly2  5. 
waiting,  sent  Scindia  an  ultimatum,  bidding  him  deliver 
up  the  British  resident  or  take  the  consequences  ;  but 
his  term  of  office  had  come  to  an  end  before  any  answer 
could  be  received.  He  had  sent  home  his  resignation  at 
the  end  of  1803,  and  had  delayed  only  until  the  negotia- 
tions with  the  Mahratta  chiefs,  which  subsequently  gave 
place  to  war,  should  have  been  terminated.  Meanwhile 
his  ambitious  and  costly  policy  had  commended  itself 
neither  to  the  East  India  Company  nor  to  the  British 
Cabinet ;  and  war  and  conquest  in  India,  ever  since  the 
trial  of  Warren  Hastings,  could  be  always  held  up  as 
wicked  and  unnecessary.  Hence  when  his  successor, 
Lord  Cornwallis,  arrived  at  Calcutta  on  the  30th  of  July  30. 
July,  he  brought  with  him  both  the  hopes  and  the 
instructions  of  the  Government  for  a  new  era  of 
economy  and  peace. 

The  faith  reposed  by  British  ministers  in  Cornwallis 
is  somewhat  remarkable,  for  he  was  not  a  man  of  great 
ability,  and  his  career  had  by  no  means  been  of  the 
most  successful.  In  America  he  had  proved  himself 
decidedly  a  failure.  In  India  he  had  been  within  a 
hair's-breadth  of  actual  disaster  before  Seringapatam  ; 
and  though  he  had  redeemed  his  first  mishaps  in  the 
field  by  subsequent  victory,  his  neglect  or  misgovern- 
ment  had  left  to  his  successor  very  formidable  difficulties. 
As  chief  military  adviser  to  Pitt's  Cabinet  and  as  Master- 


132  HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  book  xiii 

1805.  general  of  the  Ordnance,  his  career,  whether  by  his  fault 
or  not,  was  the  reverse  of  creditable  to  him  ;  and 
though  he  had  done  well  in  Ireland  in  1798,  he  had  cut 
a  deplorable  figure  as  a  diplomatist  at  Amiens.  He 
was  beyond  doubt  a  man  of  sterling  integrity,  with  a 
high  sense  of  duty  as  a  public  servant ;  and  these  are 
gifts  which  are  not  so  common  as  to  be  valued  lightly. 
But  his  chief  merit  in  the  eyes  of  the  Government  seems 
to  have  been  what  was  termed  his  moderation,  of  which 
it  can  only  be  said  that  it  bore  a  dangerous  resemblance 
to  mediocrity.  But  in  any  case  his  health  was  so  much 
broken  that,  though  he  most  nobly  and  unselfishly 
undertook  the  heavy  charge,  it  was  simple  folly  to 
despatch  him  to  India. 