


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  book  xiii 


1802  they  were  not  disposed  to  place  their  foreign  policy 
under  British  direction,  to  exclude  all  Europeans  except 
those  who  bore  a  British  passport,  to  see  their  native 
troops  disarmed  and  a  British  force  quartered  in  the 
capital,  to  yield  up  a  part  of  their  territory  in  payment 
for  this  privilege,  and  to  see  the  frontier  between  their 
own  land  and  the  British  thrown  open  for  purposes  of 
trade.  They  wished  to  keep  their  country  for  them 
selves  in  all  its  primitive  sanctity  and  isolation.  It  was 
bad  enough  that  foreigners  should  rule  the  seven 
hundred  miles  of  coast  that  ringed  the  mountains 
about,  but  it  was  intolerable  that  they  should  be 
masters  of  Kandy.  The  First  Adigar  therefore  evaded 
the  grant  of  the  promised  redress  to  the  merchants  who 
had  been  despoiled,  and  in  spite  of  all  protests,  massed 
such  rude  warriors  as  he  possessed  upon  the  frontier 
His  action  was  easily  to  be  explained  by  a  natural 
desire,  by  no  means  alien  to  British  sentiment,  to  pre 
serve  the  independence  of  his  country.  North,  how- 
ever, could  see  in  it  nothing  but  the  nefarious  perversity 

1803.  of  an  incurable  evil-doer.    On  the  31st  of  January 
1803  ne  ordered  his  troops  to  march  upon  Kandy. 

The  garrison  of  Ceylon  at  this  tirrffc  consisted  of  the 
Nineteenth,  Fifty-first,  and  a  small  detachment  of  the 
Eightieth  Foot,1  a  battalion  of  native  infantry,  two 
companies  of  artillery  lent  temporarily  by  the  Indian 
Government,  and  a  battalion  of  Malays,  the  last-named 
extremely  untrustworthy  and  dangerous  troops.  The 
Europeans  numbered  about  fourteen  hundred  men 
altogether  ; 2  and  these,  as  well  as  the  native  troops 
were  distributed  in  small  detachments  over  a  dozen 
different  stations,  with  no  advantage,  as  may  be  supposed 
to  their  discipline.  The  force  was  amply  sufficient 
to  overcome  such  resistance  as  could  be  offered  by  the 
Kandians  ;  but  this  was  the  least  of  the  difficulties  of 
the  coming  campaign.  In  the  first  place,  there  was 
from  climatic  causes  but  one  month  in  the  year  when 

1  The  rest  of  the  Eightieth  was  in  Egypt. 
2  There  are  no  returns  of  their  strength  in  1803. 


ch.v        HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  143 

the  force  could  take  the  field ;  in  the  second  place,  1 
the  Kandian  territory  was  unexplored,  the  passes  in 
the  mountains  were  extremely  dangerous,  and  the  tracks 
and  paths  were  so  bad  as  to  forbid  not  only  wheeled 
traffic  but  even  pack-animals  ;  and  in  the  third  place, 
it  was  more  than  doubtful  whether  the  mere  capture  of 
the  capital  would  in  itself  produce  the  slighest  effect 
in  reducing  the  King  of  Kandy  or  his  advisers  to  sub- 
mission. These  obstacles,  however,  North  appears 
either  to  have  appreciated  insufficiently  or  to  have 
ignored.  He  had  little  doubt  but  that  in  a  month  he 
would  bring  his  recalcitrant  neighbour  to  reason. 