

The  advance  upon  Kandy  was  to  be  made  by  two 
distinct  columns  operating  from  two  distinct  bases,  the 
one  from  Colombo  on  the  west  coast,  the  other  from 
Trincomalee  on  the  east.  The  first  column,  under  the 
command  of  General  Macdowall,  was  made  up  of  the 
Fifty-first,  two  companies  of  the  Nineteenth,  a  thousand 
native  infantry,  two  weak  companies  of  Bengal  Artillery, 
and  a  small  force  of  pioneers  ;  in  all  from  eighteen  to 
nineteen  hundred  men.  The  second  column,  under 
Colonel  Barbutt,  was  of  slightly  inferior  strength, 
comprising  five  companies  of  the  Nineteenth,  the  greater 
part  of  a  battalion  of  Malays,  and  one  company  of 
Madras  Artillery. 

On  the  evening  of  the  31st  of  January  Macdowall 
marched  out  of  Colombo,  and  after  an  inspection  of  his 
troops  by  the  Governor  on  the  next  day,  crossed  the 
Kalany  Gunga  at  daybreak  of  the  2nd  of  February. 
Thence  his  march  lay  northward  upon  Ja  Ela  to  Halpe, 
from  which  point  he  turned  a  little  north  of  east  to  P 
Allugalla  on  the  Maha  Oya  river,  and  on  the  6th  of 
February  reached  Kotadeniyawa.  This  place,  having 
good  communication  by  water  with  Negombo  and  the 
coast,  had  been  selected  as  the  site  for  a  magazine  ;  and 
Macdowall  halted  for  four  days  to  throw  up  a  small 
redoubt  for  its  protection,  the  work  receiving  the  name 
of  Fort  Frederick  in  honour  of  the  Governor.  Then 
leaving  a  garrison  of  a  hundred  Sepoys  and  a  few 


i44  HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  bookxiii 

1803.  Europeans  to  hold  it,  he  resumed  his  advance  on  the 
Feb.  10.  10th,  and  fording  the  Maha  Oya  on  that  day  at  Giriulla, 
entered  Kandian  territory. 

From  this  point  forward,  owing  to  the  difficulty  of 
the  roads  in  the  interior,  men's  shoulders  formed  the 
only  possible  means  of  transport,  and  all  baggage  was 
therefore  reduced  as  low  as  might  be.  The  country, 
however,  was  still  fertile  and  well  cultivated,  and  the 
troops  had  to  wade  for  a  part  of  the  first  two  marches 
through  paddy-fields,  knee-deep  in  mud  and  water; 
but  the  men  were  healthy  and  the  inhabitants  friendly, 
being  ordered,  as  they  said,  by  the  King  to  supply  the 
Feb.  11.  English  with  all  that  they  wanted.  The  second  day's 
march  brought  the  column  to  Dambadeniyawa,  little 
more  than  five  miles  in  a  straight  line  from  Giriulla ; 
and  here  supplies  failed  owing  to  the  death  of  a  com- 
missary. The  force  therefore  again  halted  for  four  days, 
formed  a  magazine,  and  threw  up  a  redoubt  to  protect 
Feb.  16.it.  On  the  16th  Macdowall  resumed  his  march  in  an 
easterly  direction,  and  for  the  first  time  traversed  a 
distance  of  rather  over  ten  miles.  But  the  roads  were  so 
bad  that  it  was  necessary  to  dismount  the  three-pounder 
guns  which  he  had  with  him,  and  to*  employ  men  to 
carry  them.  The  baggage-coolies  fell  far  behind,  and 
Feb.  17.  the  column  was  consequently  unable  on  the  morrow 
to  advance  more  than  six  miles  to  the  Magroo  Oya 
river.  A  picquet  of  the  enemy  was  surprised  fast 
asleep  on  this  day,  and  fled  with  such  precipitation  on 
being  awakened,  as  to  diminish  any  anxiety  that  the 
British  might  have  felt  about  an  active  resistance. 