

What  real  purpose,  if  any,  may  have  underlain  these 
dark  overtures  of  the  Adigar,  it  is  difficult  to  say  ;  but 
in  any  case  North  thenceforth  was  filled  with  appre- 
hensions concerning  the  murder  of  the  King  of  Kandy 
and  the  invasion  of  British  territory.  He  now  tried  to 
approach  that  potentate  more  directly,  and  proposed 
that  General  Macdowall,  who  commanded  the  troops 
in  Ceylon,  should  go  ambassador  to  Kandy  with  a 
sufficient  escort,  in  order  to  remove  the  person  of  the 


ch.v        HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  141 

King  to  British  ground  if  he  was  in  danger,  or  if  not,  1799. 
to  negotiate  what  was  called  in  India  a  subsidiary  treaty. 
Macdowall  accordingly  started  on  his  mission  in  March 
1800;  but  most  of  his  escort  was  stopped  at  the  1800. 
frontier,  and  though  he  himself  proceeded  to  the 
capital,  the  embassy  came  to  naught.  A  new  negotia- 
tion, opened  soon  afterwards  by  one  of  the  nobles  of 
the  Kandian  court,  was  equally  a  failure,  as  were  also 
sundry  efforts  made  by  North  to  approach  the  King 
through  other  channels  than  the  First  Adigar.  Through- 
out this  time  Pelime  Talauve  was  reported  to  be  active 
in  inciting  his  countrymen  to  war,  and  the  natives  in 
British  territory  to  revolt. 

Early  in  1802  the  First  Adigar  or  his  instruments  1802. 
twice  approached  Governor  North  with  the  old  in- 
vitation to  join  in  dethroning  the  King  of  Kandy,  with 
the  usual  result,  of  course,  of  indignant  refusal.  In 
April  matters  took  a  more  serious  turn.  Certain  April, 
native  merchants,  British  subjects,  were  arrested  in 
Kandian  territory  while  carrying  on  a  commerce  which 
was  sanctioned  by  long  usage  ;  and  their  goods  were 
taken  from  them.  Rightly  or  wrongly,  North  inter- 
preted this  as  deliberate  provocation  to  war  ;  but  it 
was  not  until  September,  after  minute  investigation  of  Sept. 
the  case,  that  he  forwarded  a  remonstrance  to  Kandy. 
He  fully  expected  at  this  time  that  he  would  be  com- 
pelled to  resort  to  force  to  bring  the  King  to  reason  ; 
but  to  his  astonishment  he  was  answered  not  only  by  a 
promise  of  speedy  redress  but  by  an  expression  of  the 
First  Adigar's  wish  to  conclude  a  friendly  treaty.  North 
replied  that  he  was  equally  anxious  for  an  amicable 
arrangement,  but  that,  before  any  further  negotiation,  he 
must  insist  upon  knowing  the  King  of  Kandy 's  sentiments 
with  regard  to  the  treaty  already  submitted  to  him  by 
Macdowall.  This  answer  was  decisive.  The  Kandians 
were  an  ignorant  and  unwarlike  people  ;  but  they,  and 
particularly  those  about  the  court,  were  filled  with 
extravagant  conceit  of  their  greatness  and  superiority  ; 
and  however  unreasonable  it  may  have  seemed  to  North, 