

But  here  the  praise  of  Lake  must  end.  The  siege 
of  Bhurtpore  stands  out  as  a  sad  example  of  his 
impatience  and  his  love  of  rough-and-ready  methods  ; 
but  the  despatch  of  Monson's  detachment  on  its 
isolated  march  to  the  south  remains  a  still  greater  blot 
upon  his  fame.  For  this  measure  showed  that  he  had 
not  studied  his  enemy,  nor  thought  out  the  means 
of  making  every  movement  of  the— campaign  con- 
tribute to  his  ruin.  His  fault,  it  is  true,  was  not 
greater  than  Napoleon's  when  he  sent  Dupont's  corps 
in  similar  circumstances  to  Andalusia;  and  it  was, 
perhaps,  a  misfortune  for  Lake  that  such  a  man 
as  Arthur  Wellesley  should  have  been  his  rival  in  the 
field ;  but  against  the  background  of  Wellesley's 
achievements  the  defects  of  Lake  became  very  con- 
spicuous. If  it  were  only  Assaye  that  were  to  be 
compared  with  Laswaree,  the  elder  General  would 
have  nothing  to  fear  ;  but  beneath  Assaye  is  the 
solid  structure  of  communications  thoroughly  guarded, 
magazines  and  advanced  bases  carefully  stored,  trans- 
port laboriously  organised  ;  everything  provided  that 
prudence  and  sagacity  could  foresee,  nothing  left  to 

1  It  is  now  the  second  battalion  of  the  Duke  of  Wellington's 
(West  Riding)  Regiment. 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY 


137 


chance  which  could  be  assured  by  industry  and  care.  1 
It  must  at  the  same  time  be  admitted  that  Lake,  unlike 
Wellesley,  fought  his  campaigns  in  a  country  of  which 
very  much  was  absolutely  new  and  strange  to  the 
British  ;  and  that  he  had  not  Wellesley's  good  fortune 
in  possessing  Mysore  bullocks  for  the  transport  of  his 
army.  Moreover,  though  Wellesleys  are  rare,  Gerard 
Lakes  are  rare  also  ;  and  an  honourable  place  in  the 
Army's  history  must  always  be  reserved  for  this  in- 
domitable Guardsman,  whose  magic  of  leadership  could 
make  men  march  and  fight  beyond  their  ordinary 
powers.  Loyal  to  his  men,  loyal  to  his  officers,  loyal 
to  his  superiors,  brave  as  his  sword,  a  cool  strong  master 
in  the  direction  of  a  battle,  a  fiery  youth  in  the  leading 
of  a  charge,  he  was  a  type  of  English  gentleman  which 
is  of  untold  worth  to  the  Army. 


CHAPTER  V 


The  reader  has  been  detained  for  long  in  the  East,  but 
there  remains  still  to  be  narrated  the  story  of  a 
forgotten  little  war  in  that  quarter  which,  from  its 
extreme  inopportuneness,  threatened  at  one  moment 
to  carry  with  it  very  serious  consequences. 

The  British,  it  will  be  remembered,  had  in  1796 
captured  from  the  Dutch  their  settlements  in  the  island 
of  Ceylon.  We  of  this  generation  have  generally 
assumed  that  those  settlements  embraced  the  entire 
country  ;  but  they  did  not.  The  Dutch  possessed 
indeed  the  whole  coast-line  of  the  island,  measuring  in 
circumference  some  seven  hundred  miles ;  but  the 
mountainous  country  of  the  centre  was  still  un- 
conquered,  and  owed  no  allegiance  except  to  the  King 
of  Kandy.  The  Kandians  were  not  comfortable 
neighbours.  They  were  not  formidable  and  they 
were  not  aggressive,  but  they  were  amazingly  conceited, 
jealous,  and  suspicious  ;  unwilling  to  enter  into  any 
negotiation  with  the  Dutch,  except  as  superiors  treating 
with  inferiors,  and  therefore  requiring  extravagant 
concessions  alike  of  solid  gain  and  of  outward  respect. 
Such  an  attitude  never  commends  itself  to  a  commercial 
nation  ;  and  it  was  galling  to  the  Dutch  to  find  them- 
selves unable  to  push  their  trade,  as  well  as  inconvenient 
to  possess  no  road  from  Colombo  to  Trincomalee 
except  that  which  followed  the  coast.  At  last  in  1766 
the  Dutch  declared  war,  and  after  many  skirmishes  and 
considerable  loss  in  the  field,  took  possession  of  Kandy, 
only  to  find  themselves  very  little  the  better  for  their 