

Still  moving  eastward,  Macdowall,  after  a  very 
fatiguing  march  of  fifteen  miles,  reached  the  Deek 
Feb.  18.  Oya  on  the  18th,  and  on  the  following  day  encountered 
Feb.  19.  the  two  most  formidable  posts  upon  the  road.  The 
first,  a  square  and  open  redoubt,1  built  of  hewn  stone 
and  seated  at  the  top  of  a  rocky  mountain,  completely 
commanded  the  narrow  pass  which  led  to  it ;  but  the 

1  Macdowall  calls  it  Galle  Gidehu  ;   Cordiner  calls  it  Galle 
Gedera.    I  cannot  find  it  upon  any  map. 


ch.v        HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  145 

Kandians,  making  no  effort  at  defence,  fled  instantly,  1803. 
abandoning  three  guns  and  a  quantity  of  ammunition.  Feb-  J9- 
The  next  stronghold,  Geriagame,  lay  beyond  it,  very 
similar  in  construction,  and  so  situated  that  a  few 
resolute  men  might,  as  was  said,  have  defended  it  with 
a  shower  of  stones.  The  approach  to  it  was  by  a  kind  of 
natural  stairway,  winding  up  the  side  of  the  mountain 
between  impervious  thickets,  and  intersected  by  a  series 
of  perpendicular  rocks,  all  of  which  were  within  range  of 
the  cannon  above.  The  Grenadiers  of  the  Nineteenth, 
being  in  advance,  were  the  first  to  draw  near  the  fort, 
and  were  at  once  saluted  by  a  very  noisy  and  ineffective 
fire,  under  which  they  toiled  up  to  the  enemy's  guns 
and  walked  into  the  battery.  The  enemy  promptly 
fled  as  they  entered,  carrying  their  wounded  with  them  ; 
but  Macdowall  in  the  rear,  judging  from  the  prolonged 
cannonade  that  there  was  serious  resistance,  hurried  the 
entire  column  with  all  haste  over  the  pass.  The 
casualties  amounted  to  no  more  than  two  men  wounded  ; 
but  the  rapid  ascent  of  the  rugged  path  seems  to  have 
strained  the  men  beyond  belief;  and  it  appears  that 
many  soon  afterwards  succumbed  to  the  effects  of  the 
exertion,  or  at  least  were  so  much  weakened  by  it  as 
to  be  unable  to  stand  against  the  fever  which  presently 
beset  them. 

A  garrison  was  left  in  this  important  post,  the 
capture  of  which  threw  open  the  road  to  Kandy. 
Macdowall  now  turned  south,  and  halting  in  the  after- 
noon at  Kattugastotte,  on  the  Maha-villa-ganga,  fired 
three  guns  as  a  signal  to  Barbutt,  whose  artillery  he 
had  heard  after  the  storm  of  Geriagame.  The  signal 
was  promptly  answered,  for  Barbutt  was  in  fact  within 
two  miles  of  him.  He  had  met  with  a  trifling  resistance 
at  a  pass  close  to  Kandy,  and  again  at  the  Maha-villa- 
ganga,  but  had  overcome  both  by  a  few  cannon-shots  ; 
and  thus  the  two  columns  starting  from  opposite  coasts 
of  the  island  effected  their  junction  almost  to  an  hour 
within  three  miles  of  their  destination.  On  the  21st  Feb.  21. 
therefore  the  two  commanders  entered  the  city,  each 
vol.  v  L 