

Long  before  that  time  most  of  the  chief  actors  in  the 
drama  of  the  great  Mahratta  war  had  passed  away. 
Jeswunt  Rao  Holkar,  after  a  few  years  of  excessive  indul- 
gence in  brandy,  died  in  181 1.  Lake  embarked  for 
England  in  February  1807,  but  died  soon  after  his 
return  on  the  28th  of  February  1808,  in  time  to 
be  spared  the  pain  of  mourning  for  the  gallant  son  who 
had  been  wounded  by  his  side  at  Laswaree,  and  who  fell 
at  Rolica  in  the  same  year  1 808.  Though  he  can  hardly 
be  reckoned  a  great  general,  Lake  left  behind  him  such 
fame  as  has  been  gained  by  few  British  officers  among 
the  native  troops  of  India  ;  and  worthily  he  had  earned 
it,  for  on  the  field  of  battle  he  was  not  only  a  grand  leader 
but  a  great  commander.  Had  he  been  born  a  French- 
man and  served  under  Napoleon,  he  would  assuredly 
have  won  a  marshal's  baton  by  sheer  hard  fighting  ; 
and  the  Great  Captain,  who  loathed  the  very  name  of 
supplies,1  and  declared  that  twenty  thousand  men  could 
live  in  a  desert,  would  have  pardoned  him  many  short- 
comings for  the  sake  of  his  surpassing  prowess  in 
action.  Lake's  military  experience  had  been  remark- 
able, for  he  had  been  matched  first  against  the  crafty 
and  tenacious  Americans  in  the  most  difficult  and 
dangerous  of  all  the  wars  fought  in  the  eighteenth 
century,  then  against  the  tumultuary  armies  of  France 
in  1793,  and  lastly  against  the  Mahrattas  in  the  plains 
of  India  ;  and  he  had  seized  victory  by  the  hair  at 
Linselles  as  at  Laswaree.  As  a  disciplinarian  he  was 
strict ;  but,  like  Abercromby,  he  took  thought  for  the 
comfort  of  his  men,  and  while  making  great  demands 
upon  their  courage  and  endurance,  never  subjected  them 
to  fatigue  for  no  object.  He  spared  himself  as  little  as 
1  "  Les  vivres  !  Ne  m'en  parlez  pas." 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  book  xiii 


1805.  he  spared  his  men,  and  whether  it  was  the  cavalry  or 
the  infantry  that  was  bearing  the  brunt  of  action,  Lake, 
for  all  his  sixty  years,  was  always  to  be  found  at  their 
head  in  the  thickest  of  the  press  and  the  hottest  of  the 
fire.  With  such  qualities  and  with  natural  affability 
of  manner  and  kindness  of  heart,  he  was  adored  by  all 
ranks  of  his  army ;  and  under  his  leadership  they 
wrought  marvels.  Few,  unfortunately,  now  know  any- 
thing of  the  battles  which  he  won  ;  and  his  most  famous 
battalion,  the  Seventy-sixth,  which  should  at  least  bear 
Lake's  crest  upon  its  colours,  has,  under  a  new  organisa- 
tion, become  associated  with  the  still  greater  name  of 
Wellington.1  None  the  less  should  it  always  be  re- 
membered as  the  fighting  battalion  of  one  of  Britain's 
greatest  fighting  generals. 