

138 


ch.v        HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  139 

exertions.  Their  object  was  either  to  conquer  the 
country  outright,  or  to  dethrone  the  reigning  king  ; 
but  they  had  not  troops  enough  to  accomplish  the 
former,  and  there  was  no  means  of  dethroning  the  king 
except  by  capturing  him,  which  in  spite  of  desperate 
efforts  they  completely  failed  to  do.  The  operations 
were  prolonged  for  some  time  with  no  very  decisive 
result,  and  in  the  end  a  treaty  of  peace  was  concluded, 
of  which  it  need  only  be  said  that  it  left  the  position 
of  Kandy  wholly  unweakened. 

When  the  British  captured  the  island  in  1796  they 
too  sent  an  embassy  to  Kandy,  offering  concessions  in 
the  matter  of  navigation  which  were  thought  too  liberal  ; 
but  the  treaty  was  none  the  less  rejected  by  the  King. 
It  unfortunately  happened  also  that  the  expedition 
which  took  Ceylon  was  sent  from  India,  and  was 
therefore  at  first  administered  by  Indian  civil  servants. 
These  gentlemen  brought  with  them  not  only  their 
detestable  system  of  inflated  correspondence,  but  also 
Malabar  agents  as  their  underlings,  who  superseded 
the  native  headmen.  By  oppressive  abuse  of  their 
masters'  authority,  these  subordinates  soon  drove  the 
unfortunate  Cingalese  into  spasmodic  rebellion  ;  and 
although  the  Malabar  agents  were  presently  removed 
and  the  native  officers  restored,  the  incident  was  not 
likely  to  give  the  Kandians,  who  hated  all  white  in- 
truders impartially,  a  favourable  impression  of  British 
rule. 

In  1798  the  King  of  Kandy  died  ;  whereupon  1798. 
Pelime  Talauve,  the  chief  minister  or  (to  give  him  his 
local  title)  First  Adigar,  contrived  to  oust  all  members 
of  the  royal  family  in  favour  of  a  young  Malabar  of 
obscure  extraction,  whom  he  seated  on  the  throne  as 
his  puppet,  becoming  himself  the  true  governor  of  the 
country.  The  relations  of  the  deceased  sovereign  he 
placed  in  confinement,  from  which  they  presently 
escaped  ;  and  one  of  them,  named  Moottoo  Sawmy, 
who  had  the  strongest  pretension  to  the  Crown,  solicited 
for  himself  and  his  fellow  refugees  the  protection  of  the 


140  HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  book  xiii 

1798.  British  Government.  The  legitimate  claimant  of  an 
usurped  throne  is  always  a  tempting  instrument  to  a 
diplomatist  who  has  an  object  to  gain ;  but  the 
Governor,  Mr.  Frederick  North,  declined  to  take 
advantage  of  it  in  this  case.  The  Kandians  seemed  to 
be  content  with  their  new  King  ;  and  North  therefore 
put  Moottoo  under  surveillance,  so  that  he  should  be 
unable  to  give  any  trouble  to  the  government  in 
Kandy. 

1799.  ^ot  l°nS  afterwards,  in  February  1799,  the  First 
Adigar  approached  North  with  mysterious  proposals, 
which  in  December  he  made  clearer  by  inviting  the 
Governor  directly  to  assist  him  in  making  away  with 
the  new  King,  and  in  placing  himself,  Pelime  Talauve, 
upon  the  throne ;  which  done,  he  promised  to  make 
the  British  masters  of  the  country.  North  naturally 
rejected  this  overture  with  indignation  ;  and  the  Adigar 
then  addressed  himself  to  the  Secretary  of  Ceylon, 
declaring  that  he  hated  the  royal  race  of  Malabars,  the 
oppressors  of  his  fatherland,  and  that  he  had  raised  his 
puppet  to  the  sovereignty  with  the  object  of  bringing 
the  whole  clan  into  contempt  and  rousing  the  people 
to  drive  them  out  for  ever.  The  Secretary  answered 
that  the  British  would  never  conspire  to  depose  a 
foreign  prince  who  had  been  guilty  of  no  aggression 
against  them ;  whereupon  the  Adigar  innocently  inquired 
whether  an  invasion  of  British  territory  would  be  a 
sufficiently  aggressive  act  to  answer  the  purpose,  a 
question  which  not  unnaturally  stimulated  North  to 
excessive  anxiety  and  suspicion. 