


146 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY   book  xiii 


1803.  with  a  strong  detachment  of  his  force,  in  great  content. 

Feb.  2 1 .  Barbutt  had  not  a  single  casualty  nor  even  a  sick  man 
in  his  camp.  Macdowall  could  hardly  say  as  much, 
for  some  of  his  Sepoys  had  fallen  down  with  fever,  but 
the  Europeans  were  in  remarkably  good  health.  Both 
of  them,  and  still  more  Governor  North,  looked  upon 
their  work  as  well  done.1 

The  aspect  of  Kandy,  however,  was  not  reassuring. 
The  main  street  with  its  two  miles  of  mean  houses,  its 
innumerable  branching  lanes,  its  palace  and  its  temples, 
stood  untouched  in  the  plain  within  its  ring  of  wooded 
mountains  ;  but  not  a  living  creature,  with  the  exception 
of  a  few  dogs,  was  to  be  seen  in  it.  The  city  in  fact 
was  deserted  ;  the  treasure  and  everything  of  value  had 
been  carried  off ;  the  magazine  had  been  blown  up, 
and  several  of  the  buildings  were  in  flames.  After 
1 8 1 2  such  a  scene  would  inevitably  have  reminded  a 
general  of  a  like  desolation  at  Moscow;  but  this  was 
in  February  1803,  when  Napoleon  was  still  First  Consul. 
Macdowall,  Barbutt,  and  North  were  perfectly  easy  and 
satisfied,  and  knew  exactly,  as  they  thought,  what  was 
best  to  be  done.  On  his  march  from  Trincomalee 
Barbutt  had  reported  that  if  Moottoo  Sawmy,  the 
rightful  claimant  to  the  throne  of  Kandy,  would  but 
join  him,  every  Kandian  on  that  side  of  the  country 
would  flock  to  his  standard.  This  done,  provisions  for 
the  army  could  be  obtained  without  difficulty.  North 
grasped  eagerly  at  the  idea.  He  at  once  gave  directions 
that  Moottoo  Sawmy  should  be  escorted  to  the  capital, 
intending  that  in  return  the  new  King  should  cede  to 
the  British  two  large  and  rich  districts,  known  as  the 
Seven  Korales  and  the  Saffragam  Korale,  lying  on  the 
west  and  north  of  the  Kandian  territories.  Barbutt 
accordingly  marched  with  the  Malay  regiment  to  meet 

Mar.  4.  Moottoo  ;  and  on  the  evening  of  the  4th  of  March  the 
poor  puppet  was  duly  brought  by  the  British  troops 
into  Kandy. 

1  Macdowall  to  North,  5th,  19th,  20th,  21st,  24th  Feb.  ;  Barbutt 
to  North,  19th,  20th  Feb.  1803. 


ch.  v         HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  147 

In  due  course  North's  proposals  were  submitted  to  1803. 
him,  and  not  a  little  to  Macdowall's  surprise,  were 
resisted  with  considerable  spirit.  North,  to  do  him 
justice,  willingly  abated  his  claims ;  and  finally  a 
convention  was  signed  whereby  the  British  Government 
agreed  to  deliver  to  Moottoo  the  town  of  Kandy  and 
the  whole  of  the  Kandian  territory  at  that  time  occupied 
by  British  troops,  receiving  in  return  the  district  of 
Seven  Korales,  the  two  hill -forts  of  Geriagame  and 
Galle  Gedera,  a  strip  of  ground  sufficient  to  make  a 
road  from  Colombo  to  Trincomalee,  and  certain  facilities 
for  commerce.  All  this  would  have  been  highly 
satisfactory  had  the  Kandians  but  shown  the  slightest 
disposition  to  receive  Moottoo  as  their  ruler  ;  but  on 
the  contrary  not  a  soul  would  go  near  him,  so  that  he 
found  himself  in  the  palace  at  Kandy  with  no  further 
adherents  than  his  own  servants  and  the  British  guard. 
On  the  other  hand,  the  deposed  King  and  the  First 
Adigar,  who  had  fled  to  a  royal  palace  two  days'  march 
from  the  capital,  enjoyed  full  control  of  their  bands  of 
followers  and  were  not  slow  to  prove  it.  Parties  of 
armed  men  skulked  continually  round  the  British 
outposts,  hiding  themselves  by  day  but  firing  at  the 
sentries  by  night,  and  slaughtering  every  straggler, 
coolie,  or  armed  follower,  with  barbarous  mutilation. 