

The  monsoon  was  now  near  at  hand  ;  it  was  evident! 
that  the  object  of  the  expedition  could  not  be  secured 
without  another  campaign  ;  and  North  began  to  grow 

1  Macdowall  to  North,  5th,  9th,  14th,  18th  March;  Colonel 
Baillie  to  Macdowall,  16th  March  1803. 


ch.v         HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  149 

anxious.  The  refusal  of  the  Kandians  to  accept  1803. 
Moottoo  Sawmy  as  their  King  had  upset  all  his 
calculations  ;  and  that  unhappy  man's  failure  to  perform 
the  part  which  the  British  Government  had  put  him 
forward  to  enact,  was  quite  sufficient,  in  the  Governor's 
view,  to  absolve  it  from  all  engagements.  On  the 
23rd  of  March,  therefore,  North  instructed  Macdowall  Mar.  2 
to  dissuade  Moottoo  from  being  proclaimed  King,  since 
the  British  could  not  undertake  to  support  him.  He 
spoke  too  late.  On  that  very  day  Macdowall,  though 
acknowledging  that  the  authority  of  the  fugitive 
sovereign  was  now  greater  than  it  had  ever  been,  with 
singular  want  of  judgment  installed  Moottoo  Sawmy 
as  King  of  Kandy  amid  all  the  ceremony  of  a  royal 
salute.  Twenty -four  hours  later  came  news  from 
Madras  that  General  Arthur  Wellesley  was  on  his 
march  from  Hurryhur  to  Poona,  and  that  at  such  a 
conjuncture  not  a  man  could  be  spared  from  the  Mar.  2 
Presidency  for  Ceylon.  North  instantly  wrote  to 
Macdowall  that  the  quarrel  with  Kandy  must  be  made 
up  at  once,  and  that  overtures  must  be  reopened  with 
the  First  Adigar  ;  but  he  was  fain  to  add  that  the  city 
of  Kandy  must  be  held  until  some  convention  had, been 
agreed  to.  He  was  soon  to  learn  that  the  contest  with 
Kandy  was  not  so  easily  to  be  concluded.1 

While  North  was  thus  hurriedly  multiplying  orders 
to  Macdowall,  that  officer  became  unpleasantly  aware, 
during  the  last  fortnight  of  March,  that  his  communi- 
cations with  Colombo  were  interrupted.    Several  small 
parties  of  coolies  with  provisions  had  been  murdered ; 
one  mail  had  been  captured  from  its  escort  of  Sepoys  at 
Dambadeniyawa  ;  the  rest  had  been  stopped  through 
want  of  sufficient  protection  ;  and  it  was  only  by  sending  Mar.  3 
down  a  powerful  detachment  that  Macdowall,  on  the  30th, 
I  contrived  at  last  to  bring  in  despatches  and  supplies. 
I  Moreover,  tumultuous  bodies  of  Kandians  had  broken 
I  at  more  than  one  point  into  British  territory,  and 

I     1  North  to  Col.  Sec.  of  Ceylon,  19th  March;   to  Colonel 
I  Bar  butt,  23rd  March  ;  to  Macdowall,  25  th  March  1803. 


i5o 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  book  xiii 


1803.  though  easily  dispersed  by  a  few  dozen  British  soldiers, 
March,  kept  the  country  in  constant  agitation  and  alarm.  Even 
this  was  not  the  worst.  Many  of  the  posts  on  the  line 
of  communication  proved  to  be  extremely  unhealthy, 
Fort  Frederick  in  particular  being  the  most  deadly  of 
all.  On  the  13th  of  March,  when  its  first  commandant 
had  already  been  carried  from  it  to  die,  it  was  reinforced 
by  seventy-five  men  of  the  Sixty-fifth  and  fifty  Cingalese 
infantry.  Every  individual  of  this  detachment  was 
struck  down  by  fever  ;  and  orders  were  despatched 
for  the  redoubt  to  be  destroyed  and  the  post  to  be 
evacuated  ;  but  none  the  less  within  a  month  of  the 
13th  of  March  one  officer  and  two  men  were  all  that 
survived  of  the  whole  party. 