

But  this  was  not  the  worst.    A  few  days  after  the 
occupation  of  Kandy  the  effects  of  fatiguing  marches 
began  to  tell  upon  the  troops  ;  and  presently  jungle 
fever  attacked  them,  especially  the  Sepoys,  with  terrible 
virulence.    On  the  9th  of  March  Macdowall  reported  Mar.  9. 
5  that  he  had  little  more  than  eighteen  hundred  bayonets 
e  fit  for  duty,  that,  unless  the  people  should  speedily 
t  declare  for  Moottoo  Sawmy,  all  hope  of  reducing  the 
I  interior  must  be  abandoned,  and  that  the  army,  with 
e  the  exception  of  a  thousand  men  to  hold  Kandy  itself, 
i  must  be  withdrawn  without  delay  to  Trincomalee  and 
Colombo.    Then  a  sudden  gleam  of  hope  appeared  in 
i  the  shape  of  a  message  from  the  First  Adigar,  giving 
full  information  as  to  the  position  of  the  King's  refuge 


148 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY   book  xm 


1803.  at  Hangaramkatty,  as  to  the  easiest  roads  by  which  to 
approach  it,  and  the  nature  of  the  resistance  to  be 
expected.  He  also  requested  that  two  strong  columns 
might  be  sent  out  to  converge  upon  it  simultaneously 
by  different  routes,  promising  that  he  personally  would 
be  present  to  assist  in  delivering  the  monarch  into  the 
hands  of  the  British.    Nothing  doubting,  Macdowall, 

Mar.  13.  on  the  morning  of  the  13th  of  March,  sent  out  two 
detachments,  the  one  of  five  hundred,  the  other  of 
three  hundred  men.  The  country  through  which  they 
had  to  pass  was  by  nature  difficult,  and  they  had 
not  marched  many  miles  before  they  realised  that 
the  enemy  had  turned  its  strength  to  account.  Guns 
were  posted  upon  every  height  that  commanded  the 
path  of  the  columns,  and  sharp-shooters  lurked  in 
ambush  in  the  thickest  of  the  jungle.  Heavy  firing 
soon  began,  and  a  single  volley  struck  down  two 
officers  and  several  men,  both  British  and  native.  With 
incredible  labour  and  harassed  at  every  step,  the  troops 
forced  their  way  forward  through  a  perpetual  fire  ;  and 
after  traversing  nearly  thirty  miles,  the  two  columns 

Mar.  14.  found  themselves  on  the  evening  of  the  14th  before 
Hangaramkatty.  The  palace  was  instantly  taken 
without  much  resistance  ;  but  the  King  had  fled  ;  and 
pursuit,  owing  to  want  of  transport  and  supplies,  was 
impossible.  The  building  was  therefore  burnt,  and  the 
two  detachments  reached  Kandy  safely  on  the  evening 

Mar.  16.  of  the  1 6th.  The  loss  of  the  troops  was  slight,  not 
much  exceeding  twenty  wounded,  thanks  to  the  bad 
marksmanship  of  the  Kandians,  but  nineteen  unfortunate 
transport-coolies  were  killed,  and  that  at  a  time  when 
their  numbers  were  already  seriously  diminished.  In 
fact,  the  entire  movement  was  a  complete  and  rather! 
humiliating  failure.1 