

Davie  made  his  dispositions  for  defence  ;  and  at  four  June  24. 
o'clock  next  morning  the  Kandians  assailed  a  post  on 
the  hill  in  rear  of  the  palace  where  the  British  troops 
were  quartered.  This  small  guard,  which  consisted  of 
but  ten  native  soldiers  with  a  light  field-gun,  was 
easily  overpowered  ;  and  an  hour  later  a  strong  body  of 
Kandian  Malays  attempted  to  storm  the  palace  by  the 
eastern  barrier,  where  Davie  had  stationed  a  second  gun. 
They  were  met  by  a  Lieutenant  and  a  few  men  of  the 
Nineteenth  ;  and  the  leaders  of  the  two  bands  closed 
in  a  hand-to-hand  struggle,  wherein  the  Malay  mortally 
stabbed  the  British  officer,  but  was  himself  immediately 
slain  by  the  Adjutant  of  the  Nineteenth.  The  alarm 
was  at  once  sounded  ;  and  a  single  discharge  of  grape 
swept  away  twenty-four  of  the  Kandians,  who  thereupon 
withdrew  to  a  distance  and  kept  up  a  galling  fire  from 
their  light  native  field-pieces.    The  British  guns  replied ; 

I  and  the  duel  was  maintained  continually  until  two 
o'clock  in  the  afternoon,  when  many  European  officers 
entreated  Davie  to  enter  into  a  capitulation,  since  the 

1  enemy  was  advancing  in  such  numbers  that  the  palace 
could  not  be  held  for  much  longer.  Nor  was  this 
merely  pusillanimous  counsel,  for  the  British  soldiers 

I  were  reduced  to  a  handful  of  twenty  men,  nominally 
fit  for  duty  but  in  reality  convalescents  who  were  not 

I  yet  recovered.  Of  their  comrades  one  hundred  and 
twenty  were  helpless  in  hospital,  and  the  remainder 
were  dead.    There  were  left  the  Malay  regiment, 


154  HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  book  xm 


1803.  which  recent  events  had  proved  to  be  not  over 
June  24.  faithful,  and  the  lascars  of  the  East  India  Company's 
artillery.  Moreover,  the  officers  themselves  were  so 
weak  and  exhausted  that  they  were  hardly  equal  to 
further  resistance.  After  some  hesitation,  Davie  hoisted 
a  white  flag,  and  was  presently  escorted,  together 
with  a  loyal  native  officer  of  the  Malays,  to  the 
quarters  of  the  First  Adigar.  It  was  then  agreed  that 
the  British  garrison  should  march  out  with  its  arms 
on  the  road  to  Trincomalee,  and  that  Moottoo  Sawmy 
should  be  allowed  to  accompany  them  ;  in  return  for 
which  the  Adigar  undertook  to  feed  and  tend  the 
British  sick  until  they  could  be  removed.  The  con- 
ditions were  reduced  to  writing  and  signed  ;  and  the 
Adigar  further  gave  Davie  a  passport  in  the  King's 
name  to  enable  him  to  proceed  towards  Trincomalee 
unmolested. 

At  five  o'clock  on  the  same  evening  the  garrison 
marched  out,  fourteen  British  officers,  twenty  British 
soldiers,  about  one  hundred  lascars,  two  hundred  and 
fifty  Malays,  and  in  the  midst  of  them  the  unfortunate 
Moottoo  Sawmy.1  After  proceeding  for  a  mile  and  a 
half  they  were  stopped  by  the  river  Maha-villa-ganga, 
when,  finding  neither  rafts  nor  boats  to  enable  them  to 
cross,  they  bivouacked  for  the  night  in  pouring  rain. 
June  25.  Next  morning  the  troops  were  engaged  in  making  rafts 
when  a  number  of  armed  Kandians  appeared ;  and 
some  chiefs,  approaching  Davie,  said  that  the  King  was 
much  enraged  that  the  garrison  had  been  allowed  to 
leave  Kandy,  but  that  he  would  give  the  troops  boats 
and  forward  them  on  their  way,  if  they  would  yield 
up  Moottoo  Sawmy  to  him.  Davie  reminded  the 
messengers  of  the  terms  of  the  capitulation,  and  refused. 
Two  hours  later  another  party  of  chiefs  came  up  with 
an  intimation  to  Moottoo  Sawmy  from  the  King  that 