

However,  North's  negotiations  seemed  at  first  to 
Mar.  30.  bear  fruit,  for  on  the  30th  of  March  the  Second  Adigar 
came  to  Kandy  bearing  the  emblems  of  peace  ;  and 
with  him  Macdowall  arranged  what  he  thought  to  be  a 
satisfactory  truce.  Thereby  the  First  Adigar  was  to 
be  invested  with  supreme  authority  in  Kandy,  paying 
an  annual  allowance  to  Moottoo  Sawmy,  who  was  to 
retire  to  JafFnapatam  ;  and  the  British  were  to  receive 
the  province  of  the  Seven  KoralSs,  the  road  to 
Trincomaiee  and  Fort  Macdowall,  and  a  fort  which 
commanded  that  road  at  a  distance  of  about  eleven  miles 
due  north  of  Kandy,  together  with  the  district  around 
April  1.  it.  This  done,  on  the  1st  of  April  the  General  marched 
back  to  Colombo  with  the  Fifty-first,  and  sent  a  part 
of  the  Nineteenth  to  Trincomaiee  ;  leaving  in  Kandy 
the  rest  of  the  Nineteenth,  detachments  of  the  East 
India  Company's  artillery,  and  some  companies  of 
Malays.  In  all  three  hundred  Europeans  and  seven 
hundred  natives  remained  as  a  garrison  for  the  city 
under  the  command  of  Colonel  Barbutt. 
April  2.  On  the  next  day  after  Macdowall's  departure  the 
First  Adigar  advanced  with  a  large  force  to  within 
three  miles  of  Kandy  ;  but  the  movement  excited  no 
alarm,  for  it  was  generally  supposed  that  the  truce 
would  shortly  be  converted  into  a  durable  peace.  Nor 


ch.v         HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  151 

did  these  favourable  appearances  seem  likely  to  be  1803. 
belied,  for  not  many  days  later  the  Adigar  sent  a 
message  to  North  requesting  an  interview  for  the  final 
settlement  of  the  treaty.  A  meeting  was  accordingly 
held  on  the  3rd  of  May  at  Dambadeniyawa,  the  capital 
of  the  province  so  greatly  coveted  by  North — the  Seven 
Korales.  The  terms  agreed  upon  by  Macdowall  and 
the  Second  Adigar  were  discussed  and  ratified,  with  the 
stipulation,  which  to  North  seemed  a  mere  matter  of 
form,  that  the  execution  of  the  treaty  should  be  delayed 
until  the  King  of  Kandy  should  be  delivered  into  the  hands 
of  the  British.  Until  that  time  hostilities  were  to  cease.1 
All  now  seemed  to  be  in  train  for  a  happy  ending  to 
the  quarrel.  Some  slight  embarrassment  was  caused 
by  the  sudden  illness  of  Barbutt,  to  whom,  as  com- 
mandant of  Kandy,  the  execution  of  the  treaty  was  to 
have  been  committed  ;  but  at  the  request  of  the  First 
Adigar,  Macdowall  went  up  temporarily  to  take  his 
place.  The  General  duly  arrived  at  the  capital  on  the 
23rd  of  May,  and  found  a  miserable  state  of  things.  May  23. 
The  garrison,  both  black  and  white,  was  reduced  to  a 
shadow  by  fever  ;  many  had  perished,  and  nearly  all  of 
the  European  soldiers  were  in  hospital.  Macdowall's 
brigade-major  had  been  stricken  on  the  journey  upward 
and  sent  back  to  Colombo,  and  both  he  himself  and  his 
one  remaining  staff-officer  were  attacked  by  the  same 
malady  a  few  days  after  their  arrival  in  Kandy.  In 
weakness  and  misery  they  awaited  in  vain  the  coming 
of  the  First  Adigar  ;  until  at  last,  on  the  2nd  of  June,  June  2. 
arrived  an  ominous  message  that  he  could  not  attend 
the  General  without  the  permission  of  the  King. 
Therewith  all  hopes  of  a  treaty  vanished,  and  North 
found  himself  for  the  twentieth  time  the  dupe  of  his 
crafty  antagonist.  Macdowall  and  his  aide-de-camp, 
still  prostrate  with  sickness,  left  Kandy  on  the  nth  of  June  11. 
June,  and  by  good  fortune  reached  Colombo  alive  on 
the  19th.  They  were  the  last  white  men  to  set  eyes 
upon  the  isolated  garrison  in  the  hills. 