

1  North  to  Hobart,  4th  May  1803. 


152  HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY   book  xm 


1803.  The  epidemic  fever  had  by  this  time  spread  over  the 
greater  part  of  Ceylon,  attacking  blacks  and  whites 
alike  with  savage  virulence.  In  Colombo  itself  it 
reduced  the  Fifty -first  from  four  hundred  to  one 
hundred  men  in  less  than  three  months  ;  and  within 
the  Kandian  territory  its  ravages  were  even  more 
frightful.  The  Kandians,  though  themselves  not  spared 
by  it,  welcomed  it  as  an  ally  and  seconded  it  with 
vigour.  The  newly  appointed  commissioner  to  the 
Seven  Korales  was  driven  from  his  post  within  a  month, 
leaving  his  secretary  dead  of  fever  behind  him.  The 
unhappy  transport-coolies,  who  were  still  employed  to 
carry  supplies  up  to  Kandy,  covered  the  road  with  their 
corpses,  falling  victims  some  to  the  sword,  some  to 
fever,  some  to  small-pox,  some  even  to  famine.  In 
Kandy  itself  by  the  third  week  in  June  the  British 
soldiers  were  dying  at  the  rate  of  six  a  day  ;  and  the 
Malay  troops,  their  only  comrades,  were  beginning  to 
desert.  The  Kandian  warriors  meanwhile  crept  nearer 
and  nearer  to  the  city,  entrenching  themselves  in  strong 
positions  until  their  time  should  come.  The  First 
Adigar,  wishing  to  cut  matters  short,  proposed  to 
Major  Davie,  upon  whom  the  chie£»  command  had 
devolved,  to  make  a  second  expedition  to  Hangaram- 
katty  in  pursuit  of  the  fugitive  king.  To  give  colour 
to  his  suggestion,  he  alleged  that  he  himself  was  out  of 
favour,  and  that  this  was  the  only  method  whereby 
peace  could  be  obtained  ;  but  Davie  was  not  to  be 
deceived  by  this  trick,  even  if  he  could  have  collected 
men  enough  for  the  enterprise.  For  his  British  soldiers 
did  not  cease  to  die,  nor  his  Malays  to  desert. 

North  now  realised  that  it  was  high  time  to  evacuate 
Kandian  territory  ;  and  accordingly  a  small  detachment 

June  17.  of  Ceylon  native  infantry  was  ordered,  on  the  17th  of 
June,  to  proceed  at  once  to  Kandy  in  order  to  help  to 
escort  the  sick.  But  from  the  extreme  difficulty  of 
procuring  coolies  the  party  was  unable  to  set  out  until 
the  26th  ;  and  meanwhile  the  Kandians  struck  their 

June  23.  decisive  blow.    On  the  23rd  the  posts  of  Geriagame 


ch.  v         HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  153 

and  Galle  Gedera  were  surprised  and  taken,  a  mishap  1803. 
which  seems  less  extraordinary  when  the  amazing  truth  June  2  3- 
is  told  that  in  each  of  them  there  were  stationed  but 
one  sergeant  and  twelve  privates  of  the  Malay  regiment, 
of  whom  one-third  had  deserted  already  to  the  enemy. 
By  the  fall  of  these  two  strong  places  communications 
between  Colombo  and  Kandy  were  finally  severed  ; 
and  on  that  same  day  the  First  Adigar  warned  Major 
Davie  that,  in  spite  of  all  his  efforts  to  prevent 
it,  the  British  garrison  in  Kandy  would  shortly  be 
attacked. 