

1  These  are  Cordiner's  figures,  which  seem  to  me  to  be  probably- 
correct.  The  last  return  of  the  garrison  shows  sixteen  British 
officers  and  thirty  men,  eleven  native  officers,  and  four  hundred 
and  sixty-five  native  troops  fit  for  duty. 


ch.  v         HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  155 

he  desired  to  embrace  and  protect  him.  Once  again  1803. 
Davie  refused  to  let  him  go;  and  the  messengers  J une  2  5- 
presently  returning  threatened  that,  if  Moottoo  Sawmy 
were  not  given  up,  the  King  would  send  his  whole  force 
to  seize  him  and  prevent  the  British  troops  from 
crossing  the  river.  Finally  Davie,  after  consultation 
with  his  officers,  told  Moottoo  that  he  had  no  longer 
power  to  detain  him,  and  that  the  King  had  promised 
to  treat  him  kindly.  Moottoo  answered  with  a  bitter 
reproach,  which  was  only  too  well  merited.  Davie  was 
in  a  difficult  position  ;  but  it  is  plain  that  he  and  his 
garrison  hoped  to  buy  their  own  salvation  by  throwing 
this  unfortunate  puppet,  whom  their  own  arms  had  set 
up,  as  a  sop  to  the  Kandians.  Though,  as  it  turned 
out,  Moottoo  Sawmy 's  fate  could  hardly  have  been 
different  whatever  the  decision  of  the  British  commander, 
yet  it  was  none  the  less  base  and  mean  to  abandon  him. 
The  victim  was  led  away  to  Kandy  and  to  instant  death  ; 
and  Davie  was  destined  to  pay  dearly  for  the  sacrifice. 

In  the  afternoon  a  few  Kandians  joined  the  British, 
and  made  ostensible  preparations  to  help  them  to  cross 
the  river,  both  then  and  on  the  following  morning.  June  26. 
Still  no  boats  appeared  ;  and  when,  after  many  diffi- 
culties, a  British  officer  succeeded  in  passing  a  warp 
to  the  opposite  bank,  the  rope  was  presently  cut  by  the 
Kandians.  Upon  this  the  Malays  and  lascars  began  to 
desert  in  small  parties  to  the  enemy  ;  and  at  eleven 
o'clock  a  mob  of  Kandians  ranged  themselves  close  to 
the  forlorn  British,  while  a  chief  advanced  to  bid  them 
in  the  King's  name  lay  down  their  arms  and  march 
back  to  Kandy,  on  pain  of  being  immediately  surrounded 
and  put  to  death.  With  extraordinary  infatuation, 
Davie  and  his  officers  decided  to  obey  ;  and  the  whole 
party  was  then  marched  off.  Presently  the  British 
were  halted  between  two  ranks  of  Kandians  ;  and  the 
Malays  were  bidden  to  advance,  which,  with  a  few 
exceptions,  they  did.  The  Europeans  were  then  led 
out  two  by  two,  and  their  brains  were  dashed  out  with 
the  butts  of  muskets.    Two  officers,  Davie  and  another, 


156  HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY   book  xm 


1803.  alone  were  preserved  and  taken  back  to  Kandy  ;  a  third 
June  26.  made  his  escape,  but  was  captured  and  soon  after- 
wards died  ;  one  corporal  of  the  Nineteenth,  named 
Barnsley,  though  desperately  wounded  and  left  for  dead, 
recovered  his  senses  and  contrived  to  crawl  back  to  Fort 
Macdowall.  Meanwhile  the  whole  of  the  Europeans 
in  hospital  at  Kandy  had  likewise  been  murdered  in 
cold  blood,  to  the  number,  according  to  one  account,  of 
one  hundred  and  twenty  ;  but  it  appears  more  likely 
that  the  full  tale  of  the  victims  amounted  to  nearly  one 
hundred  and  ninety.  In  a  word,  between  desertion  and 
massacre,  the  entire  garrison  of  Kandy  was  annihilated. 