

This  attack  was  the  signal  for  several  others  in 
various  quarters,  one  and  all  of  them  so  feeble,  spiritless, 
and  contemptible,  as  to  make  Davie's  weakness  more 
than  difficult  of  explanation.  Captain  Madge  of  the 
Nineteenth,  who  was  in  command  at  Fort  Macdowall, 
June  25.  was  assailed  on  the  25th  and  on  the  two  following  days, 
but  held  his  own  stoutly,  though  he  had  but  thirteen 
men,  fortunately  all  Europeans,  fit  for  duty.  Then 
Corporal  Barnsley  brought  the  news  of  the  massacre  at 
Kandy  ;  and  Madge  thought  it  prudent  to  evacuate 
the  post  by  night,  unfortunately  leaving  nineteen  sick 
men  of  his  regiment  behind  him  for  want  of  transport, 
but  bringing  off  three  officers.  For  four  days  he 
marched  towards  Trincomalee  under  an  incessant  fire, 
until  he  met  a  small  column  of  a  hundred  men  from  that 
garrison,  on  the  sight  of  which  the  enemy  instantly  fled. 
At  Dambadeniyawa  also  the  fort,  a  feeble  structure  of 
fascines  and  earth,  was  from  the  23rd  onwards  com- 
pletely blockaded  by  the  Second  Adigar,  who  sent  in  a 
daily  summons  to  surrender,  with  promises  of  peaceful 
evacuation,  transport  of  the  sick,  and  similar  temptations. 
Ensign  Grant  of  the  Malay  regiment,  who  held  the  post, 
had  no  more  than  fourteen  convalescent  men  of  the 
Nineteenth  and  twenty-two  invalid  Malays  ;  but  though 
himself  so  enfeebled  by  ill-health  that  he  could  hardly 
walk,  he  refused  to  hear  of  terms  of  surrender.  He 
June  30.  was  reinforced  on  the  30th  by  a  detachment  of  sixty 


ch.  v         HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY 


1S7 


men  which  had  been  designed  to  escort  coolies  to  Kandy  ;  1803 
but  their  ammunition  was  soon  exhausted,  and  the 
little  garrison  defied  its  enemy  with  the  bayonet  only, 
until  brought  off  by  a  party  of  one  hundred  men  on 
the  2nd  of  July.  The  relieving  force  had  to  storm  July 
more  than  one  battery  during  its  advance  ;  but  this 
was  not  a  dangerous  service,  for  the  Kandians  were  too 
cowardly  to  stand  for  a  moment  after  they  had  once 
fired  their  guns.  Never  was  there  a  more  miserable 
enemy  than  that  to  which  Davie  had  surrendered. 

However,  the  fact  remained  that  the  Kandians  had 
now  taken  the  offensive,  and  that  through  pestilence, 
massacre,  desertion,  and  general  mismanagement,  there 
were  very  few  troops  with  which  to  repel  them.  In 
fact  the  European  infantry  in  Ceylon  was  reduced  to 
little  more  than  six  hundred,  and  the  native  infantry  to 
fewer  than  three  hundred  bayonets.  North  therefore 
sent  urgent  messages  to  Madras,  Bombay,  and  Calcutta 
for  reinforcements,  which  request  was  not  the  more 
welcome  for  arriving  just  when  Arthur  Wellesley  was 
opening  his  campaign.  That  General  bluntly  character- 
ised the  whole  of  the  proceedings  at  Kandy  as  dis- 
graceful folly  ; 1  and  Lord  Wellesley  seems  to  have 
sent  no  answer.  Governor  Duncan,  on  the  other  hand, 
appears  to  have  been  really  anxious  to  oblige  North, 
probably  with  the  object  of  disobliging  Arthur  Wellesley. 
But  the  danger  of  Ceylon  upon  a  renewal  of  the  war 
with  France,  which  though  not  known  was  expected 
in  India,  made  it  impossible  to  refuse  all  help.  Lord 
Clive  therefore  prepared  to  send  at  once  from  Madras 
two  hundred  of  the  Thirty-fourth  Foot,  and  five 
hundred  native  infantry  known  as  the  Bengal  Volun- 
teers. North,  meanwhile,  in  despair  over  the  mortality 
in  the  native  regiments  from  jungle  fever,  began  to 
buy  African  slaves,  in  order  to  form  a  corps  on  the 
model  of  those  which  had  been  so  successful  in  the 
West  Indies.    Thus  in  Ceylon  there  was  witnessed  the 