

Kandians  under  it,  that  he  made  condescending  offers  ai 

to  grant  them  peace  if  the  King  were  deposed  and  the  C 

authors  of  the  massacre  punished.    The  whole  of  these  e 

overtures  were  rejected  with  scorn,  for  as  a  matter  of  1 

fact  the  Kandians  were  none  the  worse  for  the  blockade,  Ji 

though  the  villagers  were  incensed  t<*  madness  by  the  ii 

devastation  of  their  fields  and  the  shooting  down  of  ir 

their  fathers  and  brothers.    North,  however,  so  reported  « 

these  predatory  chases  as  to  make  them  appear  great  I 

operations.    This,  unfortunately,  as  a  rule,  they  were  m 

not  ;   but  one  exception  must  be  mentioned.     The  n 

officer  in  command  at  Batticaloa  misunderstood  the  i 
order  countermanding  the  general  attack  upon  Kandy, 
and  boldly  led  his  column,  consisting  of  sixty  men  of 
the  Nineteenth  and  two  hundred  native  troops,  straight 
upon  the  capital  by  a  new  and  untried  route.  He 
reached  it  after  a  march  of  nearly  two  hundred  miles, 
without  the  loss  of  a  man  ;  but  waiting  for  some  days 
for  the  remaining  columns  to  come  up,  he  found  his 
retreat  cut  off  by  large  bodies  of  Kandians.  Without 
hesitation,  he  attacked  and  forced  his  way  through  ;  nor 
1  North  to  Hobart,  3rd  March  1804. 


ch.v         HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  161 

would  he  have  suffered  much  loss  had  not  his  ammuni-  1804. 
tion  become  exhausted,  which  caused  a  panic  among 
his  native  troops  and  transport-coolies.  Finally  he 
returned  safely  to  British  territory  with  the  loss  of  nine  Oct.  1 
Europeans,  sixty  native  soldiers,  and  seventy-six  coolies 
killed  and  wounded.  Contemptible  though  the  enemy 
was,  this  was  a  creditable  feat  of  courage  and  endurance.1 
At  length  at  the  end  of  1804  a  letter  written  by 
the  commanding  officer  of  one  of  North's  predatory 
columns  found  its  way  to  the  hands  of  the  Duke  of 
York,  who  sent  it  to  the  Colonial  Office,  asking  if  these 
stories  of  destroying  paddy-fields  and  shooting  villagers 
were  true,  since  in  his  opinion  they  were  very  disgraceful 
to  the  British  arms.  Several  months  necessarily  elapsed 
before  the  question  could  be  passed  on  to  Governor 
North;  and  meanwhile  in  February  1805  an  exceedingly  1805. 
trivial  matter  encouraged  the  Kandians  to  renewed 
aggression.  General  Wemyss  and  the  Puisne  Judges  of 
Ceylon  fell  at  variance  about  a  minute  point  in  which 
each  party  conceived  that  its  dignity  was  concerned. 
The  General  behaved  with  extreme  foolishness,  the 
Judges  with  ridiculous  conceit ;  and  the  Judges  eventu- 
ally haled  the  General  before  them  while  he  was 
immersed  in  the  business  of  directing  the  blockading 
columns,  and  bound  him  over  to  keep  the  peace.  The 
Kandians,  hearing  of  the  quarrel,  seized  the  moment  to 
make  simultaneous  attacks  in  every  direction.  They 
were  of  course  repelled ;  and  their  rashness  brought  upon 
them  the  usual  reprisals  of  death  and  devastation  until 
July.  Nor  would  their  punishment  have  ceased  even 
then,  had  not  North  resigned  the  government  from  ill- 
health  ;  when  the  British  Ministers,  suspecting  that  all 
might  not  be  right  about  this  war,  sent  out  General 
Thomas  Maitland  to  succeed  him.2 