

1  North  to  the  Sec.  of  State,  25th  May,  25th,  30th  Sept.  1804, 
I'th  Jan.  1805. 

2  Colonel  Gordon  to  the  Colonial  Office,  15  th  Nov.  1804; 
^orth  to  the  Sec.  of  State,  8th,  21st  Feb.,  nth  March,  13th  April, 
loth  July  ;  Sec.  of  State  to  North,  21st  Feb.  1805  ;  Colonel  Wemyss 
.0  Colonial  Office,  14th  Feb.,  10th  March  1805. 

VOL.  V  M 


162  HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  book  xm 


Maitland  arrived  on  the  17th  of  July,  and  quickly 
realised  the  situation.    Overtures  for  peace  had  been 
made  by  the  Second  Adigar  in  June,  in  consequence  of 
the  King  of  Kandy  being  stricken  with  small-pox,  which 
was  interpreted  as  a  mark  of  the  divine  displeasure  ;  but 
these  were  as  little  genuine  as  any  of  the  previous 
proposals.    Maitland  resolved  to  wait  for  a  few  weeks 
in  case  the  King  should  feel  disposed  to  open  negotia- 
tions with  a  new  Governor,  being  determined,  in  the 
contrary  event,  to  take  the  initiative  himself.  He 
did  not  ostensibly  discontinue  preparations  to  meet 
further  aggression,  but  he  was  resolved  to  make  no 
further  offensive  movement  from  his  side ;  and  he 
issued  a  stern  order  to  forbid  the  cruel  and  useless 
burning  and  plundering  with  which  North  had  indulged 
his  columns.    It  was  none  too  soon,  for  the  troops  were 
already  thoroughly  demoralised.    Owing  to  the  laxity 
and  incompetence  of  Wemyss,  and   indeed   not   of  , 
Wemyss  only  but  of  the  entire  administration  both  i 
civil  and  military,   public  money  had   been   issued  2 
lavishly  to  every  subaltern  in  command  of  twenty  ( 
men  who  chose  to  ask  for  it  ;  and  the  result  was  an  l 
enormous  military  establishment,  scandalous  waste,  and  j 
great  financial  distress  in  the  Colony.    All  this  Maitland  f 
brought  summarily  to  an  end  with  a  strong  hand.    The  (( 
Sepoy  regiments  he  condemned  as  useless,  the  Malays  j 
as  both  useless  and  dangerous  ;  and  he  marked  out  <a 
both  for   speedy  disbandment.     But   above  all  he  r 
deplored  the  condition  of  the  British  regiments.  They 
were  lamentably  weak  in  numbers,  for  the  service  in  r 
tiny  detachments  had  killed  many  by  useless  fatigue, 
and  enervated  the  rest  by  giving  them  unlimited  oppor-  r. 
tunities  to  drink.  Their  discipline  also  was  very  seriously  .:. 
impaired.      The   Nineteenth,    which   had   been,    by  ;,' 
Maitland's  own  testimony,  one  of  the  finest  regiments  ; 
in  the  Service,  had  lost  all  sense  of  subordination  ;  . 
and  the  General  only  checked  the  evil  by  trying  the  : 
Major  and  a  Captain  by  court-martial  and  cashiering; 
the  Major.    By  this  timely  severity  and  by  massing  thq  : 


ch.v         HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  163 

troops    in  two   divisions   only,  at  Trincomalee   and  1805. 
Colombo,  order  was  presently  restored,  and  the  men 
regained  the  good  tone  and  the  discipline  that  they 
had  lost. 