

In  October  the  First  Adigar  reappeared  on  the  fron-  Oct. 
tier  as  if  to  make  an  inroad  upon  the  district  of  SafFragam  ; 
but  North,  having  received  his  reinforcements  from 
India,  to  which  Clive  had  added  three  hundred  men  of 
the  Tenth  Foot1  over  and  above  the  forces  already 
promised,  now  initiated  a  new  system  of  counter-raids 
by  small  detachments  upon  Kandian  territory.  These 
little  columns,  which  rarely  numbered  one  hundred  men, 
simply  hunted  the  unfortunate  inhabitants  away  from 
their  homes,  burned  their  houses,  destroyed  their  crops, 
and  cut  down  their  most  valuable  trees.  The  service 
meant  much  fatigue  though  little  danger  to  the  troops, 
but  since  it  left  them  free  to  plunder  and  destroy,  was 
by  no  means  unpopular.  North  was  much  elated  by 
the  successes  of  these  columns,  and  wrote  home  that  he 
hoped  to  open  a  decisive  campaign  in  July  1804, 
capture  the  First  Adigar,  depose  the  King,  and  annex 
Kandy.  General  Macdowall  went  home  at  the  end  of 
1803;  and  was  replaced  in  March  1804  by  Major- 1804. 
general  Wemyss,  who  entered  warmly  into  North's 
projects,  and  cheered  on  the  troops  against  their 
unfortunate  victims  with  a  zeal  worthy  of  a  better  cause. 
North  then  conceived  the  extraordinary  idea  of  com- 
bining with  his  incursions  a  general  blockade  of  the 
Kandian  territories,  so  as  to  cut  off  their  supplies  of  salt, 
and  put  an  end  to  all  commerce  ;  hoping  that  the  people 
would  thereby  be  incensed  against  the  King  and  depose 
him.    He  accordingly  divided  his  three  thousand  troops 

1  These  were  drafted  into  the  Nineteenth  and  Fifty-first. 


160  HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  book  xm 

1804.  into  minute  fractions,  with  the  fond  expectation  that 

by  so  doing  he  could  close  a  frontier  of  some  seven  1 

hundred  miles.    Wemyss  made  no  attempt  to  undeceive  i 

him  ;  indeed  it  seems  rather  that  he  fully  shared  the  i 

imbecility  of  North  ;  and  thus  the  British  troops  were  ] 

urged  on  still  further  in  their  career  of  demoralisation.1  ] 

Upon  the  news  of  the  first  disasters  at  Kandy  Lord  1 
Hobart  wrote  drily  in  March  1804  that  he  refrained 

from  all  comment,  but  would  send  reinforcements,  t 

These,  however,  did  not  arrive  until  September  ;  and  c 

meanwhile  a  sickly  season  wrought  havoc  among  the  1 

July.  British  soldiers.    Thus  when  July  came  and  the  question  s 

of  transport -coolies  with   other    kindred  difficulties  v 

required  to  be  faced,  North  decided  to  abandon  the  I 

decisive  campaign,  and  to  maintain  what  he  was  pleased  b 

to  call  his  blockade.    So  fully  did  he  believe  in  its  } 

efficacy  and  in  the  reports  of  the  sufferings  of  the  ti 