

Meanwhile,  owing  to  the  withdrawal  of  the  British 
raiding  columns,  the  war  died  a  natural  death.  "  I 
want  peace,"  wrote  Maitland,  u  first  in  order  to  regain 
our  prisoners,  and  secondly  to  enable  Ministers  to  tell 
Parliament  that  there  is  peace.  In  point  of  security  we 
are  just  as  well  off  as  though  peace  were  signed." 
Here  Maitland's  experience  as  a  member  of  the  House 
of  Commons  stood  him  in  good  stead  ;  but,  notwith- 
standing all  possible  moderation  in  his  proposals,  he 
was  unable  to  persuade  the  powers  at  Kandy  to  enter 
upon  any  formal  discussion  of  a  treaty.  He  therefore 
set  secret  agencies  to  work  in  the  hope  of  aiding  the 
prisoners  to  escape,  and  contrived  not  only  that  letters 
should  be  conveyed  to  Major  Davie,  but  that  his 
answer  should  be  safely  brought  to  hand.  That 
answer  told  a  miserable  story.  "  I,  Davie,  am  the 
only  prisoner  left,"  so  it  ran,  "  the  rest  are  all  dead, 
murdered,  or  starved.  I  am  without  meat  or  clothes. 
I  expect  not  to  survive  many  days.  Do  not  tell  my 
friends  that  I  am  alive."  Then  followed  advice  as 
to  the  conduct  of  an  expedition  to  Kandy,  with  a 
plan  for  his  escape,  and  near  the  end  the  ominous 
sentence,  "I  am  told  that  I  am  to  be  murdered  when 
my  countrymen  come  to  Kandy." 

Maitland's  schemes  for  the  captive's  escape,  though  he 
spared  neither  pains  nor  money  to  make  them  successful, 
proved  abortive  ;  and  for  months  and  years  no  more 
was  heard  of  the  unfortunate  Davie.  At  home  a 
piteous  petition  came  from  his  mother,  praying  for 
payment  of  his  allowances  to  herself ;  for  she  had 
six  daughters,  three  of  them  still  unmarried,  and 
no  means  of  support  but  her  son's  little  estate  near 
Edinburgh,  which  hungry  creditors  were  threaten- 
ling  to  seize.  In  Ceylon,  in  the  year  18 12,  when 
I  Maitland  had  left  the  island  and  a  new  General  had 


1 64  HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  book  xm 


1805.  come  to  take  his  place,  there  arrived  at  Colombo  two 
ragged  scraps  of  native  paper,  bearing  a  few  faint  and 
scarcely  legible  lines  scrawled  in  pencil  by  a  feeble 
and  exhausted  hand.1  These  pitiful  fragments,  which 
may  still  be  seen  deeply  buried  among  the  pompous 
folios  of  official  despatches,  were  the  last  sign  that  any 
white  man  saw  of  Davie.  Maitland's  agents  soon 
afterwards  reported  that  he  had  died  at  length  of 
dysentery  and  had  been  buried  secretly  in  the  jungle. 
If  his  weakness  on  his  march  out  of  Kandy  was 
culpable,  assuredly  he  atoned  for  his  fault  by  such 
a  penance  as  is  laid  upon  few  men  ;  for  he  languished 
a  prisoner  for  years  within  one  hundred  miles  of  British 
regiments,  which  practically  on  any  day  could  have 
marched  up  to  deliver  him.  Yet  Thomas  Maitland 
did  his  duty  when  he  refused  to  move  a  man  to 
save  him  ;  for  it  was  more  important  that  there  should 
be  peace  in  Ceylon  even  than  that  murdered  English- 
men should  be  avenged.  While  Davie  was  yet  living, 
Maitland,  as  shall  in  place  be  told,  was  summoned 