

1  North  to  Sec.  of  State,  31st  August  1803  ;  Wellington  Desp. 
(ii.  143,  165). 


158  HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  book  xiii 


1803.  extraordinary  spectacle   of  a   military   establishment  ' 

numbering  less  than  two  thousand  men,  but  including  1 

British,   Bengalis,  Madrasis,   Cingalese,  Malays,   and  ' 

Africans  ;  and  all  to  repel  an  enemy  of  which  two  i 

thousand  would  hardly  have  faced  one  hundred  British  i 
soldiers  in  the  open  field. 

However,  the  King  of  Kandy,  elated  by  his  success, 

now  sent  emissaries  to  all  quarters  to  detach  the  native  1 

subjects  of  the  British  from  their  allegiance  ;  and  by  1 

the  end  of  July  he  had  massed  large  forces  at  various  1 
points  on  the  frontier  to  second  any  rebellious  rising. 

The  sphere  entrusted  to  the  First  Adigar  was  the  district  t 

of  Matura,  at  the  extreme  south  of  the  island  ;  while  I 

the  King  formed  the  ambitious  design  of  marching  on  1 

Aug.  13.  Colombo  itself.    On  the  13th  of  August  intelligence  of  t 

the  renewal  of  war  with  France  reached  Ceylon  ;  and  f 

a  few  days  later  the  Adigar  advanced  within  twenty  I 

miles  of  Matura,  the  rebellious  inhabitants  meanwhile  I 

severing  communication  between  that  place  and  Galle.  s 

The  commandant  at  Matura  was  seized  with  panic,  and  t 

was  about  to  withdraw  to  Galle,  when  North  sent  round  la 

a  small  reinforcement  by  sea,  and  an  officer  to  supersede  1 

the  nervous  leader.    The  threatened  «iishap  was  thus  \ 

averted.    A  little  activity  soon  sufficed  to  drive  the  I 

Kandians  back  and  to  restore  order  among  the  in-  1 

habitants  in  this  quarter.    Nor  was  the  King's  invasion  \ 

Aug.  21.  much  more  successful.    On  the  21st  of  August  his  c 

bands  occupied  the  little  fort  of  Hangwell,  about  twenty  \ 

miles  east  of  Colombo,  and  even  advanced  five  miles  1 

nearer  to  the  town  ;  but  the  place  was  easily  retaken  and  j 

Aug.  27.  the  invaders  driven  back  with  some  loss.    Another  raid  : 

upon  the  ruined  fort  of  Chilaw,  on  the  west  coast  to  the  1 

north  of  Colombo,  was  as  futile,  for  two  young  civil  I 

servants  and  twenty-five  Sepoys  contrived  to  hold  the  t 

miserable  post  against  an  immense  number  of  Kandians  I 

for  twenty-four  hours,  until  relieved.    Finally  a  second  1 
grand  attack  upon  Hangwell  delivered  by  the  flower  of 
the  Kandian  army  under  the  King  in  person  was  beaten 
off  with  very  heavy  loss  by  a  garrison  of  fifty  Europeans 


1 


ch.v        HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  159 

and  about  thrice  as  many  native  troops.    The  casualties  1803. 
of  the  British  on  this  occasion  were  two  men  wounded  ;  AuS- 
those  of  the  enemy  were  known  to  have  exceeded  two 
hundred  and  seventy  killed  ;  but  the  most  welcome 
result  of  the  victory  was  the  recapture  of  the  lascars  of 
the  East  India  Company's  artillery,  who  had  been  made 
prisoners  after  Davie's  surrender.    Another  week  saw 
the  whole  of  the  district  cleared  of  the  enemy  ;  and 
though  in  September  the  Kandians  made  a  raid  upon  Sept. 
Batticaloa,  the  invasion  for  the  moment  came  to  an  end. 