

The  Swiss  difficulty  was  only  one  of  a  series  which 
were  beginning  to  arise  between  England  and  France. 
French  troops  still  continued  to  occupy  Holland,  though 
nominally  the  Batavian  Republic  was  independent  ;  and 
this  was  a  matter  upon  which  the  British  were  peculiarly 
sensitive.  Moreover,  commercial  relations  between  the 
two  countries  were  strained  ;  for  Bonaparte,  less  perhaps 
from  unfriendliness  than  from  extreme  ignorance  of 
everything  pertaining  to  trade,  had  determined  to  shut 
out  British  goods  from  all  markets  controlled  by  France. 
Remonstrance  from  England  upon  any  one  of  these 
matters  was  met  at  once  on  the  part  of  the  First 
Consul  by  the  demand  that  the  British  should  evacuate 
Malta.  But  on  this  point  the  Ministry  stood  firm. 
It  had  been  weak  enough  to  restore  its  conquests  in  the 
New  World  even  in  the  face  of  Bonaparte's  high-handed 
proceedings  in  Europe  ;  but  the  experience  of  the  last 
war  had  shewn  that,  under  existing  conditions,  the 
Mediterranean  was  the  true  field  of  operations  for  Eng- 
land against  France  ;  and  Addington  was  not  disposed 
lightly  to  yield  up  Malta.  In  fact  Lord  Whitworth, 
our   ambassador  in  Paris,   held    instructions  which 


172  HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  book  xm 


1802.  empowered  him  practically  to  claim  Malta  as  indemnity 
for  the  various  annexations  of  France. 

All  this,  however,  was  hidden  from  the  country  at 
large,  or  at  any  rate  Ministers  seemed  to  think  so.  A 
new  Parliament  met  in  November,  and  was  opened  by  a 
speech  from  the  Throne  so  colourless  that  no  one,  on 
reading  it,  could  have  guessed  that  England  had  not 
for  years  been  living  in  a  state  of  profound  peace. 
Grenville  in  the  Lords  and  Windham  in  the  Commons, 
as  became  men  who  had  disapproved  the  Peace  of 
Amiens,  did  indeed  call  attention  to  Bonaparte's 
proceedings  in  the  bitterest  terms  ;  but  Pitt  was  silent ; 
Fox,  of  course,  took  the  opposite  view  ;  and,  after  the 
effusion  of  a  suitable  volume  of  prose  by  Addington, 
the  address  of  thanks  was  passed  with  little  ceremony. 
When,  however,  the  estimates  came  up  for  discussion 
in  the  first  week  of  December,  the  case  was  different. 
For  the  Navy,  Ministers  had  begun  by  proposing 
thirty  thousand  seamen.  This  number  they  suddenly 
increased  to  fifty  thousand,  alleging  first  that  the 
additional  twenty  thousand  would  be  wanted  for  a  few 
months  only,  but  finally  asking  for  them  as  part  of 
the  establishment  for  the  year.1  Tlae  estimates  for 
the  Army  likewise  testified  to  a  certain  uneasiness. 
The  Secretary  at  War  began  by  reciting  at  length 
the  various  forces  of  France,  setting  down  their  total 
at  over  nine  hundred  thousand  men,  after  which  he 
asked  money  for  an  establishment  of  over  one  hundred 
and  forty-three  thousand  men  ;  sixty-six  thousand 
of  them  for  the  United  Kingdom,  twenty-three  thou- 
sand for  India,  forty-two  thousand  for  the  Colonies, 
and  twelve  thousand  artillery.  Of  those  detailed  for 
service  at  home  five  thousand  represented  the  men 
who  had  formerly  been  called  Invalids,  and  had  been 
organised  into  independent  companies.  They  were  now 
distributed  into  seven  Garrison  Battalions.  Among  the 
troops  abroad  were  over  three  thousand  foreigners,  com- 
prehending the  regiments,  nominally  Swiss,  of  Meuron, 
1  Pari.  Hist,  xxxvi.  1054. 