


170 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY   book  xiii 


1802,  showed  particular  reluctance  to  loosen  their  hold  upon 
Swiss  ground.  The  result  was  that  the  unfortunate 
people  were  unable  to  arrive  by  any  peaceful  process  at 
a  decision  regarding  the  government  which  they  really 
required.  There  were  two  parties  in  the  country,  of 
which  the  one  favoured  a  strong  centralised  adminis- 
tration, and  the  other  the  retention  of  large  independent 
powers  by  each  canton.  This  latter  had,  for  very  good 
reasons,  been  the  system  of  the  old  Swiss  Confederacy. 
But,  as  fast  as  one  party  came  into  power,  the  French 
authorities  after  a  few  months  arranged  or  connived  at 
a  revolution  to  displace  it,  so  as  to  keep  the  country  in 
continual  commotion  and  afford  constant  pretexts  for 
the  intervention  of  Bonaparte.  The  truth  was  that  his 
heart  was  set  upon  gaining  possession  of  Valais  in  order 
to  construct  a  military  road  over  the  Simplon  pass  ; 
and  until  he  could  obtain  this  he  was  not  disposed  to 
relax  his  grip  upon  Switzerland.  At  length  in  July  he 
was  prevailed  upon  to  withdraw  his  troops,  and  to  leave 
the  country  to  determine  for  itself  the  form  of  its 
government.  The  issue  was  submitted  to  the  vote  of 
the  whole  body  of  the  people  ;  and  the  majority 
against  centralisation  was  so  great  as  te»  leave  no  room 
for  further  doubt.  None  the  less  the  minority  refused 
to  accept  their  defeat,  whereupon  their  opponents 
rushed  to  arms,  and  were  in  mid  career  of  a  victorious 
enforcement  of  their  vote  at  the  polls,  when  Bonaparte 
Sept.  30.  suddenly  interfered.  His  troops  once  again  crossed 
the  frontier  ;  and  he  declared  that  the  new  Constitution 
of  Switzerland  must  be  arranged  at  Paris  under  his 
mediation. 

So  shameless  a  violation  of  the  Treaty  of  Luneville 
naturally  caused  agitation  at  every  court  in  Europe  ; 
but  the  excitement  was  short-lived.  Prussia,  in 
the  hope  of  gaining  further  territory  in  Germany, 
was  too  abjectly  subservient  to  the  First  Consul 
to  protest.  Austria  was  too  jealous  of  Prussia  to 
think  of  Switzerland  ;  Russia  showed  indifference  ; 
and  England  alone  stood  out  heartily  for  the  cause  of 


ch.vi        HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  171 

Swiss  independence.  So  seriously  did  Addington's  1 
Ministry  treat  the  question  that  vessels  were  at  once 
despatched  to  the  West  Indies,  the  East  Indies,  and 
the  Cape  to  cancel,  until  further  directions,  the  orders 
for  the  restitution  of  the  Dutch  and  French  colonies  ; 
and,  as  has  been  seen,  Pondicherry  and  Chandernagore 
were  still  in  the  hands  of  the  British  when  the  war  was 
renewed.  But,  finding  themselves  unsupported  by 
other  powers,  the  British  Ministers  gave  way  about 
Switzerland  ;  and  fresh  commands  were  issued  for  the 
redelivery  of  the  French  and  Dutch  colonies  to  their 
former  masters.  Bonaparte  then  regulated  the  new 
Constitution  of  Switzerland  according  to  his  own 
ideas,  which  were  calculated,  as  a  Swiss  patriot  com- 
plained, to  assure  to  the  country  all  domestic  happi- 
ness, but  to  annihilate  it  as  a  political  factor  in 
Europe. 