

167 


i68 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  book  xiii 


1802.  at  once  on  one  hundred  thousand  men  for  purposes  of 
defence.1 

May  4.  Not  many  days  later  a  bill  was  brought  in  to  enable 
the  country  to  accept  an  offer  from  certain  corps  of 
Yeomanry  and  Volunteers  to  continue  their  service  ; 
and  on  this  occasion  a  gentleman  was  found  to  protest 
against  the  maintenance  of  such  an  establishment,  "  when 
the  country  was  in  a  state  of  profound  tranquillity,"  as 
"  adverse  to  the  ancient  constitutional  practice  of  the 
realm."  The  unfortunate  British  Constitution  has 
been  invoked  as  the  protectress  of  many  foolish  senti- 
ments, but  rarely  of  an  opinion  quite  so  foolish  as  this. 
However,  the  voice  of  this  objector  passed  unheeded, 
for  the  times  were  too  serious  for  the  pastime  of 
pedantry  ;  and  without  further  examination  at  present 
into  its  provisions,  it  must  suffice  to  say  that  the  bill 
was  passed.  New  estimates  were  shortly  afterwards 
introduced  for  the  Army  ;  and  for  the  first  time  in 
history  the  regiments  were  designated  to  the  House  of 
Commons  by  their  numbers  as  well  as  by  the  names  of 
their  Colonels  ;  a  welcome  change,  which,  slight  though 
it  was,  signified  that  the  proprietary  rights  of  Colonels 
were  beginning  to  lose  their  primeval  sacredness.  The 
establishment  was  fixed  at  rather  over  seventy  thousand 
men  for  the  United  Kingdom,  over  twenty-five  thousand, 
including  six  West  India  Regiments,  for  the  Colonies, 
and  over  twenty-six  thousand  for  India ;  which,  added 
to  ten  thousand  artillerymen,  made  a  total  of  over  one 
hundred  and  thirty-two  thousand  men.  The  regiments 
of  cavalry  included,  besides  the  Household  regiments 
and  those  of  Dragoon  Guards,  twenty-three  regiments 
of  Dragoons,  the  three  last  being  those  which  we  have 
seen  fighting  with  such  distinction  in  India.  Among 
the  infantry  neither  the  Ninetieth,  the  Ninety-second, 
nor  the  Ninety-third  found  a  place,  the  order  for  their 
disbandment  having  gone  forth  on  the  6th  of  May  ; 
but  the  Scots  Brigade  still  bore  prophetically  the 
number  Ninety-four,  and  Manningham's  Rifles,  at  a 

1  Pari.  Hist,  xxxvi.  535  sq. 


ch.vi        HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  169 

ridiculously  low  strength,  were  still  at  hand  to  claim  1802. 
that  of  Ninety-five.  Fencible  corps  had  received  their 
death-warrant  at  the  same  time  as  the  Ninetieth  ;  and 
second  battalions  were  passed  or  passing  into  the  first 
battalions  of  their  own  or  of  other  regiments.  But 
these  estimates  were  calculated  to  be  valid  only  from 
June  to  December  ;  and  many  things  were  to  happen 
before  December. 

As  has  already  been  told,  the  first  alarm  to  the 
Ministry  was  given  by  Bonaparte's  expedition  to  St. 
Domingo.  But  Bonaparte,  unfortunately  for  himself, 
had  always  a  new  project  upon  the  stocks  before  the 
first  was  fairly  launched.  Now,  in  the  negotiations 
at  Amiens  the  King  of  Sardinia  had  been  one  of  the 
potentates  for  whom  the  British  envoy  had  made  special 
efforts,  in  the  hope  of  gaining  for  him  some  indemnity 
for  the  territory  which  the  French  had  taken  from  him  in 
Italy  and  merged  in  the  Italian  Republic.  On  the  21st  Sept. 
of  September  1802  Bonaparte  by  formal  decree  annexed 
Piedmont  to  France,  thus  reducing  the  dominions  of 
the  King  to  the  island  from  which  he  took  his  title. 
Valid  excuse  for  this  proceeding  there  was  none  ;  but 
there  was  a  sufficiently  valid  reason  in  that  the  possession 
of  Piedmont  assured  that  of  the  pass  of  Mont  Cenis. 
A  month  later,  upon  the  death  of  the  Duke  of  Parma, 
his  duchy  was  likewise  annexed  to  France,  though 
Bonaparte  had  raised  the  legitimate  heir  to  the  rank  of 
King  of  Etruria,  and  had  thereby  gained  from  Spain  the 
vast  province  of  Louisiana.  Finally  the  First  Consul 
laid  violent  hands  on  a  country  which  appealed  far 
more  than  Piedmont  or  Parma  to  the  sympathy  of  the 
British  of  all  parties.  Ever  since  the  first  interference 
of  the  Directory  with  Switzerland  in  1798,  that 
unhappy  land  had  been  impoverished  and  oppressed  by 
the  presence  of  large  bodies  of  French  troops.  Its 
independence,  and  its  right  as  the  Helvetian  republic 
to  decide  upon  its  own  form  of  government,  had  been 
guaranteed  by  the  Treaty  of  Luneville  ;  but  still  the 
French  battalions  remained  in  their  old  quarters  and 