

1  Here  is  the  full  text. 

_        "August  18 1 1. 

"  Gen.  Wilson — Oh  be  expeditious  in  saving  me.  Is  there  any 
question  that  my  wishes  are  to  be  released  hence  without  delay  ? 
I  have  no  means  to  propose  than  those  formerly  mentioned.  I  have 
wrote  several  times  within  these  10  months  and  have  got  three 
small  slips  of  paper  without  signature.  Messenger  is  of  no  use 
being  in  [sic)  daily  sick  unto  death  without  money,  clothes,  or  food  ; 
please  send  me  a  little  opium  or  laudanum  to  alleviate  my  pains  ; 
expect  to  die  daily  ;  could  be  carried  by  dooly  by  way  of  Gambo 
and  Ganda.  [Here  follow  illegible  scraps  about  mohurs  and  rupees.] 
If  you  no  intentions  {sic)  of  speedily  doing  something  send  me  a 
pair  of  pistols  to  terminate  my  painful  existence,  twelve  months 
unable  to  rise  from  mat  [illegible]  a  pen-knife,  a  little  rum,  gin,  or 
brandy  and  laudanum,  stopping  at  Kalug  [illegible]  and  when  night 
falls  sending  a  party  with  a  dooly  might  get  out  of  the  country 
[illegible]  distance  without  a  shot  being  fired  at  as  my  anguish 
[illegible].  (signed) 

"Ad.  Davie." 

Second  scrap  about  4^x2  inches. 

"  My  anguish  of  body  is  insupportable,  and  I  see  but  imperfectly 
my  dear  friend.    No  paper.    My  complaints  are  [illegible]." 


ch.v         HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  165 

to  reinforce  the  Indian  Army  at  a  moment  of  supreme  1805. 
danger,  and  was  able  to  answer  to  the  call.1 

So  ended  this  forgotten  episode  of  the  Great  War, 
an  episode  which  perhaps  may  be  thought  undeserving 
of  the  space  that  has  been  allotted  to  it.  Yet  it  came 
at  a  most  critical  time  alike  for  England  and  for  India, 
when  both  were  required  to  send  to  Ceylon  regiments 
which  could  ill  be  spared,  and  both ,  made  shift  to 
despatch  them  ;  and  to  India  this  might  well  have  been 
of  most  serious  consequence.  The  losses  in  action 
were  trifling  ;  yet  this  futile  enterprise,  thoughtlessly 
undertaken  and  thoughtlessly  carried  out,  must  have 
cost  the  lives,  directly  or  indirectly,  of  little  fewer  than 
a  thousand  British  soldiers  and  of  fully  as  many  natives, 
and  that  at  a  moment  when  every  soldier's  life  was 
precious.  The  arrival  of  a  French  armament  before 
Ceylon  in  1805 — and  North  was  warned  that  one  was 
likely  to  appear  in  August — would  have  found  the 
British  troops  thinned,  worn  out,  and  demoralised  ;i  while 
the  capture  of  Trincomalee  would  have  so  heartened 
the  Mahrattas  and  their  allies  that  they  might  have 
gone  near  to  sweep  the  British  out  of  India.  None  of 
these  things  occurred,  and  the  Kandian  war  of  1 803  to 
1805  has  been  utterly  forgotten  ;  but  it  may  serve  at 
least  as  a  warning  of  the  mischief  that  may  be  done 
by  a  foolish  Governor  seconded  by  a  foolish  General. 