

Mar.  13.  address  to  Whitworth,  which  was  only  cut  short  by  the 
freezing  silence  of  the  Ambassador  ;   but  the  First 
1  Desbriere,  Projets  et  tentatives  de  debarquement,  iii.  6-8. 


ch.vi        HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  175 

Consul  did  not  deceive  himself  as  to  the  true  meaning  1803. 
of  the  situation,  and  sent  a  despatch-vessel  in  all  haste  Mar.  16. 
to  divert  Decaen's  expedition  from  Pondicherry  to 
Mauritius.  He  had  made  the  enormous  blunder  of 
treating  the  Court  of  St.  James's  as  if  it  had  been  the 
Court  of  Naples  ;  and  the  result  was  that  the  renewal 
of  hostilities  was  not  to  await  his  good  pleasure  until 
October  1804,  but  was  to  be  forced  upon  him  at  once, 
while  his  preparations  were  still  incomplete,  and  his 
great  West  Indian  expedition  hopelessly  compromised. 
The  British  Ministry  made  a  last  effort  to  come  to  an 
understanding  ;  but  Bonaparte  was  so  furious  at  the 
British  retention  of  Malta,  as  a  pledge  for  proper  con- 
cessions from  France,  that  no  one  durst  broach  the  matter 
to  him.  He  made  a  final  attempt  by  a  shallow  device  to 
gain  time  ;  but  Whitworth  was  not  to  be  hoodwinked  ; 
and  on  the  16th  of  May  1803  England  declared  war.    May  16. 

The  First  Consul  instantly  retorted  by  an  order  that 
all  Englishmen  in  France  between  the  ages  of  eighteen 
and  sixty  should  be  detained  as  prisoners  of  war.  The 
pretext  for  this  decree,  which  condemned  some  ten 
thousand  innocent  men  to  indefinite  detention  and  in 
many  cases  to  ruin,  was  that  two  French  merchantmen 
had  been  captured  by  British  frigates  before  the 
declaration  of  hostilities.  This,  as  was  so  frequent  with 
Bonaparte's  statements,  was  entirely  and  demonstrably 
false.  There  was  no  excuse  for  this  outrageous  action  ; 
there  was  no  reason  for  it  except  the  spiteful  rage  of  an 
ungovernable  man  who  had  been  unable  to  have  his 
own  way.  It  is  too  often  forgotten  that  Bonaparte  the 
First  Consul  could  be  quite  as  mean  and  petty  when 
thwarted  as  Bonaparte  the  captive  of  St.  Helena.  The 
result  of  the  decree  was  that  England  entered  upon  the 
war  not  only  with  indignation  but  with  intense  and 
implacable  hatred. 

Since  the  crisis  in  Switzerland,  Ministers  had 
suspended  many  of  the  reductions  ordered  in  the 
Army.  The  disbandment  of  the  Ninetieth,  Ninety- 
second,  and  Ninety-third,  as  well  as  of  the  second 


176 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  bookxiii 


1803.  battalion  of  the  Fifty-second,  had  been  revoked  between 
October  and  December  1802  ;  and  the  last  named  was 
in  January  erected  into  a  separate  regiment  and 
numbered  the  Ninety-sixth.  The  Cavalry  and  Guards 
had  also  been  slightly  augmented  in  March,  so  that 
preparations  were  far  less  backward  than  usual  at  the 
beginning  of  a  war,  and  the  Ministry  could  take  the 
offensive  at  once.  There  was  no  doubt  as  to  the 
quarter  in  which  the  first  blow  should  be  struck.  In 
St.  Domingo  the  French  were  barely  holding  their  own 
against  the  negroes,  and  their  chief  support  was  the 
fleet  under  Admiral  Latouche  Treville  which  lay  at 
Cap  Francois.  Before  the  French  ships  could  escape, 
Admiral  Duckworth  had  brought  his  squadron  to 
blockade  them,  thus  not  only  hemming  in  the  ships 
but  cutting  off  all  supplies  from  the  troops  ashore. 
This  was  a  serious  matter,  for,  unless  they  have  been 
grievously  maligned,  many  of  the  French  generals 
used  the  campaign  simply  as  a  means  of  enriching 
themselves  by  plunder  and  embezzlement.1  The 
negroes  welcomed  the  unexpected  aid  of  the  British 
exultingly ;  and  Duckworth's  cruisers  played  havoc 
among  the  French  transports  and  smaller  men-of-war 
which  were  on  the  coast.  A  frigate  with  a  General 
Morgan  and  five  hundred  French  troops  on  board  was 
the  first  capture  ;  and  Morgan  reported  that  the  army 
and  the  fleet  together  had  already  lost  sixty  thousand 
men  since  the  first  invasion  of  the  island.  Within  a 
week  or  two  the  Commandant  of  the  French  garrison 
at  Leogane  entreated  the  Captain  of  H.M.S.  Racoon  to 
take  himself  and  his  men  on  board  as  captives  ;  and  he 
was  refused  only  because  the  frigate,  already  encumbered 
by  prisoners  from  a  captured  transport,  could  hold  no 
more.  Then  the  Duquesne,  a  French  seventy-four,  tried 
to  escape  from  Cap  Francois,  but  was  taken  ;  though 
a  more  fortunate  consort,  the  Duquay  Trouin,  together 
with  a  frigate,  contrived  to  sail  safely  away.  The 