

It  is  idle  to  rail  at  the  treachery  of  the  Kandians, 
and  to  exalt  the  good  faith  and  virtuous  intentions  of 
the  British.  Independence  is  as  dear  to  primitive  races 
as  to  the  most  highly  civilised  nation.  Deceit  is  the 
natural  resource  of  the  weak  against  the  strong,  and 
duplicity  has  nowhere  been  carried  to  such  perfection 
of  art  as  in  the  East.  The  story  of  Kandy  is  one  that 
will  be  frequently  repeated  in  this  history,  the  story  of 
a  column  which  marches  to  an  oriental  capital  with  easy 
triumph,  and  returns  not  again.    Usually  the  destruc- 

1  Maitland  to  the  Sec.  of  State,  19th,  28th  July  ;  4th,  18th,  19th 
Aug.  ;  19th,  28th  Oct ;  22nd  Nov.  1805  ;  28th  Feb.  ;  20th  Sept. 
1806. 


i66 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  book  xiii 


tion  of  the  first  column  is  followed  immediately  by  the 
advance  of  a  second  ;  but  it  was  not  so  in  Ceylon  in 
1803.  The  tattered  scraps  which  record  Davie's  agony 
are  the  crown  of  the  whole  enterprise  ;  and  it  is  a 
crown  of  thorns.  No  long  time  was,  however,  to  elapse 
before  the  Kings  of  Kandy  should  cease  to  be,  and 
their  historic  throne  should  find  a  new  home  in 
Windsor  Castle. 

The  authorities  for  this  account  of  the  Kandian  war  are  : 
Colonial  Correspondence,  Ceylon,  vols,  vii.-xxiv.  ;  and  Cordiner's 
Description  of  Ceylon,  vol.  ii.  The  latter  is  based  principally  upon 
official  papers,  supplemented  by  private  inquiries  by  the  author, 
and  bears  strong  marks  of  having  been  inspired  by  Governor  North. 


CHAPTER  VI 


From  the  troubles  in  the  East,  which  it  has  been  J802. 
necessary  to  follow  by  anticipation  until  far  into  the 
renewed  contest  against  Napoleon,  I  return  now  to 
England,  which  we  left  enjoying  the  hope  rather  than  the 
fruition  of  peace  in  March  1802.  It  was  somewhat 
significant  that  within  three  weeks  of  the  signature  of  the 
Treaty  of  Amiens  the  Government  thought  it  necessary 
to  introduce  a  bill  to  consolidate  the  militia-laws  and 
augment  the  Militia.  "  The  benefits  of  peace,"  said 
Mr.  Secretary  Yorke,  when  proposing  the  measure, 
"  can  only  be  derived  from  placing  the  country  in  a 
proper  position  of  defence,"  an  eternal  truth  which  for 
once  was  accepted  by  the  House  of  Commons,  thanks 
to  the  national  dread  of  Bonaparte  and  the  military 
organisation  of  France.  The  establishment  of  Militia 
was  fixed  by  this  Act  at  seventy-two  thousand  men  for 
Great  Britain  ;  forty-nine  thousand  of  whom  were  to 
be  at  once  enrolled  for  twenty-one  days'  training,  and 
the  remainder  to  be  called  up  in  case  of  emergency  by 
proclamation.  The  bill,  of  which  more  shall  presently 
be  said,  was  passed  without  opposition,  rather  indeed 
with  the  approval  of  all  parties  ;  and  the  fact  was 
extremely  significant.  It  is  true  that  many  prominent 
members,  and  notably  Fox,  were  absent  from  Parliament, 
being  attracted  by  very  pardonable  curiosity  to  the 
court  of  the  First  Consul  at  Paris.  But  no  one  felt  any 
confidence  that  peace  could  endure  for  long  ;  and  hence 
this  unique  acceptance  of  the  proposition  that,  in  the 
event  of  war,  England  ought  to  be  able  to  lay  her  hands 