


ch.vi        HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  173 

Rohan  and  Watteville,  together  with  Stuart's  battalion,  1 
at  first  Minorquin  but  now  composed  chiefly  of  Germans, 
which  had  distinguished  itself  so  greatly  in  Egypt. 
Lastly  eight  thousand  volunteers,  principally  cavalry, 
had  enrolled  themselves  for  continued  service  in 
England,  and  nearly  thrice  that  number  in  Ireland  ; 
and  altogether  it  was  reckoned  that  the  country  could 
count  upon  two  hundred  thousand  men,  exclusive  of 
the  troops  in  India. 

It  is  satisfactory  to  be  able  to  add  that  the  Commons 
showed  no  backwardness  to  vote  the  money  required  of 
them.  Bonaparte's  treatment  of  Switzerland  had  so 
incensed  all  parties  that  even  Sheridan  gave  his  voice 
heartily  for  a  large  military  force.  Fox  almost  alone 
advocated  a  reduction,  making  light  of  any  idea  of 
invasion,  and  apparently  contemplating  with  perfect 
serenity  a  disembarkation  of  Bonaparte  in  England 
with  fifty  thousand  men,  which  he  declared  to  be  the 
largest  possible  army  that  could  be  conveyed  across  the 
Channel  in  the  relative  state  of  the  forces  of  England 
and  France.  He  even  committed  himself  to  the 
characteristic  proposition  that  by  maintaining  twenty- 
five  thousand  men  less,  the  country  would  shortly  gain 
twenty-five  million  pounds  more  to  apply  to  her  defence 
against  aggression.  It  is  precisely  from  acting  upon 
this  fallacious  opinion  that  England  has  built  up  her 
national  debt.  Fox  must  have  known  perfectly  well 
that  time  as  well  as  money  is  needed  to  produce  trained 
and  disciplined  soldiers,  and  that  no  number  of  millions 
can  abridge  that  time.  Pitt  took  no  part  in  the  debate  ; 
and,  seeing  that  he  had  actually  reduced  the  Army  in 
1792,  he  was  probably  prudent  to  hold  his  peace  when 
ten  years  later  his  great  rival  proposed  to  outdo  that 
egregious  blunder. 

Meanwhile  at  Paris  matters  were  coming  rapidly  to 
a  crisis.  Since  the  publication  of  Sebastiani's  menacing 
report  as  to  Egypt,  Lord  Whitworth  had  been  instructed 
to  declare  that  England  would  not  evacuate  Malta 
until  reassured  as  to  Bonaparte's  designs  upon  the 


174  HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  book  xiii 


1803.  valley  of  the  Nile  and  the  Ottoman  Empire  at  large. 

Feb.  18.  The  First  Consul  thereupon  took  the  occasion  of  a 
reception  at  the  Tuileries  to  treat  Whitworth  to  a 
torrent  of  menace  and  invective  which  lasted  for  nearly 
two  hours.  Such  an  outburst  was  ill-calculated  to 
produce  any  great  impression  upon  an  English  gentle- 
man, who  was  not  to  be  intimidated,  and  was,  perhaps, 
not  ill-pleased  to  see  how  low  so  great  and  formidable 

Feb.  20.  a  man  could  abase  himself.  But  two  days  later 
Bonaparte  addressed  an  inflated  message  to  his  own 
Legislative  Assemblies  upon  the  state  of  the  Republic, 
in  which  his  threats  were  renewed.  "  In  England,"  he 
said,  "  there  are  two  parties  that  struggle  for  power  ;  one 
of  them  has  made  peace,  the  other  has  sworn  implacable 
hatred  to  France.  While  this  strife  of  parties  continues, 
the  Republic  must  take  its  measures  of  precaution. 
Half  a  million  men  must  be  and  shall  be  ready  to 
defend  and  avenge  her.  .  .  .  England  will  never  be 
able  to  draw  other  nations  into  new  coalitions.  .  .  . 
Alone  England  cannot  stand  up  against  France. " 
This,  together  with  Whitworth's  report  of  the  scene 
at  the  Tuileries,  roused  the  spirit  of  the  British 
Ministers  and  still  more  that  of  the-JGng.  On  the 
Mar.  8.  8th  of  March  a  Royal  message  was  brought  down 
to  both  Houses  setting  forth  the  need  for  measures 
to  countervail  the  preparations  which  were  said  to 
be  going  forward  in  the  ports  of  France  and  Holland. 
As  a  matter  of  fact  those  preparations  were  as  yet 
trifling ; 1  and  Bonaparte's  activity  was  more  easily  to 
be  traced  at  home,  where  French  spies  and  agents  of 
disaffection  had  been  freely  dispersed  both  in  England 
Mar.  9.  and  in  Ireland.  However,  the  message  was  met  by 
an  unanimous  address  of  thanks  from  both  Houses  ; 
Fox  carping  but  not  opposing  in  the  Commons,  and 
Moira  warmly  supporting  in  the  Lords.  Bonaparte 
used  this  proceeding  as  a  pretext  for  another  violent 