

1  Evidently  the  letter  was  accompanied  by  returns,  which  are! 
not  now  to  be  found. 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY 


179 


isation  ;  and  that  the  British  officers  in  Jamaica,  who  1 
usually  were  glad  to  meet  their  gallant  brethren  of 
France,  could  not  bring  themselves  to  consort  with  the 
prisoners  of  St.  Domingo.  "  Their  generals  as  a  rule," 
wrote  General  Nugent  from  Jamaica,  "  are  a  low 
ignorant  set  of  people  who  talk  of  nothing  but  their 
own  prowess  and  the  supremacy  of  the  Great  Nation. 
.  .  .  The  incapacity  and  atrocious  conduct  of  their 
chiefs  in  St.  Domingo  are  proverbial."  Yet  these  were 
the  men  sent  out,  with  excellent  soldiers  under  them,  by 
Bonaparte  ;  and  the  fact  is  a  very  grave  reflection  upon 
either  his  honesty  or  his  judgment.1 

But  it  was  not  only  to  leeward  that  the  British 
Ministers  turned  their  eyes.  Pitt's  example  was  still 
before  them,  and  the  conquest  of  the  French  Windward 
islands  promised  to  be  easy,  for  on  that  side  also 
Bonaparte's  treacherous  policy  towards  the  negroes  had 
borne  fruit.  Martinique,  it  is  true,  had  been  taken 
over  from  the  British  practically  unchanged  ;  but  when 
Richepanse  came  before  Guadeloupe  in  April  1802  he 
found  the  two  divisions  of  the  island,  Grande  Terre 
and  Basse  Terre,  each  under  the  rule  of  a  mulatto.  In 
Grande  Terre  the  French  troops  were  received  without 
opposition,  but  in  Basse  Terre  they  were  defied,  and  for 
a  time  successfully.  In  truth  the  French  force  was  so 
abominably  ill-provided  and  equipped  that  Richepanse 
was  forced  to  buy  clothing  and  shoes  wherever  he  could 
find  them,  and  even  to  borrow  ammunition  from  the 
British.  However,  by  the  end  of  May  he  had  virtually 
crushed  all  resistance,  though  with  the  loss  of  about  two 
thousand  out  of  three  thousand  French  troops,  dead  or 
disabled  in  action  or  by  sickness.  In  fact  it  was  mainly 
by  the  exertions  of  a  corps  of  black  troops  under  a  chief 
named  Pelage  that  Richepanse  finally  prevailed;  yet 
no  sooner  had  this  force  done  its  work  than  the  French 
General  ordered  every  man  of  it  to  be  embarked  and 

1  Col.  Corres.  Jamaica.  Nugent  to  Sec.  of  State,  21st  July, 
9th  Sept.,  8th  Oct.,  19th  Nov.,  19th,  21st,  25th  Dec.  1803  ; 
14th  Jan.,  10th,  nth  March,  20th  May,  10th  June  1804. 


180  HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  book  xii 

1802.  deported  to  Rattan,  from  whence  there  was  e very- 
prospect  that  they  would  ultimately  be  shipped  off  to 
the  mines  on  the  Spanish  Main.  Before  the  hurri- 
cane season  was  ended  Richepanse  was  dead  of  yellow 
fever  ;  but  his  successor,  as  was  natural,  steadily  carried 
forward  the  disarmament  of  the  negroes,  regarding  all 
black  regiments  as  an  accursed  thing.  He  was  really 
only  trying  to  execute  Bonaparte's  avowed  policy  of 
re-establishing  slavery.1 