

It  was  therefore  tolerably  certain  that  the  French 
negroes  would  not  take  up  arms  with  any  great 
enthusiasm  for  their  new  commanders ;  and,  apart 
from  this,  the  extreme  aversion  of  the  French 
authorities  from  black  troops  worked  by  a  curious 
chain  of  circumstances  greatly  to  their  damage  and  to 
the  profit  of  the  British.  In  April  1802  the  British 
islands  were  startled  by  the  news  that  on  the  night  of 
April  9;  the  9th  the  Eighth  West  India  Regiment  at  Dominica 
had  risen  in  mutiny,  and  had  murdered  three  of  their 
officers  and  the  whole  of  their  white  non-commissioned 
officers  with  shocking  and  hideous  mutilation.  The 
mutineers  were  quelled  after  a  short  pitched  battle 
which  cost  them  over  one  hundred  casualties  and  their 
assailants  nearly  thirty  killed  and  wounded.  A  court 
of  inquiry  was  held,  and  it  was  discovered  that  the 
mutiny  was  due  to  an  idea  that  the  regiment  was  to  be 
disbanded  and  the  negroes  sold  as  slaves  ;  the  Governor, 
a  certain  Mr.  Cochrane  Johnston — who  gained  later  an 
unpleasant  notoriety — having  employed  the  men  in 
clearing  the  jungle  off  his  estate,  nominally  for  purposes 
of  fortification,  without  giving  them  working  pay. 
Such  a  practice  was  strictly  contrary  to  the  orders  of 
the  General  in  command,  who  knew  the  value  of  the 
the  West  India  Regiments  and  desired  nothing  more 
strongly  than  to  raise  the  self-respect  of  the  black 
soldiers  who  composed  them.  Before  the  news  of 
this  mutiny  could  reach  England,  orders  came  from 

1  CO.  Windward  and  Leeward  Islands,  General  Trigge  to  Sec. 
of  State,  17th,  24th,  30th  May,  nth  June,  1st,  10th  July  1802. 


ch.vi        HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  181 

the  Colonial  Office  for  the  West  India  Regiments  1802. 
to  be  reduced  from  twelve  to  six,  upon  the  con- 
clusion of  peace,  by  the  simple  process  of  disband- 
ment.  The  execution  of  these  directions  would,  in 
the  circumstances,  have  been  dangerous,  for  it  would 
have  confirmed  the  general  suspicions  which  had  caused 
the  outbreak  in  Dominica,  and  would  probably  have 
brought  about  a  mutiny  of  the  remaining  regiments. 
With  great  good  sense  General  Trigge  had  issued  an 
order  to  reassure  the  negroes,  directing  that  his 
own  guard  should  always  be  formed  from  the  two 
West  India  Regiments  at  headquarters  ;  and  he  resolved 
at  any  rate  not  to  precipitate  the  disbandment.  Still 
the  position  was  difficult,  for  England  was  nominally 
at  peace  and  the  British  public  would  certainly  be 
clamouring  for  the  reduction  of  establishments  ;  and  it 
therefore  occurred  to  Trigge,  since  one  of  the  regiments 
had  been  raised  in  Martinique,  to  offer  it  to  the  French 
authorities,  provided  that  the  men  were  willing  to  take 
service  with  them.  The  answer,  as  might  be  expected, 
was  an  uncompromising  rejection  by  the  French  of  any 
such  proposal  ;  and  it  was  finally  decided  not  to  risk 
the  danger  of  disbandment,  but  to  draft  the  men  of  the 
last  six  West  India  Regiments  into  the  first  six,  and  to 
allow  time  to  reduce  their  numbers.1 