

1  Intercepted  letter  from  Commissaire  Ordonnateur  Colbert  to 
Rochambeau,  enclosed  in  Nugent  to  Sec.  of  State,  20th  May  1804. 


ch.vi        HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  177 

garrison  of  Jeremie,  driven  from  its  post  by  the  1 
negroes,  and  not  by  negroes  only  but  by  some 
hundreds  of  Poles  and  Germans,  deserters  from  the 
French  army,  surrendered  to  a  British  man-of-war, 
and  was  brought  to  Jamaica.  Other  detachments 
submitted  to  the  like  fate,  and  on  the  30th  of  November  M 
the  garrison  of  Cap  Francois  yielded  themselves  to  the 
British  fleet  as  prisoners.  By  the  end  of  the  year 
nothing  was  left  of  the  French  army  but  a  garrison, 
strictly  blockaded  by  the  English,  in  the  town  of  St. 
Domingo  itself.  Of  the  soldiers  and  seamen  by  far  the 
greater  number  were  dead.  Of  the  survivors  seven 
thousand,  including  one  thousand  officers,  were  prisoners 
in  Jamaica,  where  over  five  hundred  Germans  and  Poles 
entered  the  ranks  of  the  Sixtieth.  Three  hundred 
invalids,  left  behind  in  hospital  at  Cap  Francois,  were 
placed  on  board  a  ship  and  sent  to  the  bottom  by  the 
negroes.  A  few  soldiers  escaped  to  America,  and  about 
eleven  hundred  to  Havanna,  where  they  were  hospitably 
received  by  the  Spaniards.  But  still  misfortune  dogged 
the  poor  wretches  to  the  end.  Eight  hundred  of  these 
last  sailed  in  four  transports  from  Havanna  to  Carolina. 
One  of  these  ships  with  four  hundred  men  on  board 
was  captured  by  the  escort  of  a  British  convoy  ;  two 
more  were  lost  with  every  soul  on  board  in  the  Bahama 
Keys,  and  one  only  was  left  to  pursue  her  solitary  course. 
As  to  the  men-of-war,  the  greater  number  found  their 
way  as  prizes  to  Port  Royal,  which  was  full  of  captured 
j  vessels  of  all  kinds  ;  and  thus  ignominiously  ended 
:!  Bonaparte's  expedition  to  St.  Domingo. 

History  has  been  strangely  silent  as  to  this  enter- 
prise, and  yet  surely  it  must  be  reckoned  as  one  of  the 
most  disastrous  ever  recorded.    It  is  probably  within 
!  the  truth  to  say  that  it  cost  France  forty  thousand  good 
i  soldiers  and  sailors  not  disabled  but  dead  ;  but  even  so 
■this  is  not  the  most  terrible  part  of  the  story.  There 
are  signs  enough  in  the  English  archives  alone  to  show 
that  the  conduct  of  the  senior  officers  was  infamous. 
* 4  Your  predecessors,"  wrote  Commissaire  Colbert  to 

M     VOL.  V  N 


i78 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  book  xiii 


1803.  Rochambeau  on  his  arrival,  "have  committed  atrocities 
which  I  cannot  trust  myself  to  speak  of.  Our 
magazines  are  empty.  I  show  you1  what  we  have 
legitimately  consumed  and  what  our  generals  have 
embezzled.  Sarrazin  and  La  Valette  are  governed 
only  by  the  most  cruel  egoism  and  the  most  sordid 
avarice.  .  .  .  The  Generals  have  done  their  best  to 
oppress  the  people  and  make  the  soldier  discontented. 
The  officers  and  men  are  groaning  under  terrible  misery 
and  want.  La  Valette  and  the  head  of  the  Admini- 
stration think  only  of  enriching  themselves  and  giving 
favours  to  their  Creole  girls."  Add  to  this  that 
not  only  two  educated  mulattoes,  one  of  whom  had 
come  out  with  Leclerc  as  a  general  of  division,  but 
several  hundred  white  men,  were  driven  by  maltreat- 
ment to  take  sides  with  the  brigands,  and  also  that 
Rochambeau  by  his  cruelties  gained  for  himself  the 
name  of  Robespierre,  and  we  can  form  some  idea  of  the 
degradation  to  which  a  French  army  could  sink  even 
under  one  of  the  greatest  military  administrators  that 
ever  lived.  It  may  be  pleaded  that  Napoleon,  being  in 
Paris,  was  not  responsible.  No  doubt  much  of  the 
rascality  and  embezzlement  was  kept  Jjidden  from  him  ; 
yet  it  was  he  who  gave  the  tone  for  the  deliberate  and 
perfidious  maltreatment  of  the  blacks  which  was  at  the 
root  of  all  the  mischief ;  and  he  cannot  have  been 
ignorant  of  the  outrageous  oppression  practised  by 
his  generals.  The  like  evils  had  flourished  among 
British  officers  for  a  time  during  their  occupation  of 
St.  Domingo,  but  never  among  the  Generals  ;  and 
upon  the  first  suspicion  at  home  of  such  mischief, 
Simcoe  and  Maitland  were  sent  out  to  restore  order  with 
a  stern  hand.  Beyond  doubt  a  little  severity  would 
speedily  have  recalled  the  French  also  to  a  sense  of  their 
duty  ;  for  it  would  be  absurd  to  suppose  that  originally 
they  were  in  any  way  inferior  to  the  British.  Yet  it  is! 
certain  that  they  sank  far  below  the  British  in  demoral-j 