

Eight  companies  of  the  Royal  Scots  and  a  company 
of  negroes  were  left  at  Tobago ;  and  therewith 
Grinfield  prudently  returned  to  Barbados.  The 
conquest  of  islands  might  be  easy,  but  the  supplying 
of  garrisons  in  such  a  climate  was  a  costly  process,  and 
might  become  still  more  costly  if  the  French,  with  a 
powerful  force  at  Martinique,  should  attempt  reprisals. 
There  was,  of  course,  a  British  squadron  to  windward, 
and  Commodore  Hood  was  an  active  and  zealous 
officer  ;  but  his  ships  were  not  too  many,  and  Antigua 
and  Dominica  lay  invitingly  close  to  -Guadeloupe  and 
Martinique.  Moreover,  the  Assembly  of  Antigua, 
with  characteristic  perversity,  was  declining  to  vote  any 
money  for  its  defence  or  to  call  out  its  militia  ;  and 
Grinfield,  like  other  commanders  in  the  West  Indies 
before  him,  was  beginning  to  discover  the  difficulties 
of  guarding  the  precious  sugar-islands.  Ships  passed 
in  and  out  of  their  harbours,  he  knew  not  on  what 
errand,  and  he  had  not  the  slightest  power  to  stop  them. 
The  forts,  though  garrisoned  by  the  King,  were  mostly 
Colonial  property,  and  as  such  owned  no  master  but  the 
civil  government.  Signals  were  likewise  under  the 
domain  of  the  Colonial  authorities,  and  all  flags  of  truce 
were  claimed  by  the  civil  Governor  as  concerning  him 
only.  In  fact  all  control  was  in  civil  hands,  but  all 
responsibility  for  protection  against  the  enemy  was 
thrown  on  military  shoulders.    Yet  this  was  the  sphere 


ch.vi        HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  185 

and  these  were  the  conditions  in  which  Pitt  delighted  to  1803. 
make  war.1 

Nor  did  Addington  Jag  behind  his  great  master. 
Before  Grinfield  had  been  at  Barbados  a  week  there 
arrived  fresh  orders  from  England.  Victor  Hugues 
had  recently  visited  the  Dutch  settlements  on  the  main-  July  20. 
land  ;  and  the  Dutch  planters,  dreading  a  repetition  of 
the  scenes  which  had  troubled  Guadeloupe  in  1794, 
had  appealed  to  England  for  protection.  Ministers 
promised  to  afford  it ;  and  accordingly  on  the  10th  of 
June  Lord  Hobart  instructed  Grinfield  to  make 
immediate  arrangements  for  taking  over  Demerara, 
Berbice,  and  Surinam,  summoning  the  Governors  to 
surrender  and  attacking  them  if  they  refused.  Since 
the  Batavian  Republic  was  dragged  into  war  against 
England  a  week  later,  the  General  was  of  course  at 
liberty  to  attempt  the  capture  of  Curacoa  also,  if  he 
thought  fit.  Grinfield,  like  all  officers,  was  eager  for 
active  service  ;  but  on  receiving  the  first  conditional 
orders  for  the  expedition  to  the  Dutch  colonies,  he 
very  rightly  pointed  out  to  Ministers  that  they  might 
not  be  aware  what  they  were  doing.  St.  Lucia  and 
Tobago  had  already  swallowed  up  nearly  two  thousand 
of  his  men  ;  and  the  occupation  of  Demerara  in  addition 
would  not  only  deprive  him  of  the  whole  of  his  ex- 
peditionary force  but  would  leave  all  his  garrisons 
dangerously  weak.  The  Government  had  promised  to 
send  him  one  battalion  from  Gibraltar,  and  he  had  been 
able  to  save  three  hundred  negroes  from  a  regiment  that 
had  been  doomed  to  disbandment ;  but  to  make  good 
the  daily  losses  from  sickness  in  the  islands,  quite  apart 
from  those  sustained  on  active  service,  he  would  need 
reinforcements  of  at  least  five  thousand  men.2 