


Total  of  all  ranks         .  3149 


ch.vi       HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  183 

break  of  the  21st  the  armament  was  off  St.  Lucia,  and  1803. 
during  the  course  of  the  day  the  greater  part  of  the  June  21. 
force  was  disembarked  in  Anse  du  Choc,  the  bay 
which  lies  immediately  to  the  north  of  Castries.  In 
the  evening  the  enemy's  outposts  were  driven  in,  and  a 
summons  was  sent  to  the  French  commander  on  Morne 
Fortune.  This  officer,  General  Nogues,  was  very 
much  inclined  to  surrender  ;  for  the  inhabitants  of  St. 
Lucia  had  welcomed  the  British  with  open  arms.  Indeed 
the  Prefect  and  several  officers  actually  entertained 
Grinfield  and  his  staff  at  supper,  not  without  friendly 
messages  from  the  General  himself.  Duty,  however, 
prevailed  with  Nogues,  who  finally  returned  an  answer  of 
defiance  ;  and  at  four  o'clock  on  the  morning  of  the 
22nd  the  British  attacked  the  fortress  in  two  columns  June  22. 
under  Brigadiers  Prevost  and  Brereton,  and  carried  it, 
despite  a  spirited  resistance,  in  half  an  hour.  The 
Royal  Scots  and  Sixty-fourth  bore  the  brunt  of  the 
work,  Pakenham  being  wounded  at  the  head  of  the 
latter ;  but  the  fortifications  were  in  too  ruinous  a 
condition  to  be  very  formidable,  and  the  casualties  did 
not  exceed  one  hundred  and  thirty-eight.1  The  troops 
on  both  sides  became  very  friendly  directly  after  the 
surrender,  and  when  the  six  hundred  prisoners  had 
been  embarked  for  France,  Nogues  and  a  few  of  his 
officers  gratefully  accepted  permission  to  retire  to 
Martinique.  Altogether  the  first  contest  in  the  new 
war  was  marked  by  the  best  of  good  feelings.2 

Leaving  General  Brereton  with  the  Sixty-eighth  and 
three  companies  of  negroes  to  hold  St.  Lucia,  Grinfield 
sailed  again  on  the  25th,  and  at  daybreak  on  the  30th  June  30. 
made  Tobago.  By  five  in  the  evening  the  troops  were 
landed,  when  they  at  once  marched  straight  upon  the 
town.    A  dangerous  defile  on  the  way  being  found 

1  20  men  killed,  9  officers  and  109  men  wounded. 
2/1  st,  9  men  killed,  2  officers  and  45  men  wounded. 
64th,  6    „      „      4      „       „  34    „  „ 
3rdW.I.R.,  2      „       „  23  „ 

2  Sec.  of  State  to  Grinfield,  7th,  16th  May;  Grinfield  to  Sec. 
of  State,  28th  April,  9th,  10th,  20th,  22nd,  24th  June  1803. 


i84  HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY   book  xm 


1803.  unguarded,  Grinfield  took  the  hint  and  at  once  sent 
June  30.  a  summons  to  General  Cesar  Berthier,  who  capitulated 
forthwith  with  the  honours  of  war.  Berthier  had  indeed 
no  choice  in  the  matter,  for  his  garrison  numbered  but 
two  hundred  men,  half  of  them  sailors,  while  the  whole 
of  the  population  was  hostile  to  him.  He  revealed, 
however,  to  Grinfield  that  his  orders  had  been  to 
fortify  Man-of-War  Bay  thoroughly  and  to  make  the 
island  a  French  naval  depot,  with  a  garrison  of  twelve 
hundred  men.  This  plan,  if  fulfilled,  would  have 
placed  Trinidad  and  the  whole  of  the  southern  islands 
at  his  mercy. 