

With  Victor  Hugues  at  Cayenne,  Green  judged  it 
imprudent  to  leave  fewer  than  fifteen  hundred  men  to 
guard  the  new  conquest ;  though  he  was  fortunate 
enough  to  enlist  some  hundreds  of  the  Dutch  soldiers 
into  the  British  service.  But  none  the  less  here  was 
another  hostage  given  to  fortune,  and  another  British 
battalion  relegated  to  a  distant  station  where  the  annual 
casualties  by  sickness  and  death  could  not  be  reckoned 
at  less  than  one-third  of  the  whole.  Nor  was  this  all  ; 
for  still  earlier  in  1804  England  had  only  narrowly 
escaped  being  saddled  with  Curacoa  as  well  as 
Surinam.  Admiral  Duckworth,  without  saying  a 
word  to  General  Nugent  at  Jamaica,  had  sailed  in 
January  to  Curacoa  with  two  line -of- battle  ships,  as 
many  frigates,  and  a  schooner,  intent  upon  playing  the 
general.  Landing  eight  hundred  men  without  artillery, 
he  found  himself  powerless  against  a  garrison  of  six 
hundred  men  within  fortifications,  failed  to  make  the 
slightest  impression  upon  the  defences,  and  was  fain 
to  re-embark  his  men  ignobly  and  sail  away.  Had  he 
but  communicated  his  ideas  to  the  General,  he  would 
have  received  a  few  gunners  and  mortars,  with  which, 
as  he  himself  acknowledged,  he  would  have  forced  the 
Dutch  to  surrender  in  two  or  three  days.  Having, 
however,  like  most  naval  officers  in  those  days,  a  keen 
and  pardonable  taste  for  prize-money,  he  tried  to  be 
soldier  as  well  as  sailor  and,  very  fortunately  for  all 
parties,  over-reached  himself.    But  for  Pitt's  mistaken 


192 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY   book  xiii 


1804.  policy  during  the  last  war,  the  gallant  officer  would 
have  been  less  eager  to  capture  sugar-islands  without 
orders  from  the  Cabinet. 

In  truth  Surinam,  superadded  to  previous  conquests, 
was  already  far  too  much.  The  Commander-in-chief  to 
Windward  naturally  begged  for  reinforcements  as  soon 
as  the  Colony  had  fallen,  sending  a  return  which  showed 
his  entire  force  to  be  eleven  thousand  men,  scattered 
over  thirteen  different  islands  and  settlements,  with  a 
sick  list,  which  he  truly  pronounced  to  be  normal,  of 
two  thousand.  In  September  the  Secretary  of  State 
promised  him  two  battalions  ;  "  but,"  he  added,  "  every 
soldier  is  imperatively  needed  to  repel  a  possible  invasion 
of  England  by  France.,,  Nevertheless  General  Myers 
at  Barbados  and  Commodore  Hood  still  hankered  after 
Curacoa,  ostensibly  as  a  station  for  the  distribution  of 
British  manufactures  in  the  Spanish  Main.  This  was 
a  plea  likely  to  commend  itself  to  British  manufacturers 
and  therefore  to  the  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer  ;  but 
for  once  the  British  Government  returned  a  decided  and 
unmistakable  negative.  "  Multiplication  of  garrisons," 
wrote  the  Minister  for  War,  "weakens  the  whole  of 
our  islands."  The  comment  was  justythough  it  came 
a  little  late,  after  the  West  Indian  garrisons  had  been 
multiplied  by  two  through  the  orders  of  Ministers 
themselves.  It  is  now  time  to  return  to  England,  and 
to  examine  the  causes  which  had  converted  Addington's 
Ministry  to  principles  so  sound,  so  sober,  and  so 
novel.1 