

1  Green  to  Sec.  of  State,  13th  May  (2  letters)  ;  to  Sullivan,  14th 
May;  Myers  to  Sec.  of  State,  7th,  31st  Aug.;  Sec.  of  State  to 
Myers,  Nov.  1804. 


CHAPTER  VII 


It  has  already  been  told  that  England's  declaration  of  1803. 
war  came  to  Bonaparte  as  a  surprise,  his  preparations 
being  still  altogether  incomplete  ;  and  in  truth  the 
weakness  of  France  at  sea  in  May  1803  was  such  as  May. 
would  have  daunted  many  men.  Forty-eight  vessels, 
carrying  each  from  eighty  to  ten  guns,  were  at  St. 
Domingo,  of  which  number  seven  ships  only  were 
destined  to  escape  capture  or  destruction  by  taking 
refuge  in  different  ports  of  Spain.  The  whole,  therefore, 
might  be  practically  looked  upon  as  lost.  In  March  the 
French  Admiralty  reported  that  all  the  ports  of  France 
could  in  a  month's  time  produce  but  five  ships  of  the 
line  and  ten  frigates  ready  for  sea,  and  in  six  months' 
time  no  more  than  twenty-one  ships  of  the  line  and 
nineteen  frigates.  In  June  matters  had  not  improved.  June. 
There  were  but  three  line-of-battle  ships  at  Brest,  all  of 
them  short  of  their  complement  of  men,  and  as  many 
more  at  Toulon.  In  such  circumstances  it  is  not 
astonishing  that  Bonaparte's  first  care  was  for  the 
protection  of  his  own  coasts,  and  that  he  should  have 
shown  particular  anxiety  for  the  safety  of  the  island  of 
Walcheren  as  the  gate  of  the  Scheldt.  But  even  for 
defence  his  maritime  resources  were  dangerously  small, 
for  though  nearly  two  hundred  gunboats  remained  on 
the  list  of  the  French  Navy,  only  twenty-seven  of  them 
were  even  tolerably  sound.  The  naval  impotence  of 
France,  as  their  own  writers  confess,  was  as  great  in 
1803  after  three  years  of  the  Consulate,  as  in  1793 
after  four  years  of  revolution. 

VOL.  V  193  o 


1 94 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY   book  xiii 


1803.      Powerless  to  strike  at  sea,  Bonaparte  lost  no  time 
in  doing  England  such  mischief  as  he  could  on  land 
A  few  days  before  the  declaration  of  war  he  began  to 
concentrate  his  garrisons  in  Holland  ;  and  on  the  31st 

May  31.  of  May  Mortier  invaded  Hanover  at  the  head  of 
twenty-five  thousand  men,  brushed  away  such  feeble 
opposition  as  was  made  to  him,  and  on  the  3rd  of 

June  3.   June  took  over  the  entire  province  under  a  convention 
The  Hanoverian  troops  retired  for  the  moment  to  the 
east  of  the  Elbe,  but  were  destined  to  avenge  them- 
selves, as  shall  in  due  time  be  seen,  in  another  land 
and  under  another  name.    The  chief  mischief  wrought 
to  England  by  this  stroke  was  the  shutting  of  the 
Elbe  and  the  Weser  to  her  trade  ;  but  to  Bonaparte 
the  gain  of  the  province  was  indirectly  most  valuable 
for  he  could  use  it,  as  he  said,  as  a  bone  for  Prussia  to 
gnaw  ;  and,  with  such  a  prize  to  dangle  before  her 
he   could   be   sure  of  attracting   her  to   his  side 
Simultaneously  he  called  upon  Spain  for  the  help  that 
she  was  bound  to  afford  him  under  the  Treaty  of 
San  Ildefonso,  ordered  Gouvion  St.  Cyr  to  invade 
Neapolitan  territory  and  occupy  Tarento,  Otranto,  and 
Brindisi,  and  directed  Leghorn  to«be  placed  under 
martial  law.    He  also  forbade  the  entry  into  the  ports 
of  France  or  her  allies  of  all  colonial  produce  coming 
directly  from  England  or  from  any  of  her  possessions 
If  he  could  not  meet  the  British  fleet  at  sea,  he  would 
at  least  exclude  British  merchantmen  from  as  many 
harbours  as  possible,  especially  in  the  Mediterranean 
while  the  occupation  of  the  peninsula  of  Otranto  served 
the  additional  purpose  of  threatening  the  Levant,  the 
Morea,  and  Egypt.    If  he  could  not  prevent  England 
from  foiling  his  colonial  projects  and  sweeping  the 
whole  of  the  Antilles  into  her  net,  he  would  at  any 
rate  close  against  her  every  market  that  he  could 
control,  and  so  lay  the  foundation  of  the  Continental 
System.1 