

But    these    measures,    however    formidable,  wer 
1  Sorel,  vi.  309. 


ch.vii      HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY 


r95 


secondary  to  a  still  vaster  project  which  was  ripening  1303. 
in  his  brain  for  more  signal  humiliation  of  the  inveterate 
enemy.  In  March  he  had  given  orders  for  the  creation 
of  a  flotilla  of  five  hundred  craft  at  Dunkirk  and 
Cherbourg,  the  whole  of  which  were  to  be  ready  by 
September ;  and  in  June  he  compelled  the  Batavian 
Republic  to  provide  ten  ships  of  war,  transports  for 
twenty-five  thousand  men,  one  hundred  gunboats,  and 
two  hundred  and  fifty  flat-boats  for  a  descent  upon 
England.  From  Spain  he  claimed  fifteen  ships  of 
the  line  besides  smaller  vessels,  though  finally  after 
months  of  haggling  he  accepted  a  subsidy  of  ^240,000 
a  month  in  their  stead.  From  Hanover  he  required 
the  construction  of  flat-bottomed  boats  in  the  Weser 
and  the  Elbe.  From  France  herself  he  demanded 
that  twenty  ships  should  be  fit  for  sea  at  Brest  by 
the  third  week  in  November  ;  and,  after  many  changes  Aug.  2 
of  plan,  he  decreed  that  two  thousand  small  craft 
should  likewise  be  constructed  by  the  same  date. 
On  the  14th  of  June  he  had  ordered  the  concentration 
of  the  Grand  Army  in  six  camps,  one  in  Holland,  and 
the  rest  at  Ghent,  St.  Omer,  Compiegne,  St.  Malo,  and 
Bayonne  ;  and  therewith  his  original  design  was,  on 
paper,  complete.  The  small  craft  for  the  conveyance 
of  troops  were  one  and  all  to  be  armed,  with  the 
object  apparently  of  fighting  their  way  through  the 
British  fleet,  if  necessary.  One  hundred  and  ten  or 
twenty  thousand  men  would  be  embarked  on  them  ; 
they  would  slip  across  the  Channel  on  some  favourable 
night  of  fog  and  darkness  during  the  winter ;  a 
revolution  would  break  out  in  London  at  the  sight  of 
the  French  Army,  and  England  would  become  a 
vassal  of  France.1 

Such  was  the  project  which  from,  the  end  of  May 
onwards  possessed  the  brain  of  Bonaparte.  For  the 
present  it  was,  as  we  shall  see,  both  wild  and  vague  ; 
but  possibly  for  that  very  reason  it  struck  the  greater 
alarm  into  the  British  Ministry.  The  First  Lord  of 
1  Sorel,  vi.  310  ;  Desbriere. 


196 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY   book  xiii 


1803.  the  Admiralty  at  this  time  was  Lord  St.  Vincent,  who, 
in  the  enthusiasm  of  an  economic  crusade  against  the 
corruption  in  the  dockyards,  had  not  only  allowed 
artificers  to  be  discharged  and  valuable  material  to  be 
sold,  but  had  omitted  to  replenish  the  stock  of  necessary 
stores.  His  instinct  for  strategic  dispositions  was  as 
sound  as  ever  ;  and  squadrons  under  renowned 
commanders  were  soon  watching  every  one  of  the 
French  naval  arsenals.  Nelson  lay  before  Toulon  ; 
Pellew  shut  in  the  fugitive  vessels  from  St.  Domingo 
at  Ferrol ;  Collingwood  cruised  off  Rochefort  ;  Corn- 
wallis,  a  seaman  unsurpassed  in  vigilance,  nerve,  and 
resolution,  blockaded  Brest.  But  the  numbers  of  their 
ships  were  insufficient  ;  and  Nelson  complained  bitterly, 
though  to  no  purpose,  that  the  majority  of  those  under 
his  command  were  unfit  for  sea.  Looking  to  the  1 
contemptible  strength  of  the  French  Navy  at  the 
outbreak  of  the  war,  an  invasion  of  England  may  seem 
to  us  now  a  plan  so  hazardous  as  to  be  absurd  ;  but 
our  ancestors  may  be  forgiven  if,  with  a  Bonaparte  on  e 
the  other  side  of  the  Channel,  they  wished  to  be  ready  a 
for  any  contingency. 