

operations  were  to  be  undertaken,  yet  on  the  arrival  of 

these  two  regiments  and  of  a  new  Commander-in-chief, 

Sir  Charles  Green,  towards  the  end  of  March,  an  expedi-  March. 

tion  was  at  once  arranged  for  the  capture  of  Surinam. 

The  people  of  that  settlement  were  believed  to  be 

friendly,  but  the  secret  of  the  project  had  been  allowed 

to  leak  out,  so  that  it  was  necessary  to  employ  a  large 

and  imposing  force.    During  the  last  weeks  of  March 

both  Green  and  Commodore  Hood  worked  strenuously 

at  their  preparations ;  and  on  the  7th  of  April  the  April  7. 

armament,  numbering  over  two  thousand  troops,1  sailed 

before  the  trade  wind  from  Barbados,  and  anchored  on  April  25. 

the  25th  off  the  Surinam  River.2 

Paramaribo,  the  capital  of  Dutch  Guiana  and  in  those 
days  a  thriving  town  of  twenty  thousand  inhabitants, 
lies  about  twenty  miles  up  the  Surinam.  This  great 
river,  though  swelled  to  a  breadth  of  two  or  three  miles 
at  its  mouth  by  the  influx  of  a  large  tributary,  the 
Commewyne,  is  full  of  banks  and  shoals,  which  render 
its  navigation  difficult.  It  was  therefore  by  no 
means  a  formidable  task  to  defend  the  passage,  and,  if 
the  waterway  were  closed,  effective  entrance  into  the 

1  Advanced  Corps.  Flank  companies  of  the  16th  and  64th. 

Rifle  companies  2/6oth  and  York  L.I.  Volrs. 
Light  company  6th  W.I.R. 
1st  Brigade.  Advanced  corps,  493 \  Brig.-Gen. 

1 6th  Foot,     57 3 J     Fred  Maitland. 
2nd  Brigade.  64th  Foot,     604^  .  _Q  Hu?hes 

6thW.I.R.,   30$ J     e'  hughes. 
Royal  Artillery       .        .        .  106. 
Ordnance.  6  light  six-pounders ^ 4.  howitzers,  in. 

2    „    three    „      J4       „         „  light. 
2  medium  twelve-pounders)  1  mortar,  8  inch. 
2  light  twelve-pounders  -  J  2  mortars,  10  inch.  • 
Royal  Artificers,  26  ;  Black  Pioneers,  20  ;  Staff,  21. 
lotai.  2148  of  all  ranks. 
2  Grinfield  to  Sec.  of  State,  4th,  9th  Nov. ;  Brig.-Gen.  Fred 
Maitland  to  Sec.  of  State,  19th  Nov.  1803  ;  Green  to  Sec.  of  State, 
22nd  March,  2nd  April  1804;  Sec.  of  State  to  Gen.  Moncrieff, 
2nd  Jan.  1804. 


i88 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY   book  xiii 


804.  Colony  was  practically  impossible ;  for  the  country, 
though  a  level  plain,  was  marshy  and  overgrown  with 
thick  jungle  for  some  distance  inland  from  the  sea. 
For  defence  of  the  river,  therefore,  the  Dutch  engineers 
had  constructed  a  series  of  powerful  works.  The  first 
of  these  was  a  battery  of  seven  eighteen-pounders 
situated  at  Bram's  Point,  at  the  eastern  side  of  the 
entrance  to  the  river.  Further  up  the  stream  stood  Fort 
Amsterdam,  mounting  altogether  eighty  guns,  which  was 
placed  on  the  southern  bank  of  the  Commewyne  at  the 
point  of  its  confluence  with  the  Surinam.  Over  against 
it  to  northward,  and  at  about  two  thousand  yards' 
distance  on  the  opposite  bank  of  the  Commewyne,  stood 
Fort  Leyden,  armed  with  twelve  heavy  guns ;  and 
another  work  called  Frederick's  Battery,  also  of  twelve 
heavy  guns,  lay  about  a  mile  below  Fort  Leyden. 
Nearly  opposite  to  Fort  Amsterdam,  on  the  western 
bank  of  the  Surinam,  stood  Fort  Purmerend,  containing 
ten  heavy  guns,  and  having  its  flanks  and  rear  pro- 
tected by  a  marsh.  Further  up,  and  on  the  same  bank, 
stood  Fort  Zeelandia,  a  battery  of  ten  guns,  for  the 
immediate  defence  of  Paramaribo.  The  whole  of  these 
works  could  bring  a  cross-fire  to  bear  upon  the  one 
channel  by  which  ships  could  ascend  the  river  ;  and 
the  problem  set  to  Green  was  to  open  a  passage  for 
the  fleet  in  despite  of  them. 