

1  26.  On  the  26th  the  Advanced  Corps,  augmented  to 
six  hundred  rank  and  file  by  men  of  the  Sixteenth, 
Sixty-fourth,  and  Sixth  West  India  Regiment,  and  by 
one  brigade  (or,  as  we  should  now  say,  one  battery) 
of  light  artillery,  was  detached  on  different  ships  under 
General  Maitland's  command  to  Warappa  Creek,  about 
thirty  miles  to  east  of  the  Surinam.  Maitland's  orders 
were  to  land,  find  communication  by  water  with 
Commewyne  Creek,  collect  boats  enough  from  the 
various  plantations  to  carry  his  troops  down  the 
Commewyne  to  its  junction  with  the  Surinam,  take  up 
a  position  in  rear  of  Fort  Amsterdam,  and  cut  off"  a 
strong  detachment  of  the  enemy  which  was  stationed 


ch.vi       HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  189 

in  a  less  important  work  hard  by.  On  the  same  day  1804. 
the  men-of-war  Pandora  and  Emerald  engaged  and 
silenced  the  fort  at  Brain's  Point,  whereupon  a  small 
party  of  the  Sixty-fourth  landed  and  took  possession, 
capturing  over  forty  of  the  garrison.  The  ships  then 
entered  the  river,  and  Green  sent  a  summons  to  the 
Governor  to  surrender.  He  was  answered  on  the 
28th  with  defiance,  and  proceeded  at  once  with  the  April  28. 
task  before  him. 

His  chief  difficulty  was  that,  owing  to  the  shallow- 
ness of  the  river,  landing  was  everywhere  difficult  except 
at  the  top  of  the  tide,  and  below  Fort  Frederick  was 
almost  impossible  on  account  of  the  marshes  and  jungle 
on  the  banks.  On  the  28  th  he  tried  to  disembark  a  force 
for  the  capture  of  Fort  Purmerend,  but  was  completely 
foiled  by  the  unfavourable  state  of  the  tide  ;  and  it 
was  not  until  the  following  day  that  he  obtained  April  29. 
information  of  a  path  which  led  through  the  woods 
upon  the  rear  of  Fort  Leyden  and  Frederick's 
Battery.  On  that  night  between  ten  and  eleven 
o'clock  Brigadier-general  Hughes  with  one  hundred 
and  eighty  men,  chiefly  of  the  Sixty-fourth,  besides  a 
party  of  black  pioneers  carrying  axes,  landed  quietly 
and  entered  the  bush  under  the  guidance  of  some  native 
negroes.  Heavy  rain  had  rendered  the  path  nearly 
impassable,  and  it  was  only  after  five  hours  of  an 
intensely  fatiguing  march  that  the  column  at  last 
approached  the  rear  of  Frederick's  Battery.  The  alarm 
was  given  in  the  fort,  and  a  heavy  fire  of  grape  was 
poured  upon  the  men  as  they  deployed,  which  was 
seconded  by  musketry  as  they  advanced  ;  but  they 
speedily  entered  the  work  and  swept  the  enemy  out 
with  the  bayonet.  The  fugitives  fled  to  Fort  Leyden, 
though  not  before  they  had  kindled  the  powder-maga- 
zines, which  presently  exploded,  killing  and  wounding 
many  of  the  British.  Hughes,  however,  quickly  rally- 
ing his  little  force,  pushed  on  to  Fort  Leyden  along 
a  narrow  road  which  was  enfiladed  by  the  enemy's 
guns,  and  charging  up  to  the  Battery  in  face  of  a 