

Hence  it  was  that  at  the  outbreak  of  the  war  the  1803. 
West  India  Regiments  were  still  in  fair  strength  ;  while, 
owing  to  the  delay  in  restoring  the  captured  islands  to 
the  French,  there  was  an  unusually  large  force  of  white 
troops  at  disposal  for  work  in  the  field.  In  April 
there  were,  in  the  Windward  and  Leeward  Islands,  not 
far  from  ten  thousand  men  of  all  ranks  and  colours  fit 
for  duty,  of  whom  between  three  and  four  thousand 
I  could  be  spared  for  active  operations.  Nor  was  the 
British  Government  negligent  in  giving  early  warning 
that  war  was  approaching,  for  General  Grinfield,  who 

1  Trigge  to  Sec.  of  State,  16th,  23rd,  30th  April,  4th,  29th 
May,  13th  June,  1st,  10th  July;  Grinfield  to  Sec.  of  State,  17th 
Sept.  ;  Sec.  of  State  to  Trigge,  6th  May  1802. 


182 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY   book  xiii 


1803.  had  succeeded  Trigge  in  the  chief  command,  began  to 
prepare  for  all  emergencies  before  the  end  of  April  1 803. 
By  the  beginning  of  June  a  rupture  seemed  so  certain 
to  the  British  in  the  West  Indies  that  one  of  the  British 
cruisers  detained  a  French  transport,  which  was  carrying 
troops  to  Martinique,  and  sent  her  to  Barbados.  Grin- 
field  also  embarked  six  weeks'  supplies  for  four  thousand 
men,  and  Commodore  Hood  made  every  arrangement 
for  the  embarkation  of  the  men  themselves  at  twenty- 
four  hours'  notice.  About  the  middle  of  the  month 
arrived  the  news  of  the  declaration  of  war,  with  orders 
for  attack  upon  Martinique,  St.  Lucia,  and  Tobago, 
each  or  all  of  them.  Grinfield  at  once  summoned  the 
June  20.  Commodore,  who  arrived  on  the  17th  of  June;  and 
on  the  20th  the  fleet  and  transports  got  under  way 
and  made  all  sail  to  leeward. 

The  British  Ministry  had  been  over -sanguine  in 
expecting  the  conquest  of  Martinique,  which,  well- 
garrisoned  as  it  was,  required  ten  thousand  men  to 
master  it  ;  but  St.  Lucia  and  Tobago  were  within  the 
powers  of  Grinfield's  force,  and  the  former  being  the 
more  important  as  a  check  on  Fort  Royal,  was  clearly 
marked  out  as  his  first  object.  He  htd  three  thousanc 
excellent  troops,1  with  at  least  two  senior  officers 
who  were  of  more  than  ordinary  ability.  These 
were  Thomas  Pic  ton,  who  was  on  his  way  home 
from  Trinidad  after  enduring  shameful  persecution  by 
certain  malignant  commissioners  sent  out  from  England, 
and  Edward  Pakenham,  who  was  destined  after  a 
brilliant  career  to  fall  before  New  Orleans.    By  day- 


1  StafF.      .      .      .   17 

2/ist   487I 

64th   744 

68th   765 

3rd  W.I.R   714. 

Royal  Artillery,  with  14  field-guns  and  16  siege-guns   .  271 

Royal  Military  Artificers   80 

Black  Pioneers  ........  71 