


3  90  HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY   book  xm 


1804.  furious  fire,  captured  over  one  hundred  and  twenty 
April  29.  prisoners.  Thus  the  defences  of  the  eastern  bank 
north  of  the  Commewyne  were  secured,  and  with 
them  a  position  from  which  Fort  Amsterdam  could 
be  cannonaded  and  communication  assured  with  Mait- 
land's  detachment. 
April  30.  The  following  day  was  employed  in  throwing  up 
shelters  in  the  captured  works  against  the  fire  of 
Fort  Amsterdam,  which,  however,  was  soon  silenced 
when  two  British  mortars  were  brought  into  play  ;  and 
on  the  same  evening  Green  received  intelligence  that 
Maitland  had  accomplished  his  disembarkation  suc- 
cessfully, having  defeated  a  small  party  of  the  enemy 
which  guarded  the  landing-place  at  Warappa  Creek,  and 
captured  two  guns.  Accordingly  in  the  course  of  the 
May  1, 2.  next  two  days  the  bulk  of  the  force  that  still  remained 
upon  the  ships  landed  at  Fort  Leyden,  and  marched 
for  some  distance  up  the  north  bank  of  the  Commewyne 
May  3.  to  await  the  arrival  of  Maitland.  On  the  3rd  Maitland 
appeared,  with  his  entire  column  afloat,  passing 
comfortably  down  the  Commewyne,  as  had  been  pre- 
arranged. He  presently  landed  on  the  south  bank  ; 
and,  his  boats  being  thus  released,  Grain's  troops  were 
likewise  transferred  from  the  north  to  the  south  bank. 
The  operation  was  not  completed  till  the  afternoon  of 
May  4.  the  4th,  when  Maitland  advanced  by  a  road  through 
the  jungle  to  within  a  mile  of  Fort  Amsterdam,  and 
drove  in  the  enemy's  advanced  parties.  Shortly 
afterwards  a  flag  of  truce  reached  Green,  and  on  the 
May  5.  following  day  Surinam  was  delivered  over  to  him  by 
capitulation.  His  casualties  were  trifling,  as  were  also 
those  of  Commodore  Hood,  the  total  number  of  killed 
and  wounded  in  Army  and  Navy  not  exceeding  thirty, 
though  of  these  no  fewer  than  ten  were  officers.  The 
enemy's  force  numbered  about  thirteen  hundred  white 
troops  and  four  hundred  negroes,  besides  the  crews  of 
two  small  men-of-war,  which  brought  the  full  roll  of 
the  defenders  up  to  two  thousand  men.  With  such 
strength,  and  with  over  two  hundred  and  eighty  guns  of 


ch.vi        HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  191 

one  kind  and  another,  the  Dutch  should  have  made  a  1804. 
better  resistance,  but  for  the  fact  that  their  officers  were 
divided  among  themselves.  Ministers  in  England  had 
supposed  that  the  province  would  be  delivered  up  at 
once  by  a  people  eager  for  protection  ;  but,  as  usual, 
not  a  man  of  the  inhabitants  would  move  to  help  the 
British  until  he  saw  that  they  were  likely  to  be  successful. 
Addington's  Cabinet  had  made  the  old  mistake,  so 
often  made  by  Pitt  and  Dundas  between  1793  and 
1 801  ;  and  only  by  good  fortune  did  it  fail  to  be 
again  disastrous. 