


204 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY   book  xiii 


1803.  from  Ireland,  the  whole  to  be  duly  apportioned  among 
the  counties  and  parishes  as  in  the  case  of  the  Militia. 
In  Ireland  the  Lord  -  Lieutenant  was  empowered  to 
enlist  the  men  by  beat  of  drum  instead  of  by  the 
ballot,  at  his  discretion.  The  standard  of  height  was 
to  be  five  feet  two  inches ;  and  service  could  be 
commuted  by  any  ballotted  man  either  by  the  pro- 
duction of  a  substitute,  which  assured  permanent 
exemption,  or  by  the  payment  of  ^20,  which  sum 
purchased  immunity  from  the  ballot  for  one  year  only. 
All  men  were  to  be  enrolled  for  service  in  the  United 
Kingdom  and  Channel  Islands  alone,  principals  for  five 
years,  substitutes  for  the  same  term  or  until  six  months 
after  the  signature  of  a  definitive  peace.  Parishes  failing 
to  produce  their  appointed  quota  of  men  were  subjected 
to  a  cumulative  fine  of  ^20,  to  be  repeated  every 
quarter,  for  every  man  deficient.  Exemption  was 
granted  to  all  Volunteers  and  Yeomanry  enrolled 
before  the  22  nd  of  June,  provided  that  their  offers  of 
service  extended,  in  the  event  of  invasion,  to  every 
part  of  their  military  district,  or  in  other  words,  pro- 
vided that  they  had  accepted  the  June  Allowances. 
Finally  the  members  of  the  Army  df  Reserve  were 
permitted  to  enlist  into  the  Regular  Army. 

The  augmentation  of  the  Regular  Army  was  the 
principal  purpose  of  the  Act,  though  the  fact  does  not 
appear  upon  its  surface.  Nor,  in  theory,  was  the  plan 
upon  which  it  was  based  by  any  means  essentially  bad. 
The  fifty  thousand  men  were  to  be  formed  into  fifty 
second  battalions  to  as  many  regiments  of  the  line, 
and  were  to  be  tempted  by  bounties  to  fill  up  the  gaps 
in  the  first  battalions  as  occasion  might  require.  The 
Duke  of  York,  ever  since  he  had  been  Commander-in- 
chief,  had  been  striving  hard  to  give  a  second  battalion 
to  every  regiment  of  regular  British  infantry  ;  and  he 
it  was,  no  doubt,  who  had  suggested  this  organisation. 
But  Pitt,  who  had  originally  urged  the  measure  upon 
Addington,  had,  under  the  inspiration  of  the  Horse 
Guards,  very  wisely  designed  to  enlarge  its  scope,  and  to 


ch.vii       HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY 


add  to  it  further  machinery  for  filling  up  the  gaps  in  1803. 
the  Army  of  Reserve  itself  every  year,  so  that  it  should 
be  maintained  at  a  constant  strength.  This  most 
important  detail  was  wholly  omitted  by  Addington  and 
Hobart.  Entirely  ignorant  of  all  military  matters,  they 
provided  simply  for  sudden  increase  of  the  Army  by  a 
spasmodic  and  costly  effort,  not  for  its  permanent 
support,  nor  for  making  good  the  waste  of  war. 
What  they  actually  did  was  to  augment  the  number  of 
men  to  be  raised  by  ballot  in  a  single  year  to  one 
hundred  and  ten  or  twenty  thousand  men,  admitting 
throughout  the  principle  of  substitution,  which  as  a 
natural  consequence  swept  into  the  Militia  and  Army 
of  Reserve  every  man  who  might  with  better  manage- 
ment have  been  recruited  into  the  Army.  The  policy 
was  furiously  attacked  by  Windham,  who  looked  upon 
it  as  fatal  to  all  chance  of  ever  creating  an  offensive 
force.  He  maintained  that  no  enlistment  ought  to  be 
permitted  for  any  troops  except  the  Regulars,  and  that 
for  the  Militia  there  should  be  no  alternative  between 
personal  service  or  heavy  fines  for  exemption,  the 
proceeds  of  which  fines  should  be  gathered  into  a 
general  recruiting -fund.  "  I  would  sooner  leave  the 
Militia  incomplete,"  he  said,  "  than  introduce  that  fatal 
principle  of  substitution." 1  He  spoke  to  deaf  ears. 
Pitt,  for  reasons  best  known  to  himself,  defended  the 
measure  as  it  stood  ;  and  his  voice  prevailed.  The  race 
for  substitutes  naturally  became  a  headlong  scramble 
after  the  passing  of  the  Act ;  but  still  Addington  and 
Hobart  had  not  exhausted  their  powers  of  ineptitude. 