


ch.  vii       HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  207 

passed  a  fortnight  later,  provided  further  that  if  the  1803. 
number  of  Volunteers  in  any  county  were  satisfactory 
to  the  King,  he  could  suspend  the  operation  of  the 
Levy  en  Masse  Act,  even  though  such  number  did  not 
amount  to  the  prescribed  tale  of  three-fourths  of  the 
first  class. 

This  measure  amounted  practically  to  an  Act  to 
compel  men  to  become  Volunteers,  and  was  meant  to 
be  interpreted  as  such.  The  Government  on  the  30th  July  30. 
of  July  had  sent  a  Circular  to  the  Lords- Lieutenant 
limiting  the  numbers  of  men  to  be  immediately  trained 
to  six  times  the  quota  of  the  Ordinary  Militia,  or  in 
round  figures  to  three  hundred  and  nine  thousand 
privates,  and  directing  that  the  enrolment  of  Volunteers 
up  to  that  number  should  be  encouraged.  This  instruction 
was  supplemented  on  the  3rd  of  August  by  promulga-  Aug.  3. 
tion  of  a  new  set  of  allowances,  known  as  the  August 
Allowances,  for  all  Volunteer  corps  accepted  after  the 
22nd  of  June.  The  Circular  set  forth  the  impossibility, 
on  financial  grounds,  of  extending  the  June  Allowances 
to  a  greater  number  of  men  than  already  received  them  ; 
and  offered  in  their  stead  to  such  infantry  corps  as 
might  in  future  be  formed  a  grant  of  ^1  a  man  for 
clothing  every  three  years,  and  one  shilling  a  day  for 
twenty  days'  exercise  in  the  year.  No  allowance 
for  clothing  and  appointments  was  to  be  made  in 
future  to  men  entering  corps  of  Yeomanry  ;  but,  under 
the  Levy  en  Masse  Act,  men  who  appeared  on  horse- 
back, properly  armed  and  accoutred  at  their  own 
expense,  were  excused  from  service  in  the  infantry,  and 
might  either  be  attached  to  existing  corps  of  Yeomanry, 
or  formed  into  new  troops  or  regiments. 

Having  done  this,  the  Government  proceeded,  on 
the  1 1  th  of  August,  to  pass  an  Act  known  as  the  Aug.  1 1 . 
Billetting  Act,  to  enable  Volunteers  and  Yeomen  to  be 
billetted  upon  occasion.  Incidentally  this  enactment 
subjected  both  Yeomanry  and  Volunteers  to  military 
law,  if  called  out  to  repel  invasion,  and  transferred 
them  in  the  same  emergency  from  the  control  of  the 


208 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  bookxiii 


1803.  Lords-Lieutenant  to  that  of  the  General  commanding 
their  districts.  It  made  likewise  some  kind  of  provision 
for  discipline  at  other  times  by  vesting  the  funds  of  all 
Volunteer  corps  in  their  commanding  officers,  and 
making  the  collection  of  fines,  which  had  been  imposed 
upon  the  Volunteers  under  the  rules  of  their  corps, 
recoverable  by  distress.  Lastly  it  ordained  the  qualifica- 
tion of  an  effective  Yeoman  to  be  attendance  at  twelve 
days'  exercise,  and  of  an  effective  infantry  Volunteer  to 
be  attendance  at  twenty-four  days'  exercise  in  the  year  ; 
and  exempted  all  such  effective  men  from  the  ballot, 
not  only  for  the  Army  of  Reserve,  but  for  any  other 
Additional  Force  that  might  be  raised  in  future.  How 
this  last  clause  ever  passed  through  both  Houses  of 
Parliament  is  and  remains  a  mystery.  Sir  William 
Yonge  averred  that  it  had  been  surreptitiously  introduced 
into  the  House  at  a  time  when  most  of  the  members 
had  left  London  for  the  country  in  order  to  drill  with 
their  various  regiments  ; 1  and  this  is  possible,  for  the 
provision  was  certainly  contrary  not  only  to  the  Army 
of  Reserve  Act  itself  but,  by  their  own  admission,  to 
the  actual  intention  of  Ministers.  Indeed,  in  spite  of 
the  plain  words  of  the  Act,  they  cdtlld  not  believe 
that  the  section  really  exempted  Volunteers  from  the 
ballot  for  the  Army  of  Reserve,  until  their  own  Law- 
Officers  pronounced  that  undoubtedly  it  had  such  force  ; 
when  with  infinite  mortification  they  communicated  the 
unwelcome  news  to  the  Lords- Lieutenant.  Thus, 
with  a  masterpiece  of  careless  imbecility,  ended  the 
summer  session  of  1803. 