

Their  next  action,  however,  showed  some  return  of 
sense,  for  it  consisted  in  a  bill  to  amend  the  absurd 
Defence  Act  of  the  1 1  th  of  June,  which  became  law  on 
the  27th  of  July  as  the  Levy  en  Masse  Act.  It  was  July  27. 
based  upon  the  undoubted  right  of  the  Sovereign  to 
demand  military  service  of  all  his  subjects  to  repel 
invasion,  and  provided  the  following  machinery  for 
that  purpose. 

1  Pari  Hist,  xxxvi.  p.  1622,  23rd  June  1803. 


206 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY   book  xiii 


The  Lords-Lieutenant,  to  whom  the  entire  execution 
of  the  Act  was  entrusted,  were  required  to  obtain  lists 
of  all  men  between  the  ages  of  seventeen  and  fifty-five, 
and  to  sort  them  into  four  classes,  namely  :  first, 
unmarried  men  under  thirty  years  of  age,  with  no  child 
living  under  ten  years  old  ;  secondly,  unmarried  men 
between  thirty  and  fifty  years  of  age,  with  no  child  as 
aforesaid  ;    thirdly,  married  men  from  seventeen  to 
thirty  years  of  age,  with  not  more  than  two  children 
living  under  ten  years  old  ;  fourthly,  all  other  men 
whatsoever.    Exemption  was  granted  to  the  infirm,  to 
the  judges,  to  clergymen,  schoolmasters,  persons  actually 
serving  in  the  Army,  Navy,  and  Reserve  Forces,  Lords- 
Lieutenant,  their  Deputies,  and  peace-officers.  The 
King  was  empowered  to  direct  any  parish  to  be  provided 
with  arms  ;  and  to  order  the  three  first  classes  to  be 
trained,  under  the  superintendence  of  the  Deputy- 
Lieutenants,  for  two  hours  on  every  Sunday  or  other 
convenient  day  in  the  week  from  Lady  Day  to  Christmas, 
and  moreover,  until  Christmas  1803,  on  at  least  fourteen 
and  at  most  twenty  successive  days.  Deputy-Lieutenants 
were  authorised  to  hire  instructors  and  to  appoint 
four  officers  to  every  six-score  met^;  and  provision 
was  made  for  enforcing  attendance  by  means  of  fines, 
and  punishing  misconduct  on  parade  by  fine,  and  by  im- 
prisonment for  seven  days  in  default  of  payment.  In 
case  of  invasion  or  imminent  danger  thereof  the  whole 
or  any  part  of  the  men  enrolled  under  the  Act  were 
liable  to  be  embodied  in  new  battalions,  or  in  existing 
corps  of  Regulars  or  Militia,  and  marched  to  any  part  of 
Great  Britain.    If  only  a  part  of  the  classes  was  to  be 
embodied,  the  required  number  was  to  be  selected  by 
ballot ;  but  in  places  where  Volunteer  corps  had  been 
formed,  or  where  a  number  of  men  of  any  age  between 
seventeen  and  fifty,  equal  to  three-fourths  of  the  first 
class,  engaged  themselves  to  serve  as  Volunteers  and  to 
march  to  any  part  of  Great  Britain  in  case  of  invasion, 
the  King  was  empowered  to  suspend  the  compulsory 
training  prescribed  by  the  Act.    An  amending  Act, 