


ch.vii      HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY 


201 


Meanwhile,  on  the  nth  of  March  a  proclamation  1803. 
was  published  for  the  embodiment  of  the  Militia  ;  when 
that  force  in  Great  Britain  was  found  to  be  in  an  ex- 
tremely unsatisfactory  state.  Notwithstanding  that  the 
ballots  had  been  going  on  ever  since  the  previous 
December,  the  levy  was  still  incomplete,  and  very 
seriously  incomplete.  Even  in  Ireland,  where  Militia- 
men were  raised  almost  entirely  by  voluntary  enlistment 
for  a  bounty  of  two  guineas,  there  was  a  considerable 
deficiency.  In  Great  Britain  there  had  been  a  rush  for 
substitutes,  the  price  of  which  had  already  run  up  to  an 
extravagant  figure.  There  had  been  some  recalcitrance 
in  Scotland,  and  persistent  evasion  everywhere  ;  and 
crimps  and  insurance  -  societies 1  had  been  driving  a 
roaring  trade.  This  was  a  serious  matter,  for  war  was 
drawing  nearer  every  day.  An  Act  was  passed  on  the 
24th  of  March  to  prolong  the  annual  training  of  the 
Militia  from  twenty-one  days  to  twenty-eight  ;  and 
another  Act  of  the  7  th  of  April  made  an  attempt  to 
ensure  that  there  should  be  some  men  to  be  trained,  by 
doubling  the  bounty  for  the  Irish  Militia  from  two 
guineas  to  four.  Then  on  the  16th  of  May,  as  has 
been  told,  war  was  declared  ;  and  on  the  28  th  the 
Government  called  out  the  additional  contingent  of 
Militia,  known  as  the  Supplementary  Militia,  which 
was  authorised  by  the  Act  of  1802.  This  signified 
that  Great  Britain,  which  so  far  had  failed  to  pro- 
duce fifty-one  thousand  men  in  four  or  five  months, 
must  now  produce  another  twenty -five  thousand  ; 2 
and,  in  order  to  quicken  the  process,  an  Act  of  the 
27th  of  May  levied  a  cumulative  penalty  of  £10  every 
quarter  upon  the  counties  for  every  man  deficient  of 
their  quota,  raised  the  fine  for  exemption  from  £10 
to  ^15,  and  made  substitutes  who  had  deserted  liable, 
upon  conviction,  to  serve  in  the  Regular  Army  abroad. 
This,  however,  did  not  prevent  but  rather  stimulated  a 

1  Societies  which,  for  a  certain  premium,  undertook  to  provide 
men  with  a  substitute  or  with  the  amount  of  the  exemption-fine. 

2  Ireland  had  no  Supplementary  Militia. 


202 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY   book  xiii 


1803.  second  rush  for  substitutes,  with  the  natural  result  that 
their  cost  again  increased  rapidly.  With  high  prices, 
which  were  commonly  called,  and  to  all  intents  actually 
were,  high  bounties,  crimps  grew  rich,  and  desertion 
and  fraudulent  enlistment  flourished  more  abundantly. 

These  hasty  measures  did  not  escape  sharp  criticism, 
for,  when  men  could  gain  from  £20  to  ^30  as  sub- 
stitutes, they  were  not  likely  to  accept  a  bounty  of 
£7:12:6  to  enter  the  Regular  Army.  Windham 
attacked  the  whole  system  fiercely,  pointing  out  that 
if  men  could  earn  large  sums  by  serving  for  a  few  years 
at  home,  they  could  not  be  expected  to  enlist  for  life 
to  serve  in  the  Regular  Army  in  any  part  of  the  globe. 
Pitt  echoed  Windham's  strictures,  and  both  agreed  in 
condemning  a  purely  defensive  policy  as  alike  ruinous 
and  dishonourable.1  But  Addington  was  popular  with 
the  country  members ;  and  the  House  accepted  his 
assurance  that  he  was  only  dealing  with  defensive 
measures  first,  in  view  of  the  vast  preparations  of  the 
enemy.  When  the  opportunity  for  offensive  operations 
should  arrive,  he  added,  no  doubt  the  country  would 
afford  means  for  supporting  them  with  honour. 