

To  this  enactment  the  Ministry  added  another  in 
the'same  session  of  1 802  for  dealing  with  the  Volunteers. 
The  Volunteer  Acts  passed  by  Pitt  during  the  late  war 
had  expired  with  the  war  ;  and,  in  the  uncertainty  of 
the  continuance  of  peace,  the  Government  thought  it 
expedient  to  enable  such  of  the  corps  as  were  willing,  to 
prolong  their  service.  Now  the  Volunteers  called  into 
existence  by  Pitt  had  been  established  upon  a  totally 
false  principle.  They  had  been  dependent  mainly  upon 
private  subscriptions,  and  governed  by  committees  of 
the  subscribers,  who  were  not  necessarily  officers  ;  and 
it  was  therefore  extremely  doubtful  whether  they  were 
commanded  by  their  titular  commanding  officers  or  by 
their  committees.  Jealousy  and  self-importance  had 
prompted  a  vast  majority  of  the  corps  to  organise 
themselves  into  small  and  insignificant  units,  so  that 
they  might  reserve  to  themselves  the  greater  indepen- 
dence, and  indulge  to  the  utmost  their  peculiar  ideas  and 
idiosyncrasies.  They  were  subject  to  no  discipline 
excepting  their  own  rules,  which  could  only  be  enforced 
by  public  opinion.  They  were,  therefore,  practically 
under  no  control ;  and  as  an  inevitable  consequence, 
they  were  for  the  most  part  utterly  useless.  Here, 


200 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY   book  xiii 


802.  therefore,  was  an  opportunity  for  reconstituting  them 
upon  some  sounder  basis,  if  they  were  to  be  revived  at 
all ;  but  Lord  Hobart  who,  though  Secretary  of  State 
for  War,  had  for  some  reason  taken  over  the  charge  of 
the  Volunteers  from  the  Home  Secretary,  was  far  too 
incapable  to  think  of  any  such  thing.  Hence  the 
Volunteer  Act  of  1802,  without  attempting  to  remedy 
a  single  defect,  simply  empowered  the  King  to  accept 
any  offers  from  Yeomanry  and  Volunteer  corps  to 
prolong  their  service,  and,  in  return,  guaranteed  such 
corps  exemption  from  the  Militia  ballot  in  consideration 
of  their  undergoing  five  days'  exercise  annually. 

A  fair  number  of  corps  accepted  these  terms  in 
1802,  but  a  great  number  refused  them,  seeing  no 
occasion  for  any  such  patriotic  display  in  time  of  peace. 
As  the  prospects  of  war  became  more  certain,  however, 

803.  the  Government  issued  on  the  31st  of  March  1803 
a  Circular  calling  for  more  Volunteers,  at  the  same 
time  submitting  a  scale  of  allowances  which  they  pro- 
posed to  grant  for  their  maintenance  and  encourage- 
ment. The  response  to  this  was  ready  and  even  eager. 
But  presently  Ministers  bethought  themselves  that  if 
they  created  too  many  Volunteers  they»would  leave  no 
men  to  be  ballotted  for  the  Militia  ;  wherefore,  after 
effusive  acceptance  of  a  great  many  offers  of  Volunteer 
corps,  they  suddenly  and  abruptly  declined  to  answer 
further  applications.  Many  thousands  of  men  who 
had  tendered  their  services  were  thus  kept  in  suspense, 
and,  as  was  natural,  murmured  loudly  at  such  treatment ; 
and,  since  they  had  really  been  inspired  in  the  vast 
majority  of  cases  by  truly  patriotic  motives,  they  com- 
plained that  the  Government  was  deliberately  damping 
the  ardour  of  the  people.  This  was  unjust.  Adding- 
ton  and  his  colleagues  were  only  hesitating  until  they 
should  have  ascertained  their  own  minds.  But  this 
was  a  lengthy  process,  for  it  was  extremely  doubtful 
whether  they  possessed  any  minds  beyond  such  frag- 
ments as  their  lofty  patron,  Pitt,  might  choose  to  dole 
out  to  them. 