

1  Rose  and  Broadley's  Dumouriez  and  the  Defence  of  England, 
PP-  332-337- 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY   book  xiii 


1803.  leave  to  Bonaparte  all  initiative,  and  suffer  the  strength 
of  England  to  be  paralysed  by  a  menace  from  Boulogne. 
The  only  augmentation  ordered  for  the  army  was  an 
addition  of  eleven  men  to  every  troop  of  dragoons  and 
of  ten  to  every  company  of  Guards  ;  and  Mr.  Yorke, 
June  6.  the  Secretary  at  War,  when  introducing  the  estimates 
took  credit  for  the  moderation  of  the  increase. 
Ministers,  in  fact,  were  resolved  to  stand  wholly  on 
the  defensive,  except  in  the  West  Indies,  and,  moreover, 
considered  the  resolution  to  be  exceedingly  clever. 

The  Militia  Act  of  1802  1  had  been  framed  wholly 
with  this  view.    It  provided  for  raising  by  ballot,  and 
by  no  other  means,  fifty -one  thousand  five  hundred 
men  between  the  ages  of  eighteen  and  forty-five,  and 
at  least  five  feet  four  inches  in  height,  from  all  the 
parishes  of  Great  Britain ;  giving  the  King  power, 
moreover,  on   menace  of  invasion   or  rebellion  to 
augment  that  number  by  one-half  on  calling  Parliament 
together  within  fourteen  days.     Any  parish  which 
failed  to  produce  its  quota  of  men  was  fined  annually 
£10  for  every  man  deficient.     The  men  were  to  be 
trained  for  twenty-one  days  annually  ;   and  enlistment 
from  the  Militia  into  the  Regular  Ari»y  was  positively  1; 
forbidden.    They  were  to  be  chosen  by  ballot,  and  if 
they  accepted  the  lot  that  fell  upon  them,  were  to  serve 
for  five  years  ;  receiving  from  the  parochial  rates,  if 
they  were  worth  less  than  £500,  a  sum  equal  to  half  the 
cost  of  a  substitute.    Such  men  were  at  liberty  to  pro- 
long their  service  on  giving  notice  four  months  before 
the  expiration  of  their  term,  and  stating  the  sum  which 
they  demanded  for  such  prolongation.    But  there  were  j 
several  ways  whereby  service  in  the  Militia  could  be  t 
evaded.    In  the  first  place,  parishes  could  produce  If 
parochial  substitutes  and  levy  a  rate  to  purchase  them,  j| ; 
up  to  the  price  of  £6  a  head.    In  the  second  place,  a  | 
ballotted  man,  or  to  use  the  contemporary  name,  a  |- 
lotman,  could  provide  a  personal  substitute,  towards  the  j|  \ 
cost  of  which  the  parish  gave  him,  if  he  were  worth  |i  n 
1  42  Geo.  III.  caps.  90,  91. 


ch.vii      HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY 


199 


less  than  £500,  half  the  current  price  of  a  substitute,  1802. 
such  substitutes  being  required  to  be  drawn  from  the 
"  same  or  some  adjoining  county  or  place."  And 
thirdly,  he  could  purchase  exemption  for  five  years  by 
the  payment  of  £10.  But  whereas  ballotted  men,  who 
accepted  service,  were  enrolled  for  five  years  only  and 
then  released  until  their  turn  to  be  ballotted  should 
come  again  in  rotation,  substitutes  were  retained  until 
the  disembodiment  of  the  Militia,  or,  in  other  words, 
until  the  end  of  the  war.  All  sergeants  and  drummers, 
again,  were  enlisted  for  life.  Hence,  unless  the 
majority  of  the  lotmen  were  ready  to  serve  in  person, 
which  was  contrary  to  all  experience,  Addington's 
Militia  Act  promised  to  lock  up  a  vast  number  of 
men  in  the  Militia,  who  would  otherwise  have  enlisted 
in  the  Army. 