

The  dull,  pompous  man  was  therefore  permitted  to 
proceed  with  his  defensive  measures.  He  had  long 
paltered  with  the  Volunteers,  sometimes  urging  them  to 
tender  their  services,  sometimes  refusing  to  accept  their 
offers;  and  he  now  passed  what  was  called  a  Defence  Act, 
the  object  of  which  seems  to  have  been  to  stimulate  them 
to  come  forward.  It  directed  the  Lords- Lieutenant 
to  furnish  lists  of  all  able-bodied  men,  between  the  ages 
of  fifteen  and  sixty,  who  were  willing  to  serve  in  defence 
of  their  country  ;  distinguishing  among  these  such  as 
were  Yeomen  or  Volunteers,  and  such  as  were  ready 
to  serve  as  waggoners,  pioneers,  or  the  like.  It  also 
required  returns  as  to  the  vehicles,  horses,  cattle,  forage, 
and  so  forth  in  the  country,  giving  powers  for  the 
destruction  or  removal  of  them  in  case  of  invasion, 
and  for  the  acquisition  of  land  for  military  purposes. 
1  Pari.  Hist,  xxxvi.  p.  1574,  6th  June  1803. 


ch.vii       HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY 


203 


Lastly  it  ordained  that  persons  enrolled  in  Volunteer  1803 
corps  after  the  passing  of  the  Act  should  not  be  called 
out  except  according  to  their  own  conditions  of  service, 
nor  except  in  case  of  invasion  or  imminent  danger 
thereof.  A  more  foolish  enactment,  except  as  regards 
the  registration  of  horses  and  kindred  matters,  was 
never  proposed  ;  for  it  was  and  is  the  undoubted  right 
of  the  Sovereign  to  call  up  all  able-bodied  men  to  serve 
in  defence  of  their  country,  willing  or  unwilling  ;  and 
there  was  little  object,  therefore,  in  ascertaining  whether 
they  were  willing  or  not. 

Moreover,  the  enactment  as  to  the  Volunteers  was 
nugatory,  for,  a  few  days  after  the  Act  had  been 
passed,  Ministers  finally  made  up  their  minds  what  they 
would  do  about  them,  and  issued  a  code  of  regulations 
which  became  known  as  the  June  Allowances.  Hereby  June 
they  offered  to  the  Volunteer  Corps  pay  for  eighty-five 
days'  exercise  in  the  year,  as  well  as  salaries  for 
a  limited  number  of  officers  and  for  a  permanent 
staff ;  requiring  from  them  in  return  an  agreement  to 
serve  in  any  part  of  their  military  district.  On  the 
other  hand,  the  Government  announced  that  no  Volunteer 
enrolled  after  the  16th  of  June  would  be  exempted 
from  the  ballot  for  a  new  force,  shortly  about  to  be 
called  into  being.  Nevertheless  the  terms  were  so 
liberal  that  they  were  readily  embraced  on  all  sides,  and 
produced  many  additional  tenders  of  service  from  new 
Volunteer  corps.  But  now  the  Cabinet  took  alarm  at 
the  expense  ;  and  once  again,  amid  deep  groans  from 
disappointed  patriots,  their  offers  were  left  unanswered. 

On  the  20th  of  June  the  bill  for  creating  the  new 
force  above-named — the  most  important  of  the 
Government's  measures — was  duly  brought  forward  in 
the  House  of  Commons,  and  on  the  6  th  of  July  became  July- 
law  under  the  name  of  the  Additional  Force  Act.  It 
ordained  that  within  the  year  there  should  be  raised  by 
ballot  in  the  United  Kingdom,  an  Army  of  Reserve  of 
fifty  thousand  men,  namely  thirty-four  thousand  from 
England,  six  thousand  from  Scotland,  and  ten  thousand 