

In  virtue  of  the  large  establishment  voted  in  1802,  0 
and  by  the  timely  suspension  of  the  disbandment  of 
many  condemned  corps,  the  British  Government  had 
ready  to  its  hand  a  regular  army  incomparably  stronger 
and  more  efficient  than  had  ever  before  been  seen  at 
the  beginning  of  any  war.    Moreover,  despite  of  St. 
Vincent's  failure  at  the  Admiralty,  England's  superiority 
at  sea  was  overwhelming.    Here,  therefore,  was  an  k 
opportunity,  such  as  is  not  often  afforded,  for  augment-  i: 
ing  the  Regular  Army  to  formidable  strength  by  means  b 
of  the  tens  of  thousands  of  men  trained  during  the  ; 
last  war,  and  disconcerting  the  whole  of  Bonaparte's  : 
plans  by  a  vigorous  offensive  movement.    The  obvious  1 
sphere  for  such  a  movement  was  the  Mediterranean. 
The  French  invasion  of  Calabria  was  of  course  a  glaring  j 
violation  of  the  neutrality  of  the  Kingdom  of  the  Two 
Sicilies.    The  Court  of  Naples,  though  utterly  corrupt  . 


ch.  vir       HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY 


197 


and  inefficient,  at  least  preferred  British  protection  to  1803. 
the  encroachments  and  menaces  of  Bonaparte.  The 
Apulians  hated  the  French  invaders,  and  might  easily  be 
brought  to  turn  against  them  savagely,  both  as  individuals 
and  in  masses.  Gouvion  St.  Cyr  lay  weak  and  isolated 
at  the  very  heel  of  Italy,  almost  the  remotest  point  to 
southward  that  could  be  reached  by  French  troops. 
Thirty  thousand  British  soldiers,  or  forty  thousand  if 
transport  could  be  found  for  them,  concentrated  in 
Sicily,  with  their  ships  ready,  would  have  stirred  up 
dangerous  unrest  in  the  whole  of  the  Peninsula.  They 
would  have  compelled  Bonaparte  to  drain  men  from 
France  for  reinforcement  of  the  Italian  garrisons,  and 
would  have  constrained  him  either  to  double  the 
strength  of  St.  Cyr's  corps,  or  to  recall  it  altogether  and 
to  relieve  Nelson  from  all  anxiety  as  to  the  safety 
of  the  Levant,  of  Egypt,  and  of  India.  If  Austria, 
later  on,  were  drawn  into  hostilities,  forty  thousand 
British  troops  could  give  her  most  effective  help  on 
either  flank  of  Italy  ;  while,  on  the  other  hand,  such 
a  force  might  well  harden  Spain  in  her  reluctance  to 
yield  to  Bonaparte's  claims  upon  her  under  the  Treaty 
of  San  Ildefonso.  Italy,  in  fact,  the  scene  of  Bona- 
parte's triumphs,  the  acquisition  that  was  dearest  to 
his  heart,  was  the  sphere  where  a  British  fleet  and 
a  British  army,  under  command  of  such  a  man  as 
Moore,  might  have  made  a  diversion  that  Bonaparte 
himself  could  not  have  ignored. 

But  no  such  ideas  occurred  to  Addington  or  to  his 
colleagues.  Dumouriez,  whom  they  consulted  late  in 
the  year,  advocated  an  attack  upon  Walcheren  and  an 
expedition  to  Portugal  as  the  best  means  of  checking 
a  descent  upon  Ireland,  which  he  justly  held  to  be  the 
most  vulnerable  point  in  the  Empire,  Ministers  may 
well  have  been  justified  in  rejecting  both  projects  ;  but 
they  were  equally  deaf  to  all  the  protests  of  Dumouriez 
against  an  inert  defensive.1    Their  only  notion  was  to 