


1803.  of  unanswered  letters  containing  offers  of  Volunteers 
from  all  quarters.  For  a  week  he  wrestled  with  them, 
and  then  giving  up  the  attempt  in  despair,  he  issued  on 
Aug.  31.  the  31st  two  Circulars  to  announce  that  all  the  offers 
were  accepted,  provided  that  they  did  not  exceed  the 
quota  laid  down  in  Lord  Hobart's  Circular  of  the  18  th 
of  August  ;  also  that  a  certain  number  of  supernumerary 
volunteers  might  be  attached  to  accepted  corps,  which 
supernumeraries,  however,  should  be  entitled  to  no 
allowance  whatever  from  Government  and  should  enjoy 
no  exemption  from  the  ballot.  For  the  rest,  all  troops 
and  companies  must  be  of  a  certain  strength,  and 
muskets  would  be  issued  for  one-fourth  of  the  appointed 
quota,  unless  the  arms  already  provided  by  corps  for 
themselves  rendered  so  large  a  proportion  unnecessary. 
For  the  remainder  of  the  infantry  and  for  the  artillery 
there  was  abundance  of  pikes,  which  could  be  furnished 
to  any  number  that  was  required. 

These  concessions,  though  more  apparent  than  real, 
stilled  the  clamour  for  a  time  ;  and  at  this  point  it  will  be 
well  to  show  exactly  what  the  Government  had  accom- 
plished. First,  it  had  ordered  some  hundred  and 
twenty  thousand  men  to  be  raised  by  ballot  within  a  few 
months  for  the  Ordinary  Militia,  Supplementary  Militia, 
and  Army  of  Reserve.  The  general  terms  of  service  for 
the  three  were  the  same,  but  the  standard  for  the  Militia, 
until  the  27th  of  July,  was  five  feet  four  inches,  and 
for  the  Army  of  Reserve  five  feet  two  inches.  An  Act 
of  the  27th  of  July,1  however,  had  lowered  the  standard 
for  substitutes  in  the  Militia  to  five  feet  two  inches  ; 
so  that  according  to  the  letter  of  the  law  there  was  one 
standard  for  principals  and  another  for  substitutes. 
Substitutes  for  the  Militia  might  not  have  more  than 
one  child  born  in  lawful  wedlock,  while  substitutes  for 
the  Army  of  Reserve  might  have  an  unlimited  number. 
In  the  Ordinary  Militia  a  fine  of  £io9  and  in  the 
Supplementary  Militia  a  fine  of  ^15  purchased  ex- 
emption from  the  ballot  for  five  years  ;  in  the  Army  of 
1  43  Geo.  III.  cap.  100. 


ch.vii      HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  211 

Reserve  a  fine  of  £20  purchased  exemption  for  one  1803. 
year  only.  Lastly,  men  who  served  in  person  or  by 
substitute  in  the  Militia  were  exempt  from  the  ballot 
for  the  Army  of  Reserve,  and  vice  versa  ;  but  men  who 
had  only  paid  the  exemption-fine  for  one  of  these  two 
forces  were  not  immune  from  the  ballot  for  the  other. 
Again,  five  days'  exercise  sufficed  to  deliver  any  Yeoman 
or  Volunteer  from  the  ballot  for  the  Militia,  but  a 
Yeoman  must  undergo  twelve  days'  drill,  and  an 
infantry  Volunteer  twenty-four  days'  annually  to  obtain 
deliverance  from  the  Army  of  Reserve.  These  dis- 
tinctions were  not  all  of  them  made  quite  clear  in  the 
Acts,  with  the  consequence  that  they  were  imperfectly 
grasped  by  the  county  authorities  and  hardly  appre- 
hended at  all  by  the  body  of  the  people.  The  natural 
result  was  enormous  correspondence  between  the  Home 
Office  and  the  Lords -Lieutenant,  endless  confusion 
in  making  the  levies,  and  deep  resentment  among  all 
classes  that  were  liable  to  the  ballot.  The  task  of  the 
Lieutenancies  in  raising  so  great  a  body  of  men  would 
under  the  most  favourable  conditions  have  been  very 
arduous  ;  but  the  action  of  the  Government  made  it 
practically  impossible  of  performance.  The  wholesale 
exemption  from  all  ballots  of  over  three  hundred  thou- 
sand Volunteers,  chiefly  unmarried  men,  threw  the 
obligation  upon  married  men,  to  whom  personal  service 
was  often  ruinous.  Once  again,  therefore,  the  price  of 
substitutes  rose  with  a  bound  to  ^30,  £40,  and  even 
£60.  The  proceeds  of  the  exemption-fines  which,  in 
theory,  were  supposed  to  enable  the  parishes  to  pur- 
chase substitutes  for  the  men  who  had  paid  them, 
were  of  course  inadequate.  The  parish  officers  resorted 
in  despair  to  the  crimps.  The  crimps — and  there  was 
probably  at  least  one  crimp,  professional  or  amateur, 
in  every  parish — observant  of  the  daily  increasing  value 
of  their  goods,  were  in  no  haste  to  place  them  on  the 
market.  Menaced,  therefore,  by  exorbitant  prices  on 
the  one  hand,  and  the  spectre  of  cumulative  quarterly 
fines  on  the  other,  the  parochial  authorities  finally  sat 