

The  effect  of  all  these  measures  concerning  the 
Volunteers  was,  of  course,  immediate.  There  was  a 
general  rush  for  enrolment  ;  and  the  offers  of  service 
poured  in  with  such  abundance  that  the  War  Office 
Aug.  18.  was  fairly  swamped  with  them.  On  the  18th  of 
August  the  Lords  -  Lieutenant  were  informed  by 
Circular  that  the  classes  need  not  be  called  out  under 
the  Levy  en  Masse  Act,  and  that  the  operation  of  the 
1  H.D.  Commons,  14th  Dec.  1803. 


ch.  vii      HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  209 

measure  in  regard  to  training  was  suspended.  It  was  1803. 
further  intimated  to  them  that  the  voluntary  system 
could  not  be  carried  to  an  unlimited  extent,  and  that 
no  additional  corps  would  be  accepted  in  counties 
where  the  number  of  effective  Volunteers,  including 
Yeomanry,  exceeded  the  appointed  number  of  six  times 
the  quota  of  the  Ordinary  Militia.  In  truth  Ministers 
were  already  appalled  at  the  monster  that  they  had 
called  into  being  without  any  adequate  means  of 
controlling  it ;  and,  moreover,  they  had  quite  overlooked 
the  difficulty  of  arming  this  host  of  men.  Another 
Circular,  therefore,  was  issued  to  the  Lieutenants  on  the 
22nd  of  August,  asking  what  number  of  arms  could  be 
procured  from  public  or  private  sources  in  each  county, 
and  intimating  that  for  the  present  the  Government 
did  not  propose  to  issue  firelocks  for  more  than  one 
man  in  four  of  the  appointed  quota,  which  number 
would,  in  its  opinion,  suffice  for  purposes  of  training. 
The  remainder  would  be  provided  with  pikes,  of 
which  there  was  an  amply  sufficient  supply. 

The  answers  to  these  Circulars  was  a  howl  of  dis- 
content. The  nation  was  ablaze  with  the  first  furious 
flame  of  patriotic  ardour,  and  felt  such  announcements 
to  be  drenches  of  cold  water.  Ministers  had  asked  for 
Volunteers  to  defend  the  country,  and  every  able-bodied 
man  was  eager  to  respond  to  the  summons.  What 
manner  of  Government  was  this  which  presumed  to 
say  that  thousands  should  be  excluded  from  the  per- 
formance of  an  honourable  duty,  and  to  trifle  with  the 
supply  of  arms?  The  clamour  was  loudest  in  the 
maritime  counties,  which,  being  the  most  exposed  to 
danger,  were  naturally  and  reasonably  the  most  eager 
to  equip  themselves  for  defence  ;  and  the  Government 
had  put  itself  in  the  wrong  by  the  egregious  blunder  of 
making  the  quota  the  same  for  all  counties,  whether 
inland  or  upon  the  coast.  In  the  height  of  the  crisis 
the  direction  of  the  Volunteers  was  re-transferred  from  Aug. 
the  War  Office  to  the  Home  Office ;  and  the  unhappy 
■Mr.  Yorke  found  himself  confronted  with  a  vast  mass 


VOL.  V 


P 


2IO 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY   book  xnr 