


ch.vii       HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  215 


very  many  corps  ;  and  incidentally  this  same  dearth  1803. 
of  arms  gave  birth  to  a  legitimate  grievance.  The 
law  laid  down  that  Volunteers,  to  gain  their  ex- 
emption from  the  ballot,  must  appear  at  exercise 
properly  armed  and  accoutred  for  a  certain  number 
of  days  before  the  21st  of  September.  Many  com- 
manders, naturally  unwilling  to  waste  all  the  days 
of  drill  without  training  in  arms,  reserved  a  certain 
number  of  them  against  the  time  when  the  long-expected 
muskets  should  arrive  ;  and  waiting  too  long,  sacrificed 
the  exemption  for  their  corps.  These  naturally  pro- 
tested against  the  strict  enforcement  of  the  law  in  their 
case  ;  and  many  others  indignantly  asked  how  it  was 
possible  for  them  to  appear  properly  armed  and  accoutred 
when  Government  failed  to  supply  arms  and  accoutre- 
ments. The  situation  was  most  awkward,  for  the 
Secretary  of  State  could  not  override  the  law  ;  and  he 
could  only  promise  to  pass  a  short  Act  of  Parliament  at 
the  earliest  possible  moment,  which  he  duly  did  on  the 
13th  of  December  1803,  to  remove  the  grievance  and  to 
grant  exemption  for  drills  thus  attended  without  arms. 

However,  in  spite  of  all  obstacles,  the  Volunteers  con- 
tinued to  increase  steadily  during  the  autumn  and  winter 
of  1803.  There  was  much  sound  patriotic  feeling 
as  yet  at  the  heart  of  the  movement.  Private  sub- 
scriptions for  the  foundation  and  maintenance  of  corps 
had  been  abundant  and  generous,  so  that  officers  of 
regiments  on  the  August  Allowances  were  practically  able 
for  the  present  to  give  their  men  the  June  Allowances  ; 
this  being  the  one  means  whereby  harmony  could  be 
kept  up  between  the  New  Volunteers  and  the  Old. 
Enormous  sums  were  foolishly  squandered  upon  dress 
and  frippery  at  large  ;  but  for  the  moment  enthusiasm 
averted  any  serious  financial  pressure.  The  men  were 
delighted  with  their  smart  new  uniforms,  and  the  officers 
supremely  well  satisfied  not  only  with  their  gold  and 
silver  lace,  but  with  their  new  titles.  In  the  session 
of  1803  there  were  already  so  many  Colonels  in  the 
Commons  that  Robert  Craufurd,  the  future  leader  of 


2l6 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY   book  xiii 


1803.  the  Light  Division,  was  nicknamed  the  "Regular 
Colonel,"  to  distinguish  him  as  the  one  man  who  had 
any  right  to  the  appellation.  It  may  be  reckoned  also 
that  at  least  as  many  women  as  men  were  well  pleased 
by  all  this  cheapening  of  rank  and  uniform.  And  yet, 
if  Napoleon  had  landed  at  the  end  of  September  or 
beginning  of  October,  he  would  have  found  little  to 
oppose  him  but  a  half- armed,  undisciplined  rabble, 
composed  in  many  instances  of  fragments  of  corps 
whereof  part  had  marched  out  to  meet  him  and  the 
remainder,  agreeable  to  their  terms  of  service,  had 
refused  to  move  out  of  their  military  districts. 