

Colonel  Robert  Craufurd,  more  ingenuous  and  with 
greater  insight,  declared  that  the  entire  Volunteer 
system  was  faulty  from  beginning  to  end  :  faulty  in 
its  constitution,  its  finance,  its  committees,  its  ex- 
emptions,  its   training,  even    its  clothing.     It  was 


220 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY   book  xiii 


1804.  wrong  to  allow  the  Volunteers  to  be  of  all  descrip- 
tions, old  and  young,  sound  and  infirm,  married  and 
single  ;  for,  if  they  were  called  out  for  service,  half 
of  them  would  go  home  unless  a  decisive  action  were 
fought  at  once.  It  was  wrong  to  allow  Volunteers  to 
be  self-controlled  by  elected  committees,  and  in  some 
cases  by  general  assemblies  ;  for  that  meant  almost  as 
many  parliaments  as  corps.  It  was  wrong  to  let  them 
be  supported  by  private  subscription,  for  this  signified 
the  taxation  of  the  generous  and  patriotic  for  a  burden 
that  should  fall  upon  all  :  if  the  expense  of  Volunteers 
were  defrayed  from  Imperial  funds  there  would  be 
no  occasion  for  committees  and  assemblies.  The 
exemptions  were  wrong,  for  they  crippled  every  branch 
of  the  forces,  even  the  Volunteers  themselves,  since  they 
limited  the  number  of  men  who  could  be  trained  to 
arms  lest  none  should  be  left  for  the  ballot.  Moreover, 
the  Volunteers  were  a  privileged  body,  the  envy  and 
dislike  of  the  poorer  classes,  upon  whom,  by  the 
exemptions,  the  whole  weight  of  the  ballot  was  thrown. 
The  training  was  wrong,  for  the  Prussian  system  of 
drill  was  utterly  useless  for  fighting  in  England,  and 
was  only  taught  to  the  Regulars  because  they  were 
intended  to  fight  abroad.  The  clothing  was  wrong, 
because  it  confused  Volunteers  with  Regulars.  The 
sight  of  Volunteers  retreating  would  dishearten  the 
Regular  troops  by  making  them  believe  that  regiments 
of  the  Line  had  been  beaten,  and  would  for  the  same 
reason  encourage  the  French.  He  himself  would  much 
have  preferred  to  call  out  the  whole  of  the  first  class 
under  the  Levy  en  Masse  Act,  put  them  under  half- 
pay  officers,  clothe  them  and  train  them,  with  the  help 
of  poachers  and  gamekeepers  instead  of  drill-sergeants, 
to  load,  fire,  and  hit  their  mark,  and  to  advance  or 
retire  rapidly  from  shelter  to  shelter.  As  things  were, 
if  Parliament  tried  to  enact  regulations  for  them,  it  was 
told,  not  that  the  rules  were  just  or  unjust,  but  that  they 
were  not  agreeable  to  the  Volunteers.  "  So  delicate  a 
machine,"  he  declared  very  truly,  "  is  unfit  for  war." 


ch.vii      HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY 


221 


Craufurd  spoke  at  enormous  length  and  probably  1804. 
to  an  empty  House  ;  and  though  Windham  echoed 
every  word,  his  protests  fell  upon  deaf  ears.  Never- 
theless the  bill  made  little  progress.  The  Govern- 
ment, represented  by  feeble  men  who  did  not  know 
their  own  minds,  was  constantly  overborne  and 
brought  into  contempt.  By  the  end  of  March 
the  bill  had  been  committed  and  recommitted  four 
times  ;  twenty -four  new  clauses  had  been  added, 
nearly  all  the  original  clauses  had  been  altered  or 
abandoned,  and  yet  the  measure  was  as  far  from 
passing  as  ever.1 