

Fighting  thus  an  unsuccessful   battle  against  the 

1  Circular  to  Lords-Lieutenant,  10th  Feb.  1804. 
2  Circular  to  Lords-Lieutenant  of  12th  Oct.  1803. 
3  Circulars  to  Lords-Lieutenant,  5th  and  6th  March  1804. 


ch.vii      HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  223 


Volunteers  both  in  and  out  of  Parliament,  Addington's  1804. 
Ministry  showed  increasing  signs  of  weakness.  Awed 
by  the  incessant  attacks  of  Windham,  Craufurd,  and 
finally  of  Pitt  upon  their  neglect  of  their  Regular  Army, 
the  Government,  at  the  end  of  March,  brought  forward 
a  plan  for  augmenting  it.  Mr.  Yorke,  in  introducing  Mar. 
the  measure,  confessed  that  the  Army  of  Reserve  Act 
had  broken  down  completely,  the  recruits  gained  during 
the  past  three  months  having  hardly  outbalanced  the 
desertions.  He  proposed,  therefore,  to  suspend  the  Act 
for  one  year,  and,  in  view  of  this  removal  of  competition 
in  the  recruiting  market,  to  raise  eight  new  regiments 
and  ten  new  battalions,  each  one  thousand  strong,  at  a 
bounty  not  exceeding  ten  guineas.  He  also  brought 
in  a  bill  to  increase  the  Irish  Militia  to  twenty-eight 
thousand  men,  so  as  to  enable  ten  thousand  of  them  to 
serve  in  England,  which  they  had  offered  to  do,  and 
to  liberate  that  number  of  Regular  troops  for  service 
abroad.  An  augmentation  of  two  thousand  men  to 
the  Guards  and  of  three  thousand  five  hundred  to  the 
cavalry,  for  both  of  which  recruits  were  always  easily 
gained,  had  already  been  ordered ;  so  that  upon  the 
whole,  the  Army  would,  by  one  way  and  another,  be 
increased  by  twenty-five  thousand  men.  It  does  not 
appear,  however,  that  Yorke  at  once  announced  the 
means  by  which  he  intended  to  raise  his  new  battalions. 
This  was  no  other  than  the  old  resource  of  raising  men 
for  rank  ;  and  he  had  already,  in  fact,  set  this  objection- 
able machinery  in  motion  for  the  augmentation  of  the 
cavalry.1  The  Commander-in-chief,  however,  had  no 
intention  of  allowing  the  abuses  of  1794  to  be  repeated  ; 
and  he  laid  it  down  as  a  rigid  rule  that  no  officer  should 
gain  more  than  one  step,  no  matter  how  many  recruits 
he  might  produce,  and,  that  unless  the  men  were  forth- 
coming within  six  months,  no  step  should  be  granted 
at  all.  Permission  was  accordingly  given  for  the  officers 
of  the  Fourth,  Eighth,  Twenty  -  third,  Fifty -sixth, 
Seventy-eighth,  and  Seventy-ninth  to  enlist  men  for 
1  S.C.L.B.  3rd  Oct.  1803. 


224 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY    book  xiii 


1804.  their  own  promotion  in  second  battalions.1  Letters  of 
service  were  also  granted  on  the  14th  of  May  to  Lord 
Matthew  and  Colonel  Brown,  and  on  the  24th  to 
Colonels  Falkiner  and  Burke  to  raise  four  new  regi- 
ments in  Ireland,  of  which  three  formed  part  of  the 
Line  until  18 18,  and  Brown's  was  swept  into  the 
Eighty-seventh  Foot.2  But  besides  this  a  contract  was 
concluded  with  a  certain  Colonel  French  and  Captain 
Sandon  for  raising  five  thousand  men,  of  which  four 
thousand  were  to  be  produced  within  nine  months, 
and  the  entire  number  within  thirteen  months.  The 
levy-money  granted  for  each  man  was  thirteen  guineas, 
raised  subsequently  to  nineteen  guineas,  with  an  addi- 
tional ten  guineas  upon  the  delivery  of  each  batch  of 
five  hundred  recruits  ;  and  it  was  conceded  that  ten 
boys  should  be  allowed  among  every  hundred  men. 
This  levy  was  a  complete  failure,  the  Deputy-inspector- 
general  of  Recruiting  in  Ireland  having  set  his  face 