

At  the  same  time  Ministers  had  been  fighting  a 
losing  battle  with  the  New  Volunteers  over  another 
point.  These  last  needed  adjutants,  instructors,  and  so 
forth,  as  much  as  their  brothers  on  the  June  Allowances  ; 
but  Ministers  began  by  refusing  to  allow  any  pay  what- 
ever to  provide  them  with  a  permanent  staff.2  This 
of  course  provoked  much  outcry,  and  the  Government 
then  offered  to  concede  pay  for  adjutants  and  sergeant- 
majors  in  all  corps  of  a  certain  strength,  provided  that 
the  New  Volunteers,  like  the  Old,  would  agree  to  be 
exercised  for  eighty -five  days  in  the  year.  It  was 
hardly  a  fair  arrangement,  for  the  Old  Volunteers  under 
the  June  Allowances  received  pay  for  the  whole  of 
their  eighty-five  days,  whereas  the  New  Volunteers, 
under  the  August  Allowances,  received  pay  but  for 
twenty  days ;  the  theory  being  that  drill  on  every 
Sunday  made  up  fifty-two  days  in  the  year,  which 
added  to  the  twenty  above  mentioned  left  only  thirteen 
days  of  exercise  to  be  performed  gratuitously.  But  it 
was  out  of  the  question  that  labouring  men  should  give 
up  a  day's  work  for  nothing  ;  and  this  regulation 
therefore  signified  simply  that  the  officer  must  pay  the 
men  for  thirteen  days  out  of  his  own  pocket.  The 
inevitable  result  was  fresh  discontent.    Practically  the 

1  H.D.  Commons'  Debates,  8th,  27th,  29th  Feb.  ;  6th,  9th, 
19th,  22nd  March  1804. 

2  Circular  to  the  Lords-Lieutenant,  28th  Sept.  1803. 


222 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY   book  xiii 


i  804.  entire  burden  of  providing  parochial  substitutes  and  of 
paying  parochial  fines  for  the  Militia  and  Army  of 
Reserve  fell  upon  the  landed  interest  ;  and  there  was 
great  resentment  at  the  imposition  of  this  new  tax,  for 
such  in  efFect  it  was,  upon  shoulders  that  were  already 
aching.  The  Government,  therefore,  was  compelled 
in  February1  to  grant  a  day's  pay  to  all  officers  and 
privates  who  should  attend  inspection  of  their  corps  by 
a  General  Officer  or  Field  Officer,  provided  that  such 
inspection  did  not  recur  oftener  than  once  in  two 
months.  The  pretext  for  this  allowance  was  a  desire 
to  ensure  regular  attendance  at  inspections  ;  but  it  was 
in  reality  only  a  cloak  to  disguise  a  surrender  to  the 
clamour  of  the  Volunteers. 

Meanwhile,  however,  Ministers  had  for  once  taken 
a  wise  and  sensible  step,  which  helped  to  extricate 
them  from  their  difficulties.  In  October  1 803  2  Mr. 
Yorke  had  invited  the  Volunteers  of  many  of  the 
maritime  counties  to  go  out  upon  permanent  duty  in 
successive  reliefs  for  ten  days  or  a  fortnight,  receiving 
daily  pay  and  voluntarily  subjecting  themselves  to 
military  law  during  their  period  of  service.  The  men 
responded  heartily  ;  and  the  improvement  to  their 
discipline  was  so  great  that  in  March  1804 3  Yorke 
renewed  the  invitation  not  only  to  the  maritime  but  to 
the  inland  counties  also.  At  the  same  time  he  inti- 
mated that  he  would  grant  permanent  pay,  as  before, 
for  any  period  not  exceeding  a  month  and  not  shorter 
than  ten  days,  which  should  count  as  part  of  the  exercise 
required  to  obtain  exemption  and  the  pay  for  a  per- 
manent staff",  and  would  add  to  this  an  allowance  of  a 
guinea  a  man  for  necessaries,  any  surplus  from  which 
would  be  paid  into  the  men's  hands.  The  concession 
having  been  yielded  late  in  the  day  of  course  provoked 
less  gratitude  than  contempt. 