

1  The  whole  of  the  papers  disinterred  upon  this  unsavoury  affair 
are  printed  in  Stratford's  authentic  edition  of  the  Investigation  of 
the  charges  against  the  Duke  of  York,  vol.  ii.  355  seq. 

VOL.  V  Q 


226 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY    book  xiii 


1804.  right.  His  motion  was  lost  by  a  majority  of  thirty- 
seven  ;  but  the  fate  of  the  Government  was  hardly 
doubtful  from  that  moment.  The  bills  for  the 
augmentation  of  the  Irish  Militia  and  for  enabling  it  to 
volunteer  for  service  in  England  were  passed  on  the 
3rd  of  May,  and  on  the  7th  the  House  was  informed 
that  Pitt  had  been  called  upon  to  form  a  Ministry  in 
the  room  of  Addington  resigned. 

[For  the  authorities  upon  which  the  foregoing  narrative 
is  based  I  must  refer  the  reader  to  my  work,  The  County 
Lieutenancies  and  the  Army,  1803-1814.] 


t 


CHAPTER  VIII 

The  formation  of  Pitt's  new  administration  took  some  1804. 
time,  and  when  completed  was  anything  but  satisfactory.  May. 
The  Prime  Minister  had  desired  to  include  in  it  the 
ablest  men  of  all  parties  without  any  exception  ;  but 
George  the  Third  would  not  hear  of  admitting  Fox  to 
his  councils  ;  and  having  regard  to  the  instability  of  the 
King's  mental  powers  at  the  moment,  Pitt  forbore 
to  press  his  wishes  upon  the  Sovereign.  Fox  very 
generously  accepted  the  situation  without  a  murmur, 
and  promised  to  advise  his  followers  to  accept  places  in 
Pitt's  Government ;  but  they  with  one  voice  refused  to 
take  office  without  their  chief,  and,  worse  still,  Lord 
Grenville  and  his  political  adherents  declared  likewise 
that  they  would  enter  no  Cabinet  from  which  Fox  was 
excluded.  Pitt's  position  was  one  of  extreme  difficulty  ; 
1  but  he  decided  that  at  any  cost  he  would  supplant 
Addington's  inefficient  administration.  This  is  no 
place  to  discuss  the  question  as  to  whether  he  was 
right  or  wrong,  but  it  is  certain,  at  least,  that  he  was 
actuated  by  none  but  patriotic  motives.  The  result, 
however,  was  that  the  list  of  the  new  Ministers 
showed  a  deplorable  number  of  nonentities  ;  and  their 
weakness  was  not  least  conspicuous  in  the  departments 
with  which  this  history  is  chiefly  concerned.  Lord 
Chatham,  most  indolent  of  men,  became  Master  - 
general  of  the  Ordnance.  Lord  Camden,  a  nobleman 
of  tried  mediocrity,  took  charge  of  the  War  Office  and 
Colonies.     Henry  Dundas,  Lord  Melville,  succeeded 

227 


228 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY   book  xiii 


i  804.  St.  Vincent  at  the  Admiralty.  The  Home  Office,  more 
May.  happily,  was  committed  to  Lord  Hawkesbury,  a  man 
whose  reputation  is  far  below  his  deserts  ;  and,  best  of 
all,  India  was  entrusted  to  one  still  greater  and  abler, 
Robert  Stewart,  Lord  Castlereagh.  On  the  other  hand, 
the  Opposition,  headed  by  Fox,  was  rendered  doubly 
formidable  now  that  it  had  gained  the  uncompromising 
resolution  of  Grenville  and  the  insight,  eloquence,  and 
wit  of  Windham.  The  parting  of  these  men  from 
Pitt,  in  a  political  sense,  had  not  been  friendly  ;  and 
the  great  Minister  now  found  himself  confronted  no 
longer  by  a  powerless  though  venomous  minority,  but 
by  lost  friends  whose  criticism  was  sharpened  by  the 
feeling  that  their  late  honoured  leader  had,  ever  since 
the  Peace  of  Amiens,  fallen  below  his  reputation  and 
forfeited  their  confidence. 