

But  Napoleon  had  been  guilty  of  blunders  as  serious 
in  their  own  kind  as  those  of  Addington  and  Hobart, 
and  his  preparations  were  as  backward  as  theirs.  On  the 
2 1  st  of  July  he  had  mapped  out  his  scheme  of  invasion 
as  follows  : — There  were  to  be  ready  three  hundred 
vessels  at  Flushing  to  bring  over  the  Dutch  contingent 
of  his  army  ;  three  hundred  more  at  Nieuport  and 
Ostend  to  embark  thirty  thousand  men  ;  three  hundred 
more  at  Dunkirk,  Gravelines,  and  Calais  for  conveyance 
of  six  thousand  horses  and  baggage  ;  two  thousand 
three  hundred  and  eighty  at  Wissant,  Ambleteuse,  and 
Boulogne  ;  and  a  few  hundred  more  at  Etaples  for 
transport  of  three  thousand  horses  and  one  hundred 
and  twenty-five  guns.  All  this  was  clear  enough  on 
paper ;  but  in  practice  things  were  different.  Nearly 
all  of  the  ports  above  enumerated  were  small  and 
bad,  with  bars,  shoals,  or  other  impediments,  so  that 
it  was  admittedly  impossible  for  more  than  a  limited 
number  of  vessels  to  leave  them  by  one  tide.  This  made 
it  necessary  that  the  craft  which  left  the  ports  by  one 
tide  should  lie  in  the  roadstead  till  another  tide  should 
release  their  fellows,  during  which  interval  they  would 
need  protection  both  from  British  attack  and  from  the 
weather.  Fortifications  were  therefore  erected  in  some 
quarters  to  cover  the  anchorage  ;  and  very  extensive 
works  were  also  undertaken  for  the  improvement  of 
the  harbours.    But  excavation  and  dredging  are  lengthy 


ch.vii      HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  217 


operations  ;  and,  even  supposing  them  to  be  completed,  1803. 
many  of  the  flotilla,  having  been  constructed  in  distant 
ports,  would  have  to  run  the  gauntlet  of  the  British 
frigates,  which  cruised  off  every  promontory,  before 
they  could  be  concentrated  in  the  Channel.  Moreover, 
all  was  by  no  means  well  with  the  flotilla.  Too  many 
of  the  craft  had  been  put  into  building  at  once,  which 
caused  delay.  Many  others,  particularly  the  vessels 
designed  to  carry  horses,  were  found  to  be  clumsy 
sailers  and  so  faulty  in  many  ways  that  their  construction 
was  suspended.  In  fact,  by  the  spring  of  1804  little 
more  than  three-fifths  of  the  two  thousand  vessels  were 
ready.  Furthermore,  fishing-vessels  of  light  draught 
were  found  to  be  unobtainable  in  the  number  required, 
and  it  was  necessary  to  replace  them  by  large  merchant- 
men of  too  great  draught  for  any  anchorage  but  the 
Scheldt.  Even  of  the  smaller  craft  many  of  the  heavier 
boats  had,  by  Napoleon's  perverse  rejection  of  his 
Admirals'  advice,  been  apportioned  to  harbours  which 
had  not  water  to  float  them.  In  a  word,  the  great  plan 
of  the  2 1st  of  July  had  broken  down  completely  ;  the 
building  of  the  flotilla  was  in  arrear  ;  the  construction 
of  the  vessels  themselves  was  defective  ;  their  efficiency 
for  attack  was  extremely  doubtful ;  they  could  only 
with  great  difficulty  be  brought  into  the  ports  of  the 
Channel,  and  if  brought  in  they  could  only  with  equal 
difficulty  be  brought  out  again  in  any  large  numbers. 
By  the  end  of  January  1804  Napoleon  therefore 
renounced  the  project  of  invasion  by  surprise  during  the 
darkness  of  winter,  and  determined  not  to  cross  the 
Channel  until  his  ships  of  war  had  cleared  the  way  for 
him.  The  whole  of  his  armed  boats,  of  which  some 
four  hundred  and  sixty  were  concentrated  by  the  end 
of  March  1804  at  Boulogne,  Wimereux,  Etaples,  and 
Ambleteuse,  thereupon  became  useless.  Had  they  been 
designed  merely  as  transports  they  would  still  have 
been  valuable,  but  having  been  intended  also  for  fighting 
purposes  they  had  been  spoiled  for  any  useful  object. 
The  whole  of  the  money  spent  upon  them  had  thus 