


212 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY   book  xiii 


1803.  down  in  despair,  hoarding  the  exemption-fines  against 
the  day  when  the  price  of  recruits  should  fall,  or  a  lucky 
chance  should  throw  them  some  poacher  or  beggar  who 
would  be  glad  to  enlist  in  order  to  escape  from  the  law. 

Much  of  the  trouble  had  been  brought  about  by  the 
anxiety  of  the  Government  to  create  a  force  of  Volunteers ; 
yet  the  Volunteers  themselves  were  in  the  same  con- 
fusion as  the  ballotted  levies.  In  the  first  place,  they 
were  divided  into  two  totally  distinct  sections,  supported 
by  two  different  scales  of  allowances,  enrolled  under 
two  different  conditions  of  service,  and  governed  by 
two  distinct  Acts  of  Parliament.  Those  under  the 
June  Allowances,  who  may  be  called  the  Old  Volunteers, 
were  liberally  supported,  liable  by  the  Government's 
own  deed  to  service  within  their  military  district  only 
and  were  administered  under  the  Volunteer  Act  of  1802 
and  the  supplementary  provisions  of  the  Billetting  Act  of 
1803.  Those  under  the  August  allowances — the  New 
Volunteers,  as  they  may  be  termed — were  stinted  in  the 
matter  of  grants  from  the  Treasury,  liable  for  service 
in  any  part  of  Great  Britain,  and  administered  under  the 
Levy  en  Masse  Act.  The  more  favourable  position 
of  the  Old  Volunteers  naturally  ga*e  rise  to  much 
jealousy  and  incidentally  led  to  much  friction.  The 
Government  very  rightly  encouraged  the  amalgamation 
of  isolated  troops  and  companies  into  regiments  and 
battalions  ;  and  hence  it  frequently  happened  that  corps 
were  composed  in  various  proportions  of  units  engaged 
on  varying  terms  of  service,  half  of  the  companies 
perhaps  under  the  June  Allowances,  and  half  under 
the  August  Allowances.  Thus  a  man  in  one  company 
who  absented  himself  from  drill  was  liable  only  to  the 
penalty  imposed  by  the  rules  of  the  corps,  while  a  similar 
offender  in  another  company  of  the  same  battalion  could 
be  fined  under  the  Levy  en  Masse  Act.  Again,  a  man 
of  one  company  who  misconducted  himself  on  parade 
was  subject  to  the  fine  prescribed  by  the  rules  of  the 
corps  ;  but  a  man  guilty  of  the  like  offence  in  another 
company  could  not  only  be  mulcted,  probably,  in  a 


ch.vii      HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  213 

different  sum  of  money,  but  could  be  imprisoned  in  1803. 
default  of  payment.  Yet  again,  the  Old  Volunteers, 
being  but  men,  were  not  immortal,  and  therefore  were 
constantly  diminished  by  casualties.  Though  in  theory 
no  more  Volunteers  were  to  have  been  accepted  after 
a  certain  date,  except  on  the  August  Allowances,  it  was 
impossible  to  break  faith  with  officers  who  had  raised 
corps  on  the  understanding  that  they  should  receive 
the  June  Allowances  ;  and  it  was  therefore  laid  down 
that  these  should  be  permitted  to  fill  any  vacancies 
which  left  their  corps  short  of  establishment.  The 
commanders  of  the  Old  Volunteers,  therefore,  enjoyed 
a  peculiar  kind  of  patronage.  Being  able  to  offer  the 
best  terms,  they  could,  of  course,  be  sure  of  obtaining 
the  best  men  ;  and  it  was  no  uncommon  thing  for 
commanders  of  New  Volunteers  to  find  that  some  of 
their  most  promising  recruits  had  left  them  without  a 
word  and  gone  to  some  troop  or  regiment  of  Old 
Volunteers. 