

Incidentally  this  brought  up  the  whole  question 
whether  Volunteers  at  large  had  or  had  not  the  right 
to  resign  when  they  pleased.  The  Law-Officers  of  the 
Crown  decided  against  any  such  right ;  and  the  Govern- 
ment circulated  their  opinion  to  the  Lieutenancies  for 
their  guidance.  On  the  other  hand,  Erskine,  the  famous 
advocate  and  future  Chancellor,  who  commanded  with 
extreme  inefficiency  the  Inns  of  Court  Volunteers,  up- 
held the  opposite  contention  in  letters  to  the  public 
prints,  with  all  the  pomp  of  florid  and  redundant 
verbiage  which  was  to  be  expected  from  a  man  whose 
rhetorical  powers  were  only  exceeded  by  his  consuming 
vanity.  The  letters  spread  like  wildfire  all  over  England, 
and  were  not  only  eagerly  devoured  but  were  quoted 
as  of  paramount  authority  by  Volunteers  in  all  quarters. 
I  Commandants  were  in  despair,  for  their  powers  of 
discipline  were  already  insufficient.  The  great  mass 
of  the  Volunteers  were  ordinary  labouring  men,  who 
had  already  discovered  that  the  only  penalty  for  not 
jattending  drill  was  a  fine,  which  had  little  terror  for 


2i4  HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY   book  xm 


1803.  those  who  possessed  no  property.  The  remainder  were 
men  of  superior  education,  though  by  no  means  always 
of  superior  character,  who  had  given  to  their  corps  the 
form  of  a  club,  and  in  many  cases  claimed  the  right 
to  elect  their  own  officers.  If  every  sulky  or  dis- 
contented man  could  resign  whenever  he  pleased,  then, 
in  the  opinion  of  many  commandants,  there  was  an  end 
of  ail  discipline.  The  question  agitated  the  force  all 
through  the  winter  of  1 803  ;  the  Government  striving 
to  comfort  themselves  with  the  reflection  that  men  who 
declined  to  serve  as  Volunteers  could  be  trained  com- 
pulsorily  under  the  Levy  en  Masse  Act,  but  forgetting 
that  it  would  be  almost  impossible  to  find  officers  and 
instructors  for  such  levies,  and  that  the  establishment  of 
yet  another  description  of  force  for  home  defence  would 
only  further  confound  the  existing  confusion.  At 
length  the  controversy  came  before  the  Courts  of  Law, 
when  the  Judges  of  the  King's  Bench  decided,  on  the 
6th  of  February  1804,  in  favour  of  Erskine's  con- 
tention that  every  Volunteer  had  the  right  to  resign  at 
his  own  will. 

Much  trouble  was  engendered  also  by  the  dearth 
of  arms ;  the  muskets  in  the  arsenals  being  utterly 
insufficient  to  meet  the  enormous  demand.  Great 
numbers  of  Volunteer  corps,  with  excellent  spirit,  came 
out  and  drilled  for  week  after  week  without  weapon 
of  any  kind,  until  at  last  they  very  pardonably  lost 
patience  and  declared  that  they  would  proceed  no 
longer  with  such  a  travesty  of  training.  Ministers 
in  vain  offered  to  supply  pikes  to  any  number  :  the 
men  would  not  receive  them.  The  Volunteer  infantry, 
by  the  Government's  own  direction,  had  been  clothed 
in  scarlet  like  the  Regulars  ;  and  it  had  no  intention 
of  being  armed  except  as  the  Regular  Infantry,  with 
firelock  and  bayonet.  Was  not  the  pike  the  weapon 
of  regicide  French  and  rebel  Irish?  and  of  what 
service  would  it  be  against  a  French  musket  ?  The 
discontent  was  so  acute  in  many  quarters  that  the 
Lords  -  Lieutenant   apprehended    the    dissolution  of 