


2i 8  HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY   book  xiii 


1803.  been  wasted  ;  and  meanwhile  the  preparations  for 
strengthening  the  French  Navy  proper  had  been  very 
seriously  retarded.  In  brief,  Napoleon  had  lost  a 
year's  work  by  devoting  himself,  contrary  to  all  naval 
advice,  to  the  wrong  object. 

It  was  well  for  England  that  this  was  so  ;  for  when 
Nov.  22.  the  Government  met  Parliament  in  November  it  had 
only  a  miserable  story  to  tell.  The  casualties  in  the 
Regular  Army  during  1803  numbered  rather  over 
thirteen  thousand ;  the  recruits  gained  in  the  same 
period  were  rather  over  eleven  thousand ;  so  that 
upon  the  whole  the  Army  had  been  diminished  by  over 
two  thousand  men.  It  must  not  be  supposed  that 
Ministers  were  so  methodical  as  to  have  produced  any 
such  figures,  but  such  was  the  actual  state  of  the  case. 
The  much  vaunted  Army  of  Reserve  was  in  an  equally 
lamentable  condition.  Of  the  fifty  thousand  men  to 
be  raised  within  the  year,  there  had  been  obtained  by 
the  31st  of  December  just  under  forty-one  thousand, 
of  whom  rather  more  than  one-tenth  had  deserted. 
This  loss,  together  with  other  casualties,  reduced  the 
effective  total  to  thirty-four  thousand  five  hundred, 
of  which  number  rather  more  than -seven  thousand, 
tempted  by  an  additional  bounty  of  ten  guineas,  had 
enlisted  into  the  Regular  Army  and  had  thus  brought 
the  number  of  recruits  during  the  year  to  the  figure 
above  quoted.  In  fact,  the  Army  of  Reserve  Act 
was  a  failure.  Addington  himself  confessed  in  April 
1804  that  since  November  1803  its  inconveniences  had 
exceeded  its  advantages;  and  by  the  end  of  1803  it 
was  in  practice  already  dead.  The  Militia  also,  in 
spite  of  endless  ballots,  was  still  short  of  its  establishment 
by  seven  thousand  men.  In  short,  there  was  little  to 
show  for  the  past  year's  work  but  about  three  hundred 
and  eighty  thousand  Volunteers  and  Yeomanry  of  all 
ranks,  of  whom  three  hundred  and  forty  thousand 
claimed  to  be  effective  rank  and  file,  in  Great  Britain, 
and  eighty-two  thousand  in  Ireland  ;  making  a  total 
of  some  four  hundred  and  sixty  thousand  men,  un- 


ch.vii       HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY 


219 


organised,  undisciplined,  expensive,  and  for  the  most  1804. 
part  useless. 

The  Government's  first  measure  was  a  Consolidated 
Volunteers'  Act,  whereby  it  was  hoped  to  amend  some 
of  the  appalling  blunders  committed  during  the  last 
session.  As  a  vast  number  of  the  members  of  both 
Houses  were  Volunteer  officers,  the  measure  was 
sure  of  a  stormy  reception.  Bitter  and  scathing 
comment  was  passed  upon  the  confusion  over  the 
matters  of  arms,  exemptions,  and  various  allowances  ; 
and  since  the  question  of  exemptions  touched  not  only 
the  Volunteers  but  the  Militia  and  the  Army  of  Reserve, 
the  bill  brought  the  entire  military  policy  of  the 
Government  under  legitimate  review.  Yorke  declared 
that  the  points  which  chiefly  needed  attention  for  the 
improvement  of  the  Volunteers  were  the  election  of 
officers,  the  control  of  corps  by  committees,  and  the 
general  question  of  discipline.  As  to  the  evils  that 
followed  upon  the  two  first,  there  should  have  been 
no  question  ;  but  the  election  of  officers  was  defended 
not  only  by  Sheridan  but  by  so  shrewd  and  sensible  a 
man  as  Whitbread  ;  while  it  was  declared  by  Yorke 
himself,  in  absolute  defiance  of  the  truth,  that  the 
committees  devoted  themselves  exclusively  to  financial 
business.  As  to  discipline,  one  member,  Mr.  Giles, 
maintained  that  the  Volunteers  might  secure  it  for 
themselves  by  their  own  rules,  but  that  Parliament  had 
no  right  to  impose  it.  The  more  the  whole  matter 
was  thrashed  out,  the  more  clearly  it  appeared  that  this 
huge  mass  of  men  was  absolutely  uncontrollable  ;  and 
even  Pitt,  after  many  protestations  that  he  approved  of 
Volunteers  in  principle,  was  fain  to  admit  that  "  it  was 
impossible  to  trust  continually  to  the  operation  of  the 
Volunteer  spirit." 