

2  But  it  appears  from  a  letter  from  the  Commander-in-chief  to 
the  Duke  of  Richmond  that  the  canal,  with  its  ultimate  extension 


234 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY   book  xiii 


..  This  was  made  in  order  to  isolate  the  Romney  marshes, 
where,  according  to  Dumouriez,  an  invading  force 
could  otherwise  have  secured  all  the  cattle  and  horses 
which  fed  on  the  marshes.  But  Pitt  is  more  generally 
remembered  by  the  martello  towers,  which  were  advocated 
by  Craufurd  among  many  other  officers,  and  are  still  to 
be  seen  on  the  coast.  Indeed  it  seems  probable  that 
Pitt  leaned  greatly  upon  Sir  John  Moore,  whose  good 
work  at  the  camp  of  ShornclifFe  came  under  his  im- 
mediate notice  while  he  was  organising  the  forces 
of  the  Cinque  Ports,  and  was  thoroughly  appreciated 
by  him. 

Meanwhile  Napoleon,  since  the  18th  of  May  1804 
Emperor  of  the  French,  remained  throughout  the  year 
with  his  plans  in  a  state  of  flux.  He  had  realised  that 
he  could  not  throw  his  army  across  the  Channel  until 
his  line-of-battle  ships  had  cleared  the  way  for  him  ; 
and  having  abandoned  the  idea  of  an  invasion  during 
the  foggy  nights  of  winter,  he  was  inclined  to  take 
advantage  of  the  calmer  days  of  summer  for  the  opera- 
tion. It  was,  however,  essential  first  that  the  boats, 
which  were  building  in  every  port  of  France  should  be 
concentrated  in  the  harbours  of  the  Channel ;  and  this,  in 
the  face  of  the  British  cruisers,  was  no  easy  matter.  The 
flotilla  in  the  Scheldt  was  strictly  blockaded ;  and  though 
the  Dutch  Admiral  Verhuell  with  considerable  skill 
contrived  more  than  once  to  baffle  the  vigilance  of  Sir 
Sidney  Smith,  and  to  bring  vessels  down  by  Ostend  and 
Dunkirk  to  Boulogne,  yet  little  was  really  accomplished 
by  him  owing  to  his  want  of  seamen.  At  Havre  the 
blockade  was  equally  strict,  and  was  varied  by  occasional 
bombardments  which  caused  much  alarm  even  if  they 
did  little  damage.  The  passage  to  the  Channel  from  the 
ports  in  the  Atlantic  was  even  more  difficult,  so  closely 
did  the  British  frigates  watch  every  promontory  and 
headland.    It  was  necessary  for  French  cavalry  and 

to  Cliff  End  in  Sussex,  was  suggested  by  Sir  David  Dundas.  H.O, 
Internal  Defence,  Duke  of  Richmond  to  C.-in-C,  1 3th  Nov.;  C.-in-C. 
to  Duke  of  Richmond,  19th  Nov.  1806. 


ch.viii      HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY 


235 


artillery  on  land  to  follow  the  course  of  the  boats  at  sea  1804. 
in  order  to  ensure  their  safety  ;  and  in  spite  of  aid  from 
the  troops  and  from  countless  batteries  on  the  coast, 
only  thirty-five  vessels  out  of  two  hundred  and  thirty-one 
succeeded  in  reaching  the  Channel  from  the  Ocean  at  all. 
Moreover,  even  when  they  did  reach  it,  they  were  glad 
to  put  into  the  first  port  that  they  could  find  ;  and  from 
this  cause  there  were  in  Boulogne  nearly  three  times  as 
many  boats  as  had  been  allotted  to  that  place.  Nor 
were  they  safe  even  then,  for  the  difficulties  of  leaving 
and  entering  the  port  had  been  little  diminished  by 
Napoleon's  extensive  improvements ;  and  a  light  gale 
was  quite  sufficient  to  throw  the  whole  of  the  craft  in 
the  roadstead  into  confusion. 