


238 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY   book  xiii 


1804.  British  Government  lost  patience  with  her  undisguised, 
though  unwilling,  inclination  towards  the  French  cause. 
On  the  30th  of  September  the  capture  of  three 
Spanish  plate-ships  by  Sir  Graham  Moore,  the  brother 
of  Sir  John,  brought  matters  to  a  crisis.  Napoleon 
seized  the  moment  to  stimulate  Spain  to  open  hostilities  ; 
and  after  two  months  of  hesitation  the  Court  of 

Dec.  14.  Madrid,  on  the  14th  of  December,  declared  war  upon 
England.  The  Spanish  fleet  was  therefore  now  at  the 
disposal  of  Napoleon,  though  it  was  in  no  very  efficient 
state.  There  were  a  few  fine  ships  and  a  great  many 
indifferent.  Some  were  overburdened  with  an  ex- 
cessive spread  of  canvas,  others  with  an  excessive 
weight  of  guns  ;  and  seamen,  owing  to  an  epidemic 
in  the  Mediterranean  ports,  were  extremely  difficult  to 
obtain.    However,  the  ships  were  at  any  rate  to  hand  ; 

1805.  and  on  the  4th  of  January  1805  Admiral  Gravina  on 
Jan.  4.  behalf  of  Spain  and  Decres  on  behalf  of  France  signed 

a  convention,  under  which  at  least  twenty-five  Spanish 
sail  of  the  line  and  some  seven  thousand  Spanish  troops 
were  to  be  ready  by  the  30th  of  March  for  a  secret 
expedition.  Meanwhile  the  squadrons  at  Toulon  and 
Rochefort  had  embarked  the  troops  assigned  to  them, 
and  on  the  12  th,  14th,  and  23  rd  they  received  their 
first  instructions.  Both  were  to  break  the  blockade  at 
the  first  opportunity,  and  sail  for  the  West  Indies. 
Villeneuve,  with  the  Toulon  fleet,  after  picking  up 
three  French  ships  from  Cadiz,  was  first  to  reinforce 
the  garrison  of  Cayenne,  and  then,  dividing  his  squadron, 
to  attack  Surinam  with  one  division  and  Demerara, 
Berbice  and  Essequibo  with  the  other  ;  but  in  any  case 
he  was,  within  sixty  days  after  his  arrival  at  Surinam,  to 
return  to  Ferrol,  liberate  the  blockaded  squadron  there, 
and  proceed  with  it  to  Rochefort.  Missiessy  with  the 
Rochefort  squadron  was  to  sail  straight  to  Martinique, 
capture  Dominica  and  St.  Lucia,  and  levy  contributions 
upon  the  remaining  British  islands.  Napoleon  reckoned 
that  Missiessy  would  be  master  of  the  Caribbean  Sea  for 
at  least  thirty  days,  which  period  he  was  to  turn  to  the 


ch.  viii      HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY 


best  possible  account.  Missiessy  likewise  was  to  make  1805. 
Ferrol  his  first  port  on  his  return.  The  Emperor  also 
sketched  a  suggestion  for  the  use  of  the  Brest,  Cadiz, 
and  Ferrol  squadrons,  who  were  to  descend  upon  Ireland 
on  Villeneuve's  reappearance  ;  but  so  far  he  had  no 
thought  of  using  his  fleets  in  the  Channel  upon  their 
return  from  the  Antilles.  Indeed,  he  seems  to  have 
had  no  design  in  the  expedition  to  the  West  Indies 
beyond  a  plundering  raid,  which  could  have  little  or  no 
influence  upon  the  course  of  the  war. 