

Nor  was  fortification,  permanent  and  temporary, 
forgotten.  Addington's  Ministry  had  already  made  a 
beginning  in  this  matter  by  forming  entrenched  camps  in 
chosen  positions,  as  rallying  points  for  die  forces  of  each 
district  ;  but  these,  though,  of  course,  designed  by 
military  men,  did  not  always  escape  criticism  from 
officers  of  the  Army.  Thus  at  Chelmsford  there  had 
been  constructed  at  great  expense,  not  a  chain  of 
detached  works,  but  a  single  line  of  entrenchment. 
What,  asked  Robert  Craufurd  in  the  House  of  Commons, 
was  the  use  of  this  ?  No  enemy  would  pause  to  attack  it, 
but  would  push  straight  on  to  London  ;  and  if  the  force 
in  the  camp  closed  in  upon  his  rear,  the  enemy  would  be 
none  the  worse,  for  having  no  communications  he  could 
not  be  cut  off  from  them.  This  challenge  was  answered, 
not  very  effectually,  by  General  Thomas  Maitland  ;  and 
the  subject  was  allowed  to  drop.  Pitt,  however,  infused 
far  greater  vigour  into  the  work  of  fortifying  the  country, 
even  riding  about  to  inspect  the  works  in  person  with 
an  energy  which  Lord  Grenville,  no  longer  his  supporter 


ch.viii      HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY 


233 


but  now  his  critic,  condemned  as  ridiculous.  It  is  1 804. 
difficult  to  say  who  was  Pitt's  principal  adviser  in  such 
matters,  for  he  seems  to  have  been  eclectic  in  his  tastes. 
Some  would  have  us  believe  that  it  was  Dumouriez  who 
was  chiefly  consulted  by  him  ;  and  it  is  at  least  certain 
that  Dumouriez,  after  many  wanderings,  settled  in 
England  in  1803,  received  a  pension  from  Government, 
and  produced  a  general  scheme  for  the  defence  of  the 
country.  This,  as  he  had  planned  a  scheme  of  invasion 
in  1779,  he  claimed  to  be  well  qualified  to  do.  But  the 
military  authorities,  not  unreasonably  feeling  some 
distrust  of  the  man,  declined  to  permit  him  to  make  a 
close  military  survey  of  any  ground ;  and  since  he  was 
therefore  compelled  to  rely  wholly  upon  inaccurate 
maps  for  his  premises,  his  conclusions  must  necessarily 
have  been  of  doubtful  value.  Furthermore,  amid  much 
that  is  probably  sound  in  Dumouriez's  plans,  there  is 
such  a  wealth  of  what  can  only  be  described  as  nonsense, 
that  it  is  impossible  to  suppose  that  they  can  have 
received  much  attention.1  One  costly  work  may, 
however,  perhaps,  be  ascribed  to  the  French  General, 
namely  the  military  canal  from  Hythe  to  Sandgate.2 

1  Dumouriez's  plans  of  defence  have  been  recently  published  in 
Dumouriez  and  the  Defence  of  England  against  Napoleon,  by  Dr.  J.  H. 
Rose  and  A.  M.  Broadley,  together  with  a  certain  number  of  the 
projects  which  Dumouriez  was  eternally  sending  to  the  Government 
unasked,  and  which  are  to  be  found  by  the  dozen  scattered  among 
the  papers  in  the  Record  Office.  Except  in  a  few  instances,  which 
I  shall  duly  point  out,  I  cannot  find  that  his  advice  carried  much 
weight,  nor  can  I  think,  after  examination  of  a  good  many  projets, 
that  it  deserved  to  do  so.  Dumouriez  was  no  doubt  a  man  of 
exceptional  talent  and  in  some  respects  an  exceedingly  able  soldier  ; 
but  his  vanity  was  portentous,  his  hold  upon  facts  was  never  strong, 
and  he  was  an  inveterate  schemer.  I  am  unable,  therefore,  to  accept 
the  authors'  valuation  of  Dumouriez,  or  their  assurance  that  he 
rendered  great  service  to  this  country.  For  the  rest,  >  this  book, 
together  with  the  two  bulky  volumes  entitled  The  Great  Terror  by 
A.  M.  Broadley  and  H.  Wheeler,  appear  to  have  been  published 
chiefly  to  call  attention  to  a  private  collection  of  documents  and 
caricatures ;  for  with  space  to  contain  much  that  would  be  of 
priceless  value  to  a  serious  historian,  they  provide  disappointingly  little. 