

The  plan  was  bold  and,  if  the  expression  may 
be  used,  conciliatory.  The  ballot  had  become  very 
oppressive  during  1803  :  Pitt  proposed  to  leave 
it  unused.  There  had  been  loud  complaints  of  the 
burden  laid  on  the  agricultural  interest  by  parochial 
rates  and  fines  under  the  Militia  and  Army  of  Reserve 
Acts  :  Pitt  transferred  the  entire  weight  of  the  bounties 
under  his  new  measure  to  the  Imperial  Treasury. 
Nevertheless,  critics  were  not  wanting  to  call  into 
question  every  advantage  expected  from  the  measure. 
Windham  prophesied  that  if  any  men  at  all  were 
brought  forward  by  the  parochial  officers,  they  would 
be  purchased  from  the  crimps.  Another  member 
predicted  that  the  bill  might  produce  money  but  would 
never  produce  men,  and  that,  far  from  giving  any 
relief  to  landed  proprietors,  it  would  inflict  on  them 
the  equivalent  of  a  doubled  land-tax.  Yet  another 
pointed  out  that  to  offer  a  man  £16  :  1 6s.  to  enter  the 
Line  directly,  and  £23  :  2  s.  to  enter  it  through  the 
new  force  was  on  the  face  of  it  absurd.  Lastly,  Colonel 
Robert  Craufurd  condemned  the  whole  plan  as  worth- 
less, advocating  in  its  stead  compulsory  training  for  all 
men  of  a  certain  age,  with  short  service  and  liberal 
pensions  to  tempt  them  to  enlist  voluntarily  into  the 
Line.  Pitt,  however,  turning  a  deaf  ear  to  any  croak- 
ings  of  failure,  stood  up  firmly  for  his  bill,  which  on  the 
29th  of  June  was  duly  passed  into  law. 

Meanwhile  the  general  preparations  for  defence 
against  invasion  progressed  steadily  towards  perfection. 
Orders  had  already  been  issued  on  the  31st  of  October 
1 803  for  the  removal  of  all  live-stock  and  provisions — 
"driving  the  country"  as  it  was  called — but  this 
procedure,  which  had  been  first  suggested  in  1779,  was 
so  strongly  opposed  by  such  capable  authorities  as  Sir 


232  HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY   book  xiii 

1804.  John  Moore  and  the  Duke  of  Richmond  that  it  was 
abandoned.  Far  more  valuable  was  the  Duke  of  York's 
recommendation,  that  among  the  vehicles  registered 
under  the  First  Defence  Act,  one  light  cart  should  be 
set  apart  and  marked  as  regimental  transport  for  each 
company  of  Volunteer  infantry,  and  that  waggons 
should  likewise  be  marked,  set  apart,  and  provided  with 
seats  to  convey  the  men  from  the  remoter  districts  to 
any  threatened  point.  Indeed,  the  organisation  for 
speedy  moving  of  troops  was  so  far  perfected  that  they 
could  be  readily  concentrated  in  any  quarter.  The 
Volunteers  and  Yeomanry  in  each  military  district 
were  also  organised  into  brigades,  and  their  brigadiers 
duly  appointed.  The  quality  of  the  levies  steadily 
improved  as  more  and  more  of  them  took  their  turn 
of  permanent  duty  ;  though  their  unwillingness  to 
submit  to  any  officers  but  their  own  made  their  dis- 
cipline, already  a  doubtful  quantity,  more  uncertain 
than  ever. 