

In  the  first  place,  both  the  Army  of  Reserve  and  the 
Supplementary  Militia  were  seriously  short  of  their 
establishment,  to  the  extent  altogether  of  nearly  twenty 

1  Army  of  Reserve  for  United  Kingdom      .        .  49,880 
Supplementary  Militia  for  Great  Britain  .        .  29,071 

Total     .  78,951 

Ireland  had  no  Supplementary  Militia. 


230  HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  book  xiii 

i  804.  thousand  men  ; 1  and  it  was  necessary  to  raise  that 
June,  number  before  the  Permanent  Reserve  could  be  said  to 
exist.  In  addition  to  these  there  must  be  levied  also  by 
the  1st  of  October  1805,  the  first  annual  instalment 
of  one-sixth,  which  was  modestly  set  down  at  eleven 
thousand  men,  to  replace  those  who  should  have  enlisted 
from  the  Reserve  into  the  Army.  On  the  whole, 
therefore,  the  scheme  required  thirty- one  thousand 
men  to  be  supplied  within  the  ensuing  fifteen  months. 
How  was  this  number  to  be  obtained  ?  The  ballot  of 
1803,  owing  to  the  false  principle  of  substitution,  had 
produced  only  inferior  men  and  a  gigantic  rise  in 
bounties.  Pitt  resolved,  therefore,  to  dispense  with  it 
altogether,  and  to  call  upon  every  parish  of  Great  Britain 
for  its  quota  of  the  number  of  men  required.  In  brief, 
he  threw  the  work  of  raising  the  levy  upon  the  parochial 
officers.  To  preserve  its  local  character  he  limited  their 
range  of  recruiting  to  a  distance  of  twenty  miles  around 
their  parishes  within  the  same  county,  or  of  ten  miles 
in  an  adjacent  county.  To  ensure  that  they  should 
not  compete  with  the  recruiting  parties  of  the  Regular 
Army  he  restricted  their  bounty  to  twelve  guineas, 
being  three-fourths  of  that  allowed  *fo  the  Regulars, 
which  was  sixteen  guineas.  The  parochial  recruits  were 
to  be  enlisted  for  home  service  only  and  for  five  years 
or  until  six  months  after  the  cessation  of  war,  but  were 
to  be  encouraged  by  a  further  bounty  of  ten  guineas  to 
take  service  with  the  Regulars.  To  stimulate  the  zeal 
of  the  parochial  officers,  they  were  to  receive  one  guinea 
for  every  man  that  they  produced,  whereas  if  they 
failed  in  their  new  duty  their  parishes  were  to  be 
mulcted  in  £20  for  every  man  deficient  of  the  quota. 
The  fines  thus  collected  were  in  the  last  resort  to  be 
paid  to  the  general  recruiting  fund  of  the  country  ;  and 
the  commander  of  the  battalion  concerned  was  then  to 

1  Deficiencies  in  Army  of  Reserve       .       .  12,477 
In  Supplementary  Militia         .       .       .  7,305 

Total      .  19,782 


ch.viii     HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY 


231 


fill  the  vacancy  or  vacancies  in  his  regiment  by  ordinary  1 804. 
recruiting,  paying  the  same  bounty  as  that  offered  by  June, 
the  parish  and  no  more.    Finally  the  whole  of  the  men, 
when  raised,  were  to  be  formed  into  second  battalions 
to  the  Regular  regiments  of  the  Army. 