

When  at  length  Pitt  was  able  to  meet  Parliament, 
June,  his  first  business  was  to  pass  the  Volunteer  Consolida- 
tion Act,1  the  stormy  career  of  which  came  to  an  end 
on  the  5th  of  June.  Of  this  it  must  suffice  to  say  that 
by  it  the  Volunteer  Act  of  1802  and  the  Billetting  Act 
of  1 803  were  repealed  ;  that  Yeomanry  were  required  to 
attend  four  days'  drill  and  Volunteer  Infantry  eight 
days'  drill  every  quarter  to  gain  them  exemption  from 
the  ballot  for  the  Militia  or  any  Additional  Force  ; 
that  Volunteer  Infantry  assembled  of  their  own  will 
for  permanent  duty  were  subjected  to  military  law, 
but  not  so  Volunteer  Cavalry  or  Yeomanry ;  that 
no  rules  of  any  future  corps  were  to  be  binding 
unless  approved  by  the  King ;  that  rules  made  in 
the  past  could  be  annulled  by  the  same  authority  ; 
and  that  greater  powers  of  discipline  at  large  were 
granted  to  the  Commanding  Officers.  Several  trouble- 
some questions  were  thus  finally  set  at  rest,  and 
means  were  assured  for  turning  the  chaos  brought 
about  by  Addington's  folly  into  some  kind  of  order. 
But  the  original  blunder  in  respect  of  the  Volunteers, 
due  as  much  to  Pitt  as  to  Addington,  was  for  the 
1  44  Geo.  III.  cap.  54. 


ch.  viii      HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY 


229 


present   beyond   correction  ;    and   it  was   with   the  1 
whole  weight  of  this  blunder  round  his  neck  that  J 
Pitt   grappled  with   the   more   serious   problem  of 
maintaining  the  Regular  Army. 

The  Army  of  Reserve  Act  had  by  this  time  died  a 
natural  death  ;  and  it  behoved  Pitt  to  devise  some  new 
scheme  which  should  replace  it.  The  objects  which  he 
set  before  himself  were  sound  and  statesmanlike.  First, 
the  existing  competition  for  recruits  between  the 
Regular  Army  and  the  multifarious  forces  designed  for 
home  service  only  must  be  ended,  and  the  enormous 
height  of  bounties  must,  by  this  and  other  means, 
be  brought  low.  Secondly,  all  obstacles  in  the  way  of 
establishing  a  Permanent  Additional  Force  as  a  standing 
foundation  for  the  maintenance  of  the  Army  must  be 
done  away.  He  had  already  sketched  his  device  for 
attaining  these  ends  in  a  speech  on  the  25th  of  April ; 
and  on  the  5th  of  June  he  introduced  a  Permanent 
Additional  Force  Bill  which  embodied  his  scheme  in  its 
maturity.  In  substance  the  bill  was  as  follows  : — First, 
the  Militia  of  Great  Britain  would  be  reduced  to  its 
original  quota  of  1802,  namely  fifty-one  thousand  men. 
Next,  the  quotas  of  the  Supplementary  Militia  and  the 
Army  of  Reserve  would  be  merged  into  one,  making  a 
total  of  seventy- nine  thousand  men.1  This  would 
provide  a  permanent  reserve  for  the  Army ;  and 
machinery  would  be  devised  for  making  good  any 
drains  upon  it  to  the  extent  of  one-sixth,  or  thirteen 
thousand  men,  annually.  The  intention  of  his  proposals 
was  therefore  excellent  ;  it  remained  to  seek  out  the 
means  for  their  fulfilment. 