

Pitt  was  the  last  man  to  trifle  with  such  a  situation. 
With  his  usual  courage  he  looked  fatts  in  the  face, 

Mar.  31.  and  on  the  31st  of  March  brought  in  a  bill  to  enable 
a  number  ~of  men,  equal  to  the  actual  strength  of  the 
Supplementary  Militia  in  each  county,  to  be  enlisted  in 
the  Army.  To  attract  recruits  it  was  enacted  that 
they  should  receive  a  bounty  of  ten  guineas,  should 
be  allowed  to  choose  their  own  regiments,  and  should 
not  be  drafted  from  them  without  their  own  consent ; 
and  special  provisions  were  inserted  to  reconcile  the 
Colonels  of  Militia,  as  far  as  possible,  to  this  weakening 
of  their  battalions.  Under  this  Act  about  eleven 
thousand  men  passed  into  the  Regular  Forces  between 
the  10th  of  April  and  the  26th  of  June,  four-fifths  of 
them  into  the  infantry,  and  the  remainder  into  the 
Marines.  Pitt  had  named  seventeen  thousand  men 
as  the  figure  for  which  he  had  hoped  ;  but  nine 
thousand  were  by  no  means  to  be  despised,  the  less 


ch.  viii     HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY 


so  as  they  were  not  raw  but  trained  and  disciplined  1805. 
troops. 

Nor  had  Pitt's  diplomacy  been  idle  since  his  accession 
to  office.  At  the  outset  of  the  war  England  had  at 
once  sought  the  friendship  of  Russia,  which  the  Tsar 
Alexander  was  very  ready  to  grant ;  for  he  had  dreams 
of  constituting  himself  the  protagonist  of  Europe 
against  the  Revolution  and  its  representative,  Bonaparte. 
Where  Russia  led  there  was  good  hope  that  Prussia 
would  follow,  her  despicable  King  being  very  willing  to 
attach  himself  to  Alexander's  skirts,  though  his  greed 
for  Hanover  was  such  that  he  would  have  broken  any 
faith  to  obtain  it.  Austria  was  also  approached  by 
Addington  but  would  commit  herself  to  nothing,  which 
was  not  unnatural  considering  all  that  she  had  suffered 
during  the  last  war.  Napoleon,  however,  who  was 
also  on  the  search  for  allies,  unwittingly  forwarded 
England's  interests.  In  the  west  he  could  gain  what 
he  wanted  in  many  cases  by  threats.  Holland  and  the 
Italian  Republic  were  virtually  French  provinces  and 
were  treated  as  such.  Spain  he  had  intimidated,  as  has 
been  told,  into  furnishing  a  large  monthly  subsidy  until 
she  should  openly  break  with  England ;  and  from 
Portugal  also  he  had  extorted  a  convention  under 
which  that  helpless  kingdom  gave  him  money  and 
commercial  advantages  as  well  as  a  promise  of  strict 
neutrality.  Naples,  likewise,  he  overawed,  as  we  have 
seen,  by  an  armed  occupation.  The  lesser  German 
states,  Bavaria,  Wiirtemberg,  Baden,  and  Hesse,  he  had 
gained  early  in  1803  by  allotting  to  them  the  con- 
fiscated property  of  the  ecclesiastical  states  ;  thereby  so 
whetting  the  appetites  of  the  princes  who  controlled 
them,  that  Bavaria  proceeded  to  seize  all  the  lands  lying 
within  her  borders  that  were  held  directly  of  the 
Emperor  Francis.  The  aggrieved  owners  appealed  to 
Austria  for  protection,  and  the  Emperor  occupied 
all  the  immediate  lordships  (as  they  were  called) 
both  in  Bavaria  and  Wurtemberg  with  troops.  He 
withdrew  them,  however,  upon  a  threat  of  invasion 