

Thus,  to  the  disgrace  of  England,  the  French  were  1804. 
actually  the  first  to  send  an  offensive  expedition  across 
the  sea  ;  nor  was  the  reason  far  to  seek.  The  British 
after  eighteen  months  of  war,  following  upon  a  brief 
truce  which  had  been  preceded  by  ten  years  of  another 
war,  did  not  yet  possess  an  Army.  Addington  was 
chiefly  responsible  for  this,  but  Pitt  also  must  bear 
some  part  of  the  blame,  for  his  favourite  scheme,  the 
Permanent  Additional  Force  Act,  had  proved  a  dismal 
failure.  The  parochial  authorities,  conceiving  that 
funds  and  not  men  were  expected  from  them, 
christened  the  measure  the  "  Twenty  Pound  Act "  and 
resigned  themselves  to  pay  their  fines.  According  to 
the  strict  letter  of  the  law,  the  twenty  thousand  men 
deficient  in  the  Army  of  Reserve  and  Supplementary 
Militia  were  to  have  been  raised  by  the  9th  of  August ; 
but  there  were  symptoms  in  the  country  which  led 
Ministers  to  inquire  as  to  the  progress  of  the  levy. 
The  answer  from  every  county  was  uniformly  the 
same.  Not  a  man  had  been  raised ;  the  areas  of 
recruiting  were  too  much  restricted,  the  bounties  to 
recruits  too  low,  the  rewards  offered  to  parish  officers 
too  paltry.  The  Government  extended  the  time  for 
raising  the  men  until  the  1 5  th  of  November  and  issued 
circular  after  circular,  half  coaxing,  half  menacing,  to 
stimulate  the  parochial  authorities  to  their  new  duties  ; 
but  in  vain.  By  the  1st  of  November  fewer  than  eight 
hundred  men  had  been  enlisted,  and  of  these  a  full 
eighth  had  deserted.    Parliament  met  in  January  1805, 


240 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY    book  xiii 


1805.  and  a  motion  was  at  once  brought  forward  in  the  Lords 
for  the  repeal  of  the  Act.  The  measure  was  defended  by 
Lord  Hawkesbury,  who  alleged  that,  under  the  spur  of 
many  circulars,  the  parishes  had  begun  to  move,  and 
that  the  Act  was  now  producing  men  at  the  rate  of 
three  hundred  a  week,  or  eleven  thousand  men  a  year. 
Upon  this  very  inconclusive  assurance  the  Lords 
rejected  the  motion  for  repeal  ;  but  the  attack  was 

Feb.  2 1 .  renewed  in  the  Commons  a  week  later  by  far  more 
formidable  critics  ;  and  on  the  6th  of  March  Sheridan 
definitely  moved  the  repeal  of  the  Act.  The  motion 
was  lost  by  a  very  large  majority  ;  but  the  situation 
was  serious  ;  and  Pitt  knew  it.  The  casualties  in  the 
Regular  Army  for  the  first  nine  months  of  1804 
exceeded  the  recruits  gained  during  the  whole  year 
by  over  three  thousand  ;  and  Lord  Grenville  openly 
asserted  in  the  House  of  Lords  that  the  numbers  of 
the  Regular  Infantry  were  actually  smaller  on  the  1st  of 
January  1805  tnan  on  ^e  Ist  °f  January  1804.  If 
the  war  were  to  be  conducted  on  such  lines,  the  ruin 
of  the  nation  could  only  be  a  matter  of  time. 