

Sept.  September  Napoleon  at  last  produced  a  more  definite 
plan.  According  to  this,  the  Brest  squadron  was  to 
carry  eighteen  thousand  men  to  Ireland,  first  going  far 
to  westward  so  as  to  approach  it  as  if  from  Newfound- 
land ;  it  was  then  to  enter  the  Channel  so  as  to  favour 
the  passage  to  England  of  the  flotilla  from  Boulogne,  or 
failing  this,  to  go  to  the  Texel  and  escort  twenty-five 
thousand  men  more  to  Ireland.  At  the  same  time  the 
squadrons  from  Toulon  and  Rochefort  were  to  sail  to 
the  West  Indies  with  reinforcements,  raid  all  the  British 
islands,  return  to  Ferrol  to   release  the  five  ships 


ch.viii      HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY 


237 


blockaded  there,  and  then,  united,  to  put  in  to  1804. 
Rochefort. 

Napoleon's  orders  concerning  the  attack  on  Ireland 
went  astray,  and  their  purport  reached  the  British 
Government,  curiously  enough,  through  the  smuggler 
Etches.1  Whether  this  happened  by  design  of  the 
Emperor  or  not  is  doubtful.  All  that  is  certain  is  that 
in  October  he  renewed  his  orders  to  the  squadrons  at 
Rochefort  and  at  Toulon  to  embark  their  troops  at 
once,  while  nothing  more  was  said  as  to  the  action  of 
the  Brest  fleet.  It  seems,  however,  that  the  British 
Government  now  became  more  nervous  about  Ireland, 
which  only  in  the  previous  year  had  been  disturbed  by 
the  abortive  insurrection  of  Robert  Emmett.  Dumouriez 
had  dwelt  with  great  emphasis  upon  the  fact  that  it  was 
the  most  vulnerable  spot  in  the  Empire  ;  wherefore, 
urging  that  there  could  be  no  safety  in  an  attitude  of 
passive  defence,  he  had  advocated  attack  upon  the  points 
from  which  an  expedition  might  be  expected  to  sail  for 
Ireland,  namely  the  ports  of  the  Peninsula  and  the 
Scheldt.  Whether  moved  by  this  counsel  or  not, 
Ministers  in  November  consulted  Sir  John  Moore 
as  to  the  possibility  of  an  attack  upon  Ferrol  with 
twenty  thousand  men,  alleging  that  in  the  opinion  of 
the  naval  officers  the  destruction  of  the  place  by  a  coup 
de  main  would  be  an  easy  matter.  Unable  to  find  any 
warrant  for  this  view  in  the  papers  laid  before  him, 
Moore  undertook  to  reconnoitre  the  place  secretly  in 
person  ;  and,  though  prevented  by  the  suspicions  of  the 
Spaniards  from  making  any  close  survey  of  the  defences, 
he  was  able  at  least  to  satisfy  himself  that  Ferrol  was 
fully  prepared  against  attack.  Upon  his  report,  there- 
fore, the  enterprise  was  abandoned. 

But  in  the  interim  the  situation  had  again  changed. 
Spain,  equally  afraid  of  France  and  of  England,  and 
longing  only  to  remain  perfectly  neutral,  had  so  far 
yielded  to  the  stronger  pressure  of  Napoleon  that  the 

1  Desbriere,  iv.  199,  calls  him  the  Reverend  Cadman  Etches ; 
having  apparently  construed  Rd.  (Richard)  to  mean  Reverend. 