

On  the  other  hand,  the  British  attempts  against 
Boulogne  were  one  and  all  unsuccessful.  Early  in 
1804  Addington  countenanced  a  plan  from  which 
great  results  were  expected  by  the  thoughtless.  Three 
ships  were  to  be  filled  with  masonry,  carefully  built  and 
clamped  together,  and  having  been  run  aground  upon 
the  shoal  at  the  entrance  to  Boulogne  were  then  to  be 
burned,  with  the  intention  that  the  masonry  should 
remain,  block  the  mouth  of  the  harbour  permanently, 
and  shut  in  the  whole  of  the  flotilla  for  ever.  This 
brilliant  idea  emanated  from  a  smuggler,  by  name 
Etches,  who  was  supposed  to  know  the  navigation  about 
Boulogne  better  than  other  men.  Extensive  prepara- 
tions were  carried  out,  and  an  effort  was  actually  made  to 
put  the  plan  into  execution,  with  the  help  of  a  few  light 
vessels  of  the  Royal  Navy.  It  need  hardly  be  said  that 
the  entire  project  came  to  a  ridiculous  end,  with  the  usual 
recriminations  between  the  parties  concerned  therein  ; 
the  smugglers  laying  the  whole  of  the  blame  upon  the 
naval  officers,  who  had  viewed  the  proceedings  with 
a  surly  contempt  which  was  fully  justified  by  results.1 
Later  in  the  year,  on  the  2nd  of  October,  a  more  Oct.  2. 
sensible  attack  was  made  upon  Boulogne  by  vessels 

1  The  whole  story  is  in  W.O.  Orig.  Corres.  184,  The  Stone 
Expedition. 


236 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY   book  xiii 


1 804.  which  were  practically  torpedoes  ;  but  though  five  of 
them  were  exploded,  the  damage  done  was  trifling.  In 
fact,  the  most  serious  loss  inflicted  upon  the  flotilla  at 
Boulogne  was  caused  by  Napoleon  himself.    In  July  he 

July,  paid  a  visit  of  inspection  to  the  port  and  ordered  out 
the  craft  for  a  review.  Admiral  Bruix,  seeing  certain 
signs  of  the  approach  of  bad  weather,  declined  to  obey ; 
and  after  a  stormy  scene,  in  which  the  two  men  nearly 
came  to  blows,  Bruix  was  dismissed  and  the  Emperor 
had  his  way.  The  result  was  that  twenty  or  thirty 
craft  were  lost,  and  from  fifty  to  two  hundred  men 
drowned.  The  whole  affair  was,  of  course,  smothered 
under  a  mass  of  lies,  as  was  Napoleon's  manner ;  but  the 
experience  can  hardly  have  weakened  his  dislike  for  the 
naval  profession  at  large. 

Meanwhile  his  sea- going  fleets  had  made  little 
progress  during  the  summer  of  1804.  At  Brest  there 
were  twenty-six  ships  paralysed  by  want  of  seamen  ;  at 
Isle  d'Aix  and  Orient  nothing  had  been  accomplished  ; 
and  only  at  Toulon,  under  the  impulse  of  Latouche 
Treville,  eleven  line-of-battle  ships  were  slowly  made 
fit  for  service.  In  May,  and  again  in  July,  Napoleon 
had  sketched  speculative  instructions  *for  the  Toulon 
fleet,  to  which  were  appended  the  pompous  words, 
"  Let  us  be  masters  of  the  Channel  for  six  hours, 
and  we  shall  be  masters  of  the  world."  But  in 
August  Latouche  Treville  died,  and  the  Toulon  fleet 
had  achieved  nothing.     However,  at   the   end  of 