

Finally,  in  November  a  special  emissary  from  St.  Nov.  16. 
Petersburg  reached  London,  and  on  the  1 1  th  of  April 
1805  a  Treaty  between  England  and  Russia  was  signed 
at  the  Russian  capital.  Its  objects  were  defined  to  be 
the  evacuation  of  Italy,  Hanover,  and  North  Germany 
by  the  French,  the  security  of  the  Kingdom  of  Naples, 
the  re -  establishment  of  the  King  of  Sardinia,  and  the 
independence  of  Holland  and  Switzerland.  The  means 
were  to  be  half  a  million  men,  for  which  England  was 
to  pay  at  the  rate  of  a  million  and  a  quarter  sterling 
for  every  hundred  thousand.     Russia  was  to  place 


244 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY   book  xiii 


1805.  eighty  thousand  men  on  the  Austrian,  and  sixty- 
thousand  on  the  Prussian  frontier.  Austria  and 
Prussia  were  to  be  invited  to  join  the  alliance,  and  on 
agreeing  to  do  so  were  to  receive  a  million  sterling 
apiece  for  the  initial  expenses  of  the  campaign.  Spain 
and  Portugal  were  to  be  invited  likewise  to  include 
themselves  in  the  alliance  within  three  months  of  the 
opening  of  active  operations.  The  condition  for  pay- 
ment of  the  subsidies  was  that,  within  five  months  of 
the  signature  of  the  treaty,  Russia  and  Austria,  or  one 
of  them,  should  set  her  forces  in  action  against  France. 
Sweden  was  comprised  in  the  agreement ;  and  mean- 
while she  had  already  come  to  a  separate  arrangement 
with  England,  whereby,  in  return  for  an  annual  subsidy 
of  j£ 60,00c),1  the  port  of  Stralsund  and  the  Isle  of 
Rugen  were  placed  at  the  disposal  of  the  British  as 
military  and  commercial  stations. 

Such  was  the  storm  that  was  gathering  round 
Napoleon's  head  at  the  opening  of  1805.  He  was  not 
unaware  of  it,  and  was  ready  with  counterblasts  in 
every  direction.  He  prepared  to  crush  Austria  if  she 
did  not  disarm.  He  sent  Marshal  Junot  to  Portugal 
to  demand  the  closing  of  her  ports  against  the  British 
and  the  expulsion  of  all  British  agents  before  the  22nd 
of  March,  on  pain  of  immediate  war  ;  and  he  hung  out 
the  crown  of  Portugal  as  a  bait  to  attract  Godoy,  the 
actual  ruler  of  Spain.  He  wrote  letters  to  the  Shah 
and  to  the  Sultan  of  Turkey  to  stir  them  up  against 
Russia.  When  Holland  complained  of  the  burden 
that  was  laid  upon  her,  he  transformed  her  into  a 
March.  French  province.  The  Italian  Republic  he  converted 
into  a  kingdom,  first  for  his  brother  Joseph  and,  when 
Mar.  1 7.  Joseph  upon  second  thoughts  refused  it,  for  himself. 
If  he  could  not  persuade  the  really  independent  states 
to  throw  in  their  lot  with  him,  he  would  at  least  make 
sure  of  his  own  vassals. 

Meanwhile  his  two  fleets  put  to  sea,  Villeneuve  from 
Jan.  Toulon  on  the  18th  of  January,  Missiessy  on  the  nth 