

1  Pierrepont  to  Sec.  of  State,  3rd  Jan.  1805. 


ch.  viii      HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY 


from  Rochefort.  Villeneuve,  meeting  at  once  with  1805. 
heavy  weather  which  seriously  damaged  three  of  his 
ships,  put  back  to  Toulon,  with  loud  protests  against 
sending  ships  to  sea  ill-fitted,  undermanned,  and  en- 
cumbered with  troops.1  Missiessy,  on  the  other  hand, 
made  a  fairly  good  passage,  and  on  the  20th  of  Feb.  20 
February  arrived  safely  at  Fort  de  France,  Martinique, 
with  his  entire  force  of  five  ships  of  the  line,  five 
smaller  vessels  of  war,  and  thirty-three  hundred  troops. 
In  the  British  West  Indies,  General  Myers,  the  com- 
mander-in-chief, had  been  sadly  harassed  by  privateers, 
by  the  weakness  of  the  British  squadron  both  in  quality 
and  quantity,  and  above  all  by  a  sickly  season,  which  had 
wrought  special  havoc  in  Dominica,  Antigua,  and  St. 
Lucia.  In  the  last-named  island  in  particular  the  Sixty- 
eighth  Regiment  had  lost  over  five  hundred  men  dead 
and  over  one  hundred  and  seventy  invalided  to  Europe 
during  the  last  six  months  of  1 804,2  while  in  Myers's  own 
staff,  civil  and  military,  twelve  out  of  sixteen  persons  had 
perished.  He  had  asked  for  reinforcements  but  none 
had  yet  arrived  ;  and  Missiessy  may  therefore  be  said  to 
have  come  at  a  good  moment  for  himself. 

Obedient  to  his  instructions,  the  French  Admiral 
wasted  no  time,  but  on  the  21st  sailed  for  Dominica, 
and  arriving  off  Roseau  early  on  the  22  nd  under  British  Feb.  21 
colours,  was  received  by  the  harbour-master,  who  came  Feb.  22 
aboard  the  flag-ship  not  doubting  but  that  he  was  wel- 
coming the  British  Commodore.  General  Prevost,  who 
was  in  command  ashore,  speedily  perceived  the  mistake 
and  opened  fire  from  the  batteries  upon  the  French 
squadron.  The  bulk  of  the  ships  then  remained  in 
position  before  Roseau,  while  two  small  divisions  parted 
from  them  north  and  south  to  cover  the  disembarkation 
of  the  troops. 

The  landing-place  selected  by  General  Lagrange, 
who  was  in  command  of  the  French,  was  between  two 

1  Desbriere,  iv.  299-300. 

2  Gen.  Myers  to  Sec.  of  State,  30th  Sept.,  14th  Oct.  1804  ;  5th 
Jan.,  10th  Feb.  1805. 


246 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  bookxiii 


1805.  and  three  miles  south  of  Roseau  and  a  little  to  the 
Feb.  22.  north  of  Point  Michel;  and  at  about  seven  in  the 
morning  nineteen  barges  full  of  troops  made  for  the 
shore  at  this  point,  under  protection  of  a  schooner  and 
of  several  boats  armed  with  carronades.  Prevost's 
entire  force  for  the  defence  of  the  island  consisted  of 
about  three  hundred  men  of  the  Forty-sixth,  a  score 
of  Royal  Artillery,  about  four  hundred  of  the  First 
West  India  Regiment,  and  a  few  companies  of  Militia  ; 
but  even  this  handful  of  men  he  was  compelled  to 
divide  between  Roseau  and  Prince  Rupert's  Bay,  the 
maintenance  of  the  harbour  at  the  latter  point  being 
vital  to  the  safety  of  the  island.  However,  he  was 
resolved  to  contest  every  foot  of  ground  ;  and  with 
three  selected  companies,  one  from  each  of  his  three 
corps,  he  drove  back  the  first  of  the  French  boats. 
Two  French  ships  then  stood  in  shore  to  cover  the 
disembarkation  with  their  guns,  whereupon  Prevost 
withdrew  the  three  companies  further  inland  to  a  defile 
which  defended  the  approach  to  Roseau.  Then,  rein- 
forcing them  with  two  additional  companies  of  Militia, 
more  men  of  the  Forty-sixth  and  two  light  guns,  he 
handed  the  command  of  the  whole  tcHMajor  Nunn  of 
the  First  West  India  Regiment,  with  orders  not  to 
yield  an  inch  of  ground.  The  French  thereupon 
landed  over  two  thousand  men  and  advanced  with  great 
impetuosity  to  the  attack.  But  the  position  was  strong  ; 
Prevost's  dispositions  were  good  ;  the  detachment  of  the 
Forty-sixth,  which  did  not  exceed  two  hundred  men, 
set  a  fine  example  ;  and  Nunn's  tenacity  was  beyond 
all  praise.  The  French  column  suffered  much  during 
its  advance  from  the  British  artillery,  especially  from  a  i 
single  gun  so  cunningly  placed  behind  a  wall  that  it  j 
could  only  be  approached  in  single  file  ;  and  a  whole 
company  of  French  grenadiers  sacrificed  itself,  man 
after  man,  in  a  vain  endeavour  to  capture  it.  At  ten 
o'clock  Nunn  was  mortally  wounded,  and  the  command  1 
passed  to  Captain  O'Connell  of  the  same  regiment.  He  I 
also  was  wounded  almost  immediately,  but  remained  in  j 