

However,  he  had  now  set  on  foot  a  naval  campaign 
upon  a  grand  scale ;  and  it  is  necessary  to  see  what  opera- 
tions the  British  Government  was  contemplating  at  this 
same  time.  It  must  be  premised  that  the  Admiralty's 
great  difficulty  was  to  divine  the  service  upon  which  the 
Toulon  fleet  was  to  be  employed.  By  the  occupation 
of  the  peninsula  of  Otranto  and  the  ports  at  the  heel  of 
Italy  Napoleon  threw  out  a  standing  menace  to  the 
Mediterranean  at  large  ;  and  the  British  Ministers  were 
in  constant  apprehension  as  to  the  point  where  the  blow 
would  fall.  Napoleon  by  admirable  management 
contrived  that  the  suspicions  of  Downing  Street  should 


252 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY   book  xiii 


1805.  De  turned  entirely  towards  Egypt.  He  had  spread 
constant  reports  of  an  Egyptian  expedition  during 
1802,  which  were  greedily  swallowed  by  General  Sir 
John  Stuart,  at  that  time  the  Commander  of  our  troops 
at  Alexandria.1  After  the  evacuation  of  the  country  by 
the  British,  again,  the  French  agent  at  Cairo,  M.  de 
Lesseps,  declared  continually  and  with  firm  conviction 
that  a  French  fleet  was  on  its  way  to  Alexandria  to  ask 
for  a  passage  thence  to  the  East  Indies  ;  and  Major 
Missett,  the  British  agent  left  behind  by  Stuart,  never 
ceased  to  urge  the  importance  of  sending  a  British  force 
to  avert  such  a  catastrophe.2  Lastly,  Nelson,  to  whose 
vigilance  the  watch  upon  Toulon  was  entrusted,  was 
firmly  imbued  with  the  idea  that  Egypt  was  Villeneuve's 
ultimate  destination. 

But  there  were  other  objects  besides  Egypt  within 
reach,  most  notably  Sicily,  the  possession  of  which  in 
French  hands  would  have  shaken,  if  not  destroyed, 
British  ascendancy  in  the  Mediterranean.  There  was 
no  counting  upon  the  Court  of  Naples.  The  King,  a 
degenerate  Bourbon  like  his  brother  of  Spain,  was  in- 
capable of  any  fixed  resolution  ;  and  the  Queen  was  a 
false,  dangerous,  and  scheming  woman,-*vho  was  more 
likely  than  not  to  favour  Napoleon  if  by  so  doing  she 
could  advance  any  small  interest  of  her  own.  From  the 
very  outbreak  of  war  Nelson  had  urged  the  occupation 
of  Messina  ;  and  Addington  had  given  the  Governor  of 
Malta  discretionary  orders  to  employ  two  thousand  men 
for  the  purpose,  if  Nelson  and  Mr.  Hugh  Elliot,  the 
resident  at  Naples,  should  ask  for  them-3  The  Court 
of  Naples,  however,  would  not  hear  of  permitting  the 
British  to  protect  Messina  for  them,  dreading,  according 
to  Nelson,  the  jealousy  of  the  Russians  at  Corfu  rather 
than  that  of  the  French.    Yet  at  any  moment  the  King 

1  W.O.  Egypt,  346  ;  Stuart  to  Sec.  of  State,  20th  Jan.,  26th 
Oct.  1803. 

2  W.O.  Egypt,  346  ;  Missett  to  Sec.  of  State,  25th  Aug.  1803  ; 
25th,  26th  Jan.,  27th  Feb.,  2nd,  16th  March,  28th  May  1804. 