


ch.viii      HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  249 


would  probably  be  the  safest  port  for  him  to  make  for  1805. 
on  his  return.1 

Missiessy  interpreted  this  as  an  order  to  visit  St. 
Domingo  and  then  return  home.  Admiral  Villaret 
Joyeuse,  Governor  of  Martinique,  on  the  contrary,  was 
urgent  that  he  should  first  attack  the  Diamond  Rock, 
which  had  been  fortified  and  garrisoned  by  the  British 
Navy  as  a  thorn  in  the  French  side  ;  but  Missiessy 
refused  to  listen  to  him,  alleging  that  any  such 
operation  was  contrary  to  the  tenor  of  his  instructions. 
On  the  22nd  of  March,  therefore,  he  sailed  for  the  port  Mar. 
of  St.  Domingo,  which  was  then  besieged  by  the  rebel 
negroes,  threw  a  reinforcement  with  supplies  and  stores 
into  it,  and  on  the  evening  of  the  28th  sailed  for  Mar. 
Rochefort.  Myers,  however,  knew  nothing  certain  of 
these  movements  and  remained  in  the  greatest  anxiety. 
He  had  received  a  welcome  reinforcement  of  three 
battalions2  at  Barbados  on  the  nth  of  March,  but  in 
the  presence  of  a  superior  French  squadron  he  was  at  a 
loss  to  know  how  to  distribute  them.  Commodore  Hood 
was  indeed  collecting  his  ships  at  Deseada  ;  but  with 
only  one  vessel  of  the  line  and  a  few  frigates  he  could 
not  hope  to  engage  Missiessy.  Moreover,  a  convoy 
from  England  carrying  troops  for  Jamaica  was  known 
to  be  on  the  way  ;  and  one  straggling  ship  from  it 
actually  arrived  at  Barbados  on  the  27th  of  March, 
so  that  Myers  could  not  tell  what  disaster  might  be 
impending.  A  little  more  enterprise  on  the  part  of 
Missiessy  might  have  made  things  very  uncomfortable 
for  us  at  this  time  in  the  West  Indies. 

It  is  now,  however,  necessary  to  forsake  the  Antilles 
for  a  moment  in  order  to  follow  the  fortunes  of  Ville- 
neuve.  On  the  16th  of  January,  two  days  before  that 
Admiral  left  Toulon,  Napoleon  had  produced  another 
plan,  namely,  that  the  squadrons  from  Brest,  Rochefort, 
and  Ferrol  should  embark  twenty-two  thousand  men  and 
sail  to  the  East  Indies.    Since  Missiessy  had  started  on 

1  Decres  to  Missiessy,  27th  Jan.  1805  ;  Desbriere,  iv.  313. 
2  The  15th,  90th,  and  96th. 


250 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY   book  xiii 


1805.  the  nth  with  the  Rochefort  squadron,  his  participation 
in  this  wild  expedition  was  impossible ;  but  when 
Villeneuve  returned  on  the  22nd,  he  was  ordered  to 
refit  his  ships  and  re-embark  his  troops  as  speedily  as 
possible  for  a  new  enterprise  which,  though  the  fact  was 
not  actually  revealed  to  him,  could  only  have  been  in  the 
East.  Evidently,  therefore,  with  Missiessy  detached  on 
an  independent  service,  and  the  remaining  squadrons 
appointed  for  East  Indian  waters,  the  idea  of  invasion 
of  England  had  been  for  the  moment  dropped.  The 
attitude  of  Austria  was,  indeed,  too  threatening  to 
permit  of  it. 