

Towards  the  end  of  February,  however,  French 
relations  with  Austria  had  so  far  improved  that  Napoleon 
returned  to  his  darling  project ;  and  heartened  by  the 
assurance  of  full  co-operation  of  the  Spanish  fleet,  he 
Feb.  27.  framed,  on  the  27th  of  February,  his  final  plan.  First, 
directions  were  sent  to  Missiessy  to  stay  in  the  West 
Indies  and  await  further  order ;  though  these,  not 
arriving  until  after  the  Admiral  had  sailed  for  Europe, 
were  given  to  no  purpose.  Next,  Admiral  Ganteaume 
was  ordered  to  weigh  anchor  at  once  with  the  Brest 
fleet — twenty-one  ships  of  the  line — release  Vice-admiral 
Gourdon's  squadron  at  Ferrol,  and  sail  with  it  to 
Martinique,  where  he  would  take  the  squadrons  of 
Missiessy  and  Villeneuve  under  his  command,  and  with 
the  combined  fleets  make  for  Ushant,  attack  the  British 
vessels  there,  and  proceed  to  Boulogne.  If  the  com- 
bined fleets  at  Martinique  were  fewer  than  twenty-five 
ships  of  the  line,  Ganteaume  was  to  return  straight  to 
Ferrol  ;  but  he  was  authorised  to  wait  thirty  days  at 
Martinique  for  the  Toulon  fleet. 

Supplementary  to  these  orders,  instructions  were  given 
to  Villeneuve  to  sail  to  Martinique,  unblockading  Cadiz 
if  necessary  on  the  way,  to  take  Missiessy  under  his 
command  there,  and  to  wait  forty  days  for  Ganteaume. 
If  the  last-named  did  not  appear  within  forty  days, 
Villeneuve  was  to  return  to  Europe  by  way  of  St. 
Domingo,  wait  once  again  twenty  days  for  Ganteaume 


ch.viii      HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY 


251 


at  the  Cape  de  Verde  Islands,  and  put  back  from  thence  1 
to  Cadiz. 

This  done,  the  Emperor  drew  up  on  the  23  rd  of  ]\ 
March  and  the  following  days  the  detailed  orders  for  the 
embarkation  of  the  invading  force.  But  these  were  at 
once  found  to  be  impossible  of  execution.  In  Ney's 
corps  two  divisions  had  too  many  boats  for  their  men 
and  one  division  too  many  men  for  its  boats,  with  the 
result  that,  upon  the  whole,  over  fifteen  hundred  men 
were  left  without  any  boats  at  all.  In  Soult's  corps  five 
thousand  men  were  left  without  means  of  embarkation  ; 
and  altogether  it  was  found  that  transport  for  twenty 
thousand  men  and  for  over  five  thousand  horses  was 
still  wanting.  Yet,  when  the  matter  was  examined,  it 
appeared  that  after  all  there  were  numbers  of  vessels  to 
which  no  men  had  been  assigned.  But  this  was  all  part 
of  the  general  confusion  ;  for  though  the  total  number, 
both  of  troops  and  boats,  might  correspond  exactly,  yet 
the  distribution  was  so  faulty  that  in  some  places  there 
were  too  many  craft  for  the  men,  and  in  others  too 
many  men  for  the  craft.  In  fact,  the  boasted  organisa- 
tion of  the  army  flotilla  of  invasion  existed  only  on 
paper,  being,  when  reduced  to  practice,  a  very  chaos. 
Napoleon  had  in  fact  wasted  time  and  money  irrecover- 
ably by  adherence  to  his  own  ignorant  methods  in 
maritime  matters,  while  neglecting  the  advice  of  his 
skilled  and  experienced  naval  officers. 