

3  Nelson  to  Addington,  private,  28th  June  1803  ;  Nelson  to 
Hobart,  22nd  Dec.  1803. 


ch.  viii      HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY  253 


might  be  compelled  to  fly  from  Naples  to  Palermo  ;  and  1 
the  internal  state  of  Sicily  was  as  bad  as  it  could  be, 
with  an  oppressive  nobility,  an  enraged  middle-class,  and 
not  so  much  as  a  company  of  troops.  When,  therefore, 
Villeneuve  broke  the  blockade  in  January  1 805,  Ministers 
took  the  peril  to  heart  and  resolved  to  strengthen  the  British 
garrisons  in  the  Mediterranean  before  it  was  too  late. 

Accordingly  towards  the  end  of  March  Lieutenant- 
general  Sir  James  Craig  received  orders  to  take  four 
battalions  together  with  a  small  detachment  of  cavalry 
and  artillery  to  Malta,  and  to  assume  command  in  the 
whole  of  the  Mediterranean  excepting  Gibraltar.  The 
principal  object  of  his  force  was  to  be  the  protection 
of  Sicily,  and  this  object  he  was  to  fulfil  with  or 
without  the  consent  of  the  King  of  Naples,  but  always 
in  his  name.  If  that  potentate  had  gone  so  far  as  to 
exclude  British  ships  from  his  ports,  then  Craig  was  to 
take  possession  of  Sicily  for  King  George  ;  but  if  the 
French  had  invaded  it,  or  threatened  invasion,  he  was 
to  dislodge  them  or  repel  them,  according  to  circum- 
stances, in  the  name  of  King  Ferdinand.  As  regarded 
the  further  destination  of  the  force,  it  was  necessary  to 
keep  several  contingencies  in  view.  The  Russians  were 
preparing  to  attack  the  French  in  the  Mediterranean, 
and  might  drive  them  from  the  Neapolitan  dominions  ; 
or  again  the  French  might  attack  Naples  before  Sicily, 
and  the  Russians  might  call  upon  the  British  for  assist- 
ance. In  either  case  Craig  might  co-operate  with  the 
Russians,  if  summoned  either  by  Elliot  or  by  the 
Russian  commander,  putting  himself  under  the  orders 
of  the  latter  if  the  foreigner  were  his  superior  in  rank. 
Yet  again  the  French  might  attack  Turkey,  in  which 
case  the  occupation  of  Alexandria  might  be  necessary  ; 
or,  as  Nelson  dreaded,  they  might  turn  their  arms  against 
Sardinia  and  block  the  way  to  the  Levant.  For  these 
cases  no  special  instructions  were  given  ;  but  they  were 
indicated  to  show  the  possible  scope  of  Craig's  duties-1 

1  W.O.  Entry  Book,  52,  Sec.  of  State  to  Craig,  most  secret,  28th, 
29th  March  1805. 


254  HISTORY  OF  THE  ARMY   book  xm 

1805.  Craig,  accordingly,  sailed  on  the  17th  of  April, 
April  1 7.  carrying  with  him  two  battalions  for  Gibraltar  besides 
the  troops  assigned  to  his  own  command.  The  whole  of 
them  filled  thirty-seven  transports,  which  were  escorted 
by  a  small  squadron  of  three  ships  under  Rear-admiral 
Knight.  But  meanwhile  Villeneuve  had  slipped  out  of 
Mar.  30.  Toulon  on  the  30th  of  March  with  eleven  sail  of  the 
line  and  eight  smaller  ships  of  war,  carrying  in  all 
over  three  thousand  troops  besides  the  crews.  He  was 
seen  by  two  British  frigates  ;  but  obtaining  by  good 
luck  intelligence  that  Nelson  was  at  Palma,  on  the 
south-west  coast  of  Sardinia,  he  shaped  his  course  to 
evade  him  by  hugging  the  coast  of  Spain.  At  Car- 
thagena  Villeneuve  found  six  Spanish  ships  of  the  line, 
which  were  placed  at  his  disposal  by  their  commanders  ; 
but  he  decided  to  leave  them  behind,  and  profiting  by 
a  favourable  wind,  passed  the  Straits  of  Gibraltar  on 
April  9.  the  9th  of  April.  Arrived  before  Cadiz,  he  dispersed 
the  blockading  force  under  Sir  John  Orde,  and  liberat- 
ing Admiral  Gravina's  squadron,  hurried  on  without 
waiting  to  incorporate  it  with  his  own.  Orde  fell 
April  30.  back  to  the  Channel  fleet  ;  and  on  the  30th  of  April 
Admiral  Knight,  being  at  the  moment  off  Finisterre 
with  Craig's  army  under  convoy,  learned  to  his  great 
dismay  that  the  Toulon  fleet  was  at  large.  The 
Admiralty  had  written  to  Nelson  on  the  15th  of 
April  to  provide  for  the  safety  of  Knight  and  his 
charge  on  their  passage  from  Gibraltar  eastward  ;  but 
the  Board  had  never  dreamed,  apparently,  that  the 
convoy  might  be  cut  off  before  it  reached  the  Rock. 
Unaware  that  Villeneuve  was  hastening  westward  with  all 
May  7.  speed,  Craig  was  much  alarmed  ;  and  on  the  7th  of  May 
the  convoy,  with  the  exception  of  two  transports  which 
had  parted  company,  took  refuge  in  Lisbon.  Not 
knowing  whether  the  French  and  Spanish  squadrons 
might  not  attack  him  even  there,  Craig  made  every 
preparation  to  land,  seize  the  Portuguese  forts  and 
turn  the  guns  upon  the  enemy's  ships.  It  was  a 
desperate  expedient  and  by  no  means  in  accordance 